##  Introduction to American Politics  
Political Science 101  
University of Illinois at Chicago  
Syllabus for Fall 2001

#### October 23 update: [Film paper assignment
sheet](http://www.uic.edu/~mckenzie/filmpaper.htm)

  * Instructor: Dr. Evan McKenzie 
  * Class meetings: MWF 11-12. Lectures are MW in BSB 145. Discussion sections are on Friday in the assigned BSB classrooms. 
  * Office: BSB 1122D 
  * Telephone: 312-413-3782 
  * E-mail address: [mckenzie@uic.edu](mailto:mckenzie@uic.edu)
  * Teaching Assistants: Mitzi Ramos (mramos8@uic.edu) and Daniel Bliss (dbliss@cpinternet.com). 
  * Web page: <http://www.uic.edu/~mckenzie>. If you lose this syllabus, print another copy from the website. The syllabus is subject to revision thoughout the semester. Revisions will be announced in class and you can print revisions from the website. 
  * Instructor's office hours: MWF 2:00pm-3:00pm. Your discussion leader will have office hours at a time and place of his or her choosing. 

**Course Description:**  
Many students begin this course with the assumption that they have studied the
subject already, because periodically during elementary and secondary
education they were exposed to material dealing with American political
institutions. However, what we expect to do in this course is actually
different in a number of ways from the standard "high school civics" that
virtually all American students are exposed, or subjected, to. We encourage
you at the start to set aside your preconceived notions and approach the
course with the same open mind you would bring to any new subject, rather than
assuming you have "heard that, been there," already, because you haven't. The
most significant difference between this course and what you may have learned
in high school is in the perspective we bring to the subject. Let us try to
explain this by telling you what we are trying to do.

This course is intended to accomplish two related objectives. One is to
provide you with information. The other is to help you develop understanding.
Regarding the first objective, you will see that the course materials present
a great deal of information about American government and politics. This
includes a recounting of how our basic institutions of government were founded
and how they have evolved over the last two hundred years. By "institutions,"
we mean not just Congress, the executive branch, and the courts, but
federalism, separation of powers, constitutional government, limited
government, civil liberties and rights, popular sovereignty, and other
institutions involved in the public policy process. These institutions are
social and conceptual rather than concrete, and they depend upon mutual
understandings among people in order to function. We do not expect you simply
to memorize vast quantitities of information about these institutions, but you
do need to know certain things in order to participate in society as a
citizen, and even to make an informed decision not to participate any more
than absolutely necessary. And your employers will certainly expect you to
have some comprehension of how the government functions, because every aspect
of our economy is affected by the activities of government. The American
government is deeply involved in the lives of every person who lives in this
country, not to mention other countries, and unless you have some
comprehension of how that government works, you may spend much of your life
feeling bewildered by the things that happen to you. This perpetual state of
bewilderment is probably the norm for most Americans, and based on experience
with previous classes, I believe that most people who start this course know
next to nothing about their system of government, how it developed, and how it
works.

This leads to the second course objective: developing understanding, or
critical thinking abilities. Here I am speaking not just of understanding this
subject, but of developing your ability to understand in general. This is
consistent with the general mission of the liberal arts and sciences to
encourage you to develop the capacity for independent thought, for reflection,
for comparing things as they are with things as they might be, and, in an
important way, to become a different kind of person than you were when you
entered this university. There are some significant differences between people
with a college education, particularly in the liberal arts and sciences, and
those without. Perhaps the most important is the development of this critical
thinking ability, which will serve you well for a lifetime once you acquire
it.

So, you will see that the materials we use in this course challenge you to
think critically about American government and politics, while providing you
with substantial information to fuel the critique. Keep in mind that this
course can generate controversy. In fact, it is one of our main objectives to
get past the "don't talk about politics" taboo that afflicts Americans in
general. We can only do this if we all show respect for each other's opinions,
whether or not we agree with them. Everybody in the course should feel free to
express or analyze any point of view without fear of ridicule or retribution.
You are not being graded on the basis of whether you agree or disagree with
anybody else's opinions, but on what you learn and how effectively you express
it.

**Text:**  
The text for this course is Edward S. Greenberg and Benjamin I. Page, _The
Struggle for Democracy, Fifth Edition_ , published by Longman. The book is, or
soon will be, available at the UIC Student Bookstore. Because the official
publication date of this book is August 15, the publisher and the bookstore
are making every effort to have them here on time.

**Requirements:**  
Please be advised that we will not accept late papers or other assignments,
and we will not administer makeup exams except in cases of documented serious
emergencies.

  * Mid-term examinations (two): 15% each, for a total of 30%. The exams will be half multiple choice and half essay. You will write one essay question chosen by me from a list of questions that I will give you a week before the exam. 
  * FInal examination: 20%. Same format as midterms. 
  * Media journal: 15%. You will buy an 8.5 by 11 spiral or 3-ring notebook and keep a journal that tracks media coverage of American politics throughout the semester. Your discussion leader will give you more information about this assignment. You will keep a journal to be turned in once or twice during the semester for checking, and at the end of the course. The idea is to record your general understandings of government and politics before, during, and at the end of the course, and to track events happening in the nation and around the world that you find interesting. The journal entries should include description of news coverage of significant events in American politics and government, along with a citation of the source and your reaction to the event and the way it was covered. At least one entry per week, preferably more, are required. 
  * Weekly reaction papers: 15%. See "Reading and assignment schedule" below for details on turning in these papers. Each paper should include your summary of the key points in the readings, and must conclude with at least two clearly identified, concise, specific questions, observations, or reactions that you can raise in your discussion section 
  * Political films paper. 10%: You will be given more information about this assignment, and a signup sheet, later in your discussion sections, but briefly it involves watching two films that deal with politics, which you will choose from a list I will give you, and then writing a 5-8 page paper about them. You will address the following questions in your paper:

-Who are the antagonists and what forces in society do they represent? 

-What theory(s) does the film have regarding the nature of political power, who has it, and how the system operates? 

-What viewpoint(s) does the film present on what government should do, or be, or what its objective should be?

-What theory(s) of human nature and motivation does the film represent?

-What perspective(s) on the nature of justice does the film present?

  * Participation: 10%. Your discussion leaders will be taking roll at the start of discussion sections. If you miss more than three discussion classes, you are subject to failing the course. 

**Reading and assignment schedule:**  
All these readings are to be done by the Monday of the week for which they are
listed. On that day in class (Monday), you will turn in a one or two page
summary of the week's readings. For example, the readings listed for the week
of August 27, Week 2, is to be turned in on August 27. This paper must be a
typed hard copy, and must be turned in **at the start of class**. No late
papers, email transmissions, or faxes will be accepted, and papers covering
the wrong readings receive zero credit.

WEEK OF:

  1. Aug. 20. On Monday I will introduce the course; **Begin Unit 1, Structure** ; and talk about Chapter 1. You don't have to do a reaction paper this week. For Wednesday, read the prefatory materials and Chapter--Democracy and American Politics 
  2. Aug. 27. First reaction paper due. Chapter 2--The Constitution (also read appendices: The Declaration of Independence, The Constitution of the United States, and Federalist Papers No. 10) (all these appendices are available for reading, downloading, and printing from the Liberty Library of the Constitution Society, at <http://www.constitution.org/liberlib.htm> See items 82 and 89 on that page. If the textbooks are not available by Friday, your reaction paper should cover the Constitution, Declaration of Independence, and Federalist No. 10.) 
  3. Sept. 3. Monday is a holiday. Second reaction paper due Wednesday. Chapter 3--Federalism. 
  4. Sept. 10. Chapter 4--The Structural Foundations of American Government and Politics. 
  5. Sept. 17. Monday: _first mid-term examination_. Reaction papers due Wednesday. **Begin Unit 2, Politics** ; Chapter 5-- Publc Opinion 
  6. Sept. 24. Chapters 6 and 7--The Media; Interest Groups and Corporations 
  7. Oct. 1. Chapters 8 and 9--Social Movements; Political Parties 
  8. Oct. 8 Chapter 10--Participation, Voting, and Elections. 
  9. Oct. 15 Monday: _Second mid-term examination_. [STUDY GUIDE LINK HERE](http://www.uic.edu/~mckenzie/101f01guidet2.html). Reaction papers due Wednesday. **Begin Unit 3, Government and Politics** Chapter 11: Congress 
  10. Oct. 22 Chapter 12: The President 
  11. Oct. 29 Chapter 13: The Federal Bureaucracy 
  12. Nov. 5. Chapter 14: The Courts 
  13. Nov. 12 Chapter 15 and 16: Civil Liberties and Civil Rights 
  14. Nov. 19. _Political Film papers due_. Chapters 17: Domestic Policy. Friday is a holiday. 
  15. Nov. 26. Chapter 18. Foreign Policy. Friday is the last day of Fall classes. _Media journals due_. 
  16. Dec. 3: Finals Week. _Final examination_ per university schedule. 

**Internet links (I will be adding to this list during the semester):**  
Here is the website for your textbook, which has some helpful information for
you:  
<http://occ.awlonline.com/bookbind/pubbooks/greenberg5e_awl/>

