| [![ECO 105-01](GIFs/105Banner.gif)](105Main.html)  
---|---  
  
[![Main](GIFs/Main.gif)](105Main.html) ![](GIFs/Syllabus_.gif)     Objectives
Background     Textbook     Class Format     Study Teams     In-Class Work
Quizzes     Out-of-Class     Final Project     Participation     Grades
Some Advice     Drop Policy |  |

**Learning Objectives**

The main objective of this course is to help you learn to think as an
economist. My goal is not to help you become merely competent technicians, but
to help you learn how to explain _what you are doing and why_ \-- a crucial
skill you will use for the rest of your life. Toward that end we will explore
economics as economists see it -- not a collection of facts about markets but
a powerful approach to thinking about almost all human behavior. The
Department of Economics has also specified a set of _tasks_ important for
students majoring in economics to master. The tasks relevant to this course
are listed below. Assignments related to them are marked  "Task #".  
  
After successful completion of this course you will be able to:

  1. Explain basic economic concepts and apply them to specific situations; 
  2. Locate information on topics and issues that can be informed by economics; 
  3. Summarize what is known about the current condition of a market for a product or resource; 
  4. Locate and interpret macroeconomic data and recognize the limitations of the data; 
  5. Summarize what is known about the current condition of the economy; 
  6. Identify basic economic concepts that are used in economic analyses published in articles from [daily newspapers and weekly newsmagazines](105Links.html). 

Specific learning objectives are listed at the beginning of each chapter.  



**Recommended Background**![Top](GIFs/Top.gif)

The study of economics requires some diverse skills. You are expected to be
able to express yourself in writing coherently and logically (4 years of high
school English); to have a _solid_ grasp of high school algebra and geometry
(2 years); and to have some sense of the world and American history (2 years
of history or American government). This background is important; a weaker
background will slow progress in your coursework  



**Textbook**![Top](GIFs/Top.gif)

[_Principles of Economics_ ,](http://www.dryden.com/econ/mankiw/) Gregory
Mankiw, 1998, The Dryden Press.  
  
The textbook by Mankiw has been chosen from among dozens of other principles
of economics textbooks. I chose this text because it offers clear concise
coverage of economic concepts important at the principles level. The author
clearly lays out the ten most important principles of economics -- concepts
that will serve you well long after the course has ended. Each chapters'
learning objectives are clearly stated in order to help you understand what
you must learn. Finally, the author provides you with plenty of chances to
monitor your understanding through in-chapter "Quick Quizzes", and end-of-
chapter "Questions for Review" and "Problems and Applications". These well-
written questions will help you "learn by doing the thing".  
  
I require that you read the assigned chapter _before_ coming to class, as an
introduction to the material. The material in the chapter will be referred to
by you and members of your team as you work through the "Quick Quizzes",
"Questions for Review", and "Problems and Applications". So knowledge of the
readings will reduce the time it takes you in class to "learn by doing the
thing". I strongly suggest you critically reread the chapter after class in
order to correct your notes and double-check the answers to the questions and
problems completed in class.  



**Class Format**![Top](GIFs/Top.gif)

My goal is to create an environment with a number and variety of learning
experiences that will allow you to discover and construct economic knowledge
for yourself. I endeavor to manage the learning environment so that you can
produce the highest quality learning. I consider it your goal to take
responsibility for achieving the highest quality learning.  
  
This is an active learning class. You are expected to come to class having
already read over the assigned section or chapter. At the beginning of class I
will give you tips on how to understand certain concepts, solve certain
problems, meet the chapter's learning objectives, or construct key graphical
models. I will also try to clear up any questions you have about the assigned
reading. The class will then work in study teams on the assigned Quizzes,
Questions, and Problems, while I assist each team facing an impasse (see
Working in Study Teams below). At the end of class each individual will turn
in written answers to the Quizzes, Questions, or Problems their study team was
able to solve (see In-Class Work below).  
  
Out of class, you will apply your newly-developed economic knowledge to events
in the real world by summarizing and analyzing the economic content of today's
news stories (see News Analyses below).  
  
Every Friday, we will start the class with an open discussion of questions you
have about the "Quizzes", "Questions", and "Problems" your team could not
confidently solve. During the last twenty minutes of the class you will take a
quiz (see Quizzes below). The readings and problems for the next chapter will
be written on the board while you are taking the quiz (these may also be found
on the [Course Schedule](105Schedule.html)).  
  
At the end of the semester you will complete and out-of-class project that
will measure how well you where able to "put it all together" (see Final
Project below).  



**Working in Study Teams**![Top](GIFs/Top.gif)

You will quickly find that working in teams is an excellent way to achieve the
highest quality learning. As an active member of your team you will learn how
to establish a point and defend it, or change it in light of sound criticism.
You will discover the value of accepting responsibility for the effect your
actions (or inactions) have on others with whom you work.  
  
Given the class format, reading the text before class and _actively_ engaging
in discussion and problems solving with members of your study team are
crucial.  
  
Your Role in Study team Work:

  * Accept responsibility for your own work; 
  * Be willing to help any study team member who asks; 
  * Ask me for help when everyone has the same question; 
  * Achieve a group solution for each problem; 
  * Make sure everyone understands a solution before going on; 
  * Listen carefully to each other; 
  * Share the leadership; 
  * Make sure everyone participates and no one dominates or "free rides". 

Sometimes it is helpful either to divide a problem into smaller parts which
each member of the team pursues individually, or to work together to solve
each part of a problem. As a study team you may review, compare answers to
problems solved outside of class, teach each other, encourage and support each
other, inform each other about information if a class has been missed, and
evaluate your team's learning process.  
  
My Role in Study team Work:

  * Point out important concepts, chapter readings, and problems; 
  * Give tips on understanding concepts or on solving problems; 
  * Observe study teams, listen, assist as needed; 
  * Question study team about conclusions, solutions, ask what are you doing and why. 

You will learn economics more effectively by "doing the thing". This entails
asking your team members questions, answering their questions, helping each
other, and analyzing your mistakes. Remember that it is rarely the case that
one either "gets it" or "gets it wrong" the first time; learning takes place
gradually and as a result of repeated attempts to "debug" your thinking. This
is where good team work can be the greatest help.  



**In-Class Work** (Task 1) ![Top](GIFs/Top.gif)

During the class period, each team will work on some of the "Quick Quizzes",
"Questions for Review", and "Problems and Applications" in assigned chapters
of the textbook. These problems are assigned to greatly aid your understanding
of the material and to help you prepare for Quizzes and News Analyses. You
will not be able to complete all of the assigned problems during class time,
but it is important that you complete all the problems. Work after class with
your study team or a "study buddy". Don't seek my help the moment you get
stuck; work with the question for a while, go over your notes, reread the
text, ask questions of those in your study team, etc. Remember, you are trying
to learn to think about the world in a way that is completely different -
mastery of [the economic way of
thinking](http://quasar.csuchico.edu/econ/info/costben.html) will take a lot
of practice. If your team is stuck, then seek out my help during class,
[office hours](105Info.html) (or make a special appointment), or by
[e-mail](mailto:mswalber@ilstu.edu). Keep in mind that you have learned
something from these practice problems only when you are able to "fly solo",
without your study team or me to hold you up.  
  
During [Part 1](105Schedule.html#Part1) of the course I will go over your
written answers to "Quizzes", "Questions", and "Problems" and return them by
the next class period. I will not grade your answers but will read them to get
an idea how well you are learning the material and to give you feedback on how
well your learning is progressing.  



**Quizzes** (Task 1) ![Top](GIFs/Top.gif)

To help you monitor your understanding of each chapter's learning objectives,
I will give you a quiz once a week. Each quiz will consist of one or more
Questions or Problems similar to those your study team has been working on
that week. Quizzes will be taken and graded individually.  
  
I will, however, calculate each _team's_ average quiz score (TAQS) and give
each student on the team bonus points based on their TAQS. One bonus point
will be available for each quiz, with 14 bonus points possible for the
semester. The bonus points you earn will be added to your quiz score.  
  
If your TAQS on any given quiz is 90% - 100%, each member will earn 1/2 bonus
point for that quiz; if it is 80% - 89.9%, each will earn 1/4 point; if it is
70% - 79.9% each will earn 1/8 point. If the TAQS is less than 70% no bonus
points will be awarded. It is possible, then, for an individual to earn up to
7 bonus points by the end of the semester (that's about 2% of the total
points).  
  
Thus, each one of you has an incentive to consistently ensure that your team
does quality work. Failure to attend class and work carefully on the
Discussion questions and Problems will prevent you, and your colleague's, from
earning bonuses. If a member of the team misses a quiz, he or she will not be
eligible to receive the bonus points the rest of their team earns on that
quiz.  

**You will complete fourteen (14) quizzes at 10 points each for a total of 140
points. Bonus points may be earned  
**



**Out-of-Class Work**![Top](GIFs/Top.gif)

_News Analyses_ (Task 2, Task 3, Task 4)  
To get you involved in, and to help you develop your understanding of, current
economic issues, I would like each student to maintain a folder of news
clippings relevant to an economic topic.[1](Other/News_fn.html) The news
stories should be chosen from well written sources in either the financial or
popular press. Two great sources for news stories are the textbook (see "In
the News" sections of most chapters) and the textbook's web site. You will
annotate each news clipping by commenting on the economics news or opinions it
contains. Your annotations should be intellectual interactions with the
article, not summaries. Annotations may express bewilderment at what is
reported, or it may offer reinforcement -- complete with reference to relevant
economic model or concept. The annotations may also make comparisons with
other news items or with class discussion or textbook interpretations.

I will collect your folders four times during the semester -- twice during the
first half and twice during the second half of the course. I will answer
questions you raise in your annotation and ask you questions in return. Your
annotations and my reviews will establish a dialogue on your topic.

Your responsibility is to collect news clippings and make entries (at least
once a week) from multiple sources. You will find that at times different
newspapers or magazines have different interpretations of the same economic
information. Sifting through these interpretations will strengthen your
analytical skills. To reinforce your learning of the economic concepts and
models presented in class, you are required to include both in your
annotation. My responsibility will be to collect your folders on the assigned
days, write reviews that encourage learning, and return them within a week.

Links to the textbook's Web site as well as the Web sites of several well-
written newspapers and magazines are located on the [Web Links](105Links.html)
page. (See the [Analysis Guidelines](105Guidelines.html) for more information
and the [Course Schedule](105Schedule.html) for due dates.)  

**Your News Analysis folder will be reviewed four (4) times during the
semester. Each review will be worth 25 points, for a total of 100 points.**





**Final Project** (Choose from one (1) of the following.)

_Microeconomics Focus_ **** (Task 1) ![Top](GIFs/Top.gif)

In a market economy, everything is connected to everything else. Changes to
any of the variables influencing product demand, for instance, affect the
competitive market price. Changes in a product's price affects the demand for
labor used to make that product. Changes in the demand for labor affect a
firm's marginal costs. This in turn affects the competitive market supply of
goods, further altering market price. This again alters the demand for labor,
and on it goes...

Before the advent of the computer, this interrelatedness was difficult to
simulate, especially using graphicl models. As a final project in the course,
you will use an Excel template that simulates a "general equilibrium model" of
the perfectly competitive markets for a product and the labor used to make
that product. Your task will be to trace out the effects of changes to the
demand for or supply of the product on a representative firm in its role as a
competitive producer of a good and buyer of labor and to follow those changes
back to the market.

(See the [Final Project Guidelines](105Guidelines.html) for more information
and the [Course Schedule](105Schedule.html) for the due date.)



**You will __ complete one (1) final project on the General Equilibrium Model,
worth 50 points.**



_Macroeconomics Focus_ **** (Task 1) ![Top](GIFs/Top.gif)

The purpose of this project is to help you develop a sense of how the economy
has been doing over the past ten years. Towards that end, you will complete
three tasks: (1) gather the required data series on the state of the economy;
(2) put the data in tabular and graphic form (preferably using a spreadsheet);
and (3) prepare a written memo to the President of the United States
summarizing the data you have collected and discussing what it reveals about
the state of the economy (you are his Chief Economic Advisor). The data can be
found in the _Wall Street Journal_ , _[The Economic Report of the
President](http://www.access.gpo.gov/eop/index.html)_ , or from [various
sites](105Links.html) on the Web. (See the [Final Project
Guidelines](105Guidelines.html) for more information and the [Course
Schedule](105Schedule.html) for the due date.)



**You will __ complete one (1) final project on a Data Analysis of the U.S.
Economy, worth 50 points.**





**Class Participation**
[![Top](../ECO240/GIFs/Top.gif)](../ECO240/240Syllabus_p3.html#Top)  
Because this is an _active learning_ class, daily attendance and active
participation with your teammates in discussions and problem solving is
absolutely essential if you are to master the key economic concepts and models
taught in this course. As a result, I will monitor your class participation
and reward your efforts accordingly.



**Class participation is mandatory and is worth 10 points.**





**Grades**![Top](GIFs/Top.gif)

Course grades will be based on a total of 300 points acquired as follows:

|  | **Source** | **Points**  
---|---  
Quizzes | 140  
News Analyses | 100  
Final Project | 50  
Participation | 10  
**TOTAL** | **300**  
| **Grade** | **Points Required**  
---|---  
A | 270 - 300 points  
B | 240 - 269 points  
C | 210 - 239 points  
D | 180 - 209 points  
F | < 180 points  
  
No extra credit work will be available under any circumstances.



* * *

**Some Useful Advice**![Top](GIFs/Top.gif)

Students often leave the classroom thinking that because they followed my
"tips" or their team's discussion, they must have understood them. They use
the same reasoning when reading the textbook. They then become frustrated when
they don't do as well as expected on quizzes. The problem lies in _mistaking_
_following_ the tips, discussions or readings _for_ _understanding_ the tips,
discussions or readings. Remember Publilius:

"One must learn by doing the thing; though you think you know it,  
you have no certainty until you try."

The best way to test your understanding is to be successful in conveying it to
other members of your study team and to answer their questions clearly and
completely.  

The objective of learning is NOT to accumulate facts which you simply parrot
back on a quiz.

"Learning is not simply the acquisition of facts, which a data-base-management
[program] can do; it is also the acquisition of knowledge. Knowledge consists
of facts, [along with] an understanding of the relationships between the facts
and their implications."

It's one thing to know that the price of gasoline has increased 14
cents/gallon, it is quite another thing to be able to explain how an increase
in crude oil prices and a reduction in refinery capacity - not greedy gasoline
producers - would lead to that 14 cent/gallon increase.  



**Drop Policy**![Top](GIFs/Top.gif)

Anyone may drop without receiving a grade up to 4 September. A grade of WX
will automatically be assigned by the University if you drop before the end of
the fifth week [Fri. 25 September]. No one may drop the course after 25
September.  
[![ISU](../ECO240/GIFs/ISU_Logo.small.gif)](http://www.ilstu.edu/) | | [ECO105
Main Page](105Main.html) | [Economics Department](http://www.econ.ilstu.edu/)
|
![](../ECO240/GIFs/1x1_pixel.GIF)[![Previous](../ECO240/GIFs/Previous.gif)](105Info.html)![](../ECO240/GIFs/1x1_pixel.GIF)![Top](../ECO240/GIFs/Top.gif)![](../ECO240/GIFs/1x1_pixel.GIF)[![Next](../ECO240/GIFs/Next.gif)](105Schedule.html)  
[Copyright](../ECO240/Copyright.html) (C) 1998: [Mark S.
Walbert](mailto:mswalber@ilstu.edu) All rights reserved. Revised 18 August,
1998

