Civics

Back to [Kwiatkoski 's](kwiatkoskihs.html) Page

**Social Studies [Civic Studies] IA -SYLLABUS**

Social Studies [Civic Studies] IA

is a required course for all freshmen beginning in 97/98 that will focus upon
the Documents of Freedom, and the functions of the Legislative , Executive,
and Judicial branches at the Federal level. It will introduce the principles
of our society's free market economy and basic consumer skills including
negotiating and money management. Time permitting, there will be a discussion
of comparative government.

This understanding will lead the student to a better understanding of civic
responsiblity and thier role as a participating citizens of the United States.

**TEXTBOOK-CIVICS(RESPONSIBILITY AND CITIZENSHIP)** ; GLENCOE, 1998



**CLASS GOALS**

1\. To ready students for the High School MEAP in social studies.

2\. To use the class as an overall approach to teaching citizenship and
responsibilities to  
students.

3\. To show students the uniqueness and importance of the Declaration of
Independence, The articles of Confederation, and the U.S. Constitution.

4\. To explain the three branches of government to the student in a meaningful
way.

5\. To introduce basic economic principles and consumer skills.

**High School Social Studies MEAP Core Values Goals**

Core democratic values are the fundamental beliefs and constitutional
principles of American society which unite all Americans. These values are
expressed in the Declaration of Independence, the United States Constitution
and other significant documents, speeches, and writings of the nation. (see
attached Core Values sheet)



**CLASS OUTLINE**

1\. The Roots of American Democracy (Chapter 2)

2\. The Constitution (Chapter 3)

3\. Congress (Chapter 9)

4\. The Presidency (Chapter 10)

5\. The Executive Branch (Chapter 11)* (If time permits)

6\. The Judicial Branch (Chapter 12)

7\. The American Economic System (Chapter 18)

8\. Government and the Economy (Chapter 19)

9\. Financing Our Government (Chapter 20)

10\. The Economy and the Individual (Chapter 21)

11\. Comparative Government (Chapter 22)* (If Time permits)



**CLASSROOM TEACHING METHODS**

1\. Lecture by instructor (note taking by students).

2\. Journal keeping (Topics focus on relevant current events and core values)

3\. Cooperative exercises.

4\. Classroom discussion.

5\. Student participation and homework.

6\. Periodic quizzes.

7\. Test after each unit/chapter.

**STUDENT PARTICIPATION ACTIVITIES**

1\. Grafitti, Taskmaster/recorder/speaker.

2\. Role-playing activities

3\. Classroom discussion of current news activities and controversial legal
subjects



**Social Studies [Civic Studies] IB - SYLLABUS**

Social Studies [Civic Studies] IB

is a required course for all freshmen beginning in 97/98. It will focus on
civic involvment in the government process in action and identify the various
parts and functions of the justice system. Students will gain a good
understanding of their basic rights as guaranteed to them by law. This
understanding will lead the student to a better understanding of civic
responsiblity and thier role as a participating citizens of the United States.



**TEXTBOOK - CIVICS(RESPONSIBILITY AND CITIZENSHIP)** ; GLENCOE, 1998



**CLASS GOALS**

1\. To ready students for the High School Proficiency Test in social studies.

2\. To use the class as an overall approach to teaching citizenship and
responsibilities to

students.

4\. To show students their role as U.S. Citizens.

5\. To show students their role in the U.S. Economy .

**High School Social Studies MEAP Core Values Goals**

Core democratic values are the fundamental beliefs and constitutional
principles of American society which unite all Americans. These values are
expressed in the Declaration of Independence, the United States Constitution
and other significant documents, speeches, and writings of the nation. (see
attached Core Values sheet)



**CLASS OUTLINE**

1\. What is Civics? (Chapter 1)

2\. The Bill of Rights (Chapter 4)

3\. The citizen and the community (Chapter 5)

4\. Parties and Politics (Chapter 6)

5\. Voting and Elections (Chapter 7)

6\. Public opinion and interest groups (Chapter 8)

7\. State Government (Chapter 13)

8\. Local Government (Chapter 14)

9\. Community Issues (Chapter 15)

10\. Legal rights and responsibilities (Chapter 16)

11\. Criminal and Civil Law (Chapter 17)



**CLASSROOM TEACHING METHODS**

1\. Lecture by instructor (note taking by students).

2\. Journal keeping (Topics focus on relevant current events and core values)

3\. Cooperative exercises.

4\. Classroom discussion.

5\. Student participation and homework.

6\. Periodic quizzes.

7\. Test after each unit/chapter.

**STUDENT PARTICIPATION ACTIVITIES**

1\. Grafitti, Taskmaster/recorder/speaker.

2\. Role-playing activities

3\. Classroom discussion of current legal activities and controversial legal
subjects

