**[![Saint Joseph's University
Home](saint_josephs_univ.gif)](http://www.sju.edu/)**  
---  
**- POLITICAL SCIENCE DEPARTMENT**  
**-** **C HAIRMAN**  
** -** **F RANCIS GRAHAM LEE**  
  
>  
>  ![](Images/DrLee.jpg)  
>  **F RANCIS GRAHAM LEE**, a native of Boston, was educated at the Boston
Latin School, received his bachelor's degree from Boston College, and earned a
Ph.D. in Political Science from the University of Pennsylvania.  
>  He is currently Chairman of Political Science at Saint Joseph's University
in Philadelphia where he has also served as President of the Faculty Senate,
Dean of the University College, and Director of Graduate Programs. He now
serves as Coordinator of the **[University's Washington
Semester](dc_internship.htm)** and Director of the Legal Studies (Para-Legal)
Program. In additional to these responsibilities, Lee serves as advisor for
the ETA NU Chapter of the national political science honor society,  [ **PI
SIGMA ALPHA**](http://www.h-net.msu.edu/%7Epsa/). The chapter has been awarded
grants three times by the national office in recognition of outstanding
achievements by its student members. The chapter sponsors an annual
distinguished lecture. Past lecturers have included Anthony Cardinal
Bevilacqua, Archbishop of Philadelphia, the Honorable Lawrence Pierce, Judge
of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, and the
Honorable Stephen J McEwen, President Judges of the Superior Court of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.  
>  
>  Professor Lee's primary disciplinary specialty is American Constitutional
Law. In addition to courses in this area, which include a seminar on religious
liberty conducted in moot court format, Lee teaches a section of the general
introductory course in American Government and upper division courses on
Parties, Interest Groups  & Voting Behavior as well as a course on
Philadelphia Politics. During the summer, Lee offers, in alternate years,
either a three week study tour of Canada (Quebec City, Ottawa, and Toronto)
which introduces students to Canadian government and society [**POL
2391**](canadian_study_tour.htm) or a four week study  tour of Greece
examining issues of law and democracy **POL 2041**.  
>  
  
- **Publications**  
  
> Lee is the author of four books: _**Neither Conservative nor Liberal**_ , a
study of the Burger Court's decisions on civil rights and liberties, _**Wall
of Controversy**_ , an examination of the different philosophies of Supreme
Court judges with regard to First Amendment controversies, and _**All
Imaginable Liberty**_ a study of the historical and legal development of the
religious liberty clauses of the Constitution which features articles by some
of the nation's leading scholars on the First Amendment, prepared as part of
the University's Bicentennial Observance. Dr. Lee has completed a new work on
church and state in America which focuses on fourteen significant issues that
have shaped church-state relations in America. _ **Church-State Relations**_
was just published by Greenwood Press in May of 2002. Lee is also editing a
volume on the judicial opinions and legal writings of Chief Justice William
Howard Taft that is part of a larger eight volume series edited by Professor
David Burton of the History Department of Saint Joseph's University for Ohio
University Press. It is scheduled for publication in 2003. Currently, Lee is
under contract with ABC-CLIO for a book on equal protection issues.  
  
**i Academic Associations & Activities**  
  
> Dr. Lee was a founder of the Pre-Law Advisors National Council, and is a
past President of the Northeast Association of Pre-Law Advisors, a former
Secretary Treasurer of the Association of Graduate Schools at Catholic
Colleges and Universities, and past president of the Ethnic Studies
Association. He currently edits **[NAPLA Notes](http://napla.org/)** , the
oldest journal serving the needs of pre-law advisors and their students and is
the author of the section on financial aid in **[The Handbook for Pre-Law
Advisors](http://www.planc.org/)**. For the past  six years, Dr. Lee has
offered a workshop at the annual meeting of the American Political Science
Association on pre-law advising for political scientists. Under the aegis of
Freedoms Foundation of Valley Forge, he has offered seminars on constitutional
law topics for high school and college teachers and works with the Union
League of Philadelphia on citizenship forums for high school students. Working
with Dr. Bruce Murphy of Lafayette College, Lee recently offered a one week
prototype of a Governor's School in Government and Public Service for students
in Chester County. He has served third terms as a Commonwealth Speaker for the
Pennsylvania Humanities Council, speaking on issues that include judicial
selection, the right of privacy as well as church-state matters.  
>  
>  Lee also is a member of the Liaison Advisory Board of the Washington
Center, the nation's largest provider of internships. Approximately, fifteen
students a year from Saint Joseph's participate in the internship, working in
a wide variety of placements ranging from the Departments of State, Commerce,
Justice, and Defense to the Supreme Court, the Senate Finance Committee, and
the embassies of several foreign nations.  
  
**i Community Activities**  
  
> Currently, Dr. Lee chairs the Diocesan Appeals Board. The Board hears
disputes arising under the contracts between the Archdiocese of Philadelphia
and High School teachers in the system. At the national level, Lee is a member
of the First Friday Committee, an organization designed to highlight issues of
concern to Catholics and has written position papers on ethnic and Catholic
issues for national candidates. Lee was a member of the Planning Commission of
Haverford Township from 1998 to 2001. He continues to serve as judge of
elections in the township. Also, Lee is a former member of the Board of
Trustees of the Academy of Notre Dame de Namur, having served as Chairman of
both the Faculty & Education and Planning Committees.  
  
  

**i Introductory Courses**  
  
---  
  
**POL 1011**

| **i Introduction to American Government & Politics** |

**[view syllabus](1011lee.htm)**  
  
**POL 1091**

| **i Introduction to Political Science Research** |

**[view syllabus](1091.htm)**  
  
**i Political Theory**  
  
**POL 2041  
iiiiiiii(2045) **

| **i Legal Theory ** |

**[view syllabus](20412045sum03.htm)**  
  
** iAmerican Government and Politics**  
  
**POL 2151**

| **i Constitutional Politics** |

**[view syllabus](2151.htm)**  
  
**POL 2161**

| **i Constitutional Law: Civil Rights and Liberties** |

**view syllabus**  
  
**i Comparative Politics**  
  
**POL 2391**

| **_i_ Canadian Government and Politics** |

**[view syllabus](syllabus-canada2002.htm)**  
  
**i Seminars**  
  
**POL 2731**

| **i Seminar on Freedom of Religion** |

**[view syllabus](2731.htm)**  
  
**POL 2801 iiiiiiii2811 **

| **i Washington Internship I-II** |

**[view syllabus](dc_internship.htm)**  
  
**  
**

**For more information please contact: i**

| **[i Dr. Francis Graham Lee](lee.htm)**  
---|---  
  
**Office:** **i**

| **i Barbelin Hall, Room 105**  
  
**Office Hours:**

|

**i Mondays: 10-12  
iTuesdays: 2-3  
iWednesdays: 10-12, 2-3  
iFridays: 2-3**  
  
**Phone: i**

| **i (610) 660-1753 (1917)**  
  
**e-mail: i**

| [**i glee@sju.edu**](mailto:glee@sju.edu)  
  
[Return to Political Science Home Page](index.htm)  
  
---  
  
Site designed and developed by: Jane Frangiosa, Saint Joseph's University
Political Science Department Secretary.
[jfrangio@sju.edu](mailto:jfrangio@sju.edu)  
  
---  
  
Last updated: August 2002  
  
  
  

  

  
  
  
  
  
  

