

![](images/usac.gif)

Civics

> > Back to [Mr. Vandenheede's page](index.htm)   _As of the 2001-2002 school
year I am no longer teaching Civics. I leave this site open so that my history
students and others may access the links._

>>

>> [**_Click Here for assignments and due dates_**](civic_assignments-b.htm)

>>

>>  
>>

>> ![](images/ew468_12001.gif)

>>

>> _Cool civics related links!_

>>

>> ![](images/ew468_12002.gif)

>>

>> [ National Council on Economics Quiz -
](http://www.nationalcouncil.org/poll/econsurvey.html)test your econ
knowledge.

>>

>> [WNDU.COM](http://www.wndu.com/) \- _This is the local news site we talked
about in class and you received a password for. Some current event questions
will come from this site!_

>>

>> [ Dowagiac Daily News
_-_](http://www.leaderpub.com/leaderpub/myarticles.asp?S=326&P=327585&PubID=5748&EC=0)
_Check the local news online. Also has links to other area newspapers._

>>

>> [ Think Quest Stock Game
_-_](http://library.thinkquest.org/3096/61game.htm) _This is the site we will
be using for our simulated stock game._

>>

>> [ Associated Press Online](http://www.nytimes.com/aponline/) _-_ _Great for
our current event quizzes!_

>>

>> [ ForeignWire.Com](http://www.foreignwire.com/index.html)\- _Foreign news,
search by country for  
>  current and past articles!_

>>

>> [ Stately Knowledge](http://www.ipl.org/youth/stateknow/skhome.html)\-
_find information on the states!_

>>

>> [ States of the Union](http://www.homeworkcentral.com/toplinks/49.html) \-
_More information on states._

>>

>> [ American Originals ](http://www.homeworkcentral.com/toplinks/1.html)\-
_Look at historical documents of American history, speeches, documents,
newspaper stories etc._

>>

>> [ InfoNation Country Data](http://www.homeworkcentral.com/toplinks/85.html)
_\- search for information on member countries of the United Nations._

>>

>> [ Anatomy of a Murder](http://www.homeworkcentral.com/toplinks/103.html)
_\- Learn the basics of the American legal system._

>>

>> [ Justice for Kids and
Youth](http://www.homeworkcentral.com/toplinks/136.html) _\- More information
on our legal system and special crimes such as internet crime._

>>

>> [ University of Virginia Hyper text
collection](http://xroads.virginia.edu/~HYPER/hypertex.html) _\- Full text and
illustrations of American literary classics online! Read Tom Sawyer or review
the Federalist papers for chapter three._

>>

>> [ Douglas Archives of American public
Address](http://douglass.speech.nwu.edu/) _\- Look at some of the great
speeches of American history, hone your skills as an orator._

>>

>> [ Capitol Virtual Tour
](http://www.homeworkheaven.com/files_framer.htp?http://www.senate.gov/capitol%0D/virtour.html)_\-
Tour many of the rooms of the United States capitol building online, great
when we do our mock congress in chapter nine!_

>>

>> [ Outline of American Government
_-_](http://www.usia.gov/usa/oap/oagtoc.htm) _An online textbook which gives
the basics of our government and the documents which created it._

>>

>> [ Federalist Papers](http://www.homeworkcentral.com/toplinks/153.html) _\-
look here when we do chapter three, gives good information on the framework of
our government._

>>

>> [ Earth Alert
](http://www.discovery.com/news/earthalert/earthalert.html)_\- Broaden your
horizons! Check the weather, disasters, health and more of countries around
the world._

>>

>> [ U.S. presidents
Gallery](http://www.corbis.com/jefferson/pres/pres_frame_p01.html) _\- See
pictures of the American presidents, get information on them and read speeches
by them. Great for chapter ten and eleven!_

>>

>> [ Mapmaker, Mapmaker, Make me a
Map!](http://loki.ur.utk.edu/ut2kids/maps/map.html) _\- Learn the basics of
mapmaking and how to read a map._

>>

>>  
>>

>> * * *

>>

>> _Political Party Web Pages_

>>

>> _

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> _

>>

>> [ Democratic National Committee](http://www.democrats.org/)

>>

>> [Republican National Committee](http://www.rnc.org/)

>>

>> [Reform Party](http://www.reformparty.org/)

>>

>> [Libertarian Party](http://www.lp.org/)

>>

>> [Green Party](http://www.greenparty.org/)

>>

>> [Democratic Socialists](http://www.dsausa.org/dsa.html)

>>

>>  
>>

>>  ![](images/ew468_12003.gif)

>>

>> **Social Studies [Civic Studies] IA -SYLLABUS**

>>

>> ![](images/ew468_12004.gif)

>>

>> Social Studies [Civic Studies] IA

>>

>> is a required course for all freshmen beginning in 97/98 that will focus
upon the Documents of Freedom, and the functions of the Legislative ,
Executive, and Judicial branches at the Federal and State level.It will
introduce the principles of our society's free market economy and basic
consumer skills including negotiating and money management.

>>

>> This understanding will lead the student to a better understanding of civic
responsibility and their role as a participating citizens of the United
States.

>>

>> **TEXTBOOK-** CIVICS(RESPONSIBILITY AND CITIZENSHIP; GLENCOE, 1998

>>

>>  
>>

>> **CLASS GOALS**

>>

>> 1\. To ready students for the upcoming High School MEAP in social studies.

>>

>> 2\. To use the class as an overall approach to teaching citizenship and
responsibilities to

>>

>> students.

>>

>> 3\. To show students the uniqueness and importance of the Declaration of
Independence, The articles of Confederation, and the U.S. Constitution.

>>

>> 4\. To explain the three branches of government to the student in a
meaningful way.

>>

>> **High School Social Studies MEAP Core Values Goals**

>>

>> Core democratic values are the fundamental beliefs and constitutional
principles of American society which unite all Americans. These values are
expressed in the Declaration of Independence, the United States Constitution
and other significant documents, speeches, and writings of the nation. (see
attached Core Values sheet)

>>

>>  
>>

>> **CLASS OUTLINE**

>>

>> 1\. What is Civics?

>>

>> 2\. Roots of American Democracy

>>

>> 3\. The Constitution

>>

>> 4\. Congress

>>

>> 5\. The Presidency

>>

>> 6\. The Executive Branch

>>

>> 7\. The Judicial Branch

>>

>> 8\. State Government

>>

>> 9\. The American Economic System

>>

>> 10\. Government and the Economy

>>

>> 11\. Financing Our Government

>>

>>  
>>

>> **CLASSROOM TEACHING METHODS**

>>

>> 1\. Lecture by instructor (note taking by students).

>>

>> 2\. Guest lectures

>>

>> 3\. Oral reading in class.

>>

>> 4\. Classroom discussion.

>>

>> 5\. Student participation and homework.

>>

>> 6\. Periodic quizzes.

>>

>> 7\. Test after each unit.

>>

>> **STUDENT PARTICIPATION ACTIVITIES**

>>

>> 1\. Mock Congress

>>

>> 2\. Role-playing activities

>>

>> 3\. Classroom discussion of current news activities and controversial legal
subjects

>>

>> In addition we will be discussing current events daily and you will be
expected to keep up with the news as we will have periodic current event
quizzes.

>>

>>  
>>

>> GRADING

>>

>> Grading will be based on a straight scale using the following percentages:

>>

>> 90 -100% = A

>>

>> 80 - 89 % = B

>>

>> 70 - 79 % = C

>>

>> 60 - 69 % = D

>>

>> Less than 60 % is failing

>>

>> Points will be distributed in approximately the following manner:

>>

>> 15% Daily work and participation.

>>

>> PARTICIPATION IN CLASS DISCUSSION AND ACTIVITIES

>>

>> IS EXPECTED AND WILL BE REWARDED!

>>

>> 20% Journal*

>>

>> 25% Homework including vocab and worksheets.

>>

>> 25% Quizzes and tests, including current event quizzes.

>>

>> 15% Final comprehensive exam

>>

>> *JOURNAL

>>

>> Each student will be required to keep a journal. This will be kept in a
SEPARATE spiral notebook. The journal should only be used for journal
assignments, and not for general note taking. Journal assignments will vary in
length and how often given. The journals will be collected every nine weeks
and assigned a grade at that time. Time will be given in class to complete
most journal assignments.

>>

>>  
>>

>> SUPPLIES

>>

>> in addition to the journal notebook, each student should have a folder or
notebook in which to take notes. Pen and pencil and loose leaf paper should
also be brought to class every day.

>>

>>  
>>

>> CLASSROOM RULES

>>

>> It is the responsibility of all students to see the teacher and get
assignments, homework, and notes they missed when absent. The teacher will not
remind the student that they have a test or homework to make-up. It is the
student's responsibility to find out and remember to complete all make-up work
and tests.

>>

>> Students must see the teacher the day they return from an absence whether
they meet in that class or not. Students can do this during seminar, between
First and 2nd hour,between 3rd and 4th hour, or after school. Students are
expected to be prepared to hand in homework,projects,take quizzes or tests if
they were here the day before or during the last block that that class met.

>>

>>  
>>

>> Respect each other and each others opinions. DISRESPECT TO OTHERS WILL NOT
BE TOLERATED. Class discussion will be part of this class and everyone has a
right to their opinion.

>>

>>  
>>

>> No talking unless called upon.

>>

>>  
>>

>> Except during group activities students are to remain in their assigned
seats at all times, including before bell.

>>

>>  
>>

>> No eating in class. Drinks will be allowed if handled responsibly.

>>

>>  
>>

>> Arrive on time and prepared. Requests to go get needed materials will
result in a tardy.

>>

>>  
>>

>> First tardy is a warning, 2nd and 3rd are 1 hour detention. Additional
tardies will result in referral and possible Saturday.

>>

>>  
>>

>> Limit restroom passes. Repeated requests may result in that student being
denied pass privileges.

>>

>>  
>>

>> Any and all rules as listed in the Student Handbook.

>>

>>  
>>

>> ![](images/spinglob001.gif)

>>

>> * * *

