Global Christianity Syllabus

* * *

### DEMIS 802: GLOBAL CHRISTIANITY

* * *

#### Fall Semester, 1995

#### _DOCTORAL STUDIES PROGRAM

COLLEGE OF COMMUNICATION AND THE ARTS

_

#### _DIVINITY/MISSSIONS MINOR_

* * *

_**Professor:**_ Vinson Synan, Ph.D.

_**Telephone:**_ (804) 579-4401

_**Fax:_** (804) 579-4597

_**E-mail:_** [vinssyn@regent.edu](mailto:vinssyn@regent.edu)

* * *

#### **COURSE DESCRIPTION

** This course covers the history of world missions with an emphasis on modern
missions. It also will deal with global resources for evangelization, the
different types of missions sending agencies as well as the various para-
church missions ministries. Major attention will be given to the range and
growth, and proliferation of current pentecostal/charismatic agencies and
phenomena.

* * *

#### **OBJECTIVES

**

At the completion of the course students should be able to:

1) Understand the overall history of Christian missions with special attention
given to the place of signs and wonders in spreading the Gospel.

2) Survey and explain the important turning points in the history of missions,
with emphasis on the charismatic leaders and movements that have appeared over
the centuries.

3) Understand and explain the most successful methods and strategies used by
missionaries, both Catholic and Protestant.

4) Learn the reasons why Pentecostalism has exploded around the world in the
Twentieth century.

5) Know the stories of the pentecostal "Missionaries of the One Way Ticket."

6) Learn about the missionary record and strategies of the more recent
charismatic movements since 1960.

7) Understand the global resources available for world evangelization and to
know the major references available .

8) Catalogue and learn about the different types of para-church missions
organizations in existence and how they may help aid in the missionary
enterprise.

9) Know the size and importance of the different missions agencies active in
world evangelization

* * *

#### **COURSE PROCEDURES

**

The course will involve several methods of learning which will be going on
simultaneously.

* **Reading and Lesson Assignments**

The syllabus will list directed readings from the textbooks for the subject
matter covered by each lesson. These readings will serve as the background and
basis for student interactions The course will consist of 12 two page lectures
accompanied by several questions on the lesson.. Students will send their
replies both to the professor and fellow classmates. All assigned research
papers will be also be distributed to all class members for reading and
replies. Students will e-mail their assignments as they are completed. Lessons
thirteen to fifteen will be designated for the completion of assignments, term
papers, and the final exam

Each student will post an e-mail review of one article from current periodical
literature on some aspect of the course. The students and professor will react
to the reviews as they are posted. The professor will post current news of
interest to the entire class at any time.

In addition to the required texts, each student will read four books, which
may come from the reading lists or from other approved sources. They should
total 800 pages. Book reports will be only one page long and will follow the
format given at the end of the syllabus. They will be posted to the whole
class by e-mail.

* **Term Papers**

Each student will write and submit one term paper of ten pages text not
including the endnotes and bibliography. By the third week, a topic must be
chosen and approved by the professor. By the fifth week, an outline and
bibliography will be submitted by e-mail. The outline and bibliography will be
sent to the entire class. The final copy will be sent by e-mail to the
professor for grading. The style will follow the MLA style form.

* **Class Interaction**

Throughout the course, each student will interact with the professor and all
the other students by e-mail. The professor will send e-mail messages to each
student once a week to monitor the progress of each one.

* * *

#### **TESTS (Required)

**

* **Mid-Term Exam**

An objective short-answer test will be given midway through the course with
the answers returned to the professor by e-mail.

* **Final Exam**

At the end of the course, an open-book discussion exam will be sent to the
students by e-mail. They will be returned to the professor for grading by
e-mail.

* * *

#### **Grading Policies

**

Final grades will be based on the following scale:

Response to weekly e-mail assignments, 20%; E-mail interaction with other
students, 20%; Mid-Term and Final Exams, 20%; Term Papers 40%.

* * *

#### **RECOMMENDED READING TEXTS

**

David B. Barrett, _World Christian Encyclopedia_ (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1982).

David B. Barrett, "The 20th Century Pentecostal/Charismatic Renewal in the
Holy Spirit, With its Goal of World Evangelization" ( _International Bulletin
of Missionary Research_ , 1988).

David B. Barrett, _Cosmos, Chaos and Gospel:A Chronology of World
Evangelization :From Creation to New Creation_ (Birmingham, AL: New Hope,
1987).

Stanley Burgess,Gary McGee and Patrick Alexander, _Dictionary of Pentecostal
and Charismatic Movements_ (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1989).

Earle E. Cairns, _Christianity Through the Centuries: A History of the
Christian Church_ (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1981).

Harvey Cox, _Fire From Heaven: The Rise of Pentecostal Spirituality and the
Reshaping of Religion in the Twenty-first Century_ (New York: Addison Wesley,
1995).

James Goff, _Fields White Unto Harvest: Charles Fox Parham and the Missionary
Origins of Pentecostalism_ (Fayettville, Arkansas: University of Arkansas
Press, 19??).

Charles E. Hummel, _Fire in the Fireplace:Charismatic Renewal in the
Nineties._ (Downers Grove, IL, InterVarsity Press, 1993).

Todd M. Johnson, _Countdown to 1900: A History of World Evangelism_
(Birmingham, AL: New Hope Press, 1988).

J. Herbert Kane, _A Concise History of the Christian World Mission_ (Grand
Rapids, MI: Baker Book House, 1982).

David Martin, _Tongues of Fire:The Explosion of Protestantism in Latin
America_ (Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwood, Ltd., 1990).

Grant McClung, _Azusa Street and Beyond: Pentecostal Missions and Church
Growth in the Twentieth Century_ (South Plainfield, N.J.: Bridge 1986).

Stephen Neill, _A History of Christian Missions_ (New York: Penguin Books,
1986).

Karla Poewe, ed., _Charismatic Christianity as a Global Culture_ (Columbia,
SC: University of South Carolina Press, 1994).

Vinson Synan, _The Holiness-Pentecostal Movement in the United States_ (Grand
Rapids, MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans, 1971).

Vinson Synan, _The Spirit Said Grow' The Astounding Worldwide Expansion of
Pentecostal & and Charismatic Churches_ (Monrovia, CA: Marc, 1992).

John Wimber, _Power Evangelism: Signs and Wonders Today_ (London: Hodder and
Stoughton, 1985).

* * *

#### **COURSE SCHEDULE / TOPICS / PRESENTATIONS

**

* * *

![](/Gif/Button/yellow-ball.gif) **Week One**

_**Topic:_**

* A Global View Of Christianity

_**Reading:_**

![](/Gif/Button/blue-ball.gif) Barrett, _Cosmos, Chaos, and Gospel_ , pp.
1-100.

![](/Gif/Button/blue-ball.gif)Cairns, pp. 13-31.

![](/Gif/Button/blue-ball.gif)Become familiar with the _Chronologies_.

* * *

![](/Gif/Button/yellow-ball.gif) **Week Two**

_**Topic:_**

* Christianity and the Roman Empire (AD 30-500)

_**Reading:_**

![](/Gif/Button/blue-ball.gif) Kane, pp. 3-35.

![](/Gif/Button/blue-ball.gif)Neill, pp.13-52

* * *

![](/Gif/Button/yellow-ball.gif) **Week Three**

_**Topic:_**

* The Christianization of Europe (AD 500-1200)

_**Reading:_**

![](/Gif/Button/blue-ball.gif) Cairns, pp. 165-259.

![](/Gif/Button/blue-ball.gif) Kane, pp. 37-48.

* * *

![](/Gif/Button/yellow-ball.gif) **Week Four**

_**Topic:_**

* Protestant and Catholic Missions in Europe and America (AD 1500-1800)

_**Reading:_**

![](/Gif/Button/blue-ball.gif) Cairns, pp. 273-373.

![](/Gif/Button/blue-ball.gif)Kane, pp. 57-89.

* * *

![](/Gif/Button/yellow-ball.gif) **Week Five**

_**Topic:_**

* Ninteenth Century World Missions

_**Reading:_**

![](/Gif/Button/blue-ball.gif) Neill, pp.273-334.

![](/Gif/Button/blue-ball.gif)Kane, 93-100.

* * *

![](/Gif/Button/yellow-ball.gif) **Week Six**

_**Topic:_**

* The Christian World in 1900

_**Reading:_**

![](/Gif/Button/blue-ball.gif) Todd M. Johnson, _Countdown to 1900: A History
of World Evangelization_.

![](/Gif/Button/blue-ball.gif) John R. Mott, _The Evangelization of the World
in This Generation_ (if available).

* * *

![](/Gif/Button/yellow-ball.gif) **Week Seven**

_**Topic:_**

* Christian Missions in the Twentieth Century

_**Reading:_**

![](/Gif/Button/blue-ball.gif) Kane, pp. 101-112.

* * *

![](/Gif/Button/yellow-ball.gif) **Week Eight**

_**Topic:_**

* The Pentecostal Movement as a Missionary Force

_**Reading:_**

![](/Gif/Button/blue-ball.gif) Goff, _Fields White Unto Harvest_ , pp. 17-106.

![](/Gif/Button/blue-ball.gif)McClung, _Azusa Street and Beyond_ , pp.3-172.

* * *

![](/Gif/Button/yellow-ball.gif) **Week Nine**

_**Topic:_**

* Pentecostal Missionaries of the One Way Ticket

_**Reading:_**

![](/Gif/Button/blue-ball.gif) Synan, _Holiness-Pentecostal Movement_ , pp.
95-139.

![](/Gif/Button/blue-ball.gif)Synan, _The Spirit Said Grow,"_ pp. 5-57.

![](/Gif/Button/blue-ball.gif) Synan, _In the Latter Days_ , pp. 43-69.

* * *

![](/Gif/Button/yellow-ball.gif) **Week Ten**

_**Topic:_**

* Signs and Wonders in World Evangelization

_**Reading:_**

![](/Gif/Button/blue-ball.gif) John Wimber, _Power Evangelism_.

![](/Gif/Button/blue-ball.gif) David Barrett, _The 20th Century
Pentecostal/Charismatic Renewal in the Holy Spirit, with its Goal of World
Evangelization_. (Also available in Burgess, et. al., _Dictionary of
Pentecostal and Charismatic Movements_ ,pp. 810-829.

* * *

![](/Gif/Button/yellow-ball.gif) **Week Eleven**

_**Topic:_**

* Charismatic Missions Since 1960

_**Reading:_**

![](/Gif/Button/blue-ball.gif) David Shibley, _A Force in the Earth_.

![](/Gif/Button/blue-ball.gif) Karla Poewe, _Charismatic Christianity as a
Global Culture_

* * *

![](/Gif/Button/yellow-ball.gif) **Week Twelve**

_**Topic:_**

* Global Resources for Evangelization

_**Reading:_**

![](/Gif/Button/blue-ball.gif) Barrett, _Our Globe and How to Reach It_.

* * *

![](/Gif/Button/yellow-ball.gif) **Week Thirteen**

_**Topic:_**

* Agencies for Evangelization

_**Reading:_**

![](/Gif/Button/blue-ball.gif) TBA

* * *

![](/Gif/Button/yellow-ball.gif) **Week Fourteen**

_**Topic:_**

* Para-Church Missions Organizations

_**Reading:_**

![](/Gif/Button/blue-ball.gif) John Siewart, et al.,. eds. _Mission Handbook_
(Monrovia, CA.: Marc, 1992-1996).

* * *

![](/Gif/Button/yellow-ball.gif) **Week Fifteen**

_**Topic:_**

* Exams, term papers, assignments and interaction with students and professor

* * *

_This syllabus is subject to change without notice. August 9, 1995 update._

