![](/icons/ecblank.gif)| LRNG 602 - Syllabus 2002 - Group Dynamics and Team
Learning fall 2001  
---|---  
![](/icons/ecblank.gif)  
![](/icons/ecblank.gif)  
![](/icons/ecblank.gif)|

**FALL 2002**

  
  
  
  
**GROUP DYNAMICS AND TEAM LEARNING  
LRNG 602.001  - Fall 2002  
DRAFT SYLLABUS**  
  
  
  
**Professor Ann C. Baker Classes meet on Arlington campus, Room 253**  
**Contact Information: abaker1@gmu.edu  
703-993-3805  
Office: Arlington, Room 264**  
  
Class Schedule for fall 2002: Friday evenings (6  - 9pm) and Saturdays (9am -
5pm)  
September 13-14, September 20-21, October 4-5, October 18-19, October 25  
  
  
  
Increasingly the ability to work effectively in small groups - i.e., project
management teams, boards of director, cross-functional teams, cross-cultural
teams, top management groups - is seen as a critical competence for achieving
effectiveness, both within and among organizations and institutions. The
research evidence continues to grow affirming that small group interactions
have complex dynamics and knowledge and familiarity with these phenomena
significantly improves one's ability to function constructively across
multiple contexts. This course is designed to provide opportunities for
students to explore various communication approaches, power differentials,
divergent perceptions, conversational dynamics, leadership styles, decision-
making patterns, and other aspects of group dynamics.  
  
  
Texts: All texts can be purchased in the Arlington GMU Bookstore. Please
purchase them prior to the first class and bring them to the first class.  
  
Forsyth, Donelson R. (1999). Group Dynamics (Third Edition), New York:
Brooks/Cole, Wadsworth.  
  
Schein, Edgar H. (1999). Process Consultation Revisited, New York: Addison-
Wesley.  
  
Seashore, Charles N., Seashore, Edith Whitfield, & Weinberg, Gerald M. (2001).
What Did You Say?: The Art of Giving and Receiving Feedback, Columbia, MD:
Bingham House Books.  
  
Stone, Douglas, Patton, Bruce, & Heen, Sheila (1999). Difficult Conversations:
How to Discuss What Matters Most, New York: Viking.  
  
Learning Style Inventory (You can purchase it in the Arlington GMU Bookstore -
please purchase it and fill it out prior to the first class on September
13th).  
  
  
  
Assignments:  
Completion of all assigned reading, attendance, and active participation in
class are expected each week. There will be two Personal Reflection
Application Essays (PRAEs) that are based upon the experiential learning model
formulated by David Kolb. They will demonstrate a reflective integration of
readings and interactions within the Group Dynamics and Team Learning
environment.  
  
The first PRAE (12-16 pages) will draw on your experiences from the beginning
of the semester through the time of your writing and is due on October 4th.
You will need to keep detailed notes as the semester progresses to use as a
necessary resource for writing both PRAEs.  
  
The second PRAE should be drawn from your experience, observations,
conversations, readings, and reflections during the entire semester course. An
essential part of both papers, but especially in the second PAE (18-30 pages),
will be to include your perspective of themes that emerge and develop across
the whole experience supported by your concrete experiences offering a
conceptual understanding extensively supported by the class readings. The
second PRAE is due on November 8th.  
  
In addition, a Critical Book Review (5-6 pages) of a book related to group
dynamics or small group interactions is required. A list of suggested books
will be available. The book review is due on September 20th.  
  
Because of the extensive reading and condensed nature of this course that ends
on October 25th, students are strongly encouraged to complete as much of the
course reading as possible prior to the beginning of classes.  
  
The final course grade will be based upon:  
， Critical Book Review (15%) - Due on September 20th  
， First PAE (25%) - Due on October 4th  
， Second PAE (35%) - Due on November 8th  
， Overall effort, preparation, attendance in all classes, and collaborative
involvement in class interactions (25%)  
  
More details will be given during the first class.  
  

* * *

  
  
  
**Group Dynamics and Team Learning** **  
****Book List - fall 2002** **  
Professor Ann C. Baker**  
  
Argyris, Chris. (1993). Knowledge for Action: A Guide to Overcoming Barriers
to Organizational Change. Jossey-Bass.  
  
Baker, Ann C., Jensen, Patricia J.,  & Kolb, David A. (2002). Conversational
Learning: An Experiential Approach to Knowledge Creation. Westport, CT: Quorum
Books.  
  
Baker, Wayne. (2001). Achieving success through social capital. Jossey-Bass.  
  
Belenky, M.F., Clinchy, F. M., Goldberger, N. R. & J.M. Tarule (1986). Women's
ways of knowing: The development of self, voice and mind. New York: Basic
Books.  
  
Bell, Ella & Nkomo, Stella (2002). Our Separate Ways: Black and White Women
and the Struggle for Identity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press  
  
Bellah, Robert, et al (1985). Habits of the heart. University of California
Press.  
  
Bennis, Warren. (1997). Why Leaders Can't Lead: The Unconscious Conspiracy
Continues. Jossey-Bass.  
  
Bennis, W., & Slater, P (1999). The Temporary Society- What Is Happening to
Business and Family Life in America Under the Impact of Accelerating Change.  
  
Bernhard, Gary & Glantz, Kalman. (1992). Staying human in the organization.
New York: Praeger.  
  
Bly, R. (1990). Iron John: A book about men.  
  
Bruner, Jerome (1990). Acts of Meaning. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press.  
  
Bruner, Jerome (1986). Actual Minds, Possible Worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.  
  
Chang, R. (1999). The Passion Plan- A Step-by-Step Guide to Discovering,
Developing, and Living Your Passion.  
  
Chodorow, N. (1978). The reproduction of mothering: Psychoanalysis and the
sociology of gender. Berkeley: University of California Press.  
  
Conger, Jay & Beth, B. (1999). Building Leaders- How Successful Companies
Develop the Next Generation.  
  
Covey, Stephen (1992) Principle-centered leadership. New York: Simon &
Schuster.  
  
Covey, Steve. (1989). The seven habits of highly effective people. New York:
Simon & Schuster.  
  
Crainer, S. (1999). The Management Century- A Critical Review of 20th Century
Thought and Practice.  
  
Crawford, M. (1995). Talking difference: On gender and language. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.  
  
Csikszentmihaly, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal experience.  
  
Davenport, Thomas. (1999). Human Capital: What It Is and Why People Invest It.
Jossey-Bass.  
  
Donnellon, Anne (1996). Team talk: The power of language in team dynamics.
Harvard Business School Press.  
  
Fiumara, G. C. (1990). The Other Side of Language: A Philosophy of Listening.
New York: Routledge.  
  
Freire, Paulo (1992). Pedagogy of the Oppressed. New York: CONTINUUM  
  
Gilligan, C. (1982). In a different voice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press.  
  
Giovagnoli, Melissa. (1998). Angels in the workplace: Stories and inspirations
for creating a new world of work. Jossey-Bass.  
  
Goleman, Daniel (1995). Emotional Intelligence. New York: Bantam Books.  
  
Goleman, Daniel (1998). Working with emotional intelligence. New York: Bantam.  
  
Handy, Charles. (2000). 21 Ideas for managers: Practical wisdom for managing
your company and yourself. Jossey-Bass  
  
Handy, Charles (1999). The Hungry Spirit : Beyond Capitalism : A Quest for
Purpose in the Modern World. Broadway Books  
  
Handy, Charles. (1999). Waiting for the Mountain to Move: Reflections on Work
and Life.  
  
Handy, Charles (1995). The age of paradox. Harvard Business School Press.  
  
Helgesen, S. (1995). The Female Advantage: Women's Ways of Leadership.  
Herman, Stanley (1994). The Tao at Work: On Leading and Following. Jossey-
Bass.  
  
Hey, Kenneth., & Moore, Peter. (1998). The caterpillar doesn't know: How
personal change is creating organizational change. New York: The Free Press.  
  
Hochschild, A. (1983). The managed heart. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.  
  
Hochschild, Arlie. ((1997). The time bind: When work becomes home & home
becomes work.  
  
hooks, bell (1994). Teaching to Transgress: Education as the Practice of
Freedom. New York: Routledge.  
  
Hunt, David (1992) The renewal of personal energy. Toronto:OISE Press.  
  
Hurst, David K. (1995). Crisis and renewal: Meeting the challenge of
organizational change.  
  
Josselson, Ruthellen (1992). The Space Between Us. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass
Publishers.  
  
Judge, William. (1999). The leader's shadow: Exploring and developing
executive character. Sage.  
  
Katzenbach, Jon & Smith, Douglas. (1992). The wisdom of teams. Harper Collins.  
  
Keen, Sam (1991). Fire in the belly: On being a man. Bantam Books.  
  
Kets De Vries, Manfred F.R. (1993). Leaders, Fools, and Impostors: Essays on
the Psychology of Leadership.  
  
Kleiner, Art (1996) The age of heretics. Currency-Doubleday.  
  
Kohn, Alfie (1986). No Contest: The Case Against Competition - Why We Lose in
Our Race to Win. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.  
  
Kotter, John. (1997). Matsushita leadership: Lessons from the 20th century's
most remarkable entrepreneur.  
  
Kouzes, James., & Posner, Barry. (1999). Encouraging the heart: A leader's
guide to rewarding and recognizing others. Jossey-Bass  
  
Kurtzman, Joel. (1998). Thought Leaders: Insights on the Future of Business,
Jossey-Bass.  
  
Lewin, Roger., & Regine, Birute. (2000). The soul at work. Simon & Schuster.  
  
McClure, Bud. (1998). Putting a new spin on groups: The science of chaos.  
  
McWhinney, Will. (1997). Paths of change. Sage.  
  
Mitroff, Ian I.; Denton, Elizabeth. (1999). A Spiritual Audit of Corporate
America: A Hard Look at Spirituality, Religion, and Values in the Workplace.
Jossey-Bass.  
  
Miller, J.B. (1986) Toward a new psychology of women. Boston: Beacon Press.  
  
Nahavandi, A. (1996). The art and science of leadership. Prentice-Hall.  
  
Oshry, Barry (1996). Seeing systems: Unlocking the Mysteries of Organizational
Life.  
  
Oshry, Barry. (1999). Leading systems, Lessons from the powerlab. Berrett-
Koehler.  
  
Owen, Harrison (1999). The spirit of leadership: Liberating the leader in each
of us.  
  
Quinn, Robert E. (1996). Deep change: Discovering the leader within.  
  
Quinn, Robert. (2000). Change the World: How Ordinary People Can Accomplish
Extraordinary Results. Jossey-Bass.  
  
Rudolph, Barbara. (1998). Disconnected: How six people from AT&T discovered
the new meaning of work in a downsized corporate America. The Free Press.  
  
Schutz, Will (1994). The human element: productivity, self-esteem and the
bottom line.  
  
Shaw, Robert (1997). Trust in the Balance: Building Successful Organizations
on  
Results, Integrity, and Concern, Jossey-Bass.  
  
Swann, William Jr. (1996), Self-Traps: The elusive quest for higher self-
esteem.  
  
Tannen, D (1990). You just don't understand: Women and men in conversation.  
  
Teal, Thomas. (1996). First Person: Tales of management courage and tenacity.  
  
Thompson, Michael. (2000). The congruent life: Following the inward path to
fulfilling work and inspired leadership. Jossey-Bass  
  
Thrall, Bill; McNicol, Bruce; McElrath, Ken. (1999). The Ascent of a Leader:
How Ordinary Relationships Develop Extraordinary Character and Influence.
Jossey-Bass.  
  
Vail, Peter (1999). Learning as a Way of Being.  
  
Walters, Marianne, Carter, Betty, Papp, Peggy, & Silverstein, Olga (1988). The
Invisible Web: Gender Patterns in Family Relationships. New York: The Guilford
Press.  
  
Wheatley, Margaret. (1994). Leadership and the new science. Berrett-Koehler.  
  
Whyte, D. (1994). The heart aroused: Poetry and the preservation of the soul
in corporate  
York: W.H. Freeman.  
  
Wood, J. (1994). Gendered lives. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing.

