**HISTORY 307                         THE UNITED STATES, 1945-1975
SPRING 2002**

Class meets MWF at 12:20 in G-01 Kinard Hall. If I am late, please have the
courtesy to wait 5 minutes, or until someone from the department instructs you
otherwise.

Prof. Richard Saunders -- 200-A Holtzendorff Hall -- 656-5373

assisted by  Ronald "Bird" Burriss who will help with attendance and other
class chores.

TO CONTACT ME:  Come by during regular office hours--Mondays and   Wednesdays
1:30-4:30 and Tuesdays 9-11:30 & 12:30-4:30. These are generous office hours
and should accommodate most people. You do not need a special appointment
during those hours. If you have a special problem, stop after class to arrange
a special appoint-ment at some other time. If you want to talk, my office
phone is 656-5373, and my home phone is 654-2841. Please, no calls during the
evening news hour 6:30-7:30. E-mail is airedal@clemson.edu, but it is a poor
way to reach me, as I don't read it very regu-larly and generally take a
dislike to students who don't have the guts to call or see me in person.

READING:

    Pete Daniel,          Lost Revolution; The South in the 1950s   
    Robert Dallek    ,  Flawed Giant   
    James Carroll,      An American Requieum; God, My Father, and the  War that Came Between Us

**REQUIREMENTS**  
:  
   1\. Submit two reports as described below.  
   2\. Pass the midterm and final examinations.  
   3\. Attend class. See attendance requirement described below.  If you do
not understand it, ask, because there will be no exceptions. ****

**EXAMINATIONS** :  
    There will be a midterm and a final. Both will be  primarily essay examinations. Grading is based on the  accuracy and completeness of your information, the clarity of  your expression and your ability to use factual evidence to  reach a conclusion.

**GRADES:**  
    Final grades are a matter of judgment. To guide me in     that judgment, the papers will count 15% each, the midterm 30% and the final 40%. I am getting excellent results from my tech-nique of lecture coupled with video--most students giving me crystal clear recall weeks after a presentation. Grades should therefore be high. But since I must also have a proper curve on grades, this means that failure to meet the attendance re-quire-ment or turn in papers on time (see below) will get full penal-ties. Be warned.

**ATTENDANCE** :  
     This is a lecture course. What I want from you for three hours of credit is to be here and absorb. There is no substitute for being present and thinking, for 50 minutes, about the subject at hand.  Getting notes from a friend is an empty substitute.   
     If you take more than four cuts, you should not count on the benefit of the doubt if your final grade is close. However, there is no specific penalty until you take more than 6 cuts. Whatev-er subject matter and announce-ments you miss are your responsibil-ity. These cuts are meant for university activi-ties (including athlet-ics), illness, family emergencies, job interviews, or whatever--it is your business. There is no distinc-tion between "ex-cused" or any other absences. A full letter grade will be deduct-ed for anyone with more than 6 cuts. If you miss more than 10 classes, your final grade will be no higher than D, and most likely F.   
     In very rare cases such as a hospitalized illness late in the semester, you may plead for special consideration, but exceptions will be considered only for students whose average in the class is at least a mid-C at the time their special troubles began, and only for those who can explain every cut, not just the one or two that may have gone over the limit. Remember, I have a record of the exact dates you cut, so your records will have to tally.   
 Late arrivals annoy everyone and signal me that you are not very serious
about the course. Attendance will be taken about seven or eight minutes after
the start of class. That is generous leeway. If you are not in your seat at
that point, you are absent and that is that. I will believe my assistant every
time. I am tolerant of many student foibles, but cutting class and wandering
in late are not among them. Take this seriously.

**REPORTS:**  
    You will write two outside papers, both book reports, one on the Lost Revolutions book and one on the American Requiem book. (The Dallek book is a text for the second half of the course and will be covered by specific questions on the final exam.)   
 For the reports, read the book, and write a paper on what it is about, what
are its most interesting points, and what conclu-sions it reaches. What is so
hard about that? These should be a minimum of 5 pages double-spaced in normal
type. Papers of minimum length should not expect maximum grades.  
 Papers are due on the dates specified. They are due at class time, al-though
there is a grace period until 4:30 that afternoon. Papers that are late but
come in before I return the rest of the class's papers will be docked a letter
grade. After that, papers are docked two letter grades.  No papers will be
accepted for any reason after 3:00 pm, Apr 26, the last day of class. One
paper not turned in at all will mean an automatic D in the course and two
papers not turned it means an automatic F. No need to even take the final.
Comput-er problems are specif-i-cally NOT an excuse for a late paper, so plan
ahead.

    
**SYLLABUS:**  
Date     Topic

Jan  9   V-J Day.  
            The world loved the Americans   
    .   
     11   The Soviets Get the Bomb.   
            Stalin and the Iron Curtain

    14   A Death in Greece, "Loss" in China.   
           Subtleties of the  Cold War.

    16   Korea & MacArthur.   
           The frustration of limits.

    18   McCarthy and His Ism.   
           What does freedom mean?

    21   King Day. No class.

    23   The GI Bill   
            Liberalism Creates the America You Know

    25   Levittown and Cars with Fins.   
           The boom  that liberalism brought you.

    28   California Zephyr and Interstate Highways.   
            A flashy new  streamliner from private enterprise and the biggest construction project ever from the government illuminate  the new political economy.   
    
    30   Ozzie and Harriet.   
            The way we thought we were.

Feb  1   I Love Lucy.  
            Television, and goodbye to sitting on the  front stoop talking to neighbors.

     4     The Brown Decision.   
             The great fault line.

     6    Silent Spring,  Death of a Salesman,  The Other America,  The Feminime Mystique,  Night Comes to the Cumberlands,  The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit,  Black Like Me, On the  Road.   
           Only a fool ignores the storm warnings.

     8   Rhythm & Blues, Honky Tonk and the Birth of Rock 'n  Roll. Out of the South, the whole South, black and  white, comes a new art form to define "America" to the  world.  Includes Rich's homage to Capitol Records and the sounds of the West Coast.

    11   Emmett Till.   
            Murder in Mississippi.   
    
    13   The Year 1960.   
            A capsule of time, and a presidential  campaign.

    15    Kennedy.   
           A stylish but not very successful presidency.

    18   Fidel.   
            The brink of nuclear war.

    20    Camelot.   
             The mystique of a reign, and its horrible end.

    22    Assassination.   
             The nexus at the underbelly.

    25   The New Polarity.  Goldwater defines conservatism.   
    
    27   Vietnam.  French imperialism, Indochina, Ho Chi Minh,  Dienbienphu, Geneva, and Ngo Dinh     Diem.   
           The U.S. creates South Vietnam.   
                                                                                                       Lost Revolution Paper Due

Mar  1   Vietnam.  
             Ike, Kennedy, the VC, MACV, Ap Bac, the events of October & November, 1963.

     4    Vietnam.   
            Johnson, Yankee Team, incident in the Gulf of Tonkin, Pleiku, DaNang, Rolling Thunder, search & destroy, credibility gap.

     6   Vietnam.   
           Television, the draft, and a move-ment.

     8   MIDTERM EXAMINATION

    11   Freedom Rides.   
           Terror in the South.

    13   Harvey Gantt.   
           Adam Clayton Powell, Martin Luther King, Jr., redneck mayhem at Ole Miss, dignity at Clemson.

    15   Freedom Summer.   
           Three lives for Mississippi, Selma, the  response of white America, the emergence of SNCC.   
    
         Spring Break

    25   Dutch Elm Disease.   
           A tree blight underscores the decay of the American city.   
    
    27    Martial Law in Detroit, the troubled black family and  the Moynihan Report.

    29    Great Society.   
            Johnson's dream and the limits of  liberalism.

Apr  1   Port Huron Statement.  
             Roots of a youth rebellion.   


     3      Drugs, Sex & Rock'n Roll   
              What the music told.

     5      1968.   
             The country drifts toward anarchy.

     8      1968.   
              Sights and sounds of a terrible year.

    1 0     Bring Us Together.   
              The Good Nixon and ther Silent  Majority.   
                                                                                             American Requiem Paper Due   
    
    12      After My Lai.   
              The War tears Americans apart.

    15       Spies.   
               Keeping secret files on Americans and overthrowing a democracy in Chile.   
    
    17    Campus Shock.   
             The Movement ends in Helter Skelter; rampant careerism takes over while the kids copulate       like fox terriers.

    19     China & Detente.   
              Kissinger & Nixon manage the Cold  War.

    22     Oil Embargo and the Decreasing Rate of Productivity Increase.   
              Far from dry, this is the most profound  watershed since the end of World War II and sets in    motion the coming angst of the 1970s and 1980s.

    24     Watergate.   
              The Constitution holds, but not by much.

    26      Fall of Saigon.   
              The horror, the horror.   


Apr 29   FINAL EXAMINATION, Monday, April 29 from 1 to 4 pm.  
    
    


