**The United States Since 1877**

  
HIS 2020 Spring, 2001  
Dr. Small  
CH216L  
Office Hours: Wed. 9:00-12:00 a.m.; Fri. 2:00-4:00 p.m. and by appointment  
Office Phone: 581-6380  
E-mail: [cfnps@eiu.edu](mailto:cfnps@eiu.edu)

This syllabus is subject to change at the professor's discretion.  
If you have a documented disability and wish to receive academic
accommodations,  
please contact the Office ofDisability Services, 581-6583.

The Course:  
We will study approximately 100 years of U.S. history in the next sixteen
weeks. We will consider the economic, political, and social conditions that
created and defined each era  
in that time span. Primary sources will allow you to examine first-hand
accounts of, and contemporary commentary on, the events we will be studying.

  
Textbooks:  
James Roark, et al, _The American Promise  
_ Robert Marcus and David Burner, _America Firsthand_ NOTE: Readings from this
book  
are indicated in the Oral Presentation section below. Read documents as noted
for each chapter of _The American Promise._

Your grade:  
Your grade is based on weekly quizzes (given every Monday, no make-ups except
in  
cases of excused absences), three exams, one oral presentation, and three
short writing assignments.  
Quizzes: 10% These cover the readings due for that week. This means that you
must have the readings for that week done by the time you come to class on
Monday.  
Exam 1: 15 %  
Exam 2: 15%  
Exam 3 (Final, not comprehensive): 20%  
Writing assignments and oral presentation: 10% each for a total of 40% of your
grade Attendance is mandatory .  

**Calendar**

Week of:  
January 8: Reconstruction  
Readings: Roark, chapter 16  
No quiz this week.---

January 15: Migrations  
Quiz will cover Roark, chapters 16 and 17  
Readings: Roark, chapter 17  
(Note: no class Jan. 15)

January 22: Gilded Age-- Politics and Business  
Readings: Roark, chapter 18

January 29: Gilded Age-- Labor  
Readings: Roark, chapter 19

Writing assignment #1 due January 31.

February 5: Exam I. Will cover Reconstruction through the Gilded Age. No quiz.
February 7: Begin Progressive Era  
Readings: Roark, chapter 20

February 12: Progressive Era  
Quiz will cover Roark, chapters 20 and 21.  
Readings: Roark, chapter 21

(Note: no class Feb. 16)

February 19: The Great War Readings: Roark, chapter 22

February 26: From boom to crash  
Readings: Roark, chapter 23

March 5 : A New Deal  
Readings: Roark, chapter 24

March 12: Spring Break

March 19: The U. S. and the Second World War  
Readings: Roark, chapter 25

March 26: Exam #2. Will cover Progressive Era through WWll. No quiz.

Mar. 28: Cold War  
 Readings: Roark, chapter 26

April 2: Prosperity  
 Quiz will cover Roark, chapters 26 and 27.  
 Readings: Roark, chapter 27

 April 9: Rebellion and Reform  
 Readings: Roark, chapter 28

April 16: Vietnam  
Readings: Roark, chapter 29

April 23: Nixon  
Readings: Roark, pp. 1175-1202

**Final Exam Schedule:**  
1 :00 class (section 2): Tuesday, May 1,2:45- 4:45 3:00 class (section 4):
Monday, April 30, 2:45-4:45

                                                **Oral Presentation**

You each will be assigned one of the following questions to answer in class.
Your answers should take the form of a mini-lecture-at least 5 minutes long,
not more than 10 minutes. You must cite the relevant documents from _America
Firsthand_ to support your answer. All of the suggested documents may not have
a direct bearing on your question. Use your textbook to help you formulate
your answer, but do not simply repeat whatever it has to say. You will make
your presentation during the week that the syllabus says we will be discussing
that chapter from Roark. I will call on you at an appropriate time during the
lecture to make your presentation.  
Take notes of your classmates' answers and any ensuing discussion. All of
these questions are potential essay questions on the exams.

**You will be graded on:**  
1.length-have you used your time well?  
2.organization-is your answer coherent? does it progress logically from one
point to the next?  
3.use of primary sources-have you made clear how the primary sources support
your answer?  
4.overall quality of your answer-have you answered the question completely?
have you fit this question and your answer into its proper historical context?
does your answer indicate a thoughtful analysis of the question and the
sources? have you stuck to the point?  
_If you have any questions at all, or simply want to run through your answer
before you present it to the class, please come see me at least two days
before your presentation. I am available during office hours and other times
byappointment._

Chapter 16 (see docs. 1-7)  
 1\. What were the changes in southern life wrought by emancipation and
Reconstruction that the Klan hoped to reverse? What methods did the Klan use
in their attempts to accomplish this?  
2\. What was the effect ofKlan violence and terrorism on politics and
political activity in the Reconstruction South?  
3\. What factors prompted African Americans to migrate west and north after
the Civil War? In particular, how did the events of 1877 affect the freed
people's lives and decisions to migrate?  
 Chapter 17 ( see docs. 9-13 )

 1\. Why was Indian education seen as vital to the successful acculturation of
Indian people's into white culture?

2\. The American West was settled within twenty-five years after the Civil
War. Discuss  
the several factors responsible for the quick settlement of the West.  
3\. What factors helped to hasten the final removal of Native Americans from
the West  
after the Civil War? What was the government's long-range plan for dealing
with the  
Indians?  
4\. Was "the West" the stronghold of freedom and democracy, as Frederick
Jackson  
Turner argued in 1893, or was it the setting for some of the worst
exploitation of human  
and natural resources in our history?

Chapter 18 (see docs. 17, 18)  
I. Were John D. Rockefeller and Andrew Carnegie "robber barons" or "industrial  
statesmen"? Although different from one another, how were both Rockefeller and  
Carnegie typical of their era?  
2\. What factors contributed to industrial growth at the end of the 19th c. ?
(consider docs.  
15, 16, 19, and 21 also)  
3\. Did Big Business in the Gilded Age create a crass, materialistic culture,
or did it  
democratize goods and services, rendering them available to everyone?

Chapter 19 (pp. 754-755 in The _American Promise;_ docs. 19 and 20)  
I. What criteria have historians used to measure success? What have been some
of the  
pitfalls in measuring this success? How might different class and ethnic
groups in late- nineteenth-century America have defined and measured success?  
2\. The presidents from Hayes to Cleveland seemed overshadowed by the
businessmen of  
the Gilded Age. Is it because the presidents were insignificant or because the  
businessmen were so significant? Explain.

Chapter 20 (docs. 8, 14, 19,21)  
I. What differentiated Populists from Democrats and Republicans?  
2\. The Populist platform of 1892 was to have solved major problems of the
Gilded Age.  
How? What were the problems to which it was responding and how might each
plank  
have solved those problems?  
3\. Based on the documents describing the accounts of the Spanish-American
War, what  
were the greatest concerns of the soldiers? Compare the Davis and Roosevelt
accounts of  
the American attack on San Juan Hill. How might they have differed from other  
published accounts? Base your answer on "The Spanish-American War: Eyewitness  
Accounts," p. 792 in _The American Promise. I_

Chapter 21

1\. The progressive movement failed to better the situation of African
Americans, largely ignored the plight of the laborer, and ignored women.
Analyze this statement, discussing its validity. (See docs. 15, 16,
19,21,24,27)  
2\. How did the practice of gathering documentary evidence change throughout
the  
progressive period? What does the documentary evidence collected by the
progressives  
reveal about their attitudes, beliefs, and biases? Do these attitudes and
beliefs affect the  
reliability of the evidence? Base your answer on "What do Early Documentary
Texts tell  
us about the Men and Women who called Themselves Progressives?" p. 806, _The  
American Promise _.  
3\. What arguments did textile mill owners give for using child laborers? How
valid are  
their arguments? What arguments did the progressives give to counter the mill
owners?  
How valid are their arguments? How did child laborers feel about their work  
experiences? Base your answer on  "The Issue ofChild Labor," p. 831,
_TheAmerican  
Promise_

Chapter 22  
1\. For what reasons did African Americans enlist and fight in the First World
War? What  
conditions did they encounter once they enlisted and fought in battle? To what
extent did  
their service in World War I help African Americans after the war's end? Base
your  
answer on "What did the War Mean to African Americans?" p.860, _The American  
Promise, _ and doc.24. Consider the last question carefully and be sure to
read chapter 22  
closely.  
2\. What reasons do the documents in "For and Against World War I," p. 870,
_The  
American Promise, _ give for why Americans were supposed to support the war
effort?  
How were they to show their support? How did Jane Addams describe the European
war  
effort and its causes? What did she mean when she wrote that the war could be
helped by  
"a certain touch of human nature?" In addition to the materials cited above,
consider doc. 25.

 Chapter 23  
 1\. Discuss the following statement from Marcus and Burner: "The Scopes Trial
... revealed the chasm in religious and social values between fundamentalists
and modernists." (p. 155) Exactly how did the trial do that? (See docs. 22 and
23)  
 2\. How could the 1920s be seen simultaneously as an era of prosperity and
economic weakness? Who prospered? Who did not? What were the economic
weaknesses? (See  doc. 26, "Was Samuel Insull a Villain or a Victim?" p. 922,
_The American Promise,_ and  your textbook, chapter 23)
_  
 _3\. Who was Samuel Insull and what was his claim to fame? Why was the stock
market crash of 1929 a turning point for Insull? How did his life change? Was
Insull a villain or a victim of his times? Base your answer on "Was Samuel
Insull a Villain or Victim?" p. 922, _The American Promise_.  
                                      

Chapter 24  
1\. What attitudes about government, wealth and poverty, opportunity, and
patriotism are  
revealed in the selection of letters printed in doc. 28?  
2\. What in Huey Long's background made him the champion of the dispossessed?
Huey  
Long often broke the "rules" to achieve his desired results? What rules did he
break?  
What results did he achieve? Was Huey Long a demagogue or a champion of the  
dispossessed? Explain your answer. Base your answer on "Huey Long: Demagogue
or  
Champion of the Dispossessed?" p. 952, The _American Promise  
_ 3\. It is spring 1937. It appears that the Depression is lifting. Take a
stance either as a  
Republican or a Democrat and argue for or against the welfare state created by
the New  
Deal. Be sure you: identify yourself as one party or the other, define
"welfare state,"  
describe benefits and costs, suggest alternatives if arguing against, use
specific pieces of  
legislation, specific events to back up your argument.

Chapter 25  
1\. Why were Americans of Japanese descent singled out as an ethnic group for
abuse,  
discrimination, and internment? How did relocation and internment affect the
Japanese-  
Americans who were resettled in camps? Base your answer on "Japanese
Internment," p.  
1000, The _American Promise_ and doc. 32.  
2\. In what ways did American women support the nation's war effort during WW
II?  
(See docs. 29, 31 )  
3\. What factors made it difficult to know what was happening behind German-
held  
borders with regard to the death camps? What was the American and British
reaction to  
the death camps, once word of their existence surfaced? Why did they react in
this  
manner? Why did the Allies refuse to bomb the death camps? Do you believe
their  
decision was correct?  
4\. Why did the United States use atomic bombs to end the war in the Pacific?
Were there other possible means for ending the war? What were they and what
were the advantages  
and disadvantages over using the atomic bomb? (See docs. 29, 30, 33)

Chapter 26  
1\. After World War II, employment among women who had worked during the war
fell  
dramatically. What happened to their jobs and why? What were their postwar  
expectations regarding work? Of the "Rosies" who desired to continue working
after war,  
most faced obstacles. What were some of these obstacles? How did women get
around  
them? What help did unions provide? Base your answer on "What Happened to
Rosie the  
Riveter?" p. 1036, The _American Promise,_ and doc 31. /  
2\. How did the second Red Scare begin and what impact did it have upon
Americans?  
 Discuss some of the events that started it. (See doc. 34)  
     

Chapter 27  
1\. Put yourself in the role of a college student of the 1950s. Discuss your
interests and  
your social and religious values. (See docs. 34,35)  
2\. How did the Civil Rights activists of the 1950s overcome many of the
obstacles to  
minority attainment of Civil Rights? Cite specific legislation, court
decisions, direct  
actions (or grass roots activity.) (See doc. 36)  
Base your answers to the next two questions on "The _Brown_ Decision," p.l
090, _The  
American Promise _.  
3\. What were Justice Warren's reasons for concluding that schools must be
integrated and  
that in public education  "the doctrine of 'separate but equal' has no place"?
What  
arguments did southern congressmen give for opposing the _Brown_ decision?
What  
arguments were they withholding?  
4\. African American students seemed to favor their integrated education. What
were their  
reasons? To what extent were the reasons given by African American students
for  
favoring integration different from those given by the Supreme Court? Explain.

Chapter 28  
 1\. Discuss the social and political context in which the Students for a
Democratic Society  
drafted the Port Huron Statement. What were the statement's main criticisms of  
American society? Does it emphasize cultural and moral issues or political and
economic  
ones? (See doc. 39)  
 2\. What changes in American society did the social reform movements of the
1960s and  
 1970s achieve? Include specific aspects of those movements, such as the
Mississippi  
 Summer Freedom Project, the Port Huron Statement, and _The Feminine
Mystique._ (See  
 docs. 39,40,41)  
 3\. NAACP leader Roy Wilkins remarked that "Legislation is not self-
implementing."  
 Who implemented the Voting Rights Act of 1965, and how? Why do you think the  
 greatest number of elected positions for African Americans came at the local
level? Were  
 these politicians able to effect change for their communities? In what ways?
What did  
 Mayor Unita Blackwell ofMayersville, Mississippi, mean by the words, "We
changed a  
 whole outlook"? Base your answer on "What Difference did Black Voting Rights  
 Make?" p. 1120, _The American Promise._

_ _ Chapter 29  
 1\. What considerations, concerns, and constraints influenced President
Johnson and his  
advisers in their decision making about the Vietnam War? How did the North _I_
Vietnamese counter the bombing strikes that destroyed their industries and
transportation  
network? The American military commanders argued that their airpower and
bombings  
over North Vietnam did not fail. What did they see as the major reasons for a
lack of success in prosecuting the war? Base your answer on "Why Couldn't the
United States Bomb its Way to Victory in Vietnam?" p. 1152, _The American
Promise.  
_ 2\. How did the massacre at My Lai become public knowledge? What,
specifically, had to happen and did happen before an investigation could take
place? Why were Americans so shocked at the news of the massacre at My Lai?
(See docs. 37,38) L.

                                              **Writing Assignments**

You will receive a list of questions for each writing assignment. Write a two-
to three- page response to **one** of the questions. If you do not think you
can get a two- to three- page response out of a particular question, choose
another question. U se class notes and assigned readings to help you fomlulate
your answer. You must use your own words.  
You may use brief quotes from the text to illustrate a point. Anytime you
refer to the readings (directly quoted or not) you must provide a
parenthetical citation. That is, cite either Roatk or:.Marcus and the
appropriate page number in parentheses. All you need is the author and page
number.  
These are not original research, personal opinion, or creative writing
exercises. Any question that asks "in your opinion" means "based on the
evidence at hand." In other words, I want to know what you think, but I want
you to justify your position. In these papers you must demonstrate that you
have read, analyzed, and understood the material. Punctuation, grammar,
spelling all count. If you do not express yourself clearly I will not be able
to follow your answer which means that you will not get a good grade.  
All of your papers are graded on:  
1.organization  
2.clarity  
3.use of primary sources where appropriate  
4.overall quality of your answer ( see oral presentation grading)

Following are the choices for writing assignment #1 which is due **January**
31.  
1\. The persistence of racism, both in the North and South, lay at the heart
of Reconstruction's failure. Do you agree or disagree with that assessment?
Explain why.  
2\. The following questions relate to "The Meaning of Freedorn, " p. 612, The
_American Promise._ How are the African Americans represented in these
documents seeking to explore the potential of freedom? What are their desires
and ambitions? What arguments do the black T ennesseans put forth to justify
their receiving political and civil rights?  
3\. Discuss the differences between the old and the immigration in temlS of
their population, their problems, and their impact on the cities.  
4\. How successful was technology in overcoming the major problems of the
cities? Discuss the problems and their technological solutions.  
5\. The ideas of social Darwinism and laissez-faire played an important role
in the period following the Civil War. Define both. Explain the effect that
both had on big business and businessmen and on the role of government. In
your opinion, was it a positive effect?  
 6\. Write an essay tracing the evolution of the following political issues
through the 1870s, 1880s, and 1890s: civil service refoml, the currency
problem, the tariff, and government
\-

regulation of industry .Which was the most successfully resolved issue? Which
was the most important? Why?  
7\. How did the industrial workforce change after the Civil War? Include in
your answer the roles of men, women, and children.  
8\. Explain the cult of domesticity. What was it? To what extent was it a
reality in the late nineteenth century? What was the relationship of the
"domestics" to women who lived within the cult of domesticity?  
9\. Discuss the development of the union movement following the Civil War,
taking note of the various unions, their organizations, their goals, and their
success in achieving solutions to their problems.  
10\. Toward the end of the nineteenth century, certain Americans began to
challenge the status quo. Who were these people and what action did they take?
What problems did they identify? What were their solutions?  

[back](index.htm)

