

* * *

** **![](../images/SCt.jpg) **Constitutional Law I**   ![](../images/SCt.jpg)



* * *

> ![](http://www.law.asu.edu/homepages/clinton/images/asulogot.gif)

>

> Robert N. Clinton

>

>   **Syllabus**

>

> **Spring 2002**

>

>  
>

> **Communications  
>  ** Room 237, Armstrong Hall

>  
> 480.965-3501 (office)

> 602.276.2657 (home office)

>  
> Email: [rclinton@robert-clinton.com](mailto:rclinton@robert-clinton.com)

> Course Website:
[http://law.asu.edu/homepages/clinton/ind2.htm](http://www.law.asu.edu/HomePages/Clinton/ind2.htm)

>  
> Secretary: Estela Obregon,  269 Armstrong Hall

> 965-1354  
>

>

> **Office Hours**

>

> Tuesday  
> 8:30-11:30 AM, 1:30-3:30 PM

>  
> **Note** :  The instructor maintain an open door policy and students should

> feel free to drop by his office at any time he is there.  The office hours
are

> posted to try to keep him tethered to the office during those times.

>  

**Objectives**

Constitutional Law I governs the law surrounding the allocation of
governmental power between federal, state, and tribal governments and the
distribution of governmental authority within the federal government. It is a
pervasive subject in the sense that such constitutional questions can emerge
in such disparate areas of legal practice as immigration, corporations and
securities, family law, criminal law, banking, and insurance. While the course
does not cover individual constitutional rights (the subject matter of
Constitutional Law II), questions of Congressional power to enforce various
constitutional rights are raised as part of the course coverage. Furthermore,
the framers of Constitution did not see the bright line our curriculum
currently draws between allocation of power and individual rights questions,
since many statements in the Constitutional Convention and the ratification
documents suggest that the framers thought that the primary protection of
individual liberty should be a constitution appropriately distributing and
limiting delegated governmental authority, rather than a listing of rights of
the type found in the Bill of Rights.

This course not only seeks to provide a survey of contemporary constitutional
law, but also basic insights into American constitutional and jurisprudential
history to demonstrate the how constitutional law has changed over time, often
with the ebb and flow of national intellectual, political, and economic
history surrounding prevailing jurisprudential and economic trends and
movements. Consequently, the legal, jurisprudential, economic and political
history of the United States will play a prominent role in the course.

In addition, unlike some subjects, such as contracts, where stability and
predictability may be more important values that the correctness of a
particular decision, constitutional law constitutes a subject through which
the nation has continued to play out and revisit the same political and
philosophical debates that animated the formation of the Constitution. In
constitutional law, it is often perceived that it is more important that a
constitutional decision be "correct" than that it be historically consistent
with prior precedent. Consequently, one aspect of this course will be
examining the factors that propel such change, many of which cannot be found
within the confines of a decided opinion.

The course will also examine the virtues and vices of the allocation of
governing authority between federal, state, and tribal governments in a
confederated or federal system, as compared to a unitary governing system like
that of New Zealand.

Finally, the course will examine and discuss various approaches to
constitutional decision making, examining, among other things, the importance
of originalist history, post-adoption constitutional history, legislative
history, text, economics, jurisprudence, policy and politics in the
interpretation of the nation's written constitution.



**Books & Assignments**

The published books for Constitutional Law I are Stone, Seidman, Sunstein, &
Tushnet, CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (4th Ed. Aspen) the latest SUPPLEMENT thereto, and
a set of additional materials made available on the website noted above.
Students interested in further reading in the subject matter covered by this
course should begin with TRIBE, AMERICAN CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (3d. Ed. 2000)
(Foundation Press).



**Website  **

The syllabus, assignment sheet, and additional materials for the course have
been posted to the website for this class, which is accessible from the
instructor's website the address for which is located at the top of this
syllabus. In addition, the overheads used by the instructor in class will also
be posted to the website.

Students are expected to check the website and assignment sheet frequently
since various materials will be posted to the website that will not be
circulated in printed form (although anyone with access to a computer can
print them out). Additionally new assignments may be posted to the assignment
sheet in the event of newly decided cases. Thus, the assignment sheet posted
on the site may change over the course of the semester to take account of any
newly decided cases. The cover sheet and instructions to the final examination
(or any take-home examination questions) will also be posted to the website
during the last week of class and all students will be responsible to have
read it before the examination. Any class cancellations or rescheduling will
also be posted to the website.

The use of the web for publishing course information and materials is intended
both to save students money in printing costs and to encourage use and
knowledge of internet skills to prepare law students legal practice in the
computer age. Some students already have reported that familiarity with
internet research and resources has become an important and, sometimes,
essential job skill and qualification for some law firms and other
organizations. Accordingly, the instructor expects all students in the course
to become internet and computer proficient. If you have no background with
computers or the world wide web, grab a student in the class or a friend and
have them show you. It is easy and painless!



**Preparation and Attendance Policy**

Since the instructor tends to make use of discussion and the socratic method,
_thorough_ class preparation is essential, as the progress of the course and
the educational experience of your classmates are in great part dependent upon
thoughtful classroom participation. Excellence manifested in class
participation, both during class and on the course website discussion group,
may be utilized by the instructor to boost grades of students to a maximum of
3 grade points where the student's performance on the final examination
appears disproportionately below the _quality_ (not quantity) of their class
presentations.

In order to follow class discussion and participate actively, a _detailed_ and
organized familiarity with the rationales, policies, and historical context,
as well as the holdings, of the assigned case material will be necessary. The
instructor assumes that students will not only have read but will have thought
about and analyzed the cases thoroughly before they come to class. Some
students find in constitutional law that they have trouble with this aspect of
the course at first. If you experience such difficulties, the instructor
strongly recommends that you return to briefing cases if you already have
abandoned that process.

Section 305(c) of the AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL OF LAW
SCHOOLS (the accreditation standards) provides in relevant part:

> Regular and punctual class attendance is necessary to satisfy residence and
class hours requirements. The law school has the burden to show it has adopted
and enforces policies relating to class attendance.

Accordingly, students who regularly and persistently miss class may receive a
failing grade for the course, a grade reduction or in cases of justifiable
exigency, at the sole discretion of the instructor, have their registration
involuntarily canceled for the course.

A number of students and faculty members also have commented on the disruptive
effect of students entering or leaving classes while they are in session.
Students should punctually arrive for class and remain during the entire class
hour so as to not disrupt class for others.

Since this course constitutes a required first year course, the instructor
will only sign drop slips for students upon a showing of extraordinary
circumstances, usually an unforeseeable and serious medical or family
emergency, justifying such a drop.

**Grading, Final Examination, and Class Participation**

The grade will be based primarily on the final examination.  Any student who
places below the median who has made substantial qualitative contributions in
class may have their grade boasted up to two grade points for class
participation.

The final examination for the course will be closed book. The instructor will
make available to students clean copies of the Constitution of the United
States for use during the examination. Historically, he has made use of both
multiple choice objective questions and essay examinations. In all likelihood
at least a third of the final examination will be objective.

The instructor desires to assure that all students have equal access to
information about the final examination. For that reason, he posts the
instruction sheet to the final examination during the last week of class on
the website and will not respond to individual oral inquiries about the
nature, format for, or coverage of the final examination at any time.



**Reading Assignments**

The progress of the course undoubtedly and intentionally will be slower at
first and will accelerate as the semester progresses. The instructor
anticipates covering the entire assignment sheet and students will be
responsible for all required readings on it irrespective of class coverage.
Since class progress and coverage are substantially dependent upon the level
of class preparation and discussion, it obviously is to your own advantage and
that of your classmates to prepare and to participate extensively in a
relevant manner. The dates for coverage of material set forth in the
assignment sheets represent estimates and may vary with the progress of the
course, explaining the reason for the cushion at the end of the semester.

The course assumes that all students have a basic working knowledge of
American political history and American government. If you do not, please
brush up on these subjects. One good source to consult for this purpose in the
two volume set Richard N. Current. et. al, _American History: A Survey_ (6th
Ed. 1983). Students interested in a reader on American constitutional history
that is topically, rather than chronologically, organized, should consult
Daniel A. Farber  & Suzanna Sherry, _The History of the American
Constitution_. Students desiring a chronological constitutional history might
review Alfred H. Kelly  & Winfred Harbison, _The American Constitution: Its
Origins and Development_ (6th ed. 1983).

Material indicated in brackets in the assignment sheet either will be covered
rather rapidly in class, often by lecture, or may not be discussed at all
during class. Students are nevertheless fully responsible for the material
contained in these sections.

No specific assignments have been made to the parallel pages of the Supplement
to the Stone casebook. Please note that the Supplement is keyed to the pages
of the casebook and students are responsible for reading the portions of the
Supplement that parallel the assigned readings from the casebook.

The constitutional law literature included on the assignment as **Recommended
Further Reading** does not constitute required reading. Rather it represents a
mini-bibliography for students interested in further reading or who desire
additional clarification on the primary materials they read.



Go to [Assignment Sheet](assignmt.htm)

