J. Bouknight, Spring 2001, 3 credits

Sp 241, Sec. 21999 et al TR 2-3:15, BEC 156 and Open Campus

**

Media, Communication, and Society**



[![](../BettyBiff.gif)](sp241info.html)



copyright 2000, Tom Tomorrow, permission granted

Course Description:

> This course analyzes the social and cultural impact of mass media, including
broadcast, print, film and cyberspace.

Course Goals:

> 1) Students will be able to define the term "media," and construct a
chronology of the technical innovations of media from handwriting to digital
communication forms.

>

> 2) Using key points in the history of media, students will be able to
explain the impact of media on culture--particularly noetics, the transmission
and storage of knowledge.

>

> 3) Students will be able to distinguish between the following functions of
media: The informative and entertaining functions; the commercial and the
public-service functions.

>

> 4) Students will be able to evaluate the impact of advertising on the
content of media production.

>

> 5) Students will be able to evaluate the impact media in two or more
political contests.

>

> 6) Students will be able to review the changing concept of the ownership of
ideas and language through the history of media. Students will demonstrate a
knowledge of current copyright laws and fair use guidelines for their own
media productions.

>

> 7) Students will be able to list three or more transnational media
corporations and be able to present arguments for and against the existence of
such large corporations.

>

> 8) Students will identify three academic and/or governmental responses to
the existence of transnational media corporations.

>

> 9) Students will be able to list three examples of reputable "alternative"
media sources.

>

> 10) Students will be able to discuss the starting and middle level jobs in
at least three branches of the media (e.g.: newspapers, web design, radio,
etc.)

Office and Hours _:

> _

>

> Jefferson 116 MW 1-2, W 5:30-6:30, TR 11-12 and by appointment. 330-4394;
"jbouknight@cocc.edu"

Texts:

> > Vivian, John. _The Media of Mass Communication, Updated Online Edition_.
Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 2001.

>>

>> Nichols, John and Robert W. McChsney. _It's the Media, Stupid_. New York:
Seven Stories Press: 2000

>>

>> "Media Change The Way We Think" Coursepack, avail at Bookstore

>

>  
>

>  
>

> WebSites:

>

>> > Syllabus and weekly study questions available at
<<http://www.cocc.edu/jbouknight/sp241info.html>>

>

>                     Our WebCT site is available at
[<<http://www.cocc.edu:8700/webct/public/home.pl>>](http://www.cocc.edu:8700)

>

>  
>

> Assignments:

> > > **

>>>

>>> WebCT online quizzes:** Each week a five to ten question quiz will be
given on the readings. The questions should be no surprise because all
relevant topics and/or potential questions to the quiz will be posted by
Monday and the class will often refer to these questions as a basis for class
discussion. The quiz will be available to students from Friday morning to
Monday at midnight. Students will drop their lowest quiz score.

>>>

>>> **

>>>

>>> Midterm Project:** Using two different media outlets, compare differing
coverage of the same even. The media outlets may be radically different (such
as a movie and a song) or may be from similar media with differing
perspectives (such as a story reported in the _New York Times_ vs. _The Bay
Guardian_ ). Move the comparison toward a broader conclusion about media. The
project may be a written paper of 2 1/2 pages (typed, double-spaced) not
counting any bibliography OR students may make a 4-5 minute presentation from
the Bend Campus, with notes and bibliography to be turned in to the
instructor.

>>>

>>> **

>>>

>>> Final Paper:** As a two-hundred level transfer course, SP241 satisfies
some of its outcomes by means of a research assignment. The paper should be
5-8 pages, not including the bibliography. All students will give a 4-5 minute
"sharing" of their work for the final. It is not necessary to do this sharing
from the Bend Campus. The following additional criteria will be used for
evaluation:

>>>

>>>> > > 1\. The author should clarify if the paper is primarily a report or
an argument.

>>>>>>

>>>>>> 2\. The author should use a reasonable amount of current sources in the
paper's development.

>>>>>>

>>>>>> 3\. The author should use a suitable style and demonstrate college-
level writing skill.

>>>

>>> Here is a sample of possible titles to suggest the rage of topics
available:

>>>

>>>> A Comparison of Subway Graffiti and Old English Script

>>>>

>>>> How the Internet is Changing Copyright Law

>>>>

>>>> Types of Books Frequently Burned

>>>>

>>>> A Set of Guidelines for Future CD Rating Systems for Parents

>>>>

>>>> A Bibliography of Corporate Connections in the Media

>>>>

>>>> A Defense of Napster-Style Sharing

>>>>

>>>> Famous Faked Stories

>>>>

>>>> A Brief Biography of a Historical (rather than just popular) Figure in
Media, such as Ida Tarbell, Ida Well-Barnett, William R. Hearst, Alfred
Hitchcock, Ronald Reagan, Helen Thomas.

>>>

>>> Basically, the media field is pretty wide open, so it should be possible
to find the area that interests you. Thus the first four weeks of the course
should be used to cultivate your natural interests of look for directions in
our readings.

>>>

>>>  
>

>  
>

> Grading:

>

> Students will be assigned points for major assignments. Letter grades may be
determined by the percentage (your points divided by points possible). Thus an
A = 100-93%, A-=92-90% B+ = 89 -87%, B=86-83%, B-=82-80%, C+ =79-77%, C =
76-70%. D, = 69-60% and so on. Assignments are weighted as follows:

>

> Online quizzes (plus one bonus point) 9 at 11 points each

>

> Midterm Project 40

>

> Final Paper 80

>

> Class Participation 50

>

> Total 270 points

>

>  

Course Calendar

Apr. 3: Notes; Introductory issues; [Week 1 Study
Questions](week_1_study_questions.htm)

Apr. 5: Notes; "Introduction," Vivian 1-27



Apr. 10: Notes; _Orality and Literacy_ from coursepack ; [Week 2 Study
Questions](week_2_study_questions.htm)

Apr. 12: Notes; "Books," Vivian 28-50



Apr. 17: Notes; "Magazines," Vivian 50-70; [Week 3 Study
Questions](week_3._study_questions.htm)

Apr. 19: Notes; _Can't Buy My Love_ in coursepack



Apr. 24: Notes; "Newspapers," Vivian 71-97, 231-239; _[Week 4 Study
Questions](week_4_study_questions.htm)_

Apr. 26: Newspapers, cont., _Manufacturing Consent_



May 1: Notes; Recording, Vivian 98-118, Grammy Article from course pack; [Week
5 Study Questions](week_5_study_questions.htm)

May 3: Notes; "Obsc. and Porn." Vivian, 444-446 "Copyright," Vivian 448-450



May 8: "Radio," Vivian 144-169; [Week 6 Study Questions, Part
1](week_6-1_study_questions.htm)

May 10: Notes; "Problem with the U.S. Media," _Stupid_ , 27-52; [Week 6 Study
Questions, Part 2](week_6_study_questions_2.htm)



May 15: "Global Media and Its Discontents," _Stupid_ , 53-88; [Week 7 Study
Questions](week%207%20study%20questions.htm)

May 17: Notes; "Mass Media and Governance," Vivian 405-428, _Manufacturing
Consent_ , _Lines in the Sand_



May 22: Notes; "Making Media an Issue in American Politics," Stupid, 89-120;
[Week 8 Study Questions, Part 1](week_8_study_questions.htm)

May 24: Notes; "Movies," Vivan 119-143, Lyrics to "Cheepnis", "Time Was
Unkind" in coursepack; [Week 8 Study Questions, Part
2](Week%208%20Study%20Questions,%20Part%202.htm)



May 29: Television, 170-205; Visitors Michael Garrett (Media services COCC)
and Steve Huddleston (Media Activism--COFIC)  [Week 9 Study Questions, Part
1](week_9_study_guide1.htm)

May 31: [Notes](day18notes.htm), _TV Nation_ , _Atomic Cafe_ , Edward R.
Murrow, [Week 9 Study Questions, Part 2](week_9_study_questions_2.htm)



June 5: [Notes](Day19notes.htm), Read "Napster," "Lord of Rings," "Teen is
villain " in coursepack AND "The Web," Vivian 205-229 OR "Photography," Vivian
Online; [Week 10 Study Questions](Week%2010%20Study%20Questions.htm)

June 7: Course Wrap-up



Final Exam: Thurs, June 12, 1-3 p.m., Sharing of Final Papers

