ECONOMICS 330

HISTORY OF ECONOMIC THOUGHT

For a Word version of this syllabus, click [here](f93330.doc).

Professor Steven Horwitz Fall 1993

108 Hepburn Hall TTh 12:40-2:10

379-5731 (office) 105 Hepburn

379-9737 (home)

Office Hours: M 1-3; T, Th 2:30-3:30 and by appointment

This course is something a little bit different from most other upper-level
economics courses. Rather than examining how existing economic theory can be
developed and applied to specific areas within economics, we will instead be
looking back through the history of economic thought to understand how
existing economic theory came to be. In particular, we want to understand both
how mainstream neoclassical economics came to dominate the profession and how
some alternative schools of thought have evolved and how they challenge
neoclassicism.

Given my own expertise and interests, the focus of this course will be on the
development of economic thought _since the 1870s_. The catalog description of
the course emphasizes Adam Smith and Karl Marx, and they have been the central
figures when Dr. Young has taught it. However, our focus will be on the so-
called marginalist revolution of the 1870s and the various schools of thought
that emerged from it. We will be reading two of the three actual texts that
are responsible for that revolution and we will attempt to trace its strands
all the way to current issues in economic thought. We will spend some
significant time on the rise and fall of Keynesian economics which we will
examine through Keynes' own words.

The goal of this course is not just to be familiar with what a lot of mostly
dead economists have said. That's important, but what's more important is
understanding how where economics is today, and especially what's wrong with
it, can be understood by looking at the path by which economic theory has
evolved. I will try as much as possible to relate the older ideas we will
explore to modern theoretical and political ideas and controversies that you
might have come across in other courses.

You should be aware from the start that this course will involve a significant
reading load, both in terms of quantity and difficulty, as well as a good deal
of writing and a strong expectation of class participation. I don't think
you'll be able to do well if you can't or don't keep up with the reading and
participate in class. I am not going to lecture at you for 14 weeks - you need
to do the reading and come to class prepared to discuss and ask questions.

BOOKS AND ASSIGNMENTS

There are four required and one recommended book for this course. The textbook
is Ekelund and Hebert's _A History of Economic Theory and Method_. The other
three books are seminal contributions to the history of economics. Carl
Menger's _Principles of Economics_ and William Stanley Jevons' _The Theory of
Political Economy_ ignited the marginalist revolution in the 1870s and John
Maynard Keynes' _The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money_
defined economics for a good part of the 20th century. The recommended book is
Don McCloskey's _The Writing of Economics_. It's cheap, it's excellent, it's
relevant for _any_ course at this university. There will also be a small
packet of outside readings available for purchase.

Your grade will be comprised of four parts. There will be two substantial
papers due during the course of the semester. These will be 5 to 8 pages long
and on topics to be passed out during the term. I will also be passing out my
world-famous guide to paper writing early on in the semester. You will also
have the opportunity to _revise_ both papers if you wish. _You must revise at
least one, you may revise the other_. Each paper will count 20%.

The other major written assignment will be an ongoing research project. Early
in the semester I will pass out a list of economists. Your job is to choose
one on whom you wish to become an expert. Over the course of the semester you
will be asked to complete a series of library research and reading assignments
relating to your choice. These will include a biography, an intellectual
biography, summaries of the author's own articles or book, and summaries of
articles or a book about the economist. _You will NOT be writing an actual
research paper, your grade will be based on how well you do the research
itself_.

I will read each individual assignment and give you comments, but the project
will be graded as a portfolio consisting of all four parts. When you hand in
the final portion of the project, you will also hand in the rest of the
already graded portions. Instead of writing the paper, the final exam will
include a question that will require you to relate your research to the
course. We'll talk about this assignment a great deal more as we go on, and I
will pass out a separate schedule for the individual pieces of research. The
research project (not counting the final essay) is worth 25%.

Your grade will also include an _open books/notes final exam_ worth 25%. The
exam will be an essay exam asking you to summarize, analyze and integrate the
semester's material. The exam is scheduled for Monday December 13 at 1:30pm.
The remaining 10% of your grade will be class participation. As usual, this
will be based not just on quantity but also quality.

I have given you my home phone number, please don't abuse the privilege. Don't
call before 9:00am or after 9:00pm. I have never taught this course before,
but I'm really looking forward to it, and, with your help, I think we'll all
learn a lot and manage to have some fun too.  


* * *

  


  

ASSIGNMENT SCHEDULE AND GRADING BREAKDOWN

  
  

Paper #1 Tue Oct 5 20%

Paper #2 Thu Nov 18 20%

Final Exam Mon Dec 13 1:30 25%

Research Project various times 25%

Class Participation 10%

\--------------------------------------

TOTAL 100%  
    


GRADING SCALE

4.0 93-100

3.5 88-92

3.0 83-87

2.5 78-82

2.0 73-77

1.5 67-72

1.0 60-66

There may be a curve, but it will be no tougher than this.  
    


This syllabus is to be viewed as a contract and the final court of appeal for
relevant disputes. I RESERVE THE RIGHT TO MAKE CHANGES TO DATES AS NECESSARY.
ANY CHANGES WILL BE ANNOUNCED IN CLASS AND BEING AWARE OF THEM IS YOUR
RESPONSIBILITY.

* * *

NARRATIVE OUTLINE AND SCHEDULE

(Underlines refer to books, EH is the text, others in packet)

Topic (dates) Reading

\-------------------------------------------------------------------

INTRODUCTION AND THE BACKGROUND OF CLASSICAL ECONOMICS (8/26 - 9/7)

An overview of economics EH (1)

Adam Smith and economic theory EH (5)

Classical economics EH (pp. 127-132; 7, 8;

pp. 214-224)

We begin with a thumbnail sketch of the history of economics, with some
emphasis on the themes we will develop this semester. The most important of
those is whether economic theory took the wrong path leading away from the
marginal revolution of the 1870s. Economics has become almost a branch of
applied mathematics with apparently ever-decreasing relevance to real world
problems. The question to ask is whether it had to be that way. In other
words, what was the opportunity cost of mathematizing the discipline. To see
the revolutionary implications of marginalism, we need a brief review of
classical economics, especially its theories of value.  
    


MARGINALISM AND MARSHALL (9/9 - 10/5)

The early precursors EH (12)

Menger's marginalism _Menger_ (pp. 45-225);

EH (13)

Jevons' marginalism _Jevons_ (pp. 1-166)

EH (14)

From Jevons to Marshall EH (15)

Walras' marginalism EH (16)

De-homogenizing marginalism Jaffe (1976)

This is the core section of the course. We will explore the thinking of the
three marginal revolutionaries (Carl Menger, William Stanley Jevons and Leon
Walras) in some detail. Our purpose here is not just to understand what each
said, but try to get a handle on their differences and how each one's thinking
relates to the way economists see their discipline today. Specifically, we
will compare: their views on the nature of economics, their use of
mathematics, what each meant by "marginal utility," to what degree was each a
"subjectivist" about value, what assumptions each one employs, and the
political implications (if any) of each one's version of marginalism. We will
end with Jaffe's classic essay which tries to disentangle the three thinkers
and points us toward the path each one's followers would take in the 20th
century.

**PAPER #1 DUE TUESDAY OCTOBER 5TH**  
    
    
    


RADICAL DISSENT: MARXISM AND INSTITUTIONALISM (10/7 -10/19)

Early opponents of classicism EH (10)

Karl Marx's systematic critique EH (11); Engels (1844)

Veblen and institutionalism EH (17)

Of course not everyone agreed with either classical economics or the
neoclassical revolution. In this section we will take a brief look at some of
the dissenters of the 19th and early 20th century. One set of opponents to the
whole thrust of Smith's view of the world were the Saint-Simonians and their
so-called "constructivism." Later in the 19th century, Marx fused this view of
the social world with Ricardian economic theory and German philosophy to
develop a far more systematic critique of both economic theory and laissez-
faire. In the late 20th century Marxism is virtually dead in economics, but
the most prominent radical critics of neoclassicism are the institutionalist
economists who found their roots in early opposition to marginalism by
Thorstein Veblen.

THE RISE AND FALL OF KEYNESIAN ECONOMICS (10/21 - 11/16)

"Macroeconomics" before Keynes Warburton (1981)

Overview of Keynes EH (19)

The critique of classicism _Keynes_ (chs. 1-3)

The theory _Keynes_ (chs. 8-17)

Rejecting laissez-faire _Keynes_ (ch. 24)

The aftermath Yeager (1986)

The monetarist alternatives EH (20)

Our second major section of the course concerns Keynesian economics. The
Keynesian revolution was to the 20th century what marginalism was to the 19th,
with one major exception: as a whole, Keynesianism has been reputed by most
economists. However, there are numerous remnants of it still around as well as
what we might call the "opportunity cost of Keynes." What might economics have
looked like if Keynes has not been accepted? We will explore all of these
questions in this section by looking at what came before Keynes, what Keynes
himself actually said, and what has come since. We will try to link our
discussion here to our earlier look at the marginalists, especially their
notions of what economics should study and how it should study it.

**PAPER #2 DUE THURSDAY NOVEMBER 18**

CHICAGO AND MODERN MICROECONOMICS (11/18 \- 11/30)

Friedman's method Friedman (1953)

Studying economic man EH (23)

Most of modern microeconomics has been a consistent pushing forward of the
Jevonian and Walrasian branches of the marginalist revolution. Modern micro is
an unholy combination of the mathematical versions of marginalism and the
pseudo-positivist physics envy inspired by Milton Friedman's methodological
defense of both mathematics and unrealistic assumptions. In this section we
will look at Friedman's classic essay and explore the so-called "Chicago"
approach to microeconomics in the work of Nobel winners Gary Becker, George
Stigler, and Ronald Coase.  
    


NEO-LIBERAL DISSENT: PUBLIC CHOICE AND THE AUSTRIANS (12/2 - 12/9)

The economics of politics EH (24)

Austrian economics Kirzner (1973); EH (21)

Not everyone, once again, is completely comfortable with the theoretical and
political direction taken by 20th century economics. One of the major new
ideas of the last 30 years, and a very effective response to Keynesianism, has
been the development of public choice economics, or the application of
economic theory to political exchange. Rather than viewing government as a
benevolent despot doing whatever economists deem right, public choice starts
with the self-interest of political actors and progresses from there. Austrian
economists, the modern heirs of Menger, have deep reservations about the
modern preoccupation with equilibrium and the assumptions which economic
theory makes about knowledge. The Austrians too see their theories as a
response to Keynes and other opponents of laissez-faire. The resurgence of
markets and classical liberalism around the world has been significantly
fueled by both of these schools of economic thought.  
    
    

BIBLIOGRAPHY

  
  

Books: Ekelund, Robert B. and Robert F. Hebert. 1990\. _A History of Economic
Theory and Method_ , third edition, New York: McGraw Hill.

Jevons, William Stanley. 1931 [1871]. _The Theory of Political Economy_ ,
fourth edition, Charlottesville: Ibis Publishing.

Keynes, John Maynard. 1964 [1936]. _The General Theory of Employment,
Interest, and Money_ , New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

Menger, Carl. 1976 [1871]. _Principles of Economics_ , New York: New York
University Press.  
    
    
    
  Articles: Engels, Frederick. 1844. "Outlines of a Critique of Political
Economy," in Karl Marx, _The Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844_ ,
Dirk Struik, ed., New York: International Publishers, 1964.

Friedman, Milton. 1953. "The Methodology of Positive Economics," in _Essays in
Positive Economics_ , Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1953.

Jaffe, William. 1976. "Menger, Jevons, and Walras De-homogenized," _Economic
Inquiry_ 14, December.

Kirzner, Israel. 1973. "Market Process versus Market Equilibrium," from
_Competition and Entrepreneurship_ , Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Warburton, Clark. 1981. "Monetary Disequilibrium Theory in the First Half of
the Twentieth Century," _History of Political Economy_ 13 (2), Summer.

Yeager, Leland B.. 1986. "The Keynesian Heritage in Economics," in _Keynes's
General Theory: Fifty Years On_ , John Burton, et.al., eds., London: The
Institute of Economic Affairs, 1986.  
    


