Professor Peter J. Boettke  
ECON 881/Spring 1999  
Enterprise Hall Rm. 318  
Tuesday 4:30-7:00  
    
    
  **The Austrian Theory of the Market Process II**   **Class Description**  

This is the second class in a two course sequence designed for serious
students of Austrian economics. The emphasis in the class will be on the
_conceptual tool-kit_ that can be found in the Austrian tradition, not on the
biographies of major figures within the tradition. We will study the
contributions of Menger, Mises and Hayek, but not their lives nor doctrinal
developments within the tradition. I will stress "opportunistic" and
"productive" readings of the Austrian tradition, rather than the intellectual
history of the Austrian approach and its doctrinal history. The burden of
proof for those who want to rationally reconstruct previous contributions for
present purposes must always rest on the shoulders of those outside of the
mainstream of economic scholarship, not the other way around. What is the
_value of the marginal product_ of the conceptual tools found in Austrian
economics as compared to alternative approaches for solving puzzles which all
economists would like to solve? This will be the question we will continually
ask throughout the semester.  
    
  **Readings**  

The required text for the class is Peter J. Boettke, ed., _The Elgar Companion
to Austrian Economics_ (Aldershot, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing, 1994;
paperback edition 1998), henceforth referred to as _ECAE_. Each entry in the
_ECAE_ is cross-referenced with other entries and contains a bibliography of
writings on the topic. In addition, there will be journal articles and book
chapters which will be listed in the syllabus and are required reading. I also
think you should bookmark the Austrian Economics Study Guide, which is a
comprehensive bibliography of articles and books on all the topics we will
discuss in class -- go to <http://www.mises.org> and follow the link to the
study guide. Students may also find the syllabus of the course that I taught
in the Austrian sequence at NYU to be useful. That course was concerned with
the intellectual history and doctrinal development of the Austrian School in a
way which this course will not be, but the final exam from that course will
give the student an idea of the type of exam I will be giving in this class.
That syllabus and exam can be found on my web page -
<http://www.gmu.edu/departments/economics/pboettke>.  
  **Grading**  

Class grade will be determined on the basis of four short papers on the topics
of the Asian Flu, the Transition from socialism, the Microsoft case, and the
development gap between North and South. Each paper will be worth 25 points
each. These short papers will have a 10 page double-spaced typed page limit
and each must answer 4 questions -- (1) What are the main contending
explanations for the economic phenomena under investigation within the
mainstream of the economics profession?; (2) What are the main weaknesses with
these explanations?; (3) What in the Austrian conceptual tool-kit will improve
upon these weaknesses?; and (4) What is the weakest point about the Austrian
perspective on this issue?  


There will also be a final exam worth 100 points. The final will consist of 12
questions, 10 of which you will have to answer. I will hand-out this exam on
April 27 and it will be due on May 12.  
    
  **Course Schedule**  

January 26 INTRODUCTION  


_ECAE_ , pp. 1-6; 601-15.  
    


Feb. 2 DOES AUSTRIAN ECONOMICS POSSESS 'EVOLUTIONARY' POTENTIAL?  


Boettke, "Is there an Intellectual Market Niche for Austrian Economics?,"
_Review of Austrian Economics_ , Vol. 11, nos. 1-2 (1998).

Boulding, Kenneth. "After Samuelson Who Needs Smith?," _History of Political
Economy_ , Vol. 3 (Fall 1971): 225-237.

Rizzo, Mario. "Time and Ignorance After 10 Years," in O'Driscoll and Rizzo,
_The Economics of Time and Ignorance_ , 2nd Edition (London: Routledge, 1996):
xiii-xxxiii.

Rosen, Sherwin. "Austrian Economics and Neoclassical Economics: Any Gains from
Trade?," _Journal of Economic Perspectives_ , 4 (1997): 139-152.

Vaughn, Karen. "Does Austrian Economics Have a Useful Future?," _Advances in
Austrian Economics_ , Vol. 5 (1998): 3-14.

Yeager, Leland. "Austrian Economics, Neoclassicism, and the Market Test,"
_Journal of Economic Perspectives_ , 4 (1997): 153-166.  
    


Feb. 9 METHODOLOGICAL REFLECTIONS - PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE  


A. _ECAE_ , pp. 11-83; 459-464.  
    


B. _Selected Articles or Chapters_.  


Boettke, "Where Did Economics Go Wrong? Modern Economics as a Flight from
Reality," _Critical Review_ , 11, no. 1 (1997): 11-64.

Boettke, "Formalism and Contemporary Economics," _Critical Review_ , 12, nos.
1-2 (1998): 173-186.

Hausman, Daniel. "The Faults of Formalism and the Magic of Markets," _Critical
Review_ , 12, nos. 1-2 (1998): 127-138.

Heilbroner, Robert. "The Self-Deception of Economics," _Critical Review_ , 12,
nos. 1-2 (1998): 139-150.

Mayer, Thomas. "Boettke's Austrian Critique of Mainstream Economics: An
Empiricist's Response," _Critical Review_ , 12, nos. 1-2 (1998): 151-171.  
    


Feb. 16 COORDINATIONIST VIEW OF MACROECONOMICS  


A. _ECAE_ , pp. 209-223; 471-77.  


B. _Selected Articles or Chapters_.  


Hutt, W. H. "The Nature of Coordination Through the Price System," in _The
Keynesian Episode_ (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1979): 135-77.

Leijonhufvud, Axel. "The Wicksellian Connection: Variations on a Theme," in
_Information and Coordination_ (New York: Oxford University Press, 1981):
131-202.

Lewin, Peter. "Methods and Metaphors in Capital Theory," _Advances in Austrian
Economics_ , Vol. 2B (1995): 277-296.

Lewin, Peter. "Time, Change and Complexity," _Advances in Austrian Economics_
, Vol. 3 (1996): 107-165.

Witt, Ulrich. "Coordination of Individual Economic Activities as an Evolving
Process of Self-Organization," _Economie Appliquee_ , XXXVII (1985): 569-95.  
    


Feb. 23 COORDINATIONIST VIEW OF MACROECONOMICS (cont.)  


A. _ECAE_ , pp. 249-257; 372-377; 402-407; 425-439.  


B. _Selected Articles or Chapters_.  


Cowen, Tyler. "Business Cycles Without Rational Expectations," in _Risk and
Business Cycles: New and Old Austrian Perspectives_ (London: Routledge, 1997):
76-114.

Wagner, Richard. "Austrian Cycle Theory: Saving the Wheat while Discarding the
Chaff," _Review of Austrian Economics_ , Vol. 12, no. 1 (1999).  
    


March 2 CAN A COORDINATIONIST VIEW EXPLAIN THE ASIAN FLU?  


**Paper presentations**  
    


March 9 CAPITALISM, SOCIALISM & DEMOCRACY: Theory and History  


A. _ECAE_ , pp. 224-230; 285-293; 345-357; 465-470; 478-484; and 516-522.  


B. _Selected Articles or Chapters_.  


Boettke, Peter. "Economic Calculation: _The_ Austrian Contribution to
Political Economy," _Advances in Austrian Economics_ , Vol. 5 (1998): 131-58.

Boettke, Peter. "Hayek's _The Road to Serfdom_ Revisited: Government Failure
in the Argument Against Socialism," _Eastern Economic Journal_ , 21, no. 1
(Winter 1995): 7-26.

Boettke, Peter. "The Political Economy of Utopia: Communism in Soviet Russia,
1918-1921," _Journal des Economistes et des Etudes Humaines_ , 1, no. 2
(1990): 91-138.

Caldwell, Bruce. "Hayek and Socialism," _Journal of Economic Literature_ , 35
(December 1997).  
    


March 16 SPRING BREAK (No class, but do the readings)  


A. _ECAE_ , pp. 440-454.  


B. _Selected Articles or Chapters._  


Boettke, Peter. "The Russian Crisis: Perils and Prospects for Post-Soviet
Transition," _American Journal of Economics & Sociology_ (June 1999).

Boettke, Peter. "Rethinking Ourselves: Negotiating Values in the Political
Economy of Post-Communism," _Rethinking Marxism_ , Vol. 10, no. 2 (Summer
1998): 85-95.

Boettke, Peter. "Promises Made and Promises Broken in the Russian Transition,"
_Constitutional Political Economy_ , no. 2 (1998): 133-142.

Boettke, Peter. "Credibility, Commitment and Soviet Economic Reform," in
Edward Lazear, ed., _Economic Transition in Eastern Europe and
Russia:Realities of Reform._ (Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press, 1995):
247-275.  
    


March 23 IS THERE A UNIQUELY AUSTRIAN PROGRAM FOR TRANSITION?  


**Paper presentations**.  
    


March 30 MARKET THEORY AND THE PRICE SYSTEM: Existence, Stablity, Convergence  


A. _ECAE_ , pp. 23-29; 87-205; 500-507; 535-548.  


B. _Selected Articles or Chapters_  


Boettke, Peter and Prychitko, David. "Introduction: Varieties of Market
Process Theory," _Market Process Theories_ , 2 Volumes (Aldershot, UK: Edward
Elgar Publishing, 1998): ix-xxvii.

Kirzner, Israel. "Entrepreneurial Discovery and the Competitive Market
Process." _Journal of Economic Literature_ , 35 (March 1997): 60-85.  
    


April 6 MARKET THEORY AND THE PRICE SYSTEM: Policy Questions  


_ECAE_ , pp. 244-248; 294-299; 382-401.  
    


April 13 MICROSOFT, MONOPOLY AND THE MARKET PROCESS  


**Paper presentations**.  
    


April 20 GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT: The puzzle of non-convergence  


Mankiw, Gregory. "The Growth of Nations," _Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity_ , Vol. 1 (1995).

Olson, M. "Big Bills Left on the Side Walk," _Journal of Economic
Perspectives_ ...  
    


April 27 GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT: Institutions and Entrepreneurship  


Brenner, Reuven. "Keys to Prosperity," in _Labyrinths of Prosperity_ (Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1994): 51-84.

Harper, David. "Institutional Conditions for Entrepreneurship," _Advances in
Austrian Economics_ , Vol. 5 (1998): 241-276.

Steele, Charles. "Entrepreneurship and the Economics of Growth," _Advances in
Austrian Economics_ , Vol. 5 (1998): 51-84.  
    


May 4(A) WHY ARE SOME NATIONS RICH WHILE OTHERS ARE POOR?  


**Paper presentations**  
    


May 4(B) THE RETURN OF GRAND THEORY IN ECONOMICS  


A. _ECAE_ , pp. 304-308; 313-342.  


B. _Selected Articles or Chapters_  


_"The Crisis of Vision in Modern Economic Thought_ : A Symposium," _Advances
in Austrian Economics_ , Vol. 4 (1997): 113-154.  
    


May 12: FINAL EXAM DUE

