|  ![](442_text..JPG) |  
  
---|---|---  
  
|

##  ![](442_navbar.JPG)

|  
  
|

## Syllabus Fall 2000  

|  
  
|  |

|

**Instructor**

|

[Dr. John Kornfeld](mailto:john.kornfeld@sonoma.edu)

|

|

**Office Hours**

|

Tuesdays 4:40-6:00

|  
  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
|

**Office**

|

3096-C Stevenson

|

|

|

Thursdays 2:30-4:00

|  
  
|

**Phone**

|

664-4208

|

|

|

and by appointment

|  
  
|

**Fax**

|

664-4200

|

|

**Class Meets:**

|

Tuesdays 1:00-4:40

|  
  
|

**email**

|

john.kornfeld@sonoma.edu

|

|

|

Stevenson 3076

|  
  
|

|

|

|

|

|  
  
****

This course addresses theoretical issues and practical concerns related to
teaching in middle, junior, and senior high school. We will explore many
educational and social issues in order to help you consider the following
questions about yourself as a teacher: What should students learn in my
classroom? How can I best prepare my students to be active participants in our
pluralistic, democratic society? What should I do to ensure that all students
in my classroom have equal opportunities to learn and succeed in school? To
assist you in your consideration of these broad questions, you will be
introduced to a wide range of teaching methods and techniques, to lesson
planning, to unit development, and to multicultural issues. Throughout this
course, you will have the opportunity to research, develop, and apply your own
teaching ideas and interests.  

#### Course Goals

  * To convey the myriad complexities of teaching in middle and high schools in the late 20th century.
  * To examine current structures and practices in schooling and consider alternatives to traditional models.
  * To explore current issues in multicultural education, including an examination of the nature of culture and its impact on learning; of diverse cultural perspectives; of issues of race, class, and gender in schools; of the complexities of cross-cultural contact in classrooms; of culturally responsive teaching strategies; and of goals and curriculum models for multicultural education.
  * To explore various theories of learning and to become familiar with teaching methods which accommodate students' diverse learning styles.
  * To become conversant with all phases of curriculum development, especially the planning, implementation, and evaluation of lessons and units.
  * To consider various aspects of classroom environment, including classroom management, teacher/student relationships, and building community in the classroom.
  * To help preservice teachers articulate teaching philosophies which address their roles and responsibilities as teachers, taking into account all of the above goals.  

#### Required Reading

  * Wood, George. _Schools that Work: Americas Most Innovative Public Education Programs._ New York: Dutton, 1992.
  * Tchudi, Stephen. _Travels Across the Curriculum._ New York: Scholastic, 1991.
  * _Rethinking our Classrooms: Teaching for Equity and Justice._ Milwaukee, WI: Rethinking Schools, Ltd., 1994.
  * California Middle Grade Task Force. _Caught in the Middle: Educational Reform for Young Adolescents in California Public Schools._ Sacramento: Calif. State Dept. of Education, 1987.
  * California High School Task Force. _Second to None: A Vision of the New California High School._ Sacramento: Calif. State Dept. of Education, 1992.
  * California Commission on Teacher Credentialing. _California Standards for the Teaching Profession: A Description of Professional Practices for California Teachers._ Sacramento: Calif. State Dept. of Education, 1997
  * Education 442 Course Reader (available in SSU Bookstore)
  * Various handouts throughout the semester  



**Course Requirements**

  1. _Attendance_ : Class discussions and activities constitute a vital part of what you learn in this course. You cannot participate if you are not present. Please plan to attend every class, to make an effort to arrive on time, and to remain in class for the entire 3 3/4 hours. _Each absence will result in the loss of_ ** _four_** _attendance points. Late arrivals or early departures from class will result in the loss of points._ ** _If you are absent more than three times, you will not pass this course._**
  2. _Class participation_ : Complete all assigned readings and short homework assignments; participate in class activities and discussions.
  3. _Electronic journal_ : Participate weekly, for the first ten weeks, in electronic discussions on assigned topics on the course web page. In your journal entries, you may draw upon the readings, class activities and discussions, your experiences in the field, and/or your classmates' entries.
  4. _Learner Project_ : Choose something that you want to learn, find a teacher, and examine the ways that you learn best.
  5. _Field Project_ : Frame a question about schools and schooling that you wish to explore, use existing educational research and your 443 field experience to seek answers to the question, and present your findings in a manner that is meaningful to you.
  6. _Cultural Project_ : Using literature, art, film, and a variety of research materials, collaborate with one or more colleagues to explore experiences of members of a particular cultural group; then convey some of your findings via the course web page and a learning center.  

**Grading**

**

Attendance

|

60 points (4 points per class)  
  
---|---  
  
Class participation

|

50 points  
  
Electronic journal

|

40 points (4 points per entry, one entry per week)  
  
Learner Project

|

30 points  
  
Field Project

|

50 points  
  
Cultural Project

|

70 points  
  
**Total** |

**300 points**  
  
**

**Grading Scale**

300-280 = A

|

249-240 = B-

|

209-200 = D+  
  
---|---|---  
  
279-270 = A-

|

239-230 = C+

|

199-190 = D  
  
269-260 = B+

|

229-220 = C

|

189-180 = D-  
  
259-250 = B

|

219-210 = C-

|

179-0 = F  
  


**A Few Words about Grading and Assessment:**

Please keep in mind that this is a fast-paced 4-unit course. You must make
every effort to stay caught up on your reading and other assignments for the
course. _Please note that your scores for assignments handed in late will be
dropped 10% for each class meeting that they are late._

All grades are somewhat negotiable in that you may rework and resubmit
assignments if you are not satisfied with the grade you have received. You
must, however, meet with one of us beforehand to discuss what revisions are
necessary, and hand in the revised assignment within one week of receiving it
back from us. _If you do not think that an assignment meets your needs as a
preservice teacher, please meet with us well before the assignment is due in
order to discuss alternatives that address both your goals and ours._

Please be aware that spelling, grammar, and punctuation do count in all
written assignments (except journal entries). A helpful strategy is for you to
ask someone to proofread your assignments before you create a final draft.
Even the most renowned scholars will read their own work several times, really
looking for mistakes, and still not notice some errors. Don't just use a
spellchecker; it wont catch a mistake if that mistake happens to be a real
word (although not the word you meant to write). Think of the wrong impression
you would give to your students (and their parents) if you handed out
assignments that had typos and misspelled words.  

**Disabilities Accommodation**

If you have a disability that requires accommodation in this class, you must
notify the instructor before the end of the second week of class regarding the
nature of the accommodation you need. You must register with the campus
Disability Resource Center which is located in Bldg. AFC#1, 664.2677. The
Center will then provide you written documentation of your verified disability
and the recommended accommodation which you must then present to the
instructor.



**Dates to Remember**

  * **Weekly for the first ten weeks: Submit at least one electronic journal entry**
  * **September 19: Learner Project due**
  * **November 7: Field Project due**
  * **December 5: Cultural Project Learning Center presentations**

  
  
|  ![](442_navbar.JPG) |  
  
|

#### Education 442

**Tenative Topics**

##### Establishing a rationale for teaching

  * Why teach?
  * What should be the role(s) and personal expectations of the teacher? (limitations,
  * involvement, burn-out, criticism, etc.)

##### Examining and reconceptualizing secondary and middle schools

  * Current structure and practices
  * The politics of teaching
  * Alternatives to current structures and practices

##### Teaching in a pluralistic society

  * Cultural issues and their impact on learning
  * Goals and curriculum models for multicultural education
  * Race, class, and gender issues in schools
  * Socioeconomic issues
  * Linguistic diversity

##### Teaching and learning

  * Multiple ways of knowing
  * Inquiry-based education
  * Seven intelligences
  * Thematic/interdisciplinary curriculum
  * Hands-on, experiential learning
  * Construction and acquisition of knowledge
  * Curriculum planning
  * Collaborative/cooperative learning
  * Contextualizing curriculum in the "real" world
  * Tricks of the trade
  *  

##### Assessment

  * Traditional assessment methods
  * Alternative assessment methods  

|

