Creating a Classroom Atmosphere Conducive to Learning **_Journal For Learning
Enhancement_ , Volume 1**

Editorial Comments:  
The purpose of the _Journal For Learning Enhancement_ (JLE) is to showcase
research methodologies, ideas and techniques that enhance teaching and
learning. This first edition of the Journal takes as its theme:

![](jle.gif)

Contributors were asked to address the following questions:

  * How do you eliminate barriers to student participation in the learning process? 
  * How do you encourage the questioning and discussion that lead to a rich learning environment? 
  * Can you suggest strategies or techniques to involve students in the subject matter, to get them excited and participating? 
  * In larger classes how do you encourage students to be active rather than passive learners?

The authors of the three articles selected for publication all confront the
challenge posed by large classes where not only numbers but often classroom
architecture inhibit active learning and free exchange of ideas. Representing
the humanities, the sciences and the social sciences and the corporate world,
the San Diego State University professors share the creative ideas and
pedagogical strategies that have proven successful in their classrooms.

Eve Kornfeld describes her transition "from torture to delight" in her
development of a methodology that incorporates student journals for a weekly
commentary on and analysis of the lecture material, and structured discussion
that actively involves students in an understanding of the role of the
historian as interpreter of events and of the diversity of opinion that shapes
our understanding of history.

Stephen Roeder counters the growing depersonalization he perceives in large
lecture classes with a number of strategies he has developed to help make
students feel individually acknowledged and valued. He also addresses the
importance of re-engaging students' interest by connecting material presented
in class (using science classes as examples) with their lives, their careers,
and other fields outside the instructor's own particular area of expertise.

Renatte Adler presents her Integrated Group Projects in context of a recent
RAND study assessing the way universities prepare students for success in the
global corporate arena where cognitive and social/personal skills are highly
ranked. Her strategy makes teamwork "both an integral and continual part of
[her] course structure" and provides opportunities for students to develop and
practice "real world skills" such as creative and critical reasoning and
spontaneous oral and written responses.

Presentation of these articles by the _Journal For Learning Enhancement_ was
made possible by a limited license grant from the authors who have retained
all copyrights.

_Carole Scott  
Division of Undergraduate Studies  
San Diego State University_

**Journals And Discussions In Large Classes**  
Eve Kornfeld, Department of History

For those of us convinced of the efficacy of active learning, teaching a
large-lecture class can prove a daunting challenge. Even the most engaged
students are hesitant to participate in a class of 120 strangers. Few students
enter these General Education courses with the same level of commitment and
confidence that they bring to courses in their majors; most are quite willing
to sink back into invisibility and passivity. The poor acoustics and
architecture of most of our large-lecture rooms contribute to this attitude: a
tentative remark will often go unheard, and, with chairs bolted to the ground,
it is physically difficult to encourage small-group discussions. Small wonder
that these classes are known as "large-lecture" classes on this campus.

I began to teach a large-lecture section of History 310A, an upper-division,
General- Education survey of early American history for non-majors, in fall
1991. For the first time in my teaching career, I found that I did not know
how my students were responding to my lectures or the provocative readings
assigned each week. I tried to encourage participation by offering extra
credit for it. I used complex, rotating seating charts to keep track of which
students were participating from week to week (those seated in front were most
likely to participate). I succeeded only in raising the anxiety level of the
students, fostering a competitive atmosphere in the class ("my hand was up and
you didn't call on me"), and giving myself a perpetual headache. Beyond doubt,
some other solution was needed.

When I returned to the large section of History 310A in fall 1993, I tried a
different and more successful method of encouraging active learning. Developed
and refined in the fall semesters of 1994 and 1995, this method has
transformed the class for me and many of the students from torture to delight.
I offer each student the option of taking two midterm essay examinations and
writing a final paper, or of writing a weekly journal, participating in class
discussions each week, and writing a final paper. In each of the last three
years, about 70 of the 120 students enrolled in the course have chosen the
journal/ discussion option, although most have no experience with the form
before the class begins. Many try it with the understanding that they can
"retreat" to the midterm option at the time of the first midterm; only one or
two ultimately do so each year.

The course syllabus includes a detailed, page-long description of the journal/
discussion option and its pedagogical goals. I explain both orally and in
writing that each week, each student who chooses this option must submit a
one-page, typed paper that analyzes and responds to the central argument(s) of
the assigned reading. Both a critical analysis of the assigned historical
interpretations and primary sources, and a response to them are required. I
ask students to think about what is surprising or new to them in the readings,
and how they relate to "what they have always believed" about early American
history. Over the first few weeks of the course, I guide those students who
neglect one or the other of these aspects of the assignment to strengthen that
element. By the time of the first midterm, most can identify the central
argument in the reading (even if they doubted at the start of the course that
historians advance arguments), assess the nature of the evidence, and offer a
personal response.

The weekly journal entries serve as a prelude to small-group and class
discussions. Each week I set aside 75 minutes for discussion. With their
journals in hand, students are divided into five or six small groups, and
asked to discuss the argument, evidence, surprises, and questions raised by
one of the readings. (Given the classroom architecture, the groups generally
go to sit outside; I wander between them, as unobtrusively as possible.) After
about 15 minutes, the small groups return, and report in turn upon their
discussions and conclusions. This sparks an open discussion and comparison of
the readings among all members of the class. Those students who have chosen
the midterm option join a small group as well, and are encouraged to speak
whenever they have something to add. I keep track of the participation of the
journal writers (they must announce their names for the first several weeks,
so that I can record them). While they need not participate every week -- and
are encouraged to listen as much as to talk -- they know that their overall
level of participation in discussion will count toward their final journal/
discussion grade. Some students find it very difficult to speak in the large
group, although they can participate in their small groups. But a surprising
number feel comfortable enough, after articulating their thoughts in their
journals and then trying them out in their small groups, to venture their
judgments before the assembled masses. No doubt learning the names and faces
of their fellow students also defuses the anxiety of class participation.

Many revelations occur during these discussions. Students who enter the course
believing that history is a collection of facts are amazed to see that
historians have very different interpretations of the same events and, even
more surprising, that students in the class can also read the same document or
primary source very differently. I could lecture all semester about how our
values, beliefs, and experiences shape our understanding of history, but I
could never make this point more dramatically or effectively than our class
discussions do on a weekly basis. Some students thus confront a diversity of
experience and views for the first time; some visibly struggle all semester to
come to terms with it, and to learn how to respect and value different
learning styles and diverse opinions. Arguably, this is one of the most
important lessons students can learn in a General Education course.

According to student testimony on evaluations, this opportunity to connect
what they are reading and hearing with what they already know and believe
greatly aids the learning process. Most note that they have learned and
remembered much more by writing and speaking as well as hearing and reading
about historical issues. Many students (particularly Liberal Studies majors)
comment that this has been the first time they have ever spoken in class at
SDSU. Even those students who choose the midterm option generally believe that
the discussions improved their skills of critical analysis and synthesis;
their examinations seem to bear this out. Many students note that this is the
first time that they have not "hated history." Overall, I have concluded that
the investment of my time in reading each student's weekly journal is a good
one. This may be one way to overcome the depersonalization of large classes,
for students and instructor alike.

****************************************

**Re-Humanizing The Large Lecture Class**  
Stephen B. W. Roeder, Departments of Chemistry and Physics

It is encouraging to see a renewed interest in teaching and learning.
Techniques of teaching are just fine, of course. But when I think of the
techniques of instruction, I immediately think of the numerous manuals
available in any bookstore on the techniques of sex. There seems to be a
dearth of attention paid to the achievement of true love between man and
woman. When such love exists, the techniques are soon found and easily
learned. But in the absence of love, the techniques of sex have only marginal
value. So it is with education. I fear that an emphasis on techniques may
divert us from seeking and grappling with the most fundamental issues of a
true education. Therefore as I discuss techniques I have found valuable, I
will more deeply be concerned with the humanistic aspects of learning:
improving education by addressing the human needs of the whole person as a
human being.

**_The Need To Re-Humanize Our Delivery Of Instruction**_

From the late 1960s through the early 1970s, I taught lecture classes often.
Then, for about fifteen years I taught upper division and graduate level
courses almost exclusively. In 1989 I returned from a research sabbatical to
lower division teaching and was assigned to a large course in general physics.
The classroom atmosphere seemed to have changed significantly. I sensed a that
my students were dispirited, disinterested, even mildly hostile. This
surprised me. These feelings were not present in the earlier years and I asked
myself, "Why? What can I do about this?"

First, it was obvious that lower division class size had greatly increased.
Second, the attitudes and interests of the faculty had shifted. When I first
arrived at SDSU in 1968, it seemed to be a universal practice in Physics for
all faculty to keep their office doors open to indicate that students were
welcome to drop by. Now, when I walk past faculty offices all over this
university, I see that they are largely closed, understandably so when one
views the large amount of scholarship that is now going on and the heavy
demands this places on faculty time and energy. On the lower division level,
students are often in large classes and taught by professors who seem
anonymous, busy with other things, and remote. Students sense that they are
not welcome. Were I one of them, I too would feel that my own individual
education didn't seem very important in the scheme of things.

Often to lower division students, the whole process seems to be a game: play
whatever game needs to be played to get sufficient points to get the required
grade to go on to play the game again. When you are finally squeezed out the
other end of this educational tube, you should have a job offer and a ticket
to the middle class. Some students perceive the game to be a hostile one in
which it is the duty of the professor to try to keep as many points away from
students as possible and the student tries to get as many points as he or she
can. While many departments do a very good job with their upper division
courses and laboratories in which students do get adequate personal attention,
a great deal of good could be done by giving more personal attention to
students in our lower division courses also. By treating individual students
as valuable in their own right, it becomes much easier to get students to
accept that what we tell them is also valuable.

**_Personalizing The University**_

The most important thing is to try to re-personalize the classroom. The first
step is to learn the name of every student in the class, even in large
lectures. I take a number of pictures around the classroom and have each
student identify his or her image with initials on the front and name on the
back. I use these as flash cards to learn every student's name. I make a point
of referring to students by name both inside and outside the classroom. When a
student asks a question in class and I refer to the student by name, it
demonstrates to the entire class that I regard each of them as an individual.
When I see a student outside of class, I make a point of addressing him or her
by name. This amazes some students and gratifies all of them. Learning and
using names does more to change the atmosphere of the class than any other
technique I have tried.

Learning names is difficult for me, so I need to work hard at it. On the first
day of classes, I announce that on the next class day I will be taking
pictures, and I encourage students to sit in that part of the classroom that
they intend to remain in for the semester. Associating a name with a face
along with a location in the classroom helps. I strongly encourage students to
remove their caps during picture taking as hair color and style, as well as
the ability to see the face fully, helps to differentiate individuals. Making
joking comments while taking pictures encourages them to look at the camera.
For a class of 150 to 200 students, taking a roll of 20 pictures with a 35mm
pocket camera is sufficient. Most pictures will contain a group of 4 or 5
students and a few pictures will be of large sections of the class.

The next difficult task is learning names. I circulate each deck of pictures
during the next couple of classes and ask students for their initials on the
front and name block printed on the back. Midterm exam time is a good
opportunity to further one's learning of names and faces. While students are
taking the exam and I walk around proctoring, I get out my deck of "flash
cards" and try to associate individuals in the pictures with those sitting in
the classroom. At the end of the test, I insist that students hand their exams
to me individually, primarily to ensure that names are on the tests but also
to associate names with faces as reinforcement. Furthermore, students who are
tempted to send in someone else to take the exam know that they might be
caught.

The next technique to personalize a large lecture class is to walk around the
classroom during class, and to look at individual students while lecturing. As
I use overhead transparencies projected on the screen and employ a laser
pointer, I can continue talking while walking all around the class and looking
at students individually. Students feel that they are receiving individual
attention just by the eye contact and presence. Students who are nearby are
much more likely to ask a question during lecture than when the instructor is
standing in front of the whole assembly.

The peripatetic lecture style works best, at least in science and mathematics
courses, when the lecture notes are on transparencies. Prepared
transparencies, taking full advantage of colors, work well. However, some
students write much more slowly than others. I use two overhead projectors,
one with the current transparency projecting on the main screen and a second
projector displaying the immediately preceding transparency on a second screen
or even on a side wall. Having two transparencies shown at the same time helps
students see the flow of ideas.

In large lecture classes it is common to have at least one hearing-impaired
student who relies on a signer and thereby is not able to pay full attention
to copying the material on the transparencies. Consequently I photocopy my
transparencies and place several copies in the library on limited loan. In
addition to the hearing impaired, many students will use these to check their
notes or to get the notes in case they missed a class. This procedure avoids
the annoying question, "I missed your class last time; did you say anything
important?" I used to provide to limited loan three copies of each lecture but
in recent years have been discouraged by the theft of the lectures removed
from the binders.

The critical ingredient in personalizing our large lower-division courses is
treating students as individuals in spite of the size of the class. I may be
the biggest beneficiary from these efforts because I enjoy my teaching much
more because of them. When I walk around the classroom lecturing and seeing
students as individuals, it changes how I look at them and how I address them
in subtle ways. When I welcome students at office hours, they know I mean it
because they know I see them as individuals.

**_Re-engaging The Student**_

Besides these techniques for personalizing large classes, I look for ways to
make the material itself relevant to students' lives and connected with their
other classes. Many years ago, three of us in Physics created a general
education course called The Physics of Hi Fi. This course used high fidelity
sound systems to illustrate many of the principles of physics. In those days,
many students were really involved in their systems and their music and by
relating every issue in the course to these interests we produced exceptional
student enthusiasm. Using hi fi as a vehicle, we taught a great deal of
physics, and numerous demonstrations brought the concepts to life. For
example, in one lecture we placed a speaker (hooked up to a stereo system) in
a bell jar. The class could hear the sound coming from the speaker. Then we
pumped the air from the bell jar and the sound diminished and disappeared.
This was proof of the nearly obvious -- that sound, unlike light, requires a
medium of transmission. Then we illustrated another principle -- that of
conservation of energy -- by passing the speaker around the classroom. It was
hot! The electrical energy flowing into the speaker from the amplifier had to
go somewhere and when it could no longer create mechanical energy in the air,
the energy turned into heat energy.

This is a very special example of a way to make the material the instructors
wanted to convey connect with something that already interested the students.
But I believe that professors ought to be able to explain to students in any
of our introductory courses, whether they be general education or preparation
for a major, why the major topics of the course and the overall purpose of the
course is relevant to students' lives or their careers. Many of us are so
involved in our fields that we do what has traditionally been done in such
courses and have not really thought about the issue of relevance. Furthermore
we are generally so specialized in our training that we are not well prepared
to make these connections for students. We tend to teach each introductory
course as if it were an intellectual island, connected, if to anything at all,
only to more specialized work to follow.

Every introductory course ought to have the flavor of a liberal arts course
which also makes the connections to other fields. An example from the field of
chemistry should make this point: In introductory chemistry we talk about
chemical equilibrium and we talk about solid-liquid-gas phase equilibria. But
we never relate this to the large question of what does equilibrium mean and
what kinds of equilibria are there? A marble in a tea cup and a marble on a
table illustrate two kinds of mechanical equilibria. That minority of students
who learn to set up the equations for a chemical equilibrium correctly rapidly
lose this skill with time because the skill was never placed into the larger
and very interesting picture so that it would have greater meaning. Connecting
chemical equilibrium to mechanical equilibrium questions would at least
motivate the mechanical engineer in the audience to appreciate the concept.
This is just one example of forming those creative connections that help make
the material relevant to students' own lives and goals so that no one ignores
them or denies their importance.

*********************************

**Fostering Real World Skills In The Classroom With Integrated Group
Projects**  
Renatte K. Adler, Department of Economics

A major difficulty for professors with large classes (in excess of 25
students) is finding not only the means, but also the time, to facilitate in-
class participation by any but a handful of outspoken students. Of special
importance, as will be shown in the discussion which follows, is encouraging
students' participation in order to develop and practice using "real world
skills" which grow out of the academic theories and studies presented in class
lectures and reading materials. Examples of such skills include creative or
critical reasoning, formulating spontaneous oral and written responses, and
performing within a team.

The teaching method presented in this paper will be referred to as the
integrated group project (IGP). It is a strategy for facilitating real world
skills development through group projects by making teamwork both an integral
and continual part of the course structure. Further benefits of developing
these skills through use of the IGP in combination with lectures include: more
and livelier interactions both in and out of the classroom, increased insights
by the students into the subject matter, and therefore better grades for at
least some students.

An important new study by the RAND Institute (Bikson and Law 1994) reports the
results of a broad, nation-wide survey of multinational corporations exploring
the ways in which university programs prepare students for success upon
entering the global corporate arena. A key result is that in corporations'
ratings of recent undergraduate job applicants, **cognitive skills** and
**social/personal skills** are ranked significantly higher above students'
knowledge of academic majors. Cognitive skills refer to ability to learn
independently, problem-solving ability, decision-making, and innovativeness;
social/personal skills include flexibility, openness to new ideas, ability to
communicate effectively in writing and in speech. Unfortunately, "corporate
representatives do not believe that colleges focus on developing these skills
and qualities." (p. x)

> In scientific, engineering, and technical positions,...communication ability
makes a big contribution to successful job performance, but neither students
nor their institutions make this association. [Corporate participants in the
study] reported a similar lack of emphasis on communications ability even
among entering employees with liberal arts degrees." (p. 21)

Students are aware of the difficulties of succeeding on the job market today,
and many are disillusioned by the gap they perceive between the theoretical
teachings in their academic courses and the need for real world skills.
Professors who inform students that participation in the IGP method is a way
of bridging this gap can heighten their students' interest in proactively
learning and applying course material, as opposed to passively sitting through
lectures.

**The IGP Strategy:** Using a group project as a teaching tool is not unusual
in courses university-wide, but the project is commonly a one-time assignment
which is often due at semester's end. A typical project may or may not involve
a class presentation. In contrast, the IGP strategy used in both the
Intermediate and Advanced Micro-economic Theory courses at SDSU consists of
group projects/presentations which are incorporated throughout the semester in
bi-weekly assignments that are related specifically to examination material.

Across campuses, students frequently report they find economic theory courses
to be daunting due to the theoretical content which is perceived to be
difficult to relate to real world economic situations and policies. By using
the integrated group project from the start to the end of the semester, the
instructor can foster cognitive skills development through hands-on learning
as group members learn how economic theory is applied to creatively solving
real world problems. Then, by requiring groups to present their results to
class members, students build upon their abilities to illustrate how economic
theory works in practice, while improving their social/personal skills at
working together in a team setting and communicating effectively during oral
presentations.

An important element for achieving maximum success with the IGP strategy is to
spend class time at the start of the semester explaining the purpose of these
group projects and presentations; i.e., that the IGP is a means of not only
encouraging more class discussion and improved student performance, but also
of enhancing students' skills in the context of employability. This
explanation is important for establishing trust between the class members and
the professor, and quelling fears that students have about speaking in front
of a group and responding to questions spontaneously.

A question/answer period must follow each group's presentation. If students in
the audience do not have questions, the professor should ask one or two
questions which encourage the group members to go beyond their surface level
presentation. It is crucial, however, to remind the class that the professor
is not attempting to embarrass or harass group members. Rather, the
instructor's role in maximizing the success of the group presentation as a
learning tool is to encourage spontaneous responses by talking the group
members through their discussion answers, which tends to encourage
participation from other class members as well.

**Method:** At the start of the semester, the class is divided into seven
groups of 4-6 members. (The method is described for a class size of 25-40.)
Students are randomly assigned to groups; ideally, a quiz is given initially
so that each group can be structured to include a mix of high-, middle-, and
low-achievers. The composition of the seven groups will remain unchanged
throughout the semester. Seven problems are then assigned which are
applications from the chapters to be covered during the next two weeks.

Each group is responsible for developing a solution and presentation of
results to one problem, though the groups should work all problems since every
problem represents potential examination material. Then, every two weeks,
class presentations will be made; exams will correspond to the group projects.
One of the 7 groups is told that their presentation is definitely scheduled,
while the other 6 groups are told that only one other group will be selected
on the presentation day. The selection will be made randomly. Thus, in a
15-week semester with bi-weekly group projects, each group will make two class
presentations -- one scheduled and one randomly determined.

The bi-weekly schedule begins with the professor presenting lecture material
for two weeks, with the last 45 minutes at the end of the second week reserved
for group presentations and follow-up discussions. Presentations can last
15-20 minutes, and each group member must participate in some way. The next
class begins with a short exam which covers material from lectures, from the
seven assigned problems, and the group presentations. The seven groups then
receive their next problems, and the bi-weekly cycle begins again.
(Instructors may prefer to give less frequent, longer exams, while the
presentation schedule can remain bi-weekly).

Students understand that their in-class presentations and responses to follow-
up questions must be well-thought out for two reasons: (1) they are, in
effect, teaching their portion of the material to the remainder of class
members, so presenting incorrect methodology and answers is damaging to all of
the students; and, (2) they are receiving points for the quality of their
presentation which will affect their final grade in the class. In order to
have group projects taken seriously, the IGP grade should comprise at least
25% of the students' course grade. Each student's IGP grade is a sum of three
scores, assigned by the professor, by other group members, and by the class
after hearing the presentation.

To encourage the growth of communication abilities, visual aids such as
posters, overheads, or flip charts are strongly encouraged and will generally
enhance the presentation grade. Presentation grades may also be enhanced by
groups' production of hand-outs for the class which outline methodology and
solutions. Group members are told that IGP scores are not based exclusively
upon the correctness of their problem solution; an important component of
score determination is their ability to present their material clearly and in
an interesting manner. Stress is placed upon the importance of being able to
work in a group and present results, as would be the case in a corporate
office or other professional setting once students have left the university.

**Results:** On a large campus with class sizes in excess of 25, students find
interaction with others a rarity. By assigning group projects, professors
encourage class members to spend time working together and developing
relationships, both for studying and personal interaction. Students do not
initially welcome group projects because of the added work required. Also,
most students are unfamiliar with how to work efficiently in a group.
Professors who offer tips on working within a group's dynamics, and who
reinforce the idea that developing skills at working as part of a team and
presenting results are essential to career success, will find that the method
will be better received.

With practice over a semester's time, many students begin to enjoy
participation in their groups. Several students have commented on how much
more they were able to learn by being thrown into a working situation with
their peers. For example, a full-time working student reported that for the
first time he finally understood and even enjoyed economics; he was grateful
for the opportunity to work with other students since he had always been
afraid to approach them due to their age difference. Other students have
stated that they felt the IGP method definitely improved their course grade by
encouraging them to keep up with class material.

Interaction between the professor and students also increases because group
members utilize their professor's office hours to discuss problem solutions
before their class presentations. (Note that all groups are generally working
on their problems because of the random selection process for presentations;
however, once they begin meeting to solve their own problems, they begin to
establish study habits to work together on other problems as well.) In the
classroom, the role-reversal of having the professor in the audience listening
to students lecture and respond to questions further serves to increase
professor-student personal interactions. Even the difficulty of learning the
names of 40 students is more easily overcome.

Though economics is a discipline which has technical problems that can be
assigned as group projects, all other academic disciplines can utilize this
method by assigning exercises in critical and creative thinking. This might
include group projects on poetry critiques in a literature course, or
describing the set-up or results of a controlled experiment in a science
course, or debating two sides of an ethical question in a philosophy course.

Utilizing the IGP method entails some costs to the instructor. Integrating
group projects/presentations throughout the semester's class meetings requires
the instructor to put together bi-weekly problem sets; however, since written
assignments (and thus grading) can be reduced by substituting in-class
presentations instead, this method may not result in a great increase in the
instructor's work load. Also, instructors using this method will find their
office hours are often fully utilized. And, a commitment of class time to the
students' group presentations is required. If, however, classes become more
lively, while students begin to perform better and to report that they are
truly understanding the material, this may prove to be time well-spent.

As any instructor who has required group presentations knows, students'
presentation skills are often untried, almost always unpolished. Their first
attempts can be labored and painfully slow, perhaps more so for their
audience. However, the poorly developed cognitive skills and social/personal
skills of silent students sitting through traditional lecture-style courses is
all the more justification for working to improve these skills. This is
especially true because of the high value that skills such as innovative
problem-solving and oral presentation ability have on the job market or in
graduate school in a wide variety of disciplines. When group projects and
presentations are integrated in the class on a continuing basis, the
instructor will inevitably witness improvement as students' confidence grows,
and they develop superior techniques and styles for effective communication.

Bikson, T.K. and S.A. Law. "Global Preparedness and Human Resources: College
and Corporate Perspectives." RAND Institute on Education and Training: Santa
Monica, California, 1994.

*********************************

