![U of M shield](blueshie.gif)  [**Department of History home
page**](home.html "Home page for the Department of History, The University of
Memphis")  ![->](arrowtny.gif)  Current page  
---  
  
**Department of History**

**The University of Memphis**

**GUIDE**

**_for_**

**GRADUATE STUDENTS**





* * *

**TABLE OF CONTENTS**

**Introduction  
Quick Facts about The University of Memphis  
Faculty of the Department of History  
URLs and Application Procedures  
Master of Arts in History  
**       The Program  
      Application  
      Admission Requirements  
      Advising  
      Nature of Course Offerings  
      Program Requirements and Restrictions  
      Grades  
      Time Limitation  
      Thesis  
      Comprehensive Examination  
      Statement of Intent to Graduate  
      Timetable for M.A. Program **  
Doctor of Philosophy in History  
**       The Program  
      Application  
      Admission Requirements  
      Advising  
      Nature of Course Offerings  
      Fields of Study  
      Course Requirements and Restrictions  
      Grades  
      Previously Earned Credits  
      Time Limitation  
      Foreign Language Requirement  
      Comprehensive Examination  
      Dissertation  
      Timetable for Doctoral Program **  
Graduate Committees  
**       Master's Program  
      Doctoral Program  
      Graduate Studies Committee  
      Appeals **  
Graduate Assistantships  
Internships  
Belle McWilliams Scholarships  
Library Resources for Research  
WWW and University of Memphis Links from the History Department Web Page  
Graduate Courses in History**



* * *

**INTRODUCTION**

The Department of History of The University of Memphis welcomes your interest
in our graduate program. We offer both master's and doctoral degree programs,
as described in the following pages, and we are proud of the quality of our
programs and our faculty.

The University of Memphis and the Department of History are committed to
excellence in teaching and in research. Our basic objectives are (1) to
preserve and disseminate knowledge, (2) to extend knowledge through research,
and (3) to prepare students to assume responsible and useful roles in society.

The University of Memphis is a comprehensive institution serving a diverse
student body. The campus is centrally located in an attractive residential
area of Memphis, one of the South's largest cities. As a medical, educational,
communication, distribution and transportation center, Memphis offers a rich
and full range of research opportunities and cultural experiences. The city,
known worldwide for its musical heritage, has many fine restaurants, museums,
theaters, and parks. Local museums include the National Civil Rights Museum,
the National Ornamental Metal Museum, Brooks Art Gallery, Dixon Gallery and
Gardens, and the Pink Palace Museum; in addition, the on-going Wonders Series
has brought special exhibits to the city from the great museums of St.
Petersburg, Paris, Rome, Istanbul, London, and others.

The University of Memphis is one of 46 institutions in the Tennessee Board of
Regents system, the seventh largest system of higher education in the nation.
The TBR is the governing board for this system which comprises six
universities, 14 community colleges and 26 area technology centers. The TBR
system enrolls more than 80 percent of all Tennessee students attending public
institutions of higher education.

The History Department of The University of Memphis sponsors several special
community outreach programs. Each year the Belle McWilliams and Memphis
Sesquicentennial Lecture Series invite nationally prominent speakers to
campus. The Belle McWilliams Foundation also funds a scholarship program in
U.S. history and sponsors the High School Scholars Seminars, which bring high
school students to campus six times yearly. Each year the History Department
hosts the state History Day competition for junior and senior high school
students, the winners advancing to the national finals.

The Graduate History Association sponsors an annual national conference in
African American history, and in the past two years they have added an
European history conference.

Epsilon Nu Chapter of Phi Alpha Theta, the history honorary society, is very
active on campus. It brings together undergraduates, graduates, and faculty
for many activities, including an annual awards dinner and a monthly scholarly
presentation and discussion, which during the last year has looked at
questions of race and identity. Over the years it has brought in such speakers
as Willie Morris, Shelby Foote, and C. Vann Woodward. Epsilon Nu Chapter has
several times received "Best Chapter" awards for Phi Alpha Theta.

The Department of History and The University of Memphis have much to offer the
graduate student in history. Ours is a quality program with high educational
standards, yet one with much personal attention and respect for individuality.
A limited number of assistantships, internships, and scholarships are awarded
yearly.



* * *

> > _**Quick Facts About . . .**_

>>

>>> > _**THE UNIVERSITY OF MEMPHIS**_

>>

>> The University's 20,000+ students come from 50 states and more than 75
foreign countries.

>>

>> The Graduate School currently enrolls nearly 5000 students in 38
departments offering 140 concentration areas.

>>

>> The campus consists of 1,160 acres at four sites with nearly 200 buildings.

>>

>> The University of Memphis' six colleges offer baccalaureate degrees in 70
majors, master's degrees in 51 subjects, and doctoral degrees in 18
disciplines

>>

>> The University of Memphis has 24 endowed Chairs of Excellence, more than
any other single campus in the state.

>>

>> The Mississippi Valley Collection is a unique repository of local and
regional history.

>>

>> The University of Memphis has five Centers of Excellence dedicated to
scholarship and research in education, Egyptian art and archaeology,
psychology, earthquake science and speech and hearing.

>>

>> The Institute of Egyptian Art and Archaeology plays a role in international
research through excavation and study in Egypt. It houses one of the South's
most extensive libraries on ancient Egypt, as well as a fascinating collection
of artifacts. The Institute also sponsors an epigraphic project at the Great
Hypostyle Hall of Karnak Temple, Luxor, Egypt.

>>

>> The Center for Research on Women is nationally recognized for its
pioneering work on race, class, and gender.

>>

>> The University of Memphis is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action
University. It is committed to education of a non-racially identifiable
student body.

>>

>>  

* * *

**DEPARTMENT OF HISTORY OF THE UNIVERSITY OF MEMPHIS**  
100 Mitchell Hall, Memphis, TN 38152-3450  
(901) 678-2515; FAX: (901) 678-2720  
<http://www.people.memphis.edu/~history/>

**Chair:** F. Jack Hurley, [jhurley@memphis.edu](mailto:jhurley@memphis.edu),
Mitchell Hall 100  
**Graduate Coordinator** : James M. Blythe,
[jmblythe@memphis.edu](mailto:jmblythe@memphis.edu), Mitchell Hall 141  
**Office Manager:** Ann Rand, [arand@memphis.edu](mailto:arand@memphis.edu),
Mitchell Hall 100  
**Degrees Offered:** B.A., M.A., Ph.D.  
**Academic Year System:** Semester  
**Areas of Specialization:** U.S., Europe, African American, Ancient Egypt  
**Graduate Admissions:** Graduate School Student Services, Administration
Bldg. 216 (901) 678-2911  
**Graduate School:** Administration Building, Suite 308 (901) 678-2531

**Faculty:**  
ALLEN, Calvin H. (Ph.D., Washington 1978; prof.) modern Middle East, Islamic
world  
BLYTHE, James M. (Ph.D., Cornell 1987, prof.) medieval Europe, Renaissance
Europe  
BOND, Beverly G. (Ph.D., Memphis 1996; assoc. prof.) 19th cent. African
American  
BOSTON, Michael (Ph.D., 2001, State University of New York-Buffalo; asst.
prof.) African American  
BROWN, Walter R. (Ph.D., Emory 1973; assoc. prof.) early modern Europe, France  
CAFFREY, Margaret M. (Ph.D., Texas, Austin 1986; assoc. prof.) American women  
CHUMNEY, James R. (Ph.D., Rice 1964; assoc. prof.) American South, U.S. Civil
War, military  
CRAWFORD, Charles W. (Ph.D., Mississippi 1968; prof.) Tennessee, oral  
CROUSE, Maurice A. (Ph.D., Northwestern 1964; prof.) colonial and
revolutionary America  
FICKLE, James E. (Ph.D., Louisiana State 1970; prof.) American economic,
labor, conservation  
FRANKLE, Robert J. (Ph.D., Wisconsin, Madison 1970; assoc. prof.) Tudor-Stuart
England, Reformation  
HAWES, Joseph M. (Ph.D., Texas, Austin 1969; prof.) U.S., family  
HURLEY, F. Jack (Ph.D., Tulane 1971; prof.) U.S. between the wars, technology,
urban  
JUDAKEN, Jonathan (Ph.D., California-Irvine 1997; assist. prof.) modern
Europe, France, intellectual  
KNIGHT, Frederick (Ph.D., California-Riverside 2000; assist. prof.) African
American  
KRIEGEL, Abraham D. (Ph.D., Duke 1965; prof.) modern England  
LAUMANN, Dennis (Ph.D., UCLA, 1999; assist. prof.) Africa  
MITCHELL, Kell F. (Ph.D., Georgia 1966; assoc. prof.) American diplomatic  
PENNER, D'Ann R. (Ph.D., California-Berkeley 1995; asst. prof.) Russia, modern
Europe  
SHERMAN, Janann M. (Ph.D., Rutgers 1993; assoc. prof.) 20th century U.S.
political, women, social  
SKEEN, C. Edward (Ph.D., Ohio State 1966; prof.) early national period U.S.  
STEIN, Stephen (Ph.D., 1999, Ohio State University; Instructor) Military and
naval, post-Civil War U.S.  
SUN, Lung-kee (Ph.D., Stanford 1984; prof.) modern China, Japan, East Asia  
TUCKER, David M. (Ph.D., Iowa 1965; prof.) African American, modern America  
UNOWSKY, Daniel (Ph.D., Columbia, 2000; asst. prof.) modern Central and
Eastern Europe  
**Adjunct Faculty:**  
HOOKS, Benjamin L. (JD, DePaul 1948; adj. prof.) African American, social,
political  
**Nondepartmental Historians:**  
BENIN, Stephen D. (Ph.D., California, Berkeley 1980; assoc. prof.) Byzantine,
medieval Christian-Jewish relations, patristics ( Bornblum Judaic Studies)



* * *

**URLS AND APPLICATION PROCEDURES**

  * The history department manual for graduate students (which may be more up-to-date than this one), explaining the history program is available on the web at <http://www.people.memphis.edu/~history/guide02.html>.
  * The Graduate school is <http://www.people.memphis.edu/~gradsch/>
  * The university graduate catalog is available at <http://www.people.memphis.edu/~gradsch/grad_catalog/linkframe.htm>.
  * The History department is <http://www.people.memphis.edu/~history>
  * The University of Memphis homepage is <http://www.memphis.edu>
  * Current history courses offered with full descriptions are at <http://www.people.memphis.edu/~history/minicats.html>

The Graduate School encourages all prospective students to apply on-line
through [embark.com](http://embark.com) and pay their application fee with a
credit card. However, you may obtain a paper application by writing or calling
the Graduate School. Foreign students can obtain an email application by
emailing the history Graduate Coordinator at
[jmblythe@memphis.edu](mailto:jmblythe@memphis.edu). The reason for this
situation is that contractual obligations with embark.com prevent the
university from posting electronic applications. This may change, and it is
possible that you may be able to obtain an electronic application in the
future. Please check the [Graduate School
webpage](http://www.people.memphis.edu/~gradsch/) for any changes. Check it
also for complete university requirements and fees for application, since
these may change. As of now, all applications for admission from US applicants
must be accompanied by a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) non-refundable
application fee, unless previously paid; for foreign students the fee is fifty
dollars U.S. (U.S. $50.00).

Students may check on the status of their application by going to
[www.tigerweb.memphis.edu](http://www.tigerweb.memphis.edu) or calling STRIPES
at (901) 321- 7000. They will need to have their birth date and nine digit
student ID number (their social security number or a number that has been
assigned by the university). Foreign students' PINs have already been set to
their birthdate (MMDDYY); all others must pick their own PINs.

The University of Memphis believes that the presence of a balanced
representation of international students on campus will enrich the educational
environment for all students. The University is authorized to enroll non-
immigrant alien students on the "F-1" student visa. For more information on
admission of international students, please write or call the Graduate School
Student Services Office; also see the [graduate
catalog](http://www.people.memphis.edu/~gradsch/grad_catalog/linkframe.htm).
Keeping up with current procedures is even more important now that the U.S.
government has complicated its regulations for obtaining a visa and made the
process much more lengthy.

Foreign students must arrange for World Education Service
(<http://www.wes.org> or by email at [info@wes.org](mailto:info@wes.org)) to
do a "document- to-documen" evaluation of their foreign credentials. WES
should send an official evaluation directly to The University of Memphis. An
applicant must send the University of Memphis an English translation of their
academic records from their attendance at college, university, and
professional institutions of learning. Records should list the subjects
studied and the grade, mark, or other evidence that each individual subject
was completed to the satisfaction of the authorities in charge. Since
certificates and records filed for examination are not ordinarily returned,
applicants should send certified photostatic copies if the documents in
question cannot be easily replaced.

All applicants whose native language is not English must supply results of the
Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL) or its equivalent. TOEFL
information can be obtained by writing to TOEFL, Educational Testing Service,
Princeton, New Jersey, 08541, U.S.A. All test scores must be sent directly
from the testing agency to The University of Memphis, institutional code 1459.
Scores must be less than two years old. The Graduate School requires a minimum
score of 550 on the paper or 210 on the computer test.

For other requirements please see the [Graduate School
webpage](http://www.people.memphis.edu/~gradsch/) and the separate masters and
Ph.D. sections of this manual.

Students who do not meet all requirements of the program or applicants who
apply too late for admission for a given semester are eligible to take courses
as non-degree students. Up to twelve credits of this work may later be counted
toward a graduate degree upon acceptance to a degree program. All that is
required is completing a short application to the Graduate School and showing
proof of having earned a baccalaureate degree. At the end of the first
semester of course work, you may be required to furnish an official transcript
showing your degree from an accredited college or university. Before
registering for a second semester, you may also be required to sign a release
agreeing that additional course work [above 12 credits] will not apply to
degree programs. Non- degree students must maintain a 3.00 GPA in graduate
courses in order to re-enroll and are not eligible for graduate assistantships
or (usually) for financial aid. There may be some restriction on the courses
you can take, and matriculated students will have preference in enrolling
crowded classes



* * *

**MASTER OF ARTS IN HISTORY**

**The Master of Arts Degree Program:**

The Master of Arts program of study in history is a flexible one which
prepares students for a variety of careers. Students who regard the M.A. as a
terminal degree usually elect to fulfill its requirements by 33 hours of
course enrollment without writing a thesis. Most of these students go on to
teaching positions on the secondary and community college levels; a lesser
number enter government service; and some secure specialized positions in
business, industry, and journalism.

Those students preparing for teaching on the university level or related
careers in research and writing should look upon the M.A. program as
preparation for advanced graduate study. They are thus strongly urged to
fulfill the requirements of the M.A. program by the preparation of a thesis.

**Application to the M.A. Program** :

A typical application takes three to six weeks to process; applications are
reviewed by the history Graduate Coordinator and other appropriate faculty
before an admission decision is recommended to the Graduate School. If you
apply too late or do not yet meet all the requirements, you can still register
for a time as a non-degree student (see above under Application Procedures).
All credentials become the property of the University and are not forwarded or
returned. We will maintain your credentials in an active file for at least one
year.

You should send all application materials directly to the Graduate School,
**not** to the History Department.

**Admission Requirements:**

1\. A completed application form with a _non-refundable_ $25.00 application
fee [$50.00 for international students]. Since this may change, you should
check with the Graduate School before applying.

2\. An official transcript showing a bachelor's degree awarded by an
accredited college or university. In addition, transcripts from any other
college or university may be requested. (Students who received bachelor's
degrees from The University of Memphis may disregard this step.)

All transcripts must be sent _directly_ from each institution at which the
credit was earned to the Graduate School Student Services Office of The
University of Memphis.

3\. A minimum of 18 semester hours in undergraduate history with a minimum GPA
of 3.0 on a 4 point scale in all undergraduate history courses. In special
cases the Graduate Coordinator in History may make an exception, particularly
in a case where a student with fewer than 18 credits in history courses has
other non-history courses sufficiently similar in content or methodology to
history courses, or when exemplary grades in the last undergraduate years
follow poor earlier performance. While we primarily look at grades in history
courses, we also may reject an applicant if grades in other humanities courses
or overall GPA is unacceptable.

4\. Graduate Record Examination (GRE) or Miller Analogies Test (MAT)
scores.The department will normally consider for admission only students with
a GRE verbal score of at least 450, or a MAT score of at least 45. **We urge
candidates for admission to take the Graduate Record Examination, especially
if they plan to work toward the Ph.D. degree.** All test scores must be sent
_directly_ from the testing agency to the Office of Graduate School Student
Services. Test scores older than five years are not acceptable. Scores on MAT
exams written in less than 2 month intervals are not acceptable.

In unusual circumstances we may admit a promising student who does not fully
meet this requirement. If you wish to be considered for such an exception,
please send at least two academic recommendations and a sample of writing done
for a history course to the Graduate Coordinator of History.

Students who already have an earned master's degree or equivalent degree from
an accredited institution may, with the concurrence of the Graduate
Coordinator, request a waiver of the entrance examination.

Contact the Testing Center, Health Center Room 111 (901-678-2428) to arrange
to take the MAT or to obtain a registration packet for the GRE. The GRE is
administered by the Educational Testing Service; the Institution Code for The
University of Memphis is 1459.

**Advising:**

The Graduate Coordinator will advise students admitted into the Graduate
School when they first enroll. Although students may subsequently choose a
thesis advisor and use that person or another faculty member for academic
guidance, they should still direct technical questions about department and
university requirements and policies to the Graduate Coordinator.

As soon as possible, get a M.A. Tracking form from the graduate coordinator or
at <http://www.people.memphis.edu/~history/maplan.doc>.

We urge students to consult their faculty advisors before enrolling for each
semester, and students will be required to meet their advisors periodically.
The responsibility for meeting all degree requirements rests, however, with
the student.

Before you register for the first time, and about once a year afterwards, you
will need to obtain advising clearance from the Graduate Coordinator in order
to register. All registration is now done by phone (STRIPES) or on the
internet (TIGERWEB). For instruction on how to register, see
<http://www.enrollment.memphis.edu/registrar/register/tigerwebinfo.htm>.

**Nature of the Course Offerings:**

Students in the M.A. program may enroll for credit in all courses on the 6000
and 7000 level.

Courses on the 6000 level are open to both graduate students and upperclass
undergraduate students. These courses usually center around lectures and
discussions and survey an entire period, enabling students to get a background
in fields they have previously not studied. In addition to the lecture
materials, readings, and examinations required of the undergraduates, graduate
students are expected to do a significant amount of additional work. By close
consultation with the professor about the precise nature of this additional
assignment, students may do work in accord with their interests and needs. If
you have taken a course at the 4000 level (undergraduate) you cannot take the
same course again at the 6000 level.

7000 and 8000-level courses are the same in content, meeting times, and
requirements; they differ only in the fact that M.A. students register at the
7000 level and Ph.D. students at the 8000 level.

Courses on the 7000 level are open only to graduate students and are usually
limited to a class size of 15 or fewer. With a few exceptions (History 7000,
7070 and 7996, and courses that don't count toward the degree) these courses
are designed primarily to survey the important secondary works on a period, a
part of a period, or a theme and to familiarize students with leading
scholarly interpretations. The emphasis is on extensive reading, rather than
on a major writing project on some narrow topic. Class discussions of common
readings, written critiques, and student presentations, rather than the
lecture, are the basic format of these courses. With the exception History
7000, 7011, and 7100, 7000 level courses (including 7070) typically differ
from term to term, and if this is the case you can retake them

History 7000 is an introductory course dealing with the methods of historical
research and writing. It includes the techniques of historical composition,
the nature and use of various kinds of historical source materials,
bibliographical aids, computer techniques, and methods of historical
synthesis. This course or its equivalent is required of all M.A. students. It
should be taken early so that students can apply knowledge gained in this
course to other graduate courses. It is a prerequisite for History 7070
research seminars.

History 7012 is a directed readings course taken individually with a
professor. By advance consultation with and approval by a professor, students
can arrange for directed readings in a field of interest not offered as a
regular class, fill in gaps in knowledge, or investigate possibilities for a
thesis topic. Such a course is available only with the express agreement of
the professor who will direct it; no one has the right to a directed readings
course. A directed readings registration form must be filed with the
department office prior to enrollment. M.A. candidates normally enroll for no
more than 3 hours of directed readings, but permission to take 3 more, for a
total of 6 hours, may be granted upon petition to the Graduate Studies
Committee. In this case the student must (1) supply the Committee with the
syllabus of both the previous readings course and the one under consideration
(including a list of books read) and (2) state reasons why a second readings
course is necessary. As an exception, M.A. students in ancient history may
without such a petition take three additional hours of Directed Readings with
the consent of the History Department's graduate advisor in the ancient
history field. It is the policy of the Committee not to approve readings
courses if a student is able to attend a class that covers the same or similar
general topics.

History 7070 is a research seminar. The emphasis is on research using primary
materials in announced topics and on preparation of a scholarly paper. All
M.A. students are required to take at least one 7070 seminar; students who
elect not to write a M.A. thesis must take two. **History 7000 is a
prerequisite for all 7070 courses.**

History 7990, Reading for Comprehensives, is an individualized readings course
for students preparing for comprehensive examinations. Credit is _not_
applicable to the degree.

History 7020 (Seminar for Teaching Assistants), History 7021 (Colloquium for
Graduate Assistants), and History 7022 (Teaching Skills for Graduate
Assistants) are courses that address the responsibilities, activities, and
concerns of graduate assistants; they do _not_ count toward the degree..

History 7996 is the course number assigned for the 6 hours of thesis credit.

**Program Requirements and Restrictions:**

1\. A total of 33 hours for the student who elects not to write a thesis.

2\. A total of 30 hours for the student who elects to write a thesis (24 hours
of coursework, 6 hours of thesis credit).

3\. No more than 9 hours may be taken at the 6000 level.

4\. History **7000**.

5\. Two History **7070** seminars if you are not writing a thesis, one if you
are. You may take more if you wish.

6\. The following courses do **not** count toward the degree: History 7020
(Seminar for Teaching Assistants), History 7021 (Colloquium for Graduate
Assistants), History 7022 (Teaching Skills for Graduate Assistants), History
7990 (Reading for Comprehensives).

7\. You may take no more than 21 hours in United States History, European
History, or any one broad field of history, such as Asian History. Unless you
specialize in Ancient History, there is no requirement that you take a minimum
number of courses in any one field. M.A. students in Ancient History may count
their ancient art, anthropology, and language courses (taught in the Art,
Anthropology, and Foreign Language Departments), as field(s) separate from the
History Department courses they take in their major field of Ancient History)

8\. You may take six hours in a field outside history, with the approval of
the Graduate Coordinator. Under special circumstances, students may petition
for up to an additional 6 hours.

9\. You are restricted to one History 7012 Directed Readings course. If there
is a good reason, you may petition to take one more. See above, under Nature
of the Course Offerings, for the procedure.

10\. In the last term of courses (or later), you must take an oral
comprehensive examination, which covers all your coursework. It is given by a
committee of at least three professors chosen by you and your advisor. In most
cases one committee members should be outside the field of most of your
courses.

11\. If you write a thesis, you must defend it before a departmental committee
chaired by the faculty member who directed the preparation of the thesis.
Usually, though not always, the thesis defense and the comprehensive
examination are conducted by the same committee and at the same time.

12\. You must complete all the requirements within a six year period beginning
with the first term of matriculation. There are no exceptions to this policy.
Students may, however, request the option of validating old courses; see the
[graduate
catalog](http://www.people.memphis.edu/~gradsch/grad_catalog/linkframe.htm).
Such validation, which generally involves additional readings, and must
include a written exam, is limited to 1/3 of the total credits required for
the degree and is limited to courses with a fixed content.

13\. You may transfer a maximum of 6 semester hours of credit from another
college or university, provided these credits are no more than 6 years old
when you receive the M.A. degree. No transfer of credit is allowed for grades
less than B. No credit will be transferred without the approval of the
student's advisor and the Graduate Coordinator.

**Concentration in Ancient Egyptian History**

Beyond the core requirements, students choosing this concentration must take
HIST 6058 plus nine (9) hours (if writing a thesis) or fifteen (15) hours (if
not writing a thesis) of MA level courses with a focus on ancient Egypt.
Students will also take two semesters of basic Middle Egyptian (ARTH 7115 and
7116, which are required but will not count toward the degree), plus two more
semesters of readings from ancient Middle Egyptian texts, which do count
toward the degree.

**Grades:**

The University of Memphis uses a four-point grading system. For most
substantial courses students receive one of the following grades: **A+, A, A-
B+, B, B, C+, C, C-, D+, D, or F.** Grades used to postpone or suspend course
completion include **I** (incomplete), **IP** and **W** (withdrawn). For
thesis and dissertation hours and courses that do not count toward the degree,
such as readings for comprehensives and colloquium for graduate assistants,
students receive an **S** (satisfactory), **U** (unsatisfactory), or **IP**
(in progress). The points awarded for each credit of a plus/minus grade are:
A+=4.00, A=4.00, A-=3.84, B+=3.33, B=3.00, B- =2.67, C+=2.33, C= 2.00,
C-=1.67, D+=1.33, D=1.00, F=0.00. Graduate students must maintain a 3.00 (
**B** ) average. No more than 7 hours of **C** work and no hours of **D** or
**F** work will count toward degree requirements, but all **C** 's, **D** 's
and **F** 's will be calculated in the total grade point average. An
Incomplete ( **I** ) must be removed within 90 days from the end of the term
in which it was received (see University Calendar) or the **I** will
automatically become an **F** , regardless of whether or not the student is
enrolled. Extensions of 45 days may be granted by the instructor if sufficient
extenuating circumstances exist. At the end of the 45 day extension, the I
grade will automatically become an F.

Students who receive an IP must register for the same number of credits in the
same course for the next semester. After all work is completed, they will
receive credit for the first course only. An exception is for thesis credit,
for which students are required only to sign up for one credit or more the
next semester and will receive credit for all thesis credits taken, up to the
required six. Students do _not_ have to register for thesis credit, or for
another course in which they got an IP, in the summer.

The student will be certified for graduation when all requirements are met,
including the removal of all I grades. For students who have an I in the
semester in which they expect to graduate, the certification process will
automatically be deferred to the next term.

A graduate student whose cumulative GPA drops below 3.00 will be placed on
probation. Two consecutive semesters on probation can result in suspension.
Conditions under which continuation in the graduate school will be granted
must be recommended by the department and approved by the Dean of the Graduate
School. If, in the opinion of the Graduate School and the department, the
student is not making satisfactory progress, the student will be dismissed
from the degree program.

**Time Limitation:**

All requirements for the degree must be completed in six years. Courses more
than six years old will not be allowed as credit for the master's degree.
There are no exceptions to this policy. However, students may request the
option of validating old courses, as described in the [Graduate
Catalog](http://www.people.memphis.edu/~gradsch/grad_catalog/linkframe.htm).
Such validation, which generally involves additional readings, and must
include a written exam, is limited to 1/3 of the total credits required for
the degree and is limited to courses with a fixed content.

**Master's Thesis:**

Students who elect the thesis option are encouraged to select their topics
early (we recommend at least one year before expected graduation) in
consultation with a department member holding at least associate graduate
faculty rank who agrees to direct the thesis. Either at that time or
previously, the student may request that the thesis director, or another
faculty member whose professional interests are compatible with the student's
main area of study, be designated as the student's academic advisor. This
request should be approved by the faculty member and then submitted to the
Graduate Coordinator whose approval would ordinarily be _pro forma_. In
extraordinary situations, however, the case could be referred to the entire
Graduate Studies Committee for a decision.

After the advisor approves the thesis topic and the committee is chosen (see
below), the student must register the thesis with the Graduate School. There
is a PDF form for this available on the Graduate School site,
[http://www.people.memphis.edu/~gradsch/
forms1.html](http://www.people.memphis.edu/~gradsch/forms1.html), under the
title "Thesis/Dissertation Proposal Defense."

The student arranges for the composition of the thesis committee in
consultation with the thesis advisor; all prospective committee members must
agree to serve and sign a form obtainable from the office or
<http://www.people.memphis.edu/~gradsch/committee.html>. Usually, a thesis
committee will consist of the director and two readers, who may also be
consulted by the student during the various phases of preliminary reading,
research, and writing. When the thesis is completed, the student will be
expected to defend it, usually in conjunction with the Comprehensive
Examination. The thesis director may choose, however, to have the thesis
defense conducted separately. Results of the thesis defense must be reported
to the Graduate School, with copies to the history office and the graduate
coordinator. You can get the form in the office or at
<http://www.people.memphis.edu/~gradsch/defense.html>.



**M.A. Comprehensive Examination:**

All M.A. candidates must take an oral comprehensive examination, of
approximately 1/2 hours duration, over the all their course work. The
examination will cover knowledge of particular courses as well as the capacity
for larger historical synthesis. Ordinarily the examination will be given in
the last few weeks of the student's final semester in the program. In no case
will it be given prior to the semester in which the student's course work
and/or thesis are completed.

Within forty-five (45) days from the beginning of the semester in which the
student intends to graduate, the student, in consultation with the advisor,
must assemble an examining committee consisting of three faculty members
(though the advisor may recommend up to five, depending on how varied the
student's course work has been). Although the Graduate Studies Committee may
grant an occasional exception, not all committee members should be from the
same concentration (U.S., European, etc.). Before the examination is taken,
the student must provide the members of the examining committee with lists of
courses taken, books read, and papers written for the M.A.

The committee may judge the student to (1) pass with distinction with a
recommendation for Ph.D. work, (2) pass, or (3) fail. A unanimous vote is
required to pass or pass with distinction. In the event of failure, the
committee will adopt one of the following: (1) permit the student to take a
written or oral examination within the same semester (if the student
satisfactorily completes this option, the original failure will not be
recorded on the permanent record; if not the student will be able to take the
exam again under option 2), or (2) permit the student to take a written or
oral examination the following semester. Any student who fails to complete the
second examination satisfactorily will be dropped from the department's
graduate program. Results of the comprehensive examination must be reported to
the Graduate School, with copies to the history office and the graduate
coordinator. You can get this form in the office or at
<http://www.people.memphis.edu/~gradsch/comps2.html>.

**Statement of Intent to Graduate:**

Candidates for the M.A. degree must file a candidacy form
(<http://www.people.memphis.edu/~gradsch/mdc.html>) and a statement of intent
to graduate (<https://www.memphis.edu/intent_to_graduate/>) with the Dean of
the Graduate School at the beginning of the semester or session in which the
academic requirements for the degree are to be completed. A 3.00 average is
required for graduation. Students must meet this average by the beginning of
the term in which they plan to graduate. Grades made during the final semester
may make up for previous deficiencies, but the student will not be able to
graduate until the subsequent semester.



**TIMETABLE FOR M.A. PROGRAM**

Make sure your application form, application fee, official transcripts and
test scores arrive at the Graduate School Student Services Office on time. A
typical application takes three to six weeks to process.

Submit graduate appointment application form with transcripts and two letters
of recommendation to the History Department by February 15 to apply for a
graduate assistantship, internship or Belle McWilliams scholarship for the
next academic year.

Upon notification of acceptance into the M.A. program, contact the Graduate
Coordinator for an advising appointment. You will not be able to register
until you have been advised.

Register using the STRIPES telephone or TIGERWEB web-based registration
system. See
<http://www.enrollment.memphis.edu/registrar/register/tigerwebinfo.htm>.

Begin the M.A. tracking form, obtainable in the department office, from the
Graduate Coordinator, or at [http://
www.people.memphis.edu/~history/maplan.doc](http://www.people.memphis.edu/~history/maplan.doc).

Continue the advising, registration, and tracking process each semester.

As soon as appropriate, choose an advisor/committee chair and committee of at
least three professors. The advisor/chair must hold at least associate
graduate faculty status. Fill out a committee form, available in the office
(blue form) or at <http://www.people.memphis.edu/~gradsch/committee.html>,
obtain all committee signatures, and submit it to the office and Graduate
Coordinator. The office will pass it on to the Graduate School, which must
receive it by 45 days from the beginning of the semester of graduation.

For students writing a thesis, register the thesis topic with the Graduate
School. The Tennessee Conference of Graduate Schools' (TCGS) _Guide to the
Preparation of Theses and Dissertations_ is available in the university
bookstore. Also, obtain a checklist of requirements from the Graduate School
office or from their web page at
<http://www.people.memphis.edu/~gradsch/chklst2.htm>. History students should
follow the format recommended by the _Chicago Manual of Style_ as described in
the most recent edition of Kate L. Turabian, _A Manual for Writers of Term
Papers, Theses, and Dissertations_ (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

The first week of the last semester obtain the green Application for Master's
Degree Candidacy form and the Intent to Graduate card from the department
office, the Graduate School, or online
(<http://www.people.memphis.edu/~gradsch/mdc.html> and
<https://www.memphis.edu/intent_to_graduate/>) and complete both. Obtain the
required signatures/approvals. The candidacy form must be submitted to the
College Director of Graduate Studies and the Intent to Graduate card to the
Graduate School by the designated deadline for that semester.

During the latter part of the last semester, schedule the comprehensive oral
examination and/or thesis defense with committee members and the department
office. Comprehensive examinations and theses defenses must be held by the
designated Graduate School deadline for the semester. Report the result to the
history office and the graduate coordinator getting the form at the office or
at <http://www.people.memphis.edu/~gradsch/comps2.html>.

Submit final copies of the thesis to the Graduate School by the designated
deadline for the semester.



* * *

**DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY IN HISTORY**

**The Doctoral Degree Program:**

The Ph.D. is the highest degree granted by the University; it is conferred
only on those candidates whose work evidences general proficiency and the
ability to perform independent investigation. The degree is never conferred
merely for the accumulation of credits.

The program leading to the Ph.D. in history is designed to provide broad
knowledge in various fields of history, intensive preparation in a major
field, and also the competence in original historical research and writing
that will prepare the student for teaching and research in higher education or
for careers in government, business, library service, and other research
related fields. At least four academic years of study and research beyond the
M.A. degree, and usually more, are needed to complete the program.

**Application to the Graduate School and the Ph.D. Program in History:**

Although we will consider applications throughout the year, February 15 is the
deadline by which we must receive all the application materials of anyone who
wishes to be considered for an assistantship. All application materials will
be considered by the Graduate Studies Committee, with input invited from
department members who might serve on the applicant's advisory committee. We
will normally make decisions about assistantships by April 1.

If you are applying at a time that makes consideration in March inconvenient,
a typical application would take three to six weeks to process. If you apply
too late or do not yet meet all the requirements, you can still register for a
time as a non-degree student (see above under Application Procedures). All
credentials become the property of the University and are not forwarded or
returned. We will maintain your credentials in an active file for at least one
year.

New students applying for the doctoral program in history must be admitted to
the Graduate School. Since the Graduate School has minimum grade and GRE score
requirements, official transcripts and Graduate Record Examination test
scores, together with the application form and application fee, should be sent
directly to the Graduate School. You can send all other materials to the
Graduate Coordinator in the History Department, 100 Mitchell Hall, Memphis, TN
38152-3450. The criteria below combine the Graduate School and History
Department requirements.

**Admission Requirements:**

1\. A completed application form with a _non-refundable_ $25.00 application
fee [$50.00 for international students]. Since this may change, you should
check with the Graduate School before applying.

2\. Official transcripts from graduate and undergraduate institutions. You
must send all transcripts directly from each institution at which the credit
was earned to the Graduate School Student Services Office of The University of
Memphis. The Graduate School will not accept personal copies of transcripts.

3\. A minimum of 24 graduate hours in history with at least a 3.25 GPA (on a
4.0 scale) from an accredited institution. An M.A. in history is strongly
recommended. Occasionally, we may consider a student with fewer than 24
credits of graduate history courses who has other non-history courses
sufficiently similar in content or methodology to history courses.

4\. A GRE verbal score of at least 500.

5\. A 750-1000 word "Statement of Purpose," in which the applicant states
educational goals, anticipated fields of study, and general research
interests. In this statement, we expect the candidate to demonstrate some
familiarity with the history department's program and faculty.

6\. Three letters of recommendation concerning the applicant's academic
abilities and accomplishments.

7\. Considerations of departmental resources, total numbers of applicants, and
fit of the particular applicant to our program may mean that we do not admit
all who meet the formal requirements.

**Advising:**

The Graduate Coordinator will advise students admitted into the Graduate
School when they first enroll. During the first semester, or at latest the
second semester, the student must choose an advisory committee composed of a
major professor with full graduate faculty rank and at least two other
graduate faculty members. The student and major professor should arrange for
the committee to meet shortly after it is formed to assist the student in
determining fields of study, choice of courses, acceptance of credit from
other institutions (usually previous M.A. work) and applicability of earlier
coursework to the Ph.D. fields of study. The committee must issue all its
decisions in writing, giving copies to the student and the Graduate
Coordinator. Use the Ph.D. Tracking form for this purpose, which you can get
from the office, Graduate Coordinator or at
<http://www.people.memphis.edu/~history/phd3f.doc>. You should get this form
as soon as possible and start keeping track of your progress and plans right
away.

We urge students to consult their faculty advisors before enrolling for each
semester, and students will be required to meet their advisors periodically.
The responsibility for meeting all degree requirements rests, however, with
the student. Students should direct technical questions about department
requirements and policies to the Graduate Coordinator.

Before you register for the first time, and about once a year afterwards, you
will need to obtain advising clearance from the Graduate Coordinator in order
to register. All registration is now done by phone (STRIPES) or on the
internet (TIGERWEB). For instruction on how to register, see
<http://www.enrollment.memphis.edu/registrar/register/tigerwebinfo.htm>.

**Nature of the Course Offerings:**

Students in the Ph.D. program may enroll for credit in all courses on the 6000
and 8000 level.

Courses on the 6000 level are open to both graduate students and upperclass
undergraduate students. These courses usually center around lectures and
discussions and survey an entire period, enabling students to fill in their
backgrounds. In addition to the lecture materials, readings, and examinations
required of the undergraduates, graduate students are expected to do a
significant amount of additional work. By close consultation with the
professor about the precise nature of this additional assignment, students may
do work in accord with their interests and needs. If you have taken a course
at the 4000 level (undergraduate) you cannot take the same course again at the
6000 level.

7000 and 8000-level courses are the same in content, meeting times, and
requirements; they differ only in the fact that M.A. students register at the
7000 level and Ph.D. students at the 8000 level. If you have taken any of the
courses described below at the 7000 level, you do not need to take them again
at the 8000 level; indeed, you are not allowed to unless their content has
completely changed (see below).

Courses on the 8000 level are open only to graduate students and are usually
limited to a class size of 15 or fewer. With a few exceptions (History 8000,
8070, and courses that don't count toward the degree) these courses are
designed primarily to survey the important secondary works on a period, a part
of a period, or a theme and to familiarize students with leading scholarly
interpretations. The emphasis is on extensive reading, rather than on a major
writing project on some narrow topic. Class discussions of common readings,
written critiques, and student presentations, rather than the lecture, are the
basic format of these courses. With the exception of History 8000, 8011, and
8100, 8000 level courses (including 8070) typically differ from term to term,
and if this is the case you can retake them.

History 8000 is an introductory course dealing with the methods of historical
research and writing. It includes the techniques of historical composition,
the nature and use of various kinds of historical source materials,
bibliographical aids, computer techniques, and methods of historical
synthesis. This course or its equivalent is required of all Ph.D. students. It
should be taken early so that students can apply knowledge gained in this
course to other graduate courses. It is a prerequisite for History 8070
research seminars. Those who have taken a similar course at the M.A. level
should provide a syllabus to Dr. Crouse who can exempt qualifying students
from taking History 8000.

History 8012 is a directed readings course taken individually with a
professor. By advance consultation with and approval by a professor, students
can arrange for directed readings in a field of interest not offered as a
regular class, fill in gaps in knowledge in preparation for the comprehensive
examination, or investigate possibilities for a dissertation topic. Such a
course is available only with the express agreement of the professor who will
direct it; no one has the right to a directed readings course. A directed
readings registration form must be filed with the department office prior to
enrollment. Ph.D. candidates normally may enroll for no more than 6 hours of
directed readings, but permission to take 6 more, for a total of 12 hours, may
be granted upon petition to the Graduate Studies Committee. In this case the
student must (1) supply the Committee with the syllabus of both the previous
readings course and the one under consideration (including a list of books
read) and (2) state reasons why a second readings course is necessary. It is
the policy of the Committee not to approve readings courses if a student is
able to attend a class that covers the same or similar general topics.

History 8070 is a research seminar. The emphasis is on research using primary
materials in announced topics and on preparation of a scholarly paper. All
Ph.D. students are required to take at least three 8070 seminars, though a
M.A. thesis can substitute for one of these. **History 8000 is a prerequisite
for all 8070 courses.**

History 8990, Reading for Comprehensives, is an individualized readings course
for students preparing for comprehensive examinations. Credit is _not_
applicable to the degree, _except_ as described under  "Course Requirements
and Restrictions" below.

History 8020 (Seminar for Teaching Assistants), History 8021 (Colloquium for
Graduate Assistants), and History 8022 (Teaching Skills for Graduate
Assistants) are courses that address the responsibilities, activities, and
concerns of graduate assistants; they do _not_ count toward the degree.

History 9000 is the course number assigned for the 12 hours of dissertation
credit.

**Fields of Study:**

The student, in consultation with the major professor/advisor and advisory
committee, will choose three fields of study. One will be designated the
dissertation field.

Dissertation fields are offered in United States before 1877, United States
after 1877, Ancient World, Britain, and Modern Europe, with minor fields in
(in addition to the above) Medieval-Renaissance Europe, Early Modern Europe,
Latin America, Africa, China and Japan, Russia and Near East. Normally a
dissertation in Ancient History must be in the area of Egyptology. Upon
approval of a petition to the Graduate Studies Committee from both the student
and a prospective dissertation director, a student may write a dissertation in
a field that is not normally a dissertation field. This will usually require
obtaining a second major field examiner outside of the department. Please note
that examiners outside the university must apply for and receive adjunct
graduate faculty status.

As determined by the advisory committee, a student will complete a minimum of
eighteen semester hours of credit in the major (dissertation) field, plus
twelve hours of dissertation. In each of the two minor fields, the student
will complete a minimum of twelve hours of credit. In addition, students will
take three Reading for Comprehensives courses, and in each they will be
expected to do intensive individual study in one of the three fields directed
toward the historiography of the field as a whole, which would include the
compilation of a list of important books and articles and the gaining of
familiarity with their arguments and the key debates in the field. The
professor should give some guidance with this, but it is not expected that
there would be regular meetings. Students may take more credits of Reading for
Comprehensives, but only three, one in each field, would count toward the
degree.

At least one of a student's fields must have its primary focus on a
geographical region different from that of the major field. With this
restriction, a student may petition the Graduate Studies Committee for a field
or fields not listed in the official list if the prospective field advisor
agrees and the student's advisory committee approves. Additionally, if a
student's major field embraces separate regions or is conventionally divided
into separate fields (such as Ancient or Medieval/Renaissance), it may be
subdivided into two (and only two) separate fields. With the approval of the
Graduate Studies Committee, one field may be taken in another department or
may be interdisciplinary, including courses from at least three departments
(two in the case of Egyptology). No course may be used to fulfill the
requirement for more than one field. In rare instances, if the student can
demonstrate a compelling reason, the Graduate Studies Committee may waive the
geographical requirement.

**Program Requirements and Restrictions:**

1\. A minimum of 60 semester hours of regular graduate course work beyond the
bachelor's degree, excluding credit received for thesis and dissertation.
Students who have earned a master's degree must complete at least 36 credits
beyond the M.A., since at most 24 credits can be counted from the M.A. (see
below under **Previously Earned Credits** ).

2\. A minimum of 12 hours of History 9000 (Doctoral Dissertation), for a
minimum total of 72 graduate credits.

3\. At least 36 hours of the 60 hours must be taken in residence at The
University of Memphis and be distributed among the fields of study in a way
best suited to prepare the student for the comprehensive examination.

4\. At least 39 hours of the 60-hours must be completed at the 7000/8000
level.

5\. As part of the 60 hours, at least nine hours in Research Seminars (History
8070); however, students who have completed a Master's thesis in history may
count it as one of these seminars.

6\. As part of the 60 hours, History 8000 (Historical Research & Writing),
History 8100 (Studies in Global History), and History 8011 (Philosophy of
History) or their equivalents.

7\. History 8012 (Directed Readings) may be repeated for a total of 6 hours of
credit, with an additional 6 hours permitted by petition to the Graduate
Studies Committee. See above, under **Nature of the Course Offerings** **,**
for the procedure.

8\. The following courses do **not** count toward the 60 credits: History 8020
(Seminar for Teaching Assistants), History 8021 (Colloquium for Graduate
Assistants), History 8022 (Teaching Skills for Graduate Assistants), History
8990 (Reading for Comprehensives, except as described above under Fields of
Study), and History 9000 (Doctoral Dissertation).

9\. The 60 credits is a minimum; it is up to the Advisory Committee to
determine if the student is fully prepared in each field, and in some cases it
may require that the student take additional course work.

10\. The University also requires that the student commit to full-time study
for a minimum of two successive semesters at some point during the degree
program. This can include a summer semester, but graduate history courses are
limited at that time.

11\. A language exam in at least one foreign language (see below, under
Foreign Language Requirement).

12\. A written and oral comprehensive examination (see below, under
Comprehensive Examination).

13\. A dissertation (see below, under Dissertation).

**Grades:**

The University of Memphis uses a four-point grading system. For most
substantial courses students receive one of the following grades: **A+, A, A-
B+,B, B, C+, C, C-, D+, D, or F**. Grades used to postpone or suspend course
completion include **I** (incomplete), **IP** and **W** (withdrawn). For
thesis and dissertation hours and courses that do not count toward the degree,
such as readings for comprehensives and colloquium for graduate assistants
students receive an **S** (satisfactory), **U <

