## History 306  
MODERN AMERICA  
SPRING l998

Instructor: Maurice P. Sneller  
Office: 235 M. Ruffner  
Office Telephone: 395-2223  
Office hours:  
MW and TT 3:30 and at your convenience  

## Contents

Course Description  
Required Texts  
Course Objectives  
Class Schedule  
Course Requirements  
Grading  
Attendance Policy  
Research Paper  
Definition of Plagiarism  
Honor Code  

### Course Description:

History 306 concerns the United States from the end of World War II to the
present. The main emphasis will be on domestic affairs such as the economy,
social conditions, religion, politics, and intellectual life. Because foreign
matters impinge on internal events, particularly after World War II, these
will be included but not emphasized.  
  
Return to Table of Contents  
  

### Text:

  * Link, William and Arthur Link. _Affluence and Anxiety: 1940-1992_. Vol. 2 of _American Epoch: A History of the United States Since 1900_. 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1993. 
Return to Table of Contents  
  

### Course Objectives:

  * 1\. To provide the student with an introduction in depth to the events, personalities, trends, and forces which shaped this pivot period in American life. 

  * 2\. To enhance the student's understanding of the nature of the historical process, with emphasis upon the elements of cause and effect, change and continuity, the role of the myriad factors and forces--political, economic, social, cultural, intellectual, and institutional--at work in shaping human society. 

  * 3\. To develop an understanding of the importance of a working knowledge of history and the nature of historical process to learning in other disciplines, to an understanding of events and issues of the modern world, and to the development of a meaningful system of personal values. 

  * 4\. To develop the student's capacities for independent investigation in the field of history and for the organization and presentation of the fruits of research through the preparation of a formal paper. 
Return to Table of Contents  
  

### Class Schedule:

#### Week 1 (Jan. l2-16)

After Victory; Postwar Adjustments; The Problems of Reconversion; The Fair
Deal Economic Growth, Economic Consolidation, and Dislocations; The Consumer
Culture; Labor Troubles and Party Politics; Suburbia and the Baby Boom; Radio
and Television.  
  

#### Week 2 (Jan. 19-23)

The Election of 1948; HUAC and Alger Hiss; The Federal Loyalty Program; The
Rise and Fall of McCarthyism; The Origins of the Cold War; Changing Alliances.
Tensions in Iran and Turkey; Atomic Deadlock; The Truman Doctrine and the
Marshall Plan.  
  

#### Week 3 (Jan 26-30)

Institutionalizing the Cold War; Berlin Blockade; NATO; "Loss" of China;
Korean War and Its Consequences; Twilight of the Truman Years.  
  

#### Weeks 4-5 (Feb 2-13)

Eisenhower and the "Middle Road"; The Rise of the Civil Rights Movement;
Population, Economy, and Technology; Women, Men, and Sex; Religion in American
Life; Youth Rebellion, Eisenhower's Approach to Foreign Policy; America and
the Challenge of the Third World; Vietnam; Oil and Politics in Iran;
Intervention in Guatemala; Showdown with China; Suez and Lebanon; Hungarian
Uprising; Cuban Revolution; Efforts at Detente; Eisenhower's Farewell..  
  
**_FIRST TEST:February 5 (Th); Link, _American Epoch_ , pp. 444-583._**  
  

####  Week 6 (Feb. 16-20)

Election of 1960; Kennedy; Personalities and Style of the New Frontier; Cuba--
Bay of Pigs and Cuban Missile Crisis; Policy Toward the Developing World;
Detente with Russia; Space Exploration; Promoting Economic Growth; The Natural
Environment and Poverty; Civil Rights Kennedy's Assassination.  
  

#### Week 7 (Feb. 23-27)

Lyndon Johnson: Politician and President; Background; Great Society: Successes
and Disappointments; Medical Programs; Antipoverty Legislation; Voting Rights;
migration; Supreme Court and Civil Liberties; Decline of the Great Society.  
  

#### Week 8 (March 2-6)

Defense, the Soviet Union, and NATO; Dominican Republic; Vietnam: Escalation
and Frustration. Politics and Culture of Protest; From Civil Rights to Black
Power; SDS and the Rise of the New Left: The Counterculture--Its Growth and
Marketing; 1968: A Year of Trouble; The New Feminism; Social Change and
Women's Issues; Legacies of Cultural and Political Dissent.  
  
**SECOND TEST, March 5, (Th); Link, _American Epoch_ , pp. 584-663.**  
  
  

#### March 11-13 SPRING BREAK

#### Week 9 (March 16-20)

Nixon, Kissinger and New Policies; Vietnamization; Peace with Honor; Detente
with the Soviet Union; The China Initiative; War and Diplomacy in the Middle
East; Nixon's Domestic Policies; Welfare Reform; Crime and Drugs; Managing the
Economy; The Supreme Court; Election of 1972.  
  

#### Week 10 (March 23-27)

Abuse of Power--Watergate; Nixon's Resignation; Nixon's Domestic Record and
the Implications of Watergate; The Ford Presidency; Pardon; Seeking Stability;
Energy and Inflation; The Election of 1976; Carter the Outsider as President;
Human Rights and National Interests; Divisive Social Issues; Economic
Problems; Religious Revival and the New Conservative Movement; Crisis in Iran;
The Election of 1980.  
  

#### Week 11 (March 30-April 3):

Reagan Years; Background; The Great Communicator; Economic Agenda; Defense
Spending; Deficits; Imbalances in the Economic Recovery; Deregulation; Civil
Rights; Society and Culture in the 1980s--Education, Drugs, Religion, Gender.  
  

#### Week 12 (April 6-10)

Foreign Policy of Reagan; New Arms Race; America and the Middle East; El
Salvador and Grenada; Iran-Contra; Toward the End of the Cold War  
  

#### Week 13 (April 13-17) and Week 14 (April 20-24)

Election of 1988 and the Reagan Legacy; Triumph of George Bush; Congress and
Public Animosity; Education, Drugs, Environment; Discordant Social Issues;
Budget Deficit; America and the Post-Cold War World; War with Iraq; Election
of 1992; Clinton; A Diverse Nation; An Unfinished Agenda; Toward the Twenty-
first Century.  
  
**REMAINDER: Link, _American Epoch_ , pp. 667-813.**  
  
  
Return to Table of Contents  
  

### Course Requirements:

Two tests  
Paper  
Oral Report  
Final comprehensive examination  
  
Return to Table of Contents  
  

### Grading:

The following approximate values will determine the semester grade:  
  
Tests-----------------------------------50 percent  
Paper and Oral Report-----------------10 percent  
Final Examination and Professionalism--40 percent  
(Note: Included in the above numbers will be five (5) percent for
professionalism. This means class attendance, fulfilling assignments on
schedule, arriving in class on time, a willingness to learn, attentiveness,
and consideration for other class members.)  
  
The examination will be comprehensive in containing material from the
beginning to the end.  
  
Return to Table of Contents  
  

### Attendance Policy:

Logic says you should attend classes; the College Catalog adds that absences
may impair academic performance. Being somewhat a realist, your instructor
knows that on occasion you may have to miss. For example, you may be
participating in a College-sponsored activity, be sick, or involved in a
recognizable emergency. While such reasons may exist, use caution in
exercising them, and make certain that you take your test early if there is a
field trip or athletic event creating a conflict. Do not miss a test or
examination because there is little chance of a makeup. If you request a
makeup, be prepared to include an explanation for your school absence from
your doctor or appropriate College official. Even a rare makeup must be taken
within five calendar days of the originally scheduled date. In a word, get the
maximum reward for your study by taking the test when it is scheduled.  
  
Return to Table of Contents  
  

### Research Paper:

Possibly you have wondered what the world was like when you were born. Now is
the opportunity to find out. This semester you can investigate newspapers,
magazines, and other sources of information for the week of your birth.
(Assume that the week starts on Sunday and ends on Saturday.) The perspective
can be either local or national although probably a combination will lead to
the best result.  
  
From your information write a paper in which you document all important
statements of fact. If you have questions of style, use Kate Turabian, _A
Manual for Writers of Term Papers, Theses, and Dissertations_.  
  
The paper will be due on Thursday, February 19, 1998. A late paper will lose
credit for each calendar day. There are no acceptable excuses for lateness. If
you wish to be safe, hand in the paper early.  
  
Return to Table of Contents  
  

#### PLAGIARISM:

Students should be reminded that the use of an author's ideas in a student
paper without giving proper credit to the author constitutes plagiarism.
Likewise the use of an author's words without placing those words in quotation
marks and providing proper citation is plagiarism. Students sometimes believe
that by changing an occasional word or two or even three in a sentence or
paragraph, they are avoiding plagiarism. This is not the case! The information
and ideas taken from a source must be re-formed into your own words! And after
re-forming it into your own words, you must use a footnote or endnote giving
proper credit to the author.  
  
If your instructor suspects intentional or unintentional plagiarism, your
paper will be returned ungraded and you will be asked to bring your sources to
his office to verify the scholarship.  
  
Return to Table of Contents  
  

### Honor Code:

Because trust and integrity are integral parts of an academic environment and
decent society, all work in the course will be your own. Write out and sign
the honor pledge when you hand in papers. (I have neither given nor received
any help on this test nor am I aware of any infraction of the Honor Code.)  
  
The instructor will be happy to talk to you if you have any questions. His
office is Main Ruffner, Room 235.  
  
Return to Table of Contents  
  

* * *

[Return to Course Syllabi Page](syllabi.htm)  
[Return to Department of History and Political Science Homepage](home.htm)  

* * *

