![](../../images/title.gif)



## LARC 450/HORT 689R: Environmental Resources

_UMCP: Landscape Architecture Program_ _Professor: Elmina Hilsenrath_

### SYLLABUS: ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES



#### CATALOG DESCRIPTION

A review of ecosystems and an examination of planning strategies for
preservation, conservation, management and development of sensitive natural
and cultural landscape resources in the mid-Atlantic region.

#### COURSE RATIONALE AND OBJECTIVES

This course will introduce the methods employed by the landscape architecture
profession to examine and resolve environmental resource issues. A primary
goal of every planning effort should be environmental quality; a prerequisite
to this is an understanding of and respect for natural ecosystems. We study
ecosystems to understand the forces that shape them and the forces, both
natural and imposed, that can change or destroy them. As stewards of the land,
we must recognize the capacity of any landscape to accommodate a proposed use.
We must have a commitment to preserve the landscape values which are essential
to the physical and physiological survival of humans and all other species on
this planet.       In studying environmental resource issues our scale will be
a regional one, often focusing on the watershed as the unit of investigation.
The emphasis will be on the role of the landscape architect as policy maker or
regulator rather than as designer. The primary point of view will be that of
the public practitioner or non governmental organization (NGO), although
viewpoints of developers, designers and users will be represented. We will
explore ethical issues in environmental planning and discuss current theories
including sustainable development and ecosystem management

During this course, we will study the mid-Atlantic landscape to:

    Identify, classify and evaluate ecological systems and environmental resources;     Understand the role of natural factors as potential determinants of land use;     Explore the relationship between ecological, visual, and cultural values;     Examine planning devices for resource preservation, protection, management, development. and restoration. 

The course will be organized in three topic areas:

OVERVIEW: A brief overview of ecosystem types and characteristics; the
principles which govern ecosystems; and the interrelationship of physiography,
vegetation, wildlife, human settlement, etc.       LAND AND WATER RESOURCES: A
broad look at various landscapes, their characteristics, how land use
decisions affect them, and ways in which we can restore them when disturbed..

LANDSCAPE MANAGEMENT: A review of land use policy and environmental resource
management techniques.



#### COURSE FORMAT

The course will be taught in a series of lectures, discussion periods, and
field trips. Guest lecturers will participate in the class. The class will
meet Wednesdays 11:00 to 12:15 for lecture/discussion. Friday class periods
are scheduled for 12:30 to 4:30 to provide adequate time for 4 \- 6 field
trips. Friday class periods where no field trip will be held will be 1 hour
fifteen minute lecture/discussion periods (12:30 - 1:45 pm). Two all-day
(Saturday) field trips will be required. See the course calendar for the
biweekly field trip schedule.. Students who do not attend field trips will be
required to review films or digital presentations and prepare written study
guide materials covering the field trip topic.



#### COURSE EVALUATION

Course evaluation will be based on the student's performance in the following:

Assignment #1 - Personal Environmental Impact Inventory Assignment #2 -
Ecological Communities Report Assignment #3 - Book Review (undergraduate
students only) Assignment #4 - Term Paper and Oral Presentation (graduate
students only) on some aspect of the natural or cultural landscape that poses
a critical environmental concern for the state or region. Mid-term Exam Final
Exam Participation in and contribution to class discussions, field trips, etc.

The value of each element is as follows:

_Graduate Student_        Assignment #1 10% Assignment #2 10% Mid-term Exam
20% Assignment #3 NA Final Exam 25% Assignment #4 25% Participation 10%  

_Undergraduate Student_

Assignment #1 15% Assignment #2 15% Mid-term Exam 20% Assignment #3 15% Final
Exam 25% Assignment #4 NA Participation 10%

          

Grades will be based on individual performance relative to the written
requirements for each assignment and the standards set by the instructor. Late
work is marked down 2/3 grade for every day late (Ex: If the quality of the
work is B+ and it is two days late it becomes a C). You must turn in all
assignments to get a good grade in this course. If work is late, do not put it
in my mailbox, give it to the landscape architecture secretary, Mary Jo Dosh;
she will stamp the date it is received. The reduction in grade policy for late
work may be waived by the instructor for an approved reason. If work is late
for a reason other than the officially approved university policy, you stand a
better chance of getting leniency _before_ the work is late rather than after
the fact. If you miss a class _for any reason_ it is your responsibility to
get the assignment, hand-outs, notes, etc. _immediately_ from a classmate so
that you can complete the assignment on time or participate in class
discussions. If you miss class sessions without valid, approved excuses, your
final grade may be affected because you will not have participated
in/contributed to class discussions.        All work produce in this class
becomes the property of the Department. The Department reserves the right to
retain work for use in teaching, exhibits of student projects, archives and
accreditation review. Students are advised to keep their original work and
submit only copies of assignments. Students should be knowledgeable of
university honor code and policies on academic dishonesty and plagiarism. If
you have a documented disability and wish to discuss academic accommodations
with me, please call or come see me.



#### TEXT: Ian McHarg - __Design With Nature__ __

The textbook is available at the campus bookstore and many local book sellers.
Additional reading, both required and recommended will be assigned throughout
the semester. Assigned readings will be on reserve in Hornbake Library under
LARC 450. Assigned videos to be viewed will be on reserve in the audio-visual
room in Hornbake.

#### _Faculty_

Elmina (Mina) J. Hilsenrath 2144 Plant Sciences Office Phone: 301-405-4369
Home Phone: 301-604-0293 (not before 7:00 am or after 10:00 pm) e-mail:
[eh68@umail.umd.edu](mailto:eh68.umail.umd.edu) Office Hours: Monday and
Wednesday 10:30-12:00 pm or by appointment



[Back to LARC 450](LARC450.html)  
---  
  








