**Government 2301 Syllabus**

**Professor Renato Ramirez**

**Fall Semester 2001**

    ** **
    

[**Del Mar College**](http://www.delmar.edu) | [**Social
Sciences**](../../index.html) | [**FAQs**](../../FAQs.html) |
[**Faculty**](../../faculty.html) | [**Ramirez**](rramirez.html)  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
**[Course Prerequisites](rrgv2301.html#rrgv01pq)** |  | **[Course
Objectives](rrgv2301.html#rrgv01obj)** |  | **[Attendance-Absentee
Policy](rrgv2301.html#rrgv01at)**  
---|---|---|---|---  
[**Fall 2000 Schedule**](rrgv2301.html#rrgv01sc) |  | **[Course
Description](rrgv2301.html#rrgv01ds)** |  | **[Additional
Considerations](rrgv2301.html#rrgv01ad)**  
**[Required Texts](rrgv2301.html#rrgv01tx)** |  | **[Course
Requirements](rrgv2301.html#rrgv01rq)** |  |  
  
**Course Prerequisites**

American Government 2301 is a sophomore level course. In order to successfully
complete the research requirements for the course it is strongly advised that
students complete English 1301 and 1302 (grammar and composition) prior to
enrolling for this course.

[_top_](rrgv2301.html#rrgv01tp)

      
**Fall Semester 2001 Schedule**

**

Aug. 27-**First Class Day; (1:30-6:00pm) Late Registration Schedule Changes-
Harvin Center **  
Sept. 3-** Labor Day Holiday **  
Oct. 5-** Last Day to Drop with Auto\W **  
Nov. 19-**Research Assignment Due **** (MW & MWF Classes) **  
Nov. 22-23-**Thanksgiving Holidays **  
Nov. 26-** Last Day to Drop a Course **  
Dec. 5-** Last Day of Classes **  
Dec 6-12-**Final Exams (Refer to Final Exam Schedule)

[_top_](rrgv2301.html#rrgv01tp)

      
**Required Textbooks**

> Schmidt, Steffen W., Shelley, Mack C., and Bardes, Barbara A. **_American
Government and Politics Today_**   2001-2002 Edition, Wadsworth-Thomson
Learning, Belmont, Cal. USA, 2001. (Textbook Website is [http://political
science.wadsworth.com](http://politicalscience.wadsworth.com))

    Maxwell, William Earl and Crain, Ernest, _**Texas Politics Today**_ Tenth Edition, West-Wadsworth Publishing Co.: Washington D.C. 2001. <http://politicalscience.wadsworth.com/texas>


[_top_](rrgv2301.html#rrgv01tp)

  
**Course Objectives**

The realization of the following objectives will be a fundamental goal of the
course:

  1. to examine social institutions and processes across a range of historical periods, social structures and cultures,
  2. to develop and communicate alternative explanations or solutions for contemporary social issues,
  3. to comprehend the origins and evolution of U.S. and Texas political systems, with a focus on the growth of political institutions, the constitutions of the United States and Texas, federalism, civil and human rights,
  4. to analyze, critically assess, and develop creative solutions to public policy problems.

[_top_](rrgv2301.html#rrgv01tp)

**Course Description**



This course is the first part of a two-course introductory study of American
and Texas government and politics.   The areas of study concern a summary
examination of basic political terms,  concepts and ideals necessary for a
fundamental understanding of government and politics in the United States and
in Texas.  Course material will also focus on the historical development of
the US political system including the creation of the US Constitution, the
grants of power established therein and limitations on governmental power as
well.  The various facets of federal-state relations that encompass fiscal,
legislative, bureaucratic and judicial relationships will also be examined.
The fight for freedom and equal protection of the law by various groups in
society throughout history will also be subject to review.  Also attention
will be given to the growth and influence of interest groups, political
parties and the media in electoral politics.  For each facet of national
politics that is examined in class there will be a corresponding review of
similar aspects of government as they affect the Texas political system.

GOVT 2301will complete the Texas Teachers Certification requirement in
government for those who already have three semester hours in US Government
and three additional semester hours that include the government, history and
constitution of Texas. (Assessment Levels: R3, E3, M2)

[_top_](rrgv2301.html#rrgv01tp)

      
**Course Requirements**

      
**Three Exams (100 pts. each-Drop the Lowest Test Score).....200 pts.**

**Research
Assignment................................................................100
pts.**

**Final Exam (Comprehensive)
...................................................200 pts.**

    **                                                               Total Points........500**
**Grading Scheme** |  | **Exam Dates** | **MWF** | **MW** | **TT**  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
**A=500-450 pts.** |  | **1st Exam-     ** | **Sept 26  ** | **Sept 26** |
**Sept 25**  
**B=449-400 pts** |  | **2nd Exam-    ** | **Oct 26** | **Oct 29  ** | **Oct
25**  
**C=399-350 pts.** |  | **3rd Exam-     ** | **Nov 28** | **Nov 28** |
**Nov29**  
**D=349-300 pts.** |  | **Final Exam-   (TBA)** |  |  |  
**F=299 pts. & less** |  |  |  |  |  
  
The first three exams are composed of matching, true-false and essay
questions. The final exam is composed of only matching and true-false
questions. Students will be provided with a study guide prior to each exam to
help condense and focus the material subject to testing. Students will also
have the entire class period to complete each exam. To receive full credit for
the essay portion of each test, the answers must be complete and correct both
in content and composition. No make-up exams will be offered.

The research assignment is a program requirement.  Failure to submit a
research assignment may result in a failing grade for the semester.  Research
assignments submitted late will be penalized five points per day.  Students
will be given the option of choosing the type of research assignment to
complete from the following choices; a book review, a research paper or a US
Supreme Court case summary.  The format for each type of research will be
provided to students in a separate handout.  The deadline for the submission
of the research is provided in the schedule above.  Regardless of the choice
of research options, students must obtain the approval of the instructor prior
to commencing work on a specific project.

[_top_](rrgv2301.html#rrgv01tp)

      
**Attendance-Absentee Policy**



Regular class attendance is strongly encouraged.  Regular class attendance and
class participation, such as answering questions in class, participating in
class discussions, or showing improvement on test scores can have a positive
on your overall semester grade.  On the other hand, frequent absences,
tardiness, or inattentiveness in class can have a detrimental effect on your
final grade. Students with four consecutive unexcused absences will be dropped
from the course.  If you feel you must drop the course for whatever reason,
speak with the instructor first, then if no other recourse is available, take
the appropriate steps to drop the course.  Do not assume that the instructor
will drop you from the course if you simply stop attending class.  If a
student fails to drop him or herself from the course before the established
deadlines, that may result in an "F" for the course.  So, it is imperative
that close attention is given to the drop dates listed on this syllabus.

[_top_](rrgv2301.html#rrgv01tp)

      
**Additional Considerations**



All students should complete a degree plan in the major of their choice to
help guide and realize educational goals in a clear and direct fashion. Refer
to the current school bulletin or catalog for the dates and procedures or
inquire at the department office that corresponds to your major to begin the
process.



Del Mar College offers students with special educational needs the services of
the Office of Special Services. The Office offers programs and support
services to assist students in overcoming  obstacles to obtaining an
education. Populations served include students with disabilities, re-entry
women and men, and senior citizens. The Office is located on the first floor
of the Harvin Center. The phone number is 698-1298. Please refer to the school
catalog for additional information.



Del Mar College offers extensive library services to assist students in
research and in general educational interests. A newly established Student
Technology Center, located on the first floor of the  White Library, offers
students access to high quality computer technology for educational
enrichment. The College provides students with a variety of counseling
services that include tutors and mentors, a Skills Enrichment Center, and an
Office of Special Populations. the English Department offers the services of
The Writing Center to assist students in the preparation of compositions
required by various courses. The College offers a variety of clubs and
activities to help broaden a student's social and civic interactions.
Telecourses are available for students to gain college credit for courses
delivered through the medium of television. Weekend College is now being
offered to expand the opportunity to enhance educational enrichment, and a
wide variety of non-credit courses are available as well.



It is essential to maintain an atmosphere conducive to learning in the
classroom. To that end, I expect students to be in class when the class is
scheduled to begin, and I expect students to have the proper materials
(textbooks and writing material) for each class. Please do not hesitate to
enter the classroom if you are late, just do so quietly.



Please feel free to ask questions in class. Vigorous discussion of current
events related to the course subject matter is vital to understanding the
workings of our political system. Also feel free to visit me in my office
during my scheduled office hours or at any other time I am available. Thank
you and good luck!

[_top_](rrgv2301.html#rrgv01tp)

