![](/~chem27/images/announce.gif)

| [![Home](/~chem27/buttons/home.gif)](/~chem27/) |
[![Announcements](/~chem27/buttons/announce.gif)](/~chem27/announce)  
---|---  
[![Course Info](/~chem27/buttons/info.gif)](/~chem27/info) |
[![Instructors](/~chem27/buttons/instr.gif)](/~chem27/instr)  
[![Lectures](/~chem27/buttons/lectures.gif)](/~chem27/lectures) |
[![Sections](/~chem27/buttons/section.gif)](/~chem27/section)  
[![Problem Sets](/~chem27/buttons/psets.gif)](/~chem27/psets) |
[![Examinations](/~chem27/buttons/exams.gif)](/~chem27/exams)  
[![Laboratory](/~chem27/buttons/lab.gif)](/~chem27/lab) |
[![Links](/~chem27/buttons/links.gif)](/~chem27/links)  
  
* * *



## Course Announcements (most recent first)



Monday, May 20

**Final exam coverage-** Everything covered through daphniphyllum may appear
on the final. The molecular evolution material will not be included.

**Evening office hours** will be held this week, 7-8:30, SC 110.

Thursday, May 9

**Exam grades** will be listed by ID today in the first floor science center
hall. Check your grades and report any discrepancies by Friday at 5pm.

**All reviews** , including the three hour exam reviews and the problem review
sessions, are available
[here](http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~chem27/coursevideo/).

**Office hours** : Professor Liu will continue to have office hours Wednesdays
12:15-1:15. Josh will have office hours on the Tuesday before the final from
12-1. Evening office hours will be held the Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday
before the final, 7-8:30 in SC 110.

Friday, May 3  
End of the semester [ schedule](/~chem27/announce/EOSSchedule.pdf).

**Practice Finals:** solutions posted on [ exams
page](/~chem27/exams/index.html).

**Exam #3:** Handed back after class today. Regrades due 5 PM, **Wednesday** ,
May 8. (Wednesday, not Friday- no exceptions!)

**Final Exam:** The final exam is cumulative. It's at 9:15 AM on Thursday, May
23. Last names A-Ko in ScD; Ku-Z in Sc C.

**Problem Sessions:** During class next week.

[ Unit 1 Problems](/~chem27/announce/R1.pdf).

[ Unit 2 Problems](/~chem27/announce/R2.pdf).

[ Unit 3 Problems](/~chem27/announce/review_probs.pdf) from the review on
April 22.

Wednesday, May 1  
**[Exam 3](/~chem27/exams/data/Exam3-2002.pdf)** and [answer
key](/~chem27/exams/data/Exam3-2002key.pdf).

Monday, April 29  
**Handout:** End of the semester [
schedule](/~chem27/announce/EOSSchedule.pdf).

**Problem Set #7:** Due TODAY by 5 PM.

**Exam #3:** This Wednesday. It will cover from DNA through steroids (last
Friday's lecture). S-Z in Pfizer as usual. Daphniphyllum is not part of exam 3
coverage.

**Review Session #3:** TONIGHT, 8-10 PM, SC C.

Friday, April 26  
**The supplemental steroid slides** that were not in the prenotes are
available [here](steroids.pdf).

**PS 7** due Monday.

**Exam 3 review** Monday 8-10pm Sc C.

**Exam 3** Wednesday.

Wednesday, April 24  
**Lecture Notes:** Several of the overheads from today's lecture are available
[ here](/~chem27/announce/steroids.pdf).

**Exam #3:** Next Wednesday, May 1. It will cover from DNA through steroids
(Daphniphyllum will not be on the test, but may be on the final.) S-Z in
Pfizer as usual.

**Review Session #3:** Monday, 8-10 PM, SC C. We will try again to get it
taped and posted before the test, although that didn't happen for exam 2.

**Read Ahead Pages:** 187-190 in the red sourcebook.

**Reading Assignment:** 317-323 in the red sourcebook.

Monday, April 22  
**The pentalene scheme** from lecture on Friday is available
[here](pentalene.pdf)

**Problem Set #7:** Due Monday, April 29 by 5 PM. There is an error on S01
(see below).

**Read Ahead Pages:** 184-186 in the red sourcebook.

**Reading Assignment:** 311-316 in the red sourcebook.

The [review problems](review_probs.pdf) from today are available online.

Friday, April 19  
**Problem Set #6:** due TODAY.

**Problem Set #7:** Due Monday, April 29 by 5 PM. There is an error on S01(b)-
it should be the gene table for Deoxymethymycin, not Deoxyerythronolide B.

**Read Ahead Pages:** 184-186 in the red sourcebook (for Wednesday).

**Reading Assignment:** 311-316 in the red sourcebook.

Wednesday, April 17  
**On Monday, April 22** Professor Liu will be out of town. We will hold a
question and answer / practice problem session during lecture, so bring your
questions.

**Exam #3:** Reminder: Exam #3 is now two weeks away (Wednesday, May 1)! It
will cover through next Friday's lecture.

**Read Ahead Pages:** 174-183 in the red sourcebook.

Monday, April 15  
**Read Ahead Pages:** 172-174 in the red sourcebook.

**Reading assignment:** 284-310 in the red sourcebook.

**The final exam** will be on Thursday, May 23, 9:15AM. Last names A-Ko are in
Sc D, Ku-Z in Sc C. (We'll remind you again later).

Friday, April 12  
**Read Ahead Pages:** 170-172 in the red sourcebook.

**Problem set #6:** due next Friday. There is an error on the syllabus- there
is no problem R26.

**Lecture Slides:** A summary of the polyketide slides from lecture are
available [ here](/~chem27/announce/Modules.pdf).

Wednesday, April 10  
**Problem Set #5 due TODAY.**

**Problem Set #6:** Due next Friday, April 19 by 5 PM.

**No evening OH tonight** due to a grad student exam.

**Read Ahead Pages:** 163-170 in the red sourcebook.

**Reading Assignment:** 276-283 in the red sourcebook.

**Tentative final exam date:** Thursday, May 23, 9:15 AM.

Monday, April 8  
**Problem Set #5:** Due Wednesday by 5PM

**Read Ahead Pages:** 157-163 in the red sourcebook.

Friday, April 5  
**Read Ahead Pages:** 148-157 in the red sourcebook. (This includes today's
lecture, we got slightly off schedule)

**PS #5:** Was due Monday. Due to a BS 54 exam, you may hand it in on
Wednesday if you want. However, you will learn the material better if you
don't wait until Tuesday night to do all the problems.

Wednesday, April 3  
**Read Ahead Pages:** 144-148 in the red sourcebook.

**Reading assignment:** 258-275 in the red book.

Monday, April 1  
**Problem Set #5:** Due Monday April 8 by 5 PM.

**Read Ahead Pages:** 137-144 in the red sourcebook.

**Exam 2** handed back today; regrade requests due by Friday in Josh's
mailbox.

Friday, March 22  
**Exam #2:** Handed back Monday after spring break. Regrades will be due the
following Friday. 6.

**Problem Set #5:** Due Monday April 8.

**Read Ahead Pages:** 130-137 in the red sourcebook.

Monday, March 18  
**Exam #2:** Wednesday, March 20. S-Z report to Pfizer Lecture Hall (as
before). Exam covers from TIM through ATP.

**Review Session #2:** TONIGHT, 8-10 PM, SC C.

**Problem Set #4:** Due TODAY by 5 PM.

**Read Ahead Pages:** 126-130 in the red sourcebook (for Friday)

**Office Hours:** Held on Tuesday only this week.

Friday, March 15  
**Exam #2:** Wednesday, March 20. S-Z report to Pfizer Lecture Hall (as
before). Exam covers from TIM through ATP.

**Read Ahead Pages:** 121-126 in the red sourcebook.

Wednesday, March 13  
**No evening OH tonight** due to a grad student exam.

**Exam #2:** Wednesday, March 20, covers through this Friday's lecture. S-Z
report to Pfizer Lecture Hall to take the test (as before).

**Review Session #2:** Monday, March 18, 8-10 PM, SC C. It will be taped and
posted on the web..

**Read Ahead Pages:** 113-120 in the red sourcebook.

**Reading Assignment:** 252-257 in the red sourcebook.

Monday, March 11  
**Read Ahead Pages:** 107-112 in the red sourcebook.

Friday, March 8  
**Problem Set #3:** Due TODAY by 5pm.

**Problem Set #4:** Due Monday, March 18.

**Read Ahead Pages:** 102-106 in the red sourcebook.

**Exam 2** will cover through next Friday's lecture.

Wednesday, March 6  
**Read Ahead Pages:** 94-101 in the red sourcebook.

**Problem Set 3** due Friday. **Exam 2** is in two weeks. **Change in lab
grading policy** \- see the [lab page](../lab/index.html) for details.

Monday, March 4  
**Read Ahead Pages:** 86-93 in the red sourcebook.

**Exam regrades** will be returned in section.

Friday, March 1  
**Read Ahead Pages:** 81-85 in the red sourcebook.

Wednesday, February 27  
**Read Ahead Pages:** 75-80 in the red sourcebook.

**Reading Assignment:** 238-251 in the red sourcebook.

**Regrade requests** due by Friday at noon, in Josh's mailbox, with a cover
letter. Do not write on the test.

Monday, February 25  
**Read Ahead Pages:** 72-75 in the red sourcebook.

**Exam #1:** Returned after class.

**Problem Set #3:** Due Friday, March 8.

Wednesday, February 20  
**Read Ahead Pages:** 65-72 in the red sourcebook. (For Monday)

**Reading Assignment:** 230-237 in the red sourcebook. (For Monday)

**Practice Exam #1 solutions** are now available on the [exams
page](../exams).

**Exam #1: Important-** Last names S-Z report to Pfizer Lecture Hall on the
ground floor of the chem building. Find the room before Friday morning- you
are responsible for getting to your exam room on time! The exam will start at
exactly 11:07 and you'll have until 12:00. If you arrive late, you will still
have only until 12:00. Pfizer is on the ground level, indicated on the map by
the red X:

![](pfizerlocation.jpg) **Exam 1** covers through last Friday's lecture (Asp
proteases and inteins). Exams will be returned after Monday's lecture.

**Review Session:** Tonight 8-10 PM, Jefferson 250. On the web by tomorrow
afternoon.

**Problem Set #2:** Due TODAY at 5 PM.

Friday, February 15  
**Read Ahead Pages:** 59-65 in the red sourcebook.

**Reading Assignment:** 226-229 in the red sourcebook.

**Conflicts-** If you have an exam conflict, you must [email
Josh](mailto:jbittker@fas.harvard.edu) today if you were not contacted about
rescheduling.

**No evening OH Monday** due to the holiday.

Wednesday, February 13  
**No** evening office hours tonight.

**Read Ahead Pages:** 48-58 in the red sourcebook.

**Problem set 1 answers** are posted on the [problem set](../psets) page.
**Review Session:** The exam 1 review session is next Wednesday, Jefferson
250, 8-10 PM. It will be taped.

Monday, February 11  
**Read Ahead Pages:** 43-48 in the red sourcebook.

**Reading Assignment:** 200-205 and 206-225 in the red sourcebook.

**Exam #1:** Exam one will cover THROUGH protease inhibitors - this Friday's
lecture.

**Problem Set #2:** PS #2 is due on Wednesday, February 20. It will cover
THROUGH Friday's lecture.

**No evening office hours this Wednesday.** See [instructor's page](../instr)
for TF personal office hours.

Friday, February 8  
**Read Ahead Pages:** 28-42 in the red sourcebook.

**Exam #1:** It's two weeks away!

**Professor Liu's office hours** [ will now be in his office, Mallinckrodt
Labs room 303J, Wednesdays 12:15-1:15.

Wednesday, February 6  
**Read Ahead Pages:** 21-27 in the red sourcebook.

**Problem set 1** due Monday 2/11.

**Individual TF Office Hours** will be posted under the instructors section of
the website.

Monday, February 4  
**Read Ahead Pages:** 19-23 in the red sourcebook.

**Sections:** Discussion sections began TODAY!

**Office Hours:** Course office hours begin TODAY: Every Monday through
Thursday in SC 111 from 7-8:30 PM (except for dates noted below). Staffed by
various TFs.

Friday, February 1  
**Read Ahead Pages:** 13-19 in the red sourcebook (for Monday).

**Problem Set #1:** Due in your TFs mailbox by 5 PM Monday, February 11.

Thursday, January 31  
We heard that the copy center was running out of the prenotes. The
[syllabus](../info/2002syllabus.pdf) (pages 1-8) and the [first couple
lectures](../lectures/prenotes2002pp9-20.pdf) (pages 9-20) are available
online until more copies are printed. We **will not** be posting the entire
prenotes online (for organizational and copyright purposes), so you still need
to buy them once they're available.

Wednesday, January 30  
**Read Ahead Pages:** 4-13 in the red sourcebook (for Friday).

**Slide Show:** As each topic is covered in lecture, the corresponding slide
show can be found on the web site at
[lectures.](http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~chem27/lectures/)

**Lecture** : Lectures delivered by Prof. Liu will soon be available over the
web! Check out the
[lectures](http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~chem27/lectures/) page for
details.

**Lab** : A posting that contains detailed information about Chem 27 Lab
(taken from the Chem 27 Lab Manual) has been made on the
[laboratory](http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~chem27/lab/) page.

**Office Hours:** Professor Liu's office hours will be held in SC 101 B
**Wednesdays** from **12:15-1:15 PM**.

**Sectioning:** Sections begin the first full week of classes, Feb. 4. **You
must sign up for a section by 5 PM on Friday, February 1**. Sign up for a
section at [www.section.fas.harvard.edu](http://www.section.fas.harvard.edu/).
If you are cross-registered and do not have a Harvard ID, please email Head
Teaching Fellow [ Josh Bittker](mailto:jbittker@fas.harvard.edu) to obtain a
sectioning ID.

**Tutoring:** Check out the Bureau of Study Counsel, 5-2581, 5 Linden St.  
[Bureau of Study Counsel, Academic
Services](http://www.fas.harvard.edu/~bsc/Peertut.htm)

> Peer tutoring is available through the Bureau in any subject, but
particularly in mathematics, natural sciences, and languages. Peer Tutoring is
regarded as a supplement to the assistance provided by course instructors.
Peer tutors are carefully selected, prepared, and supervised so as to help
students master the subject matter of a course and explore new ways of
learning on their own. Students interested in this service may stop by to
arrange an appointment with an appropriate peer tutor. There is a charge of
$12 per hour. (Harvard College undergraduates pay only $4 per hour.) Students
on financial aid can apply for assistance through the Financial Aid Office.

**Evening Office Hours:** Office hours will be held every **Monday-Thursday
from 7:00PM - 8:30PM in SC111** from February 4 - May 9. Office hours will not
be held on the day of [exam review sessions or exams](../exams/index.html) or
on the following dates:

> Wednesdays, Feb. 13, March 13, and April 10 (due to graduate student exams)  
>  Mon, February 18 (President's day)  
>  Wed, March 20 - Thu, March 28 (spring break)  
>  Thu, May 2  
>

>

>  

####  

* * *

[[Chem27 Home](/~chem27/)] [[Announcements](/~chem27/announce/)] [[Course
Info](/~chem27/info/)] [[Instructors](/~chem27/instr/)]
[[Lectures](/~chem27/lectures/)] [[Sections](/~chem27/section/)] [[Problem
Sets](/~chem27/psets/)] [[Examinations](/~chem27/exams/)]
[[Laboratory](/~chem27/lab/)] [[Links](/~chem27/links/)]  
Site design by Finny Kuruvilla, Brian Goess. Send comments to the
[Webmaster.](mailto:jbittker@fas.harvard.edu)  
_URL:   _ www.courses.fas.harvard.edu /~chem27/announce/index.html  
_Last modified:   _ Wednesday, 22-May-2002 09:55:26 EDT  
Copyright (C) The President and Fellows of Harvard College.

