## Articles on Composition

Listed below are articles on this topic from the Campus Writing Program
library. Short summaries and citations are provided when available.



  * Barnes, Carol P. and Kenneth Goodhue-McWilliams [eds]. "Those Who Can, Teach."
  * Beyer, Barry K. "Pre-Writing and Rewriting to Learn."
  * Bizzell, Patricia. "What Happens When Basic Writers Come to College?"
  * California Berkeley (Univ. of, at ). Actual author: Steve Tollefson. "Encouraging Student Writing, A Guide for Instructors."
  * Clark, Irene L. "Some Ideas on Readability."
  * Coogan, David. _Electronic Writing Centers: Computing in the Field of Composition_
  * Curtis, Marcia, and Anne J. Herrington. "Diversity in Required Writing Courses."
  * DeBeaugrande, Robert. "Forward to the Basics: Getting Down to Grammar."
  * Edwards, Bruce L. "Tagmemic Rhetoric."
  * Flanigan, Michael C., and Diane S. Menendez. "Perception and Change: Teaching Revision."
  * Gefvert, Constance. "Training Teachers of Basic Writing."
  * Graves, Richard L. "A Primer for Teaching Style."
  * Hairston, Maxine. "Diversity, Ideology, and Teaching Writing."
  * Harris, Muriel. "Individualized Diagnosis: Searching for Causes, Not Symptoms, of Writing Deficiencies." With a comment by Vincent Puma, and a response by Muriel Harris. 
  * Jacobs, Erica. "Improving the Literature Class as We've Improved the Writing Class."
  * Jaeger, George. "One Year Later: Description of a Freshman Composition Class Taught Completely Online by Computer and Modem Hosted on a BBS."
  * Kaufer, David S., and Erwin R. Steinberg. "Economies of Expression: Some Hypotheses."
  * Kintsch, Walter, and Douglas Vipond. "Reading Comprehension and Readability in Educational Practice and Psychological Theory."
  * Klare, George R. "Assessing Readability."
  * Kroll, Barry M. "Some Development Princples for Teaching Composition."
  * Lybbert, E.K. and D.W. Cummings. "On Repetition and Coherence."
  * Matalene, Carolyn. "Contrastive Rhetoric: An American Writing Teacher in China."
  * Morris, John O., and Margaret C. McLaren. "Responses to Readability Issue," and "Another Approach to Readability."
  * Peterson, Linda. "Repetition and Metaphor in the Early Stages of Composing."
  * Raybin, Ron. "The Technique of the Infelicitous Alternative."
  * Selzer, Jack. "Readability is a Four-Letter Word."
  * Shaughnessy, Mina "Common Errors."
  * Shaughnessy, Mina. "Syntax."
  * Sommers, Nancy. "Revision Strategies of Student Writers and Experienced Adult Writers."
  * Tibbetts, Arn. "Ten Rules for Writing Readably."
  * Williams, Joseph M. "The Phenomenology of Error." 

* * *

**Barnes, Carol P. and Goodhue-McWilliams, Kennith [eds.]** "Those Who Can,
Teach." ERIC, 1992. EDRS 352 352.  

> Various teachers explain their views of the teaching process through the use
of metaphors and describe teaching strategies found to be effective in their
own classes.

**Beyer, Barry K.** "Pre-Writing and Rewriting to Learn." _Social Education_
(March 1979): 187-189, 197.  

> Argues for the importance of prewriting and revision in student writing.
Describes prewriting activities--data analysis and data-using activities.
Suggests ways to get students to revise the substance of their papers:
checklists or peer review.

**Bizzell, Patricia.** "What Happens When Basic Writers Come to College?"
_College Composition and Communication_ 37.3 (1986): 132-139.

> By looking at the academic community as a language community, basic writing
programs can help basic writers more effectively because this type of view
encompasses both language usage and critical thinking employed by the academy.
Although it is difficult to ascertain the world view typical of basic writers
upon entering college, it is easier to generalize about the academic world
view: a world in which absolutes give way to commitments. Students learn that
they can choose to align themselves with various positions, based on what they
believe to be the merits of the argument. This transition may be harder for
basic writers, partly because they stand to lose the most, but the ultimate
gains will be worth the effort.

**California Berkeley (Univ. of, at ). Actual author: Steve Tollefson.**
"Encouraging Student Writing, A Guide for Instructors." Office of Educational
Development, University of California at Berkeley, July 1988.  

> Chapters for faculty discuss how to construct writing assignments, how to
evaluate written work, how to avoid plagiarism. Chapters for students discuss
theses, introductions, active vs. passive voice, how to write research papers.

**Clark, Irene L.** "Some Ideas on Readability." _Writing in the Center:
Teaching in a Writing Center Setting_. Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt, 1985. 72-75.  

> Gives 12 simple rules that writers can follow as they write or revise to
make their prose more readable. Rules include: use natural SVO order, use
verbs rather than nouns, prefer concrete over abstract, avoid "to be" verbs,
cut unnecessary words and cliches.

**Coogan, David.** _Electronic Writing Centers: Computing in the Field of
Composition_.Stamford, CT: Ablex Publishing Company. 1999.

> Coogan theorizes the electronic writing center as a dialogic space where
students and tutors learn to value those off-stage voices and contradictory
impulses that inform their writing. This approach is opposed to that in which
the writing center is a fix-it shop and the computer is a type of teaching
machine. The text has five chapters: "Tutors and Computers in Composition
Studies," "Email `Tutoring' and Dialogic Literacy," "The Medium is Not the
Message," "The Idea of an Electronic Writing Center," and "Computing in the
Field of Composition." An appendix, "African-American Poetry as Catalyst for
Exploring Discrimination," includes a 4-week teaching guide on poetry and
discrimination for junior and senior high school students.

**Curtis, Marcia, and Anne J. Herrington.** "Diversity in Required Writing
Courses." _Promoting Diversity in College Classrooms_. ( _New Directions for
Teaching and Learning_ , no. 52.) Ed. Maurianne Adams. San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass, 1992. 71-84.  

> Summarizes development of culturally diverse curriculum for a freshman comp
course. Also describes assignments used to encourage students to deal with
cultural/ethnic/etc. diversity.

**DeBeaugrande, Robert.** "Forward to the Basics: Getting Down to Grammar."
_College Composition and Communication_ 35.3 (1984): 358- 367.  

> Argues that most people have a working understanding of grammar as it is
actually used in normal conversation. But when grammar is taught, it's most
often taught as an abstract set of rules to be applied. Author argues that
people would have an easier time constructing grammatically correct sentences
if we put this active grammatical knowledge to use. Suggests techniques
writers can use to detect sentence fragments or comma splices, identify
subjects and predicates, find verbs that must agree with subjects, and label
verb tenses. (Techniques are similar to those described in Muriel Harris,
"Teaching One-to-One.")

**Edwards, Bruce L.** "Tagmemic Rhetoric." No citation; manuscript with
attached photocopied pages.  

> Manuscript defines tagmemic rhetoric, summarizes its history, and briefly
reviews a text that uses a tagmemic theory of rhetoric, _Rhetoric: Discovery
and Change_ , by Young, Becker, and Pike (1970).

**Flanigan, Michael C., and Diane S. Menendez.** "Perception and Change:
Teaching Revision." _College English_ 42.3 (1980): 256- 266.  

> Describes a method for teaching revision in a freshman comp class, using
structured revision guides completed by peer "editors," and discussed among
editors and writers. Argues that this combination of editorial commentary and
peer review enables students to view their writing more objectively, and gain
a stronger sense of audience. Comments emphasize how the reader/editor made
sense of the writer's text, what the reader was led to expect and why.

**Gefvert, Constance.** "Training Teachers of Basic Writing." _Basic Writing:
Essays for Teachers, Researchers, Administrators_. Eds. Lawrence N. Kasden and
Daniel R. Boeber. Urbana, IL: NCTE, 1980. 119- 140.  

> Justifies the teaching of a special course for teachers of basic writers.
Describes readings and course design, and presents a model syllabus.

**Graves, Richard L.** "A Primer for Teaching Style." _College Composition and
Communication_ 25.2 (1974): 186-190.

> Teachers often remark that they feel frustrated in their attempts to teach
writing, while at the same time they devalue teaching style. Because good
style seems to be a hallmark of good writing, it makes sense for teachers to
adjust their classroom priorities. The problem, though, is that style seems to
be vague. This article, however, offers a variety of techniques to enable
students to understand style, and how it contributes to writing. For the most
part, these techniques concentrate upon defining and illustrating various
rhetorical terms, possibly out of hope that the students will then be able to
apply the concepts to their own work.

**Hairston, Maxine** "Diversity, Ideology, and Teaching Writing" _College
Composition and Communication_ 43.2 (1992): 179- 193.  

> Warns against a trend she's noticed: the use of composition courses as
political tools for social reform rather than student-centered writing
workshops. Argues that literary critics and theory-crazy grad students have
wrongly infused ideology into the teaching of writing. Suggests that a
culturally-inclusive curriculum can be had by focusing on the experiences of
the students rather than by forcing a 'multiculturalist' agenda.

**Harris, Muriel.** "Individualized Diagnosis: Searching for Causes, Not
Symptoms, of Writing Deficiencies." With a comment by Vincent Puma, and a
response by Muriel Harris. _College English_ 40.3 (1978). Reprinted _Tutoring
Writing: A Sourcebook for Writing Labs_. Ed. Muriel Harris. Glenview, IL:
Scott, Foresman, 1982.  

> Original Harris article discusses a questionaire used in her writing lab to
determine how motivated the student is to write, how important s/he sees
writing as being, etc. Puma commentary argues that tutors need more info than
this: more about the underlying cause or nature of the grammatical/mechanical
errors a student makes. In her response, Harris agrees with Puma and discusses
some of the questions she asks tutees to pinpoint the information the student
lacks, or the misinformation the student holds.

**Jacobs, Erica.** "Improving the Literature Class as We've Improved the
Writing Class." No citation. 56-63.  

> Describes the success of incorporating into literature classes techniques
commonly used in writing classes: small group work to answer specific
questions about a piece of literature; peer review of drafts; and writing that
relates personal experience to some aspect of the topic considered in the
piece of literature.

**Jaeger, George.** "One Year Later: Description of a Freshman Composition
Class Taught Completely Online by Computer and Modem Hosted on a BBS." No
citation.  

> A report on a composition course taught by computer, with no face-to-face
interaction. Argues that face-to-face interaction is not necessary for one-to-
one interaction; that collaborative learning can occur under these
circumstances; and that in general this is a good way to offer composition
courses.

**Kaufer, David S., and Erwin R. Steinberg.** "Economies of Expression: Some
Hypothesis." _College Compostion and Communication_ 39.4 (1988): 453- 457.

> It is important to consider the context and purpose of all information
before applying general stylistic editing rules. We should analyze what
information is necessary for the reader's understanding, and edit accordingly.

**Kintsch, Walter, and Douglas Vipond.** "Reading Comprehension and
Readability in Educational Practice and Psychological Theory." _Perspectives
on Memory Research: Essays in Honor of Uppsala University's 500th
Anniversary_. Ed. Lars- Goran Nilsson. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1979.
329-365.  

> Discusses the inadequacy of readability formulas, stating specifically that
neither the predictor variables nor the measure of readability that the
predictors are correlated with are defined adequately. Moreover, the formulas
are completely atheoretical. The authors suggest a model of readability based
on theories of reading comprehension. They take several passages differing in
readability and identify characteristics that affect readability: number of
propositions per paragraph, number of new concepts per proposition, and
coherence (path from every concept to every other concept). Then describes a
hypothetical comprehension process that fits with the theory above.

**Klare, George R.** "Assessing Readability." _Reading Research Quarterly_ 1
(1974-75): 62-102.  

> Describes formulas used for measuring the readability of a piece of writing,
including the Fog Index and other formulas. Describes both original and
revised/recalculated versions. Most of these formulas include at least a
word/syntactic variable and a sentence/semantic variable; beyond this the
complexity of the formulas varies widely. Summarizes manual and computerized
application aids available also. Points out that these formulas yield indices
of readability, but say nothing about causes of high or low readability, and
don't indicate how to write readably.

**Kroll, Barry M.** "Some Development Princples for Teaching Composition." No
citation. 258-271. Note on p. 1: "This essay originally appeared in a slightly
different form in _Teaching English in the Two-Year College_ 7 (1980): 17-21.
(c) East Carolina University. "  

> Suggests principles that use cognitive development concepts of Piaget in
freshman comp: Provide writing problems; emphasize writing as a process;
facilitate social interaction; recognize the importance of attitudes; extend
language facility (fluency); deal forthrightly with errors (i.e., do error
analysis).

**Lybbert, E.K. and D.W. Cummings.** "On Repetition and Coherence." _College
Composition and Communication_ 20.1 (1969): 35-38.

> This article explains the difference between unity and coherence in writing,
and considers ways in which repetition and parallelism can be used to make
writing more or less coherent.



**Matalene, Carolyn.** "Contrastive Rhetoric: An American Writing Teacher in
China." _College English_ 47 (1985): 789-808.  

> Summarizes the author's experiences as a composition teacher in China.
Outlines differences between Chinese rhetorical conventions (importance of
indirect approach, rigid format for argumentation, flowery prose, importance
of reading and citing the classic literature, etc.).

**Morris, John O., and Margaret C. McLaren.** "Responses to Readability
Issue," and "Another Approach to Readability." _Journal of Business
Communication_ (Spring 1982): 51-58.  

> Responses of 2 authors to articles by Selzer and by Tibbetts, in a previous
issue of the journal on readability. Morris argues that readability formulas
aren't as widely used as Selzer indicates, and suggests that length limits on
sentences and paragraphs can help avoid unclear writing. McLaren agrees with
Selzer that formulas are hopeless, and in their place suggests rules for
readable prose, similar to those of Tibbetts.

**Peterson, Linda.** "Repetition and Metaphor in the Early Stages of
Composing." _College Composition and Communication_ 36.4 (1985): 429-443.

> Peterson uses a series of drafts of a statement by Richard Wright about his
autobiography _Black Boy_ to illustrate how repetition and metaphor are used
by a writer at various stages in the writing process. She suggests that these
are often generative strategies to be used in the early stages of the writing
process, and should be differentiated from the later stage of editing for
style and clarity. Repetition and metaphor often help the writer clarify
meaning to themselves. Most expository prose then becomes a way of working out
the implications contained in the metaphors used.

**Raybin, Ron.** "The Technique of the Infelicitous Alternative." ERIC ED 049
249.  

> Illustrates the use of a teaching device in literature or composition
classes: the infelicitous alternative, or "the find-out- what-it-isn't-to-
discover-what-it-is approach." The basic approach: present a poor alternative
to the correct or desired characteristic or wording, and have students tell
you why that isn't as good as the actual wording, characteristic, etc.

**Selzer, Jack.** "Readability is a Four- Letter Word." _Journal of Business
Communication_ 18.4 (1981): 23-34.  

> Points out that readability formulas are widespread in business, government,
teaching, etc., and criticizes the use of formulas to assess the readability
of prose. Argues that the formulas don't always predict readability
accurately, mainly because they don't take whole-paper level concerns into
account. Also, formulas don't help writers produce more readable prose--
formulas suggest that shorter sentences or words will increase readability,
and this isn't necessarily the case. Finally, he suggests that formulas, by
emphasizing product over process, have detrimentally affected the teaching of
writing.

**Shaughnessy, Mina** "Common Errors." _Errors and Expectations._ New York:
Oxford UP, 1977. 90-159.

> Chapter 4 of Shaughnessy's text. Suggests that basic writing instructors
need to differentiate between performance-based errors and grammatically-based
errors in order to address the needs of basic writers more effectively.
Examines the types of errors students may make, and implies strategies for
lesson planning.

**Shaughnessy, Mina.** "Syntax." _Errors and Expectations._ New York: Oxford
UP. 1977. 44-89.

> This is the third chapter of Shaughnessy's book. Whereas practiced writers
look at syntax in terms of stylistic choices, a basic writer looks at syntax
in terms of correctness. Unfamiliarity with the dialect of formal writing
often leads basic writers into predictable error patterns, but traditional
grammar drill fails to give these writers a good grasp of how to employ
effective syntactic strategies as part of their writing process.

**Sommers, Nancy.** "Revision Strategies of Student Writers and Experienced
Adult Writers." _College Composition and Communication_ 31 (1980): 378-388.  

> Case studies of freshmen and experienced writers (academics, journalists,
editors), each of whom wrote 3 essays and revised each essay twice. Analyzed
changes from draft to draft. Results: student writers change individual words
when they "revise;" worry a lot about repetition; don't know how to identify
or deal with larger concerns in a paper. Experienced writers see drafts as
attempts to structure their argument, to deal with concerns of audience.
Experienced writers use more different types of revision activities; see the
paper as a whole; and revision as a recursive process.

**Tibbetts, Arn.** "Ten Rules for Writing Readably." _Journal of Business
Communication_ 18.4 (1981): 53-62.  

> Gives 10 rules writers can use as they write or revise to make their writing
more readable. Rules include using genuinely familiar words, avoiding abstract
nouns, breaking sentences into clear units that are separated by commas and
marked by signalling words, and varying sentence structure.

**Williams, Joseph M.** "The Phenomenology of Error." _College Composition and
Communication_ 32 (1981): 152-168.  

> Discusses the difficulty of defining grammatical/mechanical errors, and the
wide variation in definitions and judgments about the seriousness of different
errors. Defines categories of error based on whether a rule was violated or
not and whether we (readers) notice or respond to its violation or not.
Discusses errors that fall into each of these categories.

* * *

Return to the index of Articles on Composition.

Return to the [general index of the Campus Writing Program
library.](libdir.html)

