Syllabus for:

**AMERICA AND VIETNAM, 1945-1975**

**Spring 2001**

**Professors Ernest May and Hue-Tam Ho Tai**

****

* * *

(Click here to see the [Schedule of Lectures and
Assignments](http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~hsb68/syllabus/lectures.html)
for this course.)

(Click here to access a [printable
version](http://icg.harvard.edu/~core/syllabus/sp01/hsb68/) of this syllabus.)

  

* * *

**_Introduction_**

The Vietnam War remains a defining event for both Americans and Vietnamese.
"Lessons of Vietnam" continue to influence decisions in both countries--and
elsewhere. The war continues to affect countless men and women who experienced
it. Through writings, films, and music, it also affects millions who did not
experience it.

The more the war recedes, the more complex it seems. Its global setting was an
East-West Cold War which itself remains a historical puzzle. For Vietnam, the
contexts included a struggle for decolonization and struggles for--and against
--social revolution. These struggles began before the Cold War but became
entangled in it. Vietnam would have been an arena of armed conflict even if
isolated from the superpowers. The United States, too, had an inner life
largely independent of the Cold War. Battles over racial segregation were one
manifestation of American domestic concerns. There were others, in every area
associated with "the sixties."

The war is all the harder to reconstruct because conditions continually
changed. The Cold War went from the high tension of the 1950s to the d¨¦tente
of the 1970s. In Vietnam, a war for independence gave way to a contest between
Vietnamese factions. The American of the big bands and " I like Ike" meanwhile
became the America of Woodstock and Watergate.

A course in Historical Study should improve one's ability to make sense of
past experience. That is the foundation for almost any thinking about human
affairs, whether past, present, or future. This course tries to provide a
balanced review of relevant evidence from both sides and from ordinary
citizens and soldiers as well decision-makers. Though the instructors
interpret this evidence, their intention is to help students form their own
interpretation.

* * *

**_Office Hours and Locations_**

**Professor May:** Tuesdays 2:00-4:00 in KSG L352

(Ernest_ May@harvard.edu)

****

**Professor Tai** : Fridays 1:30-3:30 in Coolidge Hall 316 A

(hhtai@fas.harvard.edu)

**Ed Miller:** Thursdays 1:30-3:30 in Robinson Hall L-30

(emiller@fas.harvard.edu)

  

* * *

**_Course Requirements and Grades_**

> _Participation in Weekly Sections_ (20% of course grade). Sections will
begin on February 15 (Thursday sections), February 16 (Friday sections) or
February 19 (Monday sections). Students will indicate sectioning preferences
at lecture on February 6; notification of section assignments will be made via
email on February 9 or 10.

>

> _A Midterm Hour Exam_ (10% of course grade.) to be administered during the
lecture meeting on Tuesday, March 6. Seniors writing an Honors Thesis may be
exempted from the midterm _with prior agreement_ of their TFs; in such cases,
the term paper will count for 35% of the course grade and the final will count
for 45%. ** __**

>

> **__**

>

> _A Term Paper_ (30% of course grade) of ten to fifteen pages (double-spaced,
12 point font), due on or before Monday, May 14th. ** __**

>

> **__**

>

> _A Final Examination_ (40% of course grade) tentatively scheduled for
Wednesday, May 23. ** __**

>

> ****

>

> ****

* * *

**_Discussion Sections_**

During the lecture on Tuesday, February 6, students will be asked to fill out
a form indicating the hours when they can attend discussion section meetings.
(Students can also obtain forms from the History Department office on the
second floor of Robinson Hall). Students will be informed of section
assignments via email on February 9 or 10\. Sections will begin on February 15
(for Thursday sections), February 16 (Friday sections) or February 19 (Monday
sections). All Monday section meetings will discuss the readings and lectures
from the previous week.

Students are required to submit a total of four short response papers over the
course of the semester; these papers must be turned in during weeks 5, 7, 10
and 12 (see [schedule of lecture and
assignements](http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~hsb68/syllabus/lectures.html)).
Each response paper will provide a short answer (250-300 words) to one
question drawn from a list provided by the Teaching Fellow during the previous
week's section meeting. Students should draw on material from the current
week's readings and lectures when writing their papers; however, it is not
necessary to include footnotes or detailed citations. **Response papers will
_not_ be submitted in paper form; rather, they _must_ be posted electronically
prior to section meeting, via the **[**Discussions
page**](http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/webx/WebX?14@@/hsb68) **of
the HSB-68 Course website.** Your TF will indicate when your response paper
will be due. (In most cases, the deadline will be 5pm on the day before
section is held.) Once you have posted your response paper, it will be
available for your classmates to read on-line; you may wish to consider what
your classmates have posted when composing your own paper.

There will be no special section for graduate or professional school students.
They should sign up for one of the regular sections. Professors Tai and May
will, however, hold some special meetings for graduate students.

  

* * *

**_Term Paper_**

The object of the term paper is to give each student some experience
reconstructing history. To the extent possible, the paper should be based on
primary sources. If it deals primarily with the American side of the conflict,
it can draw on government documents or congressional testimony or
contemporaneous letters or diaries or newspapers or magazines. It can draw on
cultural artifacts such as music or film. It can even draw on interviews--for
example, with family members or with war veterans.

If it deals with the Vietnamese side of the conflict, it will probably have to
be based more on secondary sources--that is, accounts by Western observers or
works by scholars who used Vietnamese sources. There are, however, a number of
primary Vietnamese documents which have been translated into English. When
looking for source material, students are encouraged to use HOLLIS and also
the numerous websites dealing with the Vietnam War; links to many of these
sites are available
[here](http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~hsb68/wwwlinks/).

Whatever the topic, the paper should not simply comment on others'
interpretations, including those in lecture and assigned readings. The paper
should involve independent judgment regarding some event or sequence of
events, or some individual, or some puzzling questions about the history of
the war.

Topics will be worked out individually between students and Teaching Fellows.
A one-paragraph paper prospectus must be turned during the week after Spring
Recess, and students will be encouraged to submit early drafts in order to get
advance criticism.

* * *

**_Reading Materials_**

****

All books except the _Sourcebook_ are available at the Coop and the Harvard
Bookstore. The _Sourcebook_ will be on sale for a brief period early in the
term in the basement of the Science Center. Multiple copies of all assigned
materials, including the _Sourcebook_ , are on reserve in Lamont and Hilles.

> 1\. Akira Irye, _The Globalizing of America,_ Cambridge University Press,
1995.

>

> 2\. Warren I. Cohen, _America in the Age of Soviet Power_. Cambridge
University Press, 1995 __

>

> 3\. Robert J. McMahon, _Major Problems in the History of the Vietnam War_.
Lexington, D.C. Heath, 1995.

>

> 4\. Gary Hess, _Vietnam and the United States_. Rev. ed. Boston: Twayne,
1998. __

>

> 5\. Tim O'Brien, _Going After Cacciato_. New York: Delta, 1998.

>

> 6\. Nguyen Thi Dinh _No Other Road to Take_. Ithaca: Cornell Southeast Asian
Program, 1975.

>

> 7\. _HSB-68 Sourcebook._ ****

**  

* * *

**

[**Schedule of Lectures and
Assignments**](http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~hsb68/syllabus/lectures.html)

**Back to Top of Page**

