![](../../images/banner.gif)  
  
  
  
|  ![navigation bar](../../images/navbar2.gif)  
---  
![Site information bar](../../images/sitebar.gif)  
[Howard Richards](index.html)  
|

## Philosophy of Education Syllabus  
Howard Richards, Earlham College

Spring Term, 1997 M T Th. F 10 a.m. Meetinghouse Library

The study of the philosophy of education can be described  
as a search for firm foundations or key concepts to guide the  
work of educators.  
  
Education is a field with many exciting new ideas, and many inspiring
personalities. It is true that many teachers are discouraged, that many are
working under intolerable conditions, and that many are deadened by routine.
But it is also true that every year there are dozens of workshops, books, new
curricula, experimental programs, and alternative movements offering valuable
innovations. Anybody who goes to a conference of educators will find it well
worthwhile to go with an empty suitcase, in order to carry back all the
handouts from the exhibits of the publishers and from the presenters. Further,
in almost every town in America there are celebrated teachers, who are revered
by colleagues and legendary among their former students.  
  
In a field where so much is new and exciting, and where, nevertheless, there
seems to be no great overall improvement in results, but rather, at least on
the basis of test scores, a general decline, one cannot help but wonder which
ideas are valid. One wonders how much is fad, fueled by passing enthusiasm,
and how much is solidly grounded in reality.  
  
To think of the study of the philosophy of education as a search for _firm_
foundations is to look for a foundation that will not change this year or the
next, because it is based on enduring values and on enduring truths. A _key_
concept, similarly, is a concept that unlocks, opens up, many other concepts.
Amid the welter of ideas offered to educators, a key concept is one to learn
first, to make it easier to learn the others; it is one to learn when you do
not have time to learn them all.  
  
University level curricula designed to prepare teachers for teaching are
sometimes divided into  "foundations" courses and "methods" courses. The
latter include teaching practice and special techniques, such as how to teach
reading. The "foundations" series includes titles like "Philosophy of
Education," "Psychology of Education," "Sociology of Education," "History of
Education," and sometimes explicitly, "Foundations of Education." It is hoped
that somehow the study of selected materials from the great academic
disciplines will produce "foundations," that is to say, reasons to justify and
explain what teachers do. It is hoped that in taking courses in foundational
subjects the future teacher will find something that will actually be of use
in a teaching career.  
  
Thus philosophy is not the only discipline that is expected to contribute to
giving education a "foundation." In this course we will not hesitate to cross
disciplinary boundaries and to draw relevant ideas from psychology, sociology,
history, and educational theory. Nevertheless, because this course is a
philosophy course, it will reflect certain characteristics philosophy has
preserved ever since the mainstream of its tradition in the West began
approximately 2400 years ago in the time of Socrates and Plato.

### The Idea of Education

The word "education" is derived from a Latin word meaning "to lead out." It
has come to name any deliberate effort to establish patterns of human
behavior, or to instill or strengthen any capacity that it is thought
desirable for human beings to have, such as, for example, to read, write, add,
subtract, multiply, and divide.  
  
Considered as one of the social sciences, education is not only the study of a
particular social institution, but - like the other social sciences \- the
study of all of society from a certain point of view. Just as, for example,
everything that has ever happened in society for the past several thousand
years has happened after prehistoric times and in the past and therefore is
part of history, so anything humans do is something they learned to do, or at
least did not learn not to do, and therefore everything that happens in
society happens because of education. It follows that all social problems are
educational problems. If crime is a problem, it is because people have learned
to be criminals, or because people have learned to participate in institutions
that produce criminals. If war is a problem, it is because education has
established the patterns of behavior that lead to war, and has not taught
peace.  
  
Education is particularly identified with schools. This identification is not
made because schools are the main places where young humans develop their
personalities and their abilities - on such a basis television, parents,
siblings, work experience, church, sports, and several other influences would
have to count as no less educational, no less formative, than schools. My
opinion is that it is customary to single out schoolteachers as "educators"
because they are the ones who get paid for deliberately educating in the way
that the politically organized society - or whoever pays them - wants
education done. The identification of education with schooling is unfortunate
in several ways. One way is that it leads to a confusion between the
proposition that every social problem is an educational problem, which is true
by definition, and the proposition that every social problem is a problem
schools can solve, which is false.  
  
In this course we will to a certain extent discuss the texts as they apply to
schools. However, we will remember that each of us is always an educator all
the time, in or out of school, because the way we act always has some tendency
to shape the behavior of other people. As the Russian writer Anton Chekhov
once wrote in a letter to his wayward brother, "An educated person seeks to
have an educational influence on others; for this reason he does not drink to
excess, and does not go to sleep with his clothes on."

### The Idea of Philosophy

With some notable exceptions philosophy is a field of human endeavor that has
maintained some rather constant features over the past several thousand years.  
  
One of its features is that philosophy asks all questions. As Plato wrote in
_The Republic_ the geometer accepts as true certain axioms, such as (in
Plato's time) the axiom that parallel lines never meet. But the philosopher
asks why that axiom is true, and whether it might be, or sometimes is, false.
Philosophy questions everyone else's assumptions, and it questions its own
assumptions.  
  
For this reason, since this is a philosophy course, everything I have written
above must be amended to add,  "But this may be wrong; let's question it."  
  
Students often find philosophy frustrating because in a sense there is nothing
to learn in a philosophy course. Everything that is taught is taught with the
proviso that it may be false. But even that may be false; we may have hit on
something that is true, and it would then be false to say it may be false.  
  
For this very same reason philosophy is thought to be especially suited to
establish the foundations of education, or of mathematics, or of anything.
Since philosophers dare to question the assumptions that everybody else makes,
philosophers are in a sense specialists in the study of fundamental
assumptions, and if anybody is going to find the right fundamental
assumptions, it should be philosophers - since they are always looking for
them (with the exception of certain philosophers who, in revolt against
philosophy's main traditions, make it a point not to look for fundamental
assumptions). But perhaps it would not be philosophers _per se_ who would find
the right assumptions, but rather people who first know their own discipline
and then think about it philosophically. For this reason the philosopher
Alfred North Whitehead thought that undergraduates should not study
philosophy; first you should get a degree in something, and then in graduate
school go on to study its philosophy.  
  
For a similar reason Aristotle thought that young people were not ready to not
study philosophy, that is, because young people do not have enough experience
of life. However, in answer to Aristotle, and with respect to undergraduates,
we can say that if people in college are going to study the philosophy of
anything it should be the philosophy of education. College students have a
great deal of experience in schools, twelve or more years of it; and they have
even more experience in having their characters shaped by influences. After so
much experience, some reflection on what it is all for would seem to be called
for.  
  
Another feature of philosophy is that you are supposed to give reasons for
your opinions. Socrates upset the people of Athens, and ultimately made
himself so unpopular that he was condemned to death, by persistently asking
them _why_ they believed what they believed. This feature of philosophy can
also be upsetting to students, perhaps more so in our culture than in other
cultures. In our culture it is often thought to be a requirement of morality,
not just of courtesy, to respect other people's opinions. People are brought
up to believe that they have a right to have opinions, and that they have no
obligation to give any reason for what they think except that they think it.
It is a challenge for anybody anywhere to have to justify beliefs, and it is a
special challenge in a culture like ours. Philosophy requires that everybody,
including the teacher, submit to a higher authority, namely logic. As one
student who was in this course last year rather grumpily wrote,  "The one
thing I learned in this course was that any idea that comes from myself does
not count." This grumpy reflection was not, however, completely accurate;
because (as the philosopher Rene Descartes made it a great point to emphasize)
an idea that one happens to have may well count, i.e. be valid, in the respect
that it is true that one has the idea. Whether it is a true idea is another
question, but it is not irrelevant, and it is on some accounts an
indispensable beginning, to take an inventory of the ideas one has.  
  
This is not to say, either, that logic cannot be questioned - indeed
questioning logic and deciding what it is and what its limits are is one of
the things philosophers have done most often. Logic is not an exception to the
rule that everything is to be questioned.  
  
This identification of philosophy with being asked to engage in a dialogue
where you give reasons for your beliefs has led to the identification of
philosophy with logical thinking, and with learning to think logically. For
this reason, Jean Piaget could plausibly assert the opposite of the view of
Aristotle just mentioned. Far from saying that young people cannot yet do
philosophy, Piaget held that even little children, even kindergartners, were
philosophers. Infants who play peek-a-boo and toddlers who make mud pies are
learning to make sense of the world; they are developing logical operations;
far from beginning in graduate school, this process begins in the womb.  
  
A third feature of philosophy - I should admit that it is a third frustrating
feature - is that it is typically about what are sometimes called "essentially
contested concepts." These are concepts whose role in social life is to be a
verbal battleground on which different factions fight for the control of the
terrain. There has been no peace treaty signed and adhered to by everyone,
which provides the agreed meaning of the concept. It may well be that every
concept is essentially contested in some contexts and to some degree, but
there are some that stand out. Examples of such concepts are: "science,"
"democracy," "art," "justice," "mentally ill," "appropriate," "right," and, of
course, "education."  
  
You will not get in this course, or anywhere, _the_ definition of education.
Even a dictionary will not give you _the_ definition. It will only tell you
what the person who wrote the dictionary thought common usage was; and the
better the dictionary the more variations and nuances it will tell you, and
the more it will tell you about the history of the word. In a sense I have to
take back what I said above about the meaning of the word  "education,"
because even though I think what I said was defensible, I must recognize that
"education" is a word that people have been fighting about for centuries. For
some of the same reasons that people have been fighting about the practices
that the word names (e.g. should there be prayer in schools? Should there be
sex education?) people have also been fighting about whether the word
"education" properly names the practices.  
  
A course in philosophy should prepare you to deal with essentially contested
concepts. Faced with a situation where there is more than one way to talk
about something, and where one or more underlying issues come to a head in
deciding what words to use, a person who has had a course in philosophy should
be able to do better than (a) simply give up, or (b) take the nearest
dictionary off the shelf, or (c) say something like "it's only a matter of
semantics," and thus justify the conclusion that it does not matter who wins
the essentially contested terrain.

### The Aim of this Course

The above may lead you to think that this may well be a fascinating but
downbeat course, in which you learn to be more skeptical than you already are,
and to believe less than you already believe. Actually, at least in terms of
my own contribution to the class, I am going to be making a case for views
that are not at all skeptical, of the kind commonly called realist. It is
because I have to obey the rules of philosophy the same as everyone else that
I have to recognize that all of my own views can be questioned, that I need
reasons, and that I am taking positions on essentially contested terrain.  
  
I will be making a case that the most important thing in life, and therefore
the most important thing in education, is love. Many people, I think, will
agree with me, and will be ready to go on to questions this assertion implies,
such as, "What, then, is love?" "How can children, or anybody, learn love?"
And, "How can we transform our society, and our world, so that it will become
a loving, caring place?" The more general question, "How can we make a
difference in education?" I would rephrase as the more specific question,
"What can we do as educators to raise the level of love in the world?" I would
also in most contexts rephrase my own assertion, and instead of saying that
the most important aim of education is to learn love, I would say the aim of
education is to learn "love and respect."  
  
The historical direction of this philosophy of education course will be from
ancient to modern. Many themes might be chosen to tie together a search for
key concepts in education; I have been inspired to choose the theme "love and
respect" at least as the organizing principle of the readings, while being
open to seeing what happens in the discussions. Part of my philosophical
argument will be that the ideal of "respect" is best thought of as a necessary
consequence of the more basic ideal of "love." Nevertheless, it is important
most of the time to give "respect" equal billing with "love" as a way to guard
against some of the abuses to which the word "love" lends itself.  
  
My inspiration for organizing this course around "love and respect" came in
the first place from Sister Paulette Schroeder, a Franciscan nun. She chairs a
parish on the east side of inner city Indianapolis. It is unusual for a woman
to head a Catholic parish, since the Catholic Church has not yet seen the
light and ordained women; she plays this role because one priest attends to
three parishes, each of which is headed by a committee, and at Holy Cross
Parish she is the chair. Holy Cross Parish has a remarkable school and a
number of other remarkable activities, most of which are done in cooperation
with other churches in the area (such as a black Protestant church) and
community organizations (such as a housing coop). When she showed me the
parish school she remarked, "What the children learn in this school is love
and respect. If they learn something else, that's fine, but what they must
learn is love and respect."  
  
It struck me that she was right. A few months later when I was at The Hague in
Holland, invited there to be on a committee of "experts" for UNESCO to propose
world educational policy to the United Nations, I told everybody what Sister
Paulette had said. The meetings were mostly about literacy, and how to teach
reading, and how to teach math, and to some extent also how to teach social
skills, maybe even moral development, maybe even cooperation. But when I said
that the real aim of education is love and respect, nobody disagreed.  
  
The novelty of the idea is not as great as might first appear. "Love" is a
good name for the ideal of traditional western culture at its best. "Respect"
is a good name for the ideal of modern culture at its best. Thus the phrase is
a way of summarizing civilized ideals, although it is mainly western ideals
that it summarizes, and there would no doubt be much that would be useful for
us to learn by studying the ideals of nonwestern cultures - but that would
have to be another course. (I do believe, however, that our appreciation of
nonwestern cultures is enhanced by studying the non-modern, ancient, roots of
western culture; they have much in common with nonwestern wisdom.)  
  
It turns out that the poor and minority inner city children in the Holy Cross
parish school do very well on standard tests. As if by a miracle, they do as
well as suburban kids. They do learn to read, and they do learn mathematics,
even though the main purpose of the school is to learn love and respect. This
is not unusual. A school with a good atmosphere will often produce better
academic results than one whose stated aim is academic excellence. So I do not
believe putting love and respect first represents choosing one horn of a
dilemma - either teach moral ideals or teach the three R's; it represents
choosing a wise strategy.  
  
We will trace in the reading the development of our culture's main ideals.
Here I am already, due to the way I am organizing the course, taking a
philosophical position that needs to be questioned. I believe that reality is
socially constructed, and that to understand the reality we live in we need to
study how it was constructed. Consequently this course in philosophy of
education will to some extent be a constructionist history of love, whose
background will be a realist view of nature and human nature. One reason why I
only say "to some extent," is that the course will depend to a considerable
extent on what other people bring to it. I am only one participant, even
though I am the teacher and even though (with exceptions to be stated below) I
chose the readings. Since this is a discussion course, in which all the
participants have a great deal of experience on which to base what they say in
discussion, the outcome of the course may be much different from the one
implicit in the criterion I used in choosing the readings.  
  
I have in any event chosen recognized classics - which anybody seeking firm
foundations and key concepts for education, whether or not that person thinks
the firm foundation is love and the key concept is love and respect - will
have to respond to in one way or another. The readings are for the most part
great landmarks of philosophical and educational thought with respect to which
teachers have for many years taken their bearings.

### The Main Readings

Three of the main readings I did not ask you to buy. I list them here because
I think they are essential to the discussions in the course, even though you
will only look at them on reserve, and will not be expected to read much of
them. The main readings are:  
  
Plato, _Phaedrus_.  
This is a classic early account of love and its relationship to the pursuit of
wisdom.  
  
Aristotle, _Nichomachean Ethics_.  
This classic work is about friendship more than anything. If Aristotle is
right then most children are wiser than most teachers, insofar as the children
think the most important thing in school is friends, while the teachers often
see friends as getting in the way of serious things like learning to read. We
will not read all of this book.  
  
Saint Augustine, _Confessions_.  
This is a book I did not ask you to buy, although some may have already read
it for another class. Although this is mainly a discussion course, I will
cover Augustine by lecture, and only ask you to read short passages. This book
is a key to the development of the idea of an inner spiritual life, the idea
of a sound mind in a healthy body, the idea of truth leading to God, and of
love's relationship to truth; it is also - you may find this hard to believe -
a classical source both for people who think children are naturally bad and
need to be disciplined to be made good, and for people who think children are
naturally good and can have their natural goodness brought out by love and
respect.  
  
_What Love Could Be_.  
I wrote this myself; it is Letter from Quebec #69. It is my summary of the
history of love and of the role love should play in social transformation. It
relies on biology more than the other works.  
  
Emile Durkheim, _Moral Education_.  
This is another book I did not ask you to buy. It is a modern classic too
little read, which is now being taken more seriously as people begin to
realize that it is not just individuals but schools as institutions that need
to have values. It is an account of the growth of respect in the child,
leading from primary friendships to global citizenship. I will lecture on it
and ask you to read just a few quotations.  
  
John Dewey, _Democracy and Education_.  
My mother taught elementary school for thirty years, and this was her
educational Bible. She studied it in her philosophy of education class at the
University of Redlands (in California), never forgot it, and constantly relied
on it. Besides my mother, several generations of American schoolteachers drew
their principal guidance from Dewey; he has many followers still today in
education; in philosophy proper there has been a revival of interest in Dewey
with the decline of analytic philosophy and the rise of postmodernism. This is
the third book I did not ask you to buy, partly because it is long and
repetitive.  
  
Jean Piaget, _The Moral Judgment of the Child_.  
This is another modern classic, and one that many students of education read,
but few people read it as we will, and as it was written: namely, as a reply
to Durkheim, and as a psychological theory adding detail and practicality to a
philosophy much like John Dewey's. One of the great lessons to be learned from
studying Piaget is that philosophy is now in a new era in which many of its
questions can only be answered by using the results of detailed empirical
research. Piaget was one of the first - he has been followed by many - to
study in painstaking detail exactly how children develop moral ideals. Anybody
who wants to help make children, or the world, better, cannot afford to ignore
this research. Piaget, like Dewey, finds that children develop mutual respect
and democratic values by interacting with each other. We will read only part
of this book, but we will learn a great deal from it; hopefully you will find
time to read the rest at some other point in your life.  
  
Lawrence Kohlberg and Rochelle Mayer,  "Development as the Aim of Education."  
This is an article from _Harvard Educational Review_. It is a defense of
Piaget and Dewey's ideas which provides a remarkable summary of _all_
educational philosophies, and thus an overview of the field.  
  
Paulo Freire, _The Pedagogy of the Oppressed_.  
This is the most recent of the educational classics, one that makes respect a
method for  "making a world where it is easier to love." Freire worked with
poor peasants in northeast Brazil, and later in Chile and in other countries.
This book has served as the inspiration and guidebook for many revolutionary
activists, community organizers, social workers, missionaries, and adult
educators as well as schoolteachers. At a UNESCO conference on adult education
in Rio de Janeiro I heard the representative from the island of Fernando Po
(off the coast of Africa) say that the entire population of the island had
been organized as a learning community using Freire's principles.

### The Format of the Course

There will be a variety of class activities, including a field trip to Sister
Paulette's school in inner city Indianapolis, but the basic format of the
course will be class discussions which will sometimes tend to be _explications
des textes_. (This French phrase expresses the idea that the teacher helps the
students read the text.)  
  
You should feel free to talk in class whenever you want to. However, I am
going to be a little bit pushy in asking people to talk, usually by going
around the room and giving everybody a turn. You may pass when it is your
turn, but you will make a better impression if you can at least ask a question
about something you did not understand. A good question should, as a general
rule, point to a specific page and a specific sentence. However, that is not
the only way to ask a good question. And you do not need to ask a question at
all. You may make a comment, or say whatever is on your mind and heart. You
are especially invited to build on what other people have said.

### The Extra Credit Projects

While the readings will deal with foundation stones of western educational
thought, the extra credit projects will be contemporary. They consist of
helping with one of several ongoing research projects, which deal with
education today.  
  
Each student should select a subject are from one of the following extra
credit research areas.

> A. The Youth Culture Transformation Project.  
>  This is an ongoing international effort, and an ongoing project studying
youth culture in Richmond, especially at Richmond High School, and especially
with respect to violence. Some of the research to be done is field work; other
parts of it are mostly helping to analyze and assimilate field work that has
already been done.  
>  
>  B. Service Learning.  
>  Many of you are already in service learning placements. Those who are not
may sign up for a placement as part of this course. This can overlap with the
Youth Culture Transformation Project.  
>  
>  C. Racial Violence Narrative.  
>  This is part of the Youth Culture Transformation Project, but a rather
specialized part, which somebody may wish to choose as a separate project.
Like the YCTF in general, it includes both field work and analyzing work
already done.  
>  
>  D. Library Research.  
>  I am looking for help with the footnotes for a series of lectures I gave at
the University of Baroda in India. There are four of them, called:

>

>> (1) Education for Constructive Development;  
>  (2) Evaluation for Constructive Development;  
>  (3) Planning for Constructive Development; and  
>  (4) Motivation for Constructive Development.

>

> Helping me with this research should appeal whose interests are more
scientific and philosophical, to people more oriented toward global issues, or
to people who do not want to deal with the hassle of making arrangements to
interview townspeople in the middle of winter.

Whether or not you do library research for your extra credit project, I would
like you to do a certain amount of browsing in the library in order to develop
a broad sense of the range of ideas that lie within the domain of philosophy
of education. For this purpose you will be expected to look at books on
reserve. You are not expected to read them. The purpose of the reserve shelf
is to make us aware of books that we do not have time to read. In addition,
you should feel free to add books to the reserve shelf that you think the rest
of us should be aware of; if you really think it essential that we read
something, you should feel free to propose it as an assigned reading for the
entire class.  
  
The browsing assignment asks you to look at an average of three books per week
the reserve shelf, and to take notes on it. You may also include books on
education and on philosophy not on reserve, which you find on your own.  
  
Browsing notes should be turned in at the beginning of the class hour every
Friday  
  
No two people are alike in their browsing styles or in their note-taking
styles. This assignment should lead you toward developing ways of using your
time and your mind that work for you, although they might not work for someone
else. No particular form or content is required for the booknotes. For those
who would like a guide, here is one:

> 1\. Author.  
>  2\. Name of book.  
>  3\. Place published: publisher, date.  
>  4\. Number of pages.  
>  5\. What the book seems to be about.  
>  6\. One or more facts or ideas gleaned from a cursory perusal.  
>  7\. How, if at all, this book looks like it might be a resource for my
personal plans and projects (later when I have time to come back to it).

### Assignments

1\. Browsing notes, discussed above.  
  
2\. Readings.  
The reading will be adjusted to the pace of the discussions. The books will be
read in the order given above, but how many and which pages will be assigned
will depend on the content of the discussions and on people's feelings about
how much work they are able to handle.  
  
3\. Daily comments.  
You will be asked to make a brief response to each class on a form. This will
help me to keep the class connected with where your thoughts are.  
  
4\. Extra credit projects.  
These will be individually designed, and will involve writing. The writing
will give you an opportunity for you to practice writing as an art and as a
skill. With respect to writing as an art, you will be expected to make a
careful study of the first reading, Plato's _Phaedrus_ , including Plato's
advice on how to organize thoughts to make them coherent. If writing is not
one of your strengths, you should ask Supportive Services for a tutor, and
write with a tutor's help. Even if you are a strong writer, you should write a
first draft and read it aloud to your roommate, or to somebody, before
revising the first draft to make a paper to hand in.  
  
5\. Tests not previously announced.  
These will be simple quizzes designed to reward people who have the reading
done on time. They are an aid to improving the discussions by making people
prepare for them by doing the reading. The quizzes will be so easy that
anybody who has done the reading at all should pass them.  
  
6\. Participation in class discussions.  
This is your main assignment.  
  
7\. Midterm and final.  
These will be take-home essays based on the class discussions, and to a lesser
extent on the readings, lectures, films, and miscellaneous activities. About
ten days before the midterm and final I will ask the class to try to reach
consensus about what suitable questions would be.

### Grades

The grades will be based on the assignments as follows:  
  
1\. Browsing notes. 10%  
  
2\. Readings.  
How well you read will not be graded separately, but will be inferred from
quiz grades and class participation.  
  
3\. Daily comments. 10%  
  
4\. Extra credit projects.  
Although everyone is expected to have an extra credit project, it does not
count toward your grade, but rather it is an opportunity to raise your grade
above what it would otherwise be. A lackluster extra credit report will not
raise your grade, but it will not lower your grade either. As is stated above,
you should get a tutor if a tutor would be helpful to you, you should take
seriously what Plato says about how to organize your thoughts, and you should
read drafts to someone before revising papers to hand in. The extra credit
project should be submitted, at the latest, together with the take-home final.
The best extra credit efforts will include showing me drafts and partial
results continuously throughout the term.  
  
5\. Quizzes not previously announced. 20%.  
To some extent poor performance on quizzes can made up for by showing
familiarity with the readings in class discussions.  
  
6\. Participation in class discussions. 30%  
I will ask you to make comments on each other's participation, in order to
help me to assess the quality of participation.  
  
7\. Midterm and final. 30%  
The two tests are worth 15% each.  
However, I am likely to find a number of the midterms unsatisfactory and to
refuse to grade them until they are rewritten. If I do not get an acceptable
rewritten midterm fairly quickly, then there may be no good reason to make a
distinction between the rewritten midterm and the final. In that case you will
have only one test paper to write and it will be worth 30%.  
  

Back to the top  
---

