**NANCY APPLEGATE  
WORLD LITERATURE--ENGL 2111  
TENTATIVE SYLLABUS  
Spring 2002  
** **email: napplega@mail.fc.peachnet.edu**

[ Applegate Home Page](applegate.htm)

![](worldCLR.gif)

**COURSE OBJECTIVES**

**English 2111 helps to fulfill these Student Learning Outcomes. Number One.
Communication: Students will demonstrate the ability to write and speak
logically, clearly, precisely, and the ability, through accurate reading and
listening to acquire, organize, present, and document information and ideas.
Number Five. Critical Thinking: Students will demonstrate that they have
developed dimensions of critical and analytical thinking. Number Six. Global
and International Perspectives: Students will demonstrate an awareness of
global and multi-cultural issues as they have affected individuals and social
structures in the past and are likely to affect them in the future.**

**EXPECTED RESULTS**

**Through tests and papers, students will demonstrate an understanding of the
diversity among cultures as revealed in history, customs, and literature,
especially the intellectual and historical foundations of Western society and
the influences, genres, themes, and characters that have been important in
World Literature through the early seventeenth century.**

**Through the writing of essays and discussion test topics, students will
demonstrate their ability to conceive ideas about a topic, synthesize and
arrange them logically, and express them clearly in written standard
English.**

**Through written assignments, students will also demonstrate critical
thinking skills as they recognize differing perspectives and analyze and
interpret literary works.**

**Through writing and/or oral reports students will demonstrate library
research skills, their understanding of proper documentation, and the ability
to call upon the scholarship of others in formulating their own views.**

**REQUIREMENTS: Readings; THREE short (750 word) formal papers; THREE tests;
possible pop quizzes and homework assignments; class attendance and
participation. All major tests and papers will be weighted equally in the
computation of final grades. As you prepare for tests, _be sure to study
reading assignments AND authors' backgrounds_.  
  
ATTENDANCE: You are allowed FOUR absences; on the fifth, your grade will be
lowered one letter, and on the sixth, you will receive an  "F" in the
course.**

**LATE WORK: Late work is discouraged. You may submit one late paper during
the semester; your grade will be lowered one letter for each class day after
the due date. Make-up tests will be given only in emergencies, and any
emergency must be documented.**

**TEXTS: _The Norton Anthology of World Masterpieces: Expanded Edition_ Volume
One (Required) ; and _The Reader's Companion to World Literature_
(Recommended; referred to as  "RC"). **

**Relevant Web sites are attached to this syllabus; you are encouraged to
visit these as you complete your reading assignments and write your essays. A
problem with survey courses such as ENGL 2111 is that students often believe
they know "everything" about an author simply because they have studied one of
his/her works in a college course. However, if you browse these Web sites, you
will see how rich and diverse the study of literature truly is.** [**On-Line
Literary Resources**](http://www.english.upenn.edu/~jlynch/Lit/) **  will link
you to a wide variety of literary sources.   **

![](worldCLR.gif)

**_Week One_**  
**Introduction; terms; history.** **Read _Gilgamesh_ (10-41).**

**_Week Two_**  
**Homer, _The Odyssey_ (225-530). RC:  "Homer" and "The Iliad and The
Odyssey."**

**Links:**  
** **[ **Perseus Project Home Page**](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/)  
** **[ **The Homer Home
Page**](http://www.dc.peachnet.edu/~shale/humanities/literature/world_literature/homer.html)

**_Week Three_**  
**Homer, _The Odyssey_ continued.  
_  
Week Four_**  
**Finish discussion, _The Odyssey_.** **The Old Testament. From _The Book of
Job_ (77-93) RC:  "The Bible."** **Begin discussion, Sophocles, _Oedipus the
King_ (616-658). RC:  "Sophocles," "Tragedy," and "Oedipus the King." PAPER
ONE DUE.  
  
Links:**  
** **[ **The Bible
Browser**](http://goon.stg.brown.edu/bible_browser/pbeasy.shtml)  
** **[ **World Wide Study Bible**](http://ccel.wheaton.edu/wwsb/)  
  
**_Week Five_**  
**Finish Discussion, _Oedipus the King_. Aristophanes, _Lysistrata_ (727-779).
RC:  "Aristophanes" and "Comedy." TEST.**

**_Week Six_**  
**Plato, "The Apology of Socrates" (779-799); Aristotle, from _The Poetics_
(799-804);   Confucius, _Analects_ (823-32).**

**_Week Seven_**  
**Petronius, _The Satyricon_ (1182-1199); St. Augustine, from _Confessions_
Books I, II, III, VI, and VIII (1221-48). RC:  "Augustine, Saint"** **and
"Confessions."**

**Links:**  
[**Augustine of Hippo**
](http://www.trincoll.edu/pub/academics/departments/phil/philo/phils/augustine.html)  
** **[ **St. Augustine**](http://ccel.wheaton.edu/a/augustine/augustine.html)  
** **[ **Biography of
Augustine**](ftp://pharos.bu.edu/CN/synexarion/Augustine.txt)

**_Week Eight_**  
**Li Po, Poems (1379-1384); The Koran (1426-60). TEST  
  
_Week Nine_  **  
**  
Spring Break**

**_Week Ten_**  
**Dante, _The Inferno_ (1836-1942). **  
  
**Link:**  
** **[Dante Chronology](http://www.nd.edu/~italnet/Dante/text/Chronology.html)

**_Week Eleven_**  
**Finish discussion, Dante, _The Inferno_ ; Selections from _The Epic of Son-
Jara_ (2415-2462). PAPER TWO DUE.**  
  
**_Week Twelve_  
Chaucer, _The Canterbury Tales_.  "The General Prologue," "The Miller's Tale,"
and "The Wife of Bath's Prologue and Tale" (2051-2106).  RC: "Chaucer" and
"Canterbury Tales."**

**Links:**  
** **[ **Chaucer's Canterbury Tales**](http://www.siue.edu/CHAUCER/)  
** **[ **Hear Chaucer in Middle
English**](http://www.siue.edu/CHAUCER/cant1.html)  
** **[ **Geoffrey Chaucer General
Information**](http://www.luminarium.org/medlit/chaucer.htm) **  
  
_Week Thirteen_  
Japanese No Drama (2263-93). TEST.  
  
_Week Fourteen_  
Erasmus,  "The Praise of Folly," Parts I, II, and IV (2494-2517). RC:
"Erasmus, Desiderius"** **and "Humanism." Machiavelli, "The Prince"
(2521-2532). RC: "Machiavelli, Niccolo" and "Prince, The."**

**Link:**  
[**Machiavelli On-Line Resources**](http://www.sas.upenn.edu/~pgrose/mach/) **  
  
_Week Fifteen_  
PAPER THREE DUE**

**Links:**  
[**Mr. William Shakespeare and the
Internet**](http://daphne.palomar.edu/shakespeare/)  
**  
_Week Sixteen  
_ Donne, poems (2819-25). RC: "Donne, John" and "metaphysical poetry." FINAL
TEST.**

![](worldCLR.gif)

[Applegate Home Page](applegate.htm)

