![](sm_world.gif)

Syllabus

History 232: Contemporary History of Civilization

Summer 2002

Professor Edward Hanlon

**Tuesday,Wednesday, Thursday; Period 2.**

**Office 4307N; Phone 237-8856**

**Office Hours: Tuesdays, 1:15-2:15 & by appointment.**



_Course Description_ : History 232 is an introductory course in the history of
civilization from the eighteenth century to the twentieth century. During the
semester we will discover the roots of modern society in Europe, the Americas,
and in Asia. We will see the periods of revolution worldwide, the rise of
industrialization, imperialism, and colonialism. The class will also trace the
roots of modern warfare; from the small, professional armies of the 18th
century, to the mass armies of the 20th. We will attempt to discover whether
war is natural or learned, why nations resort to it, and what can be done
about it in the future.

_Procedure_ :

  * Lectures on major themes. 
  * Class discussion on the day's topic. 
  * Group work on selected subjects. 
  * Films on the central themes of the course. 

_Course Objectives_ :

  * To provide an understanding of the roots and development of the modern world's values and morals.
  * To increase knowledge and understanding of Modern History in general, and key historical events in particular.
  * To increase student's ability to evaluate ideas and arguments critically, to weigh historical evidence, and to draw conclusions.
  * To improve student's ability to communicate ideas and arguments concisely, accurately, and informatively orally and in writing.

_Grading_ :

There will be a mid-term exam and a final. Additionally, quizzes will be given
on a weekly basis.

There will be no make-up tests or quizzes given.

_

Midterm Examination_: The midterm covers first portion of the course. I will
provide you with more details later. In order to complete the midterm, you
must have a good grasp of World geography. A firm grasp of geography is
essential to understanding history. Be sure you are able to identify from a
map all of the countries in Europe at any time during the 20th century. You
can use any reputable atlas to learn this. Here are some web sites:

[http://www.lib.utexas.edu/Libs/PCL/Map_collection
](http://www.lib.utexas.edu/Libs/PCL/Map_collection)

<http://research.umbc.edu/~roswell/mipage.html>

_Final Examination_ : The Final will be cumulative covering the entire course.
I expect you to integrate information into cohesive arguments, and demonstrate
that you have achieved the course objectives stated above. You must be
familiar with geography in order to take the final exam.



_

Class Participation._ You must contribute to the class discussions and remain
engaged in lectures, films, and presentations. Do not simply sit in class and
take notes. Those who sleep in class will receive a poor participation grade.
In addition, I will use this portion to evaluate your contribution to the
class at other times, your attendance, cooperation, and your dedication to
excellence.

_Attendance:_

**Attendance is Mandatory!** The professor is unable to grant excused
absences; only the registrar can do so. After four absences the professor will
be obliged to drop the student.

_Text:_

Craig, Graham, et al. [The Heritage of World
Civilizations.](http://www.prenhall.com/craig) Volume II, 5th Edition. Upper
Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1997.



_

Readings_:

You must complete these! I cannot stress enough the importance of
accomplishing the readings _before_ class meets. In many instances, we will
spend a     portion of the period discussing readings; you cannot participate
effectively if you are not prepared. I will not permit those students who
choose not to prepare for class to participate with those who do prepare (to
benefit, so to speak, from work they have not done).

> (1) In some instances, the course schedule tells you to scan a particular
selection, or visit a particular web site. In these cases, I would like you to
be aware of the content and the subject matter, but do not require you to read
these as closely as you would your texts. In other instances, the reading
schedule lists optional items. These are there for you to look at if you like.

> (2) Bring your text to class with you each day they are assigned. I want you
to have these available because I will often refer to portions of them and in
some instances we will read from them. Bring the other books when there are
readings assigned. For selections off the web, in some cases I have directed
you to bring in a printed copy for reference.

> (3) Plan you readings ahead. Work ahead and come to class prepared. Some
days have a heavy reading load and others have a light load. The key is to
stay current and not fall behind!

> (4) If you anticipate or have trouble with the readings, either
understanding them or keeping up with them, let me know so that I can work
with you.

>

> * * *

Schedule

**  June 4** | **Course introduction, syllabus. Chapter 19: Conquest and
Exploration. pp.518-542.**  
---|---  
  
**  June 5** | **Chapter 20: East Asia. pp. 544-580.**  
  
**  June 6** | **Chapter 21: State Building and Worldwide Conflict.
pp.582-608. Quiz**  
  
**  June 11** | **Film: The Road to Total War**  
  
**  June 12** | **Chapter 22: The _Ancien Regime_. pp.610-632.
[Lecture.](http://web.jjay.cuny.edu/~ehanlon/ancien/index.htm)**  
  
**  June 13** | **Chapter 24: The Enlightenment. pp.660-687. Quiz.**  
  
**  June 18** | **Chapter 25: Revolutions of the Americas. pp.688-693,
708-715.**  
  
**  June 19** | **Chapter 25: The French Revolution and Napoleon.
pp.693-708.[Lecture.](http://web.jjay.cuny.edu/~ehanlon/Napoleon/index.htm)**  
  
**  June 20** | **Chapter 26: Nationalism, Liberalism, and Industrialization.
pp.718-725. Industrialism: Chapter 22: pp.624-628; Chapter 26: pp.726-733.
Quiz. [Lecture. ](http://web.jjay.cuny.edu/~ehanlon/indust/index.htm)**  
  
**  June 25** | **Chapter 27: Nation States and Imperialism. pp.744-771.
Quiz.**  
  
**  June 26** | **Chapter 27: The American Civil War.
pp.764-768.[Lecture.](http://web.jjay.cuny.edu/~history/Civil/index.htm)**  
  
**  June 27** | **Mid-Term Exam**  
  
**  July 2** | **Film: Anybody's Son Will Do.**  
  
**  July 3** | **Chapter 28: Society and Politics. pp. 776-797**  
**

July 4** | **Independence Day: no classes**  
  
**July 9** | **Chapter 29: European Thought. pp. 806-825. Quiz.**  
  
**  July 10** | **Film: The Deadly Game of Nations.**  
  
**  July 11** | **Chapter 33: The Lost Peace: World War I. pp. 920-945.**  
  
**  July 16** | **Chapter 34: The Inter-War Years. pp. 946-969. Quiz.**  
  
**  July 17** | **Chapter 35: World War II in Europe. pp.978-989, 992-995,
997-1001.**  
  
**  July 18** | **World War II in the Pacific. Chapter 35: pp. 989-991,
995-997, 1001-1005.**  
  
**  July 23** | **East and West Since World War II. Chapter 36, pp. 1006-1023,
Chapter 37, pp.1035- 1055.**  
  
**  July 24** | **Film: Notes on Nuclear War.**  
  
**  July 25** | **Final Exam**  
      
    
    		

* * *

[ Class Materials](http://web.jjay.cuny.edu/~ehanlon/clas.htm)

[Links](http://web.jjay.cuny.edu/~ehanlon/lnk.htm)

[Home](http://web.jjay.cuny.edu/~ehanlon/his232.htm)

* * *

