**CHID 210 (5 credits)**

**" The Idea of the University: Ways of Learning, Exploring and Knowing"**

** **



**Instructor:**

Dr. James Clowes, Padelford B102,
[jclowes@u.washington.edu](mailto:jclowes@u.washington.edu)



**Teaching Assistants:**

Eric Bright, Padelford B102,
[ebright@u.washington.edu](mailto:ebright@u.washington.edu)

Lisa Wong, Padelford B 103,
[istvan@u.washington.edu](mailto:istvan@u.washington.edu)



**Course Web Site:**  
<http://depts.washington.edu/chid/chid210/>



**Required Texts:**

_Wheels in the Head_ , Joel Spring

_American Higher Education: A History_ , Christopher Lucas

_What 's College For_, Zachary Karabell

Class reader: (Reader #1 is now available at RAM Copy Center 4144 University
Way NE; Reader # 2 will be available in the third week.)

  

**Course Structure:**

The class will meet as a lecture on Monday, Wednesday and Friday during the
course of the quarter. There will be a number of guest lecturers. On Tuesdays
the Teaching Assistants will facilitate discussions on the readings and
lectures in groups no larger than 25. On Thursdays, peer facilitators will
help create a more personalized reflection on the content of the course.
Towards the end of the quarter they will work in conjunction with
Undergraduate Advising to help students develop a focus of study at the
University. (This will include helping students make contact with relevant
departmental advisors.)

** **

**Course Content:**

The course takes its point of departure from the central issues / tensions
framed by the course "Rethinking the University" which was commissioned by
President McCormick and the Faculty Senate to explore central issues for
undergraduates. The hope here is to provide an example of the careful use of
critical reflection in an attempt to address specific issues. With this in
mind, we hope to demonstrate the utility of a variety of disciplinary
approaches. The course then will be organized around the following themes
outlined in the report delivered to President McCormick last spring. For the
full text see:
<http://depts.washington.edu/chid/chid498e/finalreport/index.html#themes>)



# Organizing Themes / Tensions:

1)    Student generally have minimal understanding of what the university is,
how it can address one's actual desires or reasons for being in the
university, why it often seems a baffling collection of unrelated
requirements.



2)    Students report feeling disconnected from the majority of academic
disciplines and ways of knowing available on this campus. This tends to create
a strong sense of the fragmentation of knowledge, divided as it is into
various disciplinary approaches (and majors) that seem to have little common
dialog.



3)    Students report a strong sense of disconnect between what happens on
campus and how it relates to the surrounding social / cultural context. What
is the meaning of knowledge? How does it relate to the world around and how
does it apply?



4)    Students also report ongoing tensions about their primary identity:
student or consumer?



**Approach:**

The course will explore the causes of these tensions as well as pointing out
ways to address them. It will weave together a variety of disciplines and
approaches.



# 1) An epistemological groundwork

The course will first consider what "knowing" means exploring a wide variety
of definitions. We hope to demonstrate how different epistemological paradigms
are: 1) framed by their historical, cultural context; 2) help focus
exploration; 3) limit the types of inquiry; 4) have a substantial social /
cultural impact.



# 2) An historical reflection on the Idea of the University

Next, the course will spend a fair bit of time in an historical exploration of
the idea of "University," with a specific focus on the history of the
development of disciplinarity and various disciplinary epistemologies. In this
process it will also begin to explore the reciprocal dialog between the
university and its social, economic context relating this to the central
issues / tensions mentioned above. Whenever possible examples will be drawn
from the University of Washington.



**3) An introduction to the culture of the University of Washington.**

By utilizing interviews of faculty and administrators on campus and then by
discussing those experiences in the peer led groups, we hope you will gain a
better understanding of the processes of the University of Washington.



**4) Addressing the reasons you are here.**

Throughout the course you will work to develop a deeper understanding of the
reasons you are here: the social / cultural pressures and the specific values
you hope to address. This work will occur in the context of an ongoing "values
assessment" paper which will serve as the basis for deciding how your reasons
for being at the university can be affirmed or challenged by the university
itself. This then should provide the context for a few workshops designed to
help you choose a major or to choose a focus within a major.

#  

# 5) The Relationship between the University and its Context

As a final focus, the class will look specifically at the overarching
connections between the university and wider society/culture (social,
cultural, political, intellectual and economic.) Much of this will be related
to the section exploring the history of the idea of the university but towards
the end of the quarter we will consider current issues of the social
psychology of higher education.



**Schedule of Lectures and Readings:**



**First Week:** January 2-5

**Tuesday:** Introduction to the course quiz section objectives

**[Wednesday:](Lectures/Lecture1-3-01.html)** Introduction to the course
structure: Exploration of the central questions

### **Thursday:** Initial Peer led discussions

[Friday](Lectures/Lecture1-5-01.html): "How do we know? What does it mean to
know? Different ways of knowing." Introduction to the "idea and function" of
the University as it developed in Europe.



**Readings:** **NOTE: (I strongly recommended that you start reading the books
_What 's College For? _****and _Wheels in the Head_** **before we discuss
them.) Due for the First Week:** Reader: pp. 1-21: Miner, "Body Ritual Among
the Nacirema"; Geertz, "Common Sense as a Cultural System"; Schleiermacher,
from _On Religion_ ; Nietzsche, "On Truth and Lie in an Extra-Moral Sense"





**Second Week: January 8-12**

**[Monday](Lectures/Lecture1-8-01.html)** : Ways of Knowing 2

**[Wednesday](knowledge/FundingUW.html)** : Guest Lecturer: Dr. George Bridges
(Associate Dean of Undergraduate Education) The goals of undergraduate
education, including general education, experiential learning and choosing
majors as understood within the wider social context.

**[Friday](Lectures/Lecture1-12-01.html) ** Ways of Knowing 3



**Readings:** Readings: Reader pp. p. 22-74:Feynman,  "The Uncertainty of
Science"; Feyerabend __ from "How to be a good Empiricist," "Pluralistic
Theory of Knowledge and Action" and "How to defend society against science";
Mithen, from _The Prehistory of the Mind;_ Kuhn from _The Structure of
Scientific Revolutions_





**Third Week: January 15-19**

**Monday** : NO CLASS (Martin Luther King Jr. Day)

**Wednesday** : Guest Lecturer: Dr. Kathleen Woodward (Director of the Walter
Chapin Simpson Center for the Humanities) The Humanities and their role in the
university and the wider social context.

**Friday** Ways of Knowing 4 ( **Take Home Exam)**



**Readings:** Reader p. 75-99: Appadurai, "Diversity and Disciplinarity as
Cultural Artifacts"; Bellah, "Social Science as Public Policy"; Kingsolver,
"High Tide in Tucson"





**Fourth Week: January 22-27**

**[Monday](Lectures/Lecture1-22-01.html): ** Ancient roots of higher education
(Plato, Aristotle, Cicero et al.)

**[Wednesday](Lectures/Lecture1-24-01.html): ** Ancient Roots of higher
education (Augustine and the foundation of monastic learning)

**Friday** The Medieval University: Guest Lecturer Dr. Stephen Jaeger
(Germanics)

** **

**Readings:** _Wheels in the Head_ , pp.3-14; _American Higher Education,_ pp
3-90; Reader TBA

** **



# Fifth Week: January 29- February 2

**[Monday](Lectures/Lecture1-29-01.html)** : "Trimming the Tree of Knowledge"
Foundation of Enlightenment Epistemology

**[Wednesday](Lectures/Lecture1-31-01.html)** : Emergence of American
Universities (Impact of Scottish Common Sense and English University
structures.)

**[Friday](Lectures/Lecture2-2-01.html)** : The forging of the modern American
University (1)



**Readings:** _Wheels in the Head_ , pp.33-46, 107-144; _American Higher
Education, p. 90-182_ ; Reader TBA





**Sixth Week: February 5-9**

**[Monday](Lectures/Lecture2-5-01.html)** : The forging of the modern American
University (2)

**[Wednesday](Lectures/Lecture2-7-01.html)** : The forging of the modern
American University (3)

**[Friday](Lectures/Lecture2-9-01.html)** : The forging of the modern American
University (4)



**Readings:** _Wheels in the Head_ , pp. 15-32, 47-62; _American Higher
Education,_ pp.185-266 __ Lucas; Reader TBA





**Seventh Week: February 12-16**

**[Monday](Lectures/Lecture2-12-01.html): ** American Universities in context
1950-2000 (1)

**[Wednesday](Lectures/Lecture2-14-01.html):** American Universities in
context 1950-2000 (2)

**Friday:** American Universities in context 1950-2000 (3)



**Readings:** _Wheels in the Head_ , pp. 63-106; _American Higher Education,
pp._ 267-316 __ Lucas; Reader TBA.

** **



**Eighth Week: February 19-23**

**Monday (No Class) Presidents ' Day**

**Wednesday:** (In Class Exam)

**Friday:** Guest Speaker: Dr. Susan Jeffords (Dean of the Social Sciences)
The Social Sciences: epistemological frame of reference, role in the
university, intersection in the community, role in wider social context,
strengths and limitations.

** **

**Readings:** _Wheels in the Head_ , pp. 145-172; _What 's College For,
intro-p.45; Reader _TBA.

** **



**Ninth Week: February 26-March 2nd**

# Monday  Introduction to the Social Psychology of Higher Education (1) Dr.
James Antony (Educational Leadership and Policy Studies)

# Wednesday Introduction to the Social Psychology of Higher Education (2) Dr.
Antony

**Friday Guest Lecturer** : Dr. Keith Benson (Medical History & Ethics) The
Sciences: epistemological frame of reference, role in the University,
intersection in the community, role in wider social context, strengths and
limitations.



**Readings** : _What 's College For, pp 46-140; _Reader TBA

** **



**Tenth Week: March 5-9**

**Monday**. Guest Speaker: Dr. Eugene Edgar (Education) The Professional
Schools with a focus on the school of Education

**Wednesday** Bringing it into focus

# Friday Where from here?

** **

**Readings:** _What 's College For, _pp. 141-246. __ Reader (TBA)

** **



**Course Requirements** :  
participation, reading journals, (10%); one take home, one in class exam (25%
each); group presentations on interviews and specific themes (10%); and a
final individual or group project including personal response. (30%)





