**University of Toledo  
PSY 3940-159: Developing and Implementing the STAR Mentee Program**

Syllabus for Fall Semester 2002

"Some people will never ask questions, thinking it will make them look
ignorant.  
But it's the ones who never question anything who show their true ignorance."

\- A Greek Philosopher

**Time and Place:**  
12:15 p.m. - 1:45 p.m. Tuesday and Thursday at St. Hyacinth Elementary School  
Group Meetings at UT - TBA

**Instructor:**  
Dr. Mojisola F. Tiamiyu  
Department of Psychology, UH 1063  
Telephone: 530-2853; fax: 530-8479  
Email: [mtiamiy@uoft02.utoledo.edu](mailto:mtiamiy@uoft02.utoledo.edu)  
Website for syllabus - <http://www.utoledo.edu/psychology/tiamiyu/>  
Personal homepage - <http://www.utoledo.edu/psychology/faculty.html#clinical>  
Notes could be left in my mailbox in the Department of Psychology (UH 1600)

**Office Hours:**  
M 10:00 a.m. - 11:00 a.m.; TW 10:00 a.m. - 12:00 p.m.; or by appointment.
Please visit me during my office hours if you have any questions.

**Course Description:**  
The purpose of this course is to develop and implement an academic and
tutoring program for students at St. Hyacinth School, Toledo, Ohio. This will
involve you working with two of the Center for Applied Psychology's community
partners (St. Hyacinth School and Partners in Education). You will be working
with children in grades 5-8 who are primarily from ethnic minority and/or
socio-economically disadvantaged families that need academic mentoring and
tutoring in the area of Language Arts, including vocabulary, grammar and
reading.

Your learning objectives are: 1) to gain program development and
implementation skills, which are specific to academic mentoring of the target
population, including mentoring about health/clinical programs at universities
in northwest Ohio; 2) to acquire knowledge of theories and empirical studies
about youth mentoring; and 3) to learn how to engage in university-community
collaborations. Your service objective is to provide tutoring in Reading and
academic mentoring, including mentoring about health-related/clinical programs
at universities in northwest Ohio to the target population. Your service-
learning objective is to work with Dr. Tiamiyu and our community partners to
learn how to develop and implement a successful academic mentoring program for
ethnic minority and/or socio-economically disadvantaged children in an
elementary school.

You will receive individual and group supervision from the principal/school
building coordinator and teachers of the students you will be mentoring at St.
Hyacinth School. Reading materials regarding youth mentoring will be provided
by Dr. Tiamiyu and these will be discussed at special group meetings with her.
You will keep a reflection journal in which you will describe your reactions
to and processing of your training experiences throughout the semester.
Through these experiences, you will continue to build on your knowledge of
youth mentoring and health-related/clinical programs at universities, your
academic mentoring skills, and experience of participating in university-
community collaboration. You will also complete the following evaluation
forms: pre-posttest and student feedback

**Prerequisite:**  
Completion of PSY 1010, PSY 2510 or equivalent.

******Required Materials:**  
Required Readings: Journal Articles on Youth Mentoring (will be provided by
Dr. Tiamiyu)

Supplies: Computer/Access to the Web (to obtain information about health-
related/clinical programs at universities in northwest Ohio); Notebook (for
taking notes during group meetings and at St. Hyacinth School).

******My Teaching Philosophy:**  
I am committed to facilitating students' understanding of the lived
experiences of various groups including economically disadvantaged, ethno-
cultural minorities, women, and the elderly, in western and non-western
societies from multiple perspectives. Thus, in sharing my understanding of the
lived experiences of these various groups with my students, the issue of
diversity (as defined in its broadest sense) is always emphasized. I began
teaching in a Nigerian university about 17 years ago, and having pursued my
undergraduate studies in Nigeria and my graduate studies in Canada, I have
firsthand experience of the challenges we all face because of our multiple
roles in society. Juggling academic schedules, work and family commitments
build character and resilience. I expect students to take responsibility for
their learning by going through their reading assignments on time, submitting
assignments when they are due, and always attending mentoring sessions/group
meetings eager to be good role models and/or to participate in
activities/discussions. Doing these, I consider are evidences of a positive
attitude, which is a key ingredient to realizing our service learning goals.
My teaching philosophy guides my expectations of students. ****

**Electronics:**  
Please turn off anything that may "beep" during group meetings and when at St.
Hyacinth School. Thank you.

**Evaluation:**  
There is no formal exam. Grading will done by Dr. Tiamiyu (based on your
journal which is due on **December 2, 2002** \- journal must be typed), and
input from the community partners as to whether student has attained the
learning and service learning objectives at the completion of experience.

_Grading_ : The final course grade will be determined in accordance with the
grading system below, which lists category floors:  
A 95% A- 90%  
B+ 85% B 80% B- 75%  
C+ 70% C 65% C- 60%  
D+ 55% D 50% D- 45%  
F 00%  
I reserve the right to discretionary grade adjustments.

___Community Site / Group Meeting Attendance and Participation:_  
You should plan to attend every mentoring session/group meeting, unless there
is a valid reason for your absence. Promptness is appreciated. Frequent
absences do have a bearing on your grade (will lower your grade) so if you
have a legitimate reason for missing a mentoring session/group meeting, please
let me know prior to your absence. I have an answering machine in my office so
you can leave a message for me day or night. I will also want to see relevant
documents. In addition, if you will be missing a mentoring session, you will
also need to inform the Principal of St. Hyacinth School at (419) 535-7078 as
soon as possible.

