![](../images/vt.gif) |

# **English 3754: Advanced Composition**  
  
---|---  
**[Syllabus](Syllabus.htm)** | **[Workshop Guidelines](WritingWorkshops.htm)**
| **[Grading](GradingPolicies.htm)** | **[Assignments](Assignments.htm)** |
****| **[Course Home](Schedule02.htm)** | **[Paretti
Home](http://www.english.vt.edu/%7Emparetti/)**  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  


##### Instructor | Texts & Materials | Assignments | Important Policies

## Instructor

Marie C. Paretti  
431 Shanks Hall  
[mparetti@vt.edu](mailto:mparetti@vt.edu)  
[http://www.english.vt.edu/~mparetti/](http://www.english.vt.edu/%7Emparetti/)

| Office Phone: 231-8322  
Office Hours:  
MW: 10:30-Noon  
and by appointment  
---|---  
  
Please feel free to send me a note, call me, or come by my office any time you
have a question or concern; though my office hours are officially 10:30-Noon
MW, I'm usually in my office most of the day MWF.

When I'm not in the office, [email](mailto:mparetti@vt.edu) is typically the
best way to reach me: In general, I respond to email **within** **24 hours** ;
however, I do **not** answer email on Sundays, so if you email me Saturday
afternoon or Sunday, you won't get an answer until Monday morning.

## **Texts and Materials**

#### **Texts**

  * Zinsser, William. _On Writing Well_. 25th Anniversary or 6th edition
  * Root, Robert L. and Michael Steinberg. _The Fourth Genre: Contemporary Writers of Creative Non-Fiction_
  * A writing handbook that covers the basic rules of punctuation, mechanics, and grammar.
  * The course web site  

> **A note on the web site:** This web site includes handouts for the course,
along with the schedule of all homework assignments and due dates. The site is
an integral part of the course and you are responsible for all the material
here.

  * ##### Instructor | Texts & Materials | Assignments | Important Policies

## **Assignments**

> **Assignment**

>

> |

>

> **Weight**  
>  
> ---|---  
>  
> Writing Portfolio

>

> |

>

> 50%  
>  
>> [Writing About Yourself (Memoir)](Assignments.htm#Essay1)

>

> |  
>  
>> [Writing About A "Topic" ](Assignments.htm#Essay2)

>

> |  
>  
>> [Writing About Someone Else (Profile)](Assignments.htm#Essay3)

>

> |  
>  
>> [Reflection Letter](FinalPortfolio.htm#Reflect)

>

> |  
> Drafts|

>

> 15%  
>  
> Reflection Questions

>

> |

>

> 15%  
>  
> Workshops/Peer Reviews

>

> |

>

> 15%  
>  
> Participation|

>

> 5%  
  


#### **Writing Portfolio**

Over the course of the semester, you will write three essays (a memoir, an
informative piece, and a profile). Although the schedule devotes approximately
5 weeks to each essay, you can (and should) revise any or all of them
throughout the whole semester.

I will grade your work using a portfolio system: at the end of the course,
you'll submit a [portfolio](FinalPortfolio.htm) with the best version of each
piece, along with a cover letter. You'll then receive a single grade for the
entire portfolio. Don't panic, though - you will receive tentative grades on
each piece in conference,and you're always free to come talk to me if you have
questions or concerns.

> **A Note on Conferences:** Instead of reading your polished ( "third")
drafts and providing written feedback (as I do with first drafts), we'll talk
about those drafts in one-on-one conferences. After you submit your polished
draft, you'll come to my office for a 30-minute conference: I'll read through
the essay, and then we'll talk about its strengths and weaknesses, where it
falls on the grading scale (as both a draft and an essay), and what kinds of
revisions you might consider.

>

>   * I strongly suggest bringing **a second copy of your essay** with you to
conference; while I'm reading my copy, you can review your copy and refresh
your memory. That also gives you something to do while I read your work, so
that you don't have to watch me. You may want to note strengths, weaknesses,
and specific sections areas you'd like help with.

>

>

>

> For specific details on how I evaluate your work and calculate final grades,
refer to the [Grading Policies](GradingPolicies.htm).

#### **Workshops**

Because you learn to write best by editing and rewriting, most of our time
together will be spent in large- and small-group workshops:

> Wednesdays are large-group workshops; the whole class will read and comment
on two student papers. Over the course of the semester, you'll each present
**one** essay for the class workshop.

>

> Fridays are small-group workshops. By the 2nd week of the semester, I'll
divide you into writing groups of 3-4 students. Each Friday, 2 of you will
bring new work for the group to read and comment on. I'll provide general
review guidelines to help familiarize you with the process of editing one
another's work, and I'll regularly sit in on each group over the course of the
semester.

These groups are critical to your success this semester - not only for the
feedback you'll receive on your own writing, but for the editorial skills
they'll help you develop as you read and work to improve other people's work.

The [Workshop Guidelines](WritingWorkshops.htm) outline the general format for
these peer reviews.

#### Turning in Essays: Reading Days

On the days essays are due, we'll spend the entire class period reading aloud
from our work. You'll have approximately 1-2 minutes (depending on the class
size); choose a passage from your essay that you're particularly pleased with,
and be prepared to read it aloud to heartfelt applause and admiration. In
other words, reading days are time to enjoy one another's work without
analysis or critique.

Instructor | Texts & Materials | Assignments | Important Policies

## **Important Policies **

**Schedule:** The tentative due dates for each assignment appear on the course
schedule; note, however, that these are subject to change as the semester
progresses. I will announce changes and keep the schedule on the web site
updated regularly.

**Email:** In general, I will respond to emails **within 24 hours** ; however,
I do **not** check email on Sunday, so if you email me Saturday afternoon or
Sunday, you probably won't get a response until Monday.

Consider this course a **professional** environment, and craft your emails to
me and to your classmates accordingly.

**Grammar and Mechanics:** Part of the "prerequisite" for this course is a
basic understanding of the grammar and mechanics of standard written English.
Not everyone remembers all those rules as well as we should, though - there
are still things I have to look up in a handbook every time.

We will not spend much, if any class time on grammar, but if you feel you need
a refresher, you may want to take advantage of the English Department's
[Grammar Gym 1 Introductory
Level](http://www.english.vt.edu/%7EIDLE/Gym2/map1.html) web site. The first
two sections (Workouts 1-10) primarily provide a refresher on all the
terminology and basic grammar, while Workouts 11-25 focus on punctuation and
usage. If you don't understand any of these concepts or want more help with
grammar and mechanics, please come by and see me or make an appointment with a
tutor at the [English Department's Writing
Center](http://www.english.vt.edu/writing/center.htm).

If you are a second-language student, you may also want to check the [English
Language Institute of Virginia Tech](http://www.eli.vt.edu/) \- you can view
the site in Korean, French, Spanish, or English.

Additional grammar resources on the web:

> [Copyediting-L](http://www.blinn.com/ce-l/) \- the home page for the
copyediting list - here's the place to take your most obscure questions about
the use of the English language

>

> [Capital Community College](http://ccc.commnet.edu/grammar/) \- Grammar
reference site

>

> [Grammar
Handbook](http://www.english.uiuc.edu/cws/wworkshop/grammarmenu.htm)
(Univeristy of Illinois - Urban Champaign)

>

> [The Grammar Gym](http://www.english.vt.edu/%7EIDLE/Gym2/map1.html) \- VT
English Department online grammar tutorial

>

> [Grammar Quizzes](http://www.aitech.ac.jp/%7Eiteslj/quizzes/grammar.html) \-
Online grammar quizzes designed for ESL students

>

> ["Pop-up Grammar"](http://www.brownlee.org/durk/grammar/) \- Online self-
study quizzes for students

**Plagiarism:** The University Honor Code applies to all work for this course;
all work you submit must be your own.

> Plagiarism is defined as "the copying of the language, structure, ideas,
and/or thoughts of another and passing same off as one's own, original work,
or attempts thereof." It is academically dishonest, and often illegal, to
present someone else's ideas or writing as your own. You cannot use even short
phrases or parts of sentences obtained from other sources unless you properly
document those sources. This documentation includes quotations, when
appropriate, as well as notes, citations, and a reference list. It is also
academically dishonest to submit your own previously written work for a
current assignment or to submit an assignment in more than one class without
the previous knowledge and consent of all instructors involved. Suspected
cases of plagiarism will be reported to the Virginia Tech Honor System Review
Board.

You will be held accountable for furnishing upon request all sources and
preliminary work (notes, rough drafts, etc.) that you use in preparing written
assignments. If you cannot produce these materials upon request, you cannot
receive a satisfactory evaluation on the assignment.

**Americans with Disabilities Act** : If you have a disability that affects
you as a student in this class, you are invited to notify me and/or contact
the Dean of Student's Office regarding [Services for Students with
Disabilities](http://www.dos.vt.edu/SSD/default.html) or the [Americans with
Disabilities Act](http://fbox.vt.edu:10021/admin/eoaa/ada.html) Coordinator.
Your notification will remain confidential.

##### Instructor | Texts & Materials | Assignments | Important Policies



