## English 309:001--Introduction to Nonfiction Writing

#### Fall 2001* MW 900-1015* ENTerprise 174*

#### Professor [Chris Thaiss ](mailto:cthaiss@gmu.edu)

#### Office--Rob. A473*Office Hours--M 1030-1130 & by appt.*Phone
703-993-1170*[My homepage](http://mason.gmu.edu/~cthaiss)

**Schedule**

|

**Books, Materials**

|

**Assignments**  
  
---|---|---  
  
**[Fall for the Book](http://www.fallforthebook.org)**

|

**Participation**

|

**Grades**  
  
**[English Home](http://www.gmu.edu/departments/english)**

|

**[Writing Center](http://writingcenter.gmu.edu)**

|

**Nonfiction Links**  
  
####  

#### _INTRODUCTION TO NONFICTION WRITING_ begins the sequence of 300, 400, and
500 level courses in the English major for serious students of nonfictional
prose writing. In this course we will read and discuss some excellent short
works of memoir, personal essay, and feature journalism, plus works in other
nonfiction genres of personal interest to you. All the readings will be
springboards to writing; we'll do in-class and homework exercises, plus
several longer pieces. All of your writing will constitute a portfolio that
you will build through the semester. We will also take advantage of the 3rd
annual "Fall for the Book" literary festival (Sept. 19-23), which brings
together published authors in a wide range of genres for readings and panels
at various venues at GMU and the City of Fairfax.

#### The world of nonfiction is broad and many-featured; there is room within
it for almost any writerly ambition or desire, as long as that ambition or
desire includes the goal of telling the truth as the conscientious writer sees
it. The overarching term is "nonfiction"\--that is, writing that deals in
perceptions, people, and events that are "not made up" by the writer. (We
might call it "reality writing.") The writer and reader of nonfiction share
the tacit understanding that the work strives for accuracy, even if the
product sometimes falls short of this goal and even though we humans are
always limited in what we can know. Nonfiction writers have at hand the many
tools of the fiction writer--dialogue, shifts in point of view, sensual
description, and on and on--but the nonfiction writer always strives to earn
the reader's trust that the persons and places of the work are real (though
sometimes we have to change the names) and the events indeed happened.

#### Hence, I have two major goals for you in this course: first, to help you
improve your ability to tell truth through your writing, by using forms of
writing itself and by using the tools of research; second, to give you
practice in diverse styles and genres of nonfiction, as you work toward
identifying your own favorite subjects and modes of writing.

* * *

#### SCHEDULE OF CLASSES

#### M Aug. 27 Introductions--"Biography"exercise

#### W Aug. 29 The Personal Essay--"Writing about yourself, really"; self-
observation exercise. (Have read (FG) Hampl's"Parish Streets," Lopate's
"Portrait of My Body," and Toth's "Going to the Movies"; begin writer's
notebook.)

#### M Sept. 3 Labor Day (Meditate on work, maybe write about it)

#### W Sept. 5 Bring in revision of notebook exercise on "difficult truth" for
workshop; have read (FG) Sanders, "The Singular First Person," and Stanton,
both "Zion" and "On Writing 'Zion.'"

#### M Sept. 10 Observing with All Senses--exercise; have read (FG) Dillard,
"Living like Weasels," and Cofer, "Silent Dancing," plus Dillard, "To Fashion
a Text"; submit brief proposal online for "personal truth" essay.

#### W Sept. 12 Placeand Memory, Place and Action--exercises; have read (FG)
Barber,  
"Oh, Say, Can You See?"; Chavez, "Independence Day, Manley Hot Springs,
Alaska"; Iyer, "Where Worlds Collide."

#### M Sept. 17 "Place" continued; have read (FG) Lamy, "Life in Motion," and
Lott, "Brothers"

#### W Sept. 19 Bring in draft of "personal truth" essay for workshop (have
four copies); "Fall for the Book" preview and assignments.

#### W Sept. 19-Sa Sept. 23 Fall for the Book Literary Festival, various
places City of Fairfax and GMU--attend at least two writers events and be
prepared to give brief report.

#### M Sept. 24 Bring in revised draft of "personal truth" essay; give brief
report on Fall for the Book events.

#### W Sept. 26 Segments and Other Odd Shapes--have read Griffin, "Oval";
Morano,"The Queimada"; Saner, "Pliny and the Mountain Mouse"; Willard, "The
Friendship Tarot." Pick up dialogue/interview handout.

#### F Sept. 28 Final day to drop courses without Dean's permission.

#### M Oct. 1 "Writing Speech":the Interview Article--have read
dialogue/interview handout; exercise.

#### W Oct. 3 Guest writer, Scott Berg. Have read Berg excerpts online from
Lexis-Nexis and Sept. 28 Washington Post Weekend cover story.

#### F Oct. 5 NOTE--send by this date email proposal (1-2 paragraphs) for
interview-based biographical essay. Specify subject, rationale, your angle,
and interview setting.

#### M Oct. 8 Columbus/Indigenous Peoples Day

#### W Oct. 10 Guest writer, Meryle Secrest, on "writing biography"

#### M Oct. 15 Interview article progress reports; online interview search

#### W Oct. 17 Bring in draft of interview article (four copies) for workshop

#### M Oct. 22 Class will not meet. Continue revision of interview article.

#### W Oct. 24 Revised draft of interview article due in class. Begin "feature
journalism"project. Have read (FG) Tompkins, "At the Buffalo Bill Museum, June
1988," and Hearne, "Can an Ape Tell a Joke?"

#### M Oct. 29 Periodical Fair--bring to class two items: a short feature
article (no more than 2 pp.) that you particularly admire from a print or
online periodical of your choice, plus your critique (1 page) of what you and
others might learn from the writer's style and research techniques. Bring
enough copies for all of us, and we'll build an anthology.

#### W Oct. 31 Bring, for workshopping, your feature journalism proposal (1
page, 4 copies). Specify subject, possible sources, your angle, and specific
publications that include articles such as that you are proposing.

#### M Nov. 5 Online (database) research workshop, location TBA.

#### W Nov. 7 "Feature" progress update. Have read (FG) Cliff, "History as
Fiction, Fiction as History," and Chase's "Warping Time with Montaigne" and
"Notes from a Journey toward Warping Time."

#### M Nov. 12 Progress update. "Integrating Research" exercise. Have read
assigned articles (TBA) from class anthology.

#### W Nov. 14 Sentence Style exercises (using class anthology)

#### M Nov. 19 Progress update. More sentence style exercises.

#### W Nov. 21 Draft of feature article due for workshop (four copies).

#### M Nov. 26 Plan contents of final portfolio. Practice the "Reflective
essay."

#### W Nov. 28 Begin "read-around" of feature articles.

#### M Dec. 3 Continue read-around. Revised draft of feature article due in
class.

#### W Dec. 5 Course evaluations. Final portfolios due in class. Continue
read-around.

* * *

#### BOOKS AND MATERIALS

#### Robert L. Root, Jr., and Michael Steinberg, eds. _The Fourth Genre:
Contemporary Writers Of/On Creative Nonfiction_. 2nd Ed. New York: Longman,
2002.

####  Rather than require you to purchase additional books, I will expect you
to make photocopies (for our one-time use) of drafts of your essays for our
workshop sessions, as well as of a brief printed or online essay for our class
working anthology.

#### Your portfolio should be kept in a simple two-pocket folder. (If you have
a website, you may ask me about keeping your portfolio online. If you don't
have a website, but would like to build one, here are some [technical
instructions](http://mason.gmu.edu/~cthaiss/campbell.htm) you might use. For
more support and instruction, check out the services of the STAR center in
Johnson 311.)

#### Keep your writer's notebook in a separate two-pocket folder (online
option also possible).

* * *

#### PARTICIPATION

#### Your full and active participation in all events of the course is key to
your success and that of the class. In-class exercises, critique workshops on
drafts, analytical discussions of assigned readings, and attendance at and
your reports on the Fall for the Book festival will all be evaluated in your
participation grade, which is worth 25% of your final grade. That means that
each day's participation is worth just under 1% of your final.

#### Missed exercises may not be made up.

#### CAVEAT: You will not receive credit for any longer essay (personal truth
essay, interview-based article, feature project), if you have not been present
for the workshop on draftsof that essay or if you have not handed in on-time
the proposal or the draft of that essay. "On time" means in class at the
beginning of class.

* * *

#### ASSIGNMENTS

#### 1\. Exercises (part of participation grade)

#### I will regularly ask you to write in class to practice stylistic
techniques or approaches to subject matter. Many of these are listed on the
syllabus, but I may ask you at any time to try out a particular technique in
writing. Often I will follow the writing exercise with a request to present
these to members of the class. These are informal, low-pressure, and (I trust)
enjoyable events, but they are nonetheless important to the growth of writers.
You should keep all exercises, some of which I'll look at, in your working
portfolios.

#### 2\. Writer's Notebook (part of final portfolio grade)

#### During the first week, I'll ask you to begin keeping a notebook in which
to make at least one entry per week and in which you'll collect items and
observations of interest to you as a writer. I will expect you to make brief
analytical and/or creative entries (1/2 page to a page) in response to all
assigned readings. For a given class, I may ask that your notebook entry be of
a specific character. You should regard your notebook as practice space and as
a seedbed for ideas for your longer essays. Bring your notebook to any
conferences you set up with me. I'll not read your notebook in its entirety,
but I will ask that you include in your final portfolio ten pages of what you
regard as your better or most interesting notebook writing.

#### 3\. "Personal Truth" Essay (20% of final grade)

#### During the first month of the course we will concentrate on that varied
nonfiction genre known as the personal essay. We will read and analyze a good
number of these by some excellent writers, and we'll do exercises and notebook
entries to get a feel for this ever-more-popular and important genre. Your
essay (at least 1300 purposeful words) will be on a topic of your choice,
perhaps an event, relationship, or important place in your life, and among
your goals for this essay will be your presentation of a "personal truth or
truths" that have emerged for you in regard to this subject. We start with
this essay because the persistent, disciplined pursuit of personal honesty
that marks the best writing in this genre also marks most successful
nonfiction.

#### 4\. Interview Article (20% of final grade)

#### During the second month, and building on the first month's work, we will
focus on how we understand and present other people in our nonfiction. This
particular essay uses the interview as the primary source of data, and so we
will study interviewing and look at some well-done interviews to help that
process. But the interview will not be your only source of background data;
you'll need to cultivate rich observation and you'll need to bring in data
from other sources to fill out your picture. Again, your goal will be not only
to present another person, but to reach a personal truth or truths that shows
your reader the importance to you of studying this person. At least 1300
purposeful words.

#### 5\. Feature Article (20% of final grade)

#### Building on the first two projects and the various readings and exercises
of the course, this essay requires you to integrate a variety of source
material toward elucidating a personal truth or truths, or to substantiate
your point of view on an issue of interest to others. The focus of this essay
need not be you or another person; this is your opportunity to branch out into
other nonfiction genres. To help us, we will construct an anthology of pieces
from diverse periodicals that exemplify different kinds of nonfiction work,
and each student will write a concise analysis of the piece s/he has
contributed to the anthology. Your goals for this article will be determined
by the subject, the genre, the type of audience you wish to address, and
typical periodicals that might publish workof the type you are creating. Since
this will be a research-based essay, we will devote some time to research
sources and techniques. At least 1500 purposeful words.

#### 6\. Final Portfolio (15% of final grade)

#### During the semester, you should keep a "working portfolio" of exercises,
proposals, and drafts (in addition to your writer's notebook). Like the
writer's notebook, the working portfolio will be both an ongoing archive of
your work and a source of inspiration for current and new projects.

#### The _final_ portfolio, due the last day of class, will be a winnowing of
your portfolio to your best work of the semester, for my consideration. The
portfolio process gives you one more chance to revise earlier work on the
three longer projects, plus an opportunity to present your most interesting
and proficient work from your notebook. The final portfolio will include the
following items:

####  a. reflective essay on the contents of your portfolio and your growth as
a writer during the semester (max. 500 words)

#### b. your choice of the best two of the three longer essays you have
written, revised, including a brief statement of how you have improved each
piece (max. 300 words); include the previous revised draft of each essay

#### c. the best ten pages of entries from your writer's notebook

#### The process of creating the final portfolio will give you practice in the
decision-making of writers as they ready their work for publication or for
graduate school applications, grant applications, job interviews, etc. The
final portfolio puts your best foot forward, so its appearance, as well as its
content, should demonstrate your professionalism and your style.

* * *

#### GRADES

**Grading standards are as follows (grades to be determined at the discretion
of the instructor):**

**A = outstanding work: among the specific virtues, full, active, cooperative,
and imaginative participation in all activities, exercises, and projects of
the course; prose that consistently demonstrates the characteristics of
effective nonfiction, as manifest in our readings and as we develop them
throughout the course;**

**B = very good work: full, active, and cooperative participation in all
activities, exercises and projects; prose that almost always demonstrates the
characteristics of effective nonfiction;**

**C = satisfactory work: full, cooperative participation in all activities,
exercises, and projects; prose that, with revision, almost always demonstrates
the principles of effective nonfiction;**

**D = almost satisfactory work: almost full, usually cooperative participation
in all activities, exercises, and projects: prose that, with revision, usually
demonstrates the principles of effective nonfiction;**

**F = unsatisfactory work: inconsistent participation in activities,
exercises, and projects; or prose that, with revision, still fails to
demonstrate consistent application of the principles of effective
nonfiction.**

**I will give pluses and minuses according to GMU policy.**

**NOTE:** **A written project will receive an F if a student does not
participate in **every** phase of the development of the project. **

* * *

####  NONFICTION LINKS

#### This part of the page for ENGL 309:001 is under construction. I'll be
adding useful links throughout the course, and ask that you bring to my
attention good sites that you discover in your searches. These links will be
part of a "Nonfiction Resources" site, to serve all our nonfiction writing
students, that we are constructing under a new grant from the University's
Technology across the Curriculum Fund.

[Technical Support](http://mason.gmu.edu/~cthaiss/campbell.htm)

|

 ["Reading Links" Website](http://www.readinglinks.com/)

|

[_Creative Nonfiction_ Magazine](http://www.creativenonfiction.org)  
  
---|---|---  
  


|



|

  
  


|



|

  
  
**English 309 - Top of Page**



####  

####  

####  

####  

####  

####  

####  

####  

####  

