| MNPS 702 - Syllabus 2002 - The New Professional as Reflective Practitioner:
Organizational Learning  
---|---  
![](/icons/t20.gif)|

**_George Mason University_**  
  
**_THE NEW PROFESSIONAL AS REFLECTIVE PRACTITIONER_**

 ** __**

**_ORGANIZATIONAL LEARNING_**

 ** __**

**_MNPS 702 - 5L2_**  
  
**_SPRING, 2002_**

 **DRAFT SYLLABUS**  
  
**Professor:** ** _Ann C. Baker, Ph.D._**

  
Class Location: Johnson Center, Assembly Room D  
  
Class Time: Tuesday evenings, 8:10 - 10pm; Saturday, April 27th from 9am - 5pm  
  
Office: Finley Building, Room 216, Fairfax, VA 22030  
Telephone: 703-993-3805  
Fax: 703-993-3788  
_abaker1@gmu.edu_  
  
Office hours: Tuesdays, 4 - 5:30pm and by appointment  
  
**_OVERVIEW_**  
The rapidly changing world that we live, work, and relate to each other in
requires considerable flexibility in our thinking, conceptualizing, and
sensemaking processes. My primary objective in this context is to help us step
outside of our core worldviews to explore new possibilities, to enable each of
us to see alternative worldviews. My intention is not to change anyone's
values or to take anything away. Instead, my intention is to expand horizons,
to help us 'take off the blinders' of unexamined assumptions to offer more
choices for consideration.  
  
This process is fundamental to the kind of **learning** that Wenger (1998)
describes as changing "who we are by changing our ability to participate, to
belong, to negotiate meaning" (p. 226). An emphasis of the course will be to
draw upon conceptual and experiential resources to increase the competency of
each of us to participate and negotiate meaning in a wider range of
organizational and relational settings. By learning from a multiplicity of
relevant theoretical and experiential perspectives, our competencies can be
expanded by consistently exploring how these theories are being and can be
used and the appropriate contexts for their application.  
  
The course content will include exploration into multiple levels of learning
(single loop, double loop, triple loop, deutero), tacit and explicit
knowledge, multiple ways of knowing, sensemaking and enacting of
organizational realities, communities of practice, collaborative creativity,
reflective learning, multiculturalism, contextual relevancy, etc. as they
relate to organizations. To bring these concepts to life, there will be an
effort in class to use double-loop learning and to attempt to engage in
triple-loop learning. Romme and van Witteloostuijn (1999) suggest that while
double loop learning "involves reframing ¡­ [and] learning to see things in new
ways," triple loop learning requires "developing new processes or
methodologies for arriving at such re-framings" (p. 439). In triple-loop
learning not only are norms questioned but embedded assumptions of how we
think and learn are reexamined. William Isaacs (1993) suggests that this
approach "is the learning that permits insight into the nature of paradigm
itself, not merely an assessment of which paradigm is superior."  
  
This course attempts to offer a theoretical and conceptual foundation that
will inform and guide the pragmatic work of creating, facilitating, and
supporting learning organizations. Because of the dynamic and discontinuous
nature of most contemporary organizations, learning _techniques_ for
intervention are inadequate. The alternative that this course offers is
providing exposure to an array of theoretical, conceptual, and metaphorical
perspectives. Through an interpretive approach to reading the literature and
hearing each other and through careful attention to the learning context, the
intent is for each person to create new ways of seeing and thinking about
organizations grounded in collective wisdom.  
  
  
**_COURSE REQUIREMENTS AND EVALUATION_**  
Course requirements include a combination of reading of the texts, writing one
PAE, a team preparation and presentation based on the Challenger Case,
participation in the on-line conversational database, team member
contribution, and effort and participation in all course activities.  
  
**READINGS**  
**_Images of Organization,_** **Second edition** , 1997, by Gareth Morgan,
published by Sage Publications in Thousand Oaks, CA and available in the GMU
bookstore.  
A **Packet of Readings** available at the Johnson Center, Room 117, include:  
  
Argyris, C. (1994). A leadership Dilemma: Skilled Incompetence. In _On_  
_Organizational Learning_ (p. 100-111). Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers Inc.  
  
Argyris, C. (1994). Good Communication That Blocks Learning. _Harvard Business
Review_. _July_ , p. 77-85.  
  
Belenky, M., Clinchy, B., Goldberger, N., Tarule, J. (1986). Procedural  
Knowledge: Separate and Connected Knowing (a portion) & Constructed Knowledge:
Integrating the Voices. In _Women's Ways of Knowing_ (p. 100-123,131-152). New
York: Basic Books Inc. Publishers.  
  
Bethanis, S. (1995). Language as Action: Linking Metaphors with Organization  
Transformation. In Sarita Chawla and John Renesch (Eds.), _Learning
Organizations: Developing Cultures for Tomorrow's Workplace_ (p.184-195).
Portland, Oregon: Productivity Press.  
  
Brown, J. (1995). Dialogue: Capacities and Stories. In Sarita Chawla and John  
Renesch (Eds.), _Learning Organizations: Developing Cultures for Tomorrow's
Workplace_ (p.152-164). Portland, Oregon: Productivity Press.  
  
Elbow, P. (1986). The Value of Dialectic. In _Embracing Contraries_ (p.
237-252).  
New York: Oxford University Press.  
  
Isaacs, W. (1993). Taking Flight: Dialogue, Collective Thinking, and  
Organizational Learning. _Organizational Dynamics_ , _22_ , 2, p.24-39.  
  
Schon, D. (1983). The Crisis of Confidence in Professional Knowledge and The  
Structure of Reflection-in-Action. In _The Reflective Practitioner_ , (Chapter
1, p. 3-20, and Chapter 5, p. 128-167). US: Basic Books.  
  
Vaughan, D. (1996). Lessons Learned. In _The Challenger Launch Decision:
Risky_  
_Technology, Culture, and Deviance at NASA_ , (Chapter 10, p.387-422).
Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.  
  
Vogt, E. (1995). Learning Out of Context. In Sarita Chawla and John Renesch  
(Eds.), _Learning Organizations: Developing Cultures for Tomorrow's_  
_Workplace_ (p. 292-303). Portland, Oregon: Productivity Press.  
  
**EVALUATION**  
Late submissions and significant variance in the recommended length of papers
or presentations **can substantially influence grades** and should be
discussed before or after a class **prior** to the date they are due. When
final course determinations are borderline between two grades, final grades
will be determined based upon class attendance and effort and participation as
described above. For course grades, the assignments and participation are
weighted as follows:  
  
  
Personal Application Essay ( **Due April 3rd)**.. ¡­¡­¡­¡­... ****
¡­..¡­.¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­.¡­..35%

Team Presentations ( **April 27th)** ¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­.¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­...¡­.25%

On-line Conversational Database Participation ( **throughout the semester**
)¡­.20%  
  
Team Member Evaluation ( **April 30th)** ¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­..10%  
  
Effort and Approach ( **after the final class** ) ¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­10%  
---|---

