**SOCIOLOGY - 101 lecture T/R 10:00 - 11:18 IH 100**

**SPRING QUARTER, 2002 Ofc Hrs: T/R 12:00 - 1:00**

**INSTRUCTOR: JOHN SKOPIN** Office: Journalism - 363 A

Dept. Phone: 292-6681 (mssg.) Office No: 292-1385

E: skopin.1@osu.edu  


**Required** _SOCIOLOGY: A Global Perspective_ , 4th ed, Joan Ferrante
**Texts:** _Understanding Social Issues_ , 5th ed., Berlage & Egelman,  


**Course Description:** An introduction to the sociological perspective as the
scientific study of culture, socialization, social organizations, deviance,
social stratification, race and ethnicity, gender, population and family life,
education, religion, and social change. Social Institutions and the issues of
race and gender within social structures are analyzed in the context of
multicultural societies and increasing global interaction. Basic sociological
principles and research findings are used to support the analysis of the
social issues.  


**Course Objectives:** The student will develop knowledge and skills which
demonstrate an understanding and appreciation of the sociological imagination
and the various theoretical perspectives in sociology, so these skills may be
applied in both personal and professional endeavors.  


At the end of this course the student will be able to:

1) Define the process of socialization and identify human needs served by
socialization.

2) Understand and describe the steps of scientific research.

3) Evaluate the major social theories.

4) Explain how societies social philosophies provide individuals with
underlying assumptions to evaluate social institutions.

5) Describe social demographic conditions and their impact on the national and
global level.

6) Explain how social structure creates status, role differentiation, and
social stratification.

7) Analyze how social group membership affects quality of life and social
perception.

8) Analyze the process of change and the personal problems caused by rapid
social change.

9) Identify the underlying causes social conflict based on ethnic or cultural
differences, and suggest solutions.

10) Evaluate the impact of multicultural social practices on international and
multinational business.  


**Attendance / Participation / Assignments:** Your regular attendance and
active participation are expected and contribute to your final grade. Class
will begin on time and continue for the duration of the scheduled period.
Students are responsible for obtaining class materials for any class missed.  
    
    
    
    


**SOC - 101**

**_p 2_**  


**Attendance / Participation / Assignments** (continued):

Reading assignments, according to the syllabus schedule, are expected to be
completed before each class so that students will be prepared for in-class
assignments, discussion, and questions.

NOTE: **PLEASE TURN OFF CELL PHONES DURING CLASS!!!**  


**Academic Integrity:** Each student is solely responsible for his/her own
work. All assignments are therefore "individual" in nature. Unless otherwise
noted, teamwork is not permitted. Any case involving suspected academic
dishonesty (cheating on exams and plagiarism) will be referred to the Office
of Academic Affairs for disciplinary action.  


**General Educational Outcomes:** An integral part of the degree program is
the provision of general educational studies. A general education is the
acquisition of the common understanding and set of skills essential to
successful living as a whole, integrated person in a modern society.
Therefore, upon the completion of the degree program, the graduate will be
able to demonstrate the ability to:

think critically communicate effectively

solve problems demonstrate interpersonal skills

learn efficiently recognize the value of human diversity

demonstrate life management skills  


**Student Responsibilities:** Each student is expected to conduct him/herself
in a professional manner that demonstrates courtesy and respect to the
instructor and other students. We all share the responsibility for creating a
classroom atmosphere that is conducive to learning.

The student is ultimately responsible to be certain that all course
requirements are clearly and fully understood.  


**Course Requirements:** Grades are awarded according to work completed and
graded. Assignments and projects with potential point credit are as follows:  


Two midterm and a final exam (50 points each) 150 points

[Course project](courseproject.pdf) 50 points

Five recitation teamwork modules (20 points each) 100 points

Five pop quizzes, in recitation (10 points each) _50 points_

Total: 350 points

A = 350 - 315 C = 279 - 245

B = 314 - 280 D = 244 - 210 E = below 210  


**Written Assignment:** Papers are accepted only on the due date, handed to
the instructor in person. They must be typewritten, double-spaced, on 8 1/2 -
11" paper, stapled in the top left

corner, name in upper right corner. (NO BINDERS!!!)  


**SOC - 101**

_p 3_ **Tentative Schedule:**  


DATE: ASSIGNMENTS: (Ferrante; Berlage & Egelman)  


Apr 2 Introduction and Course Overview

Apr 4 The Sociological Imagination (Ferrante) Chap 1  


Apr 9 Theoretical Perspectives (Ferrante) Chap 2

Apr 11 Research Methods (Ferrante, etc.) Chap 3  


Apr 16 Culture Chap 4

Apr 18 Socialization Chap 5

Apr 23 **EXAM #1 Chapters 1 - 5** (Tue., Apr 23, 2002)

(in lecture hall - IH 100)

Apr 25 Social Interaction / Construction Chap 6  


Apr 30 Social Organizations Chap 7

May 2 Deviance, Conformity, Social Control Chap 8

May 7 Social Stratification Chap 9

May 9 Race and Ethnicity Chap 10  


May 14 Race and Ethnicity (continued) Chap 10

May 16 **EXAM # 2 Chapters 6 - 10. (Thur., May 16, 2002)**  


May 21 Gender Chap 11

**[COURSE PROJECT](courseproject.pdf) DUE: Tue., May 22, 2002**

**(presented in person in recitation section)**

May 23 Economics and Politics Chap 12

May 28 Population and Family Life Chap 13

May 30 Education Chap 14

Jun 4 Religion Chap 15

Jun 6 Social Change Chap 16

**Final Exams for Graduating Seniors**

**M - W, June 3, 4, & 5, 2002**  


Jun 13 **FINAL EXAM** **(Thursday, June 13, 2002, from**

**9:30 to 11:18, Chapters 11 - 16)**  
    
    


**THIS MATERIAL IS AVAILABLE IN ALTERNATIVE FORMATS** **UPON**

**REQUEST. STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR MAKING THEIR NEEDS
KNOWN AND SEEKING**

**THE AVAILABLE ASSISTANCE IN A TIMELY MANNER.**  
    
    


