**College of Arts and Sciences Women's Studies**  
**Northern Arizona University Fall 2001**  


**_Instructor: Dr. Sanjam Ahluwalia  _**  
**_Office: LA 232_**  
**_Office Hours: TTH 3.40-4.30, and by appointment_**  
**_Phone # : 3-8709  _**  
**_E-mail:[Sanjam.Ahluwalia@nau.edu](mailto:Sanjam.Ahluwalia@NAU.EDU)_**

**_Class Meetings_ : _Wed 2.30-5.00; SBS: 23 7_**  
**_Course Prerequisites: None_**  


**WST 191: WOMEN, GENDER, AND ETHNICITY**  
**COURSE DESCRIPTION**

This course will explore the politics of cultural representations of gender
and ethnicity, through a multidisciplinary and multicultural approach. The
course will focus on demonstrating how gender identities are intersected by
variables of ethnicity, race, and class . To assist us in understanding how
these various systems determine women's lives we will draw upon the
experiences of women within different communities. Despite highlighting the
distinct experiences of women within their respective communities the course
will emphasize the complex heterogeneity of these social groups rather than
impose an artificial uniformity on them. After careful attention to
differences within women, we will conclude the course with a discussion on the
complex issue of multiculturalism and its usefulness in understanding gendered
identities. This class is a liberal studies class bearing the thematic focus
"Valuing the Diversity of Human Experience." It is in the "Cultural
Understanding" distribution block. This course will address several of the
essential skills which are features of the liberal studies program, including
critical reading, critical and creative thinking, ethical reasoning, effective
writing and effective oral communication.

**COURSE OBJECTIVES**

This course seeks primarily to heighten our sensitivity to issues of diversity
and difference within our world. An awareness of differences will allow us to
question main/malestream representations of social and cultural "others," both
in print and media. To facilitate our understanding of the various cultural
modes of exclusion experienced by women of color/third world women, and women
who belong to ethnic minority communities, this course will use materials
drawn from academic writings, biographical sketches, fiction, and films. This
course seeks to make us conscious of identifying political implications
underlying all forms of cultural representations. By focusing on experiences
of women within distinct ethnic communities we will learn to identify and
appreciate how women are differently placed in locations of domination and
subordination based on their specific race, class, and ethnic affiliations.

The course meeting our Program's Mission's of "re-evaluation of sex and
gender" will examine the quality, nature, and diversity of women's
experiences. Students will perform this examination by critically reading
essays on politics of representation, and on modalities of gender
socialization within different ethnic groups such as American Indians, Asian
Americans, and African Americans. We will also examine gender politics with
families, health care systems, in the construction of educational curricula
and in the arena of paid work.

By comparing and assessing differing and conflicting cultural understandings
of above referenced themes you will develop critical reading and reasoning
skills. By applying these skills to relevant Women's studies essays, films,
and other creative texts you will expand your understanding of diversity and
culture more generally and be able to write effectively at the same time.
Through the class presentations of book reviews there will be an opportunity
to improve your oral expressions. You will be asked to participate on a weekly
basis in class discussions about films and essays we will be seeing and
reading and through this participation you will be able to formulate clear
positions on how cultural understandings affect understandings about gender.
The central feature of the class will be to examine and study the interplay of
gender, culture, ethnicity, and diversity. This understanding will be part of
a dynamic process involving the interrelationship amongst ethical reasoning,
critical reading, critical and creative thinking, followed by effective
writing. You will be able, at the end of the class, in writing, to identify,
describe, define, explain, and critique the concepts, issues, and concerns the
class raises.

**COURSE STRUCTURE AND APPROACH**

The class will be a combination of lectures and discussions, with expectations
of increasing student participation and performance. Students should feel free
to speak their minds, but not at the expense of other's opinions and beliefs.

**READINGS**

Estelle Disch, Reconstructing Gender: A Multicultural Anthology.
**_(REQUIRED)_**  
Joshua Cohen, Matthew Howard, and Martha C. Nussbaum, eds., Is
Multiculturalism Bad for Women? **_(REQUIRED)_**

**_Students will select one of the following novels_**

Jhumpa Lahiri, Interpreter of Maladies: Stories.

Jamaica Kincaid, Lucy **.  **

Sandra Cisneros, Woman Hollering Creek.

Luci Tapahonso, Saanii Dahataat: The Women are Singing. ** **  
  ****

**PROVISIONAL COURSE SCHEDULE: SUBJECT TO MODIFICATION**  


WEEK ONE: August 29 **Class Introduction**

WEEK TWO : September 5 **Politics of Representation**

**Primary Readings** : Disch, "Introduction," PP: 1-20; Maxine Baca Zinn and
Bonnie Thronton Dill, "Theorizing Difference from Multiracial Feminism," PP:
59-68; Tracey Lai, "Asian American Women," PP: 34-40; Paula Gunn Allen, "Angry
Women are Building," PP: 52-55; Ruth Atkin and Adrienne Rich, " 'J.A.P' **-**
Slapping," PP: 56-58.

WEEK THREE: September 12 **Gender Socialization**

**Primary Readings** : Judith Lorber, "The Social Construction of Gender," PP:
69-80; Barrie Thorne, "Girls and Boys Together," PP: 81-97; Virginia Harris,
"Prison of Color," PP: 115-120.

Michael Messner, "Boyhood, Organized Sports, and the Construction of
Masculities," PP: 98-114; **** Luis Rodriguez, " Always Running," PP: 126-131;

WEEK FOUR: September 19 **Embodiment**

**Class Assigment** : Film, Skin Deep; Black, Bold and Beautiful. These films
will be discussed on October 3.

WEEK FIVE: September 26 **_NO CLASS!!_**

WEEK SIX: October 3 **Embodiment**

**Primary Readings** : Elayne Saltzberg and Chrisler, "Beauty is the Beast,"
PP: 140-156; Becky Thompson, "A way Outa no Way," PP: 157-171; Christy
Haubegger, " I'm Not Fat, I'm Latina," PP: 181-182; Martha Coventry, "The
Tyranny of the Esthetic," PP: 183-191. Also class discussion of the two films,
Skin Deep and Black, Bold, and Beautiful.

WEEK SEVEN: October 10 **Families**

**Primary Readings:** Lillian Rubin, " The Transformation of Family Life," PP:
272-284; Audre Lorde, " Man: Child," PP: 295-300; Walter Williams, "The
Relationship between Male-Male Friendship," PP310-321.

WEEK EIGHT: October 17 **Sexuality**

**Primary Readings:** Film,  Golden Threads; Anne Finger, "Forbidden Fruit,"
PP: 244-247; Paula Rust, " The Impact of Multicultural Marginalization," PP:
248-254; Patricia Collin, "The Sexual Politics of Black Womanhood," PP:
255-271.

WEEK NINE: **** October 24 **Education and Paid Work**

**Primary Readings:** Myra and David Sadker, "The Miseducation of Boys," PP:
322-333; Ruth Sidel, "Conflict Within the Ivory Tower," PP: 334-343; bell
hooks, "Black and Female," PP: 344-350; Ben Fong-Torres, "Why there are no
Male Asian Anchor _men_ on TV," PP: 383-387; Cynthia Enloe, " The Globetrotter
Sneaker," PP: 414-421.

WEEK TEN: OCTOBER 31 **Health and Violence**

**Primary Readings:** Evelyn Barbee and Marilyn Little, "Health, Social Class
and African-American Women," PP: 444-459; Connie Chan, "Reproductive Issues,"
PP: 460-462; Rita Arditti, "Breast Cancer," PP: 463-473; Helen Zia, "Where
Race and Gender Meet," PP: 541-544.  
WEEK ELEVEN: **** NOVEMBER 7 ** _Is Multiculturalism Bad for Women?  _**  
**Primary Readings:** Cohen, "Introduction," PP: 3-5; Susan Okin, "Is
Multiculturalism Bad," PP: 7-24; **** Bonnie Honig, "My Culture Made me do
it," PP: 35-40; Azizah al-Hibri, "Is Western Patriarchal Feminism Good for
Third World/Minority Women?" PP: 41-46; Sander Gilman, "'Barbaric' Rituals?"
PP: 53-58; **** Bhikhu Parekh, " A Varied Moral World," PP: 69-75.

WEEK TWELVE: NOVEMBER 14

Films: Under One Sky, Orientalism.

**_WEEK THIRTEEN AND FOURTEEN: NOVEMBER 21 & NOVEMBER 28 : Student reviews of
works of fiction_**

**_DECEMBER 11: Written Review of one Novel. Due in my office by 4.00 PM!!_**  


**REQUIREMENTS**

Students will be required to engage with weekly readings carefully and
critically. Class discussions will be central to the course and, should be
attended faithfully. This will contribute 20% of your class grade.

Informal Writing: In addition to the readings you will also be expected to
submit written informal responses to the weekly readings, typed 1-2 pages. You
may choose two weeks in which you do not complete this assignment. These
papers are due in class on the day of our meetings. No late papers will be
accepted. **By the end of the semester each student should have submitted a
total of 6 informal typed papers. No late submissions will be accepted.  **

Book Presentation: You will do a short oral presentation on one of the novels
in class.

This will count towards 10% of your course grade.

Book Review: This is the final requirement of the course. It will be 4-5 pages
of critical assessment of one of the novels that you choose to read as part of
the course requirement. In writing this review you should try to relate it to
the themes covered during the course. More detailed instructions on the paper
will be discussed in class before the assignment is due.

**EVALUATION METHODS**

Class Participation (20%) This includes attendance and active intellectual
participation in class and small group discussions. It will also include media
analysis. I'll be looking at your mastery of critical reasoning, critical
reading, effective writing and oral communication skills.

Informal Reviews (50%) These will be short typed responses to the weekly
readings. These will help you to speak and discuss the weekly writings in
class more effectively. These papers will also ensure that you do all the
readings and engage actively in class discussions. You will be evaluated for
effective writing and reasoning. You will also be assessed for critical and
ethical reasoning and thinking as part of your course grade.

Book presentation (10%) This will give students a chance to discover and
explore the role of women in other cultures. In the last 2 weeks each student
will make an oral presentation of a novel. I will be looking for effective
oral skills and ability to respond to any questions that your fellow students
might ask of you about your reading of the novel.

Final Paper (20%). It will be 4-5 pages based on a careful reading of one of
the novels. I will be looking for your critical thinking skills, effective
writings skills as well as your critical reading skills of the various
material you will draw upon for this paper.

**COURSE GRADES**

Grades for the course will be calculated in the following way:

Class Participation 20%; Informal writing 50%; Book Presentation 10%; and
Final Paper 20%.  
TOTAL FOR COURSE 100%

The grading scale for the course will be as follows:

90%+ =  **A** ; 80 - 89%=  **B** ; 70-79%=  **C** ; 60-69%=  **D** ; below
60%=  **F**.

**COURSE POLICY**

TURN IN ALL ASSIGNMENTS AND HEED ALL DUE DATES-- You are responsible for
knowing all due dates including schedule changes. You will lose a letter grade
for each (school) day your assignment is late.

ATTENDANCE IS MANDATORY-- Your attendance and participation will not only
affect the quality of this class, but it will also make a difference in your
grade. **After ONE absence you will lose a letter grade for each additional
absence.  **

COMPLETE THE READINGS BEFORE THE CLASS IN WHICH THEY ARE DISCUSSED--Part of
your grade will be based on participation.

**PLAGIARISM** \-- Academic dishonesty will not be tolerated. We will talk
about appropriate use of other people's thoughts and ideas. Students should
also familiarize themselves with these matters as defined by the university.
See the current NAU Student Handbook.

