Endicott College, Division of Arts and Sciences, Course Syllabus

** **

**Course No:** LA 100

**Course Title:** Freshman Seminar: **** Constructing Australia

**Credits:** 3

**Pre-requisites** : none ****

**Semester and Year:** Spring, 2002

**Faculty:** Gabrielle Watling, Ph.D. ****

**Office Location, Telephone, E-mail:** AC 219, x2973,
[gwatling@endicott.edu](mailto:gwatling@endicott.edu)

**Office Hours:** As per timetable on office door



**Catalogue Description:** Students will be introduced to inquiry-based
learning skills that will provide the foundation to their four years of study
at Endicott College. Students will learn the process of investigating an
issue, how one reflects upon it and how one forms and defends a position.



**Course Description:** This course invites students to discuss, write about,
contemplate, research, challenge the myths of, solve the problems of, beat the
hell out of, deconstruct, reconstruct and grapple with the contradictions of
"Australia". The United States was the product of the 18th century
enlightenment - fertile, blessed with potential and born out of patriotic
revolution. Australia was not. What is (and what isn't) Australia? This course
will examine the ideologies which helped to establish, and the myths and
realities which "construct", Australia.



**Course Objectives: The general objectives of this course are to help develop
the reading, writing, critical thinking and problem solving skills necessary
to be a liberally educated and successful college student. An equally
important objective of this course is to instill a sense of enthusiasm and
internal motivation for the love of learning and discovery. Some specific
objectives for this course include:**

，        Understanding the historical context of a problem

，        Developing and refining information literacy skills (see
[http://www.ala.org/acrl/ilintro.html#ildef](http://www.ala.org/acrl/ilintro.html#ildef)
for more detail)

，        Finding sources

，        Critiquing the value and usefulness of sources

，        Preparing annotated bibliographies

，        Reading for understanding and critical inquiry

，        Developing writing skills - summative, synthesis and position taking

，        Comparing and contrasting what others have said about a problem or
issue

，        Understanding the basic modes of inquiry

，        Idea generation, creativity, and working with ideas

，        Developing skills in the use of objective and subjective arguments

，        Understanding scientific methods and when their use is appropriate
for problem solving

，        Understanding the academic and social standards expected of an
Endicott Student

，        Developing a sense of community among the students and with the
institution

，        Developing professional skills as they relate to finding and
successfully experiencing an internship

，        Introduce students to INT300 (portfolio requirements)



**Topical Outline:**

，        Working backwards: The contemporary American construction of
Australia ( _Crocodile Dundee_ )

，        Early Colonial impressions and early impressions of the Colony ( _The
Fatal Shore_ )

，        The tragedy of exploration ( _The Explorers_ )

，        Being and trying not to be Australian through art, novels and icons

，        "Aust. Lit" ( _The Road to Coorain_ , _My Place_ )

，        Australian Self Analysis ( _Beyond the Fatal Shore_ )



**Teaching/Learning Strategies:** Reading workshops, discussion/debate on
concepts, video/visual materials and supporting criticism, papers and
assignments.



**Attendance Policy:** Attendance is not compulsory, but at least 85%
attendance is strongly recommended in order to maintain a satisfactory grade.
Attendance will be taken in each class, but this is for the instructor's
records only.



**Evaluation Methods and Grading System:**

Literature Review and Annotated Bibliography: 25%

Debate Participation: 10%

Position papers x 3 @ 15%: 45%

Class participation: 20%

**Total 100% **

****

**Note:** All papers must be typed, double-spaced and have 4cm margins down
both sides of the page. Papers without these requirements will not be
accepted. **Late Paper Policy:** Papers are due by 5.00 P.M. of the date
listed in the syllabus. Papers handed in after that will lose 10% each day (or
part thereof) that they are late.



**Academic Honesty:** Any breech of the Endicott College Academic Honesty
Policy will result in dismissal from the class with a failing grade.

** **

**_Required Readings_** ****

** **

**NOTE: these books are available from the College bookstore. Other readings
will be added to this list as the issues contained in them are raised in
class.**

** **

，        **Flannery, Tim. _The Explorers_. New York: Grove Press, 1998.**

，        **Hughes, Robert. _The Fatal Shore_. New York: Vintage, 1988.**

，        **Ker Conway, Jill. _The Road From Coorain_. New York: Vintage,
1990.**

，        **Morgan, Sally. _My Place_. Fremantle: Fremantle Arts Centre Press,
1987.**

，        **Hacker, Diana. _A Writer's Reference_. Boston: Bedford/St.
Martin's, 1999.**

，        **www.theaustralian.news.com.au**

** **

** **

** **

**This syllabus subject to change.**

**_Semester Schedule._**



**Tuesday, Jan. 29:** Introduction to Course.

，        Word association: write down as many words as you can that you
associate with Australia

，        Australia quiz

，        Where is Australia?

，        What assumptions can we make about the place based on its geography?
****

**< span style='fo

