class syllabus

# PHIL 336: Bioethics and Biotechnology

## Dr. Michele Svatos

## Spring 1997, Tuesdays 7-9:30pm

## Office: 433 Catt Hall Office phone: 294-0056

## E-mail: [svatos@iastate.edu](mailto:svatos@iastate.edu)

## Secretary: 402 Catt Hall Secretary phone: 294-7276

### Please note that Catt Hall is open only during normal business hours

###  Prereq: Phil 230 or junior classification. Students should at least have
some background in either basic genetics or moral theory. In-depth study of
some of the central moral issues arising from genetic engineering and the new
biotechnology, e.g., human genetic research and testing, the use of animals in
research, genetically engineered plants and animals, risk analysis,
biotechnology patents, research ethics and social responsibility, regulation
of biotechnology, biodiversity, and the impact of biotechnology on society and
the environment. Major moral theories will be discussed and applied. Writing
and discussion intensive. Topic varies by semester; this semester we will
discuss both agricultural and medical biotechnology, with an emphasis on the
latter. This course differs significantly from Moral Problems in Medicine
(Phil. 331), which is more appropriate for premed/nursing students.

Required Books:

  * Justice and the Human Genome Project, Timothy Murphy and Marc Lappe, eds. The Lives to Come, Philip Kitcher. 
  * The Frankenstein Syndrome: Ethical and Social Issues in the Genetic Engineering of Animals, Bernard Rollin. 
  * Course Packet, available later in the semester. 
Additional recommended books: (Nearly all are available in the library and in
my office.)

\--The Elements of Moral Philosophy, James Rachels. Good introduction to moral
theory for those who have not had Phil. 230.

\--Ethical Issues in Modern Medicine, 4th ea., John D. Arras and Bonnie
Steinbock. Mayfield, 1995. --Exploding the Gene Myth: How Genetic Information
Is Produced and Manipulated by Scientists, Physicians, Employers, Insurance
Companies, Educators, and Law Enforcers, Ruth Hubbard and Elijah Wald. Boston:
Beacon Press, 1993. (EGM)

\--A Garden of Unearthly Delights: Bioengineering and the Future of Food,
Robin Mather. Dutton, 1995.

\--Gene Mapping, George Annas and Sherman Elias. New York: Oxford UP, 1992.

\--Genes and Human Self-Knowledge, Robert Weir, Susan Lawrence, and Evan
Fales, eds. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 1994.

\--A Preface to Philosophy, Mark B. Woodhouse. (Written for students who have
never had philosophy before; includes chapters on reading and writing
philosophy. I have several copies.)

\--Silent Spring, Rachel Carson. New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1962.

\--Shattering: Food, Politics, and the Loss of Genetic Diversity, Cary Fowler
and Pat Mooney. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1990.

\--Ethics and Biotechnology, ed. Anthony Dyson and John Harris. New York:
Routledge, 1994. --Superpigs and Wondercorn, Michael W. Fox. New York: Lyons
and Burford, 1992.

\--Supermen and Wonderwomen, John Harris. New York: Oxford UP, 1992. \--The
Secret of Life, David Suzuki and Joseph Levine. Boston, 1993. Companion to the
video series.

Course Requirements:

  * Stellar attendance (See attendance policy below) 
  * 3 exams, approximately 150 pts each 
  * Faithful reading of assignments before class 
  * Research assignments, 30 pts each 
  * Come prepared to discuss or at least ask questions 
  * possible quizzes 
  * Other research assignments or internet assignments (web page, email discussion group, etc.) 
  * Class research/presentations, up to 50 pts each but usually less 
Graduate students are additionally required to write an 8-12 page paper, due
during finals week, worth 150 pts. Topic and reading list must be approved by
instructor before break.

Exams:

3 exams, approx. 150 pts each. Includes both objective, short answer questions
and take-home essays.

Discussion:

Most class periods involve both lecture and discussion. All students are
expected to participate. This involves reading the assignment beforehand,
preparing questions if you don't understand the assignment, being prepared to
discuss the merits of the assigned article, and being prepared to defend your
own views on the issue. Participating in discussion is practice critiquing
arguments and doing philosophy. Even if you're not ready to participate in
discussion, you can still participate by asking questions about the readings.
Participation is a tie-breaker for your final grade. Videos: If you absolutely
can't be present on the day a video is shown, you're responsible for borrowing
it from the instructor and viewing it yourself. Video equipment is available
in the library. Late work: Late work loses one full grade for each day or
portion of a day it is late. Assignments are due at the beginning of class.

Attendance:

Lecture and discussion form a large part of this course; simply doing the
readings and assignments is not adequate. You will lose one full grade for
each absence after the third. Exceptions are made only in cases of extended,
serious illness or extreme family emergency.

Incompletes are given only in exceptional cases of extended illness or extreme
family emergency. No incompletes will be given simply because the student
would do better if they had more time to work on an assignment.

Grading:

Total points will be approximately 600 to 800.

Grading criteria:

Your work is graded on 3 main criteria: (1) Your mastery of the readings on
various issues, as demonstrated in your explanation of the arguments, (2) Your
ability to apply the views in the readings to other issues, and (3) Your
ability to think critically about the readings and the issues, as demonstrated
in your evaluation of the arguments. Effort, especially lack thereof, also
influences your grade. Your ability to understand, apply, and evaluate the
readings should improve throughout thesemester. You will not be graded on what
position you take on a particular issue. Rather, you will be graded on your
knowledge of the arguments on both sides of the issue, and your ability to
give reasoned arguments in favor of whatever position you do take. Our
readings often include more than one viewpoint on an issue, and you may choose
to support any one of them, or none of them--so long as you provide support
for your view which might help convince those who disagree with you (including
people with different upbringings and religious beliefs).

Research Assignments (RAs):

For each of the research assignments, find an article that's relevant to one
of the topics in the current section of the course. Exception: the first RA
may be on any topic related to modern biotechnology, so long as it raises
important social and/or ethical issues. RAs on the wrong topics will be
returned ungraded. Good sources include journals such as The Hastings Center
Report, Genewatch, Science, Nature, New Scientist, and so on. Use the
periodicals indexes (such as GSCI) on Scholar at the library. Try keywords
such as genetic engineering, human genome, gene therapy, human growth hormone,
and so on. The quality of article which you find will influence your grade.

For RAs, turn in (1) a copy of the article, along with (2) a one or two
paragraph summary of the article (more, if necessary), and (3) a 3-5 paragraph
analysis of the philosophical issues which the article raises. The article
need not address the issue(s) explicitly; it might just be a report about some
new scientific development, and it's your job to identify the issues. If the
article already seems to identify all the issues, then you should defend your
view on one of the issues. Your summary and analysis should be typed or neatly
handwritten. Each RA is worth 30 points. Effort will be taken strongly into
consideration in grading these, both in terms of the quality and source of
what you've found, and what you have to say about it yourself. Depth of
thought is very important for your analysis/defense. Avoid stating the
obvious, or simply restating what we've discussed in class. Don't just find
any old article; look for one that's especially thoughtful or interesting, and
which is preferably recent. At most one of your RAs may use an article on the
internet as its source.

Class research/presentations:

You should expect to spend 3 hours preparing for class for every 1 hour in
class, or 8-9 hours/week preparing. Although the readings are dense and may
require multiple passes, they shouldn't take you that long. Some weeks you'll
be working on your take-home essays, but other weeks you may be given group or
individual research/presentation projects. These projects take advantage of
the fact that students come to this class with many different areas of
expertise and deficiency. Some scarcely know basic genetics, others have never
had a philosophy class before (much less an ethics class). Some are skilled at
web research, others are better at library research. You will be assigned
groups based on what you can contribute to the class. Ask not only what this
class can do for you, but also what you can do for this class. Class research
and presentations may be worth up to 50 pts each, and will constitute no more
than 1/3 of your course grade. Part of the assignment involves creating and
photocopying a handout for the benefit of the class, unless otherwise stated.
If there are a significant number of these during the semester, you may be
able to opt out of some depending on your realistic grade aspirations. In
other words, if each student is assigned 5 total, a C or D student might be
allowed to opt out of 2, and a B student might be allowed to opt out of 1.

Example: a group of 6 biology majors might be responsible for a 10-15 minute
presentation and handout on basic genetics. Within that group, #1 might be
responsible for finding materials, #2 for writing the handout, #3 for planning
and leading the class presentation, #4 for assisting in the preparation of the
presentation (including writing up FAQs or examples), and answering questions
(both during class and later), #5 for preparing a bibliography of good
readings on basic and more advanced genetics (including, perhaps, web sites to
look at), #6 for coordinating the groupand editing and copying the handout. If
the presenter were unexpectedly absent, the coordinator would be the
understudy. She would also be responsible for seeing that the presentation
would not take much more than the allotted time, and for getting a copy of the
handout and presentation outline to me by Monday afternoon for review.
Everyone in the group would be the resident experts on this topic for the rest
of the semester; when we discuss genetic screening, some of the concepts might
need to be explained in greater detail, or they might need to be applied to
specific examples.

The work might be distributed considerably differently--for example, each
student might be responsible for producing about 20% of the handout and
presentation--but it's important that each person have a definable
contribution to the project. You should allow 5-10 minutes during break or
after class to begin to work out the distribution of tasks. You must iron out
the problem of differing skill levels amongst yourselves. Even a person with
relatively little knowledge on a subject can be given useful tasks--but such a
person's main task within the group may well be to develop an expertise. He
can learn about the topic while typing and photocopying the handout, for
example. Group members will be asked to evaluate their own and each other's
contributions and learning, and these evaluations will be factored into your
grades. Group projects tend to work better when membership is assigned, so
that's what we'll do. If you have a problem working with your group, you may
ask to be reassigned to another group, or to work on your own. Students who
repeatedly show little effort in the group, or who let the group down without
a good reason, will be required to work on their own. The group should jointly
fund any photocopying of handouts for the class of 35, which would perhaps
involve a contribution of 50 cents each. Let me know if this constitutes a
burden on anyone. Handouts in most cases should be 1 or 2 pages.

Ultimately these group projects may become part of a bioethics page. If you're
skilled at HTML and interested in working on this, please let me know. Working
in a group on getting a web page going could substitute for working in some of
the other groups.

First assignment:

Rollin Ch 1 & appendix, Kitcher Ch 1 & 2 if available. Also
research/presentation assigned in class, due date as assigned in class. We'll
re-read parts of Rollin Ch 1 later in the semester, as we discuss some of the
topics in greater depth.

Initial research/presentation topics:

basic genetics, basic genetic engineering, history of eugenics, Human Genome
Project, genetic engineering and art. For each, the assigned group should
prepare 35 copies of a typed handout, plus a 10-minute presentation, as
described above. You must clear these with me by the Monday afternoon before
the presentation; if not, the group's grade will be docked by 5%. Following
are some of the important concepts for each, which your handout and
presentation should define/address. Some definitions may be found in Kitcher;
you may refer to those in your handout, but you may also want to simplify or
elaborate upon them. Your handout might include drawings, or refer to drawings
in the text. You may wish to give examples and/or answers to FAQs (frequently
asked questions). Assume that your classmates do their reading; you must go
beyond that. The number of students assigned to a group depends partially upon
how extensive the topic is. Each of these assignments will be worth 30
pts/person. Keep a copy of your handout on diskette, in case we create a class
web page. Keep written track of who does what.

Basic genetics: Define genes, chromosomes, dominant vs. recessive traits,
hetero- and homozygous, genotype and phenotype, somatic vs germ cells, basic
Mendelian inheritance, single- vs. multi-gene traits, where and how genes
"start" and "end, etc.

Basic genetic engineering: Look at Kitcher ch 2 and the appendix in Rollin and
try to make them more understandable for those who have very little knowledge
of genetics. Keep it very simple, don't get bogged down in technical details
for your presentation, but be prepared to answer questions about the more
technical details. Let the class know what currently is and isn't possible,
what will be likely in the near future, and what's very sci-fi. Remember, the
focus is on explaining it so that people will be able to understand the
ethical and social principles raised by these new technologies. If you'd like
to arrange an actual demonstration for the class, I'd be happy to help you
(e.g., by getting a lab for us to use and scheduling class time for it).

Human Genome Project: What is a genome, what does it mean to map a genome,
what does it look like, which genomes are being mapped, what's the difference
between mapping a genome and sequencing a gene, who's involved, how much is it
costing, what are the likely results (e.g., does it lead directly to great
medical therapies), etc.

History of eugenics: Definition of eugenics, source of the word (when, who,
what does it mean literally), positive vs. negative eugenics (ask me for
help), Nazi eugenics laws, US eugenics laws in early 1900s, attitudes of
scientists and physicians toward eugenics in early 1900s, current positive
eugenics in Singapore, "homemade" eugenics (Kevles in Murphy book), etc.
(Start with Kitcher ch 8 and Murphy ch 2; ask me to suggest an additional
reading.)

Genetic engineering and art: Find out the story about the art in and on the
Molecular Biology bldg. What does it mean, what does it say, and why. We'll
probably schedule a class tour, for which you should be well-prepared.

![](extras/wavybar.gif)

###  [ ![](extras/arrow.gif) ](homepage.html) Back to the main page

