## HIEU 201 WESTERN CIVILIZATION TO 1600 A.D.

**Fall, 2002**

**Mr. Paul Kershaw**  
[pjk3p@virginia.edu](mailto:pjk3p@virginia.edu)  
telephone: 434-924-6389  
Office Hours: Monday, 12.15-1.45,  
Wednesday, 12.15-1.45, and by appointment.

147 Clark Hall, MWF 11:00-11:50

**Teaching Assistants** :

**Holly Daniel**  
[had3f@virginia.edu](mailto:had3f@virginia.edu)  
Office hours: Thurs. 10:30-12:00  
Location: Alderman Caf e

**Rod Martin**  
[rhm3t@virginia.edu](mailto:rhm3t@virginia.edu)  
Office hours: Thurs. 9:30-11:00 and by appointment  
Location: Periodicals Section, Main Floor, Clemons Library

**Course Description**

![Egyptian Metal Workers and Brick-makers: Civilization in
Creation](images/egypt.jpg) This course will introduce and place in
perspective the essential features of the human experience in the western
world from ancient Mesopotamia to the Reformation. Political and institutional
developments, social organization and ideas, art and architecture, literature,
philosophy and religion will all receive attention. Basically, this is the
course where you will encounter all those things you have always known you
ought to know, and find out why you felt you ought to have known them.
Readings will be drawn from a textbook and a series of primary sources ranging
from the very earliest literature of ancient Mesopotamia through to the
writings of Martin Luther, taking in Homer, Plato, the Bible, Peter Abelard
and Dante along on the way. Reading will average around 100 pages per week.
Certain themes will recur throughout the course: mankind's relationship to the
divine, the forms in which human society was structured, the ways in which
life and death were thought of, and man's place in the universe conceived. How
did people in the past think about themselves, and about the world in which
they lived? And what paths lead from their worlds to ours?

The course consists of three lectures and a single discussion section each
week. A portion of reading from the textbook is assigned for each week. This
reading complements the information in the lecture, the two working together
to give you a rounded knowledge of the subject at hand. Questions to be
addressed in the discussion class will be based largely around sources and
will demand that you read and **think hard** about them. It will normally
address the historical period covered in the lectures the previous week, so
that you will all have had the benefit of hearing a lecture (or three) on the
subject you are to address, and be able to combine the notes you have made in
lecture hall with those you have made from your reading of the course
textbook, thus maximizing your knowledge of the period.

  
Students will complete three examinations and write four three to four page
papers.

**Required Books**

  * T.F.X. Noble, et al. _Western Civilization. The Continuing Experiment_ , 3rd edition, Volume 1 (Houghton Mifflin 2002). 
  * M. Perry, J.R. Peden & T.H. Von Laue, _Sources of the Western Tradition_ , 4th edition (Houghton Mifflin, 1999).   

Both available from the UVa bookstore.

Supplementing readings from these two books are a number of online documents.
These may be accessed through the links embedded in the course website.
Students should print out, and ensure that they bring to class, copies of
these online texts.

**Lectures**

!["The Stele of the Vultures": Organized Warfare, c.2400
B.C.](images/steele.jpg) Lectures will be held three times a week, and
although no roll-call will be taken, it is expected that students will attend.
It is not sufficient to simply read the textbook to pass this course. Every
Friday a series of key terms from that week's lectures will be added to the
course website. The definitions section of the exams will offer a selection
taken from this list, from which you may in turn choose a certain number to
define.

**Discussion Sessions**

Each week you should do the assigned reading BEFORE the scheduled meeting.
Come to class prepared to participate in the discussion led by your assistant,
but also to ask questions and raise subjects for yourself. For each week a
series of questions have been set, most of which draw upon the primary sources
that you have read, but several of which demand that you place this reading in
a wider context that you have gleaned from your reading of the text-book and
attendance at the lecture. These questions are not exhaustive, nor is it
necessary for every question listed to be discussed in the class: they are
addressed at the discretion of the TA, who may also ask additional questions
relating the sources to your broader knowledge of the period under study.

They merely serve to guide your reading, and your thought, to the key issues
of each text. Each assistant will explain the precise rules of how they wish
to organize their discussion session.

Students are expected to come to class with copies of **all** texts to be
discussed in that class.

**Essays**

![The Hellenistic Berlin Green Head, 1st century B.C.](images/greekhead.jpg)
Each student will be expected to submit FOUR essays of 3-4 pages each. On four
occasions during the term students are to select one question from the group
pertaining to a particular week's reading, and answer as a formal essay. This
must be submitted to the TA at the class where the question is to be
discussed. Please note that on any given class only answers to questions
pertinent to the current week are acceptable. The first date for submitting an
essay is the week beginning **9th September** , at which time students may
choose to submit an essay on aspects of Greek culture drawn from the list of
questions for week three. Students will have 12 available dates for the
submission of their essays, and may submit their four on any of these dates.
Given the flexibility of this schedule, there will be no late papers and no
extensions. Students may, however, elect to submit FIVE essays, and then have
only the four best marks count towards the final grade. The extra fifth essays
conforms to the same requirements as the other four, i.e., it has to be
submitted to class the week in which the question is to be discussed. Essays
must be polished and well-presented.

**Examinations**

There will be three examinations, two during the semester and one during the
final examination period. All are **closed book** examinations, and will take
place in the lecture hall. All answers must be submitted in **blue books** ,
which are available from the UVa bookstore.

**The first two exams** are an hour long, and divided into two sections. In
the first part, students are required to define a series of words or phrases,
drawn from the lists of terms posted on the course web-site at the close of
each week (see below). In the exam's second section, they must identify and
comment critically upon a choice of unlabelled extracts from the primary
sources that they have read, explaining their historical importance, and the
light they shed upon the era in which they were written. Neither of the first
two exams will be comprehensive, that is to say that each will address the
material that immediately preceded it in the term.

**The final exam** is three hours long, and in addition to the sections
present in the first two exams, it contains a third component in which
students are required to write an essay length answer to one question that
they select from a list of about fifteen. The essay selected will be on themes
and issues that span the whole chronological span of the class.

**First Exam** : 10.00-11.00, 30th September 2002  
**Second Exam** :10.00-11.00, 4th November 2002  
**Third Exam** : 9.00-12.00, 10th December 2002  

**Grading Standards**

Weekly marks will be entered for each student's participation in the
discussion sessions according to the following scale:

**0** Absent.

**1** Present. Does not voluntarily contribute. Has difficulty responding when
called upon. Shows little interest, and no evidence of having completed the
assigned reading.

![Michael Holford, Coffin Portraits from the Faiym, 2nd century
A.D.](images/coffin1.jpg)**2** Occasionally participates voluntarily. Can
respond, minimally, when called upon. Shows very basic level of preparation,
but gives no evidence of critical thought and thorough analysis.

**3** Participates frequently. Makes effective interventions in class. Knows
basic information, and can offer interpretations, analyses and critical
reflections. Shows real interest, and gives evidence of having completed, and
understood, the assigned reading. Responds to other students' points.

**4** Participates all the time, without having to be called on. Responds to
issues raised by both the assistant and fellow students. Knows how to work in
a discussion-based environment. Keeps to the point. Consistently displays
careful, critical analytical reading of the week's assignments.  
  
Students can assume that the numbers can be translated into letter grades
ranging from F (0) to A (4). It is expected that students will improve over
time, that anyone can have a bad day, and that even the most conscientious
student will find some assignments harder than others. Consequently, these
numbers are objective benchmarks, rather than hard and fast rules.

**Grading**

The grading system used in this course is very straightforward.

Exams 50%  
Discussion section 25%  
Essays 25%

**Special Policies**

The instructor and the assistants all keep regular office hours, posted at the
top of this web-site. We are here to help in any way we can, and would, in any
case, enjoy having an opportunity to talk with you. If you are experiencing
difficulties in the course, please bring them to our attention early in the
term so that we can make a prompt start on removing them. Students who require
special consideration for reasons of health or personal circumstance are
strongly advised to make their situation known to their TA at the earliest
opportunity.

**Lectures, Readings and Significant Dates**

**Week One: The Earliest Civilizations**

  * Lectures: 
    * Wednesday, 28 August: ' **Origins: What is Civilization?** ' 
    * Friday, 30 August: ' **Mesopotamia** '
  * Reading: 
    * Noble, pp. 3-21
  * [Discussion:](intro/questions.html#1) ' **Orientation** '
  * [Terms](terms.html#1)
  * [Timeline](timeline.html#1)

**![Michael Holford, Coffin Portraits from the Faiym, 2nd century
A.D.](images/coffin2.jpg)Week Two: Ancient Empires**

  * Lectures: 
    * Monday, 2 September: ' **The Gift of the Nile: Egypt** '
    * Wednesday, 4 September: ' **Assyria, Neo-Babylonians and Phoenicians** '
    * Friday, 6 September: ' **Israel** '
  * Reading: 
    * Noble, pp. 21-57
  * [Discussion](intro/questions.html#2): ' **Gilgamesh and Hammurabi: Ancient Mesopotamia** '
  * [Terms](terms.html#2)
  * [Timeline](timeline.html#2)

**Week Three: The Rise of Classical Greece**

  * Lectures: 
    * Monday, 9 September: ' **A Land of Heroes: Early Greece** '
    * Wednesday, 11 September: ' **Society and Power in Archaic Greece: _Polis_ and _demokratia_** '
    * Friday, 13 September: ' **Classical Greece** ' 
  * Reading: 
    * Noble, pp. 57-103
  * [Discussion](intro/questions.html#3): ' **Israel** ' 
  * [Terms](terms.html#3)
  * [Timeline](timeline.html#3)

**Week Four: The Hellenistic World**

  * Lectures: 
    * Monday, 16 September: ' **Greek Drama** ' 
    * Wednesday, 18 September: ' **Philip of Macedon and Alexander the Great** '
    * Friday, 20 September: ' **The Macedonian Legacy** '
  * Reading: 
    * Noble, pp. 104-135 
  * [Discussion](intro/questions.html#4): ' **Culture and Society in Greece** '
  * [Terms](terms.html#4)
  * [Timeline](timeline.html#4)

**Week Five: Republican Rome**

  * Lectures: 
    * Monday, 23 September: ' **Roman Origins** '
    * Wednesday, 25 September: ' **Matrons, Patrons and Clients: Republican Roman Society** '
    * Friday, 27 September: ' **The Making of an Empire, the Death of a Republic** ' 
  * Reading: 
    * Noble, pp. 137-171
  * [Discussion](intro/questions.html#5): ' **The Golden Age of Greek Thought** '
  * [Terms](terms.html#5)
  * [Timeline](timeline.html#5)

**![Astrologer with an Astrolabe, c. 1100 A.D.](images/astrologer.jpg)Week
Six: Imperial Rome and the Emergence of Christianity**

  * Lectures: 
    * Monday, 30 September: **First Exam**.
    * Wednesday, 2 October: ' **Augustus and the _Pax Romana_** ' 
    * Friday, 4 October: ' **Rome in Crisis: the Third Century** '
  * Reading: 
    * Noble, pp. 173-191 
  * [Discussion](intro/questions.html#6): ' **Republican Rome** '
  * [Terms](terms.html#6)
  * [Timeline](timeline.html#6)

**Week Seven: Late Antiquity**

  * Lectures: 
    * Monday, 7 October: **No Class** (Reading Holiday)
    * Wednesday, 9 October: ' **Early Christianity** ' 
    * Friday, 11 October: ' **The Empire Christianized** '
  * Reading:
    * Noble, pp. 191-237
  * [Discussion](intro/questions.html#7): ' **Life and Culture under the _Pax Romana_** '
  * [Terms](terms.html#7)
  * [Timeline](timeline.html#7)

**Week Eight: The Post-Roman Successor States**

  * Lectures: 
    * Monday, 14 October: ' **Barbarians and Byzantium** '
    * Wednesday, 16 October: ' **The Changing Face of Christianity** '
    * Friday, 18 October: ' **Europe after Empire** '
  * Reading: 
    * Noble, pp. 219-237
  * [Discussion](intro/questions.html#8): ' **From Classical Culture to Christianity: the Late Antique Transition** '
  * [Terms](terms.html#8)
  * [Timeline](timeline.html#8)

**Week Nine: The Rise of Europe**

  * Lectures: 
    * Monday, 22 October: ' **Jihad: the Rise of Islam** '
    * Wednesday, 24 October: ' **The Father of Europe: Charlemagne and Carolingian Culture** '
    * Friday, 26 October: ' **Europe in 1000 AD** '
  * Reading: 
    * Noble, pp. 238-284
  * [Discussion](intro/questions.html#9): ' **Father of Europe: Charlemagne** '
  * [Terms](terms.html#9)
  * [Timeline](timeline.html#9)

**![Joan of Arc, c. 1455](images/joanofarc.jpg)Week Ten: The Central Middle
Ages**

  * Lectures: 
    * Monday, 28 October: ' **The World of the Crusades** '
    * Wednesday, 30 October: ' **Medieval Culture and the Rise of the Universities** '
    * Friday, 1 November: ' **Medieval Society** '
  * Reading: 
    * Noble, pp. 284-352
  * [Discussion](intro/questions.html#10): ' **Knights, Priests, Students and Pilgrims: Medieval Society** '
  * [Terms](terms.html#10)
  * [Timeline](timeline.html#10)

**Week Eleven: The Later Middle Ages**

  * Lectures: 
    * Monday, 4 November: **Second Exam**.
    * Wednesday, 6 November: ' **The Flowering of the Middle Ages** '
    * Friday, 8 November: ' **Emperors and Crusaders** '
  * Reading: 
    * Noble, pp. 355-371
  * [Discussion](intro/questions.html#11): ' **Thinking and Living in the Medieval University** '
  * [Terms](terms.html#11)
  * [Timeline](timeline.html#11)

**Week Twelve: Plague and Popular Rebellion**

  * Lectures:
    * Monday, 11 November: ' **The Fourteenth Century** '
    * Wednesday, 13 November: ' **Plague and Pestilence: the Black Death** '
    * Friday, 15 November: ' **The Humanist Enterprise** '
  * Reading: 
    * Noble, pp. 371-403
  * [Discussion](intro/questions.html#12): ' **Late Medieval Society** '
  * [Terms](terms.html#12)
  * [Timeline](timeline.html#12)

**Week Thirteen: The Renaissance**

  * Lectures: 
    * Monday, 18 November: ' **Art and Power: Renaissance Culture** '
    * Wednesday, 20 November: **No Class** (Thanksgiving Recess)
    * Friday, 22 November: **No Class** (Thanksgiving Recess)
  * Reading: 
    * Noble, 403-427. 

**![Paul Kershaw, Cloister of the Church of San Zeno, Verona,
1994](images/verona.jpg)Week Fourteen: New Conquests, New Empires**

  * Lectures: 
    * Monday, 25 November: ' **Machiavelli** '
    * Wednesday, 27 November: ' **The World of Exploration** ' 
    * Friday, 29 November: ' **Reformation Europe** '
  * Reading: 
    * Noble, pp. 429-459
  * [Discussion](intro/questions.html#14): ' **An Age of Rebirth? Understanding Renaissance Civilization** '
  * [Terms](terms.html#14)
  * [Timeline](timeline.html#14)

**Week Fifteen: The World of the Reformation**

  * Lectures: 
    * Monday, 2 December: ' **Martin Luther** '
    * Wednesday, 4 December: ' **The Catholic Reformation** '
    * Friday, 6 December: ' **The View from 1600: Thinking about the Western Tradition** '
  * Reading: 
    * Noble, pp. 461-496
  * [Discussion](intro/questions.html#15): ' **Belief and Society at the Dawn of the Modern World** '
  * [Terms](terms.html#15)
  * [Timeline](timeline.html#15)

**Final Exam: Tuesday, 10 December 2002, 9:00-12:00**

