Fall 2001

Final exam

AMH 4231

United States, 1914-1945

Instructor: Robert H. Zieger. Office is 236 Keene-Flint. Hours: Monday,
12:30-1:40; Thursday, 3:00-4:30; Friday, 9:00-10:00. Reachable at 392-0271, ex
252 and zieger@ufl.edu[.] Website: http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/rzieger[.]  


**Course objectives** : 1) To help students to develop a sophisticated
understanding of key themes in 20th century history; 2) To encourage students
to construct a coherent personal view of the national past; 3) To help
students toward a better informed and more effective conception of
citizenship; 4) To further students' ability to think and express themselves,
particularly in their writing.  


**Examinations, grading** : There is a mid-term exam, to be handed in Oct. 12
(20%), and a final exam (25%), to be handed in on (or before) Dec. 13.
Periodic reading quizzes count a total of 25%. A term project is due as
indicated below and counts 30%. Exams are take-home and follow an essay
format. Note: A grade of at least 60% on the quizzes is needed for a passing
grade in the course.  


**Readings** : Robert Zieger, _America's Great War_ ; David J. Goldberg,
_Discontented America: The United States in the 1920s_ ; Ronald Edsforth, _The
New Deal_ ; William O'Neill, _A Democracy at War_. A coursepack, also listing
materials to be read on-line via JSTOR or available on reserve, is available
at T.I.S. College Bookstore, 1222 W. University Ave. Note: Two copies of
Zieger, _America's Great War_ have been placed on two-hour reserve. Royalties
(about $3.00 per book sold) generated by sales for this course are donated to
the Department of History's George E. Pozzetta Fund, administered by the UF
Foundation.  
    
    
  

List of non-book readings:

Note: Items marked *** are available via [JSTOR](http://www.jstor.org/jstor/);
others are in coursepack.  


K. Walter Hickel, "War, Region, and Social Welfare: Federal Aid to
Servicemen's Dependents in the South, 1917-1921," _Journal of American
History_ 87:4 (March 2001): 1362-91  


***David Williams, "The Bureau of Investigation and Its Critics, 1919-1921:
The Origins of Federal Political Surveillance," _Journal of American History_
68:3 (Dec. 1981): 560-79  


Robert H. Zieger, "Solving the Labor Problem: Herbert Hoover and the American
Worker in the 1920's," _Herbert Hoover Reassessed_ (Government Printing
Office, 1981), 177-86  


Melvyn P. Leffler, "1921-1932: Expansionist Impulses and Domestic
Constraints," _Economics and World Power: An Assessment of American Diplomacy
since 1789_ , ed. William H. Becker and Samuel F. Wells, Jr. (NY: Columbia
University Press, 1984), 225-75  


Mae M. Ngai, "The Architecture of Race in American Immigration Law: A
Reexamination of the Immigration Act of 1924," _Journal of American History_
86: 1 (June 1999): 67-92  


***Jacquelyn Dowd Hall, "Disorderly Women: Gender and Labor Militancy in the
Appalachian South," _Journal of American History_ 73:2 (Sept. 1986): 354-382  


***Allan J. Lichtman, "Critical Election Theory and the Reality of American
Presidential Politics, 1916-1940," _American Historical Review_ 81:2 (April
1976): 317-51  


Lois Rita Helmbold, "Downward Occupational Mobility During the Great
Depression: Urban Black and White Working Women," _Labor History_ 29: 2
(Spring 1988): 135-172  


***Ronald Tobey, Charles Wetherell, and Jay Brigham, "Moving Out and Settling
in: Residential Mobility, Home Owning, and the Public Enframing of
Citizenship, 1921-1950," _American Historical Review_ 95: 5 (Dec. 1990):
1395-1422  


***Mark H. Leff, "The Politics of Sacrifice on the American Home Front in
World War II," _Journal of American History_ 77:4 (March 1991): 1296-1318  


***Ronald Schaffer, "American Military Ethics in World War II: The Bombing of
German Civilians," _Journal of American History_ 67: 2 (Sept. 1980): 318-334  


***Richard Dalfiume, "The 'Forgotten Years' of the Negro Revolution," _Journal
of American History_ (1968)  
    
    
  

*****

**Unpleasant reminder** : Students are alerted to the Department of History's
statement on Academic Honesty, contained in the Department's Manual on
Policies and Procedures. This statement covers plagiarism, attribution,
citation, multiple submission of papers, bogus data, plain old cheating, and
student defense. Students are expected to be, or to become, familiar with
standard legitimate practices and may inspect the above document in the
Department office, Room 25, Keene-Flint Hall. I'll be happy to advise and
counsel on these matters.

Class sessions

Students are expected to come to class prepared to discuss the material
assigned for that day. Always expect a quiz.

**The Great War** Aug. 22

Aug. 24-Zieger, _America's Great War_ , chs. 1-2

Aug. 27- _AGW_ , ch. 3

Aug. 29- _AGW_ , ch. 4

Aug. 31- _AGW_ , ch. 5

Sept. 5-Hickel, "War, Region, and Social Welfare" (coursepack [henceforth CP])

Sept. 7- _AGW_ , ch. 6

Sept. 10-Goldberg, _Discontented America_ , pp. 28-39

Sept. 12- _AGW_ , ch. 7

Sept. 14-- Williams, "The Bureau of Investigation and Its Critics" (JSTOR)  
    
    
  

**The Roaring Twenties** Sept. 17- _DA_ , ch. 3

Sept. 19- _DA_ , ch. 4

Sept. 21--Zieger, "Solving the Labor Problem" (CP); website fact sheet

Sept. 24--Hall, "Disorderly Women" (JSTOR)

Sept. 26--Leffler, "1921-1932: Expansionist Impulses and Domestic Constraints"
(CP)

Sept. 28- _DA_ , ch. 5

Oct. 1- _DA_ , ch. 6

Oct. 3- _DA_ , ch. 7; Ngai, "The Architecture of Race in American Immigration
Law" (CP)

Oct. 5- _DA_ , ch. 8; Lichtman, "Critical Election Theory" (JSTOR); mid-term
questions distributed  
    
    
  

**Depression and New Deal**

Oct. 8-Edsforth, _The New Deal_ , chs. 1-2

Oct. 10- _ND_ , ch. 3-4

Oct. 12--Helmbold, "Downward Occupational Mobility During the Great
Depression" (CP)

Oct. 15- _ND_ , ch. 5-6

Oct. 17- _ND_ , ch. 7-8

Oct. 19- _ND_ , ch. 9

Oct. 22- _ND_ , ch. 10 to p. 241

Oct. 24- _ND_ , pp. 242-52

Oct. 26-Tobey, Wetherell, and Brigham, "Moving Out and Settling In" (JSTOR)

Oct. 29- _ND_ , ch. 11 and Epilogue

Oct. 31-Zieger website "handouts" on interwar diplomacy

**World War II**

Nov. 5-O'Neill, _A Democracy at War_ , to p. 73

Nov. 7- _DAW_ , 75-152; 201-24

Nov. 9-Leff, "The Politics of Sacrifice" (JSTOR)

Nov. 14- _DAW_ , 153-99

Nov. 16- _DAW_ , 225-66

Nov. 19-Dalfiume, "The 'Forgotten Years' of the Negro Revolution" (JSTOR)

Nov. 21- _DAW_ , 267-319

Nov. 26-Schaffer, "American Military Ethics in World War II" (JSTOR)

Nov. 28- _DAW_ , 321-90

Nov. 30-Continue

Dec. 3- _DAW_ , 391-434

Dec. 5-Continue; final exam questions distributed.

******

Term project

Each student will be assigned a specific month and year of an American
newspaper. She or he will read the paper (microform room, Library West) for
that month and will construct a paper based on this reading. The project will
be submitted in stages, as indicated below.

Stage 1 (due Sept. 14): Read the lead article (i.e., the article that occupies
the far righthand column of the first page) in the newspaper for the10th of
the month assigned and write a 250-word, double-spaced synopsis. (15% of
Project grade).

Stage 2 (due Nov. 19): Choose one of the themes listed below (or develop your
own in consultation with me). Read through the newspaper for the month
assigned with particular reference to the treatment of this theme. Identify
from the **bibliographical material in the required reading** (i.e., the
endnotes in O'Neill; the "Further Reading" listings in Edsforth; the footnotes
in the coursepack and JSTOR readings) two other significant secondary sources.
Write an 8-10 page (double-spaced) paper summarizing and illustrating the
newspaper's treatment of this theme and commenting on how and the extent to
which our current understanding of this theme, as advanced by the historians,
both the authors of required class readings and those whose work you have
selected from the **bibliograhical material in the required reading** ,
differs from, confirms, or modifies views present in the newspaper. About 2/3
of the paper should be summary and illustration and 1/3 commentary. Be sure to
include references to relevant required readings and the two outside sources
in developing your paper. (65% of Project grade).

Stage 3 (due Dec. 3): Revise your paper in light of my comments and
criticisms. (20% of Project grade).

Start off your paper with a paragraph indicating your most important
conclusions, both as to the newspaper's treatment of the chosen theme and the
ways in which our views of this subject have changed over the years. I will
judge your paper on grammar, spelling, transitions between paragraphs, syntax,
punctuation, organization, and overall logic and coherence, as well as on
"content." per se.

Historians write in the active voice and chose active verbs and concrete
nouns. They avoid cliches. They get to the point. They include frequent
specific chronological references. They proofread obsessively. They strive
always for clarity. More detailed advice about writing is posted on the course
website.  
    
    
  

_Themes:_

African-Americans

Gender

Labor relations

U.S. foreign policy

The Soviet Union

The reigning president

First Amendment (civil) liberties

Federal government's role in economic activities

The greatest domestic threat facing the country

    Notes: In compiling this information, be sure to use the whole newspaper for the whole month. You don't have to read every page but do cover the whole month chronologically. Draw the quotations and illustrative photoduplications (see below) from as wide a scope, both chronologically and in terms of parts of the newspaper, as is possible. Do consult the various sections of the newspaper, not neglecting advertisements, editorials, and features, as well as regular news columns. On some topics, the sports, society, business, and/or entertainment pages will be rich in relevant information. Carefully distinguish, both in your own mind and in your writing, these various kinds of material. You will be reading, for example, press service dispatches, by-lined articles by the paper's correspondents, by-lined feature articles, by-lined news analyses, unsigned editorials, letters to the editor, and other kinds of material. Be sure that the important distinctions between and among these various kinds of journalism are observed in your paper.

    Attach to your paper three photoduplicated examples of the treatment of your theme found in the paper. These may be typical or unusually revealing articles, representative photographs or advertisements, and whatever else you think best illustrates the paper's handling of the theme. In your choices, strive for diversity in terms of the dates from which examples are chosen, the kind of material (graphic vs. written), and section of the paper (e.g., news section, sports, editorial, features).

    In the first 2/3 of your paper--the summary-and-illustration part--choose key quotes from the paper to develop your overview. But don't get carried away. No more than 20% of the writing in this section should be quoted material. And all quotes must be identified in terms of author and date and page number.

    When comparing the paper's treatment of the theme with that of subsequent historians, refer primarily to the required reading for this course and to the items you have selected from the bibliographies. When writing this section, be sure that you provide accurate and generous citations to historical works consulted.

_Grade Sheet for part 2 of Term Project_ (based on 65 points total)

**Opening paragraph gives overall perspective, central conclusions? (10
points)

**Survey of paper's' treatment is thorough, insightful, balanced? (15 points)

**Quality of outside sources chosen; incorporation of relevant required
readings; understanding of and effective use of historians' perspectives (20
points)

**Quality of writing; conformity to posted rules (15 points)

**Choice of xeroxed materials (5 points)

******

**How to  write** 1\. The **first paragraph** of a historical paper, be it a
research paper, short synopsis, or book review, should contain the author's
central thesis or conclusions. The author must mention all important actors,
as well as inclusive dates of coverage and basic concepts or historical
developments in the first paragraph.

2\. Use vigorous, direct language. Short sentences work. Employ concrete,
precise nouns and active verbs, being careful, for example, to find active
substitutes for forms of the verb "to be" and "to go." Instead of "The boat
went up the river," "The freighter chugged up the river."

3\. Use the active, not the passive voice, in your prose. The active voice
places the subject before the action. Active voice: On opening day, McGwire
blasted his 71st home run. Passive voice: His 71st home run was blasted by
McGwire on opening day. (See the elaboration of this point below).

4\. Avoid all first-person or surrogate references. By "surrogate" I mean such
terms as one, we, the current writer.

5\. Avoid discussion of method, intentions, and structure. There is no need to
intrude explicit statements of authorial intention ("In the following pages, I
am going to argue that. . . ."-just state the argument) or to deliver
bulletins about the paper's structure ("This paper is divided into three
sections. . . ."-just state your three central arguments or observations in a
well-crafted opening paragraph).

I agree with scholar Samuel Hynes that "the less obtrusive the story-teller
is, the better for the story, and . . . when an assertive narrating
personality shoulders his [or her] way between the reader and the subject,
biography [and history] suffer. . . ."

6\. Inclusion of frequent chronological references and **their placement at
the beginnings of sentences, paragraphs, phrases, and so forth** contributes
significantly to more accessible and dynamic prose.

7\. On a related point, an author must be careful in selecting the time
boundaries for her paper but once having established them she must not extend
them in the text. Authors should observe this rule on the level of the
paragraph as well. For example: If the title of your paper is something like
"Gainesville Goes to War, 1917-19," it is not appropriate to mention in the
text any event or development that occurred after 1919, except possibly in an
introductory paragraph. If the writer finds herself "stretching" the
chronological boundaries of the paper to make points that seem important but
falling beyond the original time limits established, she needs to adjust the
paper's explicit focus and change the title. Thus, for example, "Gainesville
Goes to War, 1917-1919" might be retitled: "The Impact of World War I
Mobilization on the Citizens of Gainesville, 1917-1941."

8\. It is easy to fall into stuffy, pompous, trite rhetorical patterns. Double
negatives, for example, often only lend inflated importance to commonplace
observations. The gratuitous imputation of erroneous views to the reader is
another bad habit (as in: "It would be unfair to conclude that Nixon was a
homosexual. . ."; or "It would be a gross overstatement to say that the South
won the Civil War. . . ." In both cases, the **reader** is being warned
against making an error that the author is actually suggesting).

9\. Don't use lengthy block quotes. Always paraphrase and integrate into your
own prose. Confine quoted words to short, distinctive selections,
subordinating quoted material to your own purposes and your own language.

10\. There is much dismissive talk these days about so-called "political
correctness." It is important for serious people to weigh carefully their
language when referring to ethnicity, race, gender, and other politically
charged subjects. Many complaints about the need to be "politically correct"
reflect a desire on the part of politically or culturally dominant groups or
interests to have license in the language they use to characterize or refer to
minority, subordinated, or vulnerable groups. Language is a powerful tool. Use
it judiciously, carefully, and with due respect for your fellow human beings.
No one ever accused Adolph Hitler of being "politically correct."  
    
    
  

**Common errors and bad habits**

1\. Run-on sentences. When in doubt, start a new sentence.

2\. Misplaced modifiers. ("Jumping out of bed, my shoulder hurt"; "Based on
this evidence, Prof. Jones argues. . . ").

3\. Quotations and punctuation marks. Remember these lifetime rules: In
American English--  


> Commas and periods _always_ go inside quotation marks;

> Colons and semi-colons _always_ go outside quotation marks;

>

> Question marks and exclamation points (which latter you have no need for in
this paper) depend on the context.

4\. Distinguish between possessives, which take the apostrophe, and plurals,
which don't. There are specific rules for plural possessives (e.g., for nouns
ending in s, add apostrophe s to make the possessive; but for pluralized nouns
otherwise not ending in s, just add the apostrophe). Examples: Margaritas are
made with tequila (correct). Margaritas' [or Margarita's] are made with lime
juice (incorrect). The Margaritas' intoxicatory properties turned me into a
zombie (correct).

5\. Watch out for **its** and **it's**. **Its** is the possessive, as in "I
liked the house because of its roominess." **It's** is the contraction for it
is, as in "It's going to rain today."

6\. Adjectives and adverbs--get rid of as many as possible. In general, the
higher the proportion of verbs in your writing, the more vigorous and
effective it will be. Especially, strike the words "very" and "interesting"
from your written vocabulary.

6\. Comparisons and parallels. Make sure that when you make or draw them, the
terms are consistent with each other. ("In regard to onions, Harding's smelled
stronger than Coolidge"--should be: stronger than "those of Coolidge" or
"Coolidge's.")

7\. Be a "which" hunter, substituting "that" wherever possible.

8\. When dealing with human beings, "who" is the correct pronoun; "that" is
never acceptable (as in: I met a man who [not that] once tended Sir Douglas
Haig's horse).

9\. In quotations, always make clear the identity of the person whom you
quote. Every quote needs a "signature phrase," indicating the identity and/or
standing of the person being quoted.

*****

Rules for take-home exams

Questions for take-home exams will be distributed on the dates indicated in
the syllabus. I'll also post them on the course website. Students are expected
to choose one question on which to write and to produce a well-crafted essay
that responds to the question thoughtfully.

1\. In grading these papers, I give great weight to the first paragraph. It
must contain _your most significant conclusions about the subject under
discussion_. It is likely that you will re-write the first paragraph after
finishing the main body of the essay because it is often the case that a
writer gains a full sense of her or his argument only after working through
the issues.

2\. Papers must be typed and _double spaced_. Staple the pages.

3\. Answers must not exceed 1500 words (the equivalent of 6 typed, double-
spaced sheets).

4\. In developing your response to the question you choose to write on, make
significant use of a book located through the bibliographical essays in the
required texts and/or referred to in coursepack readings footnotes **in
addition to** relevant required class readings. Consult with me (via e-mail,
for example) to locate applicable readings after you have perused these
bibliographical locations. Be sure to refer to this source by author and brief
title in your essay.

5\. Respond to the question in your own words, drawing on class presentations,
required readings, and the selected additional source (see no. 4 above).
Confine any quoted material, which must be informally cited by author, to no
more than 10% of your wordage.

6\. Refer specifically to the books and articles upon which you draw, whether
you quote them or merely refer to them. Always make the identity of the author
clear. ("As Woodly Darrow argues. . ."; or, "Contrary to the view of Frieda
Burpp. . .").

7\. Be precise in references to people, organizations, legislative acts, court
decisions, and so forth. Make sure the essay contains frequent references to
chronology and that it develops in a clear chronological fashion.

8\. See the section Zieger's Writing Rules in the term project assignment
handout for more detailed advice about writing and mechanics.

9\. Questions, suggestions, advice, encouragement? I'm your guy.

Grading weights First paragraph. 15 pts.

Cogency of overall approach. 25 pts.

Factual accuracy and chronological development. 15 pts.

Use of required readings. 10 pts.

Quality of and engagement with student-selected sources. 15 pts.

Quality of writing (organization, clarity, observance of writing rules). 20
pts.  
    
    
  

*****  
Record of class sessions AMH 4231

August 22, 2001. Showed images by way of overview of course coverage.

August 24, 2001: This quiz was administered and some of the class session was
taken up with discussion of these questions, explaining both the wrong and
right answers. Here is the answer key: 1-b; 2-a; 3-d; 4-c; 5-all answers
correct.

Quiz for August 24 (Friday): Reference to Zieger, _America's Great War_ ,
chapters 1 and 2 and to Woodrow Wilson's War Message, April 2, 1917

1\. According to Zieger, which of the follow statements best characterizes the
role of the US in the events leading to the outbreak of war in Europe in
August, 1914: a) The US naval alliance with Great Britain was a decisive
factor in encouraging the British to resist German aggression; b) the US had
no role in the diplomatic and military events leading to the outbreak of war;
c) the "hidden agenda" of German foreign policy in 1914 was to resist US
economic influence; d) US support of its traditional ally France moderated
German demands and encouraged the French to attack Germany.

2\. Wilson's efforts to broker a victoryless peace in the period 1914-17
failed largely because: a) both the Allies and Germany insisted on what
amounted to non-negotiable demands; b) Wilson's tilt toward Germany alienated
the British and the French; c) both sides feared America's great military
might; d) Wilson's naked advocacy of US economic interests discredited his
insincere appeals for peace without victory.

3\. Which of the following statements best characterizes Zieger's view of the
relation of US economic activity to the European war in the period 1914-17: a)
whereas once scholars depicted US economic and financial activity as having
been critical to the Allies' war effort, we now know that in fact the war had
little impact on the American economy; b) since both the Allies and the
Central Powers (i.e., Germany and Austria-Hungary) were largely self-
sufficient industrially and agriculturally, the US remained marginal to the
war throughout this period; c) US loans to England, France, and Russia were
the direct and most critical reason for the American declaration of war in
1917; d) while the US economy became increasingly enmeshed in the Allied war
effort, Wilson's determination not to let

economic factors control US policy was both sincere and operative.

4\. With respect to the controversies over neutral shipping rights in the
period 1914-17, which of the following statements is most valid: a) whereas
the US protested vehemently against German resort to submarine warfare, it had
few quarrels with its ancient trading partner, Great Britain; b) ironically,
the US declared war just as Germany was on the verge of renouncing submarine
warfare; c) Wilson denounced the British blockade but regarded Germany's
submarine warfare as a more serious and reprehensible violation of the rights
of neutral nations such as the US; d) the sinking of the passenger liner
Lusitania led directly to the US declaration of war against Germany.

5\. In his war message to Congress, Wilson: a) expressed sympathy for the
German people even as he denounced that nation's autocratic government; b)
indicated that the US would fight alongside, but would not be formally allied
with, Britain, France, and Russia; c) pledged US leadership in creating a new
world order after victory had been achieved; d) championed the rights of small
nations to self-determination and protection from aggression.

*****

Monday, August 27. Reading was Zieger, _AGW_ , chapter 3.

*****

August 29, 2001

Note: An oversight on the original on-line syllabus resulted in nothing being
listed for Friday, Aug. 31. Clearly, chapter 5 of _America's Great War_ should
have been listed. Students attending class on Friday will have the opportunity
to take a "free' quiz on chapter 5. The points earned will be credited to the
student's semester quiz total but the quiz itself will not be counted as part
of the total quiz points.

Reading: Zieger, _America's Great War_ , chapter 4. Discussion centered on
these questions:

What were the biggest problems faced in military mobilization? Anti-military
traditions; WW's desire to play an honest broker; suddeness of German
declaration of unrestricted submarine warfare.

Why did it take so long for US troops to become seriously engaged in action?
Lack of trained officer corps and cadres of non-commissioned officers to train
mass army; difficulties in transport and supply.

How did American political and military leaders believe that the US army would
be different in character and motivation from those of our allies and
adversaries in terms of motivation, morale, and moral character? More moral,
upright, fair-minded than decadent Europeans; fronteir traditions of rugged
individualism and sharpshooting; a democratic army with high ideals and noble
character.

In what ways did the US Army, taken overall, live up to these stereotypes, and
in what ways did it differ from them? In reality a polyglot army of
unprepossessing physical characteristics. Sec. of War Newton Baker tries hard
to instill Progressive Era morality. Treatment of African American troops
profoundly compromises US and the army's democratic claims. Mechanized warfare
has little room for individual heroics and fabled frontier virtues.

How did US and Allied conceptions of the military role that the US would play
differ? GB and France want US troops distributed piecemeal as rifle and
machine gun units; Pershing insists on full US divisions, with ordnance,
support, and intelligence, despite US deficiencies in transport, logistics,
and heavy weapons production. US fights as an associate, not an ally; seeks to
deploy its military in a way that will enhance its diplomatic influence in
postwar deliberations.

What were the ruling military doctrines of US commanders, notably General
Pershing? US leaders see US troops as restoring movement to the Western Front
and promote aggressive tactics based on the valor and aggressiveness of the
rifle-toting Doughboy. In reality, US tactics largely repeat the lethal mass
attack tactics of 1914-17.

Why did the fortunes of war shift so abruptly in the summer of 1918? German
gains can't be sustained. Foch's counterattacks catch the Germans, who had
suffered horrendous losses in their spring victories, with extended supply
lines and many vulnerable salients in their lines. Germany's economy, damaged
severely by the British blockade, is exhausted.

Why did Germany give up? Did Germany in fact give up? Second question first:
Yes and no. German army was defeated. German military ledership (Ludendorf)
forces civilian authorities to seek peace. But German army remained intact.
Germans claim that they sought an armistice but were confonted with demands
for de facto surrender.

Why did the Allies accept German request for an Armistice; why not invade
Germany? Could the Allies have sustained the huge losses that invasion of
Germany would have entailed? Would Britain and France have welcomed the growth
in US influence that a protracted war would have inevitably entailed? Was
there danger of a devastated Germany going Bolshevik?

Was the US military contribution to Allied victory decisive? Manpower more
than military prowess. Meuse-Argonne was not decisive (despite the 26,000
dead) but the prospect of an endless supply of well-fed and well-equipped
Americans certainly sapped Germany's will to resist as the Allies took to the
offensive in the summer and fall of 1918.

******

August 31. Reading was chapter 5 of _America's Great War_. There was a quiz,
which offered "free" points to those present and taking it. Here's the quiz:

Answer key: 1-c; 2-a; 3-d; 4-a; 5-a.  


1\. Which of the following statements is the most accurate with reference to
the general state of labor relations in the US in the WWI decade: a) Unusually
harmonious relations between labor and management prevailed; b) The radical
American Federation of Labor waged a losing battle against the more
conservative Industrial Workers of the World for the allegiance of the
American working class; c) This was a decade of strike activity of
unprecedented scale and continuity; d) Since the country was largely agrarian,
labor issues that troubled other belligerents rarely arose in the US.

2\. With respect to labor relations during the period of US belligerency, the
federal government: a) intervened in labor relations on an unprecedented
scale; b) created agencies such as the National War Labor Board that
discouraged workers from joining unions; c) was notable for its refusal to
subject even anti-war labor organizations such as the IWW to persecution; d)
followed a generally pro-labor course despite the anti-war stance of Samuel
Gompers and the American Federation of Labor.

3\. According to Zieger: a) the Wilson administration was an ardent champion
of civil rights for African Americans; b) irresponsible black militants were
primarily to blame for most of the racial violence that afflicted the US in
the 1910s; c) the entry of the US into the war abruptly stopped in hitherto
extensive migration of African Americans from the South to the North; d) the
war helped to stimulate civil rights activism among African Americans.

4\. Which of the following statements best characterizes the pre-World War
I-era women's movement: a) it focused on attaining the right of women to vote;
b) having achieved suffrage, it sought gender equality in the workplace and in
the military; c) it was far more militant and confrontational than its more
famous British counterpart; d) President Wilson led the fight for women's
suffrage.

5). Which of the following statements best describes women's participation in
the wartime labor force: a) while women did gain access to a wider range of
jobs than had been the case before the war, most of these opportunities did
not outlast the war; b) ironically, the absolute numbers and proportions of
women working for wages declined during the period of US belligerency; c)
despite aggressive organizing campaigns, organized labor found that docile and
frightened women workers were rarely willing to join unions; d) although women
were pressed into service to toil in a variety of industrial occupations, most
were eager to return to such characteristic pre-war female employment as
domestic service.

*****

September 5.

Reading: K. Walter Hickel, "War, Region, and Social Welfare: Federal Aid to
Servicemen's Dependents in the South, 1917-1921," _Journal of American
History_ 87:4 (March 2001): 1362-91

What does this account of an important public initiative indicate about:

The gender dynamics of early 20th century America

The racial dynamics

The role of the state in the lives of American citizens during this period

The impact of the war on ordinary citizens

The longer range impact and significance of the extraordinary measures thought
necessary to secure effective prosecution of the war

Specific questions:

Who was primarily responsible for launching the program of allowances and
allotments (A&A)?

Is Hickel's use of the terms "paternalist" and "maternalist" in characterizing
social programs of the early 20th century clear?

What were the intended consequences of the A&A program?

What significant unintended consequences emerged?

Who could possibly object to the seemingly worthy effort to provide for the
wives and children of the men who were fighting for the country? Why?

Hickel says that through the allotment and allowance program, the state became
a surrogate husband. Explain and comment.

On the whole, did this program empower women, or did it merely confirm their
subservient status?

What does Hickel's account of the attitudes of ordinary soldiers and their
ordinary wives suggest about the character of domestic relations during this
period in US history?

There were several good questions from members of the class. Discussion
clarified North-South differences in income and explored why the allotment
system had a particularly signficant impact in the South. Connections were
made between WWI "welfare"-type programs, such as the allotments and
allowances, on the one hand, and subsequent federal programs, through the
Sheppard-Towner Act and during the New Deal, on the other. A question arose
about the ability of southern blacks to resist or protest against the drastic
implementation of "Work or Fight" orders, as well as one about how the
government actually communicated this program to large numbers of citizens,
especially those without much formal education or experience with bureaucratic
procedures. The point was strongly made that during WWI the state forged, at
least briefly, a direct connection with a class of people hitherto outside its
normal purview, namely women, notably lower-income women, and more
specifically black women.

****

Quiz on chapter 6 of _America's Great War_. September 7, 2001 (This was posted
Sept. 6)

1\. Woodrow Wilson: a) was an economic determinist; b) believed in the
providential mission of America; c) was an outspoken critic of the racial
policies of European colonial powers; d) ignored the economic aspects of the
U.S. role in the world order.

2\. Which of the following statements about the Armistice is the most
accurate: a) U. S. General John J. Pershing urged invasion of Germany; b) the
German army's complete dissolution made an end to the war imperative; c) the
new German civilian government forced the German Army into capitulation; d)
Allied leaders were anxious to end the war in the West lest the Germans
destroy the democratic regime that had emerged in Russia.

3\. Which of the following statements best reflects Wilson's goals as he went
to Europe to begin negotiations: a) he sought recognition of U.S. hegemony in
Latin America; b) he was determined to force Britain and France to grant
freedom to their colonial possessions; c) he was determined to make Germany
pay substantial war reparations; d) he believed the U.S. moral and economic
leadership were the keys to lasting world peace.

4\. Which of the following statements about the Allies' position during the
Versailles peace conference is the most accurate: a) France urged a moderate
policy toward Germany, hoping to deflect German aggressive through peaceful
co-existence; b) the British renounced the so-called Secret Treaties in an
effort to curry favor with the moralistic Wilson; c) the British, French, and
Italians resented Wilson's moralistic approach to peace making; d) the Allies
broke with Wilson and repudiated the Treaty in hopes of imposing more rigorous
terms on the Germans.

5\. When the terms of the Versailles Treaty become known, the German
government: a) decided to resume the war rather than submit; b) declared that
in imposing such a harsh settlement their enemies had violated Wilson's
Fourteen Points; c) reluctantly accepted them and ended their blockade of
Allied ports; d) retaliated against the western Allies and the U.S. for
imposing such harsh provisions by compelling the hapless Russians to yield
vast territories in the East.

Students raised several excellent questions during the discussion, to wit:
what was going on on the Eastern Front in the latter stages of the war?; what
was the connection between WW's views on the economy and his efforts to
engineer a new world order?; when I criticized WW for failing to acknowledge
pre-war Belgian atrocities in the Congo and the ghastly death toll resulting
from the US war against Philippino insurrectionaries, 1899-1902, was I perhaps
not being unfair to him by holding him to current standards of human rights?
Re Eastern Europe, I noted the first and second Russian revolutions and the
chaotic conditions that prevailed throughout much of the former Russian and
Austo-Hungarian Empires, and the threat to the interests of statesmen in the
West, posed by the collapse of the Tsarist regime and the overthrow of the
pro-Allied Kerensky government in Russia by the Bolsheviks in October, 1917.
Also noted was the draconian peace imposed on the Bolsheviks at Brest-Litovsk
by the Germans in March, 1918\. Re Wilsonian economic attitudes and their
relation to his diplomatic endeavors, I stressed the close connection, arguing
that WW was a shrewd and aggressive promoter of US worldwide economic
interests, as suspcious of British motives and actions, as he was of those of
Germany. I stressed, though, that for WW, the dynamism and success of US-style
capitalism was not an end in itself but was imporant mainly because, in his
view, it permitted the emergence of a new, transcendent, and peaceful world
order. I noted that Wilsonian ideas were quite prevalent today in the new
global world order, though speculated that today's US statesmen and policy
makers probably privilege the theme of "free" markets rather than that of
human rights, seeing in market economies and untrammeled interantional trade
an automatic and benign association with human rights and general welfare, a
view that many people (e.g., protesters in Seattle and Genoa) would dispute
most vigorously. Re WW and the Congo, Philippines, and so forth, I reject the
notion that he was simply a child of his times. Many prominent intellectuals
(and remember, WW was a Ph.D. and the president of one of the country's
greatest universities before entering into a political career) were publically
critical of both the Belgian atrocities and the actions of the US in the
Philippines. WW, after all, claimed the role as champion of human rights,
partisan of democracy, scourge of colonialism.  
    
    
  

*****

Class session September 10. Reading: Goldberg, _Discontented America_ , pp.
28-39

Relationship between Wilson's diplomatic ambitions for a new world order and
the position of the US in the emerging postwar global economy.

  * Wilson's attitudes toward large corporations, financial interests. Critical, skeptical-they needed to be controlled in the public interest; bigness threatened to marginalize the little fellow. But WW in no sense anti-capitalist.
  * Wilson's views of the US relation to "Western" civilization and to Europe generally. US as the successor to Europe in advancing superior Western civilization, bringing it to inferior and less enlightened peoples. US has Christian dispensation.
  * Why would the Bolshevik Revolution pose a particular challenge to Wilson and people who viewed the world as he did? Closes Russia off to benign trade, economic development; challenges every major western institution-private property; representative government; Christianity. Note the danger of the appeal Bolshevism may have to the already-restive workers and soldiers upon whom the war effort depends so heavily.
  * How did Wilson's world view connect with US policies and interests in Latin America and the Far East? Latin America will receive the benefits of US trade and democratic governance. Asia a kind of new frontier for American business; and remember, the Philippines are a US possession that must be governed and, presumably, defended. Difficulties in dealing with Japan, which seeks a role in Asia similar to that claimed by the US in Latin America.
  * What specific provisions of the Versailles Treaty particularly reflected Wilson's distinctive view of the new world order that he sought to bring forth? Mandates; open diplomacy; end to trade barriers; League of Nations.
  


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


 What elements in his agenda were particularly distasteful to the Allies,
especially our British cousins? US-British rivalry is intense, before, during,
and after the war. Britain fearful of US international economic hegemony. With
whom does Canada, e.g., identify, the U.K. or the U.S.? Australia? And why is
the U.S. so critical of British efforts to subdue the Irish rebellion? U.S.
naval growth in WWI alarms the Brits.

*****

Class session September 12, 2001

Our reading today was the final chapter of _America's Great War_ , which deals
with the debate in the U.S. over the ratification of the Versailles Treaty and
U.S. participation in the League of Nations; problems of race, labor, and
civil liberties in the wake of war; the U.S. intervention in Russia, 1918-20;
and related subjects. In the next few days I will post some comments and
questions on this material in lieu of a formal class discussion of it today.
Friday's reading is David Williams, "The Bureau of Investigation and Its
Critics, 1919-1921: The Origins of Federal Political Surveillance," _Journal
of American History_ (Dec. 1981): 560-79, which is available vit the JSTOR
site. The section of chapter 7 in _AGW_ , "Reds and Reaction," pp. 194-203, is
particularly relevant to this essay.

It seemed appropriate today, though, to devote some attention to trying to use
the tools and sensibility of the historian to gain some better understanding
of what happened yesterday. Are there ways in which historically informed
reflection can help us to assess these events, both in a public-political way
and also with reference to our own lives in more personal and individual ways?
Are there ways in which the material we have been studying-the political and
diplomatic events surrounding the conclusion of the Great War; and the
behavior of the American people and their government in times of perceived
national crisis-can help us to achieve perspective on yesterday's events? As
historians, we are committed to the proposition that the only acceptable
answer is "yes."

1\. Du Bois said in 1906 that "The problem of the 20th century is the problem
of the color line." By this he meant more than that the fate of African
Americans was a crucial test of American democracy and American institutions.
He always put the domestic experiences of African Americans in the broad
context of people of color around the world. For our purposes, it is important
to see the horrendous events of yesterday as part of the story of a half-
millennium of Western hegemony and of the response of people of color to it.

2\. The theme of "The Other"; scholar Edward Said's concept of "Orientalism."
Imputing sub-human or extra-human characteristics to one's enemies (or those
whom you would educate or enlighten) is dangerous. Demonization of the Germans
during WWI; demonization of the Japanese during WWII; demonization of the
Americans by some people in the Middle East.

3\. Another context can be gained by trying to see yesterday's events in
relation to other episodes of mass human suffering. When I visited the French
town of Oradour last summer, where in 1944 German troops had massacred the
inhabitants and destroyed the village, I notice some African visitors as well.
Did they think, as they walked the streets of this unrestored village, of the
villages in Senegal or the Belgian Congo ravaged by Europeans? How much
"collateral damage" was suffered during our recent missile attacks on the
Somali pharmaceutical factory. 86,000 Japanese died at Hiroshima. Pol Pot
killed hundreds of thousands in the Cambodia gulag.

4\. There is a specific Middle Eastern context here. It is in the WWI era that
important seeds of the conflicted history of the modern Middle East were sown.
The Sykes-Picot Agreement of May, 1916, divided up the Middle East between
Britain and France; the Balfour Declaration of November, 1917, promised the
creation of a Jewish homeland in Palestine. The growing importance of the
Middle East as a source of petroleum, evident during and immediately after
WWI. The theme of the U.S. being the "heir to empire," that is, the inheritor
of the opportunities and burdens of European suzerainty, a favorite theme of
Wilson's. Is yesterday's destruction part of the price we pay for running the
new imperium?

5\. The theme of American innocence and invulnerability.

6\. The theme of civil liberties during a time of great national crisis and
peril.

***** Class session September 12, 2001

Our reading for today was the final chapter of _America's Great War_ , which
deals with the debate in the U.S. over the ratification of the Versailles
Treaty and U.S. participation in the League of Nations; problems of race,
labor, and civil liberties in the wake of war; the U.S. intervention in Russia
in 1918-1920; and related subjects. In the next few days I will post some
comments and questions on this material in lieu of a formal class discussion
of it today. Friday's reading is David Williams, "The Bureau of Investigation
and Its Critics, 1919-1921: The Origins of Federal Political Surveillance,"
_Journal of American History_ 68:3 (Dec. 1981): 560-79, which is available via
JSTOR (see link on syllabus). The section of chapter 7 "Reds and Reaction,"
pp. 194-203, is particular relevant to this essay.

It seemed appropriate to devote some attention today to trying to use the
tools and sensibility of the historian to gain some better understanding of
what happened yesterday. Are there ways in which historically based reflection
can help us to assess these events, both in a public-political way and with
reference to our own lives in more individual and personal ways? Are there
ways in which the material we have been studying-the political and diplomatic
events surrounding the conclusion of the Great War-can help us to gain
perspective on the events of yesterday? As historians, we are committed to the
proposition that "yes" is the only acceptable answer.

1\. Du Bois said in 1906 that "The problem of the 20th century is the problem
of the color line." By this he meant more than that the fate of African
Americans was a crucial test of American democracy and American institutions.
He always put the experience of African Americans in the broad context of
people of color around the world. For our purposes, it is important to see the
horrendous events of yesterday as part of the story of Western imperialism and
the response of people of color to it.

**Comment**. Everyone was so eager to talk about the events of Sept. 11 that
we did not get past this first question. We did make some effort to place the
NYC and Pentagon attacks in the context of 20 th century history, with
particular emphasis on the challenge on the part of people of color to western
hegemony. World War I-era developments-the Sykes-Picot Agreement of 1916, by
which, in effect the British and French divided up territory and spheres of
influence in the Middle East; the Balfour Declaration of 1917, indicating
British support for a Zionist homeland; the postwar maneuvering for oil
concessions-clearly connect to more recent conflicts in the Middle East and
pretty directly to the activities of some Islamic fundamentalists and Arab
nationalists against the U.S., which is, in many ways rightly, perceived as
the "heir to empire" (i.e., the successor to Britain as the chief western
presence in the world). In a curious way, the attacks on the World Trade
Center and the Pentagon pay a kind of tribune to Wilson's view that the U.S.
was to pick up the faltering torch of western civilization and carry it into
the 20th century and beyond. The subject of media punditry and so-called
expert opinion arose during the class discussion, with one commentator warning
against the glib sorts of analysis of contemporary world developments
associated with the likes of _NY Times_ columnist Thomas Friedman (author of
_The Lexus and the Olive Tree_ , a paean to the new global economy). Another
recent book in this vein, though stressing more the theme of the political
triumph of western ideas, is Francis Fukuyama, _The End of History and the
Last Man_ (1992). Also mentioned in class was Harvard University political
theorist Samuel Huntington, whose book _The Clash of Civilizations and the
Remaking of World Order_ (1996) speaks against these optimistic assessments
and stresses the irreducible nature of the great cultural divisions that
separate the world's various civilizations.

As for the other questions (see above), I'd be happy to discuss them with
students but, with the exception of no. 6, which we will be discussing on
Friday, they amount to variations on this theme.

With reference to the assigned reading for Sept. 12, _AGW_ , chapter 7, I'd
like to make the following points:

1\. Nineteen-nineteen was one of the most turbulent and violent in American
history. The most recent year that seems comparable would be 1968, with the
assassinations of Dr. King and Robert Kennedy; the escalating violence in
Vietnam and in opposition to the war there; the violence in Chicago at the
Democratic National Convention; the presidential candidacy of the George
Wallace campaign, with its thinly disguised racist appeal; and the general
conflict of values, life-styles, and public presence associated with the New
Left and the Counter Culture.

2\. The strikes of 1919, especially the steel strike of 1919-1920, brought the
highly successful wartime labor movement to a screeching halt and paved the
way for union rollback through the 1920s. This is especially noteworthy in
light of the vast expansion of numbers and, presumably, of influence and
legitimacy achieved by the American Federation of Labor just before and during
the war years.

3\. The big story through this entire period is the Great Migration of African
Americans into the North and Middle West. No development in the 20th century
more profoundly redirected the country's demographic, political, economic, and
cultural trajectory. The racial violence of this postwar period was savage
and, in effect, sanctioned by the state (and by the southern states).

4\. This period is notable for giving birth both to the intense surveillance
activities of the federal government and our modern conceptions of civil
liberties. The demonization of Germans and Reds and foreigners associated with
wartime and postwar repression provide, in my view, clear lessons for how not
to respond to the events of September 11, 2001. We'll discuss this more during
the Friday class.

5\. Finally, historians used to depict the conflict between Wilson and League
supporters, on the one hand, and Lodge and League skeptics on the other as a
fight between light and dark, good and evil, enlightenment and provincialism.
But nowadays we are not so sure. Irish- and German- Americans saw the League
as a victor's club, as a guarantor of existing (and, to them, unjust) colonial
and territorial arrangements. Many associated with the labor left saw it as a
vehicle for expanded corporate enterprise and for the promulgation of a new
form of economic imperialism. These were not Lodge's objections, which focused
on what now appear to be legitimate questions relating to national security,
the use of American armed forces, and the implications of Wilson's League for
the U.S. Constitution's separation of powers. Even so, though, it's hard not
to feel that joining the League would not have been worth the risk; and that
by not joining it, the U.S. sent a very negative and discouraging signal to
other nations.

*****

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Quiz for Friday, Sept. 14, 2001

Reading: David Williams, "The Bureau of Investigation and Its Critics,
1919-1921: The Origins of Federal Political Surveillance," _Journal of
American History_ 68:3 (Dec. 1981): 560-79

1\. According to Williams, the so-called "Red Scare" of 1919-20 has been over-
emphasized because on reflection we can see that the federal government and
its various agencies were actually scrupulously fair in dealing with dissent
and alleged subversion.

2\. Upon examining recently (as of 1981, that is) opened files, Williams finds
that federal agents did not confine themselves to investigating and harassing
alleged radicals and subversives but also targeted many conventional
politicians and groups for surveillance and harassment.

3\. At least one major American institution, the legal profession as
represented by the state and national bar associations, earns high marks for
stalwart defense of civil liberties in the face of officially sanctioned anti-
radical hysteria.

4\. Non-naturalized immigrants and other aliens were particularly vulnerable
to arbitrary arrest and subsequent legal proceedings without access to legal
counsel.

5\. Although the high-handed actions of the Bureau of Investigation, Military
Intelligence, and other federal agencies shocked many private citizens,
neither Congress nor the president (Woodrow Wilson in this case) made an
effort to uncover, rectify, or punish those responsible for the blatantly
illegal actions associated with postwar assaults on civil liberties.

***** Politics in the 1920s

Goldberg, _Discontented America_ , chapter 3. September 17, 2001  


1\. From Goldberg's discussion, what sense do you have of the constituencies
of the two main political parties? On what sources of voters did LaFollette's
supporters draw in 1924  


2\. How does Goldberg account for the GOP's overwhelming victories in 1920 and
1924? How do you account for them?  


3\. Is the content and trajectory of "Progressivism" clear to you during this
period (c. 1900-24)?  


4\. What policies and programs are associated with the Republican Party of the
1920s?  


5\. How do you account for declining voter participation during the first
quarter of the century?

*****

Quiz. September 19, 2001

Reading: Goldberg, _Discontented America_ , chapter 4

1\. Which of the following statements about the wave of strikes that broke in
1919 is the most accurate: a) while organized labor made major gains in
transport and communications, the defat of the steelworkers' strike was a
devastating blow; b) despite the fears of government leaders, industrial
relations remained calm and uneventful in the aftermath of war; c) the Wilson
administration continued its unwavering support of organized labor after the
war; d) a series of bitter defeats crushed the expectations of AFL leaders
that their wartime loyalty would result in continued gains.

2\. The term "American Plan" refers to: a) employers' determination to
forestall and root out unionism; b) the Wilson administration's policy of
encouraging worker representation; c) futile efforts on the part of
progressives to

