Spring 2000  
Department of Sociology  
University of Texas at Austin  
    
    
  

**SOC 308: Unique # 40920**

**Sociological Perspectives on Asian Americans**

**MWF 11:00 - 12:00: BUR 232**  
****  **Instructor:** |  Satomi Furuichi  
---|---  
**Office:  ** | Burdine 377  
**Office Hours:** |  MWF 10:00 - 11:00  
**Email:  ** | [satomi@soc.utexas.edu](mailto:satomi@mail.la.utexas.edu)  
  
**************** **Substantial Writing Component Course** *******************

**COURSE OBJECTIVE :**

Upon completion of the course you should be able to (1) understand the meaning
and the significance of the basic terminology used in the discussions on Asian
Americans in sociology literature (2) apply sociological framework to the
Asian American issues (3) know the scholarly discussions on Asian Americans
such as panethnicity, model minority, cultural or structural factors
associated with their socioeconomic adaptations.

**COURSE DESCRIPTION :**

This course surveys the experiences of Asian American groups in the
sociological context of the analysis of institutions and inter-group
relations. Topics include basic concepts involved in sociological research; a
history of Asian immigration to the United States; family, religion and
education of Asian Americans; patterns and processes relating to social
inequality affecting Asian Americans; and contemporary issues of Asian
Americans.

**REQUIRED READINGS :** Chan, Sucheng. 1991. _Asian Americans: An Interpretive
History_. Boston: Twayne Publishers. Available at the University Co-op on
Guadalupe.

A packet of assorted readings. Available at the University Duplicating
Service, UNB (Texas Union) 2.214, phone # 475-6675. To purchase a course pack,
I suggest you bring a copy of the course syllabus. **RECOMMENDED READING :**
Takaki, Ronald. 1998. _Strangers from a Different Shore: A History of Asian
Americans_. Penguin USA. Available at the University Co-op on Guadalupe.
**COURSE REQUIREMENTS :**

**Participation :**Attendance and participation to discussions are expected
from each member of the class. It is expected that students complete the
assigned readings before the class period, and ask any questions they may have
and engage in active discussion during the class. After a review of Asian
immigration history, the class is mainly based on students' discussions. Any
outside experience relating to Asian American life is encouraged to be
included in the discussions. Students are also expected to show respect for
other people's opinions. Attendance and class participation will count 15
percent of the total grade. To assure active discussions, each of the class
members will lead discussions as a pair at least twice during the semester,
and the rest of the class members will take quizzes over the readings.

**Short Essay : **You will be asked to write five one-page essays based on the
readings and discussions from class. The essays need to be turned in within
one week from the date of the assignment for you to receive credits. Each
essay worth 2 percent of the total grade.

**Exam : **There will be one exam that tests your understanding of the
sociological concepts and Asian American history reviewed in the class. This
exam is worth 20 percent.

**Assignments :**

**[1\. Immigration History.](imghsr00.html)** The first assignment is an
interview with an Asian American person to write about his or her family
immigration or refugee experience. Describe the circumstances that led the
person to come to America, how the process of immigration was, and what the
environment of the family was like when they first arrived to the United
States. You may interview your family members, friends, friends' family or any
Asian person you know. Consult the instructor if you foresee a problem in
finding an interviewee. The paper should be at least 5 pages, double-spaced
typed. The first assignment is worth 15 percent of the total grade. Further
details will be given during the course.

**[2\. Book Report.](bkrep00.html)** The second assignment is a book report.
You may choose a book on Asian Americans for the report, but the contents of
the book need to be checked with the instructor to assure that it is
appropriate for this assignment. This report should be at least 5 pages in
length. The second assignment is worth 15 percent. Details will be given
during the course.

**[3\. Group Project.](grprj.html)** The third assignment is a group project.
You will be expected to participate in a group of three to five people in the
class and conduct a simple survey, interview, or library research that is
related to the life of Asian Americans. The type of project and topic for the
project is up to the group, but needs to be cleared by the instructor. Each
member of the group needs to write two-page summary of the work he or she is
doing as a part of the group. Individual paper is worth 10 percent. Each group
will submit a 10 page report that describes the project and the findings.
Group paper is worth 10 percent. At the end of the semester, the group will
present the project in the class. The presentation is worth 5 percent.

**GRADING POLICY :**

I do not "curve" grades but rather assign them according to the following
scale.  Essay Quizzes (5) |

10 %

|   |

90 - 100 %

| A  
---|---|---|---|---  
Exam  |

20 %

|   |

80 - 89 %

| B  
Assignment 1 |

15 %

|   |

70 - 79 %

| C  
Assignment 2 |

15 %

|   |

60 - 69 %

| D  
Assignment 3: individual |

10 %

|   |

59% or lower

| F  
: group |

10 %

|   |   |  
: presentation |

5 %

|   |   |  
Class Participation |

15 %

|   |   |  
Total |

100 %

|   |   |  
****

**OTHER POLICIES :** **Scholastic dishonesty : **Scholastic dishonesty
includes, but is not limited to, seeking assistance in completing in-class
examinations using books, notes, handouts, or other peoples' work. Talking
during the exams or agreeing to show your work to other people during the
exams are also considered as scholastic dishonesty. Using other people's work
without noting credit is considered as plagiarism. If you have any doubts
about citations, please feel free to talk to me.

**Make-up exams : **I will not give make up exams except for health related or
religious reasons. If you have special conditions that may not allow you to
take the quizzes or exams on the day on the syllabus, you need to come to talk
to me _before_ the date of the tests.

**Special accommodations for students with disability : **I will make myself
available to discuss appropriate academic accommodations that you may require
as a student with a disability. Before course accommodations will be made,
students may be required to provide documentation to the office of the Dean of
Students - Services for Students with Disabilities.

**[COURSE OUTLINE :**](outln00.html)

[ Back to ](http://www.la.utexas.edu/course-
materials/sociology/soc308/satomi/fl99/index.html) SOC308 Home Page

