# The Nobel Prize for Literature:

# History, Politics & Controversies

## Syllabus

![](lines_blue_031.gif)

**Required Texts**

Andric, Ivo. The Bridge on the Drina.

Mann, Thomas. Death in Venice and Other Stories.

Singer, Isaac. The Collected Stories.

Solzhenitsyn, Alexander. One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich.

Soyinka, Wole. Collected Plays. Vol. 2. 1990

Course Packet

* * *

**Course Description**

Through a critical and historical examination of the lives and works of
authors designated as "Nobel Laureates," this course will explore the ways in
which the Nobel Prize for Literature has almost from its inception sparked
fierce controversy, all the while being coveted by hopeful laureates. At a
time when our notions of a canon of great literature is in a state of constant
flux, a study of Nobel Prize Winning Literature offers an immensely rich
global view of literature and a framing device that invites often startling
and complex juxtapositions of literary works that span the breadth of our
global village.

The most outspoken critic of the prize has been George Bernard Shaw. Responses
to Shaw's criticisms of the prize have been implicit in the presentation
speeches and other rare commentaries by the Nobel Prize Committee during the
past ninety-seven years. Throughout the course students will be asked to
formulate their assessment of the validity of Shaw's criticism, as the study
Alfred Nobel's will, the presentation speeches of the Nobel Committee, the
literature of the Nobel Laureates and their acceptance speeches.

Much of the course time will be devoted to both an examination of texts and to
an active discussion of the history and politics that surround the literary
works. Additionally, because each Nobel Laureate generally gives an acceptance
speech, we will also examine what each writer has to say about his or her own
work. We will use video tapes of interviews with the authors and audio tapes
of their readings to capture the essence of their work.

The course will take students through the historical inception of the Nobel
Prize for Literature as designated by Alfred Nobel's will to an in-depth
analysis of significant works by authors whose work span almost the entire
twentieth century. Through a series of mini-lectures, close readings of the
literature will be framed by literary theories including New Historicism,
Cultural Criticism, and Short Story and Narrative Theory.

* * *

**Course Goals**

  * To understand the connections that exist among history, politics, and literature to foster a better appreciation for the aesthetics and cultural complexities of Nobel Prize winning literature.
  * To identify works that have made significant contributions to particular literary genres
  * To gain an in-depth knowledge of several of the most renowned authors of this century.
  * To apply multiple literary frameworks to the study of literature in order to enrich reading and aesthetic appreciation of the laureates' work.
  * To gain an understanding of Alfred Nobel and the Nobel Prizes he sponsored.
  * To understand the principles of persuasive and argumentative synthesis.

* * *

**Assignments and Course Requirements**

The assignments consist of weekly readings, a journal in which students will
record responses to the readings and to class discussions and pose questions
for further discussion. You will keep a reading journal in which you record
your reactions to the texts and frame questions for class discussion. To
prepare for class discussions, we will have a short quiz before discussing the
readings for each class period.

You will have a mid-term, an oral presentation, a short research paper, and a
collaborative web project.

**Grades will be determined using the following percentages:**

Class participation and attendance = 5%

Mid-term (take home) exam = 20%

Oral Presentation = 20%

Web Page Project = 25%

Short Research Paper = 30%

* * *

### Schedule

Week One: Mini lecture on Alfred Nobel's will & overview of controversies.

Week Two: Reading Assignment: "Yentl the Yeshiva Boy," Nobel's will and short
articles on theoretical frames. Class focus: Theoretical Frames: New
Historicism, Cultural Criticism, and Short Story and Narrative theory.

Week Three: Reading Assignment: _Death in Venice and Other Stories._ Class
focus: Initial exploration of laureates on the eve of the rise of the Third
Reich. Discussion of Mann's _Death in Venice._

Week Four: Reading Assignment: Mann's short stories and excerpt from _Mario
and the Magician_. _The Bridge on the Drina._ Class focus: Mann's works and
the Third Reich's recognition of the politics of literature.Begin discussion
of _The Bridge on the Drina._

Week Five: Reading Assignment: _The Bridge on the Drina._ Take home mid-term
exam. Class focus: Discussion of novel and criticism of Nobel Committee to
award political revolutionaries.

Week Six: Reading Assignment: Singer short stories. Discussion of literature
and Singer's career.

Week Seven: Oral presentations on research findings. Web page updates. Class
discussion and critique of oral presentations.

Week Eight: Reading Assignment: _One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich._
Class focus: Discussion of reading and political implication of the prize.

Week Nine: Reading Assignment: _The Lion and the Jewel_ and _Jero's
Metamorphosis_. Class focus: The problematic of censorship and the politics of
literature. Discussion of works.

Week Ten: Peer response workshop to research paper drafts.

Week Eleven: Final draft of research paper due. Web page presentations to
class.

* * *

![](Blue_Arrow3321.gif) [**Course home page**](nobel.htm) | [**research
links**](nobelresearch.htm) **| student pages**



