**_The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly.  
_****___________________________________an order of thinking_proposed
syllabus** **  
******

_![](logo.gif)some opening thoughts  
![](logo.gif)proposed syllabus  
![](logo.gif)[readings by the week](readings.htm) _

German - including German history, behavior, morals, and accents - has become
a fixed property of US imagination, a kind of cultural appropriation justified
by the victory of the US and its allies over the German government in the
Second World War. This appropriation was further justified at a cultural level
in the US by the revelations about the German conduct of the war and the
governing of its own and its conquered territories. The 'holocaust,' as a
portion of this governing technique and technology came to be known, became
the most evident reason for American involvement in things German, German
history, and German morality, or the presumed absence thereof.

During the occupation of Germany, or that two-thirds of postwar Germany which
came to the western allies after the war, those allies together with their
largely complicit German and political and cultural accomplices, wrote or
perhaps re-wrote the history of both the German past and present. The
remaining one-third of Germany, occupied by the Soviets and governed by a
communist regime, was presumed to be equally described by this western
revision of German history and behaviors. That third of Germany was also held
to be doubly accountable after German unification in 1990 because it had been
both fascist and communist, the latter having been and continuing to be a far
greater horror to Western-style regimes and their people than the former. The
revision of  "German" country, culture, history, behaviors, etc., complemented
the unwritten histories of the United States, for example, in which the
continuing triumph of good over evil, of Batman-assisted forces for good over
Joker-assisted forces of evil, has played an enormous and captivating role. It
has been remarked, perhaps not just in jest, that had the events of the Third
Reich not actually taken place, Americans would have had to invent them, so
fascinating have these been to this country's cultural imagination and it's
media.

In this course, we will explore reasons why, perhaps, this appropriation and
revision of "German" has been so important an aspect of post World War II
American and German imagination and its cultural representations. Long after
West Germany, at least, became a reliable political, cultural, and above all,
economically of the US and long after Germany, the western portion, at least,
became the goal of an annual tourist pilgrimage by hundreds of thousands and
even millions of Americans, the imaginary German and his/her nation continued
to inflame the minds and the hearts of countless Americans, ostensibly in the
name of remembering and combating evil with which German and Germany had been
equated.

In 2001, it is "springtime for Hitler and Germany" again \- this time on
Broadway, and at least for the length of _The Producers_ , an adaptation of
Mel Brook's first feature film (1968) of the same title. After the opening of
_The Producers_ in 1968, a telegram was sent to Mr. Brook's producers:
"Congratulations. 'Hitler' will run forever." Does it, does he? And where?
Would "springtime for Hitler and Germany" be possible in Germany?

In 1997, in a review of German-American writer Ursula Hegi's book _Tearing the
Silence: Being a German in America_ , Walter Reich, director of the US
Holocaust Museum suggested that regardless of "fair" or "unfair," Germans of
all generations must face an ongoing interrogation of their relationship to
what Reich calls "the greatest crime in all human history," i.e., the
"Holocaust." In the same issue of the _The New York Times_ (August 17, 1997)
in which this review appeared there is an article describing the plans for a
holocaust memorial to be built in Albuquerque, New Mexico. The story describes
the protests of some residents of the city, including Jewish residents,
against placing the memorial on a plaza surrounded by shops and eating
establishments, given the very explicit nature of the proposed monument. It
concludes with a statement from the mayor of Albuquerque to the effect that
such protests cannot stop the placement of the monument, which is necessary,
so that "this greatest crime will not be forgotten. " There is no monument in
Albuquerque, and certainly not on a major plaza, which memorializes the
genocidal project of both the US government and many of its citizens against
the Native Americans, millions of whom were liquidated in the name of
'manifest destiny' or simple greed and racism. Nor is there any recognition by
the Bureau of Indian Affairs, a Federal Agency, that the land on which
Albuquerque itself stands is land forcibly taken from Native Americans who
were themselves placed on reservations, where they, in part, continue to live
as the one of the poorest most disadvantaged members of the American
community.

One explanation of this curious 'blind spot' derives from Otto Kernberg, a
noted psychoanalyst, and his interpretation or augmentation of Freud's defense
mechanism. Kernberg postulated two refinements of Freud's mechanisms, the one
called "splitting," in which the subject divides the environment into "good"
and "bad," simplifying thereby the otherwise complicated task of assuming
responsibility for judgements. That which is outside myself is "bad" and that
which is I is "good." Unfortunately, it seems that this is a majority opinion
of the world's inhabitants, and though Kernberg calls it a "primitive defense
mechanism of the immature self," it plays well for almost everybody, making
life all the simpler for politicians and advertisers. The other mechanism is
called "projective identification" through which the subjects project onto
another those parts of herself, which she cannot endure within her. This is
obviously a correlate of "splitting" and is most usually seen in terms of
projecting onto the other, the bad self, the bad thoughts, ideas, and
fantasies, remaining thereby in one's own self "good." However, as Jessica
Benjamin, a contemporary psychoanalyst, emphasizes in her reading of
Kernberg's work, the tensions that accompany mechanisms such as splitting and
projective identification are - up to a certain level - also crucial for
development (indeed for the survival) of the individual, as a subject, and for
the establishment of intersubjective relationships, i.e., relationships that
are not based on processes of domination and submission/master-slave
hierarchies. It is when the tensions can no longer be maintained that "good"
and "evil" become the only categories of judgement.

Applying this to the situation of "German" in America (and elsewhere, too) we
might understand that the projective identification and splitting explain why
it is possible for an entire people to be made blame for those real and
fantastic evils which we, too, know to live within ourselves, within our own
personal and cultural histories. It is most useful, however, in understanding
how Hollywood, both literally and figuratively as the media capital of the
world, can so successfully appeal to our need to see the other as having those
portions of myself which I cannot abide in myself, precisely the "bad" parts
of my otherwise "good" self.

Unfortunately, the number of genocidal projects is not small. To the extent
that the example of European Germans under Hitler's regime might be usefully
employed to deter or even to gain an understanding of how it happens that such
genocidal projects occur, it is quite right to remember the 12 millions of
people who were deliberately murdered by the Nazis and their allies. To the
extent that such remembering diverts attention from the underlying issue of
why such projects occur, it is fair to ask why such diversion is happening.
And that is the project, in part, of this seminar: to gain an understanding
greater than that provided by the media of just how processes of 'othering'
work and why it is possible to select and to murder on the basis of declaring
the intended victims as "others." The simplest theories are simplistic genetic
theories: they, the murderers, are different, are in fact themselves "other,"
which gives us some right to "murder" them. This theory continues to be most
popular and informs some, if not all, recent books by Goldhagen and others on
the conduct of German civilians during the Third Reich. From there the going
gets rougher, of course, which accounts for our love of the Hollywood version
of Germans, Indians, Cowboys, Asians, Blacks, etc., etc. etc.

In this course, we will focus on the equation "German = Evil" and seek first
to understand how and where this equation occurs both in institutions,
individuals, and cultures, and what are the results of the equation being
formulated. From there, we will try to understand some of the theoretical
explanations for this process. This is not an uncomplicated task and touches
us all personally, even in a protected academic environment. So we must also
be alert to the ways in which it happens, even in this environment, with its
assumed pretense of objectivity.

_![](logo.gif)proposed syllabus_

Over the course of the semester, you will be watching about twelve films. You
will submit a weekly screening report (due Friday at noon-submit via our
webpage[ "film of the week" at
http://vassun.vassar.edu/~german/german265/zoom_in.htm](zoom_in.htm) ) and
prepare and lead two discussions on various filmic and socio-political
aspects. You will be asked to keep a journal during the course and to use the
journal as the basis for opening comments at the beginning of each of our
meetings (which can also be introductions to a film), for class discussion and
for meetings with me. The journal, accordingly, may be understood as a place
where you record your own engagement with the films, the readings, the class
discussions and findings, and with yourselves as you become more acquainted
with the various topics of the course. The journal is, of course, not a graded
assignment. I expect of all of us that we attend the films and the weekly
meetings, engage with each other in discussions informed by careful readings,
viewings, and research, and that we engage with the topics in a matter that
encourages our mutual and individual interest in this entire project. For most
of the semester, we will be working in two groups. In the German section of
this course, we will read additional texts in German (not available in
English) and discuss various aspects in German - some special meetings will be
scheduled. Some texts, available in English only, will, on the other hand, be
studied in the English section of the seminar. During our regular meetings, we
will exchange our findings and will, hopefully, benefit from this cross-
cultural analysis and practice.

More specifically, there will be roughly  
_three parts to this course_. In addition to watching films, the first part,
lasting about three weeks, will be devoted to gaining a general historical and
socio-political overview regarding topics of Germany, fascism, representation,
etc., and familiarizing ourselves with film terminology. At the end of those
weeks, you will be asked to write a film review (to be handed in September
28). During the second, five week section of the course, we will continue
watching films (screening reports, note taking, use of the discussion list
included) and discussing our findings. At the end of the sixth week of the
semester, you will have to submit in writing definitions of terms and concepts
crucial to our work (due date October 23; this will be your midterm-paper).
During approximately week 7 and 8 of the semester, we will be reading a novel
by W.G.Sebald (in English and German, respectively). You will be asked to
write a one-page response paper (due date October 30). You will also be asked
to engage with an aspect of our investigations in greater detail; first and
preliminary results of this engagement should be submitted in form of a
presentation (including a written outline, due November 13) and should include
references to various film shots and sequences. You will be making
presentations of your engagement to the entire group at the end of this period
of time - you will also be asked to contribute your own selections to the
screening list (see film listings). Feel free to meet with me individually or
in smaller groups for discussions of any aspect of the course, but in
particular for discussions of your own projects as they develop. We will begin
working on your projects during week 8 of the semester. As your project
progresses, you will be submitting to the group specific references to
important works (in form of a bibliography, this list will become part of your
final written work) and - if necessary - you will hand out copies of such
materials for class reading and discussion. The presentations made to the
entire group (during week 11 and 12 of the semester) should be formalized (in
form of an-almost-final draft of an analytical essay) for submission to the
class including me by the date of the assigned final presentation/
examination. You will have access to video copies of the films through the
library (on reserve - all articles used in the course plus additional
materials can be found at the same place). The final analytical essay/project
will be due December 7 - we will meet at the media cloisters two times to
discuss some of the possibilities for multimedia representations. For
participants in the German section of this course, all papers are (of course)
to be written in German. (We will talk about further details during our first
meeting.)

_materials and texts_  
the following materials should be purchased:  
\- Sebald, W. G. _The Emigrants._ (Transl. Michael Hulse) New Directions,
1997. _  
_ \- Sebald, W. G. _Die Ausgewanderten_ (German section)  
\- Eley, Geoff. Ed. _The "Goldhagen-Effect": History, Memory, Nazism--Facing
the German Past_. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2000  
\- Elsaesser, Thomas and Michael Wedel. _The BFI Companion to German Cinema._
London: BFI Publishing/ Indiana UP, 1999.  

additional articles (especially for the German section) will be handed out
over the course of the semester and/or are available through the library (on
reserve - also check the web pages)

Discussion of the articles will be assigned to class participants for initial
presentations but all of us, obviously, will have to read the articles as
well. Your journals are appropriate places for reactions to the discussions of
these articles and the other readings.

_in the language of numbers:  
_ \- regular attendance of films and discussions, active participation in the
discussions and submission of weekly screening report s-24%  
\- preparation and leading of two discussions (on required readings,
introduction to a film), note taking and summarizing remarks at the beginning
of our meetings -15%  
\- 8 screening reports -16%  
\- film reviews and first presentation -10%  
\- midterm on definition of terms -10%  
\- final project (presentation and analytical essay) -25%  
As you can tell from these introductory comments, the emphasis in this course
is on your own interest and your willingness and ability to share with other
participants in the course your thoughts, impressions, work. Our meetings will
be somewhat "informal" but discussions are not to be the locus of personal
likes and dislikes, opinions, etc., only. Instead, I hope and anticipate that
our discussions will include evidence of engagement with the films, the
readings, and the presence of other people in our mutual endeavor. You can
expect that this course will require lots of commitment and the need to engage
with others in the group.  |

![](eye2.gif)  
  
---|---  
  
|

[_HOME ?_](germ265.htm)

