![](images/enghead.jpg)  

Interrelated programs in the [Department of
English](../../Departments/English/index.html) bring together teaching
assistants new to instructing college classes and experienced high school
teachers for a year of shared learning and instructing. Each year, several
dozen teaching assistants-master's and doctoral degree candidates-assist the
department by teaching first year English composition courses. They are
prepared for their tasks by a several-pronged approach, including a three-day
orientation; several teacher training courses, supervision by [Mara
Holt](mailto:mholt1@ohiou.edu), associate professor of English, and director
of composition; and mentoring by visiting high school teachers. The high
school teachers are selected during spring quarter to spend the following year
enriching their backgrounds with college courses, mentoring the teaching
assistants, and teaching college first-year composition. (See related story,
page 6.)

The first day Kai Pearson stood up to instruct a class of first-year
composition students his knees were shaking. "It was terrifying," said Mr.
Pearson, a master's degree candidate in English. "But it went more smoothly
than I expected it to. It was fall quarter, at eight o'clock in the morning,
so it was the first class those students had ever had at the university. They
were probably at least as scared as I was. Dr. Holt had a pretty heavily
structured first few weeks for us, complete with a syllabus-right down to
'walk in, introduce yourself, write your name on the board.' For the first
three weeks of the course every minute of the class was outlined and we could
follow that if we wanted to. As the course progressed, we were given more
freedom to adapt our own ideas."

Dr. Holt said that she believes the preparation that teaching assistants in
the English Department receive is one of the best in the country. (The
teacher-training program was described that way by rhetorician James Kinneavy,
professor emeritus of the Department of English, University of Texas, in a
recent Ohio Board of Regents review of the doctoral program.) Dr. Holt said:

> Our teaching assistants have full responsibility for their classes. They
prepare their own assignments and do their own grading. That's why we want
them to be well prepared. We have a three-day orientation for all the new
teachers before fall quarter begins. During that time we introduce them to the
campus and give them an idea of what to expect during the coming year. Then
during fall quarter teaching assistants take English 591, "Problems in the
Teaching of College English." The five-hour course is structured so it can
include workshops and talks by the visiting high school teachers.

A continuation of English 591 is a three-hour course taken during winter
quarter-591 A, "Teaching College English II." It consists of observation of
each teaching assistant by Dr. Holt, a peer observation, and a weekly meeting
where students can discuss teaching issues. "Our teaching assistants are very
enthusiastic," Dr. Holt continued. "They work hard on their courses and they
end up having really good classes. We find that first-year students really
love them. Their evaluations from the students are very good for the most
part."

A bullpen-type office with desks arranged so teaching assistants and visiting
high school teachers are close to each other facilitates interaction of the
two groups. "The big, open office spaces become a fertile ground for
exchanging ideas about classes," Dr. Holt observed. "We situated the groups
together for that very reason."

Neil Browne, a teaching assistant in his third year of doctoral work, said
he's gained insight from interaction with the visiting high school teachers.
"Sharing some of their day-to-day experiences and hearing their practical
observations of teaching high school students has been really invaluable," Mr.
Browne said. "I was particularly interested in learning more about the culture
of local students from Jim Williams, who teaches at Marietta High School."

Colleen Carow Girton, an English master's degree candidate, said that
classroom management was a worry for her at first. She said Mr. Williams
taught her how to overcome those fears. "When I observed him teaching it was
obvious that there would be no monkey business," Ms. Girton said. "He would
start talking as soon as he walked in the door and all eyes were on him. There
was no doubt about who the authority was, but he did it with such grace and
had such a peaceful sense about him." Ms. Girton said she has had mixed
success with controlling her classes-ranging from rapport with students to
struggling to keep them from talking too much. She said this was her first
teaching experience and that it has influenced her toward a teaching career.
"I never thought I'd be teaching, but it's turned out to be something I'm
really comfortable with and can do well," Ms. Girton said. "I now hope to
teach at the college level."

  

## High School Teachers Mentor Teaching Assistants While Updating Their Own
Teaching Skills

  

Including high school English teachers in the College agenda is nothing new
for [Betty Pytlik](mailto:bpytlik1@ohiou.edu), chair of the Department of
English. Shortly after Dr. Pytlik arrived at Ohio University in 1983, she
codirected a Board of Regents-funded program, the Early Composition Assessment
Project (ECAP). The program was designed to help area high school teachers
assess students' writing while they were juniors, in order to gain a clear
understanding of what students needed to work on as seniors.

Dr. Pytlik said it was a very worthwhile program.

> The main reason I think it worked so well for us is that we invited local
teachers to plan the proposal with us. They were very much a part of planning
and, of course, the implementation. It was a situation in which both teachers
and pupils won. During the time we worked with the teachers we could update
them on teaching composition and help them learn new assessment skills.

In 1986 funding was granted from the University Planning Advisory Committee
(UPAC) to recruit three high school English teachers each year to spend one
academic year at the university. "We hoped the program would generate new
ideas for instruction and assessments, and the teachers would return to their
schools and spread the word," Dr. Pytlik said.

> In addition, we hoped they would interact with our teaching assistants and
give them some real-world views of teaching English. The teachers get free
tuition and graduate credit for any university courses they want to take, they
receive a salary, and in return they teach eight sections of freshman
composition. The only required course for them is English 591, "Problems in
the Teaching of College English." We have had some really good, enthusiastic
teachers in the program. And they leave with a confident feeling of having
been brought up-to-date in their field.

The teachers are selected from applications they submit during winter quarter.
Nineteen applicants this year made the choice very difficult, according to
Deirdre Kravitz, who worked closely with Mara Holt, associate professor of
English and director of composition, on the recruitment. Ms. Kravitz also
assisted Dr. Holt with the teaching assistant program before graduating spring
quarter with a master's degree in English.

Ms. Kravitz said that in past years flyers had been sent to high school
principals.

> As a result we didn't have many applications. But this year, with help from
James Davis, professor of English, we utilized a list from the National
Council of Teachers of English and sent Information directly to a number of
teachers in Ohio. We aren't looking for people who just want a year's vacation
from teaching. We want teachers who are really interested in revitalizing
their high schools and who want to help the teaching assistants. I'll never
forget the year I took 591 and Kara Wingett, a visiting high school teacher,
presented, "A Day in the Life of a High School Teacher." It really opened my
eyes and I realized why many high school students don't learn well!

Donna Duda was one of the three visiting high school English teachers who
spent the 1995-96 school year with the department. Ms. Duda has a master' s
degree in English and said she looked at the year as an enrichment experience
rather than as working toward a higher degree. She had taught at a private
girls' boarding school in Cleveland for three years and wanted a year to do
something different before continuing her career.

"I was very interested in helping mentor the teaching assistants, to share my
knowledge with inexperienced teachers," Ms. Duda said. "I have a pretty solid
foundation in grammar, which is something many people don't have now. I felt I
could offer them counsel about teaching grammar."

Ms. Duda commented that sharing the 591 course with the teaching assistants
was a very good opportunity to get to know them.

> I appreciated the opportunity to have a professional dialogue about teaching
composition, and all the problems, issues, and possibilities connected with
teaching. It was a wonderful experience. The second-quarter 591 A course was
also a good experience as it got the new teachers into the habit of being
observed, and of observing and writing a report.

> I was really impressed with the preparation and support for the teaching
assistants-having a syllabus for the first six weeks was far more preparation
than I received as a teaching assistant. Also, teaching assistants from last
year met with the group and discussed classes they had taught. They shared
handouts and other materials.

Besides entering teaching assistants and teaching composition classes, Ms.
Duda was on several committees, including the committee to select high school
teachers for the 1996-97 year. "I think the primary goal of the program is to
find teachers willing to return to their high schools with new information, in
addition to working closely with the teaching assistants. As I reviewed
applications, I looked for people who were interested in both carrying on a
professional dialogue and in getting themselves updated on new teaching
techniques."'

  
![](images/eng_tas.jpg) _Colleen Carow Girton, a graduate teaching assistant
in English, is surrounded by students with questions after a first-year
composition class spring quarter. Students, from left, are Jeff Booth, Ruben
Shannon, and Bryan Davis._  
  
Back to [fall 1996 FORUM](fall96.html)

