**[Home](index.html)     [ Student Resources](studentresources.html)
[Links](links.html)    [Email](mailto:jugarcia@u.arizona.edu)**  


**396A: Nature and Practice of History**



**Assignments:**

**Assignments to be posted**



**Syllabus:**  



Professor Juan R. Garc¨ªa  

Office Location: Room 227, Social Sciences Building

Office Phone Number:  621-1586

E-Mail: Jugarcia@U.Arizona. Edu

Office Hours: Tuesday  9:00 A.M. to 10:00 A.M.; Wednesday  3:00 P.M. to 4:00
P.M.; Friday  10:00 A.M. to 11:00 A.M.; and by appointment.



**REQUIRED TEXTS:**



Wendy Bishop & Pavel Zemliansky (eds.), _The Subject is Research._

James Davidson & Mark Lytle, _After the Fact: The Art of Historical Detection_
(4 th edition).



**COURSE DESCRIPTION:**

** **

History 396A is a capstone course in U.S. History for students majoring in the
discipline. The purpose of the course is: for students to learn how historians
research, write about, and interpret the past; and for students to practice
the art and craft of researching and writing history.  The course is designed
to provide students with information, skills, and practical experience in
reading, researching, writing, and interpreting history.



**COURSE REQUIREMENTS:**



Students in this seminar are required to write a research paper anchored in
primary resources. The topic must confine itself to the United States between
1890 and 1980. The research paper must adhere to the highest standards of
historical scholarship, be written in competent, if not graceful English
prose, and contain original research, analysis, and interpretation. The paper
must be 10-15 typewritten pages in length, excluding title page, endnotes,
graphs, charts, tables, appendices, and bibliography. _TWO_ copies of the
final paper are to be submitted to the instructor on **May 9, 2002.** The
research paper is worth one third of your final grade.



  


One-third of the final grade is based on written assignments (including the
proposal and preliminary outline), on active participation in discussions,
homework, in-class assignments, written critiques, and attendance. One
requirement is that each student must submit a one-page proposal delineating
the research topic, a preliminary thesis, and reason(s) why you are interested
in pursuing work on this topic. A working bibliography (provided on a separate
sheet) must also accompany your proposal. **The proposal is due January
24th.** Part of the course will be conducted on a tutorial basis. Each student
is expected to confer with the instructor during the semester. At these
meetings, students will discuss their progress, present a synopsis of their
research, and describe any problems they have encountered. Students are
required to participate in class discussions over the assigned readings. In
addition to the texts listed above, students will be provided with
supplementary readings throughout the course.

One-third of the final grade is based on student presentations and a written
pr¨¦cis. During the semester each  student will be required to present an oral
report about their research in class and write a pr¨¦cis. The pr¨¦cis is to
contain a succinct statement of the research topic, the thesis, major
preliminary conclusions, and a bibliography of the most salient primary and
secondary sources consulted. The pr¨¦cis is to be four or five typewritten
pages in length. The presenter must provide each student in the course a copy
of the pr¨¦cis. The instructor must receive _TWO_ copies of the precis from
each presenter. **The pr¨¦cis is due on March 7th, 2002.**

The oral presentation to the class, which is to be based on your precis,
should address the following points: The content of your pr¨¦cis; how you have
approached your research, techniques; research methodologies; sources you are
utilizing; any major problems in your research or writing; how you are
addressing those problems. Useful reference tools, guides, resources, methods,
and experiences that may help your peers are also to be included in the
presentation. Each "keynoter" will have 15 to 20 minutes for their
presentation.

Each pr¨¦cis will be reviewed and critiqued orally and in written form by two
students. The two reviewers will give the written critiques in oral summation
immediately after the keynoter has completed their oral presentation. The
comments should concentrate on the strengths and weaknesses of the keynoter's
pr¨¦cis, presentation, and research. Rebuttals, clarifications, questions, and
general discussion from the keynoter and other students will follow. Feedback
from the commentators must be constructive, balanced, helpful, and insightful.



  


**IMPORTANT DATES:**



Proposal due January 24, 2002.

Preliminary outline for Research Paper due February 15

Pr¨¦cis due March 7, 2002.

Presentations of Precis Begins March 21st.

Final Paper due Thursday, May 9, 2002.



Your assignments are due on the dates designated above, unless otherwise
modified or changed by the instructor.



**Grading:**



The final grade in this course is based on the three requirements delineated
above.          Absolute grading is used in this class.  In other words, there
is no curve for this course, and you are not competing with your fellow
students.  The advantage to you in using this system is that you know, at any
time in the course, exactly what you have to do to get a certain grade.  What
follows is a summary of the grading scale:

A = 91 - 100

B = 81 -  90

C = 71 -  80

D = 61 -  70

E =  0 -  60



_Points for attendance:_

     80 to 100% = +2 points

                                                            60 to 80%  =  0 points

  40 to 60%  = -2 points

                                                               20 to 40%  = Dropped from course   

  


Attendance points will be added or deducted from the 1/3 of your grade
involving assignments, book reviews, discussions, etc.  



Grades from assignments and feedback from your instructor will keep you
apprized of your progress in the class.  Please do not ask me to provide you
with progress reports on your grade at any time during the semester. I do not
provide information about grades via e-mail. Do not ask me what grade you need
to earn on an examination or assignment in order to receive a better final
grade in the course. I am a historian, not a prognosticator. Besides,
projecting final grades always leads to problems.

I will not assign an incomplete for this course.

**All assignments submitted after the due date will be assessed a penalty of
five points for each day that it is late.** **There is no make-up assignment
for a missed discussion, or for an assignment that is not turned in within the
time specified by the instructor.** _It is the responsibility of the student
to ascertain if any work was assigned during her or his absence_.



**ATTENDANCE:**

            Attendance at all discussion sessions and lectures is required. Excessive absenteeism from, or tardiness to, class will result in a lowering of the final grade or being dropped from the course. Points will be lost for poor attendance, and added for good attendance.  Refer to the grading information above. 



**CONDUCT:**

**  
 **

            Any actions involving cheating or plagiarism will be dealt in accordance with the University of Arizona Code of Academic Integrity.  This code prohibits all forms of academic dishonesty, including cheating, plagiarism, and fabrication.  Do your own work. Please do not come to class unless you are prepared to listen and to participate.  As a courtesy to your fellow students and me, do not eat, drink, read newspapers, make or receive phone calls and pages, converse with others during class time, or engage in any activity that may disrupt the class or distract students. All pagers and phones must be turned off during the class period. Please arrive for class on time, and do not begin packing up your materials before the end of the class.  Both actions are disruptive and discourteous to your classmates and me. 



**OTHER IMPORTANT INFORMATION:**

If you are having difficulty, please see me immediately. Waiting until the
last minute to discuss concerns or seek additional help is detrimental to you,
the student. It is your responsibility to approach the instructor about such
matters.  If you have special needs, please see the instructor within the
first week of class.  Every effort will be made to accommodate your needs. It
is also your responsibility to keep apprized of any assignments, information,
or changes to the syllabus that may occur during an absence.

            This syllabus and the course requirements are subject to change or revision by the

 instructor. Any changes and revisions will be communicated to students orally
in class.

