UNIVERSITY AT ALBANY STATE UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK CLASSISM, RACISM, AND SEXISM
Fall 1993 Susan Russell and Celia Gonzalez A AAS 240P Office Hours:
8:45-9:45p.m. A LCS 240P in HU 117 A WSS 240P by appointment Thursday,
5:45-8:35 \-------------- p.m., in HU 137 DESCRIPTION AND GOALS
\--------------------- This course analyzes connections among classism,
racism, sexism, heterosexism, and homophobia, their mutually reinforcing
nature, and the tensions arising therefrom. Attention is given to the
ideological and personal aspects of these phenomena, as well as to their
institutional manifestations in American society. Students are expected to
broaden their understanding of group oppression and identity from many
different perspectives. REQUIRED TEXTS AND PAMPHLETS
\---------------------------- Andersen, Margaret L. and Patricia Hill Collins,
Race, Class and Gender: \----------------------- An Anthology, Belmont,
California: Wadsworth Publishing Company, 1992. \------------ Amott and
Matthaei, Race, Gender and Work: A Multicultural History of
\------------------------------------------------- Women in the U.S., Boston:
South End Press, 1991. \----------------- Davis, Angela, Women, Race and
Class, New York: Vintage Books, 1983. \--------------------- Davis, Susan,
Women Under Attack: Victories, Backlash and the Fight for
\--------------------------------------------------------- Reproductive
Freedom, Boston: South End Press, 1988. \-------------------- COURSE OUTLINE:
\-------------- Readings with an (R) designation are on reserve at the Library
and are available in a packet. 9/9 INTRODUCTION \------------ Discussion of
syllabus, course requirements and course goals. LIFE STORY DUE 9/23 SHIFTING
THE CENTER \------------------- Andersen, pp. 1-46 (R) Angelou, "On the Pulse
of Morning" Amott and Matthaei, pp. 3-140 9/30 BIAS INCIDENTS \--------------
(R) Rothenberg, Paula S., Race, Class & Gender in the
\--------------------------- United States: An Integrated Study, New York: St.
Martin's \---------------------------------- Press, 1992, pp. 63-90, 388-397
Film: "Beyond Hate" 10/7 RACE AND RACISM \--------------- Andersen, pp. 47-95,
397-412, 429-442 Davis, A., Chapter 3 (R) Gates, "The Uses of Anti-Semitism"
Davis, "The Jews in the Slave Trade" Horowitz, "The New Anti-Semitism" Racism
packet Guest Speaker 10/14 CLASS AND INEQUITY \------------------ Amott and
Matthaei, pp. 141-287 Andersen, pp. 96-127 Davis, A., Chapter 4 (R)
Rothenberg, pp. 358-363 10/21 GENDER AND SEXISM \----------------- Andersen,
pp. 128-171, 413-428, 443-449 (R) Rothenberg, pp. 341-347, 374-388 Johnson,
"Haunted by Anita Hill" Smith, "Down These Mean Streets" JOURNAL 1 DUE 10/28
GENDER AND SEXISM \----------------- (R) Gates, "Backlash" Rothenberg, pp.
351-357, 431-440 Baehr v. Lewin Homophobia Packet 11/4 WORK AND FAMILIES
\----------------- Amott and Matthaei, pp. 291-356 Andersen, 172-266 Davis,
A., Chapters 9 and 13 11/11 IDENTITY AND IDEOLOGY/ EDUCATION
\------------------------------- Andersen, pp. 267-396 Davis, A., Chapter 6
11/18 REPRODUCTION AND CHOICE \----------------------- Davis, S., entire
pamphlet Film: "La Operacion" 12/2 HISTORY OF SOCIAL CHANGE/ REVISIONING THE
FUTURE \------------------------------------------------ Davis, A., Chapters
2, 5 and 7 Andersen, pp. 495-518 (R) Rothenberg, pp. 408-417, 448-449 12/9
LAST THOUGHTS \------------- Film: "Facing Evil" JOURNAL 2 DUE COURSE
REQUIREMENTS \------------------- 1\. Life Story: Ungraded assignments. A
short essay to be written the first day of class in 15 minutes. Summarize the
significant events in your life which have made you who you are today. In
particular, focus on events related to your racial/ethnic background, your
class or socio-economic background, and your gender and/or sexual orientation.
Due 9/9. 2\. Journals: Journals reflect your reaction to materials from this
class: readings, films, panel discussions, speakers, class discussion, and
discussion groups. Journals also chart your journey through this class,
including the questions which occur to you. Journals must be typed, double
spaced and 10 pages in length. Each journal will discuss 5 items from the
materials listed above (2 pages per item). Each item must be identified by
date assigned/discussed/seen, author and title. Each journal will count for
45% of final grade. Journal 1: Due 10/21 Covers course work from 9/9 through
10/21. One item must be from class discussion. One item must be from "Bias
Incidents" 9/30. No more than one item may be used from any one class. Journal
2: Due 12/9 Covers course work from 10/28 through 12/2. One item must be from
class discussion. One item must be from "Identity and Ideology" 11/11. No more
than one item may be used from any one class. Total of 90% of grade. 3\. Class
attendance: Class attendance will count for 10% of final grade. Roll will be
checked twice during each class period: at 5:45 p.m. and at some point after
the evening break. If you are not in your assigned seat when roll is checked,
you will be marked absent. That absence will be removed only with a doctor's
excuse. If you are unable to get to this class on time, you should register
for something else. 4\. Class participation: Persons who regularly participate
in class discussions will have their grade increased one fraction of a letter
grade. Please wear your name tag so that we will know who you are. 5\. Eating
in class: There will be no eating in the classroom. Sodas will be permitted as
long as the room is left clean at the end of class.

