` HISTORY 332  
**HISTORY OF AMERICAN FOREIGN RELATIONS  
** FALL SEMESTER 1994  
SYLLABUS  
  
Prof. Chris Kimball  
Office: Memorial Hall 114A  
Phone: 330-1195(o)/724-2329(h)  
Campus Box 30  
Internet: kimball@augsburg.edu  
Office Hours: MF 8-9, M 1:20-2;20, W 12:10-1:10, & by appointment.  
  
**Course Description:  
** **  
** We will survey the patterns of American foreign relations from the founding
of the republic to the end of the Cold War. In tracing the rise of the United
States as a world power, attention will be paid to such themes as the impact
of domestic developments on foreign relations, changing meanings of war and
peace, military and economic strategy, nationalism and internationalism, and
the role of public opinion and the mass media.  
  
**Course Objectives:  
** **  
** This course has several objectives appropriate to a general introduction to
the history of American foreign relations:  

  1. To acquire factual knowledge. This does not imply the memorization of facts but rather an introduction to what historians call "historical evidence"--people ( _who?_ ), places ( _where?_ ), events, ideas, trends ( _what?_ ). This evidence is the basis for understanding American foreign relations. We will spend time with primary sources as well as secondary ones. We will also evaluate the assumptions, arguments, and claims advanced by the writers whom we study.  

  2. To learn basic concepts (theories, if you prefer) useful in understanding _how_ and _why_ the United States has dealt with the world in the ways that it has.  

  3. To apply these concepts in order to make sense of the massive amount of available evidence. That is, the course should provide the opportunity for interpreting _what_ happened, _why_ it happened (and _why then?_ , as opposed to some other era). This means that we will become familiar with some of the major interpretive frameworks that historians have applied to American foreign relations.  

  4. To assess the significance of this material (the _so what?_ question) by asking why something is worth knowing. This process of explanation and interpretation is central to the historian's craft. As we practice understanding people and processes, we will gain a sense of how historians work.   

  5. To develop oral and written expression through large- and small-group discussions as well as writing assignments. Attention will be paid to the ability to present (orally and in writing) evaluations and/or conclusions regarding the evidence consulted in the course. In addition, each of us will develop questions for consideration by the class and, on occasion, lead discussion of those questions.  
  

**Course Requirements:  
**  
The requirements are: class attendance and participation, required readings
listed below, a research paper, three tests, and a comprehensive final.  
Regular class attendance is required. Everyone is expected to take an active
and positive role in class. The grade for class participation will be
determined by a mixture of instructor-, peer-, and self-evaluation. Thus,
unexcused absences may be grounds for a reduction in grade. Exams will be
based on material presented in class as well as the readings. Except in cases
of medical or other emergency, no student will be allowed to take a make-up
exam. In all cases, no make-up will be granted without permission from me
prior to the original test. Students working with the CLASS Office should
contact me about any necessary accommodations.  
The paper (5-10 pages in length) will analyze the history of the relations
between the United States and a nation of your choice. That choice must be
approved by the instructor and should be made early in the semester. A
bibliography (describing a minimum of ten books and articles on the subject)
and an outline must be turned in before the paper is submitted. The paper
itself will be returned with comments in order to make revisions. Consult the
class schedule for the specific due dates. Each step in this writing process
must be completed and the first version of the paper should be resubmitted
with the final version to receive full credit. Please, no late papers.  
Augsburg College has an Academic Honesty Policy which can be found in the
Augsburg Student Guide. It is your responsibility to read and understand that
policy. All students will be asked to sign the following honesty policy
statement:  
I have read and understand the policies of Augsburg College regarding academic
honesty. I understand how they apply to this course, and I pledge myself to
abide by the policies and work to create an atmosphere of academic integrity
on the campus.  
You are encouraged to ask questions about the application of the policy in
this course.  
  
**Grading:  
**  
Grading will follow College policy. Grades will be assigned according to the
following point scale:  
  
Exam #1 - 50 points  
Exam #2 - 50 points  
Exam #3 - 100 points  
Participation/Engagement - 100 points  
Paper - 100 points  
Final - 100 points  
  
500 total possible points  
450 = 4.0  
425 = 3.5  
400 = 3.0  
375 = 2.5  
350 = 2.0  
325 = 1.5  
300 = 1.0  
275 = 0.5  
  
**Required Readings:  
**  
The required books are available for purchase.  
  
Beisner, _From the Old Diplomacy to the New_  
Brands, _The United States in the World_ , Volumes I and II  
May (ed.), _American Cold War Strategy: Interpreting NSC 68_  
Olson and Roberts, _Where the Domino Fell_  
Rosenberg, _Spreading the American Dream_  
Occasional hand-outs  
  
After the first week, the reading assignments are to be completed before the
first class meeting of the week for which they are assigned.  
  
**Class Schedule and Reading Assignments:  
**  
Sept. 7 Introduction  
Sept. 9 Patterns of American Foreign Relations  
**Reading** : Brands I, Chapter 1  
Beisner, Chapter 1  
Hand-out  
  
Foreign Relations in the Early Republic  
  
Sept. 12 Revolutionary Diplomacy  
Sept. 14 The New Nation and the Opening of the West  
Sept. 16 The War of 1812  
**Reading** : Brands I, Chapter 2, pp. 72-95  
  
Sept. 19 John Quincy Adams  & the Monroe Doctrine/PAPER TOPIC DUE  
Sept. 21 Manifest Destiny and Indian Removal  
Sept. 23 The Mexican War  
**Reading** : Brands I, pp. 95-111, Chapter 4  
  
Sept. 26 Civil War Diplomacy  
Sept. 28 Industrial America's Search for Markets  
Sept. 30 FIRST EXAM  
**Reading** : Brands I, Chapters 5, 6  
Beisner, Chapters 2, 3  
  
  
The Age of Empire  
  
Oct. 3 Imperialism and anti-Imperialism  
Oct. 5 China and the Open Door  
Oct. 7 The Spanish-American War/BIBLIOGRAPHY DUE  
**Reading** : Brands II, pp. 1-31  
Beisner, Chapters 4, 5, and "Harbingers"  
Rosenberg, Chapters 1, 2  
  
Oct. 10 Panama and the Roosevelt Corollary  
Oct. 12 Wilson's World Order  
Oct. 14 World War I  
**Reading** : Brands II, pp. 31-71  
Rosenberg, Chapters 3, 4  
  
Oct. 17 The Failed Peace  
Oct. 19 SECOND EXAM  
Oct. 21 MID-TERM BREAK  
**Reading** : Brands II, pp. 71-88  
Rosenberg, Chapter 5  
  
Diplomacy in Prosperity and Depression  
  
Oct. 24 1920s: Hoover and Economic Foreign Policy  
Oct. 26 Responses to Revolutionary Nationalism  
Oct. 28 The New Imperialism  
**Reading** : Brands II, Chapter 9  
Rosenberg, Chapters 6, 7, 8  
  
Oct. 31 Fascism and the Popular Front  
Nov. 2 Isolationism and Appeasement  
Nov. 4 FDR and the Second World War/PAPER OUTLINE DUE  
**Reading:** Brands II, Chapter 10 **  
** Rosenberg, Chapter 9  
  
Nov. 7 The Diplomacy of Global War  
Nov. 9 Building a Postwar Order  
Nov. 11 THIRD EXAM  
**Reading** : Brands II, pp. 181-192  
Rosenberg, Chapter 10, 11  
  
The Era of the Cold War  
  
Nov. 14 The Origins of the Cold War  
Nov. 16 Divided Europe  
Nov. 18 Revolution in Asia  
**Reading** : Brands II, pp. 192-221  
May, Introduction and Part One  
Olson and Roberts, Chapter 1  
  
Nov. 21 Discussion of NSC 68  
Nov. 23 The Korean War/PAPER DUE  
Nov. 25 THANKSGIVING RECESS  
**Reading** : Brands II, pp. 222-240  
May, Part Two and Afterword  
Olson and Roberts, Chapter 2  
  
Nov. 28 Peaceful Co-existence  
Nov. 30 Kennedy's Crises  
Dec. 4 Vietnam  
**Reading** : Brands II, pp. 240-269, Chapter 13  
Olson and Roberts, Chapters 3 through 8  
  
Dec. 5 Nixon, Kissinger and Detente  
Dec. 7 Reagan, Gorbachev and the End of the Cold War  
Dec. 9 Beyond the Cold War/REVISED PAPER DUE  
**Reading** : Brands II, Chapters 14, 15  
Olson and Roberts, Chapters 9 through 12  
  
  
  
FINAL EXAM: Monday, December 12, 8:00-10:00 A.M.

