COURSE: **HISTORY 236: The United States Since 1877**  
Fall, 1998

_Instructor_ : **Clarence L. Mohr 346 Humanities Building**  
Office Hours: Tu: 2:00-3:00 P. M & Wed 11:00-12:00 A. M. or by appointment at
other times  


_SCOPE AND CONTENT_

Covering the years from emancipation--ca. 1970, this course explores the
economic, political, cultural, and intellectual forces that transformed the
United States in the century following the Civil War. After an initial survey
of the choices facing Americans during the era of Reconstruction the class
will proceed, through topical lectures, reading, and discussions, to explore
the elements of conflict and consensus that have accompanied the ongoing
struggle to define the meaning of freedom, equality, and other national
ideals. The outlines of modern America took shape gradually, beginning in most
instances with changes set in motion by emancipation and the industrial
revolution and subsequently accelerated or redirected by larger events such as
Progressivism, the New Deal, World War II, the Cold War, the Civil Rights
Movement, and the technological revolution of the past generation. Much of the
semester's reading will concern transitional periods or turning points when
clashes between old and new priorities were magnified in the arena of national
politics.  


_OBJECTIVES_

Developing the intellectual tools and the habits of mind necessary for
understanding the historical framework of contemporary American life is the
central goal of this course. Connecting the past to the present requires a
foundation of basic factual knowledge, an attitude of critical detachment
toward controversial issues, and an appreciation of the interpretative
scholarship that makes text books possible. Or, to put the matter another way,
the course seeks to understand American history in terms of 'processes' rather
than linear relationships of cause and effect. A concern with historical
process means that students must give attention not simply to the facts of
recent U. S. history but also to the strategies that historians employ to
arrange and extract meaning from those facts. Above all the course seeks to
encourage active intellectual engagement with the past and the questioning of
unexamined assumptions (both yours and mine).  


_CLASS FORMAT_

Lecture/reading and discussion  


_REQUIREMENTS_

All students must purchase and read the following books:

1\. American Social History Project, _Who Built America? Working People and
the Nation's Economy, Politics, Culture and Society_. Vol. 2, From the Gilded
Age to the Present (New York: Pantheon Books, 1992)

2\. Elliott J. Gorn, Randy Roberts, and Terry D. Bilhartz, _Constructing the
American Past: A Source Book of a People's History_ (New York: Harper Collins,
1995)

_Who Built America?_ is a collectively authored textbook which draws upon new
varieties of historical scholarship in order to tell the story of modern
America from an egalitarian perspective--i.e. in a manner that places working
people and work itself at the center of familiar political controversies and
social changes. In addition to serving as a convenient source for reviewing
basic "facts and dates," _Who Built America?_ is intended to provide a
framework for lectures and class discussions. Relevant chapters will be
assigned on a week-to-week basis and should be read in advance of lectures.

_Constructing the American Past_ is a documentary volume containing first
person accounts and other forms of primary evidence which illuminate key
historical episodes from a variety of perspectives. You will be assigned
specific chapters in the book and asked to write short essays in which you
interrogate the documents and reach conclusions about what happened and why.

_PLEASE NOTE_ _Specific chapters from the above mentioned works will be
assigned each week. Brief unnanounced factual quizzes or short essays on
assigned reading will precede many lectures. Only students attending class on
the day of a short quiz make receive credit for the quiz. Class discussions
may follow weekly quizzes when the schedule permits._

Grades will be calculated on the following basis:  
  WEEKLY TESTS ON ASSIGNED READING AND BRIEF DOCUMENTARY QUESTIONS  | 33.3%  
---|---  
MID-TERM EXAM | 33.3%  
FINAL EXAMINATION | 33.3%  


_A FINAL NOTE_

You are encouraged to consult with me on a regular basis to review test
performance, discuss assigned reading, and other matters related to the
course. If you are having difficulty with an assignment or need clarification
of points raised in lectures the time to raise questions is _before_ the next
quiz.

This course will succeed to the extent that you become actively engaged with
the books and ideas we will be examining. All students should devote maximum
effort to the semester's reading feel completely free to express their candid
opinions (and listen to other ideas) both in and out of class.  


**Tentative Schedule of Lectures and Assignments**

August 25--Introduction to course: "What Every South Alabama Freshman Should
Know"  


**A. RECONSTRUCTION**

August 27--"Nothing but Freedom"--The Civil War and its Meaning

September 1--Reconstruction: Was it Radical?

September 3--CONTINUED

September 8--The Southern White Backlash

        \-- _Constructing the American Past_ /Chapter 1   


**B. THE GILDED AGE, 1877-1900**  


September 10--Politics, Economics, and Race: The Compromise of 1877  


        \-- _Who Built America?_ / Chapter 1   


September 15--Economic Transformation: Cities, Factories, Farms  


        \-- _Constructing the American Past_ /Chapter 2   
    


September 17--CONTINUED  


September 22--CONTINUED  


September 24--The Metamorphosis Of Organized Labor  


        \-- _Who Built America?_ / Chapter 3, pp109-144   


September 29----CONTINUED  


        \-- _Who Built America?_ / Chapter 4, pp159-198   
    


October 1--The Populist Revolt  


        \-- _Who Built America?_ /pp. 95-107 [in **Chapter 2** ] and pp. 144- 157 [in **Chapter 3** ]   


October 6--Populism continued  


October 8--MID-TERM EXAM  


**C. THE PROGRESSIVE ERA, 1900-1920**  


October 13--Disfranchisement as Reform: Racial Politics in the age of Booker
T. Washington.  


October 15--Immigration and Anxiety: Theodore Roosevelt and 'Race Suicide'  


        \-- _Constructing the American Past_ /Chapter 4   


October 20--Progressivism--One Movement or Many?  


        \-- _Who Built America?_ / Chapter 4, pp. 199-213   


October 22--Continued  


        \-- _Constructing the American Past_ /Chapter 6   


October 27--Continued  


October 29--The Great War and the Birth of Modern America  


        \-- _Constructing the American Past_ /Chapter 8   


**D. AMERICA BETWEEN THE WARS, 1920-1940**  


November 3--Dialectical Decade: The Clash of Opposing Values in the 1920s  


November 5--It Can't Happen Here-The Great Crash and Its Aftermath  


November 10--FDR to the Rescue  


November 12/ **NO CLASS**  


November 17--Three New Deals  


**E. POSTWAR AMERICA, 1945-1970**  


November 19--The Cold war and the New Liberal Consensus  


November 24--Civil Rights: Challenge in the Courts  


November 26/ NO CLASS--THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY  


December 1--Civil Rights: Nonviolent Direct Actiom  


December 3--Fighting Poverty and Communism  


December 8-- ** _finis_**

