**United States History Since 1865**  
    
    
    


**HISTORY 111**

Spring 2002

Mrs. Norton

  
  
  
  
  
  
  

**TEXT:** George B. Tindall and David E. Shi, _America: A Narrative History_ ,
5th ed, New York:  
W. W. Norton, 1999. This text was used in the fall term, and used texts should
be available through the college bookstore.  It is likely that a new text will
be on the market for next fall.

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS:**

1\. Chat room
20%  
2\. Essay examinations (4@ 15 % each)                                  60%  
3\. Research projects (4 @  5 % each)                                    20%  
    (Topics and materials available on the [Tindall site](http://www.wwnorton.com/tindall); password for site is **america webbook** .) 

**GRADING POLICY:**

**Proper Submission of Work to Instructor:**

Tests and papers must be typed, double-spaced. If submitted in hard copy, it
must be stapled or  
placed in a binder. Hard copy may be submitted in person, by campus mail, or
by U. S. Mail. If  
submitted on disk, it must be prepared in Microsoft Word or Corel Word
Perfect. Work may be  
submitted by e-mail as **.doc, .wpd., .RTF, .txt, or .htm or .html** files.
(Please do not submit **ZIP** files.) Work will be treated as late until these
terms are met.

**Determining Grades:**

**Scale:** 92-100=A, 84-91=B, 74-83=C, 65-73=D, 0-64=F

**Letter grade equivalents:** A+=98, A=95, A-=93, B+=90, B=88, B-=85, C+=82,
C=78, C-=75, D+=72, D=69, D-=66

**Other Grading Considerations:**

Completeness is a primary grading consideration. Spelling, sentence structure,
paragraphing, etc., will also be factors in determining grades assigned to
written work submitted. By and large, it is expected that quoting on tests,
research assignments, etc., will be minimal and that most answers and reports
will be written in your own words. The ability to restate something you have
read in your own words and the ability to combine information taken from
several sources into a statement of your own are standard and expected college
level communication skills and are thus expected of all students enrolled in
this course.

**Plagiarism warning:** Any form of academic dishonesty will be penalized
including, but not limited to, failure to use quotation marks to indicate
phrases or sentences quoted or appropriate citations to source and page to
indicate material quoted or paraphrased from a published source. For purposes
of this policy, the textbook is to be treated as any other published source.
Penalties for plagiarism or any other form of academic dishonesty may include
assigning a failing grade to the test or exercise, assigning a failing grade
for the course, or bringing formal disciplinary charges.

**ATTENDANCE AND WITHDRAWAL:**

It is expected that you will be on-line and on time for each real-time
discussion or tutorial for which you are scheduled. However, it is recognized
that on occasion absence is unavoidable; thus, I reserve the right to excuse
absences from these sessions for sufficient cause. If for some reason you must
miss a session and wish to be considered for an excused absence, please leave
a message for me on voice mail at (304) 233-5900,extension 4295 or my home
number, or e-mail at
**[gnorton@northern.wvnet.edu](mailto:gnorton@northern.wvnet.edu)** . Please
leave a phone number or e-mail address for a return message should that be
necessary. I do not drop students from the class roster unless specifically
asked to do so (provided the request is timely). If you want or need to drop
the course, you must submit the proper paperwork to the Registrar's Office.

**WEB SUPPORTS FOR THIS COURSE:**

This course is supported by web sites at the following locations:

**<http://www.northern.wvnet.edu/~gnorton/UShist2/index.htm>** .This site
contains a study guide, lectures, tests and other materials you will need for
the course.

**<http://www.wwnorton.com/tindall>** . This site contains a variety of
materials including chapter outlines and research materials. The universal
password for this site is **america webbook .** The Tindall site's research
materials will be needed in order to complete your contributions to the
asynchronous discussion forum.

Additional web supports will be announced as these are developed.

**SUCCESS IN THIS COURSE:**

1\. Each student is registered for a particular internet chat room time. It is
expected that you will be online and ready to join the chat room at exactly
the time for which you signed up. To ensure that you are ready to receive a
chat room invitation on time, you should log on 5-10 minutes before the start
of class.

2\. Unless you are an AOL user, it is necessary for you to use Netscape for
class because AOL Instant Messenger is used for scheduled chat sessions. If
you are an Internet Explorer user, you will need to go to the Netscape home
page **<http://home.netscape.com>**   and download the Netscape browser. The
download takes some time, so you will need to do this well before your first
scheduled class.

3\. Versions of Instant Messenger numbered lower than 2.0 do not support the
group chat applications. The version of Instant Messenger that you have shows
on your AIM start-up screen; if you need to upgrade, download and install an
upgrade from the Netscape home page. If you are a Netscape user and have not
already done so, you need to download and install Instant Messenger from the
Netscape home page before the start of classes. If you are an AOL user, you
may need to reconfigure your Instant Messenger preference screens in order to
be able to communicate with those of us using the Netscape version of Instant
Messenger. Be sure that you are set up to accept chat invitations from all
users and that you add the screen names of all other persons in your class
session on your "Buddy List" after the first class session. Compuserve users
receive a version of Instant Messenger from Compuserve that does not allow
users to join chat sessions; if you are a Compuserve user, you need to
download and install the Netscape version of Instant Messenger.

4\. Except for the scheduled chat sessions, you will be able to complete other
course work at your convenience. Most students appreciate the flexibility that
this allows them to fit course work into their work, parenting and other
responsibilities. One of the major problems that students have with this
arrangement, however, is yielding to the temptation to procrastinate, to put
off doing reading and other projects for too long to do them well. The most
successful students in internet courses prioritize their various activities
and schedule their study and work on assignments just as they schedule their
work, appointments, car pooling, and other activities; when they must take
care of some other problem during a scheduled study session, they re-schedule
it at a definite time. You need to make the effort to create a priority list
of activities and also to develop a master schedule for activities. Day
planners and/or weekly planners are helpful in this effort.

5\. Precisely because the time in chat sessions is limited, it is important
for students in internet courses to work more closely with the instructor than
they usually do with instructors of courses that meet face-to-face several
hours a week. For that purpose, the instructor maintains online office hours
during which she can be reached through Instant Messenger. Students are
encouraged to use e-mail to ask questions or report problems when the
instructor is not online. E-mail will be checked several times during the day
and replies sent at the instructor's earliest opportunity.

6\. Precisely because class "meetings" are held in a chat room, you will be
expected to contribute more to each "meeting" than you may be used to
contributing to a class that meets in a classroom. It is relatively common for
3-5 students to carry the entire load of class discussion in college
classrooms while other students are, for the most part, free riders. That
tactic does not work in a chat room where there are only 5-7 students. The
other thing that is different is that you will be typing your contributions.
While we all make errors when we try to get messages entered quickly, you
should try to spell as well as possible and also to make your entries as
grammaticallycorrect as you can.

**CONTACTING THE INSTRUCTOR:**

You need to adjust your thinking about how courses work so that you are
prepared to participate in a relationship that is closer to an individual
mentor/student relationship than you are used to. You may contact the
instructor by phone at the office: (304) 233-5900, ext. 4295 or at home. I
have provided my home number to students enrolled in this course. Since my
office computer is down as the term begins, it is highly likely that I will be
in my home office far more than in my college office.

**By e-mail:** [gnorton@northern.wvnet.edu](mailto:gnorton@northren.wvnet.edu)

**On Instant Messenger:** **gnorton99**

**Online office hours** on Instant Messenger: 9:30-10:30 AM Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday and Thursday and 7-7:30 PM Monday and Wednesday.

I would ask that you refrain from contacting me by Instant Messenger when I am
using it to teach other classes. These class hours are 8-9 AM, 6-7 PM, and
7:30-8:30 PM Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday. At other times, feel free to
contact me by Instant Message whenever I am online, including weekend days.  


**In person:** Office Hours in 310 B (Wheeling Campus): 12-12:30 and 1:45-2:00
PM Mondays and Wednesdays. Other hours are available by appointment.

I have a lab class in the computer lab (202B) 12:30-1:45 PM Monday and
Wednesday. If necessary, you may come to see me during this lab class.

