** CAS RN 110: MULTIRELIGIOUS AMERICA**

**(SAMPLE SYLLABUS)**



Professor: Stephen Prothero Office: STH 5th Floor (540B)

Phone: 353-4426 Office hours:

Email: prothero@bu.edu



**Description**

In a 1965 U.S. Supreme Court decision, Justice William Douglas wrote that the
United States was "a nation of Buddhists, Confucianists, and Taoists, as well
as Christians." Today in the United States, Protestant and Catholic churches
abound, but so do synagogues, temples, and mosques. This course explores that
religious diversity.



We consider five religious traditions: Hinduism, Buddhism, Judaism,
Christianity, and Islam. We focus on inter-religious interactions. We conclude
with a discussion of the uses and abuses of the First Amendment in
contemporary America. Although we will explore the histories of these
religious in the United States, our emphasis is on the period after 1965, when
new legislation opened up immigration from Asia and in the process rapidly
transformed the country from a Judeo-Christian nation to a nation of
religions.



**Objectives**

1. To cultivate basic literacy in the world's religious traditions

2. To explore the dynamism of American religions

3. To ponder the meanings and ends of religious faith.

4. To improve your ability to read texts carefully and critique them intelligently

5. To improve your writing skills



**Requirements**

1. Genogram (due at the beginning of the second week of class). Family tree of your ancestors, including their names, ethnicity, religion, and place of birth. Two-page paper (typed, double-spaced) analyzing your religious heritage. (10%.)

2. Site visit and report. Visit a religious site in the Boston area and submit a brief report (three pages, typed, double-spaced). Observe with care what is going on. Who is attending? What can you determine about their ages? Gender? Ethnicity? What are they doing with their bodies? What are they saying? Are they articulating, either through words or rites, any beliefs? If so, what are those beliefs? (10%.)

3. Two book reviews. Three pages each (typed, double-spaced). You may choose from among the books by Pope John Paul, the Dalai Lama, Malcolm X, Swami Yogananda, and Stephen Dubner. If you do more than two, I will use your two best grades. You can also rewrite any of your papers. Rewrites will be due one week after I hand your papers back, and for those who do rewrites I will average the grades of your initial paper and the rewrite. (15% each = 30% total.)

4. Two quizzes on terms (the first on Christianity, Judaism, and Islam; the second on Hinduism and Buddhism). (10% each = 20% total.)

5. Final examination (30%).



**Required Reading**

Jacob Neusner, _World Religions in America: An Introduction_ (Westminster/John
Knox, 1999)

Diana Eck, _Encountering God: A Spiritual Journey from Bozeman to Banares
****_ (Beacon, 1994).

  

Pope John Paul, _Crossing the Threshold of Hope_ (HarperSanFrancisco, 1995)

Malcolm X, _The Autobiography of Malcolm X_ (Chelsea, 1999)

Dalai Lama, _The Good Heart: A Buddhist Perspective on the Teachings of Jesus_
(Wisdom, 1998)

Paramahansa Yogananda, _Autobiography of a Yogi_ (SRF Publications, 1997)

Stephen Dubner, _Turbulent Souls: A Catholic Son's Return to His Jewish
Family_ (Bard, 1999)

Course Packet available on the course Web site



**Late Papers/ Makeup Exams Policy**

Exams will not be rescheduled. Papers are due at the beginning of class on due
date. Papers may be handed in late, but will be marked down one half of a
grade for each day or portion of a day they are late. (No excuses are
necessary.) Exceptions only for illness with doctor's note or death/sickness
in the family.



**Plagiarism**

In keeping with Boston University's policies, plagiarism will be penalized
severely. Don't do it. And it you don't know what it is, look at BU's handbook
on academic conduct or come see me.



**INTRODUCTION**



Week One: Religions in America from the Puritan Past to the Pluralistic
Present

Modes of Interreligious Contact: Conflict, Cooperation, Creolization

Views of Other Religions: Exclusivism, Inclusivism, Pluralism

**Reading** : Eck, _Encountering God: From Bozeman to Banares ****_



**CHRISTIANITY**



Week Two: Basic Christianity: Beliefs, Practices, Symbols, Stories

Varieties of American Protestantism: Puritanism, Liberalism, Fundamentalism,
Pentecostalism

**Reading** : Neusner, _World Religions in America_ (Christianity chapter)

Wacker, "Searching for Eden with a Satellite Dish: Primitivism, Pragmatism and
the Pentecostal Character," in CP.



Week Three Varieties of American Christianity: Catholicism

**Reading** : Neusner, _World Religions in America_ (Christianity chapter).

Essay on Catholicism (t.b.a.).



Week Four Issues in Contemporary American Christianity: Interreligious
Dialogue

**Reading** : Pope John Paul VI, _Crossing the Threshold of Hope_.



**JUDAISM**



Week Five: Basic Judaism: Beliefs, Practices, Symbols, Stories

Varieties of American Judaism: Reform, Orthodox, and Conservative

**Reading** : Neusner, _World Religions in America_ (Judaism chapter)



Week Six Issues in Contemporary American Judaism: Who is a Jew?

**Reading** : Dubner, _Turbulent Souls_

  

**ISLAM**



Week Seven Basic Islam: Beliefs, Practices, Symbols, Stories

Varieties of American Islam: The Nation of Islam and Islamic Orthodoxy

**Reading** : Neusner, _World Religions in America_ (Islam chapter)



Week Eight Issues in Contemporary American Islam: Race and Racism

**Reading: ** Malcolm X, _The Autobiography of Malcolm X_ ; James Cone,
"Malcolm and Martin: Integrationism and Nationalism in African American
Religious History," in CP.



**HINDUISM**



Week Nine Basic Hinduism: Beliefs, Practices, Symbols, Stories

Varieties of American Hinduism: Mainline Hinduism and New Religious Movements

**Reading** : Neusner, _World Religions in America_ (Hinduism chapter).



Week Ten Issues in Contemporary American Hinduism: Immigration and
Americanization

**Reading** : Yogananda, _Autobiography of a Yogi_ ; Joanne Waghorne, "The
Hindu Gods in a Split-Level World: The Sri Siva-Vishnu Temple in Suburban
Washington, D.C.," in CP.



**BUDDHISM**



Week Eleven Basic Buddhism: Beliefs, Practices, Symbols, Stories

Varieties of American Buddhism: Mainline Buddhism and New Religious Movements

**Reading** : Neusner, _World Religions in America_ (Buddhism chapter).



Week Twelve Issues in Contemporary American Buddhism: Protestantization and
the Buddhist Social Gospel

**Reading** : Dalai Lama, _The Good Heart_



**CONCLUSION**



Week Thirteen The First Amendment and Religious Freedom

**Reading** : Laycock, "Peyote, Wine and the First Amendment"; Grunes,
"Creationism, the Courts, and the First Amendment"; U.S. Supreme Court
decision in Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye v. City of Hialeah (Santeria
case). All in CP.

