**WELLESLEY COLLEGE**

![](../Images/wcseal2.gif)

**Political Science 306  
Revolution and War in Vietnam  
Spring 2002**

Professor William A. Joseph  
PNE 232, x2201  
Homepage:
[http://www.wellesley.edu/Polisci/wj/wjhome.html](http://www.wellesley.edu/Polisci/wj/wj/wjhome.html)  
Office Hours:  
T 2:15-4:00; W 9:30-12:00; Th 2:30-5:00  
and by appointment

**Purpose:** The purpose of this course is to understand and analyze the
origins, development, and consequences of the Vietnamese revolution from the
early twentieth century through the 1990s. After an introductory meeting, the
next section will be spent discussing the meaning and causes of revolution,
the relationship between revolution and war, and the tactics and strategies of
both revolutionaries and those who want to stop them from winning power and
achieving their revolutionary goals.

The remainder of the course will focus specifically on revolution and war in
Vietnam and will consider topics such as: the impact of French colonialism on
traditional Vietnamese society; the role of World War II in shaping
nationalism and communism in Vietnam; leadership (particularly that of Ho Chi
Minh), organization, and tactics of the Vietnamese revolutionary movement; the
motives, stages, and strategies of American intervention in Vietnam; expansion
of the conflict to Cambodia and Laos; important events such as the My Lai
Massacre and the Tet Offensive; the anti-war movement in the United States;
lessons and legacies of the Vietnam War for both Vietnam (e. g. the
environmental impact) and the United States (e. g. the treatment of American
veterans of the war); and political and economic development in Vietnam since
the end of the war and the reunification of the country under communist rule
in the mid-1970s.

**Requirements:** The written assignments for the course, due dates, and their
proportion of the final course grade are as follows:

  1. One take-home essay (8-10 pages) due __ no later **4:30 p.m., Friday, March 15th** (before spring break!) (25%);
  2. Attendance, attentiveness, participation, oral presentations (25%); 
  3. A final research paper (approximately 20 pages) on a topic chosen in consultation with the instructor due by **4:30 p.m., Friday, May 17th** (50%). A brief statement of your paper topic and a preliminary bibliography are due by **4:30 pm. Friday, April 26th.**

Each student will do two oral presentations, one on a topic related to the
class subject of the day and one on a conversation with someone about their
experience, memory, or knowledge of the Vietnam War. These will not be graded,
but the quality of the presentations will be taken into account when
determining (2) above. Please also see the list of [ "Responsibilities and
Expectations"](../resp.html) for the course that is attached to this syllabus.

**Required Books:** The following books are available for purchase in the
bookstore. They are also on reserve in the Library.

  * Bao Ninh, _The Sorrow of War_.
  * Graham Greene, _The Quiet American._
  * Robert J. McMahon, Major Problems in the History of the Vietnam War
  * Tim O'Brien, _If I Die In a Combat Zone._
  * Tran Tu Binh, _The Red Earth: A Vietnamese Memoir of Life on a Colonial Rubber Plantation._
  * James W. Trullinger _, Village at War: An Account of Revolution in a Vietnamese Village._
  * Marilyn Young, _The Vietnam Wars, 1945-1990._

In addition, some of the assigned readings will be available for purchase
through the instructor.

**Video Assignments:** There are both required and recommended video
assignments for this course. The required videos should be taken just as
seriously as the required reading. All required and recommended videos are on
reserve at the library. The instructor may try to arrange group showings of
some of the videos; students are also encouraged to view the videos in groups,
if possible. For a complete list of videos on the Vietnam War available in the
College Library, see the [Videos on the Vietnam War in the Wellesley College
Library](http://www.wellesley.edu/Polisci/wj/vietfilms.html) on the
instructor's homepage.

**Internet Assignments:** There are quite a few Internet assignments for this
course, which can be accessed via the on-line syllabus or the FirstClass
course conference. There is an extraordinary wealth of information about the
Vietnam War on the Internet: some suggested sites can be found on the "[
Vietnam Links"](http://www.wellesley.edu/Polisci/wj/Vietnam/vietlink.html) on
the instructor's homepage.

**Photograph Books:** Photographs are a particularly vivid and affecting way
to try to understand the realities of the Vietnam War. Three books of photos
by combat photographers are on reserve:

  * _Vietnam: images from combat photographers_ / Owen Andrews, and C. Douglas Elliot (DS557.72 .A53 1991)
  * _Images of war_ / Julene Fischer and Robert Stone (q DS557.7 .I48 1986)
  * _Requiem: by the photographers who died in Vietnam and Indochina_ / Horst Faas and Tim Page (f DS557.72 .F33 1997)

I urge you to take a look at these books--particularly _Requiem_ \--at some
point during the course.

[**Course Schedule and Assignments**](306sched.htm)

