> > > >  
>>>

>>>  
>  **The United States Since 1877  
>  **

This course is the second half of the survey of American history. Its primary
goal is to foster historical and critical thinking about events, ideas, and
people in America over the last century and a quarter. To that end, we will
focus on a number of themes, including: 1) The evolving character of the
American state and its relation to the economy and to society; 2) the
situation and strategies of minorities in American society, including women,
African-Americans, and immigrants; and 3) the determinants of American foreign
policy.  
  
Some specific themes will include the changing role of the government in the
economy and in individuals' lives, particularly during the Gilded Age, the
1890s, the Progressive Era, the New Deal, and the Great Society; the shifting
ideological bases, institutional structures, and electoral characteristics of
the political system; American foreign policy during the era of expansionism,
World Wars I and II, and the Cold War; the civil rights era of the 1950s and
1960s and its consequences for African-Americans; and the changing status of
women, especially during and after World War II.  
  
To explore these various topics and themes, will incorporate lectures, role-
playing exercises, student-led presentations, films, and writing assignments.
Above all, the class will be based on discussions.  
  
Course Requirements  
Grading  
Texts  
Assignments  
Schedule of Lectures and Assignments  
  

* * *

  
**  
Course Requirements**

You are expected to attend every class. If you miss a significant amount of
classes (e.g., more than 5), your participation grade will be lowered
accordingly. **Everyone** is expected to participate in discussions and class
exercises. If you are uncomfortable speaking out in class, you should see me
at my office hours, email me, or somehow let me know that you want to
contribute but are hesitant to do so. I am sure we can work something out. If
you do not speak to me, I will assume that you are not participating because
you have not done the reading. You will learn a lot more if you participate in
the discussions. Your papers and exams will also almost certainly be better,
and you will undoubtedly be more interested in the subject. Thus, I encourage
you to speak up!  
This class will have a LISTSERV email discussion group as part of its daily
discussion. The LISTSERV is not only good for posting notices to other members
of the class, but, more importantly, raising questions, focusing on ideas
which we did not have time for in class, and continuing discussions after
class has ended. You will be required to post at least 2 messages to the
LISTSERV.  
In order to participate-either in class or on the LISTSERV-you must do the
reading.  
Lateness-to class or with assignments-will not be tolerated. A full letter
grade will be deducted for each day a paper is due. If you have foreseeable
conflicts (e.g., sports, performances, etc.), I will expect you to inform me
(in writing) of the dates **at the beginning of the semester**.  
It is your responsibility to read, comprehend, and comply with  "The Code of
Academic Integrity" at the College of Wooster as specified in _The Scot's
Key_.

* * *

  
  
**Grading**

Grades are comprised of the following components:

1\. Four (4) writing assignments, each 3-4 pages. (10% each)

2\. One (1) World Wide Web (WWW) assignment, 3-4 pages long. (10%)

3\. Discussion participation (including discussion leading) (20%)

4\. Take-Home Final Exam (30%)

* * *

  
**  
Texts**

The following books are available at the Bookstore and are on reserve in Gault
Library.

Alan Trachtenberg, _The Incorporation of America_

Rosalind Rosenberg, _Divided Lives_

William Leuchtenberg, _Franklin D. Roosevelt and the New Deal_

Harvard Sitkofff, _The Struggle for Black Equality_

John Lewis Gaddis, _Strategies of Containment_

William Chafe, _The Unfinished Journey_

Additional readings will be made available as xeroxed handouts.

* * *

  
  
**Assignments**

Assignments are intended to help you not only understand the material, but
also to give you the opportunity to develop and apply your interpretive
skills. Each assignment will be detailed in handouts throughout the semester.
Written assignments include the following:

1\. Historical autobiography: A short paper which examines the history of your
life.

2\. Point-of-view (P.O.V.) essay: An essay from the P.O.V. of an historical
actor, whether someone famous or unknown.

3\. Film Analysis: An examination of a film from a selected time period. You
will analyze and interpret such characteristics as the content, imagery,
intended audience, probable effects, etc.

4\. Book Analysis: Your chance to critique and interpret the author's
argument, evidence, etc.

5\. Final Exam

To make sure there is no misunderstanding, a page is double-spaced, 12 point
Times or similar font.

If you misspell a word in a paper (including accidentally using a homonym
(e.g., "bare" instead of "bear"), I will deduct **one full letter grade** from
your paper. This is non-negotiable.



WWW assignment:

Web site addresses are noted throughout the syllabus . Using these addresses
as starting points, you will choose an historical issue, event, or personality
to research on the Web. Creativity is a must!

Participation

As mentioned above, every student will be expected to participate. In
addition, you will work with one other student to serve as a discussion leader
for one class session. This assignment will involve meeting with me before the
class, developing questions and activities, and ensuring that the discussion
is productive and epiphany-producing.

I will evaluate your discussion participation by the following criteria:

A. What did you say? In other words, what are you arguing?

B. Did your participation grow out of the reading, or was it a fuzzy
"feeling"? In other words, what is your evidence?

C. How did you respond to your classmates' questions and points? Did you take
these further?

D. Did you push yourself to your limits, or did you play it safe?



If you are reluctant to speak in class, you have the following options:

A. Talk to me about how to set participation goals.

B. Use the LISTSERV as a way to foster discussion outside of the class. While
this will not count for all of your participation grade, it can make a big
difference.

C. Do neither A nor B, and lose up to 20% of your grade.

* * *

  
  
**Schedule of Lectures and Assignments**

Readings and written assignments are due the day they appear on the schedule.
Some weeks have more reading than others, and you are still expected to do the
reading when written assignments are due. Check the schedule regularly and
plan your time accordingly.

**Note:** I have assigned only a few chapters from Chafe's _Unfinished
Journey_. It is, however, an excellent book to use for postwar background
information. I highly recommend reading chapters 3,4,7,8-11, 13-14.

1/11: Introduction: Requirements, themes, and expectations

1/13: Reading, writing about, and understanding interpretations of American
history. Mini-writing workshop.

READ: Trachtenberg: Preface and Chap. 1

1/15: 1876

READ: Trachtenberg, Chap. 2

WWW: http://grid.let.rug.nl/ahc/hist.html (A good place to start your web
search)

http://lcweb2.loc.gov/amhome.html (Library of Congress American Memory
Project-Excellent!)

http://history/cc.unkans.edu/history/ (Another good starting place)

http://www.kaiwan.com/~lucknow/horus/horuslinks.html (history bibliographies)

1/18: 1877

READ: Trachtenberg, Chap. 3

1/20: The Meanings of Reconstruction

READ: Trachtenberg, Chap 4, and Eric Foner, "The Meaning of Freedom," from _A
Short History of Reconstruction_ (1990), pp. 23-37.

1/22: New Peoples in New Places

READ: Trachtenberg, Chap 5

**Autobiographies Due**

WWW: http://www.chicagohs.org/ (Chicago Historical Society)

http://www.umn.edu/ihrc (Immigration History Research Center)

1/25: Gilded Age Politics

READ: Trachtenberg, Chap. 6

1/27: The 1890s-Overview

READ: Trachtenberg, Chap. 7

1/29: Populism and Other Protests

READ: Excerpts from Lawrence Goodwyn, _The Populist Moment_ (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1978), reprinted in Allen F. Davis and Harold E. Woodman,
eds., _Conflict and Consensus in American History_ , vol. 2 (Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1997), 142-152.

2/1: Populism and Progressivism

READ: Daniel T. Rogers, "In Search of the Progressive Era," _Reviews in
American History_ 10, no. 4 (Dec., 1982), 113-132

2/3: Progressivism II

READ: Rosenberg Chap. 1

2/5: The Ambiguities of Progressivism: African-Americans, Women, and
Immigrants

READ: Rosenberg Chap. 2

2/8: American Diplomacy and Foreign Relations

READ:

**WWW Assignment Due**

2/10: Theories of Expansionism

READ: Philip S. Foner, "Why the United States Went to War With Spain in 1898,"
(1968) in Blanche Wiesen Cook, Alice Kessler Harris, and Ronald Radosh, eds.,
_Past Imperfect_ vol. II, (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1973), pp. 74-91.

2/12: Interpretations of World War I

READ: George F. Kennan, "World War I," from _American Diplomacy_ (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1951), pp. 55-73.

WWW: http://www.lib.byu.edu/~rdh/wwi/ (WWI documents)

2/15: World War I

READ: Woodrow Wilson, "The Fourteen Points," (Address to Congress 8 January
1918)

2/17: Conclude World War I and Foreign Relations

READ:

2/19: The Divided 1920s: Race, Gender, Ethnicity, and the Economy

READ: Rosenberg Chap. 3

**P.O.V. Essay Due**

**Notes on** Culture of the 1920s distributed.

WWW: http://www.msstate.edu/Archives/History/USA/20th_C./twenty.html (Lots of
20th century resources)
http://izzy.online.discovery.com/Dco/doc/1012/world/history/cigarettes/cigarettes
1.3a.html (Cigarettes in society)

http://rs6.loc.gov:8080/nfexpe.html (Voices of the Presidential Election of
1920)

http://lcweb2.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/D?wpa:1:./temp/~~ammem_Frkw:: (Whites
Invade Harlem, from the Library of Congress American Memory Project)

2/22: America on the Eve of the Depression

READ: Leuchtenberg Chaps. 1-2

2/24: The Depression: Causes and Effects

READ: Leuchtenberg Chaps. 3-4

2/26: The New Deal and Problems of Recovery

READ: Leuchtenberg Chaps. 5-6

3/1: Films: _The River_ and _The Plow that Broke the Plains_

READ: Leuchtenberg Chaps. 7-8

WWW: http://rs6.loc.gov/wpaintro/wpahome.html (WPA Federal Writers Project
excerpts)

http://lcweb2.loc.gov/ammem/fsowhome.html (Images from the Farm Securities
Administration and Office of War Information Files)

3/3: Legacies of the New Deal

READ: Leuchtenberg Chaps. 10, 14

3/5: Isolationism

READ: Leuchtenberg Chaps. 9, 13

3/8-3/20: Vacation

3/22: World War II: Entrance and Fighting the War

Film of FDR's Declaration of War

READ: Leuchtenberg Chap. 12

WWW: http://www.army.mil/cmh-pq (Center for Military History)

3/24: The War at Home

READ: Rosenberg Chap. 4; Chafe Chap. 1

3/26: The Politics of War and Dropping the Bomb

READ: Gaddis Chaps. 1-2

**Film Analysis Due**

WWW: http://sunsite.unc.edu/lia/president/truman.html (Truman Presidential
Library)

3/29: A New Kind of War

READ: Gaddis Chaps. 3-4

WWW: http://www.msstate.edu/Archives/History/USA/20th_C./twenty.html (link to
Cold War documents)

3/31: McCarthyism, Cold War Culture, and Postwar Society

READ: Gaddis Chap. 5

WWW: http://webcorp.com/mccarthy/mccarthypage.html (Archives on McCarthy,
including audio and video clips)

http://www.english.upenn.edu/~afilreis/50s/blacklist.html (Resource on
Hollywood Blacklist)

4/2: **No Class: Read Lecture Notes on** The 1950s: Happy Days?

READ: Gaddis Chap. 6; Chafe Chap. 5

WWW: http://www.psc.lsa.umich.edu/SSDAN/ (using US census 1950-1990)

http://www.lib.uconn.edu/RoperCenter/ (Roper Center polling data)

4/5: The Civil Rights Movement I

Film of Martin Luther King

READ: Sitkoff Chaps. 1-2

WWW: http://www.msstate.edu/Archives/History/USA/1961.html

http://www-leland.stanford.edu/group/King/mlkpp.htm

http://webcorp.com/civilrights/ (sound clips from civil rights movement)

4/7: The Civil Rights Movement II

Film of Malcolm X

READ: Sitkoff Chaps. 3-4

4/9: Political and Social Movements of the 1960s I

READ: Sitkoff Chaps. 5-6

WWW: http://www.feminist.org (The Feminist Majority Foundation)

http://h-net.msu.edu/~women (H-Women Website)

4/12: Political and Social Movements of the 1960s II

READ: Sitkoff Chaps. 7-8; Chafe Chap. 12

**Book Analysis Due**

WWW: http:www.diggers.org

4/14: Guns or Butter?

READ: Gaddis Chap. 7

4/16: Vietnam and the Great Society (continued)

READ: Gaddis Chap. 8

4/19: Summing up the Sixties

Film of RFK's Eulogy for MLK

READ: Rosenberg Chap. 6

4/21: The 1970s: An Alfred E. Newman Decade?

READ: Gaddis Chaps. 9,10

WWW: http://webcorp.comp/video/nixon/nixonvideo.html

4/23: Reagan

Film of Reagan's 1981 Inaugural

READ: Gaddis Chap. 11; Chafe Chap. 15

WWW: http://www.msstate.edu/Archives/History/USA/20th_C./twenty.html

http://www.msstate.edu/Archives/History/USA/1961.html

http://history.hanover.edu/20th/reagan.htm (Reagan speeches and links to other
Reagan sites)

4/26: Post-Industrialism and a Changing America

Film of Jesse Jackson's 1984 Campaign

READ: Rosenberg Chap 7 and Epilogue

**Take-Home Final Assigned**

4/28: Clinton and America in the 1990s

READ: Chafe, Chap. 16 and Epilogue

4/30: Conclusions

5/4: **TAKE-HOME FINAL EXAM**

