**

Gender and Sexuality in the Americas

(Anth 3375E, Fall 2000)

Course Syllabus

**

Professor: Dr. Ana M. Juarez

Office: Liberal Arts 259

Phone: 245-7838 (direct) or 245-8272 (dept.)

E-mail: [aj07@swt.edu](mailto:aj07@swt.edu)

Web Page: [http://www.swt.edu/~aj07/](http://www.swt.edu/~aj07/)

Office Hours: MWF 3:00 pm -5:30 pm, or anytime by appointment

**

Students with Special Needs:** Students with special needs (as documented by
the Office of Disability Services) should identify themselves at the beginning
of the term. The Department of Anthropology is dedicated to providing these
students with necessary academic adjustments and auxiliary aids to facilitate
their participation and performance in the classroom.



**

Course Description** : This course critically examines cultural constructions
of gender and sexuality among both indigenous and immigrant (African and
European) populations throughout the Americas, with a special emphasis on
identity and inequality in Greater Latin America. Lectures, films, course
activities, and readings will be used to analyze theoretical and
methodological issues related to culture, identity, political economy, sexual
practices and gender, racial, and social inequalities. Some pre-colonial
cultures (Maya, Aztec, and Inca) and historical periods will be examined, but
the emphasis will be on contemporary cultures and practices.

**

Required Text:

**

Peach, Lucinda Joy. 1998. _Women in Culture: A Women's Studies Anthology_.
Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers Inc.

**

Selected Readings** will be available from the professor. **** Students must
make copies of all required readings at the beginning of the semester.

**

Requirements** :

**_

Class Activities and Participation (15% of grade)**_ :

Students will be required to come to class prepared to discuss and participate
in class activities, discussion, readings, and assignments.

If you miss class, it is your responsibility to get lecture notes from another
student and make sure you keep up with course assignments.

Students with no more than two absences will receive _five extra points_ on
their participation grade. Otherwise, attendance will be used to determine
whether students who have borderline final grades will be moved up to the next
grade level.

_**

Research Presentation and Paper (35% total; 15% for presentation, 20% for
paper)** :

_

Students will develop research projects based on either library, archival, or
ethnographic research.

You will be required to present your findings in a **15-20 minute class
presentation** during the last few weeks of class. On the day of your
presentation, you must turn in a _typed topic sentence outline and a
bibliography with a minimum of three approved sources_ (the number of sources
will depend on the nature of your project and sources).

A **seven to ten page final paper and an annotated bibliography** will be
**due at the beginning of the final exam period** (Friday, December 13, 3
p.m).

Research projects comprise 35% of your final grade ( _15% presentation, 20%
paper_ ). Further guidelines on papers and presentations will be available in
class.

A list of suggested topics will be available, or you may ask me to approve
another topic.

_**

Exams (50% total; 25% for Exam One, 25% for Exam Two):

**_

There will be two exams, as noted on the course schedule, consisting of
multiple choice, short answer, definitions, and essay questions. Each exam is
worth 25% of your grade. Exams will be based on course lectures, readings,
activities, discussion, and films.

**_

Exam Regulations** :_ 1) Exams require an "8 1/2 x 11" _BLUE BOOK_. 2) You
must arrive for exams ON TIME. If you arrive more than 10 minutes late you
will not be allowed to take the exam. 3) If you miss an exam due to an
OFFICIALLY documented sickness or emergency, you may be able to make it up
within one week of the original test date. The make-up exam may not be the
same as the original exam.

**_



Summary of Grading and Requirements:

**_

First Exam: 25% |

Participation: 15%  
---|---  
  
Second Exam: 25% |

Presentation: 15%  
  |

Paper: 20%  
  
**

A** =90 or above; **B** =80 or above; **C** =70 or above;

**

D** =60 or above; **F** =59 or below

**_



Final Exam Period**:_ Wednesday, Dec. 13, at 3:00 p.m.

**_

Note: Syllabus is subject to change

**_ **_

TENTATIVE_ Schedule of Topics and Readings



8/30** _Introductions, Course Description_



**

9/1** _Commonalities and Differences

_

Chapter 2, Commonalities and Differences among Women, Introduction in _Peach
1998

_

Cole, Johnnetta B., "Commonalities and Differences" in _Peach 1998

_

Lorde, Audre, "Age, Race, Class, and Sex: Women Redefining Difference" in
_Peach 1998

_

Truth, Sojourner, "And Ain't I A Woman?" in _Peach 1998

_



**

9/6** _Commonalities and Differences, cont.

_

Indiana University Empowerment Workshop: "When You Meet a Lesbian: Hints for
the Heterosexual Woman" in _Peach 1998

_

Gay and Lesbian Speaker's Bureau: "Heterosexuality Questionnaire" in _Peach
1998

_**



9/8 ** _Pre-Columbian Mayas

_



**

9/11 ** _Pre-Columbian Mayas

_

In-class Video: _Popol Vuh_ (1987)

_



_**

9/13 ** _Pre-Columbian Incas

_

Silverblatt, Irene. 1980. "Andean Women Under Spanish Rule," in _Women and
Colonization: Anthropological Perspectives_ , eds. Etienne, Mona and Eleanor
Leacock. New York: Bergin/Praeger Publishers.

_



_**

9/15** _American Indians

_

Maltz and Archambault, 1995. "Gender and Power in Native North America:
Concluding Remarks," in _Women and Power in Native North America_ , eds.
Klein, Laura F. and Lillian A. **** Ackerman. Norman: University of Oklahoma
press.

_



_**

9/18** _American Indians

_



**

9/20** _Western Models

_



**

9/22** _Western Models and Colonialism

_

Kellogg, Susan. 1997. "From Parallel and Equivalent to Separate but Unequal:
Tenochca Mexica Women, 1500-1700," in _Indian Women of Early Mexico_ , eds.
Schroeder, Susan, Stephanie Wood, and Robert Haskett. Norman: University of
Oklahoma Press.

**

9/25** _Malintzin and the Virgen de Guadalupe

_

Rebolledo, Diana Tey and Eliana S. Rivero, eds. 1993. Selections from "Chapter
Five, Myths and Archetypes," _Infinite Divisions: An Anthology of Chicana
Literature_. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.



**

9/27** _Catch Up, Review

_**



9/29** _Library Databases on Gender and Sexuality

_



**

10/2** **_EXAM ONE

**_



**

10/4** **_Preliminary Reports on Research Topics and Sources Due

**_



**

10/6** _Latin American Families

_

In-class Video, _Como Agua Para Chocolate

_



**

10/9** _Latin American Families

_

Arrom, Silvia M. 1994 [1985]. "Changes in Mexican Family Law in the Nineteenth
Century," in Yeager, Gertrude M., ed. _Confronting Change, Challenging
Tradition: Women in Latin American History_. Wilmington, DE: Scholarly
Resources, Inc.



**

10/11** _Machismo and Marianismo

_

Paredes, Americo. 1993 [1971]. "The United States, Mexico, and _Machismo_ ,"
in Paredes, Americo, _Folklore and Culture on the Texas-Mexican Border_ , (ed.
Richard Bauman). Austin: Center for Mexican American Studies.

**

10/13** _Machismo and Marianismo

_

Stevens, Evelyn P. 1994 [1973]. "Marianismo: The Other Face of Machismo" in
Yeager, Gertrude M., ed. _Confronting Change, Challenging Tradition: Women in
Latin American History_. Wilmington, DE: Scholarly Resources, Inc. _

_



**

10/16 **_Motherhood and Diverse American Families

_

Chapter 7:Motherhood and Families, Introduction in _Peach 1998

_

Collins, Patricia Hill, "Shifting the Center: Race, Class, and Feminist
Theorizing about Motherhood" (excerpt) in _Peach 1998

_



**

10/18 **_Women and Popular Culture I: Advertising, Print Media, and
Pornography

_

Kilbourne, Jean, "Beauty and the Beast of Advertising," in _Peach 1998

___

In-class Video, _Slim Hopes

__



_**

10/20 **_Women and Popular Culture I: Advertising, Print Media, and
Pornography

_

Chapter 4: Women and Popular Culture I: Advertising, Print Media, and
Pornography, Introduction, in _Peach 1998

_



**

10/23 **_Women and Popular Culture I: Advertising, Print Media, and
Pornography, cont.

_

Scott, Linda M., "Fresh Lipstick: Rethinking Images of Women in Advertising,"
in _Peach 1998

_



**

10/25** _Fashion, Beauty, and Women's Health_

Chapter 6: Fashion, Beauty, and Women's Health, Introduction, in _Peach 1998

_

Wolf, Naomi, " The Beauty Myth" (excerpt) in _Peach 1998

_



**

10/27** _Fashion, Beauty, and Women's Health_

Chernin, Kim, "Obsession, the Tyranny of Slenderness" in _Peach 1998

__



_**

10/30** _Madonna and the Music Scene_

_ _

In Class Video: _Dreamworlds II_

**



11/1** _Madonna and the Music Scene_

_ _

Kellner, Douglas, "Madonna, Fashion, and Identity"(excerpt) in _Peach 1998

__



_**

11/3 ** _Domestic and Sexual Violence_

_ _

In-class Video, _The Smell of Burning Ants

_

Bohmer, Carol and Andrea Parrot, "Scope of the Problem," in Peach 1998



**

11/6** _Domestic and Sexual Violence_

Mahoney, Martha R., "Legal Images of Battered Women" (excerpt) in Peach 1998

Bass, Ellen, "In the Truth Itself, There is Healing" (excerpt) in Peach 1998



**

11/8 ** _Sexual Harassment

_

Chapter 8: Sex, Sexism, Sexual Harassment, and Sexual Abuse, Introduction, in
Peach 1998

Van Gelder, "High School Lowdown" (excerpt) in Peach 1998

**



11/10** _Alternative Sexualities

_

Kulick, Don. 1997. "The Gender of Brazilian Transgendered Prostitutes," in
_American Anthropologist_ Vol. 99, No. 3:574-585.

**_



_

11/13** _Catch Up, Review

_ **

11/15 EXAM TWO

11/17 NO CLASS: Research Day

** **

11/20 ** **_Class Presentations Begin

**_ **

12/13 _FINAL EXAM PERIOD, Wednesday, 3 - 5:30 p.m.

**_

**Class Presentations and Final Papers Due

**

