## Wealth and Poverty

**Sociology 340 Augustana College, Sioux Falls, South Dakota**  
![](bluemarb.gif)  
**William J. Swart**  
Office Phone: 605.336.5329  
Email: swart@inst.augie.edu  

**DESCRIPTION:**  
This course presents a sociological examination of social stratification in
industrial societies, with primary emphasis on the class system of the United
States. During roughly the first half of the course, we will explore the
sociological explanations for social stratification, links between class, race
and gender inequality, and the class system in the United States. During the
second half of the semester, we will examine the relationship between social
class and life chances through a number of ethnographic accounts of the
consequences of wealth and poverty.

**OBJECTIVES:**  
1\. To study the basic sociological concepts and perspectives on social
inequality and stratification.  
  
2\. To understand the major sociological explanations for social inequality
both within the United States as well as globally.  
  
3\. To explore the influence of wealth and poverty on the political, economic,
family, religious, and educational institutions of American society.  
  
4\. To understand the link between social class and lifestyle, and thus the
influence of social status on human dignity and social worth.

**REQUIREMENTS FOR THE COURSE:**  
**_Required Books:_** **(SUBJECT TO CHANGE FOR FUTURE SEMESTERS)**  

  * Katz, Michael B. 1989. _The Undeserving Poor: From the War on Poverty to the War on Welfare._ New York: Pantheon Books.
  * Kerbo, Harold R. 1996. _Social Stratification and Inequality._ New York: McGraw-Hill Publishing.
  * Kotlowitz, Alex. 1991. _There Are No Children Here: The Story of Two Boys growing Up in the Other America._ New York: Anchor Books.
  * Kozol, Jonathan. 1991. _Savage Inequalities: Children in America's Schools._ New York: Crown Publishers.
  * Reiman, Jeffrey. 1990. _The Rich Get Richer and the Poor Get Prison: Ideology, Class, and Criminal Justice._ New York: Allyn and Bacon.

**_Student Responsibilities:_**  
Students are not potted plants, and I expect full student commitment and
participation in this learning experience. As noted in the course outline,
only the first half of the course will be lecture oriented. Following the mid-
term exam, we will hold seminar discussions over the assigned readings. These
discussions not only require that you come to class having read the assigned
material, but also that you come prepared to **contribute** to class
discussions. Thus, I expect you to come to class having read and prepared the
readings for discussion. I dislike "free riders," and thus reserve the right
to resort to pop quizzes if it becomes apparent that people are not doing the
reading before class. Ultimately, how much you get out of this course largely
depends on how much you put into it.

**_Exams:_**  
There will be only ONE exam this semester. This exam will occur around mid-
term, and will cover the basic sociological concepts, theories and data
regarding class inequality as discussed in the Kerbo text. This exam will be a
entirely essay, with the potential to be a take home exam. This exam is worth
100 points.

**_Experiential Research Project:_** This course will require you to complete
an experiential research project designed to give you first-hand knowledge of
the social consequences of economic stratification. For this project, you will
need to identify and study an issue related to economic stratification in the
city of Sioux Falls. The goal of your project should be to compare the effects
of social class on a specific social variable. These variables might include
race, gender, religion, education, politics, health care, and so on. As noted
in the course schedule, you will present your findings to the entire class
during one of the two final class periods of the semester. At the same time a
typewritten paper detailing the project's findings is due. This project is
worth 200 points.

The following due dates are designed to get you stated early on this project:  
  
1\. Select a topic and submit a brief (one page) proposal (due February 26).  
  
2\. Submit a brief progress report (2-3 pages) as well as a bibliography of
the literature you will use to direct your project (due April 9)  
  
3\. Submit a completed, typewritten paper of approximately 6-8 pages (due at
in-class presentation).  
  

**_Book Reports:_**  
In lieu of a final examination, you will be required to turn in book reviews
over two of the four ethnographies we will read this semester. These book
reviews should draw evidence from the specific book to answer the following
questions: What is the relationship between social class and lifestyle? Is the
individual the sole cause of their economic status? How does society's class
structure influence other social institutions? What does this book tell us
about the relationship between social status and human dignity and worth? Each
book review should be between 4-6 typewritten pages. Each book review is worth
100 points and will be due by the end of the scheduled final exam period.

**_Grading:_**  
Final grades will be based on the cumulative points from the five exams and
mini-lab assignments, and will be assigned, as noted below, on a straight 10
percent scale, with 60 percent passing. There is no extra credit available for
this course.

90% and above.............A 80-89%.........................B
70-79%.........................C 60-69%.........................D 59% and
below.............F  
**OTHER INFORMATION ABOUT THE COURSE:**  

**_Availability:_**  
My scheduled office hours are for you, and I hate sitting alone during my
office hours. I look forward to and encourage meeting with students during
these times. If my office hours do not meet your schedule, however, please
feel free to make an appointment with me at another time. I am also available
via the internet (swart@inst.augie.edu). If you need to get in touch with me
outside of my office hours and do not have access to the internet, feel free
to call my office (336-5329) and leave a message if I'm not available.

**_Persons with Disabilities:_**  
If you have any sort of disability or personal problem which prevents the
fullest expression of your abilities, please let me know as soon as possible
during the semester - _before_ it interferes with your work - so that I can
make a reasonable accommodation to your needs.  

**_A Note About Due Dates:_**  
Due dates for this course are FIRM, and I expect you to turn in assignments
and take the exams during the scheduled class period. This policy will be
strictly enforced throughout the semester. Excuses for turning in late
assignments or taking a make-up exams will be considered on an individual
basis, and only when supported with the appropriate documentation. As a
student, you bear the sole responsibility for turning your work in on time.

**_Academic Misconduct:_**  
Students should abide by all student regulations as stated in the Augustana
College Catalog and the Student Handbook, especially those rules pertaining to
**_cheating_** and **_plagiarism_**. Plagiarism, cheating, or any other form
of academic dishonesty will not be tolerated in this course. Any student
engaging in academic dishonesty in this course can expect a failing grade for
the course _and_ formal charges to be brought before the Dean.

**COURSE SCHEDULE: (Topic Schedule Only)**  
  
**Section I: Introduction to the Study of Social Stratification**  

  * Introduction to the Course -
  * Perspectives and Concepts in the Study of Social Stratification; Social Stratification in Human Societies (Kerbo, Chapters 1 and 3)
  * Dimensions of Inequality Within and Outside the United States (Kerbo, Chapters 2 and 13)

**Section II: Forms and Explanations for Social Inequality**  

  * Social Stratification Theory: Early Statements (Kerbo, Chapter 4)
  * Modern Theories of Social Stratification; The Intersection of Class, Race, and Gender (Kerbo, Chapters 5 and 10)
  * The Upper Class (Kerbo, Chapters 6 and 7)
  * The Middle Classes (Kerbo, Chapter 8)
  * The Lower Class (Kerbo, Chapter 9)
  * "Monopoly" and Social Mobility

**Section III: Life Consequences of Wealth and Poverty**  

  * The Consequences of Poverty in the United States (Kotlowitz)
  * Wealth, Poverty, and Justice (Reiman)
  * Wealth, Poverty, and Education (Kozol)
  * Addressing Inequality: The History of Welfare (Katz)
  * In-Class Research Presentations

_Last Revised: August 1, 1998_  

