|  ![](images/stgs_bnl.gif) |  History 3090 |  ![](images/stgs_bnr.gif)  
---|---|---  
  
* * *  
  
[![](images/stgs_smb.gif)Home Page](Welcome.html) **  
![](images/stgs_smb.gif) History 3090**  
[![](images/stgs_smb.gif)History 1210  
](page2.htm)

|  **Native Americans in American History  
History 3090, Fall 2000**

**COURSE DESCRIPTION:**

**This course surveys the history of Native Americans from pre-European
contact to the present. Since this history covers hundreds of different
cultures over thousands of years, it will necessarily be selective in focus.
The course will nevertheless provide an overview of the major themes and
trends in Native American history, and it will illuminate particular issues
with case studies from select regions. History 3090 can only serve as an
introduction to this vast field of history, and those students wishing to
explore other issues of concern to them should consult with the professor.**

**The most dramatic changes in lives of Indian peoples stemmed from their
interaction with European Americans. All Indian peoples, despite the
tremendous diversity among them, had to adapt to the colonial drive of
European nations and the United States. This shared experience--the efforts of
Indian peoples to retain their power and autonomy while adapting to great
changes in their lives--will provide one of the unifying themes for this
course. The course will demonstrate that Indian peoples were not passive pawns
in their histories, but positive actors. At the same time, however, the
oppressive nature of colonial policies will be recognized and assessed.**

**The course reading load, although not excessively heavy for a course offered
through the history department, is difficult. Many reading selections are, in
the jargon of historians, "primary sources" that are taken from documents,
artifacts, journals, diaries, newspapers, oral accounts and literature from
the period under study. Reading these sources will sometimes be a slow
process, as the language and prose may differ from that commonly used today.
Make sure that you allow yourself plenty of time to read and understand these
items on the reading list. Your job here is to read between the lines and
interpret these sources as if you are an historian. Other reading assignments
are second-hand accounts of the past or "secondary sources," such as essays
written by historians. My lectures would qualify as a secondary source. It is
important to note that secondary sources are interpretations of the past, and
that you should read them to understand their argument and how it is
supported. Needless to say, in reading both primary and secondary sources, you
will find taking notes helpful in preparing for essays and exams.**

**REQUIRED TEXTS:**

**( The first two are available in the college bookstore)**

> **Colin Calloway, _First Peoples_**

>

> **Eve Ball, _Indeh_**

>

> **A book of your choice from the list distributed in class**



**REQUIREMENTS AND GRADING:**

**Feel free to come to my office hours to discuss the course ideas, readings,
requirements, and grading policy. Assignments will consist of a mid-term
examination, a three page essay, a book review, a final exam, and class
participation. The essay will be evaluated for both content and skill in
written expression. I will discuss these assignments in greater detail as the
course progresses. All assignments must be completed to pass the course. Late
papers and exams will receive a 1/3 grade reduction on each day they are late,
and make-up exams will not be given. If you have a documented illness or
hardship that prevents you from completing an assignment, please see me.**

**Assignments will be proportionally weighted according to the following
schedule in determining your course grade:**



**Mid-term exam . . . . . . .20%**

**Essay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25%**

**Book Review. . . . . . . . . 15%**

**Final exam . . . . . . . . . . 30%**

**Class participation . . . . 10%**



**Tentative Reading and Assignment Schedule :**

**Week 1 (Aug. 22 and 24): Calloway, Introduction; and syllabus**

**Week 2 (Aug. 29 and 31): Calloway, 10-27, 60-66, skim 28-59.**

**Week 3 (Sept. 5 and 7): Calloway, 67-82, and 98-108.**

**Week 4 (Sept. 12 and 14): Topic of book review due on September 14.**

**Week 5 (Sept 19 and 21): Calloway, 82-97, and 109-143.**

**Week 6 (Sept. 26 and 28): Calloway, 144-161, and 168-180.**

**Week 7 (Oct. 3 and 5): Calloway, 161-167, and 181-210.**

**Week 8 (Oct. 10 and 12): Mid-term examination October 12, bring blue book to
class.**

**Week 9 (Oct. 17 and 19): Calloway, 211-220, and 250-258. Begin Ball**

**Week 10 (Oct. 24 and 26): Calloway, 220-232, and 259-275. Continue Ball.**

**Week 11 (Oct. 31 and Nov. 2): Calloway, 276-298. Continue Ball.**

**Week 12 (Nov. 7 and 9): Calloway, 350-376. Continue Ball.**

**Week 13 (Nov. 14 and 16): Calloway, 415-439. Finish Ball.**

**Week 14 (Nov. 21, Thanksgiving Holiday): 3-page essay on Ball text due Nov.
21.**

**Week 15 (Nov. 28 and 30): Calloway, 480-545.**

**Week 16 (Dec. 5 and 7): Prepare for Final Exam. Date to be announced. Book
Review Due at Final Exam. Late reviews will not be acceptable.**  
  
[ Home Page](Welcome.html)| **History 3090** | [History 1210](page2.htm)

![](images/stgs_bar.gif)

James Drake  
[drakeja@mscd.edu](mailto:drakeja@mscd.edu)  
Date Last Modified: 08/18/00  

