* * *

# **Fall Course Syllabus

**

* * *

**FIELDWORK: THE FAMILY FARM

Anthropology/Sociology 67-68  
1995-1996**

Course meets: Thursday evening, 7-10 PM, 14 Davis House

Professor: Howard L. Sacks, Department of Anthropology/Sociology,106 Palme
House

Office Hours: Monday, Wednesday, Friday 10-11 AM; Tuesday 1-3 PM; and by
appointment (ext. 5850; e-mail SACKSH)

Research Room: 15 Davis House, ext. 5507

**COURSE DESCRIPTION**

This course provides an introduction to fieldwork techniques and to the
ethical and political issues raised by our purposeful involvement in other
people's lives: What is my responsibility to the community under study? How
might my research affect the lives of the people I observe? Far more than
casual scrutiny, fieldwork involves precise methods for the planning,
collection, and analysis of material obtained in the field. Whether the
subject is a Tibetan religious rite, homelessness in New York, or a Knox
County family reunion, fieldwork provides insight into the human condition
through direct observation of and participation in everyday life. Commonly
used by anthropologists, folklorists, sociologists, and historians, fieldwork
is valuable to anyone with a desire to explore human activity in context.

Students will conduct original field research in the surrounding county for
public presentation as the central component of their coursework. Our
fieldwork will revolve around the family farm. "The family farm" resonates as
a key image of traditional American culture, but today that institution faces
perils that threaten rural community life. Recent scholarship on subject
emphasizes an interdisciplinary approach that stresses the relationships
between the farm economy and its cultural context. As a general theme, the
family farm offers a wide variety of potential topics for investigation: the
changing role of women and children on the farm, land-use aesthetics,
agribusiness and the home economy, the significance of religion in Amish
farming, contracted labor, family folklore, and farm values. Background
readings will be drawn from a variety of sources in the arts, humanities, and
sciences. Students may receive full credit in anthropology or sociology, or
they may arrange partial credit in other departments and programs. This course
satisfies the senior seminar requirement in American studies. Prerequisite:
permission of instructor. This course is cross-listed as both anthropology and
sociology.

**REQUIRED READINGS**

Wendell Berry, _The Unsettling of America: Culture and Agriculture_ (San
Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 1986)

Family Farm Project, _Rural Delivery: Family Farming in Knox County, Ohio_
(Gambier, OH: The Family Farm Project, 1995)

Bruce Jackson, _Fieldwork_ (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1987)

Ronald Jager, _Eighty Acres: Elegy for a Family Farm_ (Boston: Beacon Press,
1990)

Marty Strange, _Family Farming: A New Economic Vision_ (Lincoln: University of
Nebraska Press, 1990)

**COURSE ACTIVITIES AND REQUIREMENTS**

This course emphasizes collaborative learning involving students as active
participants in the creation of knowledge, and our activities reflect this
approach. I will provide detailed handouts describing each assignment in
class.

**Research Assignments.** Students will conduct original research, including
both focused assignments and self-directed work toward completion of a course
project.

**Course Project.** Students will develop and implement a significant project
for public presentation in the spring.

**[Journal](journals.htm).** Each student will maintain a journal including
research documentation, responses to course readings, and discussions of class
activities.

**Class Participation.** Students are expected to contribute actively to class
meetings through both formal presentations and general discussion.

Tentative mid-year grades will be based on my evaluation of your journal
entries, research assignments, and class participation--each weighted equally.
I will continue to evaluate your work in these areas throughout the year. As
the culmination of your work, the course project will be the most significant
determinant of your final grade.

**A TENTATIVE OUTLINE FOR THE SEMESTER**

[NOTE: Dates listed in **bold** are special events at times other than our
regularly scheduled meetings.]

8/31 Introduction to the Course

> course syllabus

>

> Ruth D. Fitzgerald and Yvonne R. Lockwood, eds., _1994 Festival of Michigan
Folklife_ (East Lansing: Michigan State University Museum)

>

> Assignment: _[Mount Vernon News](assign1.htm)_

9/7 Fieldwork: Issues and Approaches

> Bruce Jackson, _Fieldwork_ , pp. 1-78, 244-279

>

> _Recommended:_

>

> Colin Bell and Howard Newby, _Community Studies: An Introduction to the
Sociology of the Local Community_ (New York: Praeger Publishers, 1974)

>

> Michael Chibnik, ed., _Farmwork and Fieldwork: American Agriculture in
Anthropological Perspective_ (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1987)

>

> James Clifford and George E. Marcus, eds., _Writing Culture: The Poetics and
Politics of Ethnography,_ (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986)

>

> Robert M. Emerson, ed., _Contemporary Field Research: A Collection of
Readings_ (Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press, 1988)

>

> Kamyar Enshayan, _Dr. Twisted Visits a Farm_ (Cedar Falls, IA: Privately
printed, 1994)

>

> Don D. Fowler and Donald L. Hardesty, _Others Knowing Others: Perspectives
on Ethnographic Careers_ (Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1994)

>

> Charles C. Ragin and Howard S. Becker, _What is a Case?: Exploring the
Foundations of Sociological Inquiry_ (New York: Cambridge University Press,
1992)

>

> Research assignment: [Gambier farmers market](assign2.htm)

9/14 The Family Farm and Community Life

> Family Farm Project, _Rural Delivery_

>

> _Recommended:_

>

> Eleanor Arnold, ed., _Voices of American Homemakers_ (Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1985)

>

> Jane Brox, _Here and Nowhere Else: Late Seasons of a Farm and Its Family_
(Boston: Beacon Press, 1995)

>

> Joan M. Jensen, _With These Hands: Women Working on the Land_ (Old Westbury,
NY: Feminist Press, 1981)

>

> Wayne D. Rasmussen, _Taking the University to the People: Seventy Five Years
of Cooperative Extension_ (Ames: Iowa State University Press, 1989)

>

> Rachel Ann Rosenfeld, _Farm Women: Work, Farm, and Family in the United
States_ (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1987)

>

> Jane Smiley, _A Thousand Acres_ (New York: Fawcett Columbine, 1991)

>

> Joanna L. Stratton, _Pioneer Women: Voices From the Kansas Frontier_ (New
York: Touchstone Books, 1982)

>

> Sherry Thomas, _We Didn't Have Much, But We Sure Had Plenty: Rural Women in
Their Own Words_ (New York: Anchor Books, 1989)

>

> William Turner, _Ohio Farm Bureau Story, 1919-1979_ (Columbus: Ohio Farm
Bureau Federation, Inc., 1982)

>

> Thomas Wessel and Marilyn Wessel, _4-H: An American Idea, 1900-1980_ (Chevy
Chase, MD: National 4-H Council, 1982)

>

> Assignment: [The family farm in community life](assign3.htm)

**9/16 Visits to Family Farms**

> Research assignment: [Visiting a family farm](assign4.htm)

9/21 Discussion of Farm Visits

> no readings

9/28 Crisis in the Family Farm Economy

> Marty Strange, _Family Farming_

>

> _Recommended:_

>

> Rand D. Conger and Glen H. Elder, _Families in Troubled Times: Adapting to
Change in Rural America_ (New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 1994).

>

> Osha Gray Davidson, _Broken Heartland: The Rise of America's Rural Ghetto_
(New York: Anchor Books, 1990)

>

> Mark Friedberger, _Shake-Out: Iowa Farm Families in the 1980s_ (Lexington:
University Press of Kentucky, 1989)

>

> Mark Friedberger, _Farm Families and Change in 20th-Century America_
(Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 1988)

>

> Linda M. Lobao, _Locality and Inequality: Farm and Industry Structure and
Socioeconomic Conditions_ (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1990)

10/5 Family Farm Life in Historical Perspective

> Ronald Jager, _Eighty Acres_

>

> _Recommended:_

>

> Charles Fish, _In Good Hands: The Keeping of a Family Farm_ (New York:
Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1995)

>

> John Hildebrand, _Mapping the Farm: The Chronicle of a Family_ (New York:
Alfred A. Knopf, 1995)

>

> Robert Leslie Jones, _History of Agriculture in Ohio to 1880_ (Kent, OH:
Kent State University Press, 1983)

>

> Archie Lieberman, _Neighbors: A Forty Year Portrait of an American Farm
Community_ (San Francisco: Collins Publishers, 1993)

>

> Joe Munroe, _Changing Faces on Our Land_ (Des Moines, IA: Meredith
Corporation, 1990)

>

> Research assignment: [The family farm in history](assign5.htm)

10/12 Discussion of Newspaper Research

> no reading

10/19 Fieldwork: Interviewing

> Bruce Jackson, _Fieldwork,_ pp. 79-193

>

> Research assignment: [Interviewing](assign6.htm)

10/26 Tour of Knox County Agricultural Museum

> no reading

11/2 Discussion of Interviews and [Farm Themes](themes.htm)

> no readings

11/9 Preparation for Meeting With Farm Community

> no readings

**11/12 Community Dinner**

11/17 Discussion of Project

> no readings

**11/18-26 Thanksgiving Vacation**

11/30 Farming and the Environment

> Wendell Berry, _The Unsettling of America_

>

> _Recommended:_

>

> _Alternative Agriculture_ (Washington: National Academy Press, 1989)

>

> Wendell Berry, _Sex, Economy, Freedom, and Community: Eight Essays_ (New
York: Pantheon Press, 1993)

>

> Wendell Berry, _Home Economics_ (New York: North Point Press, 1993)

>

> Wendell Berry, _The Collected Poems of Wendell Berry, 1957-1982_ (New York:
North Point Press, 1987)

>

> Robert Chambers, Arnold Pacey, and Lori Ann Thrupp, eds., _Farmer First:
Farmer Innovation and Agricultural Research_ (London: Intermediate Technology
Publications, 1993)

>

> David Ehrenfeld, _Beginning Again: People and Nature in the New Millennium_
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1993)

>

> Cary Fowler and Pat Mooney, _Shattering: Food, Politics, and the Loss of
Genetic Diversity_ (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1990)

>

> Joan Dye Gussow, _Chicken Little, Tomato Sauce and Agriculture: Who Will
Produce Tomorrow's Food?_ (New York: Bootstrap Press, 1991)

>

> Wes Jackson, _Becoming Native to This Place_ (Lexington: University Press of
Kentucky, 1994)

>

> Wes Jackson, _Alters of Unhewn Stone: Science and the Earth_ (San Francisco:
North Point Press, 1987)

>

> David Klein, _Great Possessions: An Amish Farmer's Journal_ (New York: North
Point Press, 1990)

>

> Verlyn Klinkenborg, _Making Hay_ (New York: Vintage Books, 1986)

>

> Gene Logsdon, _At Nature's Place: Farming and the American Dream_ (New York:
Pantheon Books, 1994)

>

> Catherine Lewallen Marconi, ed., _Handspan of Red Earth: An Anthology of
Farm Poems_ (Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 1991)

>

> David Mas Masumoto, _Epitaph for a Peach: Four Seasons on My Family Farm_
(San Francisco: Harper, 1995)

>

> Judith D. Soule and Jon K. Piper, _Farming in Nature's Image: An Ecological
Approach to Agriculture_ (Washington: Island Press, 1992)

12/7 Discussion of Project

> no readings

* * *

  
[![Home](../welcome/home2.gif)](../welcome/welcome.htm) ![](../mailbox.gif) [
E-mail The Family Farm Project](mailto:famfarm@kenyon.edu)  

