    
    
  **Glendale**  
**Community**  
**College**  
**  6000 W. Olive**  
**Glendale, Arizona 85302**  


 **********  
  **Term: Spring 2002**  
**********  
  **Credits: 3  **  
**********  
  **Instructor:**  
Shari Robinson, RN, MS  
 **********  
  **Office Hours:**  
[Available via email](mailto:shari.robinson@gcmail.maricopa.edu)  
or  
Posted at Office  
**********  
  **Office Location:**  
NUR125

 **********  
  **Office Phone**  
 623-845-321l  
 **********  
**Accommodations**  
 If you feel you may need an accommodation for any type of disability, please
see me during office hours or make an appointment to see me.  
  **Attendance**  
 Attendance and participation in class is expected. If for any reason you can
not attend a class, please notify the instructor.

*********  | Syllabus

* * *

HCR220--Health Care Organizations

* * *

**Required Text:  **  
Williams, S. (2001) Essestials of Health Services.  Albany, NY:  Delmar.

**Optional Text:**  
Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association (APA Publication
Manual, 5th)(Highly recommended)

**Course Overview:    **The course focuses on an overview of health care
systems including the organization, financing, and delivery of services.
Issues related to managed care, health care providers, health policy, and
regulatory and accrediting bodies will be discussed. Basic principles of
budgeting, cost-benefit analysis, quality of health care, resource management,
and information systems will be included. This course meets Literacy 1
requirements for General Studies at Arizona State University.

**Prerequisites:   **English 101, English 102

**Course Objectives:   **At the completion of this course the student will be
able to:  
1.    Utilize appropriate text and electronic resources (e-mail, Internet, and web-searches) in the learning process.    
2.    Explore the history and evolution of health care delivery systems in the United States.    
3.    Describe the political, social, and economic forces affecting health care policy.    
4.    Examine the costs and financing of health care in the United States.    
5.    Examine the impact of managed care on the United States health care system, including ethical issues, access to health care, quality of care, and the effect on health care providers.    
6.    Compare the health care delivery system in the United States with those in other industrialized countries.    
7.    Discuss educational preparation and roles of licensed and non-licensed health care providers.    
8.    Examine the role of regulatory and accreditation bodies and recent legislation related to consumer protection.    
9.    Compare models of health care organizations and health care delivery across the curriculum of care.    
10.  Examine information systems and tele-medicine utilized in health care.    
11.  Identify basic principles of budgeting, cost-benefit analysis, quality issues, and resource management.    
12.  Reflect competencies in scientific writing consistent with the editorial style used by the College of  Nursing (Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association, 4th Edition).    


**Primary Teaching Method:** Lecture, discussion, required readings,
discussion forum submissions, group chat sessions, written papers and oral
presentation with visual aids all of which are intended to facilitate and
promote literacy and critical thinking. Students are expected to utilize
Internet and e-mail resources in this course. Evaluation will be consistent
with university literacy and critical inquiry (L1) requirements. Students are
responsible for reviewing the course website for syllabus information, class
assignments, Internet links and APA Guidelines that will be used for course
work. Please note that I anticipate updating the website throughout the
semester and running some of the classes as chat sessions.  Students are
responsible for checking Blackboard regularly to obtain messages related to
this course.

**Course Evaluation:** In this course, critical thinking is demonstrated
through written work and classroom/chat  interaction. Students engage in
cooperative learning activities, which involve the formation of small groups
for the purpose of sharing and learning. The students are required to prepare
for class discussion through readings, accessing the Internet, and through
e-mail communication with faculty and students. Exams, written papers, out-of-
class assignments and in-class participation will be used to determine course
grade.

Class Presentation (Ten to Fifteen minute presentation on your first paper.
Presentation needs to be done using Powerpoint Slides (or another visual
program) and needs to address one discussion questions for the class.[10%]

Written assignment #1 (4-6 pages) paper on topic of your choosing related to
the course objectives [20%]

Written assignment #3  (8-10 pages) paper on assigned topic. [30 %]

Class attendance, participation in chat and discussion forums (10%)

Open book/note examinations  [30%]

**Grading Scale:**  
90-100 = A  
80-89 = B  
70-79 = C  
60-69 = D  
59 or below = E

**An _incomplete_ grade will be issued by the instructor according to the
guidelines that are printed in the _Glendale Community   College catalog_. **

**Any withdrawal from this class _ _must_ be initiated_ by the student!!**  
    


  
---|---  
  |  

