**

University Of North Dakota

Department of Economics

**



**

COURSE SYLLABUS

**



Econ 405 Dr. O=Neill

Bank Regulation Office: Gamble 286 B

Spring 1998 Office Hours:

M,W,F 2:00-3:30 pm

Phone: 777-3358

**



TEXTBOOK

**



_

Banking Regulation: Its Purposes, Implementation, and Effects_ by Kenneth
Spong (KS)





**

COURSE OVERVIEW

**



The course will travel down two roads. Road one is the Monday/Wednesday road.
On this road we will explore the content of the Spong text. Road two is the
Friday road. On this road we will explore bank regulatory systems in other
countries and any newsworthy items that arise during the semester (such as the
current banking crises in Asia). The second road may also take us to guest
speakers (or it may bring them to us).





**

COURSE OBJECTIVES

**



At the completion of this course, the well-motivated student should have:



1\. An understanding of the historical evolution of bank regulation in the
United States.

2\. An appreciation for and knowledge of the extraordinarily complex system of
banking regulation in the United States.

3\. An understanding of the process by which bank regulations are formed and
implemented.

4\. Knowledge of how the bank regulatory structure in the United States
compares with the bank regulatory structure of other developed economies.

5\. Developed a sense of how bank regulations impact (enhancing or impeding) a
bank=s ability to earn a profit.

6\. Begun to formulate an opinion as to what the optimal structure of bank
regulation should be.

**















INSTRUCTIONAL PROCEDURES



**

Most of the material encountered during our travels will be presented in a
lecture-discussion format. What this means is that **I** will typically
present material in a  Alecture.@ However, when the mood strikes, I will ask a
question of **you** to see if you have been paying attention. Put the case
that you choose not to divulge the answer, other means of extracting a correct
response will be attempted. These alternative methods include, but need not be
limited to: randomly selecting one of your unsuspecting classmates to fill in
for you, an  Ainstant quiz,@ a dramatic pause.

**



**

To ensure that the classes do not become routine, the procedure described
above will be supplemented with any number of creative pedagogical devices
(which have to be experienced to be believed).





**

EVALUATION PROCEDURES

**



**

I. Course Requirements

**



1\. Two in-class exams on bank regulation, history, institutions, and
compliance in the United States. Each exam is worth 25% of the course grade.



2\. A term paper. This paper is worth 25% of the course grade. Details of this
assignment appear on a separate handout.



3\. A final exam on bank regulation, history, institutions, and compliance in
the United States and abroad. This exam is worth 25% of the course grade.





The final exam is **Thursday May 7 at 6:00 pm.

**





**

II. Grades

**



Grades will be determined according to the following scale:



_

Grade_ _Percent

_



A 100-90

B 89-80

C 79-70

D 69-55

F 54-

**













COURSE SCHEDULE AND TOPIC OUTLINE (Monday/Wednesday)

**

(Subject to minor changes at the discretion of the instructor.)



**

i. BACKGROUND MATERIAL ON BANKS



**

Reading: KS Ch 3



**

I. INTRODUCTION TO REGULATION

**



Reading: Vietor Ch 1



**

II. INTRODUCTION TO BANK REGULATION

**



Reading: KS Ch 1

**

III. BANK REGULATION HISTORY AND INSTITUTIONS

**



1\. An Historical Overview of Bank Regulation: The laws and their impacts



Reading: KS Ch 2



2\. An Overview of Regulatory Institutions



Reading: KS Ch 4





**

IV. REGULATIONS IN DETAIL

**



1\. Regulations for Depositor Protection and Monetary Stability



Reading: KS Ch 5 pp. 51-99



Kroszner, R.S., & Raghuram G. Rajan, AIs the Glass-Steagall Act Justified? A
Study of the U.S. Experience with Universal Banking Before 1933,@ _American
Economic Review_ , 84 (4), September 1994, pp. 810-32.



**

************** EXAM 1 *****************

**





2\. Regulations for Efficiency and Competition



Reading: KS Ch 6



Guerin-Calvert, M.E., & Janusz A. Ordover, AThe 1992 agency horizontal merger
guidelines and the Department of Justice=s approach to bank merger analysis,@
_The Antitrust Bulletin_ , Fall 1992, pp. 667-88.



Savage, D.S., AInterstate Banking: A Status Report,@ _Federal_ _Reserve
Bulletin_ , December 1993, pp. 1075-89. **OPTIONAL

V. COMPLIANCE

**



1\. Supervisory Compliance Procedures



Reading: KS Ch 5 pp. 99-122





**

************** EXAM 2 ****************

**





2\. Regulation for Consumer Protection



Reading: KS Ch 7



Wilke, J.R., AGiving Credit: Mortgage Lending To Minorities Shows A Sharp 1994
Increase,@ _The Wall Street Journal_ , February 13, 1996, p. A1.





**

************** FINAL EXAM *****************

**

