SYLLABUS  
**TEXAS HISTORY**  
(HIST 3372)  
Dr. J.F. de la Teja  
MWF 10-10:50

**SCOPE and CONTENT**  
This course covers the **entire** length of Texas history, from prehistoric
times to the Civil Rights Movement of the 1960s. The focus is on social and
economic history, although attention will be paid to major political events
and characters.

Texas has always been a multi-ethnic and multicultural region. The blending of
the Indian, Spanish, Mexican, Anglo American, African American, European and,
increasingly, Asian cultures, places Texas in a unique position within
American society. The study of Texas history cannot, therefore, be confined to
tracing the process by which the area passed from one sovereignty to another,
or to a discussion of a small group of influential political, military, and
economic leaders.

**GOALS**  
This course is intended to provide students with a broad understanding of the
main currents of Texas history. The expectation is that students will acquire
a critical understanding for the major events and processes that influenced
the state's development and be able to place these events and processes within
the broader contexts of Spanish colonial, Mexican, and American history. It is
also expected to provide students with an appreciation for the ethnic and
social diversity of the state's population, and the role that interethnic
relations have played in Texas's history.

**NOTE:** This syllabus and calendar are intended to provide you with all the
information necessary to successfully keep up with the course. Unless
expressly stated in class, the guidelines established herein are final. These
documents are also available on my homepage under **SYLLABI**.

**REQUIRED TEXTS**  
Robert A. Calvert and Arnoldo De Le¨®n, _The History of Texas_ , 2nd ed.  
David E. Kyvig and Myron A. Marty, _Your Family History: A Handbook for
Research and Writing_.  
Procter and McDonald, eds., _The Texas Heritage_ , 3rd ed.

**REQUIRED WRITING**  
The past is most meaningful--historical--when it teaches us about ourselves.
History is the organization of past events into a logical discourse that
instructs regarding our collective selves--community, ethnic group, state,
nation, civilization--or our personal selves--family. Unlike nuclear physics
or electrical engineering, everyone can be a historian, after a fashion,
because everyone is capable of making some sense of their personal past if not
of their collective past.

Your writing assignment is a family history of no more than 12 and no fewer
than 6 pages, excluding title page, endnotes, and appendixes. The paper will
be based on the types of sources described in _Your Family History: A Handbook
for Research and Writing_.

**The minimum requirements** for a  "C" are:

  * 1 oral interview (in person or by telephone) with a family member;
  * at least 5 family photographs;
  * at least one non-family document source (census, vital statistics, church records, other government records, newspaper articles, business records);
  * at least 3 secondary sources (books, journal articles) regarding the history of the ethnic group(s) from which you descend, the immigration of those groups to the United States and Texas, and the local history of area(s) in which your family settled.
  * Proper notation form and other mechanics (see below regarding technical requirements).

The more **varied** , **imaginative** , and **informative** , beyond the
minimal requirements, the higher the grade.

**Technical requirements.**  
The paper should be written in standard English, using reasonably good grammar
and spelling. It should be double-spaced and follow normal conventions for a
term paper, including appropriate use of citation notes and bibliography.
Aside from being graded on the historical elements noted above, you may also
be marked down for submitting a sloppy, poorly constructed paper.

**NOTE:** No plastic or other types of covers, please. Use a staple or paper
clip in the upper left-hand corner to bind the paper together.

For information on writing a clean, well constructed and presented paper, see
my homepage under **[WRITING ASSIGNMENTS](http://www.history.swt.edu/Full-
Time-Faculty/delateja/writing-tips.htm)** and **[GRAMMAR&
SPELLING](http://www.history.swt.edu/Full-Time-
Faculty/delateja/grammar&spelling.htm)**. For tips on conducting an oral
history interview see under **[ORAL HISTORY
PROJECTS](http://www.history.swt.edu/Full-Time-
Faculty/delateja/oralhistory.htm)**. For Web links to family history and
genealogy on the Web, see **[FAMILY HISTORY PAPER
LINKS](http://www.history.swt.edu/Full-Time-Faculty/DelaTeja/genealgy.htm) .**
Also visit [RESOURCES FOR TEXAS HISTORY](http://www.history.swt.edu/Full-Time-
Faculty/DelaTeja/Texaslinks.htm) at my homepage.

**ASSESSMENT**  
Aside from the family history paper, there will be two tests, a midterm and a
final, in the course of the semester and quizzes on the weekly readings. The
midterm consists of two essay questions each worth 50 points. The final
consists of three essay questions, two on material from the second half of the
semester worth 25 points each, and one comprehensive question worth 50 points.

**GRADING**

Course:  |

Tests 2 @ (1st 20%, 2nd 25%)  = 45%  
Quizzes 10 @ 3% = 30%  
Family history paper 1 @ 25% = 25%  
Total 100%  
  
---|---  
  
A=91-100 B=81-90 C=71-80 D=61-70 F=below 61  


**CLASS POLICIES**  
The following policies will be enforced rigorously. Exceptions will be made
only in documented cases of hardship or catastrophe:

**Withdrawal** : Withdrawals made after the "automatic W" date will carry with
them the appropriate grade. That is, if you withdraw while holding an F
average, your semester grade will be an F. Anyone holding a D or above will be
granted a W. It is **your** responsibility to withdraw from class. Anyone who
has stopped attending class but appears on the final grade roster will receive
a grade.

**Incomplete** : An incomplete will not be issued in the course except under
the conditions noted above. Failure to show up for an examination **does not**
constitute grounds for issuance of an I.

**Deadlines** : Deadlines are final. Work turned in after a deadline will be
subject to a one-half grade reduction per class-day late. It is **your**
responsibility to have all work in on time and to show up on examination dates
and times.

**Make-ups** : **THERE WILL BE NO MAKE-UP EXAMINATIONS** , except for the
midterm, and only upon presentation of a doctor's note or similar evidence of
a catastrophic event. All midterm make-up exams will take place on the last
day of the semester- **no exceptions**.

**Attendance** : Students are expected to come to class. Attendance is taken
to substantiate presence in case some unforeseen situation should make such
data relevant.

**Office hours** : Aside from announced and posted hours, I will be more than
happy to make special arrangements to see you. If, on a written assignment or
test, I request that you see me during office hours, make sure you do it.
Failing to meet with me when I so request will have significant consequences.

**Scholastic dishonesty** : Cheating is not acceptable. The instructor
reserves the right to issue a failing grade for the course for any act of
willful dishonesty, such as plagiarism, purchasing the preparation of a paper
that should be the student's own work, and use of unauthorized materials
during an examination. The instructor also reserves the right to impose any
lesser penalty for inadvertent infractions of these rules.

**Computer Lab** : Use of the History Department computer lab is strongly
encouraged. The department's fully equipped lab includes both Macs and PCS.
There is scanning equipment available and all machines have Internet access.
Aside from the general department homepage, which includes sources for
historians, please check my homepage at **LINKS** for sites specifically
relevant to my courses.

Please remember the most important rule of all, **IGNORANCE IS NO EXCUSE**. If
you have a question, **ASK!**

[**CALENDAR**](3372spring2001calendar.htm)

