**GOVERNMENT E-1879/W**

**THE UNITED STATES IN WORLD AFFAIRS**

Harvard University Extension School

Spring Term 1998

Wednesdays 5:30-7:30 p.m.

Sever Hall Room 103

Professor Taliaferro

Department of Political Science

Tufts University

Telephone: (617) 628-5000 ex. 2054

E-mail: jtaliaferro@infonet.tufts.edu

Office hours: Tuesday, 1-3 (Medford)

Office: Eaton Hall 303 (Medford/Somerville campus)and by appointment (in
Gutman Library)

* * *

**Objective**

This course examines American foreign policy from the end of the nineteenth
century to the dawn of the twenty first. Specifically, we will examine the
interplay of international and domestic forces in shaping American diplomacy
and military strategy during the twentieth century. The readings and class
sessions will integrate international relations theory, historical case
studies, contemporary policy analysis. The objective of the course is to
develop a deeper understanding of the forces that shape how the United States
conducts itself in international politics. This task does not have a single
"right" method or answer and the issues leave wide room for debate.

The course is divided into four parts. In Part One we will examine two schools
of thought on American foreign policy. Throughout the semester we will use
these approaches to help us analyze and think critically about foreign policy.
Part Two will examine the United States' emergence as a great power in the
early part of the twentieth century. Part Three will examine American foreign
policy during the Cold War. Topics will include the containment of the Soviet
Union, NATO, and foreign military interventions in Korea and Vietnam. The
final part surveys American foreign policy since the fall of the Berlin War
and the collapse of the Soviet Union.

**Requirements**

The instructor expects students to attend all classes and to have carefully
read the assigned reading by the date indicated of the syllabus. The course
grade will be determined as follows:

  * Class Participation: 20%, 
  * Papers: 50% 
  * Final Exam 30%. 

**Class Participation:** Class participation includes both attendance and
participation in class discussions. This is not a lecture class in the
traditional sense. Although I will do a fair amount of talking each class to
introduce and provide context to the material, I will ask question, we will do
exercises, and there will be large and small group discussions.

**Short Papers:** You are required to write three short essays (no more than 5
pages, typed) on questions that will be distributed. I will provide a sheet of
instructions on exactly what I expect from these papers. Papers must be handed
in on time; late papers will be marked down one half letter grade for each day
(or portion thereof) after the deadline. As this is a writing intensive
course, students are encouraged to revise and resubmit their papers.

**Final Exam:** All students must take the final exam at the time and place
scheduled by the Registrar of FAS. You must notify me _in advance_ if you
cannot attend/and or provide a documented excuse entailing an unusual
emergency that would warrant rescheduling. Students who miss the final exam
without prior notification or an excuse will receive a zero for that test.

**Required Readings:** The following paperback books are available for
purchase at the [Harvard Coop](http://www.bkstore.com/harvard/)

John Lewis Gaddis. _The Long Peace: Inquires into the History of the Cold War_
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1987)

Michael E. Brown, et. al, eds. _America's Strategic Choices_ (Cambridge: MIT
Press, 1997)

Tony A. Smith. _America's Mission: The United States and the Worldwide
Struggle for Democracy in the Twentieth Century_ (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1994)

Walter A. McDougall. _Promised Land, Crusader State: The American Encounter
with the World Since 1776_ (Boston: Houghlin-Mifflin, 1997)

Items on the sylabbus marked with an asterisk (*) are in the course-pack, also
available for purchase at the Havard Coop.

**Course Schedule**

January 28: Introductory Meeting (no assigned reading)

February 4: Realism in the Study (and Practice) of American Foreign Policy

February 11: Liberalism in the Study (and Practice) of American Foreign Policy

February 18: Rise and Retreat of Great Power _(Paper 1 due)_

February 25: The  "Failure" of Collective Security and Interwar Insolationism

March 4: United States and the Second World War

March 11: The Insecurities of Victory and the Origins of Containment _(Paper 2
due)_

March 18: Globalization of Containment: Defensive Parameters to Falling
Dominoes

March 22-29: Spring Break (No Meeting)

April 1: The  "Long Peace" between the Superpowers _(Paper 3 due)_

April 8: The Vietnam War and its Legacy

April 15: Ending the Cold War and Facing a New World Order?

April 22: [Re]Defining the National Interests

April 28: A US Grand Strategy for the Twenty-First Century?

* * *

**PART I: COMPETING VISIONS OF US FOREIGN POLICY**

**1\. Realism in the Study (and Practice) of American Foreign Policy (Feb.
4)**

* Hans J. Morgenthau, _Politics Among Nations,_ 6th ed., rev. Kenneth W. Thompson (New York: McGraw Hill, 1985), pp. 3-18. 

Walter McDougall, _Promised Land, Crusader State_ , pp. 1-12 and 39-56.

* Robert Gilpin, "No One Loves a Political Realist," _Security Studies,_ Vol. 5, No. 3 (Spring 1996), pp. 3-28 

**2\. Liberalism in the Study (and Practice) of American Foreign Policy (Feb.
11)**

Tony Smith, _America's Mission_ , pp. 3-33.

John Gerard Ruggie, "The Past as Prologue? Interest, Identity and American
Foreign Policy," in Brown, et. al, eds. _America's Strategic Choices,_ pp.
163-199.

McDougall, _Promised Land, Crusader State,_ pp. 76-98.

**3\. Rise and Retreat of a Great Power (Feb. 18) _(Paper 1 due)_**

McDougall, _Promised Land, Crusader State,_ pp. 101-122

Smith, _America's Mission,_ pp. 37-59.

**PART II: THE RISE OF A GREAT POWER (1900-1945)**

**4\. The United States and the First World War (Feb. 25)**

Smith, _America's Mission,_ pp. 84-110.

McDougall, _Promised Land, Crusader State,_ pp. 122-146

* Henry A. Kissinger, _Diplomacy_ (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1994), pp. 201-217. 

**5\. The "Failure" of Collective Security and the Retreat into Isolationism
(March 4)**

Gaddis, _The Long Peace,_ pp. 3-19

* Morgenthau, _Politics Among Nations,_ pp. 451-458. 

* Kissinger, _Diplomacy,_ pp. 218-245. 

**6\. United States and the Second World War (March 11) _(Paper 2 due)_**

* John Mueller,  "Pearl Harbor: Military Inconvience, Political Disaster," _International Security,_ Vol. 16, No. 3 (Winter 1991/92), pp. 172-203. 

Smith, _America's Mission,_ pp. 113-145

McDougall, _Promised Land, Crusader State,_ pp. 147-171.

**PART III: THE COLD WAR AND US FOREIGN POLICY (1945-1990)**

**7\. The Insecurities of Victory and the Origins of Containment (March 18)**

Smith, _America's Mission,_ pp. 146-176

Gaddis, _Long Peace,_ pp. 20-47 and 147-195.

**SPRING BREAK (March 22-29)**

**8\. Globalization of Containment: From Defensive Parameters to Falling
Dominoes**

Gaddis, _Long Peace,_ pp. 72-103 and pp. 147-195.

Smith, _America's Mission,_ pp. 179-213.

**9\. The "Long Peace"between the Superpowers (April 1) _(Paper 3 due)_**

Gaddis, _Long Peace,_ pp. 104-146 and 215-245.

* Marc Trachtenberg, "The Influence of Nuclear Weapons in the Cuban Missile Crisis," _International Security,_ Vol. 10, No. 1 (Summer 1985), pp. 137-163. 

**10\. The Vietnam War and its Legacy (April 8)**

McDougall, _Promised Land, Crusader State,_ pp. 172-198.

* Jerome Slate, "McNamara's Failures and Ours: Vietnam's Unlearned Lessons," _Security Studies,_ Vol. 6, No. 1 (Autumn 1996), pp. 153-195. 

Smith, _America's Mission,_ pp. 239-265.

**11\. Ending the Cold War and Facing a "New World Order"? (April 15)**

Smith, _America's Mission_ , pp. 311-345.

McDougall, _Promised Land, Crusader State,_ pp. 199-222.

* Janice Gross Stein, "Deterrence and Compellence in the Gulf, 1990-91: A Failed or Impossible Task?" _International Security,_ Vol. 17, No. 2 (Fall 1992), pp. 147-179. 

**PART IV: FACING THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY**

**12\. [Re]Defining the National Interests _?_ (April 22)**

Christopher Layne, "From Perponderance to Offshore Balancing: America's Future
Grand Strategy," in Brown, et. al, eds., _America's Strategic Choices_ , pp.
244-282.

Michael Mastanduno, "Preserving the Unipolar Moment Realist Theories and US
Grand Strategy after the Cold War," in Brown, et. al, eds., _America's
Strategic Choices,_ pp. 123-162.

**13\. A Grand Strategy for the Twenty First Century (?) (April 29)**

Barry R. Posen and Andrew L. Ross,  "Competing Visions for US Grand Strategy,"
in Brown, et. al, eds., _America's Strategic Choices_ , pp. 1-49.

Eugene Gholz, Daryl G. Press, and Harvey M. Sapolsky, "Come Home, America: The
Strategy of Restraint in the Face of Temptation," in Brown, et. al, eds.,
_America's Strategic Choices,_ pp. 200-243.

[Return to Jeff Taliaferro's Homepage](talia.html)

