![](KMlogo.jpg) |

![BC seal](bc_seal.gif)

|

221 Campion Hall  
Lynch School of Education, Boston College  
Chestnut Hill, MA 02167 USA  
Phone: (617) 552-4195  
Fax: (617) 552-2499  
  
E-mail: [mahonekj@bc.edu](mailto:mahonekj@bc.edu)  
  
---|---|---  
|  |  
---  
  


**Religion and Higher Education   ED868**

**Fall 2000**

|

Course time:  Monday, 4:30 to 7:00

221 Campion Hall

Meeting location: 009 Carney

Office hours: Monday, 2:00 to 4:00,

Tuesday, 3:20 to 5:20; and by appointment

|

**[![](home.jpg)](index.htm)**  
  
---|---|---  
  




**_Course description_**



This course explores the historic, evolving relationship between religion and
higher education, primarily in the American context.  The course begins with a
historical overview, from the university of the Middle Ages to the
proliferation of church-related colleges in the United States in the
nineteenth century.  Thereafter, the course examines those factors that have
shaped and reshaped the relationship between religion and higher education,
including the rise of modernity, the emergence of modern science, increased
religious pluralism, and the vitality of spirituality as the twenty-first
century begins.  Topical issues include (but are not limited to) student
development, the curriculum, church-college relations, and Ex Corde Ecclesiae.



**_Readings_**



Larson, Edward J.  Summer for the Gods: The Scopes Trail and America¨ªs
Continuing Debate Over Science and Religion.  Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1997.

Marsden, George.  The Soul of the American University.  New York: Oxford
University Press, 1994.

Reuben, Julie A.  The Making of the Modern University: Intellectual
Transformation and the Marginalization of Morality.  Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1996.

Course reading packet.

All required books and the items marked below with asterisks have been placed
on reserve at O¨ªNeill library.



_**Course requirements**_



Assignment #1 Did the Light Die?, part a and part b: see the final page of
this syllabus for a description.

Part A: an oral presentation in class as part of a small group of students on
a particular religious tradition and its commitment to higher education.
October 2

Part B: an individual paper, seven to ten pages in length, submitted.  October
30.



Assignment #2:  Research on religion and higher education.

Students submit a 15 to 20 page research paper on some aspect of religion and
higher education.  It may be a historically oriented paper, or it may delve in
to some current issue.  Students give a five-minute presentation on their
research on December 11 (which is also the day that the paper is due).



Students are advised to have their topic approved by the instructor before
proceeding.



Assignment #3:  class attendance and participation

Students are expected to attend all classes, to read assigned texts, and to
contribute intelligently to class discussions.



Assignment #1:

Part A = 15% of grade

Part B = 25% of grade



Assignment #2

Written paper:  40% of grade

Oral presentation: 10% of grade

Class participation: 10 % of grade



_**Class expectations**_



Please plan to attend every class.  Missing two or more classes adversely
affects one's grade.



Please adhere to the Lynch School of Education¨ªs academic integrity policy
which may be found at
<http://www.bc.edu/bc_org/avp/soe/doctoral_handbook1.html>





 _ **Course schedule**_



**September 11**             Sacred & Secular: Heritage and Realities in
Higher Education



A consideration of the nature of education and religion, and the concepts of
sacred and secular, serves as a foundation for this course.





**September 18**             Higher Education: Medieval and Reformation
Legacies



The roots of higher education are religious; higher education cannot be
understood apart from a deep appreciation of its emergence from the culture of
the Middle Ages and the impact of the Reformation.



readings:  

         Our Main Sheet Anchor for Religion, from Robert Emmett Curran, The Bicentennial History of Georgetown University, 3-15.

         Martin Luther, excerpt from An Appeal to the Working Class, found in John Dillenberger, Martin Luther: Selections from His Writings.

         David Potts, American Colleges in the Nineteenth Century: From Localism to Denominationalism, History of Education Quarterly 11 (1971): 363-80.

         Lyman Beecher, excepts from Plea for the West (Cincinnati: Truman and Smith, 1835).

         Statutes of Harvard, 1646.

         Harvard Charter, 1650.

         Marsden, George.  The Soul of the American University, pp. 1-9, 33-47.





**September 25  **   Contending with Modernity: The Liberal Reformation of
Higher Education



Modernity that difficult to define phenomenon linked to the rise of modern
science and the nation state challenged the very nature of higher education
and its historic ties to ecclesiastical structures.



readings:  

         Marsden, Soul of the American University,  99-133; 167-95.

         Reuben,  The Making of the Modern University, 1-13; 87.

         Charles Eliot, ¨¬What Place Should Religion Have in a College? 



**October 2**             Churches and Colleges: Has the Light Died?



The changing relationship between church and college during the past 150 years
constitutes on of the most striking changes in the history of higher
education.



Presentation of research-in-progress.  See final page of syllabus for
directions.



Resources include, but are not limited to, James Burtchaell, The Dying of the
Light*;  Richard Hughes, Models of Christian Higher Education*; Merrimon
Cunninggim, Uneasy Partners*;  Thomas C. Hunt and James C. Carper, Religious
Higher Education in the United States: A Sourcebook*; and websites for
religious boards of higher education and the colleges themselves.





**October 6-7    **         Conference: The Future of Religious Colleges



Class members will attend a conference on church-related colleges at the
Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University.





**October 9** no meeting; Columbus Day holiday





**October 16 or 23  **           Science and Religion in the Age of the
University



The warfare between science and religion that broke out in the nineteenth
century is complex.  Now considered secular, in the nineteenth century many
saw science as a sacred means to achieve national progress.



readings:

         Reuben, Making of the Modern University, chapters  2 and 5

         Marsden, Soul of the American University, pp.150-66

         Larson, Summer for the Gods, introduction and chapters  1, 2, pp.75-83, ch. 5

          Ronald Anderson, SJ. ¨¬God in the Curriculum: exploring new ways to talk about God in the Academy, [http://www2.bc.edu/~anderso/gic.html](%3Cspan%20style=%22font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt%22%3Ehttp://www2.bc.edu/%7Eanderso/gic.html%3C/span%3E)





**October 30  **       The Art of Teaching and Thinking: Religion, Morality,
and Other Transcendent Realities  



Universities are fundamentally organizations devoted to the intellectual life.
How should religion, which has a transcendent dimension, be studied and
taught?  How should universities approach the issue of morality and the moral
formation of students?



guest presenter: Dr. David McMenamin, director of the BC PULSE program



         Reuben, The Making of the Modern University, chapters 7 and 9

         W. Robert Connor, Moral Knowledge in the Modern University, Ideas 6 (1999): 56-67.

         materials about the BC PULSE program (to be provided)

         Gustav Niebuhr, Colleges Setting Moral Compasses, New York Times (August 4, 1996): 4A, p. 23





**November 6  **           Students and Religion



History, colleges acted in loco parentis for their students.  Should
universities and colleges attend to the religious and spiritual dimensions of
their students¨ª lives?  How do students practice religion on campus today?



         Patrick Love and Donna Talbot, Defining Spiritual Development: A Missing Consideration for Student Affairs.

         excerpts from Sharon Parks, Young Adult Faith, in The Critical Years: The Young Adult Search for a Faith to Live By Harper & Row, 1986).

         Campus Faith Groups Face Rebuke on Gay Rights, Boston Globe (April, 29, 2000): A1; Evangelicals suffer at hands of gay activists, Boston Globe (May 9, 2000): A11.

         Antony Alumkal, Small Groups in a Campus Ministry, in I Came Away Stronger: How Small Groups Are Shaping American Religion, Robert Wuthnow, ed. (Eerdmanns).





**November 13    **         Jesuit Education



guest presenter: Howard Gray, S.J.



         John O¨ªMalley, The Schools, in The First Jesuits (Harvard University Press, 1993): 200-42.

         please skim or read What Are We?  An Introduction to Boston College and Its Jesuit Tradition, pp. 1-41, 133-59 (every other page, if you wish)

         Do You Speak Ignatian? (optional)

         The Jesuits and Boston College: Six Propositions for a Conversation.   It is available at   [HTTP://FMWWW.BC.EDU/SJ/sixpropositions.html](HTTP://FMWWW.BC.EDU/SJ/sixpropositions.html%20)

         Jesuits and University Life, available at  <http://www.jesuit.org/resources/docs/c34_17.html>  (If you would like a hard copy, fell free to ask me.)





**November 20 or 27    **         Catholic Higher Education and Ex Corde
Ecclesiae



Questions about religious identity and relationships with Rome have dominated
Catholic higher education for more than a decade, spurred in large measure by
the promulgation of Ex Corde Ecclesiae by Pope John Paul II.



         David O'Brien, A Catholic Future for Catholic Higher Education? The State of the Question. Catholic Education: A Journal of Inquiry and Practice 1 (1997): 37-50.

         Ex Corde Ecclesiae can be found at this website: [http://www.vatican.va/holy_father/john_paul_ii/apost_constitutions/documents/hf_jp-ii_apc_15081990_ex-corde-ecclesiae_en.html](http://www.vatican.va/holy_father/john_paul_ii/apost_constitutions/documents/hf_jp-)

         The implementation norms for Ex Corde can be found at  <http://www.nccbuscc.org/bishops/excorde.htm>





**December 6   **    Revitalizing Religion in a Postmodern World



         Peter Laurence, Can Religion and Spirituality Find a Place in Higher Education? About Campus 4 (1999): 12-16.

         Pluralism and Prayer Under One Roof, Chronicle of Higher Education (December 3 1999).

         TBA NEW MATERIAL FROM NEW BOOK

         Review website for the Going Public with Spirituality in Work and Higher Education at <http://www.umass.edu/spiritual_conf/>

         Review website for Education as Transformation Project at  <http://www.wellesley.edu/RelLife/transformation/>





**December 11    **         Presentation of research and summing up



Assignment #1 for ED 868: Did the Light Die?



Of the varied issues subsumed under the broad umbrella of religion and higher
education, the relationship between church and college is particularly lively
at this moment.  George Marsden¨ªs widely read The Soul of the American
University has been very influential in shaping the terms of the debate.
Marsden has argue that American higher education, once thoroughly religious,
became increasingly secular and ultimately banished religion from a central
place in the academy during the twentieth century, in large part, because the
influential later nineteenth-century liberal Protestant leaders of pace-
setting American universities embraced modernity.  James Burtchaell¨ªs The
Dying of the Light also tells a story of religious decline and increasingly
secularization through a series of case studies.  Both of these books have
raised serious questions about whether colleges can maintain what is proposed
to be a faltering religious identity.  But are their arguments for religious
decline and secularization accurate or adequate?  



Your assignment is to evaluate critically the ¨¬Marsden thesis as it applies to
a particular religiously affiliated branch or institution of higher education
(e.g., Duke, Southern Methodist, Regis, the Presbyterian colleges, or colleges
run by the Sister of St. Joseph, the Franciscans, etc.).  Does the religious
decline/secularization argument adequately describe what is going on in the
college(s) you have chosen to examine?  You will also have to think critically
about the evidence you have and how you use it.  And consider this well: what
does it mean to be sacred? to be secular?



The students in class will be divided into three groups to take up colleges
falling within the three main branches of American Christianity:  evangelical
colleges, mainline Protestant colleges, or Catholic colleges and universities.
On October 2, each team will present a portrait of what they¨ªve learned about
this particular denomination.  Students are directed to Richard Hughes¨ª book,
Models of Christian Higher Education, and Burthchaell¨ªs Dying of the Light.
There is a bibliography on church-related higher education by tradition on
reserve at O¨ªNeill.  Students are also encouraged to use the web: colleges and
denominational associations have websites that are very useful.*



On October 30, each student will submit a research seven to ten page paper
based on preliminary research of a particular tradition/college.  Has the
religious light at this college(s) died?  



*You can also find information about religion and higher education at these websites:

[http://www.iupui.edu/~raac/html/general.html](http://www.iupui.edu/~raac/html/general.html)

[http://www.iupui.edu/~raac/html/r___h.html](http://www.iupui.edu/~raac/html/r___h.html)





**[![](home.jpg)](index.htm)**



|  |  
---  
  


 _Copyright 2000. The Trustees of Boston College_

