WOST 187 Fall 2000 Syllabus **WOST 187  
Introduction To Women's Studies  
Fall 2000  
Alexandrina Deschamps  
Office Hours: Bartlett 7C * Wed: 11:00am-12:30pm * By appointment * Tel: (413)
545-1958 **  

[Click here and go to "Add'l Info" for Class Notes](http://www-
unix.oit.umass.edu/~afd)

Time:     Mon & Wed: 10:10 - 11:00am     Fri: Discussion Sections Bldg/Room:
Bartlett 65 T/Assistants:     Jan Dahms, Stephanie Evans, Tanya Kachwaha,
Jeanine Marks, Lisa Dawn Thompson

* * *

**WOST 187 Course Information**

**Course Description**  
Placing women's experiences at the center of interpretation, this class
introduces basic concepts and perspectives in Women's Studies. Focusing on
Women's history and contemporary issues for women, we will examine women's
lives with a particular emphasis on the ways in which gender interacts with
race, class, sexual orientation and ethnicity. The central aim is to foster
critical reading and thinking about women's lives and the ways in which the
interlocking systems of colonialism, racism, sexism, ethnocentrism, ageism,
and heterosexism shape women's lives and how women have worked to resist these
oppressions.

A note about this syllabus - read it and keep for reference during the
semester

This syllabus is a guide to the course. It includes: (1) course requirements,
(2) reading assignments, (3) grading formula, and (4) study questions.

**Course Requirements**

  * You must be registered for _BOTH_ the lecture and the discussion section. 
  * Attendance at _BOTH_ the lecture and the discussion section is required and mandatory. 
  * Reading assignments must be _completed by the class period for which they were assigned_. 
  * This course fulfills a general education requirement, and we will therefore pay particular attention to your writing. If you experience any problems with any of the writing assignments, let us know so that we can be of help to you. 
  * You are responsible for knowing when assignments are due and handing them in on time. Dates of major writing assignments are in this syllabus, but other assignments may be made in your discussion sections. Absence from sections on the day the assignment was made does not constitute an excuse for not handing in the assignment on time. It is each student's responsibility to find out about assignments from someone in the group or your Teaching Assistant. All sections may not have the same discussion assignments. 
  * Please read the Undergraduate Rights & Responsibilities Booklet 2000-2001 on issues of Academic Honesty, Grading, Attendance, Examinations, and Absences Due to Religious Observance. 
**Written Assignments and Exams**

  * ONE out of class 3-5 page written assignment based on the readings, lectures, class discussions and other presentations. _Papers must always be typewritten and double-spaced_. Handwritten papers will not be accepted. _Papers must be handed in on the due date, Friday November 17_. _Late papers will be graded down_. 
  * Mid-term examination scheduled during discussion sections on _FRIDAY, OCTOBER 27_. 
  * A FINAL EXAM scheduled during finals week. DO NOT MAKE PLANE RESERVATIONS OR PLANS TO LEAVE BEFORE YOU CHECK THE FINAL EXAM SCHEDULE. 
  * Discussion groups are an integral part of this class. Attendance and participation in discussion sections are factored into the final grade. Three unexcused absences will result in your grade being marked down. Non attendance will result in an F. 
  * Incompletes will not be given in this class unless if there are unusual circumstances. Please speak with your TA as early as possible. 
**Grading**  
Final grades will be computed by giving equal weight to: discussion group
participation including attendance and class participation (25%); out of class
3-5 page paper (25%); midterm exam (25%); final exam (25%) - the final will
not be cumulative, but will include material from the midterm on.

**Discussion Groups**  
Discussions sections are not optional or add-ons. They are designed to be an
integral part of the course and to provide an opportunity to clarify issues in
your readings, films and lectures. We expect you to have completed and thought
about all of the readings for that week and to be ready to engage in
meaningful dialogue. Attendance and participation in discussion groups will be
25% of the grade for this course.

**Academic Honesty**  
Our assumption is that students are generally honest. Necessary action will be
taken against students who commit academic dishonesty in compliance with
official guidelines. Read and familiarize yourselves with the Undergraduate
Rights and Responsibilities booklet.

**Ground Rules**  
Despite the size of this class, we are concerned about the quality of your
experience. To that end we will try to foster as much of your active
participation in the course as possible. Lectures will include time for
questions, and discussion sections have been designed as an integral part of
the course. Make use of office hours to continue class discussions, clarify
confusions or to discuss any other problems you are having with the course.
Because of the class size and the nature of the subject matter, it is
necessary to set some ground rules:

  * 300 people in one room is a difficult situation on many levels. One of the most mundane but problematic issues is noise. Talking, even whispering, when there are so many people in the room is very disruptive to both the lecturer and other students. This class is 50 minutes and we expect you to remain for the entire period. Do not begin to pack up your things 5 minutes before the period is over. The noise of your rustling, combining with the rustling of 50 of your classmates can be very disturbing to everyone else. 
  * Please do not make plane reservations before the final schedule is posted. Make up exams will only be given to students who have an exam conflict, a medical or unavoidable excuse. Ignorance of this rule will not constitute a valid excuse. 

**Required Books**  
Howard Zinn:     A People's History Of The United States 1492-Present.
(Revised & Updated Edition) 1995. New York. Harper Perennial. WOST 187 Reader.
1999. ISBN: 0-390-98689-5. McGraw Hill, Inc.

* * *

(Available at Food For Thought Bookshop, North Pleasant Street, Amherst and
also on reserve in the library)

* * *

_**TOPICS AND QUESTIONS TO BE COVERED FOR THE SEMESTER**_  
**The Social Construction Of Gender, Race, Class & Sexuality, Diversity and
Difference**

What is "Women's Studies" and who are the "women"? How is "woman" defined?
Does "objective knowledge" exist? In what ways do social, cultural, political
and economic forces determine the facts? Is there a "woman's perspective"? If
there is, how do race, class and sexual orientation impact that perspective?
How are women alike? How do women differ? Does the common experience of a
patriarchy unite us across our differences? As a concept, oppression has had a
long history in contemporary feminist scholarship. What does it mean? Why is
it important to think about it? Will the regular methods of scholarship and
science be adequate for the task of understanding the diversity between women?
Will new tools be necessary? Furthermore, how do we encourage women to relate
at the points of their difference to promote growth, creativity, and social
change?

What is the ideological foundation of the United States? What is the
importance of history? How were European American women's lives shaped by the
social, legal, religious and economic forces of the time? How has our
knowledge of American Indian women been limited? What is the economic
foundation of slavery? What was the experience of African American women in
slavery? What were the economic reasons for imprisoning Japanese Americans in
concentration camps? How did this affect the experiences of Asian American
women?

**Social and Political Movements: Abolition And Women's Rights, The Civil
Rights Movement, The Second And Third Waves Of Feminism**

What is abolition? Who were the people involved in the movement? What were the
roles of men and women of different races? Was gender an issue? What was the
relationship between African American and European women in the abolition
movement and the women's rights movement? What were the economic and political
bases for lynching? How do societal attitudes towards African American men and
white women contribute to the justification for lynching? What were the goals
of the civil rights Movement (CRM)? What were the Jim Crow laws? What was the
role of women in the CRM? What did the CRM accomplish? Why was the CRM seen as
the  "Borning Struggle"? How was the women's movement of the late 1960s and
early 1970s shaped by social expectations for women? What can we learn from
the successes and mistakes of the movement? What still needs to be done? Where
shall we put our greatest efforts? What should be our priorities? How do we
revitalize the energy, optimism, and power of the women's movement, and where
shall we take it into the future?

**Institutions That Shape Women's Lives - Work**

What is the nature of women's work? How is it related to societal expectations
for women? How do race and class impact on definitions of women's work? Has
the work that women have traditionally done been considered work? Where are
women in the economy? Do education, individual talents, skills and effort
determine women's placement in the work force? Are there still obstacles to
women in the work force? What are the consequences and remedial strategies?

**Institutions That Shape Women's Lives - The Family and Recurring Issues**

How is family defined? What are cross-cultural and historical differences in
family form and the role women play in the family? What has been and is the
role of the state in maintaining the family? How does racism shape family
life? How do economic, political, and social pressures impact families? What
role does racism and sexism play in shaping public policy on the family? What
are the strategies women of color have developed to ensure that survival? Who
is poor? What is the connection between women and poverty? Why single mothers
do worst? What's wrong with current poverty policies and what's the unfinished
agenda? What kinds of families do lesbians and gay men have? What is
heterosexism and how does it impact on homosexual families? How is "good
family" defined? How is that definition related to cultural assumptions about
sexuality, race, gender and class?

   What is the societal basis of violence against women? Why do women stay
with men who hurt them? What significant changes have the women's movement
made to abused girls and women? Women in this culture live with the reality of
rape, what are cultural myths about rape? What is the relationship between
rape and cultural definitions of aggressive sexuality for males and passivity
for females? How has the activism of feminists affected treatment of rape
victims by police and the judicial system?

**Institutions That Shape Women's Lives - Health Care, Media, Public Policy,
Legal System**

What is the basis of our health care system? Who does it benefit? What are the
ways in which gender, race and class impact the quality and kind of health
care received? What changes in the health care system have resulted from the
efforts of women activists? Why is abortion a major issue for women? Has
abortion always been illegal? What are the consequences of denying women
access to abortion? What do we mean by reproductive rights? What is the
justification for sterilization of Puerto Rican women? What are the
connections between sterilization abuse, population control and minority
women?

**Resistance, Alliance and Coalition Building: Platforms For Action**

What is resistance? What are the ways in which resistance is impacted by
gender, race, class, age and sexuality? How do we continue to work for change
that can begin to reverse the dynamic of patriarchal domination by challenging
and transforming the way in which we look at ourselves in relation to each
other and to the world? What is consciousness raising? How do we raise
awareness and understanding, our own and others, for social action and change?

* * *

**WOST 187 Course Calendar**

_Wed September 06_      Introductions and Definitions: Social Construction of
Gender     Syllabus, Course Requirements and Expectations     Definitions and
Questions

_Mon September 11_      Women's Studies: Implications for Women and Men
Readings:     Ng. Vivian: What is Women's Studies? Reader pp. 3-7.     Frye,
Marilyn: The Problem That Has No Name. Reader pp. 8-15.

_Wed September 13_      Different Similarities: Culture, Identity, Difference
Readings:     Castaneda, Donna: Gender Issues Among Latinas. Reader pp.
93-104.     Chan, Connie S: Asian American Women and Adolescent Girls. Reader
pp. 106-115.     Gillem, Angela: Beyond Double Jeopardy. Reader pp. 129-136.

_Mon September 18_      Intersections: Age, Race, Class, Gender, Sexuality,
Disability       Readings:     Garnets, Linda: Life as a Lesbian. What Does
Gender Have to do with it? Reader pp. 116-126.     Lorde, Audre: Age, Race,
Class, and Sex: Women Redefining Difference. Reader pp. 139-146.     Ostenson,
Ruth S: Who's In and Who's Out: The Results of Oppression. Reader pp. 147-154.

_Wed September 20_      The Politics of Patriarchy     Video Screening: The
Burning Times       Readings:     Phillips, Jan: The Craft of the Wise: Who
Salem's Witches Really Were. Reader pp. 421-424.     Frye, Marilyn:
Oppression. Reader pp. 425-434.

_Mon September 25_      Early American Women's History: Pre-Contact and
Foundations of US Society       Readings:     Zinn, Howard: A People's History
of the U.S. (Text) Chapters 1 & 2\.

_Wed September 27_      European American Women - Colonial and Republican
Motherhood - Class, Gender, Race       Readings:     Zinn, Howard: A People's
History of the U.S. (Text) Chapter 3 & 6\.

_Mon October 02_      Movements and Ideologies in the 19th Century: Abolition
and the First Wave of the Women's Movement       Readings:     Zinn, Howard: A
People's History of the U.S. (Text) Chapter 9, pp. 167-186.     1838:Grimke,
Sarah: Legal Disabilities of Women. Reader pp. 81-82.     1848: The Seneca
Falls Declaration of Sentiments and Resolutions. Reader pp. 83-85.     Truth,
Sojourner: Book of Life. Reader pp. 87-89.

_Wed October 04_      Industrialization and Immigrant Women's Work - 1890-1924
Readings:     Zinn, Howard: A People's History of the U.S. (Text) Chapter 11.

_Mon October 09_     **Holiday - Columbus Day**

_Wed October 11_      World War II: Women, Work and Patriotism     Video
Screening: Rosie The Riveter       Readings:     Zinn, Howard: A People's
History of the U.S. (Text) Chapter 15.

_Mon October 16_      World War II - Internment of Japanese Americans
Readings:     Zinn, Howard: A People's History of the U.S. (Text) Chapter 16.

_Wed October 18_      Women in The Civil Rights Movement and the Second Wave
of the Women's Movement       Readings:     Civil Rights Act of 1964:
Congressional Debate. Reader pp. 19-23.     Zinn, Howard: A People's History
of the U.S. (Text) Chapter 17.

_Mon October 23_      Coalitions, Collective Actions, Alliances, Resistance
Readings:     Combahee River Collective: A Black Feminist Statement. Reader
pp. 24-31.     Hall, Nora: African-American Women Leaders and Politics of
Alliance. Reader pp. 33-50.

_Wed October 25_      Women and Work: Occupational Segregation and Gendered
Organizations       Readings:     Acker, Joan: Hierarchies, Jobs, Bodies: A
Theory of Gendered Organizations. Reader pp. 365-377.

_Fri October 27_     **Mid-Term Examinations in Discussion Sections**

_Mon October 30_      Women, Income and the Feminization of Poverty     Guest
Lecture       Readings:     Lott, Bernice: Global Connections: The
Significance of Women's Poverty. Reader pp. 169-175.     Pierce, Diana: The
Feminization of Poverty: Update. Reader pp. 391-397.

_Wed November 01_      Women and Work: Global Connections     Video Screening:
The Global Assembly Line       Readings:     Ehrenreich, Barbara, and Annette
Fuentes: Life on the Global Assembly Line. Reader pp.381-390.     Bunch,
Charlotte: Women's Rights as Human Rights. Reader pp. 157-167.

_Mon November 06_      Socio-Cultural Concepts of the Family - Public Policy,
Motherhood, Mothering and Families       Readings:     Gittins, Diana: What is
the Family? Is it Universal? Reader pp. 333-343.     Mainardi, Patricia: The
Politics of Housework. Reader pp. 344-347.

_Wed November 08_      Gender, Violence and Masculinity     Video Screening:
Tough Guise       Readings:     Kimmel, Michael: Clarence, William, Iron Mike,
Tailhook, Senator Packwood, Spur Posse, Magic and Us. (Handout).     Allen,
Robert, & Kivel, Paul: Men Changing Men. (Handout).

_Mon November 13_      Violence Against Women: Culture, Society & Femicide -
Family Violence     Video Screening: Defending Our Lives       Readings:
Gelles, Richard: Family Violence. Reader pp. 435-450.     Paludi, Michelle:
Sexual Harassment in College and University Settings. Reader pp. 351-361.

_Wed November 15_      Violence Against Women: The Recurring Issues     Guest
Speakers from Local Agencies       Readings:     Unger & Crawford: Sexuality
and Violence. Reader pp. 300-324.

_Fri November 17_     **Written Paper Due in Discussion Sections**

_Mon November 20_      Sexuality as Site of Difference       Readings:
Penelope, Julia: The Lesbian Perspective. Reader pp. 263-275.     Unger &
Crawford: Sexuality in a Social Context. Reader pp. 276-296.

_Wed November 22_     **Thanksgiving Recess**

_Mon November 27_      Health Care: Women's Physical and Mental Health -
Delivery and Access       Readings:     Riessman, Catherine Kohler: Women and
Medicalization: A New Perspective. Reader pp. 201-226.

_Wed November 29_      Women's Bodies: Reproductive and Abortion Rights
Guest Lecture       Readings:     Davis, Angela: Racism, Birth Control, and
Reproductive Rights. Reader pp. 233-245.     Roe vs. Wade, 410 U.S. 113, 1973.
Reader pp. 248-254.     Akron v. Akron Center for Reproductive Health, 462
U.S. 416, 1983. Reader pp. 255-260.

_Mon December 04_      Women's Bodies: Images, Media, Pop Culture     Video
Screening: Slim Hopes       Readings:     Chernik, Abra Fortune: The Body
Politic. Reader pp. 179-185.     Smith, Christine: Women, Weight, and Body
Image. Reader pp. 186-195.

_Wed December 06_      Women's Bodies: Media Icons, Representations and the
Cult of True Womanhood     Video Screening: Dream Worlds II       Readings:
Lurie, Allison: Sex and Fashion. Reader pp. 401-418.

_Mon December 11_      A Platform for Action: Resources for Advocacy
Readings:     Taylor, Vera: The Future of Feminism: A Social Movement
Analysis. Reader pp. 53-74.

_Wed December 13_      Redefining Feminism, Redefining the Issue

* * *

