Spring 2001  

**_SYLLABUS SOCIOLOGY 4035  
_**_  
Course Title_ : _Social Stratification  
__Time_ : Tuesday and Thursday 8:00am - 9:00am  
_Place_ : Muenzinger E131  
_Instructor_ : _Tom Mayer_

_Instructor's Office_ : Institute of Behavioral Science  
Building 2  
1546 Broadway  
492-2138  
[mayert@spot.Colorado.EDU](mailto://mayert@spot.Colorado.EDU)  
  
_Office Hours_ : Wednesday 2:00 - 4:00 PM or by appointment  
  
  

**_Course Description_** __

  
  

The analysis of social stratification is often considered the heart of
sociology. Every known human society has a system of social stratification.
This course examines the structure and dynamics of social inequality with
particular attention to the United States. It focuses on three forms of
inequality: economic inequality, power inequality, and status inequality. The
course begins with a broad survey of economic inequality in America and how
this has changed over the last several decades. It then considers the role of
class and class conflict in American history from the Great Depression to the
present. This is followed by a review of the principal theoretical
perspectives on social inequality, and by an examination of social classes in
the United States. Next we discuss movement between classes, gain and loss of
status, inequalities based upon gender and race, and how inequality is
legitimated. The penultimate section of the course deals with social
stratification in other countries, while the final section considers possible
future patterns of social inequality.  

Social stratification is a huge topic, and any single course can only hope to
address a small part. The minimal attention given to social stratification in
other societies is perhaps the most important limitation on this course. This
reflects certain boundaries of the instructors own knowledge, as well as the
fact that most empirical stratification research concerns the United States.
Sociology 4035 involves a lot of reading, some of which is not easy. It will
have a mixture of lectures, student presentations, and class discussions.

**_Course Requirements_** __

Students in Sociology 4035 are asked to write two short essays on social
stratification. There will also be two midterm examinations and a final exam.
In addition, students will be divided into pairs and asked to make class
presentation on the topic assigned for that day. Grades will be based upon the
(a) the two midterm examinations, (b) the final examination, (c) the two
essays, (d) the class presentation, and (e) class attendance (which will be
taken regularly). Each of these factors have the following (approximate)
weights:

Attendance 20%

First midterm exam 12%

Second midterm exam 12%

First essay 12%

Second essay 12%

Class presentation 12%  
  
Final exam 20%  
  
The two essays must be five pages or less. The first essay (due on Thursday
February 15) is an evaluation of the reading assigned for any day up to that
date. The second essay (due on Thursday April 19) involves the formulation and
discussion of a testable hypothesis about social stratification.

  

**_Critical Dates_** __

  
  

February 15 First essay due  
March 1 First midterm examination  
April 5 Second midterm examination  
April 19 Second essay due  
May 9 Final examination (10:30am - 1:00pm)  

**_Required Books_**  

**Chuck Collins and Felice Yeskel: _Economic Apartheid in America: A Primer on
Economic Inequality and Insecurity_. (New York: The New Press, 2000). 229
pages.**

An expose of the growing economic gap between winners and losers in the
emerging global economy. This book is written with passion and a definite
point of view. It reflects the work of scholars associated with the
organization _United for a Fair Economy_ and contains numerous easily
understood charts and cartoons.  

**Nelson Lichtenstein, Susan Strasser, and Roy Rosenzweig: _Who Built America?
Working People and the Nation's Economy, Politics, Culture, and Society_ ,
Volume Two - _Since 1877_. (New York: Worth Publishers, 2000). 786 pages.**

A retelling of American history since 1877 with the idea that ordinary working
people, not just political and economic elites, are important. This account
places class and class conflict at the center of the story. It contains many
memorable pictures and is written in an easy accessible style. _Who Built
America?_ emerged from the American Social History Project at The City
University of New York.  

**Harold R. Kerbo: _Social Stratification and Inequality: Class Conflict in
Historical, Comparative, and Global Perspective_. Fourth Edition. (Boston:
McGraw-Hill, 2000). 604 pages. **

A clear and reasonably complete text on social stratification written from a
class conflict perspective. The author is an important scholar of social
stratification. The original version of this book appeared in 1983. While
maintaining the basic organization, it has become deeper and more
comprehensive with each subsequent edition. Wherever possible, the various
charts and tables have been updated while new research has been added.  

**David B. Grusky (editor): _Social Stratification: Class, Race, and Gender in
Sociological Perspective_. Second Edition. (Boulder, CO: Westview Press,
2001). 911 pages.**

The definitive reader in the field of social stratification containing both
classic statements and current research. Among its 95 selections are many
recent and methodologically sophisticated articles. The editor astutely
identifies and addresses the principal concerns of contemporary social
stratification scholars. Each of the six parts concludes with a reflective
essay by a leading scholar prepared specifically for this volume. The overall
temper of this collection is in line with current mainstream academic thinking
on social stratification.

  
  

**_Class Schedule_**  

  * **Social Inequality in the United States** (January 16-25) **** ****

1. **_Introduction_ (Tuesday January 16)**

_Required reading_ :

Collins and Yeskel ix, 1-12.

Grusky x, 3-8

Kerbo vii-ix, 1-17

Lichtenstein, Strasser, and Rosenzweig xv-xxi

  
2\. _**Growing Inequality**_ **(Thursday January 18)**

****_Required reading_ :

Collins and Yeskel 13-67  
  

3\. _**Causes of Inequality**_ **(Tuesday January 23)**

_Required reading_ :

Collins and Yeskel 68-126

_Recommended reading_ :

Kerbo 18-45

  

4\. _**Reducing Inequality**_ **(Thursday January 25)**

****_Required reading_ :

Collins and Yeskel 127-218

_Recommended reading_ :

Grusky 77-84 ****

****

****

**B. History of Social Inequality** (January 30 - February 15) ****

**** 5. _**Inequality from Communalism to Industrialization**_ **(Tuesday
January 30)**

_Required reading_ :

Kerbo 46-76

_Recommended Reading_ ****

**** Lichtenstein, Strasser, and Rosenzweig **** 316-365 ****

  

    * _**Class and Class Conflict in the Great Depression**_ **(Thursday February 1)**

_Required reading_ :

Lichtenstein, Strasser, and Rosenzweig **** 368-481 ****

  

    * _**Change and Stability in World War Two**_ **(Tuesday February 6)**

_Required reading_ :

Lichtenstein, Strasser, and Rosenzweig 482-539

  

    * _**The Cold War Era**_ **(Thursday February 8)**

_Required reading_ :

Lichtenstein, Strasser, and Rosenzweig 544-605

  

    * _**The Sixties**_ **(Tuesday February 13)**

_Required reading_ :

Lichtenstein, Strasser, and Rosenzweig 606-681

  

    * _G **lobalization and Inequality**_ **(Thursday February 15)**

_Required reading_ :

Lichtenstein, Strasser, and Rosenzweig 682-786

**_First essay due_**

  

**C. Theories of Social Inequality** (February 20 - 27) ****

  
  

    * _**Marxist Theories**_ **(Tuesday February 20)**

_Required reading_

Grusky 91-102, 112-116, 128-131

Kerbo 77-95, 129-141

    * _**Weberian Theories**_ **(Thursday February 22)** ****

****_Required Reading_

Grusky 132-145, 152-162

Kerbo **** 95-103, 141-152 ****

****_Recommended reading_ :

Grusky 162-177 ****

  

13\. _**Functionalist Theories**_ **(Tuesday February 27)**

_Required reading_

Grusky 55-76

Kerbo 113-129

_Recommended reading_ :

Grusky 183-194

  

14\. **_Midterm Examination_** (Thursday March 1)

  

******D. Class Structure in the United States** (March 6-15)

  
  

15. **_Occupational Status Hierarchy_ (Tuesday March 6)**

_Required reading_ :

Grusky 264-286

_Recommended reading_ :

Grusky 240-247, 255-263

  

16. **_Upper Class_ (Thursday March 8)**

_Required reading_ :

Kerbo 153-215

_Recommended reading_ :

Grusky 202-211, 223-232

  

17\. _**Middle Class and Working Class**_ **(Tuesday March 13)**

_Required reading_ :

Kerbo **** 216-244

  

18\. _**Poor People**_ **(Thursday March 15)**

_Required reading_ :

Grusky 421-434

Kerbo 245-290

_Recommended reading_ :

Grusky 373-389

  

**E. Processes of Social Stratification** (March 20 - April 12)

  

19\. _**Class Mobility**_ **(Tuesday March 20)**

_Required reading_ :

Grusky 344-372

Kerbo 329-357

_Recommended reading_ :

Grusky 303-324

  

20\. _**Status Attainment**_ **(Thursday March 22)**

_Required reading_ :

Grusky 390-421

Kerbo 357-375

  

**Spring Break** (March 24 - April 1)

  

21\. _**Gender and Class**_ **(Tuesday April 3)**

_Required reading_ :

Grusky 681-688, 703-719

Kerbo 291-309

_Recommended reading_ :

Grusky 689-703, 719-742

  

22\. **_Midterm Examination_** (Thursday April 5)

  

23\. _**Race and Class**_ **(Tuesday April 10)**

_Required reading_ :

Grusky 555-568, 611-622, 636-642, 660-670

Kerbo 309-328

_Recommended reading_ :

Grusky 592-610, 642-660

  

24\. _**Legitimating Inequality**_ **(Thursday April 12)**

_Required reading_ :

Kerbo 376-405

  

******F. Social Inequality in Comparative Perspective** (April 17-26)

  

25. **_Inequality in the Modern World System_ (Tuesday April 17)**

_Required reading_ :

Kerbo 407-444

  

26\. _**Social Inequality in Japan**_ **(Thursday April 19)**

_Required reading_ :

Kerbo 445-484

**_Second essay due_**

  

27\. _**Social Inequality in Germany**_ **(Tuesday April 24)**

_Required reading_ :

Kerbo 485-516

  

28\. _**Social Inequality in Communist Societies**_ **(Thursday April 26)**

_Recommended reading_ :

Linda Fuller, "Socialism and the Transition in East and Central Europe", in
_Annual Review of Sociology 2000_ , Vol. 26, pp. 585-609.

I. Szelenyi, K. Beckett, and L.P. King, "The Socialist Economic System", in
Smelser and Svedberg (eds.), _The Handbook of Economic Sociology_ (1994), pp.
234-254.

  

**G. The Future of Social Inequality** (May 1-3)

  

29. **_Post-Industrialism and Post-Socialism_ (Tuesday May 1)**

_Required reading_ :

Grusky 830-858

_Recommended reading_ :

Grusky 805-829

  

30\. _**Trends and Forecasts**_ **(Thursday May 3)**

_Required reading_ :

Grusky 589-880

_Recommended reading_ :

Grusky 881-890

  

31\. **_Final Examination_** __(Wednesday May 9, 10:30am - 1:00pm)

