Instructor: Richard Weiner

Office: CM 275

Office Hours: MWF: 10:00-11:00

Phone: (219) 481-6692

E-Mail: weinerr@ipfw.edu



History 105: American History to 1877

MWF, Ch 56/VIDEO





Through lectures, assigned readings, and films, this course introduces
students to social, political, and economic developments in American History
from the Colonial Period through Reconstruction. Upon successful completion of
this course, which course counts toward fulfillment of the General Education
area III requirement, you will be better able to:



1\. Understand major political, social, and economic developments in U.S.
history.

2\. Grasp the relationship between events.

3\. Synthesize information into a coherent overview.

4\. Understand the diversity of American experiences.

5\. Develop a historical consciousness, including awareness of the different
perspectives and

ways of life of people in the past.

6\. Develop and use skills such as reading for content and thesis, effective
listening and note-

taking, and clear writing.

7\. Evaluate primary source material and draw appropriate interpretive
conclusions.



This is a distance learning course which students take in one of two possible
ways: 1) ch. 56, MWF, 9:00-9:50; 2) Videos sent to students= home (videos
arrive about 1 week after lectures have aired live on ch. 56). I encourage
students to contact me if they have any questions or concerns about any aspect
of the course. Communications sent via E-mail will probably be responded to
most quickly, since I check my E-mail regularly. The telephone (my office
phone only) is another way to contact me. If I am not in my office you can
leave a message and I will return your call. You can also come to see me in my
office during office hours (if my office hours are inconvenient another time
can be arranged).



The 2 main components of this course are the lectures and the assigned
readings. To do well in this course you will need to master the material in
both these areas. Thus, you will need to take detailed lecture notes and
carefully read the assigned texts. On exams I will expect you to include
information from both lectures and assigned readings.













  

Required Texts:



Michael P. Johnson, _Reading the American Past: Selected Historical Documents_
(vol. 1: to 1877), Second Edition, Bedford/St. Martin=s, 2002\. In the class
schedule below this text is abbreviated as _Past_.



Michael P. Johnson, _The American Promise: A History of the United States_
(vol. 1: to 1877), Second Edition , Bedford/St. Martin=s, 2002. In the class
schedule below this text is abbreviated as _Promise_.



Course Requirements:



There are 2 exams (a mid-term and a final), each of which is worth 1/3 of the
final course grade. Exams are taken at a test center. Exams are essay format.
There is no multiple choice or fill in the blanks component. On exams students
are required to analyze a selected passage from the assigned readings, write
an essay, and write a series of short answers. Students are required to
include information from both class lectures and the assigned readings on
their exams. Thus, it is essential to do the assigned readings and take good
lecture notes. Exam study guides will be provided.



The final 1/3 of the course grade is based on written assignments, which are
turned in on a weekly basis. I strongly recommend that students turn in their
assignments via e-mail (weinerr@ipfw.edu).  However, regular mail (Richard
Weiner, Dept. of History, Indiana University, 2101 E. Coliseum, Ft. Wayne, IN
46805) is also acceptable. A final option for turning in assignments is for
students to physically place them in my History Department mailbox, which is
located in the History Department (CM 209) at IPFW.



The weekly writing assignments due dates are listed on the syllabus (Writing
assignments are due the first class day of each week, as indicated). I need to
receive assignments sent via e-mail and delivered personally to my History
Department Mailbox by the due date (for example, week 2 assignments must be
received by 1/23. Week 3 assignment must be received by 1/28, etc.).
Assignments sent via regular mail need to be mailed by the due date (thus,
week 2 assignments must be mailed by 1/23). Writing assignments which are
turned in late are accepted, but they are marked down one full letter grade
each day that they are late.



  

The writing assignments consist of providing answers to the reading questions
that accompany the assigned readings. Each week you will be required to
provide answers to the questions in the chapter of _Reading the American Past_
that is assigned. There are 4 documents in each chapter of the text. After
each document there are a series of questions in a section entitled
AQuestions for Reading and Discussion.@ Finally, at the very end of each
chapter there is a section entitled AComparative Questions.@ Thus, in each
chapter there are 5 sets of questions (one set after each document and one
comparative set at the end of the chapter). When answering these questions,
the magic number is THREE. That is, you must answer only the first 3 questions
in each set of questions. Thus, for each chapter you answer a total of 15
questions. In addition, most weeks there is a writing assignment from the main
course text book, _The American Promise_. This assignment consists of
providing a written answer to the AHistorical Question,@ which appears in the
chapter assigned for a given week. There is only one historical question per
chapter, and some chapters do not have any. To answer this question you need
to summarize the main points that are made in this 2 page section of your
textbook. The pages of your book that the AHistorical Questions@ are on is
listed in the Table of Contents of your textbook.



Your weekly writing assignments will be graded on a Check-plus (A), Check (B),
Check-minus (C), Check-minus-minus (D), Check-minus-minus-minus (F) system. To
do well on written assignments you need to provide complete answers. A
complete answer is defined as an answer that includes historical details,
complete sentences, clear prose, and good analysis. If you desire, in addition
to a grade, I will provide you with feedback on your writing assignments in
order to help you improve your work and grade.





Assigned Reading Schedule, Writing Assignment Schedule, Exam Schedule, and ch.
56 Class Schedule:



Week 1: America Before 1492

1/14: Lecture (Assigned Reading: _Promise_ , Prologue)

1/16: Lecture

1/18: Lecture



Week 2: Europeans and the New World, 1492-1600

1/21 Holiday

1/23: Lecture (Assigned Readings/Writing Assignment due: _Promise_ , ch. 1;
_Past_ , ch. 1)

1/25: Lecture.



Week 3: The Southern Colonies in the Seventeenth Century, 1601-1700

1/28: Lecture (Assigned Reading/Writing Assignment due: _Promise_ , ch. 2;
_Past_ , ch. 2)

1/30: Lecture

2/1: Lecture



Week 4: The Northern Colonies in the Seventeenth Century, 1601-1700

2/4: Lecture (Assigned Reading/Writing Assignment due: _Promise_ , ch. 3;
_Past_ , ch. 3)

2/6: Lecture

2/8: Lecture



Week 5: Colonial America in the Eighteenth Century, 1701-1770

2/11: Lecture (Assigned Reading/Writing Assignment due: _Promise_ , ch. 4;
_Past_ , ch. 4)

2/13: Lecture

2/15: Lecture



Week 6: The British Empire and the Colonial Crisis, 1754-1775; The War for
America, 1775-83

2/18: Lecture (Assigned Reading/Writing Assignment due: _Promise_ , chapters 5
AND 6; _Past_ , chapters 5 AND 6)

  

2/20: Lecture

2/22: Lecture



Week 7: Building a Republic, 1775-1789

2/25: Lecture (Assigned Reading/Writing Assignment due: _Promise_ , ch. 7;
_Past_ , ch. 7)

2/27: Lecture

3/1: Lecture



Week 8: The New Nation Takes Form, 1789-1800

3/4: Lecture (Assigned Reading/Writing Assignment due: _Promise_ , ch. 8;
_Past_ , ch. 8)

3/6: Lecture

3/8: No TV Broadcast



MIDTERM EXAM: Exam will be taken at ACCS Testing Services, which is located in
room 232 B Kettler Hall, at IPFW. Exam must be taken between 3/11 and 3/24.
Testing times Monday-Thursday are 10 AM, 1 PM, 3 PM, and 5:45 PM. On Fridays
testing times are 10 AM, 1 PM, and 3 PM. On Saturdays the testing time is 9:30
AM. For further information call the ACCS Testing Services at (219) 481-6600.



3/11-3/17 SPRING BREAK: No TV Broadcast/No Class



Week 9: Republican Ascendancy, 1800-1824

3/18: Lecture (Assigned Reading/Writing Assignment due: _Promise_ , ch. 9;
_Past_ , ch. 9)

3/20: Lecture

3/22: Lecture



Week 10: The Expanding Republic, 1815-1840

3/25: Lecture (Assigned Reading/Writing Assignment due: _Promise_ , ch. 10;
_Past_ , ch. 10

3/27: Lecture

3/29: Lecture



Week 11: The Free North and West, 1840-1860

4/1: Lecture (Assigned Reading/Writing Assignment due: _Promise_ , ch. 11;
_Past_ , ch. 11)

4/3: Lecture

4/5: Lecture



Week 12: The Slave South, 1820-1860

4/8: Lecture (Assigned Reading/Writing Assignment due: _Promise_ , ch. 12;
_Past_ , ch. 12)

4/10: Lecture

4/12: Lecture



Week 13: The House Divided and the Civil War

4/15: Lecture (Assigned Reading/Writing Assignment due: _Promise_ , chapters
13 AND 14; _Past_ , chapters 13 and 14)

4/17: Lecture

  

4/19: Lecture



Week 14: Reconstruction, 1863-1877

4/22: Lecture (Assigned Reading/Writing Assignment due: _Promise_ , ch. 15;
_Past_ , ch. 15)

4/24: Lecture

4/26: Lecture



Week 15: READING WEEK: FINAL EXAM PREPARATION. This week is dedicated to
review for the final exam. Thus, there are no assigned readings, no written
assignments, and no lectures for this week. Students should use their study
guide to prepare for the final exam. I will be available in my office all
week. Students are encouraged to contact me (in person, via telephone, or by
E-mail) with questions regarding the final.



4/29: Final exam Preparation: No class. No TV Broadcast

5/1: Final Exam Preparation: No Class. No TV Broadcast

5/3: Final Exam Preparation: No Class. No TV Broadcast.



Week 16: FINAL EXAMS WEEK. Final exam must be taken between 5/6 and 5/11 at
ACCS Testing Services, which is located in room 232B Kettler Hall, at IPFW.





