![](../../../images/r.jpg)  
---  
**Winter 1999**  
 **POL 3810-2  
U.S. - Latin American Relations  
Blegan 155 MWF 1:25 - 2:15**  
![](../../../images/white.gif) | ![](../../../images/2-courses.jpg)  
|  Professor David J. Samuels  
Office: Social Sciences Tower 1466  
Email:[dsamuels@polisci.umn.edu](mailto:dsamuels@polisci.umn.edu)  
Office Hours: MWF 12:30 - 1:15 and by appointment  
  

**Objectives:** In this course we will first explore the history of relations
between the U.S. and Latin America, in an attempt to understand the roots of
current U.S. policy towards the countries in the region. Then we will focus
our attention on three critical contemporary inter-American policy issues
facing the U.S.: drug policy, immigration policy, and economic policy. We will
consider how the emergence of the U.S. as the dominant political and economic
power in the western hemisphere shapes the context for ongoing negotiations in
these policy arenas, and endeavor to understand how domestic politics in both
the U.S. and in the countries of Latin America constrains diplomatic
initiative.

**

Requirements:** Grading will be based on two midterms (30% each) and a short
research paper (5-6 pages) (40%). The writing assignment will be passed out
Friday January 29th and due on Monday March 1st. The exams will consist of a
combination of short-answer essays and longer essays. Exams grades will be
based on a demonstrated command of the material from lectures **and**
readings. Grades will be based on University grade definitions, which
establish the qualities of performance expected at different grade levels (see
_CLA Classroom Grading and Examination Procedures 1996-97,_ p. 13). Note, for
example, that the University defines a  "C" grade as "achievement meeting the
basic course requirements in every respect."

I expect students to do **all** the readings listed on the syllabus - before
the scheduled class. Class participation may involve answering questions I
pose about the day's readings, so come prepared. I will make time during every
lecture for questions and discussion, so please come prepared with questions
about the readings or previous lectures. I encourage students to visit me
during my office hours to either discuss class topics more in depth or to get
help with any aspect of the class, including exam and paper preparation.

**

Policies for make-up exams, late assignments, and incompletes:** make-up exams
will **not** be permitted unless the student notifies the professor before the
regular exam is administered and later presents **written documentation** of
the circumstances (e.g. note from University Health Service __ verifying
illness). Only the legitimate circumstances mentioned in the Policy on makeup
Examinations will be accepted, and only with written documentation (legitimate
circumstances include religious holidays, verifiable illness, serious family
emergencies, subpoenas, jury duty, military service, and participation in
group activities sponsored by the University). Incompletes will be granted
only in the case of documented illness, and if the student and professor
complete the CLA Agreement for Completion of Incomplete Work. Written
assignments are due during the class period on the days they are due.
**Assignments turned in after the class period will be considered late.** Late
assignments will be marked down one-tenth of a grade point (on a 4-point
scale) per day they are late.

**

Texts:** students should purchase the following texts as well as a course
packet at the bookstore. All readings are also on reserve at Wilson Library.
All readings in this syllabus are **required _**_ readings.

Schoultz, Lars. 1998. _Beneath the United States: A History of U.S. Policy
Toward Latin America_. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Danner, Mark. 1993. _The Massacre at El Mozote_. New York: Vintage Books.

Zirnite, Peter. 1998. "Reluctant Recruits: The U.S. Military and the War on
Drugs." Washington, D.C.: Washington Office on Latin America.

**COURSE SCHEDULE** **

Monday, January 4: Introduction

**

Video: from the 'Americas' series, 'Get Up, Stand Up: Problems of
Sovereignty.'

**

Unit I: History of U.S. - Latin American Relations

**

**

Wednesday, January 6:** The U.S. and Latin America: New Republics in the New
World

Schoultz, chapter 1

**

Friday, January 8:** 'Manifest Destiny,' the Mexican-American War, and the
relationship between slavery in the U.S. and U.S. foreign policy prior to the
Civil War

Schoultz, chapters 2 and 3

**

Monday, January 11:** The origins of U.S. "imperial" ambition

Schoultz, chapters 4 and 5

**

Wednesday, January 13:** The 'Spanish-American' War and its aftermath

**

**

Schoultz, chapter 8

**

Friday, January 15:** 'A Man, a Plan, a Canal: Panama'

Schoultz, chapter 9

**

Monday, January 18: Martin Luther King Day, NO CLASS

**

**

Wednesday, January 20:** 'Big Stick' Diplomacy: Might Makes Right?

**

**

Schoultz, chapter 10

**

Friday, January 22:** 'Dollar Diplomacy,' or 'Money Talks'

Schoultz, chapters 11 and 12

**

Monday, January 25:** the 'Good Neighbor' Policy

Schoultz, chapters 14 and 15

**

Wednesday, January 27:** The Cold War: Latin America as a superpower
battleground

Schoultz, chapters 17 and 18

**

Friday, January 29:** A short history of 'covert' U.S. involvement in Latin
America

**

**

Danner, _The Massacre at El Mozote_ (read as much as you can before lecture)

**

Monday, February 1:** Continue to read Danner book

**

Wednesday, Februrary 3:** Cold War continued: US support for the El Salvadoran
military in the 1980s.

**

**

Read "The Documents" section at the back of Danner book.

**

Friday, February 5:** Security policy after the Cold War? Contemporary US-Cuba
relations

LeoGrande, William M. 1998. "From Havana to Miami: U.S. Cuba Policy as a Two-
Level Game." _Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs_ 40(1):
67-86.

Henderson, David R., 1997. "Why Our Cuba Policy is Wrong." _Fortune_ October
13, 1997, pp. 48-9.

Schoultz, chapter 19

**

Monday, February 8: 1 ST MIDTERM

**

**

Unit II. Immigration Policy

**

**

Wednesday, February 10:** Immigration: 'Anglo' America comes face-to-face with
'Latin' America

Rubaut, Ruben. 1992. "The Americans: Latin American and Caribbean Peoples in
the U.S." in Alfred Stepan (ed.), _Americas: New Interpretive Essays_. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Espenshade, Thomas J., and Maryann Belanger. 1997. "U.S. Public Perceptions
and Reactions to Mexican Migration." In Bean et al., (eds.), _At the
Crossroads: Mexican Migration and U.S. Policy_. Lanham, MD: Rowman and
Littlefield Publishers, pp. 227-261.

Borjas, George. 1998. "Tired, Poor, on Welfare." _National Review,_ December
13, pp. 40-42.

**

Friday, February 12:** Who wins and who loses from immigration?

Gonzalez Baker, Susan, Robert G. Cushing, and Charles W. Haynes. 1997. "Fiscal
Impacts of Mexican Migration to the United States." In Bean et al., pp.
145-76.

**

Monday, February 15:** Immigration: the local angle in an international
political dispute

On this day we will have two visitors: one from the local branch of the US
Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS), and one from an immigrants'
support group.

Mitchell, Chip. 1998. "Blue Against Brown?" _Connection to the Americas_
15(6):1-6 (July-August).

**

Wednesday, February 17:** Immigration policy: recent developments

Smith, Peter H. 1997. "NAFTA and Mexican Migration." In Bean et al., 263-281.

Weintraub, Sidney. 1997. "U.S. Foreign Policy and Mexican Immigration." In
Bean et al., 283-298.

Massey, Douglas. 1998. "The March of Folly: U.S. Immigration Policy after
NAFTA." _The American Prospect_ #37 (March-April), pp. 22-33.

_

San Diego Union-Tribune_. 1998.  "Death in the Desert." Editorial, August 17,
1998. Pp. B-6.

DePalma, Anthony. 1998. "Border Deaths Don't Change Mexico's View of
Crossings." _New York Times_ August 25, 1998, page A4.

**

Unit III: Drug Policy

**

**

Friday, February 19:** Drug Policy: America hallucinates as it looks in the
mirror?

Geopolitical Drug Watch. 1998. "A Drug Trade Primer for the Late 1990s."
_Current History_ 97(618):150-53.

Bertram, Eva _et al.,_ 1996\. _Drug War Politics: The Price of Denial_.
Berkeley: University of California Press, chapters 1-3.

Falco, Mathea. 1998. "America's Drug Problem and Its Policy of Denial."
_Current History_ 97(618):145-149.

< **

Monday, February 22:** The Drug War: fighting new battles with old weapons?

Mendel, William M. and Murl D. Munger. 1997. "The Drug Threat: Getting
Priorities Straight." _Parameters, The U.S. Army War College Quarterly_ Summer
(web site download).

Zirnite, Peter. 1998. "Reluctant Recruits: The U.S. Military and the War on
Drugs." Washington, D.C.: Washington Office on Latin America.

**

Wednesday, February 24:** How the Drug War influences politics in Latin
America

Andreas, Peter. 1998. "The Political Economy of Narco-Corruption in Mexico."
_Current History_ 97(618):160-65.

Payne, Douglas. 1997. "Why Drug Traffickers Love Free Trade." _Dissent,_
Summer 1997, pp. 59-64.

Gugliotta, Guy. 1992. "The Colombian Cartels and How to Stop Them." In Peter
H. Smith (ed.), _Drug Policy in the Americas_. Boulder: Westview Press.

**

Unit IV: Economic Policy

**

**

Friday, February 26:** Democracy and Economic Crisis in Latin America: what
should the US response be?

Drake, Paul W. 1989. "Debt and Democracy in Latin America, 1920s-1980s." in
Barbara Stallings and Robert Kaufman, _Debt and Democracy in Latin America_.
Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

Remmer, Karen. 1990. "Democracy and Economic Crisis: the Latin American
Experience." Reprinted in Roderic Ai Camp (ed.), 1996, _Democracy in Latin
America: Patterns and Cycles_. Wilmington, DE: Jaguar Books.

**

Monday, March 1:** 'Globalization,' Financial Flows and Political Stability:
The 'Asian Flu,' the 'Tequila Effect,' and recent efforts to avoid economic
collapse in Latin America

Sachs, Jeffrey. 1998. "The IMF and the Asian Flu." _The American Prospect_ #37
(March-April 1998), pp. 16-21.

Pettis, Michael. "The Liquidity Trap: Latin America's Free-Market Past."
_Foreign Affairs_ November-December 1996, pp. 2-7.

Handout on Brazil bailout

**

SHORT RESEARCH PAPERS DUE TODAY - MARCH 1

**

**

Unit V: Trade Policy

**

**

Wednesday, March 3:** NAFTA: 'Globalization,' Trade Flows and the intersection
of domestic and international politics

**

**

Bradsher, Keith. "G.M.'s Efficient Brazil Plant Raises Fears Closer to Home."
_The New York Times,_ 6/17/98, p. A-1, C-22.



**

Friday, March 5:** NAFTA: predicted economic, political, and social effects in
the US and Latin America

Judis, John B. "The Divide." _The New Republic,_ October 11, 1993, pp. 26-27,
32.

Buckley, William F. "NAFTA, Yes." _National Review,_ November 29, 1993, pp.
13-16.

Smith, Peter H. 1992. "The Political Impact of Free Trade on Mexico."
Reprinted in Roderic Ai Camp (ed.), 1996, _Democracy in Latin America:
Patterns and Cycles_. Wilmington, DE: Jaguar Books.

**

Monday, March 8:** NAFTA: what effect has it had so far? What are the
prospects for its future?

Anderson, Sarah, et al. "NAFTA: Trinational Fiasco." _The Nation,_ July 15/22,
1996, pp. 26-29.

Raine, George. "NAFTA boosts state's exports." _San Francisco Examiner,_
7/19/98., p D-1.

Arner, Mark. 1998. "Delay on Border Trucking Blasted." _San Diego Union-
Tribune_ , August 30, page B-1.

United States Trade Representative, 1998. "Executive Summary." From USTR web
site.

Hufbauer, Gary C. and Jeffrey J. Schott. 1993. _NAFTA: An Assessment_.
Washington: Institute for International Economics, chapters 1-2.

**

Wednesday, March 10:** President Clinton's Latin America foreign policy:
change or continuity in historical patterns?

Shifter, Michael. 1998. "United States-Latin American Relations: Shunted to
the Slow Track." _Current History_ 97(616): 49-54.

**

Friday, March 12: Synthesis: Latin America and domestic politics in the U.S.

**

Excerpts from _Cincinnati Enquirer_ expos e on Chiquita Company.

Allen, Arthur. "Citizen Carl." _The New Republic,_ August 17  & 24, 1998, pp.
18-20.

**

FINAL EXAM DATE: FRIDAY MARCH 19 TH, 4-6 P.M.

**  
  
|   |  ** [S UMMER 2001](../../summer2001/index.html)  
  
[SPRING 2001](../spring2001/index.html)  
  
[FALL 2000](../fall2000/index.html)  
  
[SUMMER 2000](../../summer2000/index.html)  
  
[SUMMER 1999](../../summer1999/index.html)  
  
[SPRING 1999](../../spring1999/index.html)  
  
[WINTER 1999](../index.html)  
  
[FALL 1998](../../fall1998/index.html)  
  
[SUMMER 1998](../../summer1998/index.html)  
  
**  
---|---|---  
![](../../../images/end.jpg)

