Multicultural Pasts __

**AMST 661**| [ **Prof. Robert A. Gross**](

mailto:ragros@facstaff.wm.edu)  
---|---  
**Fall 1996**|  **College Apts.  
[![](images/SLIP1.jpg)](../../catalogs/gradcat.html#661)| **Office hours:  
Tues., 2 -3:30 p.m.  
Thurs., 11 a.m. - 12:30 p.m.  
 **Office Phone: 221-1266  
**

* * *

**Index:

        * Statement of Purpose  

        * Requirements  

        * Electronic Resources  

        * Required Reading  

        * Schedule of Readings

* * *

****Statement of Purpose**

This course explores the field of American Studies through the lens of
multiculturalism. It offers a critical scrutiny of past and present
scholarship about the United States as a pluralistic society. Recent debates
among cultural critics, historians, and literary scholars have pointed up the
limited range of sources and experiences traditionally included in our
accounts of American life. In the wake of that recognition, American Studies
has contributed to a vast expansion of the texts encompassed in the literary
canon and to the incorporation of new groups into historical scholarship.
Opening up the field has meant engaging fresh worlds of thought and
experience: attending to the lives of women and the role of gender and
sexuality in shaping collective and personal identities; investigating the
history and literature of groups defined by race and ethnicity; challenging
the cultural boundaries and the national borders that restrict the term
"America" to the United States and inhibit the development of comparative
perspectives on our society and culture.

[![](images/TURNER2.jpg)](http://avery.med.virginia.edu/~mwk2c/turner/turner.html)|
While the ferment in American Studies has generated vital scholarship and
exciting debate, the question remains whether multiculturalism has altered the
larger paradigms of the field. Has the inclusion of new groups altered the
questions we ask and the interpretations we pose? Do key works of American
Studies pioneers still control the approaches of contemporary scholars? Is
multiculturalism a different mode of doing American Studies or chiefly a way
to bring new materials into discussion? In foregrounding ethnic, gender, and
racial identities, what issues are illuminated and what problems are eclipsed?  
---|---  
  
In this inquiry, we begin by asking who has counted in the past as an
"American voice." To ask that question is to confront the ideology of America
and the possibilities and limits of American liberalism. For that very reason,
multiculturalism has provoked an intense, far- ranging, sometimes bitter
debate among Americanists. We examine the different postures in that exchange,
as represented in the American Quarterly, the journal of the American Studies
Association, and appraise the signal venture in multicultural history,
Takaki's _A Different Mirror._

[![](images/TAKAK.jpg)](http://bsd.mojones.com/mother_jones/ND94/takaki.html)|
From these introductory sessions, the course moves to specific case studies:
regionalism and the West; African-American life and the representation of
race. In each instance, we reach back to the founding era of American Studies,
assaying influential interpretations and setting them in historical context;
we then move forward to encounter recent reformulations of issues, methods,
and theories. From the case studies, we stand back and take a larger view of
ethnicity and cultural identity in American life: to what extent do Americans
reveal their commonalities by the very ways they insist upon their
differences? Does multiculturalismas practiced on these shores, carry the
inflection of American liberalism? Can we develop a comparative stance on
group identities in a world torn by conflicts over cultural diversity and
ethnic and racial pluralism? Such issues have been explosive in the classroom
as well as in America at large. We thus end the course by examining the
challenges and the difficulties of teaching multiculturalism and by
confronting the problematic legacy of American history in our classes and in
our lives.  
---|---  
  
**Requirements**

The reading list for this course is extensive. All books have been placed on
reserve in Swem Library. The one material you are required to buy is the
packet of readings available in the American Studies Office (designated as "P"
in the schedule of readings below.) An additional set of the readings will be
kept on reserve in the American Studies Reading Room.

Students are expected, naturally, to be prepared for the weekly seminars and
to participate actively in discussions. There will be two required essays: (1)
a 5-page paper, assessing the debate over multiculturalism and staking out
your own position; (2) a 15- to 20- page essay, described below, due at the
end of the semester.

**Electronic Resources**

[![](images/CREVE.jpg)](http://xroads.virginia.edu/~HYPER/CREV/home.html)|  In
pursuing research for the final essay, students can take advantage not only of
Swem Library but also of the vast array of source materials and bibliographies
now available through the World Wide Web. Through such ventures as the
**[Crossroads Project](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/asw)** of the
American Studies Association, for which the American Studies Program at
William and Mary is a test site, the value of electronic technology for the
multi-cultural, multi-national study of American life has been greatly
enhanced. The Crossroads website opens up the world of American Studies. It
organizes American Studies resources on the web into an online map, guiding
users to all sorts of information about curricula, programs, and electronic
texts and projects in the field. Through Crossroads, one can visit such sites
as the **[American Memory Project of the Library of
Congress](http://lcweb2.loc.gov/ammem/ammemhome.html)** \-- a gathering of
documents, photographs, sound recordings, and films from select collections --
and the Electronic Text Resources of the **[University of
Virginia](http://etext.lib.virginia.edu/uvaonline.html)** , which has placed
such works as Crevecoeur's _Letters from an American Farmer_ on-line. Thanks
to the labors of David Phillips, formally of Yale University, Crossroads
provides a subject-based index to American Studies materials on the web. Among
the rubrics pertinent to this course are African American Studies, Chicano/a
and Latino/a Studies, Material Culture, Native American Studies, and Women's
Studies. Each item in the index links to the relevant web sources and sites.  
---|---  
  
Electronic technology not only expands access to source materials in American
Studies, but facilitates communication with scholars in the field. The
American Studies Association maintains an electronic bulletin board, known as
H-Amstdy, which is an omnium gatherum of ideas and information. Subscribers to
this forum gain news of upcoming conferences, calls for papers, fellowship
competitions, new journals and invitations for submissions, and policies and
programs of the American Studies Association, among other items. H-Amstdy is a
lively forum for discussion of current interests in the field. On H-Amstdy,
you can pick up bibliographical suggestions on numerous subjects, follow and
contribute to debates on current approaches to teaching and scholarship, get
ideas for courses, argue about such matters as media, politics, and the film
Independence Day, and take the measure of American Studies as a field and of
its varied practitioners. An archive of all "threads" of discussion, organized
by subject, is kept on line. You can search this database to follow particular
interests.

[![](images/HNET.jpg)](http://h-net2.msu.edu/~amstdy/)|  All students in this
course should
**[subscribe](http://h-net2.msu.edu/~amstdy/about.html#subscribe)** to the
list. To do so, send the following message via e-mail to listserv@msu.edu:

subscribe h-amstdy firstname lastname

Think globally, act locally: that rule applies to the uses of electronic
technology. Through e-mail, the American Studies Program communicates
regularly with students and faculty, so you should be sure to check your
account periodically on the William and Mary system. Otherwise, you may miss
important announcements of events, deadlines, and policies in the program and
at the College.  
---|---  
  
E-mail can also enhance the conduct of this course. A separate bulletin board,
known as a Listserv, has been created for American Studies 661 to extend
communication among us. I will use this medium to announce changes in the
syllabus, special meeting places, guest speakers, films, or other relevant
matters. The larger aim of this listserv is to furnish a forum for out-of-
class discussion. As you do the readings each week, you might want to post
ideas and questions you would like to see discussed in seminar; if there is a
particular passage or section of a text you want to examine in depth, just
indicate the reference. Or you might simply desire to complain about a work or
propose a cutback in the assignment. I will incorporate your postings in
planning for the week's seminar. The bulletin board can also allow us to
reflect back on class discussions, develop further thoughts, and share
responses between the two sections of the course. At its best, electronic
technology is a participatory medium, which can deepen our exchange of ideas
and perspectives. On-line and in class, American Studies 661 seeks to
cultivate an active, collaborative community.

**Required Readings** [![](images/LION.jpg)](http://lion.swem.wm.edu)|  The
following books are available for purchase at the College Bookstore. Copies
have also been placed on reserve at [**Swem
Library](http://lion.swem.wm.edu)**.  
  
---|---  
[![](images/CHINESE.jpg)](http://web.mit.edu/21h.153j/www/) |

1\. Ely, Melvin Patrick. _The Adventures of Amos 'N' Andy: A Social History of
an American Phenomenon._ Free Press.

2\. Gilroy, Paul. _The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness._
Harvard.

3\. Gutierrez, Ramon A. _When Jesus Came, the Corn Mothers Went Away:
Marriage, Sexuality, and Power in New Mexico, 1500-1846._ Stanford Univ.
Press, 1991.

4\. **[Hollinger, David A.](http://ishi.berkeley.edu/history/hollinger.html)**
_Postethnic America: Beyond Multiculturalism._ Basic Books.

5\. **[Levine, Lawrence.](http://web.gmu.edu/departments/history/faculty/bio-
levine.html)** _Black Culture and Black Consciousness: Afro-American Folk
Thought from Slavery to Freedom._ Oxford.

6\. Limerick, Patricia Nelson. _The Legacy of Conquest: The Unbroken Past of
the American West._ Oxford.

7\. **[Lott, Eric.](http://www.engl.virginia.edu/faculty/lott.html)** Love  &
Theft: Blackface Minstrelsy and the American Working Class. Oxford Univ.
Press, 1995.

8\. Sanchez, George. _Becoming Mexican American: Ethnicity, Culture, and
Identity in Chicano Los Angeles,_ 1900-1945. Oxford Univ. Press, 1995\.

9\. **[Slotkin, Richard.](http://www.wesleyan.edu/course9596/FP/Slotkin.htm)**
_Regeneration through Violence: The Mythology of the American Frontier,
1600-1860._ HarperCollins, 1996.

10\. Smith, Henry Nash. _Virgin Land: The American West as Symbol and Myth._
Harvard.

11\. Takaki, Ronald. _A Different Mirror: A History of Multicultural America._
Little, Brown.

12\. **[Tompkins, Jane
P.](http://www.aw.com/gb/authors/tompkins/school.html)** _West of Everything:
The Inner Life of Westerns._ Oxford.  
  
---|---  
  
**Schedule of Readings**
[![](images/SLIP2.jpg)](http://www.wsu.edu/~dee/Equiano.html)|  **8/28-9**

Introduction to the Course

I. "American" Voices

J. Hector St. John de Crevecoeur, _Letters from an American Farmer,_ **[Letter
III](http://xroads.virginia.edu/~HYPER/CREV/letter03.html)** , "What Is an
American?" (P);

Olaudah Equiano, ****[The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah
Equiano, or Gustavus Vassa, the African. Written by
Himself,](http://www.wsu.edu:8000/~dee/Equiano.html) 1-20, 159-268 (P).  
  
---|---  
[![](images/SLIP4.jpg)](http://207.86.130.154/in1.html)|  **9/4-5**

II. The End of the Melting Pot: A Nation of Peoples

Ronald Takaki, _A Different Mirror: A History of Multicultural America._

**[Gary B. Nash](http://www.sscnet.ucla.edu/history/nash/index.html)** , "The
Hidden History of Mestizo America," _Journal of American History_ 82 (Dec.
1995): 941-64 (P);

John Higham, "Multiculturalism and Universalism: A History and Critique,"
_American Quarterly_ 45 (1993): 195-219 (P).

**First Paper Due in Class**  
  
---|---  
[![](images/SLIP3.jpg)](http://xroads.virginia.edu/~HYPER/hns_indx.html)|
**9/11-12** III. The West as America: Rewriting History I

A. The Land of Myths

Frederick Jackson Turner, **["The Significance of the Frontier in American
History"](http://avery.med.virginia.edu/~mwk2c/turner/turner.html)** (P);

Henry Nash Smith, **[Virgin
Land](http://xroads.virginia.edu/~HYPER/HNS2/synoptic.html)** ;

Gene Wise, "'Paradigm Dramas' in American Studies: A Cultural and
Institutional History of the Movement," AQ 31 (1979): 293-337 (P).  
---|---  
[![](images/SLIP5.jpg) | **9/18-19** B. Muckraking the Myth

Richard Slotkin, _Regeneration through Violence._

**9/25-26** C. The New Western History

Patricia Nelson Limerick, _The Legacy of Conquest_

**10/2-3** D. Before the Anglos: Pueblo Indians and Spaniards in New Mexico

Ramon A. Gutierrez, _When Jesus Came, the Corn Mothers Went Away_  
---|---  
[![](images/STAGE.jpg)](http://www.ala.org/West/discussion_series.html) |
**10/9-10** E. The Popular Culture of Manhood

Jane Tompkins, _West of Everything,_ 3-128, 179-203, 227-33.

Film assignment: **Stagecoach** (United Artists, 1939)  
---|---  
**10/16-17**

F. The Ethnic West

George Sanchez, _[**Becoming Mexican
American.](http://latino.sscnet.ucla.edu/library/csl/index.html)**_

Film assignment: _Lone Star_ (independent, 1996)

[![](images/SLIP7.jpg)](http://lcweb.loc.gov/exhibits/african/intro.html) |
**10/23-24** V. Race and Representation: Rewriting History II

A. African-American History and the Shaping of American Culture

Barbara J. Fields, "Ideology and Race in American History," in _Region, Race,
and Reconstruction,_ ed. J. Morgan Kousser and James M. McPherson (1982) (P);

W.E.B. DuBois, "Of Our Spiritual Strivings," in _The Souls of Black Folk_ (P);

Lawrence Levine, _Black Culture, Black Consciousness._

Duke Ellington, _In a Sentimental Mood_ |
[![](images/AMOS.jpg)](http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/2587/) |
**10/30-31**

B. White Men, [**Black
Faces](http://www.randomhouse.com/atr/winter96/twain3.html)**

Melvin Ely, _The Adventures of Amos 'n'
Andy._](http://www.indians.org/welker/howtheho.htm)  

Listening assignment: tape of _Amos 'n' Andy  
_

Film assignment: [**Ethnic
Notions](http://www.newsreel.org/films/ethnicno.htm)**  
  
---|---  
**11/6-7**

C. Race and the Remaking of American Literature

Eric Lott, _Love and Theft._

**11/13-4**

Guest Speaker: Stephen J. Whitfield, "The Mystique of Multiculturalism"

[**Randolph Bourne**](http://www.bigeye.com/rbourne.htm), "Trans-National
America," _Atlantic Monthly_ 118 (1916): 86-97 (P);

[**Horace Kallen**](http://members.gnn.com/apeck3101/collect.htm), "Democracy
Versus the Melting-Pot," in Kallen, _Culture and Democracy in the United
States_ (1924), pp. 67-101 (P);

David Hollinger, _Postethnic America._

[![](images/MIL.jpg)](http://www.igc.apc.org/africanam/voices.html) |
**11/20-21**

D. [**The African
Diaspora**](http://www.gatech.edu/bgsa/blackpages/diaspora.html), America, and
the Modern World

Paul Gilroy, _The Black Atlantic._

Listening assignment: selection of Rap songs

**[Thanksgiving break](http://www.2020tech.com/thanks/), 11/26 - 11/30**  
---|---  
**12/4-5**

VI. [**Teaching Multiculturalism](http://curry.edschool.virginia.edu

/go/multicultural/initial.html)**

"Teaching Multiculturalism": essays in _American Quarterly_ 45 (1993): 281-308
(P);

Hazel V. Carby, "The Multicultural Wars," _Radical History Review_ 55 (1992):
7-20 (P).

**Final paper assignment:** choose any topic, theme, problem, literary
movement, or writer in American life, and write an essay in which you trace
changing approaches to the subject in American Studies scholarship, analyze
the selective inclusions and ex clusions that have shaped its interpretation,
and offer your own assessment of the impact of multiculturalism on the
theories, methods, and ideas that arise out of that subject.

Length: 15-20 pages

**Due date: December 20, 1996**

[![](images/home.jpg)](http://warthog.cc.wm.edu/CAS/ASP/index.html) _**Return
to American Studies Program Index_**

* * *

_This syllabus was formatted for the web by[Charles B.
Green](mailto:cbgree@mail.wm.edu). Please contact him if you experience any
problems with external links or if you have any suggestions or comments.**

