United States History to 1865  
    
    
    


HISTORY 110

Fall 2000

Mrs. Norton

  
  
  
  
  
  

**TEXT: ** George B. Tindall and David E. Shi, _America: A Narrative History_
, 5th ed, New York: W.W.Norton, 1999.  


**COURSE REQUIREMENTS:**

1\. Group discussions and tutorials
20%  
2\. Four examinations (10% each)
40%  
2\. Research projects (10% each)
40%  


**GRADING POLICY:**  


**Proper Submission of Work to Instructor:**

Tests and papers must be typed, double-spaced. If submitted in hard copy, it
must be stapled or placed in a binder. Hard copy may be submitted in person,
by campus mail, or by U. S. Mail. If submitted on disk, it must be prepared in
Microsoft Word or Corel Word Perfect. Work may be submitted by e-mail as
**.txt** files. (Please do not submit ZIP files.) Work will be treated as late
until these terms are met.

**Determining Grades:**

**Scale:** 92-100=A, 84-91=B, 74-83=C, 65-73=D, 0-64=F

**Letter grade equivalents:** A+=98, A=95, A-=93, B+=90, B=88, B-=85,  
C+=82, C=78, C-=75, D+=72, D=69, D-=66

**Other Grading Considerations:**

Spelling, sentence structure, paragraphing, etc., will be factors in
determining grades assigned to written work submitted. By and large, it is
expected that quoting on tests, research assignments, etc., will be minimal
and that most answers and reports will be written in your own words. The
ability to restate something you have read in your own words and the ability
to combine information taken from several sources into a statement of your own
are standard and expected college level communication skills and are thus
expected of all students enrolled in this course.

**Plagiarism warning:** Any form of academic dishonesty will be penalized
including, but not limited to, failure to use quotation marks to indicate
phrases or sentences quoted or appropriate citations to source and page to
indicate material quoted or paraphrased from a published source. For purposes
of this policy, the textbook is to be treated as any other published source.
Penalties for plagiarism or any other form of academic dishonesty may include
assigning a failing grade to the test or exercise, assigning a failing grade
for the course, or bringing formal disciplinary charges.  


**ATTENDANCE AND WITHDRAWAL:**

It is expected that you will be on-line and on time for each real-time
discussion or tutorial for which you are scheduled. However, it is recognized
that on occasion absence is unavoidable; thus, the instructor reserves the
right to excuse absences from these sessions for sufficient cause. If for some
reason you must miss a session and wish to be considered for an excused
absence, please leave a message for the instructor in voice mail at **(304)
233-5900,extension 4295** , or e-mail at  **gnorton@northern.wvnet.edu** ;
leave a phone number or e-mail address for a return message should that be
necessary. The instructor for this course does not drop students from the
class roster unless specifically asked to do so (provided the request is
timely). If you want or need to drop the course, you must submit the proper
paperwork to the Registrar's Office.

**SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR INTERNET COURSES:** ****

1\. Each student is registered for a particular internet chat room time. **It
is expected that you will be online and ready to join the chat room at exactly
the time for which you signed up.** To ensure that you are ready to receive a
chat room invitation on time, you should log on 5-10 minutes before the start
of class.

2\. **Unless you are an AOL user, it is necessary for you to use Netscape for
class** because AOL Instant Messenger is used for scheduled chat sessions. If
you are an Internet Explorer user, you will need to go to the Netscape home
page < **http://home.netscape.com** > and download the Netscape browser. The
download takes some time, so you will need to do this well before your first
scheduled class.

3\. Versions of Instant Messenger numbered lower than 2.0 do not support the
group chat applications. The version of Instant Messenger that you have shows
on your AIM start-up screen; if you need to upgrade, download and install an
upgrade from the Netscape home page. If you are a Netscape user and have not
already done so, you need to download and install Instant Messenger from the
Netscape home page before the start of classes. **If you are an AOL user** ,
you may need to reconfigure your Instant Messenger preference screens in order
to be able to communicate with those of us using the Netscape version of
Instant Messenger. Be sure that you are set up to accept chat invitations from
all users and that you add the screen names of all other persons in your class
session on your "Buddy List" after the first class session. **Compuserve
users** receive a version of Instant Messenger from Compuserve that does not
allow users to join chat sessions; if you are a Compuserve user, you need to
download and install the Netscape version of Instant Messenger.

4\. Except for the scheduled chat sessions, **you will be able to complete
other course work at your convenience**. Most students appreciate the
flexibility that this allows them to fit course work into their work,
parenting and other responsibilities. One of the major problems that students
have with this arrangement, however, is yielding to the temptation to
procrastinate, to put off doing reading and other projects for too long to do
them well. The most successful students in internet courses prioritize their
various activities and schedule their study and work on assignments just as
they schedule their work, appointments, car pooling, and other activities;
when they must take care of some other problem during a scheduled study
session, they re-schedule it at a definite time. You need to make the effort
to create a priority list of activities and also to develop a master schedule
for activities. Day planners and/or weekly planners are helpful in this
effort.

5\. Precisely because the time in chat sessions is limited, **it is important
for students in internet courses to work more closely with the instructor than
they usually do with instructors of courses that meet face-to-face several
hours a week**. For that purpose, the instructor maintains online office hours
during which she can be reached through Instant Messenger. Students are
encouraged to use e-mail to ask questions or report problems when the
instructor is not online. E-mail will be checked several times during the day
and replies sent at the instructor's earliest opportunity.

6\. Precisely because class "meetings" are held in a chat room, **you will be
expected to contribute more to each "meeting" than you may be used to
contributing to a class** that meets in a classroom. It is relatively common
for 3-5 students to carry the entire load of class discussion in college
classrooms while other students are, for the most part, free riders. That
tactic does not work in a chat room where there are only 5-7 students. The
other thing that is different is that you will be typing your contributions.
While we all make errors when we try to get messages entered quickly, you
should **try to spell as well as possible and also to make your entries as
grammatically correct as you can**.  
****

**WEB SUPPORTS FOR THIS COURSE:**

This course is supported by web sites at the following locations:

**<http://www.northern.wvnet.edu/~gnorton/UShist/index.htm>**

**<http://www.wwnorton.com/tindall>**

Password for the Tindall site is **america webbook**

  
  

**CONTACTING THE INSTRUCTOR:** ****

You need to adjust your thinking about how courses work so that you are
prepared to participate in a relationship that is closer to an individual
mentor/student relationship than you are used to. You may contact the
instructor **by phone: Office:** (304) 233-5900, ext. 429

**                                         By e-mail:
**gnorton@northern.wvnet.edu

**                                         On Instant Messenger: **gnorton99

**Online office hours on Instant Messenger:** 9:30-10:30 AM Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday  
                                                                        9-10 AM and 6-7 PM Thursday   
                                                                        9-10 AM Friday 

**In person:** **Office Hours in 310 B (Wheeling Campus):** 5-5:30 PM Tuesday  
                                                                                          6:45-7:15 PM Thursday   
The instructor has a lab class in the computer lab (202B) 5:30-6:45 PM Tuesday
and Thursday. If necessary, you may come to see me during this lab class.

**OFFICE:**

310B (Wheeling) Phone (304) 233-5900, ext. 4295

**MAILING ADDRESS:**

> > > Grace Norton  
> West Virginia Northern Community College  
> 1704 Market Street  
> Wheeling WV 26003

**E-MAIL:    [gnorton@northern.wvnet.edu](mailto:gnorton@northern.wvnet.edu)**

