##  American Constitutional Law  
Political Science 253  
University of Illinois at Chicago  
Syllabus for Fall 2001(October 2 update)

####

  * Instructor: Dr. Evan McKenzie 
  * Class meetings: MWF 1:00-2:00pm, BSB 367 
  * Office: BSB 1122D 
  * Telephone: 312-413-3782 
  * E-mail address: [mckenzie@uic.edu](mailto:mckenzie@uic.edu)
  * Web page: <http://www.uic.edu/~mckenzie>. If you lose the syllabus, print another copy from this website. Please note that this syllabus is subject to revision throughout the semester. Revisions will be posted on this website and announced in class. 
  * Office hours: MWF 2:00pm-3:00pm 

**Course Description:**  
Please read this syllabus carefully before deciding whether to take this
course. I need to emphasize at the outset that this is a demanding course that
is harder than nearly all other undergraduate political science courses, and
_class attendance, constant reading, and participation are essential and
mandatory_. It is not a required course for any major, but is a popular
elective with pre-law students who want to get the flavor of what they will
encounter in law school. I try to meet those expectations. The nature of the
material is such that you cannot hope to understand it without hearing it
explained, asking questions, and discussing it with your instructor and fellow
students. Cramming for the exams you will take is nearly impossible. I expect
every student to attend virtually every class, to be on time, and to be
prepared. _If you are not prepared to make this commitment_ , I understand,
because there are many other courses that are less demanding, but _please drop
this course,_ because I will be enforcing these standards. For example,
missing six class sessions is grounds for failing the course, and being late
equals 1/2 an absence.

If you can live with this regimen, I believe you will find the course
extremely rewarding. This course is intended to help students develop an
understanding of certain areas of American constitutional jurisprudence. We
will study the role of the judiciary in the American political system,
particularly _judicial review_ ; the relationship between national and state
government, or _federalism_ ; _separation of powers_ among the branches of the
national government; the powers of the president, the federal bureaucracy, and
Congress, and other areas of doctrine concerning the nature and extent of
national and state government power under the U.S. Constitution. It is
important to emphasize that _this course does not cover civil liberties and
civil rights_ , which are covered in POLS 254, 255, and 256, nor does it cover
the American judicial process at the trial court level, which is covered in
POLS 258.

For the most part we will be reading and discussing written opinions of the
United States Supreme Court. Your book also contains excellent explanatory
material that provides the historical, political, social, and economic context
for these opinions. Law schools typically focus on the doctrines and
rationales of the opinions, and so will we, but we will also spend a good deal
of time on the context. This enables us to have a more informed and realistic
picture of the Supreme Court as a political institution that has been involved
with many critical decisions in our history. We need reach back no farther
than the last presidential election to see an example of this.

Although we will not be discussing "hot button" issues like abortion, racial
discrimination, and the death penalty, I think you will find that the cases we
will read have indeed often been matters of life and death, and have included
resolution of some of the most divisive and important issues in American
political history.

**Text:**  
David M. O'Brien, _Constitutional Law and Politics, Vol. One_ , and David M.
O'Brien, _Supreme Court Watch_. These two books are packaged and sold together
and are available in the UIC Student Bookstore.

**Requirements:**  

  * Mid term examination: 20%. This will be an essay exam in which you will receive a [STUDY GUIDE](http://www.uic.edu/~mckenzie/253midf01.html) a week in advance, and at the start of the exam I will select the questions on which you will write. The exam will be closed book. 
  * Final examination: 35%. Same format as mid term. [STUDY GUIDE HERE](http://www.uic.edu/~mckenzie/253finalf01.html)
  * Class participation and attendance: 15%. This includes several things. First, you must be present and on time, which means before 1:00 pm, when class will start. Six absences equals grounds for failing the course. I will circulate a sign-in sheet at the start of class every day and anybody arriving after it is collected is late, which equals 1/2 of an absence. Second, you must participate in class discussions, simulations, and other activities, which means being prepared and speaking coherently, intelligently, and civilly, recognizing that we need to be free to disagree with each other so that we can learn from each other. Third, you must be a good classroom citizen, which means not doing things like letting your cell phone ring, eating lunch in class, talking to the people sitting next to you, arriving late and leaving early, and other breaches of good manners. 
  * Weekly reaction papers: 15% 
  * Judicial biography paper: 15% In this paper you will become an expert on the background and judicial philosophy of a current member of the United States Supreme Court. This will enable you to participate in a simulation which we will stage in class. 

**Reading and assignment schedule:**  
All these readings are to be done by the Monday of the week for which they are
listed. On that day in class (Monday), you will turn in a one or two page
summary of the week's readings. For example, the readings listed for the week
of August 27, Week 2, is to be turned in on August 27. This paper must be a
typed hard copy, and must be turned in **at the start of class**. No late
papers, email transmissions, or faxes will be accepted, and papers covering
the wrong readings receive no credit. On the reading list, the cases will be
the focus of our discussion, so you should brief or otherwise clearly
understand these cases. _You should always read the new cases which are in
your supplement (Supreme Court Watch) on each subject._

WEEK OF:

  1. Aug. 20 On Monday I will introduce the course, including the Constitution and the establishment of judicial review, and will tell you how to brief a case. For Wednesday and Friday, read The Constitution of the United States and through page 69. Pay particular attention to _Marbury v. Madison_. Turn in a brief of that case on Friday. 
  2. Aug. 27 Chapter 2. Law and Politics in the Supreme Court, part A--jurisdiction and justiciability. 
  3. Sept. 3. Monday is a holiday. Chapter 2 parts B through I on court procedures. Note "Inside the Court: Voting alignment on the Rehnquist court," at p. 181. Note "The impact of Supreme Court Decisions," at p. 182. 
  4. Sept. 10 . Chapter 3, Presidential Power in Foreign Affairs, parts A-C. (two presidencies, commander in chief, treating making and executive agreements) 
  5. Sept. 17 Chapter 3, part D--war making and emergency powers.. 
  6. Sept. 24 Chapter 4, The President as Chief Executive in Domestic Affairs, parts A and B--inherent and emergency powers, appointment and removal powers 
  7. Oct. 1 Chapter 4, parts C and D--legislative powers in the administrative state, accountability and immunities. STUDY GUIDE FOR EXAMINATION IS AVAILABLE ON LINE: FOLLOW [THIS LINK](http://www.uic.edu/~mckenzie/253midf01.html). 
  8. Oct. 8 Monday: _Mid term examination_ Chapter 5: Congress: membership, immunities, and investigatory powers 
  9. Oct. 15: Chapter 6: Congress' legislative, taxing, and spending powers, parts A and B: the classic view, and from legal formalism to the New Deal Crisis 
  10. Oct. 22 Chapter 6 parts C and D: from the New Deal crisis to the administrative state, and taxing and spending powers. 
  11. Oct. 29 Chapter 7: the states and American federalism. 
  12. Nov. 5. Chapter 8, parts A and B: Representative government and the franchise; voting rights and the reapportionment revolution. 
  13. Nov. 12 Chapter 8, part C. Campaigns and elections. Judicial biography paper due on Friday. 
  14. Nov. 19. Friday is a holiday. Chapter 9 parts A and B: The contract clause and vested rights; liberty of contract 
  15. Nov. 26. Chapter 9 part C--The takings clause. Friday is the last day of Fall classes. 
  16. Dec. 3: Finals Week. _Final examination_ per university schedule. 

**Internet links:**  

  * On The Docket, from the Medill School of Journalism at Northwestern University--a great source of information on the US Supreme Court's current term: <http://www.medill.northwestern.edu/docket/>
  * The Legal Information Institute at Cornell Law School: <http://www.law.cornell.edu/>
  * The United States Supreme Court website: <http://www.supremecourtus.gov/>
  * Marc's Legal Research Page: <http://members.aol.com/ahernstahl/legal.html>
  * The website for your textbook, maintained by the publisher: <http://www.wwnorton.com/scww/> 

