`HISTORY 222 **

THE UNITED STATES IN THE 20TH CENTURY**

SPRING SEMESTER 1998 _

SYLLABUS_

Prof. Chris Kimball

Office: Memorial Hall 114A

Phone: 330-1195(o)/724-2329(h)

Campus Box #30

Internet: kimball@augsburg.edu

Office Hours: MWF 1:20-2:20, T 9:40-11:10, and by appointment. _

(This syllabus is also available on the

Augsburg History Department web site.
<http://www.augsburg.edu/history/courses/syllabi/H222S.html>_

**

Course Description:**

This course surveys the history of the United States in the 20th Century. We
will focus on the nation's adjustment to industrialization and urbanization,
the Progressive responses to those changes, the emergence of the U.S. as a
world power, the great Depression, the rise of a strong federal government,
the implications of increasing racial and ethnic diversity, and the impact of
social, cultural, and political turmoil in an age of affluence.

**

Course Objectives:**

This course has several objectives appropriate to a general introduction to
American History that addresses the _Western Heritage_ perspective and
includes a _Critical Thinking_ graduation skill component:

1. To examine the ideas and themes that have shaped the United States in the 20th Century. In specific, the student should gain an understanding of and critically reflect on developments such as those listed in the course description: industrialization, urbanization, Progressive reform, the Depression, the emergence of the U.S. as a world power, the implications of increasing racial and ethnic diversity, and the like. The major topics addressed by the course are listed in the class schedule.

2. To acquire factual knowledge. This does not imply the memorization of facts but rather an introduction to what historians call "historical evidence"--people ( _who_ ), places ( _where_ ), events, ideas, trends ( _what_ ). This material is the basis for an understanding of 20th-century America. We will spend time with primary sources as well as secondary ones. Students are asked to evaluate the assumptions, arguments, and claims advanced by the writers whom we study.

3. To learn basic concepts (theories, if you prefer) useful in understanding _how_ and _why_ the United States has evolved in the way that it has during the 20th Century.

4. To apply these concepts in order to make sense of the massive amount of available evidence. That is, the course should provide an opportunity for interpreting _what_ happened, _why_ it happened, and _why then_ , as opposed to some other time.

5. To assess the significance of this material (the _why important_ or _so what_ question) by asking why something is worth knowing. This process of explanation and interpretation is central to the historian's craft. As we practice understanding people and processes, we will gain a sense of how historians work. 

6. To develop oral and written expression through large- and small-group discussions as well as writing assignments. Attention will be paid to each student's ability to present (orally and in writing) their evaluation and/or conclusions regarding the evidence consulted in the course. In addition, each student will develop questions for these documents and, on occasion, lead their group in discussion of those questions.

7. To learn collaboratively. We will spend time working in small groups in order to master course material and to provide more general academic support. This group work requires that all group members cooperate and be accountable for the tasks and their outcomes.

**

Course Requirements:**

The requirements are: class attendance, required readings listed below, two
(2) tests, and a comprehensive final, several quizzes, five (5) short writing
assignments, and demonstrated engagement with the course material. A few words
about each of these requirements:

Regular **class attendance** _is both essential and required_. If one is going
to miss a class, the instructor must be contacted in advance. _Unexcused
absences and constant tardiness will cause a reduction in grade_. Typically,
five points are deducted for each unexcused absence.

**Reading assignments** must be completed before the class meeting for which
they are assigned. In addition, there will be several small reading
assignments handed out in class. There will be both large- and small-group
discussions based on the readings. Success in this class depends on reading
the assignments and there will be several "pop" **quizzes** on the reading.
Taken together, these quizzes will carry the same weight as a test (see
grading section below). Please note that the reading load varies from week to
week and plan accordingly. In general, however, the standard college
expectation of two hours of homework per one hour of class applies to this
course. That is, one should anticipate an average of six hours of homework per
week.

**Tests/Exams** will be based on the material presented in class as well as
the readings. Students may bring to the exams one 8 1/2 X 11 inch study sheet
with whatever information you wish written on it. These study sheets may be
prepared in conjunction with other students, must be in your own handwriting,
and must contain your signature. They may not be typewritten or word
processed. They may not be photocopies. They will be collected at the end of
the exam. Sheets that do not conform to these rules will not be allowed.

If higher, each exam score replaces the previous exam score, if the former is
a higher score. For example, if a student scores 75 on the first exam and 83
on the second, s/he will have two exam scores of 83. If s/he scores 87 on the
third exam, s/he will have a score of 83 and two scores of 87.

No make-up exams will be given. In cases of medical or other emergency, the
final exam grade will be counted in place of the missed exam as long as
permission is given _before_ the missed test.

Each member of the class must turn in five (5) **writing assignments** based
on the assigned primary sources contained in the Boller/Story reader.
Questions will be assigned for each document and should be answered in 2-3
double-spaced typewritten pages. The assignments are due on the day for which
the document is assigned (see class schedule below). They should be handed to
me at the start of class that day so that I can make a note of their receipt.
Then, they will be returned to you. At that point, the members of the class
may have the opportunity to read the assignment and make constructive
comments. You may then use those comments as well as points raised that day in
class discussion to make revisions. The final version will be due at the start
of the next class meeting.

These writing assignments will pay special attention to the skill of making
critical and interpretive judgments out of the available material. Each set of
questions asks you to begin with specific evidence and build toward larger
conclusions. Each assignment will be graded on a twenty-point scale. A
separate hand-out will describe the criteria to be used in grading these
assignments.

Please note that there are more than five sources upon which to write. While
each class member must only submit five assignments, you are free to turn in
more than that. If so, the five highest grades will be counted. _Please note
that everyone is expected to read all the assigned documents and think about
the questions, whether or not one chooses to write on them_. Many of our in-
class discussions will concern these documents and questions.

In to avoid leaving all these assignments until late in the semester, at least
_two_ _must_ be completed before the first test. At least _two_ more _must_ be
completed before the second test. __

Then, there is **engagement** with the course. Engagement has been defined as:

a cognitive and affective process, enabled by the relationship between student
and teacher, that stimulates curiosity and leads to focused attention, the
discovery of connections and satisfaction with learning.

In particular, we will make connections between different aspects of the 20th
Century discussed in our readings. Where appropriate, we will also make
connections to contemporary issues. Demonstrating engagement includes, but is
not limited to, active participation in class activities. Therefore, each
class member is expected to participate in all small- and large-group
discussions of the course material. In addition, everyone should be prepared
to lead at least one class discussion. Feedback will be provided by the
instructor and the other members of the class. The grade for engagement will
be determined by a mixture of instructor-, peer-, and self-assessment.

In addition, students are encouraged to make use of electronic communications
through e-mail and our electronic conferencing web site. Point your browser to
<http://www.nicenet.net>. Choose "Join a Class." In the next window, enter our
class key (S248283). Then follow directions. From that point on, you will no
longer need the key to log in.

The grade for engagement will be determined by a mixture of instructor-,
peer-, and self-assessment. _"E-credits_ " can be earned by posting outside
material (e.g., from television, radio, newspapers) on the web site that
connects to issues studied in the course. These "e-credits" will be added to
your engagement score.

_Finally, to promote our dialogue, each student must meet with me at least
once before the first exam._

Augsburg College has an Academic Honesty Policy that can be found in the
Augsburg Student Guide. It is your responsibility to read and understand that
policy. All students will be asked to sign the following honesty policy
statement:

I have read and understand the policies of Augsburg College regarding academic
honesty. I understand how they apply to this course, and I pledge myself to
abide by the policies and work to create an atmosphere of academic integrity
on the campus.

You are encouraged to ask questions about the application of the policy in
this course.

Students working with the CLASS Office should contact me about any necessary
accommodations.

**

Grading:**

A 2.0 is the minimum grade that can be earned to meet the Critical Thinking
graduation skill. Grades will be assigned according to the following point
scale:

Test #1 - 100 points

Test #2 - 100 points

Quizzes - 100 points

Engagement - 100 points

Writing Assignments - 100 points

Final - 100 points

600 total possible points

420 = 2.0

450 = 2.5

480 = 3.0

510 = 3.5

540 = 4.0

This grading scale is based on the Augsburg College Catalogue's definition of
grades as applied to this course.

_

2.0 Meets basic standards for the course._ This means meeting the objectives
described above. As such, basic standards include regular class attendance,
demonstrated engagement, knowledge of the material covered in the course, the
ability to reason from evidence, and the ability to make connections.

_

3.0 Achieves above basic course standards._ This means that all course
objectives have been met and that command of the material and the ability to
think historically go beyond the basics.

_

4.0 Achieves highest standards of excellence._ This means mastery of all
aspects of the course material.

Work at this level is based on critical thinking at high levels that
synthesizes a wealth of evidence in drawing conclusions.

**

Required Readings:**

Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, _America in Modern Times, Since 1890_

Boller/Story, _A More Perfect Union: Documents in American_

_History_ , 4th ed., vol. II

Davidson/Lytle, _After the Fact: The Art of Historical Detection_ ,

vol. II **

Class Schedule and Assignments:

**_

Modern Times_

Feb. 2 Introduction: Retrospect and Prospect

Feb. 4 A New Society?: Thinking Critically about the Past **

**_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, Chapter 1

Davidson/Lytle, Prologue

Feb. 6 Industrialism and its victims

_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, Chapter 2

Boller, Document 7

Davidson/Lytle, Chapter 8

Feb. 9 The Tumult of the 1890s

_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, Chapter 3

Boller, Documents 8, 9, 10, 16

_

The Progressive Era_

Feb. 11 The Spanish-American War **

**_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, pp. 58-73

Feb. 13 The Open Door

_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, pp. 73-78

Boller, Documents 19, 20

Feb. 16 The Progressive Era: an Overview

_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, pp. 79-90, 99-101

Boller, Documents 11, 12

Feb. 18 Reform and Regulation **

**_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, pp. 102-106, 115-119

Boller, Document 18

Feb. 20 Social Justice **

**_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, pp. 107-115

Boller, Document 21

Feb. 23 Women's Rights and the Color Line

_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, pp. 91-99

Boller, Document 25

Feb. 25 National Progressivism **

**_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, pp. 120-136

Davidson/Lytle, Chapter 9

Boller, Document 17

Feb. 27 From Neutrality to War

_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, pp. 137-151

Boller, Document 22

Mar. 2 World War I and Wilson's Failed Peace **

**_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, pp. 151-170

Boller, Document 23

Mar. 4 FIRST TEST

_

The US in Prosperity, Depression, and War_

Mar. 6 Return to Normalcy

_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, pp. 171-194

Mar. 9 Consumer Culture and its Critics

_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, Chapter 10

Boller, Document 24

Mar. 11 Decade of Divisions

_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, Chapter 11

Davidson/Lytle, Chapter 10

Boller, Document 13

Mar. 13 The Great Crash **

**_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, Chapter 12

Boller, Document 26

Mar. 16 FDR and the 100 Days

_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, Chapter 13

Boller, Document 27

Mar. 18 The Second New Deal **

**_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, pp. 272-286

Davidson/Lytle, Chapter 11

Mar. 20 NO CLASS

Mar. 23 MIDTERM BREAK

Mar. 25 MIDTERM BREAK

Mar. 27 MIDTERM BREAK

Mar. 30 A Third New Deal?

_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, pp. 286-298

Boller, Document 28

Apr. 1 The Road to War

_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, Chapter 15

Boller, Document 29

Apr. 3 World War II **

**_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, Chapter 16

Davidson/Lytle, Chapter 12

Boller, Documents 30, 31

Apr. 6 The Homefront

_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, Chapter 17

Apr. 8 SECOND TEST

Apr. 10 EASTER BREAK

Apr. 13 EASTER BREAK _

Postwar America_

Apr. 15 The Cold War and Containment

_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, Chapter 18

Boller, Documents 32

Apr. 17 The Korean War **

**_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, pp. 387-399

Boller, Document 34

Apr. 20 Red Scare **

**_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, pp. 399-405

Boller, Document 33

Apr. 22 Ike's America

_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, Chapters 20, 22

Davidson/Lytle, Chapter 13

Boller, Document 35

Apr. 24 The Civil Rights Movement **

**_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, Chapter 21

Boller, Document 39

Apr. 27 JFK's Camelot

_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, pp. 463-468, 484-490

Boller, Document 36

Apr. 29 LBJ's Great Society **

**_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, pp. 469-483

May 1 America's Longest War

_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, pp. 490-501

Boller, Document 37

May 4 The War at Home

_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, pp. 501-509

Davidson/Lytle, Chapter 15

Boller, Document 38

May 6 Decade of Protest

_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, pp. 509-530

Boller, Documents 40, 41, 43

May 8 Nixon and Watergate **

**_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, Chapter 26

Davidson/Lytle, Chapter 14

Boller, Documents 44

May 11 Carter and the Shrinking of America **

**_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, pp. 552-558

Boller, Document 45

May 13 The Rise of the Right

_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, pp. 558-574

Boller, Documents 42, 46, 47, 48

May 15 At the End of the Century/REVIEW **

**_Reading_ : Brinkley/Fitzpatrick, Chapter 28

Boller, Documents 49, 50, 51

**

FINAL EXAM** : Monday, May 18, 8-10 (Section A)

Wednesday, May 20, 10:15-12:15 (Section B)

`

