**HIST 200**

**A Survey of United States History to 1877**

**Summer, 2002**

**Dr. Kevin Kragenbrink**

**Office Hours: 4:30 - 5:45 p.m. W/F By Appointment**

**SH-134**

**Phone: 880-5995**

**E-Mail:   kkragenb@csusb.edu** **  **

**Web Site<http://mail.csusb.edu/~kkragenb>**

* * *

**STUDY GUIDES!!**

**[Exam One Study Guide](exam%20one%20study%20guide,%20history%20200.htm)**

**[Exam Two Study Guide](e2sg402.htm)**



  **Course Description: **

 This course is a survey of the History of the United States from pre-
colonization to 1877\. Obviously, we will not be able to cover all the names,
dates, facts and so on in so large a survey. Instead, the course will offer
you a chance to explore themes in the development of the United States
including Political, Cultural, Social, Military, and Religious subjects. We
will, as you might expect, study some of the significant events and persons in
American history, but we will also give attention to cultural and social
diversity exemplified through the lives and activities of a wide range of
individuals and groups. We will give specific attention to such themes in
American development as: political values and structures, racial and ethnic
interactions, religious idealism and reform, and gender and family roles. The
purpose of the course is not simply to give you facts and information about
what happened in the American past, but to help you analyze and evaluate how
what has happened influenced American civilization and how and why American
history proceeded as it did.

* * *

**AssignedReadings:**

**  Primary Text:**

Tindall, George B., and David E. Shi, _America: A Narrative History_ ,  Volume
1, 5th edition. (New York: W. W. Norton, Co., 1999).

**  Additional Required Reading:**

Kolchin, Peter, _American Slavery, 1619-1877_ (New York: Hill and   Wang),
1993.

* * *

**Internet Resources:**

**Course List-Serve:** First, each of you must obtain an e-mail account and
password from CSUSB if you do not already have one of your own. Once you have
this, you must sign on to the course List-Serve. You can do this by sending an
e-mail message to majordomo@csusb.edu with the message "Subscribe HIST 200"
(do not include the quotes) in the body of the message. This List-Serve will
be the primary means for me to communicate important course related
information to all of you, and it will provide you an easy way to send your
questions or ideas to me and to the rest of your class mates.

>   **Internet Research:** I have also prepared a web site that includes a
page of links on topics of importance for students of United States History. I
want to encourage every one to take advantage of this site and its links to
increase your knowledge of history, but also to enhance your awareness of and
improve your skills in using the resources available on the World Wide Web. My
Web site is located at http://mail.csusb.edu/~kkragenb. From there just follow
the links to find what you are interested in. You will also find a complete
copy of this syllabus on the web site along with additional helps and study
aids for this course.

>

>   **PLEASE NOTE:** The study aids found on the Web Site or sent out via the
List-Serve will not be presented to you in any other form. You must be signed
on to the List-Serve or go on the web to use them.

* * *

**CourseRequirements:**

  **Assigned Text:**

I cannot emphasize strongly enough the importance of reading for this course.
I strongly urge you to pick up your text book and READ IT THROUGH immediately.
Those of you who heed this suggestion will find that you are well prepared for
the exams and that your class note taking is much more productive.  There is
no set schedule for reading the primary text, but in general you will want to
read well ahead of the lecture topics for each week.  NOTE:  The lectures are
not drawn directly from the text, and there is no effort to match the two in
terms of order or topical arrangement.  You are responsible to identify the
appropriate topics in the text and ensure that you have read sufficiently to
understand that topic.  Again, if you follow my advice at the top of this
paragraph, you will have no difficulty.

  **Additional Reading**

Each student will be required to read and be prepared to respond to the issues
raised in the additional text assigned for this course.  Exams will include
questions drawn directly from this supplemental text.  Although there will be
some discussion of the issues of slavery as part of the lectures, these
discussion will not be sufficient to prepare you for the exams.  You must read
this text.

  **Examinations:**

There will be three exams in this course. Each of these three exams may
include a combination of true/false, multiple choice, and fill-in type
questions. You will need to obtain a large Scantron form from the bookstore
and bring it to each examination. Each of the sectional exams will cover only
the material presented immediately before that exam. Make-up exams will be
given at **_my_** discretion and only if you make arrangements **_before_**
the exam or if you provide documentary proof of the emergency which prevented
you from taking the exam at the scheduled time. Make-up exams will be all
essay in form and are generally more difficult than the regularly scheduled
exams.

* * *

**Grading **

There is no "curve" for this course and I do not offer extra credit. Grades
are assigned on a simple 10% scale. The assignments and exams are weighted as
listed below. **NOTE: YOU MUST TURN IN _ALL_ ASSIGNED WORK TO PASS THIS
CLASS**

**Grade Distribution**

|



**Weighted Values**  
  
---|---  
  
**  **

**92-100% = A **

|

**  **

**78-79% = C+ **

|

**  **

**60-62% = D- **

|

**  **

**Exam #1: 30% **  
  
**  **

**90-91% = A- **

|

**  **

**73-77% = C **

|

**  **

**Below 60% = F **

|

**  **

**Exam #2: 30% **  
  
**  **

**88-89% = B+ **

|

**  **

**70-72% = C- **

|

**  **

**  **

|

**  **

**Exam #3:   30% **  
  
**  **

**83-87% = B **

|

**  **

**68-69% = D + **

|

**  **

**  **

|

**  **

**Participation: 10% **  
  
**  **

**80-82% = B- **

|

**  **

**63-67% = D **

|

**  **

**  **

|



  
  


* * *

  **Lecture & Reading Schedule**:

  **Session One**

Introduction to the Course: Pre-Columbian America

"God, Gold, Glory": Colonial Foundations: The Southern Colonies

  **Session Two**

"An Errand In the Wilderness": Colonial Foundations: New England

Colonial Foundations: The Middle Colonies

"A Necessary Evil?" Racism and The Roots of American Slavery; Life in Colonial
America

**Session Three**

The Enlightenment and the Great Awakening

Making The American Revolution

  **Session Four**

Creating A Federal Union: The Articles of Confederation and the Constitution

**Sectional Exam #1**

  **Session Five**

Defining A Democratic Polity: From Federalism to Republicanism

An Emerging National Identity: Nationalism and Sectionalism

  **Session Six**

Jacksonian America: The Ideal of the "Common Man"

Making A Growing Nation Work: The Dynamics of Life in Jacksonian America.

  **Session Seven**

Religion and Reform in Antebellum America

**Sectional Exam #2:**

  **Session Eight**

"All MEN Are Created Equal": Gender In 19th Cent. America  

 "Manifest Destiny and westward expansion"

  **Session Nine**

  Myths, Legends, and Fairy Tales: The Old South

 The "Peculiar Institution" and American Racism.

**  Session Ten**

  The Impending Crisis

  The Civil War

  **Session Eleven**

 Reconstructing the Union: The Aftermath of the Civil War

   **Final Exam:**



