History 1073-02 Syllabus

  

_UNITED STATES HISTORY SINCE 1877_

  

Semester: Spring 1999

Time: 9:00-9:50 a.m., MWF

Room: 15 Allen Hall

Instructor: Dr. Richard V. Damms

Office: 234 Allen Hall

Voice Mail: 325-7086 (24 hours)

E-Mail: rdamms@ra.msstate.edu

Office Hours: 10:00-10:50 a.m., MWF, and by appointment

  

COURSE DESCRIPTION

History 1073 is an introductory survey of United States History from
Reconstruction to the present. No previous background in American history is
assumed. The course focuses on the major social, economic, political,
diplomatic and cultural developments of the United States since 1877. Some of
the topics covered include: Reconstruction and the New South;
industrialization, urbanization, and immigration; imperialism; progressivism;
Woodrow Wilson and World War I; 1920s cultural conflicts; the Great Depression
and the New Deal; World War II at home and abroad; the Cold War; Civil Rights;
the women's movement; Vietnam; and recent developments.

  

ACADEMIC OBJECTIVES

1\. The student will gain a basic factual knowledge of United States history
in this period.



2\. The student will develop or improve skills in analyzing historical data
and drawing informed conclusions about such material.



3\. The student will gain or further develop critical skills necessary to
assess arguments based on historical facts or analogies.



4\. The student will cultivate in essay examinations and class discussions the
clear, persuasive oral and written style that are the marks of a liberally-
educated person.

  
  
  

COURSE REQUIREMENTS  

1\. The course will be conducted primarily on a lecture and discussion basis,
although on certain days we may have audiovisual presentations. Students are
strongly encouraged to raise questions and make comments in class.  

2\. Students are required to complete each reading assignment by the date that
it is assigned, and should be prepared to discuss it in class. Keeping abreast
of the readings will facilitate understanding of the lectures.  

3\. Students are responsible for all material presented in the lectures and
discussions. Regular attendance is, therefore, essential. Class **attendance
and participation** will count 10% toward the course grade. More than three
unexcused absences will result in a lowering of the attendance and
participation grade.  

4\. Students are expected to conform to established classroom etiquette.
Disruptive behavior, such as smoking, sleeping, snoring, talking, and
tardiness is unfair both to the instructor and to serious students, and will
not be tolerated. The instructor reserves the right to penalize such behavior
by lowering the student's course grade.



5\. There will be three in-class midterm examinations. Each exam will count
20% toward the course grade. The exams will be primarily essay in nature, and
will be based on the lectures, readings, discussions, and any audiovisual
material presented in class. All the examinations are required. **Failure to
take any exam will result in a "Fail" grade for the course**.  

6\. There will be a final examination, during exam week, which will count 30%
toward the course grade. The final exam will follow the same general format as
the other exams, and will include a comprehensive component. No deviations
from the published University final exam schedule will be permitted.  

7\. Any student unable to take the examinations on the scheduled dates must
receive **prior** clearance from the instructor, or present a **valid written
excuse.** Make-up exams will only be given under exceptional circumstances,
and may be either written or oral, at the discretion of the instructor.



8\. Extra credit assignment. Students may write a short book report (3-4
typewritten pages) on a book selected from a list of titles approved by the
instructor. More details on the extra-credit paper are in a separate handout.
The paper grade may be substituted for the student's lowest midterm exam
score.



9\. AUDIT POLICY: Students auditing the course are required to attend
**every** class meeting in order to receive credit.



10\. The instructor reserves the right to make wisecracks and puns. If you
don't have a sense of humor, take another class!



11\. ACADEMIC HONESTY: Students are required to observe all University
policies on Academic Honesty, as set out in the _Bulldog Handbook_. Any cases
of academic misconduct (such as cheating on examinations, plagiarizing the
work of someone else, buying or selling a term paper, signing the attendance
sheet for someone else, etc.) will result in a  "Fail" grade for the course,
in addition to any sanctions that might be imposed by the University Academic
Honesty Committee. **Students who suspect academic misconduct have an
obligation to report it to the course instructor immediately**.

  

GRADING SCALE

Each assignment will be graded according to the following point scale:

A 90-100

B 80-89

C 70-79

D 60-69

F under 60  

REQUIRED READINGS

One book is **required** for the course, and it is available at the University
Bookstore.

Faragher, et al., _Out of Many_ , 2d edition, vol. 2

The instructor will also periodically assign short documents and essays that
are freely available on the Internet. Students should complete all reading
assignments by the date that they are assigned and be prepared to discuss them
in class.

  

SCHEDULE OF ASSIGNMENTS

_Week One:_ Faragher, ch. 17.

1/11 Introduction.

1/13 Reconstruction

1/14 FILM: "Ida B. Wells."

_Week Two:_ Faragher, ch. 18.

1/18 NO CLASS: Martin Luther King, Jr. Holiday.

1/20 The New South.

1/22 The West.

_Week Three:_ Faragher, ch. 19.

1/25 Industrialization and the Rise of Big Business.

LAST DAY TO REGISTER, ADD/DROP, WITHOUT A GRADE.

1/27 Labor Movements.

1/29 Urbanization and Immigration.

_Week Four_ : Faragher, ch. 20.

2/1 The Farm Problem.

2/3 Review.

2/5 FIRST MIDTERM EXAMINATION.

_Week Five:_ Faragher, ch. 21.

2/8 Gilded Age Politics.

2/10 American Imperialism.

2/12 Progressivism.

_Week Six:_ Faragher, ch. 22.

2/15 Progressivism, contd.

2/17 Woodrow Wilson and World War I.

2/19 World War I at Home.

_Week Seven:_ Faragher, ch. 23.

2/22 Cultural Conflicts in the 1920s.

LAST DAY TO DROP A COURSE WITH A "W" GRADE.

2/24 1920s Prosperity.

2/26 Great Crash and Depression.

_Week Eight:_ Faragher, ch. 24.

3/1 FILM: "After the Crash."

3/3 Review.

3/5 SECOND MIDTERM EXAMINATION.

Mid-Semester Holiday, March 6-14.

_Week Nine:_

3/15 FDR and the New Deal.

3/17 New Deal Critics.

3/19 Second New Deal and the End of Reform.

_Week Ten_ : Faragher, ch. 25.

3/22 Origins of World War II.

3/24 The Home Front.

3/26 From Grand Alliance to Cold War.

_Week Eleven:_ Faragher, chs. 26-27.

3/29 Containing Communism Abroad.

3/31 The Politics of Anticommunism at Home.

4/2 No Class: University Holiday.

_Week Twelve_ : Faragher, chs. 27-28.

4/5 Containing Third World Nationalism (Iran, Guatemala, Cuba).

4/7 Review.

4/9 THIRD MIDTERM EXAMINATION.

_Week Thirteen:_ Faragher, ch 28.

4/12 Origins of the Civil Rights Movement.

4/14 Civil Rights, contd.

4/16 The New Feminism.

_Week Fourteen:_ Faragher, ch. 29.

4/19 JFK: Myth and Reality.

4/21 LBJ and the Great Society.

LAST DAY TO WITHDRAW FROM UNIVERSITY.

4/23 Vietnam.

_Week Fifteen:_ Faragher, ch. 30.

4/26 FILM: "Vietnam."

4/28 Nixon and the Imperial Presidency.

4/30 Jimmy Carter and the National Malaise.

_Week Sixteen:_ Faragher, ch. 31.

5/3 Ronald Reagan, the Movie.

5/5 Review.

**_FINAL EXAMINATION:_** Saturday, 8 May 1999, 8:00 a.m.

