**

Public Sector Management** Dr. L. F. Keller

Political Science [ **PSC** ] 635 [950] Urban Affairs Building (UB) 113

Department of Urban Studies Levin College of Urban Affairs

Fall Semester, 2000 Cleveland State University

**

Syllabus

**

This course on management of the Public Sector in the United States. All
aspects of Public Management are examined as are all levels of government. The
focus is on to manage a complex Federal Republic in a global society.

**

Scope

**

The course examines primarily current Public Management at all levels of
government - local, state and national. History is examined only to the extent
helpful to understand why the current Management is as it is.

**

Focus

**

Line management is of most concern. Line management involves the direct
exercise of public authority over the actual work of an Agency. In contrast,
staff management is more analytical, helping line managers exercise their
direct authority; or to channel that exercise in desirable policy directions.
Staff management is studied in courses on budgeting and finance. One of the
arguments of the course is that line and staff management require different
temperments and are thus unlikely to be done equally well by an individual.
Moreover, for purposes of accountability and responsibility in government,
actors must be aware of just what their authority is and constitutionally
enact it.

This requires the course to pay attention to Law and its role in regulating
Public Management. However, the course will teach "How to manage" effectively,
both in achieving the goals of the Agency as well as providing the community
with a constitutionally valid governance system.

Note that constitutional refers not only to letter of the Law but includes the
spirit of the Law and the cultural and other traditions of the community that
bind people into a republican polity. In fact, at the local level, the United
States often has a highly democratic governance system which can not only
increase the effectiveness of government but also call into question
constitutional safeguards which it is the duty of a Public Manager to protect.
Moreover, many state and local governments have not been reformed and thus
professionalism is not respected in all cases.

The course attempts to provide the Public Manager with the necessary tools to
not only survive in a hostile environment but, as Faulkner wished, to prevail.

**

Procedures and Requirements

**

Students are expected to participate actively in the learning process. As with
management, learning is not a spectator sport. To manage a Public Agency in a
contentious political environment and a global economic context is no mean
feat. Learning to do so requires full engagement in every opportunity to
understand the current situation; its implications; and tools for dealing with
problems. Success is never guaranteed, no matter how smart the Manager or how
well engaged. However, the probability of success is greatly enhanced if
learning is approached as a pro-active, interactive and professional
experience.

Thus, all students are expected to participate fully in each class. Moreover,
as professionals who are paying a somewhat princely sum for the experience,
the Professor expects to be questioned whenever he is not understood or when
he appears incorrect. Though often inconceivable to himself, the Professor is
all too aware of mistakes - but sufficiently clever never to emphasize them.
Finally, the best way to learn is to ask questions and guess at answers. There
is no silly question and those who refuse to repair ignorance shall reap
appropriate rewards, and, sadly, may inflict wounds on the body politic. In
any event, I expect professional degree classes such as a MPA one to be a
lively experience for all, centered on learning how to govern justly and
effectively in the American tradition of a commercial republic.

In line with the notion that learning is best done as an interactive process,
all assignments revolve around implementing real world management. The first
set deal with particular and important topics in Public Management. The final
one is creating a scheme of local government with particular emphasis on the
roles of management. Each is detailed below.

The course approaches the context of management from three (3) perspectives.
The first is _management of the organization_. Here the emphasis is on the
context of Public Management, both internal and external, as illuminated by
organizational and interorganizational theory. The second is the _management
of the agency_. In this context, the emphasis is on managerial techniques
appropriate for the effective and constitutional operation of public agencies.
The final context is the _management of politics_. Here the contribution of
management to governance is central as is the honing of political skills.

Management is defined as an open, indeterminate control system. Control, as
management sages note, is not directing every movement of every organizational
member. Rather it is handling the responsibility for the Agency in a
constitutionally valid manner. Furthermore, management systems in a
bureaucratic society as Max Weber ruefully noted are mechanisms by which a
republican polity allocates public authority. (Contrary to a widespread myth,
Weber detested bureaucracy and believed it was dangerous for a republic.) In
essence, managerial authority is political authority, part of the
constitutional process by which a community is governed.

The first assignment is to read and critique three (3) articles or a book on
_management of the organization_. The second assignment is to read and
critique three (3) articles or a book on _management of the agency_. The third
assignment is to read and critique three (3) articles or a book on _management
of politics_. These are to be presented to class in a twenty (20) minute
presentation. One week after the presentation, a five (5) page paper
summarizing the lessons learned from each set of articles or a book is to be
turned into the Professor.

A final assignment is the creation of a Charter for local government. Local
government in the American Republic is regulated by state government. Some
units of local government have been granted considerable discretion in their
governance, such as municipalities in **Article XVIII** of the **Ohio
Constitution**. The governing document (understanding that the national and
state constitutions as well as relevant national and state statutes may also
apply) is a Charter. In Ohio, and for purposes of this course, municipalities
can design any system of government. In that spirit we will as a class design
a preferred system of governance for a municipality.

The dates for the presentations and the contribution of the assignment to the
final grade is noted below.

**

Grading

**

Each assignment contributes to the final grade as noted below. The following
_section_ details the due dates for all assignments as well as all important
dates.

First Assignment 20%

Second Assignment 20%

Third Assignment 20%

Creating Charter 40%

The final grade will be numerically calculated and translated into a letter
grade on the following ten (10) point scale.

92.5 - 100, A; 89.5 - 92.4, A-; 87.5 - 89.4, B+; 82.5 - 87.4, B; 79.5 - 82.4,
B-; 77.5 - 79.4, C+; 72.5 - 77.4, C; 69.5 - 72.4, C-; etc.

All papers and presentations in the course receive a letter grade. Letter
grades are equivalent to the following numerical scores.

A+ = 99; A = 95; A- = 91; B+ = 89; B = 85; B- = 81; C+ = 79; C = 75; C- = 71;
etc.

**

Office Hours

**

I have office hours on Monday, Wednesday and Friday from 1 to 2:00 PM. On
Thursday, my office hours are 2 to 5:45 PM. I will also be available a half
hour before and after class here at Lakeland Community College. If these are
not convenient times I can schedule appointments at other times. It is best to
schedule a time with me, even during office hours, as I tend to be about
rather than in my office. (I believe in MBWA!) My work phone is 687-2173. Most
of the time phonemail is in operation, a type of answering service. I tap it
once a day and promptly (well, most of the time!) return calls. You should
receive a return call by the next day. If my phonemail is filled, call
687-2136 and leave a message with Kate or other appropriate person.

**

Electronic Mail

**

One of the advantages of a UNIX based computer system is a powerful and stable
system of electronic mail. Electronic mail is using a computer to send and
receive messages. The mechanism is relatively simple and is explained in the
available materials on the Levin College Computer Network.

In addition to messages, you can also send all assignments as attachments to a
message. In this case, you attach your computer file to a message. The Levin
College materials detail how to do this and you may also ask a Lab Assistant
for help. This is an excellent way to have a draft of a paper reviewed by the
Professor. Note this may be done from home also.

As a student of grand Old CSU, you are entitled to an E-Mail account and even
free internet access. You are also entitled to a free E-Mail account through
the College. See the friendly computer people in Rhodes Tower about doing so
or surf the CSU website; check with the Professor or with the computer staff
of the College for your College account. The CSU web site contains the
information on how to sign up on-line.

My E-Mail address is _larry@wolf.csuohio.edu_.

**

Textbooks

**

David R. Morgan and Robert E. England, **Managing Urban America

**

Periodically, handouts will be distributed in class.

**

Assignments to be Handed-in

First Paper**, due 11 October, word processed double-spaced, five (5) pages or
less; critique

**

Second Paper** , due 25 October, word process double-spaced, five (5) pages or
less; critique

**

Third Paper** , due 8 November, word processed double-spaced, five (5) pages
or less; critique

Draft **Charter , due 6 December, Group Project

**

**

Critical Dates

**

30 August - First Class meeting 4 October - First Presentation

11 October - First Paper due 18 October - Second Presentation

25 October - Second Paper due

Last Day to Drop Class -- Friday, 27 October (Note a "W" will appear on
Transcript)

1 November - Third Presentation 8 November - Third Paper due

15 November - First Charter Writing Session 6 December - Completion of Charter

6 December - Last class

**

Order of Study

**_

Part I_ : Essential Background

Governance, Republics and You

Topic 1: Government in the Good Ole US of A

Topic 2: The Rise of the Administrative State

Topic 3: Public Administration and Management Theory

_

Part II_ : Managing the Organization

Here's to Theory and other Drivel

Topic 4: Organizational Dynamics

Topic 5: The Essence of a Constitutional Organization

_

Part III_ : Managing the Agency

Drinking Partners make the Best Colleagues

Topic 6: The Real Life of a Manager

Topic 7: Managing by Technique - the American Way

Topic 8: Art and Science in the Service of the State

Topic 9: Nature and Roles of a Civil Service in a Federal Republic

Topic 10: Politics, Leadership and Citizenship

Part IV: Managing Politics

And then there were none ... (was this a reference to managers?)

Topic 11: Macro and Micro Politics

Topic 12: Management as Participation and Containment

Topic 13: Constitutions, Statutes, Parties and Administrators

Part V: Conclusion

Even Fairy Tales end

Topic 14: Putting and Keeping all together

