**Political Science 420 --- American Political Development**  
**Spring 1999**  
**M-W 3:00-4:50**  
**135 North Kedzie Hall**

**Professor Jeffery A. Jenkins**

**Office Hours: Tuesdays, by appointment**  
**Office Phone: 355-6672 ext 124**  
**E-mail: jenki107@pilot.msu.edu**  


  

**_Course Description_**

This course will focus on American political development, from the late 18th
Century (beginning with the Articles of Confederation) to the late 19th
Century (ending with Reconstruction). Over the semester, we will cover a
myriad of topics: for example, (a) why the Articles of Confederation failed
and why the Constitutional system of government was more successful, (b) why
political parties formed, both within Congress and at the mass level, and (c)
how and why slavery tore the nation apart.

In addition, rather than simply document historical events, we will study
American political development from a particular theoretical focus, referred
to as the New Institutionalism (NI). In short, advocates of NI contend that
political outcomes do not just "happen." Rather, to understand the basis for
political outcomes, we must first understand what political actors (the
individuals who produce political outcomes) want --- in other words, we must
understand their preferences. The NI holds that political actors are goal-
oriented, and political outcomes must be studied with that in mind. However,
the NI also holds that political actors cannot always achieve their most
preferred outcomes. This is because political actors make decisions within a
particular political context --- the political system has rules, and rules
matter. Only those political outcomes that fall within the rules of the
political game can be achieved. Thus, at any particular point in time, by
understanding (a) the preferences of the political actors and (b) the set of
rules in place, we can better understand _why_ certain political outcomes
occurred.  


**_Course Materials_**

We will use two books and a coursepack, which will be available at _Ned's_
sometime during the second week of class. The two books are:

John H. Aldrich. 1995. _Why Parties?: The Origin and Transformation of Party
Politics in America_. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

David M. Potter. 1976. _The Impending Crisis, 1848-1861_. New York: Harper
Torchbooks.  


**_Course Requirements_**

Students should finish each week's reading in advance of our scheduled meeting
time. The course will follow a lecture/discussion format, and students are
expected to participate in class discussion. I will not count participation
toward the final grade, however, and class attendance is not mandatory. That
having been said, lecture/discussion during class is fair game for exams, and
students who miss class are responsible for "catching up" on their own.

There will be two exams, one term paper, and one set of mathematical problems.
Each exam will be in two parts: a take-home portion and an in-class portion.
Each part will be worth 15% of the final grade. No make-up exams will be given
without (a) prior notification and (b) a suitable _medical_ excuse. The term
paper will be worth 30% of the final grade, and a detailed description of
requirements will be provided by the fifth week of class. The problem set will
be worth 10% of the final grade.  


**_Academic Dishonesty_**

Plagiarism and cheating will not be tolerated. Students who plagiarize or
cheat will be held accountable to the full-extent of university guidelines.  


**_Readings_**

An ***** next to a piece indicates that it can found in the coursepack.  


**_Week 1_**

_Focus_ : Introduction to the course  


**_Week 2_**

_Focus_ : Why take a political science class to study political history? Why
not just take a history class? We will examine how the tools of social science
can help us better understand political events.

_Readings_ :

Robert Lowery Clinton. 1994. "Game Theory, Legal History, and the Origins of
Judicial Review: A Revisionist Analysis of Marbury v. Madison." _American
Journal of Political Science_ 38:285-302. *****

Jeffery A. Jenkins and Brian R. Sala. 1998. "The Spatial Theory of Voting and
the Presidential Election of 1824." _ **** American Journal of Political
Science_ 42:1157-79. *****  
  ****

**_Week 3_**

_Focus_ : In last week's readings, you were introduced to some of the tools
(like spatial voting theory and game theory) that we will be using to
understand historical phenomena in this course. This week, we develop a
working knowledge of those tools, both by themselves as well as within the
context of the broad theoretical framework, known as the _New
Institutionalism,_ which we will be using to study American political
development. In addition, a problem set will be distributed, which will be due
the following week.

_Readings_ :

Kenneth A. Shepsle. 1989. "Studying Institutions: Some Lessons from the
Rational Choice Approach." _Journal of Theoretical Politics_ 1:131-147. *****

Charles Stewart III. 1999. "Chapter One: An (Unusual) Introduction to the
Study of Congress." _Analyzing Congress_. *****  


**_Week 4_**

_Focus_ : Very likely, we will spend part of Monday finishing the "primer"
material from Week 3. Once the primer material has been completed, we will
move beyond learning the tools of social science and begin applying our
knowledge, through historical applications. For our first application, we
examine why our first national legislature, the Continental (Confederation)
Congress, failed, and how that failure helped shape the way that the
Constitutional (Federal) Congress was constructed.

_Readings_ :

Calvin Jillson and Rick K. Wilson. 1994. "Conclusion: Congressional Dynamics
and the Demise of the Continental Congress." _Congressional Dynamics:
Structure, Coordination & Choice in the First American Congress, 1774-1789_.
*****

Charles Stewart III. 1999. "Chapter Two: The Constitutional Origins of
Congress." _Analyzing Congress_. *****

John H. Aldrich, Calvin Jillson, and Rick K. Wilson. 1998. "Why Congress?:
What the Failure of the Continental and the Survival of the Federal Congress
Tell Us about the New Institutionalism." Manuscript. *****  


**_Week 5_**

_Focus_ : This week, we concentrate on how and why political parties developed
at the _institutional_ level in the United States. Specifically, we will
explore partisan emergence within the U.S. Congress. Before we focus on the
historical details, however, we first examine a New-Institutionalist theory of
party formation.

_Readings_ :

John H. Aldrich. 1995. "Chapter 2 -- Why Parties Form" and "Chapter 3 --
Founding the First Parties: Institutions and Social Choice." _Why Parties?:
The Origin and Transformation of Party Politics in America_.

John H. Aldrich and Ruth W. Grant. 1993. "The Antifederalists, the First
Congress, and the First Parties." _Journal of Politics_ 55:295-326. *****

John F. Hoadley. 1980. "The Emergence of Political Parties in Congress,
1789-1803." _American Political Science Review_ 74:757-79. *****

Robert Allen Rutland. 1995. "Chapter One: The Jeffersonian Genesis." _The
Democrats: From Jefferson to Clinton_. *****  


**_Week 6_**

_Focus_ : Last week, we analyzed the emergence of political parties in
Congress. This week, we examine how partisan (and factional) dynamics helped
shape the structure and process of Congressional institutions in the first two
decades of the 19th Century.

_Readings_ :

Robert Allen Rutland. 1995. "Chapter Two: An Era of Feelings--Good and Bad."
_The Democrats: From Jefferson to Clinton_. *****

Evelyn C. Fink, "Institutional Change as a Sophisticated Strategy: The Bill of
Rights as a Political Solution." _Journal of Theoretical Politics_ 7:477-510.
*****

Sarah A. Binder. 1995. "Partisanship and Procedural Choice: Institutional
Change in the Early Congress, 1789-1823." _Journal of Politics_ 57:1093-1118.
*****

Gerald Gamm and Kenneth Shepsle. 1989. "Emergence of Legislative Institutions:
Standing Committees in the House and Senate, 1810-1825." _Legislative Studies
Quarterly_ 14:39-66. *****

Jeffery A. Jenkins and Charles Stewart III. 1998. "Order from Chaos: The
Transformation of the Committee System in the House, 1816-1822." Manuscript.
*****  


**_Week 7_**

_Focus_ : In week 5, we studied the origins of _institutional_ parties. This
week, we study the origins of _mass_ parties. Two major questions will be
examined: (1) how and why did citizens develop partisan identifications and
(2) how and why did party leaders begin to mobilize their partisans?

_Readings_ :

Richard P. McCormick. 1960. "New Perspectives on Jacksonian Politics." _The
American Historical Review_ 65:288-301. *****

John H. Aldrich. 1995. "Chapter 4 --- Jacksonian Democracy: The Mass Party and
Collective Action." _Why Parties?: The Origin and Transformation of Party
Politics in America_.

Joel H. Silbey. 1991. "Chapter 2 --- The Country Demands the Existence of
Parties," "Chapter 3 --- Organize! ORGANIZE! ORGANIZE!," and "Chapter 4 ---
The Connecting Tissue: Ideas, Principles, and Policies in American Politics."
_The American Political Nation, 1838-1893_. *****  


**_Week 8_**

Exam #1 --- take-home portion due 3/1; in-class portion on 3/3  


**_Week 9_   (No Classes: Spring Break)**  


**_Week 10_** ****

_Focus_ : This week, we will analyze the how the political status-quo in the
antebellum United States, in which the Democrats and Whigs vied for power,
began to crumble. Our focus will be on the rise of slavery as the defining
issue of the early 1850s and its impact on party politics and the political
system as a whole.

_Readings_ :

Roger L. Ransom. 1989. "Chapter 4: The Politics of Slavery." _Conflict and
Compromise_. *****

David M. Potter. 1976. "Chapters 1 to 6." _The Impending Crisis, 1848-1861_.

Sean M. Theriault and Barry R. Weingast. 1999. "Agenda Manipulation, Strategic
Voting, and Legislative Details in the Compromise of 1850." Manuscript. *****  


**_Week 11 and Week 12_**

_Focus_ : We continue our analysis of the political chaos of the 1850s, by
examining how the slavery issue led to the formation of a new party system, in
which the Republicans succeeded the Whigs at the national level.

_Readings_ :

Roger L. Ransom. 1989. "Chapter 5: The Politics of Compromise." _Conflict and
Compromise_. *****

David M. Potter. 1976. "Chapters 7 to 10." _The Impending Crisis, 1848-1861_.

John H. Aldrich. 1995. "Chapter 5 --- Whigs and Republicans: Institutions,
Issue Agendas, and Ambition." _Why Parties?: The Origin and Transformation of
Party Politics in America_.

Jeffery A. Jenkins and Timothy P. Nokken. 1998. "The Institutional Origins of
the Republican Party: A Spatial Voting Analysis of the House Speakership
Election of 1855-56." Forthcoming. _Legislative Studies Quarterly_. *****

Barry R. Weingast. 1998. "Political Stability and Civil War: Institutions,
Commitment, and American Democracy." _Analytic Narratives_. *****  


**_Week 13 and Week 14_**

_Focus_ : We finish our examination of the troubled era of the 1850s, delve
into the South's secession in 1860-61 and the political formation of the
Confederate system, and analyze the political aspects of the Civil War.

_Readings_ :

David M. Potter. 1976. "Chapters 11 to 20." _The Impending Crisis, 1848-1861_.

William H. Riker. 1986. "Lincoln at Freeport." _The Art of Political
Manipulation_. *****

Roger L. Ransom. 1989. "Chapter 6: Slavery and the War." _Conflict and
Compromise_. *****

Marshall L DeRosa. 1991. "Chapter 5 --- Institutional Innovations." _The
Confederate Constitution of 1861_. *****

Eric L. McKitrick. 1967. "Party Politics and the Union and Confederate War
Efforts." _The American Party Systems: Stages of Political Development_. *****  


**_Week 15_** ** __**

_Focus_ : In the aftermath of the Civil War, Republican leaders faced the
challenge of rebuilding the nation. This period of American history has been
labeled the Reconstruction Era.

_Readings_ :

Robert Allen Rutland. 1995. "Chapter 5: Waving the Bloody Shirt." _The
Democrats: From Jefferson to Clinton_. *****

Robert Allen Rutland. 1996. "Chapter 5: The Party Predominant." _The
Republicans: From Lincoln to Bush_. *****

Richard Franklin Bensel. 1990. "Chapter 6: State Structure and Reconstruction:
The Political Legacy of the Civil War." _Yankee Leviathan: The Origins of
Central State Authority in America, 1859-1877_. *****

Charles Stewart III and Barry R. Weingast. 1992. "Stacking the Senate,
Changing the Nation: Republican Rotten Boroughs, Statehood Politics, and
American Political Development." _Studies in American Political Development_
6:223-271. *****  


**_Week 16_**

Exam #2 --- take-home portion due 4/26; in-class portion on 4/28  


**_Week 17_**

Terms Papers Due

