**HISTORY 1112:  THE UNITED STATES AFTER 1877  
**

**SUMMER I, 2002  
**

**SYLLABUS**  

* * *

[BACK TO CLASS HOME PAGE](1112home.html)  
  
**CONTACT INFORMATION  
REQUIRED READING  
GOALS AND OBJECTIVES  
BASIC RULES AND PROCEDURES  
GRADING POLICY  
ASSIGNMENTS  
SCHEDULE OF LECTURES/ASSIGNMENTS  
[PLAGIARISM STATEMENT](Plagiarism_Stmt.html) **  
  

* * *

  

**CONTACT INFORMATION**  
  
Professor: Dr. Elizabeth (Scout) Blum                   MTWTH 12:00 - 1:50  
Office: BG 309                                                    Room: BG 119  
Office Hours: MTWTH 2:00-2:30 and by appointment  
Phone Number: 670-5663  
Email Address: sblum@trojan.troyst.edu  
  
**REQUIRED READING**  
  
Gillon, Steven M. and Cathy D. Matson.   The American Experiment: A History of
the United States.  Volume II: Since 1865.  Boston:  Houghton Mifflin Company,
2002.  
  
There are also _several articles on reserve_ at the library that are required
reading for the course.  See the list of assignments for details.  
  
The textbook will also be available on reserve at the library.  
  
**GOALS AND OBJECTIVES OF THE COURSE**  
  
To gain a basic, general understanding of the political, social, cultural and
economic themes and events in American history from Reconstruction through the
1970s.  
  
To understand that history is not solid or unchanging, but that historians
have developed contrasting interpretations over the meaning of certain events.  
  
To gain analytical and practical skills when thinking about American history.  
  
Top of Page  
  
**BASIC RULES AND PROCEDURES**  
  
**Academic Honesty**  
  
    Cheating of any kind will not be tolerated in this class.  Any type of academic dishonesty, including, but not limited to, plagiarism or cheating, will result in the maximum level of punishment available, including dismissal from the college.  Please read and sign the [ "Plagiarism Statement"](Plagiarism_Stmt.html) for this class (an additional copy is attached to, and a part of, this syllabus).  See also, "Standard of Conduct" on pages 34-36 of the Undergraduate Bulletin, 2001-2003.  For more information about the Honor Code at Troy State University, see page 58-59 of the Oracle (Student Handbook), 2000-2001.  
  
**Special Needs/Requirements (Students With Disabilities)**  
  
    Accommodations will be made for any student demonstrating special educational needs, including additional time for taking tests.  If you feel you may qualify, see the Adaptive Needs Center (215 Adams Administration) for additional information.  
  
    Unless required by the Adaptive Needs Center, I do not allow students to tape record lectures.  You are expected to develop and utilize note taking skills as a part of this class.  
  
**Availability of Instructor**  
  
    If you have questions about the reading, lectures or your grades, please come see me.  I will generally be available both before and after class if necessary.  In addition, feel free to come by and see me during office hours, e-mail me, or leave a message on my answering machine with any specific questions.  I will gladly make an appointment to see you if you can't come by during office hours.  Remember that helping you is an important and enjoyable part of my job - so come see me!  
  
  
Top of Page  
  
**Attendance**  
  
    It is the policy of the Department of History that students must be present for 75% of classes in order to receive a grade.  In this class, you will be allowed to miss class six (6) times.  The absence policy will begin on June 6, 2002.  I do not require excuses or written explanations for class absences (other than for tests, as described below).  Upon your sixth absence, for any reason, you will be automatically given an FA in the class.  I will pass around an attendance sheet during each class period.  If you leave class early or arrive late, I reserve the right to remove your name from the attendance sheet, even if you signed it.  Poor or sporadic attendance will also affect your grade in this class in several ways.  At the end of the semester, I may consider adjusting the final grade of those students with exemplary attendance.  I also reserve the right to give pop quizzes over the assigned reading for that day at any time, without announcement.  Finally, the exams cover material from both the lectures and the required reading.  I also require that you arrive on time to class - you will not be admitted if you arrive late.  
  
**Make-Up Exams/Pop Quizzes**  
  
    The most important thing that you can do during this class is to be present and prepared for the exams at the scheduled times.  I do not give make-ups for pop quizzes under any circumstances or for any reasons.  These are designed to reward those students who come to class.  
  
    Makeup exams will only be held if the following conditions are met by the student: (1) You missed the exam because of extreme circumstances (as defined below); AND (2) I receive notification of your absence and reason within two class days after the exam (for example, if the exam falls on a Monday, I must receive notification of your absence by the following Wednesday).  
  
    Make up exams will be held only in extreme circumstances.  Extreme circumstances include, but are not limited to, a school-sanctioned absence, your serious illness, accompanied by a note from a doctor or hospital or the serious illness (i.e., hospitalization) or death of an immediate family member (children, siblings, parents, grandparents).  Documentation must be provided in each instance.  The following are examples of unacceptable reasons for missing an exam: oversleeping, minor car problems, forgetting the exam, losing your book or notes, wanting to rest for the weekend, having a job interview, taking someone to the airport or having a fight with your significant other.  
  
    If you miss an exam for an acceptable reason (as determined by me), you must take the makeup exam at the time, date and place as noted on the syllabus (All makeups will be completed on July 2, 2002 at 8:00am in BG 309 - see me if you have an 8am class).  This will be the only time that the makeup will be offered - and you will get a zero for that exam if you do not take it at that time.  The makeup for the final will be arranged on a case-by-case basis, although the above rules still apply.  Remember, it is entirely your responsibility to comply with these requirements \- if you do not, I am under no obligation to allow you to make up the exam.  
  
Top of Page  
  
  
**Common Courtesy/Removal From Class**  
  
    I expect each student to behave as a mature adult during class.  In other words, please use common courtesy toward others and me, and do not engage in disruptive or distracting behavior during class.  Disruptive behavior includes, but is not limited to, arriving late or leaving early, talking, whispering, using inappropriate language, making noise, passing notes during class, sleeping, reading the newspaper or preparing for another class.  Finally, before coming to class, please turn off all cellular phones and pagers.  
  
    I also expect each student to be attentive and to take notes during my lectures - the exams require a high level of detail, and you will need your notes to study.  During discussion sessions, please be respectful of other students' comments and questions:  Everyone has valuable ideas and experiences from which you can learn. We may watch films or look at slides during certain portions of the class - you will be expected to behave appropriately during these activities, as well.  
  
    If your behavior is distracting or disruptive, I will request that you stop.  If I have to ask more than once, I have several options.  I may ask that you leave class, or, if you are particularly disruptive over a period of time, I may drop you from class.  One of my main obligations as a teacher is to maintain an environment where others can learn, and behavior problems get in the way of others learning.  
  
**GRADING POLICY**  
  
    We will have four exams in this course, as well as three brief, written homework assignments, based on outside readings (see below for a general description of the assignments).  Each assignment has the following weight for your overall grade:  
  

  

**ASSIGNMENT  
**

|

**  % OF FINAL GRADE  
**  
  
---|---  
Class Participation  
| 20  
  
Exam 1  
| 20  
  
Exam 2  
| 20  
  
Exam 3  
| 20  
  
Exam 4  
| 20  
  
  
  
  
Top of Page  
  
  
  
**ASSIGNMENTS**  
  
**Class Participation: Written Assignments and Discussion**  
  
    You will be responsible for both readings from the text and from additional books.  Your discussion grade will consist of grades on written assignments, as well as oral participation in class over these additional readings.  Exam questions and discussions will include these readings - and if the class seems unprepared, or unwilling to discuss the readings, I will give a pop quiz over the material, or reduce everyone's discussion grade.  
  
    In order to ensure that you complete the reading, a written assignment for each chapter will be due in class (see schedule for due dates).  All written assignments must be typed - handwritten assignments will not be accepted under any circumstances. You may e-mail me your written assignments, although I must receive them by the beginning of class (12 p.m.) on the due date.  Any e-mail assignments must be sent either in the text of the e-mail, or in Word or WordPerfect.  If I can't open it, or if you send me a virus (unintentionally or not), you will get a zero for the assignment.  Do not include me in any "junk mail."  The written assignments (which account for 90% of your class participation grade) will be given a grade of either a check +, a  check, or a  check \- (corresponding roughly to an 85, 75 and 65 respectively).  The other 10% of this part of your grade will come from your participation in class discussions (see below).  
  
    The class web site contains the [ questions to be answered for the written assignments.   
](1112_RAP_Assignments.html)  
    Late assignments will not be accepted for any reason.  A "late assignment" is one that is not turned in by 12:00 pm on the due date, as listed below.  
  
    On the due date for each additional reading, we will discuss the reading in class.  In addition to the written assignment, you will also be graded on your participation during these discussions.  This grade will come from whether or not you participate, and how often, rather than the content of your participation.  In other words, you should not feel worried that you will say something "stupid" in class.  I value any contribution to the discussion.  
  
  
**Exams**  
  
    We will have four exams over the course of the summer session, on every Wednesday except the first Wednesday of the course.  These exams will consist of  a combination of objective questions and essays.  None of the exams will be comprehensive:  each will only cover the material since the last exam (or, in the case of the first exam, since the beginning of the course).  Essays, however, may require you to incorporate some previous data.  If we have time, I will have a brief review in class before each exam, so come prepared with questions.  The exams are designed to take only half the class period (about 50 minutes).  You will be expected to return for the second half of class after each exam.  
  
  
**SCHEDULE OF LECTURES/ASSIGNMENTS**  
  
THE INSTRUCTOR RESERVES THE RIGHT TO MODIFY THIS SCHEDULE AS NECESSARY
THROUGHOUT THE SEMESTER (exam and assignment dates should not change).   NOTE:
COMPLETE THE ASSIGNED READINGS AND BE READY TO DISCUSS THEM PRIOR TO COMING TO
CLASS  
  
In the Schedule of Assignments (below), The American Experiment readings are
abbreviated to "TEXT"; and the readings from Retrieving the American Past are
abbreviated to "RAP" along with the last name of the editor of the chapter.
These chapters are all on reserve at the library.  
  
Please note the following important dates:  
June 4 - last day to add a class; last day to drop without additional fees  
June 13 - last day to file intent to graduate (Dec, 2002)  
  
[CLICK HERE FOR THE LECTURE OUTLINES FOR EACH CLASS, AS WELL AS A LIST OF THE
KEY TERMS FROM LECTURE.  ](1112%20Lectures.html) PLEASE NOTE THAT THE
TERMS/OUTLINES RECEIVED IN CLASS WILL BE WHAT YOU ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR ON THE
TESTS.  
  
  
Top of Page  
  

**DATE**  

|

**LECTURE TOPIC**  

|

**  ASSIGNMENT/READING**  
  
  
---|---|---  
  
June 4  

  
| Course Introduction  
Review of Reconstruction  
| Review Chapter 16 (to page 638), if necessary  
  
  
June 5  

| New South  
| Chapter 16 (638-644)  
  
June 6  
| Industrialization  
| Chapter 18  
  
June 10  
| Urbanization  
Populism  
| Chapter 19  
Chapter 20 (781 - end)  
  
June 11  
| Imperialism  
|  [ **RAP Hahn Questions Due**](1112_RAP_Assignments.html)  
  
June 12  
EXAM ONE  
(MAKEUP JULY 2  
8:00AM, BG 309)  
|  Progressivism  
|  
  
June 13  
|  Progressivism  
| Chapter 21  
  
June 17  
| World War I/The Twenties  
| Chapter 23-24  
[**RAP Churella Questions Due**](1112_RAP_Assignments.html)  
  
June 18  
| Great Depression  
| Chapter 25  
  
June 19  
EXAM TWO  
(MAKEUP JULY 2  
8:00AM, BG 309)  
| New Deal  
|  
  
June 20  
  
| New Deal/World War II  
| Chapter 26  
  
June 24  
  
| The Fifties  
| Chapter 27  
  
June 25  
  
| The Fifties  
|  Chapter 28  
  
June 26  
EXAM THREE  
(MAKEUP JULY 2  
8:00AM, BG 309)  
|  John F. Kennedy  
|  
  
June 27  
  
| Lyndon Baines Johnson  
Civil Rights Movement  
| Chapter 29  
  
July 1  
  
| Civil Rights Movement  
Vietnam  
| Chapter 30  
[**RAP GRIMSLEY QUESTIONS DUE**](1112_RAP_Assignments.html)  
  
July 2  
MAKEUP EXAMS  
FOR ANY MISSED  
TEST - 8AM, BG309  
    
| Vietnam  
|  
  
July 3    FINAL EXAM  
|  
|  
  
  
  
  
Top of Page  
  

