PBIO 250 Lecture Notes -- Lecture Schedule -- Spring 1999

# PBIO 250 Lecture Notes

### James L. Reveal

#### Norton-Brown Herbarium, University of Maryland

![](/Pictures/strip.gif)  

# PBIO 250 LECTURE SYLLABUS

## **Plant Taxonomy  

####  Spring Semester - 1999**

**

    
    
    > ------------------------------------------------------------------
>     Date                      Subject                         Reading

>     ------------------------------------------------------------------

>      1 Feb            Introduction to Systematic Botany          1-5

>      3 Feb            Historical Background of Classification  384-412

>      8 Feb            Historical Background of Classification  384-412

>     10 Feb            Plant Nomenclature                         6-17

>     15 Feb            Plant Nomenclature                         6-17

>     17 Feb            Principles of Plant Taxonomy             412-418

>     22 Feb            Principles of Plant Taxonomy             433-435

>     24 Feb            FIRST EXAMINATION

>      1 Mar            Sources of Taxonomic Evidence            436-466

>      3 Mar            Sources of Taxonomic Evidence            436-466

>      8 Mar            Sources of Taxonomic Evidence            436-466

>     10 Mar            Origin and Classification                419-433

>     15 Mar            Origin and Classification                419-433

>     17 Mar            Origin and Classification                419-433

>     22 Mar            SPRING BREAK (22-28 March)

>     29 Mar            Evolution, Variation and Biosystematics  460-466

>     31 Mar            Evolution, Variation and Biosystematics  460-466

>      5 Apr            Specimen Preparation and Herbaria         18-53

>                 Methods of Identifying Vascular Plants

>                 and Botanical Literature  
>      7 Apr            SECOND EXAMINATION

>     12 Apr            Selected families of Pteridophytes        54-81

>     14 Apr            Selected families of Gymnosperms          82-101

>     19 Apr            Selected families of Angiosperms         136-170

>     21 Apr            Selected families of Angiosperms         171-231

>     26 Apr            Selected families of Angiosperms         171-231

>     28 Apr            Selected families of Angiosperms         232-299

>      3 May            Selected families of Angiosperms         300-336

>      5 May            Selected families of Angiosperms         337-363

>     10 May            Selected families of Angiosperms         364-383

>     12 May            Selected families of Angiosperms         364-383

>     19 May            THIRD EXAMINATION (8-10 am)

>     ---------------------------------------------------------------------

>

> **  
>

>

> **Lecturer:** [James L.
Reveal](http://www.life.umd.edu/microbiology/faculty/reveal.html), Professor.
Rm. 4102 H.J. Patterson Hall. Phone 405-1588. Email:
[jr19@umail.umd.edu](mailto:jr19@umail.umd.edu). Office Hours: By appointment
(from 7 am until 5 pm, M-F; weekends by arrangement). Please arrange through
Ms. Terry Olenick, Rm. 1212 H.J. Patterson by calling 405-1588. If necessary,
**leave a message** or emailing to
[to5@umail.umd.edu](mailto:to5@umail.umd.edu)

>

> **Required texts:** Lecture texts: _Contemporary Plant Systematics_ , 2nd
ed. by Dennis Woodland and [_PBIO 250 Lecture
Notes_](http://www.inform.umd.edu/PBIO/pb250/index.html) by J.L. Reveal
available on the World-wide Web at
http://www.inform.umd.edu/PBIO/pb250/index.html. Laboratory manuals are
_Vascular Plant Taxonomy Laboratory Manual_ by H.G. Bedell and _Manual of
Vascular Plants of Northeastern United States and adjacent Canada_ , 2nd ed.,
by H.A. Gleason and A. Cronquist. Optional: Students may wish to obtain _Woody
Plants of Maryland_ by R.G. Brown and M.L. Brown and _Herbaceous Plants of
Maryland_ by M.L. Brown and R.G. Brown. However, Brown and Brown may not be
used during any laboratory quiz or examination, and neither is required.

>

> **Course Description, Rationale and Goals:** PBIO 250 is a four credit
course for second-year students. Two hours of lecture and four hours of
laboratory per week. Prerequisite: PBIO100, BIOL 105 or permission of the
instructor. An introductory study of plant identification, naming and
classification as well as the history of systematics and the role of evolution
in systematics. Laboratory emphasis is on knowledge of the major families of
vascular plants and on the collection and identification of local vascular
plants. The rationale of the course is to provide the student with a basic
understanding of the underlying principles of systematics, including modern
technological approaches, augmented by an opportunity to gain an understanding
of the major groups of vascular plants found throughout the world. The course
provides an opportunity to collect native and naturalized plants in the Mid-
Atlantic region thereby gaining some knowledge of the local flora while at the
same time becoming familiar with the kinds of diagnostic keys that can be used
to identify plant material. The goal is to provide the student with a firm
foundation for and knowledge of the relationships between and among vascular
plants based on evolutionary principles as expressed by systematists. Class
participation, especially in laboratory, is essential and expected.

>

> **Examinations:** Three lecture examinations are scheduled as noted above.
Each exam is worth 100 points. Makeup examinations will be allowed only for
those individuals who provide a valid, University-approved excuse which can be
verified (see [Chapter
4](http://www.inform.umd.edu/ugradcat/chapter4/attendance.html) of the
_Undergraduate Catalog_ ) in writing **prior** to the expected absence. It is
the responsibility of the student to request and schedule a makeup
examination. All makeup examinations are essay. Makeups must be arranged
within one week of the scheduled exam. All examination begin at the start of
the period; persons arriving after the first person completes the examination
and leaves the room will not be permitted to take the scheduled exam and must
arrange for a makeup. See sample examination questions at
[http://www.inform.umd.edu/PBIO/pb250/exam.html](exam.html). Announced, pre-
examination review session for lecture and laboratory will be arranged prior
to the examination and held at a time and place to be announced.

>

> **Laboratory:** Attendance is required and taken in all laboratory classes.
Any student who fails to attend three or more laboratory classes without a
valid, University-approved excuse that can be verified (see [Chapter
4](http://www.inform.umd.edu/ugradcat/chapter4/attendance.html) of the
_Undergraduate Catalog_ ) will receive a failing grade for the entire course.
Approximately 15 short, unannounced quizzes will be given during the semester
of which the top ten grades will be counted (total 100 points). Three
examinations will be held as scheduled. No makeup examination will be given
without a valid, University-approved excuse that can be verified (see [Chapter
4](http://www.inform.umd.edu/ugradcat/chapter4/attendance.html) of the
_Undergraduate Catalog_ ) submitted in writing **prior** to the expected
absence. It is the responsibility of the student to request and schedule a
makeup examination. Each of the three laboratory examinations will be worth 50
points (total 150 points). Makeups must be arranged within one week of the
scheduled exam. All examination begin at the start of the period; persons
arriving after the first person completes the examination and leaves the room
will not be permitted to take the scheduled exam and must arrange for a
makeup. The Laboratory syllabus is at
[http://www.inform.umd.edu/PBIO/pb250/labr.html](labr.html).

>

> **Plant Collection:** A plant collection is required. Detailed instructions
are provided at [http://www.inform.umd.edu/PBIO/pb250/coll.html](coll.html);
any modifications will be presented later in the semester. A collection of 25
dried, labeled and correctly identified plants is required and due by 5 pm on
13 May 1997. The collection is worth 50 points. _All collections become the
property of the[Norton-Brown
Herbarium](http://www.inform.umd.edu/PBIO/.WWW/mary.html)._

>

> **Grading:** Final letter grades are based on comparative performance
established by scores received on scheduled lecture and laboratory
examinations, unannounced laboratory quizzes, and the successful completion of
the plant collection requirements. The instructor reserves the right to give
unannounced lecture quizzes worth no more than 50 points which would then
increase the total point value for the course by the corresponding amount.
Regardless of the points earned, failure to attend laboratory can result in a
failing grade for the entire course.

>

> **Academic Dishonesty:** Students are reminded that they are subject to the
University's [_Code of Academic Integrity_.

[Laboratory Syllabus  
](labr.html) [Lecture Notes  
](index.html)  

##### Last revised 8 Nov 1998

