**AMH 3420 HISTORY OF FLORIDA**

Treasure Coast Campus-Spring, 2002, Tuesdays, 4:20-7 P.M.

Dr. Sarah H. Brown

**_Office:_** MacArthur Campus, Jupiter-MLC 255

**_Office hours at Treasure Coast:_** Tuesdays, 3-4 P.M.(and by appointment)

**_at the MacArthur Campus_** : Mondays and Thursdays, 1-4 P. M.

**_Telephone and voice mail:_** 561-799-8524 (6-8524 on campus); **_fax:_**
561-799-8535

**_E-mail:_** sbrown@fau.edu

  
  

**Course Description:**

Using a chronological format, we will study Florida's history from the
beginning of the European offensive in the early 16th century through the
period of unprecedented growth and change that began at the middle of the
20th. Although Florida seems "new" by some standards, it has an extremely
long, rich, and exciting history-different from the rest of the southeast and
the nation, yet just as ancient and as vital a part of the national story. The
state also has one of the nation's most varied populations; the story of the
impact of Florida's diverse peoples on her changing culture, society, and
economy, and on her land and water resources, will be a major part of our
exploration into the state's history.

  
  

**Required Reading: (see calendar for assignment dates)**

**I. Texts **available at the bookstore:

1\. Gannon, Michael, _A Short History of Florida_ (University Press of
Florida, 1993)

2\. Colburn, David & Jane Landers, eds, _The African American Heritage of
Florida_ (U. Press of Fl, 1995)

3\. Pierce, Charles W., _Pioneer Life in Southeast Florida_ , Donald W. Curl,
ed., (U. of Miami Press, 1970)



**II. Chapters and articles on reserve** in the IRCC/FUA Library:

1\. This is part of the assignment for the second class meeting (Jan. 15-see
calendar): Milanich, Jerald T., _Florida's Indians, From Ancient Times to the
Present_ (U. Press of Fl., 1998) Reading: Chapters 8, 9,  & 10 (pp133-188)

2\. Allen, Frederick Lewis, _Only Yesterday: An Informal History of the 1920s_
(Harper  & Row, 1931), Reading: Chapter 11 ("Home, Sweet Florida," pp 191-201)

3\. Derr. Mark, _Some Kind of Paradise: A Chronicle of Man and the Land in
Florida_ (U. Press of Fl., 1998) Readings: Chapter 7 ("Water Will Run
Downhill," 151-174), Chapters 16 ("In Defense of the Environment," 353-373)

4\. Link, William and Marjorie Wheeler Spruill, eds., _The South in the
History of the Nation_ , Vol. II (Bedford/St. Martin's, 1999) Reading: Chapter
15 ("Immigration in the New South.," 308-327)

5\. Gannon, Michael, ed., _The New History of Florida_ (U. Press of fl., 1996)
Reading: Chapter 21 (Mohl and Pozetta, "History of Florida Immigration,"
390-417)



**III.** Short additional readings may be handed out in class, and the few
films we watch in class should also be considered part of the class texts.

  

**Course Requirements:**

There will be three tests during the term. The first test includes a map quiz
and short answer and essay questions, and you'll have the entire class period
if you need it. The second is a one hour test with multiple choice questions
and one essay. One question on the final exam is a take home essay which is
due a week before the final and counts for 40% of the grade on the final test.
(The question is at the end of the class schedule--page 4 of this syllabus.)
The in-class portion of the final is a combination of multiple choice and
short essays and identifications.

**Final grades will be computed as follows:**

**_ Test 1-25% Test 2-20% Test 3-45% (includes essay) Class participation-
10%_**



**An important note:** This class meets once a week-if you miss a class, you
miss 3 hours, not one.

Attendance is required and will be recorded at the beginning of class.  More
than two unexcused absences will result in a lowering of your grade. (On the
other hand consistent attendance will also be noted, and may help you if your
grade is a really close call in the end....) Tardiness, like frequent absence,
is evidence of lack of interest and application.  Please contact the professor
if you are having a problem-office hours, and voice mail and e-mail addresses,
are listed at the top of the syllabus. I return calls and e-mails!



**Grading Policy:**

A = 94-100; A- = 90-93; B+ = 87-89; B = 84-86; B- = 80-83; C+ = 77-79; C =
74-76; C- = 70-73;

D+ = 67- 69; D = 64-66; D- = 60-63; F = 59 and below

  
  
**_Class Schedule:_**

January 8 **Introduction--How is Florida History Different?**

**Spain before 1492; first European contacts. Maps.**

January 15  **Native Floridians; Spanish America**

**Florida as a part of European expansion-Spanish, English, French**

Assignment for today:

1\. Milanich, _Florida's Indians From Ancient Times to the Present_ , pages
133-188 (on reserve in the library) and

2\. Colburn and Landers, _African American Heritage of Florida_ , 17-41 (your
readings text).

  
  
January 22 **British Florida, 1763-1783; the American revolution; the second
Spanish period**

Assignment for today:

1\. Gannon, _Florida: A Short History_ -1-27

2\. Colburn  & Landers, 42-104



January 29  **The United States and Florida; Florida Territory; the Second
Seminole War; Statehood**

Assignment for today:

1\. Gannon, 27-40

2\. Colburn  & Landers,128-156



February 5 **The Cotton Kingdom; Slavery; Secession; Civil War**

Assignment for today:

1\. Gannon, 40-46

2\. Colburn  & Landers, 104-127 and 157-184  



**February 12 Test1**



February 19  **Reconstruction in Florida; Redemption**

Assignment for today:

1\. Gannon, 46-53;

2\. Colburn  & Landers, 185-206

February 26 ** "Bourbon" Florida; Railroads-Flagler & friends**; **Tourism;
Citrus, & Cattle**

**The Spanish-American War**

Assignment for today:

1\. Gannon, 53-66

2\. Colburn  & Landers, 207-228

3\. ALSO: by now you should have read at least half of Pierce, _Frontier Life
in S. E. Florida_



March 5 No class (spring break)--finish _Frontier Life_  



March 12 **Frontier Southeast Florida**

Assignment for today:

1\. Complete Pierce, _Frontier Life_ and

2\.  Bring to class (to be handed in) 4 or 5 good broad questions to stimulate
discussion about Pierce's memoir... think about economic and political issues,
the environment, the kinds of people the book tells about and why they came to
Florida, the difficulties they faced, what they wanted, how and why things
changed, etc.

We will use your questions when we discuss the book.

**__**

**March 19 Test 2**

March 26  **Progressive Florida & World War I**

**Film: From "Cross Creek"**

Assignment for Today:

1\. Gannon, 67-76

2\. Derr, _Some Kind of Paradise_ , 151-174 (on reserve)

**_ Remember, your final exam essay** is due April 23. You might get the last
two reserve assignments this week (see calendar for Ap. 16  &23) -read them
before you outline your essay._**

  

April 2  **Land Boom & Bust; The Depression; World War II**

Film: "Mr. Miami Beach: The Remarkable Story of Carl Fisher"

1\. Gannon, 77-109

2\. Colburn and Landers, 240-267

3\. Allen, _Only Yesterday_ , 191-201 (on reserve)

  

April 9  **Civil Rights & Wrongs; One Man One Vote **

**Film: "Florida Crossroads-The Fight for Rights"**

Assignment for today:

1\. Gannon, 109-135

2\. Colburn  & Landers, 298-320

April 16  **New Politics since the 60s; Florida and the Cuban Revolution,
1959-2000**

Assignment for today:

1\. Gannon,135-151

2\. Colburn and Landers, 326-356.

3\. Link and Spruill, from _The South in History of the Nation,_ 308-327 (on
reserve) ****

  

April 23  ** Hand in "take home" essay** _at beginning of class_. (Turn in
earlier if you wish) **

**The Environment; Florida today-one state or many?**

**Film : Marjorie Stoneman Douglas: "Lady of the Glades"**

Assignment for today:

1\. Mohl & Pozetta (in Gannon, ed., _New History of FL_.), 390-417 ( on
reserve-this chapter should help with the exam essay you're handing in
today...)

2\. Derr, _Some Kind of Paradise_ , 353-373 (on reserve)

__

**_April 30 Final Exam_**

** _Take home question for final exam_ :

Use any course material-assignments for last section-20th Century-for sure-
and

especially the immigration articles on reserve and similar sections in all of
the texts.

Please type your essay.



Discuss population growth and immigration to Florida (foreign and domestic)
with a particular view toward its effect on twentieth century Florida
politics-that is, on the state's economic, social, and environmental policies
as well as on political parties and elections. How and why has Florida
encouraged people to migrate here, and how have the state's policies and/or
Floridians's attitudes about immigration and migration changed (if they
have...) since 1950?

