UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA  
Department of Social Work

SW 5235 AMERICAN INDIANS AND SOCIAL POLICY  
Fall 2001

INSTRUCTOR: Joyce M. Kramer, Ph.D. OFFICE: 220 Bohannon Hall  
Professor (Enter viia 220 BohH.)Fall Syllabi 2001

PHONE: 218-726-8865 FAX: 218-726-7185

E-MAIL: [jkramer@d.umn.edu](mailto:jkramer@d.umn.edu)

OFFICE HOURS: Tues. 3:00-5:00 and Weds. 3:00-4:00 when class is held in
Duluth. Also by appointment. Please do not contact me during the hour before
class as I will be finalizing class preparations.

INTRODUCTION:

American Indians and Social Policy (SW 5235) is an advanced policy course
which builds upon the policy analysis learned in Social Welfare Policies and
Issues (SW 5010) and the historical descriptive content learned in American
Social Welfare Institutions (SW 5000). This course is required of all MSW
students and must preceed other American Indian content courses within the MSW
curriculum The overall purpose of this course is to provide the basic
knowledge and sensitivity needed by advanced generalist social workers to
effectively serve American Indian clients and communities in this region. To
this end, a social systems approach is used to foster: (a) in-depth
understanding of the relations of American Indian communities with the United
States and Minnesota governments; (b) knowledge of the interface between
American Indian and non-Indian service delivery systems; and (c) enhanced
appreciation of American Indian perspectives as they relate to the above.

COURSE OBJECTIVES:

1\. The student will acquire an historical understanding of why American
Indians have a unique position in their relationship to the Federal
Government.

2\. Using a social systems approach, the student will acquire knowledge of the
relationship of the Federal and state governments with American Indian tribal
governments. (Particular focus is on the State of Minnesota.)

3\. The student will acquire knowledge of the history of Federal policy
changes on the health and well-being of Indian people, with special focus on
life cycle and developmental changes.

4\. The student will acquire understanding of how policies impact the roles
and statuses of American Indian women and children in various American Indian
societies, with particular focus on the Ojibwe.

5\. The student will acquire in-depth comprehension of contemporary American
Indian policy issues and their implications for macro, mezzo, and micro levels
of social work practice.

6\. The students will have improved their abilities to apply the advanced
generalist problem-focused perspective to address the needs of an ethnic
group, specifically Ojibwe Indians. This experience should be transferrable to
other unique ethnic groups.

7\. The students will increase their skills for analyzing social welfare
policy and its impact on a particular population group, specifically American
Indians. This skill should be transferrable to other vulnerable populations.

8\. The students will develop their abilities to identify potential
alternatives to current policies affecting American Indians and to impact the
power structure for the purpose of promoting desirable social change.

9\. The student will exercise value clarification in relation to American
Indian issues.

COURSE REQUIREMENTS:

Non-sexist Language, Stylistic Guidelines, and Other Reminders

Students are asked to utilize the stylistic guidelines utilized in the
Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association. If you wish to
substitute another style, please check with the Instructor before doing so.
All work is expected to be of professional quality. Any submissions with
excessive typos, misspelled works, or grammatical errors may be returned for
corrections before credit is given. Students are encouraged to habitually ask
someone to proof-read their work. Your work must be your own. If you use five
or more words in sequence from another's work, you should put the language in
quotations marks and cite the original source. This includes information
obtained on the internet. Plagiarised content obtained on the "web" is easily
identifiable by Instructors with the use of a few key phrases, and plagiarism
is considered a serious offense - a form of theft in capitalist societies,
where authors and publishers make their livings from copyrighted materials.

Ground Rules for Group Discussions

The content of this course is controversial. As a microcosm of the world in
which we live, the classroom provides no "answers;" rather it provides a
problem solving process entailing listening and dialogue so as to inform
action. Learning in this context is an emergent qualitative change for the
collective group and the participating individuals (including the Instructor
as well as all students). For this problem-solving approach to provide a
successful forum for learning, it is crucial that everyone feels safe to
freely discuss their experiences, feelings, and concerns. So as to foster a
conducive classroom environment, it is expected that we all treat each other
with respect. While it is appropriate to openly disagree with someone else's
point of view, you are asked to keep your arguments focused on the issue
rather than to make disparaging remarks about the individual with whom you
disagree.

We can assume that discrimination exists in many forms (such as sexism,
racism, classism, ageism, heterosexism, anti-semitism, ableism). Any critical
understanding of these various "isms" means that we need to recognize that we
have been taught misinformation about our own group as well as about members
of other groups. This is true for dominant (such as white, male, upper class,
heterosexual, able-bodied) and subordinated group members (such as people of
color, women, poor, welfare class, gay/lesbian, people with disabilities,
Jewish people). Based on these assumptions, let's agree that we cannot be
blamed for misinformation we have learned, but we will be held accountable for
repeating information after we have learned otherwise. People and groups are
not to be blamed for their subordinate positions. Let's assume that people are
always doing the best they can. Let's actively pursue information about our
own groups and those of others. Let's share information about our own groups
with other members of the class, but never demean, devalue, or in any other
way disparage people for their own experiences. We each have an obligation to
actively combat myths and stereotypes about our own groups so that we can
break down the walls which prohibit group cooperation and group gain. Let's
create a safe environment for open discussion ,

Evaluations of Student's Learning

Students' grades will be based upon learning contracts. The type, quality, and
amount of work you do, and thus the grade you receive, depends on which
contract you choose to follow. All students are expected to contract for
either an "A" or a "B " grade. Consequently, all students are expected to
fulfill all the requirements listed below, except that a term paper is
required for students who contract for the grade of "A". Failure to complete
the terms of the contract will result in your grade being lowered to the level
that corresponds with the amount and quality of the work that you have done.
All work must be of professional quality.

**Participation**

All students are expected to attend class regularly. If you must be absent,
contact the Instructor to explain why you are not attending class and to
arrange compensatory work. (Please phone or come by after class rather than
before class, unless you are presenting that day.)

**Understanding of Concepts and Information**

Participate every week in a "threaded" group discussion via the "web." On
Tuesday of each week, I will present a controversial topic or question, about
which you are asked to respond in a well informed and thoughtful way, using
the readings, classroom content, and/or other academic sources to support your
position. Your responses will not be graded. However, your classmates and I
may ask you to elaborate, explain, and/or present your sources. Also each
week, you are asked to generate a question about the subsequent week's topic.
These questions may be addressed by the Instructor and/or used as the topic or
question in the "threaded" discussion for that week. (More information on
connecting to the "web" site will be provided later.)

Pass a short answer final exam on the required readings.

**Application of Concepts**

Participate in two community (not university) functions that have been
organized by members of the American Indian community. Write brief reports
(two typewritten pages) on each experience including: a description of the
event, what you learned that you did not previously know (related to American
Indians and Social Policy), what misconceptions (if any) about the group you
may have had prior to this experience, some ways in which discrimination has
negatively affected the people who came to this meeting, and what human
service needs (if any) this group has which are not being satisfactorily met.

**Integration of Concepts: Policy Analysis**

Students are asked to select one or more dimensions of human services about
which they are particularly interested, such as child welfare, services for
the elderly, health care, education, and alcohol and drug treatment, judicial
systems, housing, or recreation. Then the student should select three specific
problems within their selected service dimension(s) (such as the relatively
high pre graduation drop-out rate of Indian secondary school students) as the
focus of the term paper. The Instructor will select from these three the one
that the student will present. The student's analysis of the problem should
cover the content listed on the Advanced Social Welfare Policy Framework sheet
(to be distributed). All students will be expected to give a ten minute
presentation of their Policy Analysis. Following each presentation, there will
be opportunity for discussion of the information conveyed. This can be used by
students who are writing term papers to enhance the final version of the
paper. Consequently, those who choose to write a term paper will be scheduled
first.

For an "A" in the course, the student should write a term paper on their
policy analysis topic. The text of the paper should be approximately 15 pages,
double-spaced, typewritten. Policy analysis topics/problem statements should
be submitted the third week of classes for approval by the Instructor. Term
papers will be due the final day of class. However, if you want feedback and
assurance that your paper meets the "A" quality, you must submit your term
paper by or before the twelfth week of class..

Incomplete Policy

Students are discouraged from taking a grade of "incomplete." However, when
circumstances require the request of an "incomplete," the student must submit
an Agreement for Granting and Incomplete form, which can be found in the MSW
Program Student Handbook or can be obtained from the Department secretary.
After both the student and the Instructor have signed the completed form, a
copy of the agreement will be placed on file in the Social Work office to be
removed when the grade of "incomplete" has been changed; a second copy will be
given to the student. The same grading standards will be used for late work;
that is no reductions will be made in the student's final grade from having
taken an "incomplete."

REQUIRED TEXTS are available for purchase at your Campus Bookstore:

Iverson, Peter. "We Are Still Here": American Indians in the Twentieth
Century. Wheeling, IL: Harlan Davidson.

LaDuke, Winona (1999). All Our Relations: Native Struggles for Land and Life,
Cambridge, MA: South End Press.

Poupart, John, Cecilia Martinez, John Red Horse, Dawn Scharnber (2000). To
Build a Bridge: Working with American Indian Communities. St. Paul, MN:
American Indian Policy Center.

For advanced standing students and students from other disciplines who have
not taken SW 5201, it is strongly recommended that you refer to the required
text for that course. Please ask the current Instructor for that course..

OTHER REQUIRED READINGS (on reserve and/or on order to be sold at the
Bookstore.)

Brown, Dee (1971). Little Crow's War. Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee: An Indian
History of the American West. New York: Henry Holt Publishers.

DuBray, Wynne H. (1992). Human Services and American Indians. "Social Welfare
Policy and American Indian Populations" (pp. 7-31). "Issues of American Indian
Women" (pp. 89-101). "American Indian Child Welfare" (pp. 103-110). St. Paul,
MN: West Publishing Co. (Address: P.O. Box 64526, St. Paul, MN 55164-0526).

Green, Donald E. "American Indian Criminality." _In_ Green, Donald E. & Thomas
V. Tonneson (Eds.), American Indians: Social Justice and Public Policy.
Madison: The University of Wisconsin System, pp. 223-270.

"The Indian Child Welfare Act of 1978," United States Code, Title 25, &
1901-1963.

Kramer, Joyce M. (1995). Social welfare within American Indian and Alakan
Native communities. _In_ John Dixon and Robert Sheurel, Eds., Social Welfare
with Indigenous Peoples. London, England: Routledge, pp. 54-95.

The Northwest Indian Child Welfare Institute (1987). "Perspective on History
and Federal Policies" (pp. 3-14), "Appendix - A Guide to Compliance with the
Indian Child Welfare Act (pp. 93-108). Cross-Cultural Skills in Indian Child
Welfare: A Guide for the Non-Indian. Portland, OR: Parry Center for Children.
(Address: 3415 S.E. Powell Blvd., Portland, OR 97202).

Tippeconnic III, John W. (1991). "The Education of American Indians: Policy,
Practice, and Future Direction." _In_ Green, Donald E. & Thomas V. Tonnesen
(Eds.) American Indians: Social Justice and Public Policy. Madison: The
University of Wisconsin System, pp. 180-207..

These readings will be supplemented with handouts to be distributed in class.

TIMETABLE: (tentative; locations are relevant only to ITV section of the
course):

Week I (Duluth) - Orientation (in lieu of regular classes).

Week II (Duluth) - Introductions of participants, Syllabus and Course Content.
Video: Enduring Ways of the Lac du Flambeau. (Reading: American Indian Policy
Center. Handout: Map.)

Week III (Duluth) - Traditional Values. Video featuring Jimmy Jackson, Ojibwe
Medicine Man. (Reading: LaDuke pp. 1-92.) Handout on Comparative Values.
**Policy Analysis topics due.**

Week IV (Duluth) - History of Tribal Governments' Relations with the United
States Federal and State Governments. (Readings: Kramer and Brown.) Handout
providing some dates of historically significant events.

Week V (Bemidji) - Land and the Environment (Reading: LaDuke pp. 94 - end of
book). Handouts on global environmental deterioration.

Week VI (Hibbing) - Identity. Video on mascots. (Readings: Iverson Chaps.
1-3).

Week VII (Duluth) - Indian Education, Professor Thomas Peacock, guest lecturer
(tentative). (Readings: Tippeconnic).

Week VIII (Bemidji) - Indian Child Welfare. (Readings: Northwest and DuBray).

Week IX (Hibbing) - Substance Abuse. (Readings: Iverson Chaps. 4-6).

Week X **\- Field Trip to Indian Human Service Centers.**

Week XI (Duluth) - Indian Women, Two Spirits People, and the Elderly
(Readings: Dubray pp. 89 101).

Week XII (Duluth) - Leonard Peltier; video plus handouts. Indians and the
Criminal "Justice" System. (Reading: Green).

Week XIII (Duluth) - Indian Fishing, Hunting, and Gaming Rights. Handouts:
Great Lakes Inter Tribal.

W  
eeks XIV & XV - **Student Presentation of Policy Analyses. Term papers due
last day of classes.**

