East Georgia College

History 2111: American History to 1865

Course Syllabus



**[Return to Dr. Upchurch's Homepage](../home.old)**

  

(This Syllabus is the road map for this course. It is a set of directions to
follow to get you to the grade you want. Follow these directions all semester
or you will end up lost.)

  

I. Instructor: Dr. Thomas A. Upchurch

II. Course Description:  In this course, I tell the story of America, from the
world-changing arrival of Columbus in 1492 to the end of the tragic and bloody
Civil War in 1865. Students must come to class every time it meets in order to
hear the whole story. Students should listen attentively, take thorough notes,
and be prepared to ask questions and participate in brief discussions of the
lecture topics.

III. Prerequisites: English 0098, Reading 0099

  

IV. Required Text: 1\. George B. Tindall and David E. Shi, _America: A
Narrative History, Volume I_ (Brief Fifth Edition, 2000). The textbook covers
essentially the same material as the lectures, but it goes into more detail on
many topics, it is organized differently, and can thus be used to enhance your
understanding of the information covered in class.

V. Course Objectives: East Georgia College assesses student learning based
upon the achievement of eleven general education learning outcomes. A list of
these outcomes is attached to the end of the syllabus. The appropriate
learning outcome is indicated at the end of each objective listed below. The
student who completes the course will be able, both orally and in writing, to:

1\. Identify and discuss the major political, economic, and socio-cultural
currents that underlie the development of the United States. (I, X)

2\. Identify and relate to one another the people and ideas that have
contributed to the development of the United States. (I, X)

3\. Place major historical events in correct chronological relationship to one
another. (I, X)

4\. Identify the location of selected geographical sites of significance in
the history of the United States. (I, IX, X)

5\. Relate the history of Georgia to that of the United States. (I, IX, X)

6\. Demonstrate critical thinking skills by writing integrated and coherent
essays dealing with analysis of historical data. (I, III, X)

7\. Discuss the relationship of history to current events and issues affecting
the United States and Georgia. (I, III, X)

  

VI. Course Evaluation: Students will formally evaluate the course and the
instructor near the end of the semester. (This may not be applicable for
summer classes.)

  

VII. Grading Policy: There will be three written examinations. The dates for
the exams will be announced at least 7 days in advance.

The written exams will be comprised of two parts: 1) student compositions that
demonstrate an adequate understanding of the major issues under consideration
in each unit [i.e., essays], 2) questions that test the student's memorization
of isolated facts, names, places, and dates from the lectures.

The grading of the essays is determined by judging three components: 1)
INFORMATION: accuracy and adequacy of historical content, 2) ORGANIZATION:
chronology and sequence of events, 3) PRESENTATION: legibility and
comprehensibility of the student's writing.

The grading of objective items (non-essay questions) on the written exams is
self-explanatory.

Final grades for the semester will be determined by summing the scores on all
exams and assignments (see the appendix), and by considering your attendance,
participation, and apparent interest in the course.

  

VIII. Absence Policy: It is expected that college students will be mature
enough to realize that attending class is vital to success in any college
course. In no course is this more true than this one. You cannot hear the
complete story of American History unless you are in class every time it
meets. Missing even one class can very well result in failing an examination.
Getting behind by not attending class or coming into class late may ultimately
result in failure in the course. I therefore recommend that you be in class
and on time every day, to get a fellow student's notes when an absence is
unavoidable, and to take extra care to know the material covered on the day of
the absence. A good attendance record can also boost a student's final grade
if he or she is on the borderline.

  

IX. Dr. Upchurch's Office Hours and Contact Information:

Office: East Georgia College Center on Chandler Road

Office Hours: Monday-Thursday, 8 AM to 10 AM, and by appointment

Office Phone: 486-7587

E-mail: tupchurch@ega.peachnet.edu

  

I strongly recommend that you contact me to discuss any and all concerns you
have regarding your progress in the course.

  

X. Make-Up Work Policy: If a student is absent on the day of the announcement
of an exam or other assignment, he/she is still responsible for taking the
exam or completing the assignment at the scheduled time. If a student is
absent on the day of a written exam, he/she must present the instructor with
an official excuse written by a doctor, judge, or similar authority figure at
the beginning of the next class, or take a zero. Make-up tests will be given
during the my office hours, in my office, at a time scheduled by appointment.
It is the student's responsibility to contact me to set up an appointment.
Students do not need to present an excuse for missing class on non-exam days.

  

XI. Policy Regarding Taping of Class: Students are allowed to record the
lectures on audio tape as a study aid. For institutional purposes, some
classes may be video-recorded by the instructor and/or administration of the
college. (I suggest that students who have trouble keeping up with my fast
lecturing tape-record the lectures.)

  

XII. Plagiarism: It is expected that college students will perform their own
work and not copy or otherwise cheat on exams and assignments. Students who
are caught plagiarizing someone else's work will be given a zero for the exam
or assignment, will most likely fail the course, and may face additional
penalties from East Georgia College.

  

XIII. ADA Regulations: If there is any student in this class who has special
needs because of learning disabilities or physical disabilities, he/she should
discuss this problem with me as soon as possible. I will try to accommodate
you as best as possible.

  

XIV. Additional Course Requirements:  There are no more requirements. However,
students may choose the extra credit option below to boost their final grade.

  

Extra Credit Option: Students may read a monograph (book) on some topic
relevant to this course in early American History and write a formal 3-5 page
review of it, typed, double-spaced, with one-inch margins on all sides,
12-point font, and use 5-space paragraph indentions. It must be stapled (not
paper clipped, not in a folder or binder) and have your name on the front
page. Its value will be the same as one written exam (100 points), but it will
be graded on content, organization, writing style, and clarity, and thus may
not yield that many actual points.

  

XV. Daily Syllabus: See the attached Topical Outline for this course.

  

XVI. General Education Learning Outcomes: See the attachment.

  

APPENDIX

  

Value of Examinations and Assignments:

  

Written Exams: Unit 1=100 points

Unit 2=100 points

Unit 3=100 points/Comprehensive Final=100 points

(Total=400)

  

Extra Credit Option=100 points

  

Maximum number of points possible for the whole semester=500 points

  

Scale for Final Grades:

  

360-500=A

320-359=B

280-319=C

240-279=D

Below 240=F

  

***Instructor's Policy Regarding Student Behavior: I should not need to remind
anyone that this is college, not 13th grade, and that you are adults, not
children. As such, you are expected to behave in a mature and courteous manner
in my classroom. This means, among other things, once class starts all
unnecessary noise and distracting behavior must stop. Class starts when Dr.
Upchurch walks into the room. If any student cannot agree to this rule, he/she
is dismissed immediately to go drop this course.

  
  
  
  
  

Topical Outline for U. S. History 2111

Units and Lessons

  

_Unit 1: Colonial America and the Founding of the United States_

0\. Syllabus

1\. Iberian Colonization

2\. English Colonization

3\. Settlement of the 13

4\. Colonial Economies and Social Problems

5\. Origins of Slavery in America

6\. Causes of the American Revolution

7\. The War for American Independence

8\. The Articles of Confederation

9\. Written Exam

_Unit II: The Early Republic and the Jacksonian Era_

1\. The Constitution

2\. The Washington and Adams Administrations

3\. The Jefferson and Madison Administrations

4\. The War of 1812 and the Era of Good Feelings

5\. The Missouri Compromise and the Growth of Sectionalism

6\. Jacksonian Democracy

7\. Religious and Social Reform Movements of the 1830s

8\. The Peculiar Institution and the Abolition Movement

9\. Written Exam

_Unit III: The Civil War Generation_

1\. Manifest Destiny and the Mexican War

2\. Origins of the Civil War--the 1850s

3\. Secession and the Coming of War

4\. The War for Southern Autonomy

5\. Surrender and Reunion

6\. Reconstruction and Redemption

7\. Written Final Exam--unit III and comprehensive



**[Return to Dr. Upchurch's Homepage](../home.old)**

