
    
    			  University at Albany
    		      State University of New York
    			       Fall 1992
    		      
    
    		      CLASSISM, RACISM, and SEXISM
    
    A AAS 240P  5889
    A LCS 240P  5905
    A WSS 240P  3738
    
    
    Susan Russell and Celia Gonzalez, Women's Studies Department
    Office Hours:  8:45-9:45 p.m. in Humanities 117 (by appointment)
    
    
    			 Description and Goals:
    
    This course analyzes connections among classism, racism, sexism,
    heterosexism and homophobia, their mutually reinforcing nature, and the
    tensions arising therefrom.  Attention is given to the ideological and
    personal aspects of these phenomenas, as well as to their institutional
    manifestations in American society.
    
    Students are expected to broaden their understanding of group oppression
    and identity from many different perspectives.
    
    
    		     Required Texts and Pamphlets:
    
    Albelda, Randy, et al, Mink Coats Don't Trickle Down: The Economic
    Attack on Women & People of Color. Boston: South End Press, 1988.
    
    Anderson, Margaret L. and Patricia Hill Collins, Race, Class and Gender: 
    An Anthology, Belmont, California: Wadsworth Publishing Company, 1992.
    
    Davis, Angela, Women, Race and Class. New York, Vintage Books, 1983.
    
    Davis, Susan, Women Under Attack: Victories, Backlash and the Fight for 
    Reproductive Freedom. Boston: South End Press, 1988.
    
    
    			    Course Outline:
    
    Readings with an (R) designation are on reserve at the Library
    
    9/8      Introduction        
             Discussion of syllabus, course requirements and course goals
             LIFE STORY DUE
    
    
    9/15     Shifting the Center
             Anderson, pp.1-46.
             (R)Graham, Lawrence Otis, "Invisible Man," New York Magazine,
                August 17, 1992, pp.26-34.
    
    
    9/22     Bias Incidents
             (R)Rothenberg, Paula S., Race, Class & Gender in the United
                States: An Integrated Study. New York: St. Martin's Press,
                1992, pp.63-90.
             Film: "Beyond Hate"
    
    
    10/13     Race and Racism
              Anderson, pp.47-95, 397-412,429-442
              Davis, A., Chapter 4
              Guest Speaker
    
    10/20     Class and Inequity
              Albelda, entire pamphlet          
              Anderson, pp.96-127
              Davis, A., Chapter 3
              (R)Rothenberg, pp.358-363
    
    10/27     Gender and Sexism
              Anderson, pp. 128-171, 413-428, 443-449
              (R)Rothenberg, pp.351-357, 374-387, 431-440
    
    JOURNAL 1 DUE
    
    11/3      Work and Families
              Anderson, 172-266
              Davis, A., Chapters 9 and 13
    
    11/10     Identity and Ideology
              Anderson, pp. 267-358
    
    11/17     Education:
              Anderson, pp. 359-396
              Davis, A., Chapter 6
    
    11/24     Reproduction and Choice
              Davis, S., entire pamphlet
              Film: "La Operacion"
    
    12/1      History of Social Change
              Davis, A., Chapters 2, 5 and 7
    
    12/8      Revisioning the Future
              Anderson, pp. 495-518
              (R)Rothenberg, pp. 408-413, 448-449
              Film: "Facing Evil"
    
    
    JOURNAL II DUE			  
    
    			  Course Requirements
    
    1.  Life Story: Ungraded assignment.  A short essay to be written the
    first day of class in 15 minutes.  Summarize the significant events in
    your life, such as what has made you who you are today.  In particular,
    focus in events related to your racial/ethnic background, your class or
    socio-economic background, and your gender and/or sexual orientation.
    Due 9/8
    
    2.  Journals: Journals reflect your reaction to materials from this
    class: readings, films, panel discussions, speakers, class discussion,
    and discussion groups.  Journals also chart your journey through this
    class, the questions which occur to you.  Journals must be typed, double
    spaced, 10 pages in length.  Each journal will discuss 5 items from the
    materials list above (2 pages per item). Each item must be identified
    by date assigned/discussed/seen, author and title.  Each journal will
    count for 45% of final grade.
    
          Journal I:    Due 10/27
          Covers course work from 9/8 through 10/27.  One item must be from
          class discussion.  One item must be from "Bias Incidents" 9/22.  No more
          than one item may be used from any one class.
    
          Journal II:    Due 12/8
          Covers course work from 11/3 through 12/8.  One item must be from
          class discussion.  One item must be from "Identity and Ideology" 11/10.
          No more than one item may be used from any one class.
    
          Total of 90% of grade
    
    3.  Class attendance: Class attendance will count for 10% of final
    grade.  Roll will be checked twice during each class period: at 5:45
    p.m. and at some point after the evening break.  If you are not in your
    assigned seat when roll is checked, you will be marked absent.  That
    absence will be removed only with a doctor's excuse.  If you are unable
    to get to this class on time, you should register for something else.
    
    4.  Class participation: Persons who regularly participate in class
    discussions will have their grade increased one fraction of a letter
    grade.  Please wear your name tag so that we will know who you are.
    
    5.  Eating in class: There will be NO EATING in the classsroom.  Sodas
    will be permitted as long as the room is left clean at the end of class.
      
    
    
    
    
                    
    
    
                                    
        
    
    
            
    
    

