#### Mississippi State University

#### Department of History

#### HI 4163/6163 Syllabus

## UNITED STATES HISTORY, 1917-1945

* * *

* * *

  
  

Semester: Spring 2001

Time: 11:00-11:50 a.m., MWF

Room: 253 Allen Hall

Instructor: [Dr. Richard V. Damms](http://www2.msstate.edu/~rdamms)

Office: 234 Allen Hall

Office Telephone: 325-7086 (Voice Mail)

Office Hours: 10:00-10:50 a.m., and by appointment

E-Mail: [rdamms@ra.msstate.edu](mailto: rdamms@ra.msstate.edu)

Course Web Page: http://www2.msstate.edu/~rdamms/US1917-45.htm

  
  

#### COURSE DESCRI``PTION

History 4163/6163 is an upper division survey of United States history between
1917 and 1945. Some previous background in American history would be helpful,
but it is not essential. The major theme of the course will be "America in
Crisis," referring to the contested transition to modernity, the economic
upheaval of the Great Depression, and American involvement in two global
conflagrations. Topics that will be addressed include: progressivism; Woodrow
Wilson and World War I at home and abroad; cultural conflicts of the 1920s;
Herbert Hoover and the New Era; the Great Depression; FDR and the New Deal;
the international crisis of the 1930s; and World War II.

  
  

#### ACADEMIC OBJECTIVES

  
  

  1. The student will gain a basic factual knowledge of this period of United States history.
  2. The student will develop or improve skills in analyzing historical data and drawing informed conclusions about such material.
  3. The student will gain or further develop critical skills necessary to assess arguments based on historical facts or analogies.
  4. The student will cultivate in essay examinations and class discussions the clear, persuasive oral and written style that are the marks of a liberally-educated person.

  
  

#### COURSE REQUIREMENTS

  
  

  1. The course will be conducted primarily on a lecture and discussion basis, although on certain days we may have audiovisual presentations. Students are strongly encouraged to raise questions and make comments in class.
  2. Students are required to complete each reading assignment on the date that it is assigned, and should be prepared to discuss it in class. Keeping abreast of the readings will facilitate understanding of the lectures. There will be ten on-line quizzes, based on the readings, that will count for 10% of the course grade.
  3. Students are responsible for all material presented in the lectures and discussions. Regular attendance is, therefore, essential. Class attendance and active participation will count 10% toward the course grade. If you miss a class, be sure to obtain the notes from a classmate. The instructor does not provide notes for days missed.
  4. Students are expected to conform to established classroom etiquette. Disruptive behavior, such as smoking, sleeping, snoring, talking and persistent tardiness is unfair both to the instructor and to serious students, and will not be tolerated. The instructor reserves the right to penalize such behavior by lowering the student's course grade.
  5. There will be two in-class examinations. Each exam will count 15% toward the course grade. The exams will be primarily essay in nature, and will be based on the lectures, readings, discussions, and any audiovisual material presented in class.
  6. There will be a final examination at the end of the semester which will count 20% toward the course grade. The final exam will follow the same general format as the other exams, but there will be a comprehensive component.
  7. Any student unable to take the examinations on the scheduled dates must receive **prior** clearance from the instructor, or present a **valid written excuse**. Make-up exams will only be given under exceptional circumstances, and may be either written or oral, at the discretion of the instructor.
  8. Undergraduate students will conduct an oral history interview with a family member or friend who lived through World War II. The interview will be tape recorded and transcribed and then be deposited in Mitchell Memorial Library for use by future researchers. Students will also write a short commentary on the interviewee's experiences, relating them to larger historical themes. More details on this assignment will be provided in a separate handout. The interview and commentary will count 30% toward the course grade. 
  9. Graduate students will read, review, and discuss three additional books and some short articles assigned by the instructor. More details on the reviews are available in the separate handout. The reviews and discussions will count 30% toward the course grade.
  10. Students will scrupulously observe all University policies on Academic Honesty, as outlined in the _Bulldog Handbook_. All cases of academic dishonesty (cheating on exams, buying or selling term papers, signing the attendance sheet for someone else, etc.) will result in a "Fail" grade for the course, in addition to any sanctions imposed by the University Academic Honesty Committee. Students who suspect academic dishonesty have an obligation to report it to the instructor immediately. 
  11. The instructor reserves the right to make wisecracks and puns. If you don't have a sense of humor, take another class. 

#### GRADING SCALE

All assignments will be graded according to the following scale:

A 90-100; B 80-89; C 70-79; D 60-69; F under 60.

#### REQUIRED READINGS

Five books are required for the course, all of which are available at the
University Bookstore.

Jeansonne, _Transformation and Reaction_.

Gordon, ed., _Major Problems in American History, 1920-1945_.

Schaffer, _America in the Great War_

MacLean, _Behind the Mask of Chivalry_.

Terkel, _The Good War_

  
  

#### `` SCHEDULE OF ASSIGNMENTS

````**Week One** : Gordon, ch. 1; Jeansonne, ch. 1.

1/8 Introduction.

1/10 The Progressive Legacy.

1/12 Woodrow Wilson and the Great War.

  
  

``**Week Two** : Schaffer, entire.

1/15 **NO CLASS** : Martin Luther King, Jr. Day Holiday.

1/17 Over There: The Soldiers' Experience in WWI.

1/29 Over Here: The Domestic Impact of WWI. **Discussion of Schaffer**.

  
  

**Week Three** : Gordon, chs. 2-3; Jeansonne, chs. 2, 4-5.

1/22 Woodrow Wilson and the Politics of Peacemaking. **LAST DAY TO REGISTER,
ADD/DROP WITHOUT A GRADE.**

1/24 The Great Red Scare at Home and Abroad.

1/26 A New Era in Business.

  
  

**Week Four** : Gordon, ch. 6; Jeansonne, chs. 3, 6.

1/29 Cultural Conflicts in the 1920s.

1/31 FILM: "Demon Rum."

2/2 **FIRST MIDTERM EXAMINATION**.

  
  

**Week Five** : MacLean, entire; Jeansonne, ch. 8.

2/5 Instructions for Term Paper assignment. RUSSELL WEIGLEY PRESENTATION
(EVENING)

2/7 **NO CLASS: History Forum on the Civil War. Simrall Auditorium.**

2/7 **Discussion of MacLean, _Behind the Mask of Chivalry_**.

  
  

**Week Six** : Gordon, ch 7; Jeansonne, ch. 7.

2/12 Herbert Hoover and Associationalism.

2/14 The Great Crash.

2/16 Hoover and the Great Depression

  
  

**Week Seven** : Gordon, chs. 9-11; Jeansonne, ch. 9.

2/19 FILM: "After the Crash." **LAST DAY TO DROP A COURSE WITH A "W."**

2/21 The 1920s Peace Structure.

2/23 Collapse of the Peace Structure.

  
  

**Week Eight** : Gordon, chs. 12-13; Jeansonne, chs. 10-12.

2/26 FDR and the New Deal.

2/28 New Deal Critics.

3/2 The Second New Deal.

  
  

**Week Nine** : Gordon, ch. 8.

3/5 New Deal or Raw Deal for African-Americans.

3/7 The End of Reform.

3/9 **SECOND MIDTERM EXAMINATION**.

  
  

3/12-16 **NO CLASSES: MID-SEMESTER HOLIDAY**

  
  

**Week Ten** : Terkel, Book One; Gordon, ch. 8; Jeansonne, ch. 13.

3/19 FDR and Depression Era Diplomacy.

3/21 The Road to War in Europe.

3/23 The Road to War in Asia.

  
  

**Week Eleven** : Terkel, Book Two.

3/26 FILM: "Banzai-Japan Strikes."

3/28 The Grand Alliance.

3/30 Grand Alliance, contd.

  
  

**Week Twelve** : Terkel, Book Three; Gordon, chs. 14-15; Jeansonne, ch. 14.

4/2 Wartime Mobilization.

4/4 Social Change at Home.

4/6 FILM: "The Home Front."

  
  

**Week Thirteen** : Terkel, Book Four; Jeansonne, ch. 15.

4/9 The U-Boat War.

4/11 FILM: "Mass-Producing Liberty."

4/13 NO CLASS: HOLIDAY.

  
  

**Week Fourteen**

4/16 Strategic Bombing.

4/18 FILM: "Memphis Belle." LAST DAY TO WITHDRAW FROM UNIVERSITY.

4/20 Fighting the European and Pacific Theaters.

  
  

**Week Fifteen**

4/23 Truman and the Atomic Bomb: A Historiographical Controversy.

4/25 Student Reports.

4/27 Student Reports, contd.

  
  

**Week Sixteen**

4/30 America in 1945.

5/2 Review.

  
  
  
  

**FINAL EXAMINATION** : Friday, 4 May 2001, 8:00-11:00 a.m.

* * *

Updated, 15 January 2001

* * *

Return to [Mississippi State University](http://www.msstate.edu/) Home Page.

