> ![](../../Images/NPUClogo.gif) |  |  ![](../../Images/HistDepHead.jpg)  
> ---|---|---  
>  
> ![](../Images/SenSem.Syl.gif)

>

> ![](../Images/Syllabus.gif)

>

> * * *

>

> ### **I. Objectives:**

>

> The purpose of this course is to acquaint you with some of the basic
techniques of historical research and with some of the issues of historical
scholarship. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, this course is designed to
help you reflect on the purpose of history in society and on your public
responsibilities as an historian.  
>

>

> ### **II. Methods:**

>

> To meet these goals we will make use of a number of techniques. The course
will focus on two major assignments: a research paper on a topic of your
choice and a reflective paper on the nature of history as a discipline and on
your role in that discipline. Class time will be spent discussing the reading
assignments and one another's research.

>

> The readings for the course will include:

>

> Thucydides, _The Peloponnesian War_

>

> Lord Macaulay, _The History of England_

>

> Perry Miller, _The New England Mind_

>

> G.W. F. Hegel, _The Philosophy of History_

>

> Emmanuel LeRoy Ladurie, _The Peasants of Languedoc_

>

> Sima Qian, _Records of the Grand Historian_

>

> William H. Dray, _Philosophy of History_

>

> Augustine, _The City of God_

>

> Garrett Mattingly, _The Armada_

>

>

>

> ### **III. Requirements:**

>

> **A. Attendance and Class Participation**

>

> Because this course is a seminar class and centered around class discussion,
your attendance in class and your participation in discussion is imperative.
You will earn up to 20 points for frequent, active and attentive participation
in the class discussion.

>

> You may also earn up to 20 points for participation in the constructive
criticism of the work of your fellow students. You will be asked to offer
suggestions to improve their extended essays as well as their leadership of
the class discussions.

>

> **C. Written Assignments**

>

> _1\. Major Historian Report_

>

> In a short essay of 2 to 3 pages you will be asked to describe the life, the
work and significance of a major historian of your choosing. Your paper will
be photocopied and distributed in class. Please see separate sheet for
complete instructions. This assignment will be worth 10 points.

>

>

>

> _2\. The Research Paper._

>

> The major written assignment for this course will be a 12-15 page (3000-4500
word) paper on a topic of your choosing. It will be worth a total of 150
points, which will be broken down into the following assignments:

>

> a. The Research Agenda will be worth up to 5 points.

>

> b. The Preliminary Bibliography will be worth up to 10 points.

>

> c. The Evidence of Research will be worth up to 10 points.

>

> d. The Annotated Bibliography will be worth up to 10 points.

>

> e. The Book Review will be worth up to 10 points.

>

> f. The Outline will be worth up to 10 points.

>

> g. The Rough Draft will be worth up to 20 points.

>

> h. The Final Draft will be worth up to 75 points.

>

>

>

> _3\. The Reflective Paper_

>

> Besides the research paper, the other major written assignment will be a
reflective paper about the nature of history as a discipline. It will be worth
140 points, which will be broken down into the following assignments:

>

> a. The Journal will be worth 50 points and will be evaluated based on its
completeness and on the quality of your reflections.

>

> b. Four Short Essays: Each of these essay will be 1-2 pages long (250-400
words) and will be graded acceptable/not acceptable based on whether or not
you have made a sincere effort to address the issues raised. Each essay will
be worth 10 points. The short essays will be based on:

>

> i. Your experiences with research methods.

>

> ii. Your analysis of the types and varieties of history

>

> iii. Your analysis of one of the issues in the philosophy of history.

>

> iv. Your thoughts on the speculative philosophy of history.

>

> Please see separate sheets for complete instructions.

>

> c. The Reflective Essay: In the reflective essay you will be asked to
develop your own philosophy: how you define history, what you see as the
purpose of studying history, do you think history is true and other issues.
This essay will be 5-7 pages long (1250-1750 words) and will evaluated based
on your understanding of the issues, the quality with which you express your
opinion and the level of insight displayed. It will be worth 50.

>

>

>

> ### **IV. Grading.**

>

> Your final grade will be based on the percentage of the possible points you
earn. There are 350 points possible.  
>

>

>

>

> ### V. Office Hours

>

> I will be in my office on the 6th floor of Carlson Tower from 10:30-11:30
and 1-2 MWF. If this is not convenient for you, please call me at ex. 5723 to
make some other arrangement. If you prefer, I can also be reached via e-mail
at "dkoeller". Please come talk to me if you have any problems, comments or
just want to chat. You are paying a lot of money for my services, making use
of office hours is one of the best ways to get a return on your investment.

>

>

>

> ### VI. Ethics Policy

>

>   * **A. Classroom Behavior**

>

> North Park College is a Christian Liberal Arts College. As such, we expect
our students and faculty to conduct themselves with honesty and integrity.
Therefore, each student is expect to uphold high ethical standards inside and
outside the classroom. The classroom should be an environment for learning.
Therefore, behavior which is disruptive, which belittles another or which
discourages others from achieving their academic goals has no place in this
classroom.

>

>   * **B. Academic Misconduct**

>

> When you turn in an assignment and take credit for it, it must be your own
work. If it is not, you have committed academic misconduct.

>

>   * _1\. Plagiarism_

>

> Plagiarism is representing the work of someone else as your own. Most
commonly this occurs by copying from a textbook or other source and failing to
give proper credit to the author. You may avoid this problem by always using
quotation marks whenever you use someone else's exact words and by always
giving references whenever you quote from or paraphrase another author.

>

>   * _2\. Cheating_

>

> If you give or receive unauthorized aid while completing any of the
requirements for this course, you have cheated. Giving answers during an exam,
writing a paper for another student or copying another student's work are all
forms of cheating. Assistance from the writing lab, talking with a professor
or fellow student or forming a study group before an exam are all acceptable
forms of aid.

>

>   * **C. Penalties**

>

> The penalties for violation of this ethics policy will range, at the
discretion of the instructor, from having to redo assignments, to failing the
course, to an appearance before the Dean.  
>

>

>

>

> ### VII. Miscellaneous Policies

>

>   * **A. Work Turned in Late**

>

> All work turned in late will be penalized. If you would like an extension,
you must receive permission from the instructor **before** the assignment is
due.

>

>   * **B. Electronic Submission of Written Work**

>

> If you choose, you may submit your written work electronically. Short
assignments may be e-mailed to me at "dkoeller" and longer assignments may be
sent as an attachment to an e-mail message.

>

>   * **C. Use of Student Work in Class**

>

> The instructor will on occasion use excerpts from student work as examples
for class discussion. For example, a student answer from a midterm exam might
be distributed to help others learn from the strengths and weaknesses of that
answer. If you object to your work being used in this way, please inform the
instructor.

>

>

>

> ### VIII. Proviso

>

> The instructor reserves the right to alter this syllabus at any time should
it be warranted by the demands of sound pedagogy. Changes to the syllabus will
be announced in class. In any event, the posted, e-text versions of the
syllabus and schedule of classes are authoritative, taking precedence over any
printed version.

>

>

>

> * * *

>

> [ ![](../../Images/NPUClogo.gif) | ![](../../Images/HistDepButton.jpg) |
![](../../Images/WebChronW.Bot.JPG)  
> ---|---|---  
> [North Park University](http://www.northpark.edu/) |  [History
Department](../../index.html) |  [WebChron](../../WebChron/index.html)  
>  
> Copyright 2000 by David W. Koeller.
[dkoeller@northpark.edu](mailto:dkoeller@northpark.edu). All rights reserved.

