

![](greybar.gif)

  

###  Department of History

#  HIS-3931: MEDIEVAL ARCHAEOLOGY

####  Professor: Dr. [Florin
Curta](http://web.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/index.html)

####  Office: 202 Flint Hall

####  Office hours: M 10:30-12:30, F 2-4, or by appointment

####  Phone: 392-0271, ext. 240

####  E-mail:[ fcurta@history.ufl.edu](mailto:fcurta@history.ufl.edu)

####  Class will meet MWF 12:50-1:40 in TUR 2306

* * *

![The Red-and-White Church, Targsor \(Romania\)](P1010809.jpg)

* * *

###  THE COURSE SYLLABUS

###  Fall 2001

> ###  _Course description_

>

> **Historians of the Middle Ages readily acknowledge the advantage that
documentary evidence gives them over archaeologists. After all, why would
anyone need to dig in the dirt, when so many archives remain unexplored? Why
would anyone prefer the drab remains of past material culture to the spiritual
and artistic achievements of the Middle Ages? Many view archival material as a
control lacking in archaeology. The true task of the archaeologist is thus to
discover whether the evidence of material culture properly reflects the
documentary record or _vice versa._ During the last few decades, however, the
discipline of medieval archaeology experienced a spectacular growth. It has
become clear that the research carried by archaeologists has no direct
connections with, or implications for, the question posed of the documentary
record by historians. But the medieval history of material culture raises some
important issues, all of which are of historical importance. The study of
urban history, for example, cannot be conceived today with a solid training in
medieval archaeology. Problems of production and distribution, as well as
intricate questions of group identity, gender, and social status can now be
re-phrased in the light of the archaeological research. Increasingly, medieval
archaeology has become a major component of Medieval Studies.**

>

> **The main goal of this course is to outline some of the most important
areas of current archaeological research and to point to major results. From
rural settlements to pottery, the impact of medieval archaeology on the study
of medieval society cannot be ignored without the risk of serious distortion.
Following a topical, rather than chronological, order, we will take a glimpse
to life in the Middle Ages through the window opened by archaeologists. We
will look at how they gather their sources, analyze them and reached
conclusions of historical importance.**

>

>> > > ###  **TEXTBOOKS**

>>>>

>>>> ####  **Required**

>

>   * **C. J. Arnold. _An Archaeology of the Early Anglo-Saxon Kingdoms._ 2nd
edition. London/New York: Routledge, 1997 [hereafter _Arnold_ ]; on two-hour
reserve in [Library West](http://www.uflib.ufl.edu/west.html)**

>   * **Kevin Greene. _Archaeology. An Introduction._ Philadelphia: University
of Pennsylvania Press, 1995 [hereafter _Greene_ ]; on two-hour reserve in
[Library West](http://www.uflib.ufl.edu/west.html)**

>   * **_Medieval Archaeology. An Encyclopaedia_. Ed. by Pam J. Crabtree.
London/New York: Garland, 2001 [hereafter _Crabtree_ ]; also available in the
Reference section of [Library West](http://www.uflib.ufl.edu/west.html)**

>   * **Coursepack [hereafter _Pack_ ]**

>

**Optional**

>

>   * **Kieran Denis O'Conor. _The Archaeology of Medieval Rural Settlement in
Ireland._ Dublin: Royal Irish Academy, 1998 [hereafter _O'Conor_ ]; on two-
hour reserve in [Library West](http://www.uflib.ufl.edu/west.html)**

>   * **Martin Welch, _Discovering Anglo-Saxon England_. University Park:
Pennsylvania State University Press, 1993 [hereafter _Welch_ ];on two-hour
reserve in [Library West](http://www.uflib.ufl.edu/west.html)**

>   * **_Spaces of the Living and the Dead: an Archaeological Dialogue._ Ed.
by Catherine E. Karkov, Kelley M. Wickham-Crowley, and Bailey K. Young.
Oxford: Oxbow Books, 1999 [hereafter _Karkov_ ]**

>

**In addition, there will be a number of readings from various web sites.**

>

> **NOTE : It is essential that you read the assigned sections in the
textbook(s) at the time they are due. Class meetings will be organized around
a lecture/discussion format and quizzes will necessitate familiarity with the
material.**  
>  
>

> ###  _Course requirements_

>

>  
> **There is no attendance policy, but you are responsible for attending all
lectures and reading the required texts. Class participation may be taken into
account to determine the overall grade. The basis for evaluation of
performance will be four quizzes and two exams (Midterm and Final). The
unannounced quizzes will consist only of identification or multiple-choice
questions (no essay). The Midterm and Final exams will cover everything from
lectures and readings. Both Midterm and Final will consist of two parts: an
identification and/or multiple-choice part, and a short essay, in which you
will be asked to synthesize your knowledge of the topic, dropping in facts to
show that you understand the concrete aspects of that topic. Only the Midterm
will be cumulative. In other words, the Final examination will cover only the
material since the Midterm examination. Make-up Midterm and Final exam will be
given for very serious reasons, in which case you will have to produce some
official proof. There is no make-up for quizzes. Extra-credit work will be
accepted only for students with active participation in class discussions. The
format of the extra-credit option shall be discussed with the instructor
during regular office hours. The following point-system will be used in
determining the final grade:**

>

> **Quizzes: 40 points**  
> **Midterm: 30 points**  
> **Final exam: 30 points**  
> **Total: 100 points**

>

> ####  Grades:

>

> **_Points_** | **_Grade_**  
> ---|---  
> 91-100 | A  
> 85-90 | B+  
> 75-84 | B  
> 65-74 | C+  
> 55-64 | C  
> 45-54 | D+  
> 35-44 | D  
> under 35 | E  
  
* * *

  


###  COURSE WEEKLY TOPICS

**For a detailed description of readings for each week, click on the topic in
the right-hand column.**

  
**_Week_** | **_Date_** | **_Topic_**  
---|---|---  
1 | August 20-24 |
[Introduction](http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/MedArch-1.html)  
2 | August 27-31 | [History of
archaeology](http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/MedArch-2.html)  
3 | September 3-7 | [Theory and practice of
archaeology](http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/MedArch-3.html)  
4 | September 10-14 | [Urban
archaeology](http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/MedArch-4.html)  
5 | September 17-21 | [Rural
archaeology](http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/MedArch-5.html)  
6 | September 24-28 | [Medieval palaces, castles, and
forts](http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/MedArch-6.html)  
7 | October 1-5 | [Cathedral and parish
churches](http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/MedArch-7.html)  
8 | October 8-12 | [Monastic
archaeology](http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/MedArch-8.html)  
9 | October 15-19 | [Aspects of daily
life](http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/MedArch-9.html)  
10 | October 22-26 | [Burial sites and mortuary
archaeology](http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/MedArch-10.html)  
11 | October 29-November 2 | [Social structure and
archaeology](http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/MedArch-11.html)  
12 | November 5-9 | [The archaeology of
power](http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/MedArch-12.html)  
13 | November 12-16 | [Demography and
migration](http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/MedArch-13.html)  
14 | November 19-23 | [Crafts and
trade](http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/MedArch-14.html)  
15 | November 26-30 | [Gender and
ethnicity](http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/MedArch-15.html)  
16 | December 3-7 |
[Conclusion](http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/MedArch-16.html)  
17 | December 12, 3:00-5:00 | **Final exam**  
  
* * *

  
(C) Florin Curta 2001

