Bill Wilson  
_Environmental Politics Syllabus_

PO324  
Spring, 2002  
Tuesday, Thursday 1000-1115  



**EDUCATIONAL PHILOSOPHY:** _This course has been framed within a particular
sense of the purpose of education.   The approach draws heavily upon the ideas
of Parker Palmer who identifies the aims of education as including "knowing,
teaching, and learning," and he further states," **to teach is to create a
space in which the community of truth is practiced. "**  My particular task as
a teacher is to create a space for learning;  all members of the community
bear responsibility for preparation and participation to sustain the necessary
dialogue.  
    The process of developing the "community of truth" accepts the idea that all who come have something to offer the exploration and should be heard respectfully.  "Truth"  is more than knowledge, and while it is personal, it can only be achieved with the help of the community dialogue; given the limitations of every individual, it can arise only from discourse with others.  As such, "truth" resides someplace in between the individual and the learning community.  This context provides a creative tension as learners seek to develop their own ":voice" and at the same time engage in discourse which honors the modes of learning to arrive at knowledge.  To be sure, those modes have changed over time and will likely continue to change.  Hence, learning is dynamic; undergraduate studies are but an early stage of a lifelong process.  
    The achievement of "truth" is the ultimate goal of liberal education, and in the presence of "truth" our lives can be transformed.   Such a transformation is not simply gaining abstract knowledge but is also embodied in the action of the person.  The "truth" that this course pursues will seek to help you understand the subject better and empower you to act in light of that knowledge.  
    And yet it would be presumptuous to think that any course of study will automatically provide you with all of the answers you need.  Indeed, undergraduate studies may be thought of more as the development of the ability to pose critical questions in preparation for lifelong learning.  Toward this end it is helpful to listen to the wise words of Denise Levertov's poem:_

_                             Just when you seem to yourself  
                                       nothing but a flimsy web  
                                       of questions, you are given  
                                     the questions of others to hold  
                                        in the emptiness of your hands,  
                                        songbird eggs that can still hatch  
                                           if you keep them warm . . . .  
                                      You are given the questions of others  
                                           as if they were answers  
                                              to all you ask.  Yes, perhaps  
                                          this gift is your answer._

  
**PURPOSE** :  The purpose of this course is to examine the relationship
between human affairs and the "natural environment."  Such an examination has
been framed broadly within the context of the liberal arts.  At the outset, we
will investigate the fundamental questions of the human-nature relationship
through a work of fiction.  Following this assessment, we will focus on the
history of environmental politics in the United States through an anthology of
readings which, together, form a record of  our environmental dialogue.  We
will then turn to an examination of the actual policymaking process with a
series of case studies, examining twelve environmental controversies and the
difficulties of translating values into policy.   Students will work on their
own individual case study in understanding the complexity of moving from
values to public policy.  The course will focus primarily on domestic United
States policy but will also deal with selected international environmental
issues.

  
**CONDUCT:** This class demands your active participation through speaking,
listening, reading, and writing.   Central to our work is the text and
accompanying readings and activities.  From this departure point we will
investigate each subject through dedicated discussion periods and analytical
essays.  It is crucial that you do the readings for the class on time and be
prepared to participate.

**  
OFFICE HOURS:** Monday, Wednesday, Friday 2:30-3:30; Tuesday Thursday
1:30-2:30 or by appointment  
I encourage you to come in to go over papers, discuss the text, or just to
talk.  It helps to make an appointment, but don't hesitate to stop in any time
my door is ajar.   Also, you can always send me a message via electronic mail;
timely replies are guaranteed. Address:
[wwilson@smcvt.edu](mailto:wwilson@smcvt.edu)

**  
REQUIREMENTS:**  
        1\. Analytical Essays- These five page essays are the central method of evaluation.   Essays may be re-written for an improved grade.  (See Handout:[ _On Written Work](../Handouts/On_Written_Work.htm))_ (See: [Analytical Papers](saps.htm))  
        2\. Discussion Papers- Discussion papers are designed as reflections on readings or suggested topics which lead to full class examination. (See Handout: _[Discussion Papers](../Handouts/Discussion_Papers.htm))  
        _3\. [ Case Presentation](../case_study.htm)\- Each class member or group  will present a "case" from a selected list, or an approved choice which illustrates the policy-making process of environmental politics. _  
          
**  
_ EVALUATION: **Evaluation is an important aspect of this course, not in terms
of grades, but in the sense of the responsibility of each class  member for
the critical evaluation and discussion of the ideas presented in class.  
I encourage your critical views on course content and method throughout the
semester; a formal survey will be used at the end of the course.  Final letter
grades will be based upon quality points in the following proportions:

        Analytical Essays.......................................................................4 @ 150   =    600  
        Case Presentation....................................................................................   =    100  
        Discussion Papers...............................................................best  10@20)   =    200  
        Final Examination.....................................................................................    = _    200_  
                                                                                         TOTAL POINTS      =  1100 POINTS  
  
**COURSE POLICIES:**  
    1\. This course is conducted in conformance with the policy on academic integrity explained in the Student Guide (See Handout:[ Academic Integrity](../Handouts/academic_integrity.htm)) Please ask if you have any questions regarding this policy applied to any assignment.  
    2\. Students must complete all course requirements for a passing grade.  
    3\. The penalty for unexcused late submissions is the quality point equivalent of one grade per day.  If for some reason you cannot complete the assignment on time, contact me _before_ the submission date.   I have message capability on both home and office phones as well as e-mail.  
    4\. Because this class involves the obligations of a collective effort in education, attendance will be taken regularly; more than one week of unexcused absences will result in a grading penalty of five quality points for each additional class missed.  
    5\. Students with documented learning differences should contact me to make any necessary special arrangements for fulfillment of course requirements. 

**  
A WORD ON MATERIALS:** While maintaining the same overall course schema, there
are new readings for this class.  
The emphasis is to develop an updated anthology of readings and to try and
understand policy making through case studies rather than a more institutional
approach.

Clarke, J.N. and H. Cortner, THE STATE AND NATURE: VOICES HEARD, VOICES
UNHEARD IN AMERICA'S ENVIRONMENTAL DIALOGUE (Upper Saddle River: Prentice
Hall, 2002).  This is a new text which substitutes for a similar reader used
previously.  Organized chronologically, it provides a sense of an
environmental perspective developed within a historical context within the
United States.

Harr, Jonathan, A CIVIL ACTION (New York: Random House-Vintage, 1995)  This
work provides insight into the legal dimension of environmental politics
outside of governmental regulation and within a focused case study of the
impact of pollution on a small town in Massachusetts.

Layzer, J, THE ENVIRONMENTAL CASE: TRANSLATING VALUES INTO POLICY (Washington:
Congressional Quarterly Press, 2002).  This is a new work which takes a case
approach in explaining environmental politics.  This book has not been used in
this course before and shifts the substantive focus from a more governmental
emphasis to a problem emphasis, drawing in government, which also addresses
the values associated in translating an environmental perspective into public
policy.

Quinn, D., ISHMAEL: AN ADVENTURE OF THE MIND AND SPIRIT (New York: Bantam,
1992). This has not become a classic statement of a deep environmental
perspective which challenges initial assumptions and understandings of  the
environment and the place of human beings in environmental problems and their
solution.  

  
**WEB SITES OF INTEREST:** These selected websites are in some cases specific
to the course while   others are general references.  They may prove helpful
in your research.  I welcome any assessments or additional entries.  
     Comprehensive Directory of  Environmental Organizations [www.webdirectory.com](http://www.webdirectory.com)   
     Christian Environmental Organizations <http://cesc.montreat.edu/ceo> [  
](Http://cesc.montreat.edu.ceo)     Environmental Organizations
[www.jbpub.com/environet/orgs/index/cfm](http://www.jbpub.com/environet/orgs/index/cfm)  
     National Environmental Directory [www.environmentaldirectory.net/default.htm  
](http://www.environmentaldirectory.net/default.htm)     United Nations
Environmental Program  [www.gsf.de/UNEP/contents.html  
](http://www.gsf.de/UNEP/contents.html)     US Organizations- Action
[www.coejl.org/action/usenvorg.shtml](http://www.coejl.org/action/usenvorg.shtml)  
     US Environmental Protection Agency  [www.epa.gov  
](http://www.epa.gov)     US Department of the Interior
[www.doi.gov/](http://www.doi.gov/)  
     US Council on Environmental Quality [www.whitehouse.gov/ceq](http://www.whitehouse.gov/ceq)  
     US National Environmental Protection Act <http://ceq.eh.doe.gov/nepanet.htm>  
     US New England EPA [www.epa.gov/region1/](http://www.epa.gov/region1/)  
     Vermont Agency of Natural Resources [www.anr.state.vt.us](http://www.anr.state.vt.us)  
     Vermonters for a Clean Environment (interest group) [www.vtce.org](http://www.vtce.org)   
  
      Further materials and internet websites will be identified during the course for supplemental general readings on the subjects, yet it is helpful to indicate some sources for general reference.  
_CIAO_ \- Columbia University International Affairs index provides information
and on-line articles on a broad range of international affairs.  
_Lexis-Nexis_ \- Lexis-Nexis provides a wide range of information on current
events as well as on-line articles. There is also access to individual country
information.  
_MUSE-_ Muse provides a variety of periodicals- of interest to this class are
_World Politics, Human Rights Quarterly, School of Advanced International
Studies (SAIS) Review  
PAIS- Public Affairs Information Service-_ index of a wide variety of
periodicals  
_UMI-Pro-Quest Direct-_ index of periodicals and newspapers  
  
LIBRARY PERIODICAL HOLDINGS  
     
**CLASS SCHEDULE**

**DATE  
** T   1/15  
  
Th 1/17

T   1/22

Th  1/24

T   1/29

Th  1/31

T   2/5

Th  2/7

T   2/12

Th  2/14

T   2/19

Th  2/21

T   2/26

Th  2/28



T   3/5

Th  3/7

T   3/12

Th  3/14

T   3/19

Th 3/21

T   3/26

Th 3/28

T  4/2

Th   4/4

T   4/9

Th 4/11

T 4/16

Th 4/18

T   4/23

Th 4/25

T   4/30  
| **READING  
** Introduction  
  
Quinn

Quinn

Quinn

Quinn

-

Clarke-Part 1  
  
Clarke-Part 2  
  
Clarke-Part 3  
  
Clarke- Part 4  
  
Clarke- Part 5  
  
Clarke- Part 6  
  
-  
  
-  
  
Clarke Part 7  
REVISED SCHEDULE 3/5  
  
Film- Cadillac Desert Pt 2  
  
Layzer 1-2  
  
Layzer 3  
  
Layzer 4  
  
Layzer 5-6  
  
Film- Cadillac Desert Pt 3  
  
Layzer 7  
  
Layzer 8-9  
  
Layzer 10-11  
  
Layzer 12-13  
  
Layzer 14  
  
Harr  1-100  
  
Harr 100-200  
  
Harr 200-300  
  
Harr 300-400  
  
Harr 400-500  
  
Review  | **ASSIGNMENT  
  
  
  
  
** DISC1  
  
  
  
DISC2  
  
Analytical Paper 1  
  
DISC3  
  
Case1  
  
DISC4  
  
Case2  
  
DISC5  
  
Case3/DISC6  
  
  
  
  
  
Analytical Paper 2  
  
Case4/DISC7  
Analytical Paper #2  
  
Case 4  
  
DISC 7  
  
Case 5  
  
DISC 8  
  
-  
  
Analytical Paper 3a  
  
Case 6  
  
DISC9  
  
Case 7  
  
Analytical Paper 3b  
  
Case 8  
  
DISC10  
  
Case 9  
  
Case 10  
  
Case 1  
  
Analytical Paper 4  
---|---|---  
  


[Homepage](../index.htm) | [FYS101](../101_FYS/first_year_seminar.htm) |
[PO410](../410_SS/senior_seminar.htm) |
[PO245](../245_IP/international_politics.htm) |
[PO347O347](../347_IL/International_law.htm) |
[PO324](environmental_politics.htm)  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
  


