| **Syllabus:** |      | **Dr. Mary S. Black  
EDC 370S #08330**  
---|---|---  
  
## **Secondary Social Studies Methods**

#### **Tuesdays 1:00-4:00  
SZB 278  
Fall 2001**

###  Office hours:

SZB 428E Mondays 10:00-12:00, or by appointment, 512-471-4611,
msblack@mail.utexas.edu

### Rationale:

Welcome New Social Studies Teachers! This course is an introduction to
practical methods for teaching content and skills in the secondary social
studies classroom. Because learning and teaching are life-long endeavors, it
is impossible to acquire all the necessary ideas and knowledge in one course.
Therefore, this course forms a continuum with EDC 667, the student teaching
internship, where you will have the opportunity to practice many techniques
and strategies introduced in EDC 370S. In your teaching career, you will be
required to participate in continued professional development each year, so
you should expect your knowledge and skill to continue to grow over time. This
is just the beginning of what I hope will be a long and satisfying experience
for you.

### Purpose:

to acquire an introduction to the skills and resources necessary to teach
secondary social studies

### Objectives:

  * to gain skill in classroom facilitation and presentation
  * to gain knowledge of social studies resources for teachers, including the Internet
  * to practice new pedagogical methods designed to engage diverse students
  * to design one unit to be used during your teaching internship
  * to acquire professional pride in yourself as an educator

### Requirements:

#### Required text:

  * _Teachers ' Curriculum Institute._ (1999). _History Alive: Engaging All Learners in the Diverse Classroom_. Palo Alto, CA: Teachers ' Curriculum Institute.
  * _Wiggins, G. and McTighe, J._ (1998). _Understanding by Design_. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.

####  Required supplies:

  * one single-subject spiral notebook (70-100 pages), one set of colored markers

#### Required communications:

  * E-mail is required to facilitate communication in this course and in your internship. UT students can set up an email account by contacting the UT Microcenter.

#### Highly encouraged attendance:

  * Texas Council for the Social Studies annual meeting in Galveston, Oct. 6,2001.

### Assessments:

  * **Daily activities** (TEKS quiz, seating charts 30% various dates draft of culminating project and rubric, etc.)
  * **Professional Development** 25% continuous (includes IN assignments and participation)
  * **Final Unit Plan** 45% Draft due Nov. 1, Final product due Before  "Total Teach"

|

**Grading Scale:**  
  
---  
**A = 100-91:** |    | Well prepared to begin teaching duties  
**B = 90-81:** |    | Moderately prepared for teaching. Will require extra
work to meet expectations  
**C= 80-71:** |    | Poorly prepared for teaching. Will need close supervision
and additional work to meet teaching expectations  
**F = 70-below:** |    | Will not be ready for teaching  
  


### EDC 370S Class Activities:

#### Date

|

#### Activities

|

#### Assignments for next class  
  
---|---|---  
**Sept. 4** |

What is social studies?  
KWL chart  
Jigsaw (Hinchey reading)  
Discuss Hinchey reading

|

1\. Download TEKS from TEA website  
2\. Read History Alive! as fast as possible  
3\. Read Understanding by Design as fast as possible  
  
**Sept. 11** |

TEKS quiz  
Interactive Notebook  
Response Groups  
Writing in Social Studies

|

1\. Seating charts for all classes in student teaching  
  
**Sept. 18** |

Experiential Exercises  
cooperative problem solving  
History alive! video

|

######  
  
**Sept. 25** |

Interactive slide lecture  
Culminating projects & rubrics  
Discuss Understanding by Design

|

#####  
  
** NO MEETINGS FOR EDC 370S IN OCTOBER THROUGH NOVEMBER 21,2001.  
Student Teaching only, plus weekly student teaching seminar **  
**Nov. 1** |

Draft of Unit Plan Due to Dr. Black

|  
** EDC 370S MEETS MONDAY THROUGH FRIDAY FROM NOV. 26 THROUGH DEC. 7**  
**Nov. 26** |

History Standards  
Spiral Questioning  
Skill Builders  
Discuss Sexias

|  
**Nov. 27** |

Geography Standards  
Maps and Globes

|  
**Nov. 28** |

Government Standards  
Guest Speaker from Law-Related Education

|  
**Nov. 29** |

Economics Standards  
Mini Dramas  
We the People

|  
**Nov. 30** |

Psychology Standards  
Using literature in social studies

|  
**Dec. 3** |

Discovering Texas Archeology

|

1\. Download Piecing Together History from [TxDOT's teacher
pages.](www.dot.state.tx.us/insdtdot/orgchart/env/education/hancock.htm)  
  
**Dec. 4** |

20th Century Social History  
(Ruben Hancock and Life on a Cotton Farm)

|  
**Dec. 5** |

Teaching about the Holocaust  
Guest Speaker from Texas State Historical Assn.  
History Fair

|  
**Dec. 6** |

Using Video

|  
**Dec. 7** |

Wrap up and evaluations

|  
  
### Policies:

No late assignments will be accepted. All assignments must be typed or word
processed. Any student missing more than three classes can be withdrawn from
class and will not continue with teaching internship this semester.

### Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty:

Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual,
all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic
dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Judicial
Services web site at http://www.utexas.edu/dept/dos/sjs/ to access the
official University policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well
as further elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.

The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information,
contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-4641 TTY.

**Important:** You are required to complete 10 weeks of student teaching for
certification. You are required to be at your assigned school no later than 30
minutes before the first bell each day. Normally, you can expect your day to
be from about 8:30 to 4:00, with some variation among schools.

###  Suggested Readings:

#### Available in the PCL or from the National Council of Social Studies
website

  * Ankeney, Kirk, Richard Del Rio, Gary B. Nash, and David Vigilante, (Eds.). (1996). _Bring history alive: A sourcebook for teaching United States history._ Los Angeles: National Center for History in the Schools, University of California, Los Angeles.
  * Dunn, Ross E. and David Vigilante, (Eds.). (1996). _Bring history alive! A sourcebook for teaching world history._ Los Angeles: National Center for History in the Schools, University of California, Los Angeles.
  * Evans, Ronald W. and David Warren Saxe, (Eds.). (1996). _Handbook on teaching social issues._ NCSS Bulletin 93. Washington, D.C.: National Council for the Social Studies.
  * Geography Education Standards Project. (1994). _Geography for Life: National geography standards._ Washington, D.C.: National Geographic Research and Exploration.
  * Center for Civic Education. (1994). _National Standards for Civics and Government._ Calabasas, CA: Center for Civic Education.
  * National Center for History in the Schools. (1996). _National standards for history._ Los Angeles: National Center for History in the Schools, University of California, Los Angeles.
  * National Council for the Social Studies. (1994). _Expectations of excellence: Curriculum standards for social studies._ Washington, D.C.: National Council for the Social Studies.
  * Roupp, Heidi. (1997). _Teaching world history: A resource book._ Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe. _Social Education,_ the journal of the National Council of Social Studies (in PCL)
  * Texas Education Agency. (1999). _Texas Social Studies Framework, K-12: Research and Resources for designing a social studies curriculum_. Austin: Texas Education Agency.

##  

![This is a navigational tool. Please use textual links located
below.](nav.gif)  
[UT Austin](http://www.utexas.edu/) | [College of
Education](http://www.edb.utexas.edu/coe/coe.shtml) | [Curriculum &
Instruction](../c&i.html) | [Programs of Study](../programs.htm)

* * *

University of Texas at Austin, Department of Curriculum and Instruction,
Austin, TX 78712  
Questions, comments, input? Contact: Graduate Coordinator at
[cigrad@uts.cc.utexas.edu](mailto:cigrad@uts.cc.utexas.edu)

* * *

This website was designed and created by students (Cynthia Fraser-Gonzalez,
Deborah M. Guerra, Tina Oestreich, Elida Ponce, Dora Quiroz, and Siv Touba) in
Dr. Min Liu's [Interactive Multimedia Design and Production
Class](http://www.edb.utexas.edu/projects/mmdesign/mmdesign.html) of Spring
1998.  
~

