**![HIST 1700-12](_derived/HIST%201700-12.htm_cmp_strtedge100_bnr.gif)**

  
---  
[![Up](_derived/up_cmp_strtedge100_vbtn.gif)](./)| |

HIST 1700 American Civilization  
Spring 2002  
Section # 2035412  
TR 8:30-9:45 AM SS 119

![](Boston.jpg)  
Prof. William Thomas Allison  
SS 246  
Phone: 626-6710 [  
wallison@weber.edu](mailto:%0d%0awallison@weber.edu)  
[www.weber.edu/wallison](http://www.weber.edu/wallison)  
Hours: MW 11:00 AM-Noon  
           T 10:00-11:30 AM  
           or by appointment

| ![bullet](_themes/strtedge/strbul1c.gif)| Books  
---|---  
![bullet](_themes/strtedge/strbul1c.gif)| Course Methods  
![bullet](_themes/strtedge/strbul1c.gif)| Course Objectives  
![bullet](_themes/strtedge/strbul1c.gif)| Requirements  
![bullet](_themes/strtedge/strbul1c.gif)| Grade Book  
![bullet](_themes/strtedge/strbul1c.gif)| Grade Scale  
![bullet](_themes/strtedge/strbul1c.gif)| Policies  
![bullet](_themes/strtedge/strbul1c.gif)| Schedule  
  
**WELCOME** : Welcome to HIST 1700 American Civilization. Many of you have a
jaded view of studying history, probably from a bad experience with a high
school history course. Well, forget all of that, because this is not what you
had before. History is fun, it's interesting, and it's about us. We can all
relate to it. It is my personal goal to get you to enjoy history.

**BOOKS**:

![bullet](_themes/strtedge/strbul1c.gif)|  Murrin,  et al. _Liberty, Equality,
Power: A History of the American People_. Concise Second Edition, Customized
Version (Harcourt, 2001). _  
_  
---|---  
  
**COURSE METHODS**: We will use a variety of methods in this course, including
lecture, media (music and video), some group activities, etc. Normally I will
provide a computer overhead that will outline the day's topic and show you
some graphics related to the day's topic. This will help you organize your
notes and make studying for exams easier for you.

**COURSE OBJECTIVES**: Utah State Code 53B-16-103(b) requires that "A student
shall demonstrate a reasonable understanding of the history, principles, form
of government, and economic system of the United States prior to receiving a
bachelor's degree or teaching credential." Successful completion of this
course will satisfy this "American Institutions" requirement. It also helps
fulfill WSU's commitment to diversify education. As a result, the course meets
instructional objectives in each of the following areas:

![bullet](_themes/strtedge/strbul1c.gif)|   HISTORY: Students will gain a
historical perspective of American Civilization, to include a basic knowledge
of historical method, with its reliance on evidence, debate, skepticism,
criticism, and the recognition of bias, and of ways historians derive theories
about the nature of the past.  
  
---|---  
![bullet](_themes/strtedge/strbul1c.gif)| PRINCIPLES: Students will
contemplate and articulate a wide range of the values inherent in American
Civilization, to include the ideals of republicanism, democracy, due process
of law, equal protection, inalienable rights, and civil rights, and
demonstrate an ability to distinguish among these ideals.  
  
![bullet](_themes/strtedge/strbul1c.gif)| FORM OF GOVERNMENT: Students will
understand the institutions and practices of government as they evolved during
the colonial periods and Revolution, and their revisions since then, to
include a comprehension of the workings of government in the United States at
the national, state, and local levels.  
  
![bullet](_themes/strtedge/strbul1c.gif)| ECONOMIC SYSTEM: Students will
comprehend the transformation of the United States from an agrarian-based to
an industrial-based economy and the wide range of consequences for Americans
of economic change, to include analyses of capitalism, communitarianism, and
socialism as the have emerged in theory and practice.  
  
![bullet](_themes/strtedge/strbul1c.gif)| DIVERSITY: Students will grasp the
rich heritage of the American people and the ways race, creed, color, national
origin, gender, and other distinctive qualities and characteristics among
groups and individuals have shaped the American experience and have
contributed to the vitality of the nation.  
  
**REQUIREMENTS**: You will take 2 exams (midterm and final), objective in
nature. The 2 exams will be worth 50% each. You will take these exams using
the Chitester testing program in testing centers located throughout campus.

    Midterm Exam        Open March 11 through March 14  
    Final Exam              Open May 6 through May 9

**GRADE BOOK**: You may check your grade at anytime using the grade book
feature at [www.courses.weber.edu](http://www.courses.weber.edu).

**GRADE SCALE**: This course will use the standard +- grade scale in
accordance with University policy.

**POLICIES**:

， ATTENDANCE: You are expected to be in class regularly. Failure to attend
class will hurt your grade. Excessive absences will be sufficient to warrant a
reduction in your final grade. Much of our material discussed in class is not
in your books, so it is in your best interest to attend class. Roll will be
taken during the first few weeks of class to put faces with names, etc.

， EXTRA CREDIT: There is NO extra credit for this course.

， MAKE-UP EXAMS: Make-up exams are given only in extreme cases, and require an
University excuse or doctor's note.

， INCOMPLETES: Incompletes are not given in this course.

， PLAGIARISM: A fancy word for cheating, plagiarism is not tolerated. Any case
will result in the student receiving a failing grade for the course, and
further University disciplinary action according to the Student Code.

， CONDUCT IN CLASS: This is a University course, and students in it are
expected to behave as such. Please be respectful of your classmates at all
times. CELL PHONES: Turn your cell phone off or silence the ringer while in
class. If your phone rings in class, you will be asked to leave.

， AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT: Any Student requiring accommodations or
services due to a disability must contact Services for Students with
Disabilities (SSD) in Room 181 of the Student Service Center. SSD can also
arrange to provide materials (including this syllabus) in alternative formats
if necessary.

， My office hours are there for your questions and problems. Please use them.
Your questions are also welcome in class.

， This class begins at 8:30 am and ends at 9:45 am. If it conflicts your
inclinations, habits, or schedule make adjustments before the end of the add
drop/period. IF YOU CANNOT MAKE THIS CLASS ON TIME, DO NOT COME! Missing class
harms only you. Being late also bothers others and is disruptive.

， You should purchase all the books for this course as soon as possible. In
the event a book is out of print, out of stock, or there is some other
problem, the bookstore can often do something if notified early. There is
little that can be done later in the semester.

， This is a classroom, not the SUB or your dorm room. If you feel compelled to
talk, sleep, or read the Signpost (or something serious), you should drop this
class immediately. If you persist, you will be asked to leave.

， You are responsible for all material presented in class. This includes
directions, as well as subject matter. If you miss a class, it is your
responsibility to make up what you missed. Meet the people around you \- they
will be your best ally in the course.

， Your grade will be based on your examinations. There is no opportunity for
extra credit.

， The examination days including the final are noted on the syllabus. If they
conflict with your schedule, you should remove the conflicts or drop this
class. For example if the Schedule of Classes shows that you have three finals
the same day, the time to do something about it is now. Also, leaving early
for vacation when classes are scheduled is NOT an excuse to miss an exam.

， If you do not perform as well as you expected on an exam, the time to see me
is as soon as possible after the exams are returned. Bad academic habits like
illnesses are best attacked in an early stage. Besides, instructors are not
very impressed with the seriousness or commitment of students who discover
that they have problems during the last two weeks of the semester.

， Grades are not posted in this class. I will return the first three
examinations as soon as possible during the semester. If you want your final
grade earlier than the registrar provides them, give me a stamped, self-
addressed card on the day of the final examination.

， I promise not to call you at home with my personal problems, please extend
me the same courtesy.

， If I didn't think the required readings were important, I wouldn't assign
them. History is much more fun when you are making good grades than bad ones.

Some questions you probably should not ask:

1\. Will this be on the test? If it is mentioned in class or the text or given
out to you, it is important.  
2\. I was absent Friday, did I miss anything? On a good day your teacher will
say: No, he just babbled nonsense for fifty minutes; on a bad day he might get
angry.  
3\. What are your office hours? These are on the syllabus or will be announced
in class.  
4\. When is the test? This too is on the syllabus.

ETC.: The key to doing well in this course is keeping up with readings and
attending class. It's as simple as that. Please take advantage of office
hours. If you can't make posted hours, make an appointment with me in class or
just stop by, you will most likely catch me. Questions in class are welcome
and encouraged. Don't be shy. You will find my classroom relaxed and informal.
History is, after all, fun.

**COURSE SCHEDULE**:

Week 1     January 2    Introduction to the course and themes  
                                        What is History?  
                                        What is Civilization?

Week 2     January 7    The British Colonies - Empire, Liberty, and Expansion  
                   Reading: Chapter 3

Week 3     January 14  Liberty Challenged - British Colonists become Americans  
                   Reading: Chapter 5

Week 4     January 21 - Liberty Preserved - War for Independence & the
American  
                   Constitution  
                   Reading: Chapter 6

Week 5     January 28 - The Republic Matures - Markets, Manufacturing,
Farming, and  
                   the American System  
                   Reading: Chapter 9

**OLYMPIC BREAK! FEBRUARY 2-26**

Week 6     February 27 - Jacksonian Democracy - Liberty, Pursuing Happiness,
and  
                  The Establishment of the American Two Party System  
                  Reading: Chapter 12

Week 7     March 4 - The Republic Challenged - Slavery, Union, and American  
                   Democracy  
                   Reading: Chapter 14

Week 8    March 11 - Free-Market Capitalism Challenged - Industry, Labor, and  
                  Farming in the 1890s  
                  Reading: Chapter 19  
                  **Midterm Exam open on Chitester beginning Monday, March 11, at  
                  7:00 AM, until Thursday, March 14, at 10:00 PM**

Week 9    March 18 - The Impact of Industrialization and Consumer Capitalism  
                  Reading: Chapter 20

Week 10  March 25 - The Progressive Era - America Responds to its Problems  
                  Reading: Chapter 21

Week 11  April 1 - American Looks Abroad - Imperialism, War, and American
Ideals  
                  Reading: Chapter 22

Week 12  April 8 - Free Market Capitalism Challenged - The Great Depression
and  
                  Federal Intervention  
                  Reading: Chapter 25

Week 13  April 15 - Liberty Challenged - America and World War II  
                  Reading: Chapter 26

Week 14  April 22 - Civil Rights - Liberty for All

Week 15  April 29 - Recent Changes in Liberty, Capitalism, and Society  
                  Reading: Chapter 20

Week 16  Final Exam Week  
                  **Final Exam open on Chitester beginning Saturday, May 4, at  
                  7:00 AM, until Thursday, May 9, at 8:00 PM**

This schedule is subject to change - you will be notified in class if it does.



