COURSE SYLLABUS

Department:  Educational Leadership and Policy Analysis

Course Number:  6954

Course Title:  Educational Program Evaluation

Semester Hours:  Three (3)

Date of this Revision of Syllabus: Spring 1999

Text(s) and/or Required Readings:

Popham, W. J. (1993). _Educational evaluation_ (3rd edition).

Needham, Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.

Catalog Description: This course prepares students as critical, reflective
evaluators of educational programs. Students are provided an introduction to
the many activities associated with development, implementation and assessment
of educational program evaluation. They subsequently demonstrate their
knowledge of evaluation methodology and design by formulating and implementing
an evaluation plan for an existing educational program. Students present their
evaluation plans and outcomes during class for critical analysis and
assessment.

Additional Course Information: This course is designed for graduate level
students whose current or projected professional responsibilities include
conceptualizing, planning, and implementing program evaluations for
educational agencies. Working with relevant stakeholders of an educational
agency, students apply what they have learned about the purposes, forms, and
processes involved in program evaluation. By successfully negotiating and
conducting a collaboratively designed plan of evaluation, students will
demonstrate their understanding of the various issues and procedures. Students
develop evaluation plans through a peer-review process. This provides an
opportunity to develop reflective thinking skills and to benefit from multiple
perspectives emerging from the participating colleagues. Students will share
their evaluation outcomes with the appropriate personnel at participating
education agencies.

Relationship of Course to College and Program Philosophy and Goals: In the
context of fostering student competencies necessary for successful educational
program evaluation, this course relates to the goals of the College of
Education. Upon completion of the course, students will have demonstrated
knowledge of appropriate content and methodology of various types of
educational program evaluation. Peer-review process in designing and
implementing program evaluation promotes the value of stakeholder
participation in program evaluation. In conducting an actual evaluation for an
existing educational program, they will also gain valuable experience in
working with regional educational agencies. Field experiences of this nature
meaningfully integrate theory with actual practice, thereby facilitating
student growth and development as effective educational leaders. This is
particularly relevant in relation to the contemporary demands for educational
accountability. Furthermore, the course emphasizes the need to uphold the
highest ethical standards and best professional judgment in project evaluation
activities; such ethics are an essential component of our program.

Course Objectives:

Students will be able to:

- describe educational program evaluation in terms of its purposes and general forms

- identify current issues in educational program evaluation

- demonstrate knowledge of arguments relative to different viewpoints on the various issues surrounding educational program evaluation

- identify alternative models of educational program evaluation and ably discuss respective advantages and disadvantages of each

- interface with relevant statkeholders and identify evaluation questions

- demonstrate sensitivity to those factors which lead to greater utilization of evaluation findings

- demonstrate expertise in planning an evaluation

- develop an understanding of procedures, group techniques, and instrumentation used in needs assessment

- describe differences in qualitative and quantitative data collection

- discuss issues relevant to the monitoring of ongoing educational programs

- identify common evaluation designs and instruments used in assessing educational program impacts

- demonstrate effective methods for communicating evaluation findings to others

- utilize standards of effective practice for judging the adequacy of an evaluation design

- conduct a comprehensive educational program evaluation

Course Topics:

Educational Program Evaluation will encompass the following topics:

1. Definitions of evaluation and educational program evaluation

2. Purposes of educational program evaluation

3. Clarification of the differences and similarities between evaluation and research

4. History of educational program evaluation

5. Differing viewpoints on educational program evaluation

6. Qualitative and quantitative inquiry

7. The processes of educational evaluation

8. Standards for educational evaluation

9. Preparing for evaluation which includes analysis of contextual and situational factors, clarification of client interests and needs, establishment of evaluation boundaries, and identification of evaluation questions through negotiation with various stakeholders

10. Planning the evaluation activities

11. Developing the management plan

12. Analyzing political, ethical, and interpersonal aspects of the evaluation

13. Educational data management

Class Activities (including instructional strategies) and Requirements
(Projects, Papers, Tests, etc.): This course will utilize a variety of
instructional strategies: lectures, seminar, simulation, invited speakers
(experts in the field), and hands-on experience. Students will learn,
particularly though hands-on experience, to design computerized data
collection instruments, to formulate a project evaluation database, and to
create file layouts and data structures for program evaluation.

Students will serve as critical reflective colleagues and as discussion
leaders during seminars which focus on one or more of the topics. Each student
is required to complete successfully the following: a reflective journal on
readings, class discussions, and activities connected with the evaluation;two
reaction papers on specific readings of individual interest to each student;
final examination on readings, class discussions, and evaluation topics
covered; completion of a comprehensive evaluation of an educational
project\program in a local\regional education agency.

Field Experience Requirements: Students will work extensively with
stakeholders of an educational agency as they proceed through their
development and implementation of the program evaluation plan. Students will
initially identify an appropriate educational agency which has indicated a
need and desire for program evaluation. Subsequently, students define and
describe the exact nature of the evaluation through negotiation with
stakeholders and the instructor. As the evaluation unfolds, students will be
involved in extensive data collection activities which will require frequent
visits to the agency. Depending upon the nature of the evaluation, students
may also find it necessary to involve other educational agencies
collaboratively, governmental and regulatory units, and/or private sector
organizations. Outcomes of the evaluation will be shared with individuals and
groups in an appropriate format.



Bibliography:

Arredondo, D. E., Brody, J. L, Zimmerman, D. P. & Moffett, C. A. (1995).
Pushing the envelope in supervision. _Educational Leadership, 53_ , 74-78.

Banks, J. A. (1997). The lives and values of researchers: implications for
educating citizens in a multicultural society. _Educational Researcher, 26_ ,
4-17.

Boruch, R. F., et al. (1981). _Reanalyzing prgram evaluations: Policies and
practices for secondary analysis of social and educational programs._ San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Byrk, A. S., & Raudenbush, S. W. (1992). _Hierarchical linear models:
Applications and data analysis methods._ Newburg Pass, CA: Sage.

Cook, T. D., et al. (1992). _Meta-analysis for explanation: A case book._ New
York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Cousins, J. & Simon, M. (1996). The Nature and Impact of Policy-Induced
Partnerships Between Research. _Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis_ ,
18 (3), 199-218.

Cronbach, L. J. (1983). _Designing evaluations of educational and social
programs_. San Franciso: Jossey -Bass.

Donmoyer, R. (1997). This issue: educational standardsCmoving beyond the
rhetoric. _Educational Researcher, 26_ , 2-3.

Duffy, F. M. (1997). Supervising schooling, not teachers. _Educational
Leadership, 54_ , 78-83.

Duke, D. L. (1990). Developing teacher evaluation systems that promote
professional growth. _Journal of Personnel Evaluation in Education, 4,_
131-144.

Duke, D. L. (1993). Removing barriers to professional growth. _Phi Delta
Kappan, 74,_ 702-712.

Frels, K., & Horton, J. L. (1994). _A documentation system for teacher
improvement and termination._ Topeka, KS: National Organization on Legal
Problems in Education.

George, P. S. (1987). Performance management in education. _Educational
Leadership, 44_ (7), 32-39.

Goodale, J. G. (1992). Improving performance appraisal. _Business Quarterly,
51_ (2), 65-70.

Greller, M. M. (1998). Participation in the performance appraisal review:
inflexible manager behavior and variable worker needs. _Human Relations, 51_ ,
1061-83.

Hanushek, E. (1997). Outcomes, Incentives, and Beliefs: Reflections on
Analysis of the Economics of Schools. _Educational Evaluation and Policy
Analysis_ , 29 (4) 301-308.

Harshfield, J. B. Liability issues of using volunteers in public schools.
_NASSP Bulletin, 80_ , 61-65.

Hing-Ling Lau, A. & Hon-Shiang Lau, Y. (1996). A simple and logical
alternative for making PERT time estimates. _IIE Transactions_ , 28 (3),
183-193.

Hunter, M. (1993). Enhancement of teaching through coaching, supervision, and
evaluation. _Evaluation Perspectives, 3_ (3), 1-7.

Hyun, E. (1996). New directions in early childhood teacher preparation:
developmentally and culturally appropriate practice (DCAP). _Journal of Early
Childhood Teacher Education, 17_ , 7-19.

Iwanicki, E. F. (1990). Teacher evaluation for school improvement. In J.
Millman & L. Darling-Hammond (Eds.) _The new handbook for teacher evaluation._
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Joint Committee On Standards For Educational Evaluation (1994). _The program
evaluation standards_ (2nd Ed.). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Joyner, E. T., & Haynes, W. (1992). _The action research model._ School
Development Program, New Haven, CT: Yale.

Lagemann, E. C. (1997). Contested terrain: a history of education research in
the United States, 1980-1990. _Educational Researcher, 26_ , 5-7.

Lam, T. (1995). Individualization of Objectives: A Model of Educational
Program Evaluation. _Evaluation Practice_ , 16 (1), 13-27.

Laud, L. E. (1998). Changing the way we communicate. _Educational Leadership,
55_ , 23-25.

Levin, H. M. (1997). Educational performance standards and the economy.
_Educational Researcher, 26_ , 4-11.

Little, J. W. (1993). Teachers' professional development in a climate of
educational reform. _Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 15,_ 129-151.

Loveless, T. (1998). Uneasy Allies: the evolving relationship of school and
state. _Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 20_ , 1-8.

Matthews, C. E. Binkley, W. CrispA. & Gregg, K. (1997). Challenging gender
bias in fifth grade. _Educational Researcher, 55_ , 54-57.

Mayer, D. P. (1998). Do new teaching standards undermine performance on old
tests? _Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 20_ , 53-56.

McConney, A. (ed.) (1994). _Toward a unfied model: The foundations of
educational personnel evaluation._ Kalamzoo, MI: Center for Research on
Educational Accountability and Teacher Evaluation.

McGaghie, W. C. (1991). Professional competence evaluation. _Educational
Researcher 20_ , 3-9.

Migotsky, C., Stake, R., Davis, R., Williams, B., DePaul, G., Cisneros, E.,
Johnson, E. & Feltovich, J. (1997). Probative, dialectic, and moral reasoning
in program evaluation. _Qualitative Inquiry_ , 3 (4), 453-468.

O'Heil, J. (1997). Why are the black kids sitting together? _Educational
Leadership, 55_ , 12-16.

Patton, M. Q. (1986). _Utilization-focused evaluation_ (2nd Ed.). Newbury
Park: Sage.

Patton, M. Q. (1990). _Qualitative evaluation and research methods_ (2nd Ed.).
Newbury Park: Sage.

Popkewitz, T. S. (1997). A changing terrain of knowledge and power: a social
epistemology of educational research. _Educational Researcher, 26_ ,18-21.

Prendergast, C. & Topel, R. H. (1996). Favoritism in organizations. _Journal
of Political Economy, 104_ , 958-78.

Reynolds, J. R., & Walberg, H. J. (1992). A structural model of high-school
mathematics outcomes. _Journal of Educational Research, 85_ (3), 150-158.

Rice, J. (1997). Cost Analysis in Education: Paradox and Possibility.
_Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis_ , 19 (4), 318-324.

Rossi, P. H. & Freeman, H. F. (1989). _Evaluation: A systematic_ _approach
(Fourth Edition)_. Newbury Park: Sage.

Sanders, W. L., & Horn, S. P. (In press). The Tennessee value-added assessment
system: Mixed methodology in educational assessment. _Journal of Personnel
Evaluation in Education_.

Savage, T. M. & Vogel, K. E. (1996). Multimedia: a revolution in higher
education? _College Teaching, 44_ , 127-31.

Scherer, M. (1997). Perspectives. _Educational Leadership, 54_ , 5(1).

Shadish, W. R., Cook, T. D.,& Leviton, L. C. (1990). _Foundations of program
evaluation_. Newbury Park: Sage.

Smith, D. (1996). Peer coaches= problems with videotape recording for teacher
observation. _Action in Teacher education, 17_ , 18-27.

Spillane, J. P. & Jennings, N. E. (1997). Aligned instructional policy and
ambitious pedagogy: exploring instructional reform from the classroom
perspective. _Teachers College Record, 98_ , 449-81.

Stronge, J. H. (1991). The dynamics of effective performance evaluation
systems in education: Conceptual, human relations, and technical domains.
_Journal of Personnel Evaluation in Education, 4_ 405-411.

Stufflebeam, D. L. (1983). The CIPP model for program evaluation. In G.
Madaus, M. S. Scriven, & D. L. Stufflebeam (Eds.), _Evaluation models:
Viewpoints on educational and human services in evaluation_ (pp. 117-141).
Boston: Kluwer-Nijhoff.

Stufflebeam, D., & Nevo, D. (1993). Principal evaluation: New directions for
improvement. _Peabody Journal of Education, 68_ (2), 24-46.

Tsang, M. (1997). Cost Analysis for Improved Educational Policymaking and
Evaluation. _Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis_ , 19 (4), 318-324.

Waks, S., & Barak, M. (1996). Role of Evaluation in an Interdisciplinary
Educational Program. _Studies in Educational Evaluation_ , 22 (2), 171-179.

Webster, W. J., Mendro, R. L., & Almaguer, T. D. (1993). _Effectiveness
indices: The major component of an equitable accountability system._ ERIC TM
019 193.

Webster, W. J., Mendro, R. L., & Almaguer, T. D. (1994). Effectiveness
Indices: A "Value Added" Approach to Measuring School Effect. _Studies In
Educational Evaluation, 20_ 113-145.

Witte, J. (1998). The Milwaukee Voucher Experiment. _Educational Evaluation
and Policy Analysis_ , 20 (4), 229-252.

Worthen, B. R., & Sanders, J. R. (1987). _Educational evaluation: Alternative
approaches and practical guidelines_. New York: Longman.

















**

COURSE SECTION INFORMATION

**

Course Number:  6954

Course Title:  Educational Program Evaluation

Credit Hours:  Three (3)

Semester:  Spring 1999

Instructor:

Office Number:

Telephone:

Office Hours:

Course Management and Evaluation Policies:

Reflective Journal 30%

Class Discussion & Activities  20%

Paper #1 10%

Paper #2 10%

Evaluation Project & Presentation 30%

