[![Return to Archaeology and Material Culture Home
Page](homemmc.jpg)](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/home.html)  
---  
![](modmatbanner.jpg) |

![](callpaul.jpg)



  
---|---  
  
[![Email Dr. Mullins](emailsign.jpg)](mailto:paulmull@iupui.edu)  
  
![](mmctimebanner.jpg)  
  
![](mmccourseban.jpg)



Office Hours Wednesday 3:00-5:00 and by appointment  
  
This course examines how contemporary social experience is impacted by
seemingly innocuous material culture ranging from toys to theme parks. We will
focus on how consumers come to perceive themselves and others in modern
consumer culture through the medium of commodities.  The course will trace the
historical development of the relationship between goods and identity from the
eighteenth century and identify the systems of inequality that have been
reproduced (as well as subverted) through material consumption. The course
will train you to consciously apply critical anthropological insight to
cultural and subcultural difference, and we will stress how archaeology's
systematic analytical techniques provide a mechanism to probe the
technological, social, and ideological meaning in the apparently meaningless
minutia that surrounds us everyday.

**Course requirements: the non-negotiable realities**

Course links

  * [final exam study guide](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/modmatfin.html)
  * [exercise](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/capsule.html)
  * [refuse analysis exercise](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/trash.html)
  * [midterm exam](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/modmatmid.html)
  * [overlay notes through Feb. 28](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/modmatnotes.html)
  * [course readings assignments](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/readings460.html)
  * [term paper guidelines](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/paper460.html)
  * [email Dr. Mullins](mailto:paulmull@iupui.edu)

|

You are encouraged to attend every day and participate in discussions, but you
will not be graded on attendance. The vast majority of the test material will
be introduced and reviewed in class, though, so class attendance will be key
to comprehension. I want everybody to participate in whatever way they feel
most comfortable, but I will not assign participation grades. We are sure to
enjoy ourselves and learn a lot if we all actively participate, encourage each
other's intellectual curiosity, and respect each other's opinions.

There will be two exams: a [ mid-
term](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/modmatmid.html) (15% of final grade) and a
final exam (20%).  The mid-term exam will be a take home exam due March 7.
The [ final](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/modmatfin.html) will be an open-
notes, open-book essay exam.  
  
---|---  
  
Two exercises will be completed (each will count for 15% of your final grade).
In the first exercise you will assemble a [ time
capsule](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/capsule.html) of contemporary material
goods. Your capsules will contain at least 20 items, with essentially no
restrictions on what you can place within them or exactly what you want your
capsule to actually communicate to subsequent generations. You'll be expected
to clearly specify why you included each item and what you want your time
capsule to convey or symbolize. The second exercise will be an
"archaeological" analysis of a genuine [ contemporary garbage
deposit](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/trash.html). You will make a detailed
record of your own garbage for a selected period, these records will be
distributed anonymously to other students in the class, and you will then
analyze a classmates' refuse sample.

Each student will present one of the readings to the class over the course of
the semester (5% of your final grade).  The[ readings
page](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/readings460.html) includes all readings and
indicates the class member who will present each reading.  You will prepare a
written outline of the reading for me and direct the class' discussion of the
reading.  Anybody who does not complete the outline will only receive two of
the five points.  You can volunteer to present any reading of your choosing on
a first-come, first-serve basis; any students who do not sign up by the second
class will be assigned a reading.  Anybody who does not attend on the night of
their reading will receive no credit.

During the semester you will produce a [ term
paper](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/paper460.html) that interprets some
object, material space, or class of modern material objects using the concepts
and examples examined in class (30%). You will be required to provide a
proposal for your term paper subject by the midterm March 7.  _Students who do
not turn in a paper proposal by the midterm will automatically lose a letter
grade from their paper's final grade, and I reserve the right to reject any
unapproved topic:   please do not skip the proposal._

All work in the course is conducted in accordance with the university's
academic dishonesty policy.  Dishonesty includes representing somebody else's
work as your own and turning in substantially similar work as another student.
Please consult the university bulletin if you have any questions about what
constitutes dishonesty.

If you cannot complete an assignment on time for any reason, you must contact
me. I will only extend a deadline in cases where a student demonstrates
sufficient reason to be granted an extension. I can always be contacted after
class, you can schedule an appointment, and I check my email virtually
everyday. Do NOT wait until after a deadline to talk to me, and do NOT
postpone talking to me if you are having any difficulty completing an
assignment for any reason. Late assignments will be penalized significantly if
you do not negotiate an extension with me beforehand. Students who do not turn
in the term paper on time will receive a zero for the assignment without prior
approval.  To miss any of the exercises or turn in the term paper late is, at
best, mathematically ill-advised. This syllabus includes deadlines for all
assignments and test dates, and it is your responsibility to know when
assignments are due and tests are scheduled.

![](babs.jpg) | [![This ad comes from Adbusters; click here to visit their
site](tommy.jpg)](http://www.adbusters.org) | ![](babs.jpg)  
---|---|---  
  
**Don't forget these dates:**

[Time Capsule exercise due February
14](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/capsule.html)

[Refuse analysis exercise collection due February
21](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/trash.html)

[Midterm due March 7](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/modmatmid.html)

[Term paper proposal due March 7](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/paper460.html)

[Refuse analysis exercise data analysis due April
11](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/trash.html)

No class April 18

[Term paper due April 25](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/paper460.html)

Final Exam Monday, May 12 1:30-4:15

**Readings**

The reading schedule for the class is underlined on the course schedule. Three
books and a readings packet have been assigned.  You are responsible for
completing all readings prior to class.  We _will_ discuss the readings in
class, and test material will be drawn from them, so you should purchase them
or arrange to share with another class member.

The course has three assigned texts: _A Primer for Daily Life_ (Willis),
_Vinyl Leaves: Walt Disney World and America_ (Fjellman), and _Rubbish! The
Archaeology of Garbage_ (Rathje and Murphy).   _Rubbish_ is out of print, but
Follett's on Indiana Avenue has agreed to order 30 copies.   All three will
have test material taken directly from them, so you should purchase or share
them.

The remaining readings are available as a course packet that will be sold in
Follett's and in the bookstore.  Readings will also be available in the
Anthropology office as well if you prefer to copy them yourself; please be
considerate and return them in a reasonable time.

[![Email Dr. Mullins at
paulmull@iupui.edu](email2001.jpg)](mailto:paulmull@iupui.edu)  
---  
  
**Course Outline and Schedule**

_January 10_

Introduction to course: Defining anthropology, archaeology, and material
culture

_January 17_

What is culture? Mass culture? Popular culture?

_Vinyl Leaves, pp.21-33_

_Rubbish, Chapter 1_ , Yes, Wonderful Things

What makes it modern?

_January 24_

The implications of material things

What _is_ material culture?

Why Collect Things?

Collection and Context

_Foote, The Mark of Shame_

Capitalism and minutia: the link between Ronald McDonald and inequality

_Rubbish, Chapter 3_ , What We Say, What We Do

_January 31_

Methods: How material goods are analyzed

_Rubbish, Chapter 6_ , A Garbage Census?

Context: Things and their Places

Systematic artifact analysis

The history of garbage

What We Say, What Material Culture Says

_Shanks and Tilley, Social Values, social constraints and material culture:
the design of contemporary beer cans_

_February 7_

Ideology and Material Culture

_Gottdiener, Disneyland: A Utopian Urban Space_

Disciplining the Material World: Etiquette and Civility

Beer cans and Power

_Vinyl Leaves, Chapter 11_ , Utopia and Urban Planning

Commodity fetishism: can G.I. Joe have use value?

**[TIME CAPSULE EXERCISE DUE FEBRUARY
14](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/capsule.html)**

_February 14_

Puritans and Romantics: the Roots of Modern Consumer Society

The Culture of Abundance: Industrial Capitalism in Victorian America

_Vinyl Leaves, Chapter 3_ , America and Consumption

Consumption in the Twentieth Century

Ali Baba's Lamp: Department Stores and Material Spectacle

Sell Them Their Dreams: Credit, Advertising, and Mail Order

Shopping with the Cleavers: Consumption in the Age of Television

_Vinyl Leaves, Chapter 15_ , Consumption and Culture Theory

**[REFUSE ANALYSIS EXERCISE COLLECTION DUE FEBRUARY
21](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/trash.html)**

_February 21_

Constructing the Material World: Space and Style

Culture, Context, and Space at Disney World

_Vinyl Leaves, Chapter 13_ , Cinema, Music, Fantasy

_Vinyl Leaves, Chapter 16_ , Nature's "Gifts": Land, Garden, Sea

Style and Subculture

Space and Surveillance

_February 28_

Museums as material culture

_Linenthal, The Boundaries of Memory:   The United States Holocaust Memorial
Museum_

Ideology on the Mall: the Vietnam Memorial and the National Air and Space
Museum

Mass Leisure: Public Artifacts

Emergence of Public Leisure: Coney Island and Expositions

_Vinyl Leaves, Chapter 12_ , Kungaloosh! The Theme Park World

Viva Las Vegas: Gambling as Leisure

Inside the Rat: Disneyland and Utopia

**[MID-TERM DUE MARCH 7](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/modmatmid.html)**

_March 7_

Pieces of Memory: Souvenirs

Marketing Mickey

_Vinyl Leaves, Chapter 8_ , Marketing the Magic Mall

The King in the Parlor: Elvis Kitsch

Domesticating the Third World: Tourist Art

_Primer, Chapter 1_ , Unwrapping Use Value

**SPRING BREAK MARCH 14**

_March 21_

Popular History

What does it mean to "remember"?

_Vinyl Leaves, Chapter 4_ , Disney: Disney History at the Magic Kingdom

Post Modern Memory?: _Pastiche_ and History

Its a Small History: the Disney Past

_

Wallace, Mickey Mouse History: Portraying the Past at Disney World

_The Things We Remember: Historical Torture at the London Dungeon

_March 28_

Constructing Gender in the Material World

_Primer, Chapter 5_ , Playing House: Domestic Labor as Culture

More Work for Mother: Household Technologies and Gender

_April 4_

Consuming Gender: Barbie and G.I. Joe

Work Your Body: Materializing and Subverting Genders

_

Pearson and Mullins, Domesticating Barbie

_

_Primer, Chapter 4_ , Work(ing) Out

America's Fighting Man: G.I. Joe and Male Comradeship

**[REFUSE EXERCISE ANALYSIS DUE APRIL
11](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/trash.html)**

_April 11_

Disciplined Play: Childhood and the Material World

Baseball Cards and Capitalism

Totalitarianism in the Back Yard?: Star Wars Toys

_

Ingersoll, Divining the Future: The Toys of Star Wars

_

Racial constructions and Whiteness in the material world

_Primer, Chapter 6_ , I Want the Black One: Is There a Place for Afro-American
Culture in Commodity Culture?

Armageddon in the Back Yard?: _Planet of the Apes_ toys and Racial Difference

**

[NO CLASS APRIL 18 (SOCIETY FOR AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
MEETING)](http://www.saa.org/Meetings/index.html)

[TERM PAPER DUE APRIL 25](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/paper460.html)

**

_April 25_

The Socio-Moral Implications of Mass Consumer Culture

Marx was right: shopping is revolting, not revolutionary

Marx was wrong: an after-Christmas sale is more empowering than socialism

_Ewen, Form follows Waste_

Implications of Modern Material Culture Research

Moral: Consumer hedonism versus restrained Puritanism

Nationalism: Is the planet already a consumer society?

Interventions: How can understanding the material world direct social change?

_Rubbish, Chapter 5_ , The Myths of Biodegradation

**_

[Final exam WEDNESDAY MAY 2
5:45-8:25](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/modmatfin.html)

![](spacegame.jpg)  
---  
_**

**Anthropology A460, Modern Material Culture**

**Readings**

_

Required Books

_

Willis, Susan

> > 1991 _A Primer for Daily Life_. Routledge, New York.

Fjellman, Stephen M.

> > 1992 _Vinyl Leaves: Walt Disney World and America_. Westview, Boulder,
Colorado.

Rathje, William and Cullen Murphy

> > 1992 _Rubbish! The Archaeology of Garbage_. HarperPerennial, New York.

_

Reserve readings

_

Ewen, Stuart

> > 1988 Form Follows Waste. In _All Consuming Images: The Politics of Style
in Contemporary Culture_ , pp.233-258. Basic Books, New York.

Foote, Kenneth E.

The Mark of Shame.  In _Shadowed Ground: America's Landscapes of Violence and
Tragedy_ , pp.174-213.  University of Texas, Austin.

Gottdiener, M.

Disneyland: A Utopian Urban Space.  In _Postmodern Semiotics: Material Culture
and the Forms of Postmodern Life_ , pp.99-118.  Blackwell, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.

Ingersoll, Daniel W.

1994 Divining the Future: The Toys of Star Wars. In _The Art and Mystery of
Historical Archaeology: Essays in Honor of James Deetz_ , edited by Anne
Elizabeth Yentsch and Mary C. Beaudry, pp.427-443. CRC Press, Boca Raton,
Florida.

Linenthal, Edward T.

> > 1994 The Boundaries of Memory: The United States Holocaust Memorial
Museum. _American Quarterly_ 46(3):406-433.

Pearson, Marlys J. and Paul R. Mullins

1999 Domesticating Barbie: An Archaeology of Barbie Material Culture and
Domestic Ideology.  _International Journal of Historical Archaeology_
3(4):225-259.

Shanks, Michael and Christopher Tilley

> > 1987 Social values, social constraints and material culture: the design of
contemporary beer cans. In _Re-Constructing Archaeology_ , pp.172-239.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Strasser, Susan

> > 1982 You Deserve a Break. In _Never Done: A History of American Housework_
, pp.282-299. Pantheon, New York.

Wallace, Mike

> > 1985 Mickey Mouse History: Portraying the Past at Disney World. _Radical
History Review_ 32:33-57.

[![Return to Archaeology and Material Culture Home
Page](homemmc.jpg)](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/home.html) |

[![Archaeology and Material Culture Links
Page](linksbanner.jpg)](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/links.html) | [![Email
Dr. Mullins](emailsign.jpg)](mailto:paulmull@iupui.edu)  
---|---|---

