
    
     RELIGION 345
     RELIGION IN AMERICAN LIFE AND THOUGHT TO 1840:                   TR 12:30-
     1:50
     FROM THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND TO MORMONISM                     Tucker 120
    
                               INSTRUCTOR AND OFFICE HOURS
     David L. Holmes (125 Richmond Road, second floor)
     OFFICE HOURS:  Mondays, 4:30-5:30; Wednesdays, 2-2:45 and 4:30-5:30.  He is
     also available for lunches with groups of students or walks with individual
     students.
    
                                  PURPOSE OF THE COURSE
     This course is one of three surveys of American religion taught by the
     instructor.  Many who enroll have previously taken no Religion courses.
    
     Rel. 345 tells the story of religion in the United States through 1840;
     Rel. 346 carries the story through the 1990s; Rel. 347 adds alternative
     religious groups that are not part of the mainstream of American religion.
     Judaism in America is now handled in courses taught by Mr. Raphael in the
     Department of Religion.  This course will:
    
     1) tell the story of the religious dimension of American life and thought
     through 1840;
     2) analyze the background, development, beliefs, and worship of the
     Christian religious groups present in   America through 1840;
     3) place the early history of the colony and state of Virginia and of the
     College of William and Mary within      the larger context of the history
                                             of American religion; and
     4) introduce students to church and domestic architecture, to the buildings
     and programs of Colonial      Williamsburg, and to the historic
                                   preservation of America's past.
    
     Although Rel. 345 will spend the greatest amount of time on religion, it is
     intended as a broad introduction to the American experience.  Thus it will
     also include architecture, social history, education, transportation,
     historic preservation, and other aspects of American history and culture.
    
    
                                     GUEST LECTURERS
     James E. Wootton, Curator, Ash-Lawn-Highland:  The Home of James Monroe,
     Albemarle County, VA     (on dates to be announced).
     NOTE:  Mr. Holmes will miss class on Monday, Sept. 11, because of a trip
     and on Monday, Nov. 20, because of a meeting of the American Academy of
     Religion. No class will be held on Sept. 11; the historic drive (see below)
     will replace it.  Mr. Wootton may speak on Nov. 2, or a make-up class will
     be held.
    
                       COURSE REQUIREMENTS AND PERCENTAGE OF GRADE
                  (For more details, see the appendix to this syllabus)
    
     1. An historic drive during daylight as part of a team of three students
     (which the instructor will assign) on old roads.  The drive must be
     completed by September 14 and will replace class on September 11.
     2. A midsemester at the end of Segment 5 (30%).
     3. An architectural and historical project (30%) due at the start of class
     on Thursday, November 16.   4. A final examination on Monday, December 4
     (40%).
    
                             READING REQUIREMENT FOR COURSE
     The following books are required.  Unless otherwise indicated, the entire
     work is assigned:
    
     TEXT:
     1.   Peter W. Williams, America's Religions: Traditions and Cultures
     (through page 225, as assigned).  Prior to tests the instructor will
     indicate what names and terms he wishes students to know from the text.
    
     COLONIAL VIRGINIA:
     2.  Hunter Farish, ed. Journal and Letters of Philip Vickers Fithian (all)
     3.  Devereux Jarratt, Devereux Jarratt:  An Autobiography. (Mr. Holmes
     receives no royalties on this      book.)
     4.  Michael Olmert, Official Guide to Colonial Williamsburg
    
     AMERICAN RELIGION IN THE EARLY NATIONAL PERIOD:
     5.  Nathan O. Hatch, The Democratization of American Christianity
    
     GUIDES TO AMERICAN CHURCH AND DOMESTIC ARCHITECTURE:
     6.  John J. Blumenson, Identifying American Architecture (pages 2-25, plus
     any other styles that relate to    America through 1840).  This book is
     intended for some class use, but its principal purpose is to     serve as
     an architectural guide for your project.
     7.  G. E. Kidder-Smith, Beacon Guide to New England Houses of Worship (do
     all styles that relate to     America through 1840).
    
                        OUTLINE OF TOPICS TO BE COVERED IN COURSE
    
     The instructor will cover some of the topics listed below in more detail
     than others.  Some segments will be covered more by reading than by
     lecture.  In some years good class discussions (which he does not wish to
     break off) cause the instructor to adjust the lengths of lectures to keep
     the class on schedule. The instructor will announce or asterisk all names
     or terms he wishes class members to know from lectures or from the assigned
     books:
    
     1.  INTRODUCTION: THE EUROPEAN AND AMERICAN BACKGROUND TO AMERICAN    REL
                                                                           IGI
                                                                           OUS
                                                                           HIS
                                                                           TOR
                                                                           Y;
                                                                           FOR
                                                                           MS
                                                                           OF
                                                                           REL
                                                                           IGI
                                                                           OUS
                                                                           POL
                                                                           ITY
    
          Williams, 2-12, 44-59 (end of 2d full paragraph), 65-92.
    
     2.  THE MATERIAL CULTURE OF EARLY AMERICA:  OLD ROADS AND CHURCH AND
          DOMESTIC ARCHITECTURE IN AMERICA THROUGH 1840
    
          Blumenson (note all styles followed in the United States through
          1840).  Please bring Blumenson to class throughout this segment,
          though we will not use it every day.  See also the entries under
          "architecture" in the index to Williams.
    
     3.  ANGLICANISM AND ROMAN CATHOLICISM IN COLONIAL AMERICA
    
          Williams, 93-95, 145 (last paragraph) to 149 (omit Judaism)
          Fithian (all).
    
     4.  ENGLISH NONCONFORMITY AND CONTINENTAL PROTESTANTISM IN COLONIAL
          AMERICA: THE PURITANS (CONGREGATIONALISTS), BAPTISTS, REFORMED,
          HUGUENOTS, QUAKERS, LUTHERANS, AND GERMAN SECTARIES
    
          Williams, 95-106, last paragraph of 111-122, 133 (middle two
     paragraphs), 140-144, 192-193 (lst      paragraph);    Kidder-Smith (all).
    
     5.  THE SCOTS-IRISH AND THE TRANSPLANTATION OF PRESBYTERIANISM
    
          Williams, 107-111 (last full paragraph).
                                    MIDSEMESTER TEST
    
     6.  COLONIAL AMERICA COLLEGES AND THE COLLEGE OF WILLIAM AND MARY IN  VIR
                                                                           GIN
                                                                           IA
    
     7.  COLONIAL WILLIAMSBURG AND EARLY AMERICAN LIFE
    
          Olmert (all).  Two classes of tours of Colonial Williamsburg led by
          Mr. Wootton on dates to be announced.  The first class will meet at
          12:30 in front of Bruton Parish Church; the second class will meet at
          12:30 by the entrance gate to The Capitol.  You should bring Olmert's
          guide each time.
    
     8.  THE GREAT AWAKENING AND THE RISE OF EVANGELICALISM
    
          Jarratt (all); Williams, 94-135.
    
     9.  THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION, THE SEPARATION OF CHURCH AND STATE, AND THE
          REORDERING OF DENOMINATIONAL LIFE
    
          Williams, 135-139, 161-165, 195-196 (end of first paragraph); Hatch
     (begin).
    
     10. THE RISE OF "INFIDELITY" AND THE RELIGION OF THE FOUNDING FATHERS
    
          Hatch (continue).
    
     11. THE SECOND GREAT AWAKENINGS, METHODISM AND REVIVALISM, THE BENEVOLENT
          EMPIRE OF EVANGELICAL AMERICA, AND THE STATUS OF ROMAN CATHOLICISM
    
          Williams, 166-174, 174-175 (last full paragraph), 183-191 (omit post-
     1840 material), 196-197 (end  of first paragraph); Hatch (complete).
    
     12. THE RESTORATIONIST IMPULSE IN EARLY NATIONAL RELIGION: THE UNITARIANS,
          UNIVERSALISTS, "CHRISTIAN MOVEMENT," AND MORMONS
    
          Williams, 204-209 (omit Transcendentalism), 210-213 (end of first full
          paragraph), 219-225.
    
     13. SUMMARY OF COURSE
    
                         FINAL EXAMINATION ON MONDAY, DECEMBER 4
    
                            APPENDIX TO RELIGION 345 SYLLABUS
    
     A.  THE MIDSEMESTER AND FINAL EXAMINATION
    
          The midsemester test will include all material covered and reading
     assigned through Segment 5.  The date of this test depends upon the
     progress of lectures and discussions.  We will know the precise date at
     least one week before its administration, but students should be alerted
     NOW to watch the progress of lectures and to keep firmly in mind that the
     midsemester will come after Segment 5.
    
          The midsemester will consist of objective questons, with some choice
     permitted, on all material covered in lectures and in assigned reading to
     that point.  lectures and reading, an objective section on architecture,
     and one essay (with some choice). Except for one comprehensive question on
     the final examination, class members are not responsible for this material
     again.
    
          The final examination will be divided into objective sections and two
     or three essays; students will have a choice of essays.  It will consist of
     an objective section on lectures and reading after the midsemester, an
     objective section on Colonial Williamsburg, and essays, with some choice.
     It will test material covered since the midsemester, with a single
     comprehensive essay testing the sweep of the course.
    
     B.  THE SEMESTER PROJECT
    
          The field trip will involve visits by teams of three or four students
     (formed by students or by the instructor) to the surviving colonial
     churches, colonial church sites, and Georgian, classical revival, and
     gothic revival churches in one county in Virginia, North Carolina,
     Maryland, or Delaware.  Over the past 15 years, students have found this
     project--and the similar one done on towns, cities, and Victorian America
     in Rel. 346--one of the most enjoyable learning experiences in their
     college career.
    
          Teams may select their own county. The trip will also involve driving
     colonial roads, visiting old homes, and visiting country stores.  After
     completing its field trip, each team will submit in
     two copies a two-page paper with unlimited pages of narrative footnotes;
     the due date is the start of class on November 16.  The instructor will
     place copies of sample papers from previous semesters on desk reserve in
     the Reserve Room of the Swem Library. Full instructions will be distributed
     in the second week of class.
                                           ###

