### History 330.01  
Ancient and Medieval Jewish Civilization



History 331 fulfills the GEC requirement 5.B.3 and can be counted as a global
issues course for the GEC.



_Course Description and Philosophy_ : This course will survey the social,
cultural, and religious history of the Jews from the biblical period until the
end of the European Middle Ages. It will focus on the interaction of the
Jewish community with the larger world around it, as we attempt to analyze the
ways in which Jews continually refined their world view in response to
changing times and conditions. Specifically, the course will consider the
development of an international Jewish community and culture out of an ancient
Semitic kingdom with its own tribal religion. This is the period during which
traditional Judaism assumed its basic character and the Jew first had to learn
to adapt to the life of a Gentile society. The various factors which
contributed to this evolution and the sources which illustrate it -- biblical,
Near Eastern, Greco-Roman, Muslim, Rabbinic, and Christian literature, as well
as the archaeological evidence -- will dominate our discussions.

On account of the great mass of material which this course must survey in a
short amount of time, lectures and discussions must not only move at a rapid
pace, but they must also be selective -- stressing and highlighting certain
topics at the expense of others. For this reason, it is imperative that one
not fall behind in the assigned reading. An attempt has been made to assign as
much of the required reading as possible from the books to be purchased;
nevertheless, one should try to plan his/her schedule with an eye on the
reserve reading.

Although this course will be structured primarily around lectures, you are
warmly encouraged to ask questions in class and to participate in discussion,
either during or at the end of each session, depending on the topic being
considered. If you wish to pursue a subject or question more extensively than
class time will allow, you are urged to do so-after class, during office
hours, or at any other convenient time. Also, no one should hesitate to come
to office hours or to arrange an appointment to raise any sort of problem he
or she might be having with the course; you are most welcome to come by and
discuss anything that might be on your mind.



_Requirements_ :

  1. Regular attendance and preparation. When you come to class, it will be assumed that you are ready to be called upon to discuss the assigned readings (up to 10% of final grade). 
  2. Two midterm examinations, to be given in class on July 13 and August 3 (50% of the final grade). 
  3. A final examination, to include an essay concerning a pertinent book of one's choice to be read over the course of the quarter. A list of suggested titles will be distributed during the second week of class but books not on the list may be read with the approval of the instructor (40-50% of final grade). 



_Suggestions for Success_ :

  1. IF YOU HAVE ANY QUESTIONS OR PROBLEMS, APPROACH YOUR INSTRUCTOR AS SOON AS POSSIBLE. OUR GOAL IS TO HELP YOU, BUT WE MUST LEARN ABOUT A PROBLEM FROM YOU, IN ORDER TO BE ABLE TO CONFRONT IT. IF OFFICE HOURS ARE INCONVENIENT, ASK FOR AN APPOINTMENT. 
  2. Prepare for every class, and take careful notes on your reading. As painful as this process might seem-especially when compared to the ease of coloring a textbook with a bright felt pen-the investment of time is worthwhile, for two reasons: 
    1. Taking notes demands that you understand and digest the reading material more thoroughly than does covering it with yellow, pink or turquoise.
    2. Good notes will spare you from having to reread textbooks immediately before examinations, saving you at least as much as the "extra" investment time they required, when you need it most.
  3. Since the goal of the course is to stimulate your thought and understanding-and not simply your memory-exams will consist of essay questions, both short (i.e., identification) and long. Keep the following in mind:
    1. Always relate exam points to time: If the exam has three sections of equal value, apportion your time accordingly; DO NOT spend more time on one or two of the sections than the percentages of the grade mandate.
    2. Outline your essay before beginning to write. If you do not outline, the result often is an incoherent answer. So outline-quickly. Then begin writing a properly structured essay: write an introduction; compose the main portion of the answer; conclude with two or three sentences that summarize your argument. If you follow this procedure, and do not simply write your answer as the thoughts occur to you, you are far more apt to write an organized, effective essay.
    3. Remember that the prime concern of the historian is to analyze change or changes through a period of time. When, why, and how the changes occurred, as well as their significance, are issues underlying each question you will be asked. As you study along through the quarter, try to keep this in mind as you read the assigned material and review your notes. When exam time comes, you then will be thinking along the right lines.
  4. Feel free to seek feedback and advice (beyond the written comments appearing on your papers) concerning your performance on midterm examinations. If. having received such additional clarification you are still convinced that a grade you received is incorrect and desire that it be redetermined, you must submit a written explanation of your request. You must also recognize that the reevaluation of your exam may result in a grade higher than, equivalent to, or lower than the grade you received originally.
  5. If for any family or medical reason you find it absolutely necessary to miss an examination, you must contact the instructor before the examination and have his consent to your absence if you wish to take a make-up exam. No medical excuse will be honored without a corroborating note from a physician explaining your inability to take the examination.



_Readings_ :

  1. Robert Seltzer, _Jewish People, Jewish Thought_ (=JPJT)
  2. Josephus, _Jewish War_
  3. Any scholarly translation of the Bible (including Old Testament, New Testament, and Apocrypha)--to be brought to every class.

Additional books on reserve at the Undergraduate Library (205 Sullivant):

  1. T. H. Gaster, _Dead Sea Scriptures_
  2. J.R. Marcus, _Jew in the Medieval World_
  3. _Three Jewish Philosophers_ 



_Schedule of Classes and Assignments_ (to be completed BEFORE each class):

    
    
    
    ESSENTIALS OF BIBLICAL RELIGION AND CULTURE
    
       T  6/20  Introduction
    
       R  6/22  Monotheism and Creation
                   JPJT 7-46; Genesis 1-11
    
       T  6/27  Salvation through History; Covenant and Law
                   Genesis 12-50; Exodus 1-24
    
       R  6/29  Prophecy
                   JPJT 47-111 (selectively); Amos
    
    
    PERSIAN PERIOD:  RELIGION WITHOUT STATEHOOD
    
       R  7/06  Exile and Return
                   JPJT 112-55
    
       T  7/11  Judeans and Samaritans
                   Ezra, Chs. 7-10, Nehemiah
    
       R  7/13  Diaspora: Esther and Porton (handout)
                **EXAMINATION**
    
    
    HELLENISTIC PERIOD:  THE CHALLENGE OF ASSIMILATION
    
       T  7/18  Alexander the Great
    
       R  7/20  Wisdom
                   Ecclesiastes;
                   Ecclesiasticus, chs. 1, 4, 10-19, 24, 38:24-40:7, 42:15-50:29
    
       T  7/25  Rebellion and Independence
                   2 and I Maccabees
    
       R  7/27  A Range of Religious Reaction
                   Daniel; Gaster, pp. 46-65 ( "Manual of Discipline");
                   _Three Jewish Philosophers_ , pp. 27-35, 40-41
    
    
    ROMAN PERIOD: TRADITIONAL JUDAISM IN THE MAKING
    
       T  8/01  Age of Herod
                   JPJT 195-242; Josephus, chs. 1-5
    
       R  8/03  A Spectrum of Jewish Sects
                **EXAMINATION**
                   Josephus, pp. 133-38 (125-30)
    
       T  8/08  Christianity
                   Matthew, Romans
    
       R  8/10  World of the Rabbis
                   JPJT  243-70, 281-314;
                   optional: Josephus, chs. 14-23
    
    
    MEDIEVAL PERIOD: PEOPLE OF THE BOOK
    
       T  8/15  Under Crescent and Cross
                   JPJT 323-450
    
       R  8/17  Medieval Jewish Culture
                   assignment to be announced
    
       T  8/22  Medieval Jewish Culture
                   assignment to be announced
    
       R  8/24  Church and Synagogue
    
    
       T  8/29  **FINAL EXAMINATION - 3:00-4:48 p.m.**
    
    

