**_Modern Japanese Literature_**

**_(in Translation)_** ** __**

**_JPT3120 Course Syllabus _**



Instructor: Joseph Murphy, Grinter Hall 427

Office Hours: Th 10:30 - 1:00 and by appointment

Office Phone: 392-9107

Class Meets: MWF Per 8 (3:00-3:50) Little Hall 205



**_Set_ :** "I'd say the institutionalization of theory, whether it be
deconstruction or whatever, is virtually complete. That's why its important to
go back to the starting point, and further, I think the Japanese context is an
extremely auspicious place to do it. When I wrote _The Origins of Modern
Japanese Literature_ that's what I had in mind. When people say  "origins"
they are usually pointing to the West, and even there to the distant past.
However in a certain  
![](urj7.jpg) stretch of time in Japan's Meiji period, a number of things
that, because they occurred over the course of several centuries in the West
have rather been rendered invisible, appear in a highly condensed form. By
taking a close look at these isn't it possible to call into question things
that have become self-evident in the West."

\-- Karatani Kojin, _What is "Criticism"?_



**_Overview_ :** We take as our object in this course something called "modern
Japanese literature." Since we already know what modern means, we'll need to
pare away the modern aspects and get right down to the "Japanese" part, right?
It seems self-evident. But really, there is nothing in the experience of the
USA that can correllate with the way Japan experienced modernity. That is to
say, in fast forward, under pressure. In the 70 years between 1860 and World
War II Japan instituted in the most wrenching way the whole modern thing, from
schools, railroads and constitutional government, to hygiene, colonialism and
symbolist poetry. And so, oddly, it's often in the reaction to what seems the
most natural and self-evident in modern life, rather than in the exotic
differences, that the unsettling quality of our object lies.

We are going to survey primary source material in translation by some of
Japan's most famous and articulate observers, including novels, short stories,
essays, diaries, and film. We will approach these materials as texts that call
forth our interpretation, that is to say as literature. Close attention to the
way these texts _mediate_ our cross-cultural encounter will give us an
opportunity to reflect on the way we draw connections between a  "foreign"
tradition like Japan's and our own time and place.

All course material will be in English. No Prerequisites, Non-majors welcome.



**Texts**

The following texts are required and will be available in University Book and
Supply (UBS, 12th and University Ave., across from the Holiday Inn).



1\. Shimazaki Toson, _The Broken Commandment_ , (New York, Columbia UP, 1977)

2\. Natsume Soseki, _The Tower of London_ , (Weatherhill, 1997)

3\. Tanizaki Junichiro, _Some Prefer Nettles_ , (NY, Knopf, 1955)

4\. Yoshikawa, Eiji, _Musashi #1: The Way of the Samurai_ (NY, Mass Market
Books, 1991)

5\. Kato Shuichi, _A History of Japanese Literature: Volume 3_ , (NY,
Kodansha, 1978)

6\. Lentricchia, Frank, ed., _Critical Terms for Literary Study_ , 2nd Ed.
(University of Chicago Press, 1995)



NOTE: A Required _Course Reader_ with articles and primary source material is
also at UBS, and a supplemental Reader (also required) will be available in
September.



Kato's _History of Japanese Lit: the Modern Years_ is an easy-to-read
paperback by a writer who is very popular in Japan. Weekly readings in Kato of
about 25 pp. gives a reliable account with all the background, the names and
dates, etc. Be sure to keep up with these as they provide an excellent frame
in which to place your reading. Your papers will be expected to reflect a good
understanding of the context they provide.





**Requirements**



This class will combine lectures, discussions, writing and group
presentations. Therefore, attendance and active participation in all class
meetings are essential to the success of the course and to your grade. Grades
will be assigned as follows:

Paper #1 % 20

Presentations 15

Participation 15

Take Home Midterm 25

Paper #2 25



This course falls under the Gordon rule for writing requirements. These will
be satisfied with a combination of a short papers (4-5 pp.) and a take-home
midterm.





**Due Dates**



All assignments are to be handed in at my office by 4:00 pm on the day in
which they are due. No extensions, so plan ahead accordingly. Mark these dates
on your calendars now, assemble your materials and begin thinking. Consult the
"Guide to Thesis-Writing" on my www site <http://www.ufl.edu/users/jmurphy>
for detailed advice.



_29 Sep: Paper #1_

_16 Oct: Pick up Take-home Midterm_

_20 Oct: Hand in Take-home Midterm_

_10 Dec: Paper #2 due_





**  
Syllabus**





__Introduction: Encounters Conceptual and Otherwise__



24 Aug: Course Introduction

26 Aug: Course Reader #1: Schleiermacher, from _On the Different Methods of
Translation_

28 Aug: Reader #2: Otis Cary, "Waiting Before Closed Gates".

__ Deane, "Imperialism/ Nationalism", from _Critical Terms for Literary Study_
(hereafter CT)



_A History of Japanese Literature_ , v. 3, Chapter 1 (hereafter Kato)





__Week 2-3: Juxtapositions: Multiple Spaces in Early Meiji (1860-1890)__



31 Aug: Reader #3"The Independence of the United States of North America" in
_Meiroku Zasshi: Journal of the Japanese Enlightenment_ .

Reader#4:  "I Join the First Mission to America" from _The Autobiography of
Fukuzawa Yukichi_.

2 Sep: Reader#5: "Meiji Literature and the Transformation of Sensibilities,"
Kamei Hideo

Reader#6: "Sitting Around the Stew Pan" by Kanagaki Robun.

4 Sep: Reader #7: "Civilization-Savagery-Barbarism" by Narita Ryuichi

Reader #8: _The Painted Bird_ , by Izumi, Kyoka



>>>>>> Kato, Chapter 1 (cont.)





7 Sep: Labor Day, No labor

9 Sep: Reader #9: "Child's Play", by Higuchi, Ichiyo

11 Sep: Reader #10: from _On How I Became a Christian_ , by Uchimura Kanzo



>>>>>> Kato, Chapter 1 (cont.)





__Week 4-8: Self-Consciousness of the Meiji Elite--(1890-1912)__



14 Sep: Reader#11: "The Position of Literature in Meiji Culture," by Okazaki
Yoshie

16 Sep: Reader #12: "Maihime" by Mori Ogai

Reader #13: _Imperial Rescript on Education_

_An Encouragement of Learning_ , Preface, by Fukuzawa Yukichi. __

>>>>>Film: _The Story of Last Chrysanthemums_ (Mizoguchi, 1939, Screening TBA)

18 Sep: Discussion of Film, Kato, Chapter 1



>>>>>> Kato, Chapter 2





21 Sep: Natsume Soseki, _London Tower_

23 Sep: " "

25 Sep: Reader #14: "The Introduction of Western Philosophy";

"Fine Arts: The Drama";

"Literature of the Meiji Era"

from _Fifty Years of New Japan_ , ed. Okuma, Shigenobu, (1909)



>>>>>> Kato, Chapter 2 (cont.)





28 Sep: Shimazaki Toson, _The Broken Commandment_

30 Sep: " " "

2 Oct: " " "



>>>>>> Kato, Chapter 2 (cont.)





5 Oct: Reader# 15: _The Quilt_ , by Tayama Katai

7 Oct: " "

9 Oct: Natsume Soseki, _Mon_ (Supplemental Reader)



>>>>>> Kato, Chapter 2 (cont.)





12 Oct: _Mon_ " " __

14 Oct: Mori Ogai, "Delusions"

16 Oct: Reader #16: "The Civilization of Modern-day Japan" by Soseki



>>>>>> Kato, Chapter 2 (cont.)





__Week 9-11: Difference Within--The Emergence of Mass Culture/ Colonial
Peripheries (1913-1925)__



19 Oct: TAKE HOME MIDTERM

21 Oct: Film: _Osaka Elegy_ (Mizoguchi, 1936) (To be screened in class)

23 Oct: Discuss film, Kato Chapter 2



>>>>>> Kato, Chapter 3





26 Oct: Reader #17: _Fragments of a Past_ , by Yoshikawa Eiji

28 Oct: _Musashi: The Way of Life and Death_ by Yoshikawa Eiji

Reader #18: "Constructing the Japanese Ethnography of Modernity." by
Silverberg, Miriam

30 Oct: _Musashi_ (cont.)  " " "



>>>>>> Kato, Chapter 3 (cont.)





2 Nov: Reader #19: "General Nogi and 203 Metre Hill"

Reader #20: "The 'Composition' of Empire" by Kawamura Minato

4 Nov: Tanizaki Junichiro, _Some Prefer Nettles_ (Knopf, 1955)

6 Nov: " " "



>>>>>> Kato, Chapter 3 (cont.) _ ___

__ __

__ __

__ __

__ __

__Week 12-15: Early Showa (1925-1939)-- The Class Struggle for Meaning__



9 Nov: Reader #21: "Crimson" by Sata Ineko

??? substitute Akutagawa, "The Orange Grove"?

11 Nov: Veteran's Day, No class.

13 Nov: No class (some kind of holiday)



>>>>>> Kato, Chapter 3 (cont.)





16 Nov: Reader #22: from _Nobuko_ , by Miyamoto Yuriko

18 Nov: Reader #23: Kobayashi Takiji, _The Cannery Boat and other Stories_

20 Nov: Film: _Zatoichi: Blind Swordsman's Vengeance_ (Tanaka, 1966)



>>>>>> Kato, Chapter 3 (cont.)





23 Nov: Reader #24: "Errors in the So-called Massification of the Arts Thesis"

by Nakano Shigeharu

Reader #25: "Writing and Revolution," by Roland Barthes

25 Nov: Reader #26: "The House in the Village" by Nakano Shigeharu

27 Nov: Thanksgiving, No class



>>>>>> Kato, Chapter 3 (cont.)





30 Nov: "House" (cont.) " "

2 Dec: Reader #27: "The Machine" by Yokomitsu Riichi

4 Dec: Reader #28: "Hell of Mirrors" by Edogawa Rampo





7 Dec: Film: _The Human Condition_ (Part 1: Kobayashi, 1958)

9 Dec: **Final Paper due**.

Course wrapup, critique, Christmas.









  
  
\- 1 -

