[History of the Vietnam War/History 256](98his256.html)

[Dr. Nguyen](nguyen.html)

[History Department](index.html)

Temple University

Fall 1998

MWF 1:40-2:30 PM

AL 7

**History 256: THE VIETNAM WAR**

The Vietnam War is a microcosm of the forces that have shaped the twentieth
century world: colonialism, imperialism, nationalism, revolution,
modernization, nation-building, Third World development, capitalism,
communism, the cold war, and more. It was a defining moment for both Americans
and Vietnamese, although the peoples of neither nation can agree on what
precisely it defined. For the United States, the loss of the war produced a
crisis of national identity. For Vietnam, the victory m eant the culmination
of thirty years of revolutionary struggle. To the present day both suffer from
the failure to resolve problems inherent in these outcomes.

This course is designed to emphasize the war as a problem for both Americans
and Vietnamese. The question will be why almost complete strangers prior to
World War II became such bitter enemies so soon thereafter, and as a
consequence engag ed in mortal combat for more than a decade. The strategy
will be to explore the social, political, economic, military, and diplomatic
dimensions and ramifications from each's perspective.

**Requirements:** Course work will include readings, **discussions** , one
book review, one mid-term, and one final examination.

**Texts:** Young, _The Vietnam Wars, 1945-1990_ ; Moss, _A Vietnam Reader_ ;
Race, _War Comes To Long An_ ; Duong Thu Huong, _Novel Without A Name_.

**Grading:** Grading will be based on a system that awards a possible 400
points, which will be divided by four for determining final grades according
to the following standard: 90-100= from A- to A; 80-89= from B- to B+; 70-79=
from C \- to C+; 60-69= from D- to D+; 0-59=F. Students' _informed_ and
_regular_ participation in class discussions will influence the final grade.

**Review (worth 100 points):** There will be **one** book review, three-to-
five **typed** **double-spaced** pages in length, of either _Novel Without A
Name_ or _War Comes To Long An_. The review will be due by the en d of class
(2:30 PM) on **Wednesday, November 25, 1998**. **There will be a penalty of
ten points for late papers**.

It goes without saying that the review will be original to the student.
Paraphrasing reviews that have been published in journals or newspapers is not
acceptable (even if footnoted). The review will be graded on substance,
critical analysi s, and presentation (correct grammar, spelling, etc.). The
medium counts as much as the message.

**Mid-term Examination (worth 100 points):** Students will be expected to
write _in class_ one informed, sophisticated, and coherent essay responding to
_one question_ selected by the instructor from a list of _four question s_
distributed previously. The examination will take place on **Wednesday,
October 21, 1998, 1:40 A.M.-2:30 P.M.**

**Final Examination (worth 200 points):** Students will be expected to write
_in class_ two informed, sophisticated, and coherent essays responding to _two
questions_ selected by the instructor from a list of _five questions_
distributed previously. The examination will take place on **Monday, December
14, 1998, 11:00 A.M.-1:00 P.M.**

**Attendance** : Students are expected to attend class regularly. More than
three absences will affect the instructor's evaluation of the student's
progress (or lack thereof).

**Consultations with the instructor** : Students are encouraged to discuss the
course material, book reviews, and any related academic matters with the
instructor. Regular office hours are held every **WF** , from 8:30-9:30 A.M.
at Gla dfelter Hall 843. The instructor may be reached by telephone at (215)
204-1897 or by e-mail: ngocdieu@vm.Temple.edu. Meetings may also be arranged
for any mutually convenient time.

**Academic Honesty:** The university's policy regarding academic honesty, as
stated in the _Temple University Student Catalog_ , will be rigorously
enforced. Do not hesitate to ask the instructor if you have any questions
about univ ersity policy in this regard or if you do not understand how this
policy relates to specific course assignments.

**Schedule of Course Meetings**

The Historical and Physical Terrain: Vietnam

August 31 : Introduction.

September 2 : Human and Natural Geography of Vietnam.

The French War

Read Young, _The Vietnam Wars_ , Chapters 1-3;

Sept. 4-9 : The French Conquest and Colonization of Vietnam.

Sept. 11-14 : Foundations of United States' Asian Policy. Wilsonian Idealism.

Sept. 16-18 : The Rise of Nationalism. Origins of Vietnamese Communism.

Sept. 21 : Roosevelt and Asia. Moss, _A Vietnam Reader_ : Doc. no. 1.

Sept. 23-25 : The August Revolution. Origins of the French War 1945-1954. Doc.
no. 2; 4.

Sept. 28 : Truman and Indochina. Doc. no. 3.

Sept. 30 : Vo Nguyen Giap's War. Doc. no. 5.

October : "The Day We Didn't Go to War." Doc. no. 6; 7.

Oct. 5 : Film: _Ho Chi Minh_

Oct. 7-9 : The Geneva Agreements. Doc. no. 8; 9.

The American War

Read Young, _The Vietnam Wars_ , Chapters 4-14;

Oct. 12 : The Sovereign of Discord.

Oct. 14 : The United States' Commitment to Diem. _VR_ : Doc. no. 11; 12; 15.

Oct. 16 : The Democratic Republic of Vietnam. Doc. no. 17.

Oct. 19 : **Review**

**Oct. 21** : **Mid-term Examination**

Oct. 23-26 : The Republic of Vietnam: Rise and Fall of the House of Ngo.
Origins of the NLF. Doc. no. 16; 18.

Oct. 28 : Kennedy's Response to the War. Doc. no. 20; 21; 22.

Oct. 30 : Counterinsurgency

November 2-4 : Americanization. L.B.J.'s Escalation of the War. Doc. no. 24;
25; 26; 35.

Nov. 6-9 : The Vietnamese Political and Military Factors leading to the Tet
Offensive. Doc. no. 37; 38; 39; 40; 44.

The Peoples' War

Read Young, _The Vietnam Wars_ , Chapter 15;

Nov. 11-16 : L.B.J. and Tet. War on the Home Front. The Failed Negotiations.
_VR_ : Doc. no. 27; 29; 31; 32; 42; 45; 46.

Nov. 18 : The Hanoi Regime. Doc. no. 33; 48.

Nov. 20 : The Saigon Regime.

Nov. 23 : Book discussion.

**November 25** : Hanoi-Saigon. **(Book Review Due)**.

November 27 : **Thanksgiving**.

Nov. 30-December 2: Nixon's Secret Plan. Vietnamization. Doc. no. 49; 50; 52;
pp. 201-216.

December 4 : The Final Days. Doc. no. 53; 54; 55; 56; 58; 59.

After the War Was Over

Read Young, _The Vietnam Wars_ ; Moss, _A Vietnam Reader_

Dec. 7 : U.S.-VN Post-1975.

Dec. 11 : Review Session.

****

**Final Examination:** **Monday, December 14, 1998: 11:00-1:00 P.M.**  
  
  
  
Return to the [HIS 256 (Fall 1998) Web Page](98his256.html)  
  
Return to the [History Department's Web Page](index.html)  
  

