H106: American History II

Indiana University East

M/W, 12:30-1:45

T/R, 9:30-10:45



Spring 2002 Joanne E. Passet



![](index_files/image002.jpg)



Syllabus



**Introduction: ** In this three-credit hour course you will explore the
history of the United States from the end of the Civil War to the present.
During these years, our nation underwent transformation from a predominantly
rural society into one of the world's most powerful industrial and political
nations. Special emphasis will be given to cultural and social changes
occurring in this time frame. The course is structured around lectures,
videos, recordings, and in-class activities and discussion.



**Goals and Learning Objectives:** H106 is designed to help you:

  * Gain an appreciation of the American past and its interpreters
  * Learn how to carefully and logically analyze the American experience from multiple perspectives.
  * Enhance your understanding of how historians approach questions about the past.
  * Develop your ability to reason clearly and think critically.
  * Develop your oral and written communication skills.



H106 contributes toward the following Indiana University East learning
objectives:

  * Liberal Arts exposure.
  * Effective communication (reading, writing, speaking, and technology).
  * Critical Thinking (research, analysis, interpretation, and creativity).
  * Multiculturalism, Ethical Choices.

**Texts** : This is a survey course, which means that we will cover a lot of
material in a short amount of time. It is important that students do the
reading before coming to class. Required texts are available at the Campus
Bookstore.

  * Brinkley, _The Unfinished Nation_
  * Wheeler/Becker, _Discovering the American Past, Vol_ _._ _II_
  * Moody, _Coming of Age in_ _Mississippi_ __
  * Rampolla, _A Pocket Guide to Writing in History_
  * Hammond, _U_ _._ _S_ _._ _History Atlas_
  * Hammond, U. S. Problem Map, #5; World Problem Map #72



**Course Requirements and Grading: ** I expect you to attend class regularly,
complete assigned readings _before_ each class meeting, participate in class
discussions, and complete assignments on time. Your assignments, and the
points they are worth, are as follows:

**_ _**

  * **_2 Historical Re-Enactments (80 points each)_**

Historical re-enactments include two components. First, students choose a
historical figure, conduct research on that person's life and times, and write
a 4-5 page paper (with footnotes and bibliography). Second, on the day of the
re-enactment students will assume the historical figure's persona as we
discuss specific issues. Lists of people, focus questions, and guidelines for
each re-enactment will be distributed in class. **__**

**_ _**

  * **_Book essay (40 points)_** ****

You will write a 5-page essay in response to Moody's _Coming of Age in
Mississippi_.

**_ _**

  * **_Mid-term exam (80 points)_**
  * **_Final (80 points)_**

Examinations focus critical thinking and foster core communication skills.
Each exam will

consist of several short-answer identifications and an essay. The exams are
in-class and

closed book. They are not cumulative.



  * **_Class participation/In-class assignments (40 points)_**

Because attending class and participating in class discussion facilitates
learning, there will be regular opportunities for you to participate in class
activities, which will include oral reports on visits to historic sites
(1877-present time frame), web page briefings (from our syllabus), or reports
on films or documentaries you have watched. During class-time, you also may be
asked to respond, in writing, to the assigned readings, primary sources, or
lecture content.



  * **_Extra Credit Opportunities_**

From time-to-time you will have opportunities to attend lectures and special
events on

campus. You may earn up to 5 points for each for writing a one-page
reflection.



  * **_Map Quiz (P/F)_**



**_ _**

**_ _**

**_ _**

**_Grading Scale:_**

A 384-400

A- 368-383

B+ 352-367

B 336-351

B- 320-335

C+ 304-319

C 288-303

C- 272-287

D+ 264-271

D 252-263

D- 240-251

F 239 and below



**General Information and Policies: **

  * My office is **_278 Whitewater H_** ** _all_** , and the phone number is **_765-973-8521_**. You are welcome to use either my voice mail or e-mail to contact me with your questions and concerns about the course or your work. Please note: If you leave a phone message, speak slowly, provide a number where you can be reached, and state when you will be at that number. You also are encouraged to visit me during **office hours** :

Monday, 2-3 p.m.

Tuesday, 11 a.m.-12 noon

Wednesday, 4-5 p.m.

Thursday, 1-2 p.m.

And by appointment (call or e-mail to schedule)



  * **_Students with special needs_** _._ If you require some accommodation or modification in class procedures, activities, instruction, etc., please let me know. Your success in this class is important to me.

**_ _**

  * **_Written Assignments_** **** are to be typed in 12-point font, double-spaced, with one-inch margins, and stapled. Proofread in addition to using a spell checker. Students are encouraged to visit the Writing Lab in Springwood Hall 202B. **_Late papers_** will be penalized by a full grade reduction per week late (for example, a week-late B quality paper earns a grade of C) unless a valid, documented excuse is provided. Submitting work that adopts or reproduces ideas, words, or statements of another person without appropriate acknowledgement constitutes **_plagiarism_** , will result in a grade of 0 for the assignment, and will be dealt with by me in accordance with University guidelines.



  * **_Make-up exams_** are scheduled by permission only and must be requested in advance (unless there are acceptable extenuating circumstances).



  * **_Attendance_** **** is expected. Lectures and activities do not always follow the text, so being in class is important. After 2 absences, students will lose 4 points per class missed. If there is an extenuating circumstance you will need documentation. It is your responsibility to get notes and to make up any work you have missed. ****

** **

** **

**Course Calendar: **

The following is a weekly schedule indicating class topic and assigned
readings for each class meeting, and dates for exams and assignments. You must
complete the reading prior to each class. Please note: _this schedule is
tentative and subject to change as necessary_.





**Date**

|

**Class Topic and Assignment**  
  
---|---  
  
1/14 (M)

1/15 (T)

|

_Introduction to the Course _  
  
1/16 (W)

1/17 (R)

|

_Reconstruction & the New South_

_Read: _

  * Brinkley, Preface, Ch. 15 (Reconstruction and the New South)
  * Wheeler/Becker, Ch. 1 (Grant, Greeley, and the Popular Press)

_Internet Resources:_

  * [Andrew Johnson Impeachment](http://www.impeach-andrewjohnson.com/)
  * [Thaddeus Stevens Speech](http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/D/1851-1875/reconstruction/steven.htm)

  
  
1/21 (M)

|

**Martin Luther King, Jr** **.** **, Day--no class**  
  
1/22 (T)

1/23 (W)

|

_Westward Expansion, Indian Removal_

_Read: _

  * Brinkley, Ch. 16 (The Conquest of the Far West)

_Internet Resources: _

  * [Images of the West (click on American West) ](http://www.treasurenet.com/images/)
  * [Ken Burns'"The West"](http://www.pbs.org/weta/thewest/)
  * [Buffalo Soldiers](http://www.imh.org/imh/buf/buftoc.html)

  
  
1/24 (R)

1/28 (M)

|

_Library Orientation_

Do research for first historical re-enactment  
  
1/29 (T)

1/30 (W)

|

_Industrialization; World of the Worker_

_Read: _

