PAUS8151(Nigro) information page |  |  |  
---|---|---|---  
  |  
  

**GEORGIA STATE UNIVERSITY**

 **SCHOOL OF POLICY STUDIES**

 ****

 **DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AND URBAN STUDIES**

  
  
  
  

**Syllabus**

 **PAUS 8151: Public Personnel Administration**

 **Spring Semester 2001**

  
  

**Instructor: Lloyd G. Nigro 327 Arts & Music**

 **Time: 7:15 PM to 9:45 PM**

 **Days: Monday**

 **Office: 1246 Urban Life**

 **Telephone :(404) 651-4595**

 **e-mail : padlgn@gsu.edu**

 **Fax : (404) 651-1378**

 **Office Hours: Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday-- 1:00 PM to 3:00 PM**

 **(Please note that it is recommended that you call or e-mail for a confirmed
appointment, since I may be called out of the office to attend to other work-
related matters.)**

  
  

**COURSE DESCRIPTION**

  
  

**PAUS 8151 is a graduate level introduction to public and nonprofit sector
human resources policy and management in the United States. This course is
designed to cover: (1) the history of human resources management in government
and the nonprofit sector, (2) major elements of the personnel management
process, (3) organizational functions of human resources systems, and (4)
contemporary issues and problems confronting human resources managers and
policymakers** **in the public and nonprofit sectors**.

  
  

**CLASS PROCESS**

  
  

**Emphasis will be placed on student participation and discussion. Discussions
will center on questions and issues arising from the assigned readings,
answers to discussion questions in the text, and analysis of cases assigned
from Reeves book.**

  
  
  
  
  
  

****

**House Rules**

 **If you must miss a session or will be late arriving, please let the
instructor know in _advance_ if at all possible. Class normally will start at
7:15 PM. There will be a 15 minute break at approximately 8:30 PM. Class will
resume promptly at 8:45 PM and end at 9:45 PM. Please note that the break time
may vary somewhat in relation to class activities. You are welcome to bring
beverages into class, _but not food_. If you must leave class early, please
let the instructor know in advance, and please sit in a location where your
leaving will not disrupt the class. If at all possible, early departures
should take place at the break. If you arrive late, please take a seat near
the door in order to minimize disruption. All cell phones and other
electronics should be turned off during class time. If there is some urgent
reason a cell phone has to be left on, please notify the instructor before
class starts.**

  
  
  
  
  
  

******REQUIRED TEXTS**

  
  

**Two texts are required and should be available at the GSU and Georgia
Bookstores. They are:**

  
  
  
  

**(1) Nigro and Nigro, The New Public Personnel Administration, 5 th ed.**

 **(F.E. Peacock, 2000).**

 **(2) T. Zane Reeves, _Cases in Human Resource Management_ (F.E.**

 **Peacock, 1999).**

  
  

**Please note that a number of handouts will be provided during the semester,
and these also are required readings.**

 ****

**Please obtain the books in time to have completed the assignment for**

 **January 22nd.**

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

******_COURSE REQUIREMENTS_** ****

 **Please note that written assignments may not be submitted via e-mail or fax
without the prior approval of the instructor. Even with instructor's approval,
it is important to request and receive confirmation of receipt before it may
be assumed that the assignment has actually been submitted and accepted when
due.**

 **Course Requirements Include The Following**

 ** _A Research Paper_**

__

**One major research paper on a topic selected in consultation with the
instructor is required. Possible topics include recent developments in
affirmative action policy, EEO law, diversity, new approaches to performance
appraisal, initiatives in recruitment and selection, reforms in pay and
benefits, civil service reform, re-invention and re-engineering initiatives,
training and development, etc. Research papers should be based on materials
obtained from scholarly and professional books and articles, government
documents, and other credible publications. They may focus on the public
and/or nonprofit sectors. Topics must be approved by the instructor. Please
complete and submit the attached paper proposal form to the instructor before
February 26 th. Course texts and handouts from the class must not be used as
sources or references for the research paper. As a guideline, a research paper
of this kind may be expected to be between 15 and 20 pages in length (double-
spaced typewritten), including front and back matter and assuming normal
margins and fonts. ****_Research papers will be due on April 23 rd at 9:45 PM.
Papers submitted after this date normally will be lowered by one letter grade
for each 24 hours they are late unless written permission is given in advance
of the due date and time by the instructor._** ****

  
  

**_Please Note_**

 **Papers must follow an accepted format or style (You may refer to _Turabia_
n or any other standard style guide). These guides are available in the
Bookstore. Professional quality written work is expected. Papers _must_ be
free of obvious spelling, grammatical, and other errors. Spell-check programs
are helpful, but do not depend on them: proofread carefully! An appropriate
system of citations must be used, and _all sources of information and concepts
must be cited through footnotes or endnotes_. All quotations must be clearly
identified through the use of quote marks or block indenting with single
spacing and, of course, full citation to the source. Violating these rules may
result in plagiarism (see below). A bibliography of materials used and cited
must be provided. Careful proofreading and correction of typographical and
other errors prior to submission is **

**expected. In addition to content, paper grades will reflect the quality of
writing and organization of the presentation.**

  
  

**_Plagiarism and Other Violations of the University's Policies Regarding
Academic Honesty._**

  
  

**The GSU General Catalog provides a useful guide to these rules and you are
expected to be familiar with them, the possible consequences of violating
them, and of your appeal rights. If you have any questions, please ask the
instructor, because ignorance of the rules of citation, for example, is no
excuse for committing plagiarism. Any standard style guide will give you the
information you need to have about setting up footnotes, endnotes,
bibliographies, and reference sections. They will also tell you when quote
marks or other indicators of direct quotation are needed and how to use them.
Needless to say, every effort should be made to minimize the use of direct
quotations in your papers, since you should be trying to use your own words
whenever possible. It is also important to fully cite sources of ideas and
facts you discuss in your own words but are not your original ideas or
research products.**

 ** _A Take-Home Midterm Examination_**

 **On _Monday, February 26 th , a take-home open-book _****midterm examination
covering _all_ assigned readings, cases, class handouts, and instructor's
lectures _through_ _February 26th_ will be handed out at the end of that class
session. _The exam will be due no later than 7:15 PM on Thursday, March 1
st._** **All responses should be double-spaced typewritten and the entire exam
should be no longer than 10 pages (font no smaller than 10cpi). Spring break
is March 5 - 11, but will be no class meeting on March 12 th because I will be
attending the National Conference of ASPA in Newark, NJ on that day. Please
use the available time to work on your research papers once you have completed
and turned in the exam. Class meetings will resume on March 19th. **

  
**_A Final Examination_**  

**There will be a comprehensive _take-home_ , open-book, final examination
covering _all_ assigned readings, cases, class handouts, and instructor's
lectures. The exam will be handed out at in class 9:30 PM on April 30th and
will be due in Room 1246 Urban Life Building _no later_ than 7:15 PM on
Monday, May 7 th, which is the scheduled date of the final exam. __ The final
should be double-spaced typewritten and no more than 10 pages in total length
(font no smaller than 10 cpi). Late exams will be penalized one letter grade
unless prior approval has been obtained in writing from the instructor.**

 **** **Please note that all requests for deviations from the above dates,
times, and other conditions related to specific assignments must be approved
in advance by the instructor and that approval of such requests is not
guaranteed, but will depend on the reasons given for each request.** ****

  

******GRADING**

 **Research Paper: 35%**

 **Midterm: 25%**

 **Final Exam: 25%**

 **Attendance 15%***

  

* **Everybody starts the semester with 15 attendance points and will have one point deducted for each class session missed for whatever reason.** ****

  
  

**CLASS SCHEDULE***

 **(Subject to Revision)**

 ** _Date /Subject Assigned Readings_**



 **January 8 Class Introduction None**



 **January 15 No Class-- MLK Day**



 **January 22 The US Civil Service: Nigro and Nigro,**

 **Statistical Overview Chapter 1**



 **January 29 History of the US Nigro and Nigro**

 **Civil Service Chapter 2**

 **Cases: Reeves, #17 and #19**



 **February 5 Organizational Functions Nigro and Nigro**

 **Of Human Resources Chapter 3**



 **February 12 Civil Service Reform II Handouts:**

 **"Hard Truths/**

 **Tough Choices," from the**

 **Winter Commission Report;**

 **_Governing_ : "Who Needs Civil**

 **Service?"**



 **February 19 Recruitment and Selection Nigro and Nigro**

 **Chapter 4**

 **Handout: Wisconsin**

 **Innovations...**

 **Case: Reeves, #1**

 **__**

**February 26 Issues in Performance Nigro and Nigro**

 **Appraisal and Pay Chapters 5 and 6**

 **Cases: Reeves, #3 and #21**

  
 **Paper Topics Should be Approved by this Date--Form Signed and on File**  
  

**Midterm Examination Handed Out-- Due**

 **Thursday, March 1, 2001**

 **March 2**

 **Last Day to WP**

 **If you must Withdraw for Any Reason, this is the Deadline. After this, the
only WP possible is a hardship withdrawal authorized by the Dean of
Students.**

  
  

**March 5 No Class-- Spring Break**

  
  

**March 12 No Class-- Library Research on Paper**



 **March 19 Discrimination - Related Handouts on the EEOC;**

 **Issues, Problems, and videotapes on Affirmative**

 **Responses: EEO and AA Action and Diversity;**

 **Cases, Reeves #**

  

**March 26 Sexual Harassment Nigro and Nigro**

 **Chapter 10; videotape;**

 **Cases: Reeves # 13**

  
  

**April 2 Violence and Substance Nigro and Nigro**

 **Abuse Issues Chapters 8 and 9**

 **Cases: Reeves # 26**

  

**April 9 The New American Nigro and Nigro**

 **Workforce Chapter 11**

  

**April 16 Collective Bargaining Nigro and Nigro**

 **Chapter 7**

 **Handout: Selections**

 **From a Contract**



 **April 23 Future of PPA Nigro and Nigro**

 **Chapter 12**

 ** _Research Papers Are Due by 9:45 PM_**

  
 **April 30 __ Catch Up and Review None**  

**Final Exams Are Handed Out at 9:45 PM**

  
  

**May 7, 2001**

 **Final Exams Are Due in Room 1246 Urban Life at 7:15 PM**

  
  
  
  

****

  
  
  
  

****

****

|  
  
* * *

  

