%symlt0-1;]>

In addition to this syllabus, this course is governed by the rules and
guidelines set forth in the document &odq;Professor Black: a user's
manual&cdq; which you should receive along with this syllabus. If you have not
received that document, please let me know. You should also consult, and take
to heart, the advice offered at `http://orpheus.shu.edu/pearls.html`.  Robert
Hilliard A Biography of American Broadcasting second edition Focal Press 1997
Eric Barnouw Tube of Plenty second revised edition Oxford University Press
1992 This is highly recommended. Overview

This course offers a survey of the history of commercial American broadcasting
from its beginnings to the modern era. Our emphasis will be on the major
components of the broadcasting industry--technology, corporations, regulation,
sponsorship, programs, manufacturers, networks, producers, critics--and how
those components relate to, and have affected, each other. Throughout the
course, we will explore, too, the impact of social, economic, and historical
forces on the world of broadcasting.  Course design

The course is divided chronologically into three parts (see Chronological
Syllabus, below). Each part culminates in an exam. In addition to the three
exams, each student will also submit a 6-8 page research paper and give a
short in-class presentation. (See &odq;Chronoscope&cdq; below.)  Readings

The required text for the course is _The Broadcast Century: A Biography of
American Broadcasting_ (second edition), by Robert L. Hilliard and Michael C.
Keith. Lectures will generally parallel the reading assignments in subject
matter and time-frame; however, the lectures will not fully duplicate the
contents of the textbook, and classroom time will often be devoted to video
and audio selections (and discussions of them) not necessarily covered in
detail in the book. Students must assume responsibility for completing and
assimilating the readings. Questions and difficulties with the readings may
always be raised in class, or during office hours.  Formal Requirements Exams

There are three exams given in the course. (See also Chronoscope Project,
below.) Exams will be primarily essay-based. Any non-essay questions will be
in the form of short answers (2-3 sentences). Before any exam which includes
short answers, students will be provided with a list of possible terms from
which the questions will be drawn.  History in depth: the Chronoscope Project

One of the major aims of this course is to go &odq;beyond the
textbook&cdq;--and beyond the lectures--by means of primary research into
particular periods. The Chronoscope Project affords this opportunity.

Each student will &odq;adopt&cdq; a year from the period we cover in the
course (roughly speaking, the twentieth century), and will conduct primary
research into that year. The emphasis should be on the world of broadcasting
and communications, but may also encompass other aspects of history.

The types of research appropriate for this project might include:  examining
newspaper and magazine coverage of broadcasting (including programming
schedules, coverage of major events, advertisements for radios and
televisions, etc.) researching radio and/or television programs interviewing
people who remember broadcasting from the period you are researching, or who
worked in the field

The Chronoscope Project will result in a 6-8 page paper, and a 10-12 minute
in-class presentation. Further guidelines and suggestions for the Chronoscope
Project will be given in class.  Summary of formal requirements and grading
AssignmentWorth Exams25% each Chronoscope Project25% Attendance

Attendance is required. Permission for excused absence (including sports-
related absences) must be requested in advance, or immediately upon return
from an emergency medical absence (with documentation). Much of what we do in
class cannot be replaced by readings or &odq;getting the notes.&cdq; It is
vital that you attend regularly.  Cheating and Plagiarism

This course is governed by University and Department of Communication policies
on cheating, plagiarism, and academic dishonesty. Cheating of any kind will
result in an assignment grade of &odq;no-credit&cdq;, and/or a course grade of
`F', and/or further disciplinary action, entirely at the discretion of the
instructor.  Late and Missing Assignments

Late assignments will be penalized at one grade per calendar day. After a
maximum of one week (by which time even an `A' will have become an `F'), the
assignment will not be accepted and will be recorded as &odq;no credit.&cdq; A
missed exam will be recorded as &odq;no credit.&cdq; Chronological Syllabus
From Marconi to the 1939 World's Fair 8/25-9/26 The origins of the American
system of broadcasting. Inventions and their uses. Beginnings and firsts:
regulation, commercials, networks.  early radio commercials, _War of the
Worlds_ Preface. Beginning to 1939 (p. 90)  Chronoscope presentations9/19,
9/22 Exam9/26 From the World's Fair to the Vast Wasteland 9/29-11/3 Radio
programming through World War II -- news, music, drama, comedy. Television's
&odq;false dawn&cdq; and real dawn. The FCC's television licensing freeze.
Live anthology drama. The rise of &odq;canned&cdq; television. Network
domination. The Quiz Show scandals.  _Suspense_ , World War II broadcasts _The
Ed Wynn Show_ , _Lights Out_ , _Marty_ , _See It Now_ , _The \$64,000
Question_ 1940-1961 (pp. 91-171)  Chronoscope presentations10/27, 10/29
Exam11/3 Exploring the Wasteland 11/5-12/10  Change and stasis in business and
programming. Television in the Vietnam era. Shifts in industry power and
program content. Deregulation and the rise of cable television.  _The Mod
Squad_ , _CBS Reports: 1968_ , _All in the Family_ , _Saturday Night Live_ ,
_Hill Street Blues_ 1962-1996 (pp. 171-298)  Chronoscope presentations12/5,
12/8 Chronoscope Paperdue 12/10 Examfinal exam time slot Selected recommended
readings Here is a short annotated list of books which you might find
interesting and/or helpful in your study of the history of American
broadcasting. In particular, the last three or four years have seen a flurry
of new books about early television, including the years of invention. Several
of these books (which are not likely to turn up--yet--in many published
bibliographies) are included here. All of these books (and your textbook)
include further bibliographical references, which I encourage you to explore.
You can also learn something from these books about different research
techniques--for instance, oral history ( _The Box_ ).  Barnouw, Erik. Three-
volume history of broadcasting in the United States: A Tower in Babel [to
1933]; The Golden Web [1933-1953]; The Image Empire [since 1953]. New York:
Oxford University Press 1966/1968/1970 This monumental work has served many
subsequent researchers as an indispensable point of reference. See also _Tube
of Plenty_ , below.  Barnouw, Erik. Tube of Plenty second revised edition New
York: Oxford University Press 1990 This is a one-volume condensation of
Barnouw's three-volume work (above).  Barnouw, Erik. The Sponsor: Notes on a
Modern Potentate. New York: Oxford University Press 1975 This is a shorter
book by Barnouw which, despite (or maybe because of) its focus on the sponsor,
provides a concise recap of some key developments in early broadcasting
history.  Boddy, William. Fifties Television: The Industry and Its Critics.
Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press 1990 Boddy coined the phrase
&odq;From `Golden Age' to `Vast Wasteland&cdq;', which I have been known to
borrow, as a way of describing the changes in television--and public
perceptions of television--in the 1950s. This book presents his extremely
thorough and important research.  Douglas, Susan. Inventing American
Broadcasting: 1899-1922. Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins University Press
1987 This may be my favorite broadcasting history book. Douglas provides some
powerful analyses of what was going on in American radio before it became
&odq;broadcasting.&cdq; Fisher, David E. and Marshall Jon Fisher. Tube: The
Invention of Television. Washington, D.C.: Counterpoint 1996 A lively--and
international--look at television from its inception (or maybe before!) to its
establishment as a major mass medium. Enough RCA-bashing to keep even me
happy, and a great deal of biographical information on Baird, Sarnoff,
Farnsworth, Armstrong, and others.  Kisseloff, Jeff. The Box: An Oral History
of Television, 1920-1961. New York: Viking Penguin 1995 Hundreds and hundreds
of quotations from people who worked in various aspects of the television
industry, along with historical narrative tying it together.  Lewis, Tom.
Empire of the Air. New York: HarperCollins Publishers 1991 (Paperback: 1993)
This book was the basis for the PBS documentary of the same name. It contains
a great deal of detail on the very early years of American radio, though it is
(arguably) a bit over-committed to its thesis that everything happened because
of three men (De Forest, Armstrong, and Sarnoff).  Ritchie, Michael. Please
Stand By: A Prehistory Of Television. Woodstock, NY: The Overlook Press 1994
History and stories from the very early days, when television wasn't quite
television but sort of was more than we may think\ldots. (I first encountered
the story of Baird experimenting with a human eye in this book.)  Sterling,
Christopher H. and John M. Kittross. Stay Tuned: A Concise History Of American
Broadcasting second edition Belmont, CA: Wadsworth 1990 This used to be the
textbook for this course. It is now out of print, but you can probably find
used copies around (and a lot of frustrated students who couldn't sell it back
to the bookstore). It's very thick with detail, rather to much so for most of
us to absorb very readily--but by the same token, it is a very valuable
reference work, full of well-organized information. I recommend getting hold
of it for future reference.  `

* * *

Visit (or return to) [the Cabinet of Dr. Black](http://icarus.shu.edu/dblack),
homepage of Professor David Alan Black in the [Department of
Communication](http://www.shu.edu/depts/comm) at [Seton Hall
University](http://www.shu.edu).

