#### George Mason University

SPRING 2002

MNPS  704



RESEARCH PROJECT II:

Research Methodologies in the New Professionalism

** **

**Meeting time: periodically throughout semester   \-- see schedule below**

**In Prince William Building II, Auditorium**





## Professors:

## Erin Williams  

Office: PW1, Room 424  

Phone: 3 8385  

Email: [ewilliams@geneticmedicine.org](mailto:ewilliams@geneticmedicine.org)  



            **Pat Gillevet**

            Office: PW 1, Room 448

            Phone: 3 1057

            Email: [gillevet@ib3.gmu.edu](mailto:gillevet@ib3.gmu.edu)  



**Technology Coordinator:**

**Cathy Hubbs**

Office: PW2, Room 182A

Phone: 703 993 8384;

Email: [chubbs@gmu.edu](mailto:ewilliams@geneticmedicine.org)



Professors and Technology Coordinator share postal address and fax number:

10900 University Blvd.

MSN 4E3

Manassas, VA 20110

Fax 703-993-8401

Office hours will be by appointment only



**Research Project Directors**

Linda Carne

Patrick Gillevet

Keith McKenney

Don Seto

Jim Willett

Mark Wilson



** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

**OVERVIEW**



In this final semester of the MNPS program, students are expected to apply the
skills that they have acquired throughout the prior two years of study.  The
MNPS 704 is designed to prepare students for a professional career by guiding
them through the process of generating a collaborative, interdisciplinary
research project, poster and article.



As in MNPS 703, a great deal of the instruction will take place through
independent study and through interaction with Research Project Directors.
Students will work in Research Groups with Research Project Directors from the
previous semester.  Each Group will spend the semester working on the Research
Project that they proposed in MNPS 703. Over the course of the semester, each
Group will create an Interim Outline, Poster, and a Written Research Report.



In MNPS 704, each student will keep a Log, posting the updates weekly to
WebCT. The log should include the _hours_ and _content_ of each of your class-
related activities, with the hours for the semester totaled in the last entry.
You may also use Web CT to conduct asynchronous threaded discussions with your
classmates and group members.





**  
**

##  COURSE SCHEDULE AT A GLANCE



            Student Logs Due Weekly Throughout Semester

_Tuesday, January 22, 6-10 PM: Class meeting in the PW II Auditorium_

            _Tuesday March 19, 6-10 PM: Class meeting in the PW II Auditorium_

                        *Interim Reports Due

            Tuesday April 9 5PM

                        *Poster Drafts Due

            Tuesday April 16, 5PM

                        *Report Drafts Due

            _Tuesday April 25, 12-5PM: POSTER DAY in the PW II Auditorium_

                        *Final Posters Due

            Tuesday April 30, 5PM

                        *Final Reports Due

                        *Peer/Self Evaluations Due

           





## COURSE REQUIREMENTS

** **

**Overview**
****



Log \- _Individual_ ( **Due 6 PM each Tuesday, January 29th - April 30th) **
. .10%



Interim Report - _Group_ **(Due 6 PM, Tuesday March 19)**. . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . 10%



Poster Draft - _Group_ **(Due 5 PM Tuesday, April 9)** . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . 5%



Written Research Report Draft - _Group_ **(Due 5 PM, Tuesday April 16)**. . .
. 5%



Poster Presentation - _Group_ ( **Due 12 Noon, Tuesday April 23)**. . . . . .
. . . . 30%



Written Research Report - _Group_ ( **Due 5 PM, Tuesday April 30)**. . . . . .
. . .30% ****



Peer / Self Review - _Individual_ ( **Due 5 PM, Tuesday April 30)**. . . . . .
. . . . . 10%



** **

**Assignments / Grading:**

  

**_Log:_**

( **Due 6 PM each Tuesday, January 29th - April 30th)** __

Throughout the semester, each student will use your favorite editor or word
processing program to log the __time__ and __substance__ all class related
activities then post the document in WebCT __weekly__.   These activities
include the following:



-       meetings with Research Project Director

-       self-directed OR self-guided work 

-       work with your research group

-       other pertinent activities 



_During this semester, you are required to spend and record in your Log a
_minimum__ _of 25.5 hours of time with Research Project Directors and/or in
classroom activities.   The 25.5 hours is required _in addition__ _to time
spent in full class meetings._ _(See Log Checklist for more details)._



EVAULATION (by Instructors): 10% of final grade





**_Interim Report:_**

**(Due 6 PM, Tuesday March 19) __**

Each Group will submit a _three-page_ Interim Report to the Instructors and
the Research Project Director via WebCT.   The Report should include the
following _(Also See Interim Report Checklist):_



*      Summary of progress made on research project and other class work to date

*      Written plan and timeline for completion of research, poster and Written Research Report 

*      Rough outline of expected poster and Written Research Report contents





EVALUATION (by Research Project Director and Instructors): 10% of final grade
** __**



  

**_Poster:_**

**( _Draft_** **Due 5 PM, Tuesday April 16; _Final Poster_** **Due 12 Noon,
Tuesday April 23)**

Each research group will create and display a poster of their research project
and results.  "A good poster is uncluttered and clear in design. It has
legible text and logical organization. The main tenet of a good poster design
is simplification. Use a crisp, clean design and a strong title. Do not tell
the entire research history. Present only enough data to support your
conclusions and to show the originality of the work. The text material should
be reduced to convey your points quickly and clearly. The most successful
posters display a succinct statement of major conclusions at the beginning,
followed by supporting text in later segments, and a brief summary at the
end." (Source: <http://www.aaas.org/meetings/Posters.shtml>.)



Drafts of the posters are due two weeks before the Poster Day.  Drafts should
contain poster content and graphics only -- they need not be mounted onto a
poster.  Feedback will be given within the week on the Drafts for
incorporation into the final poster.  For more guidance, see the _Poster
Checklist_.



The POSTER DAY presentation will be held from noon to 5PM on Tuesday, April
23rd.  All Group members are expected to be present and available to answer
questions regarding their posters and work.  This event will be widely
publicized to the GMU and local business communities.  Students are encouraged
to invite current past and potential future employers, colleagues, friends and
family to attend.



As a part of this assignment, during the POSTER DAY _each student_ is expected
to review and evaluate TWO other groups ' posters using the _Poster
Checklist._  



EVALUATION

DRAFT (by Instructors and Directors): 5%

FINAL (by Instructors, Directors, Students): 30%



**_Written Research Report:_**

**( _Draft_** **Due 5 PM, Tuesday April 16; _Final Report_** **Due 5PM,
Tuesday April 30)**

Each research group will create a 2,500-word Written Research Report of their
research project and results.  Reports "present important new research results
of broad significance. Reports should include an abstract and an introductory
paragraph. A maximum of 30 references is suggested." (Source:
<http://www.sciencemag.org/feature/contribinfo/prep/index.shtml>.)



Drafts of the Reports are due two weeks before the final Report due date.
Drafts should contain as complete a paper as possible, allowing for maximum
feedback from Instructors.  Feedback will be given within the week on the
Drafts for incorporation into the final Report.  For more guidance, see the
_Written Research Report Checklist.   _You may also want to glance at articles
listed in the "Reports" section of _Science_ magazine  - your assignment is
based on this format.





EVALUATION

DRAFT (by Instructors and Directors): 5%

FINAL (by Instructors and Directors): 30%

  

**_Peer / Self Review:_**

**(Due 5PM, Tuesday April 30 th)**

Each Student will evaluate him/herself and each member of his/her Group using
_Peer / Self Review Forms_.   These should be electronically submitted to
Instructors.



EVALUATION (by Students): 10%







**COURSE OUTLINE**



(** Indicates full class meetings.)



****Tuesday January 22**



I.  CLASS ONE: 6PM - 10PM, PWII Auditorium

-       Introduction to course, assignments, grading

-       Introduction to WebCT and requirements/formatting of log



II.  Post meeting:

-       Students begin / continue work on Research Projects with their Groups and Directors

-       Students start weekly Logs via WebCT

-       Students correspond via WebCT





****Tuesday March 19**



I. CLASS TWO: 6PM - 10PM, PWII Auditorium __

-   _INTERIM REPORTS DUE_

-   Discussion of project progress, question and answer session



II. Post Meeting:

-       Students maintain weekly Logs, WebCT interactions 

-       Students continue work on Research Projects with their Groups and Directors

-       Students begin work on Report and Paper



###### Tuesday April 9 5PM:

###### I.    _POSTER DRAFTS DUE_ __

######  

###### II.  After April 9:

-       Students maintain weekly Logs, WebCT interactions 

-       Students finish research, work on report drafts



            **Tuesday April 16, 5PM:**

I.    _REPORT DRAFTS DUE_

-   Groups receive feedback about Poster Drafts



II.    After April 16

-       Students maintain weekly Logs, WebCT interactions 

-       Students refine and complete Posters



****Tuesday April 25, 12-5PM:**

I.      CLASS THREE, 12-5 PM in the PW II Auditorium

**-      POSTER DAY!! __**

-       _FINAL POSTERS DUE_

-       Students evaluate others' posters: _STUDENT 'S POSTER CHECKLISTS DUE BY END OF CLASS (each Student does 2)_

-       Students receive Feedback about Report Drafts

-       Course Wrap-up and Evaluations



II.    After April 25

-       Students maintain weekly Logs, WebCT interactions 

-       Students refine and complete Reports

-       Students complete Peer/Self Evaluations



            Tuesday April 30, 5PM

-       _FINAL REPORTS DUE_

-       _PEER / SELF EVALUATIONS DUE_

-       _FINAL INSTALATION OF LOGS DUE_



  



**Log Checklist**

MNPS 702

Spring 2002 ** __**



TO BE COMPLETED BY INSTRUCTORS - ONE FOR EACH STUDENT



**_ _**

Name of Reviewer ________________________________________



Person Being Evaluated _
._



CRITERIA  (Circle one)  0 = lowest, 2 = highest





Log Submitted to WebCT

