![](../Arts%20and%20Sciences%20Courses/Banner3.gif)

# Life-Span Developmental Psychology

## Psychology 6330 (08073)

## Spring, 2002

## Syllabus

### Instructor

**Instructor:** [Rick Harrington,
Ph.D.](http://www.vic.uh.edu/asa/A&Sfaculty/harrington.htm)  
**Office:** University West, Room 250  
**Phone:** (361)-570-4205 or 1-877-970-4848 #205 toll free if calling from an
off-campus site  
**Email:** You may email me at the course email address on the home page. I
will check my email twice daily Monday through Thursday and will attempt to
respond to emails sent M-Th within 24 hours.  
**Office Hours:** 1:30-3:30 PM, Monday and Weds.; or by appointment  

###  Texts

Berk, L. E. (2001). _Development Through the Lifespan_ (2nd ed.). Needham
Heights, MA: Allyn  & Bacon. **(Required)**

The Berk text website is [
http://www.abacon.com/berk/lifespan/](http://www.abacon.com/berk/lifespan/)

Sheehy, G. (1995). _New Passages: Mapping Your Lifespan Across Time._ New
York: Ballentine Books. **(Required)**

For information on the cost of the textbooks at the VC/UHV Bookstore, see [
The VC Bookstore Schedule
Lookup.](http://anaconda.vc.cc.tx.us/wm_disp.dept.htm) Then select the term
"Spring 02." Scroll down to "Psychology (PSY- University of Houston-Victoria)"
and click "View." Next scroll down to "6330- Life-Span Developmental
Psychology" and click "View." The cost of the texts and other text information
will then be displayed.

### Course Description

"Theory and research of successive life changes; implications for the
individual in society."

### Goals of the Course

  1. To know the primary theories of life-span developmental psychology.
  2. To know the general body of research findings in life-span developmental psychology.
  3. To know basic life-span developmental issues.
  4. To have familiarity with some of the DSM-IV disorders associated with childhood and adolescence. 

### Course Requirements

There will be three multiple choice exams, one paper, and a "discussion
postings" requirement. The multiple choice exams are site based and will be
given on Fridays in Victoria and Fort Bend from 6:00-7:30 PM. Make-up exams
are strongly discouraged. Make-up exams are essay format and will be given the
week of the final exams.

### The Breakdown of the Tests

The multiple choice tests will consist of approximately 90% lecture material
(most of which overlaps with the text) and 10% reading material from the texts
not specifically covered by the lectures. When studying for your test, it is
recommended that you focus primarily on the lectures and secondarily on the
reading material.

### The Paper

All students will be required to write a scholarly paper (approximately 20
pages) that reviews recent research in a particular topic area of human
development. All completed papers will be due on the date of the last test and
will need to be presented in hard copy in Victoria and by an email attachment
(Word or WordPerfect) by Fort Bend students. The references for the paper need
to be written using APA style. Please use PsychINFO to conduct your research
literature search. You can access PsychINFO by clicking on the
[LibraryResearch Tools](http://lois.vic.uh.edu/researchtools/home.htm) link.
Click on the "Choose Data Base By Subject" button. Next, check the
"psychology" subject area and click "submit." Then click on PsychINFO.
Magazines, personal communications, and non-scientific web based articles are
not acceptable references.

For a site that has a good listing of links to reputable developmental
psychology and related journals see [
http://classweb.gmu.edu/awinsler/Resources.html](http://classweb.gmu.edu/awinsler/Resources.html)

Approved paper topics are listed below:

  * The effect of day care on human development: research findings 
  * Fetal Alcohol Syndrome: research findings on incidence, causes, and special issues 
  * How play affects the socialization process: research findings 
  * How parenting styles affect the children of the parents: research findings 
  * The effects of parental divorce on the children of divorce: research findings 
  * The effects of and treatments for child abuse (may include sexual abuse): research findings 
  * A discussion of gender role acquisition issues: research findings 
  * ADHD causes and treatments: research findings 
  * Childhood obesity causes and treatments: research findings 
  * Aggression in children causes and treatments: research findings 
  * Anorexia nervosa causes and treatments: research findings 
  * Adolescent and child tobacco use: research findings of incidence, prevention, and treatments 
  * The effects of gender on identity development: research findings 
  * The effects of ethnicity on identity development: research findings 
  * Conduct disorder causes and treatments: research findings 
  * Applied and basic research about theories of love 
  * Adolescent suicide prevention, causes and treatment of those who survive attempts: research findings 
  * Factors related to high satisfaction in marriage: research findings 
  * Gay and lesbian parenting issues: research findings 
  * Single parenting issues: research findings 
  * Fertility problems: psychological counseling issues and research findings 
  * Psychological issues related to perimenopause and menopause: research findings 
  * Midlife crisis: issues and research findings 
  * Theories of aging and research findings about slowing the aging process 
  * Elder abuse prevention and treatment: research findings 
  * Clinical depression in late adulthood: research findings on incidence, prevention and treatments 
  * The Hospice movement: description, history, and research findings of effectiveness 
  * Counseling issues related to the grieving process: research findings

### Discussion Postings

Discussion postings in an on-line class correspond to in-class participation
in a traditional class. It is important that students become active
participants in the class each week through discussion postings. I will post
one or more discussion questions each week. Students are expected to make at
least one discussion posting per week (excluding week one and week eight-
spring break week) in response to the discussion questions. Those who make at
least one thoughtful posting per week in response to the discussion questions
will make an "A" for the "Discussion Postings" component of the course.

### Grades

Grades will be assigned according to the following system:

  * Three exams equally weighted = 65%  

  * Paper = 20% 
  * Discussion Postings = 15%

A = 90-100%  
B = 80-89%  
C = 70-79%  
D = 60-69%  

There is no curve and no extra credit.

### Course Process

All of the lectures will be available at the beginning of the semester. It is
recommended that students read the assigned text material before reading the
corresponding lecture. When reading the lecture, students are encouraged to
click on the links and examine the specific information at the link site in
more detail. The information contained at the link site is for your own
exploration and edification. You will not be tested over this information.
Nevertheless, I hope you will take a look at the link sites since they give
you a level of detail not found in the other course material and will round
out your educational experience.

### Assistance with WebCT

Kristy Holly and Hubert Bazan are the WebCT student technical support people.
If you run into any WebCT problems, or need WebCT technical support, please
contact Kristy Holly at [ Hollyk@vic.uh.edu](mailto:hollyk@vic.uh.edu) or at
(361)570-4272 or off campus toll free at 1-877-970-4848, extension #272 or
Hubert Bazan at [ Bazanh@vic.uh.edu](mailto:Bazanh@vic.uh.edu) or at (361)
570-4237 or off campus toll free at 1-877-970-4848, extension #237.

### Course Schedule

**Week One (January 14 to January 20)**  

  * **On-line Orientation**
  * Click on the [WebCT site](http://www.vic.uh.edu/webct/) and click on the "Online Orientation to WebCT." If you are not familiar with WebCT, be sure to complete the WebCT orientation before or during this week. The on-line orientation will be the only orientation for this course (no face-to-face orientation session is scheduled).

**Week Two (January 21 to January 27)**  

  * Berk- Chapter 1: _History, Theory, and Research Strategies_
  * Lecture #1: Introduction to Life-Span Development

**Week Three (January 28 to February 3)**  

  * Berk- Chapter 2: _Biological and Environmental Foundations_  
Berk- Chapter 3: _Prenatal Development, Birth, and the Newborn Baby_

  * Lecture #2: Foundations of Development

**Week Four (February 4 to February 10)**  

  * Berk- Chapter 4: _Physical Development in Infancy and Toddlerhood_
  * Berk- Chapter 5: _Cognitive Development in Infancy and Toddlerhood_
  * Lecture #3: Physical and Cognitive Development in Infancy and Toddlerhood

**Week Five (February 11 to February 17)**  

  * Berk- Chapter 6: _Emotional and Social Development in Infancy and Toddlerhood_
  * Lecture #4: Social and Personality Development in Infancy and Toddlerhood

**Exam #1, Friday, February 15, 6 PM - 7:30 PM**

**Week Six (February 18 to February 24)**  

  * Berk- Chapter 7: _Physical and Cognitive Development in Early Childhood_
  * Berk- Chapter 8: _Emotional and Social Development in Early Childhood_
  * Lecture #5: Physical and Cognitive Development in Early Childhood 
  * Lecture #6: Social and Personality Development in Early Childhood 

**Week Seven (February 25 to March 3)**  

  * Berk- Chapter 9: _Physical and Cognitive Development in Middle Childhood_
  * Berk- Chapter 10: _Emotional and Social Develpment in Middle Childhood_
  * Lecture #7: Physical and Cognitive Development in Middle Childhood 
  * Lecture #8: Social and Personality Development in Middle Childhood

**Week Eight (March 4 to March 10)**  

  * **SPRING BREAK**
  

**Week Nine (March 11 to March 17)**  

  * Berk- Chapter 11: _Physical and Cognitive Development in Adolescence_
  * Berk- Chapter 12: _Emotional and Social Development in Adolescence_
  * Lecture #9: Physical and Cognitive Development During Adolescence 
  * Lecture #10: Social and Personality Development in Adolescence
  

**Week Ten (March 18 to March 24)**  

  * Berk- Chapter 13 _Physical and Cognitive Development in Early Adulthood_
  * Sheehy- Book One 
  * Lecture #11: Physical and Cognitive Development in Early Adulthood

**Exam #2, Friday, March 22, 6:00 PM - 7:30 PM**

**Week Eleven (March 25 to March 31)**  

  * Berk- Chapter 14 _Emotional and Social Development in Early Adulthood_
  * Lecture #12: Social and Personality Development in Early Adulthood

**Week Twelve (April 1 to April 7)**  

  * Berk- Chapter 15 _Physical and Cognitive Development in Middle Adulthood_
  * Sheehy- Book Two 
  * Lecture #13: Physical and Cognitive Development in Middle Adulthood

**Week Thirteen (April 8 to April 14)**  

  * Berk- Chapter 16 _Emotional and Social Development in Middle Adulthood_
  * Sheehy- Book Two 
  * Lecture #14: Emotional and Social Development in Middle Adulthood

**Week Fourteen (April 15 to April 21)**  

  * Berk- Chapter 17 _Physical and Cognitive Development in Late Adulthood_
  * Lecture #15: Physical and Cognitive Development in Late Adulthood

**Week Fifteen (April 22 to April 28)**  

  * Berk- Chapter 18 _Emotional and Social Development in Late Adulthood_
  * Lecture #16: Social and Personality Development in Late Adulthood

**Week Sixteen (April 29 to May 3)**  

  * Berk- Chapter 19 _Death and Dying_
  * Lecture #17: The End of Life

**Exam #3, Friday, May 3, 6:00 PM to 7:30 PM**

**Paper Due**

