SYLLABUS

Psychology 414: Behavior Disorders of Childhood

Fall 1997

Instructor: Otto Wahl

Office hours: T 12:00-12:30, W 1-2

Office: David King Hall, Room 2044

Phone: 993-1361

CLASSES: Classes will be primarily lecture and discussion, with occasional
video material.

CONTENT: Course will focus on the description and conceptual explanations of
childhood psychiatric disorders. The core content of the course will be
material from the assigned text. Lectures and class discussion will be
primarily for supplementing and clarifying text material.

EXAMS: There will be five unit tests and one cumulative final exam.

Unit Tests: As shown on the attached schedule of readings, the course has been
divided into five units. A unit test will occur for each of these units in the
class following the end of that unit, as shown on the schedule of topics. Each
unit test will consist of 25 short-answer items (multiple-choice, fill-in-the-
blanks, matching), each counting one point. The best four unit test scores
will be counted toward the final course grade. THERE WILL BE NO MAKE-UP TESTS.

Final Exam: The final exam will consist of 100 short-answer items covering the
entire course, with each item counting one point. Half of the items on this
exam will come from previous unit tests and half will be new.

GRADING: Grades will be based on the total accumulation of points from the
best four unit tests and the final exam, as follows:

180-200 points = A

160-179 points = B

140-159 points = C

120-139 points = D

less than 120 = F

EXTRA CREDIT: Students will have the opportunity to earn extra credit points
(points added on to exam points at the end of the course) by doing any one
(and only one) of the following:

1\. Volunteer work at a service facility serving children with mental
illnesses: Work must involve direct contact with children with mental
illnesses (i.e., with psychiatric problems covered in this course), involve a
minimum of 1 hour per week beginning no later than Monday, September 29, 1997,
and be approved in advance by the instructor. Responsibility for arranging for
volunteer work rests with the student. Extra-credit will be awarded on the
basis of a 4-6 page paper discussing volunteer activities and integrating
volunteer experiences with course material. The paper must be typed, double-
spaced and use American Psychological Association format for referencing. It
must also be accompanied by a letter from the supervisor or institution
verifying duration, frequency, and nature of contact with children and be
submitted by the end of class Tuesday, December 2, 1997. Five to ten extra
credit points will be awarded based on the quality of thought and writing
demonstrated.

2\. Preparation of an extra-credit critique: Students may select any article
that is from a professional psychology journal and is cited in the text or
lecture, and write a 2-4 page paper describing and critiquing that article
(e.g., discussing strengths and limitations of methodology, assessing how well
data support the conclusions offered, comparing findings to material from text
and lecture). Papers must be typed, double-spaced, with references listed in
American Psychological Association style. Papers must be submitted by the end
of class time on Tuesday, December 2, 1997, with a copy of the journal article
attached. One to five extra credit points may be awarded based on the quality
of thought and writing.

3\. Participation in Psychology Department research: Students may volunteer as
participants in psychology research being conducted at GMU and receive one
extra-credit point for each one hour of research participation, up to a
maximum of five points. The Psychology Department has a written set of
guidelines for participation in research for extra-credit. Major features of
these guidelines include the requirements that researchers explain the study
to participants, that students complete a form indicating their understanding
of the study, and that participants have an opportunity to provide feedback to
the Psychology Department concerning researcher and instructor adherence to
guidelines. Complete guidelines are available from the Psychology Department
office in King Hall.

HONOR CODE: George Mason University operates under an explicit Honor Code. As
a GMU student, you are expected to be familiar with the Code and to abide by
its provisions. For this course, you may use any means available to learn the
material. However, examinations, quizzes, and papers must be your own work. It
is expected that you will make no use of written or recorded material during
examinations and quizzes and receive no assistance from other students.

SPECIAL HELP: If you have a need for special conditions for class or exams
(e.g., extended time, large print), please see me the first week of classes
and provide me with documentation of your need from the Disabled Student
Services office.

N.B.: The last day to drop this course without penalty is Sept. 2.

Textbook: Wicks-Nelson, R., & Israel, A. C. (1997). Behavior Disorders of
Childhood, third edition. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.

Tentative Schedule of Class Topics and Readings

Reading Date/ Topic Assignment

UNIT 1:

T 8/26 Introduction to course

R 8/28 Defining disordered behavior: Chap. 1, pp. 1-9

T 9/2 History: Chap. 1, pp. 9-16

R 9/4 Development: Chap. 2

T 9/9 Risk and protective factors

R 9/11 Perspectives I: Chap. 3

T 9/16 Perspectives II

UNIT 2:

R 9/18 Unit 1 test

T 9/23 Research: Chap. 4

R 9/25 Classification & Assessment: Chap. 5

T 9/30 Anxiety Disorders I: Chap. 6

R 10/2 Anxiety Disorders II

UNIT 3:

T 10/7 Unit 2 test; Depression I: Chap. 7

R 10/9 Depression II

T 10/14 NO CLASS

R 10/16 Conduct Disorders I: Chap. 8

T 10/21 Conduct Disorders II

R 10/23 ADHD I: Chap. 9

T 10/28 ADHD II

UNIT 4:

R 10/30 Unit 3 test; Mental Retardation: Chap. 10

T 11/4 Learning Disabilities: Chap. 11

R 11/6 Autism and Schizophrenia I: Chap. 12

T 11/11 Autism and Schizophrenia II

R 11/13 Autism and Schizophrenia III

UNIT 5:

T 11/18 Unit 5 test; Physical functions I: Chap. 13

R 11/20 Physical functions II

T 11/25 Psychological factors: Chap. 14

R 11/27 NO CLASS--THANKSGIVING

T 12/2 Evolving concerns: Chap. 15

R 12/4 Unit 5 exam

R 12/11 FINAL EXAM 10:30 AM-1:15 PM

