

  





![](./PUAD781_files/image002.jpg)

PUAD 781

Information Management: Technology and Policy

# Spring 2001

* * *

**Dr. Priscilla M. Regan**  
**Robinson A217**  
**[pregan@gmu.edu](mailto:pregan@gmu.edu)**  
**(703) 993-1419**  
**Office Hours: Tues 4:30 - 6:00, Thurs 2:00 - 3:00 or by appointment**

* * *

![](cd.gif)![](cr.gif)![](cm.gif)![](co.gif)

* * *

![](colorball.gif)**Course Description**

**This course will examine the challenges that organizations encounter as they
move to a more technologically sophisticated information and communication
environment. The merging of computers and telecommunications systems in the
online world of the Internet and intranets have created enormous management
opportunities for public, private, and nonprofit organizations. Efficiency,
expansion of activities, and control of internal affairs may all be enhanced
by information and communication applications. At the same time, organizations
will confront several policy issues including privacy, security,
authentication, content control, intellectual property, and taxation. Most
organizations previously addressed these policy issues in a more traditional
paper environment. The changes generated by new technologies raise questions
about the effectiveness of previous policy solutions, as well as the
possibilities about new solutions.**

  




**The course will analyze the mix of legal, technological, organizational, and
market solutions that is appropriate to address these policy problems as
organizations move their activities into cyberspace. For each policy issue
covered, we will: examine the policy problem; evaluate how the problem has
been affected by technological changes; explore the organizational interests,
as well as other competing interests; and, analyze proposed policy
solutions.**  


![](looker.gif)

![](colorball.gif)**Course Requirements  **

**This is a seminar. Readings should be completed before the class meeting and
students should come to class prepared to discuss the readings. The quality of
a seminar depends on the quality of preparation for that seminar.
Participation in the seminar will constitute 15 % of the final grade. There
will be four discussion memos (3-5 pages) based on seminar readings; each of
these memos will account for 15% of the final grade (60% total). There will
also be one research and analysis paper (12-15 pages); this paper will
constitute 25% of the final grade. Late papers will be graded down one letter
grade for each day late.**

  


  **Discussion Memos**

You are asked to write four discussion memos on issues covered in this
seminar. Five dates on which discussion memos are due are indicated on the
syllabus; you select which of the four dates work best for you. In the
discussion memo, you should select some aspect of the issue that interests and
intrigues you intellectually or that affects you professionally. My goal here
is not to be directive, but to allow you to explore further the policy or
organizational questions that interest you the most. My hope is that your
thinking and writing will enhance the quality of the seminar discussion.  
    
 Discussion memos should be 3-5 pages in length (double-spaced; 12 point-font,
normal margins). You may write the paper as a memo (e.g., to the class, to a
policymaker, to an official in an organization) or as an essay. At least three
of the readings indicated on the syllabus for that topic should be referred to
in the paper. You should engage the questions and concerns that are explored
in the readings.

    
 Each of the four papers accounts for 15%; the four papers constitute 60% of
your final grade. Late papers will be graded down one letter grade for each
day late.  
    


**Research Paper**  


You are also asked to write a paper that examines an organization's (current
or planned) online (or technologically sophisticated
communication/telecommunication) system or application. For example, the
Social Security Administration for a brief period provided online access to
personal benefit and earnings information; the State of Virginia is
considering online renewals for drivers' licenses; the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 requires the electronic
transmission of many administrative and financial transactions. The
organization may be a federal, state, local, non-profit, or for profit. It may
be an organization for which you work.  
    
In the paper, you should: (1) describe the system or application; (2) explore
the reasons for moving to this more technologically-intensive system; (3)
examine three policy and/or organizational issues that were raised and
evaluate how (both in terms of process and substance) they were handled.  
    
A memo to the class outlining the organization and system you have selected
for your paper, as well as some preliminary identification of the issues you
will discuss, is due February 27th and will be discussed in class that
evening.

  
  


![](./PUAD781_files/image003.gif)  

![](./PUAD781_files/image004.gif)    ![](./PUAD781_files/image005.gif)
**Course Materials  **



![](./PUAD781_files/image006.gif)**Most of the readings for this course will
be found online at<http://mason.gmu.edu/~pregan/PUAD781.html> or through the
webpage of the   Department of Public and International Affairs. **

** **

**One book is required and can be purchased in the bookstore.**

  
 Lawrence Lessig, _Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace_ (New York: Basic Books,
1989)  







There are several online newsletters that will keep you up-to-date on
cyberspace policy and politics.  You may want to subscribe to these; they are
free.  Some of the best are:



1)  The Center for Democracy and Technology's _Policy Post.   _To subscribe to
_CDT's Policy Post_ list, send mail to
_[majordomo@cdt.org](mailto:majordomo@cdt.org).   _ In the BODY of the message
type "subscribe policy-posts" without the quotes.



2)  The Electronic Privacy Information Center's _EPIC Alert.   _To subscribe
or unsubscribe using email, send email to

_[epic-news@epic.org](mailto:epic-news@epic.org) _  with the subject:
"subscribe" (no quotes) or "unsubscribe".



3)  The Electronic Freedom Forum newsletter from their website,
[http://www.eff.org](http://www.eff.org/).



4)  The Berkman Center Newsletter from the Berkman Center for Internet &
Society at Harvard Law School, _The Filter_.   To subscribe, go to
_<http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/filter/subscribe>_



5)  Communications-related Headlines is a free daily online news service
provided by the Benton Foundation. It will keep you up to date on important
industry developments, policy issues, and other pertinent communications-
related news events. This service is available online at (
_[www.benton.org/News/](http://www.benton.org/News/)_ ).  To subscribe to the
Benton Communications-Related Headlines, send email to:
_[listserv@cdinet.com](mailto:listserv@cdinet.com) _ In the body of the
message, type only: subscribe benton-compolicy YourFirstName YourLastName.







![](./PUAD781_files/image007.gif)  

![](./PUAD781_files/image008.gif)    ![](./PUAD781_files/image009.gif)
**Course Outline  **

![](./PUAD781_files/image010.gif)          ![](./PUAD781_files/image011.gif)  

**Week 1 - January 16**

**Introduction to Course**  
    
    
    


**Week 2 - January 23**

**Overview of Technological Developments, Policy and Economic Issues**

  
  

_Required:_  


Lessig, _Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace,_ Chapters 1, 2, 3, 6

Barry M. Leiner, et al, _A Brief History of the Internet_ (February 1998)
<http://www.isoc.org/internet/history/brief.html>  


"A Cyberspace Independence Declaration" (Feb. 1996)

                        John Perry Barlow

            <http://www.eff.org/pub/Censorship/Internet_censorship_bills/barlow_0296.declaration>





"Yesterday's Tomorrow," _Times Literary Supplement_ , 3 July 1998.

            Philip E. Agre

            <http://dlis.gseis.ucla.edu/people/pagre/tls.html>



_A Framework for Global Electronic Commerce_ (1997)

            William J. Clinton and Albert Gore

            <http://www.iitf.nist.gov/eleccomm/ecomm.htm>







            The Internet Policy Institute has made available a number of "briefing papers" for the new Administration.  Read at least three of the following:



            "What is the Internet(And What Makes it Work)" (Dec. 1999)

                        Robert E. Kahn and Vinton G. Cerf

                        [www.internetpolicy.org/briefing/12_99_story.html](http://www.internetpolicy.org/briefing/12_99_story.html)





            "Shaping the Internet Age"

                        Bill Gates

                        [www.internetpolicy.org/briefing/current.html](http://www.internetpolicy.org/briefing/current.html)





            "The Internet and the Future of Democratic Governance"

                        Sen. Patrick Leahy (D-VT) and Rep. Robert Goodlatte (R-VA)

                        [www.internetpolicy.org/briefing/leahy_goodlatte.html](http://www.internetpolicy.org/briefing/leahy_goodlatte.html)





            "Response to 'The Internet and the Future of Democratic Governance'"

                        Mike Gravel

            [www.internetpolicy.org/briefing/leahy_goodlatte_sum.html](http://www.internetpolicy.org/briefing/leahy_goodlatte_sum.html)





           

  _Recommended:_  
  

Hal R. Varian, "Economic Issues Facing the Internet" (June 10, 1996)
[ftp://alfred.sims.berkeley.edu/pub/Papers/econ-issues-
internet.html](ftp://alfred.sims.berkeley.edu/pub?Papers/econ-issues-
internet.html)  
    


_EFF 's Guide to the Internet_ (Dec. 11, 1996)

<http://www.eff.org/pub/Net_info/Eff_Net_Guide/>



Henry H. Perritt, Jr., "Cyberspace Self-Government: Town Hall Democracy or
Rediscovered Royalism?" _Berkeley Technology Law Journal_ 12 (2): Fall 1997\.  
<http://www.law.berkeley.edu/journals/btlj/articles/12_2/Perritt/html/text.html>

  
  

David Post, "Jefferson Ascendant" (1995)

<http://www.eff.org/pub/Misc/Publications/David_Post/jefferson_ascendant_post_eff.article>

  
    
  
    
**  _First Discussion Memo_**

**_Due January 23 rd_**

**Topic**  
In the above readings, authors express different  "visions" of the potential
of the Internet and the role of government in realizing that potential.
Drawing upon at least four of the readings for this week, discuss two points
of agreement (or near agreement) and two points of disagreement (or near
disagreement).  Close with your initial thoughts regarding the appropriate
role of government.  
  



**Week 3 - January 30**

**Political   Activities on the Internet**

_Required:_

_Youth Vote Influenced by Online Information: Internet Election News Audience
Seeks Convenience, Familiar Names_ (Dec. 2000)

                        Pew Internet and American Life Project

                        <http://www.pewinternet.org/reports/toc.asp?Report=27>

** **

"Arizona 'Ahead of its Time' in Online Voting?"

                        Jamal LeBlanc and Anthony Wilhelm

                        _The Digital Beat_ v.2, no.27, March 30, 2000

                        <http://www.benton.org/DigitalBeat/db033000.html>



_Campaigns in Cyberspace: Toward a New Regulatory Approach_

_                         _Anthony Corrado

                        A Report of the Aspen Institute and American Bar Association

                        2000

                        [http://www.aspeninstitute.org/c&s/campaign.asp](http://www.aspeninstitute.org/c&s/campaign.asp)



"Building Online Communities: Transforming Assumptions into Success"

                        Victoria Bernal

                        Benton Foundation

                        <http://www.benton.org/Practice/Community/assumptions.html>****



_Recommended:_

  
_New Internet Users:   What They Do Online, What They Don't, and Implications
for the 'Net's Future_ (Sept. 2000)

                        John B. Horrigan

                        Pew Internet and American Life Project

                        <http://www.pewinternet.org/reports/toc.asp?Report=22>

  
  

**Week 4 - February 6**

**Governance Activities on the Internet**

_Required:_

###  Digital Government: the Next Step to Reengineering the Federal Government

##             Robert D. Atkinson and Jacob Ulevich

            Progressive Policy Institute

            March 1, 2000             [http://www.ppionline.org/ppi_ci.cfm?contentid=606&knlgAreaID=107&subsecid=126](http://www.ppionline.org/ppi_ci.cfm?contentid=606&knlgAreaID=107&subsecid=126)

_ _

_Electronic Government: Federal Initiatives Are Evolving Rapidly But They_

_Face Significant Challenges_ (Testimony, 05/22/2000,

GAO/T-AIMD/GGD-00-179).  Found at: [http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-
bin/useftp.cgi?IPaddress=162.140.64.21&filename=a200179t.txt&directory=/diskb/wais/data/gao](http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-
bin/useftp.cgi?IPaddress=162.140.64.21&filename=a200179t.txt&directory=/diskb/wais/data/gao)

Or search GAO website for title or report number and view as PDF in Acrobat
Reader.



##### Digital State Part III: Digital Democracy Management/Administration

                        Thomas M. Lenard and Simona Folescu

                        The Progress and Freedom Foundation

                        July 2000

                        <http://www.pff.org/POP_7.10DSPartIII.htm>





_Social Security on the Web: The Case of the Online PEBES_

                        Zachary Tumin

                        Strategic Computing and Telecommunications in the Public Sector

                        John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University

                        <http://www.ksg.harvard.edu/iip/cases/ssa.html>





#### Second Discussion Memo

_Due_

_February 6 th_

_ _

From the reports of the GAO, PPI and PFF, extract ten criteria for evaluating
government websites.  Apply these criteria to three federal agency websites.
This may be displayed on a chart.  Of the three agency websites, does any one
in particular seem to have progressed the fastest toward "digital government"?
Apply these criteria to three state websites.  Once again, you may find it
easiest to display this information in a chart.  Of the three state websites,
does one seem to be more progressive in creating its digital environment?

_ _

_ _

**Week 5 - February 13**

**Privacy  **

_Required:_  


Lessig, _Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace_ , Chapters 4, 7, 11



** **

_Trust and Privacy Online: Why Americans Want to Rewrite the Rules_

            Susannah Fox

            The Pew Internet and American Life Project

            August 20, 2000

            <http://www.pewinternt.org/reports/toc.asp?Report=19>



_Privacy Online: Fair Information Practices in the Electronic Marketplace: A_

_                  Federal Trade Commission Report to Congress_ (May 2000)

**             **<http://www.ftc.gov/os/2000/05/index.htm#22>





_Recommended:_  
  

National Telecommunication and Information Administration, _Privacy and the
NII: Safeguarding Telecommunications-Related Personal Information_ (October
1995) <http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/privwhitepaper.html>  


National Information Infrastructure Task Force, _Options for Promoting Privacy
on the National Information Infrastructure_ (April 1997)
<http://www.iitf.nist.gov/ipc/privacy.htm>  
    
Federal Trade Commission, _Self-Regulation and Privacy Online: A Report to
Congress_ (July1999) <http://www.ftc.gov/os/1999/9907/privacy99.pdf>  
  

Mary J. Culnan, _Georgetown Internet Privacy Policy Study_ (June 1999)
<http://www.msb.edu/faculty/culnanm/gippshome.html>  
    
Center for Democracy and Technology, _Behind the Numbers: Privacy Practices on
the Web_ (July 1999) <http://www.cdt.org/privacy/990727privacy.pdf>  
    
National Telecommunications and Information Administration, _Privacy and Self-
Regulation in the Information Age_ (June 1997)
<http://www.ntia.doc.gov/reports/privacy/privacy_rpt.htm>  
  

Federal Trade Commission, _Privacy Online: A Report to Congress_ (June 1998)
<http://www.ftc.gov/reports/privacy3/toc.htm>  
    
CDT, _Guide to Online Privacy_ (1998) <http://www.cdt.org/privacy/guide>



_Third Discussion Memo_

_Due February 20 th_  
    


The goals of this memo are threefold: first, to acquaint you with the range of
privacy policies and information practice statements that are posted on
websites; second, to compare these policies across a number of websites; and
third, to evaluate the instrument that the Federal Trade Commission has
developed to assess privacy policies and the effectiveness of self-regulation
as a means for protecting privacy online.



            To these ends, you are asked to:



            First, select one website from each of the following:  .com, .org, .gov and .edu.  This will give you four websites to "surf."



            Second, use the FTC survey instrument that can be found in Appendix B of _Privacy Online_ (May 2000)   <http://www.ftc.gov/os/2000/05/index.htm#22> to query each of your four websites.  You do not have to complete Part I, Screening, of the Surf Survey Form.  You should start with Part 2, Domain Attributes, which begins on p. 8 of the 65 pages that you will bring up if you download Appendix B in PDF.  There are seven questions in this part.  You should then proceed to Third Party Cookies (1 question) and to the Content Analysis Form (questions 9 to 27, p. 13-18 of the 65 pages).  **N.B. It may be very helpful to refer to the Instructions that begin on p. 37 of the PDF file; this will give you definitions and helpful hints.   You do not need to print, but may want to refer to this as you surf.  **You should record and turn in the results as part of this memo; you may use one form for all four of your sites as long as you indicate clearly the results from each site.  Don't struggle to make this "neat" as long as it is clear.



            Third, select five aspects of the survey that you find yield interesting results across your four websites.  In a page or so, compare and discuss these aspects.



            Fourth, in a page or so, evaluate the FTC survey instrument.  For example, you may want to consider the following: how well does it capture the elements of the online privacy controversy; how easy is it to use the instrument to surf the websites; what are the limitations in using this instrument to determine whether self-regulation is working.





**Week 6 - February 20**

**Privacy - Technology and International Environment **



European Union, _Directive on Privacy and Data Protection._ (October 1995)  
 <http://europa.eu.int/eur-lex/en/lif/dat/1995/en_395L0046.html>



OECD, _Privacy Guidelines in the Electronic Environment: Focus on the
Internet_ (October 1997)
<http://www.oecd.org/dsti/sti/it/secur/prod/reg97-6e.htm>  
    
U.S. Department of  Commerce,   _Safe Harbor Overview (_ Fall 2000)
**_[http://www.ita.doc.gov/td/ecom/SafeHarborOverviewAug00.htm](http://www.ita.doc.gov/td/ecom/SafeHarborOverviewAug00.htm)_**



 U.S. Department of Commerce, _Safe Harbor Proposal_ (November 4, 1998)
<http://www.epic.org/privacy/intl/doc-safeharbor-1198.html>  
    


_Recommended:_  


OECD, _Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows of
Personal Data_ (23 September 1980)
<http://www.oecd.org/dsti/sti/it/secur/prod/PRIV-EN.HTM>  
    
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), _Platform for Privacy Preferences: P3P
Project_ [http://www.w3.org/P3P/#overview](http://www.w3.org/P3P/)  
    
  
Electronic Frontier Foundation, _Architecture is Policy - Case Study:
Cooperative development as a means for a standards-based Implementation for
Privacy on the Internet_ (April 6, 1999) <http://www.eff.org/privacypaper/>  
  

  
    
  **Week 7 - February 27**

**Discussion of Research Paper Topics**

**Memo to Class**

** **

**Week 8 - March 6 **

**Spring Break**

<p align=center style='te

