**CONF 801. FALL 2000**

**Mon. 4.30-7.10 Room: Thompson Hall 108**





**INTRODUCTION TO CONFLICT ANALYSIS AND RESOLUTION.**



Course Instructor: Dr. C.R.Mitchell Office Hours Mon 1.30 - 4.15 pm

[and by appointment]

Office: 4103 Chain Bridge Road [Commerce III] Room 306

Tel. [703] 993-1300

e.mail cmitchel@gmu.edu



**_Course Outline._**



This course is designed to provide students entering the Ph.D. program in
Conflict Resolution with a broad overview of the field, emphasising major
areas of theoretical interest [and contention], describing the range of
activities undertaken by practitioners, and focusing on those issues and
activities of most interest to the faculty, staff, students, affiliates and
alumni of the Institute for Conflict Analysis and Resolution at George Mason
University.



Major themes of this introductory course are:

[1] the unity of the field of Conflict Analysis and Resolution, at all social
levels,

[2] the utility of general theories and models, and the need for coherent
theory development [discovery and testing]

[3] a focus on complex, protracted social conflicts, rather than disputes or
quarrels at an individual or small group level.

[4] the linkage between underlying theories about the nature, sources and
dynamics of social conflict; and about practical approaches to coping with
conflicts, especially those which are protracted and intractable.



**_Attendance_.**



As is the case with all Institute courses, attendance at class sessions is
required and excessive absence may result in your failing. Please consult with
the course instructor in the event of your having to be absent from the class
more than once or twice.



Incomplete grades will not be granted save in cases of personal or immediate
family illness.









**_Course format_.**



This is one of the relatively rare ICAR doctoral courses where the instructor
delivers some formal lectures, but there should be ample time for class
questions, comments and discussion. Participation in any class discussions is
essential to the success of the course, and by this I mean expressing informed
opinions about the subject, asking questions based on knowledge of the
readings, agreeing - or disagreeing - with points raised by the authors of
assigned readings - all this to be conducted with due respect for, and the
objective of understanding, the views of others. You will find that your
contribution is normally appreciated, even if you are not used to putting
forward a point or making a case in public.



There is a great deal of background reading for the course. This is _required_
, so that keeping up with reading assignments is a must for success on the
course. It is also a good way of introducing yourself to the main writers and
thinkers in your field.



**_Course Requirements_.**



There will be a "take home" examination at the end of the semester which will
consist of three or four broad questions about the field of Conflict Analysis
and Resolution [e.g. focussing on the sources of social conflict; or on the
nature of, and reasons for "intractability"]. Class members will be expected
to select one such question and to answer it over a three hour period in such
a way as to display their grasp of the conceptual and theoretical material
covered during the course, and the manner in which this can be used to
illuminate a particular example of a protracted conflict.



In addition to the final examination, all class members will be expected to
complete a term paper, which will take the form of an _analytical_ case study
of an on-going or recent _conflict_. The case to be analysed and written up
will be chosen in consultation with the instructor, who will advise upon the
suitability and practicability of particular conflicts. Further details of
this requirement will be supplied at the start of the semester, a preliminary
working title for the paper must be agreed by 18th September [so start
thinking about this _early_ ] and the final paper handed in by November 27th.



These two pieces of work will each contribute 33% towards final grades.









**_Analysis Groups and Reports_.**



Depending on the size of the class, two or three "Analysis Groups" will be
established to study a particular type of conflict exemplified by a specific
case. The Groups will present progress reports to the class approximately once
every three weeks and need to meet - or certainly to communicate - outside
class time to prepare.

The main purpose of the Groups will be to see how the concepts, ideas and
theories presented in the remainder of the course help in the understanding of
a real world conflict, and what light theory can throw on reality. Each Group
will be required to make an oral presentation of its analysis and findings at
the end of the semester, and to hand in a full and final written Report which
will contribute 33% towards members' grades.

Recommended cases are of various types and illustrate different forms of
social conflict, for example inter-state [e.g. the Ethiopian/Eritrean
conflict], intra-community [e.g. the "MOVE" dispute] or inter-communal [e.g.
the nationalist/unionist conflict in Northern Ireland, or the class conflicts
in Colombia]. Groups will be formed and cases selected during the second class
session in September





**_Readings_.**



There is an infinite amount of reading that is relevant to this topic and this
course, and more is becoming available every year. All I can do is urge
eveyone in the class to begin reading now and not to stop at least until they
are embarked upon their own research at the disserattion stage of the degree.

I hope that everyone will by now have read as background Pruitt, Rubin and Kim
_Social Conflict_ , Fisher and Ury _Getting to`Yes'_ , and Mary Clark's
_Ariadne's Thread_. If not, read these over the next two week period.



The following are the formally required readings for the course and should be
available from the Bookstore in the Johnson Center:

C.R.Mitchell _The Structure of International Conflict_ [London; Macmillan;
1981]

I.W.Zartman  & L.J.Rasmussen [eds] _Peacemaking in International Conflicts:
Methods and Techniques_ [Washington DC; USIP Press; 1997] (Look under CONF 501
in the GMU BOokstore for this book)

C.Moore _The Mediation Process_ [San Francisco; Jossey Bass; 1996]



Much of the remainder of the reading will be taken from appropriate journal
articles and ICAR working papers. Where these are _extremely_ difficult to
obtain, I will arrange for copies to be placed in the Johnson Center Library
on  "Reserve", and in the ICAR Resources Room, where class members can make
individual copies. However, if they are simply available in journals, then I
will expect class members to find them for themselves from Fenwick Library
stacks, from one of the Consortium Libraries or through inter-library loan.
**[Part of the process of becoming a Ph.D. candidate - and a scholar - is to
find one's way around the journal literature.** ]

Each class will be assigned preparatory _Reading_ , mainly from the three text
books, and _Further Reading_ to be found in other sources. I will also attach
a list of _Future Reading_ which can be explored now or later in your
dissertation coursework and which will hopefully provide an introduction to
the rich and varied literature of the field





**_Course Syllabus._**





**_August 28th_ Introduction **



[1] Administrative matters

[2] Introduction to the field; recent growth of conflict studies and ADR.
Intellectual origins of the "discipline". Some key ICAR assumptions about
conflict and its resolution. The nature of "models"



_Reading_ : Mitchell _Structure_ Introduction.

Kriesberg, L.  "The Development of the Conflict

Resolution Field" Chap.2 in I.W.Zartman &

J.L.Rasmussen _Peacemaking in International Conflict_

[Washington DC; USIP Press; 1997]





_Further Reading:_

Harty, M  & J.Model "The First Conflict Resolution

Movement; 1956-71" _Journal of Conflict Resolution_

35 [4] Dec. 1991 pp.720-58

Lederach, J.P. _Building Peace; Sustainable_

_Reconciliation in Divided Societies._ [Washington DC:

USIP Press; 1997] pp.55-61.

_Future Reading:_

"A History of Conflict Resolution" Unit 2 in the

University of Bradford Distance Learning Course

"Introduction to Conflict Resolution" On line at

http://www.brad.ac.uk/acad/confres/dislearn/dislearn.

html

Mitchell, C.R. "Conflict Research" Chap.9 in A.J.R.

Groom & Margot Light [eds] _Contemporary Inter-_

_national Relations; A Guide to Theory_ [London;

Pinter; 1994]

**THERE WILL BE NO CLASS ON SEPTEMBER 4TH, LABOR DAY.**



**_Sept 11th_ Conflict Formation [1]**

Inherent causation. Internal drive models. Aggression to human needs. A
hierarchy of causes ? Importance of language and labels. The nature of
`cause'. A look at attribution theory.



_Reading_ ; Mitchell _Structure_ Chapter 1.

Seville Declaration



_Further Reading:_

Pruitt, Rubin  & Kim _Social Conflict_ 2nd ed. [New York;

McGraw Hill 1994] Chap.2

Clark, Mary _Ariadne's Thread; The Search for New Modes_

_of Thinking_ [New York; St Martins Press; 1989] Chap.

5.

Fisher, R.J  "Needs Theory, Social Identity and an

Eclectic Model of Conflict" Chap 4 in J.W.Burton

[ed] _Conflict: Human Needs Theory_ [New York; St

Martins Press; 1990]

Doherty, W.J.  "Cognitive Processes in Intimate

Conflict" _American Journal of Family Therapy_ 9 [1]

Spring 1991 pp.3-13





_Future Reading_ :

Burton, J.W. [ed] _Conflict; Human Needs Theory_ [New

York; St Martins Press; 1990]

Rapoport, Anatol _The Origins of Violence_ [New York;

Paragon House; 1989] Part I

Avruch, K.  & P.W.Black "Ideas of Human Nature in

Contemporary Conflict Resolution Theory" _Negotiation_

_Journal_ 6 (3) 1990 pp.221-8





**_Sept 18th_ Conflict Formation [2]**



Contingent causation. Scarcity and "Limited Goods" models. The case of
`indivisibles'. Change models. Ethnic and other divisions The structure-
behaviour link. Considerations of culture. A look at relative deprivation
theories.



_Reading_ : Gurr, T.R. _Why Man Rebel_ [Princeton, NJ; Princeton

U.P.; 1970] esp Chaps 2, 4, 5  & 10.

Avruch, K. _Culture and Conflict Resolution_ [Washington

DC; USIP Press; 1998] Part 1.

* Kriesberg, L. _Social Conflict_ 2nd ed. [Englewood

Cliffs; Prentice Hall; 1981] Chap.2 OR

* Himes, J.S. _Conflict and Conflict Management_ [Athens,

GA; University of Georgia Press; 1980] Chap.2

* Ginifer, J  & E.B.Eide "Ethnicity as a Source of

Conflict" [Mimeo; 1998]



*** Copies in the ICAR Resources Room & the Johnston Library**





_Further Reading_ :

Galtung, J. "A Structural Theory of Aggression" _Essays_

_in Peace Research_ III 4 [Copenhagen; Ejlers; 1975-80 Albin, Cecilia
"Negotiating Indivisible Goods; The

Case of Jerusalem" _Jerusalem Journal of International_

_Relations_ 13 [1] 1991 pp.45-76





_Future Reading_ ;

Galtung J. "A Structural Theory of Revolution" III 8;

& "International Relations & International Conflict A

Sociological Approach" IV 9 _Essays in Peace Research_ Stavenhagen, R.
"Reflection on Some Theories of Ethnic

Conflict" in T.R.Gurr & B.Harf [eds] Special Issue

of _Journal of Ethno-Political Development_ on  "Early

Warning of Communal Conflicts & Humanitarian Crises"

4 [1] July 1994.

Waltz. Kenneth N, _Man the State and War_ [New York;

Columbia University Press; 1963]



**_Note; Group Analysis logistics and agreed subjects for class members' Term
Papers must be arranged and agreed by this date_.**







_Sept 25th_



**An Introduction to research resources available in the Fenwick Library, in
the Washington DC area and generally on-line.**



**Ms Maureen Connors; Fenwick Library.**







_October 2nd_ Conflict Systems and Structures; Taxonomies.



Basic concepts. Conflict; its nature, structure & dynamics. Parties, issues,
goals & behaviour. SPITCEROW.

Galtung's models. Bilateral and multi-party conflicts. Putnam's two game
model.

Classifying conflicts. What kinds of conflicts are there ? Nature of
definition and classification. "Case" studies. Simple taxonomies. Measures and
quantities. How "intense" a conflict ?





_Reading_ ; Mitchell _Structure_ Chapters 6  & 7

* Mitchell Notes on "Classifying Conflict"

* Kriesberg, L. "Interlocking Conflicts in the Middle

East" in _Research on Social Movements, Conflict &_

_Change_ L.Kriesberg [ed] Vol 3 [JAI Press; 1980]





_Further Reading_ :



Putnam, R.D. "Diplomacy and Domestic Politics; The

Logic of Two Level Games" in P.B.Evans et al [eds.]

_Double Edged Diplomacy; International Bargaining &_

_Domestic Politics_ [Berkeley,CA; UCLA Press; 1993]

Kriesberg, L.  "Social Conflict Theories and Conflict

Resolution" _Peace and Change_ VIII [2/3] Summer

1982 pp.3-17

Galtung, J. _Peace by Peaceful Means_ [Thousand Oaks,

CA; Sage; 1996] Part 2, Chap 1.

_Future Reading_ :



Frensley, N.J. "Ratification Processes and Conflict

Termination" _Journal of Peace Research_ 35 [2] May

1998 pp.167-191







**WEDNESDAY _Oct. 11th_ Conflict Dynamics.**



Key processes in conflicts; emergence, escalation, entrapment, etcetera.
Conflict cycles. "Stages" of a dispute and some "staged" models [Lewicki,
Fisher]

Behavioural and psychological dynamics. Processes [e.g. stereotyping] and
images of self and adversary. Dynamics & importance of group loyalty.

Cognitive dynamics and dissonance theories. A look at entrapment theory.



_Reading_ ; Mitchell _Structure_ Chapters 3 and 4

* Kriesberg, L. _Social Conflict_ 2nd ed. [Englewood

Cliffs; Prentice Hall; 1982] Chap 4  & 5

* Staw, B.M. & J.Ross "Behaviour in Escalation 

Situations" _Research on Organisational Behaviour_

Vol 9. [JAI Press; 1987] pp39-78



_Further Reading_ :

* Fisher, R.J. & L.Keashley "Towards a Contingency 

Approach to Third Party Intervention: A Cyprus

Illustration" _International Journal_ XLV Spring 1990

pp.425-453

Lewicki, R.J  & B.B.Bunker "Trust in Relationships; A Model of Development and
Decline" in B.B.Bunker et al.

_Conflict, Cooperation and Justice_ [San Francisco;

Jossey Bass; 1997]

* Kriesberg, L. above cit. Chap 3.

White, R.K.  "Empathising with Saddam Hussein - Updated"

Chap. 15 in H.H.Blumberg & C.C.French _The Persian Gulf_

_War_ [Lanham, MD; University Press of America; 1994]

pp 171-190

_Future Reading_ :



Rubin, J. et al "Factors Affecting Entry into Psycho

-logical Traps" _Journal of Conflict Resolution_ 24 [3]

Sept. 1980 pp.405-426

Teger, A.I. _Too Much Invested to Quit_ [New York;

Pergamon Press; 1980]







_Oct. 16th_ Conflict Prevention



What is meant by those who argue that conflicts can and should be "prevented"
? Preventive diplomacy and the focus on violence limitation. Early warning,
early action ? Prevention and structural reform. Burton's idea of
"provention".



_Reading_ : Mitchell, C.R. "Conflict and Counterfactuals; What

Doesn't Happen Because of Conflict Prevention ?"

[ICAR; Mimeo; 2000]

Lund, Michael _Preventing Violent Conflicts; A Strategy_

_for Preventive Diplomacy_ [Washington DC; USIP Press;

1996]

Stedman, Stephen J.  "Alchemy for a New World Order;

Overselling Preventive Diplomacy" _Foreign Affairs_

May/June 1995 pp.14-20



_Further Reading_ :

Vayrynen, Raimo "Preventing Deadly Conflicts; Failures

in Iraq and Yugoslavia" _Global Society_ 14 (1) 2000

pp.5-33

Wallensteen, Peter  "Preventive Security; Direct and

Structural Prevention of Violent Conflicts" Chap.1 in

P.Wallensteen [ed] _Preventing Violent Conflicts; Past_

_Record and Future Challenges_ [Uppsala; Dept. of

Peace  & Conflict Research, University of Uppsala;

1998]





_Future Reading_ :

Publications of the Carnegie Commission on Preventing

Deadly Conflicts, especially the Final Report.



**_Oct. 23rd_ Conflict Mitigation; Violence and its Limitation.**



How parties pursue goals and prosecute conflicts. Threat, coercion, violence.
The Rubin-Pruitt dual concern model. Violence and "conflict management".

Deterrence and compellence. The use and shortcomings of peace-enforcement
strategies. Keeping the peace domestically and internationally. Arms control
and gun control.





_Reading_ :



Mitchell _Structure_ Chaps 6 and 7.



_Further Reading_ :

TO BE ASSIGNED



_Addition Reading_ :



Boulding K.E _Three Faces of Power_ [Newbury Park, CA;

Sage; 1989]

Larsen, D. _The Origins of Containment; A Psychological_

_Explanation_ [Princeton, NJ; Princeton U.P.; 1984]

Miller, S.E.  "Is Arms Control a Path to Peace ?" Chap.4

in W.S.Thompson & K.M.Jensen _Approaches to Peace; An_

_Intellectual Map_. [Washington DC: USIP Press; 1992]





**_Oct. 30th_ Institutionalisation: Conflict Within Rules.**



The development of rule systems to limit conflict behaviour and manage
conflict. Institutionalisation in society; custom, norms and law.
Institutionalisation in industrial conflict. Non-violence as unilateral
institutionalisation.



_Reading_ : Mitchell Chap.8

* Mitchell "Notes on Institutionalisation" [The City

University, London; Mimeo; 1984]

Bilder, Richard "Adjudication; International Arbitral

Tribunals and Courts" Chap 5 in Zartman & Rasmussen





_Further Reading_ ;

*Himes, J. _Conflict and Conflict Management_ [Athens,

GA; University of Greorgia Press; 1980] Chap.10

Etzioni, A.  "On Self-Encapsulating Conflict" _Journal_

_of Conflict Resolution_ 8 [3] Sept.1964 pp.242-255





_Future Reading_ :

Etzioni, A. "Encapsulated Competition" _Journal of Post-_

_Keynesian Economics_ 7 [3] Spring 1985 pp.287-302

Galtung J.  "Institutionalised Conflict Resolution"

_Journal of Peace Research_ 4 1965 pp.348-396





**_Nov 6th_ Conflict Termination (I); Pre-negotiation.**



Do conflicts ever "end" ? Types of "ending"; truce, settlement, resolution.
Types of process; some taxonomies.

The termination process; de-escalation, conciliatory gestures, pre-
negotiation.



_Reading_ : Mitchell _Structure_ Chap. 9

Moore _Mediation Process_ Chap 1



_Further Reading_ :

Saunders, H.H. "We Need a Larger Theory of

Negotiation" _Negotiation Journal_ 1 July 1985 p.250- Stein, J.G. [ed]
_Getting to the Table_ [Baltimore;

Johns Hopkins Press; 1989]



_Future Reading_ :

Smith, J.D.D. _Stopping Wars; Defining the Obstacles_

_to Ceasefires_ [Boulder. CO; Westview Press; 1995]

Licklider, R [ed] _Stopping the Killing; How Civil Wars_

_End_ [New York; New York University Press; 1995]

Mitchell, C.R. _Gestures of Conciliation_ [New York; St

Martins Press; 2000]





**_Nov.20th_ Conflict Termination (II); Negotiating and Deciding.**



Models of choice and decision. Negotiating; basic processes & models;
concession/convergence versus formula/detail. "Principled" negotiation.
Fisher's dilemma & getting to "yes"



_Reading_ : Mitchell _Structure_ Chapter 10

Fisher, R  & W.Ury _Getting to `Yes'_ Any edition

Druckman, D.  "Negotiation in the International Context"

Chap.3 in Zartman & Rasmussen



_Further Reading_ :

Sawyer,J. & H.Guetzkow "Bargaining and Negotiation

in International Relations" in H.C.Kelman [ed]

_International Behaviour_ [New York; Holt, Rinehart  &

Winston; 1965] pp.464-520



_Future Reading_

Cohen, R. _Negotiation Across Cultures_ rev. ed. [USIP

Press; Washington DC; 1997]

Hopmann, P.T. _The Negotiation Process and the_

_Resolution of International Conflict_ [Columbia, SC;

University of S.Carolina Press; 1996]

Walton, R.E.  & R.B.McKersie _A Behavioural Theory of_

_Labor Negotiations_ [New York;McGraw Hill; 1965]







_Nov 20th_ Conflict Resolution (I)



Can conflicts ever be "resolved" ? Analysis, facilitation and mediation.
Alternative dispute resolution v conflict resolution. Integrative solutions
and "win-win". Means and methods.

_Reading_ : Moore _Mediation Process_ Chaps 7 to 13

* Mitchell, C.R.  "Conflict as a Resolvable Problem"

[ICAR; Mimeo; 1999]

Mitchell, C.R. "Resolving Intractable Conflicts;

Territory & Ethnicity" [ICAR; Mimeo; 1999]

Fisher, R.J. "Interactive Conflict Resolution" Chap.7

in Zartman & Rasmussen





_Further Reading_ :

Pruitt, D.G. "Achieving Integrative Agreements in

Negotiation" in R.K.White [ed] _Psychology and the_

_Prevention of Nuclear War_ [New York; New York UP;

1986]

*Saunders, H.H. and R.Slim  "Dialogue to Change

Conflictual Relations" _Higher Education Exchange_

[Dayton OH; Kettering Foundation; 1994]

Kelman, H.C.  "Social Psychological Dimensions of

International Conflict" Chap.6 in Zartman &

Rasmussen.



_Future Readings_ ;

Rothman, J. _Resolving Identity Based Conflicts_ [San

Francisco; Jossey Bass; 1997]

Fisher, R.J. _Interactive Conflict Resolution_ [Syracuse;

Syracuse University Press; 1997]





**_Nov.27th_ Conflict Resolution (II): Third Parties: Types, Tasks  & Roles **



Third parties and their tasks. Types of third party intervention. "Timing" and
intervention. The question of a conflict's "ripeness" for outside
intervention. Appropriate intervenors and levels of intervention.



_Reading_ : Mitchell _Structure_ Chaps 11  & 12

Moore _Mediation Process_ Chaps 2 to 6 inclusive.

Bercovitch, J.  "Mediation in International Conflict;

an Overview" Chap 4. in Zartman & Rasmussen

*Mitchell, C.R. "Conflict Resolution as a Complex

Process [ICAR; Mimeo; 1999]



_Further Reading_ :

Curle, A. _In the Middle; Non-Official Mediation_

_in Violent Situations_ [Hamburg/New York; Berg

Publications/St Martins Press; 1986]

Princen, T _Intermediaries in International Conflicts_

[Princeton, NJ; Princeton U.P.; 1992]



_Future Reading_ ;



Bercovitch, J. [ed] _Resolving International Conflicts_

Boulder, CO; Lynne Reiner; 1996]

Hume, C. _Ending Mozambique's War; The Role of Mediation_

_and Good Offices_ [Washington DC; USIP Press; 1994]







**_Dec. 4th_ Conflict Transformation **

_Reading_ : *Mitchell "Beyond Resolution; What Does Conflict Trans-

formation Actually Transform ?" [ICAR; Mimeo; 1999]



_Further Reading_ :

Lederach, J.P. _Preparing for Peace; Conflict Trans-_

_formation Across Cultures_ [Syracuse; Syracuse UP;

1995]

Rupesinghe, K. [ed] _Conflict Transformation_ [New York;

St Martins Press; 1995]





_Future Reading_ :

Curle. A. _Tools for Transformation_ [London; Hawthorn

Press; 1990]

Goldman, R. _From Warfare to Party Politics_ [Syracuse NY;

Syracuse UP; 1990]

Kumar, K. [ed] _Rebuilding Societies After Civil War_

[Boulder CO; Lynne Reiner; 1996]

Hampson, F.O. _Nurturing Peace; Why Peace Settlements_

_Succeed or Fail_ [Washington DC; USIP Press; 1996]



**NOTE THAT INDIVIDUAL CASE ANALYSIS PAPERS ARE DUE IN AT THE END OF THIS
CLASS.**



**During the first and second weeks in December I will arrange an opportunity
for the Analysis Groups to make a presentation of their Case Study.**



































File # 801SYLL.F00



