Professor Beth Bailey  
AmSt 536  
Spring 2001



**MASCULINITIES**

  
To readings schedule  
  
  
  

This is a readings seminar, meant to give you a strong grounding in the
rapidly growing scholarly field of "masculinity."

Course Requirements

PARTICIPATION: The success of this course--and its usefulness to you--depends
on your careful preparation, spirited participation, and collegiality. I
expect everyone to contribute, and to bring his or her strengths to our common
endeavor. Don't just read the assignments--analyze and critique them. Take a
position and come to class ready to make an argument or raise a question. I
expect everyone to talk in class! Listening well and synthesizing are also
important skills; the seminar is a conversation, with no room for monologues.
I will evaluate each student's contributions to each seminar meeting by asking
myself the question, "How would this seminar have been different if {fill in
name} had not been there?"

Attendance is required, as much of the work of the seminar will be conducted
in class discussions. If you are too ill to attend class or have an emergency
that prevents you from coming, I expect you to notify me in advance. Email or
voicemail is fine. I'll expect you to complete the work you missed, and will
be glad to meet with you in office hours to discuss readings.

You are also required to send me questions based on the week's assigned
readings. These are meant to raise the level of class discussion by requiring
you to formulate one or two synthetic questions that the seminar could
profitably discuss. Think big. We'll pay attention to the specifics of each
reading, but this is the place to try to put it all together. Email the
question(s) to me _at least_ two hours before class, and plan to use them as a
basis for your comments in class.  You do not need to submit a question for
the week in which you write your critical review.

_Fifty percent of your final grade will be based on class participation.
"Participation" includes your weekly questions._

DOCUMENT ANALYSIS/DISCUSSION

This assignment is to encourage you to work with primary sources. Each of you
will sign up to bring in some sort of document or text or item (a scene from a
TV show or film; an advertisement; a family photo; a passage from a written
text such as a diary or novel; music; clothing---anything that seems
interesting to you) for the class to discuss. It must be related in some way
to that week's theme/topic. You will write a brief paper analyzing the item or
document, and will lead the class in working with it. I encourage you to think
historically, and if you have a special talent or training in working with
certain sorts of texts, take advantage of that to help the class learn about
techniques for analyzing film or poetry or clothing. Spend some time thinking
about how to present it-developing teaching strategies is part of the
assignment. The paper should be approximately 1000 words. You will be graded
on both the presentation/ teaching and on the paper ( _15% of your grade in
total_ ).

CRITICAL REVIEW

At the beginning of the semester you will select one book on which to write a
critical review. You will be able to express preferences, but I want to make
sure at least one person has signed up for each book, and you may not get your
first choice. Instructions for the book review will be handed out separately.
Reviews should be 1250 to 1500 words and will count as _15% of your grade_.

ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY

The class's final project will be to compile an annotated bibliography on
masculinity (U.S.-focused). Sometime toward the middle of the semester we will
have a group brainstorming session to come up with topics, and each of you
will take responsibility for developing a really good annotated bibliography
on that topic. You'll be graded on your portion of the bibliography as your
final project for the class ( _20% of your grade_ ) and we will compile the
entries into a class bibliography that should be useful for future
comprehensive exams, research, and teaching. Your portion of the project is
due on April 25th; I will distribute the complete bibliography on the last day
of class. (It is likely to be complied online for each of you to download.)

****READINGS

Course readings will be on reserve at Zimmerman Library. In almost all cases,
books from which you are reading excerpts are on reserve, and copies of those
readings are also available in assembled course packets labeled by date
(readings for February 7th would be under "February 7") on reserve under my
name and the course number. I urge you, to the extent that finances allow, to
make personal copies of reserve readings so you can annotate them and have
them available in class. Several books are available for purchase at the UNM
bookstore; we will be reading these volumes more or less in their entirety.
Check this syllabus before purchasing books.

**Books ordered through the UNM Bookstore:**

Basso, et al., eds, _Across the Great Divide  
_ Bederman, _Manliness and Civilization  
_ Cohan, _Masked Men  
_ Connell, _Masculinities_ (recommended)  
Faludi, _Stiffed  
_ Fussell, _Muscle  
_ Halberstam, _Female Masculinity  
_ Harper, _Are We Not Men?  
_ Howard, _Men Like That  
_ Kimmel, _Manhood in America  
_ Sale, _The Slumbering Volcano_  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Class Schedule

January

17 Introductions  
  
View: Historical images of gendered bodies (in class)  
  
24 " _Men have no history . . ._ ": Defining a Field

> Read:  
>  Joan Scott, "Gender . . .," _AHR_ (December 1986): 153-75  
>  Nancy Cott, "On Men's History and Women's History," in Carnes and Griffen,
eds., _Meanings for Manhood_ , pp. 205-211  
>  R.W. Connell, _Masculinities_ , pp. 1-44; 67-86  
>  Michael Kimmel, "Introduction," _Manhood in America: A Cultural History_

31 The Social-Historical Construction of Masculinities

> Read:  
>  Michael Kimmel, _Manhood in America_  
>

February

**7** Manhood as Political Claim

> Read:  
>  Maggie Sale, _The Slumbering Volcano: American Slave Ship Revolts and the
Production of Rebellious Masculinity_ (1997)  
>  Steve Estes, "I Am A Man! Race, Masculinity, and the 1968 Memphis
Sanitation Strike," _Labor History_ 41.2 (2000): 183+.  Full text available
online through ArticleFirst.

>

> View: Scenes from _Amistad_ (in class)

14 Masculinity and Sexuality in 19th Century America

> Read:  
>  Carroll Smith-Rosenberg, "Davy Crockett as Trickster," in _Disorderly
Conduct  
>  _ Ben Barker-Benfield, "The Spermatic Economy," in Gordon, _The American
Family in Social Historical Perspective  
>  _ Kevin J. Mumford, "Lost Manhood Found," _Journal of the History of
Sexuality_ (1993)  
>  Martin Duberman, "Writhing Bedfellows," in _About Time_ , pp. 5-14

21 Beyond John Wayne: Masculinity and the West

> Read:  
>  Matthew Basso, et al., eds., _Across the Great Divide: Cultures of Manhood
in the American West_ (2000)  
>  (We'll divide up primary responsibility for different essays.) (NOTE:
Publication has been delayed; don't worry if you can't find it in the
bookstore.)

28 Gender/Race/Ideology

> Read:  
>  Gail Bederman, _Manliness and Civilization_ (1995)

March  

7 Making Wars (we will reschedule this class earlier in the week)

> Read:  
>  Craig Cameron, _American Samurai_ , pp. 49-88.  
>  Robert Dean, "Masculinity as Ideology: John F. Kennedy and the Domestic
Politics of Foreign Policy," _Diplomatic History_ 22.1 (1998): 29-63
(availble online through FirstSearch ECO.)  
>  J.B. Freeman, "Hardhats: Construction Workers, Manliness, and the 1970 Pro-
War Demonstrations," _Journal of Social History_ 26 (Summer 1993): 725-44 (
available online through EBSCO HOST). (See
<http://chnm.gmu.edu/hardhats/homepage.html> also.)

14 Spring Break-No Class  

21 Crises of Masculinity in the Age of the "Traditional Family"

> Read:  
>  Barbara Ehrenreich, _The Hearts of Men_ , pp. 1-87  
>  Beth Bailey, "The Etiquette of Masculinity and Femininity," _From Front
Porch to Back Seat_ , pp. 97-118  
>  Jessica Weiss, _To Have and To Hold_ , pp. 83-113  
>  Jesse Berrett, "Feeding the Organization Man: Diet and Masculinity in
Postwar America," _Journal of Social History_ 30.4 (1995)

>

> View: _Rebel Without a Cause_ (before class)

28 Masculinity in the Movies (The Crisis of Masculinity II)

> Read:  
>  Steven Cohan, _Masked Men: Masculinity and the Movies in the Fifties_
(1997)

>

> View: Filmclips (in class)

April  

4 Queer Masculinities

> Read:  
>  John Howard, _Men Like That: A Queer Southern History_ (1999)  
>  (Note: Paperback publication has been delayed; we'll discuss possibilites
in class.)

11 Masculinity, Blackness, and "Authenticity"

> Read:  
>  Phillip Brian Harper, _Are We Not Men? Masculine Anxiety and the Problem of
African-American Identity_ (1996)

18 Female Masculinity

> Read:  
>  Judith Halberstam, _Female Masculinity_ ( 1998)

25 Male Bodies and Sport

> Read:  
>  Samuel Fussell, _Muscle  
>  _ Elliot Gorn, _The Manly Art_ , pp.

May  

2 Polemic

> Read:  
>  Susan Faludi, _Stiffed_ (1999)  
>  
>  
>  
>

