CONF 501, Section 004



INTRODUCTION TO



CONFLICT ANALYSIS AND RESOLUTION









Fall, 2000. Wednesday, 4:30 p.m.--7:10 p.m

Location: Enterprise 278



Instructors:



     Landon Hancock   lhancock@gmu.edu 

     Mohamed Al Naqbi mmoha18535@aol.com





Office Hours by appointment or email







COURSE DESCRIPTION



This course is an introduction to the field of conflict analysis and
resolution and is intended to provide a solid foundation

for further inquiry and application. This course examines definitions of
conflict and diverse views of its resolution and

explores thinking about human behavior and social systems as they relate to
the origins of conflict and the role of

conflict in violent and peaceful social change. It is designed to introduce
you to academic thinking about conflict

analysis and resolution and to help you to think systematically and
analytically about conflict and conflict resolution.







Course Objectives



     Familiarize students with terminology and concepts of the field 



     Help students to think systematically and analytically about conflict in a variety of contexts 



     Connect theory to practice through discussion, research and case studies of real events and interventions 



COURSE REQUIREMENTS



Attendance and participation: (10%) Attendance is extremely important because
the course will be interactive and

elicitive in nature. Participation in the class discussions is critical to
student learning and to exhibit that the required

reading is being completed. Students will be expected to carry the discussion
and engage each other in discussions

about the assigned readings. You can also participate by asking questions,
circulating emails, organizing study groups,

exchanging writing or introducing new ideas and resources.



Mid-term Exam: (20%) The mid-term exam will be a take home essay exam. There
will be no tricks in this exam. If

students come to class, think for themselves, and do the required reading,
they should not fear this exam. This will be

discussed further in class.



Small Assignments: (20%) During the semester these assignments are intended to
help you integrate the material and

become more familiar with the concepts presented. They also give the
instructors feedback regarding what you are

getting from the class. All of the assignments are on a separate document and
are posted to the class web site. You are

expected to complete at least four; each of these will represent 5% of your
total class grade.Two should be completed

by Week 6, the remaining two by Week 13.Each assignment will consist of a
short analysis or exercise using

frameworks or analytical tools discussed in the class or in the readings.



Group Presentation: (20%) At the beginning of the term the class will be asked
to choose from a number of

pre-selected conflicts representing a range of analysis from interpersonal to
international. At the end of the term each

group will be expected to make a presentation providing an overview and
synthesized analysis of your group case.

Additionally the groups will prepare a portfolio of the conflict to be placed
on the class website. Presentation and

portfolio requirements will be discussed further in class.



Research Paper: (30%) Each student will be expected to select a single
conflict, with instructors' approval, and write a

5000 to 6000 word analytical research paper. The paper should be a case study,
emphasizing and utilizing conflict

analysis and resolution concepts to both describe the conflict and possible
resolution strategies. Conflict 501 is a

graduate seminar, which means that the instructors expect your research paper
--and all of your work--to reflect

graduate level research and analysis. Your research paper should show that you
have undertaken research; we expect

sources from books, refereed journals, and news sources as well as possible
Internet sources. Papers should be

double- spaced and legible. Please choose Chicago, MLA or APA citation styles.
You will find style guides in the

reference section of the library. In addition, the ICAR Publication Style
sheet (based on Chicago) will be posted to the

class website.



Newspaper Assignment: At the beginning of the semester the instructors and
students will select three current conflicts

to follow in the news. Students will be responsible for keeping up with the
conflicts through the use of newspaper

stories and/or magazine articles. Each week the students and instructors will
apply the week's lessons to these

conflicts. No written assignments will be required, but evidence of
application of the readings to these conflicts will

count towards the student's participation grade. Suggestions for conflicts
could involve:







          Local communal conflicts. 

          The 2000 Presidential Election. 

          Ongoing International Conflicts. 



The decision of which conflicts to follow will depend on a) what is current
and b) what the interests of the class are.

Students will be encouraged to follow as many of the three as possible, but
will be required to follow only one.







Class Policies & Procedures



     You are responsible for completing individual and group assignments on time. You will be penalized the

     equivalent of one full letter grade for each day the assignment is late. Assignments that are overdue by more than

     one week will not be accepted. 



     If an emergency prevents you from attending class, you should let us know ahead of time when possible and

     contact a group member to find out what you missed. You are responsible for all announcements, assignments,

     and date changes made in class and for all material covered in class even if you are not there. 



     In this modern age, the use of the Internet for discussion and dissemination has become commonplace. Some

     class announcements and readings may be posted to the class website or sent via email. Students are

     responsible for keeping up to date with announcements and assignments placed on the site or sent via email. 



     Incomplete grades will not be granted save in cases of personal or immediate family illness or emergency. 



TEXTS/REQUIRED READING



Augsberger, David. Conflict mediation across cultures: pathways and patterns.
Westminster/John Knox,

Louisville, KY. 1992.



Fisher, Ury, and Patton. Getting to yes: negotiating agreement without giving
in. Penguin, New York, NY. 2nd

Edition, 1991.



Kriesberg, Louis. Constructive conflicts: from escalation to resolution.
Rowman & Littlefield, Lanham, MD.

1998\.



Rubin, Pruitt, and Kim. Social conflict: escalation, stalemate, settlement.
McGraw-Hill, New York, NY. 2nd

edition. 1994.







TEXTS/GROUP PROJECTS:



There are five recommended texts for use in this class. Each text corresponds
to one of the group projects. After you

have chosen your group, and corresponding level of conflict analysis, you
should purchase the text for that group

project. The groups and associated texts are:



Interpersonal Conflict Analysis:



Fleming, Thomas J. Duel: Alexander Hamilton, Aaron Burr, and the future of
America. New York, NY: Basic

Books, 1999. *Note: this book replaces one out of print. The paperback will be
available via Amazon from

Sept. 5th.



Inter-group Conflict Analysis One (Waco)



Reavis, Dick J. The ashes of Waco: an investigation. New York: Simon &
Schuster, 1995.



Inter-group Conflict Analysis Two (Hopi-Navajo)



Brugge, David M. The Navajo-Hopi land dispute: an American tragedy. 1st ed.
Albuquerque: University of New

Mexico Press, 1994.



Intra-State Conflict Analysis (Northern Ireland)



Holland, Jack. Hope against history: the course of conflict in Northern
Ireland. 1st ed. New York: Henry Holt,

1999\.



Inter-State/International Conflict Analysis (1991 Gulf War)



Friedman, Norman. Desert victory: the war for Kuwait. Updated ed. Annapolis
Md.: Naval Institute Press, 1992.



COURSE READER/ELECTRONIC RESERVES:



This course will use both the library's electronic reserves and a class
website. Additional readings will be posted to

both sites. Other readings may be passed out in class. All students are
responsible for downloading and reading

assignments before they are discussed in class.



The Library's Electronic Reserves are located at: http://ers2000.gmu.edu/



The Course Website can be accessed by going to the WebCT homepage at:
http://webct.gmu.edu



Follow the prompts to Course Listings and Fall 2000. The course will be listed
by section and instructor. Student

Login ID's and Passwords will be provided by Week 2 or 3\. Information on how
to get the best use out of WebCT is

available at: http://www.irc.gmu.edu/webct/



In addition to readings, the course website will have a copy of this syllabus,
framework documents and tools, an area

for groups to post their portfolios and presentations, and bulletin board
areas to exchange messages and hold group

discussions. We encourage you to use the course website to assist in the
learning process and to build community with

your fellow students.



                        CLASS SCHEDULE AND ASSIGNMENTS 

     Note: Reading and assignments listed for a class should be prepared for and completed before that date.



           

          



Week 1: August 30



     Themes: Welcome, administrative matters. Introduction to the field of conflict analysis and resolution. 

     Assignment: In class, begin to form small groups for case study





Week 2: September 6



     Themes: Basic concepts in conflict analysis and resolution: Definitions, structure of conflict, analytical

     frameworks, classifying conflicts. Class will meet at library (2nd floor conference room above circulation)

     for introduction to library resources. 

     Assignment: Finalize case study groups 

     Reading: Augsberger, Chapters 1 & 2 

                     Kriesberg, Chapter 1 

     Electronic reserve: Dugan, Maire A. 1996. A Nested Theory of Conflict.



Week 3: September 13



     Themes: Sources and causes of conflict 

     Assignment: Submit individual paper topic to instructors 

     Reading: Kriesberg, Chapters 2 & 3 

     Electronic reserve: Burton, John W. "Conflict resolution: The human dimension."

     Fetherston, A.B. and C. Nordstrom. 1995. Overcoming Habitus in conflict management: UN

     peacekeeping and war zone ethnography. *Note not on e-reserve, go to J. Center for copy.



Week 4: September 20



     Themes: Beginning dynamics, analyzing and assessing conflicts 

     Reading: Augsberger, Chapters 2, 3 & 4\. 

     Rubin, Pruitt, & Kim, Chapters 1 & 2\. 

     Electronic reserve: Caddick, et al. 1999. Conflict Assessment and the Cape Cod National Seashore.



Week 5: September 27



     Themes: Tactics and strategies, parties and intervenors 

     Reading: Rubin, Pruitt, & Kim, Chapters 3 & 4\. Kriesberg, Chapters 4 & 5 

     Electronic reserve: Berkovitch and Wells. 1993. Evaluating mediation strategies: a theoretical and

     empirical analysis. *Note not on e-reserve, go to J. Center for copy.



Week 6: October 4



     Themes: Escalation 

     Assignment: 1. Video: "The Bombing of Philadelphia 

     Reading: Kriesberg, Chapter 6. Rubin, Pruitt & Kim, Chapters 5, 6 & 7



Week 7: October 11 (No Class, Monday Classes Held on Wednesday)



     Assignment: Take Home Mid-Term Exam. 

     Reading: No Reading



Week 8: October 18



     Themes: De-Escalation 

     Reading: Rubin, Pruitt & Kim, Chapters 8 & 9 

     Class Website: Mitchell, C.R. 1999. The Anatomy of De-escalation.





Week 9: October 25



     Themes: Intervention 

     Reading: Kriesberg, Chapters 7 & 8\. Augsberger, Chapter 5 

     Electronic reserve: Laue, et al. 1988. Getting to the table: three paths. 

     Carstarphen and Shapiro. 1997. Facilitating between gang members and police.



Week 10: November 1



     Themes: Managing and resolving conflicts, critical issues in the field 

     Reading: Rubin, Pruitt & Kim, Chapters 10 and 11. Augsberger, Chapters 7 & 8 

     Electronic reserve: McCormick. 1997. Confronting social injustice as a mediator. 

     Shapiro. 1999. New approaches to old problems: lessons from an ethnic conciliation project in four

     central and eastern European countries.



Week 11: November 8



     Themes: Critical issues in the field continued: culture, gender, power, justice, violence. Guest Speaker,

     Dr. Kevin Avruch. 

     Reading: Augsberger, Chapter 6 

     Class Website: Avruch, K. and P. Black, "Conflict resolution in intercultural settings: problems and

     prospects."

     Weiss, "Power and Difference"

     And EITHER 

     Electronic reserve: Welsh, Nancy A. and Debra Lewis. 1998. Adaptations to the civil mediation

     model: suggestions from research into the approaches to conflict resolution used in the twin cities

     Cambodian community. 

     OR 

     Barnes, Bruce. 1994. Conflict Resolution Across Cultures: a Hawaii perspective and a Pacific mediation

     model.



Week 12: November 15



     Themes: Negotiations 

     Assignment: Submit first draft of individual papers for peer review 

     Reading: Kriesberg, Chapter 9. Fisher, Ury & Patton, Getting to yes (all) 

     Course Website: Druckman, "Negotiating in the International Context"



Week 13: November 22



     Themes: Outcomes, range of processes 

     Reading: Kriesberg, Chapters 10 & 11\. Augsberger, Chapter 9 

     Electronic reserve: Diamond, Louise. 1997. Training in Conflict-Habituated Systems: lessons from

     Cyprus OR Fisher, Ronald J. 1997. Training as interactive conflict resolution: characteristics and

     challenges. 

     Goldstone, Richard J. 1996. Justice as a tool for peace-making: truth commissions and international

     criminal tribunals. 

     Kesner, Idalene F. and Debra L. Shapiro. 1991. Did a "failed" negotiation really fail? Reflections on the

     Arthur Andersen-Price Waterhouse Merger talks. 

     Lieberfeld, Daniel. 1994. Mediation and postcrisis intervention in an urban high school. Mediation

     Quarterly 11 (4): 377-381.



Week 14: November 29



Themes: Group presentations and discussion



Week 15: December 6 LAST CLASS



Themes: Group presentations and discussion, wrap up



Week 16: December 13 NO CLASS



Assignment: Individual papers due at ICAR by 5pm

