**Integrating and Adapting Curriculum Across Content Areas for Diverse
Learners, K-3** ****

** EDUT 614 Sec 5U1**

** **

**Fall 2000 Dr. Sylvia Y. S¨¢nchez**

**A349 E-mail: ssanche2@.gmu.edu**

**Thursday 9-4:00 (703) 993-2041**

**3 Credit Hours Office Hours: After class and **

** Thursdays by appointment **

**Introduction:**

This course is offered as one of the strands in the Unified Transformative
Early Education Model in Early Childhood (UTEEM), a teacher training model
providing an integrated approach to preparing teachers to work with diverse
young children and their families. Teachers are prepared to work with children
with diverse learning needs in a variety of inclusive school and community
settings. This course is offered in conjunction with three other courses
(development/assessment; math/science; and language/literacy) and linked to a
full-time field placement with diverse young children in kindergarten through
third grade classrooms. Students participating in this course are enrolled
full time as a cohort in the UTEEM program.



**Course Description:**

This course provides students with an understanding of developmentally
appropriate programs and practices for teaching children in kindergarten
through the third grade. The students will explore, plan, implement, and
evaluate curriculum and environments using individually, age-related, and
culturally appropriate methods and materials. This course will provide student
interns with an understanding of strategies for planning and implementing a
community of learners that is inclusive of children with diverse abilities and
needs. In particular, there will be a focus on curriculum adaptations based on
the knowledge and experiences of a child, family, and community, an
understanding of learning styles, and the integration of knowledge of
effective practices with curriculum expectations across all content areas.
This is an integrative class which will enable students to link their
knowledge in specific content areas to the broader picture of managing the
classroom's environment, implementing an integrated curriculum across content
areas, and applying the philosophical principles related to effective
instruction of diverse young learners. This course continues to develop
reflective practices and use of a variety of problem solving strategies needed
to be effective classroom teachers.



**Overall Student Outcomes:**



At the completion of this strand, students will:

1\. Demonstrate the ability to plan curriculum activities which are responsive
to the interests, preferences, motivation, interaction styles, developmental
status, learning history, cultural variables, and levels of participation of
children in kindergarten through grade three.



2. Demonstrate the ability to plan, implement, and evaluate an integrated approach across curriculum areas based on school, district, and state curriculum goals and objectives. 



3. Demonstrate the ability to implement instruction that is linked to children=s interests and developmental capacities, that is informed by family and community knowledge and experience, that is relevant to the curriculum, and that promotes learning competence.



4. Demonstrate the ability to select culturally, linguistically, and ability responsive materials that have multiple purposes, are adaptable and varied, and promote learning. 



5. Demonstrate the ability to construct learning environments that support positive behavioral and learning expectations.



6. Demonstrate the ability to apply systematic problem solving approaches to dilemmas 

encountered in interactions in the internship experience.



7\. Demonstrate the emerging skill to conduct a professional development
presentation.



8\. Demonstrate the ability to use analysis and reflection to better
understand the K-3 learning environment and one=s own role as an early
childhood educator in that environment.

** **

**Professional Standards and Student Outcomes** :

The following NAEYC and CEC professional guidelines have been used to design
the learning activities and internship experiences which prepare early
childhood professionals in the UTEEM program. Upon completion of this course,
students will demonstrate the knowledge, skills, and dispositions needed to:

|

CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND LEARNING  
  
---|---  
  
1.1.

CEC

|

Apply theories of child development, both typical and atypical, and apply
current research with emphasis on cognitive, motor, social-emotional,
communication, adaptive, and aesthetic development in learning situations and
family and community contexts.  
  
1.2.2

NAEYC

|

Create and modify environments and experiences to meet the individual needs of
all children, including children with disabilities, developmental delays, and
special abilities.  
  
1.3

NAEYC

|

Apply knowledge of cultural and linguistic diversity and the significance of
socio-cultural and political contexts for development and learning, and
recognize that children are best understood in the contexts of family,
culture, and society.  
  
1.4

CEC

|

Apply knowledge of cultural and linguistic diversity and significance of
sociocultural and political contexts for development and learning and
recognize that children are best understood in the contexts of family,
culture, and society  
  
1.5.

CEC

|

Demonstrate understanding of a) developmental consequences of stress and
trauma, b) protective factors and resilience, c) the development of mental
health, and d) the importance of supportive relationships.  
  


|

CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION  
  
2.1

NAEYC

|

Plan and implement developmentally appropriate curriculum and instructional
practices based on knowledge of individual children, the community, and
curriculum goals and content.  
  
2.1.1

NAEYC

|

Use and explain the rational for developmentally appropriate methods that
include play, small group projects, open-ended questioning, group discussion,
problem solving, cooperative learning, and inquiry experiences to help young
children develop intellectual curiosity, solve problems, and make decisions.  
  
2.1.1.

CEC

|

Make specific adaptations for the special needs of children who have unique
talents, learning and developmental needs, or specific disabilities.  
  
2.1.2.

NAEYC

|

Use a variety of strategies to encourage children=s physical, social,
emotional, aesthetic, and cognitive development.  
  
2.1.3.

CEC

|

Incorporate information and strategies from multiple disciplines in the design
of intervention strategies  
  
2.1.4.

NAEYC

|

Develop and implement an integrated curriculum that focuses on children=s
needs and interest and takes into account culturally valued content and
children=s home experiences.  
  
2.1.5.

NAEYC

|

Create, evaluate, and select developmentally appropriate materials, equipment,
and environments.  
  
2.1.5.

CEC

|

Develop and select learning experiences and strategies that affirm and respect
family, cultural, and societal diversity, including language differences.  
  
2.1.7.

NAEYC

|

Develop and evaluate topics of study in terms of conceptual soundness,
significance, and intellectual integrity.  
  
2.1.7.

CEC

|

Select intervention curricula and methods for children with specific
disabilities including motor, sensory, health, communication, social-emotional
and cognitive disabilities.  
  
2.1.8.

CEC

|

Support and facilitate family and child interactions as primary contexts for
learning and development.  
  
2.1.9.

CEC

|

Implement developmentally and functionally appropriate individual and group
activities using a variety of formats, including play, environmental routines,
parent-mediated activities, small-group projects, cooperative learning,
inquiry experiences, and systematic instruction.  
  
2.1.10.

CEC

|

Develop and implement an integrated curriculum that focuses on children=s
needs and interests and takes into account culturally valued content and
children=s home experiences.  
  
2.1.11.

CEC

|

Select, develop and evaluate developmentally and functionally appropriate
materials, equipment, and environments.  
  
2.1.13.

CEC

|

Employ pedagogically sound and legally defensible instructional practices.  
  
2.2.

NAEYC

|

Use individual and group guidance and problem-solving techniques to develop
positive and supportive relationships with children, to encourage positive
social interaction among children, to promote positive strategies of conflict
resolution, and to develop personal self-control, self-motivation, and self-
esteem  
  
2.2.1.

CEC

|

Select and implement methods of behavior support and management appropriate
for young children with special needs, including a rage of strategies from
less-directive, less-structured methods (e.g., verbal support and modeling) to
more-directive, more-structured methods (e.g., applied behavior analysis).  
  
2.3.1.

CEC

|

Provide a stimuli-rich indoor and outdoor environment that employs materials,
media, and technology, including adaptive and assistive technology.  
  
2.3.2.

CEC

|

Organize space, time, peers, materials, and adults to maximize child progress
in group and home settings.  
  
2.4.

NAEYC

|

Establish and maintain physically and psychologically safe and healthy
learning environments for children  
  
2.4.1.

NAEYC

|

Demonstrate understanding of the influence of the physical setting, schedule,
routines, and transitions on children and use these experiences to promote
children=s development and learning.  
  


|

FAMILY AND COMMUNITY RELATIONSHIPS  
  
3.1.

NAEYC

|

Establish and maintain positive, collaborative relationships with families.  
  
3.1.1.

CEC

|

Apply family systems theory and knowledge of the dynamics, roles, and
relationships within families and communities.  
  
3.1.1.

NAEYC

|

Respect parents= choices and goals for children and communicate effectively
with parents about curriculum and children=s progress  
  
3.1.2.

NAEYC

|

Involve families in assessing and planning for individual children, including
children with disabilities, developmental delays, or special abilities.  
  
3.1.2.

CEC

|

Demonstrate sensitivity to differences in family structures and social and
cultural backgrounds.  
  
3.1.3.

NAEYC

|

Support parents in making decisions related to their child=s development and
parenting.  
  
3.1.3.

CEC

|

Assist families in identifying their resources, priorities, and concern in
relation to their child=s development  
  
3.1.6.

CEC

|

Implement a range of family-oriented services based on the family=s identified
resources, priorities, and concern.  
  
3.2.

NAEYC

|

Demonstrate sensitivity to differences in family structures and social and
cultural backgrounds.  
  
3.2.5.

CEC

|

Participate as a team member to identify dynamics of team roles, interaction,
communication, team building, problem solving, and conflict resolution.  
  
3.2.6.

CEC

|

Employ two-way communication skills  
  


|

ASSESSMENT AND EVALUATION  
  
4.1.4.

CEC

|

Involve families as active participants in the assessment process.  
  


|  <p class=MsoNormal style='l

