Political Science 202  
Lectures on Mondays and Wednesdays, 11:00-11:50  
Recitations on Fridays

Argument in Political Science

Professor Fredrick Harris  
Harkness Hall 318  
275.4735  
Email: fchs@troi.cc.rochester.edu  
Office Hours: Mondays 1-2 and Wednesdays 1-2, or by appointment.

Recitation Leaders: Acir Almeida and Robert Walker

The general aim of Political Science 202 is to introduce you to the nature of
argument; the course is designed to expose you to a variety of concepts and
forms of evidence that characterize political science. You will be taught to
recognize arguments in what you read and to develop your own arguments in what
you write. This semester we examine the role of racial and gender conflict in
American political life. We explore the origins of racial and gender conflict
in the making of American democracy and the role of actors in their challenge
to address these two forms of inequality. We also draw on the writings of
contemporary political scientists and other social scientists to examine the
centuries-long struggle to achieve equality in American political life.

Books

Three books are available for purchase at the University of Rochester
Bookstore. These books are also on reserve at Rush Rhees Library:

Judith N. Shklar. 1991. _American Citizenship: The Quest for Inclusion_.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.  


Eric Foner.1988. _A Short History of Reconstruction_. New York: Harper  & Row.

Ian F. Haney Lopez. 1996. _White By Law: The Legal Construction of Race_. New
York: New York University Press.

Additional required readings:

The remaining readings are accessible on the web. On the web version of this
syllabus, each reading is linked automatically to its appropriate website. If
any link does not work, please let Professor Harris know immediately, by phone
or e-mail, so he can address the problem. Some of these websites, including
the sites set up by Rush Rhees Library, are accessible only to computers on
campus (and off campus computers that are recognized by the campus). One
website, JSTOR <[www.jstor.org](http://www.jstor.org)>, is an on-line archive
of articles from leading academic journals. You can access JSTOR from any
computer on campus, but usually not from computers off campus. To print from
JSTOR, you must first download a printing application Adobe Acrobat (available
free from the Adobe website) or JPRINT (available free from the JSTOR
website). Do not attempt to print from JSTOR by using your web browser's
regular "print" function.

Requirements

Class participation is worth 20% of your grade. You are expected to attend
lectures and recitations on a regular basis. The baseline participation grade
is determined by participation in recitations. You must attend recitation on a
regular basis to receive credit for the course. For most students-who attend
lectures regularly but do not speak up during recitations-the recitation grade
will be recorded as the participation grade. Recitation grades will be revised
upward for students who not only attend lectures regularly but also speak up
in lectures. Recitation grades will be sharply lowered for students who do not
attend lectures regularly. Short papers and the final exam are worth the
remaining 80% of your grade. You are required to write seven papers (55%) and
to take a final exam (25%). We will count the best six of the seven papers as
your final grade for the short papers.

You must write at least one paper from each of the six pairs of units listed
below. You are required to write a paper from Unit M.

Paper 1: Unit A or B

Paper 2: Unit C or D

Paper 3: Unit E or F

Paper 4: Unit G or H

Paper 5: Unit I or J

Paper 6: Unit K or L

Paper 7: Unit M

Keep papers short and to the point. Papers should be 500-900 words in length
(about 2-3 pages). No paper may exceed 1,000 words. Double-space the papers,
use 12-point Time Roman or Courier font, and no funny stuff with the margins;
an inch on each side is about right. Place your recitation leader's name at
the top of your paper. Papers are due in your recitation leader's mailbox in
Harkness 314 no later than 10:30 on Tuesday mornings. Requests for extensions
will be granted only on a rare, case-by-case basis; except in the case of a
genuine and unforeseen emergency, no late papers will be accepted without
prior permission. Three anonymous student papers will be posted to the course
website each Wednesday afternoon. You are responsible for reading those three
anonymous papers as preparation for your recitation on Friday; you should copy
those papers and bring the copies with you to recitation.  
    
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Race, Gender and the Struggle for Democracy in America

Week I:

1/16 No Class  
1/18 Introduction  


Week II, Unit A: The Constitutional and Legal Foundations of Inequality

1/21 Lecture  
1/23 Lecture  
1/25 Recitation

Declaration of Independence  
<<http://lcweb2.loc.gov/const/declar.html>>

Constitution of the United States, (especially articles 1, 4, and 5)  
<<http://lcweb2.loc.gov/const/const.html>>

Thomas Jefferson, "Notes on the State of Virginia," Queries 14 and 18, 137--
43, 162--63  
<<http://press-pubs.uchicago.edu/founders/documents/v1ch15s28.html>>

James Madison, "Memorandum on an African Colony for Freed Slaves"  
<<http://press-pubs.uchicago.edu/founders/documents/v1ch15s43.html>>

Dred Scott v. Stanford, 1857  
<<http://college.hmco.com/polisci/amgov/documents/dred.htm>>

Lopez, Chapters 1-2

In what ways were racial inequalities enshrined in the constitution and by the
beliefs of the founding fathers? How did these beliefs contradict the ideas of
the Declaration of Independence? How did the Supreme Courts'' interpretation
of black rights in the Dred Scott case reinforce the legalization of racial
inequality? And according to Lopez, how was the "race" of people of color who
were not black interpreted through U.S. law?

[Recitation papers for unit A](UnitA.pdf)  


Week III, Unit B: First Experiment with Racial Democracy

1/28 Lecture  
1/30 Lecture  
2/1 Recitation

Foner, Chapters 3, 5,6,

How did post-Civil War America address problems of racial inequalities? How
did presidential Reconstruction differ from congressional Reconstruction? What
were the arguments for and against giving blacks civil rights? How did the
doctrine of states rights influence arguments against civil rights?

[Recitation papers for unit B](UnitB.pdf)

Week IV, Unit C: Women's Quest for Equality

2/4 No Lecture  
2/6 Lecture  
2/8 Recitation

"Declaration of Sentiments," Seneca Falls, New York, 1848  
<<http://www.ukans.edu/carrie/docs/texts/seneca.htm>>

Sojourner Truth,"Ain't I a Woman?,"1851  
<<http://www.afgen.com/sojourner1.html>>

Victoria C. Woodhull, "A Lecture on Constitutional Equality," 1871  
(Search for item in the American Memory Historical Collection)  
<<http://lcweb2.loc.gov/>>

Susan B. Anthony, "On Behalf of the Woman Suffrage Amendment,"1884  
(Search for item in the American Memory Historical Collection)  
<<http://www.phschool.com/atschool/primary_sources/woman_suffrage_amendment.html>>

Amelia Bloomer, "Woman's Right to the Ballot," 1895  
<<http://douglass.speech.nwu.edu/bloo_a63.htm>>

Goldwin Smith, "Women Suffrage," 1898, 199-238  
<[reserve](http://groucho.lib.rochester.edu/)>

Jane Addams, "Why Women Should Vote," 1915  
<<http://douglass.speech.nwu.edu/adda_a03.htm>>

On what basis did advocates of women suffrage justify their cause? What
arguments did they form to appeal to the constitution and to society at large?
How did the prevailing ideas about women in society both promote and undermine
the cause of women''s right?

[Recitation papers for unit C](UnitC.pdf)

Week V, Unit D: Social Standing and American Citizenship

2/11 Lecture  
2/13 Lecture  
2/15 Recitation

Shklar, American Citizenship, Chapters 1 & 2, 25-101

According to Shklar, how did slavery influence ideas about American
citizenship? In what ways did slavery influence ideas about social standing in
the nation? And what is the relationship between social standing and
citizenship in the United States?

[Recitation papers for unit D](UnitD.pdf)

Week VI, Unit E: Debating the Consequences of Women''s Suffrage

2/18 Lecture  
2/20 Lecture  
2/22 Recitation

Paula Baker, "Domestication of Politics: Women and American Political
Society," _American Historical Review_ ," Volume 89, Issue 3 (June 1984),
620-647.  
<<http://www.jstor.org/>>

Cherly Logan Sparks and Peter R. Waknick, "The Enactment of Mothers' Pensions:
Civic Mobilization and Agenda Setting or Benefits of the Ballot," _The
American Political Science Review_ , Volume 89, Issue 3 (September 1995),
710-720.  
<<http://www.jstor.org/>>

Theda Skocpol, "Response," American Political Science Review 89 (1995),
720-30.  
<<http://www.jstor.org/>>

Anna Harvey, "The Political Consequences of Suffrage Exclusion," Social
Science History, 20 (1996), pp.97-132.  
<[reserve](http://groucho.lib.rochester.edu/)>

Did it matter that women won the vote? Be sure to draw on the assigned
readings in answering this question.

[Recitation papers for unit E](UnitE.pdf)

Week VII, Unit F: Beginnings of the Broken Alliance

2/25 Lecture  
2/27 Lecture  
3/1 Recitation

Aileen D. Kraditor, "The Southern Question," 161-218  
<[reserve](http://groucho.lib.rochester.edu/)>

Anna Julia Cooper, "Women versus the Indian," (1881), 88-108  
<[reserve](http://groucho.lib.rochester.edu/)>

Bell Hooks, "Racism and Feminism," 119-158  
<[reserve](http://groucho.lib.rochester.edu/)>

How did the racial views and political tactics of white women suffragists
influence their quest for women''s rights? How do the views of black women
such as Cooper and Hooks counter those of white women activists? According to
Hooks, what has been the long-term consequences of the betrayal of prominent
white women activists during the suffragist era to building alliances between
black and white women?

[Recitation papers for unit F](UnitF.pdf)

Week VIII, Unit G: Political Responses to Racial Exclusion

3/4 Lecture  
3/6 Lecture  
3/8 No Recitation

Plessy vs. Ferguson (including dissent by Justice Harlan), 1895  
<<http://www.bowdoin.edu/~sbodurt2/court/cases/plessy.html>>

Robert Harlan, "Migration is the Only Remedy for Our Wrongs," 1879  
<[reserve](http://groucho.lib.rochester.edu/)>

Booker T. Washington, "The Atlanta Compromise," 1896  
<<http://historymatters.gmu.edu/text/1642b-booker.html>>

Booker T. Washington, "Industrial Education for the Negro," 1903  
<<http://douglass.speech.nwu.edu/wash_b04.htm>>

W.E.B. DuBois, "The Talented Tenth," September 1903  
<<http://douglass.speech.nwu.edu/dubo_b05.htm>>

W.E.B. DuBois, "Of Mr. Booker T. Washington and Others," 1903  
<<http://www.bartleby.com/114/3.html>>

W.E.B. DuBois, "Of the Training of Black Men,"  
<<http://www.theatlantic.com/unbound/flashbks/blacked/dutrain.htm>>

Bishop Henry McNeal Turner, ""Justice or Emigration Should Be Our Watch Word,"
1893.  
<[reserve](http://groucho.lib.rochester.edu/)>

T. Thomas Fortune, "It''s Time to Call a Halt," 1890  
<[reserve](http://groucho.lib.rochester.edu/)>

Foner, 9,12

What were the political and legal forces that led to the demise of
Reconstruction? How did black leaders and intellectuals respond to the erosion
of blacks'' civil rights? In particular, how did Washington''s and Dubois''s
strategies differ?

[Recitation papers for unit G](UnitG.pdf)

Spring Break, March 9-17  


Week IX, Unit H: Dichotomizing "Race," Legalizing Whiteness

3/18 Lecture  
2/20 Lecture  
3/22 Recitation

Lopez, Chapters 3-5

Harris, 1709-1745

According to Lopez and Harris how is white identity embedded into the law?
From a legal standpoint, how do the authors explain the foundations of
"whiteness"?

[Recitation papers for unit H](UnitH.pdf)

Week X, Unit I: The Struggle of Workers Rights in America

3/25 Lecture  
3/27 Lecture  
3/29 Recitation

John L. Lewis, "What Labor is Thinking," _Public Opinion Quarterly_ , Volume
1, Issue 4 (October 1937), 23-28.  
<<http://www.jstor.org/>>

Michael Goldfield, "Worker Insurgency, Radical Organization, and the New Deal
Legislation," _American Political Science Review_ , Volume 83, Issue 4
(December 1989), 1257-1282  
<<http://www.jstor.org/>>

Theda Skocpol, Kenneth Finegold, and Michael Goldfield, "Explaining New Deal
Labor Policy," _American Political Science Review_ , Volume 84, Issue 4,
(December 1990), 1297-1315.  
<<http://www.jstor.org/>>

How would the development of labor unions expand democracy in the United
States? What factors led to the development of unions and the passage of
legislation that favored the union movement? How does Goldfield''s explanation
of favorable legislation differs from Skocpol and Finegold's?

[Recitation papers for unit I](UnitI.pdf)

Week XI, Unit J: The Battle for Civil Rights

4/1 Lecture  
4/3 Lecture  
4/5 Recitation

"Brown Decision," 1954  
<<http://www.nationalcenter.org/brown.html>>

"Southern Manifesto," Congressional Record, 1956  
<<http://www.toptags.com/aama/voices/speeches/sthmani.htm>>

Martin Luther King, "Letter from a Birmingham Jail"  
<<http://www.toptags.com/aama/voices/commentary/bjail.htm>>

Malcolm X,""Ballot or the Bullet"  
<<http://www.hartford-hwp.com/archives/45a/065.html>>

Bayard Rustin, "From Protest to Politics: The Future of the Civil Rights
Movement"  
<[pdf version](Rustin.pdf)>

Virginia Commission on Constitutional Government, "Civil Rights and Legal
Wrongs," August 1963  
<<http://douglass.speech.nwu.edu/virg_a21.htm>>

David Hilliard, "The Ideology of the Black Panther Party," 1969  
<<http://douglass.speech.nwu.edu/hill_a15.htm>>

Third World Women's Alliance, ""Black Women's Manifesto,"" Selections by
Maxine Williams, Francs Beal, Linda La Rue  
<<http://odyssey.lib.duke.edu/wlm/blkmanif/>>

What arguments did southern politicians use to justify their opposition to the
Brown decision and other civil rights gains? What were the varied visions of
black activists and thinkers during the civil rights movement? Specifically,
how did the views of King, Malcolm X, Rustin, Hillard, and the women who wrote
the "Black Women's Manifesto" vary?

[Recitation papers for unit J](UnitJ.pdf)

Week XII, Unit K: Civil Rights and the Transformation of the American Party
System

4/8 Lecture  
4/10 Lecture  
4/12 Recitation

Thomas Byrne Edsall with Mary D. Edsall, ""Race,"" _The Atlantic Monthly_ ,
May 1991, pages 53-86.  
<<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/race/edsall.htm>>

Thomas J. Sugrue, "Crabgrass-Roots Politics: Race, Rights, and Reaction
Against Liberalism in the Urban North, 1940-1964," _Journal of American
History_ , 82 (1995), pp.551-78.  
<<http://www.jstor.org/>>

Harold W. Stanley, "Southern Partisan Changes: Dealignment, Realignment or
Both,"  
_Journal of Politics_ , Volume 50, Issue 1 (1988), 64-88.  
<<http://www.jstor.org/>>

How did the civil rights movement alter the partisan preferences of Americans?
According to Edsall and Sugrue did the civil rights movement drive whites to
the Republican party or were other forces at play? What sort of evidence does
Stanley provide for changes in partisan preferences for southern whites?

[Recitation papers for unit K](UnitK.pdf)

Week XIII, Unit L: Urban Poverty

4/15 Lecture  
4/17 Lecture  
4/19 Recitation

Nicholas Lemann."The Origins of the Underclass," _The Atlantic Monthly_ , July
1986  
<<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/poverty/origin2.htm>>

Nicholas Lemann, "The Other Underclass," _The Atlantic Monthly,_ December
1991\.  
<<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/poverty/othrund.htm>>

William J. Wilson, "Social Change and Social Dislocations in the Inner City,"  
<[reserve](http://groucho.lib.rochester.edu/)>

Adolph Reed, "The Underclass as Myth and Symbol,"  
<[reserve](http://groucho.lib.rochester.edu/)>

According to the authors what accounts for the persistence of urban poverty in
America? How does Lemann explain the difference between black poverty and
Latino poverty? How does Reed's explanation of the emergence of poverty differ
from Wilson''s and Lemann's?

[Recitation papers for unit L](UnitL.pdf)

Week XIV, Unit M: Contemporary Inequalities in American Political Life

4/22 Lecture  
4/24 Lecture  
4/26 Recitation

Jeffery Goldberg, "The Color of Suspicion," _New York Times Magazine_ , June
20, 1999.  
<[reserve](http://groucho.lib.rochester.edu/)>

House of Representatives One Hundred Sixth Congress, 2000 Civic Participation
and Rehabilitation Act of 1999, Hearing before the Subcommittee on the
Constitution of the Committee on the Judiciary.  
<<http://commdocs.house.gov/committees/judiciary/hju62486.000/hju62486_0f.htm>>

Cathy Cohen and Michael Dawson. 1993. "Neighborhood Poverty and African
American Politics." _American Political Science Review_ , Vol 87:286-302.  
<<http://www.jstor.org/>>

Nancy Burns, Kay Lehman Schlozman, and Sidney Verba.1997. "The Public
Consequences of Private Inequality: Family Life and Citizen Participation."
_American Political Science Review_ , 91:373-389.  
<<http://www.jstor.org/>>  


Jeffery Koch, "Do Citizens Apply Gender Stereotypes to Infer Candidates'
Ideological Orientations?," _Journal of Politics_ , Vol. 62,No.2 (May 2000),
pp. 414-429.  
<[reserve](http://groucho.lib.rochester.edu/)>

With the evidence presented in the readings explain how racial discrimination,
gender inequality, and class privilege continues to persist in contemporary
American politics.

[Recitation papers for unit M](UnitM.pdf)

4/29 Review  
5/1 No Class

Instructions for the [final exam](Final.pdf).

