#  

#

#  ![](ruby%20slippers_60.JPG) HONORS 121: TODD  
  
---  
  
Professor Ellen Todd Phone: 993-4374 (office)

Office: B336 Robinson Hall Office Hours: T 3-4:30; W1-2:30/by appt.

E-MAIL: etodd@gmu.edu Fall Semester 1999



See separate page for [Revisions](Todd2.htm)



HONORS 121 Reading Cultural Signs

Section 003: Tues/Thurs. 10:30-11:45 FAB B110

Section 004: Tues/Thurs. 1:30-2:45 ROB B120



 **Course Description:** In this course, we shall use semiotics (the study of
signs and symbols) to  "read" our own nineteenth and twentieth century
American culture. The semiotic method is employed in cultural studies (an
interdisciplinary field using, in particular, sociology, literature,
anthropology, psychology, history visual studies and philosophy) and will help
teach us how to formulate arguments about the nature of the world in which we
live. As the editors of _Signs of Life_ point out,  "one of its precepts is
that its job is to _reveal_ interests and ideologies, not to _judge_ them. "
This process can be difficult and the encouragement to be more self-conscious
can sometimes seem intrusive. But we must remember that the goal of our study
in this class is to try to understand our contemporary beliefs and desires
"within a social and cultural context."

 **Assigned Texts:**

 _The Wizard of Oz_ (L. Frank Baum, illus. Lisbeth Zwerger, 1900/1996)

 _Wicked: The Life and Times of the Wicked Witch of the West_ (Gregory
Macguire,

1996)

 _The Battle for Christmas_ (Stephen Nissenbaum, 1996)

 _A Writer's Reference_ (Hacker, 4th edition, 1999)

 _Films_ : "The Wizard of Oz"

"The Wiz"

"She's Gotta Have It"

 _Xeroxed Readings_ : Available in Course Packets in the Johnson Center Copy

Shop (includes readings from _Signs of Life in the USA: Readings on Popular
Culture for Writers_ (Maasik and Solomon, 2nd edition, 1997) and other
selected essays

**Course Requirements:**

1\. Four formal papers 50% of Grade. (10%; 10%, 15%; 15%) These 3-4 page,
double-spaced papers will tie together issues and themes taken up in the main
sections of the course. The first of these papers will go through a
preliminary draft and then a rewrite following comments. You will receive
suggested topics on a separate handout.

2\. Eight 1-2 page micro analyses (30% of your grade). These 1-page, single
spaced papers are responses to issues that arise in readings, class discussion
and/or other work we do for the class. They are designed to help you prepare
for class discussion, reflect, on the readings and apply the results of what
you are learning while continuing to work on your writing. You will receive
suggested topics in handouts provided in the first week of the course.

3\. Group Presentation (10% of your grade). This will be an opportunity for
you to work collaboratively in small groups on course readings for _The Battle
for Christmas_ , and related topics. You will know your group assignments by
mid-semester. Group members will generate questions for discussion and present
a written summary of their assigned material.

4\. Class participation (10% of your grade). Regular, _punctual_ attendance is
necessary for this course. Consistent attendence, engagement and participation
in class discussions will be the basis of this evaluation.

In a small class like this, your contribution is vital to the class's success.
You must come to class regularly and be prepared to contribute to the
discussion. Please bring the assigned readings and syllabus to each class
period.

5\. E-Mail. By the end of the first week, you must supply me with your correct
e-mail address. I will use e-mail to you for any "late-breaking" news, to
clarify a point on an assignment. You should free to contact me about any
questions you might have on readings, assignments, etc.

Your work must be your own, done for this course alone

 **Grading Policies/Standards:**

GMU uses plusses and minuses as indicated below (A-, B+ and B-, and C+). You
will earn some form of numerical grades so you will always have a clear
indication of what your grade will be. Good papers will include statements
supported by examples and evidence from relevant readings. Written work will
be graded on grammar, style, content, organization and clarity. Spellcheck and
proofread all papers before submitting them.

 ** _A_ 93-100%; A- 90-92%** This is awarded for superior understanding of all
concepts, for impressive presentation in written work, sophisticated in
interpretation and style, imaginative projects that go beyond the assignment,
and insightful class participation. For surprising me.

 ** _B+_ 87-89%; B 83-86%; B- 80-82%** This indicates above average mastery of
the material, clear and well-produced and thoughtful written presentation.

 ** _C+_ 77-79%; C 70-76%** This is for average or merely adequate work,
rudimentary understanding of factual material and just competent written
presentation.

 ** _D_ =60-69%** This suggests less-than-satisfactory preparation of factual
material and poor written work--minimum effort and writing problems that
require follow-up from a writing center tutor.

 ** _F_ =59 and below**. Unacceptable as college level work, with serious
writing problems requiring intensive help.

 ** _0_** Work not handed in on time (contact me before the due date with
serious problems.)

 **Writing Across the Curriculum:**

In the Honors Program, students complete a variety of writing assignments
throughout the program. The writing in this course contributes to the 6-hour
Composition requirement. You will be writing formal essays , responses to some
assigned readings, films, and some impromptu class writing. Writing is an
essential component in this class and must be given serious attention.

 **Style:**

All out-of-class assignments must be typed and double-spaced with one-inch
margins. Place a header in the upper right hand corner that includes your
name, the date, the _class number and section_ , and the assignment title
and/or number. All pages but the first must be numbered. Staple the paper in
the upper left-hand corner. Do not use a cover sheet or plastic cover. Font
size should not be larger than 12. Consistently following the basic style is
part of the assignment grade.

 **Class Policies:**

 _General Class Procedures:_ For part of our classes I will be providing
historical or theoretical context, defining terms or working to help you
analyze our texts, whether verbal or visual. Some form of notetaking during
our sessions is strongly recommended; it keeps you engaged with the discussion
and may provide insights you will use in your written work. But this is not a
lecture course and all of us will be actively engaged in our discussions and
debates, whether as a group of the whole or in smaller units.

 _Attendance_ : It is the stated policy of the university that "students are
expected to attend the class periods of the courses for which they register."
This classroom is designed as a community of learners, and because of the
nature of our group interactions, you have a responsibility to your fellow
students to attend classes. Poor attendance by students undermines the work of
the whole; be courteous, prompt, and save absences for illness. Students who
fail to attend regularly should not have unreasonable expectations about their
final grade.

 _Academic Honesty_ : Academic Honesty is expected. The GMU Honor Code is
found in the university undergraduate catalog and applies to this and all
other courses. Cheating and plagiarism are expressly forbidden. For quick
reference, plagiarism can be defined as: (1) presenting as one's own the
words, work, or opinions of someone else without proper acknowledgement or (2)
borrowing the sequence of ideas, the arrangement of material, or the pattern
of thought of someone else without proper acknowledgement. A serious academic
offence, plagiarism is grounds for failing at least the assignment if not the
course.

 _Paper Submission/Late Policy_ : All papers are due at the beginning of class
on the assigned date. Do not leave papers in my mail box; they will be
considered late. I will not accept papers on electronic mail. Missed in-class
work cannot be made up. In cases of illness/serious emergencies, contact me
prior to the assignment date for an extension. Failure to submit papers will
result in a 0. I make this policy so that I can treat all students equally and
I need to grade and hand back papers promptly. No assignments will be accepted
after the last class period, December 9.

 _Note_ : Even if we do not get to discuss all the material on the syllabus
you are responsible for it. Micro-analyses are to be submitted at the
beginning of the designated class period.

SCHEDULE OF TOPICS/READINGS/ASSIGNMENTS: _Subject to modification_

CP stands for Course Packet. SOL/CP stands for the course pack with readings
from _Signs of Life in the USA_. Readings will be available for sale at the
Johnson Center Copy Shop. Most packets will be marked HNRS 121, Sections
001-006, and will list all four professors' names

I. INTRODUCTION TO SEMIOTICS: READING CULTURAL SIGNS

WEEK 1: Tu. Aug. 31 COURSE INTRODUCTION

Th. Sep. 1 General Introduction to Signs I

READ: Introduction "Popular Signs" SOL/CP, 1-18

WEEK 2: Tu. Sep. 7 Reading Grant Wood's American Gothic: The Image

and its Transformations

READ: Wanda M. Corn, "The Birth of an American Icon: Grant Wood's American
Gothic," (Doezema and Milloy _, Reading American Art_ , pp. 387-408) CP

Th. Sep. 9 General Intro. to Signs II: Terms/Definitions/Examples

On the Honors 121 Web Page Click on Semiotics, then on Primers, then on
Basics. Under Basics choose "Study of Signs, Ed Sewell" and test yourself by
substituting other examples. Other good references under basics are:
Definition: Words of Art and Semiotic Terms.

Classweb.gmu.edu/classweb/khillsha/Honors121

_Microanalysis #1 Due_

  1. SIGNS AND SPACES OF CONSUMPTION: Advertising, the Mall, and their 

participants.

WEEK 3: Tu. sep. 14 Introduction to Consumption and Advertising

READ: -Introduction "Consuming Passions" SOL/CP 21-30

-Introduction "Brought to You B(U)Y" SOL/CP 101-111

-Roland Marchand. , "The Parable of the Democracy of

Goods" in _Advertising the American Dream_ (Univ. of Ca. Press, 1985), pp.
217-222 CP

_Microanalysis #2 Due_

Th. sep. 16 Gender and Advertising: Some Guidelines

READ: Holly Devor, "Gender Role Behaviors and Attitudes," in _Gender Blending_
(Indiana Univ. Press, 1989), pp. 49-53. and Deborah Tannen,  "There is No
Unmarked Woman," _The New York Times Magazine_ , 6/20/93, pp. 18, 50-51. Both
in CP

_Draft of Paper #1 Due_

WEEK: 4 Tu. Sep. 21 Gender and Advertising: Case Studies

READ: Malcolm Gladwell, "True Colors: Hair dye and the Hidden History of
Postwar America," pp 70-81, and Rebecca Mead, "Brooks Brothers a-Go-Go," pp.
88-93, both from _The New Yorker_ , Mar. 22, 1999. CP

_Microanalysis #3 Due_

Th. Sep. 23 Packaging/Shopping

READ: Anne Norton, "The Signs of Shopping," in _Republic of Signs_ (Univ. of
Chic. Press, 1993), pp. 50-51, 65-75; Thomas Hine, "What's in a Package,"
(Little Brown & Co., 1995), pp. 1-13; and -Kron, "The Semiotics of Home Decor"
SOL, 72-83, all CP)

WEEK 5: Tu. Sep. 28 The Mall, part I

READ: For Both Classes: Jon Goss, "The Magic of the Mall: An Analysis of Form,
Function, and Meaning in the Contemporary Retail Built Economy," in Annals of
the Association of American Geographers," 83 (March, 1993), pp. 18-47. CP
(with SOL)

_Paper #1 Due Final Version_

Th. Sep. 30 The Mall, part II: Continued Discussion

WEEK 6: Tu. Oct. 5 GMU as Mall: A Visit/Discussion

 _Microanalysis #4 Due_

Th. Oct. 7 READ: "Larger than Life: The Mythic Characters of American
Culture," pp. 335-343, SOL/CP as prep. For thinking about the _Wizard of Oz_
and look at Suzanne Rahn's chronology for L. Frank Baum in CP

_Paper #2 Due_

III. An American "Classic?" The Wizard of Oz and its transformations--movies,
the novel, the web

WEEK 7: Mon./Tu. _No class,Fall break_

READ: L. Frank Baum. _The Wizard of Oz_

Suzanne Rahn, "Dorothy Opens the Door: The Inner Landscape of Oz," _in The
Wizard of Oz: Shaping an Imaginary World_ (Twayne, 1998), pp. 52-77, (CP)

Th. Oct. 14 Wizard of Oz.

Discussion of _The Wizard of Oz_

Film Screenings will be scheduled for this week. Movies must be seen again for
those who have seen them sometime in the past.

WEEK 8: Tu. Oct. 19 Wizard of Oz: The Book/The Movie

READ: "The Hollywood Sign: The Culture of American Film," in SOL/CP Robert B.
Ray. Reading on The Wizard of Oz, The Movie, CP

_Microanalysis #5 Due_

Th. Oct. 21 The Wizard of Oz. The Movie/the web sites

READ: Begin Reading the first Part of Maguire, _Wicked: The Life and Times of
the Wicked Witch of the West_

pp. 1-62 (part I.

Film Screenings will be scheduled for this week. Movies must be seen again for
those who have seen them sometime in the past.

WEEK 9: Tu. Oct. 26 The Wiz/She's Gotta Have It: African Americans and Oz

READ: The Race Card: Readings in Multicultural Semiotics, pp. 481-490 in
SOL/CP and Benjamin DeMott, "Put on a Happy Face: Masking the Differences
Between Blacks and Whites," in Harper's Magazine, September 1995, pp. 31-38.
CP

_Microanalysis #6 Due_

Th. Oct. 28 Witches and Halloween

READ: Santino, intro. xi-xxvii and -Tuleja, "Trick or Treat: Pretexts &
Contexts" 82-102, also in Santino, CP

_Microanalysis #7 Due_

WEEK 10: Tu. Nov. 2 _Wicked_

READ: Parts I and II

Th. Nov. 4 _Wicked_

READ: Part III and Part IV, Chapter I

WEEK 11: Tu. Nov. 9 _Finish Wicked_

READ: Finish Part IV and Part V

IV: CULTURAL RITUALS:

Th. Nov. 11 Organization for Group Presentations

_Paper #3 Due_

  

WEEK 12: Tu. Nov. 16 Holidays and Rituals

READ: Preface to the Battle for Christmas

 _Microanalysis #8 Due_

Th. Nov. 18 _The Battle for Christmas_

Chapters 1 & 2 Presentations/Discussions

WEEK 13: Tu. Nov. 23 _The Battle for Christmas_

Chapters 3 & 4 Presentations

Th. Nov. 25 This is the real thanksgiving holiday!

WEEK 14: Tu. Nov. 30 _The Battle for Christmas_

Chapters 5 & 6 Presentations

Th. Dec. 2 _The Battle for Christmas_ /The Twentieth Century

Chapter 7 Presentations

WEEK 15: Tu. Dec. 7 Christmas etc. in the 20th-century

 _Paper #4 Due_

th. Dec. 9 Course Wrap-up



