**SYLLABUS FOR INFT 944**

** THE PROCESS OF DISCOVERY AND ITS ENHANCEMENT **

** IN ENGINEERING APPLICATIONS**

** [D. Schum]**

** Spring 2002**

** ****************



** SYNOPSIS**



By what means do we discover or generate new ideas ? Since antiquity, many
learned persons have tried to answer this question; it remains one of the most
important, interesting, and _difficult_ of all questions we might ask about
our intellectual capabilities. At the simplest level we might say that new
ideas are discovered as a result of imaginative reasoning. But what such
reasoning involves is anything but obvious. In every context including science
and engineering we draw conclusions about phenomena, events, and situations
based upon observations we make. Over the centuries philosophers and others
have come to recognize that it is one thing to justify or defend a possible
conclusion based on evidence but quite another to determine how this possible
conclusion and the evidence arose in the first place. There are few if any
situations in which possible conclusions and all relevant evidential tests of
them are provided for us; they must be discovered by someone.



Rules, canons, or logics for justifying deductive reasoning have been with us
since the time of Aristotle's _Prior Analytics_. Rules for justifying
inductive (or probabilistic) reasoning have been more difficult to determine.
If the philosopher Hume is correct, we may never have any set of inductive
rules that can be defended as being uniquely ideal. On many accounts,
imaginative reasoning involves something other than deductive or inductive
reasoning. If imaginative reasoning does in fact differ from deduction or
induction, does it nevertheless conform to any logic ? On one view, the
process of discovery, and the imagination it involves, is a distinctly
psychological experience and one that cannot be expected to obey any rules,
canons, or logics. But on other views, some quite recently expressed, it is
argued that there is method in the apparent madness of discovery and that we
do have at least some hope for a logic of discovery. One thing quite apparent
is that study of the process of discovery is a compelling enterprise in many
different disciplines. Consequently, we have scholarship and recorded
experiences concerning discovery and imaginative reasoning that come from many
different disciplines. As expected, different views of the process of
discovery are provided by different disciplines; this is providential. In
studying intellectual processes of the highest order, such as those involved
in the discovery of new ideas, we need all the help we can obtain, from
whatever direction it comes. Different perspectives of imaginative reasoning
and discovery each supply uniquely valuable insights. As we will see, help
comes from some disciplines whose very existence is not widely recognized.



Not all new ideas deserve to be taken seriously. In grading the adequacy of a
new idea, novelty alone is not nearly enough. Many truly novel ideas fail to
explain anything, generate no new phenomena, or solve no problems. So we also
have to be concerned about the extent to which the process of discovery is
also _efficient_ and _productive_. It is one thing to be able to characterize
imaginative thought but quite another to be able to demonstrate how we might
exercise our imaginations in more productive ways. In recent years, and in
several different disciplines, there has emerged a strong interest in
developing methods for providing computer assistance to persons performing
discovery-related tasks. Considerable research on this matter is now in
progress here at GMU.



As the title of this seminar announces, we will become absorbed not only in
studying the process of discovery but also in studying ways in which this
process might be enhanced or assisted in engineering and in other contexts.
There is no single discipline from which we can obtain a necessary, much less
a sufficient, background for study of the process of discovery and the
imaginative reasoning it requires. The only major requisite for taking this
course is a willingness to consider scholarship and recorded experience from
many different disciplines. In our work we will examine discovery-related
thoughts of persons whose interests involve philosophy and logic, mathematics,
neurophysiology, artificial intelligence, probability, history, psychology,
the study of chaotic processes, the writing of fiction, and semiotics (the
study of the _signs_ of nature and their possible meanings). It will be my
esssential role in this seminar to present discovery-related ideas from this
melange of disciplines in what I hope you will agree is an orderly way. A bit
later in this syllabus we will discuss what your role will be.



** AN ANNOTATED OUTLINE OF TOPICS**

I have found it no easy task to decide how best to organize ideas from the
vast literature concerning discovery and imaginative reasoning. Here is a
selection of topics I believe congenial to the interests of persons who have
theoretical and/or practical objectives in mind as far as study of discovery-
related processes are concerned. I have put no time-line on this outline since
I cannot now predict how long we will wish to dwell on each of the following
topics.



**PART I. HISTORICAL COMMENTS ON THE PROCESS OF DISCOVERY**



It is said that necessity is the mother of invention; it is also said that
curiosity is the mother of science. As we all know, evidence of human
inventiveness and curiosity goes back many thousands of years. No study of
discovery and imaginative reasoning would be adequate without at least some
consideration of human progress in discovery and invention from the earliest
ages. The trouble is that this history is now as vast as it is absorbing; we
could easily spend several semesters just examining the history of human
scientific and technological accomplishments. However, what will absorb us the
most, as we proceed through the ages, is what people seem to have thought
about the process of discovery in which we are able to generate new ideas that
offer potential explainations of phenomena of interest. It happens that
developments in mathematics are of particular interest to us. It was believed
in earlier times that all new ideas arise from processes similar to those
involved in the proof of theorems in mathematics. Many noted mathematicians
have been especially interested in discovery.



A. _The Earliest Discoveries in Middle Eastern, Eastern, and Hellenistic
Cultures_



We begin our historical tour of progress in discovery by considering a variety
of accomplishments made in early Egypt, Mesopotamia, India, China, and Greece.
Though there is ample evidence of imaginative thought, and certainly
inventiveness, in many early cultures, it appears that it was the Greeks who
first began to give serious attention to the intellectual processes involved
in the act of discovery. The Greeks were deeply impressed by advancements made
in mathematics and believed that discovery in other areas could follow similar
lines. This idea persisted for many centuries. Though Aristotle distinguished
between deductive and inductive reasoning, progress in the study of inductive
methods was retarded for many centuries. As we will see, one explanation for
this languishing interest in inductive reasoning concerns a lack of
understanding of evidence, its properties, uses, and its discovery.



B. _The "Dark Ages": Were They Dark Everywhere_



With the demise of Greece, and later Rome, civilization entered what is
usually described as the "dark ages". They may have been dark in western
civilization, but not necessarily so elsewhere. Accomplishments were being
made in Islamic, Hebrew, and other cultures whose importance has not always
been recognized in the West. It is certainly true that scholars in the Middle
East kept the wick turned up as far as progress in science is concerned.



C. _The Rise of Experimental Science in the Early European Universities_



With the rise of the universities in Europe, by degrees came acknowledgment of
the importance of putting questions to nature and conducting experiments.
Interest in the study of inductive methods in science, which had been rather
dormant since the time of Aristotle, began to arise. As far as inductive
methods in science are concerned, it is said that Francis Bacon rang a bell
that called all the wits together. Though he drew attention to the importance
of induction in science, the methods he advocated are inadequate to the task.



D. _The Beginnings of Modern Science: The Arch of Knowledge_



By the time of Copernicus, Kepler, and Galileo, there were some definite ideas
about the process of discovery. Using the metaphor of an "arch of knowledge",
we will be able to trace, quite informatively, how the process of discovery
was viewed by the likes of Bacon, Galileo, Newton, Hooke, and others. As we
will observe, for all of these individuals there was an inductive and a
deductive arm on their arches of knowledge.



**PART II. THEORIES OF DISCOVERY AND IMAGINATIVE REASONING**



With one or two earlier exceptions, it was not until the 1800s that some
persons began to suspect that, during the process of discovery, there may be
forms of reasoning that are neither deductive or inductive. As we know, in
deductive reasoning there is no content in a conclusion that is not already
contained in premises. Induction involves reasoning connections between
evidence and hypotheses already generated or discovered by other means.



A. _Discovery vs. Justification: More on the "Arch of Knowledge"_



Using the "arch of knowledge" metaphor, we will consider views about the
process of discovery as expressed in the very important works of John
Herschel, William Whewell, and John Stuart Mill. Both Herschel and Whewell
began to think that the generation or discovery of a new idea involves
something other than deduction or induction. In the works of these three
persons we will encounter a controversy that is still with us today. It is one
thing to study how some hypothesis might be justified or defended on the basis
of evidence but quite another, or so it seems, to say how this hypothesis and
evidence were generated or discovered in the first place. Some persons argue
that discovery and justification are made of the same cloth; others disagree.



B. _Discovery: A Matter for Philosophers or Psychologists ?_



For many years, even quite recently, philosophers seem to have been quite
content to relegate the study of discovery to psychologists. The essential
ground for such a view is that discovery seems to involve apparently
unsystematic processes that cannot be captured by any form of logic we know
about. As we will note in a later section, many philosophers now seem to be
repenting their earlier disinterest in the process of discovery. Indeed,
several contemporary philosophers have recently "migrated" into the field of
artificial intelligence and are actively involved in research on computer-
based means for the analysis of discovery-related processes. __

C. _Charles S. Peirce on Abductive Reasoning and the Efficiency of Discovery_

_ _

It appears that the first person who argued that the discovery of new ideas
requires reasoning other than deduction or induction was the American
philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce (1839-1914). Peirce coined the term
_abduction_ (he also used the terms _retroduction_ or simply _hypothesis_ ) to
refer to the process by which a new idea is generated. But Peirce was not only
concerned about how new ideas are generated or discovered. He was also very
much concerned about how we might make the process of discovery efficient. As
I noted earlier, not all new ideas lead in productive directions. We will
examine Peirce's thoughts on abduction rather carefully since they form
perhaps the first attempt to study the process of discovery in a systematic
way. In any case, his work has been very influential and has given some
persons hope of discovering a logic of discovery. Peirce's thoughts on
abductive reasoning and discovery were indeed seminal. But they can also be
rather confusing since Peirce was not always precise or consistent in his
discussions of abduction or retroduction. There are now some very valuable
analyses of Peirce's works that we will examine carefully. From these works we
gain additional insight into abductive reasoning and its connection with other
forms of reasoning. There are some surprises here. For example, on one account
we have the discovery of a new idea described in terms of the modern concept
of an _inference network_.



D. _Sherlock Holmes and Abductive Reasoning_



A very interesting coincidence is that, at the same time Peirce was writing on
abductive reasoning, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle was providing his fictional
character Sherlock Holmes with reasoning skills that sound very much like
Peirce's abduction. Conan Doyle seems to have been inspired by one of his
medical school professors, Dr. Joseph Bell. Bell's abductive and diagnostic
feats are truly astonishing. We will dwell upon Sherlock Holmes and Joe Bell
not just for entertainment value. On several matters it seems that Conan Doyle
rather than Peirce got things right as far as the role of abduction in
discovery is concerned.



E. _Semiotics and Abduction: Reading the Signs of Nature_



A well-established discipline many of us never hear about is _semiotics_ , the
science of signs. The word _semiotics_ stems from the Greek _semeiotikos_ , a
word referring to a person, such as a physician, who divines or interprets the
meaning of signs. Although interest in the interpretation of signs goes back
at least to Aristotle, contemporary semiotics has its roots in the work of
Peirce. A sign is traditionally defined by the Latin phrase _aliquid stat pro
aliqou_ (something that stands for something else). Observing the signs of
nature, we attempt to discover their meaning; here is the connection between
semiotics and abduction. One contemporary semiotician, Umberto Eco, has
attracted world-wide attention through his novels _The Name of the Rose_ ,
_Foucault's Pendulum_ , and _The Island of the Day Before_. One of the
required readings in this course is his work with Sebeok: _The Sign of Three:
Dupin, Holmes, Peirce_. I regard this work as a feast for anyone interested in
imaginative reasoning and discovery.



**PART III. WHERE IS FANCY BRED?**



Peirce frequently associated abduction with the sudden "flashes of insight" we
all experience from time to time while we are attempting to draw conclusions
from evidence or are working on problems of various sorts. But Peirce was not
very informative about how such insights arise, whether or not they occur to
us suddenly. You have certainly had the experience of deliberating on
evidence, or working on some problem, when possible hypotheses or possible
answers are elusive. So, you set the task aside for a while and later, often
while occupied by other matters, a hypothesis or answer suddenly occurs to
you. Where did this new hypothesis or possible answer come from ? One
suggestion, of course, is that your brain/mind was at work on this problem all
the while you were doing other things. When it had an answer of some kind to
report, it did so regardless of what else you were doing. In the process, you
might reflect upon the fact that you were not at all aware of any mental
processes that were taking place regarding the task whose possible hypotheses
or answers were so elusive. In this section we come face to face with some
very difficult matters concerning the mental activities and processes by which
new ideas and possible evidential tests of them are generated or discovered.
Be assured that all of the matters we discuss in this section have been of
concern to persons in all of the sciences, especially in mathematics, physics,
and in many other disciplines as well.

A. _Insights: Where do They Come From ?_



Shakespeare wrote: "Where is fancy bred. Or in the heart or in the head" ? We
all expect that fancies, in the form of new ideas, somehow come from our
heads. Once we start examining processes that may be going on inside our
heads, we immediately encounter a very old issue that is certainly alive
today. This issue concern the distinction, if any, between our minds and our
brains. This is sometimes called the _mind-body problem_. One important
element of this issue involves distinctions between conscious and subconscious
mental activities. It may come as a surprise to you to learn how many eminent
scientists and mathematicians have been and are now vitally concerned about
such matters. We might believe that such matters are of interest only to
philosophers and psychologists. On several accounts that I will tell you
about, explaining how our consciousness arises is reckoned to be the most
difficult research problem that can be addressed. In addition, as noted above,
many learned persons emphasize the role of our subconscious mental processes
during the process of discovery.









B. _Methods of Study of Mental Processes_



Supposing that discovery and imaginative reasoning are mental activities of
some sort: How are they to be investigated? We will examine several different
methods that have been employed, including those now being employed by persons
in current areas such as artificial intelligence. Different methods will, of
course, be informative in different ways.



C. _Mind vs. Brain: Arguments About the Distinction_



In discussing intellectual processes such as discovery and imaginative
reasoning, arguments about the distinction between mind and brain seem
unavoidable. There have been no final answers in these arguments in the last
2500 years. I doubt seriously whether we will be able to supply any during
this semester. But there are certainly some very strong advocates of various
views that have been taken.



D. _The "Enchanted Loom": A Bit of Neurophysiology_



Persons in various disciplines in which there is interest in the process of
discovery do not always talk to each other. When they do talk, sometimes they
do not listen very carefully. On some views, we can easily discuss discovery,
invention, and other "intelligent" activities without any reference to the
work of persons who have made careful studies of the structures and functions
of the human brain. I do not happen to be among those persons who argue that
neurophysiologists have nothing to tell us about the process of discovery and
the orgins of insight. In this section we will have a look at what nature has
provided that seems to allow us to perform various discovery-related
activities. In current jargon, this involves study of the "wetware" of our
brains.



E. _Neurophysiological Correlates of Discovery_



The human brain has been referred to as the very "cathedral of complexity" in
the known universe. It seems that the highest level of the "services" or
activities in this "cathedral" involves creative, imaginative, or inventive
reasoning. Here we have a look at very current research on activities in the
brain that might plausibly be associated with the emergence of new insights.
The views of several different research activities come together on this
matter. In the process, I will provide you with what I regard as very
informative work in an emerging area called the _science of complexity_.



**PART IV. SOME MODERN SPINS ON ABDUCTION AND DISCOVERY**



In this section we will examine various current views about discovery,
abduction, and imaginative reasoning. In particular, we will observe how the
term "abduction" has acquired a variety of different meanings in the field of
artificial intelligence.







A. _Abduction as Inference to the Best Explanation_



The word _abduction_ has many meanings; Peirce himself was none too consistent
in his use of this term. As some of you may already know, this term has found
current employment in various works in artificial intelligence. On some
interpretations in AI, abduction is said to be _inference to the _best_
explanation_. This interpretation goes back at least to John Stuart Mill.
There is meaning here which is not reflected in any of Peirce's works on the
topic. The word _best_ is troublesome since it mixes justification with
discovery. If this interpretation read: _inference to _a possible_
explanation_, there would be a better correspondence. However, we are all
entitled to use words any way we please. In fact, Peirce used the term
_abductory induction_ with reference to instances in which discovery and
induction seem to be mixed together. As we discuss in a later section, we
commonly experience various mixtures of abduction, deduction, and induction.

B. _Koestler, Bisociation, and Chaos in Discovery_



Another work on your reading list is Arthur Koestler's _The Act of Creation_.
Like Eco, Koestler wrote novels and thought very deeply about imaginative
reasoning and discovery. He describes a process he called _bisociation_ ,
wherein the mind makes leaps from one frame of reference to another. Quite
recently, in their work _Turbulent Mirror_ , Briggs and Peat have given an
account of bisociation in terms of the theory of _chaotic processes_. This is
fascinating stuff and leads to some very current research on complex
phenomena.



C. _Any Hope for a Normative Theory of Discovery ?_



The work _Scientific Discovery: Computational Explorations of the Creative
Processes_ (Langley, Simon, Bradshaw, & Zytkow) attracted attention since it
suggested that there might be a logic for discovery, at least within the
context of science, that could be implemented by a computer. This work and
other computationally-oriented works to be mentioned are held in reverence by
Margaret Boden, whose book _The Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms_ has also
been influential. Other persons in AI and elsewhere argue that there was
actually no discovery but only hindsight revealed in the work of Langley et
al. Whether a computer can be truly imaginative is a controversial issue at
present.



D. _Imagination, Creativity, and Invention_



These three words are often used synonymously but they may refer to different
activities. After an attempt to sort out possible differences among these
activities, we will have a look at various studies of the characteristics of
persons whose works allow us to label them as being especially imaginative,
creative, or inventive. As expected, psychologists have been interested in
characteristics of imaginative or creative people. There are several works on
behavioral analyses of human imagination and creativity that are especially
valuable.









**PART V. _DISCOVERY IN TIME: INQUIRY, SEARCH, AND HEURISTICS_**



Most of the previous topics concern the characterization of imaginative
reasoning and discovery. It is one thing to characterize these important
activities but quite another to discover ways of enhancing the process of
discovery. We begin in this section by examining how episodes of discovery are
played-out over time and how they all seem to involve the processes of inquiry
and search. In some current works, focus is directed more on search than upon
inquiry. I believe this to be unfortunate. My own view is that sophisticated
search strategies are necessary but not sufficient for productive and
efficient discovery. Asking the "right" questions is at least as important as
having sophisticated search strategies. Since discovery occurs over time,
perhaps we do not yet have on hand (in a searchable data base) information
that will eventually lead us to further productive discoveries. Such
information we can only obtain by _inquiry_ , a necessary topic of interest in
its own right.



A. _Temporal Patterns of Discovery, Justification, and Choice_



The word _discovery_ means different things to persons in different contexts.
One reason is that they experience different temporal mixtures or cycles of
three intellectual activities: discovery, justification, and choice. Stated
another way, in different contexts we experience different mixtures or cycles
of abductive, deductive, and inductive reasoning together with value
assessments if our discovery and justification is a prelude to some eventual
decision. Many attempts to provide computer-based assistance to persons facing
difficult judgmental and decisional tasks have faltered because it has not
been acknowledged that the processes of discovery, justification, and choice
are frequently bound together in complex and interesting ways.





B. _Time and the Interrogation of Nature_



We get lots of information without asking for it. The trouble is that we
frequently do not get the information we need. Every day my mailbox is full of
information about products in which I have no interest. But it rarely contains
information I need in the research I perform. In many cases, of course, we do
not even know what information we ought to have in some problem we face. In
science, engineering, and in other disciplines we get very little information
unless we put questions to nature. Indeed, the process of _inquiry_ is crucial
in any episode of discovery. How do we know which questions to ask ? Some
questions we ask will be foolish or at least unproductive. Some questions will
supply useful answers that lead us to ask other questions. The process of
inquiry feeds on itself over time; we cannot ask all pertinent questions at
once. During discovery we have observations or data in search of hypotheses
(explanations) at the same time we have hypotheses in search of data. In
short, the process of discovery is bound together with the process of inquiry.
We will examine several theories of inquiry, the most notable being that of
the logician Jaakko Hintikka and his colleagues. In the work _The Sign of
Three_ (Chapters 7 and 8) you will discover that Hintikka believes the
allegedly abductive talents of Sherlock Holmes can be better explained by
saying that Holmes was simply adept at asking strategically important
questions of nature.



C. _Search and the Necessity of Heuristics_



On some current accounts, the process of discovery amounts to having
sophisticated methods for search (of records, files, data bases, etc). But
this assumes that all the information we need to have is already at hand. But
discovery is usually played-out over time and it will rarely be the case that
we have all useful or relevant data at hand. In many situations we only begin
to fill up a data base through the process of inquiry. But it is certainly
true that study of search is a necessary element of discovery (I just don't
happen to believe it is also sufficient). Sherlock Holmes tells Watson: "You
know my method, it is based on the observation of trifles". During discovery,
trifles (or details) accumulate at an often-astonishing rate. In some lucky
cases, a single trifle can suggest a hypothesis (or possibility), such as the
finding of a fingerprint. In most cases, however, hypotheses are generated (or
abduced) from _combinations_ of trifles. The trouble is that the number of
trifle combinations increases exponentially with the number of trifles we
have. With even a relatively small number of trifles we can readily exceed the
capacity of any known or possible computer to select all of their possible
combinations. So, we find it absolutely necessary to have some guides or
_heuristics_ for deciding what trifle combinations to examine. Peirce made the
use of the term "heuristic" central in his thinking.



D. _Peirce, Polya, Lakatos, Lenat, and Others on Heuristics_.



The word _heuristic_ can be defined as any aid to learning, inquiry, or
discovery. There are some very valuable works on heuristics by the persons
just mentioned. It will pay us to examine these works rather carefully.



E. _Discovery and Theories of Probabilistic Reasoning_



We might ordinarily think of probability theories as being concerned only with
inductive justificatio

