English 473.001: Special Studies in Shakespeare: Gender and Sexuality   Fall
1999  
MW 3:00-4:15  
Robinson B 205 |  Prof. Robert Matz  
Office Hours: MW 10:30-12:30 and by appointment  
Office: Robinson A422  
Email: rmatz@gmu.edu  
Office Ph. #: 993-1169  
Home Page: <http://mason.gmu.edu/~rmatz>  
---|---  
Required texts:

Packet of **photocopied readings** available at the Johnson Center Copy Shop

_Shakespeare's Sonnets_ (Folger)  
_Taming of the Shrew_ (Bantam)  
_As You Like It_ (Bantam)  
_Measure for Measure_ (Penguin)  
_1 Henry IV_ (Bantam)  
_Romeo and Juliet_ (Bantam)  
_Othello_ (Bantam)  
_Winter's Tale_ (New Penguin)

This course begins with the assumption that Shakespeare's plays are not about
the nature of "man" transcendent of gender or of a specific sexuality, but
rather that the body on the stage is both highly palpable and intriguingly
mutable. This quality of the staged body provides one of the material
conditions for plays that constantly engage with and derive their energies
from conflicts over particular representations of men and women. The course
explores these representations through close readings of the plays and through
additional readings in texts contemporary with them, as well as readings in
the history of sexuality and in feminist theory.

Course requirements: a presentation, reading responses, three papers and a
final

\------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Readings/ **Paper Dates** Note: This schedule is subject to change (I will
give warning, however). **Date** |  
---|---  
M Aug. 30 |  Course Introduction  
W Sept. 1 |  Shakespeare's sonnets, #s 1, 3, 6, 18, 20, 29, 41, 42, 53, 68,
87, 93, 125  
|  
W Sept. 8 |  Shakespeare's sonnets, #s 127, 129, 130, 131, 132, 139, 144, 147,
148, 151, 152  
|  
M Sept. 13 |  "An Homily on the State of Marriage" (photocopy packet); and
_Taming of the Shrew_ , Induction and act 1  
W Sept. 15 |  _Taming of the Shrew_ , acts 2-3  
|  _Taming of the Shrew_ , acts 4-5/ **paper 1 assigned (2 pp.)**  
M Sept. 20 |  Gayle Rubin, from "The Traffic in Women" (photocopy packet); and
_As You Like It_ , act 1  
W Sept. 22 |  _As You Like It_ , act 2/ **paper 1 exchanged**  
|  
M Sept. 27 |  Thomas Nashe's "Defense of Plays" and Philip Stubbes from _An
Anatomy of Abuses_ (photocopy packet); _As You Like It_ , acts 3-4  
W Sept. 29 |  _As You Like It_ , act 5/ **paper 1 due**  
|  
M Oct. 4 |  Michel Foucault, from _The History of Sexuality, Vol. 1_ , pp.
58-63 (photocopy packet); and _Measure for Measure_ , act 1  
W Oct. 6 |  _Measure for Measure_ , acts 2-3  
|  
M Oct. 11 |  No Class--Fall Break  
****  
W Oct. 13 |  _Measure for Measure_ , acts 4-5/ **paper 2 assigned (5 pp.)**  
|  
M Oct. 18 |  Alan Bray, "Homosexuality and the Signs of Male Friendship in
Elizabethan England" (photocopy packet); _1 Henry IV_ , act 1  
W Oct. 20 |  _1 Henry IV_ , act 2/ **paper 2 exchanged**  
|  
M Oct. 25 |  _1 Henry IV_ , acts 3-4  
W Oct. 27 |  _1 Henry IV_ , act 5; excerpt from _2 Henry IV_ (photocopy to be
distributed)/ **paper 2 due**  
|  
M Nov. 1 |  No class: view Branagh's _Henry V_ for Wednesday.  
W Nov. 3 |  Discussion of Branagh's _Henry V_  
|  
M Nov. 8 |  Lawrence Stone, from _Family, Sex and Marriage in England,
1500-1800_ , pp. 93-105 (photocopy packet); and _Romeo and Juliet_ , act 1  
W Nov. 12 |  _Romeo and Juliet_ , acts 2-3  
|  
M Nov. 15 |  _Romeo and Juliet_ , acts 4-5  
W Nov. 17 |  _Othello_ , acts 1-2  
|  
M Nov. 22 |  Robert Matz, from "Slander, Renaissance Discourses of Sodomy, and
_Othello_ ," (photocopy to be made available, or download from Project Muse);
_Othello_ , act 3  
W Nov. 24 |  _Othello_ , acts 4-5/ **paper 3 assigned (7 pp.)**  
|  
M Nov. 29 |  _Winter's Tale_ , acts 1-2  
W Dec. 1 |  _Winter's Tale_ , acts 3-4  
|  
M Dec. 6 |  _Winter's Tale_ , act 5/ **paper exchange 3**  
W Dec. 8 |  Finish discussion of _Winter's Tale_ ; course wrap-up  
  
Other important dates:  Last day to drop a course with no tuition liability |
Sept. 8  
---|---  
Last day to add a course | Sept. 14  
Last day to drop a course without dean's permission |  Oct. 1  
  
Course Policies:

_Readings_ :

The readings for each class are due on the date listed above. Approach each
assignment actively by always reading with a pen or pencil in hand. Note
words, phrases or sentences that interest you, that seem significant in the
context of the work, or that you have questions about. Jot down in the margins
any questions or ideas you have about a particular point or the work as a
whole. This practice will help you come prepared to discuss the plays in class
and get the most out of class discussion; it will also help you become a more
skillful reader of literary texts in general.

_Participation and Attendance_ :

There will be some historical background presented in lecture, but as much as
possible we will open up the class to discussion, to observations about the
ideas presented in a text, about its style, its uses of language, its puzzling
qualities--whatever grabs our attention. I am interested in your ideas.
Contribution to class discussion will not be formally calculated into grades,
but I _will_ take participation into account for grades that are borderline.
If you aren't in class, you can't participate in discussion, nor will active
class participation wholly excuse excessive absences.

_Reading Responses_ :

The reading responses are meant to help you to read carefully, to prepare for
class discussion and to aid you in finding starting points for your essays. A
reading response should either ask a question about or observe some aspect of
the day's reading that is _not answerable by a fact_. For example, a question
about plot would not be appropriate while an observation about the use of a
certain image or the reasons behind a puzzling sequence of events in the plot
would be. You may also wish to speculate about how your question or
observation would matter for other moments in the text, or why it seems an
important matter to consider. A reading response of a half page to a page will
be required for each day's reading, and collected at the end of class (the
questions need not be typed). I will frequently begin class by asking some of
you to read out your responses. I will read all your responses and grade them
on a credit/no credit basis. They will get credit if they are turned in at the
end of class and meet the criteria above. Grading will be based on the number
of no credits: 0-3=A; 4-5=B; 6-7=C; 8-9=D; 10 or more=F. I will also use
reading responses to keep track of who was in class for a particular day, so
if you were in class but did not do a responses (say it's not so!) let me know
you were there.

_Presentations_ :

Groups of students will initiate class discussion on the additional readings
for the course. The presentation should be about five minutes long and might
address the following: questions about material that you don't understand in
the reading or think others might not, objections to or problems with the
material presented in the text, the significance of the language of the text,
the ways in which the text might help us to read Shakespeare. The presentation
should _not_ merely summarize the material. You only have five minutes, so cut
to the chase. One grade will be given to each group.

_Paper Deadlines_ :

Each paper will be due twice: the first time in class at the paper workshop
scheduled one week after each paper is assigned, and the second time one week
following that. During the workshop you'll have a chance to trade papers with
fellow students and raise questions or give each other suggestions for
revision. You'll have the second week to revise your paper, based on this
input and on your own rethinking and rewriting. The second week after the
paper is assigned both the revised and original version of the paper will be
handed in to me. I hope that this system will build revision, so necessary to
good writing, into the structure of the course.

Late papers: You need to have your first paper done on time so that you can
work on it in the paper workshop. I also expect that the final versions will
be handed in on time. Late final versions will be graded down a half grade for
each day late. _On late first versions, see below under "paper standards_."

_Paper Standards_ (final and first versions):

Each paper should be typed with standard margins, spacing and type size. It
should be _carefully_ proofread and neatly presented. The paper topics will
relate to issues we have discussed in class, and you are encouraged to bring
to bear class discussion in your writing. You are also encouraged to expand on
these discussions and credit will be given for new ideas. You may set your own
topic, but you should talk it over with me first.

I'll grade the paper on basis of the revised version only, but I _will_ expect
the original version to be your best initial attempt at the topic. Original
versions not done, not typed or obviously incomplete will result in a half
letter grade reduction in the evaluation of the final paper. It would not be
fair for other students to have to read work that is not your best;
additionally, it is in your interest to write as good an original version as
possible, so that your second version is even better. Remember that because
everyone has two tries at the paper, I will accordingly have higher
expectations for the final version.

_Paper Helps_ :

During the scheduled workshops, you'll have a chance to give and get advice on
your papers. Additionally, I encourage you to come see me at my office hours
or to make an appointment to see me. When we meet, try to have a draft of the
paper you are working on. This will give us something more concrete to talk
about. There is also available a Writing Center at Robinson A116 that can
provide you with further individual attention to your writing. I encourage you
to take advantage of this excellent facility.

I would also suggest that you give yourself plenty of time to work. Writing a
paper at one sitting is, for most people, unpleasant, and the results are not
likely to be satisfactory. Start early!

_Plagiarism_ :

Since this class emphasizes the development of your own close reading and
interpretive skills, you are not encouraged to consult secondary sources. If
you do choose to look at such work, however, you _must_ cite, using a standard
citation format, _all_ the articles, books or other sources that your own
writing draws on, _either directly or indirectly_. Such sources include (but
are not limited to) introductions to editions of Shakespeare and Shakespeare
study aids.

Also note that uncited sources will constitute plagiarism _even if_ they ended
up in your work without your conscious knowledge (e.g. you forgot you read the
material; you confused your own notes with notes on a source), since part of
the scholarly responsibility that comes with using secondary sources is
keeping track of which words or ideas were yours and which came from a source.
If you do not wish to take on this responsibility then you should not consult
secondary sources.

I will take all suspected cases of plagiarism to the Honor Committee.

_Final_ :

The final will be a take-home essay that will emphasize the reading that you
have not had a chance to address in your papers, and that will ask you to
relate this reading to other issues raised during the course.

_Grading_ :

The final grade will be derived as follows:  
  
Presentation  | 6 %  
---|---  
Reading responses  | 12 %  
First paper  | 12 %  
Second paper |  20 %  
Third paper |  30 %  
Final |  20 %  
  
**Note** : failure to complete any one of the papers or the final, or missing
more than 14 reading responses, will result in an F for the class.

Please come see me if you have any questions about grading, the syllabus or
the class. I look forward to having the chance to meet you. Best wishes for a
good semester!

\------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
GRADE CRITERIA FOR ESSAYS

A Specific, complex and/or striking thesis, thesis developed without
digression through the course of the paper, consistently precise, sensitive
and/or striking interpretations of the text, crafted prose, no major
mechanical problems

B Specific thesis, thesis generally developed through the course of the paper,
consistently good interpretation of text, competent prose, minor mechanical
problems

C Has a thesis, but one that needs greater specificity or complexity, thesis
developed with some digression or repetition, some good interpretation, some
mechanical problems

D Very general thesis, thesis development digressive or repetitive, plot
summary or thoughts/speculations _not_ based on textual evidence, major
mechanical problems

F No thesis or thesis development

