English 472.001: _The Faerie Queene_ : Religion, Poetry, Magic Fall 2000  
TR 3:00-4:15  
FAB B112  
Required Texts:  
_Edmund Spenser's Poetry_ , ed. Maclean and Prescott, 3rd ed. (abbreviated
_ESP_ )  
Ben Jonson, _The Alchemist_ , ed. Elizabeth Cook  
Course packet available at JLC copy shop  | Professor Robert Matz  
Office Hours: TR 1:30-2:30,  
W 1:00-2:00, and by appointment  
Office: Robinson A422  
Email: rmatz@gmu.edu  
Office Ph. #: 993-1169  
Home Page: http://mason.gmu.edu/~rmatz  
---|---  
  
In 1595 a "cunning woman" from London named Judith Phillips was whipped for
tricking gullible people into paying large fees for the opportunity to meet
"the queen of the faeries." If this punishment suggests some skepticism about
the supernatural, it also reminds us of Renaissance belief in it. Indeed,
along with skepticism, Europe witnessed during the Renaissance an increasing
persecution of people--especially women--as witches. What then might Spenser
have been evoking when five years earlier he published his great romance poem
under the title _The Faerie Queene_? How might the promise of Spenser's poem
to provide access to a "faerie queene" relate to Judith Phillip's promise to
provide such access? Was Spenser joking about the supernatural? Invoking it?
What does it mean to invoke magical powers--especially as poetic ones? We'll
consider these questions in this course, as well as connect them to the
shaping in the period of ideas concerning religion, sexuality and the state.
Besides Spenser's poetry, we'll read some supplemental materials to help us
think about these issues: work in history, literary criticism and
anthropology, some accounts of modern magic, and some writers contemporary
with Spenser. The course should give us both a better understanding of the
_Faerie Queene_ , and some ways of thinking about magic and religion, about
the significance of these ideas in the Renaissance, and about Renaissance
culture more generally.

**Course requirements:** A presentation, discussion questions, three papers,
and a take-home final.  
\------------------------------------------------------------
\------------------

**Note:** Schedule subject to change (I will give warning, however).  
**Readings in course packet are designated with an *.**  
  Aug. 29  | Introduction |  
---|---|---  
|  |  
| SOME INTRODUCTORY CONTEXTS |  
|  |  
Aug. 31 | Modern Witches--and poets: Margot Adler, "Magic and Ritual"
(162-75)*  |  
|  |  
Sept. 5 | The Reformation: C.S.L. Davies, "The Beginning of the Reformation"
(176-88)*; Frances Yates, "Queen Elizabeth I as Astraea" (29-39; 76-80)*; and
Spenser, _Shepherdes Calender_ , "April" (in _ESP_ ) |  
|  |  
Sept. 7 | Poetry (I): Charms and Carmina: [Philip Sidney, from _Defense of
Poetry_](Defence.html) (18-25)* and Spenser, _Shepherdes Calender_ , "October"
(in _ESP_ )  |  
|  |  
|  |  
Sept. 12 | Poetry (II): The total poem: Jorge Luis Borges, "The Aleph"*; Angus
Fletcher, "The Cosmic Image" (129-46; 174-78)* |  
|  |  
Sept. 14  | Poetry (III): Allegory: Spenser, "A Letter of the Authors" (pp.
1-4 in _ESP_ ) and proem to book 1 (in _ESP)_ ; Keith Thomas, "The Impact of
the Reformation" (50-77)* |  
|  |  
| PROTESTANT POETICS |  
|  |  
Sept. 19 | _Faerie Queene_ , 1.1-2 (in _ESP_ ) | **Paper 1 assigned (5 pp)**  
|  |  
Sept. 21 | _FQ_ , 1.3 |  
|  |  
Sept. 26  | _FQ_ , 1.4-5 | **Paper 1 exchange**  
|  |  
Sept. 28 | _FQ_ , 1.6 |  
|  |  
Oct. 3 | _FQ_ , 1.7-8; Thomas Becon, "Displaying of the Popish Mass"* |  
|  | **Paper 1 due**  
Oct. 5 | _FQ_ , 1.9 |  
|  |  
Oct. 10 | Fall Break  |  
|  |  
Oct. 12 | _FQ_ , 1.10-11 |  
|  |  
Oct. 17  | _FQ_ , 1.12; A.C. Hamilton, "The Cosmic Image": Spenser and Dante"
(in _ESP_ , 716-726) |  
|  |  
| "AGAINST ALL RULES OF NATURE": LOVE CHARMS, GENDER AND NATIONHOOD |  
|  |  
Oct. 19  | _FQ_ , 2.12; _Othello_ , 1.3.77-172 (to be distributed in class) |
**Paper 2 assigned (5 pp)**  
|  |  
Oct. 24 | _FQ_ , 3.1-2 |  
|  |  
Oct. 26  | _FQ_ , 3.3 | **Paper 2 exchange**  
|  |  
Oct. 31 | _FQ_ , 3.4; from Mary Douglas, _Purity and Danger_ , pp. 114-15 and
122-28* |  
|  |  
Nov. 2 | _FQ_ , 3.5 | **Paper 2 due**  
|  |  
Nov. 7 | _FQ_ , 3.6-7 |  
|  |  
Nov. 9 | _FQ_ , 3.8-9; also selected sonnets from Spenser's _Amoretti_ (in
_ESP_ ) |  
|  |  
Nov. 14 | _FQ_ , 3.10-11 |  
|  |  
Nov. 16 | _FQ_ , 3.12; Thomas P. Roche, "Love, Lust and Sexuality," (in _ESP_
, 741-743) |  
|  |  
| MATERIALISMS: THE COMIC CRITIQUE OF THE "FAERIE QUEENE" |  
|  |  
Nov. 21 | Ben Jonson, _The Alchemist_ , "The argument and prologue" and act 1
| **Paper 3 assigned (5 pp)**  
|  |  
Nov. 23 | Thanksgiving Break  |  
|  |  
Nov. 28 | _The Alchemist_ , acts 2 and 3 |  
|  |  
Nov. 30 | _The Alchemist_ , act 4 | **Paper 3 exchange**  
|  |  
Dec. 5 | _The Alchemist_ , act 5 |  
|  |  
Dec. 7 | Wrap-up | **Paper 3 due**  
  
Other important dates: Sept. 6: | Last day to drop a course with no tuition
liability  
---|---  
Sept. 12: | Last day to add a course  
Sept. 29 | Last day to drop a course without dean's permission.  
  
Course policies:

_Readings_ :  
The readings for each class are due on the date listed above. Approach each
assignment actively by always reading with a pen or pencil in hand. Note
words, phrases or sentences that interest you, that seem significant in the
context of the work, or that you have questions about. Jot down in the margins
any questions or ideas you have about a particular point or the work as a
whole. This practice will help you come prepared to discuss the readings in
class and get the most out of class discussion; it will also help you become a
more skillful reader of literary texts in general.

_Participation_  
_and Attendance_ :  
The class will generally be conducted as a seminar. As much as possible we
will open up the class to discussion, to questions or observations about the
ideas presented in a text, about a text's form or style, its uses of language,
its puzzling qualities--whatever grabs our attention. I am interested in your
ideas. Contribution to class discussion will not be formally calculated into
grades, but I _will_ take participation into account for grades that are
borderline. If you aren't in class, you can't participate in discussion, nor
will active class participation wholly excuse excessive absences.  


_Reading Responses_ :  
The reading responses are meant to help you read carefully, to prepare for
class discussion and to aid you in finding starting points for your essays. A
reading response should either ask a question about or observe some aspect of
the day's reading that is _not answerable by a fact_. For example, a question
about what happens in the _Faerie Queene_ 's narrative would not be
appropriate while an observation about the use of a certain image or the
reasons behind a puzzling sequence of events in the narrative would be. You
may also wish to speculate about how your question or observation would matter
for other moments in the text, or why it seems an important matter to
consider. A reading response of a half page to a page will be required for
each day's reading, and collected at the end of class (the questions need not
be typed). I will frequently begin class by asking some of you to read out
your questions. I will read all your questions and grade them on a credit/no
credit basis. They will get credit if they are turned in at the end of class
and meet the criteria above. Grading will be based on the number of no
credits: 0-3=A; 4-5=B; 6-7=C; 8-9=D; 10 or more=F. I will also use reading
responses to keep track of who was in class for a particular day, so if you
were in class but did not do a response (say it's not so!) let me know you
were there.

_Presentations_ : One of the interests and challenges of the _Faerie Queene_
is that it refers to many other texts. To help us understand these references
and why Spenser makes them, your presentation should pick one such reference
in the reading for the day of your presentation. You might especially pick one
that you didn't recognize and you think the class might not too, or one that
seemed particularly interesting to you. Then 1) give us some background on it
(e.g. where does the reference come from? what stories have been told about
the figure you chose?); and 2) pose some questions or interpretations about
the relationship between the reference you picked and its use in the _Faerie
Queene_ (how does Spenser change or adapt the story? why? what is the
significance of where the reference comes from?). The reference could be to a
mythical or religious figure (e.g. St. George in 1.1). It shouldn't be too a
major figure (for example, Arthur or Circe) since there would be too much to
cover. The presentations will be scheduled in the first couple of weeks of
class.  


_Paper_  
_Deadlines_ :  
Each paper will be due twice: the first time in class at the paper workshop
scheduled one week after each paper is assigned, and the second time one week
following that. During the workshop you'll have a chance to trade papers with
fellow students and raise questions or give each other suggestions for
revision. You'll have the second week to revise your paper, based on this
input and on your own rethinking and rewriting. The second week after the
paper is assigned both the revised and original version of the paper will be
handed in to me. I hope that this system will build revision, so necessary to
good writing, into the structure of the course.

Late papers: You need to have your first paper done on time so that you can
work on it in the paper workshop. I also expect that the final versions will
be handed in on time. Late final versions will be graded down a half grade for
each day late. _On late first versions, see below under "paper standards_."  


_Paper_  
_Standards_ (final and first versions):  
Each paper should be typed with standard margins, spacing and type size. It
should be _carefully_ proofread and neatly presented. The paper topics will
relate to issues we have discussed in class, and you are encouraged to bring
to bear class discussion in your writing. You are also encouraged to expand on
these discussions and credit will be given for new ideas. You may set your own
topic, but you should talk it over with me first.

I'll grade the paper on basis of the revised version only, but I _will_ expect
the original version to be your best initial attempt at the topic. Original
versions not done, not typed or obviously incomplete will result in a half
letter grade reduction in the evaluation of the final paper. It would not be
fair for other students to have to read work that is not your best;
additionally, it is in your interest to write as good an original version as
possible, so that your second version is even better. Remember that because
everyone has two tries at the paper, I will accordingly have higher
expectations for the final version.

_Paper Helps_ :  
During the scheduled workshops, you'll have a chance to give and get advice on
your papers. Additionally, I encourage you to come see me at my office hours
or to make an appointment to see me. When we meet, try to have a draft of the
paper you are working on. This will give us something more concrete to talk
about. There is also available a Writing Center at Robinson A116 that can
provide you with further individual attention to your writing. I encourage you
to take advantage of this excellent facility.

I would also suggest that you give yourself plenty of time to work. Writing a
paper at one sitting is, for most people, unpleasant, and the results are not
likely to be satisfactory. Start early!

_Plagiarism_  
Since this class emphasizes the development of your own close reading and
interpretive skills, you are not encouraged to consult secondary sources. If
you do choose to look at such work, however, you _must_ cite, using a standard
citation format, _all_ the articles, books or other sources that your own
writing draws on, _either directly or indirectly_. Such sources include (but
are not limited to) introductions to editions of the texts we're reading and
any kind study aid.

Also note that uncited sources will constitute plagiarism _even if_ they ended
up in your work without your conscious knowledge (e.g. you forgot you read the
material; you confused your own notes with notes on a source), since part of
the scholarly responsibility that comes with using secondary sources is
keeping track of which words or ideas were yours and which came from a source.
If you do not wish to take on this responsibility then you should not consult
secondary sources.

I will take all suspected cases of plagiarism to the Honor Committee.

_Final_ :  
The final will be a take-home essay that will cover material from the entire
course. While comprehensive, it will also somewhat emphasize material that you
have not yet had a chance to write about.

_Grading_ :  
The final grade will be derived as follows: Presentation | 8 %  
---|---  
Reading responses | 12 %  
First paper | 15 %  
Second paper | 22 %  
Third paper | 22 %  
Final | 21 %  
  
Please come see me if you have any questions about grading, the syllabus or
the class. I look forward to having the chance to meet you. Best wishes for a
good semester!  
    
    
  

GRADE CRITERIA FOR ESSAYS

A Specific, complex and/or striking thesis, thesis developed without
digression through the course of the paper, consistently precise, sensitive
and/or striking interpretations of the text, crafted prose, no major
mechanical problems

B Specific thesis, thesis generally developed through the course of the paper,
consistently good interpretation of text, competent prose, minor mechanical
problems

C Has a thesis, but one that needs greater specificity or complexity, thesis
developed with some digression or repetition, some good interpretation, some
mechanical problems

D Very general thesis, thesis development digressive or repetitive, plot
summary or thoughts/speculations _not_ based on textual evidence, major
mechanical problems

F No thesis or thesis development

