[![The George Washington University](top.gif)](http://www.gwu.edu)

  
![GW Report on Distance Learning](bar_rep.gif)

  
  
  
  
  
![Appendices](but_app.gif)

  
  
  



APPENDIX 1: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT Appendix 1 - 1



Internal Survey of Distance Education Activities at GW Appendix 1 - 1



Overview Appendix 1 - 1



Unit Survey Appendix 1 - 1

Faculty Development Appendix 1 - 2

Staff Development Appendix 1 - 2

Physical Space Appendix 1 - 2

Resource Allocation Appendix 1 - 2

Research Appendix 1 - 2

Special Events Appendix 1 - 3

Capacity Appendix 1 - 3

Highlights Appendix 1 - 3

Gelman Library Appendix 1 - 3

Video Server Appendix 1 - 4



Faculty Survey Appendix 1 - 4

Overall Experience Appendix 1 - 4

Future Expectations Appendix 1 - 5

Email. Appendix 1 - 6

World Wide Web Appendix 1 - 6

Video Camera Appendix 1 - 6

Self-study/Correspondence Courses Appendix 1 - 7

Training Appendix 1 - 7

Potential Demand Appendix 1 - 7

Comparing GW=s Level of Effort Appendix 1 - 7

Potential Faculty Involvement Appendix 1 - 8

Interaction with Students by Type of Media Appendix 1 - 8

Most Common Responses Regarding Usage of Media by Type (percent) Appendix 1 -
8

General Comments and Concerns of Survey Respondents Appendix 1 - 8

Resources Appendix 1 - 9

Moral Support/Incentives Appendix 1 - 9

Technical Barriers Appendix 1 - 10

Cautionary Notes Appendix 1 - 10

Comparisons Appendix 1 - 11

Learning Outcomes Appendix 1 - 11

Suggestions of Survey Respondents Appendix 1 - 11



Description of Some Distance Learning Programs Currently Operating at GW
Appendix 1 - 12

Master's of Science in Project Management (SBPM) Appendix 1 - 12

The Education Technology Leadership Program (GSEHD) Appendix 1 - 12

Frontiers in Biomedicine (GWUMC) Appendix 1 - 13

Clinical Health Sciences Program (HCS) Appendix 1 - 13

Clinical Management and Leadership for Health Sciences Professionals (HCS)
Appendix 1 - 13



Infrastructure Appendix 1 - 13

Problem Appendix 1 - 13

Analysis Appendix 1 - 13

Administrative & Management Services Appendix 1 - 14

Student Services Appendix 1 - 14

Academic Services Appendix 1 - 14

Financial Services Appendix 1 - 15

Technology Systems Appendix 1 - 16

Internet2 Appendix 1 - 16

WREN Appendix 1 - 16

Conclusions Regarding Infrastructure Appendix 1 - 16

Recommendations Appendix 1 - 17



APPENDIX 2: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT Appendix 2 - 1



External Environment Appendix 2 - 1

Identified Activities Appendix 2 - 1

Trends & Forecasts Appendix 2 - 2

Analysis of Survey About Other Institutions Appendix 2 - 2

Profile of those surveyed Appendix 2 - 2

Level of Activity Appendix 2 - 3

Current Organizational Approaches/Structures Appendix 2 - 3

Participating Students Appendix 2 - 3

Organization Structure and Participating Students Appendix 2 - 3

Class Size Appendix 2 - 3

Admission Policies and Procedures Appendix 2 - 4

Staffing Appendix 2 - 4

Faculty Training and Preparation Appendix 2 - 5

Faculty Travel and Office Hours Appendix 2 - 5

Faculty Compensation and Incentives Appendix 2 - 5

Facilities Appendix 2 - 5

Technology Use Appendix 2 - 6

Testing and Evaluation Procedures Appendix 2 - 6

Procedures Manual Appendix 2 - 6

Revenue and Cost Considerations Appendix 2 - 7

Views on Distance Education Appendix 2 - 7





APPENDIX 3: [NATIONAL CENTER FOR EDUCATIONAL STATISTICS
REPORT](http://nces.ed.gov/pubs98/distance/index.html) [ (or new report due
out in Fall, 1998)](http://www.ed.gov/NCES/)



APPENDIX [4: REPORT OF THE PSU TASK FORCE ON DISTANCE
EDUCATION](http://www.outreach.psu.edu/de/DE_TF.html)



APPENDIX 5: ISSUES IN DISTANCE EDUCATION Appendix 5 - 1



Issues Appendix 5 - 1



Faculty and Student Issues in Distance Education Appendix 5 - 1

Opportunities Appendix 5 - 1

Challenges Appendix 5 - 2

Reputation and Accreditation of Distance Education Courses Appendix 5 - 2

School Priorities and Resources Appendix 5 - 3

Course Development and Conversion Appendix 5 - 3

Academic Integrity Appendix 5 - 5

Evaluation of Distance Education Courses and Programs Appendix 5 - 5

Evaluation of Student Performance Appendix 5 - 5

Faculty Community Appendix 5 - 6



Technology Issues in Distance Education Appendix 5 - 6

Summary Appendix 5 - 6

Technology Trends Appendix 5 - 7

Integrated Circuits Appendix 5 - 7

Digital Signal Processing Appendix 5 - 8

Knowledge-based Software Appendix 5 - 8

Computers and Information Terminals Appendix 5 - 8

Communications Networks Appendix 5 - 8

Optical Fiber Communications Appendix 5 - 9

Communications and Broadcast Satellites Appendix 5 - 9

Internet Appendix 5 - 9

Recommendations Appendix 5 - 10





**

APPENDIX 1: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT



Internal Survey of Distance Education Activities at GW

**



**

Overview

**



The GW Distance Education Working Group was established in 1997 to describe
current and planned activities, identifying possible trends, and offering its
thoughts on future directions. Working group members observed that, while
there was a vague awareness that some distance education activities were
taking place, there was no clear picture of the nature and extent of these
activities at GW. The Distance Education Working Group, as part of its
charter, undertook two surveys to discern the status and outlook for distance
education activities within the University, and to begin to document the array
of projects, programs, and plans.

The **first survey** targeted **administrative and departmental units** to
determine whether they were engaging in or preparing for distance education by
training faculty and staff, designating physical space, allocating resources,
undertaking research, and/or sponsoring events.

Understanding that much of the current activity often results from individual
initiative, the **second survey** was aimed at **individual faculty members**.
This survey asked respondents to describe their current understanding and use
of distance education tools in interaction with students.

In looking at the results of the two surveys, it is clear that while there are
some innovative and diverse initiatives underway, there is little being done
on a unit- or department-wide basis. Most distance education projects at GW
are isolated within a unit, usually driven by one or two individuals, and are
operating on a pilot or experimental basis. Some unsuccessful projects were
not repeated. Others have yet to show clear results. A few are operating well
and are slated for expansion or possible replication.



_

Statistical Note: These survey processes were not scientific. The purpose was
rather to capture the array of activities underway and to gather insights on
current and planned initiatives.

_



**

Unit Survey

**



In all, about 100 separate units within the University were contacted. Thirty-
four responded, with a 34% response rate. These units vary widely in their
makeup, size, and purpose. Some were enormous, such as the Schools of Law or
Business. Others were administrative, such as the Gelman Library, and the
Language Lab at CSAS. Still others were smaller departments, such as Political
Psychology and Telecommunications. Some respondents were subsets of other
units (for example, the Department of Management Science responded, as well as
the School of Business and Public Management). Therefore, there may have been
some overlap in responses, especially as they related to questions about
faculty contingents, number of students, and equipment. However, sometimes the
smaller entity had more details about particular initiatives, which provided
information about the umbrella unit.



**

Faculty Development**.



Of the 34 units responding, only seven indicated that there was any formal
training offered by the department for faculty. As for future plans, only nine
(or about 25 percent) had plans to offer such training. Many respondents
indicated that training was the burden of the faculty members themselves. Some
noted that such training was encouraged, but optional.



**

Staff Development**.



Five units said they had technical staff who had some knowledge of distance
education tools. None mentioned that they were engaged in training staff
(administrative, technical, or otherwise) either about distance education or
via distance education.



**

The Political Science Department participates in the PACE program.
Specifically, one GW class, Introduction to American Politics and Government,
is offered to Navy enlisted personnel onboard ships at sea. The Program for
Afloat College Education, sponsored by the Navy, uses the latest in computer-
interactive video, computer-based, video-based, and audio-based technology.
Four other educational institutions participate.

**_

\-- David Cox, Adjunct Prof., Political Science, CSAS

_



**

Physical Space**.



In all, eleven units (or one-third) indicated they had set aside physical
space to conduct distance education activities, many of which were
departmental or school computer labs. Some actually included video-
conferencing equipment in classrooms. Of note is that facilities at the
Virginia Campus in Loudoun County and Hampton Roads were designed with the
potential for video conferencing in mind. The Crystal City facilities are
slated for modernization, with distance capabilities set as a priority.



**

Resource Allocation**.



Nine units indicated that there were resources dedicated to developing and/or
implementing distance education activities. Most indicated that funds were
allocated as needed on a project-by-project basis, but that no steady resource
allocation was available.



**

Research**.



Only 5 units indicated that they were engaged in some type of research
involving distance education. Of these, many noted that they used distance
education tools to further research on other topics.



**

Special Events**.



Six respondents (not to be confused with units) replied that they had
sponsored or participated in special events involving distance education.



**

Capacity**.



As could be expected, the capacity of those units responding to the survey
varied greatly. Most units have at least 10 computers. Many reported having at
least one computer per faculty member, with others specifying additional
computers for the use of students (in labs, for example).



**

The School of Business and Public Management has installed Picturetel video-
conferencing equipment in a classroom and has created its own high-tech lab
with video capability. It is currently investigating options to deliver both
credit and non-credit courses via distance learning. On a pilot basis, it has
given the go-ahead to the Program on Project Management to begin offering the
master =s degree via distance learning in the Fall.

**_

\-- Jed Kee, Senior Associate Dean, SBPM

_



A typical unit has computers for faculty members, many with CD-ROM capability;
a fax machine, and at least one VCR and monitor (many also have their own
video camera). More than half of the respondents reported having ISDN lines
available. Eight have connections to the campus video network and two even
have their own in-house video conferencing capability. Five noted they have
access to other video conferencing facilities of some kind. Some even
volunteered that they have scanners, laser video-disks, and other publishing
tools. On the other end of the spectrum, some units still have old computers
(286=s) and several say they lack Internet connections.



**

Highlights

**



Some major developments affecting most departments should be noted. They
include the formation of a faculty training center and the existence of a
state-of-the-art video server facility.



_

Gelman Library_. In Summer 1997, Gelman Library will install 60 new computers
with CD-Rom and Internet access in the basement for 24-hour student use. Also,
12 new computers will be installed in a self instruction lab to be used by
classes (these will be networked together).

In the Fall, a new Faculty Training Center will open with about 14
workstations, at least one course designer as a facilitator, other technical
assistants, and the latest in multimedia tools -- both equipment and software.
This center will enable faculty to develop multimedia materials for use in
their courses, including distance learning courses. These resources will be
available to any faculty member requiring help in converting existing
materials to multimedia presentations or in designing a new course. The
emphasis is on showing faculty how to develop these materials, rather than
just doing it for them, although such a service option, perhaps on a fee-
basis, is being considered.

The Library is also buying new software this summer to upgrade Aladin and
other databases.

However, Jack Siggins, Librarian, notes that at this time the library is not
networked to off-campus sites such as Crystal City and Hampton Roads. Gelman
is thus not able to offer its databases, reserves, or other materials to off-
campus students (or DE students from other universities). More and better
connections would be needed for Gelman to serve DE students and faculty.



_

Video Server_. According to Brigitte Charloteaux, Director, Language Lab and
Classroom Services at CSAS, GW is the first university in the United States to
have a lab with video-server capability. It is nationally recognized and being
copied by other universities such as Harvard. It is currently used by the
foreign language departments, visual anthropology and speech therapy.

Potentially, this facility could help any faculty and professional staff
member develop video for DE. It is customer-oriented and the technical help
have an understanding of teaching methodology. Currently, only three or four
faculty use it regularly and news about it travels only by word of mouth.

There are plans to expand the video server capability to the residence halls.



**

Faculty Survey

**



The real texture of GW=s distance education activities can be found in the
initiatives of individual faculty members. The remainder of this report
summarizes their survey responses and highlights selected examples.

Distance education has been defined in many different ways, but because the
DEWG wanted to capture the fullest range of activities, it chose to include an
array of distance education tools, including email and fax machines, Internet
and computer-based instruction, and the more advanced video-conferencing.

Many of these same technologies are used in courses for on-campus students.
The point of the survey was to determine how extensively faculty are using
these learning tools with ALL their students, and then to focus in on whether
they were used for distance students in addition to on-campus students.

In all, more than 946 faculty members were surveyed, with approximately

208 responses tabulated, for a response rate of 22%. Some chose not to respond
to every question, so the total number of responses on any given question may
vary.



**

Overall Experience.



**

Faculty were asked to react to a set of statements regarding their current and
future expectations about distance education.



< Fifteen respondents (8.5 percent) stated that they really had never heard of
distance  education and thus had no experience with it.



< Forty-seven (26.6 percent) were somewhat familiar with the concept, but said
they didn=t know enough to incorporate it into their teaching.



< Another forty-seven reported having seen demonstrations of various types of
distance education, but they themselves do not use such tools in their
teaching.



< Sixteen (nine percent) indicated that they had made a few attempts to
incorporate a Adistance@ component into some of their classes, but do not
consider it a standard part of their teaching.



< Roughly the same number said that, while they didn=t set out to do so, they
find that they increasingly use some distance education tools in their
teaching.



< 18 (ten percent) of respondents said they consciously decided to incorporate
distance education tools into their teaching, and now consider it an integral
part of their classroom instruction.



< Six faculty members (3.4 percent) report that they currently deliver all or
most of a course via distance education tools (that is, with little or no
classroom instruction or face-to-face interaction).



< Nine chose not to respond to this question.

Another eleven respondents said that their experience did not fit any of the
above responses. Their answers varied.



**

Future Expectations.



**

To compare with their current experience, faculty were asked to indicate their
future expectations regarding the use of distance education..



< Worth noting is that 20 respondents (11.3 percent) reported that they plan
to launch a distance education course or program within the next 12-18 months,
and are developing a strategy to do so.



< Thirty-three (18.6 percent) say that while not launching a formal program,
they do plan to increase use of distance education tools in their teaching.



< Fifty respondents (28 percent) say they will continue to use distance
technology at about the same level.



< Sixty respondents (33.3 percent) have no plans to use any distance education
tools in their teaching in the foreseeable future.



< Other (7.9 percent). Answers varied.



The remainder had no response.



**

Email.

**



Faculty were asked whether they use email to interact with students. Eighty-
eight percent (163) responded that they do. When asked to indicate the number
of hours per week they allocate to this activity, 40 percent said they spend
less than an hour a week. Another 23 percent spend 1-2 hours; 17 percent spend
2-3 hours; and 15 percent spend more than four hours a week. A small number of
those who do not interact with students via their medium have no email access
available to them.



**

World Wide Web.

**



Faculty were asked to indicate the level of their personal experience in using
the Internet and World Wide Web. Forty-six percent (82) said they had at least
some experience; 29 percent reported considerable experience and 17 percent
noted extensive experience. Another 8.4 percent admitted having no experience
with the Internet.



**

Reported Purpose of Internet Usage

**_

(more than one answer may apply)



_

Research  46.7 percent

Interaction with Students:  20.7

Database Access 10.9

Review Employment Opportunities 2.2

Post Course Content (syllabus, etc.) 20.7

Course Management (tests, grades) 7.6

Course Delivery (seminar, guests) 14.1

Have Own Web Site 20.7



Sixty-one percent (111) said they require or encourage students to supplement
their research and study with web-based materials. 39 percent said they do not
make such stipulations.



**

Video Camera.

**



Forty-nine respondents (27 percent) said they had used a video camera in the
classroom to tape lectures for later use by students. Ninety-two (or 51
percent of the total) also responded that they require audio and video
materials as part of the courses they teach.



**

Self-study/Correspondence Courses.

**



A little more than 100 faculty members (59 percent) said they employ self-
study projects with some of their students. That is, the preponderance of
course work takes place outside the classroom. Only one respondent reported
teaching correspondence courses.



**

Training.

**



27 percent of respondents have participated in some type of course or
conference that involved distance education. 73 percent reported have not. 75
respondents (or 46 percent) have plans to obtain training in the use of such
media in the next year or so. Twenty-two chose not to respond.



I am developing a distance learning course for statistical analysis. It will
be in the pilot stage during the 1997-98 academic year. I am working with the
staff at CIRC to consult about statistical software and overall design.

_

\-- Dante A. Verme, Public Health Programs

_



**

Potential Demand.

**



37 faculty members (21 percent) said they receive inquiries (for example, via
email or the Internet) from individuals interested in participating in a class
or program via distance education. The majority of those (20) said that the
inquiries totaled less than five per month. However, seven respondents said
they receive more than 20 such inquiries per month. The remainder receive
between five and 20. Therefore, GW is receiving upwards of at least 7,500
inquires a year for distance education possibilities.



**

Comparing GW =s Level of Effort.

**



10% of respondents indicated that, compared to other universities in the DC
area and around the country, GW is more active in DE. 7% thought GW is less
active; while eight percent thought GW=s level of effort is about the same.
The overwhelming majority stated that they did not know enough to make an
estimation.



The Public Accountancy Program is setting up a distance learning MS degree
program for certified PA=s. The program is six semesters long and involves
video- and computer-based courses.

_

\-- Lisa Alexander, Director, PA Program

_



On the national level, the picture was slightly different. Thirty-three
respondents said that based on their knowledge of what is happening, GW is
less active than other institutions around the country. Only 4.5 percent (8)
ventured to say that GW was out ahead of other institutions. 7.3 percent said
GW=s effort is roughly the same as that of others, while 70 percent just did
not know.

I am working on a DL program in health sciences management that will start in
Jan. 98. There is a strong (national) interest in developing clinical
(emergency medicine) and management courses in the health sciences program.

_\-- Steve McGraw, Dept. of Emergency Medicine._

**

Potential Faculty Involvement.

**



Approximately one-third of the respondents said they would be very interested
in helping to further the development of distance education initiatives at GW.
46 respondents (26.1 percent) said they would not be interested, with some
saying they did not have the time or the knowledge to commit to such an
undertaking. Thirty-nine percent, or 68 respondents, said they were not sure
or didn=t know.



**

Interaction with Students by Type of Media

**



Faculty members were asked to indicate their current and planned use of
certain types of Adistance@ media. They were asked to estimate the frequency
of use on a scale of 1 to 6, with A6@ meaning Aconstantly (on a daily basis)@
and A1@ meaning Anever.@ Respondents were also given the option to put AO@ if
they never used a particular tool, but would like to know more about it.



**

Most Common Responses Regarding Usage of Media by Type (percent)

**

&nb; sp;

Now Planned Want to

(next 12-18 months) Know More



Email Constantly (36.3) Constantly (48.1) 5.3

ListServes Never (34.0) Constantly (19.5) 19.5

Fax Often (24.4) Often (23.3) 9.0

Audio Tapes Never (47.0) Never (40.9) 15.0

Video Tapes Occasionally (32.0) Occasionally (26.4) 16.3

Cmcl/Cable TV Never (59.8) Never (51.2) 21.6

Phone Consultation Frequently (24.4) Constantly (23.3) 6.2

Phone Conference Never (66.1) Never (56.5) 21.4

CD-ROMS Never (62.2) Never (42.3) 23.6

Video Conf (GW) Never (66.7) Never (50.8) 31.7

Video (non-GW) Never (67.9) Never (54.8) 28.2

Internet chat Never (73.0) Never (52.7) 26.4

Internet sites Never (36.6.) Frequently (20.5) 15.9



**

General Comments and Concerns of Survey Respondents.**



Although this was not an opinion survey per se, respondents were encouraged to
provide general comments throughout and many complied by raising a number of
issues and concerns. Many of these issues had arisen in the course of their
work and represented in their view potentially serious obstacles to
development of distance education programs at GW. Not all comments are
included, but some general trends and subjects are supplemented with specific
observations and suggestions.



For three years I have been doing remote teaching of students at other
universities and having remote professors teaching my students. This is a
Aguest lecturer@ swap with some of my colleagues at other schools (e.g., CUA,
GMU, UMd) but no students have registered as DE students.



The teaching is done via combination of website, Internet video-conferencing,
telephone conferencing, and electronic whiteboards. Sometimes, we require
teams of students to do projects together. One semester we coordinated four
courses at these four universities to be held on the same day and time to
facilitate the team and DE lecturing.



My DE sessions are run out of Labs up on the 4th floor of Tomkins hall, with
support of staff and equipment from the SEAS computer facility, although I
bring my own video camera each week.

\-- _Barry Silverman, Professor of Engineering and of Computer Medicine

_**



**

Event Management Program operates a large DL program (more details)

_

\-- Joe Jeff Goldblatt, CSEP (075)

_**



Resources

**



AFriends and colleagues in cybernetics would like to offer a course and
possibly a degree in cybernetics via the Internet. We are looking for an
institution to work with. I would need help with the administrative aspects.@
(080)



AI understand that GW will be investing $30-50 million over the next eight or
so years in information technology. We need to become prominent in DE. But we
need to be sure much of this goes into connecting classrooms and professors to
outside-world gateways (and at sufficient bandwidths).@ (102)



AI have a 286 computer in my office with a nearly full 30 MG hard drive and
640 KB RAM. The Dean has refused to provide money to the department so that I
can upgrade to a system that would be able to take advantage of the
web/Internet resources. Until the University sees fit to replace my stone-age
computer, I am afraid that I will be stuck with my stone-age approach to
teaching.@ (104)



AIf my Internet connection was better (graphical interface, rather than
textual) it would be easier to use web/Internet resources for class.@ (105)



**

Moral Support/Incentives

**



What surfaced from this survey is the perception that GW has some history of
punishing successful innovators. For instance, off-campus programs that
successfully grew enrollment were denied faculty expansion. AAdministrative
burdens are placed on sponsored research projects because of serious
weaknesses in the university support systems. This history could stifle
distance learning innovation.@ (002)

AUnless there is strong institutional support (which I have not had for my
specialized work in more than 30 years of service), I will soon retire and do
distance learning through [another organization].@ (057)

ALogistical problems! My schedule regarding research, publications is already
more than I can handle in the near future. I would like to enroll in
Aworkshops using the Internet and web pages -- but where is the time??!! It is
hard to [justify] the time when most of what I am expected to do is still
dominated by more traditional methodologies.@ (098)

AThere is much discussion about interest at GW, but no one to help establish
distance learning from the perspective of faculty needs. There should be the
attitude of >how can I help to make this work?= rather than >you must do it
our way and at our convenience.= @ (151)



**

Technical Barriers.

**



A[Won=t take up training because] inadequate equipment to justify time spent
on projects. This is a major concern. I wait with the students in the Academic
Center/Gelman to use the CIRC PCS for www. Also, what about adequacy of
technical assistance?@ (017)

AI would like to get up to speed on Powerpoint presentations, but not until I
am reasonably confident that the classrooms I teach in will accommodate them.
Right now, I am limited to text-based access to www in my office. [Therefore,]
I don=t anticipate incorporating technologies into my teaching until I am very
sure that the hardware and technology are readily available.@ (116)

A[Departmental] computer network and desktop equipment for faculty lack
adequate support and are limited. Frequent network problems and memory
limitations have hampered my productivity. Teaching is scheduled in
traditional classrooms with low potential for integrating technology.
Multimedia facilities could stimulate the integration of technology throughout
our courses.@ (150)

**



Cautionary Notes.



**

AI don=t see a huge advantage when compared to Atraditional@ methods, too much
time and not enough content in most cases. I don=t see a lot of advantages to
distance learning except for student convenience.@ (015)

AThere is an assumption beyond this questionnaire to the effect that distance
learning is automatically good. I would like to see greater realization of
this use of supplementary tools via electronics, and greater care in assessing
pros and cons. I am concerned that students, especially undergraduates, may
not have the ability to identify quality sources using the Internet.@ (040)

AToo much time is wasted [with Internet research]. Direct use of the library
gives best access to critical materials. To me the important thing for
students is writing. Distance learning ought to be able to combine this
effectively with interactive discussion. Overall, what I see as the easy way
out is Aimparting information@ via the media to passive students. Avoid this.@
(053)

AI support only those programs that enhance student-student-to teacher
interaction--not those promoting student isolation.@ (054)

AWe should be concerned about the quality and professionalism of
correspondence education. In my experience in another country, such courses
were abandoned because nobody wanted to employ students who took them.@ (153)

AI think distance learning is a ridiculously expensive Afad@ which cannot be
as effective as classroom learning. There is nothing it can do which cannot be
done better now. I think it is a bad idea and hope GW does not get involved.@
(163)

AMuch of the stuff on the >net is garbage and students have difficulty sorting
through it and finding useful materials.@ (172)

ADistance education is not an outcome or objective, it is a tool to help
better reach our education objectives. We first must identify that teaching
students at a distance is part of our education mission, and why. Only then do
the tools of distance education have meaning.@ (177)



**

Comparisons



**

AGW is very supportive in specific areas, but efforts are not integrated.
Nationally, GW is less active compared to U. of Colorado (sic), Duke (sic),
St. Francis College (sic), Wisconsin, U. of Tenn. (sic), Georgia, and Idaho
State (sic).@ (044)

ARegionally, we are ahead of some schools and way behind others (e.g., UMd).
Nationally, we are very slow when compared with dozens of other campuses that
are highly wired and highly involved in DE!!!@ (102)

AI hear of exciting programs around the country, [but] at GW, it is always
Atalk@ and no Aaction,@ because the resources are never made available
(resources would include release time for developing courses and materials, as
well as equipment, training, etc.) or because a new dean with different
priorities has just taken office.@ (109)

AThere is as great a disparity within GW as outside it. We need greater cross-
department contact.@ (191)

**



Learning Outcomes



**

AMost learning takes place >outside= the classroom for all learning. This is
even true for faculty who think they are the source of their students=
learning.@ (070)

AI run a VERY hands-on clinic. That is the essence of the teaching. ADistance@
learning is completely opposite to what I do. I specialize in personal one-on-
one feedback and live interactive teaching. I do not have time to experiment
with this stuff because I have other higher priorities.@ (182)

**



Suggestions of Survey Respondents



**

APlease consider a multimedia arts lab for engineers and visual and performing
artists. (ASU and Ohio are leaders in dance technology, have CD-ROMs.@ (031)

AI am not sure what is available, but would like to know more about video
conferencing, www, and web pages. [It would be nice to have a mentor to help
me along.]@ (090)

ARegarding training, unless it is by distance learning so I can access it at
home, the benefits to me are not worth the time. Training for a graduate
student assistant, however, is of interest.@ (057)

AIn addition to providing training for mastering the technology involved (and
keeping up to date), the University needs to develop university- or school-
wide policies on such matters as evaluating Internet resource materials,
evaluating electronic publication, questions of academic honesty and
professionalism, criteria for reduced teaching loads (of regular courses in
order to develop distance education courses), etc. It would be nice if the
university could get out ahead of these growing issues, instead of playing
desperate catch-up.@ (109)

AWith the decrease in enrollment at colleges and universities across the
country, GW needs to >go to the customer= through distance education tools and
through campus sites across the country and internationally. Quality
instruction in program content, delivery, and professors must be built into
the planned extension. If GW wants to move up the ladder among the best
colleges and universities identified in US News and World Report, our presence
--and distinction of quality programs--must extend outside of Washington, DC
in other ways than through televised sports. ... We are behind the times if we
consider all courses and programs offered in other places than on the DC
campus as >off-campus.= The only off-campus programs should be continuing
education programs that are not extensions of campus programs.@ (151)



**

Description of Some Distance Learning Programs Currently Operating at GW:



Master's of Science in Project Management (SBPM):

**



Within the School of Business and Public Management's Department of Management
Science, the Program on Project Management has been delivering a successful
on-campus Master's of Science in Project Management since Fall of 1996. In
January of 1998, the program launched its new distance education option of
this course. With an enrollment of 27 students for 2 courses in Spring 1998,
it is projected that the program will accommodate approximately 200 students
by the time the courses are fully rolled out, which will be within 2 years.



The course uses a combination of video taped lectures, related Internet
materials, textbooks and other materials, e-mail, interactive media, fax,
phone conferences. Lessons learned from GSEHD's successful ETL program were
helpful in building this program. SBPM is looking to the distance MSPM as a
model for future distance education offerings.



**

The Education Technology Leadership Program (GSEHD):

**



The Education Technology Leadership (ETL) program is a full Master's degree
offered through the Graduate School of Education and Human Development. All
courses in the program are taught off-campus, delivered through cable
television, videotape, and involve extensive use of online computer networks.
Students can choose to take individual courses or enroll as a degree student,
in which case graduate admissions standards of GW must be met. Jones
Educational Corporation administers the program, but degrees are awarded by
GW.



The program is characterized by extensive interaction with fellow students via
computer e-mail, offering the chance the learn from other educational
professionals around the country.



**

Frontiers in Biomedicine (GWUMC):



**

Frontiers in Biomedicine, an Internet-based lecture series broadcast "live"
has been developed by the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology for
continuing medical education (CME). Initiated in April 1997, this series of
lectures presented by leading scientists in cutting edge areas of medical
research is accredited by the American Medical Association, for 1.5 credit
hours per lecture in category 1, and by the American Council on Pharmaceutical
Education for 1.5 contact hours of CME. It is the most widely viewed live
program on the Internet. The program is broadcast on the HELIX website, which
received a "FREDDIE" award by the AMA in November 1997 for being the best
health website on the Internet.



**

Clinical Health Sciences Program (HCS)** :



This program, initiated one year ago, was developed specifically for Navy
independent corpsmen. Students are located all over the world and much of the
success of this program hinges on very active academic counseling. The current
enrollment is 55 students.



**

Clinical Management and Leadership for Health Sciences Professionals (HCS):



**

Launched in the Spring semester, 1998, this program was developed to provide
any allied health clinically trained professional currently possessing an
Associate's degree or equivalent with the opportunity to develop min-level
management skills useful in managing clinical services.

**



Infrastructure



Problem



**

The problem confronted by the AInfrastructure Subcommittee@ was to determine
how well the university=s infrastructure could support distance education in
the future. With this charge, the subcommittee decided to evaluate university
infrastructure in five major categories: Administrative and Management
Services, Student Services, Academic Services, Financial and Economic
Structures, and Technology.



**

Analysis



**

Using a case study approach, the committee examined the current impact of
distance education activities on the university=s infrastructure and vice
versa. In particular, it examined what systems are necessary to support
distance education and how well those systems work in the five categories.

_



_**

Administrative& Management Services

**



In the first category examined, Administrative & Management Services,
registration, student records, student accounts, personnel hiring, management,
compensation, application policies, marketing and public relations, and data
collection systems were included. These systems are at the heart of the
university=s business operations. It is in this category that the university
competes through attracting student clients, validates their efforts through
granting credit and conferring degrees and certificates, and recreates itself
through its employees. If these systems are unresponsive to prospective
clients or market opportunities, it threatens the ability of the organization
to conduct business. Unfortunately, in the case of distance education,
programs and students are virtually invisible to these systems. The systems
may work for traditional populations, procedures, and personnel, but special
requirements for distance and other non-traditional activities must typically
be forced to work through extraordinary human efforts. There are not usually
elegant ways to integrate innovation into the systems.



**

Student Services

**



The second category, Student Services, is critical to distance education as an
enterprise and as a way of doing business. Non-traditional student clients and
especially distance learners are savvy consumers. They will shop for value and
value means service in addition to name brand recognition and product quality.
With the world's universities and newer purveyors of knowledge in cyberspace,
student consumers will increasingly demand greater value. Since value is often
based in perception, the part of university life where students come into
contact with the university, student services, is critical. In the Student
Services category, the systems examined included information distribution,
administrative assistance, technical assistance, financial aid, and student
classification (status). Busy adult students demand easy access to the
information and assistance required for institutional success. The world wide
web is becoming an increasingly effective tool for information distribution
for all these systems, but it still operates on the assumption that the
readers will soon be residents or at least be commuting with physical access
to specific resources. Inherently, the web is an appropriate mechanism for
serving non-traditional and distance populations, but the existence of the
technology does not make the information accessible. The information and the
services to which it refers must also be accessible. Telephone and electronic
mail accessibility to administrative and technical assistance for a range of
necessary academic and bureaucratic tasks is also available, but the demands
of a twenty-four hour a day, seven day virtual campus would find service
wanting. Currently, personnel are not trained for the different demands and
questions that non-traditional and distance students put forth. Existing
distance education and non-traditional programs have had to create
supplementary systems at the program level to compensate.



**

Academic Services

**



The heart of any university operation is the subject of the third category,
Academic Services. The standard question from both consumers and university
personnel is whether distance education and other non-traditional programs are
Aas good as@ traditional on-campus programs. The correct response to this
question is to ask what measures will be utilized to assess Agoodness.@ Only
then, can this question be asked in earnest. The question of academic quality
must continually be asked, of traditional on-campus instruction as well as
that of which is delivered at a distance. The standard for both should be the
quality of the knowledge that the student acquires and can utilize
effectively, not the method of instruction. Still, there are standard systems
involved in the academic experience of students that transcend instructional
method. It is these systems that the committee examined including advising,
library (information) access, course development support, instructional
materials development support, and course materials distribution support.
Fortunately, each of these areas, with the exception of advising, has been
under consideration recently, and initiatives have begun to build the kind of
support systems necessary for distance education and other non-traditional
programs. Unfortunately, the attention to these areas has been primarily
oriented to campus programs. The systems need not be dedicated to any specific
population. Our institutional sense of purpose must be broadened to include
non-traditional curricula. As numbers of students increase through distance
education and other non-traditional initiatives, the demand for advising will
also increase. As a system, advising is managed differently across the campus
and is a key element of GW=s success. It should be anticipated that the slower
growth in faculty required by distance education and the rapid growth of
student numbers will likely stress this system. On a positive note, library
(information) services are specifically identified as critical to the
university=s non-traditional students and GW is fortunate to have a library
staff eager and capable of meeting that need.

_



_**

Financial Services

**



The fourth category examined by the subcommittee concerned the impact of
Financial Systems, including tuition and fees, marketing costs, development
and production costs, personnel costs, distribution costs, and revenue
distribution. There are costs associated with doing the business of a
university. It is essential to recognize that the costs for distance education
will initially appear greater than those for traditional education. However,
when one factors in the total cost of providing on-campus education, including
costs of buildings, land, comfort systems, and maintenance, distance education
can be comparatively cost effective.

While this comparison requires a far more extensive and systematic analysis
than is possible here, it illustrates that the financial and economic
assumptions made about on campus activities cannot automatically be made for
distance education and non-traditional programs. The technologies of distance
education create the possibility of new paradigms for curriculum development
and distribution which include, but extend beyond, the faculty resources
available at one campus. To realize these possibilities, financial systems and
economic policies must be flexible enough to pay market rates and create
internal incentives for innovation. Without this flexibility, GW=s ability to
compete in the market place of ideas and curricular innovation will be
diminished.



**

Technology Systems

**



The fifth category examined by the subcommittee concerned Technology Systems,
including analog and digital multiple media production and distribution. Of
all the GW systems required to support distance education, technology
represents the most immediately compatible. In addition to the existing
systems represented by CIRC, Telecommunications, and GWTV, the planned
additions to the campus technology infrastructure represent major initiatives
which will have a positive impact on the ability of the members of the
university community to participate in distance education. Nevertheless, while
the current systems do an excellent job of support, each system must
continually grow to maintain capabilities in excess of demand. As distance
education initiatives increase, the capacity to produce and distribute
materials and support communications must be ready to meet the need.



**

Internet2

**



George Washington University is a charter Member of the Internet2 Project. The
objective of the project is to facilitate development, deployment, and
operation of an advanced communication infrastructure for the research and
education community. Such an infrastructure represents the successor to the
Internet and will be able to support high quality, real time, interactive
video and audio. Initially the connectivity will be between institutional
computers, but it is anticipated that these capabilities will be available in
the home within a few years. The ability to support interactive video in the
home opens numerous possibilities for enhancing distance education.



**

WREN

**



GW has also taken the lead role in creating the Washington Research and
Education Network (WREN), which will provide cost-effective high-performance
network connectivity for a wide range of research and educational institutions
in the Washington, DC metropolitan area. The first will form the northern
anchor for the Southern Crossroads, a regional linkage of high performance
networks in the southeastern portion of the country that will become
operational in late 1998 or early 1999 and will serve as one component of
Internet2.



**

Conclusions Regarding Infrastructure

**



The committee concluded that the current infrastructure systems of the
university, human and technological, were designed to support a residential
population of students and that these systems are inadequate to support non-
traditional students at a distance, as well as other non-traditional student
populations. Currently, individuals at all levels of the university make
heroic efforts to adjust and compensate for the gaps in the current systems in
order to support distance education activities and distance students. Each
distance education initiative, however, must overcome institutional obstacles
in order to succeed. The method for success is typically special arrangements,
ad hoc structures, and duplication of university services at the school or
program level. While this Amake do@ approach can and obviously does work on a
limited basis, more effective systems need to be designed and implemented if
distance education and other non-traditional approaches to learning are to be
efficiently integrated into the university.



**

Recommendations

**



The recommendation of the committee is that a systematic study be executed for
each university system that is required to support distance education and
other current and future non-traditional student populations. This study
should identify the current capabilities of each system, what these
capabilities do and do not make possible, the interrelation of each system,
and evaluate the possibility and cost of modification. In situations where no
necessary support system exists or cannot be modified, the study should detail
what does exist and recommend new structures. The result of each study would
be a set of recommendations correlated with outcome possibilities. From these
results, a set of capability statements can be used by university units as
guidelines for new initiatives.

The recommended study cannot be adequately executed without experiential
knowledge of distance education and GW=s current systems. It is suggested,
therefore, that a study group of GW personnel be empowered and supported to
execute such a study with the periodic advice of an external consultant. The
charge to the study group should include adequate clerical and technical
support to both collect and compile the data.



**



APPENDIX 2: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT



External Environment



**

One of the major influences on GW=s posture towards distance education will be
competition from other providers of similar educational services. Another
influence will be advances in computing, networking and communication systems
and services. A final influence will result from new management styles,
organizational structures, and public demands for education and solutions that
take advantage of the new technologies. Each will influence, in its own way,
the very nature of higher education.

This subcommittee of the DEWG accepted as its charge the research necessary to
identify and describe major distance learning programs now operating. The
subcommittee then attempted to identify within these programs those practices
and procedures that appea

