![course logo](litcrit.gif)

****

**Course Syllabus, Fall 1998** | **Dr. Barbara F. McManus** | **College of New
Rochelle**  
---|---|---  
  
**DESCRIPTION:** _Introduction to the major principles of contemporary
literary theory and criticism and to established methods and materials of
literary research._

**OBJECTIVES:** Students will demonstrate

  1. understanding of the basic theoretical concepts underlying contemporary approaches to literature and of the major differences between them;
  2. understanding of the aims of literary criticism; knowledge of key forms and terminology of literary criticism; ability to read the writings of literary scholars and critics with understanding and judicious appreciation;
  3. knowledge of the methods and materials of literary research; ability to conduct literary research according to established procedures and to use such research effectively and responsibly;
  4. ability to generate and articulate personal responses to literary and critical texts, and to explain the premises and assumptions underlying such personal responses;
  5. ability to write a critical essay that states a clear thesis and supports it persuasively, integrating literary research with personal ideas.

**REQUIRED TEXTS:**

  * Abrams, M.H. _A Glossary of Literary Terms_. 6th ed. New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, 1993.
  * Chopin, Kate. _The Awakening: Complete, Authoritative Text with Biographical and Historical Contexts, Critical History, and Essays from Five Contemporary Theoretical Critical Perspectives._ Ed. Nancy A. Walker. Boston: St. Martin's Press, 1993.
  * Gibaldi, Joseph. _MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers_. 4th ed. New York: Modern Language Association, 1995.
  * Selected poems and related criticism.

**LINKS ON LITERARY THEORY AND CRITICISM:**

  * [Timeline of Major Critical Theories in the US](http://www.sou.edu/English/IDTC/timeline/uslit.htm) (Warren Hedges, Southern Oregon University)
  * [Undergraduate Introduction to Critical Theory](http://omni.cc.purdue.edu/~felluga/theory2.html) (Dino F. Felluga, Purdue University)
  * [Voice of the Shuttle: Literary Theory Links](http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/shuttle/theory.html) (Alan Liu, University of California, Santa Barbara)
  * [Literary Resources--Theory Links](http://www.english.upenn.edu/~jlynch/Lit/theory.html) (Jack Lynch, University of Pennsylvania)
  * [_A Glossary of Literary Terms_ and _A Handbook of Rhetorical Devices_](http://www.uky.edu/ArtsSciences/Classics/Harris/rhetform.html)
  * [](http://www.uky.edu/ArtsSciences/Classics/Harris/rhetform.html) (searchable online; prepared by Robert Harris and Ross Scaife)
  * [Online Literary Criticism Collection](http://www.ipl.org/ref/litcrit/) (Internet Public Library); this organization also posts a collection of links ([Online Literary Criticism Guide](http://ipl.org/ref/litcrit/guide.html)) and an excellent [Pathfinder](http://ipl.org/ref/QUE/PF/litcrit.html) explaining how to find good literary criticism on the web and in libraries

**LINKS ON WEB RESEARCH:**

  * [A Student's Guide to Research with the WWW](http://english.ttu.edu/kairos/2.2/news/youcanuse/craig/index.html) (Craig Branham, St. Louis University)
  * [Learning the Web](http://www.ce.vt.edu/faculty/dymond/learnweb/) (Randy Dymond, Virginia Tech)
  * [Guidelines for Critiquing Web Sites and Web Style Manuals](http://mason.gmu.edu/~montecin/webcritique.htm) (Virginia Montecino, George Mason University)

**METHODS:** Lecture/discussion classes; supervised library and internet
research; individual conferences.

**REQUIREMENTS:**

Punctual completion of all assigned readings; participation in class
discussions of literary and critical works and of student essays (all course
objectives).

Numerous informal written assignments; for details, see [Schedule of
Assignments: Prose Fiction](litcritassign.html) and [Schedule of Assignments:
Poetry](litcritassign2.html). Full credit will be given for all assignments
that are complete and on time, and students can earn extra points for high-
quality work. Deductions will be made for assignments that are handed in late,
and students will lose _5 points_ from the class participation portion of the
grade for each assignment that is not submitted (all course objectives).

Two formal critical essays (one on a work of prose fiction, the other on a
poem) integrating library research with personal interpretation of literary
works (objectives 3, 4, 5).

Final examination during exam week (objectives 1, 2). Please note that I will
not give any "Incompletes" at the end of this course unless the student has a
very serious reason which she has discussed with me in advance.

Since we will be dealing with complex and highly sophisticated theories in
this course, class attendance and participation are particularly important and
will constitute a high proportion of the grade (40%). Each student is
therefore responsible for prompt and regular class attendance. Each absence in
excess of four, whether excused or not, will result in a deduction of _3
points_ from the class participation portion of the grade.

**Grading:**

  * 40% class participation, including informal written assignments
  * 50% two critical essays
  * 10% final examination

**OFFICE HOURS:** Castle 315 (extension 5399)

  * Thursdays 3:30 - 4:30 pm
  * (other times by appointment, primarily during the 1-1:50 period Tuesdays and Thursdays)

  

Barbara F. McManus: [bmcmanus@cnr.edu](mailto:bmcmanus@cnr.edu) or
[bmcman@optonline.net](mailto:bmcman@optonline.net)  
[Barbara McManus Home Page](index.htm)  
revised December 1998

