**English 302**

**(George Mason University)**

**Advanced Composition for Social Science Majors**  
**Spring, 2000**

Section S05  
Tues/Thursday 9-10:15  
Robinson B122

Section S06  
Tues/Thurs 10:30-11:45  
West Building 263

Section S10  
Tues/Thurs 1:30-2:45  
West Building 261

**Instructor: Kelly Joyner**  
**Office: Robinson A455**  
**Office hours: T/Th 3-4, & by appt.**  
**Phone: 993-1176**  
**E-mail: pjoyner@gmu.edu**  
**Home Page: mason.gmu.edu/~pjoyner**

**Required texts:**  
**_The Man Who Mistook His Wife For A Hat_ , by Oliver Sacks**  
**_A Rhetoric for the Social Sciences_ , by Kristine Hansen**

**Other Expenses:**  
**Copies for Peer Review Sessions**  
**Possibly some copy center material**  
**Access to the Internet**

**     Course description:**  
**These sections of English 302, Advanced Composition for Social Science
Majors, are designed to help you become a more effective and persuasive
writer, and to address the writing and research requirements of your major
courses and the expectations of the Social Science professions. We will cover
several important rhetorical styles in the Social Sciences, including the
Critical Review and the Research Paper with Prospectus. You will also conduct
an interview for your research project, and if time permits, you'll work on a
resume. Whether you intend to go on to graduate school or move into the
workplace, you will need good writing skills. This course will help you
develop those skills.**

**     Here are the goals for the course. By semester's end, each of you
should have the ability to:**  
**         \- write clean, clear, grammatically correct and focused sentences
and paragraphs**  
**         \- identify your audience for a given assignment and write
appropriately for that audience**  
**         \- organize your writing on your own and work through process
(drafting, revising, editing)**  
**         \- conduct research in a library and on a computer**  
**         \- discriminate between good sources and bad ones**  
**         \- give effective feedback on the writing of your peers**  
**         \- get the most out of the feedback you receive from peers,
teachers and supervisors**  
**         \- document your sources using correct APA format**  


**     Rules and Regulations:**

**1-- All assignments are due within the first 15 minutes of class.
Assignments turned in after the first 15 minutes are considered late. Late
assignments will be penalized one letter grade for each day they are late (not
each class day, each day). Contact me (e-mail is best) BEFORE class if you
know you will be late or absent, and I may be able to suspend the penalty. If
you don't personally submit an assignment, follow up to make certain I
received it.**

**2-- Missed days are your responsibility. You must find out what you missed
and catch up.**

**3-- You must submit a rough draft for each of the four papers and get my ok
to proceed, otherwise I won't read the final drafts.**

**4-- You may rewrite any or all of the first three papers, but only those for
which you received a B or lower. I will average the rewrite grade with the
first grade. Please follow these guidelines:**  
**     a: In order for me to raise your grade, the rewrite must have a
significant amount of revision, and not just a         correction of
mechanical errors.**  
**     b: See me before attempting a rewrite, I might be able to direct you
and save you some unnecessary floundering.**  
**     c: You must turn in the original along with the rewrite.**  
**     d: Each rewrite has a due date -- see the schedule. I won't accept late
rewrites.**

**5-- To pass this course, all four formal papers must be turned in.**

**6-- Don't send me assignments via e-mail unless I give you permission. If I
agree to accept a submission via e- mail, save both of us some grief and do
these 3 things:**

**         1-- Send the assignment as a Word Perfect or Rich Text document if
possible -- if you send a Word document, I won't be able to access it for
perhaps up to a week.**

**         2-- Print out a copy of the dated e-mail so that I can verify
later, if necessary, that you have submitted the assignment on time.**

**         3-- Put a hard copy of the assignment in my mail box at your first
opportunity (this is the back-up in case I don't get the e-mailed version)**

**7-- All papers and homework must be computer generated or typed (double-
spaced, 12-point font). Handwritten assignments are not acceptable (except for
in-class writing).**  


**     Assignment Overview:**  
**You'll be responsible for:**  
**         \-- Four formal papers and their respective components (proposals,
drafts, prospectus, bibliography, etc.)**  
**         \-- Participation in on-line asynchronous chats (in GMU's Town
Hall)**  
**         \-- Various reading and homework assignments**  
**         \-- Various in-class writing assignments and general class
citizenship**

**Class citizenship includes showing up prepared and being engaged in the
classroom activities. This is not a lecture class, but a class based mostly on
discussion and the sharing of ideas and writing, so your attendance is
crucial.**  


**     Papers:**  
**You must turn in all four papers and their respective components on the
specified due dates. Rough drafts must be attached to revised drafts, and
revised (graded) drafts must be attached to rewrites. You may rewrite any or
all of the first three papers for a higher grade. See #3 in the Rules and
Regulations section on page 1 of this syllabus.**

**Below are guidelines for the papers. I'll distribute style and formatting
instructions as necessary. The numbers in parentheses ( ) after each paper
component are penalties that will be deducted from a paper's final grade
should you fail to submit that component.**  


**         Paper #1- Web Site Analysis- 800 words**  
**     Rough Draft (25 points) due 2/17**  
**     Revision due 2/24**  
**     (Optional) Rewrite due 3/23**

**The Internet and the World Wide Web have revolutionized the way people
exchange information. There's a lot of junk in Cyberspace, but there are also
wonderful sites if you can find them (keep in mind that the Web is largely a
commercial environment, which makes its reliability automatically suspect). As
scholars, you should be able to move around in Cyberspace and discriminate
between the useful and the suspect.**

**In preparation for this paper, do a bit of surfing and find two or three
sites that interest you and are connected in some way to your major field.
Review these sites (perhaps compare and contrast them) in an 800-word paper,
focusing on three things for each site: first, the look or design of the site;
second, the quality of the information; and third, the quality of the
interface (in other words, its effectiveness in getting your attention,
holding it, and conveying its information). Some things that can affect the
quality of a site's interface are: confusing graphics, inoperative links, too
much distracting and unnecessary stuff on the page, and illogical organization
of information. It might be useful to begin by telling your readers why you
chose the sites and what you learned from them. If you'd like to focus on one
single site for this paper, get my ok before proceeding.**

**The most important thing is that you think critically. Don't be too easily
impressed with a flashy Web site if the information it provides is
untrustworthy, or just not useful. Remember that for a traditional book or
article to reach publication, it must go through an editorial process (though
some processes are less rigorous than others), but for material to reach
publication on the Internet there is often no such process. Virtually anyone
can post information on the Internet. Approach this paper as you would
approach the review of a book, or that of an essay in a magazine, but speak to
the unique attributes of Web sites.**

**Your audience for this paper is made up of college juniors with basic
knowledge of the web. Explain terms that may be unfamiliar, and don't get
bogged down in jargon. Respect the intelligence of your audience, and keep
them interested. This paper need not read like a government document. And if
your first sentence sounds like this: "The Internet/WWW holds a vast amount of
information, but you cannot believe everything you read on it" \-- change it
to something original and less obvious. You'll be graded mostly on the clarity
and conciseness of your writing, the level of engagement in the writing (do
you keep the reader interested?), and the quality of the analysis. Your
mechanics should be perfect.**  


**         Paper #2- Critical Review (of an essay or essays in your major
field)-800 words**  
**     Prospectus (5 points) due 3/2 or 3/7**  
**     Rough Draft (25 points) due 3/9**  
**     Revision due 3/23**  
**     (Optional) Rewrite due 4/18**

**Social Scientists build upon the research and writing of their predecessors
and peers. It is important, therefore, for each of you to hone your ability to
read scholarly material critically - your own research and writing depends
greatly on this ability. It's not enough to memorize and adopt the ideas of
the scholars and experts who have come before you; you must constantly revisit
old ideas, look critically at new ones, and be able to think for yourself. For
this second paper, find one or two essays from scholarly journals (such as
_The Chronicle of Higher Education, The Canadian Journal of Sociology_ , or
_Child Development)_ that deal with a topic you are interested in, and write a
review of them. I'd rather you stay away from mainstream, general interest
magazines, because the essays and articles in those magazines are written
mostly by journalists, not professional social scientists. However, if you
think you've found an appropriate article in a mainstream magazine, run it by
me.**

**You may know what topic you'd like to research before you begin searching
for articles, but if you change your mind or if you don't have a topic
beforehand, it might help to skim through a few journals, or even a newspaper,
until a topic comes to you. Think about why you chose your major -- what
issues interest you most in your major field? It doesn't matter if the essays
you find are on-line or in hard copy, as long as they come from recognized
professional journals. Don't wait until the last minute to start your
research, because you may find that to get the articles you want you must go
through the interlibrary loan system, and that process takes a few days.**

**Once you have a topic and have found one or two essays, read the essays
critically and write an 800-word review. In the review, assess the essay(s)
with these questions in mind (paraphrased from Hansen): Is the essay based on
sound research? Is it written clearly and persuasively? Does it deal with the
issues adequately? Are the sources credible? Has the author overlooked any
information or angle? Perhaps the most important question you answer in your
review is this: Who will benefit most from this article, and why? This speaks
to the audience of the article and, on a larger scale, to the importance of
research and scholarly review in the social sciences.**

**Your audience for this paper is the same as that for the 1 st paper, and you
will be graded mostly on the clarity of your writing, the relevance of your
analysis, and the quality of your conclusions about the articles you've
chosen. Again, your mechanics should be perfect.**  


**         Paper #3-- Interview and write-up -- 600-800 words**  
**     Proposal (5 points) due 3/28**  
**     Preliminary list of questions (10 points) due 4/4**  
**     Rough Draft (25 points) due 4/13**  
**     Revision (Write-up) due 4/18**  
**     Letter of thanks (5 points) due 4/18 (attached to the Write-up)**  
**     (Optional) Rewrite due 5/11**

**For this paper, you will conduct an interview with a professional in your
current career field, in a field you're considering, or in one you're simply
curious about. Another option is to find a subject knowledgeable about your
research topic (for paper #4). We'll spend class time discussing interview
protocol, and you must conduct each step of this interview process in a
professional manner. Part of the value in this assignment is that it gives you
a chance to make contacts in the professional (or academic) world, so treat
this interview as if your future career depended on it. Note that you're
required to send your interview subject a thank you letter after the
interview, and attach a copy of the letter to your formal interview write-
up.**

**After finding an appropriate and willing subject, the interview parameters
are largely up to you. You will schedule time for the interview, keeping in
mind that you may need more than one session, and leaving enough time to
verify quotations or information with your subject before the write-up due
date. You may tape the interview as long as the subject is amenable, but be
prepared to take notes should your equipment fail. You will submit to me a
list of prepared questions before you conduct the interview, and at least some
of those questions should pertain to writing in the subject's career (such as
"What kinds of writing does the job require you to do? How much writing do you
generally do in a given week?"). Take advantage of the opportunity to pick
your subject's brain about this career field. What worries you about this
field? What excites you about it? Ask the subject about these things. Some
interviewees will expound at length without much prompting from you, but you
need to prepare twice or three-times as many questions as you think you'll
have time for in case the subject isn't terribly talkative.**

**We'll go over the formatting options for the write-up, and after all
interviews have been completed, I'll ask each of you to speak briefly in class
about your interview experiences. Your audience, again, is made up of your
peers, and you'll be graded mostly on the focus of the interview write-up, the
level of engagement in the writing, and your adherence to protocol and
formatting. Your mechanics should be perfect.**  


**         Paper #4-Research Paper w/ Prospectus -1200 words**  
**     Prospectus (5 points) due 4/6**  
**     Annotated Bibliography (20 points) due 4/20 or 4/25**  
**     Rough Draft (25 points) due 4/27**  
**     Revision Due 5/11**

**The purpose of paper #4 is to help you develop your library and computer-
based research skills, help you learn to evaluate sources, and synthesize the
information you gather with your own ideas into a cohesive essay.**

**For this paper, look back at the case studies in Sacks' book, choose one of
the presented neurological disorders that you'd like to learn more about,
research the disorder and write a report about it. You must use at least six
outside sources, one of which will be Sacks' book, at least two of which must
be recent articles (no older than five years) that exist in print (they may
also exist on the Internet, but not solely on the Internet). Most of your
information must come from the sources other than Sacks, but you must still
use Sacks' case study(ies) in this paper, perhaps only as a point from which
you start, or a point to which you lead.**

**I'll expect these things from your paper, though not necessarily in this
order: an update of where the medical world stands on the disorder, the
opinions of experts other than Sacks, a condensed history of the disorder and
its symptoms, some discussion of the latest methods of treatment, and a
discussion of what we've learned, if anything, about the disorder since Sacks'
studies were published. Your audience for this paper is made up of college
juniors with no particular background in neurological or psychological
disorders -- in other words, respect the intelligence of your audience, but
don't baffle them with jargon.**

**Include a works cited page in APA format (if your major requires another
style, see me), along with the appropriate parenthetical citations. You'll be
graded mostly on clarity of thought, use of sources and information, effective
synthesis of original and borrowed ideas, flow and organization, and an
appropriate sense of audience. Again, your mechanics should be perfect.**  


**     Town Hall:**  
**Town Hall is GMU's on-line interactive discussion tool (it works rather like
an Internet bulletin board). We will use TH to discuss the Sacks book, and to
complete two other assignments: one called "The On-line Scavenger Hunt," and
the other an introduction to critiquing the Web. I'll demonstrate in-class how
to use Town Hall, but if you find you need extra instruction, don't hesitate
to come to my office hours, or e-mail questions to me. The deadlines for
completing each Town Hall assignment are on the schedule at the end of the
syllabus.**

**When you enter Town Hall, you will click on "Course Forums", then look for
your class -- "English 302-S05 (Joyner)" [9am class], "English 302-S06
(Joyner)" [10:30am class], or "English 302-S10 (Joyner)" [1:30pm class]. Next,
read the instructions for the assignment that you'd like to complete -- in
most cases, you will be either commenting on one of the readings, or
responding to a comment made by one of your classmates. It's important that
you obey Internet etiquette (for instance, stick to the point, and don't use
ALL CAPS BECAUSE IT LOOKS LIKE YOU'RE SHOUTING), and remember that when you
post a message you are, in effect, speaking to the entire campus community, so
mind your manners. As the instructions indicate, you must post a certain
number of responses in our class forums to pass this portion of the course.
The more responses you post (provided all the postings follow the
instructions) the better your grade will be.**

**There will be no excuses accepted for not participating in Town Hall. If you
don't have access to a computer at home, simply go to one of the many computer
labs on campus to complete these assignments. If you wait until the day the
assignment is due to complete it, you may be foiled by a computer glitch or a
system outage -- these are not acceptable excuses; complete these assignments
early and you'll have no problems.**  
    


**     Grading guidelines:**  
**Paper #1 = 10%**  
**Paper #2 = 15%**  
**Paper #3 = 15%**  
**Paper #4 = 30%**  
**Town Hall = 15%**  
**Class Citizenship* = 15%**  
**     *class participation, homework, in-class exercises & free-writes**

**This is what the letter grades on your papers will mean when it comes time
to calculate a final average (your final grade will be converted back to a
letter grade-GMU recognizes only A,A-,B+,B,B-,C+,C,D &F):**

**A = 95**  
**A- = 92**  
B **\+ = 88**  
**B = 85**  
**B- = 82**  
**C+ = 78**  
**C = 75**  
**C- = 72**  
**D+ = 68**  
**D = 65**  
**D- = 62**  
**F = 55**  
**(though lower #s are possible)**  


**     The Writing Center**  
**If you haven't already visited the Writing Center, located in Robinson, Room
A114, you should do so. The Writing Center provides FREE one-on-one tutoring
in writing; it's a great resource for anyone associated with the university.
The tutors can help you write a workable thesis statement, they can help you
structure your ideas into a cohesive paper, they can give you feedback on a
draft, and they can help with chronic grammatical problems (though they will
not edit or proofread). You must call for an appointment (993-1200), and when
you go, take with you any assignments you are working on. I will not be
notified of your work in The Writing Center unless you and I arrange your
appointment together. If you prefer working with a tutor via e-mail instead,
take advantage of the Writing Center's On-line Writing Lab (OWL) (e-mail
wcenter@gmu.edu for information).**  


**     Plagiarism:**  
**Plagiarism is receiving help on an assignment, or using someone else's work
without acknowledgment or credit. GMU has a strict policy regarding
plagiarism. If you use someone else's views you must adhere to accepted
documentation guidelines--for this class, that means using parenthetical
citations and a list of sources (APA Style). Listing sources alone, without
parenthetical citations, is not acceptable. Plagiarism amounts to artistic
thievery, is a violation of the GMU honor code, and will be dealt with as
such.**

**Beware Internet sites that market academic papers. They make plagiarism
relatively easy, but they also make catching plagiarism easy. See me if you'd
like a listing of such sites.**  
    


**     Course Schedule:**  
**Important Dates: Last day to add class: February 7 (8pm)**  
**Last day to drop without Dean's permission: February 25 (5pm)**

**Week 1:**  
**Tuesday, January 25: Introductions, Syllabus, In-class writing**

**Thursday, January 27: Writing for academia, Introduction to paper #1,
Discussion of the WWW**  
**     Assignment: Have Read Hansen, chapters 1, 2 & 10**  


**Week 2:**  
**Tuesday, February 1: Introduction to Sacks, discussion of reading, group
work and surveys**  
**     Assignment: Town Hall #1 ("Introduce Yourself")**  
**     Have read Sacks, "The Man Who. . .Hat" (the 1st case study, not the
entire book)**

**Thursday, February 3: A closer look at the Web -- computer presentation,
discussion of paper #1**  


**Week 3:**  
**Tuesday, February 8: Group assignments, Discussion of Writing Style in the
Social Sciences, In-class Exercise.**  
**     Assignment: Town Hall #2 (On-line Scavenger Hunt)**  
**                             Have read Hansen, chapters 3 & 19**

**Thursday, February 10: Continue discussion of Style, Discuss assignment for
next class (web site presentations)**  
**     Assignment: Town Hall #3 (Web Site Critique)**  


**Week 4:**  
**Tuesday, February 15: Web Site Presentations, Introduction to Peer Reviews**  
**     Assignment: Be prepared to discuss a web site (your site choice for
Paper #1, or for Town Hall #3)**

**Thursday, February 17: Peer Review #1**  
**     Assignment: Rough Draft of Paper #1 due**  


**Week 5:**  
**Tuesday, February 22: Class discussion of Sacks readings, Examples of
writing, sign-up for conferences**  
**     Assignment: Town Hall #4 ("The Lost Mariner", "The Disembodied Lady")**

**Thursday, February 24: Introduction to Paper #2, Prepare for library, sign-
up for conferences**  
**     Assignment: Paper #1 due**  


**Week 6:**  
**Tuesday, February 29: Meet in the lobby of Fenwick Library**  
**     Assignment: Town Hall #5 ("Phantoms", "Cupid's Disease")**  
**                             Have Read and Hansen, chapter 9**

**Thursday, March 2: Conferences (meet in Robinson A455) -- Bring a copy of
the article you're critiquing**  
**     Assignment: Prospectus for Paper #2 (due at conference)**  
**                             Have read Hansen, chapter 13**  


**Week 7:**  
**Tuesday, March 7: Conferences (meet in Robinson A455) -- Bring a copy of the
article you're critiquing**  
**     Assignment: Prospectus for Paper #2 (due at conference)**  
**                             Town Hall #6 ("Witty Ticcy Ray" & "The
Possessed")**

**Thursday, March 9: Peer Review #2**  
**     Assignment: Rough Draft of Paper #2 due**  


**Week 8: Spring Recess. No Class.**  


**Week 9:**  
**Tuesday, March 21: Progress reports on paper #2, Introduction to Interviews,
Introduction to Paper #3**  
**     Assignment: Have Read Hansen, chapter 5**

**Thursday, March 23: Introduction to Paper #4 and research, discussion of
"Awakenings", Mid-term assessment**  
**     Assignment: Paper #2 due**  
**                             Rewrite #1 due (not mandatory)**  


**Week 10:**  
**Tuesday, March 28: Viewing of "Awakenings"**  
**     Assignment: Prospectus for Paper #3**  
**                             Town Hall #7 ("Reminiscence", "Rebecca", "The
Twins")**

**Thursday, March 30: Viewing of 2 nd half of "Awakenings"**  


**Week 11:**  
**Tuesday, April 4: Discussion of "Awakenings", Discussion of interviews**  
**     Assignment: Town Hall #8 ("Awakenings")**  
**                             Interview Questions due**

**Thursday, April 6: More on Interviewing and Research, Distribution of
Annotated Bibliography guidelines**  
**     Assignment: Prospectus for Paper #4 due**  


**Week 12:**  
**Tuesday, April 11: APA Format, Citing Sources, Quotations vs. Paraphrases,
Resumes, Sign-up for conferences**  
**     Assignment: Town Hall #9 (Respond to another posting)**  
**                             Have Read Hansen, chapter 14, and pps 449-462**

**Thursday, April 13: Peer Review #3, sign-up for conferences**  
**     Assignment: Rough Draft of paper #3**  


**Week 13:**  
**Tuesday, April 18: Resumes, Student presentations of Interviews, Research
concerns**  
**     Assignment: Paper #3 due**  
**                             Rewrite #2 due (not mandatory)**

**Thursday, April 20: Conferences (meet in Robinson A455) -- Annotated
Bibliography Due**  
**      Assignment: Bring Completed Annotated Bibliography AND all sources to
the conference**  


**Week 14:**  
**Tuesday, April 25: Conferences (meet in Robinson A455) -- Annotated
Bibliography Due**  
**     Assignment: Bring Completed Annotated Bibliography AND all sources to
the conference**

**Thursday, April 27: Peer Review #4**  
**     Assignment: Rough Draft of paper #4 due**  


**Week 15:**  
**Tuesday, May 2: Student presentations of research, Course Evaluations**  
**     Assignment: Town Hall #10 (Writing in your major or career field)**

**Thursday, May 4: Student presentations of research, In-class writing, last
rites**  
    


**Thursday, May 11: Paper #4 and Rewrite #3 due in my box by noon, (no class
meeting)**

[Back to Home Page](http://academic2.american.edu/~pjoyner/index.htm)
[Back to Vitae and Bio
Page](http://academic2.american.edu/~pjoyner/personal.htm)   [American
University](http://www.american.edu)
[Syllabi](http://academic2.american.edu/~pjoyner/syllabi.htm)    [Interesting
Sites](http://academic2.american.edu/~pjoyner/goodsites.htm)

