# HIST 2110 - **THEMES IN AMERICAN HISTORY** \- SUMMER SEMESTER, 2002

CAROL LEE, INSTRUCTOR

E-MAIL ADDRESS: [carollee@mail.clayton.edu](mailto:carollee@mail.clayton.edu)
I will communicate with you through your campus e-mail! Please be sure you
have established a campus e-mail address - and check it often!

WEB PAGE: [a-s.clayton.edu/calee](class.htm)

OFFICE PHONE: 770-961-3469/3460 (secretary)

OFFICE: ROOM 110-J

OFFICE HOURS: MWF 9:30-10:15; 12:20-1:00; 3:00-3:30. Appointments for
extensive consultations should be made at least one class meeting prior or by
phone or e-mail 24 hours in advance. If you just need a brief amount of time,
feel free to drop in any time!

COURSE DESCRIPTION: A thematic survey of U.S. history to the present. Provides
students with an historical perspective through the study of significant
periods and cultures in U.S. history from pre-history to the present. PLEASE
NOTE! Learning Support students who are required to take ENGL 0099 and/or READ
0099 must exit the requirement(s) before they can enroll in this course.

OVERVIEW OF COURSE: In this course, we will focus on the theme of major
turning points in American history. These include American independence, the
break up of the Union, the World Wars and the civil rights movement of the
20th century.

REQUIRED TEXT: _THE ENDURING VISION: A History of the American People_ ,
Concise: Fourth Edition; Boyer, Clark et al.

CLASS REQUIREMENTS

  * READINGS: Maintaining your readings in your textbook will be imperative. Your text is considered supplemental to class lectures, discussions, and activities. It is virtually impossible to cover all of history in one semester and highlighting the chapters in class keeps us from exploring events in more detail, therefore, you MUST take on this responsibility for yourself. By keeping up with your reading schedule, you will be able to form a knowledgeable basis for what is to be covered in class. Your tests will also include questions from your reading assignments.
  * ATTENDANCE: Attendance is imperative for this class and a grade for attendance will be given. Everyone will begin with a grade of 100. Every time you are absent without a documented reason, 5 points will be deducted; every time you are tardy, 2 point will be deducted (3 points for excessive tardies). If you are tardy to class, you must see me after class to correct your attendance. If you MUST be absent on a day when an assignment is due, you should make great effort to get the assignment to me on that day. **They will not be accepted late!** Only documented, excused absences will be accepted for make-up exams and that must be done within one week after the scheduled exam date. If you know ahead of time that you have a conflict with an exam date, you may make advanced arrangements to take the test early.
  * QUIZES: A quiz will be given each Friday that will cover both textbook readings for that week and information covered in class.
  * RESEARCH: One research project is required. Details are given at the end of the syllabus.
  * EXAMS: Two exams will be given during the semester, a mid-term and the final.  See list of "Dates to Remember". Exams will be partly objective (multiple choice and true/false), but will also include short answer and brief discussion questions, as well as identification of people, events and terms.

GRADING PROCEDURES

  * EXAMS - 20% each
  * RESEARCH - 30%
  * QUIZ AVERAGE - 20%
  * ATTENDANCE - 10%

OUTLINE OF COURSE TOPICS AND ITINERARY OF ASSIGNMENTS

I. AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE:  A brief background of the discovery, founding,
settlement, and purpose of the English colonies, and causes of the American
Revolution will be given. Our main focus will be the Declaration of
Independence (pp. A1-A3), its political ideology (p.75), and how the original
U.S. government organized (Chapter 7) and operated under its early
administrations (Chapters 7 & 8).

II. FROM UNION TO DISUNION: An overview of America's westward expansion will
be given, but its effects of regionalism and sectionalism will be stressed
(Chapters 9,10,12, & 13).

III. CIVIL RIGHTS: We will trace the evolution of civil rights from the end of
the Civil War through the 1960's (Chapter 16 and selected readings throughout
your textbook and on-line will be assigned).

IV. WORLD WARS TO WORLD LEADER: From the U.S. role in the Versailles
Conference at the end of WWI to its emergence as one of two superpowers
following WWII, we will look at its impact on world events (Chapters 24-30)

DATES TO REMEMBER:

JUNE 24 - First exam

JULY 1 - Last day to withdraw without academic penalty.\

JULY 5 - Holiday

JULY 25-26 - Final exams

  * Thursday, July 25, 10:30-12:30 (10:15 MWF classes)
  * Friday, July 26,1:00-3:00 (1:00 MWF classes)

`GENERAL ANNOUNCEMENTS:`

  * `Individuals with disabilities who need to request accommodations or obtain this document in an alternative format, contact Gina Phillips, Disability Services Coordinator, Student Center 214, 770-961-3719, ginaphillips@mail.clayton.edu`
  * `Students must abide by polices in the College Catalog, Student Handbook, and if applicable, program handbook.`
  * `Syllabus is subject to be changed or altered. Students will be notified in a timely manner concerning any changes.`
  * `See ``_adminservices.clayton.edu/studentlife/codeconduct.htm_`` for this school's policy concering plagiarism.`
  * ` No tape recording devices are allowed in class without the express permission of the instructor.`
  * `Phones and pagers should be turned off during class. If there are circumstances for which you must have them on, please discuss this with the instructor.`

RESEARCH REQUIREMENTS;

Oral histories or eyewitness accounts of historical events will be emphasized.
You will be required to collect 5 of these, using various sources. Once
located, you will share these in class at the appropriate period of history.
In order to to insure the event ties in with our in-class
lectures/discussions, all accounts will have to be approved by the instructor.
Use the "Outline of Course Topics" as your guideline. Below is a synopsis of
what is expected of you:

  * Use various search engines to locate eyewitness accounts of American history, particularly events that we will be discussing in class.
  * Print the account and present it to the instructor for approval. 
  * Once approval is given, the instructor will assign a date for the class presentation. 
  * Your presentation should include a thorough overview of the account without reading it to the class.
  * Avoid using the same source for all of your eyewitness accounts.

You may also do your own oral histories. If you know someone who is a veteran
of WWII, Korea, or Vietnam OR if you know someone who lived during the years
of segregation, public school integration, or the civil rights movement who
has stories to tell, you may make an audio or video tape of their experiences.
If you are interested in this, I will give you a handout of the required
guidelines. A 30 minute interview will equal two published
accounts/presentations.



