****Intelligence and National Security****

****Political Science 471****

****Winter Semester 1997**  
  
**

Instructor: Dr. Stan A. Taylor

Office Hours:

750 SWKT 11:00 to 12:00 MWF

Phone: 378-7493

e-mail: taylorsa@fhss.byu.edu  
  

Course Description: This is a senior level seminar course in which student
reading plays a significant role. Seminars present different challenges than
lecture courses. A seminar requires student contribution to the learning
experience. If you like to play the game of intellectual isolation, this is
not a course you will like. I will introduce the course with several lectures
and will spend some time introducing you to each new subject. But you must be
prepared to share what you learn from your reading and thinking with other
members of the seminar. Part of your grade will depend on the quality of these
contributions.  
  

Given the nature of the subject of the course, it is difficult to find a
single text that covers everything. I have required one text, but much of your
reading and learning must be drawn from the lengthy reading list provided
below.  
  

Anyone who makes decisions, in government or otherwise, must rely on
information about the decision environment. Hence, all governments, large and
small, have intelligence or information-providing functions. The subject of
this course is the U.S. intelligence system, its origins, development,
functions, and current operations. We will focus on the contributions of this
system to national strategic decision making. We will also spend a small
amount of time discussing and comparing the secret services of other nations.  
  
  
  

Course Requirements:  
  

Required Text: Johnson, Loch K. 1989. _America's secret power: The CIA in a
democratic society_. New York: Oxford University Press.  
  

Packet: Student must purchase a packet bearing the name of this course from
Alexander's Print Stop at 725 East 820 North. The packet will contain this
syllabus and some required readings.  
  

Writing: Each student must complete a " _World Politics_ -style" book review.
Early in the semester you should look through several such reviews in this
journal in order to grasp the nature of the task. In effect, these are as much
limited-source research papers as they are book reviews. You are encouraged to
focus on books published since 1987.  
  

Attendance: Just as in graduate or professional school and just as in the
career world, unexcused absences will hurt your performance in the
examinations, will detract from the contribution you are expected to make in
class discussions, and will lower your grade.

Grades  
  

Grades will be based on the following schedule:  
  

Attendance and participation 10%

Midterm examination 30%

Book review/research paper 30%

Final examination 30%  
  

Lecture Sequence and Readings: The topics listed below are the lecture
sequence for this course. Most items are books, but I have included a few
significant articles in academic journals. You must read any item marked by an
asterisk (*) and you should read other items as needed to give you a good
understanding of the topic. There are no "required" reading under some of the
topics. Some books are listed under more than one topic, but the complete
reference is always the first time that work is mentioned.  
  
  
  

1\. **Intelligence and Decision Making**



Bozeman, Adda B. 1992. _Strategic intelligence and statecraft: Selected
essays_. New York: Brassey's (US).  
  

Herman, Michael. 1995. _Intelligence power in peace and war_. New York:
Cambridge University Press.  
  

Jervis, Robert. 1970. _The logic of images in international relations_.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.  
  

Jervis, Robert. 1976. _Perception and misperception in international
politics._ Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.  
  

Kent, Sherman. 1949. _Strategic intelligence_. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press. (A paperback edition was printed in 1966 and reprinted in
1971).  
  

Knightly, Phillip. 1986. _The second oldest profession: Spies and spying in
the twentieth century_. New York: W. W. Norton.  
  

Laquer, Walter. 1985. _A world of secrets: The uses and limits of
intelligence._ New York: Basic Books.  
  

*Scoville, Herbert, Jr. 1976. Is espionage necessary for our security? _Foreign Affairs_ 54 (April): 482-495.   
  

Wilensky, Harold. 1967. _Organizational intelligence: Knowledge and power in
government and industry_. New York: Basic Books.  
  

2\. **Origins of Intelligence**  
  

Andrew, Christopher, and David Dilks, eds. 1984. _The missing intelligence
dimension: Governments and intelligence communities in the Twentieth Century._
Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.  
  

Andrew, Christopher, and Jeremy Noakes. 1987. _Intelligence and international
relations: 1900- 1945._ Exeter, England: Exeter University Publications.  
  

Dvornik, Francis. 1974. _The origins of intelligence services: The ancient
Near East, Persia, Greece, Rome, Byzantium, the Arab Muslim Empires, the
Mongol Empire, China, Moscovy._ New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.  
  

Rowan, Richard W. 1937. _The story of the secret service._ New York: Literary
Guild of America. (Republished as _Secret service: Thirty-three centuries of
espionage_ in 1969 by Kimber Publishing in London.)  
  

Starr, Chester G. 1974. _Political intelligence in classical Greece._ Leiden,
Holland: E. J. Brill.  
  

Thompson, James W., and Saul K. Padover. 1963. _Secret diplomacy: Espionage
and cryptography, 1500-1815._ New York: Frederick Ungar.  
  

Wark, Wesley K. ed. 1994. _Espionage: Past, present and future?_ London: Frank
Cass.  
  
  
  

3\. **The Evolution of American Intelligence**  
  

a. **Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries**  
  

Andrew, Christopher. 1995. _For the president's eyes only: Secret intelligence
and the American presidency from Washington to Bush_. New York: HarperCollins.
[Chap. 1]  
  

Ameringer, Charles D. 1990. _U.S. foreign intelligence: The secret side of
American history._ Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.  
  

Axelrod, Alan. 1992. _The war between the spies: A history of espionage during
the American Civil War._ New York: The Atlantic Monthly Press.  
  

Bakeless, John E. 1959. _Turncoats, traitors and heroes._ Philadelphia: J. B.
Lippincott.  
  

Bakeless, John E. 1970. _Spies of the Confederacy._ Philadelphia: J. B.
Lippincott.  
  

Bryan, George S. 1943. _The spy in America_. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott.  
  

Central Intelligence Agency. 1976. _Intelligence in the War of Independence_.
Washington, D.C.: CIA.  
  

Fishel, Edwin. 1996. _The secret war for the Union: The untold story of
military intelligence in the Civil War._ New York: Houghton Miflin.  
  

Ford, Corey. 1965. _A peculiar service: A narrative of espionage in and around
New York during the American Revolution_. Boston: Little, Brown.  
  

Jeffreys-Jones, Rhodri. 1977. _American espionage: From Secret Service to
CIA_. New York: Free Press.  
  

Kane, Harnett T. 1954. _Spies for the Blue and Gray_. New York: Hanover House.  
  

Knott, Stephen F. 1996. _Secret and sanctioned: Covert operations and the
American presidency._ New York: Oxford University Press.  
  

Miller, Nathan. 1989. _Spying for America: The hidden history of U.S.
intelligence_. New York: Paragon House.  
  

*Sayle, Edward F. 1986. The historical underpinnings of the U.S. intelligence community. _International Journal of Intelligence and Counterintelligence_ 1 (Spring): 1-27   
  

Thompson, Edmund R., ed. 1992. _Secret New England: Spies of the American
Revolution_. Kennebunk, Maine: The David Atlee Phillips New England Chapter of
the Association of Former Intelligence Officers.  
  

Tidwell, William A. 1995. _April '65: Confederate covert action in the
American Civil War_. Kent, OH: Kent State University Press  
  

Wriston, Henry M. 1929. _Executive agents in American foreign relations_.
Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins Press  
  

b. **American Intelligence in the Twentieth Century**  
  

Alsop, Steward and Thomas Braden. 1964. _Sub Rosa: The OSS and American
espionage_. New York: Harcourt Brace Javonovich.  
  

*Andrew. 1995. _For the president's eyes only_. [Chaps. 2, 3, and 4]   
  

Ambrose, Stephen E., with Richard H. Immerman. 1981. _Ike's spies: Eisenhower
and the espionage establishment_. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.  
  

Breuer, William B. 1993. _Hoodwinking Hitler: The Normandy deception_.
Westport, CT: Praeger.  
  

Clausen, Henry C., and Bruce Lee. 1992. _Pearl Harbor: Final judgment_. New
York: Crown Publishers.  
  

Calvocoressi, Peter. 1980. _Top secret Ultra_. New York: Pantheon Books.  
  

Collier, Basil. 1982. _Hidden weapons: Allied secret or undercover services in
World War II_. London: Hamish Hamilton.  
  

Corson, William R. 1977. _The armies of ignorance: The rise of the American
intelligence empires._ New York: Dial Press.  
  

Deakin, F. W., and G. R. Storry. 1966. _The case of Richard Sorge_. New York:
Harper and Row.  
  

Dulles, Allen W. 1963. _The secret surrender_. New York: Harper and Row.  
  

Farago. Ladislas. 1963. _Burn after reading: The espionage history of World
War II_. New York: MacFadden-Bartell.  
  

Farago, Ladislas. 1973. _The game of foxes_. New York: Bantam.  
  

Ford, Corey. 1970. _Donovan of O.S.S._ Boston: Little, Brown.  
  

Ford, Corey and Alastair McBain. 1945. _Cloak and dagger: The secret story of
O.S.S._ New York: Random House.  
  

Handel, Michael I. 1989. _Leaders and intelligence_. London: Frank Cass.  
  

Handel, Michael I. ed. 1990. _Intelligence and strategy in the Second World
War_. London: Frank Cass.  
  

Heinrichs, Waldo. 1988. _Threshold of war: Franklin D. Roosevelt and American
entry into World War II._ New York: Oxford University Press.  
  

Kahn, David. 1978. _Hitler's spies: German military intelligence in World War
II_. New York: Macmillan.  
  

Kahn, David. 1991. _Seizing the Enigma: The race to break the German U-boat
codes, 1939-1943._ Boston: Houghton Mifflin.  
  

Kirkpatrick, Lyman, Jr. 1969. _Captains without eyes_. New York: Macmillan.  
  

Kozaczuk, Wladislaw. 1984. _Enigma: How the German machine cipher was broken
and how it was read by the Allies in World War II_. Frederick, MD: University
Publications.  
  

Layton, Edwin T., with Roger Pineau and John Costello. 1985. _" And I was
there": Pearl Harbor and Midway--breaking the secrets_. New York: William
Marrow.  
  

Lawson, Donald. 1978. _The secret World War II_. New York: Watts.  
  

Lewin, Ronald. 1982. _The American Magic: Codes, ciphers, and the defeat of
Japan_. New York: Farrar, Straus, Giroux.  
  

Lewin, Ronald. 1978. _Ultra goes to war_. London: Hutchinson.  
  

May, Ernest R. ed. 1984. _Knowing one's enemies: Intelligence assessment
before the two world wars_. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.  
  

Masterman, John C. 1972. _The double-cross system in the war of 1939 to 1945._
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.  
  

Miller, Nathan. 1989. _Spying for America: The hidden history of U.S.
intelligence_. New York: Paragon House.  
  

Montagu, Ewen. 1978. _Beyond top secret Ultra_. New York: Coward, McCann.  
  

Morgan, J. William. 1957. _The O.S.S. and I_. New York: Norton.



Prange, Gordon W., and others. 1985. _Target Tokyo: The story of the Sorge spy
ring_. New York: McGraw Hill.  
  

Prange, Gordon W. 1981. _At dawn we slept: the untold story of Pearl Harbor.
New York_ : McGraw- Hill.  
  

Prados, John. 1995. _Combined fleet decoded: The secret history of American
intelligence and the Japanese navy in World War II_. New York: Random House.  
  

Persico, Joseph E. 1979. _Piercing the Reich: The penetration of Nazi Germany
by American secret agents during World War II_. New York: Viking Press.  
  

Rout, Leslie B., Jr., and John F. Bratzel. 1986. _The shadow war: German
espionage and United States counterespionage in Latin America during World War
II_. Frederick, MD: University Publications of America.  
  

Russell, Francis. 1981. _The secret war_. Alexandria, VA: Time-Life Books.  
  

Smith, Bradley. 1983. _The shadow warriors: OSS and the origins of the CIA_.
New York: Basic Books.  
  

Smith, R. Harris. 1972. _O.S.S.: The secret history of America's first central
intelligence agency_. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.  
  

Troy, Thomas E. 1981. _Donovan and the CIA: A history of the establishment of
the Central Intelligence Agency_. Frederick, MD: University Publications of
America.  
  

Troy, Thomas E. 1996. _Wild Bill and Intrepid: Donovan, Stephenson and the
origin of the CIA._ New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.  
  

Tuchman, Barbara. 1958. _The Zimmerman telegraph_. New York: Dell.  
  

Warner, Philip. 1988. _World War II: The unknown story_. London: The Bodley
Head.  
  

Whaley, Barton. 1973. _Codename Barbarossa_. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  
  

West, Nigel. 1985. _A thread of deceit: Espionage myths of World War II_. New
York: Random House.  
  

Winks, Robin W. 1987. _Cloak and gown: Scholars in the secret war, 1939-1961_.
New York: William Morrow.  
  

Winterbotham, Francis W. 1978. _The Nazi connection_. New York: Harper and
Row.  
  

Winterbotham, Francis W. 1974. _The ultra secret_. New York: Veil.  
  

Wohlstetter, Roberta. 1962. _Pearl Harbor: Warning and decision_. Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press.  
  
  
  

5\. **The U.S. Intelligence Community**  
  

a. **The Central Intelligence Agency**  
  

Agee, Philip. 1975. _Inside the company: CIA diary_. New York: Stonehill.  
  

Andrew. 1995. _For the president's eyes only_. [Chaps. 5-13]  
  

Breckinridge, Scott D. 1986. _The CIA and the US intelligence system_.
Boulder, CO: Westview Press.  
  

Breckinridge, Scott D. 1995. _CIA and the Cold War: A memoir_. Westport, CT:
Praeger Publishers.  
  

Borosage, Robert L., and John Marks, eds. 1976. _The CIA file_. New York:
Grossman.  
  

Cimbala, Stephen J., ed. 1986. _Intelligence and intelligence policy in a
democratic society_. Dobbs Ferry, NY: Transnational.  
  

Cline, Ray S. 1982. _The CIA: Reality vs myth_. Washington, D.C.: Acropolis
Books.  
  

Codevilla, Angelo. 1992. _Informing statecraft: Intelligence for a new
century_. New York: The Free Press.  
  

Colby, William E., with Peter Forbath. 1978. _Honorable men: My life in the
CIA_. New York: Simon  & Schuster.  
  

Darling, Arthur B. 1990. _The Central Intelligence Agency: An instrument of
government, to 1950_. University Park, PA: The Pennsylvania State University
Press.  
  

Fain, Tyrus G., ed. 1977. _The Intelligence Community: History, organization,
and issues_. New York: Bowker. [Chap. 5]  
  

Felix, Christopher [James McCargar]. 1988. _A short course in the secret war_.
2d ed. New York: Dell.  
  

Grose, Peter. 1996. Gentleman Spy: The life of Allen Dulles. ???[Paperback
version of a 1994 book]  
  

Jeffreys-Jones, Rhodri. 1989. _The CIA and American democracy_. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press.  
  

Jeffreys-Jones, Rhodre, and Christopher Andrew. 1997. _Eternal vigilance?: 50
years of the CIA_.

Ilford, England: Frank Cass Publisher.  
  

*Johnson, Loch K. 1989. _America's secret power: The CIA at home and abroad_. New York: Oxford University Press. [Chaps. 1, 2, and 3]   
  

Johnson, Loch, K. 1996. _Secret Agencies: U.S. intelligence in a hostile
world_. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.  
  

Kirkpatric, Lyman, Jr. 1968. _The real CIA_. New York: Macmillan.



Lowenthal, Mark M. 1984. _U.S. intelligence: Evolution and anatomy_. New York:
Praeger.  
  

McGarvey, Patrick J. 1972. _CIA: The myth and the madness_. New York: Saturday
Review Press.  
  

Marchetti, Victor, and John Marks. 1974. _The CIA and the cult of
intelligence_. New York: Knopf.  
  

Meyer, Cord. 1980. _Facing reality: From world federalism to the CIA_. New
York: Harper  & Row.  
  

Montague, Ludwell Lee. 1992. _General Walter Bedell Smith as Director of
Central Intelligence: October 1950-February 1953_. University Park, PA: The
Pennsylvania State University Press.  
  

Persico, Joseph E. 1990. _Casey: The lives and secrets of William J. Casey:
From the OSS to the CIA_. New York: Penguin Books.  
  

Powers, Thomas S. 1979. _The man who kept the secrets: Richard Helms and the
CIA_. New York: Knopf.  
  

Pfaltzgraff, Robert L., Jr., Uri Ra'anan, and Warren Milberg, eds. 1981.
_Intelligence policy and national security_. Hamden, CT: Archon.  
  

Quirk, John P. 1986. _The Central Intelligence Agency: A photographic
history_. Guilford, CT: Foreign Intelligence Press.  
  

Ransom, Harry H. 1970. _The intelligence establishment_. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.  
  

Ranelagh, John. 1987. _The agency: The rise and fall of the CIA_. New York:
Simon  & Schuster.  
  

Richelson, Jeffrey T. 1987. _American espionage and the Soviet target_. New
York: Morrow.  
  

Richelson, Jeffrey T. 1988. _The U.S. Intelligence Community_. Cambridge, MA:
Ballinger.  
  

Troy, Thomas F. 1988. The quaintness of the U.S. Intelligence Community: Its
origin, theory, and problems. _International Journal of Intelligence and
Counterintelligence_ 2 (No. 2) 245-266.  
  

*U.S. Congress. Senate. Selection Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities. 1976. _Final Report_ , Vol. I, _Foreign and military intelligence_ and vol. IV, _Supplementary detailed staff reports on intelligence and military intelligence_. Washington, D.C.: GPO.   
  

Warner, Michael. ed. 1994. _CIA: The CIA under Harry Truman_. Washington,
D.C.: CIA.  
  

b. **Defense Intelligence Agency**  
  

Fain, ed. 1977. _The intelligence community_. [Chap. 6]  
  

Handel, Michael I. 1985. _Military deception in peace and war_. Jerusalem:
Magnes Press.  
  

McGarvey, Patrick J. 1977. _DIA: Intelligence to please_. Chap. in _Readings
in American foreign : A bureaucratic perspective_ , ed. Morton H. Halperin and
Arnold Kanter. Boston: Little, Brown.  
  

Halperin, Morton, and others. 1976. _The lawless state_. New York: Penguin
Books. [See chap. 6.]  
  

*Richelson. 1988. _The U.S. Intelligence Community_. [Chaps. 3, 4, and 5]   
  

U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency. 1988. _Defense Intelligence Agency:
Organization, mission and key personnel_. Washington, D.C.: DIA.  
  

c. **National Security Agency**  
  

Bamford, James. 1982. _The puzzle palace: A report on America's most secret
agency_. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.  
  

Brownell, George A. 1981. _The origin and development of the National Security
Agency_. Laguna Hills, CA: Agean Park Press.  
  

Fain, ed. 1977. _The intelligence community_. [Chap. 7]  
  

Liston, Robert A. 1988. _The Pueblo surrender: A covert action by the National
Security Agency_. New York: M. Evans.  
  

*Richelson. 1988. _The U.S. Intelligence Community_. [pp. 24-29]   
  

U.S. Congress. Senate. Hearings. Select Committee to Study Governmental
Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities. 1976. Vol. 5. _The
National Security Agency and Fourth Amendment rights_. 94th Cong., 1st and 2nd
sess. Washington, D.C.: GPO.  
  

U.S. Congress. Senate. Select Committee on Intelligence. 1978. _Involvement of
NSA in development of the Data Encryption Standard: Unclassified summary_ ,(
report prepared by Stan A. Taylor and Ted Ralston), 95th Cong., 2nd sess.
Washington, D.C.: GPO.  
  

e. **The Federal Bureau of Investigation**  
  

Breuer, William B. 1995. _J. Edgar Hoover and his G-Men_. Westport, CT:
Praeger Publishers.  
  

Cook, Fred J. 1964. _The FBI nobody knows_. New York: Macmillan.  
  

Elliff, John T. 1979. _The reform of FBI intelligence operations_. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.  
  

Fain., ed. 1977. _The intelligence community_. [Chap. 8]  
  

Powers, Richard G. 1987. _Secrecy and power, the life of J. Edgar Hoover_. New
York: Free Press.  
  

*Richelson. 1988. _The U.S. Intelligence Community_. [Chap. 6]   
  

Sullivan, William C., and Bill Brown. 1979. _The Bureau: My thirty years in
Hoover's FBI_. New York: Norton.  
  

Theoharis, Athan G., and John Stuart Cox. 1988. _The boss: J. Edgar Hoover and
the great American inquisition_. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.  
  

Ungar, Sanford J. 1976. _The FBI: An uncensored look behind the walls_.
Boston: Atlantic, Little, Brown.  
  
  
  

6\. **What Intelligence Agencies Do**  
  

a. **Collect Information: Human Collection**  
  

Breckinridge. 1986. _The CIA and the U.S. intelligence system_. [Chaps. 8 and
9]  
  

*Johnson, 1989. _America's secret power_. [Chap. 4]   
  

Richelson. 1985. _The U.S. intelligence community_. [Chaps. 9 and 12]  
  

Shackley, Theodore. 1981. _The third option: An American view of
counterinsurgency operations_. New York: McGraw-Hill.  
  

Smith, Joseph B. 1976. _Portrait of a cold warrior_. New York: Putnam.  
  

Stockwell, John. 1978. _In search of enemies: A CIA story_. New York: Norton.  
  

b. **Collect Information: Technical Collection**  
  

Babington-Smith, Constance. 1957. _Air spy: The story of photo intelligence in
World War II_. New York: Harper  & Row.  
  

Bamford. 1982. _The puzzle palace_.  
  

Bennett, Ralph. 1996. _Intelligence investigations: How Ultra changed
history_. Ilford, England: Frank Cass Publishers.  
  

Bissell, Richard M., Jr., with Jonathan E. Lewis and Frances T. Pudlo. 1996\.
_Reflections of a cold warrior: From Yalta to the Bay of Pigs_. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press.  
  

Breckinridge, 1986. _The CIA and the U.S. intelligence system_. [Chap. 10]  
  

Brugioni, Dino A. 1993. _From balloons to blackbirds--reconnaissance,
surveillance and imagery intelligence: How it evolved_. McLean, VA: The
Association of Former Intelligence Officers. [Number 9 in the Intelligence
Profession series]  
  

Burrows, William E. 1986. _Deep black: Space espionage and national security_.
New York: Random House.  
  

Jones, Reginald Victor. 1978. _The wizard war: British scientific
intelligence, 1939-1945._ New York: Coward, McCann  & Geoghegan.  
  

Klass, Philip J. 1971. _Secret sentries in space_. New York: Random House.  
  

Pocock, Chris. 1989. _Dragon Lady: The history of the U-2 spyplane_.
Shrewsbury, England: Airlife Publishing Ltd.  
  

Richelson. 1985. _The U.S. intelligence community_. [Chap. 14]  
  

Richelson, Jeffrey T., and Desmond Ball. 1985. _The ties that bind:
Intelligence cooperation between the UKUSA--the United Kingdom, the United
States of America, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand_. Boston: Allen  &
Unwin.  
  

Taylor, John and David Mondey. 1972. _Spies in the sky_. New York: Scribner's.  
  

Yost, Graham. 1985. _Spy-tech_. New York: Facts on File.  
  

Wise, David and Thomas B. Ross. 1962. _The U-2 affair_. New York: Random
House.  
  

c. **Analyze Information**  
  

Betts, Richard K. 1978. Analysis, war, and decision. _World Politics_ 31 (no.
2): 61-82.  
  

Breckinridge. 1988. _The U.S. intelligence community_. [Chap. 12]  
  

Godson, Roy. 1980. _Intelligence requirements for the 1980's: Analysis and
estimates_. Washington, D.C.: National Strategy Information Center.  
  

*Ford, Harold P. 1993. _Estimative intelligence: The purposes and problems of national intelligence estimating_. rev.ed. Lanham, MD: University Press of America.   
  

Jervis, Robert. 1986-87. Intelligence and foreign policy. _International
Security_ 11 (no. 3): 141-161.  
  

Katz, Barry M. 1989. _Foreign intelligence: Research and analysis in the
Office of Strategic Services, 1942-1945_. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.  
  

Koch, Scott A. ed. 1993. _CIA Cold War records: Selected estimates on the
Soviet Union--1950-1959._ Washington, D.C.:Central Intelligence Agency  
  

*Johnson. 1989. _America's secret power_. [Chap. 5]   
  

MacEachin, Douglas J. 1994. _The tradecraft of analysis: Challenge and change
in the CIA_. Washington D.C.: Consortium for the Study of Intelligence.  
  

Nye, Joseph S., Jr. 1994. Peering into the future. _Foreign Affairs_ 73
(July/August): 82-93.  
  

Prados, John. 1986. _The Soviet estimate: U.S. intelligence analysis and
Soviet strategic forces_. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, paperback
edition.  
  

Richelson. 1985. _The U.S. intelligence community_. [Chap. 12]  
  

Steury, Donald P. 1994. _Sherman Kent and the Board of National Estimates:
Collected essays_. Washington, D.C.: Center for the Study of Intelligence,
Central Intelligence Agency.  
  

Steury, Donald P. ed. 1996. _Intentions and capabilities: Estimates on Soviet
strategic forced, 1950-1983._ Washington, D.C.: Central Intelligence Agency  
  

d. **The Production and Use of Intelligence**  
  

Betts, Richard K. 1978. Analysis, war and decision: Why intelligence failures
are inevitable. _World Politics_ 31 (October): 61-89  
  

Betts, Richard K. 1980. Intelligence for policymaking. _Washington Quarterly_
(Summer): 118-29.  
  

Betts, Richard K. 1980-81. Surprise despite warning: Why sudden attacks
succeed. _Political Science Quarterly_ 95 (Winter): 551-72.  
  

Betts, Richard K. 1982. _Lessons for defense planning_. Washington, D.C.:
Brookings.  
  

Cline, Ray S. 1974-75. Policy without intelligence. _Foreign Policy_ 17
(Winter): 121-35.  
  

Cohen, Eliot A. 1990. _Military misfortunes: The anatomy of failure in war_.
New York: The Free Press.  
  

Cooper, Chester L. 1972. The CIA and decision making. _Foreign Affairs_ 50
(January): 223-36.  
  

*Flanagan, Stephen J. 1985. Managing the Intelligence Community. _International Affairs_ 10 (No. 1):58-95.   
  

Gates, Robert M. 1987/88. The CIA and American foreign policy. _Foreign
Affairs_ 66 (Winter): 215- 30.  
  

Gates, Robert M. 1996. _From the shadows: The ultimate insider's story of five
presidents and how they won the cold war_. New York: Simon  & Schuster.  
  

Helgerson, John L. 1996. _Getting to know the president: CIA briefings of
presidential candidates, 1952-1992._ Langley, VA: CIA, Center for the Study of
Intelligence.  
  

Hughes, Thomas L. 1976. _The fate of facts in a world of men: Foreign policy
and intelligence making_. New York: Foreign Policy Association.  
  

Jervis, Robert. 1986-87. Intelligence and foreign policy. _International
Security_ 11 (Winter): 141-61.  
  

Knorr, Klaus. 1984. Failures in national intelligence estimates: The case of
the Cuban missiles. _World Politics_ 16 (April): 456-75.  
  

McAuliffe, Mary S. 1992. _CIA documents on the Cuban missile crisis, 1962._
Washington, D.C.: Central Intelligence Agency.  
  

*Richelson. 1985. _The U.S. intelligence community_. [Chap. 1]   
  

*Taylor, Stan A., and Theodore J. Ralston. 1991. The Role of intelligence in crisis management. In _Avoiding war: Problems in crisis management_ , ed. Alexander L. George, 395-412. Bolder, CO: Westview Press.   
  

e. **Covert Action**  
  

Godson, Roy. 1981. _Intelligence Requirements for the 1980's: Covert Action_.
Washington, D.C.: National Strategy Information Center.  
  

*Johnson. 1989. _America's secret power_. [Chap. 6]   
  

Kessler, Ronald. 1992. _Inside the CIA: Revealing the secrets of the world's
most powerful spy agency_. New York: Pocket Books.  
  

Prados, John. 1986. _Presidents' secret wars: CIA and Pentagon covert
operations since World War II_. New York: Morrow.  
  

Thomas, Evan. 1995. _The very best men: Four who dared: The early years of the
CIA_. New York: Simon  & Schuster.  
  

Treverton, Gregory F. 1987. _Covert action: The limits of intervention in the
postwar world_. New York: Basic Books.  
  

f. **Counterintelligence**  
  

Allen, Thomas B., and Norman Polmar. 1988. _Merchants of treason: America's
secrets for sale_. New York: Delacorte.  
  

Barron, John. 1974. _KGB: The secret work of Soviet agents_. Pleasantville,
NY: Reader's Digest.  
  

Barron, John. 1996. _Operation solo: The FBI's man in the Kremlin_.
Washington, D.C.: Regnery.  
  

Barron, John. 1987. _Breaking the ring: The bizarre case of the Walker family
spy ring_. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.  
  

Godson, Roy, ed. 1980. _Intelligence requirements for the 1980's:
Counterintelligence_. Washington D.C.:National Intelligence Information
Center.  
  

*Johnson. 1989. _America's secret power_. [Chap. 7]   
  

Kessler, Ronald. 1991. _Escape from the CIA: How the CIA won and lost the most
important KGB spy ever to defect to the U.S._ New York: Pocket Books  
  

Klehr, Harvey, and John Earl Haynes and Fridrikh Igorevich Firsov. 1995. _The
secret world of American communism_. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.  
  

Lamphere, Robert J., and Tom Shachtman. 1986. _The FBI-KGB war: A special
agent's story_. New York: Random House.  
  

Lindsey, Robert. 1979. _The falcon and the snowman_. New York: Simon and
Schuster.  
  

Mangold, Thomas. 1991. _Cold warrior, James Jesus Angleton: The CIA's master
spy hunter_. New York: Simon  & Schuster.  
  

Morse, George P. 1995. _America twice betrayed: Reversing fifty years of
government security failure_. Silver Spring, MD: Bartleby Press.  
  

Pincer, Chapman. 1987. _Traitors: The labyrinths of treason_. London: Sidgwich
& Jackson.  
  

Theoharis, Athan G. 1978. _Spying on Americans: Political surveillance from
Hoover to the Huston Plan_. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.  
  

*Taylor, Stan A., and Daniel Cannon Snow. 1997. America's Cold-War spies: Why they spied and how they got caught. _Intelligence and National Security_ 12: Number 2 (April). [Your packet contains a longer version of this article.]   
  

Wise, David. 1992. _Molehunt: The secret search for traitors that shattered
the CIA_. New York: Random House.  
  

g. **Communication Security**  
  

Baker, Henry, and Fred Piper. 1982. _Cipher systems: The protection of
communications_. London: Northwood Books.  
  

*Kahn, David. 1967. _The codebreakers: The story of secret writing_. New York: MacMillam.   
  

Lewin. 1982. _The American magic_.  
  

Smith, Bradley F. 1993. _The Ultra-Magic deals and the most secret special
relationship, 1940-1946._ Novato, CA: Presidio.  
  

Weber, Ralph E. 1979. _United States diplomatic codes and ciphers 1775-1938._
Chicago: Precedent Publishing.  
  

Welchman, Gordon. 1982. _The Hut Six story: Breaking the Enigma code_. New
York: McGraw-Hill.  
  

h. **Penetration**  
  

Adams, James. 1995. _Sellout: Aldrich Ames and the corruption of the CIA_. New
York: Viking.  
  

Corson, William R., Susan B. Trento, and Joseph J. Trenty. 1989. _Widows_. New
York: Crown.  
  

Dippel, John V. H. 1992. _Two against Hitler: Stealing the Nazi's best-kept
secrets_. New York: Praeger.  
  

Hood, William. 1982. _Mol_ e. New York: Norton.  
  

*U.S. Congress. Senate. Select Committee on Intelligence. 1986. _Meeting the espionage challenge: A review of United States counterintelligence and security programs_. S. Report 99-522. 99th Cong., 2nd sess. Washington, D.C.: GPO.   
  

Schecter, Jerrold L. And Peter S. Deriabin. 1992. _The spy who saved the
world: How a Soviet Colonel changed the course of the Cold War_. New York:
Charles Scribner's Sons.  
  

Weinstein, Allen. 1978. _Perjury: The Hiss-Chambers case_. New York: Knopf.  
  

g. **Counterinsurgency**  
  

Plaster, John L. 1997. _SOG: The secret wars of America's commandos in
Vietnam._ New York: Simon  & Schuster.  
  

Shackley, Theodore. 1981. _The third option: An American view of
counterinsurgency_. Pleasantville, NY: Reader's Digest.  
  

Snepp, Frank. 1979. _Decent interval: An insider's account of Saigon's
indecent end; told by the CIA's chief strategy analyst in Vietnam_. New York:
Random House.  
  

Woodward, Bob. 1987. _Veil: The CIA secret wars, 1981-87._ New York: Simon and
Schuster.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

7\. **Intelligence Services of Other Nations**  
  

a. **United Kingdom**  
  

Aldrich, Richard J. and Michael F. Hopkins, eds. 1994. _Intelligence, defence
and diplomacy: British policy in the post-war world_. London: Frank Cass.  
  

Andrew, Christopher. 1986. _Her Majesty's secret service: The making of the
British intelligence community_. New York: Viking  
  

Borovik, Genrikh. 1994. _The Philby files: The secret life of master spy Kim
Philby_ , ed. Phillip Knightly. Boston, MA: Little, Brown.  
  

Dorril, Stephen. 1993. _The silent conspiracy: Inside the intelligence
services in the 1990s_. London: Heinemann.  
  

Hinsley, F.H. and others. 1979. _British intelligence in the Second World
War_. New York: Cambridge University Press. [This is a four volume work with
volumes 3 through 4 published in 1981, 1984, and 1987.]  
  

Howard, Michael. 1990. _British intelligence in the Second World War_ , Volume
5, _Strategic Deception_. New York: Cambridge University Press.  
  

Masterman, Sir John. 1972. _Double cross system of the war of 1939-45._ New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.  
  

Newton, Verne W. 1991. _The Cambridge Spies: The untold story of MacLean,
Philby, and Burgess in America_. Lanham, NY: Madison Books.  
  

Penrose, Barrie, and Simon Freeman. 1987. _Conspiracy of silence: The secret
life of Anthony Blunt_. New York: Farrer, Straus, and Giroux.  
  

Sutherland, Douglas. 1980. _The great betrayal: The definitive story of Blunt,
Philby, Burgess, and MacLean_. New York: Time.  
  

Thomas, Rosamund. 1991. _Espionage and secrecy: The Official Secrets Acts
1911-1989 of the United Kingdom_. New York: Routledge (US).  
  

Winterbotham. 1974. _The Ultra secret_.  
  

West, Nigel. 1984. _The circus: MI5 operations, 1945-1972._ New York: Stein
and Day.  
  

Wright, Peter. 1987. _Spycatcher_. New York: Viking.  
  
  
  

b. **The Soviet Union/Russia**  
  

Andrew, Christopher, and Oleg Gordievsky. 1990. _KGB: The inside story_. New
York: HarperCollins.  
  

Andrew, Christopher, and Oleg Gordievsky. 1992. _More instructions from the
Centre: Top secret files on KGB global operations 1975-1985_. Ilford, England:
Frank Cass Publisher.  
  

Barron, John. 1974. KGB: _The secret work of Soviet secret agents_.
Pleasantville, NY: Reader's Digest Press.  
  

Barron, John. 1983. _The KGB today: The hidden hand_. Pleasantville, NY:
Reader's Digest Press.  
  

Bittman, Ladislav. 1985. _The KGB and Soviet disinformation: An insider's
view_. Washington, D.C.: Pergamon-Brassey's.  
  

Brook-Shepherd, Gordon. 1989. _The storm birds: Soviet postwar defectors_. New
York: Weidenfeld  & Nicolson.  
  

Central Intelligence Agency. 1984. _The Rote Kapelle: The CIA's history of
Soviet intelligence and espionage networks in Western Europe, 1936-1938._
Washington, D.C.: University of America.  
  

Conquest, Robert.1985. _Inside Stalin's secret police: NKVD politics,
1936-1939._ London: Macmillan.  
  

Corson, William R., and Robert T. Crowley. 1985. _The New KGB: Engine of
Soviet power_. New York: Morrow.  
  

Costello, John, and Oleg Tsarev. 1993. _Deadly illusions_. New York: Crown
Publishers.  
  

Deriabin, Peter, and T. H. Bagley. 1990. _The KGB: Masters of the Soviet
Union_. New York: Hippocrene.  
  

Epstein, Edward J. 1989. _Deception: The invisible war between the KGB and the
CIA_. New York: Simon  & Schuster.  
  

Hingley, Ronald. 1970. _The Russian secret police: Muscovite, imperial Russian
and Soviet political security operations_. New York: Dorset Press.  
  

Hyde, H. Montgomery. 1980. _The atom bomb spies_. London: Hamish Hamilton.  
  

Kessler, Ronald. 1988. _Spy vs spy: Stalking Soviet spies in America_. New
York: Scribner's.  
  

Richelson, Jeffrey T. 1986. _Sword and shield: The Soviet intelligence and
security apparatus_. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.  
  

Romerstein, Herbert, and Stanislav Levchenko. 199. _The KGB against the "Main
Enemy": How the Soviet intelligence service operates against the United
States_. Lexington, MA: Heath.  
  

Rose, Clive. 1988. _The Soviet propaganda network: A directory of
organizations serving Soviet foreign policy_. London: Pinter Publishers.  
  

Rositzke, Harry. 1981. _The KGB: The eyes of Russia_. Garden City, NY:
Doubleday.  
  

Schulz, Richard H., and Roy Godson. 1984. _Desinformatsia: Active measures in
Soviet strategy_. New York: Pergamon-Brassey.  
  

Sheymov, Victor. 1993. _Tower of secrets: A real life spy thriller_.
Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press.  
  

Stiller, Werner, with Jefferson Adams. 1992. _Beyond the wall: Memoirs of an
East and West German spy_. McLean, VA: Brassey's (US).  
  

Sudoplatov, Pavel and Anatoli Sudoplatov with Jerrold L. and Lena P. Schecter.
1994. _Special tasks: The memoirs of and unwanted witness--A Soviet
spymaster_. Boston: Little, Brown.  
  

c. **Israel**  
  

Black Ian. 1991. _Israel's secret wars: A history of Israel's intelligence
services_. New York: Grove Weidenfeld.  
  

Cockburn, Andrew, and Leslie Cockburn. 1992. _Dangerous liaison: The inside
story of the U.S.- Israeli overt relationship_. New York: HarperCollins.  
  

Deacon, Richard (Donald McCormick). 1979. _The Israeli secret service_.
London: Sphere.  
  

Eshed, Haggai. 1997. _Reuven Shiloah--the man behind the Mossad: Secret
diplomacy in the creation of Israel._ Ilford, England: Frank Cass Publishers.  
  

Katz, Samuel M. 1992. _Soldier spies: Israeli military intelligence_. Novato,
CA: Presidio Press.  
  

Ostrovsky, Victor, and Claire Hoy. 1990. _By way of deception: The making and
unmaking of a Mossad officer_. New York: St. Martin's Press.  
  

Payne, Ronald. 1990. _Mossad: Israel's most secret service_. London: Bantam
Press.  
  

Raviv, Dan, and Yossi Melman. 1990. _Every spy a prince: The complete history
of Israel's intelligence community_. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.  
  

Steven, Stewart. 1980. _The spymasters of Israel_. New York: Ballantine Books.  
  

Toscano, Louis. 1990. _Triple cross: Israel, the atomic bomb and the man who
spilled the secrets_. New York: Birch Lane Press.  
  

d. **France**  
  

Cornick, Martyn, and Peter Morris. 1993. _The French secret services_. New
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.  
  

Porch. Douglas. 1996. _The French secret services: A history of French
intelligence from the Dreyfus Affair to the Gulf War_. New York: Farrar,
Straus and Giroux.  
  

e. **Other**  
  

Bozeman, Ada. 1985. Statecraft and intelligence in the non-Western world.
_Conflict_ 6: 1-35.  
  

Cain, Frank. 1994. _The Australian security intelligence organization: An
unofficial history_. Newbury Park, England: Frank Cass.  
  

Colitt, Leslie. 1995. _Spymaster: The real life Karla, his moles, and the East
German Secret Police_. New York. Addison-Wesley Publishing Co.  
  

Eftimiades, Nicholas. 1994. _Chinese intelligence operations_. Annapolis, MD:
Naval Institute Press.  
  

Granatstein, J.L., and David Stafford. 1990. _Spy wars: Espionage and Canada
from Gouzenko to Glasnost_. Toronto: Key Porter Books.  
  

McKay, C.G. 1993. _From information to intrigue: Studies in secret service
based on the Swedish experience, 1939-1945_. London: Frank Cass.  
  

Reese, Mary Ellen. 1990. _General Reinhard Gehlen: The CIA connection_.
Fairfax, VA: George Mason University Press.  
  

Sawatsky, John. 1980. _Men in the shadows: The RCMP Security Service_.
Toronto: Doubleday.  
  

Whitney, Craig R. 1993. _Spy trader: Germany's devil's advocate and the
darkest secrets of the Cold War_. New York: Times Books.  
  
  
  

8\. **Contemporary Problems**  
  

a. **Oversight**  
  

Barnds, William J. 1969. Intelligence and foreign policy: Dilemmas of a
democracy. _Foreign Affairs_ 47 (January): 21-95.  
  

Cimbala, Stephen J., ed. 1987. _Intelligence and intelligence policy in a
democratic society_. Dobbs Ferry, NY: Transnational.  
  

Cockburn, Leslie. 197. _Out of control: The story of the Reagan
Administration's secret war in Nicaragua, the illegal arms pipeline, and the
Contra drug connection_. New York: Atlantic Monthly.  
  

Hastedt, Glen. ed. 1991. _Controlling intelligence_. London: Frank Cass  
  

*Levine, Edward P. And Stan A. Taylor. 1977. U.S. Senate oversight over the intelligence community: Powers and strategies. Paper prepared for the 18th Annual Meeting of the International Studies Association, St. Louis, March 16-20, 1977. [Paper included in packet.]   
  

Olmsted, Kathryn S. 1966. _Challenging the secret government: The post-
Watergate investigations at the CIA and the FBI_. Chapel Hill; NC: University
of North Carolina Press.  
  

Oseth, John M. 1985. _Regulating U.S. intelligence operations: A study in
definition of the national interest_. Lexington, KT: University Press of
Kentucky.  
  

Smist, Frank J. Jr. 1990. _Congress oversees the United States intelligence
community, 1947-1989_. Knoxville, TN: The University of Tennessee Press.  
  

Turner, Stansfield. 1985. _Secrecy and democracy: The CIA in transition_.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.  
  
  
  

b. **Terrorism**  
  

Dobson, Christopher, and Ronald Payne. 1987. _War without end: The terrorists:
An intelligence dossier_. London: Sphere Books.  
  

c, **Legal and Ethical Issues**  
  

Glennon, Michael J. 1984. Liaison and the law: Foreign intelligence activities
in the United States. _Harvard International Law Journal_ 25 (Winter): 1-42.  
  

Godfrey, E. Drexel, Jr. 1978. Ethics and intelligence. _Foreign Affairs_ 56
(April): 624-42.  
  

*Hastedt, Glenn. 1986. The constitutional control of intelligence. _Intelligence and National Security_ 1 (May): 255-71.   
  

Koh, Harold Hongju. 1990. _The national security constitution: Sharing power
after the Iran-Contra affair_. New Haven: CT: Yale University Press.  
  

Lefever, Ernest W. 1980. Can covert action be just? _Policy Review_ 12
(Spring): 115-22.  
  

Reisman, W. Michael, and James E. Baker. 1992. _Regulating covert action:
Practices, context, and policies of covert coercion abroad in international
and American law_. New Haven. CT: Yale University Press.  
  

c. **Paying for Intelligence**  
  

*U.S. Congress. Senate. Hearing. Select Committee on Intelligence. 1977. _Whether disclosure of funds authorized for intelligence activities in the public interest_. 95th Cong. 1st sess. Washington, D.C.: GPO.   
  

d. **Intelligence in the Post-Cold War World**  
  

*Andrew. 1995. _For the president's eyes only_. [Conclusion]   
  

Good

