|  
---|---  
  
![](images/header.gif)  
  
[![](images/home.gif)](index.html)[![](images/syllabus.gif)](syllabus.html)[![](images/instructors.gif)](instructors.html)[![](images/assignments.gif)](assignments.html)[![](images/comp.gif)](computer.html)[![](images/online.gif)](links.html)



|

**Syllabus**

**Course Description:**  
The assignments, lectures, and discussions in this course constitute a survey
of the history of science in the United States, with particular emphasis on
the institutional configurations that emerged in the period since nationhood.
We begin with indigenous and European ways of understanding nature and the
challenges provided by the Americas. Much of the course is dedicated to
following the perceptions and practices of science and technology over time;
the establishment of an infrastructure for education and research; the
relationship among government, corporate, and academic scientists and
engineers; and the access by diverse groups to education in and practice of
science.

**Course Format:  
** Class meetings will consist of lectures, group discussions, and some class
presentations. There will be assigned readings and two films. In several
cooperative learning discussions, the class will be assembled into small
groups that will include a mix of students from technical and humanistic
majors; the mix of historical and scientific issues is also evident in the
assigned readings. The goal is to allow students to learn more by sharing
knowledge with and listening to alternative ideas of others in the group, thus
serving as consultants; during discussion instructors are only to facilitate
and help to focus group attention on key questions. Since readings will be the
subject of questions and comments, students should be prepared to discuss all
reading on the day the assignment is listed.

**Course Requirements:**  
Utilizing lecture materials and readings, discussion and written assignments
are intended to increase student capacity to write independently and
analytically about historical topics. 1) Discussions are meant to enhance
participation, deepen knowledge of the themes of the course, and identify
problems in understanding the information. Attendance is therefore required.
2) Five computer based assignments will bring primary source visual and
textual materials together as another way of understanding specific aspects of
science in American culture; these are due via e-mail or via paper copy at the
beginning of class on the day designated. 3) The midterm examination will be
essay (one essay and some shorter identification subjects). 4) The final
examination (similar format) will be primarily based on the course work after
the mid-term, although the essay portion may ask for some general reflections
relating to the earlier period. Students taking the class as 5332 will need to
prepare a 2000 word report on two or three books (or a combination of articles
and books); they should propose their reading by January 21st and have the
final copy ready on February 25th.

Office and Appointments: Professor Kohlstedt's office is in 123 Pillsbury
Hall, Winchell School of Geology and Geophysics (4-9368;
sgk@mailbox.mail.umn.edu) and her office hours will be on Friday from 1:30 to
3 pm. Other times are available by appointment. Olivia Walling's office is in
435Walter Library (6-8722); wall0269@.tc.umn.edu) and her office hours will be
Tuesday from 11:10 to 12:15 and by appointment.

**Readings and Texts:**

The bookstore has on order the following four books:

Daniel J. Kevles, The Physicists: A Scientific Community in Modern
America(Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press, 1995)

Ronald Numbers and Charles Rosenberg, eds., The Scientific Enterprise in
America(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996).

Kenneth Manning, Black Apollo of Science: The Life of Ernest Everett Just (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1984).

Lawrence Badash, Scientists and the Development of Nuclear Weapons: From
Fission to the Limited Test Ban Treaty, 1939-1963 (New Jersey: Humanities
Press, 1995).

Those books are also reserve in Walter Library, along with other readings that
may be assigned.

**Topics and Assignments:**

Jan. 5 Introduction \- Science and Imperialism in North America

Jan. 7 The Dynamics of Science in Empire

Jan. 12 Political Revolution, Cultural Continuities, and National Identity

Jan 14 Natural Historians and Ingenious Yankees

   Kohlstedt, "Parlors, Primers, and Public Schooling...." (N&R)

   ON LINE Assignment Due ([Natural History](nh_title.htm))

Jan. 19 Managing Expertise in a Democratic Culture

   George H. Daniels, "The Process of Professionalization...." (N&R)

   Hugh Slotten, "The Dilemmas of Science in the U.S....." (N&R)

Jan. 21 REVIEW and DISCUSSION

   Coordinating Science on American Terms

Jan. 26 The New Naturalists and the Impact of Darwinism

   ON LINE Assignment II Due ([Joseph Henry](jh_title.htm))

Jan 28 Physical Sciences and the Public Imagination

   ON LINE Assignment III Due ([Astrophysics](as_tradintro.htm))

Feb. 2 Emerging Professions and Higher Education

   Rossiter, "Women's Work in Science" (N&R)

   Kohler, "The Ph.D. Machine" (N&R)

Feb. 4 Practice and Aspirations in the Emerging Biological Sciences

   Pauly, "The Shaping of High School Biology..." (N&R)

Feb. 9 [MIDTERM EXAM](3332-midterm.htm)

   Science in 20th Century America

Feb. 11 Progressivism and Science: the Social Sciences

   ON LINE Assignment IV ([Museums](mu_title.htm))

Feb. 16 The "New Physics"

   Kevles, The Physicists, chapters 1-5

Feb. 18 DISCUSSION: Private Funding and Elite Science

   Black Apollo, 2, 3, & 6

Feb. 23 Industrial Science

   Wise, "Ionists in Industry" (N&R)

   Owens, "MIT and the Federal Angel" (N&R)

Feb. 25 Ambiguity between Science and Culture

   Charlie Chaplin film, Modern Times

   Gregg Mitman, "Cinematic Nature" (N&R)

Mar. 2 DISCUSSION: Who does science?

   Kevles, 13, 14, & 15

   Rossiter, Women Scientists in America, vol 1, 8 & 10 ( reserve)

   Science, Government, and Industrial Incentives

Mar. 4 The Atomic Age

   Badash, Scientists and the Development of Nuclear Weapons

   Film: The Decision to Drop the Bomb

Jessica Wang, American Science in an Age of Anxiety: Scientists, Anti-
communism, and the Cold War (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina, 1998),
chapter 2.

Mar. 9 Scientific Authority and the Public Promotion of Science

   ON LINE Assignment V ([The Space Program](space_title.htm))

   Mar. 11 Science after the Cold War

   Kevles, 24, 25, and "Preface: 1995



* * *  
  


Copyright 2000 - [Sally Gregory Kohlstedt](mailto:sgk@umn.edu)  
[Program in the History of Science and
Technology](http://www.physics.umn.edu/groups/hsci/)  
[University of Minnesota](http://www.umn.edu/)

