{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1
\deff0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\\*\panose
02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f3\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\\*\panose
05050102010706020507}Symbol;} {\f11\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\\*\panose
00000000000000000000}MS Sans Serif;}{\f107\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New
Roman CE;}{\f108\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman
Cyr;}{\f110\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f111\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman
Tur;}{\f112\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman
(Hebrew);}{\f113\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman
(Arabic);}{\f114\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}}
{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;
\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql
\li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0
\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0
Normal;}{\s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\nowidctlpar
\tx-1440\tx-720\tx1\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\tx9360\tx10080\faauto\outlinelevel0\rin0\lin0\itap0
\fs24\ul\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0
heading 1;}{\\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph
Font;}}{\\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1697677816\listsimple{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat0\levelspace0\levelindent0{\leveltext\'01*;}{\levelnumbers;}\chbrdr\brdrnone\brdrcf1
\chshdng0\chcfpat1\chcbpat1 }{\listname
;}\listid-2}}{\\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid-2\listoverridecount1{\lfolevel\listoverrideformat{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat0\levelold\levelspace0
\levelindent360{\leveltext\'01\u-3913
?;}{\levelnumbers;}\f3\chbrdr\brdrnone\brdrcf1
\chshdng0\chcfpat1\chcbpat1\fbias0 }}\ls1}}{\info{\author bsos_user}{\operator
bsos_user}{\creatim\yr2001\mo4\dy12\hr10\min49}{\revtim\yr2001\mo4\dy12\hr15}{\version9}
{\edmins38}{\nofpages47}{\nofwords16784}{\nofchars-32766}{\\*\company
UMCP}{\nofcharsws0}{\vern8247}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\horzdoc\dghspace120\dgvspace120\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984
\dghshow0\dgvshow3\jcompress\viewkind4\viewscale87\nolnhtadjtbl \fet0\sectd
\linex0\sectdefaultcl
{\\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta
.}}{\\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta
.}}{\\*\pnseclvl3 \pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta
.}}{\\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta
)}}{\\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta
)}}{\\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta
)}}{\\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta
)}}{\\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta
)}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0
\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 { \par \par \par \par
}\pard \qc \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\fs48 GVPT \par
GRADUATE STUDENT ASSOCIATION}{\fs32 \par }{\fs40 \par }{\b\fs72 HANDBOOK
2000-2001}{\fs32 \par \par \par \par 4}{\fs21\up16 th}{\fs32 edition \par \par
\par \par \par \par \par \par }\pard \ql
\li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {This handbook is prepared by
graduate students in the Department of Government and Politics through the
Graduate Student Association. It is }{\i not}{ an official GVPT publication!
We have prepared this handbook to offer }{\b advice}{ between and among
students. Please }{\b DO NOT consider the comments in this handbook to be
official GVPT or University of Maryland policy!}{ If you have questions about
policies, programs, or deadlines, consult the GVPT publication \'93Doctoral
Program in Government and Politics\'94 or the University of Maryland at
College Park's \'93The Graduate School Catalog.\'94 The catalog is available
on line at }{\fs20\ul\cf2 www.gradschool.umd.edu/catalog}{\ul\cf2 }{ \par \par
}\pard \qc \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\fs32 Questions,
comments, and additions \par to the }{\b\i\fs32 Handbook }{\b\fs32 should be
sent to \par \par gvptgsa@gvpt.umd.edu.}{\b\fs28 2000-2001 GVPT Graduate
Student Association (GSA)}{ \par }\pard \ql
\li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 { \par \par \tab \par }\pard \ql
\fi720\li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b Co-Chairs:}{ \par }\pard
\ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\tab \tab Victor Assal \par
\tab \tab Tina Won Sherman \par \par \tab }{\b Social Coordinator:\tab }{ \par
\tab \tab Chris Fettweis \par \par \tab }{\b First-Year Representative}{ \par
\tab \tab Steven Maloney \par \par \tab }{\b Representative to the Campus-Wide
Graduate Student Government}{ \par \tab \tab Atiya Stokes \par \par \tab }{\b
Admissions Committee}{ \par \tab \tab Ken Cousins; Celeste Lay; Hellmut Lotz
\par \par \tab }{\b Graduate Studies Committee}{ \par \tab \tab Dave
Armstrong; Jonas Brodin; Fengshi Wu \par \par \tab }{\b Teaching Committee}{
\par \tab \tab Chris Frain \par \par \tab }{\b Undergraduate Studies
Committee}{ \par \tab \tab Anthony Kammas \par \par \tab }{\b Representative
to the College of Behavioral and Social Sciences}{ \par }\pard \ql
\fi-1440\li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 {\tab This is a
rotating position among BSOS departments. GVPT does not have representation in
2000-2001. \par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 { \par
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\i\fs30 Contact
the GSA at gvptgsa@gvpt.umd.edu}{\b\fs32 GVPT Graduate Student Association
\par \par \par \par \par \par \par \par \par \par \par }{\b CHAPTER I: INSIDE
TYDINGS HALL}{ \par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
\par \par \tab The Department of Government and Politics is located within
Tydings Hall. This section will acquaint you with the basics of the Department
and the facilities. \par \par \par }{\b The Government and Politics Office -
Room 3140}{ \par \par }{\ul Staff}{: \par \par }{\i Ann Marie Clark}{
(aclark@gvpt.umd.edu)-- Ann Marie is the assistant to the director of graduate
studies and is }{\b\i the}{ staff person you need to know in the main office.
She is generally involved with overseeing or is informed of administrat ive
processes concerning graduate students, keeps records regarding such matters
as comprehensive exam results, and is a wonderful person to go to for general
information questions on how university policies affect graduate students and
which university o ffice is responsible for what (e.g., personnel, registrar).
She rocks. She knows all the important deadlines, has many necessary forms,
and manages graduate student grants to travel to professional conferences.
Phone: 405-4161 \par \par }{\i Cissy Abell}{ (cabell@gvpt. umd.edu)-- Cissy is
the assistant to the department chair. She is a resource to go to for general
information on how the department works and who to go to for information. She
rocks, too. There is a shelf of reference materials located near her desk as
well. Phone: 405-4160 \par \par }{\i Karen Bond}{ (kbond@gvpt.umd.edu)-- Karen
is the government and politics staff assistant. She handles all matters having
to do with the building, including computer needs. She also is responsible for
reimbursing graduate students fo r expenses other than conferences (e.g.
administering grants). Phone: 405-4163 \par \par }{\i To Anh Chung}{
(tachung@gvpt.umd.edu)-- To Anh is a Program Management Specialist. She is
responsible for payroll, professors' budgets (TAs, note this), keys to Tydings
(e.g., the computer lab, the building itself), telephone matters (e.g., new
numbers, voice-mail problems) and cards for the departmental photocopier.
Phone: 405-4154 \par \par }{\i Bradford Morse }{(bmorse@gvpt.umd.edu)-- Brad
is the undergraduate adviser and is assisted by a h alf-time TA (in fall 2000,
Jennifer Skulte). He is responsible for helping undergraduates make decisions
about their major and making certain that GVPT majors meet undergraduate
requirements. Both he and the TA are supervised by the director of undergradu
ate studies. \par \par }{\i David Delmar (ddelmar@gvpt.umd.edu)}{ -- The
responsibilities of this position include office management, book orders,
recording the office hours of professors and TAs, office and classroom
supplies (including the departmental VCR and monitor), copier troubles, and
room assignments for both classes and meetings. \par \par }{\i Work study
students}{ -- These students can take care of such matters as access to office
and classroom supplies, photocopier trouble and general departmental
information such as room assignments and office telephone numbers of
professors. \par \par }{\ul Resources}{ \par \par The Department has }{\i
mailboxes}{ that are available to all graduate students. If you do not have
funding, you must request a mailbox from the Department. Inquire in the main
office if you want a mailbox. \par \par The Department has two }{\i
photocopiers}{ that are used for GVPT courses and by graduate students who
have funding. If you have funding, you will be given a copy card and an
allowance. You'll be charged 10 cents per copy for each copy you make beyon d
that allowance. If you do not have funding, you can use photocopiers in the
Copy Center on the first floor of Tydings or in McKeldin Library. Note that
you can use your student ID as a \'93debit card\'94 for photocopying use.
Insert your card into the photoc opy machine as noted and add money to your
card. When you are finished copying, you can see how much money is left on
your card, and save that for the next photocopying run. Kinko's Copies and
College Copy Center are also in the area. \par \par If you are teaching or
doing research, the department also has office supplies, overhead projectors,
TVs, and VCRs available for related work. Inquire in the main office if you
need these sorts of resources or materials. \par \par There is a }{\i
conference room}{ in the main office, which is generally used for seminars,
official meetings, and prospectus and dissertations defenses. In the
conference room there is also a }{\i teaching library}{ , available to all
interested GVPT students. This mini-library, which offers articles and books
on how to improve your teaching in the political science classroom, is
sponsored by the departmental Teaching Committee. \par \par Each graduate
student is given an e-mail account upon enrollment in the graduate program.
The default address for each student is first-ini tial-of-first-name-last-
name@gvpt.umd.edu (e.g. for Joe Smith, jsmith@gvpt.umd.edu). If you do not
have your own computer or need to use a computer while on campus, there is a
computer lab on the first floor of Tydings Hall (Room 1115) for GVPT students
a nd faculty only. You can gain access to your e-mail, the World Wide Web and
computer programs from the lab. There is also a laser printer in the lab for
finished work. The computers in this lab are not cutting edge, but new
computers are expected in the near future. \par \par }{\b Top Questions Asked
of the Assistant to the Director of Graduate Studies}{ \par \par }{\i Once I
am enrolled in the program am I still eligible for departmental funding?}{
\par \par \tab Yes. Financial aid forms for current graduate students are
distributed in early to mid-February of each year for the following academic
year. Applicants are evaluated by all faculty, and assistance is offered to
the highest ranked students. \par \par }{\i How many credits or courses should
I take per semester?}{ \par \par \tab Most graduate students register for
between nine and 12 credits (3-4 courses per semester). You can take as many
or as few courses as you like. However, please note that regardless of whether
you are here part-time or full-time you have }{\i five}{ years to complete all
course work, take all exams and defend your prospectus in order to be advanced
to candidacy. (See Chapter III.) \par \par }{\i For what should I register? }{
\par \par \tab The department has prepared official guidelines for course
selection for the first year. Normally, the first courses taken are statistics
(GVPT 622, fall; GVPT 722, spring), \'93Scope and Methods\'94 (GVPT 700), one
required political theory course, and both of the required graduate survey
courses in your fields. If you are a TA you must take GVPT 599, a one-credit
course on teaching political science, offered in the spring. \par \par }{\i
Can I take a graduate level course at UMCP outside of the department?}{ \par
\par \tab Yes. The course should relate to your field of study. (See }{\ul
Courses Outside the Department}{ later in this chapter.) \par \par }{\i Can I
take courses off-campus?}{ \par \par \tab Yes. You can take a course at one of
the consortium universities, provided that UMCP offers no comparable course.
You must receive permission to do so. For available courses, see the
consortium's website: http://www.consortium.org. \par \par }{\i What are the
total number of credits needed to receive the Ph.D.?}{ \par \par \tab In
addition to the 42 hours of course work needed (30 of which must be taken at
UMCP), to receive the degree an }{\i additional}{ 12 hours of dissertation
research (GVPT 899) must also be taken prior to having the degr ee conferred.
If you are funded and taking 3 courses, it is useful to use the tenth credit
of your tuition remission to take one credit of 899 each semester. \par \tab
\par }{\i Is there an advisory system in place?}{ \par \par \tab All students
entering after Fall 1998 are required to s elect a faculty advisor by
Thanksgiving of their first semester. You and your advisor will need to sign
forms, available from Ann Marie, formalizing this relationship. In addition--
for some less formal advice--your fellow grad students are a valuable sou rce
of information about the program. \par \par }{\i Does the department have a
language requirement?}{ \par \par \tab There is no foreign language
requirement for a degree in this program. However, students with proficiency
in another language have the option to take a test in place of some
quantitative course work requirements. \par \par \tab }{\i In all cases}{. . .
if in doubt, }{\i speak to an adviser!}{ Also available to you from the
Graduate School (free of charge from Room 2133 of the Lee Building) is the
Graduate School Catalog. This catalog lists al l the university's rules and
regulations that you will need to follow from start to finish. \par \par \par
}{\b Department Structure}{ \par \par }{\ul Department Chair:}{ The current
chair of the Department of Government and Politics is Professor Jonathan
Wilkenfeld. Most graduate students wi ll not come into contact with the
department chair on a regular basis. He is the liaison between the department
and College of Behavioral and Social Sciences, and between the department and
the university at large. His area of oversight includes searches for new
faculty, securing funding for the department, and matters related to tenure
and promotion of faculty. \par \par }{\ul Director of Graduate Studies:}{
Professor Mark Graber assumed this position in Fall 1999. Most graduate
students will come into frequent contact wi th the director of graduate
studies. He is the one to go to with feedback about your experience in the
department's graduate program. This includes any comments you wish to pass on
about your classes, working as a TA, your relationship with other members of
the department, departmental requirements (and how you plan to meet them), and
getting advice about which faculty members are doing work which might be of
interest to you. \par \par }{\ul Director of Undergraduate Studies:}{ This
position is currently held by Professor W ayne McIntosh. Graduate students
will come into contact with him in their capacity as teachers and mentors of
undergraduates, and he is responsible for undergraduate advising, and
compiling and promulgating student evaluation of TAs. He serves as liaison to
the BSOS dean's office and the Department of Government and Politics. \par
\par }{\ul Departmental Committees:}{ \par \par \tab }{\i Admissions}{:
Handles the admission process for the graduate program and makes initial
funding decisions. This committee is made up of a combination of facul ty
members and graduate students. Ken Cousins, Celeste Lay and Hellmut Lotz will
be the grad student reps on this committee for 2000-2001. \par \par \tab }{\i
Graduate Studies}{: Handles academic requirements, as well as year-to-year
funding decisions. Professors Graber, Te lhami, Schreurs, Heisler, Tismaneanu
and Williams are the current faculty members on this committee. Dave
Armstrong, Jonas Brodin and Fengshi Wu are the graduate students on the
committee. \par \par \tab }{\i Undergraduate Studies}{: Handles the academic
requirements for und ergraduate teaching. Current faculty members are
professors McIntosh, Morris, Swistak, Davenport, Kaufmann and Mattes, and
Anthony Kammas serves as the graduate student representative. \par \par \tab
}{\i Teaching}{: Focuses on both teaching excellence and the TA/professor
relationship. Faculty members are professors McIntosh, Oppenheimer, Marando,
and Butterworth, and Chris Frain is the graduate student representative. \par
\par \par }{\b Advising System}{ \par \par \tab As noted earlier, the
department recently has implemented a new advising system. Each student is
expected to select a faculty advisor who will work with him or her, especially
during the early stages of the program, to ensure that the student is
progressing through their coursework and focusing their research interests.
Faculty advisors a re also expected to inform students of upcoming scholarly
conferences and to encourage their participation in these conferences. Keep in
mind, your faculty advisor does not need to be your dissertation chair, but
your advisor can assume that role in the future. \par \par }{\b GVPT Research
Programs and Centers \par }{ \par \tab The department has several research
programs and centers, which are described in the departmental publication
\'93Doctoral Program in Government and Politics.\'94 In addition to offering a
community of inquiry in the se various interest areas, these programs and
centers also offer assistantships to graduate students. Most assistantships
are awarded through the regular departmental funding application process, but
there are some jobs that are awarded independently ava i lable in these
centers. The programs include: the Center for International Development and
Conflict Management, the Center for the Study of Post-Communist Societies, the
Harrison Program on the Future Global Agenda, Maryland Collective Center
Choice, Pro j ect ICONS (International Communication and Negotiation
Simulations), Political Economy of the Good Society, the Russian Littoral
Project, the Urban Education Project, Global Event Data System, and the Sadat
Center. Students are encouraged to explore the work done by these programs and
centers to identify potential shared interests for future research or
employment opportunities. \par \par }{\b Computers and Computer Networks}{
\par \par \tab If you have your own computer and a modem, you can dial into
the network. Dial-in programs are available through the Office of Academic
Computer Services office, located in the basement of Lefrak Hall. \par \par
\tab There are also Workstations At Maryland (WAM) computer labs all over
campus. Check with OACS if you are interested in these or other computer
programs. WAM also allows remote dial-in and internet access. \par \par \tab
Be certain to check e-mail often, as many important departmental notices are
sent out over email. Especially useful are the notices of job openings, brown
bag sessions, and GSA events. \par \par \par }{\b Course Work and Related
Information}{ \par \par }{\ul Courses in the Department}{ \par \par \tab You
can expect most of your GVPT courses to be small seminars. A few of the larger
courses will be statistics and \'93Scope and Methods.\'94 Most students will
take statistics in their first semester. Not only is it important to your
progress as a researcher in the department to take this course early, but it
is also a great chance to get to know the other students in your entering
class. \par \par \tab At midsemester the department puts out a listing of
seminars for the upcoming semester, includes a brief description of each
course, and the schedule of course will be listed on the univeristy's website
(www.testudo.umd.edu). The GSA will try to make known as soon as possible the
courses that will be offered. (Ob viously, because of changing faculty
assignments, not every course is offered every year.) Try to consider which
courses you will need to complete the program and be strategic about when you
take them. \par \par \tab The introductory or survey courses in each field a
re taught each year by rotating faculty. Feel free to look at syllabi and to
talk to faculty about their ideas behind organizing such courses, as each
faculty member has her or his own priorities and approaches to study. Note
that the political theory a r ea puts out a listing of each faculty member's
approach to the introductory courses, 741 and 742. Also, current graduate
students are good resources for advice about which faculty might be your
favorites. Not all course offerings are the same, so attemp t to find out
which combination of faculty and course best meets your interests and needs.
\par \par \tab Pay attention to the registration guidelines in the course
listings, especially add and drop dates (unless you enjoy paying out of pocket
for changing classes). Additionally, other graduate students are a good source
of information. \par \par }{\ul Courses Outside the Department}{ \par \par
\tab Students should consider taking courses outside the department at the
University of Maryland, College Park, at other University of Maryland campuses
and at other area colleges taking part in the Washington Consortium
Arrangement. \par \par \tab You can consider courses in any other college on
the UMCP campus -- the following departments have offered courses that GVPT
students have found useful: \par \par \tab }{\i Anthropology:}{ Stud ents
interested in qualitative research might look to the Anthropology Department
for methodology courses. Though the Anthropology Department does not grant
Ph.D.s (the highest degree they offer is an M.A.), the department has numerous
useful research co urses, including especially courses on ethnography. \par
\par \tab }{\i Committee on Politics, Philosophy and Public Policy: }{This is
an interdisciplinary specialization and research consortium on campus. The
faculty is made up of members from GVPT as well as several other schools, with
its focus on issues of institutional and constitutional design, power, ethics
and justice. More information on this program is available from Ann Marie;
Steve Aylward and Chip Hamilton are two GVPT students involved in this program
who mig ht be able to offer further insights into it. \par \par \tab }{\i
Comparative Literature:}{ The \'93Comp Lit\'94 Department offers a substantial
set of courses dealing with critical theory. Faculty in comp lit are in the
process of creating a critical theory certificate, which woul d give theory
students an extra credential upon graduation. The details are still being
worked out, but it looks as if students will be required to take two
introductory courses in comp lit and 12 credit hours of approved theory
courses in any department on campus, as well as taking part in three semesters
of the critical theory colloquium. This is, of course, subject to change. The
key faculty instigators of the critical theory certificate seem to be Simon
Richter (German Department) and Orren Wang (En glish and Comp Lit
Departmentts). Circe Stumbo has taken classes in this department. \par \par
\tab }{\i Economics:}{ Some GVPT faculty work very closely with faculty in the
Department of Economics. The public choice program--of particular interest to
students of political economy and formal theory--cuts across the disciplines
of GVPT and economics, and faculty involved in that program know each other
and work together. GVPT students will also find more advanced statistical
courses in the Department of Economics. One prom inent Economics faculty
member affiliated with GVPT and who frequently works with graduate students is
Thomas Schelling. Anja Kurki has taken courses in this department. \par \par
\tab }{\i History}{: The History Department offers many courses which may be
of interest depending upon your regional or issue concentration. _ \par \tab
}{\i Public Affairs:}{ Very generally, the School of Public Affairs prepares
students for work in the government, while GVPT prepares students for academic
or other similar positions. There is a great deal of ove rlapping interests
between public affairs and GVPT, and numerous students and faculty teach and
learn in both programs. Professors I.M. Destler, William Galston and Michael
Nacht are a few public affairs faculty who are affiliated with GVPT and often
wor k with GVPT graduate students. GVPT students who have taken courses in
this department are Chris Fettweis. \par \par \tab }{\i Sociology:}{ Students
wishing to do survey research as part of their dissertation can take in depth
courses in the Sociology Department. David Sega l is a sociology professor who
is affiliated with GVPT and who often works with graduate students. Students
to talk with about this department are Kristina Handy, Dave Moore, and Tim
Wedig. \par \par \tab }{\i Women's Studies:}{ The Women's Studies Department
offers a gradua te certificate in women's studies. Our understanding of the
requirements for this certificate are to take three women's studies courses,
three related courses in other fields and to submit an application. As always,
talk to the department first if you h ave questions. GVPT Professor Melissa
Matthes has a joint appointment between GVPT and women's studies. Jennifer
Skulte is a source of information within the GVPT graduate program about this
department. \par \par \tab Graduate students can also take courses at other
University of Maryland campuses and at colleges taking part in the Washington
Consortium Arrangement. For more information on these options, see the
Graduate School Catalog website. \par \par }{\ul Registration Information}{
\par \par \tab You can register for courses either in person, by Touch-Tone
phone (MARS, 301-403-0500) or on line (www.testudo.umd.edu, \'93Records and
Registration\'94 link). You must have your personal identification number if
you do not register in person. (Contact Records and Registration at
301-314-8240 if you do not have a PIN.) }{\i First-year students will need to
get approval from Ann Marie to register for the first semester.}{ Information
about registering over MARS and the Web is located in the Schedule of Courses.
\par \par \tab All deadlines are also listed in the Schedule of C ourses (also
available in www.testudo.umd.edu). We have tried to identify some key
deadlines to keep in mind, as well as some quirky details about credit hours--
but be sure to read the Schedule of Courses each semester to keep these
deadlines updated and in mind. \par \par }{\i 1. You should be registered
before the first day of the semester.}{ \par \par There is a $20 fee for
registering on or after the first day of classes. Once classes start, there is
a period of ten days during which you can drop and add credits. For exampl e,
in the fall you have between August 31 and September 14 to drop and add
without any type of penalty, }{\i provided you do it in "like" increments}{
(i.e. drop 3 credits.... then add 3 credits -- this transaction should be done
all at the same time). If you do not do it together, you will be given an 80
percent refund for the course you drop and be charged 100 percent for the
course you add. \par \par }{\i 2. Graduate }{\i\ul units}{\i are used to
determine full-time status.}{ \par \par Many students need to be registered
full-time for such things as student loan deferments and FICA exemption (see
below on FICA exemption). It takes 48 }{\i units}{ per semester to be
considered a full-time student. Graduate units are figured on the following
schedule: \par }{\ul \par \par \par Course Number\tab \tab \tab Graduate
Unit}{ \par 000-399\tab \tab \tab \tab 2 units per credit hour \par
400-499\tab \tab \tab \tab 4 units per credit hour \par 500-599\tab \tab \tab
\tab 5 units per credit hour \par 600-898\tab \tab \tab \tab 6 units per
credit hour \par 799 (master's thesis research)\tab 12 units per credit hour
\par 899 (doctoral dissertation research)\tab 18 units per credit hour \par
\par Note that students on assistantship are given 24 units automatically.
\par \par }{\i 3. If you are on some kind of funding, you should register
before the semester starts. }{ \par \par Currently, graduate students do not
pay FICA tax (social security tax) on their assistantships or fello wships.
However, you must be registered as a full-time student on or before the first
day of the semester in order to be FICA-exempt. If the university runs you
through the computer and finds that you are not registered for 48 units, you
will lose your FICA exemption and you will not be able to get a refund on the
money. }{\i Your exemption will not be changed until the following semester}{.
\par \par }{\b \par Residency}{ \par \par \tab Establishing residency in the
state of Maryland can be beneficial for tuition reasons (in-state is much chea
per), but it is a difficult process. The Residency Classification Office is
located in 0405B Marie Mount Hall. It is recommended that you begin this
process immediately, as it takes a full year and is very strictly evaluated.
If you plan to do this, sa ve your rent receipts and get your car registered
in Maryland immediately. Tim Wedig can also provide additional information on
this process. \par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0
{\b\fs28 \par \par \par \par \par \par \par \par \par \par \par \par \par \par
\par \par Chapter II: EMPLOYMENT}{ \par }\pard \ql
\li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 { \par }{\b Employment Within the
Department}{ \par \par \tab The Department of Government and Polit ics offers
some form of funding to almost of all of its graduate students. The funding
generally comes in the form of teaching assistantships, research
assistantships (see below for explanations) and fellowships (which require
work for only two years of t he four-year funding commitment). As a teaching
assistant, research assistant, or fellow, you are given tuition remission and
a stipend of about $10,000, depending upon your degree status. (If you already
hold a master's degree, your stipend is slightly higher than if you just have
an undergraduate degree.) \par \par \tab Being a funded student can be a very
important step if you want a career in academia. Working for the department
allows you to develop close relationships with faculty, exercise the skills
you will need as a professor (teaching and research), and helps you to keep
track more easily of the pulse of the department and the discipline. In
addition to the tuition remission and stipend, when funded you also are given
an office on campus and a copying al lowance. If serving as an assistant, you
will be eligible for health, dental, and life insurance through the
university. If you are on fellowship or if you are not funded, you will have
to secure insurance on your own. \par \par \tab If you did not enter this
departme nt with funding, you can apply for funding in early February. Forms
will be available in the main GVPT office. In fact, even funded students who
are not on multiyear fellowships must reapply each year. To apply, you must
fill out the form, which includ e s a section where you list the courses you
have taken and your grades. You also need to write a statement saying why you
deserve funding. It is immensely beneficial to have a clear idea of why you
are here and what you want to study and to make this app a rent in your
written statement. If you have never received funding before, you will need at
least two letters of recommendation. In addition, it is very helpful to have
at least one faculty member who will speak up on your behalf during funding
decision s . If they don't know who you are, you likely won't get funded. All
faculty are given a list of students applying for funding and are asked to
comment on their promise as graduate students. Therefore, even students who
have been funded previously will often contact their professors to remind them
who they are and to ask for a good word on their behalf. (E-mail is perfectly
fine for this sort of contact with faculty.) \par \par }{\ul Teaching
Assistant (TA) \par }{ \par \tab Many students who receive funding are awarded
teaching assis tantships. TAs are generally required to lead discussion
sections of undergraduate lecture courses that are organized and run by
faculty members. Each professor and each course require a different amount of
time. You are expected to work no more than 20 hours a week at this job,
though. It is useful when on the job market to have had at least some
experience teaching, and a TA position is a good first position to have. \par
\par \tab You can find support for your development as a TA through many
avenues. As leading d iscussions can require a high degree of preparation and
concentration, try to establish good communication early on with the professor
you are working for. Understand his or her expectations of you and the
undergraduates (a clear syllabus helps). The d e partment provides students
with a one-credit seminar course (GVPT 599), offered each spring, during which
students explore the various issues, pedagogies and tough questions involved
in the teaching experience. The course is mandatory for students who wi l l be
serving as TAs for the department. The department's Teaching Committee also
offers a teaching library in the conference room of the main office. In this
library, you will find articles, books and other tools that will support your
teaching. The Te aching Committee will also be planning brown bag sessions
during which faculty and students can discuss various issues about learning
and teaching. \par \par \tab The Graduate School also offers a useful
orientation session for new TAs. The main program is offered just before
courses start in the fall and a miniprogram is offered before courses start in
the spring. These sessions are highly recommended. \par \tab \par }\pard \ql
\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {Lastly, the Center for
Teaching Excellence offers two useful newsletters and a listserv. The
newsletters are t he center's main newsletter and the large lecture
newsletter. To get on the mailing list, send e-mail or a note to Jim Greenberg
at: \par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 { \par }\pard
\ql \li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0
{JAMES_D_GREENBERG@UMAIL.UMD.EDU. \par }\pard \ql
\li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 { \par The listserv is the
Center's \'93Idea Forum\'94 and is titled \'93CTETCH-L.\'94 To subscribe, send
a message to: \par }\pard \ql \li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0
{LISTSERV@UMDD.UMD.EDU, with nothing in the subject line, and the following in
the message: \par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
\par \tab SUB CTETCH-L firstname lastname \par \par \tab Put your name in
where \'93firstname\'94 and \'93lastname\'94 appear above. So, for example,
Jane Doe would subscribe by sending the following message to
LISTSERV@UMDD.UMD.EDU: \par \par \tab SUB CTETCH-L Jane Doe \par \par \tab The
department recently passed guidelines for TA/professor relationships. Stay
tuned for more information. \par \par }{\ul Research Assistant (RA) \par }{
\par \tab Research assistantships generally are soug ht-after positions. RAs
have an opportunity to develop close and positive relationships with one or
more professors. It can be very good for your career to be a research
assistant for a well-known professor, especially if you are able to publish
somethi ng as a result of your work. Students often discuss whether they would
be suitable for a research assistantship with specific professors before they
actually apply. Obviously, you want to work for a professor who is doing work
in your field. \par \par }{\b Employment Outside the Department}{ \par \par
\tab There are many opportunities for employment in College Park and the D.C.
area. Indeed, students in the program who are not planning a career in
academia sometimes find that employment outside the department is beneficial
both finan cially and for developing career contacts. If you do not already
have employment, and if the following possibilities do not work for you, you
can also contact the Student Employment Center within the Career Center. You
can find it at 3121 Hornbake Libra ry, www.CareerCenter.umd.edu (see
especially TERP Online), or by phone at 301-314-7225. \par \par }{\ul The
University of Maryland-College Park Campus}{ \par \par \tab If you do not hold
an assistantship within the GVPT department, there are many other
possibilities on the Maryland camp us to find employment. There are
administrative assistant positions, as well as research assistant
opportunities campuswide. The UMd. Web site (www.umd.edu) lists available
graduate assistantships under \'93 Administrative and Campus Services:
Employment Opportunities.\'94 Position announcements are also posted on the
second floor of the Lee Building. It also helps to meet people working on
different research projects within our department and in the School of Public
Affairs. During the year, you can develop p rofessional relationships that may
lead to summer employment. Overall, the more people in the department who know
you are looking for work, the greater the likelihood you will find something.
(Networking is a skill one cannot learn too early in this fie ld.) \par \par
}{\ul Off-Campus Employment Opportunities \par }{ \par \tab Because of the
proximity of the College Park campus to Washington D.C., the Washington Post
is an excellent resource for job placement. The Washington Post has the most
extensive want ads in the area. You can fi nd these ads on line at
www.washingtonpost.com, which will allow you to search for jobs by type.
Throughout the year, numerous people in the GVPT department advertise
employment opportunities through e-mail. Many times, professors are aware of
jobs in D. C. within the field of political science, and your fellow graduate
students may know of interesting job openings as well. Beyond the College Park
campus, you can visit the }{\i Common Cause}{ office in downtown D.C. and look
at their job board or contact Women in International Security, located in the
School of Public Affairs, to see their very good employment listing. WIIS
sends out employment listings via e-mail to all its members. Lastly, contact
think tanks, non-governmental organizations, governments agencie s, etc.,
directly to inquire if they have part-time or special project work available.
\par \par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\fs28 \par
\par Chapter III: GETTING YOUR DEGREES}{ \par }\pard \ql
\li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 { \par \tab This section deals
with milestones in your graduate career--those \'93hoops\'94 that must be
successfully negotiated to complete your de gree. They are material of which
legends are made. You will often hear graduate students talking about these
hoops in the hallways of Tydings. They are not that mysterious. \par \par \tab
The department has new requirements for students entering in or after Fall
1998. Ann Marie Clark in the GVPT main office has a handout that lists all the
departmental requirements (\'93 Doctoral Program in Government and Politics,
1998"). We strongly suggest you get a copy of this. This chapter is designed
to give information and a dvice from the perspective of students who have been
through the process. Since we can't give advice about some of the new
requirements, we don't address them here. Don't assume that a requirement not
mentioned here does not exist. \par \par \par }{\b Comprehensive Exams (The
\'93Comps\'94)}{ \par \par \tab After completing coursework in their main
field and their second field, students must demonstrate mastery of those
fields by passing comprehensive exams in each of those two fields. Generally
these exams are in the fields the department r ecognizes -- American politics,
international relations, political theory, etc. However, students are allowed
to create their own second field. \par \par \tab Comprehensive exams are
administered three times a year: near the end of January break, about a week
after t he spring semester ends in May, and about a week before classes begin
again in August. The format of the comps has recently been modified. The new
format was followed for the first time in January 1999. Under the old format,
students took one comp at a time, and the take-home testing period lasted five
days. Students answered three essay questions (10 pages each), and there was
some choice about which questions to answer. \par \par \tab Under the new
format, exams will last for six hours each and are administered on campus in a
\'93comps only\'94 computer lab. Comps are given on two different days during
each of 3 times per year the comps are scheduled, and students have the option
of taking one or both of the exams during that week. Each exam will be
comprised of three questions, and you have approximately two hours to answer
each question. Answers on these exams have been about 6 or 7 pages each, and
you are expected to refer to the major works in the field in your answer. You
will be given a selection of topics for e ach question, although the number of
choices varies by field. Unlike the old format, no books or notes can be used
during the exam time, but students are still expected to refer to major works
and thinkers within each answer. \par \par \tab Three faculty members are ch
osen as readers (graders) for each field; one faculty member serves as chair
and coordinates the exam. The three readers rotate during each exam
administration so that all faculty in the field read periodically. Students
take the exam anonymously. (Obv i ously, this is not the case for students who
design their own fields.) Students receive results within three to five weeks
of the close of the exam period. Students can pass the exam at three different
levels -- master's degree, Ph.D. pass, and Ph.D. wi th distinction. \par \par
\tab Since all three readers must agree on the comp grade, differences of
opinion will be handled in the following manner: If the committee disagrees,
they will meet to discuss their differences. If after this they still cannot
agree on a g rade, the exam is sent to all the faculty in the field. At this
stage the student will be notified that the exam is under review by the field,
and the student will be told whether the question is in the nature of pass-
fail or pass-pass with distinction. The whole field will be required to vote,
and there is no time limit on faculty response. If you fail a comp, you can
re-take the exam one time. \par \par \par }{\ul When to Take Comps}{ \par \par
\tab There are no hard and fast rules about when you must take comps. Because
you can take each comp at separate times, when to take the comp will depend on
many individual factors. Students who enter the program with a substantial
background in one of their sub-fields may want to take the first comp at the
end of the second year, whereas othe rs may want to take their first comp in
August between the second and third year and the second comp the next January
or May. \par \par \tab At the beginning of each school year, a list of readers
is distributed for that year -- some students choose to take the exams when
sympathetic faculty, or faculty members with whom they have taken classes, are
reading. \par \par \tab \par }{\ul Preparing for the Comps}{ \par \par \tab
Different faculty and different students have different ideas about the
purpose of the comps -- whether they are just a hurdle to get over, whether
they are an important part of learning process, whether they are a device for
weeding people out of the program, etc. By and large, though, you can believe
that if you took the courses and know the material, you will do OK. \par \par
\tab Faculty memb ers have prepared comprehensive reading lists and potential
exam questions for each field, which are available from Ann Marie. Although it
varies by field, there are about 100 books and 60 questions for each. All
questions will come from this list of qu estions; if you familiarize yourself
with these questions, you will not be surprised when you sit down to take the
exam (overwhelmed, maybe, but not surprised). \par \par \tab The GSA agrees
that you shouldn't kill yourself. Matt Thomas--a GSA veteran--says that prepar
ing for comps rounds out your understanding of that field. While you should be
able to focus on your areas of expertise in your exam answers, you will likely
need to study some items that have not been high on your personal priorities.
One student, who checked out more than 400 books for his first comp described
the process as a time when \'93I lost my mind.\'94 He may have lost it much
earlier (you don't need}{\i that}{ many books). Book reviews are helpful
resources during your preparation, as are colleagues who may focus on
different areas within your same field. \par }{\b \par How to Get a Master's
Degree}{ \par \par \tab You need 30 credits for a master's -- three of them
have to be GVPT 700. In order for you to graduate, Ann Marie needs to prepare
an \'93Approved Program Form\'94 certifying t hat you have 30 credit hours,
which you need your adviser and the director of graduate studies to sign. \par
\par \tab You must have passed at least one comprehensive exam. Under the
post-1998 system, you can take one exam and pass it at the master's level to
qualify for the degree. However, if you want to continue on to a Ph.D. you
will need to take that exam }{ \i again, }{at the same time as your
2}{\fs16\up12 nd}{ field exam, and will need to pass both at the Ph.D. level.
\par \par \tab If you are getting the master's without writing a thesis, you
must have two professors certify your scholarly writing ability. Again, Ann
Marie has the forms. \par \par \tab You must be registered for at least one
credit hour in the semester in which you will graduate. \par \par \tab }{\i
Watch for deadlines.}{ They will sneak up on you. Ann Marie usually sends out
an e-mail message at the beginning of the semester listing all important
deadlines. For the }{\b Fall 2000}{ semester, the following deadlines apply:
\par }\pard \ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0
{1.\tab }{\b September 15 }{- Deadline for diploma application \par 2.\tab
}{\b October 4}{ - Approved Program Form \par 3.\tab }{\b December 13}{ -
Completion of form certifying non-thesis option and two "evidence of scholarly
writing" forms. \par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
\par \tab If you are a Ph.D. student planning to get a master's in passing,
think about timing. When the Graduate School has funding, it will reimburse
some travel money for you to attend conferences. However, it will do this }{\i
once}{ before your master's is awarded and once before your Ph.D. is awarded.
If it does not particularly matter when you have the master's degree granted,
you may want to hold off until you have received at least one travel award
from the Graduate School. \par \par \par }{\b How to Get Advanced to Candidacy
(A.B.D.-- \'93All But Dissertation\'94)}{ \par \par \tab To become a Ph.D.
candidate, you must finish all classroom credits, complete 12 hours of
dissertation research credit, pass two comprehensive exams, successful defend
your prospectus (see below section on }{\ul Prospectus}{ ) and, for students
starting in or after the fall of 1998, prepare a paper of \'93publishable
quality\'94 (see section below on }{\b Paper Requirement}{). \par \par \tab
You can register for dissertation research credit (GVPT899) at almost any time
during your graduate career. Indeed, advanced students who have funding should
make sure they always register for dissertation credit if they have not
registered for their full allotm e nt (usually 10 hours per semester) so that
they can get all their dissertation credits paid for by the department, To
sign up for dissertation credit, you need your adviser's section number, which
you can get from Ann Marie. You will receive a grade of i ncomplete in GVPT899
until you successfully defend your dissertation. At that point, the grade is
converted to a letter grade. (Note that one dissertation credit is worth more
than the usual credit hour when figuring such things as student status for lo
an deferments. It takes 48 }{\i units}{ per semester to be considered a full-
time student; doctoral dissertation research (GVPT899) is worth 18 units per
credit hour.) \par \par \tab From the time you are admitted into the Ph.D.
program, you have}{\i five years}{ to be advanced to candidacy. You are
generally expected to be A.B.D. by Aug. 1 after your fifth year. If you have
completed your fifth year but have not yet passed your comps or defended your
prospectus, you can submit a }{\i time extension form}{ to extend the
deadline. You ca n request up to a one-year extension. You can only put in
such a request twice, so it is advised to request an extension for the full
year, even if you expect to defend your proposal within months after the
deadline. Your adviser and the director of gra d uate studies need to sign the
form. If you are filling this out retroactively (i.e., if your time ran out
before you submitted the form), you should get a letter of support from your
adviser to accompany the form. You can get the form in either room 212 5 or
2107 Lee Building. Ann Marie is an excellent person to call if you have
questions (301-405-4161). Also, you can call the Graduate Records office at
301-405-4201. \par \par \par }{\b Paper Requirement}{ \par \par \tab Students
entering the program in or after Fall 1998 will be require d to prepare a
paper of publishable quality before being advanced to candidacy. This new
paper requirement involves submitting a paper to three faculty members who
review it as if it were a journal article. Students may be required to revise
their paper and resubmit it to the faculty panel for approval. To assist in
the process of writing a high-quality paper, a workshop is held throughout the
second year. During the first semester students will meet for an hour weekly
with 3 faculty members during whi c h quality articles, lower quality papers
that did not make it to articles, and blind reviews will be discussed in order
to familiarize students with the publication process. During the second
semester two students per week will present papers to these sa me faculty
members, answer questions from peers and faculty present, and receive written
feedback about the paper. In most cases, revisions will be required and the
paper will then be re-submitted to the faculty. \par \par }{\b Dissertation}{
\par \par \tab After being advanced to candidacy, your dissertation is your
last step \emdash albeit a major one -- before being granted a Ph.D. A
dissertation is an original piece of research, usually book length (roughly
300-350 pages). This subsection discusses the core elements and considerations
o f completing your dissertation. Since none of the GSA members has defended a
dissertation yet, this section is currently heavy on front-end considerations
with regard to the dissertation. We expect future editions to have more detail
on the final steps of the dissertation. A peer group on intended to offer
advice and support throughout the dissertation phase is in its formative
stages in the department; this might be something with which you want to
become involved in the future. \par \par }{\ul Committee}{ \par \par \tab
Every disse rtation must be approved by a committee of faculty members who
will, minimally, approve a student's dissertation proposal (the prospectus)
and the final product. Picking a committee is one of the most important
aspects of your dissertation. Even if you have the most earth-shattering
question and are capable of answering it, a bad committee can derail your
efforts at every turn. A good committee can ease the pain and trials of
dissertation research and writing. \par \par \tab Typically, a committee
consists of five faculty members -- three of the five must be regular members
of the College Park graduate faculty. One member must be from outside the
department but within the University of Maryland, College Park; this member is
known as the \'93dean's representative. \'94 Mo st students have three to four
GVPT faculty members on their committees. Faculty members in our department
can recommend faculty members in other departments who are sympathetic to GVPT
dissertation work and who can be assets on a committee. One member o f your
committee can be from another university (as long as they have a Ph.D.).
Please note that a member from another university must officially be nominated
for special membership and approved by the department.}{\f11\fs17 }{ Check
with departmental regulations about alternative committee set-ups -- they do
exist. \par \par }{\ul The Chair}{ \par \par \tab Each student must choose a
chair for her or his committee (also referred to as your major adviser). Your
chair has to be a tenured professor within the department (associate
professors do qualif y, but emeritus professors don't). It will be your chair
who offers the last words of advice on the length, style, and (to some degree)
the content of your dissertation. This person's research interests should
closely resemble yours. Additionally, since y ou will be working very closely
with this person, it is crucial to determine whether you can have an amicable
relationship. You don't have to love each other, but respect helps. It is
possible to have co-chairs, although this is not a common choice of s tudents.
\par \par \tab Different faculty members have different ideas about the role
of the chair. For example, some faculty members expect that the student will
work solely with her or him until the final dissertation defense. Others
expect that the student will r ely equally on all committee members. Most fall
somewhere in between. It is important that you know and agree with your
chair's idea of her or his role. It is also important that other members of
the committee are willing to work with you in the way ex pected by the chair.
\par \par \tab Your chair will be your first line of contact with the job
market. In addition to writing letters of recommendation, he or she will field
phone calls from your prospective employers and will, hopefully, be initiating
phone calls on your behalf to potentially interested employers. You need
someone who will give a whole-hearted recommendation, as this can be the
difference between making the short list and being left off entirely. \par
\par \tab Ultimately, the chair ought to be an advocate for you, both in the
dissertation and on the job market. \par \par }{\ul Selecting a Committee}{
\par \par \tab How do you pick the committee? This is very subjective. One
method is to pick a chair and arrange the committee around the chair. A more
adventurous approach is to pick a com mittee without regard to personalities.
(The latter approach, however, is a recipe for disaster.) Although we have a
rather collegial faculty, it is important to note that there are theoretical
and methodological disagreements among the faculty, and you should be aware of
these differences. Even if you do not expect this to come up in your research,
be aware that they might -- as your research progresses you may need to employ
methods you had not previously considered. \par \par \tab You will need at
least one comm ittee member from Maryland but from outside of the department.
Faculty from the Geography, History, English, Economics, Criminal Justice, and
Sociology departments, as well as from the School of Public Affairs, have
served this role for GVPT students. B e sure to get your chair's advice about
who he or she thinks would be an appropriate 5}{\fs16\up12 th}{ member for
your committee. \par \par }{\ul Prospectus}{ \par \par \tab A prospectus is a
starting point of your dissertation. The intent is to develop a research topic
and plan and to have the memb ers of your committee understand and agree to
that plan. For many students, the prospectus becomes the first chapter of
their dissertation. The department offers a dissertation seminar during which
you can get advice and direction about your project (GV PT888A). Students who
have made it through the program suggest that you take this class when you are
ready to start writing your prospectus. \par \par \tab There are generally
three parts to a prospectus: the question, the data or information that will
be used to inves tigate the question, and the methodology of the
investigation. Miranda Schreurs (Tydings 3104-B) keeps a binder of
dissertation proposals that have been approved -- we encourage you to review
the various entries in the binder. Prospectuses can vary grea tly, however,
and you will need to work closely with your chair to decide what your
individual prospectus will, and won't, include. \par \par \tab A prospectus
must be defended before at least four of the mandatory five members of your
committee. The prospectus defense is generally a rather formal affair. A
student defending his or her prospectus should bring food and beverage for the
committee. A typical defense is scheduled to last two hours. If the student
has been good about keeping the channels open with differ ent committee
members, he or she can escape unexpected questions or challenges during the
defense. Communication is key here. \par \par \tab }{\i Advice:}{ Some
students and faculty recommend that students plan to rewrite their prospectus
numerous times to assure that the q uestion and methodology match up and the
scope of the overall investigation is reasonable (such that you can actually
finish the thing). Spending a great deal of time at this stage may make the
final stage move more smoothly. Other students and faculty, however, see the
prospectus as mainly a demonstration that the student is capable of taking on
a research project of this scale. For these folks, rewrites at the prospectus
stage may not be as important -- rather, changes in the question and
methodology may take place during the research itself. It helps to ask your
potential dissertation chair where he or she falls on this continuum. \par
\par }{\ul Methodology}{ \par \par \tab Those aiming at a quantitative
dissertation can get many of the statistical tools they need from taking G VPT
622 and 722. (Note: Grad students who have taken the stats courses strongly
recommend that you take the two courses in consecutive semesters rather than
putting 722 off for the future.) If you are more qualitatively oriented, the
department offers a q ualitative methods class yearly, and you can take a
foreign language exam to place out of some quantitative requirements. Formal
theory also has a methods class (GVPT 730). In addition, students can take
courses outside the department to augment their s kills. Examples include
economics for further statistical courses, anthropology for ethnographic and
other qualitative tools, sociology for survey research, comparative literature
for critical theory. (For a more thorough discussion, see }{\b Courses Outside
the Department}{ in Chapter 1.) \par \par \tab }{\i Advice:}{ Miranda Schreurs
currently teaches the comparative qualitative methodology class (GVPT 888A).
This class has proven to be very helpful for students not only preparing their
prospectus, but also writing grant proposals. \par \par \par }{\ul Writing}{
\par \par \tab There are different ways to think about the process of starting
your dissertation. Some students try to write every paper from day one in the
program with an eye toward their dissertations. These students may get out of
the program more quickly, but we have also seen many of them burn out before
they get to the actual dissertation research. Other students continue to
explore ideas, topics and faculty in their first years as graduate students,
without regard to the ultimate dissertation p roject. These students may be
more refreshed when it comes to dissertation writing, but they may also take a
bit longer to develop a topic and complete their dissertation. They sometimes
find themselves unprepared to take on the specialized and focused research
project that their dissertation must become. Figure out what works for you and
ask advice of faculty and other students along the way. It seems Aristotle's
\'93middle way\'94 might be well advised here. \par \par \tab Students who
find themselves blocked when it comes to writing their prospectus or
dissertation chapters might find the \'93A.B.D. Survival Guide\'94 of some
help. Ben J. Dean puts out this on-line newsletter that arrives via e-mail
every few months. He holds a Ph.D. in psychology from the University of Te xas
at Austin and is a psychologist in private practice in Bethesda, Md. You can
sign up for it directly at www.eCoach.com/subscribe.htm. \par \par \tab The
best advice we can give is to remember is that, though you want your
dissertation to be interesting (you may have to work on the thing for many
years) and important, do }{\i not}{ expect it to be the most important piece
of work you will ever produce. Think of it: How would you feel if you reached
the pinnacle of your academic career while still a student? \par \par }{\ul
Time Limits}{ \par \par \tab In addition to the time limit on being advanced
to candidacy (see that section above), students are expected to complete the
dissertation within four years of being advanced to candidacy. For other time
limits, see the Graduate School handbook. \par \par \tab Some s tudents
suggest that you plan to complete your dissertation as soon as possible. It
can be done within a year of being advanced to candidacy, and it is possible
to be advanced to candidacy within three years of starting the program. Others
suggest that if you really want to complete an important piece of work, don't
be discouraged if it is taking a while. Six or seven years as a Ph.D. student
can be justified if your work, publications, and other activities warrant that
kind of time. \par \par \tab Regardless, when you begin fretting about how
long it is taking you, keep in mind the Chinese proverb: "Be not afraid of
growing slowly; be afraid only of standing still." \par \par \par }{\ul
Defending the Dissertation}{ \par \par \tab After every member of your
committee has had a chance to review your final version of the dissertation
(allow them 2 weeks to read it), you will be ready to defend your
dissertation. Each student's actual defense will vary, based on his/her chair
and committee, but there are some general rules. All of your committee memb
ers must be present (although exceptions may be made for extenuating
circumstances). The defense will be announced to the \'93general public;\'94
that is, all students and faculty within the department may attend. As with
the prospectus defense,

