[![](images/niuheader.gif)](http://www.niu.edu/)  
[![](images/som%20logo.gif)](http://www.vpa.niu.edu/music/)

![](images/redline.gif)

**_MUSC 259, 359, 659 \- Percussion Primary_**  
**Fall 2001** ![](images/contactinfobutton.gif) |  |
![](images/gradingbutton.gif)  
---|---|---  
![](images/courseinfobutton.gif) |  | ![](images/univpoliciesbutton.gif)  
![](images/coursepoliciesbutton.gif) |  | ![](images/linksbutton.gif)  
|  |  
|  |  
|  |  
![](images/redline.gif)  


**_CONTACT INFORMATION_**

**Professor** : Rich Holly  
**Office address/phone** :     MB 141  
                                               753-8374   
**Office hours** : Walk-ins or by appointment  
**[E-Mail: rholly@niu.edu](mailto:rholly@niu.edu)**

I welcome e-mail messages on any subject, percussion or advising. During the
week, I will try to respond to you within 24 hours. For messages sent to me on
weekends I may not be able to respond to you until the work week begins again.

![](images/redtri.gif)**Top of page**

![](images/redline.gif)

**_Course Information_**

**Course description:** Percussion Primary is the study of and performance on
various percussion instruments, their uses in several ensemble and solo
settings, and the literature of those instruments.

**Course objectives** : To train students to be well-versed in the technical
and musical demands of today's percussionist.

**Required/recommended texts and materials** : Each student comes to
Percussion Primary with a different background and set of experiences. During
the first lesson of each semester, and at other times as necessary throughout
the semester, the student and instructor will discuss the student's needs and
wishes for their improvement in the art of percussion performance. Literature,
method books, technical exercises, readings and listening assignments will be
required as best serves that individual student. The Professor reserves the
right to change such assignments as he sees fit.

Each student will be required to purchase their own sticks, mallets,
accessories and music to complete the assigned literature and other materials.

**Course requirements** : For students enrolled for 2 credit hours, it is
expected that you will practice your assignments a minimum of 1.5 - 2 hours
each day, 7 days a week. For students enrolled for 4 credit hours, it is
expected you will practice a minimum of 3 - 4 hours each day, 7 days a week.

![](images/redtri.gif)**Top of page**

![](images/redline.gif)

**_Course Policies_**

**Attendance policy:** Students are expected to attend all lessons. It is
common for either the student or Professor to have other important school
commitments which will necessitate changing a few lesson times during the
course of the semester. For those lessons that the Professor must change,
every effort will be made to provide a make-up lesson time. For those lessons
that the student must change, the Professor will be as flexible as possible in
finding a make-up time. Should a make-up lesson not be possible in either
case, the student will be expected to learn more of the assigned literature
and materials and be prepared for the next lesson.

It is also common for students to experience overwhelming requirements on
their time at least one week of each semester, most commonly around the mid-
point. If for any reason you have not been able to prepare your lesson
material, you must still attend your lesson. We can substitute a lesson on a
percussion area that will not require follow-up on the student's part. Should
the student find that for more than one week they are not able to complete
their lesson assignments, then the student is strongly encouraged to consider
withdrawing from a class. The Professor will be happy to discuss this with you
either during a lesson time or at another time.

Absences are considered excused for illness, family emergencies, and NIU-
approved school functions. Absences are considered unexcused for any other
reason. Every two unexcused absences will lower your final grade by one full
letter.

**Grading** : Your grade in this course is based upon your ability to execute
the required assignments on a consistent basis. To attain a C, the student
must attend all lessons and consistently be working on the materials assigned
so that we have music and technique to discuss at each lesson. To attain a B,
the student must be making clear progress on the assigned materials in terms
of accuracy of notes, development of musical phrases, technical mastery as
required by the assigned materials, and awareness of body motions and
movements. To attain an A, the student must be completing requirements for
attaining a B at a rapid development pace, allowing the Professor to
continually assign new materials and literature. As well, musical and
technical development must be demonstrated at each lesson to a high degree.
Students attaining a poor level of preparedness will earn a D or F depending
upon how poor that level is.

Grading a performance area is subjective. The Professor bases achieving such
things as "poor level," "clear progress," "rapid development pace" and a "high
degree" on the following:  
With over 30 years' experience as a professional performer, the Professor has
experience which has allowed him to perform with ensembles in several of the
world's most prestigious concert halls, as a soloist and/or clinician at many
of the finest music schools and music conventions in the country, and as an
accompanist to several internationally-renowned recording and performing
artists. As well, several former students are now leading successful musical
careers, and several friends are as well. The Professor knows what he has had
to accomplish in order to earn these performance experiences, and knows also
what the former students and friends have had to do. The student's ability to
perform at each lesson will be compared to the work of others who are
considered successful in percussion performance world-wide.

![](images/redtri.gif)**Top of page**

![](images/redline.gif)

**_University Policies_**

**Plagiarism Statement:** "The attempt of any student to present as his or her
own work that which he or she has not produced is regarded by the faculty and
administration as a serious offense. Students are considered to have cheated
if they copy the work of another during an examination or turn in a paper or
an assignment written, in whole or in part, by someone else. Students are
guilty of plagiarism, intentional or not, if they copy material from books,
magazines, or other sources or if they paraphrase ideas from such sources
without acknowledging them. Students guilty of, or assisting others in, either
cheating or plagiarism on an assignment, quiz, or examination may receive a
grade of F for the course involved and may be suspended or dismissed from the
university." _Northern Illinois University Undergraduate Catalog_.

**Conduct and Discipline Regulations:** Students are expected to know these
regulations as published in the  
_Northern Illinois University Undergraduate Catalog_. These may be found on
page 302 of the 2001-2001 _Catalog_.

**Receiving Assistance:** Students are urged to contact me should they have
questions concerning course materials and procedures. If you have a disability
or any other special circumstance that may have some impact on your course
work and for which you may require accommodations, please contact me early in
the semester so that arrangements can be made with the Center for Access-
Ability Resources (CAAR).

![](images/redtri.gif)**Top of page**

![](images/redline.gif)

**_LINKS to Relevant Online Resources_**

 [Percussive Arts Society](http://www.pas.org/)  
 [Marc Z.'s Percussion Information](http://www.xs4all.nl/~marcz/index.html)  
 [Congahead.com](http://www.congahead.com/)  
 [Drummerworld](http://www.drummerworld.com/index.html)  
    
    
  

![](images/redline.gif)

![](images/redtri.gif)**Top of page    | **![](images/redtri.gif) **[School of
Music Homepage](http://www.vpa.niu.edu/music/)**   **    |
**![](images/redtri.gif) **[NIU homepage](http://www.niu.edu)**

