## PHYS 101

![](./line_red.gif)  

## Selected student esssays on science and technology:

  * [Relativity ](http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/pw01-1.doc), Brigette Bernagozzi 
  * [Schroedinger's Cat Prardox ](http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/pw01-2.doc), Rori Bailin 
  * [Survivor ](http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/pw01-3.doc), Jennifer Palumbo 
  * [Newtonize it ](http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/pw01-4.doc), Phaedra Friend 
  * [Relativity ](http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/pw01-5.doc), Sarah Taurman 
  * [Motion ](http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/pw00e1.doc), Elizabeth Husserl 
  * [Fountain of Youth ](http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/pw00e2.doc), Jennifer Goodman 
  * [Nanotechnology ](http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/pw00e3.doc), Elizabeth Husserl 
  * [The Pessimist ](http://www.angelfire.com/wv/jeanwilson/chaos.html), Jean Wilson 
  * Victor Vector: [Cover](http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/pw02-1a.bmp), [page 1](http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/pw02-1b.bmp), [page 2](http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/pw02-1c.bmp), Carolina Piaz 
  * Music in 2D; [ page 1 ](http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/pw02-2a.bmp), [ page 2 ](http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/pw02-2b.bmp), [ page 3 ](http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/pw02-2c.bmp), [ page 4 ](http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/pw02-2d.bmp), Lauren Weinrich 
  * Hector the Vector: [ page 1 ](http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/pw02-3a.bmp), [ page 2 ](http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/pw02-3b.bmp), [ page 3 ](http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/pw02-3c.bmp), [ page 4 ](http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/pw02-3d.bmp), [ page 5 ](http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/pw02-3e.bmp), Jennifer Gosnell 

![](./line_red.gif)  

## Recent developments in science and technology (not in the text)

  * [Nanotechnology ](http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/nano.doc)
  * [Computer Logic ](http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/comlogic.doc)
  * [Quantum Computing ](http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/q-compu.doc)
  * [Quantum Teleportation ](http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/q-tel.doc)

![](./line_red.gif)  

##  [Popular article about this course
](http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/marinello.doc)

![](./line_red.gif)  

##  Course Content

Welcome to Our Physical World at Tulane University. This course is intended to
provide an understanding of the basic principles of science, their
applications in our world and the relation of science to philosophy, politics
and other aspects of human activity. The course will focus on concepts.
Mathematics will be deemphasised, but not eliminated. Much of the course grade
will be based on weekly essays.

Text: "Conceptual Physical Science" by Hewitt, Suchocki and Hewitt.

Lectures: MWF 1-1:50 in or near Boggs 104.

Laboratory: weekly in or near Percival Stern 2020.

Office Hours: MW 10 - 10:30 in PS 5066 (or by appointment).

### Course Requirements

    
    
    
    	Weekly essays 	70%
    	Laboratory	15% (However, passing the lab is required to pass the course.)
    	Mid term exam	10%
    	Final exam 	 5%
    	Project (optional): 	increase of one full letter grade
    	   	 		or exemption from the final with
    		 		grade of A.  The project is to do
    		 		something important.
    
    
    

### Homework Essays and Syllabus

An essay of 300 or more words is due each week. The essays are an important
part of the grade in this course. These essays will be graded critically. One
criteria for grading is: would this be a good essay for an airline magazine?
The essay shoud demonstrate scientific knowledge about the topic assigned.
However, simply reporting on the topic covered in class and doing outside
research is usually not sufficient. The idea is to integrate science with
something else and to write an essay that the reader will remember. Essays are
expected to take several hours per week. Credit will be given for technical
content, common sense, depth of thinking, clarity and originality of writing.
You will not lose credit for being excessively creative. (One essay was a
large carbon atom in the form of a chocholate cake. That's no longer original
now, but we have not yet received a decent alligator gumbo that clarifies
concepts in physics.)

A few of the best essays are on the web at:
http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/

Problems assigned weekly are to be turned in with your essays. Exam problems
will be taken from problems assigned below and also other problems at the end
of the chapters (not assigned) as well as problems from other sources. It is
recommended that you do as many additional problems as necessary to do as well
as you wish in physics. Problem solutions will be given in class or in office
hours upon request.

### List of Possible Topics for Our Physical World

  * The Universe 
  * The Atom 
  * Energy 
  * Newton's six laws 
  * x(t) -- knowing how to predict what happens to everything 
  * Mechanics 
  * Work and Energy 
  * Conservation of Momentum 
  * Relativity 
  * The Bomb -- Do we bomb Japan? 
  * Pythagoras to Newton -- the stars and planets 
  * Gravity and fields 
  * Electric and Magnetic fields 
  * Circuits 
  * Computers 
  * Waves 
  * Huygen and Fermat 
  * The band width theorem, tunneling and other wave phenoemna 
  * Quantum waves 
  * Schroedinger's Equation 
  * Einstein and de Brogie 
  * Bohr and the atom 
  * Lasers 
  * The periodic table 
  * Molecules 
  * DNA 
  * Thermodynamcis 
  * The Second Law -- if disorder is inevitable, is human progress doomed? 
  * Oscillation 
  * Sound, Light and Music 
  * Solids and Fluids 
  * Astromony 
  * Geology 
  * Continental Drift 

### Recent syllabus

Typical schedule -- changes occur and are given in the current syllabus and
may also be announced in class.

Please use the syllabus handed out in class and not this one to do your
assignments.

  * The Universe: Chapter 29: E: 22,23,24,25,27; P: 1. Essay: The Big Bang. 

  * How we describe things: Chapter 1: E: 1,3,6,7,8,9,11,14,17; P: 1,6,10 Chapter 15: E: 12 Chapter 4: E: 22,24 P: 1 Essay: Motion. 

  * Forces, Fields and Newton: Chapter 2: E: 2,3,4,6,8,9,10,12,15,16,18; P: 1,3,4 Chapter 4: E: 15 Essay: The impact of Newton on the 21st Century. 

  * Electricity and Magnetism: Chap. 9: E: 2,4,7,10,16,30 Chap. 10: E: 3,7,8,17 Essay: Electricity in nanostructures. 

  * Review (Mardi Gras week) Exam 1. 

  * Special Relativity: Chapter 29: E: 1,8,10,11,17,18,20. Essay: Paradoxes of relativity. 

  * Fission, Fusion and the Bomb: Chapter 14: E: 14,15. Chapter 16: E: 5,8,23,26. List 3 reasons for and 3 reasons against dropping the H bomb on Japan in 1945. Essay: Essay: Nuclear reactions. 

  * Non-linearity and chaos: Chapter 2: E: 22,27,28,30,35,37,38; P: 7. Problems: a) How large a box did the mathematician need to collect his reward for inventing chess? b) Plot linear and exponential growth vs. time. c) Show that $1,000. invested at 14% per year will retrun $1,024,000. in 50 years. d) Repeat the above problem for a rate of 17.5% per year. Essay: Chaos. 

  * Energy: Chapter 3: E: 1,2,3,9,13,17,20,24,26,29,30; P: 3,4,5,7,8. Essay: How will energy be different in the 21st Century than in the 20th Century? 

  * Waves: Chapter 11: E: 4,5,6,7,8,15,22,23,31,38 P: 1,2,3,5,6. Chapter 12: E: 1,3,4. Essay: Physics and music. 

  * The Atom: Chapter 14: E: 2,3,5,11,12,18,19,20,21,24; P: 2. Chapter 13: E: 47,48. Essay: Quantum mechanics, Heisenberg uncertainty and free will. 

  * Chemistry and Biology: Chapter 18: E: 5,6,13. Chapter 20: E: 1. Chapter 21: E: 2. Chemistry Chapter 8: E: 30,31. What is entropy? Give three examples of the 2nd Law of Thermodynamics. How is reproduction of DNA related to the 2nd Law? Essay: Essay of your choice. 

  * Fluids: Chapter 24: E: 1,2,15 P: 1,2. Chapter 5: E: 1,3,4,14,19,29,37,42,46,48. Essay: Fluids in the environment. 

![](./line_red.gif)  

    
    
              
    
    
    
    	"always the more beautiful answer who asks the more beatuiful question"
    								  -- ee cummings
    
    
    

