**

MUSC 248C

WORLD POPULAR MUSICS AND GENDER

Semester: Spring, 1999

Times: Lecture - W 1:00pm - 2:50pm

Instructor: Professor Sandstrom

Office: Tawes 0153A

Office Phone: 301-405-5567

Office Hours: Thur., 1pm - 3pm

E-mail: bs111@umail.umd.edu



Discussions - Mondays

Teaching Assistants:

Hyeyoung Lee: **[hylee@wam](mailto:hylee@wam)

**

Renee Lapp Norris:**[rl79@umail](mailto:rl79@umail)

**

Karin Thompson: kthom@wam

TA Office: 0148B/C Tawes



Course Description:

**

"World Popular Musics and Gender" is a course offered by the Ethnomusicology
Program of the School of Music for undergraduates. Ethnomusicology is the
study of all musics as culture. This course focuses on the phenomena of world
musics as well as popular musics in different cultures with an emphasis on
cross-cultural comparisons. We will be analyzing these musics through the lens
of gender study where appropriate; as it is often the gender dynamics, which
are acted out during performance, that give insight to major issues,
particularly those of power, within a people's culture. We look forward to you
bringing your backgrounds and experiences of world popular musics into this
discussion.

**

Texts:** _Global Pop: World Music, World Markets_ by Timothy D. Taylor, 1997,
and a packet of articles (available at University Book Center)

Classes meet twice a week: once in a 1 hour and 50 minute lecture and multi-
media format, and once a week in smaller discussion groups. Attendance at both
lecture and discussion sessions is vital. In-class assignments will count
toward your final grade and you will be responsible for materials covered in
all classes. Some assignments require group participation and proper sequence.
Lectures assume the assigned readings as a point of departure.

**

Human Cultural Diversity:

**

You may have chosen this course as part of your CORE Liberal Arts and Sciences
Studies Program, the general education portion of your degree program. CORE
Human Cultural Diversity courses are designed to ensure that you will examine
experiences, perspectives, and values different from those that are dominant
in the United States or Europe. A faculty and student committee approved this
CORE Human Cultural Diversity course because it will introduce you to ideas
and human experiences often overlooked in the curriculum. Please take
advantage of the opportunities this course offers you.

**

Course Assignments and Requirements:

**

1\. Learn your discussion section number and the name of the teaching
assistant leading it. Include that number, along with your name and social
security number, on all written assignments, exams, or anything else you turn
in. Keep backup copies of all work handed in.

2\. Each week you will have a reading, writing, viewing, thinking, and/or
action assignment. All readings should be completed by the beginning of the
week assigned.

3\. You are strongly advised to get and use an E-mail (WAM) address if you
have not done so previously. We will communicate important information through
your E-mail account.

4\. Written assignments will be due at the discussion section. Written
assignments _must_ be typewritten, double-spaced or produced with a computer
and word processing program. It is expected that your assignments will be
written in standard English, with correct grammar and spelling. (See AWriting
Guidelines for Papers@ handout) If you have problems in either spelling or
grammar, plan to take advantage of writing help available to undergraduates on
this campus.

5\. You will have a midterm and a final, three papers and various in/out-of
class assignments.

**

Grading Policy and Class Participation:

**

There are required reading assignments that you must complete in order to
better understand the class presentation. You will be called upon to present
your views and interpretations of reading assignments. Participation in class
discussions is encouraged.

 Grades are determined as follows: Examinations: Midterm 18%; Final 22%

Written assignments: (3) Papers (3 - 4 pages each) 45%

Worksheets, Quizzes, In-class assignments 15%

Your final course grade is based on the following scale 90-100 = A, 80-89 = B,
70-79 = C, 60-69 = D, 59 =F.

**



Special Requirements:

**

Anyone with a disability should notify both your T.A. and Ms. Sandstrom as
soon as possible, so that your special needs can be addressed.

Anyone who will need to miss a class or a discussion section because of
organized sports events or university sanctioned religious observances, should
inform his/her T.A. at the beginning of the semester. Those absent for medical
reasons should present a note from their doctor.







**

WEEKLY ASSIGNMENTS AND TOPICS

Week I (Discussions - Feb. 1; Lecture - Feb. 3)

Introduction to Course: Popular Music, Gender and Performance Theory

**_

Assignment_ :

Herndon: "Context and Performance"



**

Week II (Discussions - Feb. 8; Lecture - Feb. 10)

Introduction to Course Continued

**_

Assignment_ :

Bem: "The Construction of Gender Identity"

Taylor: "Introduction"



**

Week III (Discussions - Feb. 15; Lecture - Feb. 17)

Popular Music & Globalization

**_

Assignment_ :

Taylor: Chapter I "Popular Music & Globalization"

Rose: "Contracting Rap"



**

Week IV (Discussions - Feb. 22; Lecture - Feb. 24)

So-called "World Beat"

_

(PAPER I DUE FEB. 22)

**__

Assignment:_

Taylor: Chapter II "Old Hegemonies and New Music"

Feld: "Notes on >World Beat="



**

Week V (Discussions - Mar. 1; Lecture - Mar. 3)

Popular Music and Rebellion

**

Assignment:

Taylor: Chapter III "Strategies of Resistance"



**

Week VI (Discussions - Mar. 8; Lecture - Mar. 10)

Gender and Power** **in Heavy Metal

**_

Assignment:

_

Walser: "Running with the Devil"



**

Week VII (Discussions - Mar. 15; Lecture - Mar. 17)

Politics and Popular Music

_

MIDTERM MARCH 17



_

SPRING BREAK (March 21 - 28)



Week VIII** **(Discussions - Mar. 29; Lecture - Mar. 31)**

**

Authenticity or Inauthenticity?

**

Assignment:

Taylor: Chapter V "Strategic Inauthenticity"



**

Week IX (Discussions - Apr. 5; Lecture - Apr. 7)

Women in Music in the United States

**_

Assignment:

_

Raphael: "Introduction" from _Grrls: Viva Rock Divas

_**



 Week X (Discussions - Apr. 12; Lecture - Apr. 14)

**

**Sexual Politics in Rap

_

(PAPER II DUE APRIL 12)

**__

Assignment_ :

Kolawole: ASisters take the Rap...But Talk Back@

Rose: "Bad Sistas: Black Women Rappers and Sexual Politics in Rap Music"



**

Week XI (Discussions - Apr. 19; Lecture - Apr. 21)

Gender Bending and Identity

**_

Assignment:

_

Mockus: AQueer Thoughts on Country Music and k.d. lang@



**

Week XII (Discussions - Apr. 26; Lecture - Apr. 28)

Creating Identity

**_

Assignment_ :

Taylor: Chapter VI "Anglo Asian Self Fashioning"



**

Week XIII (Discussions - May 3; Lecture - May 5)

Translocation and Salsa

_

(PAPER III DUE - MAY 3)

**__

Assignment:

_

Manuel: ALatin Music in the New World Order: Salsa & Beyond@

**

Week XIV (Discussions - May 10; Lecture - May 12)

Cross-Cultural Collaborations

**_

Assignment_ :

Taylor: Chapter VII "Toward a More Perfect Union: Cross-Cultural
Collaborations"

Taylor: Chapter VIII "Conclusion"



**

FINAL: TBA (WEEK OF MAY 17TH)

**









