**Mathematics 10** **Course Syllabus** **Spring, 2000**

**Professor Judith Grabiner**

**Office:** Fletcher 222 **Phone:** x 73160 **Secretary** x. 73061.

Email: [jgrabiner@pitzer.edu](mailto:jgrabiner@pitzer.edu)

**Tentative Office Hours:** MWF 11 - 12, Thursdays, 3:15-4:15. Also by
appointment--just ask!

**General** : All cultures have mathematics, though they may not have a class
of people called "mathematicians." In this course, we will look together at
the mathematical activities of a number of present-day cultures and of several
historic cultures. We will concentrate on the mathematics, but will also try
to gain some understanding of the cultural setting and to understand how
culture and mathematics interact. Each student will do a project on a topic of
his or her own choice, involving some mathematical subject in some cultural
setting, more precise instructions will be forthcoming.

**Responsibilities of the student:**

(0) **** Know all the policies in this syllabus. start to finish by _the
second_ class. (Assignment: Read this syllabus through from start to finish
_by the second class_.)

(1) This is a math course. Most people learn mathematics best in a communal
setting, with the chance to ask questions and to share ideas. Most people also
learn mathematics better when they do mathematics, rather than watch someone
else do it. I want to be able to speed up 6r-slow down according to the needs
of the class, so I will make assignments as they seem warranted by our
progress, rather than adhere to a rigid schedule. Accordingly, to get anything
meaningful for you out of the course, **please attend class regularly and to**
**complete the assignments on time. If you miss a class, it is your
responsibility to** **find out what we did, to get copies of any handouts, and
to do any assignments** **as soon as you can.** To help you, I will announce
and post my office hours, and will circulate a list of any classmates who are
willing to share their phone numbers.

(2) This is a course in history and culture. Learning about other cultures
requires an openness to new ideas, a willingness to ask questions, and free
and full discussions. But it also requires the active pursuit of new
knowledge. Accordingly, **please do the readings for a day's** **class** **
_before_** __**the class, so that you can participate in the discussion and be
able to** **build new knowledge on a foundation.**

(3) **Please ask questions whenever you think they're warranted,** and I
reserve the right to somewhat shift directions ff it seems warranted. I
promise you that, it you fulfill your responsibilities, you will come out of
this course both knowing some interesting types of mathematics and
understanding how mathematics has been part of many different cultures.

**Requirements.**

(a) **Readings-** The course has three required books (available at Huntley
now), and a _Packet of xeroxed readings_ (also obtainable from Huntley).

The books are- Marcia Ascher, _Ethnomathematics: A Multicultural View of
Mathematical Ideas;_ Frank Swetz, _Was Pythagoras Chinese? Right-Triangle
Theory in Ancient China_ ; Aasger Aaboe, _Episodes from the Early History of
Mathematics_

The reading packet includes selections from J. L Berggren, _Episodes in the
Mathematics of_ _Medieval_ lilam, R. Gillings, _Mathematics in the Time of
the_ Pharaohs, N. L. Rabinovitz, _Probabilily and Statistical Inference in
Ancient and Medieval Jewish Literature;_ W. Feldman, _Rabbinic Mathematics;_
D. E.Smith and Yoshio Mikami, _A History of Japanese Mathematics_ , and C.
Zaslavsky, _Africa Counts: Number and Pattern in African Culture_.

Also, I will distribute handouts on the mathematics any time I think this is
needed. **Handouts are required reading!**

(b) **Daily Assignments-.** There will be problem sets and/or brief writing
assignments, assigned as appropriate, and announced in class. The due dates
will be announced at the time the assignments are handed out.

I encourage you to discuss these assignments with each other, and to form
study groups. The only caution is this-. do NOT copy somebody else's writeup.
Talk together all you wish, but write up your answers on your own. Make sure
you understand any answers you've learned from your group--you'll see some of
the questions again on the quizzes and midterm. **_Remember, the purpose of
any such assignment is not to produce a_** **_pace of answers, but for you to
understand._**

**Penalty for late assignments-.** one point per CALENDAR (not class) day
(except Saturday & Sunday). (It you're sick or have a similar compelling
reason, I'll always waive the penalty, _provided that you let me know_ BEFORE
the assignment is to be handed in, leave a message on my machine at 73160 or
email)

(d) **Tests:** There may be a few 1 0-minute quizzes; there will be one
midterm, and a final.

Quizzes will be announced the class before and will closely parallel the
homework. I'll distribute study guides before the midterm and the final. The
midterm will be Wednesday, March 8 (the last class before spring break). The
final will be on Wednesday, May 1 0, at 2 P. M.

(e) **Project:** Each student will do a project on a topic of his or her
choice involving some mathematical subject in some cultural sefting. This will
result in a short (7-minute) in-class report so you can share your findings
with the class, and a written paper of about 3-4 pages. You'll be required to
understand both the mathematics you are writing about and its cultural
setting, but the emphasis of your report and paper (whether on the mathematics
or the culture) will be up to you. I will have a conference with each of you
before you get launched on your report to help you define your topic and get
the most out of this assignment. I'll hand out further instructions closer to
the time this is due.

(t) **Grading algorithm:** Midterm and quiz average 25% of grade, daily
assignments 25% of grade, project 25% of grade, final exam 25% of grade
(except students who do significantly better on the final exam will have that
counted in their favor).

**Tentative Calendar: Math 10. Spring, 2000**

**Books:** M. Ascher, _Ethnomathematics-I_ F. Swetz, _Was Plqhagoras Chinese?
A_. Aaboe, _Episodes from the Early_ _History of Mathematics_.

Plus, a packet of **_Readings for Math 10:_** including selections from J. L
Berggren, _Episodes in the Mathematics_ _of Medieval Islam_ , R. Gillings,
_Mathematics in the Time of the_ Pharaohs, N. L. Rabinovitz, _Probability and
Statistical_ _Inference in Ancient and Medieval Jewish_ Literature-, W.
Feldman, _Rabbinic Mathematics-_ , D. E.Smith and Yoshio Mikami, _A Histo!y of
Japanese Mathematics_ , C. Zaslavsky, _Africa Counts: Number and Pattern in
African_ Culture, and G. G. Joseph, _The Crest of the Peacock: NonEuropean
Roots of Mathematics_.

**Week beginning: Topic and Assignments**

**Jan. 17** : Introduction to the Course

**Jan. 24** A few number systems. Among non-literate peoples-. Ascher, chapter
1.Among the ancient Babylonians: Aaboe, pp. 5-10, 16- top of 19. In Japan:
Smith-Mikami, on the _soroban,_ Chapter 3..(Note: Ascher will be our major
source for Latin-American and NativeAmerican mathematics, and one of the two
on African mathematics.)

**Jan. 31** Graphs, in many cultures. Ascher, ch. 2 (pp. 30-65). Begin Kinship
structures, in several societies. Group theory. Ascher, 66-83.

**Feb. 7** Kinship Structures continued.

**Feb. 14** Chance, Strategy, Combinatorics, and Expectation: in games,
Ascher, 84-94; in medieval Jewish literature. Rabinovitch, 3-7, 76-77,
142-151, 161-164.

**Feb. 21** Number systems in African cultures and the history of the study of
African mathematics. Zaslavsky, 1-51. Mathematics in ancient Egypt, Gillings,
4-23, 185-192. Numbers in ancient Babylonia, Aaboe, 17-22.

**Feb.28** Geometry in ancient Babylonia, Aaboe, 23-33. Right-triangle theory
in ancient China. Swetz, 7-25.

**Mar. 6** More right triangles: China: Swetz, 26-61; 62-68; The Talmud:
Feldman, 17-18, 35.

**Mar. 8** **Midterm Examination**

**Mar. 13-17** Spring Break

**Mar. 20** Early Greek Mathematics. Aaboe, 35-37, 40 (last 2
paragraphs)-middle of 42. Aaboe, 52-53.

**Mar. 27** Mathematics in the medieval Islamic world. Berggren, 1-5, 21-26,
37-39, 124-5, 182-186', Joseph, 311-319, 324-328, 338-341.

**April 3** Mathematics in Ancient and Classical India, Joseph, 215-263.

**April 10** Joseph, 264-300. Catchup and review.

**April 17**. Student Reports. (Note: Everyone **must** be ready on Monday,
April 17.)

**April 24** Student Reports.

**May 1**. Review and applications of topics.

**_Wednesday, May 10, 2 P.M, Final Examination_**

