_

Satanism, Witchcraft, and Spirit Possession_

Religious Studies 370

Thursday Evenings, 7 to 10 p.m



W. Harman, 205 Harrison  
Spring,2000  
Office: (765) 658-4718  
e-mail: [wharman@depauw.edu](mailto:wharman@depauw.edu)

_Office Hours_ : T,TH 9:30-noon (1-day advanced planning advised for morning
hours if you wish to drop by.) Tuesday, 4-5:30 p.m. Other times are possible
by prearranged appointment. Unplanned drop-ins are most successful Tuesday and
Thursday afternoons after 4:00 p.m. Communication by e-mail is always most
efficient

        Seniors may take this course by permission only. No senior will be granted permission to take the course pass-fail.

        This is an interdisciplinary course, and will involve a good deal of independent writing and research. If you have never written a term paper, or done research for a term paper, I encourage you to consult me as well as Writing Center assistants in the course of your work.



_

The topic of Study

_

        "Witchcraft" and "satanism" are terms used in reference to occult bodies of traditional knowledge and practice intended to enable practitioners to manipulate and/or respond to postulated supernatural forces. These bodies of knowledge are often described as technologies and techniques for controlling events and persons or for entering into a particular kind of relationship with a specific supernatural force or forces. Spirit possession refers to a phenomenon found worldwide. Usually it refers to ways the human body/mind/soul/spirit are invaded and controlled by a supernatural force or forces -- perceived sometimes as beneficial, sometimes as harmful. Those who believe in spirit possession as a positive experience understand it primarily as a supernatural strategy in which human subjects become vehicles for communication between supernatural forces and the human community. Haitian Voodoo and Christian Pentecostalism would be good examples. Those who understand possession as a negative phenomenon understand it as one way malicious supernatural forces intrude themselves into the bodies of individuals and the social lives of communities: mental illnesses of various sorts have often been attributed to the invasion of a person's body by evil spirits.  
        This course, I should point out, is not a "how to" course. It is not intended to encourage or to promote participation in any of these phenomena. On the other hand, students will be encouraged to regard these phenomena as serious, _bona fide_ expressions of human religious consciousness.  
        In class, we will deal with the extent to which traditions involving witchcraft, Satanism, and spirit possession may be regarded as religious systems. We will also be investigating how these phenomena have constituted underlying and powerful movements in the world's great religious traditions such as Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, and Buddhism. Sorcery, witchcraft, devils, and spirit possession appear in a variety of forms in each tradition. Whether these phenomena can be termed "religious" will depend upon how "religion" is understood. My bias I wish to make clear: any body of knowledge that claims to provide answers to peoples' questions regarding

> > (1) what (if anything) their lives mean, (2) how they should live or die,
(3) where they came from, (4) why they are here, and (5) what might happen to
them when they die

can be regarded as an expression of a religious tradition.

The study of what many might regard as "fringe elements" in our spiritual
history is likely to force us to ask such questions as:

> > (1) What elements must be present in a "religious tradition" in order for
us to call it "religious?" Is it fair to call those traditions we like or
approve of "religions" while terming those we dislike or fear, "pseudo-
religions," "cults" or "sects?"

>>

>> (2) Is religion, in whatever form it takes, always a "good" thing?

>>

>> (3) How far does the freedom of religion extend when it comes to such
practices as human sacrifice?

>>

>> (4) Is it possible to study a particular tradition like Satanism with some
objectivity and still to pronounce value judgments about it? Is the believer
always right? Is it possible to think constructively and critically about
these traditions given mainline cultural assumptions about them?

>>

>> (5) What are Satanism and witchcraft in their essentials and in their
historical manifestations? Though they are often lumped together, along with
New Age Religions, Voodoo, and Primal religious traditions, what are their
distinctive qualities? Satanism and witchcraft differ significantly from each
other and each has within it a remarkable variety in both theory and practice.
What is the nature of this variety?

>>

>> (6) What kinds of people are involved in spirit possession, Satanism,
and/or witchcraft? What needs do these traditions meet? Why, when, and where
do they practice these traditions?

_

Required Texts_:

> > Delbanco, Andrew. _[The Death of Satan: How Americans Have Lost the Sense
of
Evil](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0374524866/qid=962285016/sr=1-2/104-1572202-7418362)._
New York: Farrar, Strauss, and Giroux. 1995.

>>

>> Goodman, Felicitas D. _[How About Demons? Possession and Exorcism in the
Modern
World](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0253204674/qid=962285636/sr=1-3/104-1572202-7418362)_.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1989.

>>

>> Hill, Frances. _[A Delusion of Satan: The Full Story of the Salem Witch
Trials](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0306807971/qid=962285662/sr=1-1/104-1572202-7418362)_.
New York: Doubleday, 1995.

Lewis, I.M. _[Ecstatic Religion: An Anthropological Study of Spirit Possession
and
Shamanism](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0415007992/qid=962285756/sr=1-10/104-1572202-7418362)_.
Routledge: New York, 1981.

> > Peck, M. Scott. _[People of the Lie: The Hope for Healing Human
Evil](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0684848597/o/qid=962285794/sr=2-1/104-1572202-7418362)_.
New York: Simon and Schuster, 1983.

>>

>> Stoller, Paul and Olkes, Cheryl. _[In Sorcery's
Shadow](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0226775437/qid=962285823/104-1572202-7418362)_.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987.

_

Recommended, but not required_:

> > Karlsen, Carol F. _[The Devil in the Shape of a
Woman](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0393317595/qid=962285842/sr=1-1/104-1572202-7418362)_.
New York: Vintage Press, 1989

>>

>> Marwick, Max (ed.) _[Witchcraft and
Sorcery](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0140132554/qid=962285865/sr=1-1/104-1572202-7418362)._
New York: Viking Penguin, 1982.

>>

>> Raschke, Carl A. _[Painted Black: From Drug Killings to Heavy Metal the
Alarming True Story of How Satanism is Terrorizing Our
Communities](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0062507044/qid=962285894/104-1572202-7418362)._
San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1990.

Victor, Jeffrey S. _[Satanic Panic: The Creation of a Contemporary
Legend](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/081269192X/qid=962285912/sr=1-2/104-1572202-7418362)_.
Peru, Ill.: Open Court, 1993.

> > Wafer, Jim. _[The Taste of Blood : Spirit Possession in
Brazilian](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0812213416/qid=962285963/104-1572202-7418362)_[
_Candomble_](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0812213416/qid=962285963/104-1572202-7418362).
Philadelphia: U. of Pennsylvania Press, 1991.

_

Requirements of the Course

_

This is a seminar, rather than a lecture course. The instructor will act
primarily as coordinator, facilitator, and resource person. In a seminar
setting, attendance is a matter of participating in a collegial way in an
environment where much of the learning occurs through reading and writing
outside of class and discussing the results of that writing in class. _As a
member of this seminar, you owe it to your classmates to be present not just
when you are making a presentation, but also when others are making their
presentations._ Your presence is, therefore, required in order for the seminar
to function properly. _If you are unable to commit yourself to attending the
seminar for the full period of each of the planned class sessions, you should
consider withdrawing now._ Each hour's unarranged absence will replace 5% of
your final grade with 5% F. Pass/fail students who miss 4 or more _hours_ of
scheduled class will fail the class. Documented physical illness and death in
the immediate family will constitute exceptions. The seminar spirit must be
one in which you commit yourself to being present and to responding to your
classmates, as well as to doing the responsibilities you accept as
assignments. The nature of this course does not permit absences on account of
bad omens, threatening evil spirits, hexes placed by or upon you, or a
generalized  "the devil made me miss class." I consider commitments to living
units and theatrical productions in this latter category.

_Requirements

_

The most basic and most important form of education in the humanities is
learning how to learn. This course is designed to help students gain skills in
three areas integral to learning: reading, writing, and discussion. This is
not a lecture course. It is, rather, a reading and writing course, and you
will be doing a good deal of writing, as well as a good deal of discussion
about that writing in class. Two kinds of writing will be involved. **(1)**
The first will be short papers, of 2 to 4 pages in length, in which you
respond to specific assigned readings. These short papers should reflect what
you think about the material read, and they should provide for you the
opportunity either to support or rebut any material that you find especially
noteworthy in the reading. The papers should not be entirely devoted to
summarizing the reading, but they should give the reader the general sense of
the points to which you are responding. No research is required for these
papers, but if you choose to quote from the assigned material, you should
document it fully. Each student must write _three_ (3) short papers.   TWO OF
THE THREE SHORT PAPERS WILL BE WRITTEN WITH A PARTNER, AND EACH PERSON GETS
THE SAME GRADE.

Preferably they should by typed, and the pages should be attached to each
other. During the first four weeks of class, ALL STUDENTS MUST WRITE AT LEAST
ONE OF THE REQUIRED PAPERS. Every time you submit a paper, it should include
at the end at least one full bibliographic reference to the work about which
you are writing. The proper form for the reference appears here and in the
bibliography above:

> > Author's last name, Author's first and/or middle name. _Title of book_.
City where published: press, copyright date.

Organization of the paper is important.  Remember that you are writing TO
COMMUNICATE WITH YOUR PEERS. Do not write as though you are writing to someone
who has a graduate degree in the topic.  Assume that your reader is bright,
and that s/he has read about the topic no more (and possibly less) than you
have.  Please do not write so as to impress people with name_dropping,
concept_dropping, or your capacity for literary acrobatics. Clarity and
directness usually indicate clarity of thought.  Abstruse, convoluted, and
vague prose usually end up sounding pretentious. Material lifted from another
source should appear in quotation marks.  Ideas borrowed and paraphrased
should be acknowledged as such.

Try to be provocative in your papers without being outrageous, or try to
analyze a new idea or concept.  Remember that your paper is intended to help
classmates understand how **you** are struggling with the material in
question.   You may be personal, or even anecdotal, but please don't be trite.
Use of the first person is acceptable.  _The paper should contain somewhere
(footnote, endnote, bibliographic list) a full and correct citation of the
bibliographic details of the material discussed._



(2) The second kind of writing will involve a research paper on any topic you
choose that is related to this course. Midway through the course you will be
expected to hand in an outline of the term paper as you project it _at that
point_. The term paper should be about 20-25 pages long. **It will be due on
May 4, one week BEFORE the end of classes.** Hints about writing term papers
are contained in the back of this syllabus.

During the eighth week of the course, each student will select any article or
short piece on a subject that interests her/him, and will present a brief
summary (2 to 4 pages) of it as a way to begin selecting a term paper topic.

In addition, students will have the opportunity to give a detailed verbal
response to at least two other students' papers. Students reacting to papers
should arrange with the author to see the paper at least a day ahead of time.
During the tenth week of the class, students will present to the class and
hand in afterward a brief outline of the term paper they intend to write. At
the end of the semester, each student will be asked to submit a completed term
paper. Below is a summary of these requirements, and the percentage of the
total grade each assignment represents.

Elements of Grading

(1) Three 2 to 4-page reaction papers, each worth 10% x 3 = 30%

> > > > This includes two team papers (written with another person) and one
solo paper.

(2) One article or chapter summary = 9%

(Submit 2-4 page summary)

(3) Term paper outline = 6%

(4) Term paper = 45%

(5) Two Verbal response (more than two possible) 2 x 5 =10%

_

_ A note about the response grades: students will grade each other anonymously
on the responses. Each student except for the student presenting and the
student responding, will be asked to give a grade (A,B,C,D; F only if you
don't show up to respond) for each respondent of the evening. Those grades,
written privately on small cards, along with the name of the student graded
AND of the student giving the grade, will be averaged. The respondent will
receive the averaged grade. Responses should not be long and elaborate. Nor do
they need to be written. They should pose questions or problems for the
presenter and lead into lively discussion. Final authority for approving the
response grade will remain, however, with the revered (not quite worshipful)
instructor. In grading responses, students should consider thoughtfulness,
whether the respondent shows evidence of having read the assigned material,
and whether the respondent has attempted both to understand and to critique
the perspective of the presenter.

_



Class Date_ _Class Schedule

_



February 3- Introduction to the course; assumptions about the topic and a
consideration of the issues. Film.

February 10- Read all of Peck; 2 to 4-page papers due

February 17- Read all of Victor or Delbanco; 2 to 4-page papers due

February 24- Read all of Hill; 2 to 4-page papers due

March 2- Read all of Stoller and Oakes; 2 to 4-page papers due

March 9- Read all of Goodman; 2 to 4-page papers due

March 23- Read all of Lewis. 2-4 page papers due.

April 6- No classes this week. Each person will arrange a half-hour
appointment to discuss your term paper topic. Come with a paragraph summary of
your topic, a tentative outline, and a _complete bibliography_ of at least 8
items. Turn these things in at the time of the appointment. LATE MATERIAL NOT
ACCEPTED. Missed appointment equivalent to 2 hours of missed class. Written
material is worth 6% of your total grade.

April 13- Choose an article or book chapter that deals with the topic about
which you think you would like to write your paper. Summarize it and tell
what, in general, it has to do with your topic. Write 3-5 pages. Worth 9% of
your grade.Make sure your bibliographic documentation is complete!

April 20, 27, May 4, May 11- **Term Papers are Due May 4, 2000.** Student
Presentations of term papers: 20-minute presentation, 10 to 15 minutes of
discussion



_

Term Paper Presentations

_



April 20 ___________________________________

___________________________________

___________________________________

__________________________________

__________________________________

___________________________________



April 27 ___________________________________

___________________________________

___________________________________

__________________________________

__________________________________

__________________________________

May 4 ___________________________________

___________________________________

___________________________________

__________________________________

__________________________________

___________________________________



May 11 ___________________________________

___________________________________

___________________________________

__________________________________

__________________________________

___________________________________





_

Weekly Presentations

_ **



February 10** (Peck)

Duet Papers: (1) __________________&__________________

[_________________]

[Response]

(2) __________________&__________________ [_________________]



(3) __________________&__________________ [_________________]



(4) __________________&__________________ [_________________]



(5) __________________&__________________ [_________________]

(6) __________________&__________________ [_________________]



**

February 17** (Victor or Delblanco)

Duet Papers: (1) __________________&__________________ [_________________]

[Response]

(2) __________________&__________________ [_________________]



(3) __________________&__________________ [_________________]

(4) __________________&__________________ [_________________]

(5) __________________&__________________ [_________________]

(6) __________________&__________________ [_________________]

**

February 24** (Hill)

Duet Papers: (1) __________________&__________________ [_________________]

[Response]

(2) __________________&__________________ [_________________]



(3) __________________&__________________ [_________________]

(4) __________________&__________________ [_________________]

(5) __________________&__________________ [_________________]

(6) __________________&__________________ [_________________]

**

March 4** (Stoller & Oakes)

Duet Papers: (1) __________________&__________________ [_________________]

[Response]

(2) __________________&__________________ [_________________]



(3) __________________&__________________ [_________________]

(4) __________________&__________________ [_________________]

(5) __________________&__________________ [_________________]

(6) __________________&__________________ [_________________]

**

March 11** (Goodman)

Duet Papers: (1) __________________&__________________ [_________________]

[Response]

(2) __________________&__________________ [_________________]



(3) __________________&__________________ [_________________]

(4) __________________&__________________ [_________________]

(5) __________________&__________________ [_________________]

(6) __________________&__________________ [_________________]

**

March 23** (Lewis)

Duet Papers: (1) __________________&__________________ [_________________]

[Response]

(2) __________________&__________________ [_________________]



(3) __________________&__________________ [_________________]

(4) __________________&__________________ [_________________]

(5) __________________&__________________ [_________________]

(6) __________________&__________________ [_________________]



Observations About Writing Term Papers

1\. Proper documentation of sources is crucial. You may choose among a variety
of styles of documentation (social sciences, U. of Chicago Manual, Modern
Languages Association), but be consistent and always include complete
information. For books this means author, title, publisher, place of
publication, and date of publication. For articles, it means author, title of
article, name of periodical, date, volume, number in the volume (if given),
and beginning and ending page numbers. Folks who are sloppy with their
documentation are scholarly moral equivalents to the inveterate bad spellers.
Refer to note eight below.

2\. Document ideas that you have borrowed and direct quotations you use.
Anytime you are aware of having been inspired by an idea or a point made by
another author, you would do well to note this in a footnote or an endnote. It
gives your reader confidence that you are honest, that you know your material
well, and that you are willing to go to some trouble to let your reader know
where s/he can go to read more extensively about the issues you raise.
Besides, if the reader thinks the point you're making is a weak one, it will
give her or him some pause to know that you're not alone in your opinion or
assessment.

3\. Write the introduction to your term paper last. If you are doing truly
creative work, you won't really know where the research and writing are going
to lead you, and so you won't be able to introduce the material until you know
what you will have produced. Note that some of the worst writing in many
student papers is usually in the introduction and often in the conclusion. A
bad introduction is often written because the author has no idea what s/he is
introducing. If the paper isn't finished, it doesn't yet exist so as to be
introduced. Bad conclusions are usually written because the author is just
sick and tired of the whole thing and hasn't taken time to think about the
paper for a few days before trying to provide an overview or a perspective on
it. Solution: give yourself enough time to allow a day or two (at least)
between finishing the paper and writing the introduction and conclusion.

4\. You don't necessarily need to start writing at the beginning of the paper.
If you have a decent outline, you will be able to isolate a portion of the
paper with which you feel most comfortable and it often pays to start writing
at that point.

5\. Resign yourself to the fact that you will hardly ever feel that you have
done enough research. So don't wait until you feel you have before you begin
writing. Start writing early on a section of the paper you feel comfortable
discussing. Continue writing on other sections until you come to a point where
you realize that you must then go back to doing some research. This kind of
dialogue between writing and reading is most efficient because it demonstrates
in sometimes painfully obvious ways that there are things you need to find out
about before you feel comfortable with finishing the paper. To wait until the
last minute to start writing is to invite backing yourself into a corner: if
you run into a problem about which you need to do some reference work, you're
just stuck, and the paper suffers.

6\. If you decide you want to write a term paper with someone else, be sure
beforehand that you can actually work with that person. Try writing a shorter
paper together first.

7\. Use an outline/table of contents as a way of giving your reader a sense of
how the paper progresses and how it is structured. Nearly any paper can
benefit from this.

8\. To misspell is not to commit a sin. It's worse than that. Done on a
consistent basis it communicates many things to your reader, some of which
include the frequently subliminal messages that you don't know how to spell,
that you don't care about learning how to spell, that you are in a rush to
whip the work off, that you are careless and thoughtless, that you come from a
deprived educational environment, that you have not or will not bother to
proofread your work, that you have little or no regard for the reader who must
endure your constant sloppiness, that you don't know how to use either a
dictionary or a spell-checker, and that you must therefore be of questionable
character. It may be true that the subliminal impressions we receive from what
we read are sometimes inaccurate, but they are nevertheless lasting. Hearken,
dear readers: those subliminal messages your written works imbed in a reader's
mind just might have some bearing on the grade your written work receives.

9\. Write about something you _want_ to write about. If you pick just some
dreary topic in which you have no interest, that will be communicated to your
reader. If you don't like what you're writing about, your reader isn't going
to like what s/he is reading about. Be confident that once you have picked a
topic and done 30 to 60 hours of reading about it, you will know more about it
than anybody in the class. Write with confidence about what you want to write
about. Don't assume that the topic you might want to do is too far out in the
ozone. Check it out. The first and most important issue is whether you are
writing about something you really want to write about; if so, wonderful. If
not, you will suffer and so will your reader. Don't do that to yourself, or to
me. The second issue is whether or not enough source material is available.
The sooner you can brainstorm about possible topics, and check on materials
available, the more likely it is you will not end up stuck with a topic you
want to deal with but about which you can find no material. People usually end
up writing about topics they don`t like when they have to make a last-minute
choice.



Ranges of Paper Topics

(These are only suggestions, intended not to limit but to stimulate your
imagination)



1\. Defining the evil person/act: psychologically, theologically, religiously

2\. Satan in a particular religious tradition: Christianity, Hinduism,
Buddhism, Islam

3\. Satan in a document: the New Testament, the Hebrew Scriptures, LaVey's
_Satanic Bible_ , the writings of Alister Crawley

4\. Modern Satanism and Youth Culture

5\. Satanism in the lyrics of rock groups

6\. Witchcraft trials in Mediaeval Europe/Salem Massachusetts/ elsewhere

7\. Witchcraft in other cultures: African, Indian, Melanesian, Eskimo,
American Indian

8\. The modern Wicca Movement and ancient Witchcraft

9\. Pentecostalism and speaking in tongues

10\. Ancestor possession in China and Taiwan

11\. The Dissociative Disorder and Religious Possession

12\. Deity Possession as a form of female social protest

13\. Possession as an element in Haitian Vaudun (Voodoo)

14\. Rock music and trance possession

15\. The power of violence in religious ritual: sacrifice, holy war, etc.

16\. Images of the devil in art, film, or literature of a certain period or
country

17\. A study of those to whom Satanism or witchcraft might appeal

18\. A study of traditional forms associated with Satanism

19\. 19th Century American Spiritualism

20\. Spiritualism and/or transe possession among the American Shakers

21\. The role of Satanic imagery in serial murder cases (Geoffrey Dahmer, Son
of Sam)

22\. Satanism and the Entertainment Industry (Film; Television)

23\. Satan in Film (Rosemary's Baby; Devil's Advocate; Angel Heart, etc.)

24\. Exorcism as a religious phenomenon

25\. Witchhunts in human history (McCarthyism; Salem; European persecutions)

26\. Famous figures in withcraft and satanism (Alistair Crawley, Anton LaVey)

