





> >  

![](../images/cloth3.jpg) |   |



# _EWS 201: African American Experience_

#  SYLLABUS

## FALL 1999

## TTH: 1-2:50 p.m.  
  
---|---|---  
  


### Bldg. 9,

###  Room 281

### Office Hours: TTH 3-4:30; W 2:00-4:00; and by arrangement.

### (909) 869-2323

**TCHumber@CSUPomona.Edu**  
  
**COURSE DESCRIPTION**

EWS 201 African American Experience: The experiences of Africans in the United
States will be framed within historical contexts of African contributions to
world civilizations, both ancient and modern. Analysis will include

  1. the historical, structural, and ideological forces that produced the matrices within which identity, culture, and experiences were forged for Africans in the Americas
  2. the rich range of cultural expressions generated by Africans in the United States in response to their historical encounter with oppression and other social and cultural forces
  3. issues of diversity among Africans in the diaspora, especially the differences and inequalities marked by gender, class, and geography; and
  4. strategies, personal and social, for forging solidarity and creating an equitable society. 

The experiences of Africans in the United States will be studied through the
analysis of language, literature, music, vernacular traditions, religion, and
social activism. Frequent written and oral presentations. 4 hours.

**COURSE PHILOSOPHY**

African American Experience acknowledges that the shaping of worldviews and
attitudes about Africans in the Americas is determined by the constraints of
one's cultural orientation and societal ideologies. Through increasing the
awareness of and sensitivity to issues affecting Africans in the Americas,
this course intends to expand students' informational base, uncover truths,
and dispel misconceptions about continental and diasporan Africans.



**EXPECTED OUTCOMES**

During the course of the quarter, students will

  1. demonstrate a knowledge of critical concepts such as race, ethnicity, minority groups, black and white, Eurocentricity, Afrocentricity, and show how these concepts are socially constituted and politically manipulated in the U.S. and elsewhere by engaging in class discussions, presentations, and written assignments; 



  1. demonstrate a knowledge of the history and sociocultural features of the African homelands and civilizations from which Africans ventured or were forcibly stripped from their homelands and shipped to the new world by engaging in class discussions, presentations, and written assignments; 



  1. demonstrate a knowledge of the social, economic, and political circumstances under which Africans were brought to the Caribbean and Americas as slaves and assess the subsequent history and experiences of Negroes, Coloreds, Blacks, and African Americans in the United States by engaging in class discussions, presentations, and written assignments; 



  1. make comparisons and identify differences (based on gender, class, and color) within the Africans in the United States in particular and across the new world African diaspora in general by engaging in class discussions, presentations, and written assignments; 



  1. compare and evaluate the diverse responses of Africans in the United States, both men and women, to their experiences of oppression and discrimination by engaging in class discussions, presentations, and written assignments; 



  1. demonstrate a knowledge, understanding, and critical appreciation of cultural forms and artistic expressions developed in communities by Africans in the United States by engaging in class discussions, presentations, and written assignments; 



  1. articulate an enabling vision(s) and effective strategies for Africans in the diaspora as they move into the 21st century by engaging in class discussions, presentations, and written assignments. 



**TEXT, READINGS, AND WEB SITES**

### _Required Text:_

**Salem, D.C. (1997). The journey: A history of the African American
experience. Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt Publishing Company.**

####  Zinn, H. (1980). A people's history of the United States. New York:
Harper & Row, Publishers.

### _Recommended Books:_

Asante, M. K. (1988). Afrocentricity. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press, Inc.

Asante, M. K. and Asante, K. W. (Eds.) (1990). African culture: The rhythms of
unity. Trenton, NJ: African World Press, Inc.

Asante, M. K., & Mattson, M. T. (1992). Historical and cultural atlas of
African Americans. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company.

Bell, D. (1992). Faces at the bottom of the well: The permanence of racism.
New York: BasicBooks.

Berlin, I., Favreau, M., and Miller, S. F. (Eds.) (1998). Remembering slavery:
African Americans talk about their personal experiences of slavery and
emancipation. Washington, DC: The New Press.

Browder, A. T. (1992). Nile Valley contributions to civilization: Exploding
the Myths, Vol. I.

Diop, C. A. (1974). The African origin of civilization: Myth or reality. New
York: L. Hill.

Douglass, F. (1962). The life and times of Frederick Douglass. New York:
Collier Books.

Douglass, F. (1968). Narrative of the life of Frederick Douglass. New York:
New American Library.

Douglass, F. (1992). Thoughts for All Time: Frederick Douglass. Washington,
DC: Parks and History Association.

DuBois, W. E. B. (1964). An ABC of color. Berlin: Seven Seas Publishers.

Franklin, J. H. & Moss. (1994). From slavery to freedom: A history of Negro
Americans. 7th Edition. New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc.

Hilliard, A. III, Williams, L., and Damali, N. (1987). The teachings of
Ptahotep: The oldest book in the world. Atlanta: Blackwood Press.

Holloway, J. E. (Ed.). (1990). Africanisms in American culture. Bloomington,
IN: Indiana University Press.

Houston, D. D. (1926). The wonderful Ethiopians of the ancient Cushite empire.
Baltimore: Black Classic Press.

Jackson, J. G. (1974). Introduction to African civilizations. Secaucus, NJ:
Citadel Press.

James, G. G. M. (1974). Stolen legacy. Chicago: Third World Press.

Karenga, M. (1984). Selections from the Husia: Sacred wisdom of ancient Egypt.
Los Angeles: The University of Sankore Press.

Katz,W. L. (1986). Black Indians: A hidden heritage. New York: Atheneum.

Katz, W. L. (1973). The Black West: A documentary and pictorial history.
Garden City, NY: Anchor Press.

Loewen, J. W. (1995). Lies my teacher told me: Everything your American
history textbook got wrong. New York: James W. Loewen.

Parker, George W. (1981). The children of the sun. Baltimore: Black Classic
Press.

Rogers, J. A. (1961). Africa's gift to America. New York: Helga M. Rogers.

Rogers, J. A. (1965). The five Negro presidents. New York: Helga M. Rogers.

Rogers, J. A. (1957). 100 amazing facts about the Negro with complete proof.
New York: Helga M. Rogers.

Rogers, J. A. (1974). World's great men of color, volumes I & II. New York:
Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc.

Salley, C. (1993). The Black 100: A ranking of the most influential African-
Americans, past and present. New York: Citadel Press.

Smith, J. C. (Ed.). (1994). Black firsts: 2,000 years of extraordinary
achievement. Detroit: Visible Ink, Press.

Van Sertima, I. (Ed.). (1992). African presence in early America. New
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.

Van Sertima, I. (1998). America revisited. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction
Publishers.

Van Sertima, I., (Ed.). (1983). Blacks in science: Ancient and modern. New
Brunswick, NJ: The Journal of African Civilizations.

Van Sertima, I., (Ed.). (1989). Egypt revisited. New Brunswick, NJ: The
Journal of African Civilizations.

Van Sertima, I., (Ed.). (1986). Great African thinkers, volume I. New
Brunswick, NJ: The Journal of African Civilizations.

Van Sertima, I., (Ed.). (1988). Great African thinkers, volume II. New
Brunswick, NJ: The Journal of African Civilizations.

Van Sertima, I. (1976). They came before Columbus. New York: Random House.

Walker, D., & Garnet, H. H. (1994). Walker's Appeal and Garnet's Address to
the Slaves of the United States ofAmerica

Williams, C. (1974). The destruction of Black civilization. Chicago: Third
World Press.

Williams, J. (1987) Eyes on the prize: America's civil rights years,
1954-1965. New York: Viking Press.

Woodson, C. G.. (1933). The Mis-education of the Negro. Washington, DC:
Washington Associated Publishers.

Yee, S. J. (1992). Black women abolitionists: A study in activism, 1928-1860.
Knoxville, TN: The University of Tennessee Press.



### _Recommended WEB Sites for African and African Diasporan History and
Culture_

  1. Meanderings--An African American Journal of Politics, Art and Culture 

> A provocative, diverse and richly packed journal pushing the notion of
interactivity in online publications. Edited by Cuda Brown.
<[www.newsavanna.com](http://www.newsavanna.com/)>

  1. NetNoir OnlineA central online resource for all things Afrocentric, covering the African diasporan and continental African topics. <[www.netnoir.com](http://www.netnoir.com/)>
  2. Yahoo! Find the best African-American Magazine Web! [African American Magazines](http://search.yahoo.com/bin/search?p=African+American+Magazines)
  3. [African American Museums](museums2.html) 



**MINIMUM STUDENT MATERIALS**

> Texts and usual student materials.



**MINIMUM COLLEGE FACILITIES**

> Classroom, library, and audio-visual services.



**INSTRUCTIONAL METHODS**

African American Experience will include lectures, reading assignments, group
interactions and discussions, individual and group presentations, exercises,
and role-plays. All class exercises and take-home assignments will be designed
to provide students with in-depth knowledge of African and African diasporan
culture, history, and experiences in the Caribbean and the Americas.



**EVALUATION OUTCOMES**

Evaluation of student performance will adhere to but is not limited to the
following guidelines:

  * Attendance/Participation --5%
  * Reflection Papers--10% 

> One- to two-page reflections of class activities, articles, videos, etc.

>

> (12-point font, maximum 1-inch margins)

* Magazine Articles and Video Summaries--10%

> Submit a 1-2 page summary with photocopy of article from each of the
following sources:

    * American Visions
    * Black Enterprise
    * Emerge
    * Video documentary or historical movie 

> Include the following:

>

>   * Title of publication;

>   * Date of publication

>   * Title of article;

>   * Name of author

>

> Due **\--------**

  * Mid Term--5% 

> **\--------**

  * Cultural Events--10% 

> Participate in 3 cultural events. One- to two-page reflection paper of each
event.

  * Course Paper--20% 

> Submit a one- to two-page description/outline of course paper--
**\--------**

>

> Submit the final paper, 8-10 pages--Due **\--------** Provide at least eight
references other than text.

  * Group Presentations--10% 

> Participate in one 5- to 7-minute presentation of a poem(s) or speech from a
famous African or African American

>

> Participate in one 30-minute presentation of text chapters Must include
visuals and class interaction

>

> Written summary of presentation for class members

  * Dramatic Presentation--10% 

> Presentation of California Firsts: Outstanding African American Achievements
and Paul Robeson: Renanissaince Man for invited audience.

  * Final Examination--10% 

> Oral Presentations--Thursday, **\--------** , 11:30 a.m.-1:30 p.m.

__All written assignments must be typed or word processed and double spaced.
Late assignments are dropped one grade.__



**POLICIES AND EXPECTATIONS**

  1. Class attendance/participation is a strong requirement for this course! Students have a responsibility to prepare, attend, and contribute to class and group work sessions. The very nature of the subject of this course demands that learning take place through discussion and group interactions. Students will be required to share their perceptions, understandings, experiences, and individual research on the African American Experience. Consistent and quality class participation can positively influence borderline grades. Students who consistently absent themselves from class will not pass this class. 



  1. Original work is expected of each student, and any plagiarism will be viewed seriously. Any outside source used in assignments must be properly credited. 



  1. The focus of this class is not on how much you, the student, are able to memorize and regurgitate during an examination. Our focus in this course is on how you can apply what you have learned in developing learning tools to assist yourself and others to have a greater understanding of the African American Experience. A question you should ask yourself at the end of each day is: Have I learned something new, and if so, how would I utilize that to improve my understanding of African and African diasporan culture and history? 



  1. Students' feedback on classroom assignments and procedures is desired. Never fail to raise a question on any issue regarding the course if the issue is not clear in your mind. The only silly question is the question that is never asked. In the final analysis, it is better to understand what something means--whether it is an assignment or a concept, etc.--than to imagine what it means in your mind. I wish you a very productive quarter. 



**GRADING**



All requirements must be completed to earn a grade of "C or better." Course
grades will be determined by the following scale:

  
|

  |   |  20% |  15% |  10% |   5% |  TOTAL POINTS  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
 A+ = |  12 |  240 |  180 |  120 |   60 |  A+ = 1170 -1200  
 A = |  11 |  220 |  165 |  110 |   55 |  A = 1070 - 1160  
 A- = |  10 |  200 |  150 |  100 |  50 |  A- = 970 - 1060  
 B+ = |   9 |  180 |  135 |  90 |  45 |  B+ = 870 - 960  
 B = |   8 |  160 |  120 |  80 |  40 |  B = 770 - 860  
 B- = |   7 |  140 |  105 |  70 |  35 |  B- = 670 - 760  
 C+ = |   6 |  120 |   90 |  60 |  30 |  C+ = 570 - 660  
 C = |   5 |  100 |   75 |  50 |  25 |  C = 470 - 560  
 C- = |   4 |   80 |   60 |  40 |  20 |  C- = 370 - 460  
 D+ = |   3 |   60 |   45 |  30 |  15 |  D+ = 270 - 360  
 D = |   2 |   40 |   30 |  20 |  10 |  D = 170 - 260  
 D- = |   1 |   20 |   15 |  10 |   5 |  D- = 70 - 160  
 F = |   0 |   0 |   0 |  0 |   0 |  F = 60  
  
## [RETURN COURSE HOME PAGE](ews201.html)



