**TRADITIONAL JAPAN (HIST 2460)**

******Time** : TTh: 9:35-10:50 am
Michael Brose

**Place** : Business 105
Office: History 360

                                                                                    Phone: 6-5125; email: mbrose@uwyo.edu

                                                                                    Office Hours: MWF 10-11am, or by appointment

This course has several purposes. First, it is designed as a general
introduction to the history and culture of Japan from early history through
the end of the Tokugawa period (appx. 1850). We will follow a broadly
chronological framework, exploring the various histories (political, social,
economic, and intellectual history) of traditional Japan, and by the end of
the semester you will have mastered many aspects of Japanese history and
society. This course is also designed as the first half of a year-long survey
of Japanese history, and it will prepare you to study modern Japanese history,
society and culture. Finally, this course is built on an analytic approach to
history; the readings, lectures, and in-class discussions will build on
particular themes or constructs that may run through and connect the various
histories. It is our goal to understand the broad forces at work that shaped
Japan's culture over time; some knowledge of "data" will be necessary, but
just as important are the themes and stories of Japanese history.

  
_Textbooks_. Four texts are required for this course, three of which follow
this thematic approach:

Mikiso Hane's **_Premodern Japan_** __\- diachronic study of political
developments to the 1850s

Shusako Endo's **_Silence_** __, and Janet Goodwin's ** _Alms & Vagabonds_**
__ both deal with religion.

Susan Hanley's **_Everyday Things in Premodern Japan_** __deals with material
culture and daily life.

Other readings may also be assigned from time to time during the semester.

  
_Course Requirements and Grading_ :

4 Quizzes 20% of total grade | A = 90% or more of total points

3 Analysis Papers 30% of total grade | B = 80% - 89% of total points

Midterm exam 20% of total grade | C = 70% - 79% of total points

Final Exam: 20% of total grade | D = 60% - 69% of total points

Attendance/Particip.: 10% of total grade | F = 59% or fewer of total points

*Attendance Policy: Regular attendance and participation is very important to your success in this class; some class time each week will be given over to student-led and general discussion, and lectures will complement but not repeat assigned reading.

_Written Work_

Written work for this class are four 30-minute in-class quizzes, midterm and
final exams, and three short analysis papers of no more than 5 pages in
length. The 30-minute **quizzes** will be map quizzes, short answer/i.d., or
both, and will test your mastery of historical data, such as specific names,
dates, terms, and events. The **mid-term** and **final** exams will consist of
essay questions that deal with broader issues in Japanese history stressed in
the lectures and readings. We will discuss these exams in class at least a
week before they are scheduled. The three **analysis papers** will focus on
issues in the 3 texts by Goodwin, Endo, and Hanley, and will provide a chance
to grapple with a problem and reflect on that in writing and in class
discussion. You have a great deal of freedom to pick the issues that interest
you but you must make a well-reasoned argument supported with citations from
the book. Simple reiteration of arguments presented in the text or in class is
not analysis and will not be acceptable.

  
_My Logic of Grading - for Essays and Papers_

Here's the deal: C is an average grade; to get an A or a B you must produce
above-average work. D essay does not meet the minimum requirements, either in
terms of content or quality, but its not quite failing.

In a **C** paper, students deal adequately with the material and meet the
minimum requirements: the paper is logically organized, there is a reasonable
idea presented, and there is use of factual material to bolster the argument.
The essay shows an average standard of literacy. C essays often tend to lean
toward the general rather than the specific and provide more summary than
analysis.

**B** work shows an ability to use information in a meaningful way. Here the
student is presenting thoughtful ideas and analysis and making ample use of
the materials to make her/his case. The B quality essay goes beyond basic
literacy, makes no factual errors, and should flow well as an argument and
narrative.

To get an **A** , students must demonstrate an outstanding ability to present
and understand ideas, to marshall evidence to sustain these ideas, and write
well. This student will impress me with more sophisticated concepts and
arguments, with a fine command of the material, and with well-written
arguments.

I assign a numerical value for a grade rather than a letter grade. The minuses
and pluses that accrue from the points scale are for those papers that are a
little above or below a solid A, B or C; for example, perhaps the student did
an excellent job with the source materials but is having trouble organizing
ideas in a logical way. Failure to turn in _any_ of the assigned work will
result in an _automatic grade of F_. This is because I have structured the
assignments so that they provide different ways for you to learn, and I view
all of the work assignments as vital to this course.

_Some notes on writing_ :

An essay should have a clearly stated thesis, followed by a well-developed
body that provides evidence for your contention. Move from the general to the
specific, i.e., start with the broad thesis, break it down into the component
elements of the argument, and provide specific details and examples for each
point. Use footnotes for direct quotations from the text--if you don't, you're
plagiarizing. End with a clear conclusion that reinforces your thesis; don't
simply repeat the introduction, but don't bring up new points that have not
been addressed in the essay. And give your essay a title--NOT "Essay No. 1." A
good title will help focus your thoughts. You are also expected to know the
rules of grammar, spelling and syntax, and they will count towards your grade.
Use the spell checker on your computer; use a dictionary; use a style manual,
such as Strunk and White's _The Elements of Style_ or Diana Hacker's _A Pocket
Style Manual_. Last, writing is difficult work, and you should begin a draft
of your paper early. This way you will be able to refine your thoughts and
argument through a series of revisions. Also, I will be happy to help you by
discussing ideas or reviewing your rough draft (even if you only have a few
opening paragraphs).

I will be in my office during office hours, and will also be glad to meet you
there at other times if those don't work. Just be sure to call or email me for
an appointment. You should feel free to come see me about any problem or
question re. this course; I'm here to help you!

Class Schedule and Reading Assignments

__Emergence of Japanese Civilization__

  
Week 1 (1/18): Course Intro.; Japan's land, people, customs

Week 2 (1/23-25) Jomon, Yayoi, Yamato periods  _Reading_ : Hane, Intro. & Ch.
1; Goodwin, ch. 1

__China's Impact on Japan__

Week 3 (1/30-2/1) Introduction of Buddhism; Development of the early State
_Reading_ : Hane, ch. 2; Goodwin, ch. 2-4  **    **             **Th. 2/1 -
Quiz 1**

Week 4 (2/6-8) Japanese Bureaucratic State - Taika Reforms & Nara Period
_Reading_ : Goodwin, chs. 5-6

Week 5 (2/13-15) Heian Period - age of the imperial court dev. in
Confucianism, Buddhism                                 **Th. 2/15 - Paper 1
due**

Week 6 (2/20-22) Culture in Heian period (Genji, etc.)  _Reading_ : Hane, ch.
3

__Medieval Japan: Eclipse of Imperial House and Formation of Samurai
Government__

Week 7 (2/27-3/1) Kamakura Period (1192-1333) politics & culture  **    **
**T. 2/27 - Quiz 2    **                             Reading: Hane, ch. 4;
Endo, chs. 1-3

Week 8 (3/6-8) Growth of estates & warrior class  Reading: Hane, ch. 5; Endo,
chs. 4-6 **Th. 3/8 - Midterm**

****Spring Break: 3/12-16**

Week 9 (3/20-22) Creation of Daimyo system (Muromachi period, 1333-1573)
Reading: Hane, ch. 6; Endo, chs. 7-10

Week 10 (3/27-29) Impact of the West: Christianity in Japan  **    **     **T.
3/27 - Paper 2 due**

__Unification of Japan by Samurai Class__

Week 11 (4/3-5) Oda Nobunaga and Toyotomi Hideyoshi  **    **         **T. 4/3
- Quiz 3**                                  Reading: Hane, ch. 7; Hanley, chs.
1-3

Week 12 (4/10-12) Rise of Tokugawa shogunate    Reading: Hane, ch. 8; Hanley,
chs. 4-7

Week 13 (4/17-19) Tokugawa cont...    Reading: Hane, ch. 9; Hanley, chs. 8-10

Week 14 (4/24-26) Late Tokugawa **T. 4/24 - Paper 3 due    ** Reading: Hane,
ch. 10 **Th. 4/26 - Quiz 4**

__Emergence of Modernity: Further Western Impact & New Attitudes to Power__

Week 15 (5/1-3) Fall of Tokugawa and early Meiji

**Th. 5/10, 10:15-12:15** **Final Exam**

  
**** WARNING: This syllabus is subject to change. It's _your_ responsibility
to attend class or when absent to contact someone and make sure you know
what's going on.**

