Rutgers University School of Management and Labor Relations

Designing Work and Governance Systems

Course Number: 38:533:636:01, Monday, 7:20 pm - 10 pm

Spring Semester 2002. Room 106 Levin Building

Professor Joseph Blasi, Levin Building; Email: jrbru@hotmail.com

_

Course Description

_****

The focus of this course is to familiarize students with the basic production
systems including manufacturing, service, and professional organizations, the
transformations that have been taking place in these systems in the U.S., and
the impact of these systems on the design of work. Includes the involvement of
employees in quality circles and team decision-making at the job level, labor-
management cooperation and works councils at the administrative level, and
codetermination and employee ownership at the strategic level of
organizations. Includes concepts of job and work systems design in the context
of underlying theories of organizational design and individual behavior.
Highlights the emergence of teams, team management, and team effects.
Considers the implications of work systems and worker governance for other HR
functions and the effect of the resulting HR systems on firm performance.
Looks at worker participation in both union and non-union work environments.
Provides and overview of the development of unions and the roles they play in
organizations and society as a whole. Considers the ethical questions raised
by work design.

_

Approach

_

The lectures will not review the readings but will cover additional material
in the context of explaining the major points of the readings. Thus, it is
important to do a close reading of all required class materials. The
instructor will prioritize the reading material for your convenience. Other
recommended readings will be reviewed and summarized in the class lecture. The
focus of the course will be implications for practical applications in human
resources, however, the course will utilize an ongoing review of systematic
research on the questions studied in order to arrive at these conclusions. The
agenda for each lecture will include: the history and development of the issue
or practice at hand, the incidence of the practice based on surveys, U.S.
Census data, and other empirical research, relevant theories and concepts, the
results of recent research on the issue or practice's impact on company
performance, one detailed case study in a particular company, the development
of the practice or related practice in one industry group, relevance to both
union and non-union settings, relevance to small, medium and large companies,
the instructor's summary evaluation of the pluses and minuses of each practice
and the implication for your HR work, and implications for other HR functions.
Each lecture will also include some additional modules. They will be noted in
the _Agenda_ section of the syllabus for each class session so that you know
what to expect. Videotapes of cases used in the class and videotapes on
additional subjects relevant to the class will be available for borrowing by
students. The instructor will provide group and individual mentoring to
students on how to write a high quality final research paper. This will be an
important focus of the last half of the course. Students will receive
instruction and coaching on the use of a variety of on-line databases.
Versions of this class was offered in past semesters by Professors James
Begin, Charles Heckscher, Charles Nanry, and Saul Rubenstein and their many
suggestions are gratefully appreciated. Copies of overhead notes will be
provided for each lecture.

****_

Required Texts Note: These are available at the Rutgers Livingston Bookstore.

The Designing Work and Governance Systems Course : A Collection of Readings._
For your convenience, University Copy will sell this reader at the first two
classes. Also, it will always be available directly from University Copy at
732-220-1211 (call first) or on reserve at the Livingston Campus Kilmer
Library, and on reserve at the SMLR Library (Ryders Lane exit, Route 1,
932-9513). _Not available at the bookstore.

_

S. George and A. Weimerkirch. _Total Quality Management: Strategies and
Techniques Proven At Today's Most Successful Companies._ (The Portable MBA
Series.) NY: John Wiley and Sons, 1998.

M. Hammer and J. Champy. _Reengineering The Corporation._ NY: Harper Business,
1993.

Pope John Paul II. _On Human Work (Laborem Exercens)._ Boston, Mass.: St.
Paul's Books, 1981. (pamphlet)

D. Zell. _Changing By Design: Organizational Innovation At Hewlett Packard._
Ithaca, NY: Cornell Univ. Press, 1997.

Page 2

_

Teams and Teamwork

_

Some of the important work of the class will be done in and by teams. You will
be asked to choose a team coordinator for different tasks and the performance
of this coordinator will be evaluated by the instructor. Each team will be
required to arrange for a one half hour visit to one class session of a
employee or labor representative or a corporate representative to provide a
brief case study of the design of a work or governance system in their
company. Each visitor would speak for 15 minute and take questions for 15
minutes.

_

Class Participation

_

The class will be taught in the style of a "focus group" with a free-wheeling
environment for questions, comments, contributions, reactions, and feedback.
Class participation will count for 5% of the entire grade and will be taken
very seriously in this course. Each student will receive either satisfactory
or unsatisfactory, that is, either the full or no points for class
participation at the end of the course. Please have your name plate displayed
at all times so that all members may address you by your first name and the
instructor can remember your class participation. You are encouraged to
distribute current news articles to other students in the class, especially
those focusing on updated information about case studies and examples which
have been discussed in the class or new case studies. Give a copy to the
instructor and you will receive credit towards your participation grade. Each
student will take turns coordinating teams approximately at two week
intervals.

_

Evaluation and Grading

_

The 100 points in a grade will be distributed as follows: 42% final research
paper (a 15 page paper), 28% mid-term report (a ten page paper), 10% for
handing in satisfactory notes on case studies and mid-term and final paper
proposals, and 20% class participation: 5% for in class verbal participation
and 1 points for each class attended. Grades will be distributed as follows:
A+: 98-100, A: 95-97, A-: 92-94, B+: 88-91, B: 85-87, B-: 80-84, C+: 76-79, C:
73-75, C-: 70-72, Failing grade: Below 70. Students who miss more than 4
classes will not receive credit for this course without special make-up work.
Plagiarism, including the use of other student's work or "purchased papers" or
electronically available papers constitutes a serious violation of the ethical
standards for this class.

_

Office Hours and Consultations

_

The instructor will be available for office hours from 6:45- 7:20 pm
immediately preceding class _and_ following the class meeting until the last
student has left in order to assist you in solving course-related problems or
discussing issues related to your study and career. Extended office hours will
be scheduled for consultation on the mid-term and the final research paper.
Students can also make appointments with the instructor in class if these
times are not suitable. The Instructor will sometimes schedule a second set of
office hours each week at the SMLR library.

_

Schedule Of Classes and Student Work Assignments

_**

January 28. Introduction: Theories Of Organization and Their Relevance To
Designing Work and Governance Systems.

**_

Agenda_: Introduction and questions. Teamwork. Long lecture. Questions.
Assignment and delivery of a book to each individual student of a corporate
histories/case study books which will be the basis of preparation for the
"Corporate

Transformation" class. Assignment of teams and choice of first team
coordinator. Case discussion in teams.

_

Readings

_

There is no reading for the first class required _before_ the class, however
students should read the following materials after the class:

"Reassessing The Divine Rights Of Managers" **** Edgar Schein, MIT Sloan
School of Management, _Sloan Management Review,_ Winter 1989. (in the
collection of readings, p. 5-10)

Page 3

_

Cases

_

For Class Discussion: W. L. Gore Industries. Material will be handed out.

Industry Group Focus: the textile industry

Other cases for brief comment: General Motors Corporation.

**

February 4 The Sociology of Work and Theories Of Capitalism and Governance.

**_

Agenda ****_ : Long lecture and questions. Case discussion in teams.
Assignment of team coordinator for the next class. Discussion of requirements
for the mid-term book reports.

_

Readings

_

Brief Sociology of work articles (to be distributed before class)

_

Note on Corporate Governance Systems: The United States, Japan, and Germany._
Robert W. Lightfoot and Professor W. Carl Kester, Harvard Business School.
December 15, 1992. (in the collection of readings, p. 23-41)

"Recasting Employees Into Teams," Ben Nagler, industrial writer, _Workforce
Magazine._ January 1998. (in the collection of readings, p. 52-56)

_

Cases

_

Case: McDonalds Corporation

Industry Group Focus: food retailing

Other cases for brief comment: Large U.S. railroad.

**

February 11. Basic Production Systems and Their Transformation Across Industry
Groups.

** _

Agenda_ : Team coordinators report to the entire class on lessons and
questions from the case studies. Questions. Brief lecture.

_

Readings

_

"The Art Of Continuous Change: Linking Complexity Theory and Time-Based
Evolution In Relentlessly Shifting Organizations." Shona Brown, McKinsey and
Company, and Kathleen Eisenhardt, Stanford University, _Administrative Science
Quarterly,_ 1997\. (In the collection of readings, p. 57-74)

_

Cases

_

Industry Group Focus: financial services

Other cases for brief comment: Anonymous Baby Bell.

_

Assignments For The Next Class

_

Prepare a one page proposal for the book which you wish to use for your mid-
term book report for the next class.

For team 1: your guest presents a case study in the next class.

**

February 18. Work Redesign and Team-Based Systems.

**_

Agenda_: Before or after class or during break. Meet briefly with professor in
order to discuss proposals for mid-term book report.

__

Collection of one page proposals for mid-term book report. Lecture (includes
module on the research on work redesign activities.) Discussion of case.
Questions. Case study by guest of team 1 (one half hour at beginning or end of
class.)



Page 4

_

Readings

Changing by Design: Organizational Innovation at Hewlett-Packard_. by D. Zell.
Read the entire book.

__

Brief selection from"The Division of Labour," in _The Wealth of Nations._ Adam
Smith. NY: The Modern Library. (in the collection of readings, p. 75-81)

Brief selection from"The Principles of Scientific Management," in _The
Principles of Scientific Management_ , Frederick Winslow Taylor, New York:
Harper and Brothers. (in the collection of readings)

_

Human Resources at Hewlett-Packard (A) and (B)._ Gregory C. Roger and
Professor Michael Beer, Harvard Business School, Case, November 1, 1995. (In
the collection of readings, p. 141-175)

_

Cases

_

Case: Hewlett-Packard

Industry Group Focus: health care.

Other cases for brief comment: a new Houston steel factory

_

Assignments For The Next Class

_

For team 2: your guest presents a case study in the next class.

**

February 25. Reengineering.

**_

Agenda_ : Lecture. Lecture (includes module on the analysis of research on
reengineering activities) Discussion of case. Questions. Case study by guest
of team 2 (one half hour at beginning or end of class.)

_

Readings

_****_

Reengineering The Corporation: A Manifesto For Business Revolution._ Michael
Hammer, consultant and James Champy, Chairman of CSC Index Consulting Firm.
Instructor will assign selected chapters.

_

Cases

_****

Video cases. "Reengineering the Manufacturing Organization" and "Reengineering
the Service Organization." Harvard Business School case studies of Pratt
&Whitney, Saturn Corp., Texas Instruments Semiconductor Group, Tufts
Associated Health Plans, CSX American Commercial Barge Line Co., and Brooklyn
Union Glass.

Industry Group Focus: telecommunications

Other cases for brief comment: BellSouth, British Telecom.

_

Assignments For The Next Class

_

For team 3: your guest presents a case study in the next class.

**

March 4. There will be no March 4 class and this class will be made up on May
6 th.

March 11. The Development of Union Approaches To Employee Involvement.

** _

Agenda_ : Lecture (Additional modules on collective bargaining, Richard
Freeman and James Medoff's economic analyses of the union effect on companies,
Charles Heckscher' concept of associational unionism). Case study by guest of
team 3 (one half hour at beginning or end of class.)

_

Readings

The New Unionism: Employee Involvement In The Changing Corporation._ Charles
Heckscher, Rutgers University School of Management and Labor Relations, xiii-
xxxiv, 1-33. (available in library and electronic reserve only)



Page 5

"Forging A Labor-Management Partnership: The Magma Copper Experience," George
W. Bohander, Arizona State University and Marshall H. Campbell, Vice President
of Human Resources, Magma Copper Company, _Labor Studies Journal,_ Winter
1994. (In the collection of readings, p. 205-214).

_

Recommended Reading

_

"Enterprise Unions in The United States," Sanford M. Jaccoby, Anderson
Graduate School of Management, UCLA and Anil Verma, Faculty of Management and
Centre for Industrial Relations University of Toronto, _Industrial Relations_
, Winter 1992.

__



Case: Magma Copper (Note: A Harvard Business School video on Magma Cooper will
be shown).

Industry Group Focus: basic materials, steel and other primary metals

Other cases for brief comment: USS-Posco, Northwestern Steel & Wire, Republic
Engineered Steel, Algoma Steel

_

Assignments For Next Class

_

Be prepared to discuss these questions on the case for the next class:*

1\. Why did PPG want a self-directed workforce?

2\. What characteristics should Berea's employees have? Can the assessment
center simulations and interviews help Berea find these employees?

3\. What action would you take to defuse the growing resentment between
support workers and technicians on the line? How would you deal with
coordinators' worry that they re working themselves out of a job?

4\. What were the underlying tensions at Berea, and how should these tensions
be resolved?

5\. Should unsupervised work crews be used? Will you proceed with peer review
in the Berea plant?

6\. How would you recognize and reward individual achievement in the plant?
How would you have dealt with the shift rotation issue? What were the problems
associated with a temporary work force?

*From The HBS Teaching Note, 5-697-095.

For team 4: your guest presents a case study in the next class. Mid-term
papers are due at the next class.

**

March 25. Employee Involvement and Empowerment: The Nonunion Setting,

** _

Agenda_ : Lecture. Discussion of case in teams and summary discussion in the
entire class. Case study by guest of team 4 (one half hour at beginning or end
of class.)

_

Readings

_

"The Business Case For Managing People Right" (Chapter 2) in _The Human
Equation: Building Profits By Putting People First_ , Jeffrey Pfeffer,
Stanford University Graduate School of Business. Boston: Harvard Business
School Press, 1998.

_

PPG: Developing A Self-Directed Workforce (A), (B), (C)._ Normal Klein and
David A. Garvin, Harvard Business School, Case, 1992. (In the collection of
readings, p. 259-279)

_

Cases

_

Case: PPG Industries

Industry Group Focus: chemical and petrochemical

Other cases for brief comment: Sedalia Engine.

For team 5: your guest presents a case study in the next class.

**

April 1. Employee Participation in Justice on the Job: Nontraditional Methods
of Employee Voice and Dispute Resolution in Union and Nonunion Companies.

**







Page 6

_

Agenda_: Long lecture (special modules on employee surveys, alternative
dispute resolution, and procedural justice). Case discussion. Case study by
guest of team 5 (one half hour at beginning or end of class.)

_

Readings

_

Two very brief readings are required:

"Pillsbury's Recipe Is Candid Talk," Gillian Flynn, Editor-At-Large,
_Workforce,_ February 1998. (In the collection of readings, p. 328-331)

"Tearing Down Roadblocks: Shell Oil Company," Valerie Frazee, Special Projects
Editor, _Workforce_. (In the collection of readings, p. 332-335)

_

Cases

_

Case: Hughes Aircraft Company

Other Cases For Brief Comment: Polaroid, Citicorp.

Industry Group Focus: aerospace and defense contractors.

_

Assignments For The Next Class

_

For team 6: your guest presents a case study in the next class.

**

April 8. Employee Involvement and Empowerment: The Union Setting.

** _

Agenda_ : Lecture (Special module on Kochan, Katz, and McKersie's perspective
on form their book, _The Transformation of American Industrial Relations_ ).
Discussion of case in teams and report to entire class. Case study by guest of
team 6 (one half hour at beginning or end of class.)

_

Readings

_

Professor will discuss: "The Survival of Employee Participation Programs in
Unionized Settings ," Adrienne Eaton, Rutgers University School of Management
and Labor Relations, _Industrial and Labor Relation Review_ , April 1994.
Article not required for reading.

Lakeville Chemical Plant (A) (B), Charles Heckscher, Rutgers University School
of Management and Labor Relations, Harvard Business School Case, 1987. (In the
collection of readings, p. 290-313)

_

Cases

_

Lakeville Chemical Plant

Industry Group Focus: manufacturing ( including electrical and non-electrical
machinery, paper, other manufacturing)

Other cases for brief comment: Pontiac/Fiero, Eastern Air Lines, Tiger Creek.

_

Assignments For The Next Class

_

For team 1: the next class is your alternate date.

**

April 15. Total Quality Management: The Non-Union Setting.

**_

Agenda_ : Collection of one page proposals for the final paper. Lecture (plus
analysis of TQM research). Case and discussion. Alternate date for case study
by guest of team 1 (one half hour at beginning or end of class.)

_

Readings

_





Page 7

S. George and A. Weimerkirch. _Total Quality Management: Strategies and
Techniques Proven At Today's Most Successful Companies._ (The Portable MBA
Series.) NY: John Wiley and Sons, 1998, 1-122.

_

Motorola_ (A Selection of Cases) Various authors (including Janis Gogan,
Michael Handel, Shoshana Zuboff, Donna Stoddard, Harvard Business School and
Gloria Schuck, MIT), 1994. (In the collection of readings, p. 336-415) Note:
Foreign cases are recommended, but not required.

**

"** Quality Drives Trident Success." Jennifer J. Labbs, Associate Managing
Editor, _Workforce._ (In the collection of readings, p. 416-420)

_

Cases

_

Case. Motorola.

Other cases for brief comment: See individual chapters of the George and
Weimerkirch volume; Trident.

Industry Group Focus: semiconductor manufacturing.

_

Assignments For The Next Class

_

Next class is the alternate date for team 2.

**

April 22. Total Quality Management: The Union Setting.

**_

Agenda_: Lecture. Case and discussion. Alternate date for team two guest case
study.

_

Readings

_

S. George and A. Weimerkirch. _Total Quality Management: Strategies and
Techniques Proven At Today's Most Successful Companies._ (The Portable MBA
Series.) NY: John Wiley and Sons, 1998, 123-240.

_

Cases

_

Case: Xerox's failure will be discussed by the instructor.

Industry group focus: construction.

Other cases for brief comment: Ford Motor Company, Harley Davidson

_

Assignments For The Next Class

_

Next class is the alternate date for team 3.

**

April 29. Employee Ownership and Participation In Corporate Boards of
Directors.

**_

Agenda_ : Lecture (includes module on concession bargaining in union and
nonunion situations for equity ownership, broadened stock options, and
corporate governance proposals by employees and the participation aspects of
these activities). Case and discussion. Alternate date for team 3.

_

Readings

_

"Employee Ownership, Employee Attitudes, And Firm Performance: A Review Of The
Evidence," Douglas Kruse and Joseph Blasi, Rutgers University School of
Management and Labor Relations, _The Human Resource Management Handbook,_
Edited by David Lewin and Daniel J.B. Mitchell, UCLA Andersen School of
Management and Mahmood A. Zaidi, Carlson School of Management, University of
Minnesota. (in electronic reserve only, to be distributed)

_

Cases

_

Case: to be provided

Industry Group Focus: airlines in specific and transportation in general (e.g.
railroads)

_

Assignments For The Next Class

_



Page 8

Next class is alternate date for team 4.

__**

May 6. The High Performance Workplace.

**

_

Agenda_ : Lecture (module on research). Case and discussion. Alternate date
for team 4.

_

Readings

_

"The Saturn Partnership: Co-management And The Reinvention Of The Local
Union," Saul Rubenstein, Rutgers University School of Management and Labor
Relations , Michael Bennett, United Auto Workers, and Thomas Kochan, MIT Sloan
School of Management in _Employee Representation: Alternatives and Future
Directions_. Edited by Bruce E. Kaufman and M. Kleiner. Industrial Relations
Research Assn. Series, 1993. (in the collection of readings, p. 586-603)

"High Performance Work Systems And Firm Performance: A Synthesis Of Research
And Managerial Implications. " Brian E. Becker and Mark A. Huselid in
_Research in Personnel And Human Resources._ (available at
http://www.rci.rutgers.edu:80/~huselid/bibliogr.htm and on electronic reserve
and to be distributed before class).

_

Brief module on:_ **Strategic Labor-Management Consultation, Works Councils,
Co-determination, and Information-sharing With Employees. Part 2. Ethics and
Philosophical Visions of Management, Work, And The Economy. Part 2.

** **

Thursday, May 8th. Final Research Paper Due.

**

The final research paper is due by 4:30 pm today. Submit all papers by email
as a Word and a Rich Text Format Document (or a text document).

End of schedule

