**History 247**

**Traditional China**

**REVISED SYLLABUS (ISSUED NOV. 1, 2000)**

Lafayette College--Fall 2000--MWF 1:10pm-2:00pm--AHE 300

**Instructor:** Dr. Paul Barclay

Office: Fretz House 33 (330-5178)

Office Hours: M 2:15-4:30, WF 8-9:30 am

barclayp@mail.lafayette.edu

**Books:**

Sun Tzu, Samuel B. Griffith (Trans. and introduction). _The Art of War._

Valerie Hansen. _The Open Empire: A History of China to 1600._

Louise Levathes. _When China Ruled the Seas : The Treasure Fleet of the Dragon
Throne, 1405-1433._

Wm. Theodore De Bary (Editor), Irene Bloom (Editor). _Sources of Chinese
Tradition : From Earliest Times to 1600._

Philip A. Kuhn. _Soul Stealers: The Chinese Sorcery Scare of 1768._

Meng-Lung Feng (Editor), Cyril Birch (Editor) _Stories from a Ming
Collection._

**Other Materials Required for Purchase:**

**Rand McNally Map of China and Japan, KRG-440 (A Blank Map for Class
Exercise)**

**Course Webpage: http://www.lafayette.edu/~barclayp/247b/247bwelc.html**

**Goals and Objectives of the Course**

**This course is an _introduction_ to Chinese history. Though it is listed as
a 2XX course, students are not required, nor expected, to have studied Chinese
history before. "Traditional China" has a double meaning for the purposes of
our class. First, "traditional China" refers to the history of the Chinese
people and state from about 1200 B.C. to 1750 A.D. (the Shang Dynasty through
the early Qing Dynasty). This portion of the class will consist of readings,
films, discussions, and activities centering around the major developments in
Chinese history over a 3,000 year span.**

**Secondly, "traditional China" refers to a set of institutions, philosophical
outlooks, political ideologies, literary masterpieces, visual aesthetics, and
family values which came to be considered "traditional" throughout East Asia
(China, Taiwan, Singapore, Hong Kong, North and South Korea, Japan, and
Vietnam) over the course of the past millennium and a half. This second aspect
of the class will be aimed at familiarizing students with some of the region's
classic texts and ideals.**

**Expectations**

**_Before_ each class meeting, students will need to read the assigned texts,
monographs, and/or handouts. Students may be surprised to learn that much of
the reading for this course is actually quite _humorous_ , _passionate_ , and
enjoyable!**

**Students will take two examinations, a midterm and a final. These will be
combination essay and identification exams on the major themes in the
course.**

**For video and in-class activities, I will collect and grade short written
assignments. These will consititute the written portion of your course
grade.**

**Course Requirements**

  * **Attendance : Exams, Assignments and Papers for this class are assigned and evaluated with the understanding that class members are attending all sessions. If you miss more than three sessions _for any reason_ , it will negatively affect your course grade. If you cannot attend a class because of your athletic schedule, family obligations, or illness/injuries, it is your responsibility to obtain notes and assignments from classmates. I suggest that you use your 3 alotted absences sparingly; you may have an emergency and really need them later in the course.**

  * **Class participation: During classes, especially on Fridays, we will be discussing the reading material. I will assign class participation grades based on your preparedness to enrich classroom discussions of the material.**

  * **Written Assignments: On Fridays, you can expect to turn in a written report. These short assignments are designed to help you think productively about the readings. They will also assure that class members are prepared to have intelligent discussions of the books in class. These will be graded, and must be typed and printed out. Late assignments will be docked one grade per day late. For example, a "B" assignment, turned in two days late, will receive a "D."**

**Grades**

  * Written Assignments: 40%
  * Participation: 20%
  * Midterm Exam: 20%
  * Final Exam: 20%
  * **Note: Students must earn a passing grade in each of these four categories to pass the class.**

Monday, Oct. 23, Wednesday, Oct. 25

No class, Instructor in Taiwan

**Friday, Oct. 27**

Tang Law Code: The Han Synthesis, Chinese Approach to Law and Order

Hansen: 197-199; Sourcebook: 546-564.

**Monday, Oct. 30**

Dunhuang Cave Finds and Buddhist Monumental Architecture: Student Presentation

Empress Wu: Hansen, 240-258.

**Wed. Nov. 1**

The Scholar Activists Emerge: Han Yu and the Attack on Buddhism

Sourcebook, 568-590.

Hansen, 229-245.

_When China Ruled the Seas,_ 33-55.

**Friday, Nov. 3**

Footbinding in Chinese History: Student Presentation

Read: Hansen, 286-289

**Monday, Nov. 6**

Song Dynasty

Confucian Revival and Wang Anshi's Tax Reforms:

Sourcebook, 609-628; Hansen, 261-272; **Stories from a Ming Collection** :
"The Lady who was a Beggar."

**Wednesday, Nov. 8**

Mongols: Genghis Khan Pt. I (video)

Read: Hansen, 335-342.

**Friday, Nov. 10**

Discussion: Mongol Conquest Pt. II

Hansen: 347-367.

**Monday, Nov. 13**

Stories From a Ming Collection: essays due, discussion of gender and social
mobility in Song China

Read: Stories From a Ming Collection, "The Pearl-Sewn Shirt."

**Wednesday, Nov. 15**

Establishing the Ming

Read: Louise Levathes, _When China Ruled the Seas,_ 56-85.

Hansen, 369-384; Sourcebook: 779-786.

**Friday, Nov. 17**

Jesuits in China:

Hansen: 393-397.

Sourcebook: 899-911

**Monday, Nov. 20**

Discussion: When China Ruled the Seas: Due: Zheng He essays

(Finish _When China Ruled the Seas_ )

**Wednesday, Nov. 22, Friday, Nov. 24: Thanksgiving Break, no classes**

**Monday, Nov. 27**

China's Last Dynasty: Enter the Qing

Read _Soulstealers_ 30-48.

**Wednesday, Nov. 29**

Kangxi and the Dyarchy

_Soulstealers_ 49-59; 1-29.

**Friday, Dec. 1**

China's Prosperous Era

_Soulstealers_ 66-84; 94-118.

**Monday, Dec. 4**

Student Presentation: Qianlong's Encounter with Lord Macartney

_Soulstealers_ 119-148; 163-186.

**Wed. Dec. 6**

The Irony of Qing Success: Energizing a Consvervative Bureaucracy

Discussion of Philip Kuhn's _Soulstealers_

Due: Soulstealers Essay

_Read_ : _Soulstealers_ : 187-222.

**Friday, Dec. 8**

Review for the Final Exam

**Student Presentations:**

Our class has 10 members. During the course of the semester, we will have five
student presentations on the topics listed below. For each topic, two students
will deliver a short (20-30 min.) power-point presentation to the class. I
will provide each pair of students with:

  * a packet of reading materials for the topic,
  * key "talking points" for each topic,
  * guidance on the use of powerpoint, scanner, projection equipment,
  * encouragement and technical assistance during the presentation.

Within a week after your presentation, you will submit a two-page essay
explaining what you learned from this experience (planning, preparing,
presenting, and reflecting).

Your presentations will constitute **50%** of your participation grade, or
**10%** of your course grade.

**_Topics and Dates of Presentations_**

1\. Oct. 11. Expanding the Frontiers of Han Influence: China's Impact on
Japan, Korea, and Vietnam

2\. Oct. 16. Buddhism in China

3\. Oct. 30. Dunhuang Cave Finds

4\. Nov. 3. Footbinding in Chinese History

5\. Dec. 4 **.** Qianlong's Encounter with Lord Macartney

**_Final Exam_**

Monday Dec. 18, 4-6 pm

