# **Religions of the World: East**

* * *

[Dr. Ess](../../../ess/ess.html)

PHIL/RELG 201.B -- 3 credit hours Burnham 215

MWF 1:00-1:50 -- B203 Campus ext. 7230

Office hours: MTWTh-- 3:00-5:00 p.m

email: cmess@lib.drury.edu

Web site:

http://www.drury.edu/faculty/ess/eastern/relg201.html

**Required Texts**

Ellen M. Chen. _The Tao Te Ching: A New Translation with Commentary_.

John Y. Fenton, et al, _Religions of Asia_ , 3rd edition

Swami Prabhavananda and Christopher Isherwood, trans., _The Song of God:
Bhagavad-Gita_

Shunryu Suzuki. _Zen Mind, Beginner's Mind_.

_Yoga : Discipline of Freedom : The Yoga Sutra Attributed to Patanjali_ ,
Barbara Stoler Miller, Trans.

**Optional Text:**

_Self-Knowledge : Sankara's "Atmabodha,"_ by Swami Nikhilananda (Translator)

**Additional Resources**

"[Western - Eastern: An Initial List,](eastwest.html)" (Web document)

_Motet_ \- Web-based conferencing software: you will need _both_ a Drury
e-mail account _and_ a Motet user ID and password (supplied by the instructor)

Peterson et al., "Religious Pluralism: How Can We Understand Religious
Diversity?" (reserve)

Additional readings, resources to be announced

**Course Project:**

In this class we will explore in an introductory way some of the main ideas,
beliefs, practices, and historical developments of eastern
religions/philosophies \-- various traditions called "Hinduism," (better: the
San_tana Dharma, the Eternal Relgion), Jainism, various forms of Buddhism,
Taoism, and Japanese traditions (Buddhisms, Shinto).

To do so, we will

**I.** use a _theoretical framework_ which will tie together

* the _history_ of specific cultures and the religious traditions which emerge within those cultures 

* the role of _economic_ organization, as correlated with _social_ arrangements, as the environment within which religious traditions emerge and develop 

* the roles and images of _women_ and _men_ in the emergence and develoment of religious traditions. 

In doing so, you will not only learn something about the particular beliefs
and practices of given religious/philosophical traditions - you will also come
to see a much larger picture concerning "religion" as a social force and
source of individual and collective beliefs, one which both shapes and is
shaped by the larger cultural environment.

**II**. We will further explore two additional, interrelated issues:

* We will address the question of _religious pluralism._ This question is raised both _within_ the context of the Eastern traditions we will study: Eastern traditions are often far more tolerant of  "other" belief systems than many Western counterparts, and we will seek to discover why this is so. But this contrast, in turn, raises the question of religious pluralism _between_ or _among_ Eastern and Western traditions. 

* We will likewise explore additional underlying similarities and differences between Eastern and Western views (beginning with the Web resource "eastwest.html") 

_Why do this?_ I can think of at least two reasons which derive from the
Western liberal arts tradition in general and the mission statement of Drury
University in particular - specifically the phrase,  "to _liberate_ persons to
_participate_ responsibly in the global community. "

**1**.  " _Participating_ responsibly in the global community " should include
communicating with "Others": communication typically requires both tolerance
and understanding of others' beliefs. Accordingly, a central goal of this
course is to _learn tolerance and thereby how to communicate more effectively
with "Others_."

In exploring Eastern views, I hope you get past an initial phase of _culture
shock_ , in which the strangeness of these views will tempt you to reject them
as inferior, silly, stupid, wrong, etc. Rather, I hope that you will come to
see that _Eastern views represent views of the world which are at least as
adequate in many ways as Western views_. Accordingly, the people who hold
these beliefs are not inferior, silly, stupid, wrong, etc.

Learning tolerance of diverse opinions is generally useful, especially as you
pursue a liberal arts education -- which can be roughly defined as discovery
of diverse modes of inquiry, diverse points of view, and how to fit these
different understandings into a larger, holistic overview of human existence
and human choices.

In addition, your gaining insight and tolerance regarding Eastern viewpoints
should serve you well in a rapidly shrinking "global village" in which Eastern
cultures play increasingly significant economic and political roles. If you
understand something of what others believe, and acknowledge that others'
beliefs have an important legitimacy and integrity (i.e., they are not
inferior, silly, stupid, wrong, etc.) - you will be much better prepared to
communicate with others, and thereby participate more effectively in a global
community.

**Note:** this is not just academic theory - former students have confirmed
with me over the years how valuable this course has been in preparing them for
better understanding and interacting with  "Others" from throughout the world.

**2.** _How do we become "liberated"_?

Our approach to the religions/philosophies of Eastern traditions will include
a focus on _philosophical_ beliefs and claims. This is required in part
because, somewhat in contrast with Western religious traditions, what
Westerners usually associate with  "philosophy" (rational argument, critical
examination of fundamental claims, etc.) centrally interweave Eastern
religions/philosophies. (Moreover, you will see that many of these traditions
likewise believe in "liberation" \- but it will be a question in the course to
determine how far "liberation" in these traditions means something similar to
the meanings of "liberation" in Western traditions.)

But this philosophical approach is not only suited to our subject matter: as a
central discipline in the _liberal_ arts education (of which this course is a
part), _philosophy_ is concerned in good measure precisely with the
_liberation_ spoken of in the Mission Statement.

One key aspect of liberation via philosophy is _the effort to become aware of
one's beliefs and assumptions about oneself and the world_.

In particular, in philosophy one attempts to discover especially those
assumptions and beliefs which are _questionable_ \- because they lack further
evidence or support. This means that one has to learn how to stand  "outside
of" one's own beliefs - a very hard trick indeed. One way of learning to stand
outside our own beliefs is _to explore the views and beliefs of another, very
different culture_ \- i.e., a culture with beliefs quite different from our
own: because the assumptions and beliefs in this alternative culture are so
different, in becoming aware of such views, we become aware of how
_questionable_ many of our own ideas and concepts may be. In particular, many
of our uniquely Western ideas appear questionable or strange when viewed from
the perspective of eastern religions.

. **In part, then, we will thus be using eastern perspectives as a tool or
means for _doing philosophy_ \- i.e., for becoming critically aware of our own
assumptions and beliefs. ** Ideally, this will liberate us from ignorance of
others and dependency on others for what we believe: ideally, it will liberate
us to develop our own views and beliefs based on what we learn and think on
our own.

Finally, Eastern systems not only illumine our own for us because they are so
different: in some ways, at least, Eastern conceptions can complement or even
replace some of our own assumptions. I suspect you may find in Eastern thought
some concepts and ideas which ultimately "make more sense" to you than some
Western assumptions which you currently hold to. In this way, I hope this
class will contribute to your putting together your own view of things: this
is what I understand liberal arts education to be directed towards.

**Class requirements:**

1\. _Attendance_ : Eastern thought is oftentimes so very different from
Western thought that it is opaque to Westerners who are first dealing with it.
Hard experience suggests that most of the time, you will be able to clarify
those points which are unclear to you only if you come to class.

Accordingly, regular attendance is required. **_Every absence - for whatever
reason - will result in the deduction of 1 percentage point from your final
grade_**.

You can make up the work for a missed class in one of several ways: a writing
exercise on the day's topics, a contribution to the class Web site, a report
on an extra-curricular activity which helps us better understand Eastern
traditions, or some alternative work which you and I will agree upon.

In my view, this class is (part of) your job. Employers do not pay employees
for not showing up.

2\. _Writing assignments/in-class exams_. We will have several major writing
assignments and one or two exams. In addition, there will be short informal
writing assignments - some of which may be posted on the Web site \- in
response to assigned readings. You may also choose to take an exam in place of
the final writing assignment.

The writing assignments and exams will constitute approximately 80% of your
grade. They will be "weighted" \-- that is, early work will count for a
smaller percentage of your grade than later work.

The writing assignments and exams are intended to both check your
comprehension of class material and to encourage the development of your own
thinking. To help you get ready for the in-class exam, I will provide you with
a study guide and review the study questions with you in class.

Writing assignments will be graded in light of content and minimal
requirements for formal writing. These include: correct spelling and sentence
structure; correct documentation of sources; good paragraph/paper
organization. Excessive problems with formal writing requirements will result
in the assignment being returned for rewriting before it is graded. To get a
better idea of what I look for in writing, see the "Checklist for Assessing
Student Writing," below,, and the "Abbreviations used in writing assignment
grading," below.

If you are not satisfied with a grade on either a major writing assignment or
exam, please discuss it with me. On at least the first writing assignment, you
are welcome to improve your grade by rewriting. Rewrites of writing
assignments must be turned in within ONE WEEK of the date the original
assignment was returned to you. Make-ups of the shorter writing assignments
will be allowed only under exceptional circumstances.

**PLAGIARISM** : Plagiarism is defined in one source as "the presentation of
someone else's ideas or words as your own." Examples of plagiarism include:

copying more than three words from someone else's writing and presenting it as
your own;

summarizing or paraphrasing another person's idea/s -- but without
acknowledging that person as the source of the idea/s

While you may not intend to plagiarize, you do so when you neglect to use
quote marks and/or to document the original sources of idea/s you have
summarized or paraphrased.

Plagiarism on a written assignment will result in an "F" for that assignment
and require that you redo the assignment. Repeated instances of plagiarism
will result in an "F" for the course and may be grounds for dismissal from
Drury University. (See the college catalog, p. 60.)

To avoid plagiarism, pay careful attention to the requirements for
documentation: these will be reviewed early on in the class.

3\. _Class participation_. About 20% of your final grade will depend on class
participation. Class participation includes asking questions, commenting on
current topics, and becoming involved in discussion.

You will note that this means that good class participation can make the
difference between a "C" and a "B" \- or a "B" and an "A."

Class discussion and participation will be guided by the following
_groundrules_ :

1\. _Listen_ before we agree or disagree. Virtually every viewpoint deserves a
hearing.

2\. _Welcome differences and use conflict_. When others disagree with you,
take the disagreement not as a personal attack on your views; rather, consider
the probability that the other person's viewpoint arises from experiences and
thought which you have not had. Disagreement means first of all the
opportunity to learn about experiences and thought different from your own.
Learning about different experiences and thought often serves to help you
understand your own experiences and views more clearly.

When disagreements arise, work through the following checklist:

a. separate the view that is expressed from the person who is expressing it.
Be clear that your disagreement is with a viewpoint - not with the person's
identity.

b. ask what evidence or arguments might support that position? People often
believe what they believe for some good reason. What might these reasons be?

c. take seriously the possibility that your view might be less correct than
the one you disagree with. Is it possible that in fact there are better
arguments and stronger evidence for the view you disagree with?

d. think seriously about how your view and the other view might both be
correct or compatible, rather than opposites or incompatible. Frequently we
assume that a difference of views must mean that they necessarily exclude one
another; but frequently, it turns out, different views may complete one
another.

Only after you have gone through these four steps should you raise your
objections or disagreements with the other position.

3\. **No put-downs of others will be tolerated**.

Putting down another person because they disagree with you -- most frequently,
by ridiculing them or the view they have expressed -- is a common way of
seeking psychological satisfaction in the face of the threat they represent to
your own viewpoint. To respond to disagreement with put-downs may save you the
labor of thinking things through, and the pain of having to admit that you may
be wrong -- but it also will guarantee your closed-mindedness and destroy any
possibility of discussion. Silence and closed minds are not the point of
liberal arts education.

4\. _Grades_. I grade each assignment on a 100 point scale (90-100 = A; 80-89
= B; 70-79 = C; 60-69 = D; below 60 = F). Usually I assign a letter grade,
e.g., B+ (= 87.5), C (= 75), A- (= 92.5), etc. In addition, each assignment is
given a certain  "weight" \-- i.e., a percentage figure which reflects its
importance in the course. For example, the first writing assignment may count
as 5% of your total grade. Your grade on that assignment is then multiplied by
the percentage figure, resulting in a certain number of points.

For example, if you get a "B" (= 85) on the first writing assignment, and if
that assignment is worth 5%, the point total would be (85 X .05) = 4.25. At
the end of the semester, the point totals for all the assignments and your
class participation grade are then added up to determine your final grade
(less any deductions necessary because of excessive absences).

I keep a running record of your grades, and it is easy to calculate your
current average. Please feel free to ask me about your current grade average
at any point through the semester. As well, as a way of keeping you informed
regarding your grade, I will pass out grade slips to you two or three times
through the course of the semester. These, in addition to your midterm grades
from the registrar's office, should give you a very accurate idea of your
progress in the class.

For more information on grading, see the Departmental Policy, attached (and on
the course Web site).

**Course Outline**

_Introduction to Eastern Religions_

On the nature of religion; the religions of Asia: Fenton, ch. 1

Informal writing assignment -- see below.

Religious story/Scripture as Myth

Early religions: economics, social structure, and the two "logics" of Myth

"Reversal myth"

Myths of creation, East and West: in-class discussion

Writing and Documentation Issues:

In-class exercise: MLA documentation style

First Writing Assignment: on definition(s) and frameworks for the study of
religion from a cross-cultural perspective (due ca. Sept. 12)

_Religious Traditions of India (Vedanta)_

Background and development of Hinduism:

_Readings:_

Fenton, chs. 2-6;

Selections from the _Bhagavadgita_ , the _Yoga Sutra_ , and (optional) _Self-
Knowledge._

Second Writing Assignment: Vedanta, Yoga, and Religious Pluralism (due ca.
Oct. 17)

_Buddhism_

Background and development of Buddhism

_Readings_ :

Fenton, chs. 7-9

Zen Buddhism: _Zen Mind, Beginner's Mind_

Third Writing Assignment: Buddhism (due ca. Nov. 7)

_Religions of China_

Background and development of Confucianism, Taoism:

_Readings_ :

Fenton, chs. 10, 11

Taoism: _Tao te Ching_

Fourth Writing Assignment/In-class exam: Chinese Religions (due ca. Nov. 24)

_Religions of Japan_

Geography, Prehistory, and Japanese Myth; Shinto; Religions in Modern Japan

_Reading_ :

Fenton, ch. 13

Final Writing Assignment/In-class exam: due final period

* * *

**Informal Writing Assignment: Fenton, ch. 1**

Instructions:

Read Fenton, ch. 1, paying careful attention to the authors' definition of
religion on pp. 4-16.

The definition offered by our authors stresses three points, i.e.:

a) religion as a relationship between human beings and sacred realities;

b) processes of symbolic transformation;

c) cultural tradition and a system of symbols.

In a brief essay (3-4 pages):

1\. Write an introductory paragraph in which you describe for your reader
which of these points of the definition ["a)," "b)," or "c)"] you will
discuss.

2\. Out of your own religious experience or understanding, describe an example
or two of what you think this part of the definition refers to. For example,
you may think of the ritual of bar mitzvah or the sacrament of baptism as an
example of "symbolic transformation." Describe your example with some care,
and explain carefully how it fits the definition discussed in Fenton.

3\. Paraphrase an example of the definition provided by Fenton in the
pertinent portion of ch. 1.

4\. Discuss briefly any points of agreement and difference you notice between
your (Western) e

