SOUTHWESTERN ASSEMBLIES OF GOD UNIVERSITY



HIS 4423 World Civilization



Instructor: Mary Jackson Spring 2001



_Course Syllabus_

_ _

_Course Description_



A survey of world cultural history which treats the development and growth of
civilization not as a unique European experience but as a global one through
which all the great culture systems have interacted to produce the present-day
world. Special emphasis is placed on the social, economic, political,
religious, aesthetic, legal, and technological elements of history.



_Course Knowledge Prerequisites_



A basic knowledge of the course of world history and civilizations will be
helpful, but not essential, for success in this course.



_Course Objectives_



Upon completion of the course, students should be able to:



A.     Trace the political and cultural reemergence of the world's non-Western
peoples that have played an important role in world affairs. These people,
their cultures, and their civilizations must be known and understood to know
their importance in present and future world roles.



B.     Describe the important social, cultural, political, agricultural, and
military aspects for those civilizations.



C.     Identify selected individuals, concepts, terms, and events significant
to the region during the period up to twenty-first century.



_Textbook_

_ _

Walbank, T. Walter (Late); Brummett, Palmira; Edgar, Robert B; Taylor,
Alastair M.;

Bailkey, Nels M.; Jewsbury, George F.; Lewis, Clyde J.; Hackett, Neil J.

_Civilizations Past & Present._ 9th ed. New York: Addison Wesley Longman,
Inc.,

2000.



_Course Plan_



The Course will be organized into the following basic sections:

China and India

Africa

Korea, Japan, and Southeast Asia

Russia



Material for which the student will be responsible will come form class
lecture, audio-visual materials, the textbook, and library assignment reading.



_Course Requirements_



A.     _Five Tests_ covering textbook material, lectures, and audio-visual
presentations. The first four tests do not cover material from previous test,
but the Final Exam is cumulative, covering the entire semester. Tests will
consist of objective and essay questions.



B.     A _Research Paper_ written on a topic pertinent to World Civilization
will be required. Directions for the research paper are given in the syllabus.
A suggested Research Topic List is also included in the syllabus.



C.     _Reading Assignments_ on the Library Reserve Readings will be averaged
as _one_ grade. The instructor will give the student the questions on the
reserve readings. Students may use the readings to complete the assignment.
Assignments _must_ be turned in on the due date.



D.     _Reading Quizzes_ will be given periodically to ensure the students are
keeping up with the reading assignments. The lowest reading quiz grade will be
dropped before averaging the grade.



_Course Assignments_



Reading in the Textbook:

China & India- (Chapters 5,6, & 10)----February 1

Africa- (Chapters 11, 23, & 27) ---- February 27

Korea, Japan, and Southeast Asia- (Chapters 12, 17, & 18)---- March 29

Russia- (Chapters 31, 32, & 34)---- April 24



_Library Assignment Readings:_



"Did the Benefits of the First Emperor of China's Rule Outweigh the Human
Costs?" January 18

"Did the Indian Emperor Aurangzeb's Rule Mark the Beginning of Mughal
Decline?" January 30

"Did Tokugawa Politics Strengthen Japan" March 8

"Did Peter the Great Exert a Positive Influence on the Development of Russia"
April 5



Research Paper due April 19

_ _

_Exam Dates:_ Dates may be changed to meet the class' schedule.



Test 1----February 6

Test 2----March 1

Test 3----April 3

Test 4----April 26



_Grading System_

_ _

Letter grades will be used to indicated the following levels of achievement:



90-100= A (superior); 80-89= B (above average); 70-79=C (average); 60-69=D
(inferior); 59 and below = F (failing); I (incomplete); and W (withdrawn)



_Grading_



Test 1----1/8 of final grade

Test 2----1/8

Test 3----1/8

Test 4----1/8

Library Reserve Reading Assignments-----1/8

Reading Quizzes----1/8

Research Paper-----1/8

Final Exam-----1/8



_Class Policies_

_ _

A.     Attendance



Southwestern's on-campus academic program is designed as an in-class learning
experience. In this type of instructional setting, the ability to pass
examinations and complete outside projects is only a partial measure of the
student's knowledge, skills, understanding, and appreciate the subject matter.
Therefore, students are required to maintain regular class attendance.



Absences which exceed twenty percent (20%) of the number of times that a class
meets per semester, (9 absences for classes meeting 3 times per week; 6
absences for classes meeting 2 time a week; and 3 absences for classes meeting
1 time per week). Regardless of the nature or reason for the absences, will
result in the student being administratively dropped automatically from the
course, receiving a grade of "w". The student will be assessed the established
course withdrawal fee.



A student who is absent from a class is totally responsible to make the
appropriate  advanced arrangements with the faculty member for possible make
up work. The

Faculty member will have the prerogative to determine if the student may make
up any examinations or outside assignments based upon the reason for a
student's absence and when the make up work must be complete. However, no
point reduction will be assessed to a student's final grade for absenteeism.



As a reminder, "School Assignment" is no longer given for any type of absence.
Therefore, all absences will impact the number allowed by the attendance
policy.

B.     Tardy



Students missing fifteen minutes of class will be counted absent for that
session. Every three tardies acquired in classes that meet three times a week
and every two tardies acquired in classes that meet twice a week will be
considered as an absence. The student is responsible, at the end of class, to
identify his/her tardiness to the professor. No changes will be made after the
date of the student's tardiness.



C.     Late Work/Make-up Tests



Required work such as the research paper will be penalized one letter grade
for each class day they are late up through the fourth day. No further penalty
will be given after that, but the work may still be turned in up to the end of
the semester.



All students in class on a test day will take the test. As students missing a
major test will not be allowed to take a make-up test unless a valid excuse is
presented. The test must be make up by the next class day, after the test.



Reading quizzes are not considered major test. There will be _no_ make-up for
reading quizzes. A missed reading quiz will be recorded as a zero. A student's
lowest reading quiz grade will be dropped before averaging.



D.     Final Examination



During the Final Exam Week, a final exam will be administered in class at the
time that the university has established as printed in the class schedule. No
final exam will be giver prior to Final Exam Week. Students with scheduling
problem may arrange with the professor (subject to professor's approval) to
take and exam at an alternate exam time. The arrangement must be done the week
prior to exam week. The alternate exam time is scheduled on Monday and Tuesday
nights from 6:00 - 7:20 p.m. of Final Exam Week.



Graduating seniors with a grade of B or higher within a course may be exempted
from the last examination of the course if the professor designates it as a
comprehensive final exam. However, a graduating senior with a grade of B or
higher with a course, at the professors prerogative, may or may not be
exempted for a unit exam given during the Final Exam Week.



E.      Cheating



Students are expected to be honest in fulfilling al academic requirements and
assignment. This pertains to examinations, themes, book critiques, reading
reports, etc. A student will not be allowed to withdraw from a course if
he/she is under investigation for academic dishonesty. In the event that the
student is determined guilty of academic dishonesty, then the student will not
be allowed to withdraw from the course and will receive the grade determined
by the faculty member, either an "F" for the assignment and/or and "F" for the
course. Dishonesty could possibly result in further disciplinary action. Refer
to Major Infractions in the Student Handbook.



F.      Miscellaneous



Students must wait 15 minutes for a faculty member before leaving class unless
they have been notified otherwise.



The following policy regarding the posting of grades has been approved for
1999-2000. To eliminate any potential violation of the Privacy Act for
Students, students' grades for examinations or any other academic assignments
will no longer be posted.



_Office Hours and E-mail Address_



Feel free to see the instructor during the hours below or at any other time by
appointment:



Office: A113-C Telephone: #3232



Office Hours: MWF - 8:55 - 9:55 a.m. & 1:00 - 2:00 p.m.

TTH \- 9:50 - 10:50 a.m.

E-mail----- [mjackson@sagu.edu](mailto:mjackson@sagu.edu)





_Direction for Research Papers_



A research paper is a report on a certain topic. The student gathers material
from several different sources (books, magazine articles, newspaper articles,
government documents, letters, etc.,) and integrates that material into a
report. The student must give credit to the sources from which he or she
obtains facts, direct quotations, and other material that is not considered
"common knowledge." This credit is given by indicating the source in either an
endnote (Turabian form) or a citation in the text (MLA form).

Students may use either _A Manual for Writers of Term Papers, Thesis, and
Dissertations_ by Kate L. Turabian of the _MLA Handbook for Writers of
Research Papers._ Copies of both are usually available in libraries and
bookstores. Either the Turabian or the MLA form _must_ be used.

If the student decides to use the MLA form, the complete paper will consist of
a title page, the text or main part of the paper, and a Bibliography or Works
Cited page on which the student lists, in proper form, all the sources
consulted in writing the paper.

The title page should be centered on a piece of paper and should contain the
following information: Title of Paper, Student's Name, Course Name and Number,
Instructor's Name, and Date.

The text, or main part of the paper, _must_ be between 6 and 8 pages long.
Shorter papers will not be accepted. The first paragraph of the text should be
an introduction in which you acquaint your reader with the topic of the paper
and state the thesis or main idea of the paper. Succeeding paragraphs will
form the body of the paper, the part in which you will present the information
you have gathered, in a clear and logical form to support your thesis. End the
text with one or more concluding paragraphs in which you state your
conclusions and summarize what you have written.

A minimum of 5 sources must be used for the paper and listed on the
Bibliography or Works Cited page.

Margins should be 1 inch on all sides. Beginning with the second page, number
each paper in the upper right hand corner.

All research papers _must be typed_ , double-spaced. Handwritten papers will
not be accepted. Use 10 or 12 pitch, if you use a computer to prepare you
paper.

Avoid the use of contractions, slang, and personal pronouns in the first or
second person (I, me, we, us, our, etc.,). Use the _past_ tense.

The instructor's approval must be given for your topic before you write the
paper. Papers will not be accepted from students who have not gotten such
approval of their topics.





Research Paper Topic Suggestions:



_China_

Boxer Rebellion _Book of Marco Polo_ & Kublai Khan & Kathy

Claire L. Chenault & The "Flying Tigers Burma Road

Chinese-Japanese Wars Great Wall of China

Indochina Oriental Drama

Ming Dynasty Mongol Empire

Open-Door Policy Joseph W. Stillwell & the Stillwell Road

Sung Dynasty Trans- Siberian Railroad

Chinese Ancestor Worship Buddhist in China

Christianity in China Confucianists in China

Islam in China Taoists in China



_India_

Akbar Asoka

Aurangzeb Babar

Chandragupta Maurya Indira Gandhi

Mohandas K. Gandi Rajiv Ghandi

Nehru Alexander the Great in India

Aryans East India Company

Gupta Dynasty Indus Valley Civilization

Kushan Empire Maurya Empire

Mongul Empire Mongol Empire

Sepoy Rebellion Hinduism





_Africa_

Addis Ababa Barbary States

Cecil J. Rhodes Henry Stanley & David Livingstone

People of Africa Aswan Dam

Arabs & the Berbers Sculpture & Handicrafts of Africa

Literature of Africa Religions of Africa

Music & Dance of Africa Education of Africa

Land Regions of Africa Animal of Africa

Agriculture of Africa Manufacturing & Mining of Africa

Transportation & Communication in Africa Exploration & Discovery of Africa

Carthage Sir Richard Burton



_Korea, Japan, and South East Asia_

Korean War United Nations & Korea

Peng Teh-huai Japanese Influence in Korea

Location, Size, and Surface Features of Korea Natural Resources of Korea

Korean Way of Life Gender Roles in Korea

Hirohito Shogun

World War II in Japan Sumurai

Kamakura Period Kamikaze

Products & Industry in Japan Ancestor Worship in Japan

Buddha Japanese Language

Theater & Drama in Japan Foreign Trade in South East Asia



_Russia_

Leonid I. Brezhnev Nikita S. Khrushchev

Lenin Joseph Stalin

Leon Trotsky Alexander (of Russia)

Catherine Ivan

Nicholas (of Russia) Peter I (the Great)

Berlin Congress Crimean War

Genoa Conference Alexander Puskin

Russian Revolution Religions of Russia

Cold War in Russia Ballet & Drama in Russia

Eastern Orthodox Churches Fairs & Expositions in Russia





