[Prof. Mark Auslander](AuslanderHome.htm)

|

Office: Languages 101  
  
---|---  
  
TTh 11:00-12:15

|

O: (770) 784-4664  
  
Seney 322

|

[mausland@learnlink.emory.edu](mailto:mausland@learnlink.emory.edu)  
  
Spring 2000

|

Office Hours: MWF 2:00-3:00 p.m; TTh 1:00-2:00  
  
**Foundations of Cultural And Linguistic Anthropology**

**Anthro 202**

AIMS OF COURSE: This course introduces students to the anthropological study
of culture, society and language. We concentrate on different approaches to
the relationship between "structure" and "process" in varied social domains.
We begin with two of the most important, classic works in social and cultural
anthropology, Victor Turner's "Schism and Continuity in an African Society"
and Ruth Benedict's "The Chrysanthemum and the Sword." We then go on to
consider recent work in some of the most interesting areas of contemporary
sociocultural anthropology -- the meaningful dimensions of place and the
material world, language as social practice, and the status of ritual in
advanced industrial societies. Throughout the course, we move back and forward
between the thoughtful study of others and of ourselves, considering the
philosophical and methodological foundations of a comparative human science.

COURSE REQUIREMENTS: This is a demanding course. Students must give careful
attention to all the reading, and indicate through class discussion, frequent
LearnLink postings and written essays that they have fully engaged with the
texts. You should read critically. Feel free to challenge assertions or
interpretations made in the readings, by the instructor, and by fellow
students, provided your critiques are well-reasoned and constructively framed.  


Grading is based on a scale of 400 points for the entire course, with the
following letter-grade cut-offs:

A=376 |

B+=348

|

C+=306

|  D=266  
---|---|---|---  
A-=362 |

B=334

|

C=294

|  F=below 266  
  
|

B-=320

|

C-=280

|  
  
**NOTE:** Plus/minus grading is used in this course, and the Honor Code is
always in force. Grading will be based on a curve.

**Attendance and Lateness Policy:** Students are required to attend each
class, on time. Missed quizzes will not be re-administered, regardless of
circumstances (including illness or family emergencies). Students will not be
directly penalized for the first three classes that they miss (although they
will miss the chance to take a quiz that day, if one is administered). For
each subsequent class missed (regardless of cause) 10 points will be deducted
from the student's course total. Eight absences will be regarded as grounds
for failing the course. One or more points will be deducted for each lateness
or for leaving class prematurely.

We will take one field trip, probably to Sapelo island.

**Courses updates and revisions to the syllabu** s will be posted in the class
LearnLink conference and at the class website at http//:wcw.emory.edu

The following work is required:

  * Five short papers (5-7 pages). 50 points each.
  * One Take Home Final Examination. 50 points
  * Quizzes. 50 points.
  * LearnLink and Class Participation. 50 points

 The following books are available in the College bookstore:

  * Ruth Benedict. _The Chrysanthemum and the Sword: Patterns of Japanese Culture_.
  * Victor Turner. _Schism and Continuity in an African Society_
  * Keith Basso _. Wisdom sits in Places._ Univ New Mexico Press
  * Keith Basso. _Portraits of the Whiteman_ . Cambridge Univ Press
  * William McFeeley. _Sapelo's People_. WW Norton.
  * Carol Hendrickson. _Weaving Identities : Construction of Dress and Self in a Highland Guatemala Town_
  * Charles Piot. _Remotely Modern_
  * T. M. Luhrmann. _Persuasions of the Witch's Craft : Ritual Magic in Contemporary England_
  * _Recommended Only_ : Keith Basso and Steven Feld, eds. _Senses of Place_



* * *



COURSE OUTLINE



Thursday, January 20. Overview: Culture and Society. Rules and Process,
Structure and Practice, Language and Society.

* * *

**I. Culture as "Pattern": The Case of Japan.**

Tuesday, January 25. **Culture and History**

  * Ruth Benedict.[ _The Chrysanthemum and the Sword: Patterns of Japanese Culture_](benedict.htm). pp. 1-97.

* * *

Thursday, January 27. **Obligation and Dependence**

  * Ruth Benedict. _The Chrysanthemum and the Sword_. pp.98-176

* * *

Friday, January 28. LearnLink posting: Benedict

* * *

Tuesday, Februrary 1. **Development and Social Reproduction**

  * Ruth Benedict. _The Chrysanthemum and the Sword:_ pp. 177-316

* * *

Thursday, February 3. **Gender and Dependence in Contemporary Japan**

  * View and discuss video: "The Good Wife of Tokyo."

* * *

**Paper #1. Dependence and Obligation in Japan.**

**Due at start of class, Tuesday. February 8.**

In many respects, the Japan seen in "The Good Wife of Tokyo" seems profoundly
different from the Japan discussed by Benedict. Yet, in this paper, you are
asked to consider seriously the continued relevance of Benedict to the
analysis of Japanese society and culture. How might Benedict account for the
various dynamics and commentaries depicted in this video?



* * *

**II. Social Dramas: Kinship and Social Process**

Tuesday, February 8. **The Concept of the Social Drama.**

  * Victor Turner. _Schism and Continuity in an African Society. pp. 1-81_

* * *

Thursday, February 10

  * _Schism and Continuity_.pp. 82-168

* * *

Friday. February 11. LearnLink: Please submit an account , at least one page
long, of a social drama in actual family. (You may write about your own family
or interview someone else about their family). Please follow Victor Turner's
model, specifying the key players and struggles.

* * *

Tuesday, February 15

  * _Schism and Continuity_.pp.169-257

* * *

Thursday, February 17.

  * _Schism and Continuity_.pp.258-331

**

* * *

Paper 2. Social Dramas in America and Zambia**

**(5-7 pages.Double spaced, typed, 10 or 12 point)**

**Due: Tuesday, February 22 at start of class.**

In this paper you are asked to compare at least one Ndembu social drama
described by Victor Turner with two social dramas described by students in
this class (one of these may be from your own family.) How well does Turner's
processual model of the social dramas apply to these cases? How much a
difference does the presence or absence of a system of matrilineal descent
appear to make to the unfolding of a social drama?

* * *

**III. Place, Language, and Personhood**

Tuesday, February 22. Paper #2 due at start of class.

  * Keith Basso. _Wisdom Sits in Places_. 1-70

 Note: In this section of the course, each student will select a specific
"place" to research: what are txplicit and implict meanings are invested in
this sit. Are these meanings generally shared or are they contested?

* * *

Thursday, February 24.

  * Basso. _Wisdom Sits in Places_. 71-152.

**

* * *

** Tuesday, Februrary 29. **Gullah Worlds.**

  * _Sapelo's People_. pp.13-98

* * *

To be scheduled: screening of "Daughters of the Dust" (mandatory)

* * *

Thursday, March 2. **Gullah Worlds.**

  * _Sapelo's People,_ pp.99-175

* * *

Optional: Weekend of March 4-5. Field trip to Sappello Island. There will be a
fee for room and board on the island; in the event more people want to go than
can be accomodated on the island, students will be selected by lottery.

* * *

* * *

Monday, March 6. **Strongly recommended:**

Linguistics Lecture: Alessandro Duranti, Anthropology, UCLA

"Linguistic and cultural borrowing in two Samoan communities"

3:00 pm, Geosciences 206 (Department of Anthropology, Emory-Atlanta Campus)

* * *

Tuesday, March 7

  * Basso. Portraits of the Whiteman.1-34

* * *

Thursday, March 9.

  * Basso. Portraits of the Whiteman.35-94.

* * *

Friday, March 10. Paper #3 due. The Meaning of a Place.( topics to be
announced)

* * *

Tuesday, March 14 and Thursday, March 16 - **No class** (Spring break)



* * *

**IV.Meaning in the Material World**  

Tuesday, March 21.

  * Carol Hendrickson. _Weaving Identities : Construction of Dress and Self in a Highland Guatemala Town._

* * *

Thursday, March 23.

  *   _Weaving Identities_

Required lecture: Carol Hendrikson. 7:00 p.m. Student Center.

* * *

Tuesday, March 28.

  * Terry Turner. "The Social Skin."

* * *

Thursday, March 30.

  * Charles Piot. Remotely Global: _Village Modernity in West Africa_. pp. 1-75



* * *

Tuesday, April 4

  * _Remotely Global_. pp. 76-155

* * *

Thursday, April 6

  * _Remotely Global_. pp.156-178,

**

* * *

V. Ritual in the Modern West **

Tuesday, April 11. **Paper #4 due at start of class.** Compare Turner,
Hendrickson, and Piot's approaches to meaning, materiality and economy. (More
precise questions to be announced)

  * Luhrmann. **Persuasions of the Witch's Craft**. Part I.

* * *

Thursday, April 15

  * Luhrmann. **Persuasions of the Witch's Craft.** Part II

* * *

Tuesday, April 18

  * Luhrmann. **Persuasions of the Witch's Craft**. Part III  & IV.

* * *

Thursday, April 20

  * Luhrmann. **Persuasions of the Witch's Craft.** Part V.

* * *

Tuesday, April 25.

  * Workshop on Ritual (Students present observations of ritual in contemporary American society)

* * *

Thursday, April 27

  * Workshop on Ritual (Students present observations of ritual in contemporary American society)

* * *

Friday, April 28. Paper #5 due: Ritual in Contemporary Society.

Recommended: Friday, April 28-Sunday, April 30. Inaugaral readings and
workshops, the Emory Center for Myth and Ritual in American Life (MARIAL).

* * *

Tuesday,May 2. Final Day of Class: Discussion of MARIAL Center events. Final
take home examination distributed in class.

* * *

Tuesday, May 9. Take home examination due at 12 noon. Dr. Auslander's office.

