**Sociology 599**

Special Topics in Sociology:  
_Social Change and Gender Inequality_

_course website address: http://opr.princeton.edu/~soc599/syllabus.htm  
class meets: Tuesdays, 2:30-5:30pm, the Great Hall, OPR _

* * *

Sara Curran  
Department of Sociology  
2-C-16 Green Hall  
office hours: Tues. 1-2pm (or by appointment) at 206 Notestein Hall  
[_curran@princeton.edu_](mailto:curran@princeton.edu)

**Sara McLanahan  
** Office of Population Research  
207 Notestein Hall  
office hours: by appointment  
[_mclanaha@opr.princeton.edu_](mailto:mclanaha@opr.princeton.edu)

* * *

__**A. Introduction**__

Our approach to the very broad topic of social change and gender is to look at
particular social problems in both industrialized and less industrialized
settings. The expectation is that comparisons across set tings will clarify
explanations for gender differentials. We organize the readings around
particular topics of relevance to the negotiation and reinforcement of gender
differences: the market, the family/household, the state. In addition, we
address oth er topics where all three social structures interact in the
process of "doing gender": sexuality and reproduction; gender and race;
poverty and single parenthood. Finally, at the end of the course, we return to
the broader topic of gender and t he philosophy of science to reinforce a
critical examination of gender biases with regards to theorizing and
methodologies in "doing science." It goes without saying that there are
numerous other avenues to pursue with regards to the topic of gender and
society. Therefore, we have structured course assignments and optional
readings to allow participants the room to pursue those avenues (refer to
[course bibliography](bibliography.htm) for more information).

__**B. Course Schedule**__

**September 17:** Overview of Course

**September 24:** Theoretical Perspectives

**October 1:** Education

**October 8:** Labor Market: Economic Status in the US and other
Industrialized Countries

**October 15:** Labor Market: Globalization and Economic Crises

**October 22:** Family: Intra-Household Resource Allocation (paper proposal
due)

**October 29:** _Fall Break_

**November 5:** Family: Female Headed Households, Poverty

**November 12:** Race: Family Structure, Feminism and Women of Color

**November 19:** The Welfare State

**November 26:** Reproduction: The Family Planning Debate

**December 3:** Reproduction: Teen Pregnancy

**December 10:** Gender and Science: Towards a New Paradigm (book review due)

**January 15:** Final paper due

__**C. Course Requirements**__

The intention of the course requirements is to help prepare you for your two
graduate papers and for your general exams. The readings cover a broad range
of topics and identify important research questions with in each topics. There
are three sets of written assignments:

**1.** 25-30 page paper which can be a literature review or research proposal.
These can be thought of as the beginning thought pieces for one of your
graduate papers. The paper is due on the first day of final exam week (January
15). A brief prospectus (2 pages) for this paper is due by the sixth week of
class (October 22) in order to get some initial feedback on your idea.

**2.** 2-3 page weekly critiques of the readings. These are intended to be
short summaries and should also include reactions, questions, thoughts about
how the readings relate t o each other and previous readings. These thoughts
will provide the basis for class discussion and will prove useful, when you
study for generals or need to refer to the literature in future research. The
critiques are due the day before class (Monday) a nd should be put on the web
page. Sara and Sara will work to prepare questions as starting points to think
about the readings as well as initially organize the readings so that you know
which pieces best relate to each other. This does not preclude your own ideas
about how the readings relate.

**3.** One 5 page book review from a book of your choice related to the topic
or from one of the books listed in the [course
bibliography](bibliography.htm). You can look at the book reviews in
_Contemporary Sociology_ , _Social Forces_ , or _American Journal of
Sociology_ for good examples. The book review is due the last week of class
(December 10).

**4.** Besides the written work, students are expected to participate in class
discussions and to contribute to the class web page. [The web page will
include student paper propo sals, student papers, critiques of the readings
and responses to critiques, comments on the class discussions, bibliography,
and whatever else students want to put on the web.]

**5**. Sara and Sara will provide you with handouts and conduct some short
lectures and discussions as needed. We have started an extensive bibliography
(which doesn't include t he references on this list) and will be put on the
web and handed out the first day of class. These are intended to be the
starting point for a bibliography for the entire class and a place for you to
pursue books for the book review, or your for own research interests.

_**D. Books**_

The following books are the main references used throughout the course. There
will also be journal articles and book chapters on reserve in the library or
as a course pack.

  * Bergman, Barbara. 1986. _The Economic Emergence of Women_. New York: Basic Books.  

  * Dixon-Mueller, Ruth. 1993. _Population Policy and Women's Rights._ Pp 1-191. Praeger Press. Westport, CT.   

  * Dwyer, Daisy and Judith Bruce. 1988. _A Home Divided: Women and Income in the Third World_. Stanford: Stanford University Press.  

  * England, Paula, (ed.). 1993. _Theory on Gender, Feminism on Theory_. New York: Aldine De Gruyter.  

  * Gordon, Linda, (ed.). 1990. _Women, the State, and Welfare_. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.  

  * Luker, Kristen. 1996. _Dubious Conceptions_. Cambridge: Harvard Press.   

  * Mason, Karen Oppenheim and An-Magritt Jensen. 1995\. _Gender and Family Change in Industrialized Countries_. Oxford: Clarendon Press.  

  * Spain, Daphne and Suzanne M. Bianchi. 1996. _Balancing Act: Motherhood, Marriage, and Employment Among American Women._ New York: Russell Sage Foundation.  

  * Tinker, Irene. 1990. _Persistent Inequalities: Women and World Development_. New York: Oxford University Press.   

  * **On the recommended list:  
**

    * Wolf, Diane. 1994. _Factory Daughters: Gender, Household Dynamics, and Rural Industrialization in Java_. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.  

  1. [**_Course Bibliography_**](bibliography.htm) 

We have also created a bibliography in addition to this syllabus. This
includes additional readings on the topics included in this syllabus, as well
as on other topics. This list can be used for selecting a book for the book
review.  

__**F. Detailed Course Outline  
**__

**Week 1. OVERVIEW OF COURSE**

This week will introduce the course material and present empirical data on
gender differences in health (mortality, morbidity, life expectancy),
educational attainment (high school graduation, college and post grad uate
training), and economic well-being (poverty status, family income, and
earnings). The purpose of the meeting is to provide a quick overview of the
empirical evidence on gender differences, and to motivate the search for
explanations.

Handouts during class:

From the Editor of _Gender and Society_ on how to submit papers to journals.

Lorber, Judith. 1994. Introduction and Chapter 1. _Paradoxes of Gender_. New
Haven, CO: Yale University Press. Pp. 1-6, 13-36.

Graphics and Data from _The World's Women 1995: Trends and Statistics_ ,
United Nations.

Initial course bibliography  

**Week 2. THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVES**

The purpose of this week's readings is to learn about different explanations
for the paradoxes of gender and conceptualizations of gender. The readings
present a variety of perspectives and approaches that have bee n used to
account for gender differences, including marxist-feminist, world systems,
macro-structural, rational choice, functionalism, social psychological,
ethnomethodological, and postmodern. The challenge for this week will be to
see if these theoreti cal perspectives are asking the same questions or not.
In other words, do the theories overlap or do they talk past each other? Are
the differences as fundamental as the differences in each theories definition
of gender and its meaning? Or, are the dif ferences in terms of levels of
analysis?

_**Required Readings**_

England, Paula. 1993. _Theory on Gender, Feminism on Theory_. New York: Aldine
De Gruyter. Pp. 3-372.

_**Recommended Readings**_

Blumberg, Rae Lesser. 1984. "A General Theory of Gender Stratification." in
Randal Collins (ed.) _Sociological Theory_. San Francisco: Jossey Bass. Pp.
23-101.

Boserup, Esther. 1990. Economic Changes and the Roles of Women. In _Persistent
Inequalities_. Edited by Irene Tinker. New York: Oxford University Press. Pp.
14-26. (or, her 1970 classic is even better: _Wo men's Role in Economic
Development_ ).

[**student reading critiques for week 2**](critiques_week2/)  

**Week 3. GENDER AND EDUCATION**

This week's readings focus on gender differences in educational goals and
attainment. In order to understand why men and women enter the job market with
different skills and qualifications, we need to understand how ed ucational
goals are determined by parents, teachers, and peers. To what extent are young
women's choices about schooling based on expectations about returns to
education? To what extent are they determined by social norms and gender role
socialization? What role do institutional factors play in channeling young men
and women into different academic courses and different fields?

_**Required Reading**_

Brinton, Mary. 1988. The Social-Institutional Bases of Gender Stratification:
Japan as an Illustrative Case. _American Journal of Sociology._ 94 (2):
300-334.

Butcher, Kristin and Anne Case. 1994. The Effect of Sibling Sex Composition on
Women's Education and Earnings. _Quarterly Journal of Economics._ 109:531-543.

Cole, Jonathan and Burton Singer. 1991. A Theory of Limited Differences:
Explaining the Productivity Puzzle in Science. in Zukerman, Cole, and Bruer
(eds.) _Women in the Scientific Community._ New York: W.W. Norto n. Pp.
278-240.

Entwisle, Doris and Linda Olson. 1994. The Gender Gap in Math: Its Possible
Origins in Neighborhood Effects. _American Sociological Review._ 59(6):
822-838.

Hyde, Janet, Elizabeth Fennama, and Susan Lamon. 1990\. Gender differences in
mathematics performance: A Meta-Analysis. _Psychological Bulletin._ 107:
139-155.

Lee, Valerie, Helen Marks and Tina Byrd. 1994. Sexism in single-sex and
coeducational independent secondary school classrooms. _Sociology of
Education._ 67: 92-120.

Spain, Daphne and Suzanne Bianchi. 1996. _Balancing Act_. Chapter 3, Pp.
51-76.

Stromquist, Nelly P. 1989. Determinants of educational participation and
achievement of women in the third world: A review of the evidence and a
theoretical critique. _Review of Educational Research._ 59:143-183 .

_**Recommended Reading**_

Lee, Valerie and Anthony Bryk. 1986. Effects of Single-Sex Secondary Schools
on Student Achievement and Attitudes. _Journal of Educational Psychology_.
78(5): 381-395.

Marsh, Herbert. 1989. Effects of Attending Single-Sex and Coeducational High
Schools on Achievement, Attitutes, Behaviors, and Sex Differences. _Journal of
Educational Psychology_. 81(1): 70-85.

Catsambis, Sophis. 1994. The pather to math: Gender and racial-ethnic
differences in mathematics participation from middle school to high school.
_Sociology of Education._ 67 (July):199-215.

Jacobs, Jerry. 1995. Gender and Academic Specialties: Trends Among Recitpients
of College Degrees in the 1980s. _Sociology of Education._ 68 (April):81-98.

Wilson, Kenneth and Janet Boldizar. 1990. Gender Segregation in Higher
Education: Effects of Aspirations, Mathematics Achievement, and Income.
_Sociology of Education._ 63 (January): 62-74.

American Association of University Women. 1995. _How Schools Shortchange
Girls_. New York: Marlowe and Co.

Mare, Robert. 1995. _State of the Nation_. Vol. 1\. R. Farley (ed.). New York:
Russell Sage.

Sadker, Myra and David Sadker. 1995. _Failing at Fairness: How Our Schools
Cheat Girls_. New York: Touchstone Press.

[**student reading critiques for week 3**](critiques_week3/)  

**Weeks 4 and 5. GENDER AND THE LABOR MARKET**

The purpose of these two weeks of readings is to represent gendered
differences in the labor market. In the first week we will focus on US women's
labor force participation during the 20th century and the gender ga p in
earnings. Barbara Bergman's book will serve as the core reading and her book
will be supplemented with articles on occupational segregation, productivity,
and wage discrimination. The aim is to familiarize students with the empirical
research on wo men's labor force participation and earnings and to discuss the
relative importance of difference factors in accounting for wage inequality,
including differences in human capital, differences in demand for labor, and
institutional factors such as anti-di scrimination laws and public support for
childcare and parental leave. During the second week we will focus on women's
position in the economy in less developed countries. The distinction between
work and family is less clear in this setting but the focus will be upon the
impact of globa lization. Much of the research and theory about women in the
labor force in less developed country settings is related to women's positions
within their families. The required readings cover several different cases in
brief, as well as theoretical perspec tives (Gimenez and Ward). We will
consider the debates about the direction of development (modernization, world
systems, dependency) and the resulting consequences for women's economic
status. The (highly) recommended reading for this week is Diane Wolf' s recent
book. This detailed case study considers the way women are integrated into the
global labor market at the same time they confront changing social relations
within the family.

**A. Gender and Economic Status in the U.S. and Other Industrialized
Countries**

_Required Readings:_

Bergman, Barbara. 1988. _The Economic Emergence of Women_. New York: Basic
Books. Chapters 1-6, Pp. 3-145.

Bernardt, Annette, Martina Morris, and Mark S. Handcock. 1995\. Women's gains
or men's losses? A closer look at the shrinking gender gap in earnings. _AJS._
101:302-328.

Hoem, Britta. 1995. The way to the gender-segregated Swedish labor market. In
_Gender and Family Change in Industrialized Countries_. Edited by Mason and
Jensen. Oxford: Clarendon Press. Pp. 279-396.

Marini, Margaret. 1989. Sex differences in earnings in the US. _Annual Review
of Sociology_. 15: 343-380.

Sorensen, Annemette and Heike Trappe, 1995. The Persistence of Gender
Inequality in Earnings in the German Democratic Republic. _American
Sociological Review._ 60 (3):398-406.

Petersen, Trond and Laurie A. Morgan. 1995. Separate and unequal: Occupation-
establishment sex segregation and the gender wage gap. _AJS._ (101):329-365.

Spain and Bianchi. _Balancing Act._ Chapters 4 and 5, Pp. 77-140.

_**Recommended Readings:**_

Bianchi, Suzanne. 1995. Changing Economic Roles of Men and Women. In _State of
the Nation_. Edited by Renyolds Farley. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Goldin, Claudia. 1990. _Understanding the Gender Gap: An economic history of
American women_. New York: Oxford University Press.

Wright, Erik Olin and Janeen Baxter, 1995. The Gender Gap in Workplace
Authority in Seven National. _American Sociological Review._ 60 (3):407-435.

[student reading critiques for week 4](critiques_week4/)  

**B. Gender, Globalization, and Economic Crises**

_Required Readings:_

Feldman, S. 1992. Crisis, Islam and gender in Bangladesh: The social
construction of a female labor force. In _Unequal Burden: Economic Crises,
Persistent Poverty and Women's Work_. Edited by Lourdes Ben eria and Shelley
Feldman. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. Pp. 105-130.

Floro, Maria. 1992. Women, work and agricultural commercialization in the
Philippines. In _Women's Work in the World Economy_. Edited by Nancy Folbre,
Barbara Bergmann, Bina Agarwal and Maria Floro. New York: New York University
Press. Pp. 3-40.

Gimenez, Martha. 1991. The mode of reproduction in transition. _Gender and
Society._ 5:334-350.

Greenhalgh, Susan. 1985. Sexual stratification: The other side of "Growth with
equity" in East Asia. _Population and Development Review_. 11(2): 265-314.

Presser, Harriet and Sunita Kishor. 1991. Economic development and
occupational sex-segregation in Puerto Rico: 1950-80. _Population and
Development Review_. 17: 53-85

Ward, Kathryn (editor). 1990. _Women Workers and Global Restructuring_.
Cornell, NY: ILR Press. Chapters 1, 2, 3, 4. Pp. 1-81.

[_summary of development theories_](/home/opr/soc599/public_html/DEVT.htm)

**Recommended reading (highly recommended):**

Wolf, Diane L. 1994. _Factory Daughters: Gender, Household Dynamics, and Rural
Industrialization in Java_. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

[student reading critiques for week 5](critiques_week5/)  

**Weeks 6 and 8. GENDER AND THE FAMILY (week 7 is fall break)**

These two weeks focus on (1) the division of labor and resources within the
household and (2) the causes and consequences of female headed households.
During the first week, intra-household resource allocation mode ls will be
used to examine competing interests within the household regarding time
allocation, nutrition, health, and fertility. Topics will include, why women
do most of the housework, and how this affects other aspects of their lives
(health, power, and earnings capacity). The discussion will consider different
explanations for the division of labor, including the 'new home economics,'
theories of power and dependence, and gender ideology (housework is women's
work). The central reading for the first week will be the Dwyer and Bruce
(which is quickly becoming a classic). The second week will focus on the
prevalence, growth, and consequences of female headed households. The
prevalence of female headed families in different parts of the world, at
different points in time, and among diffe rent racial and ethnic groups will
be compared and different explanations for the growth and consequences of
female headship will also be considered, including economic, demographic, and
cultural arguments.  

**A. Gender and Intra-household Resource Allocation**

_Required Readings_

Brines, Julie. 1994. Economic dependency, gender, and the division of labor at
home. _AJS._ 100: 652-88.

Demaris, Alfred and Monica Longmore. 1996. Ideology, power, and equity:
testing competing explanations for the perception of fairness in household
labor. _Social Forces_. 74:1043-1071.

Dwyer, Daisy and Judith Bruce. 1988. _Home Divided: Women and Income in the
Third World_. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press. Chapters 2,3,4,5. Pp.
20-120.

Greenstein, Theodore. 1996. Gender Ideology and Household Labor. _Social
Forces_. 74:1029-1042.

Hartman, Heidi. 1981. The family as locus of gender, class and political
struggle: The example of housework. _SIGNS._ 6: 365-394.

Papanek, Hanna. 1990. To each less than she needs, from each more than she can
do: Allocations, entitlements, and value. In _Persistent Inequalities: Women
and World Development_. Edited by Irene Tinker. New Yo rk: Oxford University
Press. Pp. 162-184.

Sen, Amartya. 1990. Gender and cooperative conflicts. In _Persistent
Inequalities: Women and World Development_. Edited by Irene Tinker. New York:
Oxford University Press. Pp. 123-149.

_**Recommended Readings:**_

Bruce, Judith. 1989. Homes Divided. _World Development_. 17(7):979-991.

Folbre, Nancy. 1986. Cleaning house: New Perspectives on Households and
Economic Development. _Journal of Development Economics._ 22:5-40.

Hochschild, Arlie. 1989. _The Second Shift_. New York: Viking.

Nelson, Julie. 1994. I, Thou, and Them: Capabilities, Altruism, and Norms in
the Economics of Marriage. _The American Economic Review_. 84:126-131.

Treas, Judith. 1993. Money in the bank: Transaction costs and the economic
organization of marriage. _ASR_. 58:723-732.

Zelizer, Viviana. 1994. Creation of Domestic Currencies. _American Economic
Review_. 84:138-142.

[**student reading critiques for week 6**](critiques_week6/)  

**B. Female Headed Families**

_Required Readings_

McLanahan, Sara and Lynne Casper, 1995. Growing Diversity and Inequality in
American Families. _State of the Nation_. R. Farley (ed.). New York: Russell
Sage Foundation. Pp. 1-45.

Lloyd, Cynthia and Anastasia J. Gage-Brandon. 1993. Women's Role in
Maintaining Households: Family Welfare and Sexual Inequality in Ghana.
_Population Studies_. 47:115-131.

Casper, Lynne M., Sara S. McLanahan, and Irwin Garfinkel. 1994\. The gender-
poverty gap: What we can learn from other countries. _American Sociological
Review_. 59:594-605.

Jackson, Cecile. 1996. Rescuing gender from the poverty trap. _World
Development_. 24: 489-504.

Jensen, An-Margritt. 1995. Gender gaps in relationships with children: Closing
or widening? In _Gender and Family Change in Industrialized Countries_. Edited
by Mason and Jenson. Oxford: Clarendon Press. Pp. 223-244.

Oppenheimer, Valerie and Vivian Lew. 1995. American marriage formation in the
1980s: How important was women's economic independence? In _Gender and Family
Change in Industrialized Countries_. Edited by Mason a nd Jenson. Oxford:
Clarendon Press. Pp. 105-138.

Presser, Harriet. 1995. Are the interests of women inherently at odds with the
interests of children or family? A viewpoint. In _Gender and Family Change in
Industrialized Countries_. Edited by Mason and Jenso n. Oxford: Clarendon
Press. Pp. 297-320.

Spain and Bianchi. _Balancing Act_ , Chapters 2 and 6.

_**Recommended Readings**_

Goldberg, Gertrude Schaffner and Eleanor Kremen. 1990\. _The Feminization of
Poverty: Only in America?_ New York: Praeger.

McLanahan, Sara, Annemette Sorensen, and Dorothy Watson. Sex Differences in
Poverty: 1950-1980. _SIGNS._ 15 (Autumn): 102-46.

McLanahan, Sara. The Two Faces of Divorce: Women's and Children's Interests.
_Macro-Micro Linkages in Sociology_ , edited by Joan Huber. Newbury Park, CA:
Sage Publications. Pp. 193-207.

[**student reading critiques for week 8**](critiques_week8/)  

**Week 9. GENDER AND RACE**

This week focuses on two areas in which race and gender interact: family
structure and feminism. Sociologist have long debated about whether the
black/white difference in single parenthood is a recent phenomenon or whether
it dates back to slavery. A similar debate revolves around the issue of
whether black/white differences in family structure have cultural or economic
origins (or both). Women of color in both the developed and less developed
parts of the world have criticized the contemporary feminism that prevails in
the U.S. These criticisms suggest that feminism emerged from an elitist
perspective and ignores the importance of class, culture, and race in women of
color's identities. The Collins book and the Mohanty article both offer
critiques of Western feminism. In response to the general critiques, Martin
and Mohanty offer an alternative conc eptualization.

_**Required Readings**_

Anderson, Elijah. 1989. Sex Codes and Family Life among Poor Inner-City Youth.
_Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science_ (January),
edited by William Julius Wilson. Pp. 59-78.

Bennett, Neil, David Bloom, and Patricia Craig. The Divergence of Black and
White Marriage Patterns. _American Journal of Sociology_ 95 (3): 692-722.

Collins, Patricia Hill. 1990. _Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge,
Consciousness and the Politics and the Politics of Empowerment._ Boston: Unwin
Hyman. Chapters 1, 2, 10, 11. Pp. 3-42; 201-238.

Martin, Biddy and Chandra Talpade Mohanty. Feminist politics: What's home got
to do with it? In _Feminist Studies/Critical Studies_. Pp. 191-212.

Mohanty, Chandry. 1990. Under western eyes: Feminist scholarship and colonial
discourses. In _Power, Representation and Feminist Critique_. Pp. 51-80.

Morgan, S. Philip, Antonio McDaniel, Andrew Miller and Samuel Preston. 1993.
Racial Differences in Household and Family Structure at the Turn of the
Century. _American Journal of Sociology._ 98(4):799-828.

Ruggles, Steven. 1994. "The Origins of African-American Family Structure."
_American Sociological Review_. 59 (February):136-151.

South, Scott. 1993. "Racial and Ethnic Differences in the Desire to Marry."
_Journal of Marriage and the Family._ 55 (May): 357-370.

Wilson, William J. and Kathryn M. Neckerman. 1986. Poverty and family
structure: the widening gap between evidence and public policy issues. In
_Fighting Poverty: What Works and What Doesn't_ , edited by Sheldon Dan ziger
and Daniel Weinberg. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.

_**Recommended Readings**_

Collins, Patricia Hill. 1990. _Black_ _Feminist_ _Thought:_ _Knowledge,_
_Consciousness_ _and_ _the_ _Politics_ _of_ _Empowerment_. Boston: Unwin
Hyman. C hapters 3, 6, 8.  

[**student reading critiques for week 9**](critiques_week9/)

**Week 10. GENDER AND THE WELFARE STATE**

This week focuses on the development of the gendered welfare state. The major
readings are taken from Linda Gordon's edited volume which includes a variety
of perspectives, including work by historians, political s cientists and
sociologists. Feminist theories about the relationship between women and the
state have treated women as victims of state control as well as active agents
in creating state policies. Gordon's introductory chapter and the reading by
Skocpol p rovide excellent discussions of these two perspectives. Other
readings include Esping-Anderson's general theory of welfare states as well as
Orloff's attempt to incorporate gender into Esping-Anderson's model. All of
the readings help provide a framework for understanding the topic covered
during the next two weeks: gender and reproduction.

_**Required Readings**_

Gordon, Linda. 1990. _Women, the State, and Welfare_. Madison: The University
of Wisconsin Press. Chapters 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10 and 12.

Orloff, Anne. 1993. Gender and the social rights of citizenship. _ASR_ 58:
303-328.

Skocpol, Theda. 1992. Understanding the origins of the modern social provision
in the United States. In _Protecting Soldiers and Mothers_. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press. Introduction, pp 1-62.

_**Recommended Readings**_

Boris, Eileen and Peter Bardaglio. 1983. The transformation of patriarchy: the
historic role of the state." _Families, Politics, and Public Policy._ Irene
Diamond (ed.). New York: Longman. Pp. 70-93.

Brown, Carol. 1981. Mothers, fathers, and children: from private to public
patriarchy. _Women and Revolution: A Discussion of the Unhapy Marriage of
Marxism ad Feminism._ Lydia Sargent (ed.) Boston: South End Pres s. Pp.
239-267.

Hernes, Helga Maria. 1987. _Welfare State and Women Power: Essays in State
Feminism_. Oslo: Norwegian University Press.

Esping-Andersen, Gosta. 1990. _The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism_.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Piven and Cloward, 1994. _Regulating the Poor_. New York: Free Press. Chapter
12.

Quadagno, Jill. 1987. Theories of the Welfare State. _Annual Review of
Sociology_ 13: 109-128.  

[student reading critiques for week 10](critiques_week10/)  

**Weeks 11 and 12. GENDER AND REPRODUCTION**

The readings for the next two weeks cover two instances of the State's
involvement in reproduction. The first week examines family planning issues
with relevance to both developed and less developed settings. More bro adly
these articles address the role of science and technology in controlling
women's lives - diminishing or increasing women's status. The second week
focuses on the controversy over teenage parenthood in the contemporary US.
Kristin Luker's book describes the controversy and uses a gender/political
analysis to explain its origins and popularity in th e US. Other readings this
week provide backup material for Luker's argument as well as examples of
analysis that use sisters data to identify the effect of teenage childbearing.  

**A. Family Planning and Reproduction**

_Required Reading_

Dixon-Mueller, Ruth. 1993. _Population Policy and Women's Rights: Transforming
Reproductive Choice_. Westport, CO: Praeger.

Ginsburg, Faye and Rayna Rapp. 1991. The politics of reproduction. _Annual
Review of Anthropology_.

Greenhalgh, Susan. 1994. Controlling births and bodies in village China.
_American Ethnologist_. 21:3-30.

Renteln, Alison D. 1992. Sex selection and reproductive freedom. _Women's
Studies International Forum_. 15:405-427.

[**student reading critiques for week 11**](critiques_week11/)  

**B. Teen Pregnancy _ **Required Reading**_**

Luker, Kristin. 1996. _Dubious Conceptions: The Politics of Teenage
Pregnancy_.

Spain and Bianchi. 1996. _Balancing Act_ , Chapter 1.

Burton, Linda. 1990. "Teenage Childbearing as an Alternative Lifecourse
Strategy in Multigeneration Black Families." _Human Nature_ 1(2): 123-143.

_**Recommended Reading**_

Geronimus, Arline, Sanders Korenman and Marianne Hillemeier. 1994. "Does Young
Maternal Age Adversely Affect Child Development? Evidence from Cousin
Comparisons in the United States." _Population and Development Review._ 20
(September):585-609.

Maynard (ed.) 1996. _Kids Having Kids: A Synthesis of Project Findings._ New
York: The Robin Hood Foundation.

[student reading critiques for week 12](critiques_week12/)  

**Week 12. GENDER AND SCIENCE: TOWARDS A NEW PARADIGM**

This week's readings are intended to put the prior readings in perspective and
to set our own research agendas. In other words, these are readings intended
as food for thought. There has been a lot said on the su bject of gender and
science, the highlights of the readings should be the Keller chapter and the
Nelson and Ferber chapter.

_**Required Reading**_

England, Paula. 1993. The separate self: Androcentric bias in neoclassical
assumptions. Pp37-53 in _Beyond Economic Man_. edited by Ferber and Nelson.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Harding, Sandra. 1991 ".....and race"? Toward the science question in global
feminisms. In _Whose Science? Whose Knowledge?_ _Thinking from_ _Women's_
_Lives._ Ithaca, NY: Cornell U niversity Press. Pp. 191-217.

Keller, Evelyn Fox. 1995. Language and science: Genetics, embryology and the
discourse of gene action. In _Refiguring Life: Metaphors of 20th Century
Biology_. New York: Columbia University Press.

Kusterer, Ken. 1990. The imminent demise of patriarchy. In _Persistent
Inequalities: Women and World Development_. Edited by Tinker. New York: Oxford
University Press. Pp.239-256.

Nelson, Julie A. and Maryanne Ferber. 1993. Introduction: The Social
Construction of Economics and the Social Construction of Gender. In _Beyond
Economic Man_. Edited by Ferber and Nelson. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Solow, Robert. 1993. Feminist theory, women's experience, and economics. Pp
153-157 in _Beyond Economic Man_. edited by Ferber and Nelson. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Sprague, Joey and Mary K. Zimmerman. 1993. "Overcoming Dualisms: A Feminist
Agenda for Sociological Methodology." Pp. 255-280 in England 1993.

_**Recommended Readings**_

Blank, Rebecca. 1993. What should mainstream economists learn from feminist
theory? in _Beyond Economic Man_. edited by Ferber and Nelson. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press. Pp. 133-143.

Nelson, Julie A. 1993. The study of choice or the study of provisioning?
Gender and the definition of economics. In _Beyond Economic Man_. Edited by
Ferber and Nelson. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

[student reading critiques for week 13](critiques_week13/)  

[**_BOOK REVIEWS_**](reviews/)

