Spring 1999  
**INTR 310: Travels to The "Third World"**  
Class Meetings: Wednesdays 6:00 p.m.-9:00 p.m.  
Classroom: 252 Arnold  
Mieko Nishida  
Office hours: MW 10:00 a.m.-11:30 a.m. & TTH 1:10 p.m.-2:10 p.m.  
and by appointment  
Office: 13 Arnold  
Ext. 4839  
E-mail: [nishidam@hartwick.edu](mailto: nishidam@hartwick.edu)

_A good interpretation of anything--a poem, a person, a history, a ritual, an
institution, a society--takes us into the heart of that of which it is the
interpretation._  
Clifford Geertz, _The Interpretation of Cultures_ (1973).

  
  

This seminar focuses on diverse Western writings on the "third world" (Latin
America, Africa, and Asia) at various historical points for four centuries
from the beginning of the sixteenth century to the present. Half of the class
meetings treat themes: the Old World's discovery of the New World; conversion
of the "pagan" population; social anthropology and European colonialism in
Africa; social revolution in the third world; the third world in sports
psychology; and Orientalism/Occidentalism. The rest of the course deals with
specific "Western" authors (Lafcadio Hearn, Katherine Anne Porter, Pearl S.
Buck, and Leila Hadley) and their writings on the third world.

We will pay special attentions to the categories which the author uses to
refer to a specific people, place, or culture as his/her topic. We will also
discuss how such key concepts as Old/New World, West/East (Occident/Orient),
and First/Third World, emerged in the Western terminology in accordance with
certain historical contexts; how the usage of each concept has changed over
time; how the concepts have come to be interrelated with one another; and how
the "third world" has taken labels imposed by the "first world."  


  

* * * * * * * * * * *

**Required Books** (available for purchase at the Hartwick College textbook
bookstore) :

Anthony Pagden, _European Encounters with the New World: From Renaissance to
Romanticism_ (New Haven  & London: Yale University Press, 1993).  
Shusaku Endo, _Silence_ , trans. by William Johnston (New York: Taplinger,
1980 [1969]).  
Alan M. Klein, _Sugarball: The American Game, The Dominican Dream_ (New Haven:
Yale University Press, 1991).  
Lafcadio Hearn, _Kokoro: Hints and Echoes of Japanese Inner Life_ (Boston: CE
Tuttle, 1974 [1896]).  
Peal S. Back, _The Good Earth_ (New York: Pocket Books, 1994 [1931]).  
Leila Hadley, _A Journey with Elsa Cloud_ (New York: Penguin Books, 1997).

All books and articles listed as reading assignments are also reserved at the
Stevens-German Library. * * * * * * * * * * *

**Course Requirements**

**Grades** are based on _class attendance and participation (60%)_ and _the 10
to 15 page research paper (40%)_ focused on a topic strongly related to the
theme of the course. There will be NO examinations.

Careful **reading** of the assigned materials is required and is an essential
part of the course. You are urged to look ahead in the syllabus and to pace
yourselves carefully.

Class **participation** includes _attendance_ ; _participation in class
discussions_ ; and _weekly short reviews--"five-point papers"_ (typed, 1-2
pages) on the reading assignments (see Attachment).

**No make-ups nor extensions** on paper and other writing assignments will be
given. All assignments are due _at the beginning of class_ on the due date.
Late work will NOT be accepted without prior consent; late assignments and
make-up exams will be penalized by a reduction of the grade by _one full grade
point_.

You are expected to **attend every class**. In case of illness and emergency
you have to clear your absence with the instructor ahead of time. Three late
arrivals count as one absence. You will receive an **F** for participation if
you accumulate **_four_** absences.

Students who would like assistance with their writing skills are strongly
encouraged to consult with the Writing Center (Clark Hall 230, Ext 4918).

You are urged to check your **e-mail** on a regular basis for **class
announcements**.

*** * * * * * * * * ***  
**_Course Schedule_**

  
  

_Feb. 17_      **Introduction and Course Organization**  
Movie:      "The Mission" directed by Ronald Joffe (UK, 1986), 125 minutes.

_Feb. 24_      **The Old World's Encounters with the New World**  
Reading:     Pagden, _European Encounters with the New World_ , whole.

_March 3_      **Christianity and Conversion of the "Pagan" Population**  
Reading:     Endo, _Silence_ , whole.

_March 10_     **Social Anthropology and European Colonialism in Africa**  
Readings:     Max Gluckman, "Analysis of a Social Situation in Modern
Zululand," _Bantu_  
                   _Studies_ 14 (1940):1-30, 147-74.   
                    J. C. Mitchell, _The Kalela Dance: Aspects of Social Relationships among urban_   
                   _Africans in Northern Rhodesia_ , Rhodes-Livingstone Paper, no. 27 (Manchester:   
                    Manchester University Press, 1956). 

_March 17_      **Social Revolution in the Third Worl**  
Movie:         "Soy Cuba/Ja Cuba (I am Cuba)" directed by Mikhail Kalatozov
(Soviet  
                    Union/Cuba, 1964). 141 minutes.   


_March 20-28 Spring Break_  


March 31    **The Third World in Sports Psychology**  
Reading:       Klein, _Sugar Ball_ , whole.

_April 7_         **A Travel to Medieval Japan: Time, Space, and Narratives**  
Movie:        "Rashomon" directed by Akira Kurosawa (Japan, 1950). 83 min.

_April 14  _     Guest lecture

_April 21_      **Lafcadio Hearn and Japan**  
Reading:     Hearn, _Kokoro_ , whole.

_April 28_      **Katherine Anne Porter and Mexico**  
Reading:     Katherine Anne Porter, "Maria Concepcion," "Virgin Violetta,"
"Flowering Judas,"  
                  and "Hacienda," in _Flowering Judas and Other Stories_ (San Diego, New York,   
                  London: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Publishers, 1990), pp. 1-41, 121-38, 84-232. 

_May 5_         **Pearl S. Back and China**  
Reading:     Buck, _The Good Earth_ , whole.

_May 12_      **Leila Hadley and India**  
Reading:     Hadley, _A Journey with Elsa Cloud_ , whole.

_May 19_        **Orientalism/Occidentalism**  
Readings:    William B. Taylor, "Mexico as Oriental: Early Thoughts on a
History of American  
                   and British Representations since 1821" (Unpublished paper).   
                   James G. Carrier, "Occidentalism: The World Turned Upside-Down," _American_   
                  _Ethnologist_ 19:2 (May 1992), pp. 195-215. 

                   Concluding Discussion   
    
    

* * * * * * * * * * * * 

**INTR 310: Travels to The "Third World"**  
**_Class Discussion Topics_**

  
  

Who is (was) the author?

Why did he/she go there?

How long did he/she stay here?

In what kind of social scenery and historical context was the text written?

Did the author find the "strange" and/or "unfamiliar" place agreeable or
disagreeable? And why?

How did the author interpret events?

How did the author's cultural bias(es) affect/determine his/her
interpretation(s) of another culture and the "third world"?

Did the author somehow start to develop an insider's view as time went by? If
so, how?

How did the "third world" change the author's self-perceptions and self-
identities?

Did the author's gender, age, or class background matter in his/her
understanding, descriptions, or interpretations?

How did the author identify him/herself? Did his/her identity change over
time?  
    


[Return to Homepage](nishidam.htm)

