Honors Technology and Civilization, Part II Mr. Trimble

History 1227 Spring 2002

0800-0850 e mail: trimbwf@auburn.edu

Web Site: http://www.auburn.edu/~trimbwf  


Textbooks: Lindy Biggs, ed., _Readings in Technology and Civilization_ (2d
ed.) volume 2

William F. Trimble and James R. Hansen, eds., _Readings in Technology and
Civilization_ (2d ed.) volume 3

Richard W. Bulliet, et al., _The Earth and Its Peoples: A Global History_  


This is the second course in a two-semester sequence surveying technology in
history. History 1227 will carry the development of technology from the
beginnings of the Industrial Revolution to the end of the 20th century. The
purpose of the course, and the other in the sequence, will be to expose
students to a variety of perspectives regarding the role of technology in the
development of human culture. This course will explore issues relating to the
shift from craft to machine production, transportation and communication,
power, military technology, computers, medicine, and biotechnology, stressing
the essential links between technological innovation and social, political,
and economic change.

This course has strong discussion and writing components. Students in all HIST
1227 sections will be required to attend a lecture at the beginning of each
week, in which a member of the faculty will present an overview of the topic
for that week. The remaining two class periods will be used for discussion.
Students will have to make sure that they have done the reading before each
class and they must be prepared to discuss various issues and questions raised
by the material they have read.

Please note that the discussion format might mean that we will not necessarily
cover all of the material from the readings each week. Students will still be
responsible for that reading material on the quizzes and exams.

_The Web_ : Each week students will be required to visit the Web sites
indicated in the syllabus. Please note that information from the site will be
incorporated into the quizzes and exams.

_Exams_ : Students will take four quizzes, two hour exams, and a final. The
quizzes will be given during the second, eighth, thirteenth, and fifteenth
weeks. The hour exams will include IDs or objective questions on the reading
material, plus an essay question in which the student will be required to
integrate all of the material covered during the course to that point. The
final exam will be similar to the hour exams, with IDs or objective questions
from the reading material and an essay question requiring the student to
summarize and interpret all the information covered in the course.

_Movie Review_ : Before the end of the third week of classes, you will select
a movie from a list I will provide. At the end of the semester, you will
submit a 5-page typed paper analyzing the movie from the point of view of a
historian of technology. You will follow a standard format for the movie
review and will place the film in the context of key issues and questions in
the history of technology.

_Case Study_ : The case study will be an in-class exercise in which students
will read historical materials concerning the use of the atomic bomb against
Japan at the end of World War II. Students will play actual historical
characters, debate the issues, and make oral presentations of their
recommendations to the president on whether to use and how to use the bomb.
Evaluation and grades will be determined by the accuracy of the character
portrayal, thoroughness of preparation, participation in discussion, and
quality of presentation.

_Quizzes_ : There will be four 15-minute quizzes, based on the readings and
Web sites. They are not cumulative. The first quiz will cover all of the
material from the beginning of the course; the second will cover the material
since the second quiz; and so forth. The hour and final exams will incorporate
questions from the readings much like the quizzes.  


Grades will be calculated by the following formula:

Quizzes 100 points

2 Hour Exams 200 points

Movie Review 75 points

Case Study 75 points

Final exam 150 points

Discussion _50 points_

Total 650 points  


_Attendance_ is mandatory. Attendance will be taken at the lectures and before
each class period (for administrative and record-keeping purposes). Students
are required to write a question on the attendance slip given out at each
Monday lecture. (No, you cannot have a friend do it for you.) Although the
student's attendance record will not be used in directly calculating the
course grade, when there is an instance of "borderline" grade situations,
attendance may be taken into consideration. That is, a student with a strong
attendance record will be more likely to receive the higher grade. Therefore,
I strongly urge all students to attend class.

_Makeups_ : Students with written excuses are permitted to miss _one_ of the
quizzes. Makeup quizzes for these students will be administered on Tuesday,
April 30, at 1630. Students with valid excuses can make up the hour exams,
which will be given at times to be announced during the semester. All students
must take the final exam as scheduled to pass the course.

_Cell Phone Policy:_ All cell phones must be turned off before coming to
class. If a cell phone rings during class, the student will be marked absent
for that day and asked to leave. If a cell phone rings during a quiz or an
exam the quiz or exam will be marked as a zero.

Note: For accepted university policies on attendance, academic honesty, and
other matters, consult pp. 86-96 of the most recent _Tiger Cub_.

Any students needing special accommodations in this class should contact the
Student Disabilities office for appropriate documentation.  


Office hours: Students may consult me in Thach Hall 315. My hours this
semester will be MTWRF , 0900-1000. Prior arrangements must be made to meet
with me outside these hours.  
    
    
  
  

WEEK 1 (Jan. 8-10)  


  
  
  
  
  

Introduction and course requirements; general discussion of where we are and
where we've going

Readings: Bulliet, pp. 573-96

Biggs, chap. 28

Trimble and Hansen, chap. 1  
    
    
  
  

WEEK 2 (Jan. 14-17)  


  
  
  
  
  

The Industrial Revolution; the origins of the machine age and industrial
labor.

Lecture (Mon., Jan. 14): "The Industrial Revolution"

Readings: Bulliet, pp. 599-610

Biggs, intro., Industrial Revolution; chaps. 20-24

The Web: The steam engine. http://128.151.249.33/steam/hart/

Click on: Introduction; Reminiscences of James Watt

_First quiz:_ Tues., Jan. 15  
    
    
  
  

WEEK 3 (Jan. 21-24)  


  
  
  
  
  

Transportation and responses to industrialization.

No Monday lecture (MLK Day)

Readings: Bulliet, pp. 611-19

Biggs, chaps. 25, 26

The Web: John Fitch. http://www.history.rochester.edu/steam/westcott/

Click on: Chap. 10, "The Invention of the Steamboat-Journey to Virginia"

_Movie Choice_ : Thur., Jan. 24  


WEEK 4 (Jan. 28-31)

Big business, the rise of the corporate world, and technological systems.

Lecture (Mon., Jan. 28): "Industrial Life and Technological Systems"

Readings: Bulliet, pp. 636-45, 701-13, 718-21

The Web: Meet Mr. Carnegie: Making Money the Old Fashioned Way.
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/carnegie/sfeature/money.html

Click on the Railroads, Carnegie's Tough Partner, Strike at Homestead Mill,
The Steel Business.  
    
    
  
  

WEEK 5 (Feb. 4-7)  


  
  
  
  
  

Electrification; power and light in the new world of invention.

Lecture (Mon., Feb. 4): "Electrification"

Readings: Biggs, chaps. 27, 29, intro., End of 19th Century, chap. 30

The Web: Thomas Edison. http://www.thomasedison.com/

Click on Biography, Photo Gallery, Inventions, His Greatest Achievement

_First hour exam_ : Thur., Feb. 7 (Bring blue books)  
    
    
  
  

WEEK 6 (Feb. 11-14)  


  
  
  
  
  

Mass production and cultural change

Lecture (Mon., Feb. 11): "Mass Production"

Readings: Biggs, chap 31

Trimble and Hansen, chaps. 2, 3, 8

The Web: The Life of Henry Ford. http://www.hfmgv.org/exhibits/hf/default.asp

Click on Quadricycle and Model T.  


WEEK 7 (Feb. 18-21)

The automobile and American life

Lecture (Mon. Feb. 18): "Automobility"

Readings: Trimble and Hansen, chaps. 4-7

The Web: Critique of the automobile. http://www.gn.apc.org/rts/socid.htm  
    
    
  
  

WEEK 8 (Feb. 25-28)  


  
  
  
  
  

The history of flight

Lecture (Mon. Feb. 25): "Aviation"

Readings: Trimble and Hansen, chap. 9

The Web: Black Wings. http://www.bessiecoleman.com/

Click on Texas Roots, Chicago Dreams, French Skies, American Hopes, Universal
Legacy

The Web: Tuskegee Airmen http://www.afroam.org/history/tusk/tuskmain.html

Click on all links.

_Second quiz_ : Tues., Feb. 26  


WEEK 9 (March 4-7)

Radio, television, and communication for the masses

Lecture (Mon. March 4): "Mass Communications"

Readings: Bulliet, pp. 774-77

Trimble and Hansen, chaps. 10, 11, 12

The Web: Television. http://www.tvhistory.tv/

Click on Pre-1935, 1935-1939, 1940-1949, 1950-1959, 1960-2000  
    
    
  
  

WEEK 10 (March 11-14)  


  
  
  
  
  

The world at war

Lecture (Mon. March 11): "World War I"

Readings: Bulliet, pp. 752-62

Trimble and Hansen, chap. 13

The Web: Life and death on the Western Front.

http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1918fraser.html  
    
    
  
  

WEEK 11 (March 18-21)  


  
  
  
  
  

World War II and aftermath

Lecture (Mon., March 18): "World War II"

Readings: Bulliet, pp. 762-73, 780-803

Trimble and Hansen, chaps. 14-15

The Web: Pearl Harbor. <http://www.ibiscom.com/w2frm.htm>

Click on Attack at Pearl Harbor and Attack at Pearl Harbor-The Japanese View

_Second Hour exam_ : Thur., March 21 (Bring blue books)  


Spring Break (March 25-31)  
    
    
  
  

WEEK 12 (April 1-4)  


  
  
  
  
  

Nuclear energy in peace and war

Lecture (Mon., April 1): "The Nuclear Age"

Readings: Trimble and Hansen, chap. 20

Case Study: The Decision to Drop the Bomb (Materials will be available spring
break.)

The Web: <http://www.dannen.com/decision/index.html>

Click on links that will help you with your role in the case study.  
    
    
  
  

WEEK 13 (April 8-11)  


  
  
  
  
  

Reaching beyond the earth: space and western imagination

Lecture (Mon., April 8): "The Space Age"

Readings: Trimble and Hansen, chaps. 16, 17

The Web: American space missions.
<http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/history/apollo/index.html>

Click on: Project Mercury and Overview; Project Gemini and Overview; Project
Apollo and Apollos 8, 9, 10, 11, and 13.

_Third quiz_ : Tues., April 9  
    
    
  
  

WEEK 14 (April 15-18)  


  
  
  
  
  

The digital revolution and the information age

Lecture (Mon., April 15): "Computers and the Information Age"

Readings: Bulliet, pp. 875-77

Trimble and Hansen, chaps. 18, 19

The Web: Overview of the computer.
http://www.digitalcentury.com/encyclo/update/comp_hd.html.  
    
    
  
  

WEEK 15 (April 22-25)  


  
  
  
  
  

Transforming the world: agriculture, medicine, and biotechnology.

Lecture (Mon., April 22): "Agriculture and Biotechnology"

Readings: Bulliet, p. 832

Trimble and Hansen, chaps. 22-25, 27

The Web: Dangers of the new technology <http://www.emagazine.com/may-
june_1998/0598feat2.html>

_Fourth quiz: Tues., April 23_  


_WEEK 16 (April 29-30)_

_Population, global technology, and the environment_

_Lecture (Mon. April 29): "Technology, Population, and the Environment"_

_Readings: Bulliet, pp. 867-903_

_Trimble and Hansen, chaps. 26, 28_

_The Web: Poor until 1820.
http://www.wsj.com/public/current/articles/SB91576352071526500.htm_

_Click on tables._  


_Movie Reviews Due: Tues., April 30_  


_Final Exam: Tues., May 7, 2:00 P.M._  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


