Seminar: Crisis in Asia



PLS 440, Fall 1998, Creighton University, Meeting M 2:30-5, A431

Dr. Wise, Political Science and International Studies,
[kwise@creighton.edu](mailto:kwise@creighton.edu)

Office Hours MWF 8:30-10, W 1:30-3:30, Rm 428. Ph. 280-2847

(also by appointment and any time Dr. Wise's office door is open)



**

Course Description

**



Economic and political earthquakes in Asia send shock waves across the Pacific
and around the world. What are the challenges to the governments of the
Pacific Rim? How will they mobilize and lead their peoples through this era of
immense change? What are the implications for human rights? How will strategic
relations of China, Taiwan, eastern Russia, Korea, Japan, India, Indonesia,
and regional groupings in Asia affect U.S. interests?



Specialists on Asia and its economic and political challenges differ widely on
the causes, future, and possible responses to the region's current
difficulties. Some observers are pessimistic. They expect war: China with
Japan and the United States (over Taiwan) or with states opening onto the
South China Sea (over exploitation of the Sea's resources); China internally,
falling apart into regional military districts; China with Russia over Russian
interference in China's internal affairs; North Korea with the South;
Indonesia with itself; India with its neighbors (including China and
Pakistan). Korea, shaken by the currency and structural weaknesses, will fall
into the international "basket case" category when North Korea takes down the
demilitarized zone and shows up on Seoul's doorstep. Some pessimists foresee
not only military but economic aggression toward the United States: a China
that leaves Japan in its industrial dust will form a bow wave that washes over
substantial amounts of U.S. trade interests as well. Some see nuclear war,
starting in the Asian subcontinent, spreading to the Middle East and northward
into China.



Optimists peer through the other end of the philosophical looking glass. They
find an Asia gradually recovering from the 1997-99 currency shocks and the
resulting social, political, and military adaptations of their countries'
structures. These changes will occur with cautious cooperation for and in the
twenty-first century. This school of thought sees Asians, despite their public
pronouncements about "The Asian Way," moving steadily to incorporate
international norms of economic and social structure in order to have the
social requisites of democracy and markets. They see growing cooperation
within Asia and between Asia and the eastern side of the Pacific Lake.



This seminar will seek a disciplined review of these challenges and outlooks,
applying them to Asia and the relations of Asia and the United States.
Students will research pertinent social-cultural, economic, and governmental
features of the countries and the issues of the region's mutual relations.





**

OUTLINE

**



Introduction (week one--Aug 31)



Goals, Seminar Plan, Tasks



**

  1. Survey of Country Problems of the Asian Region** (week two--Sep 14)
  2. China (PRC, ROC)

Japan

Koreas

Eastern Russia

Philippines

Indonesia

S.E. Asia

India and neighbors

Others

**

  3. Social-Cultural Settings** (weeks three-four--Sep 21, 28)
  4. Values (including human rights, social order, security, for example)

Self Images (history, aspirations)

Institutions (norms, stability, flexibility)

**

  5. Economic Settings** (weeks five-six--Oct 5, 12; Exam One Oct 5) [Fall Break]
  6. Monetary-Fiscal Problems

Trade Patterns

International Monetary Fund, Bilateral, and Private Involvement

ASEAN, World Trade Organization, and Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation

**

  7. Political Settings (** weeks seven-eight--Oct 26, Nov 2)
  8. Leaders

Consensus and Mobilization

Government Forms

Reforms and Reform Debates

**

  9. Strategic-Military Settings** (weeks nine-ten--Nov 9, 16)
  10. Problems of internal security

Alliances and Collective Security Agreements

Frictions and Tensions: borders, religions, irredentism

Military Modernization plans and progress; WMD proliferation

**

  11. Simulation** (weeks Nov. 23, 30, Dec 7) [Final Exam Wed Dec 16, 8 a.m.]



**

Objectives and Assignments

**



_

Course Objectives

_



To introduce students to

    * The agenda of issues in Asia now affecting the rest of the Pacific Rim 
    * Ways of reasoning about the contexts of these issues: political, economic, social-cultural, military-strategic. 
    * Consider debates on the relative weight of explanations derived from these contexts. 
    * Engaging the mutual interests and the competing interests of the major state actors in this region (such as China, Japan, Korea, India, and the United States). 
    * Framing and researching questions about this crisis (and crises) 
    * Pertinent tools of analysis from comparative government and international studies. 
    * An appreciation of the sources and prospective outcomes of these crises 
    * Ways of finding and testing policy alternatives for state, international governmental, and nongovernmental action. 
    * Criteria for evaluating information and data for projecting probable outcomes, based on the consequences of the various alternatives for the various actors. 
    * Presenting research findings to peers meaningfully, in class and in writing, in the manner expected in political science and international studies. 
    * Integrate new knowledge about the crisis participants' differing cultures and institutions into a larger framework of analysis 
    * Show mastery of course material in two examinations. 
    * Write and deliver in class "briefings" on substantive material about the crises. 
    * Compiling the results of a semester-long inquiry into the wide range of information one needs to analyze such events and ordering these findings in policy-relevant, easily accessible ways. 
    * Active participation in class discussion to probe, critique, and contribute to others' understandings of the crisis. 
  *  

This course introduces students to, and promotes their active participation in
learning about and the sources and nature and projected outcomes of a set of
crises afflicting nearly half of the persons on earth at this time. To seek an
understanding of this crisis students will examine the cultures and histories
of major actors, their differing worldviews and individual and collective
aspirations. For example, at many junctures students will confront competing
notions of what constitute human rights and of what roles of government are
appropriate (or inappropriate) in implementing such rights.



One of the instructor's overriding values is to help students find mutual
interests among international actors--whenever reality and the course subject
matter permit. On human rights or the issue of unification of China, for
example, resolutions of these parts of the overall crisis will be impossible
unless citizens of the United States, and their leaders, can appreciate and
take into account the soundness of Asian views. Unification of China is tied
to the stability of the current government of China and that government is
debating within itself over how much to change political rights, also in
pursuit of stability. The eastern rim of the Pacific tends to believe that
unification of China must take place only by mutual consent; this is also the
publicly expressed will of the major powers of the international community.
Asian actors know that accommodating potentially competing views on human
rights -- more a matter of timing than of ultimate expression -- could
facilitate unification of China. But east rim or world actors' trying to force
the timing to fit a non-Chinese timetable could not only prevent it but deepen
the regional crisis and the global repercussions of that crisis. Students will
have to accept the empirical reality of global interdependence in order to
work out policy options that will permit peaceful change as a way out of the
crisis. They will have to shed any Polaroid lenses that let in only partial
light.



We will examine the structure and operations of a dozen governments of Asia
and the interplay of these structures with economies and cultures. For
example, students will become familiar with why many in Asian countries
respond differently to authoritarianism in many contexts than do citizens of
the United States. This is not to say that students will find Asian citizens
liking authoritarianism but that authoritarianism is the more familiar order
for Asians. Asian citizens also have ways of "working" their system that many
outside observers overlook and, thus, in ignorance, judge inadequately.



Students will integrate findings of several social sciences. A lasting benefit
can be that to the extent that students become comfortable with this
integrating they will begin using them on the United States (or their home
country). They will, by comparing the United States to each country they
study, grow increasingly aware of parts of life in the United States they had
not noticed or had seen only dimly.



This course focuses on problems and issues of global/international scope as
well as on systems to deal with such problems. The problems of international
commerce, human rights, political stability, development-environment trade-
offs, war, religious institutions' contention, and civil disorder all are on
the global agenda and affect the relations of states throughout the world. In
this course students will become more familiar with a number of
intergovernmental organizations such as the World Trade Organization, the UN's
International Monetary Fund, and the regional association of ASEAN
(Association of Southeast Asian Nations) and so on that can help states ease
out of the crisis. Students will confront the pluses and minuses of such
organizations through the eyes of Asian countries and capital-providing
countries alike.



_

Readings_ :



Students will receive specific assignments in academic journal materials such
as those in the attached bibliography. Readings will include numerous internet
and web locations. The journal literature and a short series of instructor
lectures and email coaching will provide a theoretical framework for the
course. Students will use this framework for approaching, reading, and
extracting what they need from the up-to-date net and web materials.



Inoguchi and Stillman, eds. _North-East Asian Regional Security: The Role of
International Institutions.

_

McDougall, _The International Politics of the New Asia Pacific.

_

Vogel, ed. _Living with China: U.S.-China Relations in the Twenty-first
Century.

__

Class and Written Presentations_ :



Students will use these sources to prepare their _briefing assignments_. These
briefings will have rather rigid format requirements for several reasons:
policy relevance (no "term papers"); living "within the rules" that do those
who make policy in national capitals and corporations; learning to write
tight, effective prose. Each student will converse via _email_ with fellow
class members and the instructor, will prepare _two essay examinations_ , and
will prepare multiple _briefing papers_ and a _briefing book_ of substantial
length. Throughout the semester the instructor will expect students to engage
each other via email between class meetings. Students who will be responsible
to deliver briefings (to generate discussion) will place certain parts of the
briefing documents on the class email site _before_ conducting the briefing in
class and will place a _full outline_ of the briefing in the email within a
week after having conducted said briefing.



The briefing mode is one that students will need to be proficient in for group
decision making that is common today. The mode is akin to "executive
presentations" that major corporations use. Finally, each student will package
his or her own briefings, together with statements he or she draws from
others' briefings, together with other writing assignments from the instructor
to bridge the gaps between briefings, in a single, well-ordered _briefing
book_ (or file). In effect, each student in this course will compile a book
that could serve as a set of teaching materials whereby the student could run
a short course not unlike this seminar.



_

Briefings, Briefing Papers, Briefing Book_.



Each student will prepare and present in class at least five briefing papers:

    1. one on a selected country in session two and 
    2. one for each of four settings segments of the course: social-cultural, economic, political, strategic-military. 



Each student will throughout the semester cumulate, organize, and turn in at
the course conclusion a file of briefing papers and other documents in the
form of _a briefing book_. This book will have _background papers_ on each of
the four settings for each of the region's major countries, _surveys_ of the
functional issues such as trade and development and military strategy, and a
set of _policy recommendations_ for the United States for dealing with the
region.



_

Examinations_ : This course will have a _midterm_ and a _final_ examination.
(See course outline for dates.) Please bring bluebooks.



_

Simulation_ : Each student will prepare to play a country or international
organization officer role in the last quarter of the semester. The design of
the simulation and exact definition of roles will depend on the number of
students who enroll and their backgrounds and interests--as well as the
international situation at that point in the semester.



_

Grading

_



25% Class participation (prepared, on point)

10% Midterm exam

20% Final exam

10% Briefings (in class each week)

10% Briefing Papers on time (before each class; revise for midterm and final)

15% Briefing Book (end of course, before final examination)

10% Simulation (preparing and implementing)



NOTE: Dr. Wise will award an "I" (Incomplete) for the course only if the
student secures from Creighton College, fills out, and submits to him in
timely fashion the proper form for filing an Incomplete. Do NOT assume that
unfinished work means an automatic "Incomplete" grade; it does not. A student
should ask Dr. Wise to put in writing any extension or variance he makes in
requirements. Dr. Wise will turn in final grades as early as 24 hours after
the last date the class schedule indicates an assignment is due. Hence
anything you turn in after the deadline risks receiving a zero grade (F).



**

Class Conduct and Attendance Policy

**



Because this course will be in a seminar format, each student's participation
will be vital to all classmates' learning. Thus any student's absence will
limit others' success. Any student missing a class meeting will owe his or her
classmates a set of remarks (via email) that he or she would have contributed
in class.



Throughout the semester the instructor will expect students to engage each
other via email between class meetings. Presenters will place certain parts of
the briefing documents on the class email site before conducting the briefing
in class and a full outline of the briefing within a week after having
conducted said briefing.



_

Academic Honesty_. Because to meet course requirements students will have to
work with "facts" and "views" in unique ways, ways that will require both
creativity and discipline, the opportunity for a student's improving a grade
by plagiarizing is minimal. However, except when the instructor specifically
gives an assignment with an instruction to the contrary, the instructor
expects students to work independently. Students turning in the same work will
lose credit for that assignment. Do your own work. Pay your intellectual debts
appropriately. Know what plagiarism is and do not plagiarize. Do not invent
sources. A student will not receive credit for any assignment containing
plagiarism or dishonest citations and will NOT have a chance to re-do the
work. If a student persists in violating this rule Dr. Wise will refer the
case to the CCAS Committee on Academic Policy. The student's route of appeal
is to Dr. Wise, Dr. Wunsch (chair of the Department of Political Science and
International Studies), and the CCAS Committee on Academic Policy.



**

Bibliography (Preliminary; watch for email updates)

**



_

Books

_



Bernstein, Richard and Ross H. Munro. The Coming Conflict with China. Knopf.
1997.



Faust, John R. and Judith F. Kornberg. Lynne Rienner, 1995.



Itoh, Fumio, ed. China in the Twenty-First Century: Politics, Economy, and
Society. United Nations University Press, 1997.



Leng, Tse-Kang. The Taiwan-China Connection: Democracy and Development Across
the Taiwan Straits. Westview, 1996.



Lieberthal, Kenneth. Governing China: From Revolution Through Reform. Norton,
1995.



Metzger, Thomas A. and Ramon H. Myers, eds. Greater China and U.S. Foreign
Policy: The Choice Between Confrontation and Mutual Respect. Hoover
Institution Press. 1996



Starr, John Bryan. Understanding China: A Guide to China's Economy, History,
and Political Structure.



Taylor, Chris, et al. China: A Lonely Planet Travel Survival Kit. Lonely
Planet Publications, 1996 (or later edition if available).



United States Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence.
China's Economy in 1995-97. APLA 97-10008, December 1997.



See U.S.Army Country Handbook Series.



_

Periodicals

_





Betts, Richard K. "Wealth, Power, and Instability: East Asia and the United
States After the Cold War," International Security, Winter 1993-94, 34-77.



Bhagwati, Jagdish. "The Capital Myth," Foreign Affairs, May/June 1998, 7-12.



Bouton, Marshall M. "India's Problem Is Not Politics," Foreign Affairs,
May/June 1998, 80-93.



Ching, Frank. "Misreading Hong Kong," Foreign Affairs, May/June 1997, 53-66.



Emmerson, Donald K. "Americanizing Asia?" Foreign Affairs, May/June 1998,
46-56.



Ezrati, Milton. "Japan's Aging Economics," Foreign Affairs, May/June 1997,
96-104.



Goldstein, Melvyn C. "The Dalai Lama's Dilemma," Foreign Affairs,
January/February 1998, 83-97.



Halloran, Richard. "The Rising East," Foreign Policy, Spring 1996, 3-21.



Koppel, Bruce. "Fixing the Other Asia," Foreign Affairs, January/February
1998, 98-110.



Li Shenzhi. "Globalization and Chinese Culture," American Studies in China.
1995, 7-23.



Lincoln, Edward J. "Japan's Financial Mess," Foreign Affairs, May/June 1998,
57-66.



Mandelbaum, Michael. "Westerning Russia and China," Foreign Affairs, May/June
1997, 80-95.



Pei, Minxin. "Is China Democratizing," Foreign Affairs, January/February
1998,68-82.



Ross, Robert. "Enter the Dragon," Foreign Policy, Fall 1996, 18-26.



Wang Yizhou. "The Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation," American Studies in
China. 1995, 40-66.



Wang, Jiaji. "The Return of Hong Kong--An Example of Peceful Settlement of
International Disputes," International Strategic Studies, CIISS, July 1997,
6-13.



Yergin, Daniel, Dennis Eklof, and Jefferson Edwards, "Fueling Asia's
Recovery," Foreign Affairs, March/April 1998, 34-50.



Zhu Shanli. "The Internal Economic Factors Acting Upon China's Relationship
with the United States," American Studies in China, 1996, 37-62.





