![](../../../graphics/banners/reg_temp2.gif)  
![](../page-banner-aci.gif)  
  
**Winter 2000**  
  
This information effective for Winter 2000.  
Check with instructor the first day of class for any changes..  

#

* * *

Politics

#### [POLI-071-01] [POLI-080X-01] [POLI-100-01] [POLI-140B-01] [POLI-142-01]

##

* * *

Politics 71: Politics of Human Rights

Instructor: Isebill V. Gruhn

What are human rights? Where do they come from? In what laws, institutions and
practices are human rights embedded? We will first consider the philosophic,
historical and legal context of human rights and read International Human
Rights by Jack Donnelly. We will then move on to empirical case studies on
selected human rights issues to see how the issues arise, how they are framed
by international actors and what policies are being pursued. What happens if a
right is violated? What consequences do violations have? What policies to
address violations have been undertaken.



### Readings in this section include:

Philip Gourevitch, We Wish to Inform You That Tomorrow We Will be Killed With
Our Families: Stories from Rwanda

Jonathan Moore, Hard Choices Moral Dilemmas in Humanitarian Intervention

Alex De Waal, Famine Crimes: Politics and the Disaster Relief Industry in
Africa

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, The State of the
World Refugees



### Course requirements include:

Regular attendance in lecture classes and discussion sections. Daily reading
of the New York Times. Four take-home writing assignments

[top of page]

##

* * *

Politics 80X: Politics of the Internet

Bruce D. Larkin

Winter 2000

For information on this course, please go to:

<http://www.learnworld.com/COURSES/P80X/P80X.Syllabus.html>



[top of page]

##

* * *

Politics 100: Is Global Justice Possible?

Instructor: Ronnie Lipschutz  
459-3275  
260 Stevenson College

Winter 2000

This junior politics seminar addresses the problem of justice in a global
context, and why contemporary practice in international politics is so ill-
suited to dealing with the problem. Students will read a selection of novels
and texts, and will be required to write a number of short papers on readings
and in-class discussions.

[top of page]

##

* * *

Politics 140B: POLITICAL CHANGE IN THE THIRD WORLD

George Von der Muhll

Winter 2000

tel: 427-0346  
email: [mozart@cats.ucsc.edu](mailto:mozart@cats.ucsc.edu)

Politics 140B has been designated as suitable for meeting the Upper Division
Core Course distribution requirement for Politics majors. It has no
prerequisites. Those who seek to meet the general Social Sciences distribution
requirement for the campus or the Politics Department's Lower Division
requirement through a course in comparative politics should consider, among
others, Politics 50 ("Democratic Politics", a course combining discussion of
general issues of democratic theory and moral principles with comparative
institutional analysis of parliamentary and presidential democratic regimes in
their traditional homelands of America and Western Europe and their breakdown
and emergence in Eastern Europe, Latin America, and South and East Asia),
which I shall offer in the first Summer School. Although, at the request of
the Politics Department, I agreed to come back to teach these courses one last
time, neither will be taught in its present format after this coming year.

Since I am leaving at the beginning of October for Tibet, a trek in the
Nepalese Himalayas, Burma, and Cambodia, I will be altogether out of reach of
e-mail or phone calls until December and unable to answer questions about the
course until then. For that reason, I shall describe the course in greater
than usual detail.

As its title suggests, Politics 140B offers a broad overview of the dynamics
of change in political systems extending from Latin America across sub-
tropical Africa and the Middle East to the Asian Far East. Nearly 80% of
humanity currently lives within this zone. That percentage is certain to
increase sharply within a few decades. Most of the battles of the Cold War
were fought by proxy in the Third World. Most of the social conflicts and
political upheavals in the post-Cold War world have likewised occurred there.
By all indications, this pattern will extend well into the next century.

Students of politics have therefore strong reason to familiarize themselves
with the politics of the Third World. Yet most American citizens, tourists,
media outlets, and politicians show little familiarity with "Third" World
societies beyond a few highly selective aspects of their cultures. They
likewise show little disposition to move beyond these stereotypes except
during brief periods when the American military becomes drawn into Third World
conflicts. If anything, survey evidence suggests that much of the Third World
is now less well known to the American public than it was some thirty or forty
years ago. This indifference persists despite the fact that this region
encompasses the sites of nearly all the great civilizations of the past, much
of the world's most remarkable architecture, all of its great religions. Its
peoples have experimented with the full range of political regimes in this
century; and its ecological, economic, and ethnic identity crises promise to
set the agenda for much of the next. Amid general levels of squalor and misery
most Americans most fortunately cannot imagine, some sectors of the Third
World have experienced an almost equally unimaginable surge of sudden wealth;
and communal tensions, radical inequalities, and civic violence have not
precluded the rise in their midst of some of the most shining political
leaders of this century.

The extraordinary variety of topographies, climates, ethnicities, languages,
religions, social structures, and political traditions within the Third World
makes generalizations concerning its politics inherently suspect. And this
problem is compounded by an extreme instability of Third World political
regimes such as render cross-sectional descriptions of many of its
contemporary governments of little validity beyond the year in which they are
offered. The very features that make the Third World of exceptional value as a
laboratory for students of comparative politics thus create special challenges
in an introductory presentation.

This course will attempt to overcome these problems in four ways. Since it
does not presuppose familiarity with or previous courses on the region, I
shall make extensive use of my own slides and those of the World History
collection to provide a visual context for the readings. I shall also
concentrate on certain "core" nations in each region--China and Japan in the
Asian Far East; India in South Asia; Turkey, Iran, Iraq, and Saudi Arabia in
the Middle East; Nigeria and Tanzania in Africa; Brazil and Mexico in Latin
America--so as to permit an adequately complex tracing of the intertwining
ecological constraints, cultural traditions, patterns of economic growth,
religious values, leadership strata, and contrasting encounters with the West
that together have shaped these countries' differing degrees of political
stability and their differing political agendas. Systematic comparison--most
often, as the above list may suggest, paired comparisons and eventual
triangulations--will be used as controls on explanations that may appear to
fit individual cases. They will also be used to generate new or reformulated
propositions to try out in the next case. Finally, since this course focuses
on societal change, institutional development, and the search for a viable
political community in contexts where military coups, regime collapse, and
revolutionary reorientations are not exceptional events but the norm, it will
freely employ long-term perspectives to identify persisting parameters and
profoundly conditioning historical memories amid the often quite evanescent
state structures and policies that happen to characterize these countries'
governments in any particular year.

The reading for this course has been chosen in light of these ends. Samuel
Huntington's Political Order in Changing Societies , with its explicit focus
on the problems of constructing stable and effective governments in deeply
divided societies in which the traditional foundations of social order have
begun to shift, has long been recognized as the single most comprehensive,
provocative, and analytically ambitious text in the field,. We shall use and
criticize it in this course to develop an agenda of questions. Thereafter, we
shall be looking at the cases listed above, always with emphasis on the
formation and disintegration of political authority and community. However, we
shall do so at three levels. In a course in comparative politics, it is
appropriate to focus on the problems of constructing and maintaining
collectively binding authority at the level of what are still the fundamental
building blocks of international order--the nation states. We shall therefore
begin with politically sophisticated histories by John K. Fairbank and Kenneth
Pyle that emphasize the distinctive challenges of modernization and the
contrasting responses thereto by the Chinese and Japanese imperial regimes and
their successors. Thereafter, we shall make use of several explicitly
comparative country studies in a collective volume edited by Larry Diamond et.
al., The Politics of Developing Countries.

Concurrently, however, we shall be traveling with prize-winning reporter
Robert D. Kaplan, whose The Ends of the Earth documents a world of the 1990s
extending from West Africa through Anatolia, Central Asia, India, and Indo-
China in which exploding populations, decaying public facilities, pervasive
corruption, pullulating diseases, communal violence, and a collapsing public
authority of road blocks and armed gangs suggest the unreality of national
boundaries and capital cities in this region as symbols of political
community. While Kaplan, from his position at the grass roots, sees anarchy--
or at least the parcelized sovereignty of neo-feudalism--as the coming
political disorder of the Third World, Samuel Huntington, whose theses in his
recent Clash of Civilizations I found discussed in Riyadh, Tokyo, Prague,
Shanghai, and Buenos Aires, now argues in that book that in the post-Cold-War
era national authorities are becoming consolidated and polarized around the
"core" states of eight civilizational blocs. Searching for possible
reconciliation of these conflicting theses concerning the critical tiers of
public authority in the Third World will provide the final organizing focus of
this course.

In addition to attending the three scheduled M-W-F lectures a week, members of
Politics 140B will be expected to participate regularly and actively in a
weekly discussion section. The T.A. will be Hilde Becker, a graduate student
in History with many years of residence in China and Japan, though another
T.A. will be added if, as in past years, the enrollment after the opening
class exceeds 60 students. Written requirements for the class will consist of
an introductory exercise and mid-term and final take-home examination essays.
Because I am ending my regular (and happy) teaching association with the
Politics Department with this course and expect to be frequently out of town
for prolonged periods thereafter, you would be unwise to take this course if
you have a past history of failing to complete the required work for a course
within the time frame of the Quarter in which it is offered.

[top of page]

##

* * *

Politics 142: Russian Politics

Winter, 1999

Instructor: Michael Urban

e-mail: [urban47@cats](mailto:urban47@cats.ucsc.edu)  
tel. 3153  
office hours: M., W., 2:00-3:30, 282 Stevenson



### Course Content and Objectives:

This course concerns a young nation-state that has emerged from a very old
culture and civilization-Russia. Accordingly, the approach taken here includes
the study of past patterns of political practices and state organization-both
tsarist and Soviet-that represent antecedents of, and profound influences
upon, Russian politics today. But the emphasis falls on the present, on the
interaction among the country's political forces whose residues seem slowly to
accrete to a recognizable-if not especially stable-governmental/political
order.

Naturally, the texts selected for the course reflect this approach to the
subject matter. That by Urban (with Igrunov and Mitrokhin) focuses on popular
mobilization, beginning in the perestroika period, that succeeded in toppling
the Communist regime. It argues that the forms of organization and
communication exhibited by the popular forces, while adequate to that task,
have been particularly ill-suited to achieving their other announced goals: a
democratic government based on the rule of law. Ries's book contributes to an
understanding of that disappointing outcome through an analysis of cultural
forms that seem to sustain a number of self-defeating social and political
practices. McAuley's study enlarges this frame by taking up the matter of
regional politics during the transition period and examining how contests for
power between old and new elites have been shaped by a number of issues-
identity and interest formulation, organization and resource deployment, and
state building -that are fundamental to politics anywhere. The articles from
Current History, along with others available at the reserve reading desk, take
the story of Russia's difficult and worsening situation into the present.

The progression of lecture topics and reading assignments is primarily
oriented toward a chronological treatment but, in order to develop various
aspects of certain topics, a number of departures from the strictly
chronological scheme are unavoidable. It is therefore highly recommended that
the books by Urban, McAuley and Ries be read soon and straight through,
relying on the pagination appended to the various topics (below) for the
purpose of review before lecture sessions.

Course requirements include sitting for two examinations -a mid-term and a
final -and writing a term paper (10-15 pages in length) on a topic selected by
the student and approved by the instructor. The paper is due on the final day
of class, but each student is strongly encouraged to submit a draft of his or
her work at least two weeks prior to that date. This will enable the
instructor to comment on the work in progress and, assumedly, assist in the
production of a final draft which would benefit from revisions inspired by
these comments.



### Texts:

Michael Urban with Vyacheslav Igrunov and Sergei Mitrokhin, The Rebirth of
Political in Russia, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997).

Mary McAuley, Russia's Politics of Uncertainty (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1997).

Nancy Ries, Russian Talk (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1997).

Current History , Vol.97 (October, 1998).

Johnson's Russia List.

There is an additional number of readings listed under the topics, below, that
are available at the reserve desk in the library. Those marked with an
asterisk are also part of the course's required reading. Those marked with two
asterisks are recommended.



### Topics and Readings:

#### 1\. Russian National Identity and Political Culture.

*a. Stephen White, "The USSR: Patterns of Autocracy and Industrialism", A. Brown (ed.), Political Culture and Political Change in Communist States (New York: Holmes & Meter, 1977).

**b. V. Podoprigora and Tatiana Krasnopevtseva, "Russian... in Domestic and
Foreign Policy", Demokratizatsiya, Vol.3 (Spring, 1995), pp.166-176.

*c. Iu.M. Lotman and B.A. Uspenskii, "Binary Models in the Dynamics of Russian Culture" (handout).

**d. Mary McAuley, Soviet Politics. 1917-1991, pp.1-25.



#### 2\. Origins and Development of the Soviet State.

*a. Moshe Lewin, "The Immediate Background of Soviet Collectivization", Soviet Studies,

Vol.17 (no.2,1965).

*b. J. Arch Getty, "Party and Purge in Smolensk: 1933-1937", Slavic Review, Vol.42,

Spring, 1983).

**c. McAuley, Soviet Politics, pp.26-47.



#### 3.The Political Economy of Soviet Socialism.

*a. Hillel Ticktin, Origins of the Crisis in the USSR, pp.6-79.

b. Urban, pp.3-55.

c. McAuley, pp.13-20.



#### 4\. Perestroika and Glasnost.

a. Urban, pp.57-118.

b. MeAuley, pp. 20-27.

C. Ries, pp.1-82.



#### 5\. Crisis.

a.McAuley, pp.27-37.

*b. Michael Burawoy and Kathryn Hendley, "Between Perestroika and Privatization'9, Soviet Studies, Vol.44 (No.3, 1992), pp. 371-402.

*C. Michael Eliman and Vladimir Kontorovich, The Destruction of the Soviet Economic System, pp.12-29.



#### 6\. Democratization and Popular Mobilization.

a. Urban, pp. 119-233.

*b. Alexander Lukin, "Interpretations of Soviet State and Social Structure", Demokratizatsiya, Vol.3 (Fall, 1995), pp. 365-391.

c. McAuley, pp. 27-37.



#### 7\. Revolution and Disintegration.

a. Urban, pp. 234-254.

b. McAuley, pp. 37-41.

c. Ries, pp.83-160.



#### 8\. Regional Politics

a. McAuley, pp. 42-231.



#### 9\. Transition, Transformation and Tragedy.

a. Urban, pp.257-290.

b. McAuley. pp. 232-263.

c. Ries, pp. 161-188.



#### 10\. Outlines of a New Russia?

_Politics:_

a. Urban, pp. 291-310.

b. McAuley, pp. 264-316.

c. Articles by McFaul and Rutland in Current History, pp. 307-318.

**d. Maryanne Ozernoy and Tatiana Samsonova, "Political History of Russian
Bureaucracy and Roots of Its Power", Demokratizatsiya, Vol.3 (Summer, 1995),
pp. 275-284.

_Economics:_

a. Articles by Goldman, Kramer, and Powell, in Current History, pp.319-324;
329-341.

*b. Clifford Gaddy and Barry Ickes, "Russia's Virtual Economy". Foreign Affairs, Vol.77 (No. 5,1998), pp.53-67.

_Social Groups:_

*a. Anna Rotkirch and Anna Temidna, "What Does the (Russian) Woman Want'?", A Rotkirch and E. Haavio-Mannila (eds.), Women's Voices in Russia Today (Brookfield, VT: Dartmouth, 1995), pp.49-68.

*b. Matt Taibbi, "Coal Fires Burning", Transitions, Vol.5 (Aug.1998).

**c. idem, "Down and Out in Moscow", Transitions, Vol.5 (Nov., 1998).

**d. Illarion Sergeev, "Surviving the Russian Apocalypse", Transitions, Vol.5
(Oct., 1998).

_The Army_

a. Herspring in Current History, pp. 325-328.

**b. Victor Kalashnikov, "Discharge of the Light Brigade", Transitions, Vol.5
(Nov., 1998).



[top of page]

* * *



