International Futures: Example Syllabus

Go to [[International Futures](../ifs.html)][[Syllabi](../syllab.html)]

SCCC 3340 - 501

Proseminar: INTERNATIONAL FUTURES  
  
Professor Harvey Starr

Dep't of Government and Int'l Studies

Gambrell 432

University of South Carolina

777-7292; e-mail: starr@garnet.cla.sc.edu  
Fall 1997

Office Hours: Mon/Wed 2:00-3:30 pm and by appointment  

**_COURSE DESCRIPTION AND OVERVIEW_**  

The contemporary international system poses a complex array of political,
economic, ecological and strategic problems and puzzles. One way to approach
these complex issues, and the questions "What can be done?" or "What must be
done?" is to deal with the future through such endeavors as forecasting,
projections, and futurology. We also must recognize that the present world
system is only one outcome in a vast variety of possible world systems, and
that we must begin to consider a broad range of alternatives. To study about
world order is to study about (alternative) international futures. But, as
Barry Hughes points out, to study the future is to be concerned with _choices_
, choices which must be made under conditions of uncertainty: "We cannot know
the future, but it is important to act in the face of that uncertainty" (
_International Futures_ , p.2). Hughes presents us with three questions to
help deal with that uncertainty: "where do current changes appear to be taking
us? ...what kind of future would we prefer? ...how much leverage do we have to
bring about the future we prefer?" (p.2). These questions will help to anchor
the course and the simulation which is at its core.  

This course is organized to introduce students to a range of ways by which
analysts have tried to think about and study the future. We will deal with
general overviews, categorizations, and critiques of futurology. In addition
to Hughes' _International Futures_ two other texts will be used in this part
of the course: Barry Hughes, _World Futures: A Critical Analysis of
Alternatives_ (1985), and Allan Goodman, _A Brief History of the Future_
(1993). We will then move on to the set of contemporary problems (the
"problematique") and future alternatives, applying futures concepts and
approaches to contemporary issue areas: economics; population/food;
environment/technology; and nuclear/strategic issues. These problem areas thus
reflect the politics of exchange and distribution in energy and raw materials,
food, and technology, the politics affecting labor (population) and capital
(investment, aid, debt), and the politics of global security, armaments and
war.  

We will explore the interdependencies and trade-offs among these issues
through the use of computer simulation. The central text around which the
course will be structured is Barry Hughes, _International Futures_ (1996). In
Hughes' words (p.xiii):  "This book will immerse you in thinking about global
futures. It is not a book for passive readers... it asks you to participate in
the development of your own understanding and vision. The book involves you in
investigating the future in two ways. The first is via traditional
text...through the extrapolation of trends and through causal understanding of
the world... The second method, which will involve you even more actively in
exploration of the future, is a computer simulation model called International
Futures (IFs). IFs is a global model that simulates population, food, energy,
environmental, economic, and political developments from a base year of 1992,
allowing forecasts extending as far into the future as the year 2050." The
central activity of the course will be the analysis of current trends and
future scenarios through IFs.  
  

**_STUDENT REQUIREMENTS_**  

__Participation__

There are two keys to the nature of this course. First, this course is listed
as a _proseminar_. As such, your participation in class discussions, class
presentations, and class activities related to mastery of the simulation, is
vital. You _must_ be present to participate. You _must_ do the reading in
order to participate. All reading assignments are to be considered an
essential part of the course requirements. There is a relatively light reading
load for an upper level seminar. Students will be expected to have completed
the relevant reading assignment before coming to class. Students will also be
expected to discuss that reading with some degree of thought and coherency.
Class Participation (the quantity and quality of participation in class
discussion which includes mastery of reading assignments; the completion and
quality of class presentations) will comprise 35% of the course grade. Each
student must see the instructor during the week preceding Fall Break (October
6-10) for an interim evaluation of class participation.  

__Written Assignments__  

The second key is the IFs simulation. It is the basis (or objective) for all
of the course papers-- exercises and final projects-- and course
presentations.  

\-- Basic _IFs_ Exercises; Parameter and Variable Reports; Scenario Designs
(25% of grade)

\-- International Futures Scenario Final Project (40% of grade)  
  

__Course Reading__  

Books required for purchase (all paperback):

Allan Goodman, _A Brief History of the Future_ (Boulder: Westview, 1993)

Barry Hughes, _World Futures: A Critical Analysis of Alternatives_ (Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins, 1985)

Barry Hughes, _International Futures_ , 2nd edition (Boulder: Westview, 1996)  

Additional readings will be distributed in class or placed on reserve at
Thomas Cooper Library.  

All of the reading listed on the syllabus is _required_ reading (see above).
Students wishing to pursue any topic in more detail should speak to the
instructor.  
  

**_COURSE OUTLINE AND READING ASSIGNMENTS_**  
  
  
  

Course Introduction/Organization (Aug.22))  

**PART I THE _STUDY_ OF THE FUTURE **  

1\. The Future (Aug.25, 27)

_Required Reading_

Max Singer, "What is Happening in History," P.S., March 1997 [on Reserve]

Hughes, INTERNATIONAL FUTURES, ch.1

Hughes, WORLD FUTURES, ch.1

Goodman, A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FUTURE, chs.1, 2  

_Suggested_

Edward Cornish, THE STUDY OF THE FUTURE, chs.4-7 [on Reserve]  

[ **Note:** August 29: Session in Liberal Arts Computing Lab]  
  

2\. Overview of Futures Studies (Sept.3, 5)

_Required Reading_

Hughes, WORLD FUTURES, chs.2, 3, 10, 11

Sam Cole, "The Global Futures Debate, 1965-1976," in Richrd Falk, Samuel Kim,
and Saul Mendlovitz, eds., TOWARD A JUST WORLD ORDER [on reserve]  

_Suggested_

Cornish, THE STUDY OF THE FUTURE, chs.9, 10 [on Reserve]  
  
  

**PART II SIMULATING THE FUTURE**  

1\. The Basics of _IFs_ (Sept.8, 10, 12)

_Required Reading_

Hughes, INTERNATIONAL FUTURES, chs.2, 3, 8  

2\. Variables, Parameters, and **Basic IFs Exercises** (Sept.15, 17, 19)

_Required Reading_

_IFs_ "Variables" and "Parameter Listings" from both the 1st and 2nd editions;
2nd edition handout, 1st edition on Reserve. See also _IFs_ Simulation HELP
Menu.

"Exercises From Other Courses" Folder [on Reserve]  

**_Note:_** You should start reading Goodman, A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FUTURE  
  

**PART III THE GLOBAL PROBLEMATIQUE: ISSUES, FACTORS, RELATIONSHIPS**  

1\. Overview (Sept.22, 24, 26)

_Required Reading_

Hughes, INTERNATIONAL FUTURES, ch.4 (review ch.2)

_IFs_ HELP Menu,  "Model Detail"

Hughes, WORLD FUTURES, ch.8

Goodman, A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FUTURE, chs.4, 7  

2\. Population (Sept.29, Oct.1, 3)

_Required Reading_

Hughes, INTERNATIONAL FUTURES, ch.5 (population-related sections)

Hughes, WORLD FUTURES, ch.4  

3\. Food and Agriculture (Oct.6, 8, 10)

_Required Reading_

Hughes, INTERNATIONAL FUTURES, ch.5 (food-related sections)

Hughes, WORLD FUTURES, ch.7  

4\. Energy and the Environment (Oct.15, 17, 20)

_Required Reading_

Hughes, INTERNATIONAL FUTURES, ch.5 (energy and environment-related sections)

Hughes, WORLD FUTURES, chs.6, 9  

5\. Economics (Oct.22, 24, 27, 29, 31)

_Required Reading_

Hughes, INTERNATIONAL FUTURES, ch.6

Hughes, WORLD FUTURES, ch.5

Goodman, A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FUTURE, ch.5  

6\. Security and Peace (Nov.3, 5, 7)

_Required Reading_

Hughes, INTERNATIONAL FUTURES, ch.7

Goodman, A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FUTURE, chs.3, 6, 8  
  
  

**PART IV SCENARIOS OF CHANGE**  

1\. Theory, Models and Hypotheses: Creating Scenarios (Nov.10, 12, 14, 17, 19,
21)

\-- student reports; discussions and critiques of Scenario Designs  

2\. Changing the Future: Scenarios Choices and Outcomes (Dec.1, 3, 5)

\-- student reports; discussions and critiques of International Futures
Scenario Final Project papers

**PAPER DESCRIPTIONS**  
  
  

**Basic _IFs_ Exercises**

The first topic in Part II of the course (September 8-12) introduces students
to the basic components and capabilities of the _IFs_ simulation. A set of
exercises indicating that students have achieved some familiarity with the
basic components and procedures involved in the simulation will be submitted
when the class begins the second section of Part II (September 15-19). The
exercises will be graded simply pass/fail, and will be **due in class on
September 15**. Exercises **A** , **B** , and **C** are from courses developed
by other faculty who have used _IFs_.  

\-- Do the exercises presented in the assignment labeled **A**.

\-- In addition, select any single country/region. For that selection choose
up to three different variables. For each variable produce a table, line
graph, and bar chart. What do these materials tell us about the country/region
from 1992 to 2050? Select two of the variables and look at them together (you
can now use pie charts as well). How do they relate to each other across the
1992-2050 period?

\-- Select three different countries/regions and compare them on two different
variables (now adding the use of scatter plots).

\-- Do the exercises presented in the assignment labeled **B**.

\-- Do the exercises presented in the assignment labeled **C**.  
  

**Parameter and Variable Reports**

As noted in the **Variables and Parameter Listing** handout (generated from
the _IFs_ HELP Menu), there are 68 parameters used in the simulation. During
the week of September 15 we will discuss the nature and role of these
parameters. Earlier in the semester we will divide the parameters equally
among class members. For each parameter you will produce a paragraph or two
that goes beyond the brief description provided in the handout, explaining
_what_ the parameter is, which variables it is most closely related to, and
how it might be important to the simulation. Students will be responsible for
presenting their material on the parameters in class during that week. **Two
copies** of the written Parameter and Variable Reports will be **due in class
on September 22**. The instructor will place one copy of each report on
Reserve.  
  

**Scenario Designs**

These papers (six double spaced pages maximum length) will be **due class on
November 10**. They are described below in the discussion of the International
Futures Scenario Final Project.  
  
  

**NOTE:** These three activities will combine to account for 25% of the course
grade.

**PAPER DESCRIPTION**

**International Futures Scenario Final Project** (40% of grade)  
  
  

The central activity of the course is the preparation (and presentation) of
the International Futures Scenario Final Project. This project requires you to
find some aspect of the global system that is of interest to you, and to
explore (in any of a number of ways) what the future might look like given the
continuation and _change_ in parameters, behavior, and policy choices. Recall
Hughes' questions (INTERNATIONAL FUTURES, p.74):  "How do we want the future
to look? What leverage do we have?" You will be investigating the
consequences-- both intended and unintended-- of the scenario you have
selected, along with the changes in parameters and variables.  

The basic components of the Final Project include the following (with thanks
to Brian Pollins of Ohio State University from whose assignment I have
borrowed, but substantially modified):  

1) **Choose one area of particular interest to you.**

Each student will select one of the major issues of the problematique that
were covered in the course: population; food and agriculture; energy;
environment; economic development; security and peace. While we will not
finish class discussion of these areas until November 7, an early reading of
Hughes, INTERNATIONAL FUTURES chapters 2 and 4, our coverage of parameters
(during the week of September 15), as well as interests that you have
developed in other courses, should have led you to an area of interest by the
week of October 6. When you see the instructor that week to discuss class
participation, you and the instructor will also agree on an area of interest
for your Final Project.  

2) **Propose a change that you think might improve the situation which the
world faces.**

In selecting an area of interest, you will have identified current or
potential problems or dilemmas. You may investigate your area of interest in
different ways: looking at a single country/region (e.g. China or the USA or
Africa or Rest of the Developed countries); looking at one or more
countries/regions (e.g. the USA, EU and Japan; or China and India and Other
Asia); looking at the world system as a whole. You may also use any
combination of these (e.g. the World plus the US plus China; or the World plus
EU plus Rest of the Developed). Whichever alternative you select, you _must_
explain/justify _why_ you have taken this country/region focus given the area
of interest of your scenario.  

In suggesting "changes," you are, in effect, creating a new "scenario" of how
you think the world would look given different or altered conditions. The
"change" that you suggest must be based within some _theoretical_ context.
That is, in your assigned reading there are many arguments as to global
interdependencies, and hypotheses about what is related to what, and what
things should lead to what changes. These are perhaps most clearly presented
in INTERNATIONAL FUTURES chapters 2 and 4. Chapter 4 (and Model Detail in the
_IFs_ HELP Menu) is particularly useful in providing  "models" of
relationships-- how variables, parameters and factors might interact. In
chapter 3, Hughes provides a number of "Research Questions" that might also
form the theoretical basis for your scenarios. Each of chapters 3-9 in WORLD
FUTURES includes a section called "Forecasting: Theories and Models," which
might also help you in coming up with a scenario and providing its theoretical
justififcation. Goodman's book might be used in a similar manner. Students
should feel free to discuss their area of interest with the instructor for
additional sources of theoretical material; (but be sure to note that you _do
not_ have to go beyond the course readings). The scenario should also reflect
your understanding of the _study_ of the future-- including the different
types of change, issues of the utility and problems of extrapolation,
projection, etc.  

3) **Create a model that reflects your scenario (selecting parameters/table
functions/variables).**

In creating your scenario you will have selected some factor/set of factors--
explaining which ones have been selected and why, and what the hypothesized
direction and magnitude of impact might be. Now you must set out which
parameters/table functions/variables are to be involved, what your independent
and dependent variables are. Set out the hypothesized consequences; (later,
when running your scenario you can match the _actual_ consequences, which are
both intended and unintended, against the hypotheses). You should make clear
whether or not your purpose is to maximize some condition, minimize some
condition, simply to see what happens when some changes are made, and/or to
see if hypothesized expectations are met.  

**NOTE:** The results of the activities involved in components #2 and #3 will
be condensed into the Scenario Design paper (6 double-spaced pages maximum).
**Scenario Design papers are due on November 10**. Students will present their
Scenario Designs as the basis for class discussion during the November 10-21
period.  

4) **Set up the model run of your scenario, run it, compare the results of
your scenario to results from the Base Run.**

You need to see how your scenario for a particular country/region (or
combination thereof) affects that _same_ country/region, _other_
countries/regions, and the _world_. If your scenario starts out with a focus
on the world, then you need to see how your scenario affects various
countries/regions as well as the world. You also need to see how the changes
in your scenario affect not only your specific area of interest (e.g. energy)
but _at least_ one other area (e.g. economic development or population). The
central question is did your proposed change make a difference? Did you obtain
the desired outcome? What about higher-order or interdependence effects? (how
did your changes affect other countries/regions and/or other areas of
interest?).  

5) **Write up a report describing the various components and steps involved in
the Final Project**.

Carefully construct a Final Report which reflects the thinking that went into
the development of your scenario, the country/region focus, the area of
interest selected, the steps you followed in looking at your scenario (which
could be set for an end point of 2050 or multiple time periods-- e.g. 2007,
2030, 2050). Summarize the results in terms of the theory behind your
scenario, and in comparison to the Base Run. You must include relevant tables,
charts, graphs, scatterplots, etc. (e.g. including the data for all relevant
aspects of the scenario, both before and after changes in the parameters and
independent variables). [NOTE: While _IFs_ is not set up with its own
statistical package, you should feel free to export results to any statistical
package with which you are familiar for additional analyses. Such analyses
_are not_ required.]  

Provide conclusions-- what does this all _mean_? What does it mean for policy?
for current trends? for the interdependence among issue areas? How did this
project affect your own thinking about global problems and potential
solutions? What was missing-- from your own scenario? from _IFs_ in general?  

**NOTE:** The results of the analyses in your International Futures Scenario
Final Projects will provide the basis for student reports and discussions
during the week of December 1. The **Final Projects are due to the instructor
by 4:00 pm, Monday, December 8**. Papers should be double-spaced (normal
margins normal fonts), and be between 15-25 pages in length (not counting
tables, charts, graphs, etc.).  
  

**HINTS:**  

¡§ _Spend time_ playing with _IFs_ in general, and your model in particular.
Just like any  "game" software you may have used, there is no substitute for
experience. The more time you spend simply playing with _IFs_ and the model,
the easier the assignment will become (and the more complex and more
interesting and more fascinating the exercise will be for you). You might want
to review some of the exercises described in the  "Exercise From Other
Courses" Folder on Reserve.  

¡§ Try one change at a time, that is, do not make multiple changes on your
model all at once because that will make it more difficult to trace the
effects of any single change as its effects work their way through the system.
Remember, simulation is one way in which we can "experiment," by being able to
control cause and effect. Develop and run your model in such ways as to
maximize the control in your experiment.  

¡§ Create a master table of some kind which keeps track of: initial values of
parameters and variables; changes made to these parameters or variables (alone
or in combination); and consequences for interpolated or final values (for
2050 or any year between 1992 and 2050). Be sure to note which
country/region/[world] (or combination) is being analyzed, and for which
country/region/[world] (or combination) you are presenting results.  
  

***********  
  
  
  

**SCCC 3340 IMPORTANT DATES:**  

September 15 Basic _IFs_ Exercises due

September 15-19 Verbal Parameter and Variable Reports in class

September 22 Parameter and Variable Reports due

October 6-10 Meetings with instructor on class participation; Futures Scenario
area of interest consultation

November 10 Scenario Designs due

November 10-21 Verbal Scenario Design reports in class

December 1-5 Verbal Final Projects reports in class

December 8 Final Projects due

