[Prof. Mark
Auslander](../../Teaching%20F99/Soc101/SOC%20WEB/AuslanderHome.htm)

|

Office: Seney 312  
  
---|---  
  
TTh 11:00-12:15

|

O: (770) 784-4664  
  
Seney 322

|

[mausland@learnlink.emory.edu](mailto:mausland@learnlink.emory.edu)  
  
Spring 2001

|

Office Hours: M 3-5 pm; TTh 3:30-4:30 p.m & by appt.  
  
**Foundations of Cultural And Linguistic Anthropology**

**Anthro 202**

AIMS OF COURSE: This course introduces students to the anthropological study
of culture, society and language. We concentrate on different approaches to
the relationship between "structure" and "process" in varied social domains.
We begin with Ruth Benedict's classic work of cultural anthropology "The
Chrysanthemum and the Sword" and consider the concept of "cultural pattern".
We then consider attempts to reconcile "cultural" and "social approaches." We
then go on to consider recent work in some of the most interesting areas of
contemporary sociocultural anthropology -especially the meaningful dimensions
of the body, place and the material world, and language as social practice.
Throughout the course, we move back and forward between the thoughtful study
of others and of ourselves, considering the philosophical and methodological
foundations of a comparative human science.

COURSE REQUIREMENTS: This is a demanding course. Students must give careful
attention to all the reading, and indicate through class discussion, frequent
LearnLink postings and written essays that they have fully engaged with the
texts. You should read critically. Feel free to challenge assertions or
interpretations made in the readings, by the instructor, and by fellow
students, provided your critiques are well-reasoned and constructively framed.

The following work is required:

  * Five short papers (5-7 pages). 50 points each. (250 points)
  * One Take Home Final Examination. 50 points
  * Quizzes and learnlink. 50 points.
  * Class participation. 50 points.

Note: Students may opt, with permission of instructor, to combine papers 4 and
5 into a research paper, on some aspect of language and symbolism in their
social context. The paper should be based, in part, on original ethnographic
research in the surrounding community.

Grading is based on a scale of 400 points for the entire course, with the
following letter-grade cut-offs:

A=376 |

B+=348

|

C+=306

|  D=266  
---|---|---|---  
A-=362 |

B=334

|

C=294

|  F=below 266  
  
|

B-=320

|

C-=280

|  
  
**NOTE:** Plus/minus grading is used in this course, and the Honor Code is
always in force.

**Attendance and Lateness Policy:** Students are required to attend each
class, on time. You must bring the assigned reading materials to class, with
your notes and be prepared to discuss the readings for that day intelligently.
Missed quizzes will not be re-administered, regardless of circumstances
(including illness or family emergencies). Students will not be directly
penalized for the first three classes that they miss (although they will miss
the chance to take a quiz that day, if one is administered). For each
subsequent class missed (regardless of cause) 10 points will be deducted from
the student's course total. Eight absences will be regarded as grounds for
failing the course. One or more points will be deducted for each lateness or
for leaving class prematurely.

**Courses updates and revisions to the syllabus** will be posted in the class
LearnLink conference

 The following books are available in the College bookstore:

  * Ruth Benedict. _The Chrysanthemum and the Sword: Patterns of Japanese Culture_.
  * Beth Roy. _The Trouble with Cows: Making Sense of Social Conflict_
  * Keith Basso. _Portraits of the Whiteman_ . Cambridge Univ Press
  * Fred Myers. _Pintupi Country, Pintupi Self : Sentiment, Place, and Politics Among Western Desert Aborigines_
  * Allesandro Duranti. _Linguistic Anthropology: A Reader_.



* * *



COURSE OUTLINE

Thursday, January 18. Overview: Culture and Society. Rules and Process,
Structure and Practice, Language and Society.

Required at 4:00 p.m. Please attend the opening of the exhibition, "A Dream
Deferred: African Americans at Emory and Oxford Colleges, 1836-1968" in the
Chapel, and/or the Dr. King Worship Service, Allen Memorial at 7:30 p.m.

* * *

Friday. January 19. Leanlink posting onthe Thursday afternoon/evening events.
Write an ethnographic account of some aspect of these events, through the eyes
of an anthropologist. You might concentrate on what the various parties shared
or took for granted; or what they were arguing over, implicitly or explicitly.

* * *

**I. Culture as "Pattern": The Case of Japan.**

Tuesday, January 23. **Culture and History**. Ruth Benedict.[ _The
Chrysanthemum and the Sword: Patterns of Japanese
Culture_](../../Teaching%20F99/Soc101/SOC%20WEB/benedict.htm). pp. 1-97.

Questions to consider:

  * At the start of the book, Benedict makes a general argument for the importance of cultural anthropology in the modern world: what are the main points of her case for the discipline?
  * What does Benedict mean why she claims that anthropology requires a 'certain tough-mindedness and a certain generosity"?
  * What does Benedict appear to mean by the term "pattern" (as in "pattern of culture")? Does a "pattern" reside in specific social institutions, or does it transcend any given institution?
  * How does Benedict appear to be thinking about the relationship between "culture" and "history"? Does historical change in a given society necessarily alter its "culture"? Does "culture" influence the nature of historical change?
  * What were Benedict's research methods and how does she justify them? Why does she not rely on questionnaires and opinion polls, for example?

* * *

Thursday, January 25. **Obligation and Dependence.** Ruth Benedict. _The
Chrysanthemum and the Sword_. pp.98-176

* * *

Friday, January 26. LearnLink posting: Obligation in Japan and the U.S.
Describe some aspect of obligation and reciprocity in your immediate
surroundings (e.g. in a residence hall). How is this 'pattern' like or unlike
that described by Benedict in Japan?

* * *

Tuesday, January 30. **Development and Social Reproduction** Ruth Benedict.
_The Chrysanthemum and the Sword:_ pp. 177-316

* * *

Thursday, February 1. **Gender and Dependence in Contemporary Japan** View and
discuss video: "The Good Wife of Tokyo" in relationship to Benedict.

* * *

Friday. February 2. Learnlink. Post your reactions to the film, The Good Wife
of Tokyo.

* * *

Tuesday, February 6. Whorf, Benjamin Lee. "The Relation of Habitual Language
and Thought to Behavior"

* * *

Thursday, February 8. Discuss of Whorf and Benedict (class to be rescheduled)

* * *

**Due Monday, February 12 Paper #1.** The Concept of "Cultural Pattern". at
5:00 p.m. Write a 5-7 page essay.

Propose and defend a definition of "cultural pattern." Is a cultural pattern
necessarily grounded in the structure of a language, or might it reside in a
non linguistic form or genre, such as bodily movement, architecture, music or
visual imagery? Are such patterns normally recognized as such by natives, or
are they generally beyond the conscious articulation of members of a culture?

* * *

**II. Thinking about Conflict: Social and Cultural Models**

Tuesday, February 13. Beth Roy. _Some Trouble with Cows._ pp. 1-71

* * *

Thursday, February 15. _Some Trouble with Cows._ pp. 72-152

* * *

Friday. February 16. LearnLink: What social mechanisms existed in the village
to limit or control conflict? In what respects did these mechanisms fail? In
what respects did they work?

* * *

Tuesday, February 20. _Some Trouble with Cows._ pp. 153-194

* * *

Thursday, February 22. View and Discuss film: _We are all Neighbors_ (about
Bosnia)

* * *

Friday, February 23. Learnlink posting: Compare the escalation of social
conflict in the Roy case with the Bosnia village profiled in the film.

* * *

Tuesday, Feb. 27 Basso. _Portraits of the Whiteman_.1-34.

* * *

Thursday, March 1. Basso. _Portraits of the Whitema_ n.35-94.

* * *

Friday, March 2. Learnlink: Is Apache joking about the "whiteman" a product of
their culture, or of a political situation?

* * *

**Monday, March 5**. **Paper 2 due .** Thinking about "Culture", Social
Process. and Social Conflict (5-7 pages.Double spaced, typed, 10 or 12 point)
by 5:00 p.m. in Dr. Auslander's Office.

Compare and contrast the approaches of Benedict, Basso, and Roy to the
analysis of human society. Does an emphasis on society as a field of conflict
require one to abandon the concept of "culture" as a shared system of symbols.
Or can cultural and conflict approaches be reconciled?

* * *

**III. Place and Personhood**

Tuesday, March 6. Fred Myers. _Pintupi Country, Pintupi Self : Sentiment,
Place, and Politics Among Western Desert Aborigines_ pp.7-70

* * *

Thursday, March 8. Myers. _Pintupi Country_. pp.71-158

* * *

Tuesday, March 13 and Thursday, March 15 - **No class** (Spring break)

NOTE: Dr. Auslander will be in Ecuador during Spring Break.

* * *

Tuesday, March 20..Myers. _Pintupi Country_ pp. 159-218

**7:30 p.m. Film Screening: Where the Green Ants Dream**

* * *

Thursday, March 22.Myers. _Pintupi Country_. pp. 219-297.

* * *

Friday, March 23. Learnlink: Post your thoughts on the film.

* * *

**Monday, March 26. Paper 3 due.** How does Myers approach the relationship
between Pintupi conceptions of the self and experiences of place?

* * *

  **Part IV. The Body as Symbolic Form and Social Battlefield**

Tuesday, March 27.Terry Turner. "The Social Skin" (on reserve)

* * *

Thursday, March 29.Victor Turner. "Planes of Classification in Ndembu Ritual".
(on reserve)

* * *

Friday, March 30. Learnlink: For the Kayapo and the Ndembu, does the human
body function as a "map" of the social world?

* * *

Tuesday, April 3. Janice Boddy. "Womb as Oasis." (on reserve)

* * *

Thursday, April 5.Mark Auslander."Open the Wombs: The Symbolic Politics of
Ngoni Witchfinding" (on reserve)

* * *

**Monday, April 9.Paper 4 due.** Is the body simply a blank slate upon which
social struggles are projected; or does the body impose certain regularities
upon the experience and conduct of social life?

* * *

**V. Language and Society.**

Tuesday, April 10. Allesandro Duranti. Linguistic Anthropology: A Reader
(selections)

* * *

Thursday, April 12. Allesandro Duranti. Linguistic Anthropology: A Reader
(selections)

* * *

Tuesday, April 17. Duranti (selections)

* * *

Thursday, April 19. Duranti (selections)

* * *

**Monday, April 23. Paper 5 due. Topics tba.**

* * *

Tuesday, April 24. Duranti (selections)

* * *

Thursday, April 26. Duranti. (selection) Final Day of Class: final take home
examination distributed.

* * *

Tuesday, May 9. Take home examination due at 12 noon. Dr. Auslander's office.







