**Comparative Cultural Criticism**

This course was created to provide an interdisciplinary alternative to
traditional ways of studying other cultures. Since professor Andrew and I are
both from the Film Department, we want particularly to investigate new ways of
looking at Japanese cinema. The course material overlaps with or falls in
between the established disciplines of Anthropology, History, Politics,
Cultural Studies, and Aesthetics. We do not pretend to expertise in all these
areas, and throughout this semester we will be turning to anthropologists,
historians, political analysts and aestheticians for help in reaching a
cultural understanding of our main focus; Japan. More than that, we will be
using these theorists to interrogate our own assumptions as we practice
comparative cultural criticism. What does "comparative cultural criticism"
mean? Not an easy question to answer, I hope that by the end of this class we
will have some idea of the epistemological and ethical stakes involved in
trying to understand other societies, and unfamiliar forms of cultural
production. We might begin by investigating the title of the course more
closely.

In a sense cultural criticism has always been comparative - whether we mark
its beginning with Herodotus' ethnographic collections, with Augustine's
dictum that "the world is a book; he who stays at home reads only one page",
or more recently with the rise of capitalism and international trade, the
recognition of what we now call "culture" was predicated on its difference
from the writer's own way of life. It is only recently that anthropologists
(for theirs is the discourse in which accounts of other cultures are usually
housed) have turned inwards to examine their own culture. I hope that during
this course we will be able to recognize not only the difference of Japanese
cultural artifacts from those produced in the West, but also the differences
lurking within those two categories, "West" and "Japan", as well as what is at
stake in comparing them with each other. According to Raymond Williams,
"culture is one of the two or three most complicated words in the English
language". While I don't propose to give any glib definitions, just as I don't
pretend to know the truth of "Japan", we will ask repeatedly during the
semester just what this obscure word might mean. In the modern world, cultural
criticism has seldom been an innocent practice. It rose to prominence with the
rise of the global capitalist economic system and was complicit, as Edward
Said argues, with the "information machines" of colonial bureaucracies. While
we may not fully agree with his critique of "orientalism", I hope that we can
keep the critical edge which the title of this course echoes.

On a more practical level, this is a great time to be studying Japanese
culture at Iowa. Over the past year, the Institute for Cinema and Culture has
been gathering material, in English and Japanese, for a conference on
"Japanese Image Culture" (sponsored by CAPS and the ICC) to be held at the
University during March. This material includes rare Japanese films and books
on film and popular culture; since attendance at the conference is required of
all class members, you should visit room 162 of the Communication Studies
Building during my office hours and take a look at what we have. In addition
to film screenings during the Thursday class period, there will also be a film
series provided by the Japan Foundation, to be shown on Sundays, from February
9th to March 8th. The Institute for Cinema and Culture will supplement these
with rare and classic Japanese films to be shown on other Sundays during the
semester. These screenings are not required, but I strongly recommend that you
take this opportunity to experience Japanese film culture.

**CLASS REQUIREMENTS:**

There will be three assignments and a short take-home midterm. In addition,
you will be graded on short oral presentations of your research and of
articles read in class, and on class attendance and participation. The
breakdown of marks is as follows:

    Assignment 1 - 15%     Assignment 2 - 15%     Midterm - 10%     Oral Presentation - 10%     Attendance/discussion - 10%     Final Project - 40% 

The first assignment will be a short essay (less than 5 pages for
undergraduates) on western narratives of Japan in the Meiji period, a few
examples of which we will read in the first two weeks.

The second assignment will be an exercise in textual analysis, comparing a
prewar Japanese film (or a genre) with a contemporary film (or genre) from
another country.

The midterm will be a single question on a topic raised during class, to be
answered over a weekend

Oral presentations will be required of all class members. They will consist of
short (5 minutes maximum) discussions of an article assigned for class reading
that day. The purpose of the presentation is NOT to reiterate the contents of
the article for the benefit of those who haven't done the reading: you should
aim instead to identify the main arguments that the writer is using, and
present your own response to them. I will also be asking people to present
their own research in class, as well as occasionally to work in groups.

The final project will concern some aspect of postwar Japanese image culture.
The exact details of the project are up to you, in consultation with Professor
Andrew and myself. This project is worth a large proportion of the marks for
the course, so we expect your research to be of commensurately greater depth.

A word on class format: since there is so much ground to cover, I will be
giving short, summarizing lectures on the historical and cultural background
of the four "moments" in recent Japanese history that we will focus on.
However this is a seminar, rather than a lecture, and so stands or falls on
the quality of the discussions which WE create. Please come to class prepared,
and prepared to contribute.

**SYLLABUS**

**Week 1: Comparative Cultural Criticism: the case of Africa**

Tuesday: Introduction

Thursday: Lecture: Africa, colonialism and the rise of cultural analysis

> FILM: _La croisiere noire_

**Week 2: Cultural Interpretation and Orientalism in Meiji Japan**

Tuesday:

    Edward Said. _Orientalism._ Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1978, 1985 

Thursday:

    Frederick Penfield. _East of Suez: Ceylon, India, China and Japan._ New York: The Century Co., 1912     Basil Hall Chamberlain. _Things Japanese: Being notes on various subjects connected with Japan for the use of travelers and others._ London: John Murray, 1902     Lafcadio Hearn. _Japan: An Attempt at Interpretation._ New York: McMillan, 1904, 1928.      W. E. Griffis. _The Mikado's Empire._ New York: Harper and Brothers, 1896     Maj. Knollys, _R.A. Sketches of Life in Japan._ London: Chapman and Hall, 1887 

**Week 3: Tourism and Orientalism in Meiji Japan**

Tuesday:

    Richard Minear. "Orientalism and the Study of Japan" in _Journal of Asian Studies_ 39/3 1980     James Clifford. "On Orientalism" in _The Predicament of Culture._ Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard UP, 1988     Robert Young. "Disorienting Orientalism" in _White Mythologies._ London: Routledge, 1990 

Thursday:

    Pierre Loti. _Madame Chrysantheme._ New York: Current Literature Publishing Co., 1910      Rev. J. LL. Thomas. _Travels Among the Gentle Japs in the Summer of 1895._ London: Sampson, Low, Marston Co., 1897     Isabella L. Bird. _Unbeaten Tracks in Japan._ New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons, c.1880.     Alice M. Bacon. _A Japanese Interior._ Boston: Houghton, Mifflin and Co., 1893 

> FILM: _Yoshiwara_ (Max Ophuls, 1937)

**Week 4: Theorizing Comparative Cultural Criticism**

Tuesday:

    Ruth Benedict. _The Chrysanthemum and the Sword._ Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1946, 1989     Clifford Geertz. "Art as Cultural System" in _Local Knowledge: Further Essays in Interpretive Anthropology._ New York: Basic Books, 1983 

Thursday:

> Lecture: Ukiyo-e and Japanese image culture.

>

> FILM: _Utamaro o meguru gonin no onna_ ( _Utamaro,_ Mizoguchi Kenji, 1946)

**Week 5: Theorizing Comparative Cultural Criticism**

Tuesday:

> Group reports on theories of ethnography and cultural criticism

Thursday:

> Lecture: Some observations on popular culture in Meiji Japan

>

> Reports on western narratives of Meiji Japan.

*** FIRST ASSIGNMENT DUE ***

**Week 6: Japanese image culture in the 1920s and 1930s: Taisho Modernism and
Gender ambivalence**

Tuesday:

    Donald Roden. "Taisho Culture and the Problem of Gender Ambivalence" in _Culture and Identity: Japanese Intellectuals During the Interwar Years._ J.Thomas Rimer (ed.). Princeton: Princeton UP, 1990     Jennifer Robertson. "Gender-Bending in Paradise: Doing 'Female' and 'Male' in Japan" in _Genders_ 5 (1989)      Noel Burch. _To the Distant Observer: Form and Meaning in the Japanese Cinema._ London: Scholar Press, 1979 

Thursday:

    Robert Cohen. "Toward a Theory of Japanese Narrative" in _Quarterly Review of Film Studies,_ Spring 1981      Scott L. Malcolmson. "The Pure Land Beyond the Seas: Barthes, Burch and the Uses of Japan" in _Screen_

> FILM: _Orizuru Osen_ ( _The Downfall of Osen Mizoguchi Kenji,_ 1934) and
_Naniwa Ereji_ ( _Osaka Elegy,_ Mizoguchi Kenji, 1936)

**Week 7: Japanese image culture in the 1920s and 1930s: Ozu and the
_Nansensu_ genre**

Tuesday:

    Edward Seidenstecker. "The Decay of the Decadent" in _Low City, High City: Tokyo from Edo to the Earthquake, 1867-1923._ Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1983     Miriam Silverberg. "Constructing a New History of Prewar Japanese Mass Culture" in _Boundary 2_ (Spring, 1992) 

Thursday:

    David Bordwell. _Ozu and the Poetics of Cinema._ Princeton: Princeton UP, 1988 

> FILM: _Rakudai wa shita keredo_ ( _I Flunked, But...,_ Ozu Yasujiro, 1930)

**Week 8: Japanese image culture in the 1920s and 1930s: Militarism, Mizoguchi
and the Monumental Style**

Tuesday:

    Tetsuo Najita and H. D. Harootunian. "Japanese Revolt Against the West: Political and Cultural Criticism in the Twentieth Century" in _The Cambridge History of Japan._ Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1988     Anon. _Kokutai no Hongi._ Tokyo: Monbusho, 1937      Watsuji Tetsuro. _A Climate._ Tokyo: Japanese Government, 1961 

Thursday:

    D. William Davis "Back to Japan: Militarism and Monumentalism in Prewar Japanese Cinema" in _Wide Angle_ 11/3 1989 

> FILM: _Genroku Chushingura I_ ( _The Loyal 47 Ronin,_ Mizoguchi Kenji, 1941)

**Week 9: Discussion of Conference "Image Theory, Image Culture, and
Contemporary Japan", March 12-15, 1992**

Tuesday:

> Reports on conference panels

Thursday:

> Reports on conference panels

>

> FILM: TBA

**Week 10: *** SPRING BREAK *****

**Week 11: Ozu and the anthropology of Postwar Japan**

Tuesday:

    J. Victor Koschmann (ed.) _Authority and the Individual in Postwar Japan._ Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, 1978     Tsurumi Shunsuke. _A Cultural History of Postwar Japan._ London: KPI, 1987 Fukutake Tadashi. "The Development of Mass Society" in _The Japanese Social Structure._ Tokyo: The University of Tokyo Press, 1981 

Thursday:

    Short stories: Kojima Nobuo's "The American School" and Oe Kenzaburo's "The Catch". 

> FILM: _Banshun_ ( _Late Spring,_ Ozu Yasujiro, 1949)

*** SECOND ASSIGNMENT DUE ***

**Week 12: Postwar Japanese Subjectivity**

Tuesday:

    Masao Miyoshi. "Who Decides and Who Speaks? Shutaisei and the West in Postwar Japan" in _Off Center: Power and Cultural Relations between Japan and the United States._ Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard UP, 1991 

Thursday:

    Maureen Turim. "Psyches, Ideologies, and Melodrama: The United States and Japan" in _East West Film Journal_ 5/1 1991      Mitsuhiro Yoshimoto. "Melodrama, Postmodernism, and Japanese Cinema" in _East West Film Journal_ 5/1 1991 

> FILM: _Ukigumo_ ( _Drifting Clouds,_ Naruse Mikio, 1955)

**Week 13: Post-postwar Japan: Modernization and _Nihonjinron_**

Tuesday:

    Harumi Befu. _Japan: An Anthropological Introduction._ San Francisco: Chandler Publishing Co., 1971     Hamaguchi Esyun. "A Contextual Model of the Japanese: Toward a Methodological Innovation in Japanese Studies" in _Journal of Japanese Studies_ 11/2 1985 

Thursday:

    H. D. Harootunian. "Visible Discourses/Invisible Ideologies" in Masao Miyoshi and H. D. Harootunian (eds.) _Postmodernism and Japan._ Durham: Duke UP, 1989 

> FILM: _Yasha ga ike_ ( _Demon Pond,_ Shinoda Masahiro, 1980)

**Week 14: "Postmodern Anthropology" and "Postmodern Japan"**

Tuesday:

    Robert Young. "White Mythologies" in _White Mythologies._ London: Routledge, 1990      Roland Barthes. _Empire of Signs._ New York: Hill and Wang, 1982 

Thursday:

    Masao Miyoshi and H. D. Harootunian (eds.) _Postmodernism and Japan._ Durham: Duke UP, 1989 

> FILM: TBA

**Week 15: "Postmodern Anthropology" and "Postmodern Japan"**

Tuesday:

    Masao Miyoshi and H. D. Harootunian (eds.) _Postmodernism and Japan._ Durham: Duke UP, 1989 

Thursday:

    Masao Miyoshi and H. D. Harootunian (eds.) _Postmodernism and Japan._ Durham: Duke UP, 1989 

> FILM: TBA

**Week 16: "Postmodern Anthropology" and "Postmodern Japan"**

Tuesday:

    Masao Miyoshi and H. D. Harootunian (eds.) _Postmodernism and Japan._ Durham: Duke UP, 1989 

Thursday:

    Masao Miyoshi and H. D. Harootunian (eds.) _Postmodernism and Japan._ Durham: Duke UP, 1989 

> FILM: TBA

*** FINAL PROJECT DUE ***

