**_English 677 : Language & Communication Across Cultures_**

**(Draft) Fall, 2002**

**Objectives : This course examines intercultural communication through
readings in anthropology, linguistics and world literature in translation. The
class will explore how most travelers experience the stages of acculturation,
how language reflects culture, and how cultures interpret and communicate
experiences differently. This is a writing-intensive course, and one of the
primary goals is to help students improve their ability to write an essay, a
review, and a course paper.**

**Instructor :[ Janet
Bing](http://courses.lib.odu.edu/engl/jbing/coursespage.htm)   Class:
Wednesday, 4:20-7:00**  
**Office: BAL 423    Office hours:  2:00-3:00 T,W, R and by apt.**  
**Phone: 683-4030**  
**jbing@odu.edu**  
  **Course Requirements:** | Readings | Review | Essay Portfolio | Term Paper
| Participation | Exams  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
[A Sketch of the French
Culture](http://courses.lib.odu.edu/engl/jbing/france3.html) |
[Assignments](http://courses.lib.odu.edu/engl/jbing/schedule.html) |
[Supplementary
Readings/Resources](http://courses.lib.odu.edu/engl/jbing/677cp.htm)  
---|---|---  
  
**Required Readings: For assignments, the abbreviations (for the books) will
be used.**

    Cathy N. Davidson | _  36 Views of Mount Fuji: On finding myself in Japan  (36)_  
---|---  
 Beatty, John & Junichi Takahashi | Intercultural Communication (Cincinnati:
Atomicdog Publishing)  
 Althen, Gary | _American Ways: A Guide For foreigners in the United States_
(Yarmouth, ME, Intercultural Press.)  
[_Supplementary readings_.](http://courses.lib.odu.edu/engl/jbing/677cp.htm) |
These are available on the web (linked to the electronic syllabus), on regular
reserve, or may be copied at the self-service part of the Monarch Copy Center.  
  |  

**Book or Film Review**

**A. Write a review of a book, textbook, video or film (250-500 words) for
your classmates; see the[sample book
review](http://courses.lib.odu.edu/engl/jbing/revseetasith.html) or [sample
film review](http://courses.lib.odu.edu/engl/jbing/FMoran.html) from one of
the previous class publications. Whatever you choose to review should contain
information about another culture that would be useful for somebody who wishes
to live in that culture (and not just someone who wishes to visit as a
tourist).**

**Choose one of the following:**

  * **a novel that reveals a great deal about a culture you wish to explore such as: _The Poisonwood Bible, The Woman Warrior, Things Fall Apart, The Painter of Signs, Train to Pakistan, The Sword and the Chrysanthemum, Snow Country, Return to Laughter, Ceremony_ , etc.**
  * **an ESL textbook about intercultural communication such as: Virginia Vogel Zanger, _Face to Face: the Cross-Cultural Workbook,_ Harper  & Row (Newbury House), 1985 or Karen M. Holgerson, _The American Experience,_ Star Publishing Co. Belmont, CA 94002, 1988.**
  * **a book that deals specifically with culture, such as _Nissa (The Autobiography of a !Kung Woman), Kiss, Bow or Shake Hands_ (Korea), or Barbara Finklestein's _Transcending Stereotypes: Discovering Japanese Culture and Education._ This can also be a book about intercultural communication such as any of the books by Edward Hall, ( _The Hidden Dimension, Beyond Culture_ ) [Geerte Hofstede](http://www2.soc.hawaii.edu/css/dept/com/resources/Intercultural/Hofstede.html) or some other well-known authority.**
  * **a film or video about another culture or about culture clash: _The Great Wall, The Wedding Feast, Rashoman, My Father's Castle, Heart of Darkness, Mr. Baseball, Gung Ho_. There will be a film festival on campus featuring films from other cultures.**

*****Each review should include a brief synopsis, examples of the kind of
cultural information included, and a brief discussion of the usefulness and
accuracy of the information about the culture.**

**Essay Portfolio:   Every two weeks hand in an essay (250-500 words), either
a response to one of the readings or class activities or an essay relating to
a topic covered during the two-week period.  In some cases the questions on
the syllabus or something in class may be related to one of your own
experiences, and you may use that as part of your essay. The midterm and final
grades for the portfolio will be on the thoughtfulness and quality of your
writing, and as you rethink issues, you may rewrite or revise earlier essays
if you wish.  Hand in the portfolio for a tentative grade at midterm and for
final grade on dates indicated on the schedule.  The midterm portfolio should
consist of all versions of the first three essays plus the instructor
comments.  The final portfolio should consist of all versions of six essays
plus instructor comments.  For more help, see the [criteria for
evaluation](http://courses.lib.odu.edu/engl/jbing/essay.html) and ["The
qualities of a good essay or term
paper."](http://courses.lib.odu.edu/engl/jbing/introa.html)**

**  More essays and reviews from previous classes are available as web
publications:**  
**     Tonya Huey (ed.) [Cultural
Awakening](http://courses.lib.odu.edu/engl/jbing/journal.htm)**  
**     Pamela Lee and Lew Belcourt (eds.), [ Frames and Mirrors: Individual
Perceptions of Culture](http://courses.lib.odu.edu/engl/jbing/frames.html)**  
**     Marliss Burgazli and Huiyuan Liu (eds.), [Language and
Culture](http://courses.lib.odu.edu/engl/jbing/Pubnew.html)**  
**     Diane Ryan and Xiaoli Shi (eds.) [Cultural
Potpourri](http://courses.lib.odu.edu/engl/jbing/potpourri/potpourri.htm)**  
  
**Cultural Term Paper or Web Page:**  
**This paper should concentrate on the key questions for the course. The
recommended length is approximately 7-12 pages, but this can be somewhat
flexible.   A sample paper about France, [A Sketch of the French
Culture](http://courses.lib.odu.edu/engl/jbing/france3.html), and a
description of the culture(s) of
[Brazil](http://courses.lib.odu.edu/engl/jbing/Brazil.html) may give you ideas
for you own paper.  The types of questions you may want to ask can be found in
a similar description of
[Nicaragua.](http://courses.lib.odu.edu/engl/jbing/nicaragua/)  Your paper can
address questions from the section: "Cultural Frame" and "Model." You do not
have to address all of the questions, but they will give you some idea about
of the type of information to be included.   If you include information about
the geography, history, or economy, this should be information relevant to the
culture.  Avoid the typical descriptions found in travel books unless they
deal with cultural differences.   International students, who obviously know
another culture well, are encouraged to answer the questions about their own
cultures, and everyone is encouraged to use their own cross-cultural
experiences for examples.  However, because this is a term paper, it should be
more formal than a short essay and should rely on more than a single source of
information.  _Culturegrams_ , available at the Dragas Center, are a good
source of information, as are many of the books from [Intercultural Press
](http://interculturalpress.com/shop/index.html) (which you can borrow from
interlibrary loan.)  Those who have taken courses in electronic writing may
elect to develop web pages, but it is assumed that authors who choose to do
web pages understand the conventions of the medium.**  
  
**Participation: Regular attendance is required because much of the learning
in this class is experiential rather than academic. Familiarity with the
assigned readings, contribution to class discussions, and the sharing of class
resources will all help raise the participation grade.**

**Midterm & Final Exams: The two exams will contain both essay and objective
questions.  Evaluation criteria for an essay or essay exam assumes that the
essay:**  
**_____ meets the deadline and guidelines on length and frequency**  
**_____ demonstrates an understanding of class readings, presentations and/or
discussions;**  
**_____ shows that the writer has thought about the course material.**  
**_____ is well organized and unified around a single idea or thesis;**  
**_____ is clearly written with few distracting errors and would probably
interest a general audience.**  
**_____ is typed if an out-of-class assignment.**

**Plagiarism is easy in the electronic age, but it is now easier to catch as
well. When you use another person's ideas, give a source and page numbers even
when you reword the idea.   When you use another person's exact words, be sure
to use quotation marks, source, and page numbers.  A number of [good guides to
documentation](http://www.lib.odu.edu/linksclean2/General_Reference/Style_Guides/)
are available electronically.  Plagiarism will be treated as a serious offense
if discovered and the university now has the programs to make this easy; the
instructor reserves the right to fail a student for the entire course on the
basis of a single offense.**

**Class Policies: Late work and make-up exams are possible if done within one
week in the case of illness or emergency. However, any work handed in late
will be graded only if and when I have time.   No late work will be accepted
after April 24.**

**Grades** **Review** | **10%** | **Midterm Exam** | **15%**  
---|---|---|---  
**Term Project** | **25%** | **Final Exam** | **15%**  
**Essay Portfolio** | **25%** | **Participation** | **10%**  
  
**Most of the web pages for this course were designed by Natsuko Kojima and
are maintained by Janet Bing.**

