### History 514.02  
England in the 18th and 19th Centuries

This course covers the period from the end of the reign of Anne (1714) through
the age of Palmerston (approximately 1860). Political history will provide the
basic structure of the course, but we will also discuss social, economic, and
cultural developments. Topics covered will include changes in the British
system of government, the impact of industrialization, the influence of
various ideas and ideologies, and the growth of empire. Students will be
exposed to important ideas which have influenced the development of government
and culture in both Europe and America, and especially to an examination of
fundamental constitutional concepts. Through extensive writing (of
examinations and, for some students, of term papers) and through class
discussions, students will improve their ability to analyze social, political,
and intellectual movements and to express their understanding clearly and
effectively. British history is a particularly valuable medium for conveying
comparative understandings. Enough like American history to seem familiar yet
distinct from the American experience in very significant ways, the study of
British history should considerably expand the student's perceptions about
his/her own society and the human experience in general.

_

Required texts and reading assignments:

_

Willcox and Arnstein, _The Age of Aristocracy_

Rule, _The Labouring Classes in Early Industrial England

_

Briggs, _Age of Improvement

_

Young, _Victorian England: Portrait of an Ag_ e (all available in paperback at
SBX)

_

Course Requirements:

_

There will be two tests (30% each) and a final (40%), mainly essay, with
several short answer questions. Graduate student tests will be graded
separately from those of undergraduates, and a greater degree of familiarity
with the supplementary reading will be required. Graduate students will also
present a short paper on a historiographical topic; others may choose this
option, in which case each test, the final, and the paper will count 25%.
Additional readings beyond the required texts will be strongly recommended,
and students will have an opportunity to use material gained from outside
readings in writing their examinations. Attendance will be taken.

_

Schedule

_

September 23- October 15-- introduction, Hanoverian settlement, eighteenth
century constitutional developments, the industrial revolution, first British
empire. Readings-- Wilcox and Arnstein, Rule.

October 17- November 12-- American revolution, conflict with France, rise of
bourgeois society. Readings-- Briggs.

November 13-December 7-- intellectual change in nineteenth century Britain,
rise of popular government, labour movement. Readings-- Young.

The two tests will be held during class time on October 16 and November 13.
The final examination is scheduled for Tuesday, December 10, at 1:00 PM.
People writing papers must meet with me by October 7 for approval of their
topic and must submit a detailed outline by November 20. Papers are due on
December 7.

_

Examples of paper topics:

_

development of cabinet government

the industrial revolution

the American revolution

the Namier controversy

extension of the constitution

working class movements (e.g. Chartism)

religion in English life

the Darwinian controversy

international relations

development of empire

_

Office hours:

_

My office is in Room 159 Dulles Hall, 230 W. 17th Avenue; I will be there to
talk with you between 3:00 and 5:00 on Mondays and Wednesdays, and I will be
happy to make an appointment to see you at another time. My office phone is
292-7426; my home phone, 846-3583. In an emergency you can also reach me by
leaving a message at the front desk of the History Department, 292-2674.

_

Supplemental Readings:

_

Early and General 18th Century

Robert Walcott, _English Politics in the Early 18th Century

_

J.H. Plumb, _England in the 18th Century

_

J.H. Plumb, _Growth of Political stability in England

_

J.H. Plumb, _Walpole

_

Jeremy Black, _British Foreign Policy in the Age of Walpole

_

Wm. Lecky, _History of England in the 18th Century

_

R.W. Harris, _A Short History of 18th Century England

_

Basil Willey, _The Whig Supremacy

_

Basil Willey, _Chatham

_

J.H. Plumb, _Chatham

_

Basil Willey, _The Eighteenth Century Background

_

Harold Laski _Political Thought in England from Locke to Bentham

_

TAO. Lloyd, _The British Empire

_

Namier Controversy

Lewis Gamier, _England in the Age of the American Revolution

_

Lewis Namier, _Structure of Politics at the Accession of George III

_

Lewis Namier, "Monarchy and the Party System," in _Crossroads of Power

_

John Brooks, The Chatham Administration

Richard Pares, _George III and the Politicians

_

Romney Sedgwick, _History of the House of Commons. 1715- 1754

_

Herbert Butterfield, _George III and the Historians

_

Later 18th Century

R.J. White, _Age of George III

_

Stephen Watson, _Reign of George III

_

Raymond Postgate, _That Devil Wilkes

_

George Rude, _Wilkes and Liberty

_

Ian Christie, _Wilkes. Wyvill. and Reform

_

Ian Christie, _End of the North Ministry

_

Donald Barnes, _George III and William Pitt

_

Brian Tunstill, _William Pitt

_

Erich Eyck, _Pitt and the Fox: Father and Son

_

Edward Lascelles. _The Life of Charles lames Fox

_

Industrial Revolution

T.S. Ashton, _The Industrial Revolution

_

Phylis Deane, _The First Industrial Revolution

_

David Landes, _The Unbound Prometheus

_

Peter Mathias, _The Transformation of England

_

John and Barbara Hammond, _Village Labourer. Skilled Labourer. Town Labourer

_

E.J. Hobsbaum, _Labouring Men

_

E.P. Thompson, _Making of the British Working Class

_

E.P. Thompson, _Whigs and Hunters

_

J.H. Clapham, _Economic History of England

_

Gertrude Himmelfarb, _The Idea of Poverty

_

Pre-Victorian Social/ Cultural

Lawrence Stone, _An Open Elite? England 1540-1914

_

J.V. Beckett, _The Aristocracy in England

_

Peter Laslett, _The World We Have Lost

_

William Cobbett, _Rural Rides

_

Lawrence Stone, _The Family. Sex. and Marriage in England. 1500-1800

_

M.D. George, _London Life in the 18th Century

_

lames Boswell, _Life of Johnson

_

Elie Halevy, _The Growth of Philosophic Radicalism

_

Early and General 19th Century

Asa Briggs, _Age of Improvement

_

David Thomson, _England in the 19th Century

_

L. Woodward, _The Age of Reform

_

R.J. White, _From Waterloo to Peterloo

_

W.R. Black, _Lord Liverpool and Liberal Toryism

_

Norman Gash, _Lord Liverpool

_

Fergus O'Ferrall, _Catholic Emancipation

_

Oliver MacDonagh, _The Hereditary Bondsman. Daniel O'Connell

_

G. M. Trevelyan, _Lord Grey and the Reform Bill

_

Norman Gash, _Politics in the Age of Peel

_

Norman Gash, _Sir Robert Peel

_

Peter Mandler, _Aristocratic Government in the Age of Reform

_

Asa Briggs, _Chartist Portraits

_

G.D.H. Cole, _The Chartists

_

Dorothy Thompson, _The Chartists

_

Norman McCord, _The Anti-Corn Law League

_

Donald Barnes, _The History of the English Corn Laws

_

Cecil Woodham-Smith, _The Great Hunger

_

John Morley, _Life of Cobden

_

G.M. Trevelyan, _John Bright

_

Victorian Cultural/ Social/ Intellectual

G.M. Young, _Portrait of an Age

_

George Kitson-Clark, _Making of Victorian Britain

_

W.L. Burn, _The Age of Equipos_ e

Asa Briggs, _Victorian People_ (also _Victorian Cities_ and _Victorian Things_
)

Walter Houghton, _The Victorian Frame of Mind

_

D.C. Somervell, _English Thought in the 19th Century

_

R. Stromberg, _Intellectual History of Modern Europe

_

Stefen Collini, Donald Winch, and John Burrow, _That Noble Science of Politics

_

J.S. Mill, _Bentham and Coleridge, On Liberty, Autobiography

_

Karl Marx, _Communist Manifesto

_

F. Engels, _Observations on the Working Class in England

_

B. Disraeli, _Two Nations or Sybil

_

F.M.L. Thompson, _The Rise of Respectable Society

_

Charles Darwin, _Origin of Species, Descent of Man

_

Charles Gillispie, _Genesis and Geology

_

J.C. Greene, _Death of Adam

_

Jacques Barzun, _Darwin. Marx. and Wagner

_

Matthew Arnold, _Culture and Anarchy, Sweetness and Light

_

Thomas Carlyle, _Past and Present

_

Noel Annan, _Leslie Stephen. Godless Victorian

_

Owen Chadwick, _The Victorian Church

_

David Newsome, _Godliness and Good Learning

_

Ian Bradley, _The Call to Seriousness

_

Alan D. Gilbert, _Religion and Society in Industrial England

_

Boyd Hilton, _The Age of Atonement

_

Mid and Late Victorian Politics

Donald Reade, _England 1868-1914

_

R.C.K. Ensor, _England 1870-1914

_

H.C.F. Bell, _Life of Palmerston

_

Kenneth Bourne, _Palmerston

_

Donald Southgate, _Policies and Politics of Palmerston

_

Philip Magnus, _Gladstone

_

Robert Blake, _Disraeli

_

