![](../../../images/r.jpg)  
---  
|   | **Summer II 1999**  
 **POL 3835  
International Relations  
TWTh 8:00 - 9:30, HHH 20**  
---|---  
![](../../../images/2-courses.jpg)  
|  Professor Raymond Duvall  
1373 Social Sciences Bldg.  
Office Hours: T,W,Th 9:45-11:00, or by appt.  
Office Phone: 624-8576  
E-mail: [rduvall@polisci.umn.edu](mailto:rduvall@polisci.umn.edu)  
  
**Course Description:**

We focus on two important topics as a means to ask how various theoretical
perspectives provide distinct understandings of the structure and practices of
international relations. The first topic is the problem of ensuring security
for all people from organized violence (in the form of war, terrorism, etc.);
most of the required readings for the course focus on this topic. The second
concerns the prospect for creating a globally stable and sustainable world
economy, in which all of humanity, including future generations, can expect to
prosper. Although we do not have required readings on this topic, we will
discuss it often in our efforts to apply theoretical perspectives to the
analysis of a second important domain of international relations. We will
consider four theoretical perspectives for analyzing those topics: political
realism, liberalism, post-structuralism, and post-colonial constructivism.

The principal objective is to develop an appreciation of the ways in which
perspectives lead to different analyses. We will learn how each theoretical
perspective generates its own view of international relations, in terms of
providing a distinct understanding of the structure and practices of human
security and a global political economy. Each shares the assumption that the
many and varied interactions among states and non-state actors in the global
arena are vital elements of our world. However, in interpreting these many and
varied forms of global politics, each of the perspectives offers not only a
distinct understanding of what international relations consist of, but also
distinct guidance about what international political activity should be.
Therefore, this course will explore how each perspective _explains_ events
that occur in the arena of global politics, and also explores how adherents of
each perspective think international actors _should act_ in this arena. That
is, we will explore both the explanatory insights and the normative political
implications of each perspective. Through the highlighting of such theoretical
differences, the course is intended to provide the means for students to
develop their own theoretically informed analyses of issues in contemporary
international relations, such as what the important consequences of NAFTA are,
or what the emerging security issues in Central Asia might be.

It is recommended that this course be taken prior to coursework at the 5xxx-
level in the field of international relations. Students in this course should
have some familiarity with the subject matter of world politics, such as is
provided in Political Science 1025.

**Course Objectives:**  

At the completion of this course, you should be able to:

Demonstrate the ability to employ several influential theoretical perspectives
to analyze current situations in international relations;  
  
Recognize the use of these perspectives in everyday speech, journalism, and
academic writing;  
  
Identify important normative political implications at work within different
perspectives as those perspectives are used to analyze situations in
international relations;  
  
Evaluate the relative explanatory success of the perspectives within the
context of real situations and events in international relations.

**Course Requirements:**

You are expected to complete all of the assigned readings listed on the
syllabus prior to the class session for which they are scheduled. Lectures and
discussions will not duplicate, but instead will build on, and hence will
assume prior familiarity with, assigned readings. Your active participation in
discussion and class activities is expected. Written assignments include two
short thought papers, which call for you to apply the theoretical perspectives
of assigned readings in analysis of a topic in international relations. The
paper assignments will be distributed in class on Tuesdays (August 3 and
August 17). Each paper will be due one week after the assignment is
distributed (so, due dates are August 10 and August 24). Late papers will be
penalized. For these two papers, you are to select a contemporary issue of
international relations from the list attached to this syllabus, and to
develop a degree of expertise on that issue. The two paper assignments will
require you to analyze your selected issue in terms of theoretic perspectives
introduced in the class. The other substantial writing assignment (a third
paper) is a position paper that addresses and evaluates possible efforts to
deal with the issue. Your position paper will be due the last day of class,
Wednesday, August 25th. Periodically, you will be asked to complete an in-
class writing assignment (a "five-minute paper"). These "quizzes" are meant to
provide feedback on how well you understand key concepts from assigned
readings. Finally, you will be called upon to speak in class from time to time
about the issue on which you have developed expertise.

**Grades:**  

Grades will be calculated on the following basis: the position paper on
"solutions" for an issue in international relations, 35%; the first short
paper, 25%; the second short paper, 25%; the "five-minute papers", 5% (total);
and contributions to class discussion, 10%. Incompletes will be granted only
in exceptional circumstances, and only with my prior and explicit approval.

**Other Comments:**

I strongly encourage you to visit me during my office hours. Visits enable me
to gauge how well the course is going and whether my expectations are clear to
you. They also enable you to explore specific issues in greater depth. Please
use this time as a resource to help improve your work over the course of the
term.

If you have disabilities, special learning needs, or problems that emerge from
work commitments, family commitments, or medical emergencies, please let me
know what I can do to accommodate you. This syllabus is available in
alternative formats upon request. Please contact Cheryl Olsen, Department of
Political Science, 1414 Social Sciences, 624-4144.

**Course Readings:**  

All of the assigned readings for the course can be obtained at the H.D. Smith
West Bank Bookstore for $88.95. Assigned readings are from four books and one
article:

  1. Richard K. Betts, ed., _Conflict After the Cold War: Arguments on Causes of War and Peace_. Allyn and Bacon, 1994.
  2. David Campbell, _Writing Security: United States Foreign Policy and the Politics of Identity_ , Revised Edition. University of Minnesota Press, 1998.
  3. Amitav Ghosh, _In an Antique Land: History in the Guise of a Traveler's Tale_. Vintage Books, 1992.
  4. Kenneth N. Waltz, _Man, the State and War: A Theoretical Analysis_. Columbia University Press, 1954.
  5. Andrew Moravcsik, "Taking Preferences Seriously: A Liberal Theory of International Politics," _International Organization_ , 51(4), Autumn, 1997: 513-553. (This article is available in the course packet room of the West Bank Bookstore.)

**CLASS SCHEDULE**  
  
|  July 22 (Th) | Course overview and introduction - the importance of
theoretical perspective in the analysis of international relations.  
  
  
---|---  
July 27 (T) -  
July 29 (Th) | An overview of theoretical perspectives in terms of three
images, or levels of analysis, in international relations.  
  
Read: Waltz, entire book. (Chaps. I-III for Tuesday; IV-V for Wednesday; VI-
VIII for Thursday).  
Betts, Part 1, pp. 1-61 (we will draw on these four readings throughout the
week).  
  
  
August 3 (T) -  
August 5 (Th) | Political Realism  
  
Read: Betts, Parts 2 and 8 (pp. 63-123, and pp. 443-520) [for Tuesday]; Part 6
(pp. 309-382) [for Wednesday]; and Part 4; except the article by Norman Angell
(pp. 179-246) [for Thursday].  
  
[first paper assignment distributed in class, Tuesday, August 3]  
  
  
August 10 (T) -  
August 11 (W) | Liberalism  
  
Read: Betts, Part 3 (pp. 125-172) [for Tuesday]; articles by Norman Angell
(pp. 176-178 in Betts), Andrew Moravcsik (course packet), Stanley Kober (pp.
250-262 in Betts) and Michael Doyle (pp. 263-279 in Betts) [for Wednesday].  
  
[first paper due at class time, Tuesday, August 10]  
  
  
August 12 (Th) -  
August 18 (W) | Post-structuralism  
  
Read: Campbell, entire book (pp. 1-51, for Thursday; pp. 53-168 for Tuesday;
pp. 169-227 for Wednesday).  
Betts, articles by Ernest Gellner (pp. 280-292), and Stephen Larrabee (pp.
293-307, [for Wednesday].  
  
[second paper assignment distributed in class, Tuesday, August 17]  
  
  
August 19 (Th) -  
August 24 (T) | Post-colonial constructivism  
  
Read: Ghosh, entire book (pp. 11-105 for Thursday; pp. 107-353 for Tuesday).  
Betts, articles by Graham Fuller (pp. 386-393) and Myron Wiener (pp. 394-412)
[for Tuesday].  
  
[second paper due at class time, Tuesday, August 24]  
  
  
August 25 (W) - | Course summary  
  
[position paper due at class time, Wednesday, August 25]  
  
  
  
**Contemporary Issues of International Relations**  

  1. Issues of security from organized violence
    1. The international relations of controlling the means of violence
      1. nuclear weapons
      2. chemical weapons
      3. biological weapons
      4. new technologies for weapons and delivery systems
      5. small arms (automatic rifles, etc.)
      6. anti-personnel land mines
    2. The international relations of avoiding/reducing violent hostilities
      7. dealing with "war criminals"
      8. eliminating rape as a weapon of war
      9. assuring rights of indigenous peoples and minority nationalities
      10. Northern Ireland
      11. Caspian Sea region
      12. Sri Lanka
      13. Chiapas
      14. Colombia
      15. Sudan
      16. Central Africa (Rwanda, Burundi, Congo)
      17. Sierra Leone
      18. Ethiopia - Eritrea
      19. North Korea - South Korea
      20. Pakistan - India - China
      21. China - Taiwan
      22. Israel - Palestine
      23. Turkey - Greece
      24. U.S. - Iraq
      25. U.S. - Cuba
  2. Issues of global economic prosperity
    3. The international relations of circumventing/managing economic crisis
      26. Russia
      27. Japan
      28. South Korea
      29. Indonesia
      30. Thailand
      31. Mexico
      32. South Africa
      33. Albania
      34. unrecoverable debt
      35. stablizing and managing the global financial system
      36. dealing with trade wars
    4. The international relations of promoting sustainable development
      37. a common European currency
      38. expanding the EU
      39. expanding NAFTA
      40. strengthening ASEAN
      41. technology transfers
      42. intellectual property rights
      43. control over natural resources
      44. destruction of forests
      45. depletion of biodiversity
      46. deterioration of fisheries
      47. large dams
      48. water pollution and the degradation of water resources
      49. atmospheric pollution
      50. global warming
      51. health care
      52. provision of education and investment in human capital
      53. population
      54. industrialization
      55. agricultural productivity
      56. urbanization problems
  3. Others
    57. Another issue of your choice.

  
  
** [S UMMER 2001](../../summer2001/index.html)  
  
[SPRING 2001](../spring2001/index.html)  
  
[FALL 2000](../fall2000/index.html)  
  
[SUMMER 2000](../../summer2000/index.html)  
  
[SPRING 2000](../../spring2000/index.html)  
  
[FALL 1999](../../index.html)  
  
[SUMMER 1999](../summer1999/index.html)  
  
[SPRING 1999](../index.html)  
  
[WINTER 1999](../../winter1999/index.html)  
  
[FALL 1998](../../fall1998/index.html)  
  
[SUMMER 1998](../../summer1998/index.html)  
  
**  
![](../../../images/end.jpg)

