Bill Wilson  
_People and Boundaries_

PO349  
Spring, 2002  
Tuesday, Thursday  2:30-3:45  



**EDUCATIONAL PHILOSOPHY:** _This course has been framed within a particular
sense of the purpose of education.   The approach draws heavily upon the ideas
of Parker Palmer who identifies the aims of education as including "knowing,
teaching, and learning," and he further states," **to teach is to create a
space in which the community of truth is practiced. "**  My task as a teacher
is to create a space for learning;  all members of the community bear
responsibility for preparation and participation to sustain the necessary
dialogue.  
    The process of developing the "community of truth" accepts the idea that all who come have something to offer the exploration and should be heard respectfully.  "Truth"  is more than knowledge, and while it is personal, it can only be achieved with the help of the community dialogue; given the limitations of every individual, it can arise only from discourse with others.  As such, "truth" resides someplace in between the individual and the learning community.  This context provides a creative tension as learners seek to develop their own ":voice" and at the same time engage in discourse which honors the modes of learning to arrive at knowledge.  To be sure, those modes have changed over time and will likely continue to change.  Hence, learning is a dynamic enterprise; undergraduate studies are but an early stage of a lifelong process.  
    The achievement of "truth" is the ultimate goal of liberal education, and in the presence of "truth" our lives can be transformed.   Such a transformation is not simply gaining abstract knowledge but is also embodied in the action of the person.  The "truth" that this course pursues will seek to help you understand the subject better and empower you to act in light of that knowledge.  
    And yet it would be presumptuous to think that any course of study will automatically provide you with all of the answers you need.  Indeed, undergraduate studies may be thought of more as the development of the ability to pose critical questions in preparation for lifelong learning.  Toward this end it is helpful to listen to the wise words of Denise Levertov's poem:_

_                             Just when you seem to yourself  
                                       nothing but a flimsy web  
                                       of questions, you are given  
                                     the questions of others to hold  
                                        in the emptiness of your hands,  
                                        songbird eggs that can still hatch  
                                           if you keep them warm . . . .  
                                      You are given the questions of others  
                                           as if they were answers  
                                              to all you ask.  Yes, perhaps  
                                          this gift is your answer._

  
**PURPOSE** : Amidst the broader trends of international politics which
address the growing flow across the boundaries of states, the movement of
people is a slower process.  Central to the notion of the political identity
of the nation-state is the ability to control entry of people.  The Universal
Declaration of Human Rights includes the right of individuals to leave their
country, but there is no corresponding obligation of states to allow entry.
Through the individual policies of states (immigration laws) and international
agreements (refugee treaties), a "regime" has been created which unevenly
regulates the movement of people  
     While perhaps lagging in relation to other transboundary movements, around one million people migrate permanently each year and hundreds of thousands more seek political asylum.  In addition many more people are driven from their homelands by conditions of war, economic difficulty, or environmental disaster.   In 1997 almost 90 million people are thought to be living outside the nation-state of their birth.   
     These numbers are significant, particularly since the general movement heads in one direction, toward advanced industrial states, particularly Europe and the United States.  The United States now has the highest absolute level of immigration in its history: more than 1.1 million people annually, 400,000 higher than the annual peak of 700,000 from 1900-1920.  However the immigration rate, 0.4%, is lower than that earlier period (0.7%) due to the larger size of the receiving population.  
     Understanding the immigration/refugee issue provides insight into the workings of political, economic, and social forces both within receiving and sending states as well as the international regime which regulates these movements.  The issues to be addressed go beyond simple models of utility and efficiency since the questions of immigration and political asylum are often deeply emotional issues for societies; the issue also has a significant moral dimension.  
      

**CONDUCT:** This class demands your active participation through speaking,
listening, reading, and writing.   Central to our work is the text and
accompanying readings and activities.  From this departure point we will
investigate each subject through dedicated discussion periods and analytical
essays.  It is crucial that you do the readings for the class on time and be
prepared to participate.

**  
OFFICE HOURS:** Monday, Wednesday, Friday 2:30-3:30; Tuesday, Thursday
1:30-2:30 or by appointment  
I encourage you to come in to go over papers, discuss the text, or just to
talk.  It helps to make an appointment, but don't hesitate to stop in any time
my door is ajar.   Also, you can always send me a message via electronic mail;
timely replies are guaranteed. Address:
[wwilson@smcvt.edu](mailto:wwilson@smcvt.edu)

**  
REQUIREMENTS:**  
        1\. Analytical Essays- These five page essays are the central method of evaluation.   Essays may be re-written for an improved grade.  (See Handout:[ _On Written Work](../Handouts/On_Written_Work.htm))_ (See: [Analytical Papers](saps.htm))  
        2\. Discussion Papers- Discussion papers are designed as reflections on readings or suggested topics which lead to full class examination. (See Handout: _[Discussion Papers](../Handouts/Discussion_Papers.htm))  
        _3\. Case Presentation- Each class member will present a "case" from a selected list, or an approved choice which illuminates the issues examined in class. _  
     [   ](final_examination.htm) _[4\. Final Examination-](final_examination.htm) The Final Examination will integrate the course work around a selected theme. There is also the option of a research paper (See Handout:[ On Term Papers](../Handouts/On_Term_Papers.htm)).

     **Project:** All students will participate in an e-mail mentoring project with Charlestown High School in  Boston.  Under planning is email exchanges with first/second generation immigrant student families with a field trip to Boston to visit the school and the Museum of Immigration.

     **Four Credit Requirement:** Those students enrolling for four credits will engage in a service project of one hour per week with either Vermont Adult Learning English Schooling or the Refugee Resettlement Program. Students will also keep a journal of service, read a short work on learning English (see Materials) and submit a short paper of reflection of their experience.

**_  
_ EVALUATION: **Evaluation is an important aspect of this course, not in terms
of grades, but in the sense of the responsibility of each class  member for
the critical evaluation and discussion of the ideas presented in class.  
I encourage your critical views on course content and method throughout the
semester; a formal survey will be used at the end of the course.  Final letter
grades will be based upon quality points in the following proportions:

        Analytical Essays.......................................................................4 @ 125   =    500  
        Case Presentation....................................................................................   =   100   
        Discussion Papers..................................................................best10@20)   =  200     
        Final Examination.....................................................................................    =  _200_  
                                                                                         TOTAL POINTS      = 1000 POINTS  
  
**COURSE POLICIES:**  
    1\. This course is conducted in conformance with the policy on academic integrity explained in the Student Guide (See Handout:[ Academic Integrity](../Handouts/academic_integrity.htm)) Please ask if you have any questions regarding this policy applied to any assignment.  
    2\. Students must complete all course requirements for a passing grade.  
    3\. The penalty for unexcused late submissions is the quality point equivalent of one grade per day.  If for some reason you cannot complete the assignment on time, contact me _before_ the submission date.   I have message capability on both home and office phones as well as e-mail.  
    4\. Because this class involves the obligations of a collective effort in education, attendance will be taken regularly; more than one week of unexcused absences will result in a grading penalty of five quality points for each additional class missed.  
    5\. Students with documented learning differences should contact me to make any necessary special arrangements for fulfillment of course requirements. 

**  
A WORD ON MATERIALS:** This is the initial offering of this course.   Your
thoughts on the materials and their use are welcome throughout the course.

Castles, Stephen and Alastair Davidson, CITIZENSHIP AND MIGRATION:
GLOBALIZATION AND THE POLITICS OF BELONGING (New York: Routledge, 2000)

Criddle, JoAn, BAMBOO AND BUTTERFLIES: FROM REFUGEE TO CITIZEN (East-West
Publishing, 1992).  
  
Mills, N. ed., ARGUING IMMIGRATION: THE DEBATE OVER THE CHANGING FACE OF
AMERICA  
(New York: Touchstone, 1994).

Reimers, D., UNWELCOME STRANGERS  
  
_Extra Credit Supplement:_ Hoffman, E., LOST IN TRANSLATION: A LIVE IN A NEW
LANGUAGE  
(New York: Penguin, 1990).

  
**WEB SITES OF INTEREST:** These selected websites are in some cases specific
to the course while   others are general references.  They may prove helpful
in your research.  I welcome any assessments or additions.

IMMIGRATION/REFUGEES ISSUES AND ORGANIZATIONS  
     The Atlantic Monthly on Immigration- a series of articles on immigration and refugee issues drawn from magazine archives- interesting and providing diverse viewpoints [www.theatlantic.com/politics/immigrat/immigrat.htm](http://www./theatlantic.com/politics/immigrat/immigrat.htm)   
     Brookings Institute on Immigration Policy: the publications of a liberal think tank on US policy issues; this is a strong site with references to a variety of sources.  [www.brook.edu/gs/projects/immigrat.htm](http://www.brook.edu/gs/projects/immigrat.htm)  
     US Commission on Immigration Reform-Blue Ribbon Commission which studied and made recommendations in 1997. This was a comprehensive study too soon forgotten. [www.utexas.edu/lbj/uscir](http://www.utexas.edu/lbj/uscir)  
     US Department of State, Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration.  The Bureau may or may not still exist- note dated information [www.state.gov/www/global/prm](http://www.state.gov/www/global/prm)  
     US Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS)- The INS is the major US government agency which deals with refugee and migration policies for entry into the United States.  [www.ins.usdoj.gov/graphics/index.htm](http://www.ins.usdoj.gov/graphics/index.htm)  
     Center for Immigration Studies.  A think tank on   immigration policy issues which supports liming immigration to the US but more generous treatment for those admitted [www.cis.org](http://www.cis.org)  
     Office of Migration and Refugee Policy, US Conference of Catholic Bishops [www.nccbuscc.org/mrs/mrp.htm](http://www.nccbuscc.org/mrs/mrp.htm)  
     US Border Control- A non-governmental group opposed to liberal immigration policies.  Information on the  
organization is unclear.
[www.usbc.org/info/citusa.citusa.htm](http://www.usbc.org/info/citusa.citusa.htm)  
     Institute for the Study of International Migration, Georgetown University.  Compilation of Studies and Sources of the Program  [www.georgetown..edu/sfs/programs/isim](http://www.georgetown..edu/sfs/programs/isim)  
     Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, International Migration Policy Program. Compilation of studies and resources of the program.  [www.ceip.org/files/projects/IMP/IMP_Home.SAP](http://www.ceip.org/files/projects/IMP/IMP_Home.SAP)  
     US Committee on Refugees.  USCR is one of the most prominent non-governmentala organizations dealing with refugee issues; good sources and links available here.  [www.refugees.org](http://www.refugees.org)  
     United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees  [www.unhcr.ch](http://www.unhcr.ch)  
     Immigration Sites  
          [United Kingdom](http://www.ind.homeoffice.gov.uk)  [ Japan](http://www.tokyovisa.co.jp)[Canada](http://www.cic.gc.ca/)  
          [Sweden](http://www.immi.se/control.htm)  Australia [European Community](http://europa.eu.int/comm/justice_home/unit/immigration_en.htm)[ Israel  
](http://www.moia.gov.il)   [
Singapore](http://app.internet/gov.sg/scripts/mha/sir/index.cgi)  
     Migration News- monthly information on international migration from the University of California at Davis, with links to other sites [ http://migration.ucdavis.edu/mn/](http://migration.ucdavis.edu/mn/)  

INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (SELECTED)  
     

      Further materials and internet websites will be identified during the course for supplemental general readings on the subjects, yet it is helpful to indicate some sources for general reference.  
_CIAO_ \- Columbia University International Affairs index provides information
and on-line articles on a broad range of international affairs.  
_Lexis-Nexis_ \- Lexis-Nexis provides a wide range of information on current
events as well as on-line articles. There is also access to individual country
information.  
_MUSE-_ Muse provides a variety of periodicals- of interest to this class are
_World Politics, Human Rights Quarterly, School of Advanced International
Studies (SAIS) Review  
PAIS- Public Affairs Information Service-_ index of a wide variety of
periodicals  
_UMI-Pro-Quest Direct-_ index of periodicals and newspapers  
  
LIBRARY PERIODICAL HOLDINGS (GENERAL INTERNATIONAL)  
_American Journal of International Law (through 1994), Foreign Affairs,
Foreign Policy, International Organization, Journal of Conflict Resolution,
Journal of International Affairs, Political Science Quarterly, Studies in
Conflict and Terrorism, Third World Quarterly, World of Work, World Politics,
World Press Review, World Watch_  
        
     
**CLASS SCHEDULE**

**DATE  
**  
T    1/15

Th 1/17

T   1/22

Th 1/24

T   1/29

Th 1/31

T   2/5

Th 2/7

T   2/12

Th 2/14

T   2/19

Th 2/21

  

T   3/5

Th 3/7

T   3/12

Th 3/14

T   3/19

Th 3/21

T   3/26

Th 3/28

T   4/2

Th 4/4

T   4/9

Th 4/11

T   4/16

Th 4/18

T   4/23

Th 4/25

T   4/30  

  
| **READING  
**  
Introduction  
  
Castles 1  
  
            2  
  
            3  
  
            4  
  
            5  
  
            6  
  
            7  
  
            8  
  
            9-10  
  
\---  
  
Criddle Part I  
  
         REVISED SYLLABUS  
(See hard copy handouts)  
  
  
Film: El Norte  
  
Criddle I  
  
Criddle II  
  
Criddle III  
  
Criddle IV  
  
Reimer 1  
  
Reimer 2  
  
Reimer 3  
  
Reimer 4  
  
Reimer 5  
  
Reimer 6  
  
Reimer 7  
  
Mills 1  
  
Mills 2  
  
Mills 3  
  
Mills 4  
  
Mills 5  
  







  | **ASSIGNMENT**

DISC1







DISC2  
  
  
  
DISC3  
  
  
  
DISC4  
Analytical Paper 1  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Analytical Paper 1  
  
  
  
DISC5  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Analytical Paper 2  
DISC6  
  
  
  
DISC7  
  
  
  
DISC8  
  
  
Analytical Paper 3  
  
DISC9  
  
  
DISC10  
  
DISC11  
  
Analytical Paper 4  
  
  

  
  
  
  
  
  
---|---|---  
  


[Homepage](../index.htm) | [FYS101](../101_FYS/first_year_seminar.htm) |
[PO410](../410_SS/senior_seminar.htm) |
[PO245](../245_IP/international_politics.htm) |
[PO347O347](../347_IL/International_law.htm) |
[PO324](../324_EP/environmental_politics.htm)  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
  


