###  
University of San Francisco

### Sociology 325  
Critical Approaches to Race and Ethnicity  
Spring 2002

Professor Rebecca King O'Riain

Office: UC 550,  
Phone: 422-5861  
e-mail: king@usfca.edu  
Office hours: Tuesdays and Thursdays 1-3 p.m. and by appointment  
Class meetings: Tuesdays and Thursdays 9:45-11 a.m. in Harney 232.  
Web page: http://www.usfca.edu/fac-staff/king/  
(All course handouts including the syllabus are available on line here.)

Course Description:

This course is a comparative inquiry into the bases and mechanisms of racial
and ethnic thinking which have been used as the criteria to create social
inequality. There are four basic sections to this course. First, we look at
the epistemological ways that people have come to understand the concepts of
race and ethnicity and try to glean why these understandings are often
confusing and contradictory. Drawing heavily on Race Critical Theories (RCT)
which extend Critical Race Theories beyond the legal sphere, we will discuss
the confusion between folk and analytic notions of race and review the
fundamental ways of thinking about race and ethnicity. Second, drawing on
Racial Formation Theory, we will analyze the ways in which race has been
embedded, challenged and changed as a form of classification to divide, rank
and order human beings - both people of color and whites. Thirdly, we will see
how the concepts of race and ethnicity have been used as forms of domination
(i.e. segregation, discrimination, ghettoization) to better understand how we
may undo racism in order to create social justice. Finally, in order to
understand the uniqueness of the United States, we will use internationally
comparative cases (South Africa, Brazil, and Japan) to understand how the US
form of racialization is different from other nations.  

_Requirements:_  
Participation: Your attendance, preparation, and participation are key to
getting the most you can out of this seminar. Please come prepared for class
by completing the assigned reading before each class session.

> Each week (for 10 weeks) 2 students will be asked to prepare a discussion
overview of the readings with a detailed list of questions and to lead the
class in discussion. This means that you will have to read the assigned
readings a week or more in advance of the time that you lead the discussion
and come to discuss what you will do as class leaders prior to the class with
me. 5% of your grade will be based on this presentation.

>

> I expect students to be familiar with the university policies on plagiarism
and conduct in the classroom as published in the Fogcutter student handbook,
which can be found at: http://www.usfca.edu/fogcutter/

  
Attendance: I will take attendance at each class and your attendance will be
5% of your course grade. Please note that the schedule of topics and readings
is subject to change and that all students are responsible for any
announcements made in class. If you must miss class, you are responsible for
the material that you have missed (making up any assignments or getting the
notes/seeing the video etc.).

> Tardiness will not be accepted. If you are not present in the classroom at
11:20 a.m., you will be marked absent for that day.

>

> If you have more than 2 unexcused absences, your attendance grade will be
penalized one step for each subsequent absence i.e. from an A to an A-.

Research Paper: Students are required to write a research paper. The topic can
be anything you desire as long as it is related to the content of the course
(race/ethnicity). A set of guidelines will be handed out in class and will
also be available on my web page at: http://www.usfca.edu/fac-staff/king/.
This paper is worth 30% of your course grade.

> Your papers should be 20 (double spaced) pages in length (11 or 12 point
font with one inch margins), with at least 10 citations in the Bibliography.
You must use ASA style citations and number your pages. This paper will be due
at the beginning of class on **Tuesday, April 16, 2002**. No late papers will
be accepted.

Exams: There will be two essay, in class exams in this course each worth 30%
of your course grade. The mid term exam will be on Thursday March 14, 2002 and
the final exam is on May 16, 2002 at 12:30 p.m.

> I cannot offer exams at other times.

There are two required books for this course available in the USF bookstore
and on reserve in the Gleeson Library:

> Cornell, Stephen and Hartmann, Douglas. 1998. _Ethnicity and Race: Making
Identities in a Changing World_. Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press.(C  & H)

>

> Essed, Philomena and Goldberg, David Theo. 2002. _Race Critical Theories:
Text and Context_. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.(E  &G)

There are also articles available in a reader which has also been placed on
reserve in the Gleeson Library. These readings are marked with an (*).

Schedule of Readings and Topics

I: What is Race? What is Ethnicity?

> Week 1 and 2(January 22/24; January 29/31): Finding our way out of the
racial/ethnic maze

>

>> C & H; Chapter 1 and 2.

>>

>> Banton, Michael. 1979. "Analytical and Folk Concepts of Race" Ethnic and
Racial Studies 2-2 (April 127-138).*

>>

>> Cornell, Stephen. 1996. "The Variable Ties that Bind: Content and
Circumstances in Ethnic Processes" Ethnic and Racial Studies 19-2 (April):
265-289.*

>>

>> Goldberg, David Theo. In E & G; Chapter 16 and 25.

>>

>> Balibar, Etienne. In E & G; Chapter 12 and 23.

>

> Week 3 (February 5/7): Changing Notions of Race and Ethnicity

>

>> Banton, Michael. Changing Conceptions of Race (Ch. 3) and Theoretical
Approaches (Ch. 5) in Racial and Ethnic Competition Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press. p. 32-59, 78-99.*

>>

>> Hall, Stuart. In E & G; Chapter 2 and 31.

>>

>> C & H; Chapters 3 and 4.

  
II. Categorization and Racial Classification

> Week 4(February 12/14): Racial Formation

>

>> Omi, Michael and Winant, Howard. in E&G; Chapters 7 and 32.

>>

>> Markus, Maria. In E &G; Chapters 22 and 34.

>>

>> C & H; Chapter 5

>>

>> Jenkins, Richard. 1997. "Categorization and Power" pg. 52-73. In Rethinking
Ethnicity Arguments and Explorations London: SAGE publications.*

>

> Week 5 (February 19/21) : Classification

>

>> Barker in E&G; Chapters 4 and 35

>>

>> Van Dijk in E&G; Chapters 17 and 36.

>>

>> Davis, F. James. 1991. "Other Places, Other Definitions" ch.5 in Who is
Black? One Nation's Definition University Park: Penn State University p
81-122. *

>>

>> Nagel, Joane. 1996. "American Indian Population Growth: Changing Patterns
of Indian Ethnic Identification." pg. 83-112. In American Indian Ethnic
Renewal: Red Power and the Resurgence of Identity and Culture. New York:
Oxford University Press.*

>>

>> Wright, Luther Jr. "Race and Racial Classifications" in Delgado, Richard
and Jean Stefancic. 1997. Critical White Studies Philadelphia: Temple
University Press:320-322.*

>

> Week 6 (February 26/28): Multiracial Challenges to Racial Categorization

>

>> Root in E&G;Chapters 20 and 43.

>>

>> C&H; Chapter 6

>>

>> Fernandez, Carlos A. "Government Classification of Multiracial/Multiethnic
People" in Root, Maria P.P. 1996. The Multiracial Experience Newbury Park:
Sage Publications: 15-36.*

>>

>> Graham, Susan. "The Real World" in Root, Maria P.P. 1996. The Multiracial
Experience Newbury Park: Sage Publications: 37-48.*

>>

>> Whiteness

>

> Week 7 (March 5/7): What is Whiteness? - race? ethnicity?

>

>> Roediger in E&G; Chapters 18 and 38

>>

>> Marabel and Fernandez in E&G; Chapters 19 and 39

>>

>> Recommended: Haney Lopez, Ian F. 1996. White By Law: The Legal Construction
of Race. New York: New York University Press.

>

>  
>  Week 8:(March 12/14): White Culture?

>

>> Wray, Matt and Newitz, Annalee. eds. 1997. White trash : Race and Class in
America  
>  New York : Routledge.* (selections)

>>

>> Sacks, Karen Bodkin. "How did Jews Become White Folks?" in Delgado,
Richard. And Jean Stefancic. 1997. Critical Whiteness Studies: Looking Behind
the Mirror. Philadelphia: Temple University Press:395-401.*

**Mid Term Exam on Thursday, March 14, 2002. Please bring 2 large blue books
to class.**

III. Racial and Ethnic Divisions

> Week 9:(March 19/21) Segregation

>

>> C&H: Chapter 7

>>

>> West and McGary in E&G; Chapter 5 and 27

>>

>> Conley, Dalton. 1999. Being Black, Living in the Red. Berkeley: University
of  
>  California Press. Chapter 2 "Forty Acres and a Mule" pg. 25-53.*

>>

>> Massey, Doug. and Nancy Denton. 1992. American Apartheid. Chapters 1 and
4.*

Have a great spring break!!

>  
>  Week 10 (April 2/4): Discrimination

>

>> Mohanty and Kim in E&G; Chapters 11 and 41.

>>

>> Banton, Michael. 1994. Discrimination. Buckingham and Philadelphia: Open
University Press.  
>  Selections. *

>>

>> Takaki, Ronald. Strangers from a different shore : a history of Asian
Americans  
>  Boston : Little, Brown, 1998. Ch. 1.*

>

> Week 11:(April 9/11) Ghettoization

>

>> Davis in E&G; Chapters 3 and 44

>>

>> Collins in E&G; Chapters 9 and 30

>>

>>  
>  Wacquant, Loic. 1997. "Three Pernicious Premises in the Study of the
American Ghetto" International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 20
(July): 341-353.*

  
IV. International Comparisons

> Week 12: (April16/18) South Africa

>

>> Gilroy and Bell in E&G; Chapters 14 and 42.

>>

>> Frederickson, George M. 1981. "Race Mixture and the Color Line" Ch. 3 in
White Supremacy: A Comparative Study in American and South African History.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, p. 94-135.*  
>  
>  Recommended:

>>

>> Worden, Nigel. 1994. The Making of Modern South Africa: Conquest,
Segregation and Apartheid. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.

>>

>> Marx, Anthony. W. 1998. Making Race and Nation: A Comparison of South
Africa, the United States and Brazil. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

*** Your research paper is due on Tuesday, April 16, 2002 at the beginning of
the class.**

> Week 13: (April 23/25) Japan

>

>> Goodman, David G. "Anti-Semitism in Japan" in Dikkotter, Frank (ed) 1998.
The Construction of Racial Identities in China and Japan: Historical and
Contemporary Perspectives. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press:177-198.*

>>

>> Hane, M. 1982. "The Outcaste in Japan" p. 138-171. In Peasants, Rebels and
Outcastes: The Underside of Modern Japan. New York: Pantheon.*

>>

>> Recommended:  
>  Ooms, Herman. 1996. Status and State Racism: From Kawata to Eta ch. 5 in
Tokugawa Village Practice: Class, Status, Power, Law Berkeley: University of
California Press. p. 243-311.

>>

>> Armstrong, Bruce. 1989. Racialisation and Nationalist Ideology: The
Japanese Case in International Sociology 4-3 (September): 329-343.

>

> Week 14 (April 30/May 2) Brazil

>

>> Degler, Carl. 1970. Neither Black nor White: Slavery and Race Relations in
Brazil and the US Madison: University of Wisconsin Press. Pages 3-21 and
95-152.*

>>

>> Nobles, Melissa. 2000. Shades of Citizenship: Race and the Census in Modern
Politics Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. With Time ....they will all
be white: Brazilian Censuses and National Identity p.85-128. *

>

> Week 15 (May 7/9): Summary and Student Seminar Paper Presentations

>

>> C&H; Chapter 8.

>>

>>  

