![](../images/header3.jpg)  
  
---  
  |

**Japanese Film JA/TH 237**

Instructor: Carole Cavanaugh, Associate Professor of Japanese, Assistant
Provost

402 Old Chapel

Office hours: Wednesday 1-3, and by appointment

**The goal of this course is to analyze Japanese films within the contexts of
contemporary Japanese culture, traditional aesthetics, and film criticism.**
No prior knowledge of Japanese arts or culture and no special expertise in
film are expected.

**Japanese Film is a course designed for the study of the medium of cinema in
one of its richest cultural contexts.** The Japanese developed a national
cinema, with its own  "look and feel," very early in the 20th century, when
the world market was dominated by films from France and the United States. By
the middle of the century, Japanese film achieved international recognition
and continues to produce significant artistic achievements. The most vibrant
era of Japanese cinema was between the 1940s and the 1970s, and most of the
films in the course are from that period. It was during this time that Japan
emerged from the devastation of World War II to become the second largest
economy in the world.

**Our primary texts in this course are the films themselves.** We will watch
them carefully, scene by scene, and often shot by shot. We will pay special
attention to the combination of elements that constitute each director's
style: camera movement, lighting, mise-en-sc ene, to name a few of these
elements. The general techniques of film analyisis and critique taught in this
course will apply to other films and often to other visual media.

**We will also study the political, social, and cultural context in which each
film was made**. Information about Japanese history, literature, and society
will be provided to bring each film into focus as a special artifact of the
circumstances of its cultural production. Some critical approaches to film
ignore anything outside the film itself in arriving at meaning; others insist
that no work is free of the influences of history and culture. This course
will combine appropriate approaches to arrive at meaningful encounters with
each film.

**Certain themes emerge in this course** : individual style, definitions of
culture, cultural aesthetics, family and the individual, gender and society,
history and its interpretation. As we move through the course, your awareness
of film as an expression of social problems and values will grow within the
context of the Japanese modern experience.  

The course is organized around the concept of **analytical** **response** :
how we respond to films as works of art or commentaries on society; how we
respond to a director's individual vision; how we respond to the
representation of culture; how we respond to "the lived experience of the
other" in the films we see. To validate that response, we must first know the
cultural context of the film and the cinematic expectations that produced it.

Emmanuel Levinas, the French philosopher, argues that "there is a form of
truth that is totally alien to me, that I do not discover within myself, but
that calls on me from beyond me, and it requires me to leave the realm of the
known and of the same in order to settle in a land that is under its rule.
Here the knower sets out on an adventure of uncertain outcome, and the
instruments that he or she brings may well be inappropriate to the tasks that
will arise. Reason will play a role, but it will be a secondary one; it can
only come into play once the primary fact of the irruption of the other has
been experienced" (Michel de Certeau, _Heterologies: Discourse on the Other_
).



**Course requirements** :

1\. **Regular class attendance** and preparation for lecture and discussion
are expected.

2\. **Screenings:** Films and laser discs will be screened weekly. You are
expected to see them at scheduled time **. The screening is an officially
scheduled class; exams or meetings for other courses that conflict with
screenings should be rescheduled with the instructors of those courses**.
Videos and laser discs are on reserve in Sunderland for study and review.

3\. **Readings** : complete weekly readings according to the syllabus.
**Electronic conference** (see below) questions and class discussions will
often be based on the readings.

4\. **Assignments** :

a. A **major paper** will be assigned and instructions will be given during
the term on topics, length, and due date.

b. **Electronic Conference:** Participation in the electronic conference
(Motet) set up for this course is required. The conference is an informal
"space" to discuss thoughts and ideas. I will throw out a question about once
a week but the dialogue is yours to conduct and to keep going. **You are
required to submit two postings a week sometime between the Tuesday class and
the following Monday.** I will evaluate postings at the end of each three week
period.

c. A **short paper** (2 pages) will be assigned for each film. A word, phrase,
or question will be given as the topic of the response paper. **Response
papers are due in the JA/TH 237 course folder on the Serval vol. 2 server by
midnight on Friday of each week**.

**Logging on to Serval**

All course folders reside on the server, Serval, in Volume 2. The path to your
course folder is:

Serval\Vol2\Classes\fall 00\JA 237A

You log on to the folder using your username and password. Your username is
the same as your midd-unix username. The password for new students is the
first 3 digits of their pin number. Once students and/or faculty change their
password from the default, only they know what it is. If you have trouble
accessing the server because you cannot remember your password, please call
the HelpDesk at extension 2200 for assistance.

**Using Your Course Folder**

Your course file server folder has been created to facilitate exchange of
files and course information between students and instructors. It is divided
into five subfolders: **Dropbox** , **Handouts** , **Public_html** ,
**Return** , and **Share**.

**_Submit response papers in the Dropbox_**

The Dropbox folder is designed to allow electronic submission of your
assignments. When you write an assignment on the computer, submit it by
copying the completed file here. Copy files into the course folder in the same
way that you copy files on your hard drive. Although all course participants
may copy files into the Dropbox, only the instructor can open it to view the
contents.

**Note** : Some instructors have reported difficulties with students using
Macintoshes trying to save files to the dropbox. Please tell all your students
to save their files to a local hard drive, and then drag the file to the
dropbox. This will also provide the students with a copy of their submission.

Find your Response paper with my comments in the **_Return folder_**

The Return folder allows me to return corrected assignments and distribute
other documents to you individually. Inside the Return folder are a number of
subfolders, one for each student enrolled in the course. Each folder can be
opened only by the instructor and by the student whose username it bears.

**_Share_**

The Share folder is an open area for exchange of documents between all members
of the class. Both students and instructors may copy files into it and read
and edit its contents. The Share folder is designed to facilitate peer review
activities and other sharing of information.  
  
5\. **Exams** : A final exam is scheduled for this course.





|  
  
* * *

[Description](index.html) | [Professor](../professor/index.html) |
[Syllabus](../syllabus/index.html) | [Films](../films/index.html) |
[Assignments](../assignments/index.html) |
[Discussion](../discussion/index.html) | [Resources](../resources/index.html)

* * *

