**TENTATIVE COURSE OUTLINE**

**FOR**

ANTHROPOLOGY 452  
**JAPANESE SOCIETY**  
Professor Dan Whitney  
Spring 2000  
Class Meets: T-TH 11-12:15, SH-141

**Office:** Nasatir Hall, Room 333

* * *

**Hours:**  
most Mondays 2:30 - 4:00 pm  
Tuesday 10:00 - 11:00 am  
most Wednesdays. 3:00 - 4:30 pm  
Thursday 12:30 - 2:30 pm  
Other times by appointment

* * *

e-mail: [Dan.Whitney@.sdsu.edu](mailto:Dan.Whitney@sdsu.edu)

[Grade Book for Spring 1997k](http://www-
rohan.sdsu.edu/faculty/dwhitney/gb.html)

[http://www-rohan.sdsu.edu/faculty/dwhitney/Whits_End.html](http://www-
rohan.sdsu.edu/faculty/dwhitney/Whits_End.html)

Phone: 594-5843  
Fax: 594-1150

* * *

**TEXTS:  
  
Hendry, Joy**  
1995 _Understanding Japanese Society_. Second Edition. London, Croom Helm.

**Lebra, Takie S.**  
1976 _Japanese Patterns of Behavior._ Honolulu, U of Hawaii Press.

**Reader: Japanese Society**  
1997 I have compiled a set of readings for this class-you may purchase it from
Aztec Shops  
Customized Materials.

* * *

"... but I couldn't help remembering a conversation I'd had in Hokkaido in
July,  
a fortnight into my journey. I was sitting outside a little grocer's shop in
the sun, talking to an old man.  
The old man had asked me where I lived, and I told him I lived in Tokyo.  
`Tokyo is not Japan,' he said. `You can't understand Japan by living in
Tokyo.'  
`No,' I agreed. `That's why I'm taking this time off to have a good look at
the rest of it.'  
`You can't understand Japan just by looking at it,' the old man said.  
`No, not just by looking at it,' I said. `Not by looking at it as a tourist
might out of the window of a bus, but by walking through the whole length of
it.'  
`You can't understand Japan just by walking through it,' the old man said.  
`Not just by walking through it,' I argued, `but by talking to all the
different people I meet.'  
`You can't understand Japan just by talking to people,' the old man said.  
`How do you suggest I try to understand Japan, then?' I asked him.  
He seemed surprised by the question, and a little hurt, and a little angry.  
`You can't understand Japan,' he said."  
_The Roads to Sata: A 2000-mile Walk Through Japan_ , by Alan Booth, New York,
Weatherhill. 1985, p. 281.

* * *

Despite what the wise old man told Booth, we will spend the next 15 weeks
trying to understand Japan--no guarantees, however. Japan is a modern, complex
society in every way; imagine, if you will, trying to understand the United
States in one semester. To deal adequately with such a diverse subject as
Japan requires all the eclecticism of modern anthropology as well as the
insights provided by more traditional sociocultural anthropology, other social
sciences, and the humanities. Coming to grips with today's Japan requires
knowledge of its history, education, religion, philosophy, law, economics,
politics, and literature, as well as its social structure, kinship system, and
village and urban life. We will cover these and other topics to the degree
that time allows.

Of critical importance, of course, is an understanding of the part played by
individual Japanese and the way they come to internalize their culture. We
may, in the course of our readings, lectures, and discussions, tend to de-
emphasize the individual--saying "the Japanese this and the Japanese that"
when we should be saying "some Japanese this and some Japanese that." We
should remember that "the Japanese" are really 125.6 million individuals
(1995) who draw from a common body of general rules and guidelines when going
about their daily lives.

Readings for the course come from a variety of sources, ranging from technical
articles intended for specialists to excerpts from fiction written by and
about the Japanese. The writers are American, Canadian, Australian, English,
German, French, and Japanese; some of their works date to the turn of the
century, and others are as recent as 1996. Much of what you will read was
written by anthropologists, but I've included pieces by journalists,
historians, linguists, lawyers, popular writers, and many others. I've
assigned a lot of reading; please make time in your studies to read
everything.

**READING ASSIGNMENTS SHOULD BE COMPLETED PRIOR TO THE**

**CLASS FOR WHICH THEY ARE ASSIGNED**

Readings range from very easy to very difficult. As a general rule, the
readings in the **Lebra** book are the most difficult. Don't hesitate to ask
questions about things you don't understand. If you are at all hesitant about
asking questions in class, I encourage you to e-mail questions to me at:
[dan.whitney@sdsu.edu](mailto:Dan.Whitney@sdsu.edu). Other students almost
certainly have similar concerns, and we all will benefit by discussing your
question. Although **Lebra** published her book in 1976, much of her reasoning
and many of her conclusions are still sound nearly two decades later.
**Hendry** is pretty straightforward; her book is the closest thing we have to
a textbook. Items in the **Reader** vary a great deal-some hard, some easy,
news-papers articles, excerpts from books, things like that. I have included a
couple of readings from Richard Barrett's introductory cultural anthropology
text at the beginning of the reader. Each of you is required to have taken an
introductory cultural anthropology course, but you may not have--or, you may
have forgotten some of what you learned. I assign the Barrett material so we
can all start on the same page when it comes to using key concepts like
culture. All reading material for this course is available in the Library
Reserve Book Room--most of them in the Electronic Reserve Book section.
Although the loan period is only two hours, you may renew the item if no other
student is waiting. Please note that some readings (2/17, 3/17, 4/21, 4/28,
5/5, 5/7, and 5/12) are available only in the Library Reserch Boook Room (they
are not included in the Reader); plan your reading accordingly.

I will start each class meeting with either a reading quiz (see below) or by
discussing the readings for that day-answering and asking questions. Then I
will "lecture," show a film, or do some-thing else related to the reading
assignment; this means you must complete the assigned reading before class to
get the most benefit from the class. Be prepared to raise questions. Those who
have experienced Japan and the Japanese are strongly encouraged to share with
the rest of us; anecdotes and personal experiences are interesting and
informative, as well as the staple in an anthropological diet. There are many
paths to Buddha, and it's important to hear a variety of views and opinions.
This is a lecture/discussion course, so please get involved. If you are shy
about asking questions in class, write out your questions and give them to me
at the beginning of class, or e-mail them to me.

**GRADING**

I will make a 100% effort in this class--and I expect each of you to do the
same. The classroom only holds 40 students, and university regulations
prohibit me from over-enrolling. Each semester, scores of non-registered
students try to crash. As a dedicated instructor, it pains me to turn away
interested students. Therefore, I ask that each of you seriously consider your
degree of commitment to this course; if for any reason you doubt whether you
can participate to the fullest in all aspects of the class as outlined in this
syllabus, please drop immediately--and tell me so I can add another student to
take your seat.

You and I will sign a contract (see last page) in which you guarantee to make
your best effort to read the assignments before coming to class and then come
to class prepared to discuss the assigned material. I have put a great deal of
effort and thought into selecting reading material from the rich abundance
available. I will do my best to provide you with interesting lectures and
films and to explain readings that may, at first, seem somewhat knotty.
**PLEASE NOTE** the **CELL PHONE** and **PAGER** part of the agreement.

Reading, discussing, and learning are fun; giving and receiving grades are a
necessary evil. The following grading system is designed to encourage people
with a keen interest in Japan to work hard and learn about Japan, about
themselves, and about the art of learning.

**Earning a Grade of C**

Attendance/_[Reading quizzes](http://www-
rohan.sdsu.edu/faculty/dwhitney/sampquiz.html) _._ Fifteen times during the
semester, I'll begin class by distributing two or three questions from that
day's reading assignment. The first 10 minutes of class will be set aside for
you to write an answer showing you read the assignment. Reading quiz questions
will not be difficult. I'll bring several sets of different questions to class
and hand them out; you will write the answer on the sheet containing the
question. If your answer is good, great, or super, you will receive four (4)
points for that day; if your answer is not very good, but shows you read all
of the assigned material, you will receive three (3) points; and if you
attend, but didn't do the reading (or unluckily got a question over a part of
the assignment you didn't have time to read or can't remember what you read),
you will receive two (2) points. You need 44 points (or more) for the _first
part_ of a  "C, B, or A" grade.

**NOTE: I do _not_ give plus/minus grades on reading quizzes or tests. ** A
final course grade may have a plus attached to it for those students who
earned many points more than the 44 required, who enhanced the class by their
participation, or who wrote excellent papers (see below).

[Tests. ](http://www-rohan.sdsu.edu/faculty/dwhitney/samptest.html)Three tests
are scheduled ( **Tuesday, March 7 th, Tuesday, April 11th, and Thursday, May
18h**). You must earn a C grade or better on each test. [See [Examination
Hints](http://www-rohan.sdsu.edu/faculty/dwhitney/examhints.html)] If you
don't get at least a C grade the first time you take a test, you _must_ take
another version of the test. If you don't get at least a C on the second try,
you _must_ keep retaking the test until you earn at least a C grade. You have
only one week from the day the original tests are returned to sit for the
retake test. You must arrange the time and day (not during class time) to
retake a test at the time the original tests are returned. The highest grade
possible on a retake of a test is a C.

Tests assess both your understanding of the lectures and readings and your
ability to apply your knowledge of Japan in the analysis of "factual"
situations created for the test.

**_**

**Earning a Grade of B****

_Attendance/Reading quizzes._ Amass 44 attendance/reading points, as explained
above.

_Tests_. Average grade of at least B on the three tests. Tests may **NOT** be
retaken to raise a test grade to a B.

_Activity Reports_. Submit by **Wednesday, April 16 th** an acceptable
Activity Report. The basis of an acceptable Activity Report may be: reading a
book of Japanese fiction; reading any of the books in the [Supplemental
Reading List](http://www-
rohan.sdsu.edu/faculty/dwhitney/452_bibliography.html); or viewing a Japanese
film. **YOU MUST GET MY APPROVAL--IN ADVANCE--FOR ALL REPORTS BASED ON FILMS
AND BOOKS** except for books listed in the Supplemental Reading List--DO NOT
REPORT ON BOOKS LISTED IN THE GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY.

Your report must be typed, double-spaced, and not longer than six pages.
Reports must:  
a) provide a thorough summary of the book or movie that demonstrates careful
reading or viewing;  
b) provide an analysis of the book or movie that shows how specific parts of
the book or movie relate to some of the main points brought out in your
assigned readings and lectures. You should be diligent in finding-in your book
or movie-examples of the themes developed in readings and lectures. Teasing
out themes is the heart of the assignment. You must be explicit in relating
your book or movie to material pre-sented in class or to an assigned reading.
Make reference to particular pages in both the book you analyze and to course
materials. If you use a movie for your activity report, make certain to cite
authors and pages from course readings; and  
c) if appropriate, include a comparison with your own culture, pointing out
similarities and/or differences between the way the Japanese and members of
your culture would react to situations presented in the book or movie.

REPORTS WILL BE GRADED AS EITHER "ACCEPTABLE" OR "NON-ACCEPTABLE." A NON-
UNACCEPTABLE REPORT WILL BE RETURNED WITH SUGGESTIONS ABOUT HOW TO MAKE IT
ACCEPTABLE-AND WITH A NEW DUE DATE. **L** ATE **R** EPORTS WILL **_NOT_ BE
ACCEPTED. NOTE:** If a  "non-acceptable" report was clearly submitted simply
to meet the deadline, but with little intent to do an acceptable job, it will
be rejected without recourse to resubmit. Reports submitted early will be
returned at the next regularly-scheduled class meeting.



**Earning a Grade of A**

Attendance/Reading quizzes._ Amass 44 attendance/reading points, as explained
above.

_Tests_. At least two  "A"s on the three tests--or two "B"s with an "A" on the
Third Test--with **NO** retaken tests. Of course, tests may **NOT** be retaken
to raise your grade to a B or an A.

_Activity Reports_. Two acceptable Activity Reports, one submitted by
**Thursday, April 27 th**, and the other submitted by **Friday, May 19 th**.

One of the two Activity Reports **must** be a book from the Supplemental
Reading List.

**Class Participation**

Class participation may be used in assigning your course grade. Those who have
contributed to class discussion and demonstrated an interest in the subject
may have a "+" added to their course grade.



**COURSE CALENDAR AND READING ASSIGNMENTS**

Feb. 1 (TU)_ Introduction--No reading assignment

_Feb. 3 (TH)_ **Lafcadio Hearn** , "Strangeness and Charm" **Reader**

**Background Notes,** "Japan" **Reader**

_Feb. 8 (TU)_ **Barrett** , "The Anthropological Enterprise" **Reader**

**Hendry** , "Introduction" Pp. 1-5

**Lebra,** "Preface," Pp. ix-xii

_Feb. 10 (TH)_ **Barrett,** "The Meaning of Culture" **Reader**

**Plath** , "A Cultural `Opposing Self'" **Reader**

**Lebra,** "Introduction" Pp. xiii-xviii

**FRIDAY. FEBRUARY 11, 2000 IS LAST DAY TO DROP CLASSES WITHOUT PENALTY**

_Feb. 15 (TU)_ **Hendry,** "Sources of Japanese Identity" **Reader**

**Lebra,** "Social Relativism as the Japanese Ethos" Pp. 1-21

_Feb. 17 (TH)_ **Reischauer,** "The Land" and "Isolation" **Reader**

**Barrett,** "Intracultural Variation" Pp. 153-178

_Feb. 22 (TU)_ **Reingold,** "City Slickers, Country Roots ..." **Reserve Book
Room**

**Feiler,** "Outside the Circle: The Invisible Class" **Reader**

_Feb. 24 (TH)_ **Reischauer,** "Language" **Reader**

**Moeran,** "Speak Japan, Japanspeak" **Reader**

_Feb. 29 (TU)_ **Lebra,** "Empathy" Pp. 38-49

**Booth,** excerpts from _Roads to Sata..._ **Reader**

_Mar. 2 (TH)_ **Hendry,** "The House and Family System" Pp. 21-36

**Lock,** "Single Mother By Default" & "Picking Up the Pieces" **Reader  
**

* * *

**Tuesday, MARCH 7 th...............FIRST TEST**

**Covering Readings & Lectures from February 3rd thru March 2nd**

* * *

_

Mar. 9 (TH)_ **NO CLASS--INSTRUCTOR AT CSU ACADEMIC SENATE MEETING** __

_Mar. 14 (TU)_ **Buruma,** "The Eternal Mother" **Reader**

**Lebra,** "Dependency" Pp. 50-66

**Lock,** "Sacrificial Daughter-in-Law" **Reader**

_

Mar. 16 (TH)_ **Lebra,** "Early Socialization" Pp. 137-l55

**Dorfman** , "Home, Family, & Pre-Elementary Ed." **Reader**

_Mar. 21 (TU)_ **Tobin,** "Japanese Preschools & the Pedagogy of Selfhood"
**Reader**

**Kondo,** "Creating an Ideal Self..." **Reader**

_Mar. 23 (TH)_ **Hendry,** "The Education System" Pp. 86-102

**Dorfman** , "Japanese Education Today" **Reader**

**Greenfeld,** "The Best and the Brightest" **Reserve Book Room**

_Mar. 28 (TU)_ **Hendry,** "Socialisation and Classification" Pp. 38-51

**Lebra,** "Reciprocity" Pp. 90-109

_Mar. 30 (TH)_ **Hendry,** "Trad. Community & Mod. Neighborhood" Pp. 53-68

**Lebra,** "Belongingness" Pp. 22-37

**Dore,** "The Day the Fire Brigade Went Fishing" **Reader**

**Sakamoto,** "People as Individuals" & "You and I Are Independent" **Reader**

_Apr. 4 (TU)_ **Hendry,** "Status & Stratification in the Wider World" Pp.
70-85

**Lebra,** "Occupying the Proper Place" Pp. 67-89

**Sakamoto** , "You and I Are Equals" & "You and I Are Close Friends"
**Reader**

_Apr. 6 (TH)_ **Lebra,** "Three Domains of Situational Interaction" Pp.
110-136

**Morley,** Excerpts from _Pictures from the Water Trade_ **Reader**

* * *

**Tuesday, APRIL 11 th...............SECOND TEST**

**Covering Readings & Lectures from March 9th thru April 6th**

* * *

_



Apr. 13 (TH)_ **Hendry,** "Religious Influences" Pp. 103-117

**Plath** , "Where the Family of God is the Family" **Reader**

**Plath,** "Japanese Popular Christmas" **Reader**



* * *

**APRIL 17 - 22 \-- SPRING BREAK--NO CLASSES**

* * *

_

Apr. 25 (TU)_ **Hendry,** "Ritual and the Life Cycle" Pp. 120-133

**Buruma,** "Holy Matrimony" **Reader**

**Lock,** "Frugal Farmer" **Reader  
**

* * *

**APRIL 27 th (Thursday) LAST DAY TO TURN IN ACTIVITY REPORT #1**

* * *

**  
**_Apr. 27 (TH)_ **Fujimoto,** "Marriage: Later but Not Never" **Reader**

**Iwao,** "Expectations of Marriage" **Reserve Book Room**

**Tanizaki,** "The Makioka Sisters" **Reader**

_May 2 (TU)_ **Condon,** "Divorce" **Reader**

**Fields,** "Valentine's Day and Divorce ..." **Reader**

_May 4 (TH)_ **Hendry,** "Careers and Continuity" Pp. 135-150

**Condon,** "Career Woman" &"OL (Office Lady)" **Reader**

**Iwao,** "Working Women Today" **Reserve Book Room**

**Lock,** "A Bar Owner" & "Coming to Terms with Anger" **Reader**

_May 9 (TU)_ **Hendry,** "Arts, Entertainment and Leisure" Pp. 152-167

**Doi,** "J. Comics are Hottest New Import to the West" **Reader**

**Whiting,** Excerpts: _The Chrysanthemum and the Bat_ **Reader**

**Tamaki,** "Going for the Tie in Baseball" **Reader**

_May 11 (TH)_ **Hendry,** "Politics and Government" Pp. 169-183

**Reingold,** "Politics, Cold Cash, and Corruption" **Reserve Book Room**

_May 16 (TU)_ **Hendry,** "The Legal System and Social Control" Pp. 185-200

**Greenfeld,** "The Speed Tribes" & "Motorcycle Thief" **Reserve Book Room**





_

May ????_ **Hendry,** "Conclusion: Evaporating the Inscrutability" Pp. 202-206

**Lebra,** "Conclusion" Pp. 248-258

**Christopher,** "The Heart and Mind of Japan" **Reader**

**Greenfeld,** "Snix: The Otaku" **Reserve Book Room**

* * *

**Thursday, May 18 th...............THIRD TEST**

**Covering Readings & Lectures from April 13th thru May 16th**

* * *

* * *

**_**

**May 19 th (Friday)--Last Day to turn in Activity Report #2**

_

* * *

* * *

**_**

**THIRD TEST RETAKE**_

**At the time of the regularly-scheduled Final Exam IN SH-141**

* * *

**Agreement**

I take our joint responsibilities for the success of this class very
seriously. I put considerable time and effort into selecting reading
materials. I expect a lot from you this semester-the readings alone total
about 1,000 pages. I will be available to help you do your best (please note
my extended office hours on the first page of the syllabus, and you may reach
me via e-mail: dan.whitney@sdsu.edu). I will make arrangements for test
retakes outside of class time to ensure that you can earn at least a C grade.
If you include your address, telephone number, and e-mail address on the
bottom of this Agreement, I will personally contact you if I see you are have
having trouble.



Dan Whitney

Many students-more than 50 in past semesters-are waiting to enroll in this
class. As a condition of your enrollment, I require that you read and sign the
form below to stay in the class. **YOU MUST SIGN AND RETURN THE BOTTOM OF THIS
PAGE BY THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 3, 2000, IF YOU WANT TO STAY IN THIS CLASS.** If
you decide to drop, please tell me immediately so I can enroll one of those on
the crash list. Also, please return the syllabus to me so I can pass it on.

  
(cut here)

I, the undersigned, have carefully read and understand the syllabus for
Anthropology 452, Japanese Society. I am aware that the course requires a
significant amount of reading, and I cannot expect to pass unless I do the
assigned readings on time and attend class regularly. I understand that Dr.
Whitney rarely gives Incompletes (e.g., you must have medical verification of
a lengthy illness), and this course requires a sustained effort on my part. I
promise to do my best to live up to the expectations and fulfill the
requirements of this class.

  
I further agree to turn off all cell phones and pagers before coming into
class. If my cell phone or pager should ring during class, I will leave the
classroom and be marked absent (resulting in no quiz points that day). The
second time my cell phone or pager rings in class, I agree to its confiscation
by Professor Whitney. The conditions I have agreed to are in consideration of
my enrollment in the class.

Sign here



Print Name here



Address (Optional)



Telephone (Optional)



e-mail address (Optional)

  
[Supplmental Reading List](http://www-
rohan.sdsu.edu/faculty/dwhitney/452_bibliography.html)



<b></b><br>

