Fall, 2001                                  **Philosophy 389: SYLLABUS**
Office: 516-3959

 Office: LCH B 322                                        **Eiichi Shimomiss e
** Dept.:  516-3328

Office Hours:
Home: 519-032l

TTh 11:00-11:30 am, 2:15-4:00, 5:30-6:30 & 8:15-8:45 pm
Fax:     519-l807

by appointment
eiichish@pacbell.net

www.csudh.edu/phenom_studies/
www.csudh.edu/philosophy/eshimom.htm  



**  _Zen: Philosophy and Practice._**



This course is an introductory inquiry into the meanings and the nature of Zen
practice and its philosophy. Zen denies the use of any rational discourse
(language in general). Thus, Zen philosophy is inseparable from Zen practice.
Every student is expected to always practice at home and even after the course
is over. A continuous devotion is essential for our being one with Zen.

           

One of the most important characteristics of Zen is not to transcend where our
actual activities take place, but in the midst of it: we are able to "bracket"
all our mundane concerns and distractions for our everyday life such that we
are able to be in touch with authentic reality. Here, Through Zen philosophy
and practice, we are able to experience the genuine reality as it actually is.
For all of us, since our birth, have been cultivating and developing our
dualistic desires, attachments so strong that we need a drastic measure to
counter act them. In short, this "counter-measure" is our practice of
"meditation." This is why even Dogen established his Eihei-Ji Monastery away
in the midst of deep forest in Northern Japan. This is of course in a sense
artificial, so primarily we do not need such an environment and rigorous
disciplines. For Zen is nothing but we simply return to our original nature.

           

Bodhidharma, the First Patriarch, was supposed to come from India to China to
teach Zen Buddhism, its philosophy and practice. It must be based on a kind of
Yoga and its philosophy modified by Buddha's teaching. Later, however, Zen
Buddhism was strongly modified by Chinese culture and its philosophy and
turned out be what we know today as Can or Zen Buddhism.

           

Zen's devotion is directed to complete and true liberation of one's self. It
is also, therefore, to discover one's authentic self.

           

However, Zen practice is not goal-oriented, but it is a continuous process, or
as Shunryu Suzuki said, perpetual returns to the Beginner's Mind.

           

In the light of studying of Zen, we would also like to reflect on one concrete
case of influences of a philosophical thought upon culture in general. Due to
the lack of the material, we will study the relationship between Zen and the
Japanese Culture as an example. We learn how they are evidenced not only in
the way of life, but also in such areas as painting, garden design,
architecture, theatre, literature and poetry, marshal arts, flower
arrangement, etc.

**_ _**

**_Requirements_**



            1\. Prepare for every the assigned reading (mediating everyday at home)

            2\. **Everyday mediate at home for the same length of time** ( **starting with 5 minutes twice daily** until at least 45 minutes twice daily at the end of the semester.)

            2\. Full attendance is required.

            3\. Further in order to complete the course, you are required to take the Midterm and Final as well as mediate the given Koan a week before and bring the answers to them in.

_             _4\. Please do note the University Catalog's statements on
academic Integrity and _Plagiarism_ (cheating by copying some one else 's test
or some other materials than your own performance).

**_ _**

**_Methods of Evaluation_ :**

_ _

_             _1\. Observation of your posture and immovability in Zen
practice 30%.

            2\. Preparation for every class meeting 20%

3\. Every week, you are assigned two Koans (Zen questions) to meditate on. You
are expected to turn in the written answers to these two Koans as the semester
progresses. The total of the answers will constitute 50%.

            4\. The final grade will be the average of these above evaluations.





**_Outcome Assessment_**

**_ _**

            1\. Students are expected to be able to meditate 40 minutes without interruption at the end of the semester.

            2\. Students shall be able to answer such a Koans as "What is the sound of the one-hand clapping?"

**_ _**

**_ _**

**_Texts_** __



            Shunryu Suzuki, _Zen Mind and The Beginner 's Mind_, Weatherhill

            Mumon , _Gateless Gate_ (print), translated by Eiichi Shimomiss e, Los Angeles, CA, 1998



**_ _**

**_Bibliography_**

**_ _**

**_             _**Dogen, _Shoboganzo_

            Heinrich Dumoulin, _Zen Buddhism History: India and China_

            Daisetz Suzuki, _Essays in Zen Buddhism_

            Blyth, _Zen and Zen Classics I-V_

            Sekida, _Zen Training (Methods and Philosoophy)_

            Waddell (tr.) _The Essential Teachings of Zen Master Hakuin_

            Thich Nhat Hanh, _Zen Keys_

            Kapleau, _Three Pillars of Zen_

            Berger, _Zen Driving_

            Hooykaas & Schierbeek, _Zazen_

            Cleary (ed) _Teachings of Zen_

            Daisetz Suzuki, _Zen and Japanese Culture._

