DEPARTMENT OF POLITICAL SCIENCE

HUNTER COLLEGE, C.U.N.Y.

"Comparative Welfare States: Western Europe and the U.S."

FALL 2000

POLSC 372.01 Prof. Roger Karapin

Class meetings: Office: Hunter West Room 1722

Monday 10:00-12:00 Phone: (212) 772-5665

in Room 1731 Hunter West E-mail: rkarapin@hunter.cuny.edu  
    


Office hours (subject to change):

Mon. 4:00-5:00 p.m.

Thurs. 12:00-2:00 p.m.

And by appointment  
    


**USERS' GUIDE TO THE COURSE**

**PLEASE READ CAREFULLY AND KEEP FOR REFERENCE**

**YOU ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR KNOWING ITS CONTENTS**  
    


**Content:**

A "welfare state" consists of a state's economic and social policies, and
related institutions, which are designed to promote the well-being of the
state's population. Since the Second World War, states in the industrialized
democratic countries have sharply expanded welfare-state activities.
Nonetheless, these states still differ in the extent to which they take on
this role and in how their policies combine political controls with market
coordination.

This course will raise and answer basic questions about welfare states by
using comparative methods. What do welfare states do? In what ways are welfare
states compatible or incompatible with capitalism? How do they differ across
countries? Why do they differ? Why did they grow during the twentieth century?
What kind of a crisis are they in today, and why? To help answer these
questions, we will often make comparisons, e.g. by examining one policy area
in different states, or by examining comparing a welfare state at earlier and
later points in time.

We will focus on two very different welfare-state systems, the large and
comprehensive Swedish system and the limited welfare state in the U.S., and on
two cases that fall somewhere in between, Britain and Germany. Within these
countries, we will examine a variety of policy areas. Among social policies,
we will study old-age pensions, unemployment insurance, and social assistance
(known as "welfare" in the U.S.); economic policies considered in the course
will include macroeconomic and industrial-relations policies.

Throughout the course, we will examine a wide range of theories which try to
explain the rise of welfare states and the differences in them. To make it
easier to recognize theories, I will organize them into several explanatory
paradigms: logic of industrialism, pluralist, Marxist, statist, and cultural.
In the discussions and writing assignments, I will place major emphases on
these paradigms, which help us to understand, critique, and construct causal
explanations -- explanations of changes in particular countries over time and
of persistent differences in welfare-state policies in different nations.  
    


**Objectives:**

The course is designed to help students improve their skills in thinking and
writing and to convey knowledge about the course topics. The skills include
recognizing claims and the evidence for claims found in texts, evaluating and
critiquing arguments in texts, analyzing causation in complex systems,
applying general explanatory models to specific cases, putting together one's
own arguments, and remembering important facts in order to do some of the
previous activities. The knowledge includes the main features of the four
welfare states and the policy areas studied here, and the different kinds of
paradigms and theories advanced for the creation of welfare states.

You can put the reasoning skills taught here to good use in the rest of your
life. These skills can help you think for yourself, and hence to act more
autonomously as a citizen and in the way you earn your living. With these
skills, you can spend more time acting in accordance to your own decisions and
less time following the ideas or orders of other people.  
    


**Requirements:**

This is not a lecture course, but a seminar. If you register for this course
and do not drop it, you are committed to participate actively in several ways.
This is reflected in the requirements, which are rigorous. Students are
required to attend class regularly, complete a short writing assignment
approximately _every week_ , and write either a series of six-page essays or a
substantial research paper during the course. Moreover, students will be
expected to engage in a dialogue with me about their writing throughout the
course. The specific requirements are:

_1\. Class Attendance_. Regular attendance is mandatory, as is coming on time;
if latecomers disrupt our work, I reserve the right to bar them from class.
Anyone missing more than two meetings without documentation for a legitimate
reason (e.g. a letter from a doctor or employer) will have their course grade
reduced by 4% for each class missed; anyone with more than five unexcused
absences will fail the course.

_2\. (30% of grade) Ten Short Papers_ (1-2 pages each). These papers will
answering questions listed on the syllabus (see the schedule below), and will
be graded. Papers will be due at 10:00 a.m. on Monday, either in class or in
my mailbox in the Political Science Department; if the office is closed,
please put the paper under my office door. Questions for the papers are listed
on the syllabus; any changes in the questions will be announced in class and
placed outside my office in a brown envelope placed there for this course.
Most of these papers will include exercises in summarizing and evaluating
arguments, but some will go further to require that you make your own
arguments. Since we will go over the answers in class, late assignments will
NOT be accepted. Moreover, a major purpose of these papers is to make sure
that you are adequately prepared to discuss the readings in class.

There will be 13 of these short papers during the semester, and the 10 highest
grades you receive will count toward your course grade. So if uncontrollable
circumstances cause you to miss one or two or even three of these papers, the
missed papers will not be graded and your course grade will not be affected.
Each of the 10 grades for short papers will count 3% toward your final grade,
so together they will count for 30% of your grade.

I will write brief comments on each paper. If you want more detailed comments
on your papers, write "more comments" next to your name at the top of the
front page.

_3\. (10% of grade) Participation in Class Discussions_. You may be asked at
any time to summarize the main points of the reading assignment during class.
You will also be expected to critique the readings and to engage the points
made by other members of the seminar. On the first six-page essay or research-
paper proposal which you submit, I will include my assessment of your class
participation up to that point.

_4\. (60% of grade) Three Six-Page Essays or a Research Paper_

Note: You must choose between option A and option B by September 25!

_Option A: Research Paper_ (20 pp.) using sources in Hunter's Wexler Library,
the New York Public Library, and other New York City area libraries. This
paper must make comparisons, e.g. between policy areas in one welfare state,
between different periods for one policy area, or between the same policy area
in more than one country.

This requirement actually consists of _four_ separate requirements. Taken
together, the research paper requirement would make up 60% of your course
grade, divided as follows: 1\. Topic: discuss the topic with me by Sept. 25; I
can help you develop your ideas into a researchable paper topic; your topic
must be approved by me, or you will be required to do Option B, Three Six-Page
Essays (below)

2\. Proposal (10% of the course grade): a one-page description of your topic
and research question plus an annotated bibliography with at least three
sources relevant to the question must be turned in and _approved_ by Oct. 2;
there is a penalty of one letter-grade per day for late proposals

3\. Detailed outline (10% of the course grade): this must be in outline
format, using complete sentences for each point, and about 3-5 pages long; due
by November 6; there is a penalty of one letter-grade per day for late
outlines; this outline will be the basis of an in-class presentation of your
research which you must make during the last weeks of the course, at a time to
be arranged with me

4\. Final draft (40% of the course grade) \-- about 20-25 pages long; due
December 18 _Option B: Three Six-Page Essays_

If you take this option, you must write three essays: \- Essay # 1: assigned
Oct. 2; due Oct. 10 (20% of the course grade)

\- Essay # 2: assigned Nov. 6; due Nov. 13 (20% of the course grade)

\- Essay # 3: assigned Dec. 4; due Dec. 11 (20% of the course grade) The
essays will be on set topics handed out in class; each essay will be about six
pages (1500 words) in length. Please note some important aspects of this
requirement: \- Essays will be due either in class or by 10:00 a.m. on the due
date in my mailbox in the Political Science Department office.

\- I will write brief comments on each paper. If you want more detailed
comments on your papers, write "more comments" next to your name at the top of
the front page.

\- Students may be required to meet individually with me to discuss their
papers after they are graded.

\- Students may be required to rewrite papers which are inadequate.

\- Any late paper will be penalized with a lower grade (one letter-grade per
day late).  
    
  **General Instructions for Short Papers and Six-Page Essays:**

Type or neatly print your answers on one side of a normal-sized (8 1/2 x 11")
piece of paper. Do not hand in papers with ragged edges torn from spiral
binders; they are difficult to handle in a stack, and will be returned with no
credit. Please write your name at the _top_ of the first page (not the middle
or the bottom!).  
    


**Communications:**

If you have questions or problems concerning the course, contact me _right
away_. Don't wait until it's too late! It is best to come see me after class
or during my office hours or to send me e-mail. If you send me e-mail, I will
usually reply within 24 hours, except on weekends.  
    


**Criteria for Grading** are as follows: C (70-79%): given for work that shows
that you have done the reading and/or absorbed the lectures and are able to
repeat the key points, without necessarily understanding them fully;

B (80-89%): given for work that shows that you have done the requirements for
a C _and_ understand what you are writing, e.g. by translating technical terms
into your own language and adequately linking the evidence to the conclusion;

A (90-100%): given for work that shows that you have done the requirements for
a B _and_ write grammatically, are comfortable with the ideas being discussed,
and can use them creatively; examples of creativity include (but are not
limited to) making connections between them not made in class or in the text,
or applying them to areas not included in the class or the text;

D (60-69%): given for work that shows little ability, but significant and
conscientious effort to work with the texts and lectures of the course;

F (0-59%): given for work that shows no significant and conscientious effort,
or which is plagiarized.  
    
    
    
  **Policy on Credit/No-Credit Grades**

In accord with College policy (Hunter catalog, p. 41), the credit/no-credit
option is available only to students who satisfy the attendance requirement
(i.e. do not have excessive absences) and complete all the assignments for
this course, including the short papers and six-page essays.  
    


**Policy on Plagiarism:**

Plagiarism is a serious violation of academic integrity and has severe
consequences at Hunter College, including disciplinary proceedings. Plagiarism
is "any deliberate borrowing of the ideas, terms, statements, or knowledge of
others without clear and specific acknowledgement of the source" (Hunter
catalog, p. 43). In this course, if you use an author's words rather than your
own, you must use quotation marks _and_ cite the author and page number, for
example "(Skocpol, p. 51)"; this holds for all written work in this course,
including short papers. Otherwise you are plagiarizing. However, note also
that you are not allowed to use direct quotations for more the 10% of any
paper or exam answer which you write; papers which violate this rule will be
returned with no credit. I want you to write in your own words, not quote
extensively from the texts.

The minimum penalty for plagiarism in this course is as follows. Plagiarism on
a short paper will result in an irrevocable grade of no-credit for that paper,
_plus_ the requirement that you rewrite the paper without plagiarism; failure
to rewrite within one week will result in the loss of credit for an additional
short paper (either already graded or a future paper). Plagiarism on a six-
page essay or the research paper will result in the loss of between 10% and
100% of the entire exam grade, depending on severity. In addition, if you
plagiarize on any assignment in this course, your behavior may be reported to
the Office of Student Services.  
    


**Required Readings:**

The following books are required for the course and will be available at the
Shakespeare's bookstore (Lexington near 69th St.) and the Hunter College
Bookstore (in Hunter West Building, ground floor). The schedule below refers
to them simply by their authors' last names: Robert Kuttner, _The Economic
Illusion_. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1984.

Frances Fox Piven and Richard Cloward, _Regulating the Poor_. New York:
Vintage Books, 1993 edition. (not the earlier edition!) There are many other
required readings for this course, and they will be placed on reserve at the
Hunter College library. If you find it difficult to read these texts in the
library, you may decide to make your own copies using the ten-cent copiers in
the library. Bibliographic citations for these readings are included in the
class schedule below.  
    


**Schedule of Readings, Class Meetings, and Assignments:**

The following are the topics and required readings for each class. I reserve
the right to make changes to the schedule; you are responsible for keeping
abreast of any changes, which will be announced in class. If you miss a class
meeting, you can ask other students about any changes in the schedule, check
for any new study questions outside my office, or send me email.  
    


**_INTRODUCTIONS: CONCEPTUAL, THEORETICAL, AND HISTORICAL_**

**Meeting 1, September 11: Introduction to the Course; Conceptual and
Theoretical Introduction**

Required readings: syllabus, handed out in class

**Meeting 2, September 18: Capitalism and Welfare States in Theory**

Required readings: Kuttner, _Economic Illusion_ , pp. 1-49

Milton Friedman and Rose Friedman, "Free to Choose," in _Taking Sides_ , 8th
ed., pp. 237-44 Short Paper # 1 due today: What does Kuttner argue about
whether the pursuit of equality harms economic growth and prosperity? What
would Friedman and Friedman say in reply to Kuttner?

Optional readings: Karl Polanyi, _The Great Transformation_ (Boston: Beacon
Press, 1944), chs. 3-8. **Meeting 3, September 25: Capitalism and Welfare
States in History**

Required readings: Piven and Cloward, _Regulating the Poor_ , ch. 1 (40 pp.)
Short Paper # 2 due today: What is the relation between poor relief and
capitalism, according to Piven and Cloward?

Optional readings: Gosta Esping-Andersen, _Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism_
, pp. 9-18, 35-54

Gaston Rimlinger, _Welfare Policy and Industrialization in Europe, America,
and Russia_ (New York: John Wiley, 1971), chs. on England  
    
  **_COUNTRIES, POLICIES, EXPLANATIONS, AND THEORIES_**

**Meeting 4, October 2: Income Maintenance in Many Countries**

Required readings: Kuttner, _Economic Illusion_ , ch. 6 (pp. 229-64)

Heidenheimer, Arnold, Hugh Heclo, and Carolyn Teich Adams, _Comparative Public
Policy: The Politics of Social Choice in America, Europe, and Japan_ , 2nd ed.
(New York: St. Martins Press, 1990), ch. 7, pp. 218-54 Short Paper # 3 due
today: According to Heidenheimer, Heclo, and Adams, what are the main
differences in income maintenance programs across countries? What are the main
factors that account for those differences? What are the consequences of these
programs for income distribution?

Optional readings: John Myles, _Old Age in the Welfare State_ , revised ed.
(Univ. Press of Kansas, 1989), pp. 1-30

Harold Wilensky, _The Welfare State and Equality_ (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1975) (note: no class on Monday, October 9 due to Columbus
Day holiday; we meet on Tuesday instead)

**Meeting 5, October 10: Paradigms and Theories of Welfare-State Development**

Required readings: Piven and Cloward, _Regulating the Poor_ , ch. 12 (50 pp.)

Margaret Weir, Susan Orloff, and Theda Skocpol, _The Politics of Social Policy
in the United States_ (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1988), pp.
3-16 Short Paper # 4 due today: Briefly state the main theories of welfare
state development. Draw a causal diagram for each of them; make sure your
drawings and texts support each other.

Six-Page Essay # 1 due today

Optional readings: Christopher Pierson, _Beyond the Welfare State?_
(University Park, Pa.: Penn State Press, 1991), pp. 6-49 **Meeting 6, October
16: U.S. Exceptionalism Explained**

Required readings: Gaston Rimlinger, "Welfare Policy and Economic Development:
A comparative historical approach," _Journal of Economic History_ 26, 4 (Dec.
1966), pp. 556-71

Christopher Husbands, "Editor's Introductory Essay," in Werner Sombart, _Why
is There No Socialism in the United States?_ (White Plains, N.Y.: M.E. Sharpe,
1976), pp. xv-xxxvii (book on reserve, under HX86.S6613 1976a)

Weir, Orloff, and Skocpol, _Politics of Social Policy_ , pp. 3-10, 16-27 Short
Paper # 5 due today: Assess two of the main theories discussed last week as to
how well each accounts for the apparently exceptional development of the U.S.
welfare state.

Optional readings: Myles, _Old Age_ , pp. 1-30

Martin Shefter, _Political Parties and the State_ (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1994), chs. 2-3

Kirsten Gronbjerg, David Street, and Gerald D. Suttles, _Poverty and Social
Change_ (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1978), chs. 1-4 **Meeting 7,
October 23: Germany: The First Social Insurance Policies**

Required readings: Jens Alber, "Germany," in Peter Flora, ed., _Growth to
Limits: The Western European Welfare States Since World War II_ , Vol. 2 (New
York: Walter de Gruyter, 1986), pp. 3-15

Rimlinger, _Welfare Policy_ , pp. 88-93, 108-36 Short Paper # 6 due today:
Briefly describe the social insurance policies adopted under Bismarck.
According to Rimlinger, what were the underlying causes of these policies?
Draw a causal diagram of his argument; make sure your drawing and text support
each other.

Optional readings: Eric Owen Smith, _The German Economy_ (New York: Routledge
and Kegan Paul, 1994), ch. 5

Wolfgang Zapf, "Development, Structure, and Prospects of the German Social
State," in Richard Rose and Rei Shiratori, eds., _The Welfare State East and
West_ (New York: Oxford University Press, 1986), pp. 126-155 **Meeting 8,
October 30: Development of the Swedish Welfare State**

Required readings: Gosta Esping-Andersen, _Politics Against Markets_
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1985), parts of chs. 1-3
(relevant to Sweden only), i.e. pp. 3-11, 26-38, 48-51, 57-64, 68-73, 82-90,
106-13 (book on reserve; HX319.E87 1985) Short Paper # 7 due today: How is the
social democratic strategy different from communist strategies for gaining
political power on behalf of workers? What does the social democratic strategy
require in order to succeed politically, according to Esping-Andersen? How
well does the case of Sweden support this theory?

Optional readings: Francis Castles, _The Social Democratic Image of Society: A
Study of the Achievements and Origins of Scandinavian Social Democracy in
Comparative Perspective_ (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1978), chs. 1, 3

Walter Korpi, _The Democratic Class Struggle_ (London: Routledge, 1983), early
chs.

Francis Castles and R.D. McKinley, "Public welfare provision, Scandinavia, and
the sheer futility of the sociological approach to politics," _British Journal
of Political Science_ 9, 2 (1979), pp. 157-71 **Meeting 9, November 6: Social
Security in the U.S.**

Required readings: Theda Skocpol and G. John Ikenberry, "The Road to Social
Security," in Skocpol, _Social Policy in the United States_ (Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 1995), pp. 136-66 Short Paper # 8 due today:
According to Skocpol and Ikenberry, why did the Social Security Act (1935)
have the content which it did? Draw a causal diagram of their argument; make
sure your drawings and text support each other.

Optional readings: Frances Fox Piven and Richard Cloward, _Poor People's
Movements_ (New York: Vintage Books, 1979), pp. 41-85

Gronbjerg, Street, and Suttles, _Poverty and Social Change_ , ch. 4

G. William Domhoff, _State Autonomy or Class Dominance? Case Studies on Policy
Making in America_ (New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 1996), pp. 1-6, 117-76

Edwin Amenta, Bruce Carruthers, and Yvonne Zylan, "A Hero for the Aged? The
Townsend Movement, the political mediation model, and U.S. old-age policy,
1934-1950," _American Journal of Sociology_ 92, 2 (September 1992), pp. 308-39
**Meeting 10, November 13: Early Unemployment Policy in Sweden and Britain**

Required readings: Hugh Heclo, _Modern Social Politics in Britain and Sweden_
(New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1974), pp. 65-125 (book on reserve,
under HN389.H44) Short Paper # 9 due today: What kind of support for the
unemployed did the British and Swedish states adopt in the 20th century? Why
did the two states adopt the policies which they did, according to Heclo? Draw
a causal diagram of his main argument; make sure your drawing and text support
each other.

Six-Page Essay # 2 due today

Optional readings: Heclo, _Modern Social Politics_ , pp. 17-64, 125-54
**Meeting 11, November 20: Keynesianism in the U.S., Britain, and Sweden**

Required readings: Margaret Weir and Theda Skocpol, "State Structures and the
Possibilities for 'Keynesian' Responses to the Great Depression in Sweden,
Great Britain, and the United States," in Peter B. Evans, Dietrich
Rueschemeyer, and Theda Skocpol, eds., _Bringing the State Back In_ (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1985), pp. 107-149 Short Paper # 10 due today:
What are the main similarities and/or differences to be explained in the
economic policies which the U.S., Britain, and Sweden adopted in response to
the Great Depression, according to Weir and Skocpol? How can those
similarities and differences be explained? Draw a causal diagram; make sure
your drawing and text support each other.

Optional readings: Peter Alexis Gourevitch, "Breaking with Orthodoxy: The
economic policy responses to the Depression of the 1930s," _International
Organization_ 38 (1984), pp. 95-129

Theda Skocpol, _Social Policy in the United States_ (Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 1995), ch. 7 **Meeting 12, November 27: Industrial
Relations in the U.S. and Europe**

Required readings: Kuttner, _Economic Illusion_ , pp. 136-68

Roy Adams, _Industrial Relations Under Liberal Democracy_ (Charleston, S.C.:
University of South Carolina Press, 1995), ch. 8, pp. 165-81 (on reserve,
under HD6960.5.N7A3 1995)

Husbands, introductory essay in Sombart, _Why is There No Socialism_ (reread)
Short Paper # 11 due today: What are the most important differences in
industrial relations across countries? What explains the differences?

Optional readings: Mike Davis, "Why the U.S. Working Class is Different," _New
Left Review_ 123 (Sept.-Oct. 1980), pp. 3-44.

Adams, _Industrial Relations_ , chs. 1-3

James Morone, _The Democratic Wish: Popular Participation and the Limits of
American Government_ (New York: Basic Books, 1990), ch. 5

Frances Fox Piven and Richard Cloward, _Poor People's Movements_ (New York:
Vintage Books, 1979), ch. 3  
    
  **_THE CRISIS OF WELFARE STATES_**

**Meeting 13, December 4: Crisis of the Welfare State and Retrenchment Efforts
in the U.S. and Britain**

Required readings: Ramesh Mishra, _The Welfare State in Capitalist Society_
(New York: Simon and Schuster), pp. 1-8

Paul Pierson, _Dismantling the Welfare State? Reagan, Thatcher, and the
Politics of Retrenchment_ (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1994),
introduction, ch. 5 (45 pp.) (book on reserve, under HN59.2.P52 1994) Short
Paper # 12 due today: Why has a "crisis in the welfare state" developed? Why
did the U.S. and Britain attempt retrenchment? What have been the consequences
for social assistance policies in those countries, according to Pierson?

Optional readings: Paul Pierson, _Dismantling the Welfare State?_ , chs. 3,
6-7

Mishra, _Welfare State_ , chs. 2-3 **Meeting 14, December 11: Recent Social-
Assistance Policy in the U.S.: Options and Choices**

Required readings: Piven and Cloward, _Regulating the Poor_ , ch. 11 (55 pp.)

Kuttner, _Economic Illusion_ , pp. 265-78 Short Paper # 13 due today: What
have been the consequences for social assistance policies in the U.S.,
according to Piven and Cloward? Are their differences with Pierson factual, or
a matter of different theoretical commitments? Explain.

Six-Page Essay # 3 due today

