**CNE/ENG 120: World Literature**

**HC 7A-- Spring 2000**

Professor Radcliffe G. Edmonds III

Office: HC 206

Office Hours: MWF 9:30-10:30 or by appointment

|

MWF 10:30-11:20

Phone 280-1439

rgedmond@creighton.edu  
  
---|---  
  
****

**Required Texts:** Norton Anthology of World Literature, volume I

**Course Description:**

This course is designed to introduce the student to some of the greatest ideas
and stories that human beings have ever related. These stories have been
preserved, told and retold throughout the millenia because they were
meaningful and important to generations of men and women in societies
throughout the world. We will begin with stories of the creation of the world
and continue with tales of gods and mortals that stem from ancient oral story-
telling traditions. Indeed, many of the texts we are reading are not merely
words on the printed page, but come from traditions of performance that help
to communicate the meaning and significance of the texts. We will explore text
and performance not only in the epics, but in dramatic traditions as different
as those from Greece, Japan, and England. While drama enacts human situations
and conflicts, we will also read works that reflect upon the nature of human
experience, and we will examine the way short narratives can be arranged to
convey such reflections. We will read works spanning nearly four millenia of
human history as well as four continents on which human beings have built
their societies.

In a course so brief as this, we cannot hope to spend as much time on each of
these works as they deserve. We cannot meditate as deeply or as long upon the
ideas, characters, and stories that these works offer up to us as we might
like. Instead, a whirlwind tour of these great monuments of human thought must
suffice, a mere whetting of the appetite instead of the grand feast of
entertainment and insight that prolonged study of any one of these works might
provide us. I encourage you to taste and see what of these stories and ideas
stimulates your own thoughts and creative impulses, so that you can explore
further later on. My own role, as Socrates says in the _Theaetetus_ , is
merely "to tempt your appetite with a variety of delicacies from the tables of
the wise, until by my aid your own ideas are brought to light."



**Course Requirements:**

_Class Participation_ : The purpose of a class on literature, rather than a
course of solitary reading, is that the enjoyment and understanding of these
works can be enhanced by the sharing of ideas between class members. Active
participation in the class discussions is therefore expected of every class
member. Obviously, attendance in class is a prerequisite for active
participation. If you must miss a class, please notify me in advance.

At the beginning of each class, one student will be selected at random to lead
the class discussion on the reading, so every student should come to class
prepared to start the discussion with a topic or question from the reading.
Students are encouraged to pursue the aspects they found most interesting in
the text, but I will provide a reading question for each assignment to help
provide a focus for discussion. I will give a few very brief reading quizzes
to ensure that everyone is keeping up with the readings.

_Writing_ : Each student is required to keep a reading journal with a brief
entry for each reading assignment. These journals will be collected
periodically and marked as satisfactory or unsatisfactory. The journal entries
may take almost any form that demonstrates the student's engagement with the
text and reflection upon the characters, ideas, and themes therein. The
journal provides an ideal place for the student to work through ideas that
could be used to start the class discussion should the student be called upon
on any particular day. You should bring your journal (and your Anthology) to
every class meeting.

In addition to the journals, three short (4-6 page) formal papers will be
required for this course. I will provide suggested topics for each of the
paper assignments, but students are encouraged to pursue ideas that most
interest them. I would ask, however, that you consult with me if you wish to
choose your own paper topic. Moreover, I encourage students to consult with me
about their papers while the papers are still in draft or even outline form. I
would be more than happy to read a draft of the paper and return it with
comments so that a revised and improved paper can be turned in for the grade.
Even if you don't manage to get a draft done enough ahead of time to have me
read it, one of the most valuable things you can possibly do for your papers
is have a friend proofread it for you. Exchanging papers with a friend in the
class and going over them for each other will help you catch many errors and
problems that you might never find on your own. On that subject, please keep
your papers free from typographical or grammatical errors. I find them
terribly distracting when I'm reading a paper. Turning your paper in late is
unfair to those in the class who did meet the deadline, so any late papers
will be penalized by one grade increment for each day (including week-ends)
that the paper is late.

_Out of Class Assignments_ : All World Literature students are required to
attend at least two out-of-class events, such as lectures by guest-speakers,
films, plays, art exhibits, concerts, and other live performances. I will
notify you of upcoming events that qualify, and please let me know if there is
an event that you think would qualify. Students will be required to write a
short journal entry for each out-of-class event they attend.

_Exams_ : There will be a mid-term and final exam for the class. Both exams
will consist of identification questions and short essays in which the
students will be asked to analyze and synthesize material from several
readings.





**Grade Distribution:**

Class Participation: 20%

Journals: 10%

Paper 1: 10%

Paper 2: 15%

| Paper 3: 15%

Midterm: 10%

Final: 20%  
  
---|---  
  
****



Week I: Beginnings

  * Wed. 1/12 Introduction
  * Fri. 1/14 Genesis

Week II: Creation Stories: Popol Vuh, Hesiod, Ovid, Voluspa, Rg Veda

  * Mon. 1/17 Popol Vuh
  * Wed. 1/19 Hesiod and Ovid 
  * Fri. 1/21 Rg Veda, Voluspa and Edda

Week III: Tales of the Gods: Homeric Hymns to Aphrodite and Hermes, Jataka
tales

Mon. 1/24 Homeric Hymns

Wed. 1/26 Jataka Tales

Fri. 1/28 Son Jara (Video?)

Week IV: Oral Epics: Son Jara, Gilgamesh

* * Mon. 1/31 Son Jara

Wed. 2/2 Son Jara and Gilgamesh

Fri. 2/4 Gilgamesh

Week V: Epic: Gilgamesh to Odyssey (Paper 1 due)

* * Mon. 2/7 Gilgamesh

Wed. 2/9 Odyssey I-VI

Fri. 2/11 Odyssey VII-XII

Week VI: Epic: Odyssey

* * Mon. 2/14 Odyssey XIII-XVIII

Wed. 2/16 Odyssey XIX-XXIV

Fri. 2/18 Underworlds: Aeneid VI, Plato

Week VII: Epic Journeys to Heaven and Hell: Dante

* * Mon. 2/21 Dante

Wed. 2/23 Dante

Fri. 2/25 Dante

Week VIII: Philosophic Narrative and Drama

* * Mon. 2/28 Plato 

Wed. 3/1 Passion (CD)

Fri. 3/3 Midterm

Week IX: Spring Recess - no class

Week X: Drama: Greek Tragedy

* * Mon. 3/13 Oedipus Rex (video?)

Wed. 3/15 Oedipus Rex

Fri. 3/17 Oedipus Rex

Week XI: Drama: Japanese and European (Paper 2 due)

* * Mon. 3/20 Noh (video)

Wed. 3/22 Hamlet

Fri. 3/24 Hamlet

Week XII: Drama and Philosophy

* * Mon. 3/27 Hamlet 

Wed. 3/29 Baghavad Gita

Fri. 3/31 Confucius (Initiation conf.?)

Week XIII: Days and Nights of Tales

* * Mon. 4/3 Sa'di Golestan

Wed. 4/5 1001 Nights

Fri. 4/7 Decameron (CAMWS?)

Week XIV: Days and Nights of Tales

* * Mon. 4/10 Decameron

Wed. 4/12 Decameron

Fri. 4/14 Heptameron

Week XV: Don Quixote - (Paper 3 due)

* * Mon. 4/17 Don Quixote

Wed. 4/19 Don Quixote

Fri. 4/21 - Good Friday \- No Class

Week XVI:

* * Mon. 4/24 No Class

Wed. 4/26 Don Quixote

Fri. 4/28 Conclusions

Final Examination

