Dr. Billie R. DeWalt

PIA 2096 Spring 1997

**CAPSTONE SEMINAR: International Property Rights: Land Tenure, Security and
Reform

**

![](globe.gif)

Office hours: Tuesday 3-5 and by appointment (Please call Christina at 8-7391
to schedule an appointment) E-Mail: BRDEWALT+@PITT.EDU

The late 1980s and 1990s have seen countries around the world devoting greater
attention to neo-liberal reforms and structural adjustment that include
opening markets, reducing or eliminating subsidies, privatization of state-run
enterprises, and allowing national currencies to float. As part of this
process, countries have determined that property rights can have a great
impact on the development process. In some countries of Asia, there are moves
to eliminate restrictions on accumulation of land. In Africa, there are
recommendations that communal forms of landholding be replaced with private
property. In Latin America, countries are retreating from their modest
agrarian reforms by granting negotiable titles to individuals; they are also
devoting considerable attention to titling former national lands and granting
indigenous groups title to lands.

The principal policy questions to be addressed in this seminar relate to how
land tenure arrangements, security of landholdings, and agrarian reform affect
the process of economic development. The seminar will begin by evaluating
theories and goals concerning how land, its distribution and type of tenure,
can affect economic development. We will review the success, or lack thereof,
of land reforms focusing especially on Asian countries (like Taiwan, Japan and
Korea) and contrasting them with Latin American countries. We will address the
questions of what were the positive effects of these policies and what could
have been done better?

Students will be expected to write a major paper examining land tenure,
security, and reform issues in a particular country. Beginning approximately
half-way through the semester, students will formally present background
briefings concerning the results of their research to date. Based on input
from these presentations and further research, students will write a final
report that will be due _no later than 5:00 PM on April 18_. No incompletes or
extensions will be granted.

**Course Requirements** : This is a capstone seminar. The expectation is that,
in this course, you will be able to put together a substantial amount of the
experience you have gained in graduate school. My expectation is that during
the course of this semester each of you will complete a substantial research
project. Although there will be regular class meetings, we will not
necessarily meet each week. I expect to regularly meet with each of you
individually. This is a course in which I expect to learn a lot from your
research. While I have done substantial research on issues related to land
tenure in several Latin American countries, the issues in other parts of L.A.
and the world are often quite different. The comparative study of property
rights is the objective of this class.

Your investigation of property rights issues in a particular country will
require considerable independent research. I expect each of you to extensively
use the Internet, World Wide Web, and other resources for identifying and
getting access to materials. The Land Tenure Center library at the University
of Wisconsin will be an invaluable resource, as will libraries that have
extensive collections on countries not covered by the University of
Pittsburgh. Because you will probably have to make extensive use of
interlibrary loans, _you should begin your research as soon as possible_.
During the course of the semester, each of you will be asked to present
preliminary results of your investigations into the land tenure situation in
particular countries.

Your course grade will be based on the following:

A) Attendance -- Based on previous experience, I have to make attendance a
part of the course grade. Each of you will be allowed _one excused absence_.
For each absence beyond one, I will deduct half a letter grade (e.g. if your
work merits a B+, it would be reduced to a B).

B) Class presentations -- Because you will each be expected to share the
results of your investigations with the rest of the class, 35% of the grade
will be based on the quality of these written and oral presentations.
Timeliness is important; you must hand in each paper on the date that it is
due. Another 15% of the grade will be based on the quality of your
participation in discussion of common readings.

C) Final paper -- The final 50% of your grade will be based on the quality of
the final paper.

SCHEDULE: Because I want to find out about the country interests of each
individual in the class, the list of readings for the class may be modified
during the course of the semester. Each of you should already be well into the
research on your country as soon as possible.

FINAL PAPER: Following are the Terms of Reference for your term paper in the
Capstone Seminar. These are modified from actual terms of reference that I
received in doing a background literature paper for the World Bank. I had one
month in which to do the project on Mexico.

GLOBAL -- Each of you will choose a single country on which to focus during
the course. From published and unpublished literature on that country, you
will produce a review concerning the principal issues surrounding land tenure.
The objective is to identify what are the most pressing issues concerning land
that the country must confront. You will provide a report addressing the
issues listed below. Your discussion of the issues should also include _policy
recommendations_ for resolving these difficulties. Your literature review will
focus on the following issues:

A. **Types of Land Tenure Systems**. Describe the existing types of land
tenure systems (e.g. communal tenure, private landholdings, corporate
ownership, etc.) in the country. What are the legal (and other) frameworks on
which these systems are focussed? Provide some historical information
concerning how and why such land tenure systems exist.

B. **Conflicts Concerning Land** \-- Determine what sorts of problems such
tenure systems have created. What are the different interest groups focusing
on land tenure issues and what are the bases of their conflicts and alliances?
What is the balance between private and public interests in land? How are
ethnic and tribal (i.e. indigenous) issues, gender issues, class issues
involved in land conflicts?

C. **Land Distribution** \-- What is the existing distribution of land (i.e.
size of landholdings, extent of landlessness, etc.)? How has this changed over
time? What are the historical trends in terms of land distribution?

D. **Systems of Land Management** \-- Describe the existing systems of land
management in the country and how such management is enhanced or constrained
by the types of land tenure systems. Included in your analysis should be a
discussion of what crops and other products are being produced, how these
production patterns affect the natural environment, and what policies promote
or inhibit good land management practices. These may differ by regions of the
country so you should be prepared to specify how land management, conflicts,
and arbitration methods vary within the country. If the type of land tenure
system has affected peoples' willingness to invest in capital and other
improvements, these should be fully discussed.

E. **Informal and Formal Land Markets** \-- Evaluate the extent to which land
markets exist and how these are affected by the different systems of land
tenure. You should focus on rental, sharecropping, leasing and land sales. If
significant regional differences exist regarding land markets, these should be
specified.

F. **Titling and Security of Tenure** \-- What is the status of land titling
in the country? How secure do occupiers of land feel with regard to the
security of their tenure? Are titled lands subject to taxation and is this an
issue in the country? What are the existing systems of land taxation?
READINGS: Reading assignments will present a framework for our subsequent
discussions and provide you with important theoretical background for the
writing assignments. In addition, by the second week of class each of you
should do enough background reading in order to select a particular country on
which you will focus during the rest of the semester. A good starting point to
explore some countries is the book by Prosterman,Temple,and Hanstad, eds.,
_Agrarian Reform and Grassroots Development: Ten Case Studies_.

![](chart.gif)

_Common Readings for Week 1_ \-- These are short articles that provide a brief
glimpse of property rights issues around the world. You should read them in
roughly the order on the syllabus. All are available on reserve in the GSPIA
library.

de Soto, Hernando 1993 The Missing Ingredient: What Poor Countries Will Need
to Make Their Markets Work. _The Economist_ September 11th-17th: 8-12.

Jodha, N.S. 1991 Rural Common Property Resources: A Growing Crisis.
International Institute for Environment and Development Gatekeeper Series, No.
24.

Graham, Olivia 1989 A Land Divided: The Impact of Ranching on a Pastoral
Society. _The Ecologist_ 19 (5): 184-85.

Brooks, Karen and Zvi Lerman 1994 Farm Reform in the Transition Economies.
_Finance and Development_ December, pp. 25-28.

Prosterman, Roy L. and Jeffrey M. Riedinger 1987 _Land Reform and Democratic
Development_. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. Chapters One and Two.

Binswanger, Hans and Klaus Deininger n.d. World Bank Land Policy: Evolution
and Current Challenges. (mimeo).

_Reading Assignment for Week 2

_

Carter, Michael R. and Dina Mesbah 1990 Economic Theory of Land Markets and
Its Implications for the Land Access of the Rural Poor. LTC Paper #141, Land
Tenure Center: University of Wisconsin.

Lipton, Michael 1993 Land Reform as Commenced Business: The Evidence Against
Stopping. _World Development_ 21: 641-657.

Bell, C. Reforming Property Rights in Land and Tenancy. _The World Bank
Research Observer_ , Vol. 5, No. 2 (July 1990), pp. 143-66.

_Reading Assignment for Week 3

_

Billie R. DeWalt and Martha N. Rees 1994 _The End of Agrarian Reform in
Mexico: Past Lessons, Future Prospects_. San Diego: Center for U.S.-Mexican
Studies.

Jonakin, Jon 1996 The Impact of Structural Adjustment and Property Rights
Conflicts on Nicaraguan Agrarian Reform Beneficiaries. _World Development_ 24
(7): 1179-91.

_Reading Assignment for Week 4

_

Yager, Joseph 1988 _Transforming Agriculture in Taiwan: The Experience of the
Joint Commission on Rural Reconstruction._ Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press. Introduction, Chapter 7, and Chapter 17.

_Reading Assignment for Week 5

_

Ban, Sung Huan, Pal Yong Moon and Dwight Perkins 1980 Chapter Ten: Land
Reform. _Rural Development: Studies in the Modernization of the Republic of
Korea: 1945-75_. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Burmeister, Larry 1992 Korean Minifarm Agriculture: From Articulation to
Disarticulation. _The Journal of Developing Areas_. 26:145-168.

Scofield, Rupert 1990 Land Reform in Central America. In Prosterman, Roy L.,
Mary N. Temple, and Timothy Hanstad, eds. _Agrarian Reform and Grassroots
Development: Ten Case Studies_. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner. pp. 139-177.

Recommended: Seligson, Mitchell 1995 Thirty Years of Transformation in the
Agrarian Structure of El Salvador, 1961-1991. _Latin American Research Review_
30 (3): 43-74.

_Reading Assignment for Week 6_

Charles C. Geisler, 1984  "A History of Land Reform in the United States: Old
Wine, New Battles". In Charles C. Geisler and Frank Popper, eds. _Land Reform
American Style_. Rowman and Allanheld: Totowa, NJ.

Frederick H. Buttel 1984  "Agricultural Land Reform in America". In Charles C.
Geisler and Frank Popper, eds. _Land Reform American Style_. Rowman and
Allanheld: Totowa, NJ.

_Reading Assignment for Week 7

_

Fandino, Mario 1993 Land Titling and Peasant Differentiation in Honduras.
_Latin American Perspectives_ 20 (2):45-53.

Lambert, Virginia et al. 1990 _Ecuador Land Titling Project Evaluation_.
Bethesda, MD: Development Alternatives Inc.

Strasma, John D. and Rafael Celis 1992 Land Taxation, the Poor and Sustainable
Development. In Sheldon Annis, ed. _Poverty, Natural Resources and Public
Policy in Central America_. Transaction Publishers: New Brunswick, NJ.

_Reading Assignment for Week 8_

Binswanger, Hans and Klaus Deininger 1993 South African Land Policy: The
Legacy of History and Current Options. _World Development_ 21: 1451-75.

Shipton, Parker 1992 Debts and Trespasses: Land, Mortgages, and the Ancestors
in Western Kenya. _Africa_ 62: 357-387.

Bromley, Daniel W. 1989 Property Relations and Economic Development: The Other
Land Reform. _World Development_ 17: 867-877.

_Reading Assignment for Week 9

_

Heath, John and Hans Binswanger n.d. Natural Resource Degradation Effects of
Poverty and Population Growth are Largely Policy Induced: The Case of
Colombia. _Environment and Development Economics_ (in press).

DeWalt, Billie R., P. Vergne, and M. Hardin 1996 Shrimp Aquaculture
Development and the Environment: People, Mangroves and Fisheries on the Gulf
of Fonseca, Honduras. _World Development_ 24 (7): 1193-1208.

Thiesenhusen, William C. 1991 Implications of the Rural Land Tenure System for
the Environmental Debate: Three Scenarios. _The Journal of Developing Areas_
26: 1-24.

Recommended: Forster, Nancy and David Stanfield 1993 Tenure Regimes and Forest
Management: Case Studies of Latin America. LTC Paper 147\. Land Tenure Center:
University of Wisconsin - Madison.

_Reading Assignment for Week 10

_

Lastarria-Cornhiel, Susana, Dina Mesbah and Eric Shearer 1991 _The Reform of
Rural Land Markets in Latin America and the Caribbean: Research, Theory, and
Policy Implications_. Madison, WI: Land Tenure Center.

_Reading Assignment for Week 11

_

Carter, M.R. and B.L. Barham 1996 Level Playing Fields and Laissez Faire:
Postliberal Development Strategy in Inegalitarian Agrarian Economies. _World
Development_ 24 (7):1133-1150.

**DUE DATES FOR WRITING ASSIGNMENTS

**

_Writing Assignment for Week 3_ \-- Please produce a 4 to 8 page paper on your
country that deals with the following issues. Be prepared to discuss your
results in class. Due on January 22.

**Types of Land Tenure Systems**. Describe the existing types of land tenure
systems (e.g. communal tenure, private landholdings, corporate ownership,
etc.) in the country. What are the legal (and other) frameworks on which these
systems are focused? Provide some historical information concerning how and
why such land tenure systems exist.

**Land Distribution** \-- What is the existing distribution of land (i.e. size
of landholdings, extent of landlessness, etc.) in the country you have chosen?
How has this changed over time? What are the historical trends in terms of
land distribution? It would be very useful for you to produce a Gini
coefficient of land distribution. I will provide you with a diskette that
allows you to easily compute the Gini. If it is impossible for you to find
data on land distribution, try to produce a Gini coefficient based on income
distribution or some other alternative measure. If you can find village level
data, it would also be interesting to see Gini coefficients for specific
communities.

_Writing Assignment for Week 5_ \-- Please produce a 4 to 8 page paper on your
country that deals with the following issues. Be prepared to discuss your
results in class. Due on February 5.

**Conflicts Concerning Land** \-- Determine what sorts of problems the tenure
systems identified in your last paper have created. What are the different
interest groups focussing on land tenure issues and what are the bases of
their conflicts and alliances? What is the balance between private and public
interests in land? How are ethnic and tribal (i.e. indigenous) issues, gender
issues, class issues involved in land conflicts?

Writing Assignment Due Week 7. Please produce a 4 to 8 page paper on your
country that deals with the following issues. Be prepared to discuss your
results in class. Due February 19.

**Titling and Security of Tenure** \-- What is the status of land titling in
the country? Whether there is titled land or not, how secure do occupiers of
land feel with regard to the security of their tenure? Are there taxation
systems based on land ownership or occupancy in the country? What are the most
important issues in the country concerning property rights and taxation?

_Writing Assignment for Week 9_ \-- Please produce a 4 to 8 page paper on your
country that deals with the following issues. Be prepared to discuss your
results in class. Due March 12.

**Informal and Formal Land Markets** \-- Evaluate the extent to which land
markets exist and how these are affected by the different systems of land
tenure. You should focus on rental, sharecropping, leasing and land sales. If
significant regional differences exist regarding land markets, these should be
specified.

**Systems of Land Management** \-- Describe the existing systems of land
management in the country and how such management is enhanced or constrained
by the types of land tenure systems. Included in your analysis should be a
discussion of what crops and other products are being produced, how these
production patterns affect the natural environment, and what policies promote
or inhibit good land management practices. These may differ by regions of the
country so you should be prepared to specify how land management, conflicts,
and abitration methods vary within the country. If the type of land tenure
system has affected peoples' willingness to invest in capital and other
improvements, these should be fully discussed.

_Writing Assignment for April 4

_

Produce a draft of your final paper, one that incorporates all of the elements
that are specified in the original terms of reference on the syllabus. Deliver
three copies of the paper by 5:00 PM on April 4. Each of you will be
responsible for reading and commenting on the papers of two other students.
These will be distributed in mailboxes on April 7. You should make written
comments on these papers and hand them back to your fellow students by April
11. I will also make extensive comments on the draft of your paper so you will
have an opportunity to make revisions before handing in the final version of
the paper. The class discussion on April 9 will focus on the drafts of your
papers. Your final paper will be due before 5:00 PM on April 18.

