**[East European History](default.html)**

**Table of Contents**

**Courses**

[**History 0200**](History200syllabus.html)

  * [Topic 1](H200topic1.html)
  * [Topic 2](H200topic2.html)
  * [Topic 3](H200topic3.html)
  * [Topic 4](H200topic4.html)
  * [Topic 5](H200topic5.html)
  * [Topic 6](H200topic6.html)
  * [Midterm Review](h200mtreview.html)
  * [Final Exam Options](Finalexamoptions.html) 

**Historical Timelines**

  * [1998-1953](timeline1953-1998.html)
  * [1953-1998](timeline1953-1998-2.html) 

[**History 1270**](History1270syllabus.html)

  * [Outline](H1270courseoutline.html)
  * [Questions](H1270discussionqs.html) 

**Useful Links**

[Maps](eeuropemaps.html)

[Related Sites](relatedwebsites.html)

[News Sources](newsresources.html)

[Library Resources](libraryresources.html) |    |

**History 1270 Eastern European Jewry**

**Syllabus**



Until the Holocaust, most European Jews lived in the Eastern part of the
continent. This is an upper division course that looks at the Jews of Eastern
Europe from the time of their arrival in Eastern Europe in the Middle Ages to
the contemporary period. We will begin by looking at how, when, whence, and
with what experience Eastern European Jews arrived in Eastern Europe where
they initially found refuge. The Ukrainian massacres of the 17th century, put
an end to this "golden age" of Eastern European Jewry.

We will move quickly up to the age of Enlightened Absolutism in the 18th
century which held out the possibility of emancipating the Jews of Eastern and
Central Europe. The main focus of the course will be on the developments of
the 19th and 20th centuries, a period intimately tied up with modernity and
nationalism.

The Jewish community was affected by the economic, social, intellectual, and
political changes transforming all of European society. While some Jews
embraced modernization for the promise of prosperity and emancipation that it
held forth, others tried to resist it or to adapt it to the Jewish tradition.
The Haskalah and Hasidism, assimilation, socialism, Yiddishism, and Zionism
are Jewish responses to European modernity.



**Books for purchase at the Bookstore:**

> Howard M. Sachar, The Course of Modern Jewish History

>

> Recommended: Antony Polonsky, ed., Studies from Polin: From Shtetl to
Socialism



**Books for purchase at Copycat:**

> Eastern European Jewry coursepack (maps, articles, selections, primary
sources)

>

>  

**On Reserve:**

>   * Irina Livezeanu, Copycat coursepack

>   * Howard M. Sachar, The Course of Modern Jewish History

>   * Antony Polonsky, ed., Studies from Polin: From Shtetl to Socialism

>   * Martin Gilbert, Jewish History Atlas

>   * Bernard Weinryb, The Jews of Poland (chapters)

>   * Umansky & Ashton, Four Centuries of Jewish Women's Spirituality in
Eastern Europe

>   * Aster & Potichnyj, eds., Ukrainian-Jewish Relations

>   * Wilma A. Iggers, The Jews of Bohemia and Moravia (on order)

>   * Chimen Abramsky et al., eds., The Jews in Poland

>   * Raphael Mahler, Hasidism and the Jewish Enlightenment

>   * Lucy Dawidowicz, The Golden Tradition

>   * Richard Levy, Anti-Semitism in the Modern World

>   * Albert Lindemann, The Jew Accused

>   * Susan Glenn, Daughters of the Shtetl

>   * Jonathan Webber, ed., Jewish Identities in the New Europe

>   * Ezra Mendelsohn, "Jewish Assimilation in Lvov: The Case of Wilhelm
Feldman"

>   * Ezra Mendelsohn, "From Assimilation to Zionism in Lvov: The Case of
Alfred Nossig"

>   * Mark Zborowski & Elizabeth Herzog, "The Rebbeh Makes Miracles" in Life
is With

>   * People

>   * Elie Wiesel, Night



**Requirements:**

This course will make use of lecture, discussion, oral presentations, and
visual materials in addition to the reading assignments that you must keep up
with, week by week. If you fall behind the course will become unmanageable.
You should speak to me about it immediately. The class will work best if you
are actively involved throughout, bring your questions to class, are able to
answer questions on the reading assignments, and take part in discussions.

Read the textbook for background and context, to give you "the broad
historical sweep for the period we are studying. If you are completely
unfamiliar with the history in question, read the textbook carefully. If, on
the other hand, you have studied some version of this history before, as
Western Civ, Eastern Civ, European history, or Jewish history, you can use the
textbook to refresh your memory and for reference.

In class your close attention and participationis expected throughout.
Assignments are to be handed in on time or not at all. You must come to class
punctually and sit for the whole class period, unless a completely
extraordinary circumstance has arisen. If so, speak to me about it before
class or before the missed assignment.Do not be late, and do not leave early.
I expect, of course, perfect adult behavior and courtesy. I will tell you what
specifically I expect of you during the first class. If you are joining the
class late, please come see me during office hours or after class for a run-
down on the rules as soon as you join. If any problem should arise, please
contact me ahead of time, to make special arrangements.

The midterm and final exams will include short and long essays and map
questions.

Students will be held to rigorous standards of academic integrity. Cheating
and plagiarism are unacceptable. If you are using material from the Internet,
you must hand in a printout of the Web source with your written assignment. If
you plagiarize any part of an assignment you will receive an F grade for that
assignment.

Each week you will receive a set of questions covering the next week's topic
and reading assignments. Use these questions to guide you through the reading
you are doing, to help you formulate an essay about the topics covered, and to
prepare for class discussion.

The weekly essays you write should cover the main issues touched on in the
readings, class presentations, and videos that we see. Include answers to at
least one question about each reading that week. These essays are less formal
than the term paper, but should be in good grammatical form and represent your
best thinking.

Please limit yourself to two pages, typewritten, double-spaced per week. Think
of these weekly essays as an intellectual journal accompanying you on your
journey through the history of Eastern Europe's Jews. The essays are due each
Tuesday. (The first weekly essay is due Thursday after Labor Day.)



**Grade Calculation:**

> midterm 20%

>

> weekly writing assignments 50%

>

> paper or final 30%

Students will have a choice of writing a term paper on an assigned topic, or
taking an in- class final exam. You will receive a separate hand-out
explaining the paper assignment.



**Opportunites for Extra Credit:**

The readings marked "XC" can bring you extra credit if you complete the
reading at the appropriate time in the semester, write a one page essay on it,
and give a very brief, 3-5 minute presentation in class. In your essay and
oral report explain what is the main point or points of the article, what kind
of evidence the author uses, and what the article adds to the required
materials by way of information or interpretation.  

  
---|---|---  
  
  


Please e-mail [web maintenance](mailto:irinal@pitt.edu) if you experience any
problems. |  
  |  
  |  
  |  
  |  
  |  
  |  
  |  
  |  
  |  

