**

Introduction to Cultural Anthropology

**

(Anth 1312.003, Spring 2001)

**

Professor** :  Dr. Ana M. Juarez **Office** : Evans Liberal Arts 259

**

Phone** :  245-7838 (direct) or 245-8272 (dept.) **E-mail** :
[aj07@swt.edu](aj07@swt.edu)

**

Web Page** : [http://www.swt.edu/~aj07/](http://www.swt.edu/~aj07/)

**

Office Hours** : MW 2-4 p.m., Th 2-3, and anytime by appointment.

**

Students With Special Needs:** Students with special needs (as documented by
the Office of Disability Services) should identify themselves at the beginning
of the term. The Department of Anthropology is dedicated to providing these
students with necessary academic adjustments and auxiliary aids to facilitate
their participation and performance in the classroom.

**

Course Description/Objecatives** : This course provides an introduction to the
discipline of anthropology, with an emphasis on cultural anthropology. Topics
include the historical development of the discipline, fieldwork and
methodologies, language, culture, political economy and stratification, race
and ethnicity, kinship and marriage, and gender and sexuality. Students will
gain an understanding of the diversity of cultural practices and forms of
social organization.

**

Required Texts:

**

Nanda and Warms (CA) Cultural Anthropology, 6th Edition

Podolefsky and Brown (ACA) Applying Cultural Anthropology, 4th Ed.

**

Course Requirements:

READINGS**: Class discussion, activities, and exams will be based on the
required readings. It is the student's responsibility to complete the readings
as assigned and be prepared for class.

**

Attendance** : Attendance will be taken. Students with no more than two
absences will receive _five extra points_ on their Final Exam grade.

**

Classroom Organization** : Students will be asked to choose a place to sit for
the semester. I will use a seating chart to take attendance. I expect students
to arrive on time, but if you are late or must leave class early, you must sit
on the last row on either side of the classroom.

**

EXAMS** : There will be three in-class exams and a final exam. All four exams
will be multiple choice and _they will not be cumulative_. Exams are based on
about _70% class activities/lectures and 30% readings_. Semester grades will
be based on the following percentages:

**

First Exam: 20 %; Second Exam:25 %; Third Exam:25 %; Final Exam: 30 %

**

A **=90 or above;** B **=80 or above;** C **=70 or above;** D **=60 or
above;** F **=59 or less

EXAM REGULATIONS**: 1) **ALL exams require a** **pencil.** 2) **You MUST
arrive for exams ON TIME**. If you arrive more than 10 minutes late you will
not be allowed to take the exam. 3) If you miss an exam due to _officially
documented_ sickness or emergency you may make it up on the day of the Final
Exam. The make-up exam may be either essay or multiple choice, at my
discretion. 4) I encourage everyone who would like to improve their grade to
review their exam. Exams will be _available for two weeks after each exam_.

**

Note** : _Syllabus is subject to change at any time_.

**_

SCHEDULE OF TOPICS, READINGS, AND EXAMS



_

I. Introduction: The Four Fields, Fieldwork, and Issues in Anthropology

**

CA 1 Anthropology and Human Diversity

ACA 1 Miner, Body Ritual Among the Nacirema

ACA 3 Bourgois, Crack in Spanish Harlem

**

II. Language: Humans, Symbolic Systems, and Gender

**

CA 4 Language

ACA 6 Basso, "To Give Up on Words": Silence in Western Apache Culture

ACA 8 Rickford, Suite for Ebony and Phonics

**

III. Culture: Definitions and Characteristics

**

CA 3 The Idea of Culture

CA 5 Learning Culture

ACA 5 Bohannan, Shakespeare in the Bush

ACA 12 Cooper, Chinese Table Manners: You Are _How_ You Eat

**_

EXAM ONE_ (tentatively scheduled for Wednesday, February 7 - Week 4)

**



**

IV. Adaptive Strategies

**

CA 6 Making A Living

ACA 14 Diamond, The Worst Mistake in the History of the Human Race

ACA 15 Bartlett/Brown, Agricultural Development and the Quality of Life

**

V. Kinship and Marriage: Organization, Stratification, and Gender

**

CA 9 Kinship

CA 8 Marriage, Family, and Domestic Groups

ACA 28 Goldstein, When Brothers Share a Wife

ACA 29 Kilbride, African Polygyny: Family Values and Contemporary Changes

ACA 30 van Willigen/Channa, Law, Custom, and Crimes Against Women

**_

EXAM TWO_ (tentatively scheduled for Friday, March 9 - Week 8)



VI. Gender and Sexuality: Cultural Constructions and Diversity

**

CA 10 Gender

ACA 23 Friedl, Society and Sex Roles

ACA 25 Dollar, Child Care in China

ACA 27 Creighton, "Edutaining" Children: Cons. and Gender Soc. in Jap.
Marketing

**

VII. Political Economy**

CA 7 Economics

ACA 20 Lee, Eating Christmas in the Kalahari

ACA 21 Cronk, Strings Attached

ACA 22 Reeves-Ellington, Using Cultural Skills for Coop. Adv. in Japan

**_

EXAM THREE_ (tentatively scheduled for Wednesday, April 11- Week 12)

**



**

VIII. Power, Stratification, and Race

**

CA 11 Social Ranking and Stratification

CA 12 Power and Control

ACA 17 Diamond, Race Without Color

ACA 18 AAA, Draft Official Statement on "Race"

ACA 31 Gibbs, The Kpelle Moot

**

IX. Social and Cultural Change

**

CA 15 Cultural Change

ACA 39 Nagengast, Women, Minorities, and Indigenous Peoples:Universalism...

**_

EXAM FOUR / FINAL EXAM: Friday, May 4 th, 11:30 a.m.

**_

