**

Introduction to Cultural Anthropology

**

(Anth 1312.005, Spring 2001)

**

Professor** : Dr. Ana M. Juarez **Office** : Evans Liberal Arts 228

**

Phone** : 245-7838 (direct) or 245-8272 (dept.) **E-mail** :
[aj07@swt.edu](aj07@swt.edu)

**

Web Page** : [http://www.swt.edu/~aj07/](http://www.swt.edu/~aj07/)

**

Office Hours** : MW 2-4:30 p.m., or anytime after class or by appointment.

**

Students With Special Needs:** Students with special needs (as documented by
the Office of Disability Services) should identify themselves at the beginning
of the term. The Department of Anthropology is dedicated to providing these
students with necessary academic adjustments and auxiliary aids to facilitate
their participation and performance in the classroom.

**

Course Description/Objectives** : This course provides an introduction to the
discipline of anthropology, with an emphasis on cultural anthropology. Topics
include the historical development of the discipline, fieldwork and
methodologies, language, culture, political economy and stratification, race
and ethnicity, kinship and marriage, and gender and sexuality. Students will
gain an understanding of the diversity of cultural practices and forms of
social organization.

**

Required Texts:

**

Nanda and Warms (CA) Cultural Anthropology, 7th Edition

Podolefsky and Brown (ACA) Applying Cultural Anthropology, 5th Ed.

**

Course Requirements:

READINGS**: Class discussion, activities, and exams will be based on the
required readings. It is the student's responsibility to complete the readings
as assigned and be prepared for class.

**

Classroom Organization** : I expect students to arrive on time, but if you are
late or must leave class early, you must sit on the last row on either side of
the classroom.

EXAMS **: There will be three in-class exams and a final exam. All four exams
will be multiple choice and _they will not be cumulative_. Exams are based on
about _70% class activities/lectures and 30% readings_. Each exam is worth 25%
of your final grade. The Grading Scale is:

**

A **=90 or above;** B **=80 or above;** C **=70 or above;** D **=60 or
above;** F **=59 or less

EXAM REGULATIONS**: 1) **Bring a** **pencil.** 2) **You MUST arrive for exams
ON TIME**. If you arrive more than 10 minutes late you will not be allowed to
take the exam. 3) If you miss an exam due to _officially documented_ sickness
or emergency you may make it up on the day of the Final Exam. The make-up exam
may be either essay or multiple choice, at my discretion. 4) I encourage
everyone who would like to improve their grade to review their exam. Exams
will be _available for two weeks after each exam_.

Learning and teaching take place best in an atmosphere of intellectual fair-
minded openness. All members of the academic community are responsible for
supporting freedom and openness through rigorous personal standards of honesty
and fairness. Plagiarism and other forms of academic dishonesty undermine the
very purpose of the university and diminish the value of an education.

**

Note** : _Syllabus is subject to change at any time_.

**_



SCHEDULE OF TOPICS, READINGS, AND EXAMS



_

I. Introduction: The Four Fields, Fieldwork, and Issues in Anthropology

**

CA 1 Anthropology and Human Diversity

CA 2 Human Evolution

CA 3 Doing Cultural Anthropology

ACA 1 Miner, Body Ritual Among the Nacirema

ACA 4 Bourgois, Crack in Spanish Harlem

**

II. Language: Humans, Symbolic Systems, and Gender

**

CA 5 Language

ACA 8 Maltz and Borker, A Cultural Approach to Male-Female Miscommunication

ACA 28 Rickford, Suite for Ebony and Phonics

**

III. Culture: Definitions and Characteristics

**

CA 4 The Idea of Culture

ACA 6 Bohannan, Shakespeare in the Bush

**_

EXAM ONE_ (tentatively scheduled for Tuesday, October 2 - Week 5)

**



**

IV. Adaptive Strategies and Political Organization

**

CA 7 Making A Living

CA 12 Political Organization

ACA 12 Diamond, The Worst Mistake in the History of the Human Race

ACA 33 Gibbs, The Kpelle Moot

**

V. Kinship and Marriage: Organization, Stratification, and Gender

**

CA 10 Kinship

CA 9 Marriage, Family, and Domestic Groups

ACA 29 Goldstein, When Brothers Share a Wife

ACA 30 Kilbride, African Polygyny: Family Values and Contemporary Changes

ACA 31 van Willigen/Channa, Law, Custom, and Crimes Against Women

**_

EXAM TWO_ (tentatively scheduled for Thursday, October 25 - Week 8)



VI. Gender and Sexuality: Cultural Constructions and Diversity

**

CA 11 Gender

ACA 23 Friedl, Society and Sex Roles

ACA 24 Pringle, New Women of the Ice Age

ACA 25 Cassell, Doing Gender, Doing Surgery: Women Surgeons in a Man's
Profession

**

VII. Political Economy**

CA 8 Economics

ACA 19 Lee, Eating Christmas in the Kalahari

ACA 20 Cronk, Strings Attached

ACA 21 Reeves-Ellington, Using Cultural Skills for Coop. Adv. in Japan

**

VIII. Religion

**

CA 15 Religion

**_

EXAM THREE_ (tentatively scheduled for Thursday, November 15- Week 11)

**



**

IX. Power, Stratification, and Race

**

CA 13 Social Stratification in Contemporary Societies: Class, Caste, Race

CA 14 Ethnicity

ACA 15 Diamond, Race Without Color

ACA 16 AAA, Draft Official Statement on "Race"

**

X. Social and Cultural Change

**

CA 17 Cultural Change

ACA 39 Wolfe, Welfare Reform--Self-Sufficiency or What?

**_

EXAM FOUR / FINAL EXAM: Tuesday, December 18, , 11:30 a.m.**_

