James Madison University

Department of Political Science

POSC 230  
Dr. Robin Teske  
International Relations  
Office: Maury 217  
Fall 2000  
Phone: 568-6149  
Office Hours: T/Th: 5:00-5:30  
Email: teskerl  
Wed.: 1:30-5:30 (and by appointment)  

We playwrights who have to cram a whole human life or an entire historical era
into a two-hour play, can scarcely understand this rapidity [of change]
ourselves. And if it gives us trouble, think of the trouble it must give
political scientists who have less experience with the realm of the
improbable.

President Vaclav Havel of the Czech Republic _Address to the U.S. Congress,
February 1990_

I. _COURSE DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES

_

This course is an introduction to the theory and practice of international
relations. It focuses on some of the most significant, threatening, and
promising phenomena of the modern era. The course will begin with an overview
of the field of international relations. It will continue with a discussion of
the perceptions, or world outlooks, of some of the important actors in the
international system. These actors include the United States, Russia, China,
Japan, Europe, and the "Third World." The second part of the course will
address the issue of power, and will discuss both nuclear and nonnuclear
conflict issues. The third part of the course will examine international law
and organization, human rights, international political economy, and issues
involving global ecological balance. The course will conclude with a
discussion of alternative futures.

There are no prerequisites, since the purpose of the course is to help
students broaden their understanding of international relations. The course is
designed to stimulate students to continue their study of international
relations in the many specialized courses available within the university.

II. _ASSIGNED READING MATERIALS

_

The following texts comprise much of the reading required for this course, and
are available for purchase from the bookstore:

\- Walter S. Jones, _The Logic of International Relations_ (eighth edition)

\- Brown, et al, _State of the World 2000

_

In addition to these two books, a number of required readings will be placed
on reserve in Carrier Library, and occasional 'handouts' will be distributed
in class. Please note that some of the reserve readings also are available on
the Internet. I have noted on the syllabus when the articles are available on-
line. See Section V. of this syllabus for instructions on how to access the
on-line text of these articles.

III. _COURSE REQUIREMENTS

_

Course grades will be based on the fulfillment of the following criteria:

\- The course is divided into three sections. You will be tested at the end of
each section. I will drop your lowest grade, so only two of these three tests
will "count." Each test will be worth 30% of your course grade, for a total of
60%. The tests will be composed of multiple choice questions, with an optional
essay. Please note that make-up exams will be given only in extreme
situations, and only  when arrangements have been made with the professor
prior to the regularly scheduled exam period.  Students are expected to follow
the JMU Honor Code.

\- A comprehensive final examination, worth 40% of your course grade.

IV. _COURSE OUTLINE AND READING ASSIGNMENTS

_

A. Overview of the Course

B. Overview of the Field: The Study of International Relations - Theory and
Practice

_

Readings_ : - Jones, Chapter 1

On reserve in the library:

\- Robert Kaplan, "The Coming Anarchy," _The Atlantic Monthly_ , Feb.1994
(available on-line)

\- Samuel Huntington, "The Clash of Civilizations," _Foreign Affairs_ , Summer
1993 (available on-line)

\- Fouad Ajami, "The Summoning," _Foreign Affairs_ , October 1993 (available
on-line)

C. Perceptions in International Relations

_

Readings_ : - Jones, Ch. 2-6

On reserve in the library:

\- Dmitry Shlapentokh, "The Illusions and Realities of Russian Nationalism,"
_The Washington Quarterly_ , Winter 2000 (available on-line)

\- Tina Rosenberg, "The Unfinished Revolution of 1989," _Foreign Policy_ ,
Summer 1999 (available on-line)

\- Sheng Lijun, "China and the United States: Asymmetrical Strategic
Partners,"  _The Washington Quarterly_ , Summer 1999 (available on-line)

\- Nelson Mandela, "South Africa's Future Foreign Policy," _Foreign Affairs_ ,
Nov./Dec. 1993 (available on-line)

\- Douglas Brinkley, "Democratic Enlargement: The Clinton Doctrine," _Foreign
Policy_ , Spring 1997 (available on-line)

TEST ONE: Tentative Date - Tuesday, October 3

D. The International System and Power

_

Readings_ : - Jones, Ch. 7-10

On reserve in the library:

\- J. Ann Tickner, "Hans Morgenthau's Principles of Political Realism - A
Feminist Reformulation"

\- Carol Cohn, "Sex and Death in the Rational World of Defense Intellectuals"

\- John D. Steinbruner, "Biological Weapons: A Plague Upon All Houses,"
_Foreign Policy_ , Winter 1997 (available on-line) _OR_ George Perkovich,
"Nuclear Proliferation," _Foreign Policy_ , Fall 1998 (available on-line)

\- Thomas Merton, "Danish Nonviolent Resistance to Hitler"

\- Martin Luther King, Jr., "Pilgrimage to Nonviolence"

\- Walter Wink, "Re-visioning History: Nonviolence Past, Present, Future"

\- Opt.: Dr. Suess, _The Butter Battle Book

_

TEST TWO: Tentative Date - Tuesday, October 31

E. International Law and Organization

_

Readings:_ \- Jones, Ch. 14, 15

On reserve in the library:

\- Robert Muller, "A Copernican View of World Cooperation"

\- The Universal Declaration of Human Rights

F. Overview - International Political Economy

_

Readings_ : - Jones, Ch 11, 12, 13, 16

\- Brown, Chapters 8, 9, 10

G. The Global Environment

_

Readings_ : - Brown, Chapters 1-7

H. Alternative Futures

_

Readings_ : - Jones, Ch. 17

On reserve in the library:

\- Jessica Matthews, "Power Shift," _Foreign Affairs_ , Jan./Feb. 1997
(available on-line)

\- John Lewis Gaddis, "Living in Candlestick Park," _The Atlantic Monthly_ ,
April  1999

\- Ray Bradbury, "The Sound of Thunder"

\- Opt.: "Naming a New Era," _Foreign Policy_ , Summer 2000, pgs. 173-186

TEST THREE: Thursday, December 7

FINAL EXAMINATION: Tuesday, December 12, from 4:00-6:00

V. _NOTE:

_

\- To access the articles that are available on-line, you should follow these
steps:

\- Go to JMU home page

\- Click on Current Students

\- Click on Libraries

\- Click on Carrier Library

\- Click on Research Databases

\- Click on the letter E (on Database A-Z)

\- Click on Expanded Academic ASAP (Infotrac web)

\- Fill in Subject Guide Search (This seems to work best if you put the name
of the article in the entry box, scroll down and check the box that says "to
articles with text," and fill in the journal name. For some reason, sometimes
the system seems to get confused if you fill in the date. Check the
information in the syllabus, and make sure you are reading the correct
article). - Go to the article, and click on full text





