This information effective as of winter 98.  
Check with instructor the first day of class for any changes.

#

* * *

HISTORY ADVANCE COURSE INFORMATION

#### [HIS-025B-01] [HIS-080D-01][HIS-080J-01][HIS-080T-01]  
[HIS-150C-01][HIS-156B-01][HIS-194B-01][HIS-194D-01]  
[HIS-194J-01][HIS-194K-01][HIS-216A-01]

#

* * *

History 25B

## The United States, 1877 - Present

### Spring 1998

### Lecture MWF 11:00-12:10, Eight Acad 240

### Alice Yang Murray (ayang @cats.ucsc.edu)

### Office Hrs: Wed 1-3, Merrill Rm 31, 459-3967

**Sections: Phil Whalen & Holly Piscopo**

  * M 8:00-9:10 AM Merrill Acad 130 
  * M 5:00-6:10 PM Merrill Acad 132 
  * F 9:30-10:40 PM Merrill Acad 3 
  * F 9:30-10:40 PM Merrill Acad 2 



### Course Description:

The course focuses on major political, social, economic, and diplomatic
developments in the United States since 1877. Important themes include debates
about the government's proper economic and social role, especially in the
Progressive, New Deal, Great Society and Reagan periods; changing views of
ethnicity, race and gender, particularly during the 1880s, 1920s, the social
movements of the 1960s and 1970s, and in the 1990s; and the determinants of
United States foreign policy, notably in the Spanish-American War, World Wars
I and II, the Cold War, Vietnam, and the Middle East.

### Reading:

All books are available at the Bay Tree Bookstore and on reserve at McHenry
Library. Readings are assigned from the following volumes:

  * Larry Madaras and James M. SoRelle, eds. Taking Sides: Clashing Views on Controversial Issues in American History, Volume II: Reconstruction to the Present 
  * John C. Chalberg, ed., Opposing Viewpoints in American History, Volume II: From Reconstruction to the Present 
  * Robert D. Marcus and David Burner, America Firsthand, Volume 2: Readings from Reconstruction to the Present 
  * Gary B. Nash and Julie Roy Jeffrey, The American People: Creating a Nation and Society, Volume II: Since 1865 



### Course Requirements:

#### Attendance and Participation

Attendance and participation is critical for this course and contributes to
30% of your final evaluation. The lectures, films, and discussions held on
Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays are designed to complement the reading for
section. You will not pass the course if you miss more than two of these class
meetings without the advance permission of your TA. Participation in
discussion sections is also required. You will not pass the course if you miss
more than one section without advance permission of your TA. Moreover, you are
expected during discussions to share your critical evaluation of the arguments
and evidence presented in the readings, lectures, films, and comments of your
fellow students. You also will sign up to help lead one section discussion and
one class discussion held on Fridays.

#### Short Analytical Papers

You will write two papers based on the reading for the discussions you will
lead. The first 3-5 page paper can analyze either the primary documents that
have been provided or the scholarly arguments presented for that week. This
paper is worth 10% of your evaluation. The second 5-7 page paper must
critically evaluate scholarly arguments. You must exchange a draft of this
paper with a classmate. You will have one week to critically evaluate each
other's analysis using the Peer Writing Review sheets that will be provided.
After reading each other's comments, you will revise your paper and submit one
week later your first draft, your reader's peer writing review sheet, and your
final draft. You will be evaluated not only on the final draft but on how well
you incorporate your reader's suggestions for revision. You will not pass the
course if you do not participate in this peer review process. This second
paper is worth 20% of your evaluation.

#### Take-home Final Exam

On June 1, I will distribute 6 guide questions for a cumulative take-home
final exam. Three of those guide questions will appear on the actual exam
distributed on June 8. You will answer two of those three questions. Each
essay should be 5-7 pages and each constitutes 20% of your final evaluation.
This take-home exam must be submitted no later than 4 PM on Tuesday, June 16.
There will be a box at the Merrill Faculty Services Office marked "History
25B." You may submit a proposal for a final exam question that synthesizes
and/or compares course material (from the readings, films and lectures) on May
29. If your question is included as one of the 6 guide questions, you will get
extra credit and can choose to write on your question regardless of whether or
not it appears on the final exam.

#### Late Paper/Exam Policy

All papers are due at the beginning of class. Papers or exams submitted
without a verified medical excuse or advanced permission will be noted as
"late" on your evaluation. Papers or exams that are more than 2 days late will
not be accepted.



### Tentative Schedule of Lectures and Discussion Topics

#### Week 1

Section ****

Discussion Topic: No section meetings this week

April 8 **** Introduction to the Course: Syllabus Review, American History
Standards, and the Struggle to Control Representations of the Past

April 10 Reconstruction, the "New South" and Jim Crow

Friday

Discussion Topic: No discussion this week



#### Week 2

Section

Discussion Topic: Was Reconstruction a success?

April 13 film: "Birth of a Nation"

April 15 The Gilded Age: Workers and Life in the City

April 17 Americanization and the New Immigrants

Friday

Discussion Topic: Did late nineteenth-century immigrants have to leave behind
their old world cultures to come to America?



#### Week 3

Section

Discussion Topic: Were nineteenth-century entrepreneurs "robber barons" who
exploited the masses or marketing innovators who strengthened the nation's
economy?

April 20 "Civilizing" the West

April 22 Expansionism and Empire-Building

April 24 Latin America, the Caribbean, and World War I

Friday

Discussion Topic: Does early twentieth-century American foreign policy fulfill
FDR's description of a "good neighbor" policy?



#### Week 4

Section

Discussion Topic: Did Booker T. Washington's philosophy and actions betray the
interests of African Americans?

April 27 Suffrage, Prohibition, and the Crash

April 29 film: "The Great Depression"

May 1 The "Roaring 20s"

Friday

Discussion Topic: Were the 1920s an era of social and culture rebellion?



#### Week 5

Section

Discussion Topic: Did the Progressives fail?

May 4 Alternatives to the New Deal?

May 6 Onset of World War II

May 2 World War II: the Home Front

Friday

Discussion Topic: Did World War II liberate American women?



#### Week 6

Section

Discussion Question: Was the New Deal an Effective Answer to the Great
Depression?

May 11 World War II: the War Front

May 13 film: "The Atomic Cafe"

May 15 The Cold War and Beyond

Friday

Discussion Topic: Were the 1950s America's "Happy Days"?



#### Week 7

Section

Discussion Topic: Was it necessary to drop the atomic bomb to end World War
II?

May 18 McCarthyism, "Loyalty," and the Suppression of Dissent

May 20 film: "Eyes on the Prize"

May 22 From Civil Rights to Black Power

Friday

Discussion Topic: Was Martin Luther King, Jr.'s leadership essential to the
civil rights movement?



#### Week 8

Section

Discussion Topic: Did the Civil Rights Movement improve race relations in the
United States?

May 26 America's Involvement in Vietnam

May 27 film: "Vietnam: a Television History"

May 29 The "War on Poverty" and the Great Society

Friday

Discussion Topic: Did the Great Society fail?



#### Week 9

Section

Discussion Topic: Did the antiwar movement prolong war in Vietnam?

June 1 The Feminist Movement

June 3 Watergate, and the Fall and Resurgence of Conservatism

June 5 Post-Watergate Politics

Friday

Discussion Topic: Will history forgive Richard Nixon?



#### Week 10

Section

Discussion Topic: Were the 1980s a decade of greed?

June 8 Clinton, Gingrich and the Post-Civil Rights Era

June 10 Post-Cold War Foreign Policy, the New World Order, and War in the
Persian Gulf

Wednesday

Discussion Topic: Did President Reagan win the Cold War?

June 12 Review Session and Course Evaluations

#

* * *

History 80D

## The Making of Modern East Asia



### Instructor: Alan Christy

### Office: Merrill 115; phone: 9-5564; e-mail: alan_christy@macmail

### Class time: M,W,F 2-3:10pm, Oakes 105

### Teaching Assistants: Cherie Barkey, Carlos Mujal



This class is an introduction to modern East Asian history. It is not meant to
be a comprehensive survey of that history itself (3 countries, 200 years in 10
weeks? way too much!), but an examination of the importance of three
themes&emdash;1) Colonialism & Imperialism, 2) Revolution, and 3)
Modernity&emdash;to modern East Asian history. Among the questions we will
consider: What impact did colonialism have and how did the people of these
nations respond? How did Chinese, Japanese and Koreans envision and struggle
for (or against) the revolutionary transformations of their nations? Finally,
how might we understand the relationship between an often putatively Western
Modernity and the cultural identity of East Asians? Was Modernity adopted from
the West, or have Chinese, Japanese and Koreans created their own modernities?
How were issues of race, ethnicity, gender and class issues of modernity?

Each theme will constitute a three week module and within each module we will
examine how that theme was central to the modern history of China, Japan and
then Korea (one week each). Within each week, the lectures will proceed
chronologically. Monday's lectures will usually cover late 19th (or early
twentieth century) topics. Wednesday's lectures will cover the period from
1910 to 1945. Friday's lectures will cover post-WWII topics. Lectures and
readings each week will cover a long time span, but we will revisit that time
span three times over the course of the quarter.

Discussion section is mandatory and attendance and participation will count as
fully one-third of your final evaluation. When you register, note discussion
section times and be sure to leave at least one of them available for
attendance. We will not be making allowances for those who claim conflicts
with all times.



Since we cannot reasonably cover the full chronologies of all three countries
in the 10 weeks of a quarter, I am recommending a survey history text for each
country. These are optional readings and are meant to provide students with
support, references and background materials that cannot be covered in class.
The required readings are, as much as possible, primary materials. These will
range from memoir and manifesto to fiction and poetry. The emphasis in
assignments will be on textual analysis. The weekly reading load is about 75
pages.

### Required Readings:

3 Reading Packets (Available from Instructor)



### Optional Readings

  * (Three Survey Histories) (Available at the Literary Guillotine) 
    * Fairbank, John K., China: A New History 
    * Pyle, Kenneth, The Making of Modern Japan 
    * Cumings, Bruce, Korea: Divided Past, United Future?  



### Assignments:

  * 1 Map Quiz 
  * 3 Writing Assignments (see Lecture Schedule for due dates) 
  * Weekly Media Journal (submitted every Friday in discussion) 
  * 1 Weekly Media Journal Analysis 



### Media Journal Guidelines:

Each week, you will keep a diary of the news stories on one Asian nation
encountered during that week in one media organ (the weekly news magazine
group being the exception). Except for the weekly newsmagazine group,
everyone's media organ is a daily. Ideally, you should check your newspaper or
TV news show every day, but you must have at least four entries per week for
that week's work to be considered passing. You must turn in the journal at
least six of nine weeks in order to pass this assignment.

For each day you write in your journal, you should note whether there is any
reporting on your nation. If so, record 1) the name of the article (or the
topic of the news segment) and 2) the reporter who wrote (or presented) the
piece. Next, briefly note what the story is about. Finally, record any
comments you might have on the story, such as: Does the story portray your
country in positive or negative terms? How does it relate to other stories you
have seen this term? Does the story imply that the country in question is
different from, or similar to, the U.S.? If it is different, is that
difference good, bad or neutral? Does the story refer to traditions, history
and so on? Does the story suggest all Chinese, etc. are the same?

Often, you will find that there is simply nothing reported about your country.
Record that fact, when it happens. You might also note which foreign countries
are reported on and why. If you have heard of something going on in your
country (through other media), but those events are not reported in yours,
note that as well.

In lieu of a final exam, you will write a short paper (5-7 pages) summarizing
and analyzing the media trends you observed during the course of the term.
Evaluate the quality and the quantity of the reporting and comment. If these
media constitute the core of informed opinion in the U.S., how informed do you
think Americans are likely to be about East Asia?



### Writing Assignments:

There will be three written assignments, one at the end of each module. The
assignments will give you a chance to synthesize the readings from each
country and move beyond an analysis that is bound to one nation. The topics
will be broadly comparative, but will nevertheless ask for a detailed
discussion of specific texts. The papers will be fo 4 to 6 pages in length,
typed and double-spaced.

### Lecture Schedule:

Week One:

  * April 8: Introductory Course Business, The East Asian System Prior to 1800 
  * April 10: The East Asian System Prior to 1800 (continued) 

**Module One: Colonialism/Imperialism**



Week Two: China

  * April 13: Western Impacts: Opium, Missionaries, Custom Inspectors and Translators 
  * April 15: The May 4th Movement and Anti-Japanese Struggle 
  * April 17: The Korean War and the Sino-Soviet Dispute 



Week Three: Japan

  * April 20: Admiral Perry and the "Opening" of Japan 
  * April 22: Japan as an Imperial Power 
  * April 24: Japan Under the American Nuclear Umbrella 



Week Four: Korea

  * April 27: Korea as the Site of International Rivalry 
  * April 29: Korea as a Japanese Colony 
  * May 1: The Superpowers and Korea: From Hot to Cold Wars 

** **

**Due May 4: First Writing Assignment**

** **

**Module Two: Revolution**



Week Five: China

  * May 4: The Republican Revolution 
  * May 6: The Communist Revolution 
  * May 8: The Cultural Revolution and Tiananmen Square 



Week Six: Japan

  * May 11: The Meiji Restoration 
  * May 13: The Showa Restoration: Fascism 
  * May 15: Postwar Struggles: From AMPO to Narita Airport 



Week Seven: Korea

  * May 18: The May 1st Movement 
  * May 20: Revolution, Reaction and the Korean War 
  * May 22: Martial Law and The Kwangju Uprising 

** **

**Due May 26: Second Writing Assignment**

** **

**Module Three: Modernity**



Week Eight: China

  * May 26 (Exchange Day): Self-Strengthening Movements of the Nineteenth Century 
  * May 27: Meet Mr. Democracy and Mr. Science 
  * May 29: The Four (or was it Five?) Modernizations 



Week Nine: Japan

  * June 1: The Meiji Enlightenment 
  * June 3: Taisho Cosmopolitanism & the Desire to Overcome Modernity 
  * June 5: Citizens' Protest and Consumer Capitalism 



Week Ten: Korea

  * June 8: The Independence Club and Pre-Colonial Reform 
  * June 10: Colonial Collaborators and Cultural Nationalists 
  * June 12: Juche Independence and Chaebol Corporatism 

** **

**Due June 15: Third Writing Assignment**

** **

**Due June 17: Media Journal Analysis**

#

* * *

History 80J

## Asian American History, 1941-present

### Class Meetings: MWF 3:30-4:40 Cowell Com 134

### Discussion Sections: 11:00-12:10 Merrill Acad 002

> > > > ### 5:00-6:10 Merrill Acad 002

### Instructor: Alice Yang-Murray

### Office Hours: W 1:00-3:00 & by appt at Merrill Rm 31 (across from the
History Board office)

### Phone: (408) 459-3967, email ayang@cats.ucsc.edu

### Course Description

Examines the experiences of men and women of Chinese, Japanese, Korean,
Filipino, South Asian, Southeast Asian, and Amerasian ancestry between 1941
and the present. Topics include immigration, race relations, war, gender
ideology, family life, acculturation, political activism, interracial
marriage, multiracial identity, and cultural representations.



### Reading List

All books are available at the Bay Tree Bookstore and on reserve at McHenry
Library. Readings are assigned from the following volumes:

  * John Okada, No-No Boy 
  * Yen Le Espiritu, Asian American Panethnicity 
  * The State of Asian America: Activism and Resistance in the 1990s, ed. Karin Aguilar-San Juan 
  * No Passing Zone: The Artistic and Discursive Voices of Asian-Descent Multiracials, ed. Velina Hasu Houston and Teresa K. Williams 
  * Chang-Rae Lee, Native Speaker 
  * Course Reader 



### Course Requirements

#### Class Discussions

Attendance and participation in discussions in class and in sections
contributes to 30% of your final evaluation. You will not pass the course if
you miss more than two of the class meetings held on Mondays, Wednesdays, and
Fridays without the advance permission of your TA. Participation in discussion
sections is also required. You will not pass the course if you miss more than
one section without advance permission of your TA. You should be prepared to
respond to the discussion questions given before each Friday's class and each
section. Everyone must also sign up to help lead discussion for one Friday
class and one section. To help you prepare to lead discussion, you will turn
in a 1-2 page typed response to the discussion question and a list of 4
additional questions at the beginning of the Wednesday class before your
particular section.

#### Analytical Paper

You will complete a 5 page analytical paper on one of the following 4 topics -
1) Illegal Immigration and Proposition 187; 2) "Cultural Defense" Claims and
the Law; 3) Affirmative Action; or 4) the Responsibility of Asian American
Writers to the Ethnic Community; Material on these topics is included in your
reader. You also must use at least 1 other source. Additional material is
available on reserve. You will be evaluated on 1) your ability to provide a
critical analysis of how contemporary commentators on your topic (journalists,
politicians, lawyers, activists, etc.) use and/or misuse portrayals of the
history of Asian Americans; and 2) your use of historical evidence to support
your argument. This paper is due at the beginning of class on Monday, May 11
and accounts for 20% of your final evaluation.

#### Group Presentation

You will also give a group presentation on one of the 4 above topics. You will
be evaluated on the basis of 1) your ability to provide a critical analysis of
how contemporary commentators on your topic use and/or misuse portrayals of
the history of Asian Americans; 2) your use of historical evidence to support
your argument; 3) your ability to complement or supplement the assigned
reading on this topic; 4) your ability to handle questions and facilitate
discussion of the issues raised in your presentation; 5) your ability to work
cooperatively as a group and coordinate your roles; 6) your individual role in
the presentation; and 7) the overall effectiveness of your presentation. This
presentation will contribute to 10% of your final evaluation.

One week before the group presentation, the group will submit in a 2-3 page
outline:

  * The specific portrayals of history and historical arguments and evidence the group will address 
  * How the presentation will complement/supplement the assigned reading on that topic (including a list of the additional sources used for the presentation) 
  * The organization and time frame of the presentation (eg. debate, role playing, individual/panel lecture, mini-conference, video, combination) 
  * What the group expects the class to learn from the presentation 
  * Any equipment or resources the group will need to use in the preparation and/or presentation 
  * The role everyone in the group will play in the presentation (not everyone needs to have a "speaking part" but everyone must be involved in the planning/or presentation 
  * How the group will handle anticipated questions from class members during the next class 
  * A list of 5 questions that will stimulate discussion during the next class 



#### Take-home Final Exam

On June 1, I will distribute 6 possible essay questions for a cumulative take-
home final exam. Three of those questions will appear on the actual take-home
exam distributed on June 8. You will answer two of those three questions. Each
essay constitutes 20% of your final evaluation. You are not allowed to bring
notes or other materials into the exam. On May 31, students may, if they
desire, submit proposals for final exam essay questions. If selected, they
will receive extra credit on their evaluations and may choose to complete that
question during the actual final exam (regardless of whether or not it is one
of the three listed questions).

#### Late Paper/Exam Policy

All papers are due at the beginning of class. Papers or exams submitted
without a verified medical excuse or advanced permission will be noted as
"late" on your evaluation. Papers or exams that are more than 2 days late will
not be accepted.



### Tentative Schedule of Lectures and Reading Assignments:

** **

**Week 1**

Section Reading: Does not meet this week; No assigned reading



April 8 Introduction to the Course, Syllabus Review, and Popular
Representations of Asian American History

April 10 Debates about the Definition of an "Asian American" and the Study of
Asian American History

Reading:

  * Gary Y. Okihiro, "Is Yellow Black or White?" Margins and Mainstreams: Asians in American History and Culture, pp. 31-63 
  * Shirley Hune, "Rethinking Race: Paradigms and Policy Formation," Amerasia Journal, pp. 29-40 
  * Nazli Kibria, "Not Asian, Black or White? Reflection on South Asian American Racial Identity," Amerasia Journal, pp. 77-86 

Discussion Topic: What Does It Mean to Be "Asian American"?

** **

**Week 2**

Section Reading: No-No Boy

Discussion Topic: The Legacy of Internment for Japanese American Families and
the Community



April 13 American-Style "Concentration Camps" & The Internment of Japanese
Americans film: "Family Gathering"

April 15 Japanese American Accommodation and Protest: From World War II to the
Redress Movement

Reading: Sucheng Chan, Asian Americans: An Interpretive History, pp. 121-142

April 17 The Redress Movement

Reading: Redress handout, pp. 1-3

Discussion Topic: The Effectiveness of Accommodation and/or Protest in Coping
with Internment and Contributing to the Redress Movement

** **

**Week 3**

Section Reading: TBA

Discussion Topic: Impact of War, Resettlement, and Refugee Policies on
Southeast Asian Children



April 20 War in Southeast Asia, Resettlement, and Refugee Experiences in
America Reading: Sucheng Chan, Asian Americans: An Interpretive History, pp.
145-165

April 22 Current Issues in the Southeast Asian Community, Guest Speaker: TBA

Reading:

  * Monique Thuy-Dung Truong, "The Emergence of Voices: Vietnamese American Literature, 1975-1900," Amerasia, pp. 27-50 
  * Vietnamese American Community and Le Ly Hayslip News Articles, pp. 1-12 

April 24 Portrayals of the Southeast Asian Experience in America

Discussion Topic: Comparison of Academic, Popular and Self Representations
Described by this Week's Reading

** **

**Week 4**

Section Reading: Asian American Panethnicity, rest of the book

Discussion Topic: Success, Compromise or Failure of the Asian American
Movement?



April 27 The Model Minority Myth and the Asian American Movement

Reading: Asian American Panethnicity, 19-52

April 29 "From Fu Manchu and Charlie Chan to the "Vanishing Son" and "All
American Girl": Media Images of Asian Americans

May 1: Lotus Blossom, Dragon Lady, and Suzie Wong": Gender, Sexuality and the
Asian American Women's Movement

Reading: "Special Feature: Essays on Asian American Women's Liberation," East
Wind, pp. 31- 41.

Discussion Topic: Do You Think Activists in the Asian American Women's
Movement in the 1960s and 1970s Exhibited a Feminist Consciousness? Why or Why
Not?

** **

**Week 5**

Section Reading: The State of Asian America - ix-xii, 19-69, 119-158, 183-204,
235-273.

Discussion Topic: The State of Asian American Identity and Activism in the
1990s



May 4 Filipino Activism and Identity, Guest Speaker: Professor Dan Gonzales

Reading: State of Asian America, pp. 1-15, 173-182, 205-218, 295-320

May 6 film: "Who Killed Vincent Chin?"

May 8 Violence Against Asian Americans, Violence Within the Asian American
Community

Reading: State of Asian America, pp. 321-334

Discussion Topic: How Should Asian Americans Respond to Violence Against the
Community and Violence Within the Community?

** **

**Week 6**

Section: No reading. Organize/Practice Group Presentations



May 11 5 Page Research Paper Due; Organize Group Presentations

May 13 The Los Angeles Uprising; film: "Sa-I-Gu"

Reading: The State of Asian America, pp. 71-117



May 15 Korean Americans and Racial Politics in the 1990s

Reading:

newspaper articles on the LA riots and Korean American-African American
relations; Michael Omi and Howard Winant's "The Los Angeles 'Race Riot' and
Contemporary U.S. Politics,", Elaine Kim's, "Home is Where the Han is: A
Korean American Perspective on the Los Angeles Upheavals,"and Sumi Cho's
"Korean Americans vs African Americans: Conflict and Construction in Reading
Rodney King, Reading Urban Uprising, pp. 97-113, 215-235, 196-211.

Discussion Topic: Do you think Korean Americans were targetted during the LA
riots? If so, why? What agenda would you recommend to improve relations
between Korean Americans and other ethnic/racial groups in Los Angeles?

** **

**Week 7**

Section Reading: No Passing Zone: The Artistic and Discursive Voices of Asian-
Descent Multiracials, ed. Velina Hasu Houston and Teresa K. Williams, pp.
v-178.

Discussion Topic: Should Asian Americans Support the Notion of a Multiracial
Identity? How would this Affect the Asian American Community?



May 18 Interracial Marriage; Illegal Immigration Group Outline Due

Reading:

  * Racially Mixed People in America, pp. 64-76 
  * Joan Walsh, "Asian Women, Caucasian Men," Image Magazine, December 2, 1990, pp. 11-14. 
  * Larry Hajime Shinagawa and Gin Yong Pang, "Asian American Panethnicity and Intermarriage," Amerasia Journal, pp. 127-152. 
  * Gin Yong Pang, "Attitudes toward Interracial and Interethnic Relationships and Intermarriage among Korean Americans: the Intersections of Race, Gender, and Class Inequality," in New Visions in Asian American Studies: Diversity, Community, Power, pp. 111-123. 
  * Colleen Fong and Judy Yung, "In Search of the Right Spouse: Interracial Marriage among Chinese and Japanese Americans," Amerasia 21:3 (1995), pp. 77-98 

May 20 Amerasians and Mixed Race Heritage; film: "Do Two Halves Really Make a
Whole?"

May 22 Interracial Marriage; Cultural Defense Group Outline Due

Discussion Topic: Is Interracial Marriage a sign of Progressive Assimilation,
Cultural Genocide, or Something Else?

** **

**Week 8**

Section: No Reading; Organize/Practice Group Presentations; Discuss
Presentations and Complete Group Evaluations



May 26 Group Presentation on Illegal Immigration and Prop. 187

Reading:

  * Bill Ong Hing, "How the Immigration System Worked after 1965," Making and Remaking Asian American Through Immigration Policy, 1850-1990, pp. 198-200 
  * Bill Ong Hing, "Making and Remaking Asian Pacific America: Immigration Policy," The State of Asian Pacific America, pp. 177-139. 
  * Proposition 187 News Articles, pp. 1-16 "California Illegal Immigrants Handout" 

May 27 Discussion of Illegal Immigration and Prop. 187; Affirmative Action
Group Outline Due

May 29 Group Presentation on Cultural Defense Claims

Reading: Cultural Defense News Articles, pp. 1-15

** **

**Week 9**

Section: No Reading; Organize/Practice Group Presentations; Discuss
Presentations and Complete Group Evaluations

June 1 Discussion of Cultural Defense Claims; Asian American Writers Group
Outline Due

June 3 Group Presentation on Affirmative Action

Reading:

  * "Rethinking Affirmative Action," CQ Researcher, pp. 369-391 
  * Affirmative Action and College Admissions News Articles, pp. 1-20 
  * "Trends Affecting Affirmative Action" Handout 
  * Dana Y. Takagi, "We Should Not Make Class a Proxy for Race," Higher Bounds, p.3 

June 5 Discussion of Affirmative Action; Student Proposals for Final Exam
Questions Due

** **

**Week 10**

Section Reading: Native Speaker - entire book

Discussion Topic: Do Asian American Writers have a Responsibility to the
Ethnic Community? Why or Why Not?



June 8 Group Presentation on Asian American Writers; Final Exam Guideline
Questions Distributed

Reading:

  * Edward Iwata, "Word Warriors," Los Angeles Times (June 24, 1990), E1+ 
  * Sau-ling Cynthia Wong, "Autobiography as Guided Chinatown Tour? Maxine Hong Kingston's The Woman Warrior and the Chinese American Autobiographical Controversy," in Multicultural Autobiography, American Lives, pp 248-79. 

June 10 Discussion of Asian American Writers

June 12 The Relevance of Asian American History to the Lives of Asian
Americans Today;

Final Exam Review Session and Course Evaluations



#

* * *

History 80T

## Technology and Society in the Ancient World



Please visit the course website at:

<http://www2.ucsc.edu/people/gweltaz/techno/index.html>

#

* * *

History 150C

## Twentieth-Century China

### Spring 1998



This course will explore the history of China in the twentieth century,
focusing on the end of the late imperial state and the sources and development
of revolution in the twentieth century. The second half of the course will
examine attempts at social transformation in China since 1949. We will draw
upon novels, short stories, and films as well as more conventional historical
sources.

We will meet three times a week for a combination of lectures and discussion.
Weekly discussion sections are also required. Course requirements include:

Mindful reading and wakeful attendance. Complete the assigned readings before
each class session, and come prepared to share your opinions, observations,
and questions. Class sessions will be devoted to contextualizing as well as
analyzing the required readings. We will cover material in class that enhances
but does not duplicate the course reading; therefore attendance and selective
(not slavish) note-taking are essential.

Writing. You will be asked to write two five-page essays on assigned topics,
drawing upon the course readings, and to complete a map quiz, a midterm, and a
final.

Talking. Most class sessions will be divided between lecture and discussion,
while sections will be devoted entirely to student debate and discussion.
Prepare to question, opine, and defend!

The following books have been ordered at the Bay Tree Bookstore:

  * Spence, Search for Modern China 
  * Friedman et al, Chinese Village, Socialist State 
  * Chen, Dragon's Village 
  * Gao, Born Red 
  * Chen,Surviving the Storm 
  * Honig and Hershatter,Personal Voices 

We will be reading all of these books except Spence's Search in their
entirety. Although backup copies are on reserve in the library, it is strongly
recommended that you purchase all of the books. In addition, a reader will be
on sale during the first few class sessions.

#

* * *

History 156B

## Social and Intellectual History of Modern India

### Professor Dilip Basu (email: dkbasu@cats)



India is a complex and dynamic nation today. Historically the birthplace and
bastion of rich and diverse cultural traditions such as Hinduism, Buddhism,
Jainism, India underwent dramatic experiences under Western impact and British
colonialism. It witnessed the world's first and the greatest mass nationalist
movement. In its present post-colonial stage, India has become exposed to
global capitalism.

This course will begin with the decline of Mughal Empire in the 18th century,
investigate British colonialism, track the rise of nationalist politics, and
conclude by delving into post-colonial dilemmas and struggles. The course will
use historical, literary, and visual (cinema) materials.

The following is a preliminary reading list. It will be supplemented by films
of Satyajit Ray, and select documentaries.

  * Herman Kulke & Dietmar Rothermund, A HISTORY OF INDIA 
  * Stephen Hay, SOURCES OF INDIAN TRADITION, Vol. II 
  * Thomas Metcalf, IDEOLOGIES OF THE RAJ 
  * Partha Chatterjee, NATIONALIST THOUGHT AND COLONIAL WORLD: A DERIVATIVE DISCOURSE 
  * Homer A. Jack, THE GANDHI READER: A SOURCE BOOK OF HIS LIFE AND WRITINGS 
  * Rabindranath Tagore, HOME AND THE WORLD 
  * Aditya Behl & David Nichols, THE PENGUIN NEW WRITING IN INDIA 
  * The Course Reader 

**Requirement:** Class attendance, midterm and final exams, and a term paper.  

* * *

# History 194B

## The French Revolution (Spring 1998)

This course, which deals with one of the most celebrated and colorful episodes
of modern history, is intended as an intensive research seminar. Students
should have some prior acquaintance with the period from 1789 to 1795, whether
through a general survey like History 30B ("Modern European History"), a more
specialized course like History 124 ("Revolution in France"), or some other
systematic preparation. While we will attempt a detailed examination of what
others have written about particular aspects of the 1789 Revolution (for
example, the storming of the Bastille), the main preoccupation of the course
will be the interpretation and application of primary sources in students' own
research. The revolutionary period is one of the few for which a relatively
rich selection of English-language translations of French source materials is
available. Working with such sources (or with the French originals in cases
where an individual has the requisite language skills), students will identify
research questions that can serve as the focus of their written work. Their
objective will be to assemble evidence and present their own historically
informed interpretation of some event, trend, or dynamic of the revolutionary
period.

The course will review the historiography of the French Revolution, including
the controversies that continue to rage among competing interpretive
frameworks. We will consider the relative advantages and disadvantages of
primary and secondary source materials and various methodological approaches
as tools of historical analysis. In the final weeks, students will be asked to
present their research findings before the class and engage in a collective
discussion of what we have learned.

The course fulfills the senior seminar requirement in the history major and
also meets the "W" requirement for General Education.



* * *

# History 194D

## Senior Research Seminar: Early American Society and Culture

### Lynn Westerkamp



Explores subjects and themes in the political, social, and cultural history of
the early U.S. history, from the colonial period through 1850. Includes
critical reading of current scholarship and research in historical documents.
Although students will be expected to read and evaluate recent articles, the
focus of the course is upon the production of a research essay.

The following books are required reading. The first two are collections of
essays; the third is a guide to writing mechanics.

  * Stanley Katz, et. al., ed., Colonial America 
  * Alfred Young, ed, Beyond the American Revolution, 
  * Steffens and Dickerson, Writer's Guide--History 

There is also a reader for the course, again a collection of essays

The reading requirement for the course is limited. Students read a series of
essays, from the founding of the British colonies up through 1850, to explore
research strategies, essay-construction strategies, writing strategies, and
the impact of theory upon the historical writing process

The written requirements of the course are focused entirely upon the final
production of a research essay 20-25 pages in length. Students are free to
research any topic in this time period, provided that documents and sources
are available to them. Students will produce research proposals,
bibliographies, and drafts of papers.

#

* * *

History 194J

## Chinese, Japanese, and Indian History: Ethnicity, Nationalism, and
Biographical Narratives

### Spring 1998



#### Instructor:

Professor Dilip K. Basu

Merrill 117, ext. 2837, 2855 message, 423-6553 (home)

#### Office Hours:

Wednesday/Friday 10:30-12 noon or by appointment

#### Prerequisites:

Junior or Senior standing; academic background in one of the three areas--
China, Japan, India--is preferred. Fulfills History Senior Essay and "W"
requirements. No auditors.



#### Scope and Requirements of the Course:

The historical focus of the course is on the contrasting yet comparable
social, economic, and cultural transformation of Chinese, Japanese, and Indian
societies. Scholarly works on the three cultural areas (a better expression
than "nations" which is too narrow for purposes of this class) are plentiful,
although there are very few comparative studies. Most of these works are
standard histories or monographs or studies with a broad social science
orientation. Another among their common features is that they tend to be
"elitist," i.e., a view of history from the top down where ordinary persons or
politically unimportant individuals do not find the place they deserve if at
all in the narrative.

By using narrated biographies and autobiographies (life histories), we hope to
provide a refreshingly different "track" to our understanding of the complex
process of transformation these three societies experienced during the past
hundred years or so. This seminar will, let us hope, teach you how to "do" a
life history of a person of your choice and how to interpret that life history
in light of historical, anthropological, and other theoretical perspectives by
focussing on dimensions of class, gender, and elements of ethnicity and
nationalism.

In the first part of the quarter, we will read five selected works where the
main methodological approach is either directly that of life history or the
one that effectively uses biographical material in order to provide a broader
yet humanistically richer and meaningful portrait of the historical process.
We will read and discuss each work very carefully to appreciate and critically
evaluate the material itself and to examine the particular methodology
including theoretical perspectives the author has employed in (re)constructing
the life-history/history. Each week, you will write a two-page paper on each
assigned reading.

During the second part, seminar members will present their project reports in
the form of written papers which will be discussed, criticized in terms of the
historical material presented, and the methodology/theory employed. The
projects will be based on the cultural area, period, and subject of your
choice. The comparative dimension will derive, not necessarily from a direct
comparative interpretation of the subject-material within or without the given
culture-area, but from the interpretive questions posed and the methodology
followed.



#### Texts

  * Amitav Ghosh, In An Antique Land 
  * Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities 
  * Mikiso Hane, Peasants, Rebels and Outcastes 
  * Jonathan Spence, Gate of Heavenly Peace 
  * Partha Chatterjee, Nation and Its Fragments 



The five works listed above are required as texts that you should purchase at
Bay Tree Bookstore. In addition, I will place a series of readings on reserve
at Casa Latina/Merrill College Library. I suggest that you read the Hane,
Spence (Gate), Anderson and Chatterjee books right away with two immediate
objectives in mind: the first is to get an overview of the "modern" histories
of China, Japan, and India as narrated in these three works for a broad
comparative background and understanding of the major issues; the second is to
critically examine how the "lives"/biographies are constructed and represented
in these books both from an elite and a "subaltern" perspective.

Comprehensive/general bibliographies on life histories and nationalism will be
available for assisting you in your initial research/theoretical preparation.
However, it will be your responsibility to choose your seminar paper topic and
undertake the bibliographic research on it. I will be available for advice and
guidance.



#### Readings:

1\. Jan. 3-8: Premodern Lives/Narratives

  * Amitav Ghosh, In An Antique Land. Entire. 

2\. Jan. 10-15: Nationalism

  * Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities. Entire. 

3\. Jan. 17-22: Constructing Ordinary "Subaltern" Lives under Colonial
Conditions

  * Dilip Basu, "Mallabir: Narratives of a Calcutta Anti-Hero" (on reserve). 
  * Partha Chatterjee, Nation and Its Fragments. Entire. 

4\. Jan. 24-29: Undersides of Modernization

  * Mikiso Hane, Peasants, Rebels and Outcastes. 

5\. Feb. 5-7: Elite Nationalism and Imagined Lives

  * Jonathan Spence, Gate of Heavenly Peace 

6\. Feb. 12: Preliminary Project Reports

7\. Feb. 14-25: Research and Writing

8\. Feb. 26, 28, Mar. 4, 6, 8, 11: In-class Review of Papers



Beginning Feb. 26, we will schedule individual seminar presentations.
Typically, you will put your completed draft on reserve at the Merrill Library
three days in advance. Peers and Professor Basu will review and critique your
work.

Rewritten, final paper will be due on March 15.

#

* * *

History 194K

## ORIENTALISM AND EMPIRE

### Quarter: Spring 1998

### Instructor: Edmund Burke, III



This history research seminar is concerned with how and to what effect
European imperial domination over other societies from 1750 gave rise to a
variety of cultural representations of the other: scientific, artistic,
political. As a topic in world history, Orientalism and Empire potentially
spills over boundaries in all directions, including the origins of Western
self-understanding as well as the complex cultural politics of European
representation of other societies.

Orientalism has at least three different meanings. One derives from the
European Enlightenment attempt to devise a science of society through the
close observation of human interactions. The second derives from the European
romantic search for the exotic and has given birth to manifold cultural
manifestations, literary, musical, and artistic. Finally, as Edward Said has
argued, orientalism was a discourse of domination designed to justify and
sustain European imperial rule.

The cultural interactions set in motion by the fact of European hegemony over
the rest of the world set in motion a host of transformations, appropriations
and resistances of European orientalist discourses. We will explore examples
of them in this course.

### Organization:

In the first three weeks students will read several classic orientalist works
in an effort to familiarize students with some of the dimensions of the
overall tradition of orientalism.

In the next three weeks, students will read works with the aim of
familiarizing themselves with the issues and basic critical vocabulary
concerned with the critique of orientalist forms of representation (art,
literature, ethnography, politics), starting with Edward Said's Orientalism
(1978).

The final four weeks will be concerned with the production of a 15-20 page
research paper, its presentation to the class, and the rewriting of this
paper.

### Written work:

  1. A short paper, on a topic to be assigned. 
  2. A second short paper, on a topic to be assigned. 
  3. A fifteen page Research Paper. (All research papers must go through two drafts). 

NOTE: I am currently completing two writing projects that directly connect to
this course. The first is a study of France and the Sociology of Islam, or
what might be thought of as "orientalism as praxis." The second is a reader on
Orientalism and History. Students will be exposed to materials from both
projects.

#

* * *

History 216A

## Topics in American History: U.S. Working Class History.

** **

**The course is geared mainly to Americanists in the graduate history program,
but it is open to graduate students in other disciplines as well.**

The goal of this seminar is to provide graduate students with an introduction
to some of the key issues and debates in the field of American working-class
history and to give them a sense of where the field is heading. We'll begin
with some readings on E.P. Thompson and the "new labor history" in the U.S.
and with a look at some of the main critics of this approach. We'll come back
to these larger debates throughout the course as we examine the following
topics: emancipation and the emergence of wage labor after the Civil War;
immigrant cultures and proletarianization in the late 19th-early 20th
centuries; the character of the labor movement in the late 19th century; work
cultures, workers control and scientific management in the early 20th century;
the evolution of labor law and the state's role in shaping class relations in
the 20th century; gender and community as ways of understanding the emergence
of the Congress of Industrial Organizations in the 1930s; and black-white
relations in the CIO and in the post-war era.

Writing will include short weekly papers responding to the readings
(essentially annotations); and a paper at the end (15-20 pages), analyzing the
literature on a topic of the student's choice.



