**University Of North Dakota**

**Department of Economics**

** **

**COURSE SYLLABUS**

** **

**Econ 202 Dr. O** =Neill

Principles of Macroeconomics Office: Gamble 286 B

Spring 1998 Office Hours:

M,W,F 2:00-3:30 pm

Phone: 777-3358

**TEXTBOOKS**



The required purchases are the AColander package@ consisting of two items and
the Chernow book:



1\. _Macroeconomics_ , 3rd edition, by David C. Colander

2\. _The Wall Street Journal_ subscription card (inside the book)

3\. _The Death of the Banker_ by Ron Chernow



**NOTE:** Please fill out _The Wall Street Journal_ subscription card and give
it to me so that I may mail them all in one big envelope. This will prevent
any cards from getting lost and ensure that everyone =s subscription begins at
the same time.



A suggested purchase:



_Drill and Review Study Guide for use with Macroeconomics_ by David Colander
and Jenifer Gamber



** **

**COURSE OVERVIEW**



Principles of Macroeconomics is the second part of a two-semester introduction
to Economics (the first part is Econ 201--Principles of Microeconomics).
Economics is Athe study of how human beings coordinate their wants.@
Macroeconomics examines the aggregate economy, Awith specific focus on
unemployment, inflation, business cycles, and growth.@



**COURSE OBJECTIVES**



This course will provide you with an intriguing collection of knowledge and
skills. After successfully completing this course, you should have:



1\. An understanding of the differences and similarities between macroeconomic
and microeconomic analysis.

2\. A realization of how our knowledge of the aggregate economy has evolved
over time (and continues to evolve).

3\. An ability to glean real-world information on economics and the economy
from _The Wall Street Journal_.

4\. An appreciation for the difficulty in moving between macroeconomic theory
and macroeconomic policy.

5\. A basic knowledge of the evolution of the U.S. financial system and how it
differs from the financial systems of Germany and Japan. (Thanks Ron!)

6\. An ability to analyze the likely impact on the economy of fiscal or
monetary policy announcements via the macroeconomic policy model.

7\. A burning passion for economics that is unlikely to be quenched regardless
of how many more courses in economics you take during your college career.
(Would you believe?)



**NOTE:** Try as I might, I can not force you to acquire any of these
objectives (skills) against your will. However, if you are willing to put
forth the effort to do the assignments as they are given, you will, in all
likelihood, leave the course having attained most (if not all) of the
aforementioned objectives. And maybe, just maybe, some others that aren =t
even listed here!





**INSTRUCTIONAL PROCEDURES**

** **

The course will be taught in a lecture-discussion format. What this means is
that typically I will present material in a Alecture,@ on occasion asking a
question to see if anyone is paying attention, then beg someone, anyone, to
answer my question, wait awhile in what is likely to be considered by all as
an awkward silence, then either call on someone to Avolunteer@ the answer or
else whisper the answer myself so that only those who are truly listening will
be able to hear it.

** **

In an effort to ensure that you do not grow weary of the above procedure, the
lectures will be augmented with a seemingly random use of overhead
transparencies, handouts, in-class exercises, multimedia presentation(s), and
articles from _The Wall Street Journal_ or _The Grand Forks Herald_ dealing
with current economic events.





**EVALUATION PROCEDURES**



**I. Course Requirements**



1\. Three in-class exams. Each exam is worth 20% of the course grade.



Exam 1 **Monday, February 2**

Exam 2 **Monday, March 2**

Exam 3 **Monday, April 6**



2\. Weekly quizzes from _The Wall Street Journal_. There will be approximately
10-12 quizzes. Each quiz is worth 10 points. Your total quiz grade (your top 8
quiz scores) is worth 10% of the course grade.



3\. A series of three short writing assignments related to your reading of
_The Death of the Banker_. Details on these assignments are contained in a
separate handout. In total, these assignments are worth 10% of the course
grade.



4\. A comprehensive final exam, worth 20% of the course grade.



Final exam **Monday, May 4, 1:00 pm**



**NOTE:** There will be no make-ups allowed on the in-class exams or the
quizzes.



**II. Final Exam Incentive**



If your score on the final exam is higher than your score on any of the three
in-class exams, each in-class exam will count as 15% of the course grade and
your final exam will count as 35% of the course grade.



**III. Grades**



Grades will be determined according to the following scale:



_Grade_ _Percent_



A 100-90

B 89-80

C 79-70

D 69-55

F 54-

**COURSE SCHEDULE AND TOPIC OUTLINE**

**(Subject to minor changes at the discretion of the instructor.)**



**_WEEK # TOPICS AND ASSIGNMENTS_**

** **

**Week 1 Text, Chapter 1 Economics and Economic Reasoning**

**(self study) The Economy and Economics**

**What Economics is About**

**A Guide to Economic Reasoning**

**Economic Terminology**

**Economic Insights**

**Economic Institutions**

**Economic Policy Options**

**Text, Chapter 1, Appendices A & B**

**Economics in Perspective**

**Graphish: The Language of Graphs**

** **

**Week 1 Text, Chapter 2 The Economic Organization of Society**

**(self study) Economic Systems: Capitalism and Socialism**

**The Production Possibilities Curve: Economic Reasoning, Trade,**

**and Economic Systems**

**Text, Chapter 2, Appendix**

**The History of Economic Systems**



Week 1 (Day 2) Text, Chapter 3 Supply and Demand

Demand

Supply

The Marriage of Supply and Demand

Equilibrium

Changes in Supply and Demand

\---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Week 2 (Day 1) Text, Chapter 4 Using Supply and Demand (pages 84-90 & 97-100)

Supply and Demand in Action

The Limitations of Supply and Demand Analysis



Week 2 (Days 2 & 3) Text, Chapter 7 Economic Growth, Business Cycles, and
Inflation

Growth

Business Cycles

Unemployment

Inflation

The Interrelationship of Growth, Inflation, and Unemployment

\---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Week 3 Text, Chapter 8 National Income Accounting

National Income Accounting

Using GDP Figures

Some Limitations of National Income Accounting

Text, Chapter 8, Appendix

National Income Accounting in Detail

\---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Week 4 Text, Chapter 9 Money, Banking, and the Financial Sector

Introduction

The Definition and Functions of Money

Banks and the Creation of Money

Regulation of Banks and the Financial Sector

Text, Chapter 9, Appendices C & D

Creation of Money Using T-Accounts

Precise Calculations of the Money Multiplier When People Hold Cash



Week 4 Text, Chapter 9, Appendices A & B

(self-study) The Value of a Financial Asset

A Closer Look at Financial Institutions and Financial Markets

\---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Weeks 1-4 Text, Chapter 5 U.S. Economic Institutions

(self-study) A Bird's-Eye View of the U.S. Economy

Business

Households

Government

Text, Chapter 5, Appendices A & B

More on Business

More on Households

\---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Week 5 (Day 1: 2/2/98)) ***************** **FIRST EXAM** *****************
**FIRST EXAM** *****************





Week 5 (Day 3) Text, Chapter 10 The Modern Macroeconomic Debate

The Historical Development of Modern Macroeconomics

The Macro Policy Model

Why Macro Policy is More Complicated than this Model Makes It Look

Conclusion and a Look Ahead



\---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Week 6 Text, Chapter 10 The Modern Macroeconomic Debate

The Historical Development of Modern Macroeconomics

The Macro Policy Model

Why Macro Policy is More Complicated than this Model Makes It Look

Conclusion and a Look Ahead

\---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Week 7 Text, Chapter 11 The Macro Debate in Reference to the Aggregate

Production/Aggregate Expenditures Model

The Textbook Keynesian Model

Determining the Level of Aggregate Income

Shifts in Autonomous Expenditures

Further Examples of the Keynesian Model

The Classical Response to Keynes

Summary of the Differing Views of the Keynesian Model

Conclusion: The AP/AE Model and the Macro Policy Model

\---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Week 8 (Day 1) Text, Chapter 11 The Macro Debate in Reference to the Aggregate

Production/Aggregate Expenditures Model

The Textbook Keynesian Model

Determining the Level of Aggregate Income

Shifts in Autonomous Expenditures

Further Examples of the Keynesian Model

The Classical Response to Keynes

Summary of the Differing Views of the Keynesian Model

Conclusion: The AP/AE Model and the Macro Policy Model



Week 8 (Days 2 & 3) Text, Chapter 12 Demand Management, Fiscal Policy, and the
Debate about

Activist Demand Management Policy

Fiscal Policy and Aggregate Demand

Alternatives to Fiscal Policy

Problems with Fiscal and Other Activist Keynesian Policy

The Practice of Fiscal Policy in the 1990s

\---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Week 9 (Day 1: 3/2/98) *************** **SECOND EXAM** ************* **SECOND
EXAM** *****************





Week 9 (Day 3) Text, Chapter 12 Demand Management, Fiscal Policy, and the
Debate about

Activist Demand Management Policy

Fiscal Policy and Aggregate Demand

Alternatives to Fiscal Policy

Problems with Fiscal and Other Activist Keynesian Policy

The Practice of Fiscal Policy in the 1990s

\---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Week 10 Text, Chapter 13 Monetary Policy and the Debate about Macro Policy

Duties and Structure of the Fed

The Importance of Monetary Policy

Tools of Monetary Policy

Monetary Policy in the Keynesian Model

Monetary Policy in the Classical Model

Problems in the Conduct of Monetary Policy

Conclusion and a Look Ahead

\---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Week 11 (Days 1 & 2) Text, Chapter 14 Inflation and Its Relationship to
Unemployment and Growth

Inflation

Theories of Inflation and the Phillips Curve Trade-Off

Conclusion



Week 11 (Day 3) Text, Chapter 15 International Dimensions of Monetary and
Fiscal Policy

The Ambiguous International Goals of Macroeconomic Policy

The Effects of Monetary and Fiscal Policies on International Goals

International Phenomena and Domestic Goals

Conclusion: Selecting Policies to Achieve Goals

\---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------





Week 12 Text, Chapter 15 International Dimensions of Monetary and Fiscal
Policy

The Ambiguous International Goals of Macroeconomic Policy

The Effects of Monetary and Fiscal Policies on International Goals

International Phenomena and Domestic Goals

Conclusion: Selecting Policies to Achieve Goals

\---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Week 13 (Day 1: 4/6/98) *************** **THIRD EXAM** ************* **THIRD
EXAM** *****************

\---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Week 14 Text, Chapter 16 Open Economy Macro: Exchange Rate and Trade Policy

The Balance of Payments

Exchange Rates

Adjusting the Economy to the Exchange Rate: Traditional Macro Policy

and Trade Policy

Trade Policy

Conclusion



Week 14 Text, Chapter 16, Appendices A-C

(self-study) The J - Curve

Why Exchange Rate Determination is More Complicated than the

Supply/Demand Model Would Suggest

History of Exchange Rate Systems

\---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Week 15 (Days 1 & 2) Text, Chapter 17 The Art of Traditional Macro Policy

The Limits of Traditional Macroeconomic Theory and Policy

The Keynesian/Classical Policy Debate

Recent History of Macroeconomic Policy

Conclusion



Week 15 Text, Chapter 17, Appendices A & B

(self-study) Nonmainstream Approaches to Macro

Earlier History of Macroeconomics Policy



Week 15 (Day 3) Text, Chapter 18 Structural Supply-Side Macro Policies

Classifying Structural Supply-Side Policies

Classical Laissez-Faire Structural Policies

The Broader Questions About Tax Cuts

Keynesian Activist Structural Policies

Conclusion

\---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Week 16 (Days 1 &2) Text, Chapter 18 Structural Supply-Side Macro Policies

Classifying Structural Supply-Side Policies

Classical Laissez-Faire Structural Policies

The Broader Questions About Tax Cuts

Keynesian Activist Structural Policies

Conclusion







Week 16 (Day 3) Text, Chapter 19 Deficits and Debt

U.S. Government Deficits and Debt: The Historical Record

Economists' Way of Looking at Deficits and Debt

The Deficit Debate: Wolves, Pussycats, or Termites

\---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Weeks 14-16 Text, Chapter 6 An Introduction to the World Economy

(self-study) International Economic Statistics: An Overview

How International Trade Differs From Domestic Trade

The U.S. International Trade Deficit

International Economic Policy and Institutions

The Importance of Knowing About Other Countries

Text, Chapter 6, Appendix

Our International Competitors

\---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



**FINAL EXAM ***** Monday, May 4, 1:00 pm ***** FINAL EXAM**

** **

