**TEMPLE UNIVERSITY** **Political Science 238** **Asian Studies 241** **EAST
ASIA AND THE US** Fall 1999  | Prof. Ben Stavis  
---|---  
MWF 11:40-12:30 | 439 Gladfelter Hal  
Room GH 448 | Room GH 448 office tel: 215-204-7793  
bstavis@vm.temple.edu  
**COURSE OBJECTIVES**

 Will the "Pacific Century" really happen? Or will it turn out, instead, to
have been just a "Pacific Decade"? And how "pacific" will it be? This course
will analyze the striking economic transformation of East Asia in recent
decades, and will review factors that affect its future.

 Even though East Asia has a long history and ancient cultures, it has become
the most dynamic region of the world. Many countries and localities in East
Asia experienced rapid, sustained economic growth, and have approached western
standards of living. Western values are penetrating into Asia's ancient
cultures. The "Asian Miracle" was closely linked to the United States. The
U.S. provided markets, technology, capital, and a stabilizing military
presence, all principally to strengthen non-communist and anti-Russian
countries.

 At the turn of the millenium, this broad pattern of development might be
reaching a turning point. East Asia is no longer a marginal part of the global
political economy; it is a major part. It competes with itself, and has just
generated its own very serious financial crisis. The United States has
forgotten its cold war needs for strategic allies, and has become more
mercantilist in its relations. Japan is showing signs of outgrowing its Post-
World War II constraints. China is growing into a major economic and
potentially military power, and is threatening war to re-integrate Taiwan.
North Korea has sufficient military technology to frighten its neighbors. This
course will give students the background to understand these momentous changes
and participate in them more effectively in the future.

 The strategy East Asian countries are following originated in Japan in the
late 1800s, so our course will begin with an analysis of Japan. We will review
the Meiji Restoration reforms in the late 1800s and the reforms after the
World War II occupation. Special attention will be given to Japan's economic,
business, social, and political systems. We will use Edwin Reischauer's
comprehensive survey _The Japanese Today_ as a guide.

 Then we will examine how this pattern of development has been emulated in
other East Asian places, namely Taiwan, South Korea, Hong Kong, and Singapore.
We will use Ezra Vogel's short book _The Four Little Dragons_. Once we have
this foundation about the patterns of development in East Asia, we will look
more carefully at the Asian financial collapse and review other political
issues in the changing geopolitics of East Asia.

 Finally students will do original research on recent developments in East
Asia, using translations of East Asian press.

 Throughout, video presentations are included to help students visualize East
Asia.

 The course is an upper level course undergraduate course in political science
and is an elective in the Asian Studies program. It will be especially helpful
to political science majors, students interested in international business,
and students with special interests in East Asia. It is well suited for
students going to or coming from Temple University in Japan. It has no
prerequisites and complements with minimal overlap P.S. 236, China: Politics
and Revolution.

  **REQUIRED TEXTBOOKS**

 Edwin Reischauer, _The Japanese Today_ (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1995) (Third Edition) ("JT" in the reading list)

 Ezra Vogel, _The Four Little Dragons_. Cambridge: Harvard U. Press, 1991.
("Vogel" in the reading list)

  **RECOMMENDED TEXTBOOK**

 Philippe F. Delhaise, _Asia in Crisis, The Implosion of the Banking and
Finance System_ s (New York: John Wiley & Sons), 1998.

  **CLASS ATTENDANCE**

 Lectures: Class discussions and lectures will supplement and highlight
materials in the readings. Regular class attendance is necessary to master the
materials of the course and is expected. Students who miss a class have the
responsibility to find out the material covered in that class. Videos can be
viewed at the Media Learning Center. The syllabus gives the reference number
there.

  **OFFICE HOURS**

 Students may come to my office and/or telephone me to discuss the term paper,
to seek clarification on classroom discussions, to offer suggestions, or to
chat.

email: bstavis@vm.temple.edu (MOST CONVENIENT)

office tel: 215-204-7793

 Office hours: 439 Gladfelter Hall,

Wed, Friday 2:30-3:30 It is best to make an appointment even during office
hours. Other times are possible if these times are not feasible for you.
**COMPUTER USE**

This course requires students to be reasonably comfortable with computers to:

-obtain class materials

\- search data bases to help develop bibliographies for term papers.

\- read materials on the internet for term papers.

\- do word processing. \- use email to supplement class communication.
Students can use computers at any of the numerous computer labs on campus. The
computer center offers frequent training classes on various types of software.
If you are using a computer and modem at home, be sure to use a Temple
University account (accessed by modem through PPP software). By using a Temple
account, you can access special data bases that are needed for this course.

 Class materials, including the syllabus, study guides for exams, grades, and
other materials will be distributed at this web page, which you should
bookmark:  http://nimbus.temple.edu/~bstavis/polsci238.htm For the term paper,
students are required to utilize First Search bibliography and World News
Connection, which provides translations of World (including Asian) press.
Links to these services are available at the Asian Studies Home Page:

http://www.temple.edu/asian_studies

At the site, select "Research Links" from the menu on the left You will see a
wide range of links into Asian Studies in addition to the links to First
Search and World News Connection.

The class has a listserv, to facilitate email communication between students
and me. Email sent to the class listserv will be delivered to everyone who is
signed onto the list. The listserv address is:

<polsci238-stavis@listserv.temple.edu>

To subscribe to the listserv, send the following message to
<Listserv@listserv.temple.edu>:

sub polsci238-stavis Firstname Lastname

You will be automatically subscribed to the listserv at the email address you
used to send this message.

Archives of listserv are located at:

<http://listserv.temple.edu/archives/polsci238-stavis.html>

The Asian Studies Home Page provides links to a variety of resources about
Asia.

<http://www.temple.edu/asian studies>

Students should give me additional useful links to add to this home page or to
circulate through the class listserv.  
    


**COURSE REQUIREMENTS AND GRADING**

Scores on assignments and tests will be weighted as follows:  
  Assignment | Due Date | Percentage  
---|---|---  
Test 1 | Oct 4 | 17.5 %  
Test 2 | Nov 5 | 17.5 %  
Prospectus for Term Paper | Oct 25 | 5 %  
Quizzes (best 3 of 4) | unscheduled | 15 %  
Term Paper | Dec 6 | 20 %  
Final Exam | Dec 15 | 20 %  
**Testing:**

The tests and final exam will be mixtures of short answers and essay
questions. They will cover material in class lectures, videos, and all
readings. Study guides will be provided. Brief multiple choice quizzes will
test recent class room material and readings.

  **Oral/Written Assignment:**

Students will give oral reports and submit written research papers that
analyze some issue in East Asian politics linked to this course. The paper
should utilize recent translations from the Asian press. One convenient source
is the U.S. government's series in Daily Report - East Asia, available in the
World News Connection on the internet. You should treat the oral report as an
opportunity to sharpen the focus of your term paper and to get feedback from
the class that you can use in revising your paper.

Before doing the term paper, each student must submit a prospectus. The
prospectus should be one page only. It must include: -a concise statement of
the theme of the paper, linking some broad analytical issue to some data.

 -at least one footnote to a relevant book or journal article that has been located using the library's FirstSearch system. (Attach printout from search.)

 -at least one footnote to a translated source (probably from World News Connection), in proper format. (Attach printout of one article.)

 -It must be submitted at "adult level of presentation" as defined below.  A change in term paper topic is possible after this prospectus has been submitted, but it should be discussed with the instructor. A revised prospectus should be submitted to reflect the revised topic.

 The prospectus will be graded, but if the final term paper gets a higher
grade, the prospectus grade will be raised to that level. The prospectus
should help you do a fine term paper. If you have a clear theme, have located
the sources, and learned the formatting requirements, you are well along the
way to submitting an excellent paper.

 When you collect data for your paper, you are required to use some primary
Asian sources. For those who do not read Asian languages, the most convenient
location for primary sources are the detailed translations of media from
selected Asian countries that are published by the U.S. government in a series
called Foreign Broadcast Information Service (FBIS). This is available on the
internet, with a link to it from the Asian Studies home page. Earlier back
issues may be available in hard copy at the Asian Studies Program (515
Gladfelter Hall) and in microfiche at the Paley reference desk. These
materials may also available at the University of Pennsylvania library and at
the Foreign Policy Research Institute. The Temple library also receives
newspapers and magazines from Asian countries including _The Far Eastern
Economic Review_ , _Asian Survey_ , _Pacific Affairs_ , and _Japan Times
Weekly_. These are in the newspaper and periodical section in the basement of
the library. Many Other Asian periodicals are available on the internet, both
in original Asian languages and in translation. They can all be used as
sources for the term paper.

 The paper should be 10-12 pages (double-spaced) long. This paper must be a
finished piece of work at "adult standards" of presentation. This means that
your report must be typed, double spaced, one side of the paper, reasonable
margins (around 1 1/4" left and right), neat, accurately spelled, page numbers
on the pages, and stapled together, etc. If you are using a dot matrix
printer, try to print the final draft using "high print density." Do not use a
plastic cover for your report; the cover just gets in the way.

 Each student's written term paper should be about 10 pages (double-spaced)
long. The paper MUST use footnotes to cite the publications discussed. Here
are examples of proper format for footnotes for a newspaper, a book, and a
journal article. For references to FBIS, the citation should show the citation
to the original Asian source as well as the citation in translation. Here is a
sample. Use this format for a citation to the web. Follow these examples
precisely, down to the last comma and period, or use some other style of an
academic journal accurately and consistently. (Sorry, these examples did not
translate into htm code. Look at footnote format in _Asian Survey_ or _China
Quarterly_.)

Follow this style PRECISELY (including commas, periods, etc.) or use the style
from an academic journal such as the _American Political Science Review_ or
_World Politics_. You are strongly urged to buy a style book that will give
you complete rules for preparing papers for this course and all others you
will do at Temple and beyond. Two excellent ones are Kate Turabian, _Student's
Guide for Writing Papers_ or _Chicago Manual of Style_. Both are available at
the book store. If you hand in a draft two weeks before the deadline, you can
get comments to use in preparing your final draft.

Adult level of presentation requires proper grammar, including agreement
between subject and verb, consistency in verb tense, etc. Poor spelling and
typographic errors must be avoided. Avoid confusion of the plural (...s) with
the possessive singular (...'s) and possessive plural (...s'). Misuse of
homonyms such as their-there-they're, its-it's, to-too-two, whether-weather,
due-do-dew, principle-principal, site-sight-cite, red-read, son-sun, capitol-
capital, steel-steal, etc., are unacceptable. "Spell-checker" misses these
errors. You must proofread carefully.

In the long run, writing is one of the most valuable skills you will learn in
college. This course is not a writing or grammar course, but it does expect
you to present yourself on paper in a mature way.  If you need additional help
in writing, please visit the Writing Center (201 Tuttleman Hall, 204-0700) and
arrange for specialized instruction (free). http://www.temple.edu/writingctr  
    
You should keep a copy (or original) of your term paper so it can serve as a
sample of writing to accompany applications for jobs or graduate school. If
papers are not returned during the semester, students should pick up papers
during the following semester. I will not be responsible for papers not picked
up after one semester.

  **CURRENT EVENTS**

 Students should stay up-do-date on current events concerning the Pacific Rim.
Students are urged to read relevant articles in the _New York Times_ , _Wall
Street Journal_ , or _Christian Science Monitor_. The _Far Eastern Economic
Review_ , _The Economist_ , and _Japan Times Weekly_ are very helpful too.
Other excellent sources may be available at other libraries in the region,
particularly the U. of Pennsylvania: _Asian Wall Street Journal, Asian Wall
Street Journal Weekly,_ and _China Business Review._

**MAKEUP POLICY**

If realities of life (illness, funerals, etc.) create irreconcilable
scheduling conflicts with exams, contact me IN ADVANCE. I will try to work out
a suitable alternative. I will be far less flexible if you wait until after
the event to explain why you missed it. Written assignments handed in late
will be penalized.

**ACADEMIC INTEGRITY**

We learn in a group environment, but we must demonstrate our mastery of
materials on an individual basis. Misrepresenting other people's work as one's
own is a serious breach of academic integrity. I manage the class on the basis
of trust in each student's academic integrity, and this enables our class to
be informal and flexible. The other side of the coin is that any act that
undermines this trust in academic integrity is a serious matter.

All tests must reflect a student's own, individual work, and must be done in
the specified time period. Cheating or helping others cheat violates the
spirit of trust that we all prefer. Cheating will be considered an admission
that a student does not understand the material, and grading will reflect this
admission.

Written assignments must be based on the student's own research and writing
specifically for this course. If you like what another author says and wish to
use that material, you must use quotation marks and footnotes to show clearly
the line between your own insights and the insights of someone else. Failure
to make this distinction clear constitutes plagiarism, which is a very serious
violation of the principles of academic integrity. Papers written for other
courses can not be submitted again for this course. One paper may not be
submitted to two courses unless there is prior approval from both professors.

These guidelines are explained in greater detail in the University's Statement
on Academic Integrity, printed in the Undergraduate Bulletin.

Sometimes students are under great stress at the end of a semester. Stress can
impair judgment. Do not be tempted to copy some paper you got from a friend or
from the internet. I have a high success rate in identifying plagiarized
papers. You risk not only a grade but your priceless reputation for integrity.
It is far better to take an incomplete and do your own paper in your own time.

**STRATEGIES FOR DOING WELL IN THIS CLASS**

As you read, ask yourself, "What is important here? What are general
principles, and what are examples? Focus on learning the structure of concepts
and the examples that demonstrate them, rather than trying to memorize
disconnected facts. The lectures will highlight the most important principles
and examples, so regular class attendance is extremely useful to master the
materials of the course and is expected. You should take careful notes of
class lectures; these will be extremely useful in preparing for quizzes and
tests. Quizzes and tests will emphasize major concepts, institutions, and
policies, as well as some names and dates that provide the vocabulary for
understanding major themes. Review your lecture notes and readings. You will
receive detailed study guides for tests. You should use these guides to
organize your review of materials for the tests. For the written assignment,
follow precisely the instructions given above. If you approach the class in
this spirit, you should find the class easy and you should do well.

**GRADES**

Final grades will be assigned roughly on the basis of:

A 93-100 Thorough understanding of all material; sound grasp of all
theoretical and empirical materials directly listed in the syllabus.
Independent reading and research going beyond the materials in the syllabus.
Expression of insights, both orally and in writing, at an adult level of
presentation. A- 90-93 Thorough understanding of all material; sound grasp of
all theoretical and empirical materials. Expression of insights at an adult
level of presentation. B+ B B- 89-80 Reasonably sound understanding of most
conceptual principles and familiarity with most of the empirical materials. C+
C C- 79-70 Weak understanding of conceptual principles. Marginal familiarity
with empirical materials. D+ D D- 69-60

                                                       Serious conceptual and/or factual errors.

F below 60  


> > > > Completely detached from the materials of the class.

    
  **EAST ASIA AND THE U.S.** **STUDENT QUESTIONNAIRE** fall 1999

Last Name                              First Name                          ID
No.:

Email:

Local Address

Local Telephone

Year: Fr. Soph. Jr. Sr.

Major:

Field of special interest?  


Have you lived in or travelled in Asia? Yes No

Where

Are there any countries of special interest?

Have you studied at Temple University in Japan or are you interested in
studying there?  
    
    
    
    
    


