  
  

**_INTRODUCTION TO CULTURAL GEOGRAPHY** _

_**GEOGRAPHY 110_**  
  

**COURSE SYLLABUS**  
  

**1\. PLEASE READ THIS SYLLABUS CAREFULLY!**  
  

**2\. NO HATS MAY BE WORN IN CLASS!**  
  

**3\. YOU ARE EXPECTED TO BE HERE EACH DAY THIS CLASS MEETS!**

INSTRUCTOR: Dr. Richard Fusch

Professor of Geography

Associate Dean of Academic Affairs

OFFICE: Stewart, 241/University 107

TELEPHONE: Campus: x. 3616 (my office) or x. 3113 (Secretary, Dean's Office)

E-mail: rdfusch; if off-campus: rdfusch@cc.owu.edu

CLASS MEETING TIME: 1:30-2:45 (approx.): Tuesdays/Thursdays, Stewart, 267.  
  

OFFICE HOURS: Tues and Thurs; 8:00am-10:00am; Thur., 12:00-1:30 pm. Other
times by appointment: x. 3113 (Secretary Dean's Office) for appointments  
  

TEXTS: Knox and Marsten: Places and Regions in Global Context: A Human
Geography

Rand McNally: _Goode's World Atlas_

In-Class Handouts  
  

**CONDUCT OF THE COURSE**  
  

The next sections of this syllabus outline course requirements, and a
description of the **five themes** in geography around which this course is
built. The course is divided into a series of major topical Themes and there
are a series of Lectures/Discussions associated with those themes. The
Lecture/Discussion topics explore the various themes in a variety of ways.
There will be formal lectures on some topics. Some material will be elucidated
through class discussion--that is, we will discuss a theme in class rather
than just the professor lecturing about it. Most importantly, this course will
be copiously illustrated through the use of handouts, slides and xeroxed maps
and data sets; and you will work with a variety of mapped material often
creating your own maps. Hence _**regular attendance is critical to your
success in this course.**_  
  

As much as possible, the course will be conducted in such a way so as to
integrate the reading and the classroom material. The **textual material**
while using somewhat different terminology then I use is oriented around the
**five themes of geographic inquiry** outlined below. However, it is important
to note that the lecture/discussion is most often an example of, an
elucidation of, or an expansion of material discussed in the text.
Lecture/discussions are generally not, _I emphasize not_ , straight forward
regurgitation of the texts. You will be greatly advantaged if you _take_ the
_reading_ assignment _seriously_ and/or _ask questions about the textual
material you do not understand_ ,  
  

This course is a learning process for all of you. The learning process
involves the posing and answering of questions and the analysis of ideas,
thoughts and material. _Therefore, your questions are strongly encouraged._
Remember, no question is a dumb question if you honestly do not know the
answer to it.  
  

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS**  
  

E-MAIL/TELEPHONE NUMBER: If you have not already done so, secure an e-mail
address and send it to me (rdfusch) along with your full name and telephone
extension number. This is important because I will be communicating with the
entire class about assignments, class meetings, reminders of exams, etc. via
e-mail. You will need to check your e-mail on a regular basis to see if I have
sent you any messages. I need your telephone number so that I may contact you
individually if necessary.  
  

ATTENDANCE: Attendance is expected. This course is heavily illustrated with
maps, graphic material, slides and in some cases, video tape and computer
generated data. It is impossible to be successful in this course if you miss
this material, regardless of the fact that you have gotten the "notes" from
one of your classmates. Furthermore, research has shown (most recently by
educational psychologist Howard Schuman) that academic success is more closely
tied to attendance than anything else, including ability and amount of time
studying. Someone once said that "a major part of making it in life is simply
showing up." Therefore, you are expected to be here every day that this class
meets.  
  

READING MATERIAL: **All** assigned textual material (Knox/Marston), maps in
the atlas, and handouts are an integral part of this course. You will be
tested on your knowledge of all of this assigned material. **Bring the atlas
to class with you every day; we will use this atlas virtually every day. In
your class notes, note the title and page number of the map(s) we referred to
in class so that you can use them as part of your study materials. All
handouts are part of the reading assignments and the lecture discussion on the
day they are handed out and often on subsequent days. Keep them orderly and
associated with your relevant class notes. Use them as study materials!**  
  

EXAMS: There will be three exams. Each exam will occur at approximately at
one-third intervals in the course. The third exam will occur during finals
week (date/time TBA). These exams will consist of a variety of "objective"
(multiple choice, true-false, etc.) questions, a series of short answer
questions (definitions of terms, themes or ideas; lists of terms, themes or
ideas), and essays. Each exam will count approximately the same in total
points as each of the others.  
  

LATE EXAMS: There are but two excuses for missing a regularly scheduled exam
and receiving permission to make up this exam: (1) a verifiable (health
center/your doctor) illness; and/or (2) a verifiable personal or family
emergency. Participation in another university event (e.g., a field trip for
another class or an athletic event) **MAY** get you excused, but in any of
those cases, I will need to speak directly with the faculty member or coach
conducting such an event.  
  

**REGARDLESS: TO QUALIFY TO TAKE AN EXAM LATE YOU MUST CONTACT ME _BEFORE_ THE
SCHEDULED EXAM OR QUIZ. FAILURE TO CONTACT ME _BEFORE_ THE EXAM WILL RESULT IN
YOU RECEIVING A ZERO --0-- GRADE NO MATTER THE EXCUSE.**  
  

**COURSE DESCRIPTION**  
  

This course is a general introduction to cultural (human) and world regional
geography. Geography as a general social science is concerned with the
character of place (location) and places at the surface of the earth. In its
original Greek the word meant **earth description**. Greek scholars sought to
describe and account for the character of all places at the surface of the
earth. Their (the Greeks) purpose was to explain why their civilization was
the most powerful on earth at that particular time. In 500 BC, Athenian
culture was at its peak in Europe, and Greece was the most powerful of all
western civilizations. The Greeks, of course, had no knowledge of the
existence of China, which was far larger and far more powerful; the Chinese,
of course, had no knowledge of the Greeks. In fact they exhibited a common
phenomenon of most societies--they all were _geographically illiterate_ one to
the other. The Greeks believed, erroneously it turns out, that the reason for
the "power" of Greek civilization was a result of the **unique location** of
Greece with respect to the other cultures they interacted with in the
Mediterranean Basin. They "invented" the study of geography to further their
knowledge about both Greece as a place and the civilizations (places) around
them. Modern geography continues in the Greek tradition in that **it attempts
to understand and account for the character of place and to predict and
prepare for changes in the character of place**. It goes far beyond the Greeks
however who developed a very simplistic notion of the character of place. At
the same time modern geographers and the Greek geographers all start with the
same notion: **Place Matters**!  
  

This Cultural (Human) Geography course explores the character of place through
the development of **five** **themes of geographic inquiry** : (1) the
**interrelationships between humans and their natural environments** at
particular places; (2) the development of **particular places** ; the term
geographers use is **cultural landscapes** \--the surface of the earth as
modified by human action; (3) the **location** of particular places with
respect to other locations; (4) **movement between places** ; and (5) **the
development of regional cultural systems**. In this fifth theme we wonder how
the myriad of places within a certain area on the surface of the earth reflect
and develop similarities one to another, while remaining distinctly different
from places in other nearby areas.  
  

One theme--Human/Environment Interaction--(also called the Man-Land Tradition)
posits that human populations, in order to survive at the surface of the
earth, must interact with a variety of locations. In short they must use a
variety of resources bestowed on the planet at various places by the forces of
nature. As a result of this use of the earth's resources human groups modify
and hence change the character of the natural environment at various places
thereby creating complex interrelationships between humanity and the natural
environment. Humans are able to forever influence the character of place
through their interaction with the natural environment often simultaneously
changing both the character of the environment and the their own culture.  
  

The theme of Cultural Landscape recognizes that in the process of
human/environment interaction, and over the course of the development of human
history, societies, directed by their cultural norms, values, ideologies and
technologies, create human-made landscapes which serve human purposes. Thus,
cultural groups create places, be they cities, or rural areas, which are
reflective of human culture. Geographers call these human mosaics **Cultural
Landscapes**.  
  

The theme of **location** and the theme of **movement** are intimately
interrelated. Geographers want to know how one location relates to other
places (locations) and how and in what ways these locations may interact. The
geographer's terms are: **relative location** \--what is the location of one
place as it relates to another-- and **spatial interaction** \-- how does one
place interact across the surface of the earth with another place (e.g. the
relationship of the location of any particular dormitory at Ohio Wesleyan with
such other places on the campus such as the library or this classroom; the
relationship of a city to its suburbs; the relationship of Cuba and the United
States through its "refugee problem," or the affects of deforestation in the
tropics (e.g. Brazil) on the weather (and hence agriculture) in the mid-
latitudes (e.g. The United States. Please notice in these examples that I
changed the scale of both "vision" and real world distances).  
  

The fifth theme, usually called Regional Geography (also the Areas Studies
Tradition), examines and analyzes the character of place across broad areas of
the world, called Culture Regions. It asks such questions as (for example):
what human cultural and natural characteristics make China unique from
Southeast Asia? Or, what human cultural and/or natural processes have
interacted to create the culture region of Western Europe? Or, given the
processes now operating, how will the culture region of the United States
change in the future? A culture region is a large area or place, made up of
small areas or places, all created from the interaction of humans and the
natural environment over time. This last concept is quite hierarchial. For
example: North America is a large culture region, distinctive from Latin
America. North America is made up of two smaller culture regions, Canada and
the United States, distinctive from one another. The United States is made up
of a series of culture regions (e.g. New England, the Southwest, the Pacific
Coast, etc.) each distinctive from one another. Each of these regions is made
up of a series of smaller culture regions (e.g. for the Pacific Coast--
California and the Pacific Northwest) and each of these is divided into
smaller regions (e.g. in California: Northern California and Southern
California; Southern California is made up of several smaller regions
including the Los Angeles Basin, the Orange County Coast; Western San Diego
County; the California Coast Ranges and the desert Southwest. Notice, I
changed scales again) and so on.  
  

This course will develop the themes outlined by examining them specifically,
by an analysis of the major human cultural characteristics which give
character to place, movement , region, etc. and through the examination of
specific places (e.g. the American city) or specific regions (e.g. Latin
America). **It is imperative to also be continually cognizant of the
following: The five themes which make up the heart of geographic inquiry are
all closely interrelated one to another**. As a result you need to keep in
mind that: all regions are places. A region is made up of a large number of
smaller places which have distinct similarities, but also distinct differences
(which makes each unique with respect to the others). All places within a
region have a distinct location, while simultaneously spatially interacting
with all other places. The degree to which they interact relates to their
location and the character of all of the other places and their locations
within the region. While geography is simple when looking at the exact
location of only one place, when places are related one to another, geographic
relationships and hence geographic understanding becomes extremely complex.  
  

**THE USE OF MAPS**  
  

Geography studies the character of the surface of the earth. To do this we
take two approaches. One of these is to study the surface at particular places
in real time. That is, geographers undertake extensive "real world" direct
field observation and research. The other method is to use maps, which
represent the surface of the earth in its myriad forms, and the distribution
of various natural and human created phenomena, at a scale usable by other
geographers, students, or the general public. Humans have been creating maps
of the surface of the earth since time immemorial, to describe distance,
direction, location, place, movement, landscape and region. While maps are not
the exclusive tool of geographers, just as computers are not the exclusive
tool of computer scientists, geographers (both professional geographers and
amateur geographers--which you are about to become) use them more than anyone
else and have developed a tremendous variety of maps to depict the
tremendously varied character of place.  
  

Maps are, in fact, mathematical representations of the spherical earth on a
flat surface. A geographer who creates maps is called a cartographer and
cartography is a special branch (sub-field) of geography. Your texts are full
of maps, which describe various aspects of the surface of the earth and we
will use an _Atlas_ to assist you in using maps and understanding the nature/
character of the geographic realms under study. We will use maps extensively
in the course. The mastery of the use of this tool is a key to successful
geographic understanding and enlightenment. Furthermore, there are series of
map quizzes/exercises. The purpose of these are to test your increasing
geographic literacy and to force you to improve your skills in the acquisition
of geographic knowledge. There is general truism here: _**the acquisition of
knowledge is the key to understanding anything!_**  
  

**An Introduction to Cultural Geography and the Concept of Place**  
  

"A geographer has a harmless excuse for being practically anywhere"

Paul Theroux  
  

**Geography is the study of places (locations at the surface of the earth) and
the relationships between and among diverse places.** Does it make a
difference if we as human beings know anything about the character of place,
or understand the complexities of the character of places, or the complex
interrelationships between places on the surface of the earth? **If you think
not** consider this: In 1973 (one year after the last American troops left
Vietnam), in a hearing before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, A. Doak
Barnett, an internationally recognized scholar (historian) on Southeast Asia
stated that had Americans understood the **cultural geography and history of
the peoples of Southeast Asia** , even in a cursory way, they would never have
permitted America to become involved in a war in Vietnam; a war they would
have known America could not have won. This war cost over 50,000 American
lives, over 1,000,000 Vietnamese lives, and left countless wounded and maimed,
both physically and psychologically. A war which has left deep and lasting
scars on two cultures: the Vietnamese and the Americans.  
  

**If you think not,** answer this question: Do you know the reasons behind the
"break-up" of the former Yugoslavia into a series of warring states in which
hundreds of thousands of people have been displaced through so-called "ethnic
cleansing" and in which thousands have been killed or wounded or permanently
scarred. Do you know why the United States, her European allies and the U.N.
seemed helpless in stopping this and unable to bring this profound human
disaster to an end for so long? The answer lies in the complex cultural and
historical geography of this region. In Bosnia, to be born in one particular
place, by parents of one particular ethno-religious group means that from
birth that person is the arch enemy of members of other ethno-religious
groups, no matter that persons wealth, education, personality, gender, etc.
The same is true in Kosovo, another former province of Yugoslavia in which
your country is intimately involved at the present time. **Does place matter
in Bosnia and Kosovo?** Did you know that World War I began in **Sarajevo,
Bosnia** in 1914 for substantially the same reasons that are causing the
problems there today? ****  
  

**If you think place does not matter,** consider this: The world's rain
forests are being rapidly cut down. Some of the areas cut over are used for
agriculture by Third World peoples. Some are cut over for timber for housing,
furniture, and the like in the United States, Europe and Japan. As scientists
have shown, the deforestation in the rain forests of the world is changing
world weather patterns. Whose weather is being changed the most? If you
guessed North America's you are correct. **Clearly the actions in one place
are affecting change in another.** Think about this: American demand for
tropical hardwood for furniture leads people in Brazil to cut down the
tropical rainforest on a large scale which ends up affecting the pattern of
weather in America. **Does place matter? Do the complex interrelationships
between and among places matter?**  
  

**If you think not** , consider this: Over many years, large numbers of Cuban
refugees have left Cuba and entered the United States. They are, more or less,
free to enter. **Note the current debate over the young child, Elian
Gonzalez!** For the last eight years, however, large numbers of Haitian
refugees have tried to enter the United States. Some have entered, but most
have either died trying to get in, or have been returned to Haiti, or have
been arrested by the Immigration and Naturalization Service and interred in
refugee camps. Over the Christmas break, while the people in South Florida
were protesting madly about the possibility that Elian Gonzalez might be
returned to Cuba, the U.S. Coast Guard intercepted a boat with over 100
Haitian refugees on board; the boat was turned back. How much protest have you
heard about this? **Why is one group, from one place permitted to enter, while
another, from a very close-by place (compare their locations in your Atlas) is
not?** The answer to this question is a very complex place question. The
answer is found in the character of the United States as a nation and
Americans as a culture group as they relate to Cuba and Haiti as places and to
the Cuban and Haitian people in those places. As a result of the contradictory
attitude of Americans toward Cubans and Haitians the Clinton administration
was forced to change its immigration policies with respect to Cubans. As a
result, the Cuban community of south Florida has loudly protested this change
and have swung their considerable political "muscle" to the Republicans. **Is
this policy change and protest in any way related to the character/nature of
place?**  
  

I could ask all of you literally hundreds of these place questions; place
questions about say the break-up of the Soviet Union into a series of states,
the largest of which is Russia; about the tragedy the world now witnesses in
Rwanda and the Congo (Africa), or elsewhere; Or I could ask you literally
hundreds of place questions about your city, your neighborhood, about your
home. These place questions matter because place matters; and as you will
discover in this class, all humans are geographers all of the time, they deal
with geography all of the time without ever recognizing it, and the character
of place affects their behavior all of the time, often with little or no
recognition.  
  

The term geographers use to describe both the general ignorance about places,
and the fact that place matters and affects behavior, but people seldom
recognize it is: **GEOGRAPHIC ILLITERACY**. You will find in this course that
all human beings, including each of you has a **PERSONAL GEOGRAPHY** , which
is a product of your own unique experience and which changes with age,
education, income, attitude and belief, job, family responsibilities, etc.
Your _personal geography_ is ever dynamic. So is the _geography (place
characteristics)_ of every human on the face of the earth and every place on
the face of the earth.  
  

**The purpose of this course then** is to help you begin to understand the
importance of the character of place in shaping the character of the world;
and influencing the character of the world-- from your home, your
neighborhood, your state, your country all the way up the scale of your
planet. The purpose of this course is also to provide you with a set of basic
skills which will enable you in the future to enhance your geographic
knowledge, to enhance your personal geographies, and to help you overcome your
own geographic illiteracy, now and in the future. **This introductory course
in cultural (human) geography is designed to help you appreciate the
importance of geographic learning, understanding, and geographic knowledge and
the importance of this knowledge in decision making about the world--your
world and the world's of others.**  
  

