**![42.133](_derived/42133.htm_cmp_expeditn100_bnr.gif)**  
[![Home](_derived/home_cmp_expeditn100_hbtn.gif)](./)
[![Up](_derived/up_cmp_expeditn100_hbtn.gif)](courses.htm)
[![42.125](_derived/42125.htm_cmp_expeditn100_hbtn.gif)](42125.htm)
![42.133](_derived/42133.htm_cmp_expeditn100_hbtn_p.gif)
[![42.335](_derived/42335.htm_cmp_expeditn100_hbtn.gif)](42335.htm)
[![42.337](_derived/42337.htm_cmp_expeditn100_hbtn.gif)](42337.htm)
[![42.398](_derived/42398.htm_cmp_expeditn100_hbtn.gif)](42398.htm)
[![42.398summer](_derived/42398s.htm_cmp_expeditn100_hbtn.gif)](42398s.htm)
[![42.416-516](42.316/_derived/42.416-516.htm_cmp_expeditn100_hbtn.gif)](42.316/42.416-516.htm)

  
  
---  
| |

Students can click on the links here, below, to find guides for reading the
primary sources on which the papers in this course are based: [ Plato,
_Timaeus and Critias_](http://facstaff.bloomu.edu/hudon/plato.htm), [ Seneca,
_Letters From a Stoic_](http://facstaff.bloomu.edu/hudon/seneca.htm), [
Shikibu's _Diary of Lady
Murasaki_](http://facstaff.bloomu.edu/hudon/diary.htm), _[The Bhagavad
Gita](http://facstaff.bloomu.edu/hudon/bgita.htm)_ , and
_[Beowulf](http://facstaff.bloomu.edu/hudon/beowulf.htm)_.



![](_themes/expeditn/exphorsd.gif)

  
42.133 The Ancient and Medieval Worlds  
  
William V. Hudon  
Department of History  
Bloomsburg University  
_Office_ : OSH 105  
_Telephone_ : 389-4159  
_Fall 2001 office hours_ : M/W/F 9-10AM; M/W  2-3PM; or by appointment.

_e-mail_ : [hudon@planetx.bloomu.edu](mailto:hudon@planetx.bloomu.edu)

Ancient and Medieval Worlds

_

Textbooks_:

***ALL ARE REQUIRED FOR READING, NOT ALL FOR PURCHASE***

Plato,  _Timaeus and Critias_ (New York: Penguin, 1977).

Seneca, _Letters from a Stoic_ (New York: Penguin, 1969).

Murasaki Shikibu, _Diary of Lady Murasaki_ (New York: Penguin, 1996).

Michael Alexander, trans. _Beowulf_ (New York: Penguin, 1973).

Anthony Esler, _The Human Venture, Volume I [to 1500]_ (Upper Saddle River,
New Jersey:  
    Prentice Hall, 2000) _  
_  
**Note: You may feel free to share the cost of the Esler book with a friend in
class, and trade it back and forth for reading.  You may also simply read the
pertinent chapters in any other RELIABLE overview of ancient world history.
Is your choice "reliable"?  See me, and bring it with you.**

***OPTIONAL TEXT FOR THOSE CHOOSING TO COMPLETE THE EXTRA CREDIT  
WRITING ASSIGNMENT:***  
  Juan Mascar¨®, trans.  _The Bhagavad Gita_ (New York: Penguin, 1962).

![](_themes/expeditn/exphorsd.gif)

_

Course requirements_:

1\. Regular attendance in class is essential for success.

2\. Class participation/quizzes. (20% of final grade)  To succeed in this
course, you must engage historical documents directly and critically.  We will
do so in class, utilizing study questions for each of the major primary
sources examined this term.  The discussions in which you must participate
will be based upon those questions.  Brief quizzes may be given on the
contents of Esler, if the instructor senses that students are not doing this
crucial reading.  Any such quizzes will be unannounced, very brief, and will
occur on lecture days.  In the event of absence for an unannounced quiz, the
quiz can be made up through additional class participation during regular
discussion sessions.  There is continuous opportunity to improve this element
of the final grade, through steady class participation.  Attendance, reading,
preparation and participation are the keys to success in this course.

3\. Term papers. (40% of final grade)  You will write four (4) brief papers in
this course, one on each of the major primary sources we study in class.  Each
paper must be NO LONGER (or shorter) than three (3) FULL, type-written,
double-spaced pages.  All papers must have a title page in the standard form,
and be secured with a STAPLE in the upper left-hand corner.  Each paper must
argue a THESIS, and sustain that thesis with PRIMARY SOURCE evidence taken
from the text under examination.  The evidence must appear as QUOTATIONS
worked into your paragraphs in the form of DIRECT ADDRESS.  All papers must be
written in standard expository style, with five (5) paragraphs in all.
Additional written instructions are available by clicking on [TERM PAPER
GUIDE](http://facstaff.bloomu.edu/hudon/guide_for_term_papers.htm) here, or by
locating the hot link on my main page (http://facstaff.bloomu.edu/hudon).
Oral explanation of the contents of that guide will follow in class at a later
date.  Due dates for each paper appear below in the outline of class meetings
and assignments.  NO EXTENSIONS OF THESE DUE DATES ARE POSSIBLE.  Early
submissions will be gratefully accepted.

3a.  Extra-credit paper.  You may write a paper, identical in format to those
described above, for UP TO a 10 POINT bonus on your total final grade,
depending upon the quality of the paper, and assuming ALL basic requirements
descried above (#3) are met in the extra-credit paper.  The paper must be
based on a critical reading of _The Bhagavad Gita_.   The extra credit paper,
if a student chooses to write it, is due no later than the final exam period,
Wednesday, 12 December, 1:00PM (students enrolled in section 42.133.02), or
Friday, 14 December, 10:30AM (students enrolled in section 42.133.01).

4\. Comprehensive final exam.  Wednesday, 12 December, 1--3 PM (for students
enrolled in section 42.133.02) OR Friday, 14 December, 10:30AM--12:30PM (for
students enrolled in section 42.133.01).  This exam counts for 40% of final
grade.  This examination will be handwritten in blue books.  ***Here is the
question:***  Defend, reject, or recommend the qualification of the following
statement in a persuasive essay that presents an historical argument,
incorporating both background information, and primary evidence woven in
through the form of direct address:  "The primary sources examined in class
illustrate that ancient societies, while they emerged at different times and
in different contexts, shared so much in common that the differences between
them can be considered miniscule."  You will be permitted to bring one sheet
of notes to the exam, with the following restrictions: the sheet must be no
larger than 8 1/2 x 11 inches, written on one side of the sheet only.  If set
up effectively, that note sheet will contain an OUTLINE of the points you
intend to make, KEY NAMES, DATES, AND EVENTS to help you link what you say
about the sources to their HISTORICAL CONTEXT, plus a set of PRIMARY SOURCE
QUOTATIONS that you might not be able to commit to memory.  Blank blue books,
with your name PRINTED on the BACK cover, must be submitted to the instructor
no later than Friday, 7 December, at the end of class.  


![](_themes/expeditn/exphorsd.gif)

_

Course outline and assignments_:

***Your ability to note, understand, and describe similarities and differences
between sources and between events, policies, and attitudes in different
cultures revealed through the readings is crucial for the understanding
history, not to mention for securing successful results in this class.  Look
hard for those similarities and differences, and ASK QUESTIONS of the sources,
and of the instructor.***

**Unit I: Human origins and river-valley civilizations, to 1500BC.**  
   27 August: Introduction, discussion of goals of "general education."  
   29, 31 August, 5 September: background.  Read Esler, chapter 1, BEFORE
coming to class on 29 August.  Read Esler, chapters 2 and 3, BEFORE coming to
class on 31 August.  Begin reading Plato, _Timaeus and Critias_ , UTILIZING
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS, in preparation for the discussions beginning on 12
September.  
  
**Unit II: Greece and Persia, 1000-300BC.  
    **7, 10 September: background.  Read Esler, chapter 11, BEFORE coming to class on 7 September.  
  
    12, 14, 17, 19, 21 September: discussion of Plato, _Timaeus and Critias_ , utilizing study guide questions.  
  
   24, 26 September: more background.  
     
***PAPER on Plato, _Timaeus and Critias_ DUE on Wednesday, 26 September, AT
THE END OF CLASS.***

**Unit III: Rome, and Imperial China, 750BC--330AD.**  
   28 September, 1 October: background.  Read Esler, chapter 11, BEFORE coming
to class on 28 September.  Read Esler, chapter 7, BEFORE coming to class on 1
October.  Read Seneca, _Letters From a Stoic_ UTILIZING STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS,
in preparation for the discussions beginning on 3 October.  
  
    3, 5, 8, 10, 15 October: discussion of Seneca, _Letters From a Stoic_ , utilizing study questions.

**Unit IV: India, Japan and Southeast Asia, 1500BC--1100AD.**  
   17, 19, 22, 24 October: background.  Read Esler, chapter 20, BEFORE coming
to class on 17 October.  Read Shikibu, _Diary of Lady Mursaki_ , UTILIZING
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS, in preparations for the discussions beginning on 26
October.  
  
***PAPER on _Letters From a Stoic_ DUE on Friday, 19 October, AT THE END OF
CLASS.***

    26, 29, 31 October, 2, 5 November: discussion of _Diary_ , utilizing study guide questions. 

**Unit V: "Christian" Europe, 300--1200AD.**  
    7, 9  November: background.  Read Esler, chapter 18, BEFORE coming to class on 7 November.  Begin reading _Beowulf_ , UTILIZING STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS, in preparation for the discussions beginning on 19 November.

**Unit VI: Rise of Islam, 570--1200AD.**  
   12, 14, 16 November: background.  Read Esler, chapter 19, BEFORE coming to
class on 12 November.  
  
***PAPER on _Diary_ DUE on Friday, 16 November, AT THE END OF CLASS.***  
  
   19, 26, 28, 30 November, 3 December: discussion of _Beowulf_ , utilizing
study guide questions.

   7 December: final exam review session.

***PAPER on _Beowulf_ , and ALL extra-credit and ALL re-write papers on the
first three assignments are DUE on  Tuesday,  11 December, at 12 Noon, in my
office or mailbox.***  
  
*** _ **Comprehensive final exam will be given on Wednesday, 12 December,
1-3PM (section 2), or on Friday, 14 December 10:30AM--12:30PM (section 1).**_
***  
  
*****NOTE: While I do not anticipate any circumstances that would necessitate
alteration of the syllabus, all due dates and assignments listed here are
subject to change.   Any necessary changes will be announced in class.*****

![](_themes/expeditn/exphorsd.gif)

_

Letter and number grade equivalents_:

A = 92 and higher; A- = 89-91; B+ = 85-88; B = 81-84; B- =78-80;  C+=74-77;
C=70-73; C- =67-69; D =60-66; E =59 and below.  
---|---|---

