TITLE>261 Syllabus

**THEORIES OF WAR AND PEACE**

Political Science 261-01  
Mr. Rock, Fall 2000

**FOCUS OF THE COURSE** :

What causes war? How can war be prevented? These have long been the central
questions in the field of international politics. This course introduces
students to some of the most prominent explanations for war -- and peace --
that have been advanced by scholars. Our aim is to gain an understanding of
factors that produce international conflict as well as means by which it might
be avoided.

The approach of this course to the study of war and peace is theory-oriented
rather than case oriented. This means that we will not take specific cases of
war and peace (e.g., the First World War) and attempt to develop comprehensive
explanations for them. Instead, we will take a number of explanations for war
and peace that have been offered by political scientists and other scholars,
discuss them, and evaluate the degree to which each explanation helps (or does
not help) account for particular cases. For this approach to succeed, it is
not necessary that one know everything -- or even a lot -- about the origins
of a particular conflict. On the other hand, some knowledge of historical
cases is clearly essential. If your background in history is thin and you fear
you lack adequate knowledge, do not panic! Much of what you will need to know
can be obtained from the assigned readings, since the authors typically cite
extensive evidence from cases in support of their arguments. A great deal of
information on specific cases of war and peace can also be found in the
sources listed in the bibliography appearing at the end of this syllabus. Each
of these sources is on reserve in the Library. If, after having looked at
these sources, you feel the need to consult additional materials, please let
me know.

**COURSE MATERIALS** :

The following items should be purchased at the College Store:

  * Greg Cashman, **What Causes War? An Introduction to Theories of International Conflict** (New York: Lexington Books, 1993).

  * Barbara Ehrenreich, **Blood Rites: Origins and History of the Passions of War** (New York: Henry Holt  & Co., 1998).

All other readings for the course can be found on reserve in the library. Some
of these are also available on-line through the Vassar Libraries web page.

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS** :

**Examinations**. There will be a midterm and a final examination. The midterm
will be administered in class on Thursday, October 12. The final examination
will be self-scheduled, according to the procedures for self-scheduled
examinations set by the Registrar. Each examination will consist of one or
more essay questions. Study questions will be distributed in advance of each
examination.

**Research Paper**. Each student will write a research paper of 3000-4000
words. Students will select their own paper topics, in consultation with the
instructor and subject to his approval. A good quality research paper is not
something that can be dashed off in a day or two (though some students try).
It is the culmination of a long process that includes formulating a topic,
conducting research, refocusing the topic if necessary, conducting additional
research, writing outlines, drafting the paper, conducting more research (to
fill in any gaps you discover), editing and revising the draft, writing the
final version, and proofreading (not just spell-checking). To help structure
this process, the following deadlines will apply:

1\. November 2 -- students will submit a proposed topic, with a bibliography
of at least five (5) sources. The bibliography must be annotated, which means
that there must be a couple of sentences or a brief paragaph describing the
source and its value to your project.

2\. November 9 -- students will submit an outline of their paper. Outlines
should be as detailed as possible.

3\. November 21 -- a completed first draft of the paper is due at the
beginning of class. Each student's draft will be read by another student, who
will make comments and suggestions for revision.

4\. November 30 -- comments on first drafts are due at the beginning of class
for distribution to authors.

5\. December 4 -- the final draft of the paper is due in my mailbox in the
Political Science Department Office by 5:00 p.m.

Others. Students may be asked, from time to time, to help lead class
discussions and/or participate in classroom debates.

**EXTENSIONS AND MAKE-UP EXAMS** :

The granting of extensions to some students effectively penalizes others whose
work might also have benefited from additional time, but who completed an
assignment when it was due. In the interest of fairness, then, an extension or
permission to take a make-up examination will be granted only in cases of
personal or family illness or other emergency. An extremely heavy academic
workload may, in exceptional cases, justify a brief extension, though not a
make-up examination. A student who does not take an examination and who has
not been granted permission for a make-up will automatically fail both the
examination and the course. Late papers for which no extension has been
granted will be penalized at a maximum of one-third of a letter grade per day.

**ATTENDANCE** :

By attending class meetings, and by asking questions and participating in
discussions, a student contributes not only to his or her own education, but
to the education of other students as well. Regular attendance is therefore
essential. Unexcused absences, if sufficiently large in number, will lead to a
lowering of a student's grade and, in extreme circumstances, could result in
failure of the course itself. Absence from class will be excused in cases of
personal or family illness or emergency, for observance of certain religious
holidays, and in other situations where the instructor deems it to be
justified.

**GRADING** :

The following formula will be used to calculate a student's grade:

> Midterm Examination -- 30 percent  
>  Research Paper -- 40 percent  
>  Final Examination -- 30 percent  
>

Some adjustment may, however, be made in cases of dramatically improved (or
deteriorated) performance during semester, in cases involving an aberrant
performance on a single exercise, in cases where classroom participation has
been exceptionally strong or unusually weak, or in other cases where the
instructor deems it necessary in order to render a student's final grade an
accurate reflection of his or her performance in the course. All written
assignments must be completed in order to earn a passing grade. Failure to
write an examination or to turn in an assignment will result in failure of the
course.

**COMMUNICATING WITH THE INSTRUCTOR** :

My office is located in Rockefeller 110A (insided the Political Science
Department Office). My office hours this semester are Mondays, 1:00-3:00, and
Thursdays, 3:00-4:30. I am available at other times by appointment. My office
phone is x5558; my home phone is 471-1896. Please do not call me at home
before 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. E-mail is generally a very good way of
contacting me. Send your messages to strock@vassar.edu.

**COURSE SCHEDULE**

EXPLAINING WAR AND PEACE: INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW

August 31 The Study of War and Peace

> Cashman, **What Causes War?** chap. 1  
>  Levy, "The Causes of War: A Review of Theories and Evidence"

HUMAN-LEVEL THEORIES

September 5, 7: Human Aggression: Is War In Our Genes?

> Cashman, **What Causes War?** chap. 2  
>  Mead, "Warfare is Only an Invention -- Not a Biological Necessity"  
>  Young, "An Evolutionary Theory of the Causes of War"

September 12 War as Sacred Ritual

> Ehrenreich, **Blood Rites**

September 14, 19: Gendered Perspectives: Is War Masculine?

> Cohn, "Sex and Death in the Rational World of Defense Intellectuals"  
>  Hartsock, "Prologue to a Feminist Critique of War and Politics"  
>  Ruddick, "Preservative Love and Military Destruction: Some Reflections on
Mothering"

DECISION-MAKING THEORIES

September 21 Misperception as a Cause of War (and Peace)

> Cashman, **What Causes War?** pp. 61-72

> Key Cases: World War I, World War II, Korean War, Middle East Wars,
Falklands War, Gulf War

STATE AND SOCIETAL-LEVEL THEORIES

September 26 Economics and War: Capitalism and Imperialism

> Cashman, **What Causes War?** chap. 5  
>  Cohen, "The Economic Interpretation" (from The Question of Imperialism)  
>

> Key Cases: 19th Century Imperialism and World War I

September 28 Economics and Peace: Capitalisma and Interdependence

> Copeland, "Economic Interdependence and War: A Theory of Trade Expectations"

> Key Cases: World War I, World War II, European Union

October 3 Politics and War: Are Non-democracies Inherently Aggressive?

> Cashman, **What Causes War?** chap. 5  
>  Friedrich and Brzezinski, "The Foreign Policy of Expansion"  
>

> Key Cases: World War I, World War II, Cold War,

October 5 Politics and Peace: Why Don't Democracies Fight?

> Doyle, "Kant, Liberal Legacies, and Foreign Affairs"

> U.S.-Europe-Japan since 1945, Anglo-American Peace since 1815

October 10 Domestic Conflict and International War: War as Diversionary Tactic
or Sign of Weakness

> Cashman, **What Causes War?** chap. 5  
>  Levy, "The Diversionary Theory of War"

> Key Cases: World War I, Falklands War, Gulf War

October 12: **Midterm Examination**

DYADIC THEORIES

October 24, 26 Offensive and Defensive Weapons and Doctrines

> Van Evera, "The Cult of the Offensive and the Origins of the First World
War"  
>  Dean, "Alternative Defense"  
>  Quester, "Offense and Defense" (skim)

> Key Cases: World War I, U.S. and NATO Strategic Doctrine During the Cold War

October 31, November 2 Game Theory: Modeling Strategic Interaction

> Cashman, **What Causes War?** chaps. 6-7

November 7, 9 Deterrence and the Spiral Model: Which is Better, the Carrot or
the Stick?

> Cashman, **What Causes War?** chaps. 6-7  
>  Jervis, "Deterrence and the Spiral Model"  
>  Lebow and Stein, "Beyond Deterrence"

> Key Cases: World War I, World War II, Korean War, Middle East Wars,
Falklands War, Gulf War

SYSTEM-LEVEL THEORIES

November 14, 16 Polarity: Which are More Stable, Bipolar or Multipolar
International Systems?

> Cashman, **What Causes War?** chap. 8  
>  Deutsch and Singer, "Multipolar Power Systems and International Stability"  
>  Waltz, "The Stability of a Bipolar World"

> Key Cases: World War I, World War II, Long Peace (Cold War)

November 21 Power Transitions: War as a Function of Shifts in the
International Distribution of Power

> Cashman, **What Causes War?** chaps. 8-9  
>  Organski and Kugler "The Power Transition"  
>  Levy, "Declining Power and the Preventive Motivation for War"

> Key Cases: World War I, World War II, Gulf War

CONCLUDING ISSUES

November 28 The Alleged Obsolescence of Major International War

> Kaysen, "Is War Obsolete?"

November 30, December 5 The Problem of Internal War

> Brown, "The Causes and Regional Implications of Internal Conflict"  
>  David, "Internal Wars: Causes and Cures

December 7 Conclusion to Course

**Select Bibliography for Historical Cases of War**

Erik Goldstein, **Wars and Peace Treaties, 1816-1991** (London: Routledge,
1992).

> Covers nearly every major and minor war from 1816 to 1991, including the
Crimean War, the Franco-Prussian War, World War I, World War II, the Arab-
Israeli Wars, the Korean War, the Vietnam War, the Indo-Pakistani Wars, the
Falklands War, and the Persian Gulf War. Treatment of each case is very brief,
but if you are looking for a short summary with key facts this is a good place
to start.

Donald Kagan, **On the Origins of War and the Preservation of Peace** (New
York: Doubleday, 1995)

> Covers the Peloponnesian War, the Second Punic War, the First World War, the
Second World War, and the Cuban Missile Crisis. Treatment of each case is
extended and detailed. Basic theme is the importance of deterrence in
preventing war.

Joseph S. Nye, Jr., **Understanding International Conflicts. An Introduction
to Theory and History** (New York: HarperCollins, 1993)

> Covers the Peloponnesian War, First World War, Second World War, Arab-
Israeli Wars. Treatment of each case is brief, but clear, with some effort to
link the case to theory.

Robert I. Rotberg and Theodore K. Rabb, **The Origin and Prevention of Major
Wars** (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988)

> Covers the Wars of the Ottoman Empire, the Thirty Years' War, the French
Revolution and Napoleonic Wars, First World War, Second World War. Treatment
of each case is reasonably detailed and comprehensive, but not terribly long.
Just the kind of source needed for this course.

John G. Stoessinger, **Why Nations Go to War** , 6th ed. (New York: St.
Martin's Press, 1993).

> Covers First World War, Hitler's decision to attack the Soviet Union in
Second World War, Korean War, Vietnam War, Indo-Pakistani Wars, Arab-Israeli
Wars, Iran-Iraq War, Persian Gulf War. Treatment of each case is extensive,
but is focused mainly on the attitudes, and perceptions of decision-makers;
international and societal level factors receive much less attention.

Amos Yoder, **World Politics and the Causes of War Since 1914** (Lanham, MD:
(University Press of America, 1986)

> Covers First World War, Second World War, Korean War, Arab-Israeli Wars,
Vietnam War, Indo-Pakistani Wars, Cuban Missile Crisis, Iran-Iraq War,
Falklands War. A good basic source. Treatment of each case is detailed, but
not too long. Mostly descriptive, with some analysis.

David W. Ziegler, **War, Peace, and International Politics** , 3rd ed.
(Boston: Little, Brown & Co., 1984)

> Covers Wars of German Unification, First World War, Second World War, Korean
War, Indo Pakistani War of 1971. Also discusses U.S. strategic doctrine during
the Cold War. Provides a good analytic account of the origins of each
conflict, along with much factual information.

