**L524: Information Sources and Services**

**School of Library and Information Science**

**Indiana University (IUPUI)**  
**Instructor: Dr. Joyce Taylor**  
**Office hours (#UL1110D): Monday-12:30-5:30 p.m. (by appointment)**  
**Telephone: (317) 278-2384**  
**E-mail:[jgtaylor@indiana.edu](mailto:jgtaylor@indiana.edu)**  
**Class listserv:[ _L524-JT@iupui.edu_](mailto:L524-JT@iupui.edu)**  

**PURPOSE**

The purpose of L524 is to introduce students to the basic reference sources
and services found in most libraries/information centers, and acquaint them
with the history, philosophy, and function of the information services.

**OBJECTIVES**

By the end of the semester, students should be able to:

1\. identify, compare, and evaluate information sources; identify the sources
most likely to contain specific types of information,

2\. discuss the reference process, including techniques of question
negotiation and search strategy, 3\. define the responsibilities of the
reference librarian; identify reference and information services in different
context, and

4\. discuss current issues in information service.

**TEXTBOOK**

Bopp, Richard E. and Linda C. Smith (Bopp). **Reference and Information
Services: an Introduction** . Englewood, CO: Libraries Unlimited, Inc., 1995.
**(Required)**

**GENERAL STUDENT RESPONSIBILITIES**

  * You are expected to attend all class sessions. If you are unable to attend, it is your responsibility to obtain notes and other materials from another student. 
  * Assignments are due on the date specified. Late papers will be penalized 5 points for each day past the due date. 
  * You must complete all assignments to pass the course. 
  * Indiana University and the School of Library and Information Science policies on academic dishonesty will be followed. Students found to be engaging in plagiarism, cheating, and other types of dishonesty will receive an F for the course. 

**WRITTEN WORK**

Except for worksheets, all papers must be word processed. In addition to
content and literary style, work will be graded upon neatness of presentation
and bibliographic style. Do not use contractions (e.g., it's, don't, isn't)
unless they are contained in direct quotations. Before handing in papers,
please edit all work, checking for misspellings, incorrect punctuation and
sentence structure. The final draft should have no corrections in pen or
pencil. Unless otherwise instructed, all work should be double-spaced. Print
should be on one side of the page. Each paragraph in the formal portion of
your paper should be indented either five or seven spaces with no added
spacing between paragraphs. All work is to be stapled in the upper left-hand
corner and handed in without plastic covers. **A cover sheet should state the
title of the assignment, your name, course number, date and my name**. A style
manual of your choice should be used for correct citation, footnote and
endnote construction. Please cite the style manual used on the last page of
the assignment.

**ASSIGNMENTS**

In addition to four worksheets, there will be two short written assignments,
and one final project in this course. There will also be two in-library
practicums.

**Reference Worksheets**

  * The purpose of the worksheet assignments is to help you become familiar with the reference sources and to learn search strategies. The worksheets will focus on specific **types** of reference sources. 

  * All questions on the worksheets can be answered from at least one of the titles listed on the related bibliographies located in the syllabus. The listed sources should be used, but other sources will be accepted. 
  * Answers to reference questions must be complete for full credit. Answering source must be identified by **title, volume, page, entry #, etc**. Answers found on electronic sources must be printed out and attached to the worksheet with an indication of the question number. 
  * **Do NOT ask the reference librarians or your classmates for help unless you are having difficulty locating the sources.**
  * Contact your instructor by e-mail if you do not understand any portion of the assignment. ****
  * **PLEASE RE-SHELVE ALL MATERIALS CAREFULLY!** 

**Print Review**

You are to select and critically review a **print** reference source, such as
an encyclopedia, index, dictionary, or abstracting publication.

  * Indicate the title you have selected. Write a brief description of this source. How is it organized? What does it cover (scope). How current is it? Who is the intended audience? 
  * Describe the way in which it covers a specific person or subject. 
  * Evaluate the resource. (See Bopp and Smith, chap.12) Is it a useful resource? Is it easy to use? What are its strengths and weaknesses? Would you recommend that a library purchase this resource? Why or why not? 

The review should be 3 or more pages in length.

**Observation Paper**

The purpose of this assignment is to provide you the opportunity to observe
reference work in the actual process. Before you do the actual observation of
a reference librarian, you should read Chapter 2 of your text, "The Reference
Interview". This assignment is to be scheduled at your convenience in a
library of your choice. Arrange to observe a _**reference librarian**_ for a
period of 2-4 hours or longer. Schedule the observation in advance so you may
get approval of the librarian and/or his/her supervisor. Although it may seem
easier to do this at a library where you might currently be working, your
observations might not be as objective. I would suggest you choose a library
where you might have the strongest interest: academic, public, school media
center, or special library.

During your observation, note the types of questions received and sources
used, the reference interview, the library user's level of satisfaction, and
your conclusions and observations concerning the reference process.

**REMEMBER YOU ARE THERE TO OBSERVE AND NOT TO ANSWER QUESTIONS POSED BY
LIBRARY USERS.**

The observation paper should be 3 or more pages long. Grading of the report
will include: length (within the guidelines, **not under** ) and coverage of
the above noted points.

**Final Project--Bibliographic Guide**

You are to prepare an annotated bibliographic guide designed to assist an
interested user explore a body of literature. The immediate application of
this guide would be to inform the library user of special materials within a
particular collection. Your project will involve several steps.

  * Select a problem area (subject or person) that interests you. 
  * Review the appropriate literature attempting to cover a wide range of resources and services. 
  * Compile an annotated bibliography with brief descriptions of the sources and services included. 

**Part 1:** You are to include:

\-- a complete description of your topic, (do not assume your user is familiar
with the person or subject you select),

\-- description of the intended user of the guide and the library where the
guide may be used,

-and finally, discuss the steps you took in searching for the information, and any problems of subject access.

**Part 2:** The annotated bibliography-annotations should reflect your
assessment of the source. You are allowed to include no more than four sources
that you personally did not get to physically examine. You may use reviews of
these sources for the annotations. Be sure you credit the review by including
a complete citation for each. In this part you may include books, articles,
monographs, videos, films, tapes, diaries, Internet sites, etc. Please consult
a style manual for the proper form of a citation. Annotations are to be
**single-spaced** within the source entry, and **double-spaced** between
entries. (See example below)

**Pierce, P., ed. _The Oxford Literary Guide to Australia._ Melbourne: Oxford
University Press, 1987.**

**This resource provides descriptions of places in Australia that have been
written about in books. Not only are the places described as they exist today,
but descriptive passages from the books are also included. Each entry provides
a reference to the location on the maps in the back of the book. An index of
authors is also listed.**

**Ransom, E. W., ed. _The Australian National Dictionary ..._**

Papers will vary in length because of the differences in the attention given
to the topics as well as differences in the sources used. Your paper, though,
should fall within a 10-15 page length, but it may be longer. Be thorough, but
please be concise. The project will evaluated for resourcefulness in solving
the problem of gathering information for your user, and style of presentation.
**(Examples of bibliographic guides are on reserve at the Circulation Desk)**

**PRACTICUM INSTRUCTIONS**

An ability to make a careful analysis of questions or problems and to retrieve
relevant information efficiently is a practical and useful goal, regardless of
the position the librarian holds. Working conditions frequently and regularly
demand that information be retrieved without delay, and the timed practicums
represent these ordinary conditions. The practicum questions are typical kinds
of questions asked in libraries; many are based on actual situations.

Each student will be assigned to work on the practicum in the reference room
for a designated time period. At the beginning of class, each student will
draw an envelope containing five questions for the practicum. The questions
vary in degree of difficulty and will require different types of sources for
the information to be retrieved.

You may bring your textbook, L524 syllabus, worksheets, notes, etc., to the
practicum. Most students prefer to "plot" their strategy before beginning the
search; you should develop a strategy that works most efficiently for you.

Answer one question at a time, in any order preferred. When the answer is
found, bring the question you are answering and the volume containing the
answer to your instructor. Answers found on electronic sources must be printed
out. _**Please do not write on the question card, and above all, do not mark
the book(s)**_. Treat your instructor as a library user, turning the book so
that the answer can be read, pointing to the place where it can be found, and
discussing any part of it as it relates to the question asked if this is
appropriate.

After completing the question, reshelve, _**immediately and accurately**_ ,
the material pulled for your search. When you have finished answering all five
questions, please return the questions and envelope to your instructor.

All of the questions are answerable from the sources listed in the L524
syllabus and in Bopp and Smith. However, you are not limited to these sources.
Use any available materials which solves the problem; use the opportunity to
build on sources you already know, if their use seems relevant and improves
your efficiency. If you search for a particular item and are unable to locate
it on the shelf after checking once or twice, report the problem to your
instructor, immediately.

If you find that a question is causing difficulty, discuss your strategy with
your instructor who will try to guide you along a more productive route.
Often, a simple question may lead you toward an immediate solution. Please
regard this strategy discussion as a part of the learning process. Do not be
alarmed if you encounter difficulties; in fact, you should expect that you
might not solve each question immediately. _**A calm, logical approach is the
most important factor toward solving the problem**_. When you find that you
are growing frustrated, that is the moment to discuss your strategy. The
practicum should be an enjoyable challenge.

**CLASS PARTICIPATION**

Student contributions to discussions and informal reports about reference and
reference sources are essential. Each member of the class brings an individual
background and varying interests to the class sessions. Preparing for these
discussions is essential. This involves reading the assigned chapters in Bopp
and Smith and any selected journal articles _**before**_ class. Class sessions
may be led by your instructor, by guest speakers, or by members of the class
and may involve use of films, recordings, demonstrations, etc., that are
appropriate to the study of reference work in librarianship.

As part of the class participation points (3), students will be required to
present to the class a discussion of their bibliographic guide on the last
class meeting of the semester. Your presentation should be about 5 minutes
long. During that time you should:

**\--give a brief overview of your topic**

**\--discuss your search strategy**

**\--talk about _two_ sources you feel were essential for inclusion in your
guide, ones that should be in most library collections**

**GRADING**

Students will be graded on the following assignments:

_**Assignment**_ _**Points**_

Reference Worksheets 4 @ 15 points each 60

Practicums 2 @ 10 points each 20

Print review 25

Observation Paper 30

Bibliographic Guide 60

Class Participation _5_

***** **Total points** 200

The final accumulation of points will translate into the following letter
grades:

_**Points**_ _**Grade**_

198-200 A (outstanding work)

192-197 A- (excellent work)

187-191 B+ (very good work)

180-186 B (good-meets all requirements)

177-179 B- (marginal)

174-176 C+ (Unsatisfactory)

171-173 C ( " " )

168-170 C- (Unacceptable)

165-167 D ( " " )

_**SLIS GRADING POLICY (11/11/96):**_

A 4.0 Outstanding achievement. Student demonstrates full command of the course
materials and evinces a high level of originality and/or creativity that far
surpasses course expectations.

A- 3.7 Excellent achievement. Student performance demonstrates thorough
knowledge of the course materials and exceeds course expectations by
completing all requirements in a superior manner.

B+ 3.3 Very good work. Student performance demonstrates above-average
comprehension of the course materials and exceeds course expectations on all
tasks as defined in the course syllabus.

B 3.0 Good work. Student performance meets designated course expectations,
demonstrates understanding of the course materials and performs at an
acceptable level.

B- 2.7 Marginal work. Student performance demonstrates __ incomplete
understanding of course materials.

C+ 2.3 Unsatisfactory work. Student performance demonstrates incomplete and
inadequate understanding of course materials.

C 2.0 Unsatisfactory work.

C- 1.7 Unacceptable work. Course work performed at this level will not count
toward the MLS or MIS degree. For the course to count toward the degree, the
student must repeat the course with a passing grade.

D+ 1.3 Unacceptable work.

D 1.0 " "

D- 0.7 " "

F 0.0 Failing. Student may continue in program only with permission of the
Dean.

**SELECTED REFERENCE SOURCES**

**READY REFERENCE SOURCES**

_**General Almanacs and Yearbooks**_

Canadian Almanac and Directory. **AY414 .C2 1999**

Information Please Almanac. **AY64 .I55 1998 (Ref desk)**

Whitaker's Almanack. **AY754 .W5 1999**

World Almanac and Book of Facts. **AY67 .N5 W7 1999**

_**Government International**_

Europa World Year Book. **JN1 .E85**

Statesman's Year-Book. **JA51 .S7**

_**Handbooks and Manuals**_

American Book of Days. **GT4803 .D6 1978**

Chase's Calendar of Events. **GT4803 .C48**

Emily Post's Etiquette. **BJ 1853 .P6 1965**

Familiar Quotations. (Bartlett) **PN6081 .B27 1992 (Ref desk)**

Famous First Facts. **AG5 .K315 1981**

Guinness Book of World Records. **AG243 .G87 1997**

Handbook of Chemistry and Physics. **QD65 .H3 1998-1999 (Ref desk)**

The Home Book of Quotations, Classical and Modern. **PN6081 .S73**

Masterplots II (American Fiction Series). **PN846 .M37 1986**

The New York Public Library Desk Reference. **AG6 .N49 1993**

Oxford Dictionary of Quotations. **PN6081 .O9**

_**Advice and Information**_

Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy. **RC55 .M4**

Physicians' Desk Reference to Pharmaceutical Specialities and Biologicals
(PDR). **RS75 .P5 (Ref desk)**

_**Directories**_

The American Library Directory. **Z731 .A53 (1998/99)**

Encyclopedia of Associations. **AS22 .E5 (Ref desk)**

The Foundation Directory. **AS911 .A2 F65 (1998)**

The HEP ... Higher Education Directory. **L901 .H46 (Ref desk)**

**BIOGRAPHICAL SOURCES**

American Men and Women of Science. 8v. **Q141 .A472**

American National Biography. 24v. **Ct213 .A68 1999**

Biography Index. **Z5301 .B6**

Contemporary Authors. **Z1224 .C64; Z1223 .C63; Z1224 .C6**

Current Biography. **CT100 .C8**

Dictionary of American Biography. (DAB) **** 20v. **E176 .D56**

Dictionary of National Biography. (DNB) 22v. **DA28 .D47**

Dictionary of Scientific Biography. 18v. **Q141 .D5**

The International Who's Who. **CT120 .I5 (1966-98)**

Notable American Women 1607-1950: a Biographical Dictionary. **CT3260 .N57**

Something about the Author. **PN451 .S6**

Webster's New Biographical Dictionary. **CT103 .W4 1988**

Who Was Who in America. **E176 .W64 (1975-90)**

Who's Who Among Black Americans. **E185.96 .W53**

Who's Who in America. (East, Midwest, South and Southwest, and West) **E176
.W642**

Who's Who. **DA28 .W6**

World Authors, 1980-1985. **PN451 .W672** **(also PN456 .W3 and PN451 .W674)**

**ENCYCLOPEDIAS**

_**General Encyclopedias**_

Academic American Encyclopedia. 21v. **AE5 .A23 (1998)**

Collier's Encyclopedia. 24v. **AE5 .C683 1995**

Canadian Encyclopedia. 4v. **AG5 .C27 1988**

Encyclopedia Americana. 30v. **AE5 .E333 1996**

New Encyclopaedia Britannica **.** 32v. **AE5 .E363 1993**

World Book Encyclopedia. **22v. AE5 .W55 (1997-v. 3 missing)**

_**One-Volume Encyclopedias**_

The Concise Columbia Encyclopedia. **AG5 .C737 (also CD-ROM)**

The Random House Encyclopedia. **AG5 .R25 1990**

The Cambridge Encyclopedia. **AG5 .C26 1990**

_**Foreign Published Multi-Volume Encyclopedias**_

Brockhaus Enzyklopadie. **AE27 .G672**

Encyclopedia Universalis. **AE25 .E3**

Kodansha Encyclopedia of Japan. **DS805 .K633 1983**

The Great Soviet Encyclopedia. **AE55 .B623**

_**Subject Encyclopedias**_

Benet's Readers' Encyclopedia. **PN41 .B4 1996**

The New Palgrave: a Dictionary of Economics. 4v. **HB61 .N49 1987**

Dictionary of the Middle Ages. 15v. **D114 .D5 1982**

Encyclopedia of Library and Information Science. **Z1006 .E57**

The Encyclopedia of Religion. 16v. **BL31 .E46 1987**

Encyclopedia of Social Work. **HV35 .S6 (Ref desk)**

Encyclopedia of World Art. 15v. **N31 .E533**

McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Science and Technology. 20v. **Q121 .M3 1997**

The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians. 20v. **ML100 .G885**

Van Nostrand's Scientific Encyclopedia. **Q121 .V3 1995**

**DICTIONARIES**

_**Unabridged Dictionaries**_

Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Lanuage. **PE1625
.W36**

The Random House Dictionary of the English Language. **PE1625 .R3 1987**

_**Desk Dictionary**_

Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary. **PE1628 .W4M4 (Ref desk)**

_**Historical Dictionaries**_

Dictionary of American English on Historical Principles. 4v. (Craigie)
**PE2835 .C7**

The Oxford English Dictionary. 20v. **PE1625 .O87 1989**

_**Specialized Dictionaries**_

Acronyms, Initialisms, and Abbreviations Dictionary. (3 parts & suppl.)
**PE1693 .A3**

Dictionary of American Regional English. **PE2843 .D52 1985**

Dictionary of American Slang. **PE3729 .U5W4**

New Dictionary of American Slang. **PE2846 .C46 (1986)**

Dictionary of Modern English Usage. (Fowler) **PE1628 .F65 1996 (1996 &
1965)**

Juba to Jive: a Dictionary of African-American Slang. **PE3727 .N4M34 1994**

Roget's International Thesaurus. **PE1591 .R73**

Webster's Collegiate Thesaurus. **PE1591 .W38**

**BIBLIOGRAPHIES, NATIONAL LIBRARY CATALOGS AND TRADE**

**BIBLIOGRAPHIES**

_**Bibliographic Guides**_

Guide to Reference Books. (Balay) **Z1035.1 .G89 (Ref desk)**

Guide to Reference Books **.** (Sheehy) **Z1035.1 .G89 1986** **(On reserve)**

Walford's Guide to Reference Material **.** 3v. **Z1035 .W252 1993**

_**National Library Catalogs (stacks)**_

The National Union Catalog: Pre-1956 Imprints. **Z881 .U49A1 (Circ stacks)**

_**United States Trade Bibliographies-Annual and Biannual**_

*Books in Print. **Z1215 .P972 (Index tables)**

Publishers, Distributors and Wholesalers of the United States. **Z475 .P75**

_**Weekly, Monthly and Annual Bibliographies**_

American Reference Books Annual. **Z1035.1 .A55**

Bibliographic Index: a Cumulative Bibliography of Bibliographies. **Z1002
.B595**

Cumulative Book Index. **Z1219 .M78**

Forthcoming Books. **Z1215 .P974**

_**Reader's Advisory Aid**_

Children's Catalog. **Z1037 .C5443 (1996)**

Fiction Catalog, 13th ed. **PN3353 .W74**

Public Library Catalog. **Z1035 .W77 (1983)**

The Reader's Advisor. **Z1035 .B7 (1994)**

_**Bibliographies-Periodicals and Newspapers**_

Gale Directory of Publications and Broadcast Media. 4v. **Z6951 .A97 (1999)**

Ulrich's International Periodical Directory. 5v. **Z6941 .U52**

The Serials Directory. **Z6941 .S464**

Magazines for Libraries, **Z6941 .K2 1995**

**INDEXES & ABSTRACTS**

_**General Periodical Indexes**_

Poole's Index to Periodical Literature. (1802-1906) **AI3 .P7**

Reader's Guide to Periodical Literature. 1900- . **AI3 .R48**

_**Indexes to Material in Collections**_

Essay and General Literature Index. **AI3 .E752**

Short Story Index. **PN3373 .S3875**

The Columbia Granger's Index to Poetry. **PN1022 .G7**

Play Index. **Z5781 .P53**

_**Subject Indexes and Abstracts**_

****** ABI/INFORM (Abstracted Business Information).

***** America: History and Life. **E171 .A43**

***** Applied Science and Technology Index. **T1 .I52**

*Art Index. **N1 .A78**

***** Arts and Humanities Citation Index. **AI3 .A77** **(also Scholars
Workstation)**

****** Biological and Agricultural Index

****** Biological Abstracts

*British Humanities Index. **AI3 .B7**

***** Business Periodicals Index. **HF5001 .B75**

****** Dissertation Abstracts Ondisc.

Dissertation Abstracts International. **Z5055 .U5A53 (through 1992-Circ.
stacks)**

****** ERIC (U.S. Educational Resources Information Center)

***** Humanities Index. **AI3 .R52**

Index to Black Periodicals. **E185.5 I52**

Library Literature. **Z666 .K218**

***** PAIS International. (Public Affairs Information Service) **Z7163 .P9**

***** Psychological Abstracts. **BF1 .P65**

****** Science Citation Index.

***** Social Sciences Citation Index. **Z7161 .S65**

Social Sciences Index. **AI3 .R5**

*Sociological Abstracts. **HM1 .S67**

Social Work Abstracts. **HV1 .S6455**

_**Newspaper Indexes**_

***** New York Times Index. **AI21 .N44** **(Guide-AI21 .N442)**

***Print and Electronic**

****Electronic only**

**GEOGRAPHICAL SOURCES**

The New International Atlas. **G1021 .R23**

Times Atlas of the World: Comprehensive Edition. **G1021 .T55 (Atlas case)**

Citation World Atlas. **G1021 .H267**

Goode's World Atlas (& Guide). **G1019 .G67 1995**

Historical Atlas of the United States. **REF G1201 .S1N3 1988**

The Times Atlas of World History. **G1030 .T54**

Rand McNally Commercial Atlas and Marketing Guide. **HF1023 .R18 (Atlas
case)**

Merriam Webster's New Geographical Dictionary. **G103.5 .W42 1997**

Columbia Lippincott Gazetteer of the World. **G103 .L7 1962**

**GOVERNMENT DOCUMENTS**

United States Government Manual. **AE2.108/2:** **(Ref desk)**

Official Congressional Directory. **Y4.P93/1:1 (Ref desk)**

Monthly Catalog of United States Government Publications. **GP3.8**

CIS/Index to Publications of the United States Congress. **KF49 .C62**

CQ Weekly Report. **JK1.C15 (Circ stacks)**

Digest of Education Statistics. **ED1.326:** **(Ref desk)**

Index to U.S. Government Periodicals. **Z1223 .Z9I5**

Statistical Abstract of the United States. **C3.134:** **(Ref desk)**

Historical Statistics of the United States: from Colonial times to 1960.
**HA202.A356**

Crime in the United States/Uniform Crime Reports. **J1.14/7**

County and City Data Book. **C3.134/2:C83/2/ (Ref desk)**

State and Metropolitan Area Data Book. **C3.134/5: (Ref desk)**

Occupational Outlook Handbook. **L2.3/4: (Ref desk)**

U.S. Industry & Trade Outlook (cont. as U.S. Industry Outlook). **C61.48: (Ref
desk)**

World Factbook. **PREX 3./5: (Ref desk)**

