 WOMEN IN MEDIEVAL EUROPEAN SOCIETY

 Candace Gregory  
 History A394-001 MWF 12:30-1:20 pm, Marquette 406
Spring Semester 1999

 Office: Bobet 421, Tel # 865-3538  
 Office Hours:  MWF 11-12 pm, and by appointment.  I'm often in my office;
drop by!

 Required Texts:  
         _The Fourth Estate:   A History of Women in the Middle Age_s,  Shulamith Shahar 

        _  Medieval Marriage:   Two Models From Twelfth Century France_, Georges Duby   
        _  Women in the Middle Ages_ , Frances and Joseph Gies   
         _The Booke of Margery Kempe_   
         _The Treasure of the City of the Ladies_ , Christine de Pisan   
         _Women's Lives in Medieval Europe:   A Sourcebook_, ed. Emilie Amt.   
                    Please note that these documents will not be read according to the order of the book. 

         There is also a packet of secondary sources you must purchase from the History department secretary.   
          Furthermore, several documents will be given as Handouts throughout the semester. 

         Each student is also required to subscribe to the class listserv:  his39401 

 Course Description:  
         What were the lives of women like in Medieval Europe?  Were they passive ladies in towers, waiting for a knight to rescue them?  Were they poor peasants, overworked and underfed?  These common perceptions, which still fill popular culture, fail to acknowledge the variety of women's experiences, and the complex status of Medieval women in relation to their society.  Most importantly, many students still fail to recognize that women were an active, and indispensable, part of Medieval society.  Medieval European women occupied a multitude of spaces and performed various functions: religious, civic, familial, economic, and symbolic. This course will take a comprehensive look at women in Medieval society, from the sixth through the fifteen centuries.  We will explore how women helped to shape their society, as well as how they were shaped by the forces around them (religious, political, economic, and familial).  During the semester we will look at all aspects of women's lives across the life cycle, from childhood through marriage and motherhood (or convent), through menopause and widowhood, and finally to death.   
         One of our primary interests will be women's contributions to their society.  A sub-theme of this class is understanding how women were employed in those pre-industrial time, but many other contributions by women will be revealed, and whenever possible, by women's own voices.  Many of our readings this semester are primary sources, disclosing not only how Medieval European women fit into their historical context, but also bringing to life the full sense of these women's awareness of themselves and their relation to the world around them.  Another sub-theme of the course will be how women related to one another:  mothers to daughters, Royal wives to Royal mistresses, lay woman to nun, etc. For women who lived, worked, and died so many centuries ago, their stories reveal concerns, issues, problems, and pleasures not unknown to people today.  To supplement these primary sources, we will also read a variety of secondary sources, drawn from current feminist scholarship, on the individual topics.   
          Many of the women we will look at are extraordinary and certainly fascinating by the standards of any century.  However, we will also look beyond their stories to those of ordinary women and their equally engaging lives.  Through drama and poetry, we will also consider how women were represented in their own time.  We will look at women from all levels of Medieval society, from peasant women, to nuns, to noble and royal women; from farmers' wives and daughters, to women in the cities. Along with the traditional roles occupied by women (wives, mothers, nuns) we will also look at the alternative roads open to Medieval women (prostitutes, heretics, "witches").   
         We begin by looking at two images of women which influenced how all Medieval women were judged and portrayed:  Eve and Mary.  We will look at the role most reviled by the Medieval church:  temptress (represented by Eve), and the role most idealized:  the holy virgin (represented by Mary).  These two extreme images of women, and all that lay in between, are to be found in many sources:  laws, church doctrine, sermons, letters,  saints' Lives, scripture, poetry, drama, and autobiographies.  We will read some representation of each of these genres in an attempt to fully understand the importance of women in the society of Medieval Europe. 

 Requirements:  
         The final grade will consist of four parts:  a final, cumulative exam (25 %), one short  written analysis of an assigned reading (10%),  one long research paper (30 %), and daily participation in class discussions (35 % total). Although we will limit our reading to Medieval Europe, you are each encouraged to explore other Medieval societies, from Japan to Islamic countries; the research paper will provide an excellent opportunity to do this.   
         I have listed here the grading scale that will be used for the exam as well as the final grade.  The paper will be assigned an equivalent letter grade.   


 Grading Scale:  A       91-100  
                         B+      86-90   
                         B       81-85   
                         C+      76-80   
                         C       71-75   
                         D+      66-70   
                         D       61-65   
                         F       60 and below 

         This course is designed as a discussion course, with one weekly lecture; you are encouraged to respond to lectures as well as the discussions.  Because   
 participation will be a significant part of your grade, attendance is
essential and mandatory. You are each allowed three unexcused absences and
three unexcused tardies.  Excused absences and tardies require written
documentation, such as a doctor's note.  Each subsequent unexcused absence
after the third will result in the deduction of one point from your final
grade.  Each subsequent unexcused tardy after the third will result in the
deduction of one point from your grade on the final exam.  Tardy is defined as
arriving to class after the roll has been taken.  There will be no make-ups of
the final exam, and there will be absolutely no extensions on the papers!  
         Readings are to be done before the class for which they are assigned and it is from these readings that you will find material for participation in discussion  In general every Monday will be a lecture day, with required readings in Shahar's _The Fourth Estate_ ; Wednesday and Fridays will be discussions of the variou materials listed for each day.  Students are encouraged to respond to the lectures as well as to the readings.  The final exam (in essay format) will be drawn from the readings, discussion, and lectures.  In addition to the required readings, there will be several films scheduled outside of class time for required viewing (don't worry; they're all entertaining as well as educational!)   
    
    

**LECTURE AND READING ASSIGNMENTS**

  **WEEK I:   FROM SINNER TO SAINT**

 Monday 11 January  
         Introduction to Course; Slide Lecture on Medieval Representations of Women 

 Wednesday 13 January  
         Lecture--  The Temptress and the Beguiled:  Eve   
         Readings--  Sourcebook:  1\. "The Bible:  Adam and Eve," pp. 13-16   
                         Handout:  "York Mystery Cycle: The Cowpers: Adam and Eve"   
                         Packet: "Eve and the Privileges of Women,"  Alcuin Blamires   
                         Gies:  "Eve and Mary" 

 Friday 15 January  
         Lecture and Discussion--  "O Gloriosa Femina:"  Mary, the Exemplar of Woman   
         Readings-- Sourcebook:  2\. "The Bible:  Model Women of the Gospels," pp. 16-19 

                        Handout:  "Hymns to the Virgin Mary"   
                        Packet:  "The Heroics of Virginity" Jane Tibbetts Schulenburg 

**  WEEK II:  LAW AND EDUCATION**

 Monday 18 January  
         Martin Luther King Day, No class. 

 Wednesday 20 January  
         Lecture and Discussion-- Women and Law   
         Readings--  Shahar:  pp. 1-21   
                         Sourcebook:  12.  "Norman Laws," pp. 53-60   
                                        14.  "Spanish Laws,"  pp. 69-70   
                                        17.  "Sumptuary Laws,"  pp. 74-78   
                                        37.  "Cristina Corner:  Petitiion for Exemption," pp. 157-158   
                                        74.  "Jewish Sumptuary Laws,"  pp. 292-293   
                         Handout: "Wife Sues to Get Her Husband Back" 

 Friday 22 January  
         Lecture and Discussion: Women and Education   
         Readings--  Handout:  "Letters of Abelard and Heloise"                                                  Christine   
 de Pisan, Treasure: "Prologue," pp. 31-32, "Part One" Sects. 7-8,  
                         pp. 47-52,  Sect. 11, pp. 59-62, Sect. 14, pp. 66-68, Sect. 17, pp. 74-76 

                         Packet:  "Education and Literacy" Angela M. Lucas   
                                 "The Literate Lay Woman," Lucas 

**  WEEKS III AND IV:  THE RELIGIOUS WOMAN**

**_  FILM:  Anchoress_**

 Monday 25 January  
         Lecture-- Nuns and Abbesses   
         Readings--  Shahar: pp. 22-52   
                         Packet:  "Women Religious in the Early Medieval West," Patricia Ranft 

 Wednesday 27 January  
         Discussion--  The Convent and Women's Religious Communities   
         Readings-- Handout:  "Letters of Abelard and Heloise"   
                        Sourcebook:  4.  "St. Jerome: Virginity and Marriage,"  pp. 23-26   
                                     61.  "Caesarius of Arles: Rule for Nuns,"  pp. 221-231   
                                     64.  "Rule of St. Clare,"  pp. 235-245   
                                     65.  "Eudes of Rouen:  Visitations of Nunneries,"  pp. 245-252   
                                     69.  "Plan for Watton Priory,"  p. 276   
                        Packet:  "Cloistering of Medieval Nuns," Penelope D. Johnson 

 Friday 29 January  
         Discussion--  Abbesses:  Women in Charge   
         Readings--  Handout:   Bede, "Abbess Hilda"   
                         Sourcebook:  63.  "Hildegard of Bingen:  Letters to her Nuns," pp. 233-235   
                                       64.  "Rule of St. Clare,"  pp. 238-239, Section IV, on Abbesses   
                         Packet:  "Women's Monastic Communities," Schulenburg 

 Monday 1 February  
         Lecture-- Other Women Religious: Anchoresses, Beguines, Mystics, Visionaries 

         Readings-- Shahar:  pp. 52-64   
                        Packet: " 'Discreet and Devout Maidens:' " Penelope Galloway 

 Wednesday 3 February  
         Discussion-- Julian of Norwich:  Women's Visions   
         Readings--  Handout:  Julian of Norwich, "Visions"   
                         Sourcebook:  67\. "Description of the Beguines of Ghent," pp. 263-267 

                                        66.  "Ancrene Riwle," pp. 252-263   
                         Packet: " ' . . . And Woman his Humanity:' "Caroline Walker Bynum   


 Friday 5 February  
         Discussion--  Margery Kempe:  Mystic or Hysteric?   
         Readings-- Booke of Margery Kempe:  "Proem," pp. 33-37, Chaps. 5-6, pp. 51-54, 

                         Chap. 14, pp. 65-67, Chap. 20, pp. 83-84, Chap. 28, pp. 102-107,   
                         Chaps. 35-38, pp. 122-130, Chap. 78-81, pp. 224-238   
                        Packet:  "Margery Kempe and the Meaning of Madness," Roy Porter 

**  WEEKS V AND VI:  MARRIAGE AND FAMILY**

 Monday 8 February  
         Lecture-- Marriage and Family: Law, Custom, and Status of Wives   
         Readings-- Shahar: pp. 64-93   
                        Duby: Medieval Marriage, Part I 

 Wednesday 10 February  
         Discussion-- Courtship and Ceremonies   
         Readings-- Sourcebook:  18.  "Gratian:  Canon Law on Marriage," pp. 79-83   
                                      19.  "Liturgy for the Marriage Service,"  pp. 83-89   
                                      81.  "Householder of Paris:  Manual for his Wife," pp. 317-330   
                        Packet: "The Partnership Marriage" Barbara Hanawalt   
                                 "The Middle Ages: The Church and Marriage" Bernard Murstein   
                                 "Marriage Among the Medieval Laity," Murstein 

 Friday 12 February  
         Discussion-- Inheritance:  Women's Property Values   
         Readings-- Sourcebook:  12.  "Norman Laws," pp. 59-60, Chapter LXXX, Dowries 

                                       8.  "Laws of Roman Empire,"  pp. 33-34, Dowry   
                                      29.  "Gregory of Tours:  Ingitude," pp. 121-123   
                                      35.  "Matilda of Stickney:  Land Grants," pp. 152-154   
                                      36.  "The Roll of Ladies and Boys and Girls,"  pp. 154-157   
                        Packet:  " 'Of the Gift of her Husband"  Janet Leongard 

 Monday 15 February  
         Mardi Gras Holidays, No Class 

 Wednesday 17 February  
         Mardi Gras Holidays, No Class 

 Friday 19 February  
         Presentation of Paper Topics 

 Monday 22 February  
         Lecture--  Mothers and Widows   
         Readings-- Shahar:   pp. 93-112   
                        Packet:  "Honoring Mothers,"  Blamires 

 Wednesday 24 February  
         Discussion-- Children:  Upbringing, Education, Custody   
         Readings--  Sourcebook:  30.  "Dhuoda:  Manual for Her Son,"  pp. 123-129   
                                        33.  "Guibert de Nogent:  Life of his Mother,"  pp. 142-149   
                                        56.  "Guardians' Accounts: Raising Girls,"  pp. 208-210   
                                        12.  "Norman Laws," p. 55, Chapters XI and XIV   
                         Handout:  "The Little Children's Little Book"   
                         Packet:  "Widow and Ward" Sue Sheridan Walker   
                                    "Childhood,"  Hanawalt 

 Friday 26 February  
         Discussion--  Mothers and Daughters   
         Readings--  Handout:  "The Paston Letters"   
                                 "Sale of a Daughter into Concubinage"   
                                 "How the Goodwife Taught her Daughter"   
                         Gies:  "Margaret Paston:  A Fifteenth Century Gentlewoman" 

**  WEEK VII:  WOMEN'S BODIES**

 Monday 1 March  
         Lecture--  Women's Medicine   
         Readings-- Shahar:  pp. 113-125   
                        Packet:  "Life Expectancies for Women in Medieval Society," D. Herlihy   


 Wednesday 3 March  
         Discussion--  Women as Patients:  Sexuality, Childbirth, Contraception, Infanticide,   
                                 Abortion   
         Readings--  Sourcebook:  23.  "Liturgy for Mothers," pp. 97-98   
                                       24.  "Trotula of Salerno:  the Diseases of Women,"  pp. 98-108   
                         Packet:  "From Womencraft to Witchcraft 1200-1500, " John M. Riddle   


 Friday 5 March  
         Discussion-- Women as Midwives and Doctors   
         Readings--  Sourcebook:  25.  "University of Paris Records,"  pp. 108-112   
                         Packet: "Women and the Literature of Obstetrics," Helen Lemay 

  **WEEKS VIII AND IX:   WOMEN AND POWER**

 FILM:  Lion in Winter

 Monday 8 March  
         Lecture-- Women of the Nobility   
         Readings-- Shahar:  pp. 126-173   
                        Packet:"Women Who Ruled:  Noble Ladies," Margaret Wade Lebarge 

 Wednesday 10 March  
         Discussion--  Noble Conduct   
         Readings-- Christine de Pisan, Treasure, "Part One:"  Sects. 6-7, pp. 45-50, 

                         Sects. 11-23, pp. 59-89   
                        Handout: "Letter to Queen Eleanor on Marriage, 1173"   
                        Sourcebook:  40\. "Household Accounts of Dame Alice," pp. 165-170   
                                      41.  "Paston Letters,"  pp. 170-174   
                                      34.  "Alexander Neckham:  A Country House,"  pp. 150-152   
                        Packet :  "Courtly Model," Georges Duby 

 Friday 12 March  
         Discussion--  Noble Pursuits:  Writing and Music   
         Readings-- Sourcebook:  38\. "Leonor Lopez de Cordoba:  Autobiography, " pp.158-163 

                        Handout:  Songs of Hildegard of Bingen   
                        Packet:  "That Which Talent Confers," Marty Williams and Anne Echols   


 Monday 15 March  
         Lecture-- Queens:  Women who Rule   
         Readings-- Packet:  "Reigning Queens in Medieval Europe," Armin Wolf   


 Wednesday 17 March  
         Discussion-- The Plantagenet Example:  Eleanor of Aquitaine   
         Readings-- Christine de Pisan, Treasure, "Part Two:"  Sects. 1-7, pp. 109-125 

                        Handout:  Letters of Eleanor   
                        Packet:  "Portrayal of Royal Women in England ," Pauline Stafford   
                                 "Mothers, Daughters, Marriage, Power:," John Carmi Parsons 

 Friday 19 March  
         Discussion--  Royal Consorts, Mistresses, Concubines   
         Readings-- Sourcebook: 75.  "A Marital Question,"  pp. 293-296   
                                      18.  "Gratian,"  p. 83, Case 33   
                        Handout:  "Adulterers:  Excerpts from law"   
                        Packet: "The King's Wife," Stafford 

**  WEEK X:  WOMEN WHO TOIL**

 Monday 22 March  
         Lecture-- Women in Towns   
         Readings-- Shahar:  pp. 176-219 

 Wednesday 24 March  
         Discussion-- Women at Work I:  Shopkeepers, Maids, and Brewers   
         Readings-- Booke of Margery Kempe: Chap. 2, pp. 43-45   
                        Christine de Pisan, Treasure, "Part Three:" Sect.3, pp. 153-156, Sects. 8-9, pp. 167-171, Sect.12, 176-177   
                       Sourcebook: 46. "Descriptions of Maidservants' Work," pp. 181-182   
                                             51.  "Parisian Guild Regulations,"  pp. 194-199   
                                             52.  "Alexander Neckham,"  pp.  198-199, Weaver's Work   
                                             53.  "Lawsuit: Women Moneylenders," pp. 199-201   
                        Packet: "Women at Work," Henriettta Leyser   
                        Gies: "A City Working Woman:  Agne le Patiniere of Douai" 

 Friday 26 March  
         Discussion-- Women at Work II:  Prostitution   
         Readings--  Sourcebook:  57.  "London Prostitutes," pp. 210-213   
                         Packet:  "Prostitution in the Early Middle Ages,"  Vern Bullough   
                                 "Prostitution in the Later Middle Ages, "  Bullough   
                                 "Prostitution in the Medieval Canon Law," James Brundage 

**  \--Research Papers Due--**

 Monday 29 March  
         Easter Holidays, No Class 

 Wednesday 31 March  
         Easter Holidays, No Class 

 Friday 2 April  
         Easter Holidays, No Class 

 Monday 5 April  
         Easter Holidays, No Class 

**  WEEK XI:  WOMEN WHO TILL**

**_  FILM:  The Return of Martin Guerre_**

 Wednesday 7 April  
         Lecture-- Women in the Country   
                      Readings-- Shahar: pp. 220-250   
                                             Packet: "Women's Contribution to the Home Economy,"Hanawalt 

 Friday 9 April  
         Discussion-- Peasant Women and Farmer's Wives   
         Readings-- Handout:   William Langland, Piers Plowman   
                        Sourcebook:  49.  "Coroner's Rolls,"  pp. 188-192   
                        Packet:  "Montaillou:  Social Relationships," Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie   


**_  FILM:   Le Passion de Jeanne d'Arc_**

  ** _WEEK XII:   DANGEROUS WOMEN_**

 Monday 12 April  
         Lecture--  Women's Violence 

 Wednesday 14 April  
         Discussion-- Warriors: Joan of Arc and Others who Fight   
         Readings--  Packet:  "Joan of Arc:  Origins and Childhood and the Trial of   
                                                 Condemnation," Regine Pernoud 

 Friday 16 April  
         Discussion-- Felons and Criminals   
         Readings--  Handout:  Various Depositions   
                         Sourcebook: 16. "London Records:  Crimes and Punishments," pp. 72-74 

                         Packet:  "The Female Felons in Fourteenth Century England," Hanawalt 

**  WEEKS XIII AND XIV:  HERETICS AND WITCHES**

 Monday 19 April  
         Lecture-- Heretics   
         Readings--  Shahar:  pp. 249-268 

 Wednesday 21 April  
         Discussion-- Heretical Communities:  Cathars and Waldensians   
         Readings--  Sourcebook: 79.  "Descriptions of Heretics,"  pp. 305-306   
                                      80.  "The Inquisition Records of Jacques Fournier," pp. 306-313   


 Friday 23 April  
         Discussion-- Women as Priests:  Lollards   
         Readings-- Handout:  "Testimonies from the Norwich Heresy Trials"   
                       Packet:  " 'Great Reasoners in Scripture:' " Claire Cross 

**  FILM:   Le Moine et Sorciere, or The Sorceress**

 Monday 26 April  
         Lecture-- Witches and the Witch Hunts   
         Reading-- Shahar:  pp. 268-280   
                      Packet:  "Witchcraft in England:  the Crime and its History," Keith Thomas 

 Wednesday 28 April  
         Discussion--  "Wise Women" and Folk Traditions   
         Readings-- Sourcebook: 10.  "Salic Laws," p. 43. Concerning Witches   
                        Handout:  "Stephen de Bourbon, De Supersticione"   
                                   "London:  Church Court Records on Casting Spells"   
                        Packet:  "Magical Healing,"  Keith Thomas 

 Friday 30 April  
         Discussion--  Persecution and the Inquisition   
         Readings-- Handout: "Johannes Nider: the Ant Hill, 1432"   
                                 "Innocent VIII:  Bull Summis desiderantes"   
                                 "Malleus Malificarum"   
                        Packet:  "The Making of a Witch," Keith Thomas 

 Monday 3 May  
         Final Day of Class:  Some Final Thoughts 

 Monday 10 May  
         Final Exam due 

  **RESERVE MATERIALS**

 The following books are on reserve in the library. In addition to copies of
your required texts, I have also placed several general studies of women in
the Middle Ages.  I hope that you use these for your research papers, as well
as a place to go to read more about topics from class which interest you.

  **Required Texts:**  
 Shulamith Shahar.  _The Fourth Estate:   A History of Women in the Middle
Ages_  
 Georges Duby.  _Medieval Marriage:   Two Models From Twelfth Century France_  
 Frances and Joseph Gies.  _Women in the Middle Ages._  
_  The Booke of Margery Kempe_  
 Christine de Pisan.  _The Treasure of the City of the Ladies_  
 Emilie Amt.  _Women's Lives in Medieval Europe:   A Sourcebook_

**  Additional Sources:**  
 Vicki Leon.  _Uppity Women of Medieval Times._   (This one isn't a good
research source, but is  lots of fun to read!)  
 Christine Fell.  _Women in Anglo Saxon England and the Impact of 1066._  
 Georges Duby.  _Women of the Twelfth Century._  
 Penny Shine Gold.  _The Lady and the Virgin._  
 Diane Watt, ed. _Medieval Women in their Communities._  
 Susan Mosher Stuard, ed. _Women in Medieval Society._  
 Julius Kirschner and Suzanne Wemple, eds. _Women of the Medieval World._  
 Rosmarie Thee Morewedge, ed. _Role of Woman in the Middle Ages._  
 Angela Lucas.  _Women in the Middle Ages:   Religion, Marriage, and Letters._  
 Joel Rosenthal, ed. _Medieval Women and the Sources of Medieval History._  
 Edith Ennen.  _The Medieval Woman._  
 Helen Jewell.  _Women in Medieval England._  
 Gavin R. G. Hambly, ed. _Women in the Medieval Islamic World._  
 Mary Beth Rose, ed.  _Women in the Middle Ages and Renaissance._  
 Christiane Klapisch-Zuber, ed. _A History of Women:   II.  Silences of the
Middle Ages._  
 Derek Baker, ed. _Studies in Church History:   Subsidia I:  Medieval Women_  
 Margaret Wade LeBarge.  _A Small Sound of the Trumpet._  
 W. J. Shields and Diana Wood, eds.  _Studies in Church History, Vol. 27:
Women in the Church._  
 Joseph and Francis Gies.  _Marriage and Family in the Middle Ages._  
 Henrietta Leyser.  _Medieval Women._  
 Marty Williams and Anne Echols. _Between Pit and Pedestal:   Women in the
Middle Ages._  
 John Carmi Parsons, ed. _Medieval Queenship._  
 Jennifer Ward, ed. _Women of the English Nobility and Gentry:   1066-1500._
An excellent collection of documents in translation.  
 P. J. P. Goldberg.  _Women in England:   c. 1275-1525._ Another collection of
document  in translation.

 I'd also like to point another very useful book on Reserve in the Library
(part of the Library's Reserve collection, not the one for my class): Anne
Echols  
 and Marty Williams, ed.,  _An Annotated Index of Medieval Women_.

[back to home page](index.htm)  


