**Seminar: International Political Economy**  
**GOVT 781-01**  
**Spring 1999**

  
  
  

**Dr. George Shambaugh
Office Hours: T 11-12:00, Th 10-11:00**  
**Office: 656 ICC
Class Hours: Th 4:15-6:00, ICC 221B**  
**Phone: 687-2979**  
**Internet: shambaug@gunet.georgetown.edu**  


This seminar is designed to prepare students to carry out methodologically
sound research at the cutting edge of international political economy. To
achieve this objective, the course will explore prominent debates among and
within the dominant paradigms in IPE theory. It will focus on critiquing these
works and assessing the next fruitful steps in the relevant research programs.
Gaining a greater understanding of the core works in the field of IPE is a
positive externality of taking this course, but it is not the primary aim.
Students are presumed to be familiar with key works in international political
economy and international relations theory. Rather than introducing this
literature, this course will teach students how to assess its merits, and
determine and respond to its limitations. Each student will be expected to
master the skills needed to analyze and evaluate this literature and use these
skills to make his or her own contribution to a scholarly debate in IPE.  
    
    
  

**REQUIREMENTS**

  
  
  
  

Reading material has been assigned for each week and must be completed before
class. The reading material will focus on one or more theoretical debates in
international political economy. Beginning on January 28 and ending April 15,
every student will be responsible for writing a 2-page critique of one of the
readings (either a book chapter or article) assigned for each class. All
students will also be asked to write critiques of two of their colleagues
paper proposals. These critiques will be due on April 29\. All of the
critiques must follow the "research design" format specified in class and they
must be submitted by email to Professor Shambaugh by **10:00a.m. on the
Wednesday preceding each class**. The critiques will be distributed to
everyone via email prior to the class session. Classroom discussion will
center around the critiques.  


Each student will also be responsible for writing an article-length paper,
approximately 30 pages in length. The paper should apply one or more of the
theories or approaches discussed in class to a case or a problem in
international political economy of the student's choosing. It should be
written in a form that could be submitted for publication in a professional
journal, with appropriate revisions. The papers will be evaluated using the
same "research design" criteria applied in the 2-page critiques.  


You are required to meet with Professor Shambaugh on an individual basis to
discuss topics for the article-length paper. **Topic proposals must be
approved and submitted on or before February 25.** You are strongly encouraged
to meet with him earlier to discuss possible topics. Drafts of the final
papers (including the introduction and at least the first ten pages of the
paper) are due on April 22. These drafts will be critiqued by two other people
in the class. Final papers are due on May 5, the last day of classes.  


Grades will be estimated as follows. 75% of the grade will depend on the final
paper, 25% will depend on the critical essays and participation in class
discussions.  
    
    
  

**BOOKS**

Recommended for all students:

George Crane and Abla Amawi, editors, _The Theoretical Evolution of
International Political Economy_ (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997).  


Dani Rodrik, _Has Globalization Gone Too Far?_ (Washington, DC: Institute for
International Economics, March 1997).  


All books and articles have been placed on reserve at the Lauinger Library and
need not be purchased. It is recommended that students purchase books that are
specifically related to the research paper they wish to write.  


Kurt Burch and Robert Denemark, eds. _Constituting International Political
Economy_ (Boulder: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1997).  


Robert Keohane and Helen Milner, editors, _Internationalization and Domestic
Politics_ (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996).  


Audie Klotz, _Norms and International Relations_ (Ithica: Cornell University
Press, 1995).  


Paul Krugman, editor, _Strategic Trade Policy and the New International
Economics_ (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1986).  


Edward Mansfield and Helen Milner, editors, _The Political Economy of
Regionalism_ (New York: Columbia University Press, 1997).  


John Gerald Ruggie, editor **,** _Multilateralism Matters: The Theory and
Praxis of an Institutional Form_ (New York: Columbia University Press, 1993).  


Herman Schwartz, _States versus Markets_ (NY: St. Martin's Press 1994).

Kenneth Shepsle and Mark Bonchek, _Analyzing Politics: Rationality, Behavior
and Institutions_ (New York: W.W. Norton, 1997).  
    
    
  

**CLASS SCHEDULE & READINGS**

  
  
  
  
  
  

**I.   Pick up the syllabus and related materials in class. **(January 14)

The following books are recommended as general references to be used
throughout the semester by those who need a refresher on the history and/or
theoretical foundations of IPE:  


Herman Schwartz, _States versus Markets_ (NY: St. Martin's Press 1994).  


George Crane and Abla Amawi, _The Theoretical Evolution of International
Political Economy_ (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997).  


**II.   IPE Today: The Implications of Globalization **(January 21)  
    


Dani Rodrik, _Has Globalization Gone Too Far?_ (Washington, DC: Institute for
International Economics, March 1997).

John G. Ruggie, "International Regimes, Transactions, and Change: Embedded
Liberalism and Post-War Economic Order," in Stephen Krasner, _International
Regimes_ (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1989), pp. 195-232.  


Geoffrey Garrett, "Global Markets and National Politics: Collision Course or
Virtuous Circle?" _International Organization_ 52, 4 (Autumn 1998), pp.
787-824.  


Recommended for fun:

Benjamin Barber, _Jihad vs. McWorld_ (NY: Ballantine Books, 1996), pp. 3-87.  


**III.     International-Domestic Linkage (January 28)**  
    


Robert Keohane and Helen Milner, editors. _Internationalization and Domestic
Politics_ (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), Parts I and V.  


John Odell, "Understanding International Trade Policies: An Emerging
Synthesis," _World Politics_ 43 (October 1990), pp. 139-167.  


Oona Hathaway, "Positive Feedback: The Impact of Trade Liberalization on
Industry Demands for Protection," _International Organization_ 52, 3 (Summer
1998), pp. 575-612.  


Jonathan Crystal, "A New Kind of Competition: How American Producers Respond
to Incoming FDI," _International Studies Quarterly_ 42 (1998), pp. 513-543.  


Ronald Rogowski, _Commerce and Coalitions_ , pp. 3-21, 88-128, 163-174.  


Recommended:

Crane and Amawi, _The Theoretical Evolution of IPE,_ section 4: Revisions of
Liberalism: Interdependence Theory.  


**IV.   International and Domestic Management of the IPE (February 4)**



Robert Keohane and Helen Milner, editors. _Internationalization and Domestic
Politics_ (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), Parts II, IV.  


Benjamin Cohen,"The Triad and the Unholy Trinity: Problems of International
Monetary Cooperation," in Jeffry Frieden and David Lake, editors.
_International Political Economy_ , third edition, pp. 209-229, 255-266.  


David Andrews and Thomas Willett, "Financial Interdependence and the State:
International Monetary Relations at Century's End," _International
Organization_ 51, 3 (Summer 1997), pp. 479-511.

Charles Kindleberger, "The Rise of Free Trade in Western Europe, " in Jeffry
Frieden and David Lake, editors. _International Political Economy_ , third
edition, pp. 73-89.  


David Lake, "British and American Hegemony Compared: Lessons for the Current
Era of Decline," in Jeffry Frieden and David Lake, editors. _International
Political Economy_ , third edition, pp. 120-133.  


Recommended:

George Crane and Abla Amawi, _The Theoretical Evolution of International
Political Economy_ (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997), sections 6, 8.  


**IV.   Multilateralism and International Economic Institutions (February
11)**



John Gerald Ruggie, editor, _Multilateralism Matters: The Theory and Praxis of
an Institutional Form_ (New York: Columbia University Press, 1993), chapters
1, 2, 3, 6, 10.  


Graham Bird, "The International Monetary Fund and Developing Countries: A
Review of the Evidence and Policy Options," _International Organization_ 50, 3
(Summer 1996).  


Edward Mansfield and Helen Milner, editors, _The Political Economy of
Regionalism_ (New York: Columbia University Press, 1997), chapters 1, 3, 4, 5,
7.  


"Europe's New Currency: Gambling on the Euro," _The Economist_ (January 2,
1999), pp. 19-22.  


"The non-European Euro," _The Economist_ (January 9. 1999), p. 48\.  
    
    


**February 18: No Class**

**Complete unfinished reading and prepare paper topics.**  


**Recommended:**

**All Ph.D. Students should attend a panel at the International Studies
Association Conference taking place downtown.**  
    


**V.   Competitiveness and Competitive Advantage (February 25)**  
    


* Paper Topics are Due in Class on February 25 *   


Paul Krugman, _Strategic Trade and International Economics_ (Cambridge: MIT
Press, 1986), chapters 1, 2, 3, 5, 11 and one other (choose among the case
studies in chs. 7, 8, 9).  


Michael E. Porter, _The Competitive Advantage of Nations_ (New York: The Free
Press, 1990), chapters 1-3, 11-13.  


Jeffrey Hart, _Rival Capitalists: International Competitiveness in the United
States, Japan and Western Europe_ (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1992),
chs.1, 7 and one other (choose one of the country case studies).  


Recommended:

George Crane and Abla Amawi, _The Theoretical Evolution of International
Political Economy_ (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997), part 1.



**VI.   Economic Statecraft** ****

Joanne Gowa, _Allies, Adversaries and International Trade_ (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1994), pp. 3-10, 31-53.

George Shambaugh, "Dominance, Dependence, and Political Power: Tethering
Technology in the 1980s and Today," _International Studies Quarterly_ 40, 4
(Winter 1996).

Short discussions of the sanctions debate: Kimberly Ann Elliot, "The Sanctions
Glass: Half Full or Completely Empty," and Robert Pape, "Why Economic
Sanctions Still Do Not Work," _International Security_ 23, 1 (Summer 1998);
and David Baldwin and Robert Pape, "Evaluating Economic Sanctions,"
_International Security_ 23, 2 (Fall 1998).  


Audie Klotz, _Norms and International Relations_ (Ithica: Cornell University
Press, 1995), chapters 1, 2, 9, 10.  


Recommended:

David Baldwin, _Economic Statecraft_ , pp. 8-69.  


**VII.   Strategic Interaction I: Bargaining Strategies and Cooperation (March
18)**



Kenneth Oye, ed. _Cooperation Under Anarchy_ (Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1986), part I, part IV, and one case from part III.  


Samuel Barkin and George Shambaugh, _Anarchy and the Environment_ (Albany:
SUNY Press, 1999), chs. 1, 2, 8 and one other (available outside Professor
Shambaugh's office).  
    


**VIII.   Strategic Interaction II: Game Theory and IPE (March 25)**



Kenneth Shepsle and Mark Bonchek, _Analyzing Politics: Rationality, Behavior
and Institutions_ (New York: W.W. Norton, 1997), pp. 1-81.  


Duncan Snidal, "The Game _Theory_ of International Politics," _World Politics_
38, 1 (1983).  


Mancur Olson, _The Rise and Decline of Nations_ (New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1982), pp. 17-74.  


J. S. Coleman, "A Rational Choice Perspective on Economic Sociology," in
Smelser and Swedberg, eds. _The Handbook of Economic Sociology_.  


A. Sen, "Rational Fools: a Critique of the Behavior Foundations of Economic
Theory," _Philosophy and Public Affairs_ (1977), pp. 317-44.  


Recommended:

Robert Powell,"Appendix: Some Introductory Notes on Game Theory," _Nuclear
Deterrence Theory_ (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), pp. 187-220.
(This is a very good introduction to extensive form games.)  


Helen Milner, "Rationalizing Politics: The Emerging Synthesis among
International, American, and Comparative Politics," in _International
Organization_ 52, 4 (Autumn 1998).  
    


**IX.   Modernization Theory, Constructivism, and Norms (April 8)** ****

N.J. Smelser and R. Sweberg, "The Sociological Perspective on the Economy,"
and P. DiMaggio, "Culture and Economy," in Smelser and Sweberg, eds. _The
Handbook of Economic Sociology_ , pp. 3-26.  


Kurt Burch and Robert Denemark, eds. _Constituting International Political
Economy_ (Boulder: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1997), 1, 2, 3, 6, 7 and 10\.  


Mitchell Seligson and John Passe-Smith, editors. _Development and Under
Development: The Political Economy of Inequality_ , Part 4: Modernization and
Development.  


Adam Przeworski and Fernando Limongi, "Modernization Theories and Facts,"
_World Politics_ 49 (January 1997), pp. 155-84.  


John G. Ruggie, "What Makes the World Hang Together? New-utilitarianism and
the Social Constructivist Challenge," _International Organization_ 52, 4
(1998), pp. 855-885.  


Recommended:

David Landes, _The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some are so Rich and
Some are so Poor_ (New York: W. W. Norton, 1998).  
  ****

**X.   Democratization and Economic Development (April 15)**  
    


Larry Diamond, "Economic Development and Democracy Reconsidered," in
"Comparative Perspectives on Democracy: Essays in Honor of Seymour Martin
Lipset," _American Behavioral Scientist_ 35 (March/June 1992), pp. 450-499.

Zehra Arat, "Democracy and Economic Development: Modernization Theory
Revisited," _Comparative Politics_ 21 (1988).  


John Williamson, "In the Search of a Manual for Technopolis," in John
Williamson, ed. _The Political Economy of Policy Reform_ (Washington, D.C.:
Institute for International Economics, 1994).  


John Williamson, "Democracy and the 'Washington Consensus'," _World
Development_ 21, 8 (1993).  


Marcelo Cavarozzi, Joan Nelson, and Miguel Urrutia, "Economic and Political
Transformations in Latin America: The Interplay between Democratization and
Market Reform," in Joan Nelson, ed. _A Precarious Balance: Democracy and
Economic Reforms in Latin America_ (San Francisco: Institute for Contemporary
Studies Press, 1994).  


Moises Naim, "Latin America: the Second Stage of Economic Reform," in Larry
Diamond and Marc Plattner, eds. _Economic Reform and Democracy_ (Baltimore:
Johns Hpkins University Press, 1985).  


Joan Nelson, "Linkage Between Politics and Economics," in Diamond and
Plattner, eds. _Economic Reform and Democracy_.  
    


**XI.   Cognitive Psychology and Decision Making in Political Economy (April
22)**



* Drafts of Final Papers are Due on April 22 *   


Chaim Kaufman, "Out of the Lab and Into the Archives: A Method for Testing
Psychological Explanations of Political Decision Making," _International
Studies Quarterly_ , (December 1994).  


Janice Gross Stein, "International Cooperation and Loss Avoidance," in Janice
Stein and Louis Pauly, eds., _Choosing to Cooperate: How States Avoid Loss_
(1993), chapter 1.  


Louis Pauly, "The Political Foundations of Multilateral Economic
Surveillance," in Stein and Pauly, eds., _Choosing to Cooperate_ , chapter 5.  


Barry Eichengreen and A. Fishlow, "Contending with Capital Flows: What is
Different About the 1990s?" (New York: Council on Foreign Relations, 1996).  


W. L. Hoskins and J. W. Coons, "Mexico: Policy Failure, Moral Hazard, and
Market Solutions," _Policy Analysis_ 243 (October 1995).  


Abhijit V. Banerjee, "A Simple Model of Herd Behavior," _The Quarterly Journal
of Economics_ , CVII, 3 (August 1992), pp. 797-817.  


Sushil Bikhchandani, David Hirshleifer, and Ivo Welch, "A Theory of Fads,
Fashion, Custom, and Cultural Change as Informational Cascades," _Journal of
Political Economy_ 100, 5 (1992), pp. 992-1026.  


David Scharfstein and Janis Stein, "Herd Behavior and Investment," _American
Economic Review_ , 80 (1990), pp. 465-79.  
    


**XII.   Review, Reprise and Riposte (April 29)**



**Class discussion will focus on the critiques of the final papers.**  
    
    


**** Final Papers are Due at 5:00pm on May 5, the Last Day of Classes ****

