![](../../../graphics/banners/reg_temp2.gif)  
![](../page-banner-aci.gif)

**SPRING 1999**

This information effective for Spring 1999.  
Check with instructor the first day of class for any changes..

#

* * *

Politics

#### [POLI-100-01][POLI-100-03] [ [POLI-129-01] POLI-140B-01] [POLI-163-01]
[POLI-174-01] [POLI-179-01] [POLI-190B-01]

##

* * *

**Politics 100**

### **CORE SEMINAR: SCOPE AND FUNCTIONS OF THE STATE**

George Von der Muhll Tel.: 427-0346  
email: [mozart@cats](mailto:mozart@cats.ucsc.edu)

Spring 1999  

This course is designed as a Core Seminar in Politics to meet one of the
Politics Department's requirements for its Majors. Although it has no
prerequisites, it is particularly intended for second and early third years
students as a first Upper Division course in Politics. Like other Core
Seminars in Politics, this one will be limited to 20 students to facilitate
active participation in class discussions and to permit the instructor to give
close attention to each student's individual essays. Top priority for entry
will be given to Politics Majors, and within that group to those whose level
of advanced standing makes completion of this course most urgent. Other
students are welcome within those constraints.  
  

Several variants of Politics 100--all suitable for meeting the Politics Major
requirement--are offered by other instructors throughout the year. All are
defined by the Politics faculty's common objectives of encouraging sustained
classroom discussion of a limited number of core texts in Politics and of
developing students' facility in composing clearly argued, clearly expressed
essays in a timely manner concerning basic political issues. Given those
general objectives, the individual courses differ greatly through the
instructor's choice of substantive themes and texts. Because, five years ago,
I arranged to take early retirement after this Spring Quarter (and a
subsequent Summer School course, Politics 50) in order to provide myself with
a cleared field for scholarship and other activities in the new millennium, I
should note that the particular approach embedded in this section of Politics
100 will probably not be repeated by other faculty of the Politics Department
after I leave. For the same reason, students who in the past have had
difficulty in completing the assigned work for a class in the Quarter in which
it is offered would be unwise to enroll in this course.  

As I last taught Politics 100 three years ago and have been off campus on a
Fulbright Lectureship at Charles University in Prague for much of the interval
since then, it may be helpful to those considering taking this course if I
outline its distinctive focus in some detail. Perhaps more directly and
generically than in certain other sections of Politics 100, I intend to
explore with the class such questions as why all complex societies have
governments. What distinctive human needs and what distinctive risks have
arisen from the exercise of state power, and who benefits in what
characteristic ways from its exercise? What can we say in general terms about
how states compare with such other social institutions as markets in meeting
similar demands? What principled conclusions can we draw from these
comparisons in defining the proper scope for state action (for what states
should and should not do)? Since the character of states is critically defined
through who is bound by the laws and policies of a state and who gets to
participate in making these collectively binding decisions, what can we learn
about states by examining their terms of membership, exit, and exclusion?  

These fundamental questions were first clearly asked by the philosophers of
ancient Greece some 2,500 years ago, and they have received radically varying
answers ever since. After looking at the formulations provided by two sharply
contrasting schools of thought most notably embodied in the political
treatises of Aristotle and the 17th-century English philosopher Thomas Hobbes,
I would like to trace the logical implications of the latter perspective
(known today as liberal individualism or--for certain purposes--as
"methodological individualism"). We will start with the most famous general
defense of individual liberty ever written, John Stuart Mill's _On Liberty_ ,
then turn to Milton Friedman's _Capitalism and Freedom,_ an explicit and
influential but contentious application of Mill's principles to a number of
issues concerning the proper scope for state action in the contemporary
economy. We shall then see how, using the same paradigmatic "rational choice"
reasoning as Friedman, fellow economist Mancur Olson and biologist Garret
Hardin demonstrate certain internal paradoxes in the radical case for free-
market liberalism, thereby identifying certain functions that states can
perform better than free markets or that only states can perform. At this
point, our familiarity with the precepts of methodological individualism will
enable us to pursue the argument in two urgently contemporary directions. On
the one hand, we shall look at how David Osborne, in _Reinventing Government_
(a treatise that has profoundly affected the thinking of presidential hopeful
Al Gore), seeks to answer the question of how to harness the admitted benefits
of market pressures in improving governmental performance of those functions
that are best performed by states. On the other, we shall examine contemporary
reformulations by economist Albert Hirschman and philosopher Michael Walzer of
Aristotle's reflections on the implications of the terms of membership in the
political community.  

A Core Seminar in Politics is expected to give particular emphasis to
cultivating skills in discussion and writing. To encourage both, I have chosen
to track a single coherent and controversial tradition of analysis and
argumentation from its basic premises to a variety of systematic policy
applications in the contemporary world. In so doing, I shall seek to
demonstrate how explicitly structured reasoning leads to logically integrated
conclusions while provoking orderly discussion about the most enduring
questions of political choice and institutions. By showing how a single
perspective can unfold in numerous unexpected and compelling directions,
moreover, I hope to give everybody in the class a better sense of how to
overcome the challenges everyone must face in attempting to write clear,
effective, anticipatorily critical, elegantly balanced essays about politics.  

Among other matters, I will suggest answers to such common questions as where
to start in writing an essay, how to move forward from the opening paragraphs,
how to use other authors while developing one's own thoughts, how to foresee
the objections one is likely to provoke, how to reach conclusions to which
readers will assent, and how to engage in one's own critical review of what
one has written. We shall spend time in class discussing the rationale
underlying various principles of focused, grammatical, properly punctuated
writing; and I shall do my best to communicate these same principles
contextually through my detailed comments on your essays. Since process is as
important as product in a small seminar of this nature with these objectives,
I shall also need to enforce standards of timeliness that might seem arbitrary
in a long, substantively focused research project. For all these reasons,
prompt submission of first--and second--drafts of three relatively short (5-7
page) essays will serve as the complementary written requirement to regular
attendance and well-prepared participation in class discussions in this
course.  

[top of page]

##

* * *

POLITICS 100  
Revolution

Winter 1998 syllabus

Instructor: Michael Urban  
office hours: T, Th 4:00-5:30,  
232 Stevenson  
phone: 459-3153  
email:[urban47@cats](mailto:urban47@cats.ucsc.edu)

_Scope, Content, and Objectives_

This seminar concerns the most extraordinary ohenomena in modern politics:
revolution. Although distinguished fundamentally from normal politics,
revolutions have become a feature of the modern political world-- a fact
reflected in our survey which spans five centuries and includes many scores of
cases drawn from every quarter of the globe. The combination of these features
-- extraordinary yet ubiquitous -- makes our topic an especially challenging
one, putting to the test one or another set of explanations derived form
certain revolutions by applying them to others; indeed, calling into question
the very idea of revolution itself as a name for some identifiable political
phenomena.

Our approach to this topic is correspondingly multi-form. That is, we seek to
understand revolution via a number of different approaches to the subject --
poltiical philosophy, comparative historical-sociological studies, works
featuring cultural-symbolic and interactionist approaches-- represented by our
texts:

Hannah Arendt, _On Revolution_ (New York: Penguin, 1990).

Charle Tilly, _European Revolutions, 1492-1992_ (Oxford: Blackwell, 1993).

Theda Skocpol, _Social Revolutions in the Modern World_ (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1994)

Lynn Hunt, _Politics, Culture, and Class in the French Revolution_ (Berkeley:
University of CAlifornia Press, 1984.)

Michael Urban, _The Rebirth of Politics in Russia_ (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1997)

The interplay of both multiple cases and a variety of approaches, while not
amenable to drawing air-tight definitions, should lead to a broad appreciation
of just how much revolution entails.Equally, that knowledge sheds new light on
revolution's counterpart, state building, and on normal politics itself. The
following topical questions serve to foucs our discussions.



  * What is a revolution? How might it be distinguished from other forms of poltiical activity such a mass protest, rebellion, or coup 'd etat? Does the category "revolution" entail specifiable regularities?
  * What is a revolutionary situation? What brings it about?
  * What is a revolutionary outcome?
  * What is the role of revolutionaries in precipitating revolution and in consolidating a new political order?
  * What is the role of ideas and symbols in the revolutionary process?
  * Are certain collectivities and/or social forces critical to the making of revolutionary outcomes?
  * Is there a relationship between war and revolution?
  * What does the specific experience of a revolution contribute to the political order that succeeds it?
  * What is the role of violence in revolution?



_Course Requirements:_ Each student is required to play an active part in this
seminar. This includes: (1) participation in general seminar discussions; (2)
leadership of a seminar discussion; (3) presentation of a research paper to
the seminar; and (4) serving as an "official opponent" whose task it is to
discuss the research paper presetned by antoehr student. The research paper
itself consists of a relatively in-depth examination (15-20 pages) of one or
more revolutions selected by the student in consultaiton with the instructor
that applies appropriate conceots taken from course readings. Copies must be
delivered to both the instructor and the official opponent at least one week
prior to the date of presentation. This version of the paper is then redrafted
on the basis of comments and suggestions made at its presentation and
submitted by the Monday following the last day of winter classes.

[top of page]  
  

##  

##

* * *

Politics 129

### MILITARY POLICY AND AMERICAN POLITICS

President Clinton just called for a major increase in military spending and
wants to build a national missile defense system. Despite the end of the cold
war, the national security apparatus is, in many ways, still on a cold war
footing. This has enormous consequences for all aspects of U.S. politics.

What was the Cold War and why did it have, and why does it continue to have,
such a significant effect on American politics? This course examines the
evolution of the policies and politics of cold war and post-cold war American
national security. While considerable attention is given to the content of
military policies, both conventional and nuclear, the analytic focus is on the
formation of policy and the relationship between the military policy and
American politics and society. Students have the option of doing two papers on
assigned topics or one longer research paper.

Excellent course for other majors as well, including American Studies,
History, and Sociology. No prerequisites.

[top of page]

##

* * *

**Politics 140B**

### **POLITICAL CHANGE IN THE THIRD WORLD**

George Von der Muhll Tel: 427-0346

Spring 1999 [mozart@cats.ucsc.edu](mailto:mozart@cats.ucsc.edu)  

Politics 140B has been designated as suitable for meeting the Upper Division
Core Course distribution requirement for Politics majors. It has no
prerequisites. Those who seek to meet the general Social Sciences distribution
requirement for the campus or the Politics Department's Lower Division
requirement through a course in comparative politics should consider, among
others, Politics 50 ("Democratic Politics", a course combining discussion of
general issues of democratic theory and moral principles with comparative
institutional analysis of parliamentary and presidential democratic regimes in
their traditional homelands of America and Western Europe and their breakdown
and emergence in Eastern Europe, Latin America, and South and East Asia),
which I shall offer in the first Summer School session (June 21-July 23)
immediately following this class. As I arranged in 1994 to take voluntary
early retirement after five years so as to have a cleared field for
scholarship and other activities in the new millennium, these two courses in
Comparative Politics will not be offered again by the Politics Department
under these headings or, if offered, will almost certainly differ greatly in
their approach and syllabi from their current versions.  
For this reason, and because I have been away from campus for well over a year
on a Fulbright Lectureship in Political Science and American Studies at
Charles University in Prague (Czech Republic), a sketch of Politics 140B
beyond its catalog description may be more than ordinarily useful to those
considering taking it. When I offered it once again last spring, I also made
some changes in its structure that limit the validity of earlier syllabi as a
guide to its approach.  

As its title suggests, Politics 140B offers a broad overview of the dynamics
of change in political systems extending from Latin America across sub-
tropical Africa and the Middle East to the Asian Far East. Nearly 80% of
humanity currently lives within this zone. That percentage is certain to
increase sharply within a few decades. Most of the battles of the Cold War
were fought by proxy in the Third World. Most of the social conflicts and
political upheavals in the post-Cold War world have likewised occurred there.
By all indications, this pattern will extend well into the next century.  

Students of politics have therefore strong reason to familiarize themselves
with the politics of the Third World. Yet most American citizens, tourists,
media outlets, and politicians show little familiarity with "Third" World
societies beyond a few highly selective aspects of their cultures. They
likewise show little disposition to move beyond these stereotypes except
during brief periods when the American military becomes drawn into Third World
conflicts. If anything, survey evidence suggests that much of the Third World
is now less well known to the American public than it was some thirty or forty
years ago. This indifference persists despite the fact that this region
encompasses the sites of nearly all the great civilizations of the past, much
of the world's most remarkable architecture, all of its great religions. Its
peoples have experimented with the full range of political regimes in this
century; and its ecological, economic, and ethnic identity crises promise to
set the agenda for much of the next. Amid general levels of squalor and misery
most Americans most fortunately cannot imagine, some sectors of the Third
World have experienced an almost equally unimaginable surge of sudden wealth;
and communal tensions, radical inequalities, and civic violence have not
precluded the rise in their midst of some of the most shining political
leaders of this century.  

The extraordinary variety of topographies, climates, ethnicities, languages,
religions, social structures, and political traditions within the Third World
makes generalizations concerning its politics inherently suspect. And this
problem is compounded by an extreme instability of Third World political
regimes such as render cross-sectional descriptions of many of its
contemporary governments of little validity beyond the year in which they are
offered. The very features that make the Third World of exceptional value as a
laboratory for students of comparative politics thus create special challenges
in an introductory presentation.  

This course will attempt to overcome these problems in four ways. Since it
does not presuppose familiarity with or previous courses on the region, I
shall make extensive use of my own slides and those of the World History
collection to provide a visual context for the readings. I shall also
concentrate on certain "core" nations in each region--China and Japan in the
Asian Far East; India in South Asia; Turkey, Iran, Iraq, and Saudi Arabia in
the Middle East; Nigeria and Tanzania in Africa; Brazil and Mexico in Latin
America--so as to permit an adequately complex tracing of the intertwining
ecological constraints, cultural traditions, patterns of economic growth,
religious values, leadership strata, and contrasting encounters with the West
that together have shaped these countries' differing degrees of political
stability and their differing political agendas. Systematic comparison--most
often, as the above list may suggest, paired comparisons and eventual
triangulations--will be used as controls on explanations that may appear to
fit individual cases. They will also be used to generate new or reformulated
propositions to try out in the next case. Finally, since this course focuses
on societal change, institutional development, and the search for a viable
political community in contexts where military coups, regime collapse, and
revolutionary reorientations are not exceptional events but the norm, it will
freely employ long-term perspectives to identify persisting parameters and
profoundly conditioning historical memories amid the often quite evanescent
state structures and policies that happen to characterize these countries'
governments in any particular year.  

The reading for this course has been chosen in light of these ends. Samuel
Huntington's _Political Order in Changing Societies_ , with its explicit focus
on the problems of constructing stable and effective governments in deeply
divided societies in which the traditional foundations of social order have
begun to shift, has long been recognized as the single most comprehensive,
provocative, and analytically ambitious text in the field,. We shall use and
criticize it in this course to develop an agenda of questions. Thereafter, we
shall be looking at the cases listed above, always with emphasis on the
formation and disintegration of political authority and community. However, we
shall do so at three levels. In a course in comparative politics, it is
appropriate to focus on the problems of constructing and maintaining
collectively binding authority at the level of what are still the fundamental
building blocks of international order--the nation states. We shall therefore
begin with politically sophisticated histories by John K. Fairbank and Kenneth
Pyle that emphasize the distinctive challenges of modernization and the
contrasting responses thereto by the Chinese and Japanese imperial regimes and
their successors. Thereafter, we shall make use of several explicitly
comparative country studies in a collective volume edited by Larry Diamond et.
al., _The Politics of Developing Countries._  

Concurrently, however, we shall be traveling with prize-winning reporter
Robert D. Kaplan, whose _The Ends of the Earth_ documents a world of the 1990s
extending from West Africa through Anatolia, Central Asia, India, and Indo-
China in which exploding populations, decaying public facilities, pervasive
corruption, pullulating diseases, communal violence, and a collapsing public
authority of road blocks and armed gangs suggest the unreality of national
boundaries and capital cities in this region as symbols of political
community. While Kaplan, from his position at the grass roots, sees anarchy--
or at least the parcelized sovereignty of neo-feudalism--as the coming
political disorder of the Third World, Samuel Huntington, whose theses in his
recent _Clash of Civilizations_ I found discussed in Riyadh, Tokyo, Prague,
Shanghai, and Buenos Aires, now argues in that book that in the post-Cold-War
era national authorities are becoming consolidated and polarized around the
"core" states of eight civilizational blocs. Searching for possible
reconciliation of these conflicting theses concerning the critical tiers of
public authority in the Third World will provide the final organizing focus of
this course.  

In addition to attending the three scheduled M-W-F lectures a week, members of
Politics 140B will be expected to participate regularly and actively in a
weekly discussion section. Written requirements for the class will consist of
an introductory exercise and mid-term and final take-home examination essays.
Because I am ending my regular (and happy) teaching association with the
Politics Department with the Spring Quarter and expect to be frequently out of
town for prolonged periods after mid-summer, you would be unwise to take this
course if you have a past history of failing to complete the required work for
a course within the time frame of the Quarter in which it is offered.  

[top of page]

##

* * *

Politics 163

### Comparative Foreign Policy & International Diplomacy  
(Spring 1999)

Tuesday-Thursday 12-1:45

Instructor: Ronnie Lipschutz (459-3275;
[rlipsch@cats](mailto:rlipsch@cats.ucsc.edu))



This course addresses the problem of the making and taking of foreign policy.
What is it? Who makes it? What do they do? Why? We shall analyze, discuss, and
replicate cases through in-class simulations in an effort to answer these
questions. By studying how countries, organizations and people perceive and
respond to the kinds of situations inherent in these two cases, we should gain
a better understanding of how national security, interests, norms and goals
are defined, how policies are formulated, and why things don't always turn out
as the planners might have hoped.

Students will organize into policy groups of 6 that will represent national
and subnational actors in each of the two cases. Each group will undertake
research on the actors in order to play specific roles, in a realistic
fashion, in the two in-class simulations. Each group is expected to do all of
the assigned reading, whether or not it deals with your actor, and groups will
be assigned specific readings to present and discuss in class.

There will be a take-home mid-term exam on the lectures and readings, and a
final paper that is a written analysis of the simulations, composed in light
of readings and practice. A research draft will be due prior to the beginning
of the simulations; this will be discussed in class. Course evaluations/grades
will be based on: class participation and presentations (1/3), papers (1/2)
and exam (1/6).

[top of page]

##

* * *

Politics 174

### Global Environmental Politics

### (Spring 1999)

Tuesday-Thursday 4-5:45

Instructor: Ronnie Lipschutz (459-3275;
[rlipsch@cats](mailto:rlipsch@cats.ucsc.edu))



This is an upper division course focused on the global environmental
"problematique" and the ways in which it is being played out in a var-iety of
political and policy arenas. The course will provide students with insights
into:

(1) The political structure and context of transnational environmental issues;

(2) The intergovernmental mechanisms established for addressing problems in
the atmospheric "global commons," such as ozone depletion and climate change;

(3) The treatment of environmental problems that occur in many different
places but are not necessarily linked, such as biodiversity;

(4) Transnational environmental activity, including that through social
movements, non-governmental organizations, and corporate actors around the
issue of environmental justice;

(5) Domestic environmental politics in a comparative context in several
different countries.

Course requirements include a one take home mid-term and a focused research
paper. Students will be organized into groups for the purposes of reading and
discussing course mater-ials. Each group will choose a topic within one of the
five areas listed above. and each student will contribute to collaborative
research within the group presentation. Course evaluations will be based on
the mid-term, research paper, in-class participation, and atten-dance. No
background in the technical aspects of environmental issues is assumed, but
students should be prepared to do "catch-up" reading where necessary.

[top of page]

##

* * *

Politics 179

### Negotiation

<http://www.learnworld.com/COURSES/P179/>

[top of page]

* * *

## Politics 190B

### Arms Control

<http://www.learnworld.com/COURSES/P190B/>



* * *

[top of page]

