**_WORLD CIVILIZATIONS FROM 1650_**

Candace Gregory

History 124-010, MWF 2:30-3:20, Bobet 332

Spring Semester, 2002

**Office** : Bobet 422, 865-3537 **email:** clgregor@loyno.edu

**homepage:** www.loyno.edu/~clgregor

**Office Hours** : MWF 1:00-2:00 pm, and by appointment. Drop by and visit.

**Required Text:** _The Heritage of World Civilizations_ , Volume Two: Since
1500, Fifth Edition,

by Albert Craig et al. Hereafter referred to as Craig.

In addition to the textbook, all students are required to sign up on the class
listserv at

            **histt124010@loyno.edu** Instructions are included on how to sign up on the listserv.

There will also be $3 copy fee per person. Sorry.

**Course Description:  **This semester will complete the common curriculum
course of World Civilizations, which seeks to introduce the student to the
study of history. The semester is designed very broadly, as was the first half
of World Civilizations. We will continue to discuss the progress of
civilizations and cultures met in the first half, such as the various Chinese
dynasties, the multiple religions of India, and the development of the
American continents. Along the way we will meet new cultures unknown to us
from last semester. We will see dramatic changes to cultures we have studied
in the past, such as: the introduction of Communism into China, the
independence of the American colonies, revolutions throughout Europe. And
women will even be allowed to vote! We will see yet more expansion of European
countries into India and Africa, on an even broader scale than the
explorations of the sixteenth centuries. We will also see in the twentieth
century the re-awakening of native rule, in Africa, in India, in the Middle
East. Two world wars in the twentieth century will continue to show the
brutality humanity is capable of, while space explorations and a global
Internet will reveal humanity's endless possibilities.

We will continue to discuss what is meant by "civilization." You are
encouraged as students to reflect back on previous definitions of that term,
and to decide if those definitions are as relevant to the early modern and
contemporary worlds as they were to the ancient and medieval worlds. Each
civilization will be discussed independently, yet you will quickly realize
that it will be increasingly impossible not to discuss how cultures and
civilizations interact with one another. It is important therefore to consider
how constant interaction between civilizations affects each one, from
politics, religion, social customs, economies, to art.

You will find that the second half of World Civilizations moves much slower
than the first half, in that we will only cover four hundred years of human
history, give or take a decade or two. We will be able to consider each aspect
of world history in much more detail and thoroughness than we were able to in
the first half of World Civilizations (were we covered several thousand years
of history!)  Please remember that this course must still cover a lot of
material in a very brief time and things will get left out; feel free to
explore on your own as well. It is hoped that this course will introduce the
student to relevance of historical research and historical understanding.

**Requirements:** This is essentially a lecture course. You as students are
required to do the assigned reading in the Craig textbook before you come to
class, to attend class on a regular basis, and occasionally to participate in
class discussions. Each student is required to take all quizzes, tests, and to
complete all writing assignments.  

**Attendance:  **Attendance is essential and ****_mandatory_. Furthermore,
tardiness will not be tolerated. Each student is allowed **three unexcused
absences** and **three unexcused tardies**. Excused absences and tardies
require written documentation, such as a doctor's note or permission of the
professor prior to the absence. Every day you have a quiz; if you are absent
beyond the three you are allowed, you will miss the quiz, thus losing ten
potential points. Thus you are allowed to skip class and a quiz three times
during the semester; after that you will miss the quiz points. If you arrive
after a quiz has been given or after the roll has been called, you are tardy,
and will not be allowed to make up the quiz. You will be excused from three
quizzes due to tardies.  

**Assignments:** Students are required to read approximately twenty pages of
text before each class. There will be a **quiz on the assigned reading each
day of class**. Each day I will hand out an outline for the next day's
reading; these outlines are to help you with the reading and are not meant to
be a substitute for the reading. Quizzes can and will include any information
from the reading, whether it is also noted on the outline or not. My lectures
do not always follow the reading. There are also four scheduled map quizzes.
The tests and exams will follow my lectures primarily but will also include
material from the text. The tests and exams will all consist of multiple
choice questions, matching, fill in the blanks and possibly some
identification, and an essay. There will also be a short writing assignment,
involving some research. The instructions for the will be handed out on a
later date.

Readings are to be done _before_ the class for which they are assigned and it
is from these readings that the daily quizzes will be derived. The final exam,
as well as the tests, will be drawn from the readings and lectures.  

**Make-up Tests and Extensions:  **Make-up tests and exams will require
written documentation of a serious reason; make-ups must be taken within one
week of the student's return to class. No make-ups will be given for daily
quizzes, or for the final exam. There will be no extensions on the paper.

**Grade Components:**

Test I (20%)

Test II (20%)

Final Exam (20%)

Quizzes / Participation (25%)

Paper (15%)

**Grading Scale:** A91-100

                                B+86-90

B81-85

C+76-80

C71-75

D+66-70

D61-65

F60 and below

**Electronic Equipment:** Please turn off all cell phones and beepers before
class begins.  

**Integrity and Scholarship:** Please do not cheat. If you are caught cheating
on a test or quiz you will receive an F for the course and will be reported to
the Dean. You are held accountable for all the university guidelines as listed
in the Bulletin on plagiarism and cheating.

**_PLEASE NOTE THAT THIS SYLLABUS CAN THE CHANGED AT MY DISCRETION. LET FEAR
BE YOUR FRIEND._**

**LECTURE AND READING ASSIGNMENTS**

**Wednesday 16 January** Course Introduction  

**Friday 18 January** Reformation and Wars of Religion

Reading: Craig, pp. 448-487, 463-464, 475-476 (You may want to just read the
whole chapter now.)

**Monday 21 January** Martin Luther King Jr. Birthday; No Class

**Wednesday 23 January** English Reformation and the Witchhunts

Reading: Craig, pp. 463-464, 475-476, 478-484

**Friday 25 January** Africa, c. 1000-1800

Reading: Craig, pp. 494-517

**Monday 28 January** Conquest and Exploitation

                                Reading: Craig, pp. 518-543, 488-491

**_Map Quiz I: p. 527_**

**Wednesday 30 January** Late Imperial China

Reading: Craig, pp. 544-558

**Friday 1 February** Late Traditional Japan, Korea, and Vietnam

Reading: Craig, pp. 558-584

**Monday 4 February** State Building: The English Civil War and Restoration

Reading: Craig, pp. 584-593

**Wednesday 6 February** State Building: France and Absolute Monarchy

Reading: Craig, pp. 593-598

**Friday 8 February** State Building: Russia, Prussia, and Eastern Europe

Reading: Craig, pp. 599-611

**Monday 11 February** Mardi Gras, No Class

**Wednesday 13 February** Mardi Gras, No Class

**Friday 15 February** The Old Regime: Social Structure and Family Life

Reading: Craig, pp. 612-626

**Monday 18 February** The Industrial Revolution

Reading: Craig, pp. 626-635

**Wednesday 20 February** Class Canceled

**Friday 22 February** The Last Great Islamic Empires
Reading: Craig, pp. 636-657

**_Map Quiz II: p. 638_**

**Monday 25 February Test I**

**Wednesday 27 February** Scientific Revolutions and Technology

Reading: Craig, pp. 662-668, 684-687

**Friday 1 March** Enlightenment and Absolutism

Reading: Craig, pp. 658-659, 668-683

**Monday 4 March** Revolutions: British Colonies and France to Napoleon

Reading: Craig, pp. 688-708

**Wednesday 6 March** Revolutions: Latin America

Reading: Craig, pp. 708-717

**Friday 8 March** European Nationalism and Liberalism

Reading: Craig, pp. 718-745

**Monday 11 March** European Nation States

Reading: Craig, pp. 748-764

**Wednesday 13 March** Late Nineteenth Century Europe: Society and Culture

Reading: Craig, pp. 776-783, 792-805

**Friday 15 March** Late Nineteenth Century Europe: Women's Experience

                                Reading: Craig, pp. 783-791

**Monday 18 March** Contemporary Western Thought

Reading: Craig, pp. 806-827

**Wednesday 20 March** Independence in Latin America

Reading: Craig, pp. 828-851

**Friday 22 March** East Meets West I: Colonial India

Reading: Craig, pp. 852-861

**Monday 25 March** Easter, No Class

**Wednesday 27 March** Easter, No Class

**Friday 29 March** Easter, No Class

**Monday 1 April** Easter, No Class

**Wednesday 3 April** East Meets West II: The Islamic and African Experiences

Reading: Craig, pp. 861-879

**_Map Quiz III: p. 873_**

**Friday 5 April Test II**

**Monday 8 April** Modern China, Vietnam, Korea, and Japan

Reading: Craig, pp. 880-915

**PAPER DUE**

**NO EXTENSIONS!!!!**

**Wednesday 10 April** The Road to War: Bismarck to Sarajevo

Reading: Craig, pp. 916-917, 920-930

**Friday 12 April** World War I and the Russian Revolution

Reading: Craig, pp. 930-945

**Monday 15 April** Russia, the Communist Experiment, and Italian Fascism

Reading: Craig, pp. 946-959

**Wednesday 17 April** Hitler and the American Depression

Reading: Craig, pp. 959-969

**Friday 19 April** Son of the Road to War

Reading: Craig, pp. 970-977

**Monday 22 April** World War II

                  Reading: Craig, pp. 977-997

**Wednesday 24 April** The United States, Western Europe, and the Cold War

Reading: Craig, pp. 998-1012

**Friday 26 April** Soviet Union and the Collapse of Communism in Europe

Reading: Craig, pp. 1013-1031

**Monday 29 April** Class Canceled

**Wednesday 1 May** Class Canceled

**Friday 3 May** Class Canceled

**Monday 6 May** East Asia since World War II

Reading: Craig, pp. 1032-1057

**_Map Quiz IV: p. 1034_**

**Monday 8 May** Postcolonial Africa, Middle East, and India

Reading: Craig, pp. 1058-1077

**Monday 13 May** Final Exam, 11:30 am - 1:30 pm

