GFCG 101 Prof. Carol Mershon

MW 10:00 plus discussion section 207 Cabell, 924-7875, e-mail:
cam6m@virginia.edu

Fall 1995 office hours: M 4:30-5:30, W 11:15-12 noon, W 4:00-5:00

**Introduction to Comparative Government**

_Introduction_. This course is designed to acquaint you with the study of
comparative politics, one of the major subdisciplines in political science. We
compare politics in four countries (Britain, Italy, the Soviet Union/Russia,
and China) in order to develop an overall theme: _Political institutions of
different sorts_ (such as parties or parliaments) _have responded to and
offered expression for social conflicts_ in different societies. In other
words, we examine _how institutions act on conflicts_ and _how conflicts
influence institutions_. As we explore this theme, we will discuss such topics
as the roles played by political parties, the channels for citizens'
participation in politics, the links between executives and legislatures, and
current policy debates. We will also consider how social conflicts and
political institutions differ from long-industrialized countries (Britain) to
countries where industrial growth took off in the late nineteenth century
(Italy and the Soviet Union) and to countries where industrialization has more
recent origins (China).

The countries studied in the course provide good illustrations of different
political institutions and social conflicts. At the same time, several
similarities across two or more of the countries make for interesting
comparisons. For example, Britain and Italy are both democracies today, but
Italy has recently experienced dictatorship (the Fascist regime, 1922-43).
Britain and Italy are both parliamentary systems (unlike the U.S. presidential
system), but parties in the Italian Parliament operate rather differently than
do parties in the British Parliament. Revolutions led by communist parties
laid the basis for authoritarian regimes in both the Soviet Union and China.
The Soviet and Chinese revolutions unfolded in different ways, however, and
the Soviet and Chinese communist parties have also differed in important
respects. We will assess how these differences help to explain the collapse of
the Soviet Union in December 1991.

The course proceeds country by country, but the questions the course addresses
encourage cross-national comparisons. The bases for such comparisons will
become clearer and firmer as the semester progresses. We examine Britain first
and then Italy. Our classes on Italy will feature frequent British-Italian
comparisons. In late October, we turn to the Soviet Union. China is the last
country studied. At several points in the semester, the same question is asked
about two or more countries (for example, Sept. 25, Oct. 25, Nov. 8; Oct. 2
and 30). This feature of the course facilitates cross-national comparisons of
politics. The last week of the course ties together themes already treated for
all four countries in order to reach general conclusions about the study of
comparative government.

_Class Activities and Course Structure._ The success of this class depends on
the active participation of students enrolled in it. Participation takes place
in three areas: attending class (both lectures and discussion section),
reading, and discussing. The weekly discussion sections are designed to help
you get as much as possible out of lectures and to give you the opportunity to
talk about issues raised in lectures; to make sure you grasp the readings and
can discuss connections between readings and lectures; to help you to identify
and develop cross-national comparisons; and to allow you to discuss present-
day politics in our four countries. You can join these sorts of discussions,
of course, only if you attend discussion sections; and you can benefit from
discussions only if you attend lectures and do the assigned readings on time.

This emphasis on student participation reflects a central element of the
philosophy underlying this course: Effective learning is active, not passive.

The other central element of this course's philosophy may be summarized as
follows: To get a good answer, you have to ask a good question. Questions
structure learning. Each lecture addresses a question, as the syllabus shows.
I have organized the course this way because raw facts about politics are not
very useful or interesting in themselves; they must be analyzed and
interpreted so as to illuminate some broad question about a causal
relationship or a political process. This element of the course's philosophy
plays a practical role. The question associated with each lecture identifies a
goal for that class meeting: At the end of each lecture, you should be able to
answer the question posed for the day.

_Course Requirements_. As stated earlier, students are expected to attend
class meetings and complete assigned readings. Two blue-book examinations will
be given: an in-class midterm and a final. The blue-book exams will be based
on readings and lectures. In addition, students will write two short essays
(4-5 pages each, together constituting a take-home exam) and one research
paper (10-12 pages). Your essays and paper will be graded for organizational
coherence, presentation, and quality of writing as well as for content. This
writing load may be heavier than some of you expected for a 100-level class.
The writing requirement is designed to strengthen your writing skills in
preparation for subsequent upper-division courses. It also qualifies this
course as a second writing requirement in the College. Finally, students are
required to participate actively in discussion section.

Grades will be calculated as follows:

in-class midterm: 15% research paper: 20% final: 25%

two take-home essays: 20% discussion section: 20%

The research paper deserves special mention. The paper should investigate
politics in a country other than the four that we examine in detail together
as a class. You can write about Germany, Nigeria, Poland, Mexico, India, or
Japan ... whatever country interests you the most. The key feature of the
paper is that you must go beyond merely describing politics in your chosen
country; you must **analyze and explain** political outcomes in your country
by assessing a general question or theory raised in class or by developing one
of your own. In other words, it is not enough to say what happened in your
country; you need to say **why and how**. You must turn in a brief statement
of your proposed paper topic (3 paragraphs) on October 16. The paper is due on
November 20. **** The 10-12 page parameters will be strictly enforced. You
will find much more detailed guidelines for the paper in the xeroxed packet of
readings available for purchase at Elliewood Copies, 7 Elliewood Avenue (in
the Corner area), phone 296-3489.

As you will note, the Hauss textbook covers a number of countries that we do
not treat together in class. This "extra coverage" is an advantage when you
turn to working on your paper: You have a convenient first source on France,
Iraq, and other countries.

_Readings_. The following books contain almost all of the readings for the
course and are available at the University Bookstore.

C. Hauss, _Comparative Politics: Domestic Responses to Global Challenges_
(West, 1994).

C. Levi, _Christ Stopped at Eboli_ (Noonday/Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1963).

Liang H. and J. Shapiro, _Son of the Revolution_ (Vintage/Random House, 1984).

A few additional required readings (marked [P] for course packet) should also
be purchased at Elliewood Copies, 7 Elliewood Avenue (in the Corner area),
phone 296-3489.

For each class meeting below, I identify the readings that you should complete
_before_ we meet. If you do the assigned readings on time, you will find it
much easier to follow lectures. For each reading below, I briefly indicate the
purpose and coverage of the assignment. For example, I divide the Sept. 6
Hauss readings into three groups. One portion of the Hauss readings discusses
what it means to study comparative politics. Another portion lays out the
context for studying Britain, for it compares Britain with other
industrialized democracies. The third Hauss reading listed for Sept. 6 deals
with the rules and traditions that make up the British constitution.

**Class meetings and reading assignments.**

Sept. 4. _Themes, questions, and theories in the study of comparative
politics._

Sept. 6. _Britain. How did an unwritten constitution emerge? How does an
unwritten constitution work?_

On the study of comparative politics: Hauss, pp. 3-12.

On our comparative context for studying Britain: Hauss, pp. 24-26, 37-44.

On the British constitution and British politics: Hauss, pp.57-62.

Sept. 11. _Britain. How do parties make governments in the British
parliamentary system?_

Comparative context: Hauss, pp. 26-31 (first paragraph on p. 31 only), 49-52
(first paragraph on p. 52 only).

British parliamentary system: Hauss, pp. 80-85.

The study of comparative politics: Hauss, pp. 12-22.

Sept. 13. _Britain. Do parties make a difference for government policies?_

Comparative context: Hauss, pp. 31-33, 52-55.

British parties and policies: Hauss, pp. 63-68, 85-90.

Sept. 18. _Britain. Why does Britain have "two-plus" parties -- two large
parties plus other small parties that somehow manage to survive? Answer #1:
Social conflicts in history._

Comparative context: Hauss, pp. 44-49.

Britain's parties: Hauss, pp. 68-80.

Sept. 20. _Britain. Why does Britain have "two-plus" parties? Answer #2:
Electoral laws._

Comparative context: Review Hauss, p. 39, on competitive elections.

British electoral laws: J. Steiner, _European Democracies_ , pp. 65-77. [P]

Sept. 25. _Italy. How does the founding of a regime shape national politics in
subsequent decades?_

Comparative context: Review Hauss, pp. 43-44, on national variations.

Newly unified Italy: S. Hellman,  "Italy," in M. Kesselman, et al., _European
Politics in Transition_ , pp. 329-343. [P]

Note: I have tried to keep the reading load relatively light for Sept. 20 and
25 so that you have plenty of time to prepare for the exam. A good way to
approach our first class on Italy (and study for the exam) is to ask yourself:
In what ways does Italian politics differ from British politics? What explains
the differences you see?

Sept. 27. **In-class midterm exam**.

Oct. 2. _Italy. How does an authoritarian regime mobilize support and deal
with opposition?_

Levi, Chs. 1-18.

Carlo Levi really did live through the experiences he describes in _Christ
Stopped at Eboli_. He was a vocal, active opponent of Italy's Fascist regime
and, as punishment for his political crimes, he was banished to the Southern
Italian town he depicts here. When you first start reading the book, you might
wonder, What does this have to do with politics? Continue reading, and you
will probably begin to notice interesting patterns about the mayor, the
treatment of political prisoners, the peasants' attitude to Fascist
propaganda, and so on. Come to class prepared to discuss different aspects of
the question, How does an authoritarian regime mobilize support and deal with
opposition?

Oct. 4. _Italy. Why does it often happen that people fail to act collectively
to defend their interests?_

Levi, Chs. 19-25.

If we believe what Levi writes, we should be convinced that the peasants in
Gagliano led miserable lives. Why do they do so little _as a group_ to improve
their lot?

Oct. 11. _Italy. How did political parties build a new democracy in Italy
between the mid-1940s and the late 1960s? Why did Italy experience the longest
wave of protest in Europe from the late 1960s to the early 1970s?_

Italy's postwar democracy and protest: Hellman, pp. 345-367, 374-387. [P]

Comparative context: Review Hauss, pp. 68-70, on the politics of protest.

Review past class notes and readings in order to define a paper topic
(statement due October 16). See guidelines (labelled  "Research Paper Guide")
in the course packet [P].

Oct. 16. _Italy. How and why does Italy's parliamentary system differ from
Britain's?_

Italy's parliamentary system: Hellman, pp. 369-374, 389-404. [P]

Comparative context: Review Hauss, pp. 49-51, on presidential and
parliamentary systems.

**Statement of proposed paper topic due today at end of class**.

Oct. 18. _What explains the sudden appearance of a new Italian party system in
1994?_

Recent Italian politics: Hellman, pp. 405-422. [P]

**Take-home essay exams will be distributed at the end of class**. **Essays
are due on Wednesday, Oct. 25**.

Oct. 23. _No class meeting today_. Use the time to wrap up your take-home
essays.

Oct. 25. _Soviet Union. Why do revolutions occur? How does the founding of a
regime shape national politics in subsequent decades?_

Comparative context: Hauss, pp. 221-230.

Russian Revolution: Hauss, pp. 247-250.

I have tried to keep the reading assignment short because you are finishing
essay exams. I know it may be difficult, but it is crucial to do at least some
of the reading before coming to class.

**Essay exams are due today at the end of class**.

Oct. 30. _Soviet Union. How did leaders under the Soviet regime mobilize
support and deal with opposition?_

Comparative context: Hauss, pp. 230-235.

Soviet regime: Hauss, pp. 243-246, 250-257

Communist Party: Hauss, pp. 263 (last 2 lines only)-268. (Sorry to have to
"jump ahead" in the readings' coverage of Gorbachev, you will find it very
helpful to read about the CPSU now.)

Nov. 1. _Soviet Union. How and why did Gorbachev alter Soviet political
institutions? How did Gorbachev's policies contribute to the Soviet Union's
disintegration in December 1991?_

Comparative context: Hauss, pp. 235-238.

Gorbachev years: Hauss, pp. 257-276 (review 263-268).

Nov. 6. _Russia. What makes successful transitions to a market economy and a
democratic polity more -- or less -- likely?_

Comparative context: Hauss, pp. 239-241.

Russia after communism: Hauss, pp. 276-283.

Nov. 8. _China. Why do revolutions occur? How does the founding of a regime
shape subsequent national politics?_ __

Comparative context: Hauss, pp. 322-328.

Chinese Revolution: Hauss, pp. 284-293.

Nov. 13. _China. How and why does the role of the Chinese Communist Party in
state and society differ from the role of the Soviet Communist Party?_

Hauss, pp. 293-300, 306-310.

I have kept the reading assignment brief since you are finishing your research
papers.

Nov. 15. _No class meeting today._ Use the time to wrap up your research
paper.

Nov. 20. _China. What are the opportunities for political reform in China?_

China: Hauss, pp. 300-306, 310-319.

Comparative context: Hauss, pp. 238-239, on remnants of the communist world.

**Research paper due today at the end of class.**

Nov. 22. _No class meeting today._ Begin Liang and Shapiro for next week.
Enjoy Thanksgiving!

Nov. 27. _China. What is the role of the citizen in a state that preaches
revolution?_

Liang and Shapiro, pp. vii-160.

Nov. 29. _China. How are mass movements related to struggles within China's
political elite? Why have episodes of mobilization and protest not (yet) led
to a regime change in China?_

Liang and Shapiro, pp. 161-292.

Dec. 4. _Comparisons and conclusions: States and state performance._

Hauss, pp. 328-337, 491-503.

Dec. 6. _Comparisons and conclusions: What's unusual about American politics?
What's usual in comparative politics?_

Instead of a reading assignment, you have a thinking assignment. Identify one
way in which U.S. politics is  "strange" compared to politics in other
countries. Be prepared for counter-arguments!

**Final examination -- Dec. 14, 9:00 a.m.-12 noon.**

**GFCG 101 Class Rules**

_Adding_ Must add by Sept. 14.

_Dropping_ Last day to drop is Oct. 12.

_Withdrawing_ Will result in WF unless I agree that a legitimate reason
exists. If I so

agree, students will receive a WP. Withdrawals possible until Nov. 22.

_Missed Exams_ Students should tell me _before_ the in-class midterm or the
take-home essay

exam if they will not be able to take the exam on the regularly slated date.

Students who are absent for an exam and do not talk with me beforehand

will receive a failing grade for the missed exam. I will give permission for

make-ups only in exceptional cases.

_Late Papers_ Late essays and papers will be penalized; exceptions will be
made only in

dire circumstances. The grade on an essay or paper will be lowered by one

letter unit for every day it is late.

