**Political Science 478**

**Hong Kong in 1997: The End Game**

[Prof. Shelley Rigger](http://www.davidson.edu/academic/political/rigger.html)
Spring 1997

Chambers 324 Monday 1:30-4:00

ext. 2280 (email SHRIGGER) Office Hours: Tue, Thu 2:30-5:00; Wed 9:00-11:00

home phone 896-0569



**_The Course_**

The British colony of Hong Kong is one of the most marvelous places on earth.
A barren rock two hundred years ago, it has become a densely-packed hub of
international commerce, attracting residents and vistors from every continent.
Walking the streets of Kowloon or Central, a visitor feels the influence of
China, Japan, South Asia, Africa, Australia, Europe and the Americas. At this
moment, every variety of cuisine is cooking in Hong Kong; every imaginable
product and service is for sale. Under British control, Hong Kong has
blossomed into the most cosmopolitan city in human history.

But Hong Kong is unmistakeably a part of China, and it is about to become even
more so. For in less than six months, the British government will return this
glittering jewel to its motherland. The eyes of the world will be on Hong Kong
on July 1, 1997, when the five-star flag of the People's Republic of China is
raised over the city for the first time.

Hong Kong's fate raises fascinating questions, not only about Hong Kong, China
and Great Britain, but about politics in general. Is it possible to separate
economics from politics, as China will have to do if it is to avoid
undermining either Hong Kong's prosperity or its own stability? Is it possible
for a single political entity to incorporate two distinct political systems,
as China has promised in its "one country, two systems" formula for Hong
Kong's return? Which is more powerful, the sword of government, or the purse
of business? What does it mean to belong to the Chinese nation? Is there a
difference between nationality and citizenship? And what will China be in the
21st century? What role will it play in Asia and in the world? These are the
far-reaching questions we will explore as we study the unfolding story of Hong
Kong on the verge of a historic transition.



**_Requirements_**

This course is a seminar, which means that you are responsible for making it
work. I will not lecture to you after the first day; in fact, students will
facilitate all of the sessions after our first three meetings. The course will
succeed or fail based on what you put into it. Seminars are meant to be
adventures, in which a professor and students collaborate together to
thoroughly investigate a topic that fascinates them.

This means that every one of you must be diligent in:

**Reading:** I have assigned readings for each of the seminars; however, these
are not necessarily the only readings we will have. Even the topics of the
sessions may change. Each student will be responsible for one of the sessions;
he or she will select readings to supplement, or even replace, the ones on
this list. In order to accommodate events as they unfold, as well as the
interests of the students, the syllabus _must_ remain flexible.That means
_you_ must remain flexible, too. It goes without saying that you owe it to
yourself and your classmates to keep up with the reading.

**Participation:** If you do not participate, we all will be miserable. This
course is based on the assumption that advanced students studying a topic in
depth will have lots to contribute. Also, given that this course will meet
only 15 times, it is _essential_ that you attend every class. You will lose a
signficant chunk of your participation score if you are absent. If you know
you will have absences, drop the course now.

**Seminar Preparation:** At our second meeting, on January 20, each student
will volunteer for a seminar date and topic. You will be responsible for
researching and that topic and leading the seminar on that date. Your
responsibilities include finding supplemental or replacement readings, which
you should give to me by _two Friday_ s before your session. I will copy the
readings you have selected and distribute them in class the week _before_ your
session. You then can expect your classmates to have read all the material you
have assigned when you lead them in discussion. Read through the material I
have assigned for your seminar well in advance, to see what, if any, of it you
wish to use.

**Research Paper:** The final product of the semester will be a major research
paper on a topic of your choosing. I will ask you for a formal topic statement
(a one-page synopsis, typed of course) at our February 24 meeting. You are
welcome to consult with me before, during and after the topic-development
process. If you wish to write about a topic that is related to your seminar,
that's fine. An annotated bibliography will be due on March 31, and you will
hand in a thesis statement and detailed outline on April 14. The final paper,
which should be between 20 and 40 double-spaced pages in length, will be due
on May 6. All work is due _in class_ except the final paper, which will be due
at 5:00 PM.



**_Grading_**

Participation: 10%

Seminar Preparation: 25%

Topic Statement: 5%

Annotated Bibliography: 10%

Thesis statement and outline: 10%

Final Paper: 40%



** **

**Please note:** On your written work, please use a _cover sheet_ with your
name, the name of the course, the title of the paper and the honor pledge.
Staple the title page to the rest of the essay. Please _do not_ put your name
on the other pages.

Anything you hand in is pledged work. But as a reminder of the honor code's
importance, I would like you to write out the honor code __in full__ on the
cover sheet of any work you hand in. ( "On my honor I pledge that I have
neither given nor received help on this work, nor am I aware of any violation
on the part of others.") If for some reason you do not write the honor code,
that __does not__ exempt the work from the honor code. Please make sure you
understand the honor code, especially the definition of plagiarism. If you
have any questions, doubts or concerns about any aspect of the honor code,
please come and talk to me. If you are unsure of how you should cite material
(including Internet sources), please discuss your questions with me.





**Course Schedule**

**(assignments are due on the day under which they are listed)**

** **

**January 13: Introducing Hong Kong**



**January 20: The British Acquisition of Hong Kong**

Welsh, _A Borrowed Place_ pp. 32-131



**January 27: Hong Kong and the People's Republic of China**

Welsh, pp. 441-473

Yahuda, _Hong Kong: China's Challenge_ , pp. 1-42



**February 3: One Country, Two Systems: Thomas Wang and Andrew Sicora**

** **

Yahuda, pp. 43-60

Bueno de Mesquita, _Red Flag Over Hong Kong_ pp. 17-65



**February 10: Economic Powerhouse: Andy Fulford and Dan Cowan**



Welsh, pp. 474-501



**February 17: Integrating Two Economic Systems: Graham Ernst**



Khanna, _Southern China, Hong Kong and Taiwan_ pp. 1-41, 55-60, 71-91

Chan and Postiglione, _The Hong Kong Reader_ pp. 182-208

**_Topic Statement Due_**



**February 24: Perfidious Albion? Negotiating Hong Kong's Fate: Chad Foster
and Mary Margaret Cochrane**



Staniland, case study



**March 10: Evaluating the Negotiations: Saad Gul and Lindsay Traylor**



Yahuda, pp. 61-82

Chan and Postiglione, pp. 8-64

Welsh, pp. 502-540



** **

**March 17: Who are the Hong Kong People? Spencer Sword and Allison Moore**

** **

deLisle and Lane, "Borrowed Place, Out of Time: Democracy, Identity and
Sovereignty in

Hong Kong"

Chan and Postiglione, pp. 98-132

**March 24: "Reluctant Exiles": Emigration from Hong Kong: Katie Wells and
Mary Clare Jalonick**

** **

Chan and Postiglione, pp. 133-181

Khanna, pp. 42-54

**_Annotated Bibliography Due_**

** **

**March 31: No Class (Easter Break)**

** **

**April 7: The Rise (and Fall?) of Democracy in Hong Kong: Warren Buford**



Chan and Postiglione, pp. 65-97



**April 14: Guest Speakers**



**_Outline and Thesis Statement Due_**



**April 21: Organizing the Transition**

** **

Yahuda, pp. 83-108

Bueno de Misquita, pp. 69-100



**April 28: Divining the Future: Peter McGuire**



Yahuda, pp. 109-150

Chan and Postiglione, 209-216

Bueno de Misquita, 101-140

[![](smallpolbar.gif)](http://www.davidson.edu/academic/political/political.asp)  
[![](smalldiamond.gif)](http://www.davidson.edu/)





