**HGP 111** **DEVELOPMENT OF CIVILIZATION**



Dr. Rosa Gomez Dierks

MWF 9:00-9:50 am Office: ES 331 Extension: 7201

MWF 11:00-11:50 am e-mail: [rgdierks@adams.edu](mailto:rgdierks@adams.edu)

Office Hours: MWF : 1:00- 2:00 pm

T/TH : 2:30 - 4:00 pm and by Appointment



Welcome to HGP 111! You are about to embark on a learning journey that will
require a few initial cyber steps:

¡¤      In order to access your reading assignments, go to the
History/Government Home Page:
[www.adams.edu/academics/art_letters/hgp/hgp.html](http://www.adams.edu/academics/art_letters/hgp/hgp.html).
Click on DEVELOPMENT OF CIVILIZATION COURSE. Click on "CLICK." Type: history
at _username_ and type: 1234 at _password. _ Click on _HGP111._

¡¤     Congratulations, you have arrived! The online Development of
Civilization syllabus is very user-friendly. Click on the highlighted items to
get to your assigned readings.

¡¤  Your key to success in this course is to be prepared. Read your course
assignments and _schedule your study time_ carefully. Have fun!



COURSE REQUIREMENTS AND ASSIGNMENT SCHEDULE



_Attendance, Participation, and Assignments:_

Students are expected to _attend each class session_. Attendance will be
recorded at the beginning of class and will count towards the final grade. It
is recommended that you arrive on time since your presence will not be
recorded after roll is called. More than _three unexcused absences will affect
your other graded activities_. Attendance and participation count towards your
final grade. Your c _lass discussions will require that you complete all
reading assignments prior to class. Your participation will be graded as
follows:_ On scheduled days (see course schedule and assignments) you will
write a BRIEF ESSAY IN CLASS answering a question on major topics covered in
each course unit. Class attendance and active participation during the week
will help you prepare for this class assignment. _There will be no make-up
class essays._

Your class essays should be written in ink and you are required to use Blue
Books for all your essay assignments (you can purchase Blue Books at the
College Book Store). Leave a margin to allow room for comments. You are
expected to turn in only your own work. Plagiarism will not be tolerated.

You are required to complete your reading assignments for each class session
and to participate in class discussions. _Keeping up with your weekly reading
assignments is important for three reasons:_ 1) it will be difficult to catch
up with the material once you fall behind, 2) your attendance and
participation will count toward your final grade and 3) understanding and
knowledge of your readings will be crucial to answer the essay questions.



_Disability Information:_ Students with a documented disability who need
academic assistance should make arrangements with me during the first two
weeks of class.



_Grading_

A= 90-100%; B= 80-89%; C= 70-79%; D= 60-69%; F= 0-59%

Attendance and Participation  75 points

Brief Class Essays 1 to 3 (25 each) 75 points

Brief Class Essays 4 to 6 (45 each)  135 points

Brief Class Essays 7 to 8 (65 each)  130 points

Final Assessment 85 points

TOTAL  500 points

  

READING AND ASSIGNMENT SCHEDULE



_Unit One: Emergence of the First Global Age_

Topic One January 9-18

**REVISED ESSAY QUESTION: How did the Renaissance influence the Reformation?**

Class Essay January 21

Topic Two January 23-February1

_**[The Age of
Discovery](http://www.sc.edu/library/spcoll/sccoll/renprint/renprint.html)**_

**_[Opium War](http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/ChinaDragon/opiumwar.html)_**

Class Essay February 4

_Unit Two: An Age of Revolutions_

Topic Three February 6-15

**_[American Revolution](http://revolution.h-net.msu.edu/)_**

**_[A Tale of Two Revolutions](http://www.self-
gov.org/freeman/8908pete.html)_**

Class Essay February 20

Topic Four February 22- March 1

**_[The Industrial
Revolution](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/modsbook14.html#Social%20and%20Political%20Effects)_**

Class Essay March 4

Topic Five March 6 -March 13

[**People and
Ideas**](http://www.newgenevacenter.org/reference/enlightenment.htm)

**[_Notables and Quotables_](http://www.portraitcards.com/)**

_**[Controversy](http://www.jeffersonlegacy.org/dilemma_of_slavery.htm)**_

Class Essay March 15

_Unit Three:A Half-Century of Crisis and Achievement_

Topic Six March 26-29

**_[World War I](http://www.worldwar1.com/reflib.htm)_**

Class Essay  April 1

Topic Seven April 3- April 10

**_[World War II](http://www.nara.gov/exhall/powers/powers.html)_**

Class Essay April 12

# Unit Four: The World Since 1945

Topic Eight April 15-19

**_[The Cold War](http://www.cnn.com/SPECIALS/cold.war/)_**

Class Essay April 22

 Topic Nine: April 24-29

Final Assessment See College Schedule for Finals Schedule

[**Commanding Heights**](http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/commandingheights/)

_________________________________________________________________________________________

**4/19/02 LAB ASSIGNMENT**

1\. Click on "Cold War" under "Topic Eight" in your syllabus. Go to "Episode
by Episode" and browse for an excellent chronology of the Cold War. Check any
specific sites related to your assigned readings (e.g., "Iron Curtain").

2\. Go back to the main menu and click on "Knowledge Bank". Go to "Interactive
Maps" and quickly check each site starting with "Iron Curtain" and ending with
"The Wall Comes Down." (20 minutes).

2\. As we know, the Cold War involved a lengthy battle over ideas. One of
these ideas has to do with the political and economic choices individuals can
make in free societies. Given that we enjoy such choices in our society, go
ahead and exercise your freedom of choice. Make a choice on how to best
prepare for your upcoming class essay. _Which lab assignments have helped you
the most to get ready for your class writing assignments?_ Select any kind of
assignment that helps you the most and devote the rest of this session to work
on it. _Possible exercises include the formal outline/sample thesis statement,
freewriting, the "KLW" exercise (what do I know, what have I learned, what do
I want to know), a list of evidence and three alternative arguments (theses
statements) supported by your list, or any combination of these exercises._
For more ideas check past exercises below (all our semester exercises are
still posted here online). Remember to grade yourself using the rubric! (30
minutes).



**4/5/02 LAB ASSIGNMENT**

_I. LOOKING AHEAD:_ Please take a few minutes to click on "Commanding Heights"
the new web link at the bottom of your class schedule above. This site will be
useful for the topics we will cover between now and the end of the semester!
Make sure that you check the PBS TV schedules for the upcoming films: "The
Agony of Reform" (4/10/02) and "The New Rules of the Game"(4/17/02)!! I
recommend you tune in - these PBS programs might really help you with future
class essays! Once you are in this site, browse through the following links:
"Storyline", "Key events", "People"(take a look at the "Country Reports", in
particular the _United States, Japan, Germany, and the UK)_ and check the
"Essays" under "Ideas" (Do you see any familiar topics we have covered in our
readings and in class?) Briefly describe (freewrite) what you find relevant to
how WWII changed societies and governments (20 minutes).

II. Click on the "World War II" link under "Topic Seven" above. Browse through
this site and _select one of your assigned readings as a source of evidence to
answer the following question:_ In what ways did words, posters, and films
persuade Americans to support the war effort (WWII)? (30 minutes).

**3/28/02 LAB ASSIGNMENT**

1\. Please take a few minutes to review your assigned readings, study notes,
and class notes. Write (freewrite if this is easier!) a **list or a few
paragraphs describing, comparing and contrasting the political and
social/economic effects of the "Great War"on Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy.
** Using the "boxes framework" discussed in our last class session, be sure to
include _specific evidence_ from relevant assigned readings and from class
notes (30 minutes).

2\. Review your evidence in part 1 and think carefully about the kinds of
arguments (thesis statements) you can construct. Would it be best to compare
political effects and contrast social/economic effects across the two
totalitarian systems? Would it be best to contrast political effects and
compare social/ economic effects? Perhaps it would be best to just contrast
political effects ? How about just comparing social/economic effects? Write
four different arguments using these questions as your guideline. Evaluate
these arguments using your thesis statement guidelines handout. Select your
best argument and assess (grade) your work based on the HGP grade rubric....
while you are on this task, go ahead and grade your evidence (Part 1) as well.
How did you do?

**NOTE:** Here is a correction for your class notes:  "Kristallnacht " took
place in 1938, _not in 1923_ , when Hitler was arrested in Munich.
Kristallnacht took place in Munich and many other German cities. It marked the
beginning of the violent attacks against the Jewish population..

**3/8/02 LAB ASSIGNMENT**

1\. _Please take a few minutes to read the following passage:_

"A little noted event at Norfolk State University (NSU) in the past year
illustrates a cynical view of American history, a view which corrupts our
spirit. The event points to a serious misunderstanding about Thomas Jefferson
and his experience as a slave-owner. It is illustrative of America's inability
to comprehend and embrace its own national purpose or creed. Understanding our
founders' circumstances and vision is essential to our participation in
fulfillment of the American Revolution.

The event at NSU featured public-radio celebrity Clay Jenkinson, who presented
himself in costume as Thomas Jefferson. At the end of his presentation, there
were questions from the audience. One student, according to The Virginian-
Pilot, "challenged Jefferson's contention that most slaves could not handle
freedom because they had a child-like dependence on their white masters. If
true [the student asked] why did Monticello continue to operate while
Jefferson spent seven (sic) years in France? Who was really dependent on
whom?" Jenkinson answered, "perhaps I should just say touch¨¦." (2) Students
gave Jenkinson a standing ovation and left the event thinking they had
understood the truth. But had they?" _The Jefferson Legacy Foundation_

2\. After opening your word document, _please identify the argument and
evidence_ presented in the above paragraphs and answer the question posed at
the end of this passage. In answering the question _draw from the evidence
that you have collected so far from your assigned readings on slavery_ (30
min.).

3\. Take a few minutes to review the following paragraph: "It was we, the
people; not we, the white male citizens; nor yet we, the male citizens; but
we, the whole people, who formed the Union. And we formed it, not to give the
blessings of liberty, but to secure them; not to the half of ourselves and the
half of our posterity, but to the whole people, women as well as men. And it
is a downright mockery to talk to women of their enjoyment of the blessings of
liberty while they are denied the use of the only means of securing them
provided by this democratic-republican government - the ballot." _Susan B.
Anthony_

4\. _Please answer the following question drawing evidence from your assigned
readings:_

If you accept the argument that  "understanding our founders' circumstances
and vision is essential to our participation in fulfillment of the American
Revolution," how would you explain the long struggle for women's rights in
America?(20 minutes)

_____________________________________________________________________________________

**3/1/02 LAB ASSIGNMENT**



1\. Scroll back to the schedule section of this syllabus. Click on the " _
**Industrial Revolution**_ " weblink above (Topic Four). Once you are
connected to this site, click on " _Social and Political Effects "_ and go to
" _The Lives of Workers. " _Click on the sixth entry, " _Harriet Robinson:_
_Lowell Mill Girls(1834-48) "_. Carefully read this short primary source and
identify evidence to help you answer the question: How did the industrial
revolution affect the lives of American workers in the 19th century? Make a
list of this evidence in your word document.(30 min.)

2\. Based on your _assigned readings and your class notes_ a) add items to the
above list to achieve a _balanced, varied, accurately described and well
chosen list of evidence_ to enable you to b) _write an argument_ about the
_social effects of the industrial revolution in either Britain or the United
States_. Incorporate this argument into a formal outline (see handout). (20
min.)

**IMPORTANT NOTE: In preparing to write your class essay, review your
assessment question (HGP 111 reading assignment syllabus) for topic four. Use
evidence from your assigned readings, class notes, and today's lab assignment
when you write your essay. Note that you are expected to write about both the
early period of the industrial revolution (Britain) and the later period
(America). Complete this lab exercise to have a good idea of the argument and
the evidence you will use in your next class assignment. Review your lab
assignment for last week. Remember Monday's essay is worth 45 points.**

**________________________________________________________________________________________________**

**2/22/02 LAB ASSIGNMENT**

I. Use the "cubing technique" to _describe, compare, argue for , and argue
against:_

1) the impact of the Industrial Revolution on a) workers and b) consumers

2) the impact of a) inventions in textile manufacturing, b) inventions in
transportation, c) inventions in power generation, and d) inventions in
communications. If necessary, refer to your first reading under topic four:
"Inventors and Inventions".(25 minutes)

II. 1) Review/ read your second reading under topic four, "The Industrial
Revolution, Summary and Assessment," and identify _the main arguments made in
the first five paragraphs_ of this reading.

2) Return to your (Part I) answers and select the key points (evidence)
supporting the main arguments you identified in your second reading. (25
minutes)

**NOTE** : Bring a copy of your lab assignment to class on Monday. Read the
"Taylorism" reading carefully and identify the main arguments in this assigned
reading.

____________________________________________________________________________________________

**2/15/02 LAB ASSIGNMENT**

I. Write an essay comparing and contrasting the following factors related to
the American and French revolutions: a) the origins of each conflict, b) the
main political ideas influencing events in America and France, c)
revolutionary effects on the political order in each society, d) the
significance of each revolution to this day. Use your notes from class and the
comparative matrix handout distributed in class on 2/13/02 to complete this
part of your assignment. (30 minutes)

II. Write a clear argument about part (c) above. Identify relevant evidence
from your assigned readings to support your argument about **the revolutionary
effects on the political order in each society**. Identify relevant evidence
from your class notes to further support this argument. Use your class and
reading assignment notes plus your thesis guidelines handout to complete this
part of your assignment. (20 minutes).

**NOTE:** In preparing for your next essay on 2/20/02, carefully review your
assessment question: _How did the American and French Revolutions impact
social and political structures specifically and generally?_ Write up an
outline before your essay and think about your thesis statement. The sample
theses statements listed under #s 2, 4, 6, or 7 of your thesis guidelines are
good examples to use in crafting your next thesis. HAVE A NICE BREAK.

______________________________________________________________________________________________

**2/8/02 LAB ASSIGNMENT**

**I**. Identify _specific evidence_ in your assigned readings on the American
Revolution (first four readings of topic three). Answer the following _short
essay questions allocating about 10 minutes for each question (40 minutes):_

a) What economic, political, and social factors triggered the American
Revolution?

b) What were the main grievances of the American colonists against Britain?

c) What are the main political ideas expressed in the Declaration of
Independence?

d) What is the main argument made by James Wilson in his 1787 speech?

**II.** Based on the evidence identified in any of your four answers for the
above questions, write a  "thesis statement" (argument) about the American
Revolution. Evaluate your argument using your guidelines and grading rubric
(10 minutes).

**NOTE: Please bring your written answers for this lab assignment to class on
2/11/02.**

_________________________________________________________________________________________

**2/1/02 LAB ASSIGNMENT**



1\. Take a few minutes to review your assigned readings, study notes, and
class notes. Write (freewrite if this is easier!) a **list or a few paragraphs
describing, comparing and contrasting the similarities and differences in both
the causes and effects** of European colonization (Spain and Britain) across
the two periods of time we are studying. Make sure that your list or
paragraphs include both internal and external causes for the decline of the
Aztec empire and the Chinese empire and external and internal reasons for the
Spanish and British political, economic, social, and ecological actions in the
New World and China (20 minutes).

2\. Using your "Thesis Guidelines" and "Formal Outline" handouts, write an
outline drawing from the list or paragraphs (evidence) you wrote under section
1 of this exercise. In writing your thesis statement, pay close attention to
the "structural " elements (i.e. structure of the argument and key words used
to make the claim or point) of the "strong, unified, and independent" examples
presented in the "Thesis Guidelines" handout (see #s 3, 4,6, and 7 in
particular). Review your "grade rubric" and evaluate your thesis based on the
criteria stated. (30 minutes)



**1/25/02 LAB ASSIGNMENT**

I.. Review the study questions and learning activity posted under "Topic Two"
in your **assigned readings syllabus.** Based on your first and second
readings under this topic (Columbus My Enemy and Dreadful Sufferings of the
Besieged), answer the **first question as it relates to the "Western
Hemisphere."** These readings give you two examples of the interactions of
Europeans and indigenous populations. **Compare and contrast** the two cases
(20 minutes).

II.. Write brief essay answers to parts 1 and 2 of the following "KLW"exercise
and write a short list of "evidence" from the second reading under part 3 of
this exercise:

Part 1: What do I know about the Fall of the Aztec Empire ? Part 2: What have
I learned about the interaction of the Spaniards and the Aztecs? Part 3: What
do I want to know to help me understand the fall of the Aztec empire? After
you complete this exercise, write a concise thesis statement based on the
evidence you uncover in part 3\. (30 minutes).

___________________________________________________________________________________________





**1/18/02 LAB ASSIGNMENT**

**IMPORTANT NOTE** : The objective of your lab exercises is to help you
prepare for your class essays. Based on your syllabus' reading and assignment
schedule (see topic one above) you were responsible for completing your
readings for unit one, topic one by today. You need to complete your assigned
readings BEFORE you write your lab exercises in order to complete these lab
assignments.

Lab exercises will be collected the week before Spring break and the week
before final exams. Your lab exercises are an integral part of your
participation grade (see syllabus). Save your work to disk or to your file. If
you are using a "mac" computer save your work on a zip disk.

**PART 1**. (10 minutes) Open a word document, write your name, date, and
class (CIV 111) and the topic of today's assignment: **Impact of the
Renaissance on the Reformation**. Using the  "cubing technique" discussed
during our last class session (see your handout on "cubing") write a brief
paragraph on each of the "sides" of the cube: describe, compare, free
associate, negate, argue for and argue against a) The Renaissance and b) The
Reformation.

**PART II**. (20 minutes) Briefly review your  " Guidelines for a thesis
statement" handout and write **three** different theses (arguments) addressing
today's topic. Following the seven points in the guidelines, assess each one
of your theses statements. Select the best argument and proceed to Step III.

**PART III.** (20 minutes). Write a formal outline (see handout) and select
your _best_ thesis from Part II above to insert under section I.C. of your
outline.

________________________________



