**Meiji Japan: Grappling with the Modern (History 203)**

Fall, 2001, 9:40 a.m., T-Th, Hollenbeck 313

Jim Huffman, Instructor



_Writers perform a...daring act. They must develop an idea with logic and
clarity, knowing that a reader can study their words again and again and
discover whether the words add up to a plausible argument, given the evidence
available._

_\--Richard Marius_



Welcome to The Historian=s Craft. The course is a systematic introduction to
the research methods of the historian. We will attempt first to understand the
dynamics of Japan=s Meiji era (1868-1912): the social, political, cultural and
intellectual transformations that made it such an important time. Then,
drawing on the history of that period, we will learn to craft a historical
research paper, using a variety of sources.



The course is designed as a laboratory for history majors, for whom it is
required, and for others who want to understand the historical approach more
fully. It is taught in seminar style; so there will be few lectures after the
first three or four weeks. Class sessions will be devoted to mutual grappling
with the issues presented in each day=s readings. For that reason, a heavy
responsibility is placed on each student to be _present and prepared_ at each
session.



**Class Goals**. The purpose of this course is to help students to:

1\. Understand, broadly, the nature of Japan=s Meiji era.

2\. Understand how and why historians work the way they do.

3\. Find and evaluate historical evidence.

4\. Plan and produce a well-written, documented, finished research essay.

5\. Experience the **joy of historical discovery**.



**Resources**. You will have access to many resources as you do your work:
Wittenberg history (and other) faculty members, the holdings of Thomas
Library, the assistance of Librarian Suzanne Smailes, the ideas and aid of
fellow students, and the wide world of historical documents and sources. In
addition, the following are required readings for this course.

Turabian, Kate. _A Manual for Writers of Term Papers_. Sixth ed. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1996.

Marius, Richard. _A Short Guide to Writing About History_. Third ed. New York:
Longman, 1999.

Duus, Peter. _The Japanese Discovery of America_. Boston: Bedford Books, 1997.

Irokawa Daikichi. _The Culture of the Meiji Period_. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 1985.

Natsume Soseki. _Kokoro_. Chicago: Gateway Editions, 1957.

Handouts, including selections from E. H. House.



**Instructor**. The course is led by Jim Huffman, whose office is 310
Hollenbeck. You are welcome to contact him at any time (prior to 9 p.m.!),
about issues of any kind, by e-mail (jhuffman@wittenberg.edu), or by phone (o:
327-7845; h: 399-9684). His office hours are:

M-W-F 9:30 to 11:00

T-Th 1:00 to 2:30

Other By appointment



**Requirements and Evaluation**. The central feature of the class will be the
research/writing project. In addition, a number of assignments will be
required as a means of helping students understand the Meiji era and hone
their understanding of how historians think and work. Specific requirements
and due dates are in the right hand column of the class schedule below.
Detailed explanations will be provided in class or in the last part of the
syllabus.



Points will be awarded on the following scale.



_Writing Project (230+)_

Paper proposal (9-18) cr

Preliminary bibliography (10-2) 5

Final topic (10-9) cr

  

Search strategies (10-9, 10-16) 10 (5 each)

Web assignment (10-11) 10

Short quiz 10

Search record (10-18) 15

Working bibliography **(** 10-18) 25

Outline 1 (11-1) 10

Outline 2 (11-13) 15

Final paper (11-29) 100

Oral report (11-29 to 12-11) 30

Revision of paper (12-18) up to 10 bonus points



_ Thinking Historically (150)_

Test 50 __

_ _ Museum notes (10-25) 10

Article review (11-8) 20

Irokawa paper (11-20) 10

Natsume paper (12-13) 10

Participation 50



Notes: 1\. Attendance is particularly important in this class; each unexcused
absence, over two misses of any kind, will be assessed a one percent deduction
in the final average.

2\. All papers are to be typed (12 point), double spaced, _paginated_ , and
prepared according to proper style, using Turabian. __

_3\. You should submit two copies of each written assignment, and three copies
of the final paper!_

4\. _Deadlines are absolute_ , unless an extension is granted ahead of time by
the professor. Late work will be assessed a ten percent penalty for the first
day and an additional two percent each subsequent day. No work will be
accepted after December 18.

5\. Students should be aware of the Wittenberg policy on academic honesty;
violations (including cheating and plagiarism) will result in severe
penalties.



**Class Schedule**. Changes in session topics may occur from time to time, but
assignment dates are absolute, unless changed by the professor. T = Turabian;
M = Marius; D = Duus; H = from House.

_ _

_An Amazing Era_

8-28 Introduction

8-30 Fall of the Old Order D:1-17; H: I



9-4 Creating a Regime H: II, III

9-6 Creating a Nation H: IV, V



9-11 The Imperialist Turn H: VI

9-13 Film and History, at Huffman=s (9:00)



9-18 A World Power H: VII, paper proposal

9-20 Test partners assigned



_The Nature of History_



9-25 History as a Way of Thinking M: intro

9-26 8:00, May-lee, Winberg Chai, Weaver

9-27 The Historical Essay M: I, 72-78



_Research: Finding Sources_

  

10-2 Library **** work (Research Help Center) **** preliminary bibliography

8 p.m., Tonda puppeteers

10-4 Library work (RHC)



10-9 Library work (RHC) **** final topic, search strategy 1

10-11 Library work (RHC) **** web assignment



10-16 Library work (RHC) search strategy 2, short quiz



_Writing the Historical Paper_



10-18 The Historical Questions M: II; **working bibliography/search record**



10-23 Fall break

10-25 Different kinds of history Museum notes



10-30 Modes of Historical Writing M: III

11-1 Evaluating Sources M: 86-100, Outline 1



11-6 Evaluating Sources (continued) D: 145-204

11-8 The Act of Writing M: 101-08, article review



11-13 Reviews Outline 2

11-15 Documenting Your Work M: VIII; T (all)



_Meiji Through Different Eyes_ _B_ _I_



11-20 The Revisionist Monograph Irokawa paper



11-27 Revisionism (continued)



_Critiquing the Papers_



11-29 Presentations final paper



12-4 Presentations

12-6 Presentations



12-11 Presentations Natsume paper



_Meiji Through Different Eyes_ _B_ _II_



12-13 History through Literature, at Huffman=s



12-18 Paper revisions



  

** SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS**



Attached here are a number of supplementary materials that should help you
carry out the various tasks more effectively. You should go over them
generally now, then study each one carefully at the appropriate time during
the semester.

**_ _**

**_Table of Contents_**

**_ _**

Checklist 4

Course Concepts 4

Peer Reviewing 5

Web Assignment 6

Article Review 6

Irokawa/Natsume Papers 6

The Writing Project 6

Paper Proposal 7

Note taking 7

Preliminary Bibliography 8

Search Record and Working Bibliography 8

Outlines 9

Final Paper 9

Revised Paper and Oral Report 9

**__** Rules for Good writing 9 ** __**

**__** Styles and Editing Symbols _ _ 10

**_ _**

**_Checklist_**



_____Paper proposal (9-18) cr

_____Test (9-20) 50 __

_____Preliminary bibliography (10-2) 5

_____Final topic (10-9) cr

_____Search strategy 1(10-9)  5

_____Web assignment (10-11) 10

_____Search strategy 2 (10-16) 5

_____Short quiz (10-16) 10

_____Search record (10-18) 15

_____Working bibliography **(** 10-18) 25

_____Museum notes (10-25) 10

_____Outline 1 (11-1) 10

_____Article review (11-8) 20

_____Outline 2 (11-13) 15

_____Irokawa paper (11-20) 10

_____Final paper (11-29) 100

_____Oral report (11-29 to 12-11) 30

_____Natsume paper (12-13) 10

_____Revision of paper (12-18) up to 10 bonus points



**_Course Concepts_** ****



This course is intended to help you learn to think as an historian. You should
become comfortable with the technical concepts, skills, and vocabulary of the
craft of history this semester--to the point that you will use these ideas and
this rhetoric in _all_ of your history courses. The key ideas and concepts of
the course include the following material; it is important that you think
about them as you produce your research essay.



_Historical Thinking_

  

History as: past, account, reconstruction, interpretation

History as otherness, continuity, change

Frame of reference, context

Role of questions in defining historical approach or context

Topic v. thesis approach

Inference v. proof

Interpretation, generalization, revisionism



_Research Skills and Concepts_

Annotation v. abstract

Primary and secondary sources

Intentional v. unwitting evidence

Summary, paraphrase, quotation

Plagiarism

ALegitimate inference@ and historical method

Interpretation

Cause: immediate, direct, efficient; long-range, indirect, sufficient ****

Hypothesis, synthesis



_Writing Style_

Audience

Structure: principle of selection; paragraph unit of writing

Expository writing

Narrative writing

Analytical writing

Citation: note form (footnote/endnote), parenthetical form; bibliographic form

Technical style elements



_Turabian Concepts to Know_

Abbreviations and numbers (ch. 2, especially 2.26)

Punctuation (ch. 3, 4.14-4.15)

Quotation (ch. 5)

Notes and bibliography (chapters 8, 11; also skim chapters 10, 14)



_Citing Electronic Sources_

Note:

1\. Jane Foe, ANew History Strategies,@ _Wittenberg History Journal,_ January
1, 2000 [journal online]; available from **http
://www.wittenberg.edu/history/journal;** **** Internet; accessed January 15,
2000.



Foe, Jane. ANew History Strategies.@ _Wittenberg History Journal_ , January 1,
2000 [journal online].

Available from **http://www.wittenberg.edu/history/journal** ; Internet;
accessed January 15, 2000.



Note: For more information on citing electronic sources, see: _The Chicago
Manual of Style_ (14 th edition).



**_Peer Reviewing_**



For the purposes of this course, you will have a partner as a peer reviewer.
This partner will read and assess each of the assignments that you complete as
part of your writing project. The partner also will read your completed paper
and will present it to the class __ during the last part of the semester.
Until September 20, you may choose partners; after that, partners will be
assigned.





**_Web Assignment_**



  

Your assignment is to explore the web as a beginning brainstorming exercise
for your papers. Look at some of the sites that include Meiji Japan.



_Particulars of the assignment_ : You must print out the following (if it is a
long piece, just the first page):



Two primary written sources (fiction or non-fiction written by Japanese
between 1868 and 1912)

Two primary artistic sources (art from Japan between 1868 a

