    
  **ARCH 350   -  History of the Designed Environment III**  
                                                                                                                                                       last updated:        9:00 am     8 December  2000 



**_"The only thing new in the world is the history you don't know."_**  
**_
\-- Harry S. Truman_**  
  
---  
**COURSE SYLLABUS  **  

* * *

  
**_  TABLE OF CONTENTS_**

  **1    Meeting time and location**  
  **2  **  **Instructor**  
  **3**    **Course objectives**  
  **4**    **Required textbooks**  
  **5**    **Additional reference material**  
  **6    Reading assignments**  
  **7**    **Exams and quizzes**  
  **8**    **Grading policies**  
  **9**    **Student responsibilities**  
**10**    **Academic honesty policy** ** **  
**11**    **Lecture summaries**  
**12**    **[Return to Charney's homepage](http://www-
personal.ksu.edu/~wmick/)**   |    **_COURSE INFORMATION_** ** **  

   **Course number:**   ARCH 350

   **Reference number in line schedule:**   03780

   **Description:**   The third and final course in a         three-course
sequence which surveys the history of the built environment from its
prehistoric beginnings up to the present day; this third course outlines
historical developments from the Baroque period to the 20th century.

   **Prerequisites:**   ENVD 251 or permission of the instructor.  
    
    
    
    
**_     MEETING TIME and LOCATION_**

    **Days:**      M  W  F    
    **Time:**      11:30 am - 12:20 pm    
    **Place:**     63 Seaton Hall  
---|---  
  **_      INSTRUCTOR_**
** W. Mick Charney, Ph.D.**

     **Office:**                                                                                          201C Seaton Court    
     **Office hours:**           Monday and Wednesday 10:30-11:15  / or by appointment    
     **Voice-mail:**                                                                                        (785) 532-1103    
     **E-mail:**                                                                                               [wmick@ksu.edu](mailto:wmick@ksu.edu)    
     **Graduate Teaching Assistant:                                                        **Jess McNeely    
  
---  
click here to return to the Table of Contents  
    
  **_      COURSE OBJECTIVES_**

      Students should acquire a knowledge of the most      
 significant and most representative buildings, monuments,  
 design projects, architects, builders, planners, and patrons in  
 the history of the designed environment.  
      Students should become aware of some of the minor or       
 more neglected aspects of the designed environment.  
      Students should be able to interpret architecture and       
 design as a response to various environmental, cultural, social,  
 political, economic, and technological forces.  
      Students should acquire a familiarity with the basic       
 characteristics and chronology of styles.  
      Students should develop skills of connoisseurship, the       
 ability to distinguish between individual works of design with  
 regard to style, chronology, authorship, or geographic  
 location.  
      Students should acquire a working knowledge of       
 architecture/building/construction/design terminology.  
      Students should be able to communicate their knowledge    
 of the history of the designed environment in a clear and  
 effective manner.  
      Students should gain an appreciation of the history of    
 their future professions and should be able to integrate this  
 appreciation into their own design methodologies and projects.  
  | **_      REQUIRED TEXTBOOKS_**

     **1**    **_Architecture, From Prehistory to Post-_** **    **    
**_  Modernism_.**  Trachtenberg, Marvin and Hyman,  
 Isabelle.

     **2**    **_The Story of Architecture_.**   Nuttgens, Patrick.  

     **3**    **_The Penguin Dictionary of Architecture_.**         
 Fleming, John, _et al._  

     **4**    **_A Brief History of the Western World_.**         
 Greer, Thomas H. and Lewis, Gavin.

     **5**    Additionally, all students are strongly urged to    
 purchase a **hard-copy version of the course**  
**  syllabus** which includes much more vital information  
 than what can found here on this course syllabus  
 web page.  To acquire a hard-copy version of the  
 complete course syllabus, students should follow the  
 instructions given out by the instructor on the first day  
 of class.  Past experience indicates that students  
 who do not own a hard-copy version of the complete  
 course syllabus tend to perform at a level _one_ _full_  
  _letter_ _grade_ _below_ that of students who do possess a  
 hard-copy course syllabus.  
  
---|---  
click here to return to the Table of Contents  
    
       **_ADDITIONAL REFERENCE MATERIAL_**   

The following books have been placed on two-hour reserve in the [Weigel
Library of Architecture and
Design](http://www.lib.ksu.edu/branches/architecture/weigel.html) (323 Seaton
Hall).  Taken collectively, these books are excellent places to **begin**
looking for more information on the buildings studied in class when the
information in the required textbooks does not otherwise provide further
sufficient detail or in-depth analysis.  

  * Fletcher, Banister (Sir).  **_A History of Architecture [on the Comparative Method]_.**
  * Jordan, R. Furneaux.  **_A Concise History of Western Architecture_.**
  * Kostof, Spiro.  **_A History of Architecture: Settings and Rituals_.**
  * Norwich, John Julius, editor.  **_Great Architecture of the World_.**
  * Wodehouse, Lawrence and Moffett, Marian.  **_A History of Western Architecture_.**

  
---  
click here to return to the Table of Contents  
       **_READING ASSIGNMENTS_**     
    **Reading assignments can be found throughout the more extensive, hard-copy version of the course syllabus.    Look at each of the several _primary pages_ (which [ i ] provide simple listings of significant works of design** ** grouped in stylistic or ethnic/national/regional categories and which [ ii ] are numbered in the upper right-hand corners with simple, whole integers  -  that is, _page 1_ , _page 2_ , and so on), and reading assignments for those particular buildings and/or styles will be listed, by author and by textbook title, at the bottom of each of those _primary_ _pages_.**      
---  
click here to return to the Table of Contents  


    
    


    
    
    
  **_      EXAMS and QUIZZES  _**  
  **  There are three major exams in this course; they have been scheduled for
the following dates:**   **Exam 1:   Friday, 29 September 2000 at 11:30 am in
room 63 Seaton Hall** **Exam 2:   Wednesday,   1  November 2000 at 11:30 am in
room 63 Seaton Hall** **Exam 3:   Wednesday, 13 December 2000 at 11:50 am in
room 63 Seaton Hall**   **It is unlikely that these test dates will change.**
**Therefore, students should try to anticipate the potential for conflicts**
**with assignments in other courses well ahead of time and budget their study
time accordingly.**   **  Quizzes are administered a number of times
throughout the course of the semester and are** **  generally unannounced
(pop) quizzes.  On some quizzes, students will be allowed to consult their**
**  notes or will be asked to collaborate with fellow students.  Other quizzes
will be completed without** **  the** **benefit of notes or consultations.**  
---  
click here to return to the Table of Contents  


**_      GRADING POLICIES_**  
    
**Determination of Final Grades.**   Each student's final grade will be
determined on the basis of grades received for three major exams and several
short quizzes.  Each major exam will account for approximately **30%** of the
final grade, and the average of the quiz scores will account for approximately
**10%** of the final grade.

**Determination of Exam Grades.**   Tests will be graded on a so-called
standard, criterion-referenced scale; that is a score of **_100-90 equals an
'A'_** and a score of **_89-80 equals a 'B'_** and so on.   Small variations
in or justifiable departures from this absolute scale may be implemented on a
case by case basis in order to reflect more accurately an individual student's
academic progress or lack thereof.

**Student Responsibilities on Exams.**   Make-up exams will be given **at the
convenience of the instructor** provided the student can present a legitimate
and verifiable excuse for absence as soon as possible after the scheduled test
date; but, in any case, that make-up exam shall be scheduled and administered
with five school days after the original exam date.   Whenever possible, it is
always advisable to inform the instructor of an anticipated absence from a
scheduled exam **prior** to that exam.   Such information is always greatly
appreciated by the instructor.

**No Make-Up Quiz Policy.   Without exception, there will be NO MAKE-UP
QUIZZES ! ! !**   However, so as not to penalize a student with a legitimate
excuse for absence on a quiz day, each student's single lowest quiz score
(inclusive of any one quiz score of "0" due to absence on a quiz day) will be
dropped in determining the quiz score average.

click here to return to the Table of Contents  


       **_STUDENT RESPONSIBILITIES_**  

 All questions or concerns regarding the instruction, evaluation, and grading
procedures for this course are to  
 be brought, first and foremost, directly to the attention of the officially
designated instructor for this course.  

 Class attendance is required.  Roll may be taken at the discretion of the
instructor.  **It is the responsibility  **  
**  of the student, and the student alone, to be kept aware of all
information, instructions, materials, **  
**  assignments, and handouts disseminated in class.**  Absence of any kind is
**not** a legitimate excuse for  
 lack of performance on any and all types of class assignments and/or
requirements.

  ** _Class will start on time!  Please do not be late to class!_**

 Students will budget their own study time and are expected to keep pace with
reading assignments as  
 outlined in the hard-copy version of the course syllabus and as warranted by
the content of each lecture.

 For information on student responsibilities specifically with regard to exams
and quizzes, see the "Grading  
 Policies" section immediately above.  
  
---  
click here to return to the Table of Contents  
    
  **_      ACADEMIC HONESTY POLICY _**  
  Plagiarism and cheating are serious offenses and may be punished by failure
on the exam, paper, or project, by failure in the course, and/or by expulsion
from the University.  On all assignments, examinations, or other course work
undertaken by undergraduate students, adherence to the following pledge is
implied, whether or not this pledge is stated explicitly:  _"On my honor, as a
student, I have neither given nor received unauthorized aid on this academic
work."_   For more information on the University's Academic Honor System,
refer to the **_Undergraduate Catalog_** (pages 30-31) or to the **_Student
Life Handbook_** (pages 7-14) which can be found at the back of the campus
telephone directory.  
---  
click here to return to the Table of Contents  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


    
    


    


    
    
    
  **_      LECTURE SUMMARIES_**  
  **_Summaries of individual class lectures_**.   Click on any one of the
following dates to go directly to a brief summary of material covered in that
particular class session.    SPECIAL ON-LINE LECTURE   FRI 8 DEC | WED 6 DEC |
MON 4 DEC | FRI 1 DEC | WED 29 NOV | MON 27 NOV | FRI 24 NOV | WED 22 NOV MON
20 NOV | SUN 19 NOV | FRI 17 NOV | WED 15 NOV | MON 13 NOV | FRI 10 NOV | WED
8 NOV | MON 6 NOV | FRI 3 NOV WED 1 NOV MON 30 OCT | FRI 27 OCT | WED 25 OCT |
MON 23 OCT | FRI 20 OCT | WED 18 OCT | MON 16 OCT FRI 13 OCT | WED 11 OCT |
MON 9 OCT | FRI 6 OCT | WED 4 OCT | MON 2 OCT **  **FRI 29 SEP | WED 27 SEP |
MON 25 SEP | FRI 22 SEP | WED 20 SEP | MON 18 SEP   FRI 15 SEP | WED 13 SEP |
MON 11 SEP | SAT 9 SEP | FRI 8 SEP | WED 6 SEP | MON 4 SEP | FRI 1 SEP     WED
30 AUG | MON 28 AUG | FRI 25 AUG | WED 23 AUG | MON 21 AUG       **FRI 8
DEC:**   Picking up on our discussion of [Unity
Temple](http://www.bluffton.edu/~sullivanm/unity/unity.html), we concentrated
on the ways in which it exploited Prairie School planning tricks.  We explored
its interior, noting in particular the way in which Wright was able to
"destroy the box" through the clever use of some visual tricks involving
wooden trim placement.  Moving back to Europe, we next explored the "early
modernism" of the Austrian equivalent of the Arts and Crafts -- the Wiener
Werkstatte, or the Viennese workshops movement.  This Austrian movement sought
ways by which to avoid the excesses and decadence of the popular Beaux-Arts
and Art Nouveau styles.  Its spiritual leader was Otto Wagner who contended
that **"...nothing that is not practical can be beautiful."**   Turn the
double negatives around in that phrase and it becomes more intelligible \--
"...anything that is not practical cannot be beautiful."  In essence, Wagner
was arguing for the elimination of non-functional ornament.  His best known
work is the interior atrium space of the Postal Savings Bank in Vienna,
Austria.  Wagner's disciple, Adolf Loos, went even further.  He argued that
ornament could be equated with crime and barbarism and, therefore, ought to be
eliminated from all architecture completely.  His best known works are the
Karntner Bar and the Steiner house.  From Austria we moved on to Germany and
its version of the Arts and Crafts movement -- the Deutscher Werkbund, or the
German work/craft alliance.  The founder of this movement was Hermann
Muthesius who imported the Arts and Crafts movement from England to Germany
where he encouraged German industrialists to hire artistic consultants.  The
first such consultant to be employed by German industry was the architect
Peter Behrens.  Employed by the Allgemeine Elektricitats Gesellschaft, or the
AEG, Behrens designed the first beautiful factory and thus finally elevated
factories to a status worthy of **A** rchitectural attention.  Students should
be able to discuss how Behrens's design for the AEG Turbine Factory borrows
inspiration from great historical architecture.  Additionally, students should
be able to relay the ways in which the factory served as inspiration for the
work of Walter Gropius, a student of Behrens.  Gropius's design for the Fagus
Factory was based on the AEG Turbine Factory; but in what ways did Gropius
take his design to new levels of modernity?  How was it startlingly
progressive and obviously a work belonging fully to the 20th century?   **WED
6 DEC:**   Quiz number 15 was administered in the session; it is likely to be
the last quiz of the semester.  The entire hour was spent discussing the
Prairie School designs of Frank Lloyd Wright.  We encountered his design for
the first mature Prairie School house -- the [Willits
house](http://www.delmars.com/wright/flw2b.htm) in Highland Park, Illinois.
Why is this design considered to be a classic Prairie School design?  How was
it influenced by Japanese architecture?  In what ways did Wright come to
acquire a familiarity with Japanese domestic architectural design even though
he had not yet visited Japan in person?  Students should be able to define the
following Japanese architectural terms: **shoji** , **tokonoma** , and
**tatami**.   What is a pinwheel plan?  We also discussed Wright's other best
known early design -- the [Robie
house](http://www.arch.wsu.edu/~slides/robiectc.htm) in Chicago, Illinois.
Why might the [Robie house](http://www.ci.chi.il.us/Landmarks/RobieHouse.html)
be considered more mannered than the Willits house?  During the course of our
description of Wright's houses, we encountered several ways in which he used
his architecture and interior design features to help preserve the privacy of
the family inside.  Can you enumerate several of the tricks he often employed
to strengthen the sanctity of the family?  Additionally, students should be
able to explain how Wright's work is, in many ways, an American version of the
Arts and Crafts movement.  The Emery house by one of Wright's apprentices,
Walter Burley Griffin, was briefly cited for its importance.  In what respect
did the Emery house, in Elmhurst, Illinois, represent a **"first"**?   We
ended by looking at one of Wright's non-residential commissions -- [Unity
Temple](http://www.unitytemple.org/ourbldg.htm) in Oak Park, Illinois.  We
took particular note of the arrangement of its plan.   **MON 4 DEC:**   Quiz
number 14 was distributed during this session.  We picked up on our discussion
of the Arts and Crafts  movement at the turn of the century by talking just a
bit more about the progressive nature of Voysey's architecture and then we
moved on to the work of Charles Rennie Mackintosh, a Scottish Arts and Crafts
architect.  His design for the Blackie family residence is most notable for
the design of its master bedroom.  Why?  Students should be able to explain
why this room still looks fresh and modern even by today's standards.  The
next architect we encountered was Edwin Lutyens who, in collaboration with his
relative Gertrude Jekyll, designed the **last** great Arts and Crafts house,
Deanery Garden.   We used Jekyll's design of this house's garden to make the
point that the Arts and Crafts philosophy could extend from the house and its
contents out into the landscape.  She crafted the garden as carefully as
Lutyens had crafted the house.  Students should be able to explain the notion
of "consonance" and should be able to explain how it manifests itself in
specific works.  Students should also be able to explain why it was that
Jekyll received recognition for her accomplishments only very belatedly.  We
ended the hour by beginning a discussion of the early work of Frank Lloyd
Wright.  Students should be able to explain why the style he developed has
come to be called the **Prairie School**.   We looked in detail at Wright's
first independent commission -- the [Winslow
house](http://www.cupola.com/images/bldgstru/flwright/winslo01.jpg) in River
Forest, Illinois.  How does this design by Wright contain embryonic
characteristics of the later more mature Prairie School style?  Why do the
front and the rear elevations of this house look so different?   **FRI 1
DEC:**   Quiz number 13 was completed in this class session which otherwise
picked right up on our discussion of the structural design methods employed by
Gaudi.  Students should be able to explain the necessity for avoiding the use
of stone and brick structural members in situations where they are subject to
tensile forces.  Students should also be able to explain the brilliance behind
Gaudi's use of **funicular models**.   What is a **funicular model** and how
did it help Gaud i predict the flow of forces through his buildings'
structural systems.  We discussed some of Gaudi's personal eccentricities and
his tragic premature death, and then we concluded our survey of Gaudi's career
with a discussion of his most inspired work -- the church of the Sagrada
Familia.  Next, we turned our attention back to a brief review of Arts and
Crafts principles (see the summary of our special Sunday afternoon session
below) and their perpetuation by English architects such as Charles Francis
Annesley Voysey at the turn of the century.  Voysey has been called "the
father of the modern movement".  Why?  What about his work looks forward to
20-century, cutting-edge architectural developments rather than backward to
19th-century, old-fashioned stylistic preferences?  We will pick up on this
point in the next class session.   **WED 29 NOV:**   Quiz number 13 was
distributed at the start of class.  We continued to discuss the progressive
nature of the Art Nouveau style by looking at Horta's design for the Maison du
Peuple, a socialist workers' party headquarters.  His frank use of metal and
glass was meant to be symbolic of the rights of workers to better working
conditions, fresh air, and plenty of light -- things they had been denied as a
matter of course throughout the early party of the Industrial Revolution.  We
also outlined the avenue by which the Art Nouveau style made its way to other
countries.  What French architect is most known for importing the style to
Paris?  What major commission did he receive there?  Finally, we began a
discussion of the highly idiosyncratic (even eccentric) variation of the Art
Nouveau style as practiced by the Catalan architect Antoni Gaudi.  In
particular, we looked at his Casa Batllo, Casa Mila, and Park Guell.  Students
should be able to list Gaudi's three major life-motivating beliefs or personal
causes.  How did those beliefs (one religious, one political, and one
vocational) intertwine themselves in his designs, specifically in the formal
symbolism of his Casa Batllo?  What unusual sorts of design methods did Gaudi
employ?  How did Gaudi's designs draw influence from his immediate environment
-- Barcelona located on the Mediterranean Sea?  How did his designs
demonstrate more than just a casual awareness of the theories of Viollet-le-
Duc?   **MON 27 NOV:**   In our first lecture after Thanksgiving break, we
distributed quiz number 12 to remind ourselves about key points concerning the
Chicago School, and then we began looking at the [Reliance
Building](http://www.ci.chi.il.us/Landmarks/RelianceBuilding.html), which is
sometimes considered to be the highest achievement of the Chicago School.  It
is remarkable for its large areas of glass window wall.  Indeed, its
structural bays are completely filled with what has come to be called the
"Chicago window" in which a large central fixed pane of glass is flanked by
operable sash windows.  We devoted quite a bit of attention to the
architecture of Louis Sullivan and his search for a principle "so broad as to
permit of no exception".  In the end, he came up with the dictum **"form
follows function"**.   Students should be able to explain what Sullivan meant
by that dictum, how he used it in his form-giving process, and how apparent
inconsistencies in its application can be explained away through alternate
readings of the dictum.  Specifically, how do Sullivan's designs for both the
Wainwright Building (said to be the **most artistically considered** or **most
beautiful** Chicago School skyscraper) and the [Carson Pirie Scott
Store](http://www.ci.chi.il.us/Landmarks/Carsons.html) (said to be the
**swansong** of the Chicago School) adhere to this dictum despite their
somewhat different outward formal expressions?   Here are some hints.  What,
by Sullivan's definition, was the function of a skyscraper?  What, by
contrast,  was the function of a department store?  We next moved on to some
introductory remarks concerning the Art Nouveau.  It was the other "place"
wherein the rift between **A** rchitecture and engineering began to heal
itself.  It exploited iron, but in what way and for which one of its traits?
What are the other major characteristics of the Art Nouveau style?  We noted
that the Art Nouveau is sometimes considered to be the first deliberate, self-
conscious attempt to create a **"modern"** style **IF ** one were to define
**"modern"** as that style which has no obvious dependency upon the forms and
details of past eras.   Nevertheless, we noted the influences upon the Art
Nouveau including the theories of Viollet-le-Duc, Minoan archaeological finds,
and the Arts and Crafts movement.  Students should be able to cite the
**first** architectural manifestation of the Art Nouveau style and the
architect in Belgium who is most associated with originating this turn-of-the-
century style.   **FRI 24 NOV:    **THANKSGIVING BREAK  -  Holiday  -  no
classes !!!   THANKSGIVING BREAK  -  Holiday  -  no classes !!!   THANKSGIVING
BREAK  -  Holiday  -  no classes !!!   THANKSGIVING BREAK  -  Holiday  -  no
classes !!!   **WED 22 NOV:**    THANKSGIVING BREAK  -  Holiday  -  no classes
!!!   THANKSGIVING BREAK  -  Holiday  -  no classes !!!   THANKSGIVING BREAK
-  Holiday  -  no classes !!!   THANKSGIVING BREAK  -  Holiday  -  no classes
!!!   **MON 20 NOV:**   In this lecture we looked at a series of Chicago
School buildings including the Home Insurance Building, the
[Auditorium](http://www.ci.chi.il.us/Landmarks/Auditorium.html), the
[Rookery](http://www.ci.chi.il.us/Landmarks/RookeryBuilding.html), and the
[Monadnock Block](http://www.ci.chi.il.us/Landmarks/Monadnock.html).  In all
cases, each architect struggled to give pleasing form to a large urban
building -- an unprecedented design problem when one thinks about it.  After
all, where in history is there an example of a large, multi-storied, urban
building that needed to display some sort of aesthetically pleasing **A**
rchitectural conceit?  The one man to come along and show others how to
approach such a design problem was the American architect Henry Hobson
Richardson.  Although trained in the classicizing Beaux-Arts style, Richardson
soon afterward followed his natural inclination to design in the Romanesque
style.  However, rather than copy the style faithfully in all its details,
Richardson took only the broadest lessons from the style and so manipulated
them that this essentially Neo-Romanesque style was converted into a
distinctly modern idiom to which Richardson gave his name -- the Richardsonian
Romanesque.  So popular was this style that it reached even into the
backwaters of the American Great Plains.  Can you identify those buildings on
the Kansas State University campus which were built in the Richardsonian
Romanesque style?  What concerned Richardson were the timeless design lessons
that apply to _all_ styles -- texture, color, rhythm, proportion, scale,
solid/void, and so on.   What one Chicago area building by Richardson was most
influential in this respect?  How did it demonstrate to otherwise struggling
Chicago School architects how to design a large urban building with
aesthetically pleasing form?  Who, in particular, did it influence; that is,
to whom did this one Richardson design come as a revelation of sorts?  With
respect to other issues raised in class, students should be able to
differentiate between a true skyscraper and a so-called "elevator building."
Finally, what renders the design of the Monadnock Block so unique for its
time?  And why is the Monadnock Block so important in terms of its structural
system?     |    **SUN 19 NOV:**   This special lecture was added to the
normal schedule of class sessions in order to make up for some of the time
that was lost due to a power outage and "Fall Break" earlier in the semester.
Students not present at this special lecture should take care to note
especially well that they will nevertheless be held responsible for the
information presented in this lecture and that the following summary is only a
cursory overview of what was covered.    The lecture began by noting a certain
correspondence between the discipline of landscape architecture and the
discipline of interior architectural design in that both disciplines achieved
a certain legitimacy and identifiability as design professions (separate and
distinct from the profession of architecture) in the era of the Renaissance.
In the same way that it was the Late Renaissance era that first transformed
the utilitarian medieval and early Renaissance garden into a place of comfort
and into an aesthetically pleasing work of design so, too, it was in the
Renaissance that interior spaces became more comfortable and more pleasing to
the eye.  At the same time, however, we noted that "good design is good
design" no matter the time, the stylistic preferences, or the medium.  For
instance, when Michelangelo designed the Laurentian Library in Florence,
Italy, in the early to mid-1500s, he did not neglect interior aspects of the
room nor did he merely concern himself with traditional architectural
elements.  He did not differentiate between architecture and interior
architecture.  Instead, he treated the space as one whole and entire work of
art, designing even the book stands and the carved wooden ceiling which so
wonderfully mirrors the pattern in the floor.  Such a mirroring device tells
us that Michelangelo was concerned with the entirety of the volume of the
space and how it was that all elements of the design, no matter how
incidentally, could contribute to that overall expression.   A goodly part of
any interior design is, of course, the use of furnishings \-- both free-
standing and built-in.  Thus, we next examined some typical Rococo
furnishings.  Students should be able to recognize typical Rococo furniture
features -- such as **cabriole** legs and **ormolu** mounts -- and should be
able to define or describe them or their functions.   Students should also be
able to recognize what is perhaps the most vulgar national variation of the
Rococo furnishing style -- the so-called **Venetian** Rococo style.   We also
took a few minutes to look at Renaissance toilet furniture; you will recall
that, throughout our survey classes, we have periodically looked at the ways
in which earlier societies (as far back as the Minoans) dealt with this issue.
In the Renaissance this matter was dealt with by means of chamber pots that
were housed in nicely crafted wooden cabinets or in faux pieces of furniture
such as imitation books on a pedestal.  It was in the Rococo period that
Western societies first started to develop smaller cabinets and toilettes and
that these spaces were differentiated by gender for the first time as well.
Moving on to the interior spaces of the first modern style -- Neo-Classicism
-- we concentrated on the most famous Neo-Classic interior architect -- Robert
Adam.  Adam, like Jefferson, was a Roman Revivalist.  Indeed, he published a
major work on the Palace of Diocletian just as his fellow countryman, James
Stuart, had published a major work on Athens; both illustrated works were
published in the early 1760s.  Adam was fascinated, too, with the interiors
that were just then being unearthed at Pompeii.  His interior style mimicked
those ancient Roman interiors.  Although light and somewhat feminine like the
Rococo style, an Adamesque interior was nevertheless based on the
archaeological discoveries from the ancient Roman era and included motifs and
details such as the **festoon** , the **swag** , **rinceau** ornamental lines,
and **medallions** as well as depictions of urns and classical figures.   So
popular was the style that it came to be named for Adam -- the Adamesque.  In
America, the corresponding style was the so-called Federal Style so named
because it was popular in the first few decades of the federation of the
United States.  Nonetheless, it also exhibits the use of swags and festoons
and all the rest.  One of the most famous American Adamesque (Federal Style)
interiors is the dining room of George Washington's home, Mount Vernon.  To
see a detail of that dining room and to take a virtual tour of the rest of
Mount Vernon, click here:
<<http://www.mountvernon.org/mtour/ldinmolding_lg.asp>>.   We briefly examined
free-standing pieces of furniture from other early modern revivals, noting in
each case how the furniture embodied the same stylistic details and formal
characteristics that one would find in the corresponding building styles --
solid geometrical forms for Renaissance Revival chairs _versus_ the
curvilinear and plastic forms of a Second Empire Baroque chair or pinnacles on
a Neo-Gothic chair _versus_ an onion dome on an Exotic Revival grandfather
clock.   Special attention was devoted to the work of Catharine Esther
Beecher.  Students should be able to identify Catharine's slightly more famous
sister, Harriet, and describe her importance in American social and political
history.  Catharine promoted the Neo-Gothic style as the best sort of housing
style for the average American family in her treatise _The American's Woman's
Home_ of 1869.   Why?  How did Catharine's work give rise to these three
American sayings?   **_"A place for everything and everything in its
place."_** **_"A woman's work is never done."_** **_"A woman's place is in the
home."_**   What is especially ironic about the last saying as it relates to
the life work of Catharine Esther Beecher?  Incidentally, with regard to the
American Neo-Gothic cottage, what is **bargeboard** (also called
**vergeboard** )?  And what is it meant to mimic?   Finally, we came to the
English Arts and Crafts movement.  Founded in 1861 by William Morris as a
result of the revulsion he felt when looking upon the machine-made, mass-
produced household objects on display in the Crystal Palace, this movement
sought to bring good quality design back to domestic architecture and
furnishings.  Believing that the machine was an evil force in society, Morris
wished to return to a pre-industrial period of time -- the Middle Ages -- when
any object was **crafted** by hand and had a simple yet **artistically**
pleasing form well suited to the function or purpose of that object (hence the
name " **Arts** and **Crafts** ").  Modern, mass-produced objects were too
shoddy according to Morris.  Morris predicated his artistic movement on the
following principles:  ( **a** ) handicrafts wherein the artist/architect
becomes a craftsman once again thus assuring good quality designs [the
artistically illiterate factory owners and workers had no sense of good
taste]; ( **b** ) honesty of materials -- brick should look like brick and
stone like stone and so on; ( **c** ) total design wherein the designer
/architect should take responsibility for the entire work thus designing not
just the shell of the building but all of its contents as well in an effort to
present a unified artistic statement in the end; and ( **d** ) vernacular
styles used as the starting point for discovering a new path to a modern
architecture.  What is a **vernacular** building style?   Morris's own home,
the Red House at Bexley Heath, England, is considered to be the **first** Arts
and Crafts house.   Although loosely based on some identifiable Gothic forms,
this house bespeaks more of a vernacular origin.  Students should be able to
discuss its breakthrough architectural features in the context of the major
tenets of the Arts and Crafts style.  Why did the design represent such a
refreshing approach to domestic architecture?  Which of its features st

