
    **HIS 225: NATIVE AMERICAN HISTORY**
    **SPRINGFIELD COLLEGE IN ILLINOIS**
    **NEW HORIZONS**
    
     
    
          
    
    
     Session A, Spring 2002
    Monday 6-10pm, Jan 14-March 9
    Dawson 22 (computer lab)

|

    
    
    Instructor: Pete Ellertsen
    Becker L-9, 525-1420 ext. 519
    E-mail: ellertsenpete@yahoo.com  
  
---|---  
**www.sci.edu/classes/ellertsen/his22570syl.html**

**_" A people without a history is like wind in the buffalo grass." \-- Sioux
proverb_**

**_" From 1750 to 1850 was a century of crisis for the Cherokee. Those were
years of struggle and change, and the people's pain was evident by the scars
that remained. However the Eastern Band of [this] Native American people has
weathered that terrible crisis and has emerged with a sense of true tribal
identity." \-- T. Walter Middleton, _Qualla: Home of the Middle Cherokee
Settlement _(1999)_**



History 225-70 meets Monday nights from 6 to 10 p.m. in Dawson Hall, Room D-22
(computer lab). Instructor is Pete Ellertsen, Becker L-9, telephone
217-525-1420x519. e-mail ellertsen@sci.edu. Office hours TBA. Home: 545
Feldkamp, Springfield, IL 62704. tel. 217-793-2587. e-mail:
ellertsenpete@yahoo.com. Syllabus/links at above Web address.

**I. Catalog description.** A survey of the social, cultural, and political
responses of Native American peoples in their encounters with Britist colonial
authorities, the United States government, and European-American society from
the time of contact through periods of conquest, removal, assimilation, and
the current restoration of tribal government and Native culture.

**II. Textbook and materials.** James Wilson, _The Earth Shall Weep: A History
of Native America_ (Grove, 1999); Arnold Krupat and Brian Swann, ed., _Here
First: Autobiographical Essays by Native American Writers_ (Modern Library,
2000): Brian Swann, ed., _Native American Songs and Poems_ (Dover, 1996). In
addition, we will study the World Wide Web sites linked to this
syllabus/calendar below; they are to be considered required reading.

_Supplementary material:_ A comprehensive Web site, with links to resources on
Native culture, history, as well as representations in the movies, the media
and American popular culture, is maintained by Will Karkavelas of Osaka
University in Japan at
[http://www.lang.osaka-u.ac.jp/~krkvls/naindex.html.](http://www.lang.osaka-u.ac.jp/~krkvls/naindex.html)
You can find detailed histories of individual nations or tribes by following
this link to the First Nations website.

[![](Pix/fnsmlogo2.jpg)](http://www.tolatsga.org/Compacts.html)

**NOT FOR KIDS ONLY:** One of the most comprehensive and helpful collections
of links is the KidInfo website put together by Linda Guterba, a secondary
school teacher from Ohio, at
[http://www.kidinfo.com/American_History/Native_Americans.html.](http://www.kidinfo.com/American_History/Native_Americans.html)Check
it out -- if the information you need is on the internet, KidInfo will
probably have the links. Another very useful site, with links to everything
from "Anthropology & Archeology" to "Women" (alphabetically), is NativeWeb at
[http://www.nativeweb.org/.](http://www.nativeweb.org/) One of several
advantages to NativeWeb is that it provides information not only about Native
Americans but also indigenous peoples worldwide. Yahoo! maintains a directory
of current news stories and links at
[http://dailynews.yahoo.com/fc/US/Native_American_News/.](http://dailynews.yahoo.com/fc/US/Native_American_News/)
An excellent set of links by Dr. Jennifer Porter of Memorial University of
Newfoundland for a Religious Studies on Native American spirituality is at
[http://www.courses.mun.ca/rels2811/earth.html.
](http://www.courses.mun.ca/rels2811/earth.html)If you are reading this
syllabus on hard copy, e.g. on paper in the bookstore, you can find it on the
Internet by copying the URL for this page into the address field of your Web
browser: www.sci.edu/classes/ellertsen/his22570syl.html (with no punctuation
at the end).

**III. Goals and Objectives.**

  * To develop an awareness of U.S. history from the point of view of the American Indian and learn how Native American peoples have influenced the development of U.S. society from 1492 to the present.
  * To reach a deeper understanding of crucial events, particularly during the 19th and 20th centuries, that shaped and altered Native cultures and sovereignty.
  * To recognize the cultural presuppositions and attitudes behind U.S. government policy toward Native peoples and how these attitudes and policies have shifted over time.
  * To become conversant with Native American cultural attitudes, spiritual values and heritage as they have been maintained over the years and reawakened during the present time.
  * To develop skills in study, research and oral presentation, including facility with using the World Wide Web for research and evaluating Web sites for content. 

In addition to the goals and objectives listed above, I am guided in teaching
the course by SCI's statements of mission and goals, at
[http://www.sci.edu/assessment/collegegoals.html.](http://www.sci.edu/assessment/collegegoals.html)

**IV. Teaching Methods.** History is more than a list of dates and names. It
is an accumulation of ideas and values that can be drawn upon so we can survey
the past, find understanding for the present and better plan for the future.
This course is approached from a sociological and cultural as well as a
historical perspective, and Native as well as European-American viewpoints
will be addressed. Methodology may include class discussion, lecture, small
group activities, student presentations, guest speakers and/or videotapes.
There will be written assignments (both in- and out-of-class), conferences and
quizzes as needed; a written journal is due every week at the beginning of
class.

**V. Course Requirements.** As follows:

_Attendance Policy._ Class attendance is mandatory. This course is a highly
accelerated course which will meet only once a week for eight weeks;
therefore, students will need to take a great deal of responsibility for their
own learning outcomes - i.e., for what they learn. It is understandable that
illnesses and emergencies may arise. In either case, please notify the school
office or leave a message with the instructor by e-mail at
ellertsenpete@yahoo.com or telephone at 217 525-1420, ext. 519. If a student
misses a class, it is that student's responsibility to get class notes and
assignments from a classmate; in-class work, by its very nature, cannot be
made up. Class attendance will directly impact your final grade! **Please
note:** We will have classes the nights of Martin Luther King Day and
Presidents' Day.

_Reading assignments._ Please see course calendar below. In addition to the
textbooks, I In addition, I have linked the electronic copy of this
syllabus/calendar to World Wide Web sites that will allow us to focus on
certain aspects of the culture and history of the Haudonosaunee (Iroquois),
Lakota (Sioux), Cherokee, Siletz and Hopi, among others. Other Web sites will
allow us to compare the experience of Native Americans to other indigenous
peoples worldwide. The linked pages are required reading: Follow the hypertext
links provided below to each. If you do not have ready access to the Web at
home, you will be able to print out most of the material during class as long
as you do not disrupt class activities.

_Written and oral assignments._ Every week you will write a 2- to 3-page
journal on a specific topic listed in the course calendar below. These
journals are designed to help you focus on the topic(s) we will cover in
class. There will be a midterm and a final exam. Each student will prepare a
written term paper (8-10 pages) and deliver an oral report on a Native
American people, or a related event or subject to be agreed upon by the
instructor and the student. Additional in-class writing may be assigned
without notice.

_Means of evaluation._ Journals will be graded for content, including clarity
of thought and the use of relevant detail to support your conclusions. A final
examination will be given, consisting of essay and short-answer questions.
Quizzes and in-class journal exercises may be assigned without notice at the
discretion of the instructor. Contribution to class discussion and
participation in on-line research exercises in class will weigh heavily in
each student's grade. Final grade weighting is as follows:

  * Class participation, 25 percent
  * Written/oral presentation, 25 percent
  * Final Exam, 25 percent
  * Journals, 25 percent 

Grading scale: A = 90-100. B = 80-89. C = 70-79. D = 60-69. E = 0-59.

**VII. Course Outline.** Please note that the historical developments listed
here overlap considerably, and the labels assigned to different periods are
broad generalizations.

  1. Scientific and traditional views of history; cultural attitudes
  2. Native cultures at the time of contact (ca. 50,000 B.C.E.-1600 C.E.)
  3. Contact with Europeans: Cultural barriers to understanding (1492-present?)
  4. Conflict: Conquistadors, colonists, "praying Indians" and warfare (1519-1763)
  5. Separation: Indian Wars, "Civilized Tribes," removal to reservations (1763-1890)
  6. Forced assimilation: Reservation life, boarding schools, allotment (1887-1934)
  7. Tribal restoration: "Indian New Deal," conflicting federal policies, termination and tribal self-government (1934-present)
  8. Cultural renewal: "Red Power" activism, education, the arts, Native heritage, tribal artifacts and freedom of religion (ca. 1970-present). 

See also the tentative Calendar below.

**VIII. Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).** Springfield College in
Illinois provides individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodations to
participate in educational programs, actives and services. Students with
disabilities requiring accommodations to participate in class activities or
meet course requirements should contact the Dean of Student Affairs as early
as possible.

**IX. Names.** Following the usage of many -- although not all -- writers of
Native American heritage, I use the terms "Native American" and "American
Indian" interchangeably. "First Nations" and "indigenous people" also are
commonly encountered, especially in Canada. Many Native peoples now prefer to
name themselves in their own language rather than English; I follow their
usage, with the English name in parentheses \-- as with the Dine (Navajo)
people. For U.S. Census figures on the preferences of different ethnic groups,
see
[http://www.infoplease.com/ipa/A0762158.html.](http://www.infoplease.com/ipa/A0762158.html)

**X. Calendar.** As follows:

**Week 1: Native peoples, cultures and values**

_Complete readings and write journal before class meets Jan. 14._ Read Wilson,
note on terminology, p. xv; xxix; Chapters 1-2, pp. 3-40; Swann, pp. 1-13;
essays in _Here First_ by Sherman Alexie, pp. 6-14; Duane Big Eagle, pp.
42-62.

**_Journal: What is your image of Native Americans? Do you believe there are
typical Native traits? If so, what are they? From what sources have you gotten
your picture of American Indians - e.g., family heritage, powwows, movies and
TV entertainment shows, off-the-road vehicle commercials, Chief Illiniwek and
the Atlanta Braves, Boy Scouts or Girl Scouts, New Age gurus, reading history,
novels, watching the Discovery channel, visiting a reservation, or a trip to
Arizona and New Mexico? What do you hope to learn from History 225-70? No
promises, but I'll try to honor requests -- i.e. take your interests into
account as I plan lessons._**

In class we will explore some typical (and not-so-typical) Native cultures and
cultural values, by visiting and discussing the following sites on the World
Wide Web: (1) the American Indian Culture Research Center's site at Blue Cloud
Abbey in South Dakota at [http://www.bluecloud.org/dakota.html,
](http://www.bluecloud.org/dakota.html)especially the pages on Native and
European [cultural values](http://www.bluecloud.org/13.html) and concepts of
[time;](http://www.bluecloud.org/timecom.html) the Dakota (Sioux) [sacred
pipe](http://www.bluecloud.org/2.html) ceremony; the stories of [White Buffalo
Calf](http://www.bluecloud.org/42.html) and [Wakantanka, the Breath
Giver](http://www.bluecloud.org/3.html); (2) biographies of Blessed Kateri
Tekakwitha, a Mohawk woman who has been proposed for canonization, at
<http://www.catholic.org/saints/saints/kateritekakwitha.html> and
[http://www.bluecloud.org/tekakwitha.html;](http://www.bluecloud.org/tekakwitha.html)
(3) an educator's analysis of common stereotypes of Native Americans at
<http://www.hanksville.org/sand/stereotypes/pewe.html>; (4) another
stereotype, Chief Seattle's alleged "speech" on the environment at
[http://www.chiefseattle.com/history/chiefseattle/speech/speech.htm
](http://www.chiefseattle.com/history/chiefseattle/speech/speech.htm%20)and
<http://www.thehistorynet.com/WildWest/articles/02965_text.htm>; and (5) the
following links from the Haudenosaunee Home Page at
<http://www.sixnations.org/>: "Ten [Important Points to
Remember](http://sixnations.buffnet.net/Culture/?article=ten_important_points)
About the Haudonosaunee" and "What are the [Underlying
Values](http://sixnations.buffnet.net/Culture/?article=underlying_values) of
Haudenosaunee Culture?"

**Week 2: European contact and conflict**

_Complete readings and write journal before class meets Jan. 21._ Read Wilson,
Chapters 3-5, pp. 43-130; and the _Here First_ essay by John Smelcer, pp.
321-36.

**_Journal: Were there values in Native culture and European culture, in your
opinion, that made conflict inevitable between the Indians and British
colonists? Who was more at fault, the Native people or the Europeans; or were
both at fault? Could conflict have been avoided? If so, how? If not, why
not?_**

On the Web, we'll look at two case studies of how European and Native
perceptions interacted in early American history: (1) the real story of
Pocahontas, as historians of the Virginia Association for the Preservation of
Antiquities tells it, at <http://www.apva.org/history/pocahont.html>; a review
of the 1995 Disney movie _Pocahontas_ that looks at issues of historical
accuracy at <http://www.lib.berkeley.edu/MRC/Pocahontas.html>; and Roger
Ebert's review of the movie in _The Chicago Sun-Times_ at
<http://www.suntimes.com/ebert/ebert_reviews/1995/06/984151.html>. (2) We'll
read about the Wampanoag people and their relations with the Europeans who
settled in their homeland after 1620, go to "Plimoth-on-Web: The Library" at
<http://www.plimoth.org/Library/library.htm> and read the history of the
Wampanoag at <http://www.plimoth.org/Library/Wampanoag/wamp.htm> and how
modern researchers reconstruct the actual first Thanksgiving at
[http://www.plimoth.org/Library/Thanksgiving/thanksgi.htm.](http://www.plimoth.org/Library/Thanksgiving/thanksgi.htm)
To find out what the Wampanoag people are like today, visit their pages at
<http://www.vineyard.net/org/mvcc/wpinfo.html> and
[http://www.newbedford.com/ntvamerican.html.](http://www.newbedford.com/ntvamerican.html)

**Week 3: War, separation and trail(s) of tears**

_Complete readings and write journal before class meets Jan. 28._ Read Wilson,
Chapters 6-7, pp. 132-213. and the essay in _Here First_ by by Evelina Zuni
Lucero, pp. 247-61.

**_Journal: U.S. Presidents from George Washington on made it their policy to
find space for Native Americans to develop a "civilized" society away from the
pressure of land-hungry white settlers. Was this policy realistic? Is there
any way the Indian peoples could have kept their land?_**

On the Web: For an overview of the Cherokee nation's experience of European-
American contact, war and removal to what is now Oklahoma, read: (1) an
excellent history of the Cherokee people in _About North Georgia,_ a
commercial Web site based in Cherokee County, Ga. (now suburban Atlanta) at
[http://ngeorgia.com/history/findex.html.](http://ngeorgia.com/history/findex.html)
Click here for [Part I,](http://ngeorgia.com/history/cherokeehistory.html)
here for [Part II](http://ngeorgia.com/history/cherokeehistory2.html) and here
for [Part III.](http://ngeorgia.com/history/cherokeehistory3.html) (2)
President Andrew Jackson's rationale for Native removal to beyond the
Mississippi River at
<http://www.pbs.org/weta/thewest/resources/archives/two/removal.htm>; and (3)
first-person accounts of the Trail of Tears by a 9-year-old Cherokee boy named
Samuel Cloud, written down from oral tradition by his great-great grandson at
<http://pages.tca.net/martikw/samuel.html>; and a U.S. Army guard named John
G. Burnett at <http://www.powersource.com/cherokee/burnett.html>. For an
unhappy footnote, we will take notice of how the "Five Civilized Tribes,"
including the Cherokee, got embroiled in the Civil War, at
<http://users.erols.com/jreb/oklahoma.html> and what happened to the
Cherokees' land at the end of the war, in an 1866 treaty dictated by the U.S.,
at <http://snowbird.virtualave.net/1866.htm>.

We will also look at the Native peoples who were driven out of Illinois. Read:
(1) the histories of the Illiniwek confederation at
[http://www.dickshovel.com/ill.html;](http://www.dickshovel.com/ill.html) the
Kickapoo at
[http://www.dickshovel.com/kick.html;](http://www.dickshovel.com/kick.html)
and the Potawatomi at
[http://www.dickshovel.com/pota.html;](http://www.dickshovel.com/pota.html)
(2) a diary of the Potawatomi "Trail of Death" which went through Springfield
and out the Old Jacksonville Road in 1838, at
[http://www.ukans.edu/~kansite/pbp/history/trail_mtls.html;](http://www.ukans.edu/~kansite/pbp/history/trail_mtls.html)
(3) a (nearly) up-to-date list of powwows in Illinois at
<http://members.tripod.com/~windthruherhair/il.html>; and accounts of an
annual powwow on the site of the grand village of the Kickapoo near
Bloomington at <http://www.geocities.com/~soarring/KickShort.html> and
<http://www.voznuestra.com/Americas/_1998/_December/11>

**Week 4: The Southwest and 'Manifest Destiny'**

_Complete readings and write journal before class meets Feb. 4._ Read Wilson,
Chapter 7, pp. 173-213; and the essays in _Here First_ by by Evelina Zuni
Lucero, pp. 247-61; Luci Tapahonso, pp. 338-51; and Ofelia Zepeda, pp. 405-20.

**_The Spanish tried to Christianize the Indians in the territory they
controlled, and a mestizo culture evolved there with a blending of Spanish and
indigenous customs. Yet relations between Natives and the Spanish, later the
Mexicans, were also marked by conflict. Did their policy work better than that
followed in "anglo"_ _America? Or did either work? Why do you say so?_**

A case study: the Pueblo Indians of the Southwest, successfully resisted
Spanish/Mexican pressure to assimilate and developed a syncretic culture with
features of both. We'll read an overview of Pueblo Indian pre-history and
culture near Albuquerque, N.M., at <http://www.cabq.gov/aes/s3pueblo.html> ; a
report of the Pueblo revolt against Spanish rule in 1680 at
http://www.pbs.org/weta/thewest/resources/archives/one/pueblo.htm; a tourist
guide to Acoma Pueblo, now considered the oldest continuously occupied city in
the U.S., at <http://www.nmmagazine.com/features/acoma.html>; and a story on
restoration of the Spanish church there at
<http://www.cstones.org/projects/Acoma_Pueblo/>. We will read writing by and
about Acoma Pueblo poet Simon Ortiz at
[http://www.ipl.org/cgi/ref/native/browse.pl/A93;](http://www.ipl.org/cgi/ref/native/browse.pl/A93)[
](http://www.hanksville.org/voyage/poems/cdc/cdc1.html)<http://www.hanksville.org/voyage/poems/natpark.html>
and
[http://web.nmsu.edu/~tomlynch/swlit.ortiz.html.](http://web.nmsu.edu/~tomlynch/swlit.ortiz.html)
For some background on Mestizo culture (a mixture of Native and Spanish),
written by students at Corozal Community College, Corozal Town, Belize, go to
<http://www.corozal.com/ccc/default.htm> ...

**Week 5: Chief Joseph, Custer and military annihilation**

_Complete readings and write journal before class meets Feb. 11._ Read Wilson,
Chapters 8-9, pages 214-288; and Swann, pp. 11-15.

**_Journal: Was the Ghost Dance movement dangerous? If so, to whom? Who, in
your opinion, was to blame for the massacre at Wounded Knee? If you had been
there, what might you have done head off the confrontation on Dec. 29, 1890,
before people died? Or was it inevitable?_**

Web sites: We'll look at the Ghost Dance movement, and the beginnings of
allotment. (1) A remarkable set of contemporary (1891-93) photographs of the
Ghost Dance, narrated by anthropologist James Mooney, is collected at
<http://php.indiana.edu/~tkavanag/visual5.html>. MSNBC has a brief account,
with songs linked to it, at
<http://www.msnbc.com/onair/msnbc/timeandagain/archive/wknee/ghost.asp?cp1=1>.
On the 1890 massacre at Wounded Knee, read an overview and an account by a
U.S. Army scout at <http://www.ibiscom.com/knee.htm>; an admittedly biased
site that takes the First Nations point of view at
<http://www.dickshovel.com/WKmasscre.html>; and extensive excerpts from
primary (first-hand) accounts of the massacre by historian Sally Wagner at
<http://www.dickshovel.com/WagnerA.html>. (2) To see the relationship between
allotment, which came to shape U.S. policy toward the Native peoples well into
the 20th century, and 19th-century military conquest, read an excerpt from
U.S. Pres. Benjamin Harrison's 1891 State of the Union Address at
<http://longman.awl.com/garraty/primarysource_17_2.htm>.

**Week 6: 'Killing the Indian' and cultural assimilation**

_Complete readings and write journal before class meets Feb. 18._ Read Wilson,
Chapter 10, pp. 289-329; Gloria Bird, pp. 63-74; and Greg Sarris, pp. 297-309.

**_Journal: It has been said that the missionaries of the late 19th and early
20th centuries, although well meaning, did more to destroy Native American
culture than the U.S. Army ever did. Are there ways they could have
"civilized" the Indians while respecting their culture? Or did their own
cultural values make that impossible?_**

Web sites: An excerpt from the Dawes Act, which established allotment, is at
<http://www-personal.umich.edu/~jamarcus/dawes.html>, and a first-hand account
of allotment among the Nez Pierce is at
<http://www.pbs.org/weta/thewest/resources/archives/eight/fletcher.htm>. To
read up on U.S. Bureau of Indian Affairs boarding schools, see "They
Sacrificed for Our Survival," an overview of an Eastern Washington University
photo exhibit at <http://visual.arts.ewu.edu/ets/315sum.html> and the school
profiles of [Carlisle Industrial School
](http://visual.arts.ewu.edu/ets/315carl.html)in Pennsylvania, [DeSmet Mission
School](http://visual.arts.ewu.edu/ets/315desm.html) in Idaho and [Chemawa
Indian School](http://visual.arts.ewu.edu/ets/315chem.html) in Oregon; and an
[Associated Press](http://www.canoe.ca/CNEWSFeatures9904/28_indians.html)
story on the schools' lasting effects, both good and bad.

As a case study, we will focus on the experience of the Siletz Indians of the
Pacific coast. Read: (1) an overview titled "A Brief Interpretive History of
the Rogue River War and the Coast, Alsea, and Siletz Reservations to 1894" at
<http://www.csusm.edu/nadp/subject.htm> in the Native American Documents
collection at California State University at San Marcos, and the following
documents: A collection of brief
[speeches](http://www.csusm.edu/nadp/d73.htm#1) by Indian leaders in 1862; a
[petition ](http://www.csusm.edu/nadp/d94.htm#3)of "chiefs and head men" in
1879; and the Siletz Agency's annual reports for
[1882](http://www.csusm.edu/nadp/d54.htm#200) and
[1903](http://www.csusm.edu/nadp/d57.htm#292).

**Week 7: Tribal government and 'Red Power'**

_Complete readings and write journal before class meets Feb. 25._ Read Wilson,
Chapter 11, pp. 330-69; Swann, pp. 16-27; and essays in _Here First_ by
Gogisgi (Carroll Arnett), pp. 15-29; Patricia Penn Hilden, pp. 182-96; and
Elizabeth Woody, pp. 381-404

**_No journal. Term papers and presentations are due beginning this week --
exact schedule TBA. Your final exam, a take-home, will be assigned, due next
week at the beginning of class._**

On the Web, we will surf the official Web sites of one of the so-called "Five
Civilized Tribes," the Cherokee Nation in Tallequah, Okla., at
<http://www.cherokee.org/> and the deeply traditional Hopi Tribe in Arizona at
<http://www.hopi.nsn.us/> to see how two different peoples respond to the
challenge of maintaining their traditions in the 21st century. We'll also look
at the coverage of tribal politics nationwide in _Indian Country,_ a newspaper
at <http://www.indiancountry.com/> with offices in South Dakota and upstate
New York We will also read a brief history of the American Indian Movement at
<http://www-personal.umich.edu/~jamarcus/aima.html> (click forward in the
timeline to read about AIM's demonstration at the [Bureau of Indian
Affairs](http://www-personal.umich.edu/~jamarcus/webia.html) and occupation of
[Wounded Knee](http://www-personal.umich.edu/~jamarcus/wknee.htm) in 1973),
and a remembrance of Wounded Knee II by Carter Camp, an AIM activist who was
there, at <http://www.mail-archive.com/nativenews@mlists.net/msg04875.html>.

**Week 8: Cultural heritage and rebirth**

_Complete readings and write journal before class meets March 4._ Read Wilson,
Chapter 12, pp. 370-408, and Epilogue, pp. 409-28; Swann, pp. 28-54; and
essays in _Here First_ by Nora Marks Dauenhauer, pp. 91-109; Ray Geiogamah,
pp. 143-63; Rex Lee Jim, pp. 228-46.

**_Term papers and presentations conclude. Final exam._**

To see how Native American issues in the U.S. relate to those of indigenous
people worldwide, see an article on indigenous people's issues at
<http://www.nativeweb.org/pages/legal/peacework.html> by Ann Stewart in
Peacework magazine (which has a good definition of "indigenous") . If you
can't go to a pow wow, the next best thing is a lavishly illustrated site on
pow wow traditions originating with Southern Plains Indians at
[http://library.thinkquest.org/3081/. ](http://library.thinkquest.org/3081/)We
will also visit the Gathering of Nations pow wow in Albuquerque, N.M., one of
the biggest and best nationwide, at
<http://gatheringofnations.com/pages/powwow.htm>. We will also discuss
Spokane/Coeur d'Alene writer Sherman Alexie, one of several Native authors of
substantial literary merit. Read an interview with him in the Canadian
magazine _Aboriginal Voices_ at
<http://www.aboriginalvoices.com/1997/04-01/sherman_alexie.html>; an essay by
titled "I Always Hated Tonto" at <http://www.fallsapart.com/tonto.html>; his
poems "Water" at <http://www.fallsapart.com/water.html>; and "A Reservation
Table of the Elements" at
[http://arts.endow.gov/explore/Writers/Reservation.html](http://www.fallsapart.com/water.html);
and his poems on the Holocaust and Walt Whitman at
<http://www.geocities.com/Paris/Cafe/2726/Sherman.html>.

