Columbia University Political Science W4804y  Spring 1998







_

THE MAKING OF AMERICAN FOREIGN POLICY

_





_

Class:_ Mon./Weds. 11:00-12:15  Professor Richard K. Betts

_

Office Hours:_ Weds. 2:30-5:00,  Institute of War and Peace

or by appointment; phone x4-7325  Studies, IAB, Room 1328



How is foreign policy shaped by government structure, political culture,
organizational process, partisanship, public opinion, individual psychology,
economic interests, or other causes? Why do outcomes of policy implementation
so often differ from intentions of decision-makers? The course emphasizes
theories about the aforementioned categories and themes, in terms of issues in
defense, intelligence, political intervention, and diplomacy. There is some
attention to economic policy but much less than it deserves; students
interested mainly in foreign economic policymaking are referred to U6860.
Theories are illustrated with examples from cases since 1940, but this is not
a course on the substance of foreign policy (for which students are referred
to W4812 or G8865), nor is it a "how to" course on the current nuts-and-bolts
of the policy process.

_

Requirements:_ General knowledge of U.S. foreign policy in the past half-
century is assumed. All students must (1) complete assigned readings (denoted
by Arabic numerals below); (2) attend lectures; (3) take the three-hour final
examination on the date scheduled (check it before committing yourself to the
course). _Make-up examinations will not be allowed except for standard reasons
of certified medical necessity or genuine family emergency_. (Students who
miss the exam and expect to be excused must secure the endorsement of the
relevant Dean or supply certification of the reason to the instructor.)
_Undergraduates_ (4) must also attend discussion sections (they are optional
for graduate students) and (5) must take a _mid-term examination on March 11_
, covering sections I-VI of the syllabus. The mid-term is optional for
graduate students. _No student may take both this course and Leon Sigal's
U6870.

_

**_

Advice_ :** This course is intended to be challenging and difficult. Those who
cannot or do not wish to complete and ponder a demanding load of reading
should not take it. Those who fail to complete the reading should not expect
to do well, but may be able to _pass_ the examination by concentrating on
items 2-3, 5-16, 18-19, 23-24, 26-27. Those who intend to take this course to
fulfill a requirement should be sure to consider the other courses that would
cover the requirement, in order to be certain that this is the one they
prefer.

Students who are not generally familiar with U.S. government and foreign
policy should skim a primer or survey such as Gregory Treverton, _Making
American Foreign Policy_ (Prentice-Hall, 1993); Roger Hilsman, _The Politics
of Policy Making in Defense and Foreign Affairs_ (Prentice-Hall, 1987); James
M. McCormick, _American Foreign Policy and Process_ , Third Edition (F.E.
Peacock, 1997); or James A. Nathan and James K. Oliver, _Foreign Policy Making
and the American Political System_ , Third Edition (Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1994).



I. _ Introduction:

Foreign Policymaking and International Relations Theory

Policy: Structure, Process, and Substance

Arguments Against Studying Process

Limits of Realist and Systemic Theories

Rationality as a Benchmark

_

1. Kenneth N. Waltz, _Theory of International Politics_ (Addison-Wesley, 1979), chaps. 2, 4.

2. Graham T. Allison, _Essence of Decision_ (Little, Brown, 1971). _NB: This book is assigned for its theoretical content. The historical content, though close enough to accuracy to serve this purpose, has been surpassed by later works that could exploit declassified sources. Though not required for this course, those interested in the crisis should see especially Ernest R. May and Philip D. Zelikow, eds., _The Kennedy Tapes: Inside the White House During the Cuban Missile Crisis_ (Harvard University Press, 1997).

_







II. _ Political Culture, History, and Values

National Origins, Character, and Style

Shared Ideology: Liberal Absolutism

Interests and Elites: Leftist and Rightist Critiques

Is the American Outlook Unique or Typical?

_

3. Stanley Hoffmann, _Gulliver's Troubles: Or, the Setting of American Foreign Policy_ (McGraw-Hill, 1968), chaps. 4-6.

_

_





III. _ Constitutional Constraints

Separation of Powers

Partisanship and Competing Ideologies

Divided Government

Legalism

Public Opinion and Elections

_

4. Thomas E. Mann, "Making Foreign Policy: President and Congress," in Mann, ed., _A Question of Balance_ (Brookings Institution, 1990).

5. Kenneth N. Waltz, _Foreign Policy and Democratic Politics_ (Little Brown, 1967), chaps. 1, 3-5, 11.

6. Louis Henkin, _Constitutionalism, Democracy, and Foreign Affairs_ (Columbia University Press, 1990), chap. 3.

7. Robert Y. Shapiro and Benjamin I. Page, "Foreign Policy and Public Opinion," in David A. Deese, ed., _The New Politics of American Foreign Policy_ (St. Martin's Press, 1994).







IV. _Organizational Complexity and Political Control

Bureaucratic Dynamics and Interests

Goal Displacement

Decision and Implementation

Negative and Positive Views of Executive Pluralism

Critiques of Bureaucratic Politics Analysis

_

**** _NB: First review Allison, _Essence of Decision_ , chaps. 3-7._****

8. Stephen D. Krasner, "Are Bureaucracies Important? or Allison Wonderland," _Foreign Policy_ No. 7 (Summer 1972)

**_

or

**_

Robert J. Art, "Bureaucratic Politics and American Foreign Policy: A
Critique," _Policy Sciences_ 4, no. 4 (December 1973)

**_

or

**_

Jonathan Bendor and Thomas H. Hammond, "Rethinking Allison's Models,"
_American Political Science Review_ 86, no. 2 (June 1992).  (Graduate students
in political science should be sure to read the Bendor and Hammond critique.)

9. Charles E. Lindblom, "The Science of 'Muddling Through',"  _Public Administration Review_ vol. 19 (Spring 1959).

10. Morton Halperin, with assistance of Arnold Kanter and Priscilla Clapp, _Bureaucratic Politics and Foreign Policy_ (Brookings, 1974), chaps. 3, 5, 10, 13-15.

11. Alexander George, _Presidential Decision-Making in Foreign Policy_ (Westview, 1980), chaps. 1-4, 6-12.









V. _ Experts: Professionalism, Guilds, Power

Generalists and Specialists

Sociology of the Permanent Government

Political Discipline or Micromanagement?

_

12. Chris Argyris, _Some Causes of Organizational Ineffectiveness Within the Department of State_ , Occasional Paper No. 2 (Department of State, Center for International Systems Research, January 1967).

13. Richard K. Betts, _Soldiers, Statesmen, and Cold War Crises_ , Second Edition (Columbia University Press, 1991), chaps. 1, 3-4.

_

_







VI. _Leadership: Psychology, Beliefs, Action

What Difference Do Individuals Make?

Freudian/Emotional Influences

Cognitive/Physical Constraints

Psychological Health and Political Wisdom

_

14. Alexander L. George and Juliette L. George, _Woodrow Wilson and Colonel House_ (Dover, 1964), chaps. 1-2, 8, 11-15.

15. John D. Steinbruner, _The Cybernetic Theory of Decision_ (Princeton University Press, 1974), chaps. 1, 3, 4.

_

NB: Review Halperin, _Bureaucratic Politics and Foreign Policy_ , chap. 15.

_

_





_



VII. _ Military Policy

Politics, Economics, and Strategy

Vested Interests and Defense Programs

Patterns of Influence

Defense Budgets: Components and Trends

Issues After the Cold War

_

16. Samuel P. Huntington, _The Common Defense_ (Columbia University Press, 1961), chaps. 1, 9-19, 28-30.

17. Betts, _Soldiers, Statesmen, and Cold War Crises_ , chaps. 5-9.





VIII. _Economic Policy

Jurisdictions: Coordination and Dispersion

Economic Policy and Security Policy

Domestic Interests

_

18. I. M. Destler, _American Trade Politics_ , Third Edition (Institute for International Economics and the Twentieth Century Fund, 1995), chaps. 2-8.







IX. _Intelligence: Knowledge and Policy

Functions and Institutions

Collection: Overt/Secret/Technical/Human

Analysis: Pluralism and Politicization

When Does Intelligence Matter?

_

19. Richard K. Betts, "Analysis, War, and Decision," _World Politics_ , 31, No. 1 (October, 1978)

**

or

**

Joseph S. Nye, Jr., "Peering Into the Future," _Foreign Affairs_ 73, no. 4
(July/August 1994).

20. U.S. House of Representatives, Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Subcommittee on Oversight and Evaluation, _Staff Report:_ _U.S. Intelligence Performance on Central America: Achievements and Selected Instances of Concern_ , 97th Cong., 2d sess., September 1982.

21. Gregory Treverton, "Intelligence," in Mann, ed., _A Question of Balance_.

22. Anna M. Warrock and Howard Husock, "Taking Toshiba Public," in _Intelligence and Policy Project: Case Book_ (Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, 1991).

_



_







X. _ Political and Military Intervention

Covert Action

Paramilitary Operations

Secrecy and Oversight

War Powers: The Cycle of Controversy

_

23. Lucien S. Vandenbroucke, "Anatomy of a Failure: The Decision to Land at the Bay of Pigs," _Political Science Quarterly_ 99, no. 3 (Fall 1984)

**_

or

**_

Lucien S. Vandenbroucke, _Perilous Options: Special Operations as an
Instrument of U.S. Foreign Policy_ (Oxford University Press, 1993), chap. 9.

24. David Fagelson, "The Constitution and National Security: Covert Action in the Age of Intelligence Oversight," _Journal of Law and Politics_ 5, No. 2, (Winter 1989).

25. John Edward Wiltz, "The MacArthur Inquiry, 1951," in Arthur M. Schlesinger and Roger Bruns, eds., _Congress Investigates: A Documented History, 1792-1974_ (Chelsea House, 1975).

26. Leslie H. Gelb with Richard K. Betts, _The Irony of Vietnam: The System Worked_ (Brookings, 1979), chaps. 1, 3-5, 7-10. 

27. The War Powers Resolution (Public Law 93-148, November 7, 1973).

28. Robert Katzmann, "War Powers," in Mann, ed., _A Question of Balance_.







XI. _ Diplomacy

Regular Mechanisms

Unconventional Channels

Signalling

Mediation

_

29. Henry A. Kissinger, _White House Years_ (Little, Brown, 1979), chaps. 18-19, 24.

**_

or

**_

William B. Quandt, _Camp David: Peacemaking and Politics_ (Brookings
Institution, 1986), chaps. 1, 7-9.

**_

or

**_

Jack F. Matlock, Jr., _Autopsy on an Empire_ (Random House, 1995), chap. 8 **
_ and**_ Amos Perlmutter, "Crisis Management: Kissinger's Middle East
Negotiations," _International Studies Quarterly_ 19, no. 3 (September 1975).

_



_





XII. _Conclusion

_







**_

Supplementary Recommended Readings _ **

Recommended readings are listed for bibliographical purposes for students who
may wish to continue work on this subject in the future. No one is expected to
read any of the recommended readings for this course. Not all items on this
reading list are listed because their arguments are correct or convincing;
indeed many are quite wrong, but are listed as examples of ideas that have
been influential at some point.





_

I. Introduction

_

Richard K. Betts, ed., _Conflict After the Cold War: Arguments on Causes of
War and Peace_ (Macmillan, 1994).

Hans Morgenthau, _Politics Among Nations_ , Fifth edition (Knopf, 1973).

Kenneth N. Waltz, _Man, the State, and War_ (Columbia University Press, 1959).

Robert Keohane, ed., _Neorealism and Its Critics_ (Columbia University Press,
1986).

Arnold Wolfers, _Discord and Collaboration_ (Johns Hopkins Press, 1962).

Sidney Verba, "Assumptions of Rationality and Non-Rationality in Models of the
International System," in Klaus Knorr and Verba, eds., _The International
System_ (Princeton University Press, 1961).

J. David Singer, "The Level-of-Analysis Problem in International Relations,"
in Knorr and Verba, eds., _The International System_.

Michael J. Hogan and Thomas G. Paterson, eds., _Explaining the History of
American Foreign Relations_ (Cambridge University Press, 1991).

_

II. Political Culture, History, and Values

_



Alexis de Tocqueville, _Democracy in America_ , George Lawrence, trans., J.P.
Mayer, ed. (Harper & Row, 1966).

Louis Hartz, _The Liberal Tradition in America_ (Harcourt, Brace, 1955), chap.
11.

Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., "Foreign Policy and the American Character," _Foreign
Affairs_ 62, no. 1 (Fall 1983).

Seymour M. Lipset, _The First New Nation_ (Basic Books, 1963).

Daniel Boorstin, _The Genius of American Politics_ (University of Chicago
Press, 1953).

Richard Hofstadter, _The Paranoid Style in American Politics and Other Essays_
(Knopf, 1965).

Alex Inkeles and Daniel Levinson, "National Character," in Gardner Lindzey,
ed., _Handbook of Social Psychology_ (Addison-Wesley, 1954).

Jack L. Snyder, _The Soviet Strategic Culture_ , R-2154-AF (RAND Corporation,
September 1977).

Gabriel Almond and Sidney Verba, _The Civic Culture_ (Princeton University
Press, 1963).

Gabriel Almond and Sidney Verba, eds., _The Civic Culture Revisited_ (Sage,
1989).

Lucian W. Pye, _Politics, Personality, and Nation Building_ (Yale University
Press, 1962).

Lucian W. Pye, "Political Culture Revisited," _Political Psychology_ 12, no. 3
(1991).

Edward C. Banfield, _The Moral Basis of a Backward Society_ (Free Press,
1958).

Michael H. Hunt, _Ideology and U.S. Foreign Policy_ (Yale University Press,
1987).

Michael Vlahos, "Culture and Foreign Policy," _Foreign Policy_ no. 82 (Spring
1991).

Robert Dallek, _The American Style of Foreign Policy_ (Knopf, 1983).

Raymond Cohen, _Negotiating Across Cultures: Communication Obstacles in
International Diplomacy_ (U.S. Institute of Peace, 1991).

Bruce Russett and Elizabeth Hanson, _Interest and Ideology_ (Freeman, 1975).

George F. Kennan, _American Diplomacy_ (University of Chicago Press, 1951),
Part I.

Tony Smith, _America's Mission: The United States and the Worldwide Struggle
for Democracy in the Twentieth Century_ (Princeton University Press, 1994).

Frank L. Klingberg, "The Historical Alternation of Moods in American Foreign
Policy," _World Politics_ 4, no. 2 (January 1952).

Gabriel Kolko, _The Roots of American Foreign Policy_ (Beacon Press, 1969),
chap. 3.

James Perloff, _The Shadows of Power_ (Western Islands, 1988).

Henry Kissinger, _White House Years_ (Little, Brown, 1979), chap. 3.

_



III. Constitutional Constraints

_



_

The Federalist_ , No. 51.

Theodore J. Lowi, _The End of Liberalism_ , Second Edition (Norton, 1979).

Hoffmann, _Gulliver's Troubles_ , chaps. 8-9.

George C. Edwards III and Wallace Earl Walker, eds., _National Security and
the Constitution_ (Johns Hopkins Press, 1988).

Richard E. Neustadt, _Presidential Power_ , Fifth Edition (Random House,
1988?).

Peter Sperlich, "Bargaining and Overload," in Aaron Wildavsky, ed., _The
Presidency_ (Little, Brown, 1969).

Fred Greenstein, _The Hidden Hand Presidency_ (Basic Books, 1982).

Emmet John Hughes, _The Ordeal of Power_ (Atheneum, 1962).

Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., _The Imperial Presidency_ (Houghton Mifflin, 1973),
chap. 9.

Peter Rodman, "The Imperial Congress," _National Interest_ No. 1 (Fall 1985).

Wilfred E. Binkley, _President and Congress_ , Third edition (Vintage, 1962).

Cecil V. Crabb, Jr. and Pat M. Holt, _Invitation to Struggle_ (Congressional
Quarterly Press, 1989).

Paul E. Peterson, ed., _The President, the Congress, and the Making of Foreign
Policy_ (University of Oklahoma Press, 1994).

James M. Lindsay, _Congress and the Politics of U.S. Foreign Policy_ (Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1994).

Thomas M. Franck and Edward Weisband, _Foreign Policy by Congress_ (Oxford
University Press, 1979).

Randall B. Ripley and James M. Lindsay, eds., _Congress Resurgent: Foreign and
Defense Policy on Capitol Hill_ (University of Michigan Press, 1993).

Barbara Hinckley, _Less Than Meets the Eye: Foreign Policy Making and the Myth
of the Assertive Congress_ (University of Chicago Press, 1994).

Ernest May, "Caesars in the White House?" _Interplay_ (March 1968).

Loch K. Johnson, _The Making of International Agreements: Congress Confronts
the Executive_ (New York University Press, 1984).

Thomas M. Franck, "Courts and Foreign Policy," _Foreign Policy_ No. 83 (Summer
1991).

Harold Hongju Koh, _The National Security Constitution_ (Yale University
Press, 1990).

Steven Kull, I.M. Destler, and Clay Ramsey, _The Foreign Policy Gap: How
Policymakers Misread the Public_ (Center for International and Security
Studies/Program on International Policy Attitudes, University of Maryland,
October 1997).

John E. Rielly, "The Public Mood at Mid-Decade," _Foreign Policy_ No. 98
(Spring 1995).

Gabriel A. Almond, _The American People and Foreign Policy_ (Harcourt, Brace
& World, 1950).

John E. Mueller, _War, Presidents, and Public Opinion_ (Wiley, 1973).

John Mueller, _Policy and Opinion in the Gulf War_ (University of Chicago
Press, 1994).

Laurence Radway, "The Curse of Free Elections," _Foreign Policy_ No. 40 (Fall
1980).

John H. Aldrich, John L. Sullivan, and Eugene Borgida, "Foreign Affairs and
Issue Voting: Do Presidential Candidates 'Waltz Before a Blind Audience?'"
_American Political Review_ 83, No. 1 (March 1989).

William Schneider, "Public Opinion: The Beginning of Ideology?" _Foreign
Policy_ No. 17 (Winter 1974-75).

Eugene R. Wittkopf, _Faces of Internationalism: Public Opinion and American
Foreign Policy_ (Duke University Press, 1990).

John E. Rielly, "Public Opinion: The Pulse of the '90s," _Foreign Policy_ No.
82 (Spring 1991).

Nicholas O. Berry, _Foreign Policy and the Press_ (Greenwood Press, 1990).

Leon V. Sigal, _Reporters and Officials_ (D.C. Heath, 1973).

Brigitte Lebens Nacos, _The Press, Presidents, and Crises_ (Columbia
University Press, 1990).

Marvin Feuerwerger, _Congress and Israel_ (Greenwood Press, 1979).

Mohammed E. Ahari, ed., _Ethnic Groups and U.S. Foreign Policy_ (Greenwood
Press, 1987).

David W. Reinhard, _The Republican Right Since 1945_ (University Press of
Kentucky, 1983).



_

IV. Organizational Complexity and Political Control

_

Commission on the Organization of the Government for the Conduct of Foreign
Policy (the Murphy Commission), _Appendices_ (Government Printing Office, June
1975), 7 volumes.

I.M. Destler, _Presidents, Bureaucrats, and Foreign Policy_ , Second Edition
(Princeton University Press, 1974).

Henry A. Kissinger, _American Foreign Policy_ (W.W. Norton, 1969), Part One.

Carnes Lord, _The Presidency and the Management of National Security_ (Free
Press, 1988), chaps. 3-4.

Charles Lindblom, _The Intelligence of Democracy_ (Free Press, 1965).

Jonathan Bendor, "A Model of Muddling Through," _American Political Science
Review_ 89, no. 4 (December 1995).

Roger Hilsman, "The Foreign Policy Consensus," _Journal of Conflict
Resolution_ 3 (December 1959).

David A. Welch, "The Organizational Process and Bureaucratic Politics
Paradigms: Retrospect and Prospect," _International Security_ 17, no. 2 (Fall
1992).

Edward Rhodes, "Do Bureaucratic Politics Matter?" _World Politics_ 47, no. 1
(October 1994).

Joseph Bouchard, _Command in Crisis_ (Columbia University Press, 1991).

I.M. Destler, "National Security Advice to U.S. Presidents," _World Politics_
29, no. 2 (January 1977).

Paul David Miller, _The Interagency Process_ , National Security Paper No. 11
(Institute for Foreign Policy Analysis, 199?).

Ernest R. May, "The Development of Political-Military Consultation in the
United States," _Political Science Quarterly_ 70, no. 2 (June 1955).

Stanley L. Falk, "The National Security Council Under Truman, Eisenhower, and
Kennedy," in Wildavsky, ed., _The Presidency_.

Stephen Hess, _Organizing the Presidency_ , Second Edition (Brookings
Institution, 1988).

Zbigniew Brzezinski, "The NSC's Midlife Crisis," _Foreign Policy_ No. 69
(Winter 1987-88).

Christopher C. Shoemaker, _The NSC Staff: Counseling the Council_ (Westview
Press, 1991).

Barry Rubin, _Secrets of State: The State Department and the Struggle Over
U.S. Foreign Policy_ (Oxford University Press, 1985).

John P. Leacacos, _Fires in the In-Basket_ (World, 1968).

William I. Bacchus, _Foreign Policy and the Bureaucratic Process_ (Princeton
University Press, 1974).

Chester Barnard, _The Functions of the Executive_ (Harvard University Press,
1938).

James March and Herbert Simon, _Organizations_ (Wiley, 1958).

Richard Cyert and James G. March, _A Behavioral Theory of the Firm_ (Prentice-
Hall, 1963).

Philip Selznick, _Leadership in Administration_ (Harper  & Row, 1957).

Anthony Downs, _Inside Bureaucracy_ (Little, Brown, 1967).

Harold Seidman, _Politics, Position, and Power: The Dynamics of Federal
Organization_ , Third edition (Oxford University Press, 19??).

Francis E. Rourke, _Bureaucracy and Foreign Policy_ (Johns Hopkins Press,
1972).

Charles Frankel, _High on Foggy Bottom_ (Harper  & Row, 1969).







_

V. Experts: Professionalism, Guilds, Power

_

George F. Kennan, _Memoirs, 1925-1950_ (Atlantic/Little, Brown, 1967), chaps.
8-11, 13-17.

Frederick C. Mosher and John E. Harr, _Programming Systems and Foreign Affairs
Leadership_ (Oxford University Press, 1970).

Robert Pringle, "Creeping Irrelevance at Foggy Bottom," _Foreign Policy_ No.
29 (Winter 1977-78).

"Personnel for Foreign Affairs" and "Advisory Panels," in Murphy Commission,
Appendices P and S, _Appendices_ , vol. 6.

Warner R. Schilling, "Scientists, Foreign Policy, and Politics," _American
Political Science Review_ 51, no. 2 (June 1962).

Don K. Price, _The Scientific Estate_ (Harvard University Press, 1965).

George B. Kistiakowsky, _A Scientist at the White House_ (Harvard University
Press, 1976).

James R. Killian, _Sputniks, Scientists, and Eisenhower_ (MIT Press, 1977).

David D. Newsom, "Foreign Policy and Academia," _Foreign Policy_ no. 101
(Winter 1995-96).

Robert D. Schulzinger, _The Wise Men of Foreign Affairs: The History of the
Council on Foreign Relations_ (Columbia University Press, 1984).

Bruce L. R. Smith, _The Rand Corporation_ (Harvard University Press, 1966).

James Allen Smith, _Brookings at 75_ (Brookings Institution, 1991).

Bruce L. R. Smith, _The Advisers: Scientists in the Policy Process_ (Brookings
Institution, 1992).

Fred Kaplan, _The Wizards of Armageddon_ (Stanford University Press, 1991).

Samuel P. Huntington, _The Soldier and the State_ (Harvard University Press,
1957).

Samuel Finer, _The Man on Horseback_ (Praeger, 1962).

Morris Janowitz, _The Professional Soldier_ , Second Edition (Free Press,
1970).

Alain Enthoven and K. Wayne Smith, _How Much is Enough?_ (Harper  & Row,
1971), chap. 3.

Eliot Cohen, "Guessing Game: A Reappraisal of Systems Analysis," in Samuel P.
Huntington, ed., _The Strategic Imperative_ (Ballinger, 1982).

James Schlesinger, "Uses and Abuses of Analysis," in U.S. Senate Committee on
Government Operations, _Planning, Programming, Budgeting_ , (Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office, 1970) _OR_ James Schlesinger, "Systems Analysis
and the Political Process," _Journal of Law and Economics_ 11 (October 1968);
also published as Rand Paper P-3464, Rand Corporation, June 1967.

Charles Hitch, _Decision-Making for Defense_ (University of California Press,
1965).

Joseph Pechman, "Making Economic Policy: The Role of the Economist," in Fred
Greenstein and Nelson Polsby, eds., _Handbook of Political Science_ (Addison-
Wesley, 1975), vol. 6.

Gary Wills, "Hurrah for Politicians," _Harper's_ (September 1975).



_

VI. Leadership: Psychology, Beliefs, Action

_

Edwin A. Weinstein, James William Anderson, and Arthur S. Link, "Woodrow
Wilson's Political Personalitty," _Political Science Quarterly_ 93, no. 4
(Winter 1978) (a critique of the Georges' book).

Anthony Storr, "The Man," in A.J.P. Taylor _et al._ , _Churchill Revised_
(Dial Press, 1969).

Barbara Farnham, _Roosevelt and the Munich Crisis_ (Princeton University
Press, 1997.)

Michael A. Guhin, _John Foster Dulles_ , (Columbia University Press, 1972),
Introduction and chaps. 4, 5, 7, 10.

Townsend Hoopes, "God and John Foster Dulles," _Foreign Policy_ No. 13 (Winter
1973-74) _OR_ Townsend Hoopes, _The Devil and John Foster Dulles_
(Atlantic/Little, Brown, 1973).

Richard H. Immerman, "Eisenhower and Dulles: Who Made the Decisions,"
_Political Psychology_ 1, no. 2 (Autumn 1979).

John B. Henry II and William Espinosa, "The Tragedy of Dean Rusk," _Foreign
Policy_ No. 8 (Fall 1972).

Doris Kearns, _Lyndon Johnson and the American Dream_ (Harper  & Row, 1976).

Stanley Renshon, _The Psychological Assessment of Presidential Candidates_
(New York University Press, 1996).

John D. Montgomery, "The Education of Henry Kissinger," _Journal of
International Affairs_ 9, no. 1 (1975).

Robert Dallek, _Ronald Reagan: The Politics of Symbolism_ (Harvard Univesity
Press, 1984).

Harold D. Lasswell, _World Politics and Personal Insecurity_ (McGraw-Hill,
1935).

Robert Jervis "Hypotheses on Misperception," _World Politics_ 20, no. 3 (April
1968).

Robert Jervis, _Perception and Misperception in International Politics_
(Princeton University Press, 1976).

Ernest R. May, "The Nature of Foreign Policy: The Calculated versus the
Axiomatic," _Daedalus_ 91, no. 4 (Fall 1962).

Glen H. Stassen, "Individual Preference versus Role Constraint in Policy-
Making," _World Politics_ 25, no. 1 (October 1972).

Irving Janis, _Groupthink: Psychological Studies of Policy Decisions and
Fiascoes_ , (Houghton Mifflin 1982).

Robert Axelrod, ed., _Structure of Decision: The Cognitive Maps of Political
Elites_ (Princeton University Press, 1976).

Yaacov Vertzberger, _The World in Their Minds: Information Processing,
Cognition, and Perception in Foreign Policy Decisionmaking_ (Stanford
University Press, 1990).

Martha L. Cottam, _Foreign Policy Decision Making: The Influence of Cognition_
(Westview Press, 1986).

Philip E. Tetlock, "Accountability: The Neglected Social Context of Judgment
and Choice," _Research in Organizational Behavior_ 7 (1985).

Joseph de Rivera, _The Psychological Dimension of Foreign Policy_ (Merrill,
1968).

Deborah Larson, _Origins of Containment_ (Princeton University Press, 1985).

Jack Snyder, "Rationality at the Brink," _World Politics_ 30, no. 3 (April
1978).



_

VII. Military Policy

_

Keith C. Clarke and Laurence J. Legere, eds., _The President and the
Management of National Security_ (Praeger, 1969).

James Kurth, "A Widening Gyre: The Logic of American Weapons Procurement,"
_Public Policy_ 19, no. 3 (Summer 1971).

Thomas L. McNaugher, _New Weapons, Old Politics_ (Brookings Institution,
1989).

James G. Burton, _The Pentagon Wars: Reformers Challenge the Old Guard_ (Naval
Institute Press, 1993).

Barry M. Blechman, _The Politics of National Security: Congress and U.S.
Defense Policy_ (Oxford University Press, 1990).

Ted Greenwood, _Making the MIRV_ (Ballinger, 1975).

Jaques Gansler, _The Defense Industry_ (MIT PRess, 1980).

Vincent Davis, _The Admirals Lobby_ (University of North Carolina Press,
1967).

Arnold Kanter, _Defense Politics: A Budgetary Perspective_ (University of
Chicago Press, 1979).

J. P. Crecine, "Making Defense Budgets," in Murphy Commission, _Appendices_ ,
vol. 4.

Warner R. Schilling, Paul Y. Hammond, and Glenn H. Snyder, _Strategy,
Politics, and Defense Budgets_ (Columbia University Press, 1962).

Bruce Russett, _What Price Vigilance?_ (Yale University Press, 1970).

Bruce Russett, _Controlling the Sword: The Democratic Governance of National
Security_ (Harvard University Press, 1990).

Clark Nardinelli and Gary Ackerman, "Defense Expenditures and the Survival of
American Capitalism," _Armed Forces and Society_ 3, no. 1 (Fall 1976).

Carl Builder, _The Masks of War: American Military Styles in Strategy and
Analysis_ (Johns Hopkins Press, 1989).

Perry McCoy Smith, _The Air Force Plans for Peace, 1943-1945_ (Johns Hopkins
Press, 1970).

Samuel P. Huntington, "Defense Organization and Military Strategy," _Public
Interest_ No. 75 (Spring 1984).

Samuel P. Huntington, "The Defense Establishment: Vested Interests and the
Public Interest," in _The Military-Industrial Complex and U.S. Foreign Policy_
(Wayne State University Press, 1969).

Harold Stein, ed., _American Civil-Military Decisions_ (University of Alabama
Press, 1963).

Lewis Anthony Dexter, "Congressmen and the Making of Military Policy," in
Robert L. Peabody and Nelson W. Polsby, eds., _New Perspectives on the House
of Representatives_ , 2d Edition (Rand McNally, 1969).

Robert J. Art, Vincent Davis, and Samuel P. Huntington, eds., _Reorganizing
America's Defense_ (Pergamon-Brassey's, 1985).

Archie D. Barrett, _Reappraising Defense Organization_ (National Defense
University Press, 1983).



_

VIII. Economic Policy

_

I. M. Destler, _Making Foreign Economic Policy_ , (Brookings Institution,
1980).

I. M. Destler, "A Government Divided: The Security Complex and the Economic
Complex," in Deese, ed., _The New Politics of American Foreign Policy_.

Stephen D. Cohen, _The Making of United States International Economic Policy_
, Fourth Edition (Praeger, 1994).

Robert A. Pastor, _Congress and the Politics of U.S. Foreign Economic Policy_
(University of California Press, 1980).

Raymond A. Bauer, Ithiel de Sola Pool, and Lewis Anthony Dexter, _American
Business and Public Policy_ , (Atherton, 1963).

Theodore J. Lowi, "American Business, Public Policy, Case Studies, and
Political Theory," _World Politics_ 16, no. 4 (July 1964).

Pietro S. Nivola, _Regulating Unfair Trade_ (Brookings Institution, 1993).

Pietro S. Nivola, "Trade Policy," in Mann, ed., _A Question of Balance_.

Samuel P. Huntington, "Trade, Technology, and Leverage: Economic Diplomacy,"
_Foreign Policy_ no. 32 (Fall 1978).

Marshall Goldman and Raymond Vernon, "Economic Relations," in Joseph S. Nye,
Jr., ed., _The Making of America's Soviet Policy_ (Yale University Press,
1984).

Raymond Vernon, "The Japan-U.S. Bilateral Relationship," _Washington
Quarterly_ 13, no. 3 (Summer 1990).



Joanne Gowa, _Closing the Gold Window: Domestic Politics and the End of
Bretton Woods_ (Cornell University Press, 1984).

John D. Montgomery, _The Politics of Foreign Aid_ (Praeger, 1962).

David A. Baldwin, _Economic Development and American Foreign Policy,
1943-1962_ (University of Chicago Press, 1966).

David A. Baldwin, _Foreign Aid and American Foreign Policy_ (Praeger, 1966).

"Foreign Economic Policy," Murphy Commission, Appendix J, in _Appendices_ ,
vol. 3.



_

IX. Intelligence

_

_

A Consumer's Guide to Intelligence_ , PAS 94-00039 (Central Intelligence
Agency, February 1994).

Roberta Wohlstetter, _Pearl Harbor: Warning and Decision_ (Stanford University
Press, 1962.

Richard K. Betts, _Surprise Attack_ (Brookings Institution, 1982).

Harold Wilensky, _Organizational Intelligence_ (Basic Books, 1967), chaps.
2-4, 6-8.

Sherman Kent, _Strategic Intelligence_ (Princeton University Press, 1949).

Roger Hilsman, _Strategic Intelligence and National Decisions_ (Free Press,
1956).

Mark Lowenthal, "Tribal Tongues: Intelligence Consumers, intelligence
Producers," _Washinton Quarterly_ 15, (Winter 1992).

Yehoshafat Harkabi, "The Intelligence-Policymaker Tangle," _Jerusalem
Quarterly_ no. 30 (Winter 1984).

Halperin, _Bureaucratic Politics and Foreign Policy_ , chap. 8.

Lawrence Freedman, _U.S. Intelligence and the Soviet Strategic Threat_ ,
Second Edition (Princeton Univesity Press, 1986).

John Prados, _The Soviet Estimate_ , Second Edition (Princeton University
Press, 1986)..

Patrick J. McGarvey, "DIA: Intelligence to Please," _Washington Monthly_ (July
1970), reprinted in Halperin and Kanter, eds., _Readings in American Foreign
Policy_.

Chester Cooper, "The CIA and Decision-Making," _Foreign Affairs_ , 50, No. 2
(January, 1972).

Anne Karalekas, "History of the Central Intelligence Agency," in U.S. Senate
Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence
Activities (the Church Committee), _Final Report_ , Book IV: _Supplementary
and Detailed Staff Reports on Foreign and Military Intelligence_ , 94th Cong.,
2d sess., 1976 (reprinted in William M. Leary, ed., _The Central Intelligence
Agency: History and Documents_ [University of Alabama Press, 1984]).

Scott D. Breckinridge, _The CIA and the U.S. Intelligence System_ (Westview
Press, 1986).

John Ranelagh, _The Agency_ (Simon and Schuster, 1986).

William Colby and Peter Forbath, _Honorable Men_ (Simon and Schuster, 1978).

Stansfield Turner, _Secrecy and Democracy_ (Houghton Mifflin, 1985).

Robert M. Gates, "The CIA and Ammerican Foreign Policy," _Foreign Affairs_ 66,
no. 2 (Winter 1987/88).

Melvin Ott, "Shaking Up the CIA," _Foreign Policy_ No. 93 (Winter 1993-94).

Bruce Berkowitz, "Information Technology and Intelligence Reform," _Orbis_ 41,
no. 1 (Winter 1997).

U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, _Staff Report_ : _U.S.
Intelligence Analysis and the Oil Issue, 1973-1974_ , 95th Cong., 1st sess.,
1977.

U.S. House of Representatives Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence,
_Staff Report_ : _Iran: Evaluation of U.S. Intelligence Performance Prior to
November 1978_ , Committe Print, January 1979.

John Horton, "Mexico, The Way of Iran?" _International Journal of Intelligence
and Counterintelligence_ 1, no. 2 (Summer 1986).

Robert H. Johnson, _Improbable Threats_ (St. Martin's Press, 1997).

Douglas J. MacEachin, _CIA Assessments of the Soviet Union: The Record Versus
the Charges_ , CSI 96-001 (Central Intelligence Agency, Center for the Study
of Intelligence, May 1996).

Robert Jervis, "What's Wrong With the Intelligence Process?" _International
Journal of Intelligence and Counterintelligence_ 1, no. 1 (Spring 1986).

Arthur S. Hulnick, "The Intelligence Producer-Policy Consumer Linkage,"
_Intelligence and National Security_ 1, no. 2 (May 1986).

Richard K. Betts, "Intelligence for Policymaking," _Washington Quarterly_ 3,
no. 3 (Summer 1980).

Richard K. Betts, "American Strategic Intelligence," in Robert Pfaltzgraff,
Uri Ra'anan, and Warren Milberg, eds., _Intelligence Policy and National
Security_ (London: Macmillan, 1981).

Richard K. Betts, "Policy-Makers and Intelligence Analysts: Love, Hate, or
Indifference?" _Intelligence and National Security_ 3, no. 1 (Janauary 1988).

Betts, _Soldiers, Statesmen, and Cold War Crises_ , chap. 10.

Frank J. Smist, Jr., _Congress Oversees the Intelligence Community, 1947-1989_
(University of Tennessee Press, 1990).

Loch K. Johnson, _A Season of Inquiry: The Senate Intelligence Investigation_
(University Press of Kentucky, 1985).

Loch K. Johnson, _America's Secret Power: The CIA in a Democratic Society_
(Oxford University Press, 1989).

John M. Oseth, _Regulating U.S. Intelligence Operations_ (University Press of
Kentucky, 1985).

Edward Shils, _The Torment of Secrecy_ (Free Press, 1956).

Thomas M. Franck and Edward Weisband, _Secrecy and Foreign Policy_ (Oxford
University Press, 1974).



_

X. Intervention

_

_

Operation ZAPATA: The "Ultrasensitive" Report and Testimony of the Board of
Inquiry on the Bay of Pigs_ (Aletheia Books, 1981).

Glenn Paige, _The Korean Decision_ (Free Press, 1968).

Bob Woodward, _The Commanders_ (Simon and Schuster, 1991).

Douglas J. Macdonald, _Adventures in Chaos: American Intervention for Reform
in the Third World_ (Harvard University Press, 1992).

Charles A. Stevenson, _The End of Nowhere: American Policy Toward Laos Since
1954_ (Beacon Press, 1972).

Herbert Schandler, _The Unmaking of a President_ (Princeton University Press,
1977).

David Halberstam, _The Best and the Brightest_ (Random House, 1972).

James C. Thomson, "How Could Vietnam Happen? An Autopsy," _The Atlantic
Monthly_ (April 1968).

Larry Berman, _Planning a Tragedy_ (Norton, 1982).

Kolko, _Roots of American Foreign Policy,_ chap. 4.

Gregory Treverton, _Covert Action_ (Basic Books, 1987).

David C. Martin and John Walcott, _Best Laid Plans: the Inside Story of
America's War Against Terrorism_ (Harper  & Row, 1988).

Louis Fisher, _Presidential War Power_ (University Press of Kansas, 1995).

Gideon Rose, "When Presidents Break the Law," _National Interest_ no. 9 (Fall
1987).



_

XI. Diplomacy

_

Robert Hopkins Miller, _Inside an Embassy_ (U.S. Insitute of Peace, 1992)

"Conduct of Routine Relations," Murphy Commission, Appendix I, in _Appendices_
, vol. 3.

"The Ambassador and the Country Team," Study for the Senate Government
Operations Committee, January 18, 1963, reprinted in Scott and Dawson, eds.,
_Readings in the Making of American Foreign Policy_.

James M. Goldgeier, "NATO Expansion: The Anatomy of a Decision," _Washington
Quarterly_ 21, no. 1 (Winter 1998).

John W. Tuthill, "Operation Topsy," _Foreign Policy_ no. 8 (Fall 1972).

Tad Szulc, "Behind the Vietnam Cease-Fire Agreement," _Foreign Policy_ no. 15
(Summer 1974).

Nguyen Tien Hung and Jerrold Schechter, _The Palace File_ (Harper  & Row,
1986).

Henry A. Kissinger, _Years of Upheaval_ (Little, Brown, 1982).

John Newhouse, _Cold Dawn: The Story of SALT_ (Holt, Rinehart and Winston,
1973).

Chester Cooper, "The Iron Law of Negotiations," _Foreign Policy_ no. 19
(Summer 1975).

Richard Neustadt, _Alliance Politics_ (Columbia University Press, 1970).

Lord Harlech, "Suez SNAFU, Skybolt SABU," _Foreign Policy_ no. 2 (Spring
1971).

Bruce W. Jentleson, "American Diplomacy," in Mann, ed., _A Question of
Balance_.

Richard N. Haass, _Conflicts Unending: The United States and Regional
Disputes_ (Yale University Press, 1990).

Barry Blechman and Stephen Kaplan, eds., _Force Without War_ (Brookings
Institution, 1978).

