L O W E L L H O U S E N E W S  Volume 25, Issue 13 -----------------------
December 3, 2001 Saturday - LOWELL HOLIDAY SOIREE! 9pm to 1am. Tickets will be
sold in the dining hall. IN THIS ISSUE: ACADEMIC AND HOUSE CALENDAR FROM THE
SENIOR TUTOR SPECIAL CONCENTRATIONS DEADLINE RELIGIOUS CONFLICTS WITH FINAL
EXAMS FROM THE ASSISTANT SENIOR TUTORS FOR THE JCR FROM THE HOUSE
ADMINISTRATOR HOLIDAY DINING HALL SCHEDULE LEAVE OF ABSENCE/HOUSING
CANCELLATION INTER-HOUSE TRANSFER DEADLINES FROM THE HOUSE TUTORS HISTORY
MOVIE NIGHT - "MALCOLM X" SOCIOLOGY MOVIE NIGHT - "35 UP" LoHo SENIOR SEMINAR
WRITING A TECHNICAL THESIS? FELLOWSHIPS OFFICE HOURS FELLOWSHIPS DEADLINE
APPROACHING FROM THE CHEMISTRY TUTOR FROM THE PHYSICS TUTOR HOUSE NEWS
CHANUKAH CANDLE LIGHTING GOURMET COFFEE TASTING AT THE MASTERS' RESIDENCE.
LoHo MOVIE NIGHT LoHo COMPUTER SCIENCE STUDY GROUP COOKING AT THE MASTERS'
RESIDENCE POETRY YOGA IN THE JCR GREEK PHILOSOPHY READING GROUP. HABLA
ESPANOL? MANDARIN TABLE ARTS ANNOUNCEMENTS NAPOLEONIC ANTIPHONY - HARVARD-
RADCLIFFE CHORUS JAZZ TALK GILBERT & SULLIVAN PLAYERS FREE ACTING WORKSHOPS
BSO AUDITIONS 30th ANNUAL DUNSTER HOUSE MESSIAH SING OTHER ANNOUNCEMENTS
SUMMER SCHOOL PROCTORSHIPS INTERVIEW FOR ECHO EFFECTIVE FUNDRAISING FOR
HARVARD ARTS EVENTS WOMEN IN BUSINESS PIZZA AND MOVIE BRAIN BREAK! WOMEN IN
BUSINESS CONFERENCE CRIMSON CALLER OPEN HOUSE HARVARD COLLEGE WOMEN'S
LEADERSHIP AWARDS FROM THE OFFICE OF CAREER SERVICES FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT FOR
YOUR CAREER AND LIFE THINKING ABOUT STUDYING OUT OF RESIDENCE? THINKING ABOUT
WORKING ABROAD? VISIT JAPAN THIS SUMMER WORK IN FRANCE GOVERNMENT CAREER
RESOURCES GROUP MEETING CAREERS IN JOURNALISM PANEL MEDIA & COMMUNICATIONS
E-NEWS LIST GOVERNMENT, PUBLIC POLICY, & INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS E-NEWS LIST
ACADEMIC AND HOUSE CALENDAR \- December 3, Monday: HIGH TABLE. Sorry, there
will be no inter-house dining this evening. LoHo COMPUTER SCIENCE STUDY GROUP:
meets Mondays 8-10pm in the Coolidge Room. \- December 4, Tuesday: SENIOR
SEMINAR, 5:45-8pm in the SCR (see below). YOGA from 5:45-7pm in the JCR.
SPANISH TABLE, 5:30-7pm in the dining hall. MANDARIN TABLE, 5:30pm-7pm in the
small dining room. \- December 5, Wednesday: OIL PAINTING CLASSES 7-9pm in the
artroom, basement of L-entry (see below). Help BAKE FOR TEA in the Masters'
Residence, Wednesdays at 7:30pm (see below). Scrumptious recipes, lots of fun!
POETRY in Jim's room, P-12, from 8:30pm (see below). CHEMISTRY TUTOR'S OFFICE
HOURS: 8-9pm, by appointment (see below). \- December 6, Thursday: Special
Concentrations deadline (see below). TEA in the Masters' Residence from 5-6pm.
HISTORY MOVIE NIGHT, "Malcolm X" at 8pm, in the SCR (see below). GREEK
PHILOSOPHY READING GROUP, 1:15-2pm in the dining hall, 2-3:30pm in the SCR
(see below). PHYSICS TUTOR'S OFFICE HOURS: 7-9pm, in the dining hall (see
below). \- December 7, Friday: LoHoCo MOVIE NIGHT in the Junior Common Room,
7pm and 9pm. \- December 8, Saturday: HOLIDAY SOIREE! 9pm to 1am. Tickets will
be sold in the dining hall. \- December 9, Sunday: SOCIOLOGY MOVIE NIGHT,
"35-UP" at 7pm in the SCR (see below). MILK AND COOKIES in the Library, 10pm.
\- December 10, Monday: CHANUKAH CANDLE LIGHTING, 6-7pm in the JCR (see
below). LoHo COMPUTER SCIENCE STUDY GROUP: meets Mondays 8-10pm in the
Coolidge Room. \- December 11, Tuesday: GOURMET COFFEE TASTING in the Masters'
Residence from 8-9pm (see below). CHANUKAH CANDLE LIGHTING, 6-7pm in the JCR
(see below). SPANISH TABLE, 5:30-7pm in the dining hall. MANDARIN TABLE,
5:30pm-7pm in the small dining room. YOGA, 5:30-7pm, in the SCR (see below).
\- December 12, Wednesday: HOLIDAY DINNER! 5-7pm in the dining hall. Look in
your mail boxes for your invitation! CHANUKAH CANDLE LIGHTING, 6-7pm in the
JCR (see below). Help BAKE FOR TEA in the Masters' Residence, Wednesdays at
7:30pm (see below). Scrumptious recipes, lots of fun! POETRY in Jim's room,
P-12, from 8:30pm (see below). CHEMISTRY TUTOR'S OFFICE HOURS: 8-9pm, by
appointment (see below). \- December 13, Thursday: DINING HALL closes after
lunch. TEA in the Masters' Residence from 5-6pm. GREEK PHILOSOPHY READING
GROUP, 1:15-2pm in the dining hall, 2-3:30 in the SCR (see below). CHANUKAH
CANDLE LIGHTING, 6-7pm in the JCR (see below). PHYSICS TUTOR'S OFFICE HOURS:
7-9pm, in the dining hall. \- December 14, Friday: WINTER RECESS BEGINS FROM
THE SENIOR TUTOR * Marshall Poe, Allston Burr Senior Tutor Room A-22, 5-2283
(lowell-abst@fas.harvard.edu) OFFICE HOURS: M-F, 9:30-11am; also Mon. 2-4pm,
Wed. 2-4pm, and Fri. 3-4pm SPECIAL CONCENTRATIONS DEADLINE The next deadline
for Special Concentrations is Thursday, December 6, 2001\. In applying for a
Special Concentration a student must convincingly demonstrate that 1) his/her
proposed courses constitute an intellectual undertaking equal in substance and
coherence to that required in a departmental concentration, and 2) that
his/her academic objectives cannot be met through the degree requirements for
any other major. Each applicant must be advised by a faculty member who
assumes responsibility for his/her tutorial, thesis, and general examination,
and must be approved be his or her Senior Tutor. RELIGIOUS CONFLICTS WITH
FINAL EXAMS Students who have religious conflicts with final exams must report
the conflict(s) to the Office of Examinations (5-1542) by Thursday, December
13\. FROM THE ASSISTANT SENIOR TUTORS FOR THE JCR * Allison and Chris Tirres,
Room K-11, 3-3001, (atirres@law, ctirres@fas) If you have questions or
concerns relating to sophomore advising or any other House issue, we would be
delighted to meet with you. Just call or e-mail us, and we'll set up a time to
meet! FROM THE HOUSE ADMINISTRATOR * Adrienne McLaughlin House Administrator
Room A-22, 5-2283 (mclaugh@fas) HOLIDAY DINING HALL SCHEDULE The dining hall
will close Thursday, December 13th after lunch. It will re-open Wednesday,
January 2nd, for breakfast. LEAVE OF ABSENCE/HOUSING CANCELLATION The housing
cancellation deadline for the spring term is Wednesday, January 2, 2002. If
you are considering moving off campus or a taking leave of absence for the
spring term please let us know of your plans. You will probably want to set up
an appointment with the Senior Tutor to cover the academic side of things, and
with me to make arrangements for ending and reinstating your housing when you
wish to return. Room cancellation forms are available either here in the House
Office or at the Undergraduate Housing Office in University Hall Room 3.
INTER-HOUSE TRANSFER DEADLINES Inter-house transfer applications will be
available on or before January 2 and are due on January 9 for spring transfer.
The deadline is only a few days after the beginning of reading period, so you
should really start making arrangements before the holiday break, if you and
your friends would like to be together. It usually takes longer than most
people envision; start by talking with them and then with me about your plans.
FROM THE HOUSE TUTORS HISTORY MOVIE NIGHT. Come watch "Malcolm X" (on DVD!) in
the Senior Common Room (Q-11) this Thursday, December 6, at 8pm. Delicious
refreshments will be served, and stimulating conversation will be offered
after the movie. Contact me, Allison Tirres, with any questions
(atirres@fas.harvard.edu). SOCIOLOGY MOVIE NIGHT - "35 UP" In the SCR, Sunday,
December 9th at 7pm. Join us for this entry in Michael Apted's ground-breaking
documentary series, following a group of English schoolchildren from age 7 to
35--to be followed in the spring by "42 Up." Snacks provided. Contact Jay
Gabler (gabler@fas). LoHo SENIOR SEMINAR. The upcoming Lowell Senior Seminar
will be on Tuesday, December 4th from 5:45-8pm in the SCR. Our presentions
are: "What's Black and White and Perceived All Over?: Implicit Attitudes and
Cross-Race Cognition" by Debby Rin, Lowell Senior; "Pan-Americanism Versus
Hispanidad: United States and Mexican Cultural Relations During the Second
World War" by Claudette Pulido, Lowell Senior; "Corporate Complicity in a
Global Context: Multinational Corproations and Human Rights" by Anita
Ramasastry, Visiting Scholar and Professor of Law at the University of
Washington. Questions? Please contact Dan Farkas at farkas@fas. WRITING A
TECHNICAL THESIS? As part of the SCR's effort to offer a variety of support
for seniors writing theses, I'd be happy to schedule one-on-one editorial
conferences with students working in biology, biochem, psychology, computer
science, economics, and other experimental and quantitative fields. The
purpose is to give you feedback on the special WRITING problems of technical
theses, such as: starting to write before experiments are finished,
documenting lab procedures, explaining theoretical models and algorithms,
coordinating text with equations, graphs, and tables, presenting quantitative
data, illustrating instrumentation and physical processes, differentiating
results and conclusions, distributing information between the body and
appendices, and presenting negative results. You should feel free to bring in
preliminary outlines and drafts for comment and discussion. To set up an
appointment, please contact me at kirschj@post.harvard.edu or 617-497-4173
with your available times, preferably within the windows Mondays 2-4pm,
Tuesdays 4:15-6pm, and Thursdays 3:45-6pm. Note: A group workshop on writing
technical thesis will also be offered in the first week of the second
semester. FELLOWSHIPS OFFICE HOURS. I am available to discuss fellowships on
Tuesdays from 2-3:30pm, and on Thursdays from 3-4:30pm. If you wish to meet
with me during one of these times, please sign up for an appointment on the
noticeboard outside my office (D-21). You should have a project in mind and
have checked out the Lowell House Fellowships Web Page
(http://lowell.student.harvard.edu/fellowships.htm) and the OCS Guide to
Grants before coming to talk with me. FELLOWSHIPS DEADLINE APPROACHING.
Juniors and Sophomores interested in the Michael Christian travelling
fellowships should remember that the deadline for applications is Wednesday,
December 5th at 5pm. Details at
http://lowell.student.harvard.edu/Fellowships/christian.htm FROM THE CHEMISTRY
TUTOR. I am available for appointments regarding lectures or problem sets
every Wednesday from 8-9pm. Please feel free to contact me, Michael Storek, at
storek@fas. FROM THE PHYSICS TUTOR. Weekly physics office hours are held on
Thursdays from 7-9pm in the dining hall. Anybody who has any questions about
physics or needs help with their work should stop by. Questions? Contact Dan
Farkas at farkas@fas. HOUSE NEWS CHANUKAH CANDLE LIGHTING. Monday, December
10th - Thursday, December 13th from 6-7pm in the JCR. Contact Ben Rapoport
(rapoport@fas), Aaron Siegel (asiegel@fas) or Ben Siracusa (siracusa@fas) for
more information. GOURMET COFFEE TASTING AT THE MASTERS' RESIDENCE. Tuesday,
December 11th, 8-9pm. William Trull, Master Roaster at Red Barn Coffee
Roasters, will give a brief talk about the history, cultivation, and politics
of coffee; offer a participatory demonstration of proper brewing techniques;
and conduct a "cupping" (tasting) of some of Red Barn's specialty coffees.
Please join us for a delicious and eye-opening evening. Space is limited, so
arrive early to guarantee a spot! Contact Jay Gabler (gabler@fas). LoHo MOVIE
NIGHT. The Lowell House Film Society shows movies every Friday evening during
the term at 7pm and 9pm in the JCR. Want to watch movies for free? Volunteers
are needed to host these viewings! If you would like to help out, contact
Jesse Field (jlfield@fas) for more information. LoHo COMPUTER SCIENCE STUDY
GROUP. Meets Mondays 8-10pm in the Coolidge Room. Contact Dan Ellard
(ellard@eecs) for more information. COOKING AT THE MASTERS' RESIDENCE. Join
Meg and Carol on Wednesday nights for cooking in the Masters' beautiful
kitchen! We bake from scratch lots of excellent things for our own sampling
and for tea on Thursday. Join us at 7:30pm for relaxed cooking and company,
with all the comfort of home (including, if you like, your own recipes).
Weekly, on evenings before House Tea. POETRY. Poetry resists the intelligence
almost successfully in Jim's room, P-12, every Wednesday starting at 8:30pm.
You can set your calendar by it: the leaves fall, sparks fly in the fireplace,
and beauty is celebrated in the most laid-back way. We read whatever's on the
shelf, whatever's on your mind or your syllabus. Bring books or just a patient
ear. Special guests throughout the semester. Contact: Jim von der Heydt
(vonderh@fas). YOGA IN THE JCR. There will be a yoga class suitable for all
levels of experience in the JCR on Tuesday, December 4th from 5:45-7pm. Bring
a yoga mat or blanket or towel with you. GREEK PHILOSOPHY READING GROUP. Next
meeting Thursday, Dec. 6, 2-3:30pm, Senior Common Room (Q-11): translation and
discussion of Theaetetus 191c8-e2, 193b11-d2, 197d5-199b7, and 201a4-d5.
Optional lunch 1:15-2:00 pm, Dining Hall. In this week's selections, Socrates
explains mental mistakes by likening the mind to a wax tablet (where we
incorrectly match perceptions with memories) and then to an aviary (where we
go hunting for things we know but sometimes catch the wrong bird). Then, in
order to prove that knowledge is not simply a matter of correct judgment, he
compares the verdict of a jury with the knowledge of an eyewitness. HABLA
ESPANOL? Come join Lowell House Spanish speakers at the weekly Spanish Table.
The Table will be held this semester on Tuesdays from 5:30-7pm in the dining
hall. Just look for the "Mesa de Espanol" sign. MANDARIN TABLE. Meets every
Tuesday from 5:30pm-7pm in the small dining room. Contact: Dan Ellard
(ellard@eecs). ARTS ANNOUNCEMENTS NAPOLEONIC ANTIPHONY -- HARVARD-RADCLIFFE
CHORUS cordially invites you to an uncommon performance of Hector Berlioz: Te
Deum, Opus 22. Sunday, December 9, 2001 at 8pm, First Church in Cambridge, 11
Garden Street. Dr. Constance DeFotis, Conductor; Rockland Osgood, Tenor; Dr.
Murray Forbes Somerville, organist. Tickets range from $14 and $10 ($8 and $5
for students and senior citizens). Available at the Harvard Box Office in
Holyoke Center Arcade at 1350 Massachusetts Ave. (daily from noon to 6 PM;
496-2222) or contact your local Harvard-Radcliffe chorister in advance! Map of
First Church Directions JAZZ TALK. On December 12th, at 1pm (dessert) in the
Winthrop House Tonkins Room, there will be a reading from a novel about the
important female black jazz trumpeter Valaida Snow, by the author, Candace
Allen, who is a Harvard graduate. (Also known as Lady Rattle, she is married
to Sir Simon Rattle, who is the conductor of the Berlin Philharmonic.) She's a
very dynamic speaker and fascinating individual--her uncle is Luther
Henderson, who arranged for Duke Ellington. There will be a discussion led
afterwards by Ingrid Monson, who is the new senior jazz historian here. RSVP
requested: email Karen Painter. Associate Professor, Music Department at
kpainter@fas. GILBERT & SULLIVAN PLAYERS present The Yeomen of the Guard!
Falsely accused of sorcery by his greedy cousin, Colonel Fairfax awaits
execution in the Tower of London. Desperate to keep his cousin from profiting
from his death, he weds a poor young woman, promising an hours-long marriage
and a comfortable life. Of course, he escapes, and the characters are sent on
a wild ride through romance, comedy, and heartfelt tragedy. The Yeomen of the
Guard is classic Gilbert and Sullivan with a tragic twist. Come enjoy one of
their finest works! November 29th-December 8th in the Agassiz Theater. Student
tickets $4-8, at the Harvard Box Office or (617) 496-2222 FREE ACTING
WORKSHOPS. If you have little or no acting experience but are interested in
learning, here's your perfect chance!!! As part of a thesis research project,
there will be a free acting workshop December 8 from 1-5pm and December 9th
from 1-5pm (and one in the spring). Each student attends one set of two
classes total. These improv and script-based workshops will be taught by
professional actor/director/instructor Robert Walsh who can be seen in such
films as State And Main, Amistad, In Dreams, The Spanish Prisoner, Eight Men
Out, and Turk 182! He has acted and directed at many professional theaters in
Boston and beyond. Volunteers will be asked to complete some brief
questionnaires and participate in a short group activity during the program.
Contact Tamara at 493-2077 or spiewak@fas.harvard.edu BSO AUDITIONS. Be a
superstar! Have you always wanted to be famous? Now's your chance: audition
for the Bach Society Orchestra's annual Concerto Competition and win a chance
to perform with Harvard's premier chamber orchestra in its March 9th, 2002
concert. All musicians (instrumentalists and vocalists) are encouraged to
audition with any work scored for soloist and orchestra. Single-round
auditions will be held the week of December 3rd. There is no audition fee, but
you must provide your own accompanist. Contact Rebecca Wexler (rwexler@fas,
3-3733) for details or to set up an audition time. 30th ANNUAL DUNSTER HOUSE
MESSIAH SING. Everybody is invited to join us in this year's Messiah Sing on
Thursday, December 13 at 8pm in the Dunster dining hall with the Mozart
Society Orchestra and splendid undergraduate soloists Georgia Walle, Marisa
Green, John McMunn and Sean Damm. You, the audience members, sing the choir
parts, or you can just sit and listen. Scores and refreshments will be
provided. So put off your winter break plans and join us for a fun holiday
celebration on the last day of classes. Don't miss it! Contact Karen Freeman
(3-2165, Karen.Freeman@pnicg.com). OTHER ANNOUNCEMENTS SUMMER SCHOOL
PROCTORSHIPS. The Summer School invites all interested Lowell House residents
to attend the following house meeting, Thursday, December 6th from 8-8:30pm,
in the Lowell House Game Room, to learn more about proctoring next summer.
Summer School Proctors receive free room and board and one 4-unit course
tuition-free. Applications will be distributed and questions answered by Chris
Queen, Summer School Dean of Students. For other house meetings dates and
times please see our ad in the Crimson on December 3rd and 5th. INTERVIEW FOR
ECHO. Are you concerned about eating disorders on campus? Do your friends come
to you when they need to talk? Do you want to reach out to your fellow
students? Interview for ECHO! Interviews will be held December 8th and 9th.
Call 5-8200 to set up an appointment. ECHO s a confidential and anonymous peer
counseling hotline. Our hours are 8pm-8am 7 days a week for phone calls (call
5-8200) and 8pm-11pm for drop-ins (come to Quincy F-entry basement). "THE
BOTTOM LINE: EFFECTIVE FUNDRAISING FOR HARVARD ARTS EVENTS." Friday, December
7th at 4pm, Lowell House Private Dining Room. Free admission. Join the OFA in
a roundtable discussion on strategies for financing undergraduate cultural
events and projects. Guest speakers are: Jack Megan (Director of the OFA),
Susan Cooke (Coordinator of Student Activities at the Office of the Dean),
Stephanie Troisi (Coordinator of the OFA's Grants Program), Monica Brooker
(Student Activities Coordinator, Harvard Foundation for Intercultural and Race
Relations), Judith Scarl '02 (President, Gilbert & Sullivan Society). Pre-
registration is advised. Call (617) 495-8676 or email lee16@fas for
registration or additional info. WOMEN IN BUSINESS PIZZA AND MOVIE BRAIN
BREAK! Drop by Ticknor Lounge any time from 8-10 P.M. on Sunday, December 2nd
for some free pizza from Bertuccis! Come watch "What Women Want" with us!
Presented by Harvard Undergraduate Women in Business. Questions? Email wib-
list@hcs.harvard.edu. WOMEN IN BUSINESS CONFERENCE. Women in Business would
like to invite you to attend our third semi-annual conference, Spheres of
Influence. The conference will be held at the Charles Hotel, from 7-9pm on
Thursday, December 6th. Three prominent speakers will inspire you with their
stories and advice, featuring Susan Macke, Vice President of Motorola North
America; Katherine Busser, Vice President of Capital One Direct Marketing; and
Kathryn S. Fuller, President of the World Wildlife Fund. Company
representatives from Capital One, Goldman Sachs, Fleet Bank and HSBC will be
in attendance. Coffee, tea, and desserts will be served following the speakers
and prior to a Q&A; session. Please come join us for an inspirational evening!
Email wib@hcs.harvard.edu to register for the conference. Hurry, space is
limited! CRIMSON CALLER OPEN HOUSE. Wednesday, December 5th, 6-7pm. Are you
interested in a job for the Spring? Come get information about the best job on
campus, meet the current Crimson Callers, and sign up for an interview. Free
Food! Games! Prizes! RSVP to Kristen Wunderley at 6-6551 or
kristen_wunderley@harvard.edu. Our office is located at 124 Mt. Auburn Street,
4th Floor (next to Chili's). HARVARD COLLEGE WOMEN'S LEADERSHIP AWARDS. The
Harvard College Women's Leadership Award honors a junior or senior at Harvard
who has demonstrated exceptional leadership while attending Harvard;
contributed toward the advancement of women; achieved meaningful impact on
fellow students; and exhibited a potential for leadership in future endeavors.
The award will be presented at a ceremony in April, and will be given in
conjunction with a cash stipend of $750. Each candidate must be nominated by a
faculty person, staff member, administrator, or student in the form of a
letter of recommendation. Nomination letters should be submitted to Paul
Bohlmann in the fellowships office of the Office of Career Services any time
before 5pm, Friday, December 7th. Nominated students will be notified and
asked to submit a personal statement, resume, and additional letter of
recommendation by January 11, 2002, in order to be considered for the award.
Contact: Karen Avery, Assistant Dean of Harvard College and Director of the
Ann Radcliffe Trust. FROM THE OFFICE OF CAREER SERVICES FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
FOR YOUR CAREER AND LIFE. Concerned about how you will be able to afford to
begin your career in media, public service, government, education, or the
arts? Credit problems? Loan debt? Find out how to manage your finances and get
some valuable information about how to pursue the career you want without
having to worry about being able to afford it at Making the Most of your
Money, at Phillips Brooks House Parlor December 3, 5:00 - 6:30 p.m.
Refreshments will be served. Co-sponsored by the Office of Career Services and
the Office of Financial Aid. THINKING ABOUT STUDYING OUT OF RESIDENCE? Come to
a Study Abroad Orientation Meeting and learn the Basics, Friday, December 7th,
2:30-3:30pm, in the basement OCS Conference Room at 54 Dunster St. **PLEASE
ALSO NOTE THE PETITION DEADLINE DATES TO STUDY OUT OF RESIDENCE FOR CREDIT.
Deadline for SPRING TERM 2002 has passed; for SUMMER TERM 2002, FALL TERM 2002
and the ACADEMIC YEAR 2002-2003 is: Monday, April 15, 2002 by 12 noon.
THINKING ABOUT WORKING ABROAD? Come to a Work Abroad Orientation Meeting and
learn the Basics... Thurs. 12/6, 11am, in the basement OCS Conference Room at
54 Dunster St. VISIT JAPAN THIS SUMMER. Do you want to visit Japan this
summer? Consider applying for the Kawamura Visiting Fellowship Program! It's
open to all Harvard and MIT undergraduate and graduate students, with
preference given to juniors and seniors. Proficiency in Japanese is NOT
required. Information and applications are available at OCS, room 307.
Information is also available at www.cotech.co.jp. Application deadline is
THURSDAY, JANUARY 10th by 3PM in room 307, OCS. WORK IN FRANCE. Interested in
working abroad? Representatives from the French-American Chamber of Commerce
and the French Embassy will be speaking on Thursday, December 6th from 4-5pm
in the OCS Conference Room. They will be sharing information about Internships
and Career Development Opportunities in France. Most internships are in the
fields of sales and marketing, finance, law, engineering, and computer
science. If you cannot attend but want more information, you can e-mail them
at icdp@faccnyc.org or call 212-765-4460. GOVERNMENT CAREER RESOURCES GROUP
MEETING. Interested in exploring careers in government and related areas?
Visit the OCS Reading Room on Thursday, December 6, at 4:30pm (please be
prompt) for a Government Career Resources Group Meeting, an overview of the
resources available to help you explore careers in government, public policy,
and international affairs. CAREERS IN JOURNALISM PANEL. Thursday, December 6,
2001 at 6pm, 1033 Mass. Ave. Room 205. Members of the esteemed 2001-2002 class
of Nieman Fellows will share their experiences in an informal panel
discussion, followed by ample time for those in attendance to ask questions
and talk with panelists. The panel discussion will begin promptly at 6pm.
Refreshments will be provided. Panelists include: JAMES TRENGROVE, senior
producer of the Capitol Hill Unit at The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer; DAVID J.
LYNCH, chief of European correspondents for USA Today; MARY CLAUDE FOSTER,
producer for ABC News "Nightline"; MATTHEW BRELIS, business reporter, The
Boston Globe; BARBARA A. SERRANO, political editor for The Seattle Times;
GERALDO SAMOR, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, correspondent, Thomson
International/International Financing Review; LISA STONE, editor-in-chief,
channel programming at Women.com. MEDIA & COMMUNICATIONS E-NEWS LIST.
Interested in a media, entertainment, or communications career? Sign up for
the Media Careers e-News List. Send a request via e-mail to Sheri Ziccardi at
ziccardi@fas.harvard.edu. GOVERNMENT, PUBLIC POLICY, & INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
E-NEWS LIST. If you are interested in a government-related career, be sure to
sign up for the Government Careers e-News List, which will provide details
about government-related careers, upcoming internship deadlines, key
resources, DINING HALL DELIGHTS! Tired of the same-old same-old? Now that
Julia Child has left chilly Cambridge for sunny California, good recipes are
in even greater demand. Ever wonder how to use a Chickwich to make a chicken
caesar salad? Are you the Lowell expert on making pesto sauce from salad bar
ingredients? Share your culinary expertise with your housemates -- we'll love
you forever. Send your favorite dining hall recipes to lohonews@fas with the
header Dining Hall Delights. We'll print the best in the newsletter as part of
an ongoing series! ****** The Lowell House Newsletter is compiled every
weekend for Monday distribution and can be found at
http://lowell.student.harvard.edu. Submissions should be e-mailed to
lohonews@fas by Saturday noon, and should be as brief as possible. Phone
contact: Luis Campos, 493-2895. ******

