University of Georgia Department of Political Science   POLS 3200 Introduction
to International Relations Spring 1999 Baldwin 304 MWF 11:15-12:05   Dr. John
S. Duffield email: duffield@uga.edu Office: Baldwin 408, 542-2989 Office
hours: MR 1:30-2:30 and by appt. Web page: www.arches.uga.edu/~duffield  

**_COURSE OBJECTIVES_**

Although the United States is perhaps the most insulated from the outside
world of all countries, the well-being of its citizens depends greatly on the
environment beyond its borders.  We as U.S. residents are affected on a
regular basis by political, economic, social, and environmental conditions and
developments in other countries.  We may be inconvenienced, for example, by
the impact of a revolution on oil prices.  Or an economic downturn in a
distant part of the world may lower the cost of some imported manufactured
goods while causing a local factory to close.  And in more extreme cases, U.S.
leaders may feel compelled to send American troops into harm's way in order to
rescue threatened citizens or to prosecute a war.

This situation of inescapable interdependence dictates that well-informed
citizens have a basic grasp of world affairs.  Accordingly, this course has
several interrelated objectives:

  * to introduce students to and familiarize them with basic concepts and issues in international relations;
  * to help students relate these concepts to current events and use them to illuminate the underlying significance of contemporary developments in world politics; and
  * to foster critical, independent thinking about issues in global affairs and U.S. foreign policy as it relates to them.

**_COURSE REQUIREMENTS_**

POLS 3200 will meet three times per week.  Class will involve a combination of
lecture and discussion, with Friday meetings typically being devoted to the
latter.  Final grades will be based on the following:

  * Attendance (10%): Regular attendance is expected of all students.  Absences must be cleared in advance with the instructor.  In the case of an emergency that does not permit advance notification, a written note must be provided after the fact.  Each student will be allowed one unexcused absence.  Each subsequent unexcused absence will cost one percent of the grade, up to a maximum of 10 percent
  * Active participation in class discussion (5%).  Meaningful participation will require careful reading of all assigned materials.
  * Two unannounced quizzes covering a week's reading and lecture material (5% each).
  * Mid-term examination based on readings and other subject matter covered in class during the first half of the semester (15%) -- Friday, March 5.
  * Comprehensive final examination based on all the readings and other subject matter covered in class during the entire semester (30%) -- Tuesday, May 4, 12-3 pm.
  * Paper (30%).  A first draft, worth 10% of the grade, will be due at the beginning of class on Monday, March 29.  The final draft, worth 20% of the grade, will be due at the beginning of class on Monday, April 26.  Late submissions are strongly discouraged.  Three percentage points will be deducted for each day the first draft and/or final draft is late.  Extensions may be granted, but only if they are requested well in advance of the deadline and if there is a compelling justification.

****

**The Paper**

Each student will write a paper of 5-7 pages (typed, double-spaced, one-inch
margins, 12-point font) in length (not including cover and reference sheets)
on a topic of interest to him or her.  I have suggested a number of topics at
the end of the syllabus below, although students are welcome to choose other
topics in consultation with me.  The principal requirements are that the topic
should be relevant to the subject matter of the course (e.g., it should be an
issue in international relations or U.S. foreign policy) and that it should
admit of two or more defensible contending positions, one of which the student
will seek to advance.

The first step in the paper-writing process will be to choose a topic.
Students should turn in a paper topic proposal no later than Monday, Feb. 15.
Earlier submissions are welcome.  The proposal should include a one paragraph
summary of the topic and the position to be argued by the student.  In
addition, it should include a list of at three least promising sources on the
subject (in proper bibliographic form) that the student has already consulted.

The second step is to complete a first draft.  The first draft need be no more
than 3-5 pages in length, although full-length drafts are welcome.  I will
read the first draft and provide written comments, which the student will be
expected to address in the final draft.  The first draft must be returned with
the final draft for my reference.

Papers will be evaluated against the following criteria: adherence to
requirements, quality of analysis and argument, organization, sufficiency of
empirical content, grammar and style, and adequacy and correctness of
citation.  Final drafts should use and cite at least five different sources.
Be sure to distinguish clearly between ideas derived from the sources and your
own by providing citations wherever necessary and adequate bibliographical
information.  I will provide a handout of appropriate bibliographic forms.  


**_REQUIRED READINGS AND OTHER RESOURCES_** ** __**

I have ordered the following two texts, available for purchase at the
bookstore:

    Joshua Goldstein, International Relations, 3d ed. (hereafter referred to as Goldstein) 

    Robert Harris, Fatherland 

Both books are also on reserve at the main library.  The full text of most of
the assigned articles are available on-line to UGA students via GALILEO.  In
order to access most of these articles, follow these steps:  
    Go to GALILEO on the world wide web (http://www.galileo.peachnet.edu/Homepage.cgi)   
    Click on "Databases"   
    Click on "Full Text Journal/Newspaper Articles"   
    Click on "ABI Inform (business and management)"   
    Type the title (or author) of the article in the "Search for" field and click on "Start Search"   
    Click on the desired citation in the list of search results   
    Click on "Article Text" button   
    Read or print out the text 

I have used the following abbreviations for commonly cited journals:  
    FA = Foreign Affairs   
    HIR = Harvard International Review 

Any other assigned readings, indicated by a (R) in the syllabus, will be put
on reserve at the main library.

I recommend highly that students keep abreast of current international events
by reading on a regular basis a major newspaper or news magazine.  Inexpensive
subscriptions to the New York Times (Monday-Friday) are available through
Normal News (543-3045/543-4429).  Alternatively, you may view the New York
Times website (nytimes.com).

A good deal of course-related materials will be posted on the web.  Initially,
the class home page will be linked to my home page
(www.arches.uga.edu/~duffield), although we may migrate to WebCT during the
semester.  In addition, each student should have an email account, since some
announcements and course materials will be distributed via a Listserv
discussion list.  


**_SCHEDULE OF ASSIGNMENTS AND CLASSES_**  


Weeks 1-2. Course Overview/Introduction to International Relations

Assigned reading:  
 Goldstein, 3-23  
 "Techno-Nothings" on 3200 home page/news articles

Discussion/debate topics:  
 Why is it important to understand international relations?  What do we mean
by international relations?  What types of relations?  Between what types of
entities?  


Weeks 3-4. The Realist Paradigm (RP)

NB: No class Monday, Jan. 18 (Martin Luther King, Jr., Day)

Lecture topics:  
 Evolution of the international system  
 Nature of the contemporary international system: the Realist Paradigm  
 Implications of the Realist Paradigm for international relations  
 Impact of nuclear weapons

Assigned reading:  
(3) Goldstein, 23-49, 53-88, 193-212  
 "Diplomatic Immunity" on 3200 home page/news articles  
(4) Goldstein, 241-80 (skim 243-55)  
 John Mearsheimer, Case for a Ukrainian Nuclear Deterrent,  FA (Summer 1993):
50-66  
 Steven Miller, Case against a Ukrainian Nuclear Deterrent, FA (Summer 1993):
67-80

Discussion/debate topics:  
(3) No discussion  
(4) Do nuclear weapons contribute to peace and stability or not?  Should they
be abolished?  


 Weeks 5-6: Modifications of the Realist Paradigm (I): Non-Structural Causes
of War

NB: On Friday, Feb. 5, the class will meet at the Georgia Center for
Continuing Education, Mahler Auditorium, to attend a discussion of the future
of Central and Eastern Europe.  Attendance is mandatory.  Please try to arrive
by 10:45 if you do not have a class conflict.

Lecture topics:  
 Non-structural causes of war  
 Different types of states: status quo vs revisionists  
 Internal sources of state behavior and international conflict  
 A liberal democratic peace?

Assigned reading:  
(5) Goldstein, 147-73, 213-25  
(R) Jack Levy, Domestic Politics and War, in Rotberg and Rabb, Origin and
Prevention of Major Wars, 79-99  
(6) James Lee Ray, The Democratic Path to Peace, Journal of Democracy 8, no. 2
(1997): 49-64  
 Edward Mansfield and Jack Snyder, Democratization and War, FA (May 1995):
79-97

Discussion/debate topics:  
(5) What are the most important non-structural causes of war?  How important
are possible domestic causes in comparison with international causes?  
(6) Are democracies more peaceful than other states?  If so, why?  And under
what circumstances?  


Weeks 7-8. Modifications of the Realist Paradigm (II): International
Institutions

NB: Paper topic proposals due by Monday, Feb. 15.  
 No class Friday, Feb. 26

Lecture topics:  
 International law  
 Laws of war  
 Arms control  
 Formal alliances  
 Collective security: The League of Nations and the U.N.

Readings:  
(7) Goldstein, 280-83, 287-92, 314-33  
 Michael Hoffman, Drawing on Custom, HIR 20, no. 3 (Summer 1998): 58-63  
 "Laws of War" on 3200 home page/news articles  
(8) Goldstein, 88-98, 111-15, 292-314  
 Paul Kennedy and Bruce Russett, Reforming the United Nations, FA (Sept.
1995): 56-71  
 Reforming the United Nations--Pope Kofi's unruly flock, Economist (8 Aug.
1998), 19-22  
    
Discussion/debate topics:  
(7) Should there be any restrictions on the use of force in war time?  What
should they be?  And what good do they do?  
(8) Should the US promote a strong global collective security system after the
cold war?  Should the UN be strengthened and given more responsibilities?
What are the prospects for UN reform?  


Week 9: Catch-Up, Review, Mid-Term Examination  


 !!! Mid-Term Examination, Friday, March 5 !!!  


Weeks 10-11: Modifications of the Realist Paradigm (III): International
Political Economy

Lecture topics:  
 Why there are economic transactions: State-centric (mercantilist) models  
 Liberal model: Private economic actors  
 The state strikes back: State efforts to control commerce  
 Cooperative multilateral institutional responses  
 The special case of North-South relations

Reading:  
(10) Goldstein, 339-78, 383-422  
 "U.S. vs big oil" on 3200 home page/news articles  
 "China vs the US" on 3200 home page/news articles  
(11) Goldstein, 518-31, 555-601  
 C. Fred Bergsten, Globalizing Free Trade, FA (May/June 1996): 105-20  
 Charles Carlisle, Is the World Ready for Free Trade? FA (Nov/Dec 1996):
113-26

Discussion/debate topics:  
(10) How much control should states exercise over international business?
What are the pros and cons of restricting the activities of multinational
corporations?  
(11) Are states better off with protectionism or free trade?  Is the goal of
ever more free trade achievable?  How quickly should it be sought, and through
what mechanisms?  


Weeks 12-13: Contemporary Challenges to the Realist Paradigm

NB: First drafts of research papers are due on Monday, March 29

Lecture topics:  
(a) Interdependence and the delining capacity of states to meet the needs of
their citizens  
(b) Human rights and the erosion of state sovereignty  
(c) Disintegrative tendencies: States vs nations  
(d) Integrative tendencies: the case of the European Union  
(e) Transnational and transgovernmental actors

Readings:  
(a) Goldstein, 465-94  
 Peter Drucker, Global Economy and Nation-State, FA (Sept/Oct 1997): 159-71  
 Jagdish Bhagwati, The Capital Myth, FA 77, no. 3 (May/June 1998): 7-12  
 "Global capital flows" on 3200 home page/news articles  
(b) Goldstein, reread 329-33  
 Amartya Sen, Universal Truths, HIR 20, no. 3 (Summer 1998): 40-43  
 "Officials can't hide" on 3200 home page/news articles  
 "Sudan's atrocities" on 3200 home page/news articles  
(c) Michael Lind, Liberal Nationalism, FA (May/June 1994): 87-99  
 Gidon Gottlieb, Nations without States, FA (May/June 1994): 100-12  
 "Who's in charge?" on 3200 home page/news articles  
(d) Goldstein, 427-61  
 Martin Feldstein, EMU and International Conflict, FA (Nov/Dec 1997): 60-73  
 "Primer on Euro" on 3200 home page/news articles  
 "Gains and losses for US" on 3200 home page/news articles  
(e) Jessice Mathews, Power Shift, FA (Jan/Feb 1997): 50-66  
 Anne-Marie Slaughter, Real New World Order, FA (Sept/Oct 1997): 183-97  
 "NGOs in war" on 3200 home page/news articles

Discussion/debate topics:  
(a) To what degree are states still able to meet the needs of their citizens?
Do global environmental, population, and natural resource issues present
insurmountable challenges?  Can anything be done to reverse globalization?
Should anything be done?  
(b) To what degree have the traditional prerogatives of state sovereignty been
eroded?  Is this a good or bad thing?  
(c) How powerful a force is nationalism?  Should state boundaries be redrawn
to reflect better the geographical distribution of nationalities?  
(d) How far is European integration likely to proceed?  What are the
implications of successful integration for the United States?  
(e) Is the nation-state being eclipsed by other actors in world politics?  If
so, what are these actors and what are they doing?  


Weeks 14-15: The Role of the United States in International Relations

Lecture topics:  
 Rise of the United States as a great power  
 Importance of the United States in world affairs during the cold war  
 US foreign policy process and decision-making structure  
 Major issues in US foreign policy after the cold war

Readings:  
(14) Goldstein, 174-89  
 Harris, Fatherland (Alternatively, you may view the video of the book.)  
(15) Strobe Talbott, Democracy and the National Interest, FA (Nov/Dec 1996):
47-63  
 William Kristol & Robert Kagan, Toward a Neo-Reaganite Foreign Policy, FA
(July/Aug 1996): 18-32  
 Kim Holmes and John Hillen, Misreading Reagan's Legacy, FA (Sept/Oct 1996):
162-67  
 Samuel Huntington, Erosion of American National Interests, FA (Sept/Oct
1997): 28-49  
 some additional readings to be announced

Discussion/debate topics:  
(14) How did history unfold in Fatherland?  Why did things turn out
differently?  How plausible is this counterfactual account?  
(15) What role should the United States seek to play in global affairs after
the Cold War?  Should it actively seek to promote democracy around the world?
Should it use military force to intervene for humanitarian or other purposes?
Is the United States doing too much or too little?  


Week 16: The Future of International Relations: Catch-Up and Review

NB: Papers due, Monday, April 26

Reading:  
 Goldstein, 605-11  


 !!! Final Examination: Tuesday, May 5, 12:00-3:00 !!!  


**_POSSIBLE PAPER TOPICS_**

The following list is meant to be suggestive, not comprehensive.  You should
feel free to propose other topics that may be of interest to you.  


Global Issues  
 United Nations  
 o Should the UN be further strengthened, or has it already usurped too much
of the authority of its member states?  
 o Should the UN Security Council add new permanent members such as Germany,
Japan, and others?  
 Nuclear proliferation  
  How serious is the threat of nuclear proliferation?  Does pursuit of the
goal of stemming the spread of weapons of mass destruction ever call for the
use of military force?  
 An International War Crimes Tribunal  
  Currently, negotiations are underway in Rome to create an international war
crimes tribunal, a permanent international legal institution that would
investigate and prosecute parties involved in genocide and ethnic cleansing.
Would an international criminal court prevent such crimes against humanity or
at least bring about justice for its victims?  Would the costs outweigh the
benefits?  
  International terrorism: Does it represent a serious threat?  How should the
US responde to terrorist attacks?  Should the US observe any restrictions in
the fight against terrorism?  
 Economic sanctions: are they useful tools of diplomacy?

U.S. Foreign Policy  
  China: should the US make democracy and human rights major issues in its
relations with China?  Should it condition trade on Chinese reform?  
  Cuba: should the US continue to impose economic sanctions on Cuba?  What is
the best way to promote political reform in that country?  
  Promotion of democracy: should the US actively seek to promote democracy
around the world?  
 Iran: should the US continue to impose a trade embargo on that country?  
  Foreign deployments: should the US continue to station substantial military
forces in Europe and East Asia?  
  Israel: should the US place more pressure on its principal Middle Eastern
ally in order to promote the peace process in the region?  
  Assassination of political leaders: Should the US never assassinate foreign
policy leaders, no matter how objectionable they may be?  
  Global environment: is the US doing enough to address issues such as global
warming?  Should it ratify the Kyoto protocol?  
  Defense: is the US spending enough on defense?  Too much?  What changes
should be made?  


NATO  
 Preservation  
  Should NATO remain the dominant security organization in Europe or should it
be superseded by alternatives such as the OSCE and the EU?  
 Enlargement  
  NATO has already agreed to add Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic.
Should additional east and southeast European countries be invited to join the
alliance?  
 The Balkans  
  Western leaders are now considering the deployment of NATO forces to the
troubled regions of Albania and Macedonia. Should NATO be deployed in even
greater numbers to the Balkans?  Should NATO intervention in Kosovo stop the
fighting from spreading to Albania and Macedonia?

European Union  
 Establishment of a single currency  
  Will the common currency be a success?  What are the chances that the union
will transform Europe into one of the world's biggest and most efficient
marketplaces, and threaten the dollar as the world's reserve currency?  
 Prospects for true political union  
  The European leaders are about to introduce a common currency without also
forming a political union. Is the status quo sustainable? Will currency union
prove to be a catalyst for deeper political integration in Europe?  
 Enlargement  
  Should the EU move quickly to add new members in eastern and southeaster
Europe?

Other Regional Issues  
 Bosnia  
  So far, the 1995 Dayton agreement and NATO military presence in Bosnia have
resulted in peace in Bosnia.  But will Western intervention there be
successful in the long run?  
 Nuclear weapons in South Asia  
  Now that India and Pakistan are declared weapons states, will the possession
of nuclear deterrents by both states produce regional stability, similar to
what took place between the United States and the Soviet Union during the Cold
War? Or will these tests represent the first step in an escalating arms race
and increasing tension between the newest members of the nuclear club?  
 Sanctions on Iraq  
  Should the world community continue to impose harsh economic sanctions on
Iraq?  
 Middle East  
  Should the Kurds be allowed to have an independent state?  
    


