**POLS 4307/6307 **

**GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS OF CHINA **

**Spring Semester 2001**

David Mason 678-4879

e-mail: tdmason@memphis.edu 401 Clement Hall

Office Hours: MWF: 8:00-10:00; or by appointment or any time you find me in my
office

* * *

**TEXTS** : Lucian Pye (1991). _China: An Introduction_ (4th edition). Boston:
Little, Brown.

James C.F. Wang (1999). _Contemporary Chinese Politics: An Introduction_ (6th
Edition). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Kenneth Lieberthal (1995). _Governing China: From Revolution Through Reform_.
New York: W. W. Norton.

Brian Hook, ed. (1996). _The Individual and the State in China_. Oxford, UK:
Clarendon.

  
  

* * *

**_I. COURSE OBJECTIVES_** __

This course is intended to give students an understanding of the political
development, political culture, political institutions of the People's
Republic of China (PRC). The PRC is the world's most rapidly growing economy.
With the disintegration of the Soviet Union, it is also now the largest and
most powerful Communist Party-ruled nation in the world. Yet the same effort
to reform a centralized "command" style economic system that brought about the
demise of the Soviet Union was initiated in China in 1978 and has succeeded
beyond most people's expectations. At the same time, the post-Mao leadership
that has engineered dramatic economic liberalization has resisted pressures to
democratize the political system. The tensions between economic liberalization
and political authoritarianism erupted in the Tiananmen Square demonstrations
of 1989. While similar mass demonstrations in Eastern Europe later that same
year resulted in the demise of Communist Party rule there, the Chinese
Communist Party (CCP) that suppressed the social movement of 1989 and
preserved the party-state system intact. The purpose of this course is to give
you an understanding of how these tensions developed in Chinese society, why
China did not follow the same course as the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe,
and what the prospects are for the future of the People's Republic of China.

**_II. COURSE REQUIREMENTS_**

Your grade in this course will be based on two exams (a mid term and a final,
each worth 30% of your final grade) and a research paper (worth 30% of your
final grade), with the final 10% being determined by class participation.

A. **_Exams_** __: 60% of final grade

There will be two exams during the course of the semester, with each one
determining roughly 30 percent of your final grade. The first exam will cover
the first half of the syllabus and the final will cover the remainder of the
course. The first exam will be distributed on March 1 and will be due on March
8; the final exam will be distributed on April 24 and will be due the day that
the final exam is scheduled for this class: May 3.

  
  

The exams will be take-home and will consist of essay questions. You are free
to use any books, notes, or journal articles that you have, but **_you are not
to confer with other students on the test questions_**. Evidence of
collaboration with other students or anyone else will be treated as an
instance of cheating and dealt with according to University rules on cheating.
You will receive a grade of "0" for the exam and an "F" for the course.

  
  

B. **_Class Participation:_** __10% of final grade

A minimum of ten (10) percent of your grade will be determined by in-class
participation, including attendance. Attendance is expected at all class
sessions and I will check the role on a regular basis. If you are late for
class, it is your responsibility to check in with me after class; otherwise
you will be counted as absent that day. An attendance score will be
calculated, consisting of the percent of class sessions that you attend. This
figure, plus my estimate of your contributions to class discussions (in the
form of **_informed_** __participation in the discussion of the issues under
consideration and/or attentive listening to the contributions of others) will
determine your score on this portion of your final grade. "Informed"
participation means that it is apparent that you have read the assigned
readings prior to coming to class. I reserve the right to give unannounced
quizzes on the readings if it becomes apparent that students are not reading
the assigned material. The weighting scheme for determining your final grade
will be adjusted accordingly.

  
  

You are responsible for all material covered in class and for all other tasks
assigned for completion outside of class. Absence from class does not excuse
ignorance of the material covered or failure to complete assignments made that
day. Nor does it excuse failure to turn in assignments due that day. It is
your responsibility to find out what you missed when you are absent and to
keep up with the course.

  
  

C. **_Research Project_** __: 30% of final grade

Each student will be expected to complete a research paper on some topic of
his or her own choosing. You may deal with any aspect of the contemporary
domestic or international politics of China. My only requirement is that your
paper be focused on the **_contemporary era_** __and that it not be a strictly
historical analysis of some particular event that occurred prior to the Deng
Xiaoping era in China.

The purpose of this project is to help you develop your ability to conduct
research, to think and write analytically and critically. This requires that
you develop certain skills, such as a familiarity with the resources available
to you at this University and electronically through various scholarly data
bases. In order to ensure some quality control, avoid the horror of "over-
night wonders", and give you some experience in the mechanics of social
science research, I am requiring that you complete your project in three
installments (the percent of your final grade on the research project that is
determined by each installment is in parentheses):

  
  

1\. **_Problem Statement and Bibliography_** _(10%) - due February 13_

_2. **Problem Statement and Literature Review/Annotated Bibliography** (25%) -
due March 27_

3\. **_Final Draft_** _(75%) - due April 19_

  
  

Please note the following:

1\. **Completing these installments is not optional!**

**2\. You will be penalized 5 points for every day you are late with either
one of the installments.**

**3\. No installment will be accepted more than one week past the deadline.**

**4\. Failure to complete one of the installments will result in a grade of
"0" for that portion of your research project grade.**

  
  
  
  

**Installment 1: _Problem Statement and Bibliography_** _(10%) due February
13_

You will begin by formulating a one page problem statement on the issue that
will be the subject of your research project, and you will include with that a
bibliography with at least ten (10) articles from academic journals on the
subject of your paper. Graduate students are expected to list 15 articles for
their paper. You are to confine yourself to academic journals, not news or
opinion magazines or government publications or web sites. All of your text
books contain extensive bibliographies, and you should make good use of them
in locating appropriate scholarly sources. I will give you a handout that
lists the journals you may use. No other sources will be accepted for this
installment. Your bibliography should conform to the citation format listed in
the handout. Failure to comply with either of these requirements - confining
yourself to the accepted journals and the accepted citation format - will
result in your paper being returned to you with no grade. You will have to do
the assignment again until you do it correctly, and the late penalty applies
while you are correcting your failure to comply with these two simple
requirements.

  
  

**Installment 2:** **Problem Statement And Literature Review** (25%) _due
March 27_

For the second installment your are expected to write a detailed summary of at
least seven of the articles (ten for graduate students) from scholarly
journals that you located in the first installment. The same restrictions on
sources listed for installment 1 apply to installment 2. Each summary should
be at least one page in length and it should be preceded with a complete
bibliographic citation. In addition, you should expand your problems statement
to include a detailed statement of the research question or puzzle that will
be the focus of your research paper, what major themes you have gleaned from
your review of the ten articles you have read, and how you plan to approach
your analysis of the research question. Each article summary should spell out
the major issues addressed by the authors, the theoretical approach they used,
and their analysis, methods, and findings.

  
  

**Installment 3: Final Draft (15-20 pages of text)** (65%) _due April 24_

Drawing on the articles you summarized in Installment 1, you should prepare a
final draft of your research project. This draft should begin with a clear
**_problem statement :_** __what specific issue in Chinese politics is the
topic of your paper, why is it important and how you will go about analyzing
it. This should be followed with a ** _literature review_** __in which you
summarize the major themes and findings of the existing scholarly literature
on this subject (derived from your annotated bibliography but augmented with
additional sources you have identified since completing that installment).
Then you should present ** _your own analysis_** of the issues that define
your research question, the major findings in the existing literature dealing
with these issues, and what aspects of the research question are in need of
further research. **_For the final draft, you may use any source you wish,
including books, anthologies, government publications, or information found on
the web, as long as you cite your source completely and correctly._** __This
installment should be a completed draft of your analysis that demonstrates a
thorough awareness of the relevant research, a sophisticated understanding of
its major themes and research puzzles, and your own original analysis of these
puzzles.

  
  

**The keys to writing a good paper are thorough research, careful writing and
frequent REWRITING. At each stage in this process, you should carefully edit,
revise, elaborate and reorganize the parts of the paper that you completed in
earlier installments. Revising drafts is especially critical for the final
draft.**

  
  

My purpose in using this format is to help you learn something about the
process of doing research. The one skill that you can develop in courses such
as this one is the ability to do research. This assignment approaches the way
that serious social science research is done. By doing it this way, you will
gain some experience in doing research the way it should be done. We will
spend some time in class discussing possible topics. Once you come up with an
idea, you should come by and talk to me about it. I can give you some
suggestions on where to find material and help you think through the
definition of the problem.

**_IV. REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL WRITTEN ASSIGNMENTS _**

Once you turn in the first installment, you may not change topics. If you feel
you must change topics, discuss it with me first. Understand that if you do
change topics, you have to go back and complete all already due installments
on your new topic. Thus, if you turn in the first installment and decide to
change topics, you will have to complete the first installment on your new
topic as well as the second installment. The same rule applies for changing
topics between the second and third installments: to do so requires that you
complete the first two installments on your new topic.

1\. **Due Dates** : due dates for take-home exams and research paper
assignments are noted in the syllabus and will be enforced. A late penalty of
5 points per day will be imposed for late papers. Later papers will not be
accepted more than five days past the deadline. After 5 days you will receive
a grade of "0" for that assignment.

2\. **Electronic Submissions** : You are required to turn in an electronic
version of each assignment (exams and research paper assignments), either on
diskette or as an e-mail attachment, in MS Word or Word Perfect format. Each
file should be named with your initials and last name, and a designation of
which assignment it is. For instance, my mid-term exam would be submitted as a
file entitled "tdmason-exam1". The first installment of my research paper
would be a file entitled "tdmason-paper1".

3\. **Sources:** I will give you a handout that lists the journals that are
acceptable for the first two installments. No other sources may be used for
those installments. Failure to comply with this requirement will result in
your paper being returned to you to redo until you are in compliance. The late
penalty applies while you are redoing either of the first two installments.
Any source - books, anthologies, government publications, news articles, web
sources - is acceptable for the final draft to supplement the material from
scholarly journals found in the first two installments.

4\. **Format:** the handout I will give you specifies the citation format you
are required to use in the text of your paper and in the bibliography. You are
not allowed to use any other format. Failure to comply with this requirement
will result in your paper being returned to you until you do comply with this
requirement. Late penalties will apply while you are correcting your mistake.
All three installments should be **TYPED** double spaced with no more than
one-inch margins on all four sides and no larger than 12pt font) in MS Word or
Word Perfect format..

5\. **Plagiarism** : plagiarism is a violation of the Code of Student conduct,
and it will result in a student receiving a grade of "F" for the course and
being referred to the appropriate administrative authorities. You can be
expelled from the University for plagiarism. You will be given a handout with
detailed rules on plagiarism. One rule of thumb is to cite your sources at all
times. You will never be penalized for having too many citations. Also, any
time you use 10 or more consecutive words taken verbatim from a source, you
should put that passage in quotation marks and cite the source of the quote.

  
  

**_III. IMPORTANT DATES_** __

You should take note of the following dates. Please note that you will not
have a graded test in this course prior to the last day that you may drop
classes. Therefore, you must decide whether or not to drop this course on some
basis other than your first test score.

  
  

Paper installment 1 due - February 13

Paper installment 2 due - March 27

Paper installment 3 due - April 24

Mid-term exam distributed - March 1

Mid-term exam due - March 8

Final exam distributed - April 24

Final exam due - May 3

Last day to drop a course - March 2

  
  

**__****_COURSE OUTLINE AND READING ASSIGNMENTS_** __

Reading assignments are indicated in the course outline that follows. You are
expected to keep up with the readings in the sense of having them completed by
the time we begin the corresponding section of the course. Class participation
counts 10% of your grade, and informed participation requires attendance and
careful reading of the assignments. If it becomes evident that the class is
not reading the assigned materials, I reserve the right to give pop tests on
the readings in order to provide some incentive to keep up with them. I
reserve the right to add additional readings as I become aware of them.

  
  

**I. INTRODUCTION: THE CONFUCIAN FOUNDATION**

Because the People's Republic of China emerged from a cultural tradition that
is completely distinct in its origins and content from that of the Western
world, it is essential that we begin the course with an overview of the
Confucian tradition and its continued relevance to contemporary politics in
China. The emergence of the Peoples Republic of China can be traced to the
collapse of the Confucian-based imperial system during the 19th century. In
this section, we shall examine the Confucian tradition, the impact of the West
on China, the collapse of the imperial system, and the development of the
Chinese Communist regime that took its place.

**January 16-18: Introduction: The Confucian Tradition**

Pye - Ch. 1,2,3,4

Wang - Preface, "romanization of Chinese Names", Ch. 1

Lieberthal - Ch. 1

  
  

**January 23-25:** **The Collapse of the Imperial System and the Rise of
Communism**

Pye - Ch. 5,6,7, 8, 9

Lieberthal - Ch. 2

_graduate students:_

Barrington Moore, _The Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy_ , Chapter
4 (on reserve

**January 30-February 1: The Mao Era**

Pye - Ch. 10, 12, 13, 14, 15

Lieberthal - Ch. 4

Wang - Ch. 2

  
  

**February 6-8: Deng Xiaoping and the Four Modernizations**

Pye - Ch. 16, 17

Wang - Ch. 11, 12

Lieberthal - Ch. 5

  
  
  
  

******II. THE INSTITUTIONS OF STATE-SOCIETY RELATIONS**

The revolutionary experience of China in the first half of the twentieth led
to an explicit, officially sanctioned rejection of China's Confucian past and
the construction of a new pattern of state-society relations based on Maoist
ideology and an set of institutions dominated by the Chinese Communist Party.
In this section we will examine those institutions, their ideological
justification, and their success at creating a new social order in China. We
will then look at how these institutions have evolved since the death of Mao
Zedong and the initiation of economic reforms.

  
  

**February 13-15:** **Maoism and Chinese Political Culture**

Pye - Ch. 11

Wang - Ch. 3

Lieberthal - Ch. 3

  
  

**February 20-22:** **Party -State Relations**

Wang - Ch. 4, 7, 8, 9

Lieberthal - Ch. 6, 7, 8

  
  

**February 27-March 1:** **The Party and the Military**

Wang - Ch. 9

Shambaugh, David (1996). "The Soldier and the State: The Political Work System
and the People's Liberation Army", in Brian Hook, ed., _The Individual and the
State in China_.

Joffe, Ellis. 1996. "Party-Army Relations in China: Retrospect and Prospect",
_China Quarterly_ 146 (June): 299-314.

**March 6-8:** **Leadership Politics: Party-Government Relations in China**

Wang - Ch. 5

Dittmer, Lowell (1978). "Bases of Power in Chinese Politics", _World
Politics_. 31 (October): 26-60.

Pye, Lucian W. (1981). _The Dynamics of Chinese Politics_. Cambridge, MA:
Oelgeschlager, Gunn,  & Hain. Ch. 1 (on reserve).

Dittmer, Lowell and Yu-shan Wu (1995) "The Modernization of Factionalism in
Chinese Politics", _World Politics_ 47 (July): 467-494.

  
  

**III. STATE-SOCIETY RELATIONS IN TRANSITION**

The liberalization of China's economy has been underway for almost two decades
now, and it has radically altered the patterns of social organization within
which average citizens go about their daily lives. The opportunity structure
facing them is radically different from what was available to them during the
Mao era. The rules and regulations and institutions of social control that
regulated their daily lives at work, at home, and in other social arenas are
radically different as well. In this section we will look at some ways in
which the liberalization of the economy has unleashed other social forces that
create tensions in Chinese society and strain the capacity of the CCP to
preserve order and maintain its own monopoly on power.

  
  

**March 20-22:** **Dimensions of Economic Reform: Agriculture and the Rural
Economy**

Wang - Ch. 11

Hook, Brian (1996). "Introduction: Reshaping the Relationship between the
Individual and the State", in Brian Hook, ed., _The Individual and the State
in China_.

Pye, Lucien (1996). "The State and the Individual: An Overview
Interpretation", in Brian Hook, ed., _The Individual and the State in China_.

Ash, Robert F. (1996). "The Peasant and the State", in Brian Hook, ed., _The
Individual and the State in China_.

  
  

**March 27-29:** **Dimensions of Economic Reform: Industrial Growth and the
Urban Economy**

Walder, Andrew (1996). "Workers, Managers, and the State: The Reform Era and
The Political Crisis of 1989", in Brian Hook, ed., _The Individual and the
State in China_.

Meisner, Maurice (1997). "The Other China", _Current History_ (September).

  
  

**April 3-5:** **Dimensions of Economic Reform: Education**

Wang - Ch. 12

Bonnin, Michel and Yves Chevrier (1996). "The Intellectual and the State:
Social Dynamics of Intellectual Autonomy during the Post-Mao Era", in Brian
Hook, ed., _The Individual and the State in China_.

Gold, Andrew (1996). "Youth and the State", in Brian Hook, ed., _The
Individual and the State in China_.

Rosen, Stanley. 1993. "The effect of Post-4 June Re-Education Campaigns on
Chinese Students," _China Quarterly_ (on reserve)

  
  

**April 10-12:** **Social Changes and the Pressure for Political Reform**

Wang - Ch. 10

Lieberthal - Ch. 9, 10, 11

White, Gordon (1996). "The Dynamics of Civil Society in Post-Mao China", in
Brian Hook, ed., _The Individual and the State in China_.

Johnston, Michael (1997). "The Vices -- and Virtues -- of Corruption",
_Current History_. September.

Feinerman, James V. (1997). "The Rule of Law ... with Chinese Socialist
Characteristics", _Current History_. September.

Mason, T. David, "Modernization and Its Discontents Revisited", _Journal of
Politics_ 56 (May 1994): 400-424.

Solinger, Dorothy, "China's Urban Transients in the Transition from Socialism
and the Collapse of the Communist 'Urban Public Goods Regime'", _Comparative
Politics_ , 27 (January 1995): 127-146.

  
  

**__IV. CHINESE FOREIGN RELATIONS IN THE POST COLD WAR ERA**

Just as China has undergone dramatic changes in its domestic politics, so its
role in the international arena has been in transition in the last decade.
China emerged from its decades of isolation to play a pivotal role in the
superpower politics between the U.S. and the Soviet Union. With the demise of
the Soviet Union, China's role in the Asia-Pacific region and in the world
generally will change. We shall examine the post-Mao foreign policy of the PRC
towards the Soviet Union, the U.S., Japan, the other nations of the Pacific
Rim and the Third World generally. We shall then explore the ways in which
China's status in the region, in major power relations, and in the global
arena generally is likely to change with the end of Cold War polarity, the end
of the Soviet Union as the major source of threat in East Asia, and the
growing importance of trade and economic issues (as opposed to military
security) as the driving force in China's foreign policy.

**April 17-19: China's Military and the Domestic Politics of Foreign Policy
Making**

Lin, Chong Pin. 1996. "The Military Balance in the Taiwan Straits," _China
Quarterly_ 146 (June): 577-595

Whiting, Allen S. 1996. "The PLA and China's Threat Perception," _China
Quarterly_ 146 (June): 596-.

  
  

**April 24: U.S.-China Relations**

Lieberthal - Ch. 12

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

**BIBLIOGRAPHY**

  
  

The following is a sample of recent works of some importance on China. Your
should consult these formulating your research papers and in supplementing
your assigned class readings.

  
  

Ash, Robert. 1992. "The Agricultural Sector in China: Performance and Policy
Dilemmas during the 1990s". **_China Quarterly_.** 131 (September): 545-576.

  
  

Banister, Judith (1988). "The Aging of China's Population", **_Problems of
Communism_** __. 37 (November-December): 62-77.

  
  

Banister, Judith. 1987. **_China's Changing Population_** __. Stanford:
Stanford University Press.

  
  

Barnett, A. Doak (1985). **_The Making of Foreign Policy in China: Structure
and Process_** __. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

  
  

Bastid, Marianne. 1984. "Chinese Educational Policies in the 1980s and
Economic Development." **_China Quarterly_** __98:189-219.

  
  

Baum, Richard. 1994. **_Burying Mao: Chinese Politics in the Age of Deng
Xiaoping_** __. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

  
  

Baum, Richard. 1998. "The Fifteenth National Party Congres: Jiang Takes
Command?", **_China Quarterly_** __141-156.

  
  

Brodsgaard, Kjeld Eric. 1981. "The Democracy Movement in China, 1976-1979:
Opposition Movements, Wall Poster Campaigns, and Underground Journals."
**_Asian Survey_** __21:747-74.

  
  

Chen, Yizi. 1998. "The Road From Socialism," **_Journal of Democracy_** __9
(January): .

  
  

Cheng, Li. 1996. "Surplus Rural Laborers and Internal Migration in China:
Current Status and Future Prospects," **_Asian Survey_** __36 (November):
1122-1145.

  
  

Coale, Ansley J. (1981). "Population Trends, Population Policy, and Population
Studies in China", **_Population and Development Review_** __7 (March):85-97.

  
  

Deng, Fang. 1997. "Information Gaps and Unintended Outcomes of Social
Movements: The 1989 Chinese Student Movement," **_American Journal of
Sociology_.** 102 (January): 1085-1112.

  
  

Dittmer, Lowell (1978). "Bases of Power in Chinese Politics", **_World
Politics_** __. 31 (October): 26-60.

  
  

Dittmer, Lowell (1989). "The Origins of China's Post-Mao Reforms". Pp. 41-66
in Victor C. Falkenheim, ed., **_Chinese Politics from Mao to Deng_** __. New
York: Paragon House.

  
  

Dittmer, Lowell (1990). "Patterns of Elite Strife and Succession in Chinese
Politics", **_China Quarterly_** __123 (September): 405-430.

  
  

Dittmer, Lowell (1989). "The Tiananmen Massacre", **_Problems of Communism_**
__. 38 (September-October): 2-15.

Dittmer, Lowell. 1995. "Chinese Informal Politics", **_The China Journal_**
__34 (July): 1-34.

  
  

Dittmer, Lowell and Wu, Yu-shan. 1995. "The Modernization of Factionalism in
Chinese Politics," **_World Politics_** __47 (July): 467-494.

  
  

Dreyer, June Teufel. 1996. "The New Officer Corps: Implications for the
Future", **_China Quarterly_** __146 (June): 315-335.

  
  

Fewsmith, Joseph (1988). "Agricultural Crisis in China", **_Problems of
Communism_** __. 37 (November-December): 78-93.

  
  

Friedman, Edward (1990). "Deng versus the Peasantry: Recollectivization in the
Countryside", **_Problems of Communism_** __39 (September-October): 30-43.

Gold, Thomas B. 1991. "Youth and the State." **_China Quarterly_**
127:594-612.

  
  

Goodman, David S. G. (1984). **_Groups and Politics in the People's Republic
of China_** __. Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe.

  
  

Harding, Dwight. 1987. **_China's Second Revolution: Reform After Mao_** __.
Washington: Brookings Institution.

  
  

Hayhoe, Ruth. 1993. "China's Universities since Tiananmen: A Critical
Assessment," **_China Quarterly_** __291-311

  
  

Kwong, Julia (1988). "The 1986 Student Demonstrations in China: A Democratic
Movement?", **_Asian Survey_** __. 28 (September): 970-985.

  
  

Lardy, Nicholas. 1996. "The Role of Foreign Trade and Investment in China's
Economic Transformation," pp. 103-120 in Andrew G. Walder, ed.. **_China's
Transitional Economy_** __. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

  
  

Lardy, Nicholas. 1998. "Smashing the Iron Rice Bowl." **_Foreign Affairs_**
__77 (July-August): 67-77.

  
  

Lardy, Nicholas. 1998. "China and the Asian Contagion", **_Foreign Affairs_**
__77 (July-August): 78-88.

  
  

Li, Peter, Steven Mark, and Marjorie H. Li, eds. 1991. **_Culture and Politics
in China: An Anatomy of Tiananmen Square_** __. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction
Publishers.

  
  

Major, John S. and Kane, Anthony J., eds. (1987). **_China Briefing, 1987_**
__. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

  
  

Mason, David. 1984a. "China's Four Modernizations: Blueprint for Development
or Prelude to Turmoil?." **_Asian Affairs_** __11:47-70.

  
  

Meany, Connie Squires. 1989. "Market Reform in a Leninist System: Some Trends
in the Distribution of Power, Status, and Money in Urban China." **_Studies in
Comparative Communism_** __22:203-20.

  
  

Meisner, Maurice (1977). **_Mao's China: A History of the People's Republic_**
__. New York: Free Press.

  
  

Moody, Peter R. (1988). "The Political Culture of Chinese Students and
Intellectuals: A Historical Examination", **_Asian Survey_** __. 28
(November): 1140-1160.

  
  

Nathan, Andrew J. (1973). "A Factionalism Model for CCP Politics", **_China
Quarterly_** __. 53 (January-March): 34-66.

  
  

Oi, Jean C. 1989. "Market Reforms and Corruption in Rural China." **_Studies
in Comparative Communism_** __22:221-33.

  
  

Oi, Jean C. (1989). **_State and Peasant in Contemporary China: The Political
Economy of Village Government._** __Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press.

  
  

Perkins, Dwight H. (1990). "The Prospects for China's Economic Reforms". Pp.
25-46 in Anthony Kane, ed., **_China Briefing, 1990_** __. Boulder, CO:
Westview Press.

  
  

Pye, Lucian W. (1981). **_The Dynamics of Chinese Politics_** __. Cambridge,
MA: Oelgeschlager, Gunn, & Hain.

  
  

Pye, Lucian W. (1990). "Tiananmen and Chinese Political Culture: The
Escalating of Confrontation from Moralizing to Revenge", **_Asian Survey_**
__. 30 (April): 331-347.

  
  

Pye, Lucien W. (1988). **_The Mandarin and the Cadre: China's Political
Cultures_** __. Ann Arbor, MI: Center for Chinese Studies, University of
Michigan.

  
  

Robinson, Thomas (1972). "The Sino-Soviet Border Dispute: Background,
Development, and the March 1969 Border Clash", **_American Political Science
Review_** __64 (December):1175-1202

  
  

Rosen, Stanley (1988). "Dissent and Tolerance in Chinese Society", **_Current
History_** __. 87 (November): 261-264, 278-281.

  
  

Rosen, Stanley (1985). "Prosperity, Privatization, and China's Youth",
**_Problems of Communism_** __. 34 (March-April): 1-28.

  
  

Rosen, Stanley. 1993. "The Effect of Post-4 June Re-Education Campaings on
Chinese Students," **_China Quarterly_** __ 310-334.

  
  

Shambaugh, David. 1996. "China's Military in Transition: Politics,
Professionalism, Procurement and Power Projection", **_China Quarterly_**
__146 (June): 265-298.

  
  

Shirk, Susan. 1984. "The Evolution of Chinese Education: Stratification and
Meritocracy in the 1980s." In **_China: the 80s Era,_** __ed. Norton Ginsburg
and Bernard A. Lalor. Boulder, CO: Westview.

  
  

Shiu, Gary and Daniel Sutter. 1996. "The Political Economy of Tiananmen
Square," **_Rationality and Society_** __. 8 (3): 325-342.

  
  

Smith, Christopher J. (1991). **_China: People and Places in the Land of One
Billion_** __. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

  
  

Strand, David (1990). "Protest in Beijing: Civil Society and Public Sphere in
China", **_Problems of Communism_** __. 39 (May-June): 1-19.

  
  

Sun, Yan. 1991. "The Chinese Protests of 1989: the Issue of Corruption."
**_Asian Survey_** __31:762-83.

  
  

Taylor, Jeffrey R. 1988. "Rural Employment Trends and the Legacy of Surplus
Labor, 1978-86." **_China Quarterly_** __116:736-66.

  
  

Tong, James. 1988. "Rational Outlaws: Rebels and Bandits in the Ming Dynasty,
1368-1644." In **_Rationality and Revolution_** __, ed. Michael Taylor.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

  
  

Tsou, Tang. 1976. "Prolegomenon to the Study of Informal Groups in CCP
Politics", **_China Quarterly_** __65 (March):

  
  

Tsou, Tan. 1995. "Chinese Politics at the Top: Factionalism of Informal
Politics? Balance-of-Power or A Game to Win All?" **_The China Journal_.** 34
(July): 95-156.

  
  

Walder, Andrew G. (1986). **_Communist Neo-Traditionalism: Work and Authority
in Chinese Industry._** Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

  
  

Walder, Andrew G. 1987. "Wage Reform and the Web of Factory Interests."
**_China Quarterly_** __109:22-39.

  
  

Walder, Andrew G. 1989. "The Political Sociology of the Beijing Upheaval of
1989." **_Problems of Communism_** __38:30-40.

  
  

Wilson, Ian and You Ji (1990). "Leadership by 'Lines': China's Unresolved
Succession", **_Problems of Communism_** __. 39 (January-February): 28-44.

  
  

Wilson, Jeanne L. (1990). "Labor Policy in China: Reform and Retrogression",
**_Problems of Communism_** __. 39 (September-October): 44-65.

  
  

Yahuda, Michael (1979). "Political Generations in China", **_China
Quarterly_** __. 80 (December): 793-805.

  
  

Zhao, Dingxin. 1997. "Decline of political Control in Chinese Universities and
the Rise of the 1989 Chinese Student Movement," **_Sociological Perspectives_
** 40 (2): 159-182.

  
  

Zhao, Dingxin. 1998. "Ecologies of Social Movement: Student Mobilization
during the 1989 Prodemocracy Movement in Beijing," **_American Journal of
Sociology_** __103 (6): 1493-1530.

  
  

Zhou, Xueguang. 1993. "Unorganized Interests and Collective Action in
Communist China," **_American Sociological Review_** __58 (February): 54-73.

