**Creighton University** **Department of Political Science**

**Fall, 1998 Dr. Crawford & Dr. Mans  
  
**

**PLS334/HAP334 Public Policy of Health Care  
  
**

This course examines the efforts of government to influence the provision of
health care in the United States of America. Through the semester, students
will be introduced to a range of policy questions that have been the grounds
for political debate in the recent past. Our key emphasis will be on  "macro"
issues of health care provision. Current policies will be reviewed and
evaluated. Issues of access, cost, regulation, and distribution will be
considered. Value/ideological perspectives important to the analysis of health
care concerns will be considered. The politics of health care, including the
interest groups, roles of media, and national leadership, will be considered
in light of the recent Administration efforts to pursue health care reform.  

_**Textbooks  
**_

The following textbooks have been ordered through the Creighton University
Bookstore.  

Theodore Marmor, _Understanding Health Care Reform_ , Yale University Press,
1994.  

Kant, Patel & Mark Rushefsky, _Health Care Politics and Policy in America_.
M.E. Sharpe, 1995  

Carol Weissert  & William Weissert, _Governing Health: The Politics of Health
Policy_ Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996.  

Some additional reading will be placed on reserve at the Reinert-Alumni
Library.  

_**Course Requirements  
**_

**Meetings and Attendance:** The class meets Monday, Wednesday and Friday
mornings in Room Ad331. Attendance is expected. Frequent absences from class
harms a student's ability to assimilate course material. Cases of obvious and
excessive absence will be reported to the college dean and an  "AF" grade will
be assigned. Absence from an examination or failure to come for the oral
presentation sessions without prior arrangements will be cause for a failing
grade on the examination or presentation. In case of an emergency, the
courtesy of a phone call is expected.  

Students are responsible for all materials presented in class and for any
announcements made. Absent students must make their own arrangements to obtain
class notes. The instructors will not provide notes nor is it the obligation
of any class member to supply notes.  

This class uses a combination of lecture-discussion format. Thus, students
should be prepared to discuss assigned material in any class session. Complete
assigned readings before class!  

**Office Location, Office Hours, Telephones.  
**

Faculty Member: Dr. Sue Crawford Dr. Thomas Mans

Office Location: Admin 424a Admin. Bldg. 228

Office Telephone: 280-2569 280-2800

Office Hours: MW 10:30-12:00 almost anytime by appt

T 1:30-3:00; Th 11:00-12:00  (call 280-4009)

E-mail: crawford@creighton.edu tmans@creighton.edu  

Should you have any difficulties with the course at any point, please see
either of us right away. If you need to leave a message regarding absence from
class, etc. and one of us is not available, please leave the message with Mrs.
Richwine at 280-2836 (Crawford) or Mrs. McDonald at 280-4009 (Mans).  

**Course Assignments, Examinations and Grading  
**

_Examinations_ : There will be three examinations during the semester. Each
will be an in-class examination consisting of some objective, short answer and
essay items. Each examination will count 15% and the final examination will
not be cumulative.  

_Writing_ : There are three writing projects. Each student will prepare a well
developed research paper of 12-15 pages on a topic relevant to the course.
This will be 20% of the course grade.  

_SimHealth Simulation:_ Each student will be asked to do the  "SimHealth"
simulation and prepare a reaction paper of about three pages on their
experience with the simulation. 5% of the grade.  

_Case Study:_ A case study project will be prepared either for the group as a
whole (involving role playing) or team analysis of a case selected by the
faculty. A five page paper will be prepared. 10% of the grade.  

_Panel Presentation_ : Each class member will participate as a member of a
panel on a topic relating to a health care issue of interest. Panelists will
work with one of the faculty to define the panel topics, each will take a
share in researching for the panel, and will be responsible for orally
presenting about 15 minutes worth of material as a panel member. Students are
encouraged to use PowerPoint or a similar system as a part of their
presentation. 15% of grade.  

_Participation_ in class and discussion will account for 5% of the final
grade.  

**Grading Computation:** Assignments and oral presentations are graded with
letter grades. Letter grades are translated to points in the following way:
A=95; A-=92; B+=88; B=85; B-=82; C+=78; C=75; C-=72, etc. Raw scores on
examinations will be scaled to take account of overall class performance. If
below 97%, the highest achieved score will be set to 97% and all other scores
will be scaled upward in the same proportion.  

Final grades are computed by adding the point scores, weighted for the
relative importance of the assignment. A = 91 and above; B+ = 88-90 B=81-87;
C+ = 78-80; C = 70-77; D = 60-69; F = Below 60 AF = Three absences after
warning. The instructor reserves the right to  "round up" borderline grades
where the student's performance taken as a whole warrants.  

**Timeliness:** Assignments are due on the date specified. Late papers will be
penalized 1/3 rd of a grade point _per calendar day_ up to a maximum penalty
of two grade points (an  "A" is recorded as a "C"). No written work will be
accepted after Friday, December 11th and a grade of "0" will be recorded.  

**Additional Reading  
**

There are number of good sources that follow developments in the public policy
of health care. Journals of the various medical, hospital, pharmacy
organizations are interesting. There are also specialized journals in
economics and law which are devoted specifically to health issues.  

Since health care policy continues to be a live issue, students should make a
habit of reading a good newspaper daily. Student rate subscriptions to the
_New York Times_ are available at the Student Center information desk. A
student rate to the _Wall Street Journal_ is also available. For recent
information on the policy deliberations in Congress, _Congressional Quarterly
Weekly Reports_ is a helpful source. You will find it in the reference
collection at the Reinert/Alumni Library.  

**Miscellaneous Points  
**

_Style_ : Papers prepared in this course should be word processed or
typewritten. Presentation, footnotes and bibliographic style MUST conform with
styles set out in _The Brief Holt Handbook_ or a similar writing handbook.
Students should organize papers with care and present them correctly in terms
of grammar, spelling, and mechanics.  

_Academic Honesty_ : Students should be aware that the instructors take
questions of academic honesty very seriously. All students should be familiar
with the Statement on Academic Honesty of the College of Arts & Sciences
published in the Student Handbook.  

**COURSE OUTLINE AND READING SCHEDULE  
**

8/26 Introduction to Course, Review of Syllabus  

8/28 History of Government in Health Care  & Core Themes

8/31 GH, Introduction

HCPPA, Chapter 1 & 2  

9/2 Politics: Congress

9/4 GH, Chapter 1  

9/7 Labor Day, No Class  

9/9 Politics: Presidency

GH, Chapter 2  

9/11 Politics: Interest Groups

9/14 GH, Chapter 3  

9/16 Politics: Bureaucracy

GH, Chapter 4

Web: Review site of Public Agency in Health Care  

9/18 Politics: Federalism in Health Care

GH, Chapter 5

9/21 Policy Concepts: A Fast Review

9/23 The Policy Process: Problem Definition

9/25 GH, Chapter 6

UHCR, Chapter 1  

9/28 Policy Options: Feasibility

9/30 GH, Chapter 7

UHCR, Chapter 3  

10/2 First Examination  
  

Health Care Access, Payment and Cost

10/5 Comparative Perspectives: How Other Nations Do It

10/7 Heidenheimer, et. al, "Health Policy," Chapter 3 in _Comparative Public_

10/9 _Policy: The Politics of Social Choice in America, Europe & Japan._

(Reserve)

UHCR, Chapter 12 & 13

SimHealth Reaction Paper Due at class time on Friday 10/9  

10/12 Medicaid: The Social Welfare Model

10/14 HCPPA, Chapter 3

10/14 Medicare: The Social Insurance Model

10/16 HCPPA, Chapter 4

UHCR, Chapter 14

Web: Visit a web site (Think tank, Federal or State government and obtain data
about a budgetary aspect of health care policy)

10/17-25 Fall Break, No Classes  

Issues in Health Care  

10/26 Access Problems: Under-Served Populations

HCPPA, Chapter 5  

10/28 First Student Panel: The Poor and Under-Served Populations

(students may add brief reserve items for the class to read)  

10/30 Rising Medical Expenditures: Causes and Responses

UHCR, Chapters 5 & 6

Paul Feldstein, "Managed Care Competition" Chapter 16 in _Health Policy
Issues._ (Reserve)

Arnold Relman,  "The Health Care Industry: Where is it Taking Us?" in Lee &
Estes, _The Nation's Health_ , ppp 67-75. Reserve  

11/2 Health Professionals & Facilities: Provision and Regulation

11/4 Jennie Jacob Kronenfeld, Chapter 6 (Reserve)

Paul Feldstein, "The Shortage of Nurses" Chapter 19 in _Health Policy Issues._
(Reserve)

Guest: Dr. Linda Lazure (tentative)  

Case Problem distributed this week  

11/6 Medical Malpractice and Legal System Reforms

Henderson,  "The Legal System and Medical Malpractice," Chapter 11

11/8 Second Student Panel: Legal Reform and Health Policy  

11/10 Second Examination  

11/13 Pharmaceuticals: Innovation and Regulation

Paul Feldstein, "The High Price of Prescription Drugs" Chapter 20 in _Health
Policy Issues._ (Reserve)

_Web:_ Search an interest group or corporation active in policy debate on
Pharaceuticals, Legal Reform of Health, Long Term Care or Gender Issues)  

11/16 Student Panel (Selected from: Pharmaceuticals; Long Term Care; or
Technology)  

11/18 Long Term Care: Needs, Providers, Financing

Paul Feldstein,  "The Financing Long Term Care," Chapter 27, _Health Policy
Issues._ (Reserve)

11/20 Technology in Medicine

HCPPA, Chapter 7  

11/23 Gender Issues in Health Care

Readings to be Assigned  

Thanksgiving Vacation  

Reform  

11/30 The Clinton Care Program: An Outline, Political Dynamics  & a Postmortem

Clymer, Pear & Toner, "What Went Wrong: How the Health Care

Collapsed." _New York Times,_ August 29, 1994. (Distributed in Class)

12/2 Overview of Reform

12/4 HCPPA, Chapter 8

Paper due on Friday, 12/4  

12/7 Universal Health Insurance  & Other Reforms

12/9 UHCR, Chapter 7-11

12/11 UHCR, Chapter 15

12/15 Final Examination 8:00-9:40  

Note: Reading assignment schedule is tentative and subject to revision. At
least two panel topics will need to be established and the panel will suggest
readings for their

session.

