Dr. Satterfield

Office: 208 Crawford Hall

Office Hours: 11 AM-12 Noon, M-F, or by appointment

E-Mail: [satterg@morrisville.edu](mailto:satterg@morrisville.edu)

Class: M, T, Thursday at 12 PM

![](My%20Pictures/Chinese%20Civilization%20pics/genghis.jpg)  
---  
  
Arguably a greater conqueror than Alexander the Great, Genghis Khan appears in
this painting to be middle-aged, content, and almost wise.  This was the
influence of both Confucian ideals (Chinese) and Persian painting techniques
upon the artist as much as any personality traits exhibited by the great
leader.  Genghis Khan, as his name suggested, was "ruler of all within the two
seas."  His descendants (including Kublai Khan) would encounter the limits to
Mongol power--facing a military deadlock with opponents on the plains of
Poland and on the Sea of Japan.  Still, for a time the Mongols ruled over the
greatest empire the world has ever seen.  It included all of the Middle East,
most of Russia, and China.



SOCS 103

World Civilization I

Spring 2002

This course considers the history of humanity from the earliest civilizations
to the end of the fifteenth century, c. 3,500 BCE to 1500 CE.  Course readings
and classroom discussion will emphasize cultural exchange, both peaceful and
violent, between civilizations.  Important themes in this course will include
such topics as the spread of technology, trade, deadly disease-causing
microbes, and the importance of religion and other systems of belief in the
past.  Lectures give further emphasis to the influence of human agency in
shaping events, population growth and decline, environmental change, and other
factors of change.

[Return to Main Page](Index.htm)

Or Continue...

_Course Requirements_

Students will:

a.  Read, William H. McNeill, _A History of the Human Community.   Volume I:
Prehistory to 1500_, 5th edition (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1997.

b.  Take two exams (the midterm and the final) that will each include three
_short_ essay questions (answers should reach at least one paragraph in
length) and 40 multiple choice questions.  150 points per exam, 300 points
total.

C.  Read four sets of primary source documents and write four brief
interpretative papers.  The documents, which are short and not more than
several pages long, are available at [primary source document
sets](primary_source_document_sets.htm), or in class.  Questions will be given
in class.  Correct spelling, grammar and usage are absolutely required for
these papers.  25 points per paper, 100 points total.

_Course Outcomes_

Students will learn to think historically, in other words, to understand the
past in terms of historical periods and understand continuity and change.
Students will learn how historians create history and subject the created past
to varying interpretations, debate and revision.  Critical thinking skills and
writing skills will be taught and reinforced during this course.

_Attendance_

Required.  Class begins promptly on the hour.  Students should bring their
textbook and a notebook to class.  Lectures do not always mimic the textbook,
and students who do not attend class and participate in discussion will most
likely do worse in the course than students who do attend and participate.
Students who plan to be absent on assignment/test days must notify the
instructor _two weeks in advance before the assignment is due_
,[satterg@morrisville.edu](mailto:satterg@morrisville.edu).

_Extra Credit_

An additional document set will be made available as an extra credit
assignment; the requirements will be the same as for the other short papers.
No other extra credit will be allowed.

_Evaluation_

Two tests (midterm and final) = 300 points.  Four papers = 100 points.  Total
400 points.

400-361 = A

360-354 = A-

353-349 = B+

348-320 = B

319-315 = B-

314-310 = C+

309-270 = C

270-266 = C-

265-240 = D

_Course Calendar and Assignments_

Monday, 14 January.  Introduction, Syllabus, What is History? Civilization?
Prehistory? Periodization? "When China Ruled the Seas."

Tuesday, 15 January.  McNeill, pp. 1-19, Chapter One.  Prehistory.

Thursday, 17 January.  McNeill, pp. 22-36, Chapter Two.  Ancient Mesopotamia.

Monday, 21 January.  McNeill, pp. 36-43 and pp. 43-46, Chapter Two.  Ancient
Egypt and Indus Civilization.

Tuesday, 22 January.  McNeill, pp. 50-70, Chapter Three.  Barbarians versus
Civilization, Bronze Age civilizations, the chariot and collapse of Bronze age
civilizations.

Thursday, 24 January.  McNeill, pp. 71-83, Section titled "the Use of Plants
and Animals in Agriculture" and part of Chapter Four.  Discussion agriculture,
the Iron Age and town life.

Monday, 28 January.  McNeill, pp. 84-98, Chapter Four.  The Hebrews,
Assyrians, Persians and the rise of monotheism.

Tuesday, 29 January.  McNeill, pp. 100-110, Chapter Five.  From Greek Dark Age
to Polis.

Thursday, 31 January.  McNeill, pp. 110-120, Chapter Five.  The Western Way
and Greek Culture.

Monday, 4 February.  McNeill, pp. 123-132, Chapter Six.  Ancient India, the
Aryan Invasions and the origins of the caste system.

Tuesday, 5 February.  McNeill, pp. 132-140, Chapter Six.  Indian
transcendental religions, pre-Hinduism and Buddhism.

Thursday, 7 February.  McNeill, pp. 143-154, Chapter Seven.  From Five
Heavenly Emperors to Hsia, Shang, Chou and Shi Huang Ti.

Monday, 11 February.  [1st Paper due](file:///w:/SOCS%20103%20DOC%201.htm).
McNeill, pp. 154-161, Chapter Seven.  Shi Huang Ti (221 BCE) and the Ch'in
dynasty and Han dynasty (the Great Wall).  Three schools of Chinese thought.

Tuesday, 12 February.  McNeill, pp. 163-168.  Epilogue: Part I "The State of
the World 500 BCE."  Review and discussion:  from Prehistory to Confucius.

Thursday, 14 February.  McNeill, pp. 170-176.  Chapter Eight.  The fate of
civilizations.  The Persian and Peloponnesian Wars.

Winter Break, 18 February-22 February

Monday, 25 February.  McNeill, pp. 176-185, Chapter Eight.  Classical Greece
and Alexander the Great.  Cynics, Epicureans and Stoics (not covered by
McNeill).

Tuesday, 26 February.  McNeill, pp. 185-189, Chapter Eight.  Rome:  from the
banks of the Tiber River to Empire.

Thursday, 28 February.  McNeill, pp. 189-195, Chapter Eight.  The fall of the
Roman Republic and the establishment of imperial government in Rome, Pax
Romana and classical civilization in the West.

Monday, 4 March.  McNeill, pp. 199-207, Chapter Nine.  Raid (Wu Ti), trade,
disease and exchange of ideas in Eurasia (old world).  Mahayana Buddhism and
Hinduism and the Gupta "classical" style of Indian civilization.

Tuesday, 5 March.  McNeill, pp. 207-213, Chapter Nine.  The emergence of
Christianity.

Thursday, 7 March.  Review.

Monday, 11 March.  McNeill, pp. 213-219, Chapter Nine.  The decline of the
classical world (including Han China, Sassanian Persia, the Scythians, Huns
and the emergence of Byzantium) and its fringes.  

Tuesday, 12 March.  Mid-Term, Test One.  

Thursday, 14 March.  McNeill, pp. 219-220, Chapter Nine.  Also, "Epilogue,"
pp. 354-357.  African civilizations and other Asian civilizations.  Sea
voyages and Polynesia.  (American civilizations are dealt with on 25 March,
see below.)

Monday, 18 March.  McNeill, pp. 227-241, Chapter 10.  Islam and the
Caliphates.

Tuesday, 19 March.  McNeill, pp. 241-248, Chapter 10.  The expansion and
transformation of Islam, India, the Turks, dervishes and Sufism.

Thursday, 21 March.  McNeill, pp. 251-260, Chapter 11.  The Chinese Hegemony:
Sui (589-618), T'ang (618-907), and Sung (960).

Monday, 25 March.  [2nd Paper due](slave.htm).  McNeill, pp. 261-264, Chapter
11.  Chinese cultural brilliance and China's neighbors: Korea and Japan.

Tuesday, 26 March.  McNeill, pp. 267-270, Chapter 11.  Polynesia and
Amerindian pre-history and outline of development.  Not covered.

Thursday, 28 March.  McNeill, pp. 357-360.  (Note this is in the Epilogue at
the end of the book).  The classical American Indian civilizations.  Not
covered.

Spring Break, 1 April-5 April

Monday, 8 April.  McNeill, pp. 274-279, Chapter 12.  The barbarian invasions
of the West and the "Dark Age."

Tuesday, 9 April.  McNeill, pp. 282-289, Chapter 12.  The Carolingians,
feudalism (lord and vassal), Byzantines and Ninth Century Invasions.

Thursday, 11 April.  Discussion of feudalism and the "lord's household."  No
reading.

Monday, 15 April.  The Eleventh Century Recovery.  The church, investiture
controversy, urban growth, trade and the Crusades.  McNeill, pp. 289-299,
Chapter 12.

Tuesday, 16 April.  Review of Europe in the Middle Ages.  McNeill, Chapter 12.

Thursday, 18 April.  Genghis Khan and the Mongols.  McNeill, pp. 305-314,
Chapter 13.

Monday, 22 April.  3rd Paper due.  Kublai Khan, unity and breakup of the
Mongol Empire.  The Ming.  McNeill, pp. 310-315, Chapter 13.

Tuesday, 23 April.  McNeill, pp. 315-318, Chapter 13.  Japan in the Age of
Shoguns.

Thursday, 25 April.  McNeill, pp. 318-326, Chapter 13.  Tamerlane (1360-1405),
Orthodox Christianity and Russia, the Ottomans, Islamic cultural brilliance,
and India from 1200-1500.

Monday, 29 April.  [(Combined) 3rd and 4th Paper due.](crusades.htm)  McNeill,
pp. 331-336 and pp. 346-347, Chapter 14; also p. 298, Chapter 12.  Medieval
cultural brilliance in the West (the High Middle Ages).  The Romanesque and
the Gothic.  Scholasticism, Dante and Mysticism.

Tuesday, 30 April.  The Emergence of the Great Monarchies in Europe (12th-14th
centuries).  McNeill, pp. 337-340, Chapter 14.

Thursday, 2 May.  The "Calamitous 14th Century."  The Plague.  The Crisis of
the Papacy and the Hundred Years' War.  McNeill, pp. 340-342, Chapter 14.

Monday, 6 May.  Parliaments, pluralism, communes and trade.  McNeill, pp.
342-347, Chapter 14.

Tuesday, 7 May.  Renaissance art and Humanism.  McNeill, pp. 347-352, Chapter
14.

Thursday, 9 May.  McNeill, pp. 353-360, "Epilogue."  Review: Balance of World
Civilizations, c. 1500.  [For Final Exam Questions, click here.](final1.htm)

Monday-Thursday, 13-16 May.  Test Three/Final Exam.  Monday, 13 May, 11AM-2:20
PM, theater in STUAC.



