DEPARTMENT OF INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS COURSE NUMBER: BADM 145 SEMESTER: Fall
1998 COURSE TITLE: International Financial Environment PROFESSOR: Jiawen Yang,
Ph.D. Lisner Hall 235G 2023 G Street, N.W. Washington, DC 20052 Tel: (202)
994-8709 Fax: (202) 994-7422 E-mail:jwyang@gwu.edu OFFICE HOURS: Tuesday &
Thursday, 5:30 - 6:30 pm COURSE DESCRIPTION & OBJECTIVES: This course is a
fast-paced survey of concepts and current issues in international trade and
finance. It discusses and analyzes the international economic and financial
environments within which businesses operate. The topics covered include the
theory of international trade, commercial policy, the balance of payments, the
foreign exchange market, the basic international parity conditions, and
current issues in international trade and finance. The objective of the course
is to afford a foundation for students in assessing international economic and
financial developments as they affect corporate business activity. METHOD OF
INSTRUCTION: Lectures REQUIRED READINGS: The basic readings for the lectures
will come from class handouts and the textbook. Additional readings, which
include publications from international organizations, and articles from
academic journals, will be assigned when appropriate. Also, all students will
be responsible for keeping up with current developments in international trade
and finance by reading major business journals and newspapers (notably, the
Financial Times and The Wall Street Journal). Prior to each class BADM145
International Financial Environment Syllabus Fall 1998 Jiawen Yang session,
students are expected to complete the required readings for the assigned
session as well as other preparations. Textbook: Lindert, Peter H., and Thomas
A. Pugel, International Economics, tenth edition, Irwin, 1996. (Referred to as
Lindert & Pugel in reading assignments) EVALUATIONS: Grading will be based on
the following: Group research project: 15% Mid-term examination: 30% Final
examination: 40% Participation: 15% The two examinations will each cover one
half of the course (not cumulative). The exams cover materials contained in
the lectures, class discussions, and assigned readings (including handouts).
There will be no make-up exams except for cases of medical or family
emergencies. Requirements for the group research project are described in the
Group Project Assignment section of this syllabus. Participation will be
measured on class attendance, preparation for class, in-class performance, and
other factors deemed appropriate at the instructor's discretion. DATA SOURCES
AND REFERENCES FOR INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND FINANCE: The World Bank, World
Development Report. IMF, World Economic Outlook. IMF, Direction of Trade
Statistics, Yearbook. IMF, Balance of Payments Statistics, Yearbook. IMF,
International Financial Statistics. Yearbook. IMF, International Capital
Markets. BIS, Annual Report. United Nations, International Trade Statistics,
Yearbook. U.S. Department of Commerce, Survey of Current Business. Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Bulletin. Euromoney
Publications, Euromoney. IMF: International Monetary Fund (Washington, DC, The
United States) BIS: Bank for International Settlements (Basle, Switzerland) 2
BADM145 International Financial Environment Syllabus Fall 1998 Jiawen Yang
GROUP RESEARCH PROJECT ASSIGNMENT Some Basic Information Used To Assess
International Financial Environment You are required to find out and identify
the courses of the following information: 1\. The world's annual exports and
imports since 1994. 2\. The industrial countries' annual exports and imports
since 1994 and their share of the world total exports and imports. 3\. The
developing countries' annual exports and imports since 1994 and their share of
the world total exports and imports. 4\. The imports and exports of major
products, and their relative shares in total imports and exports for the
United States for the most recent year with available data (1997 or 1996), 5\.
The major trade partners of the United States and their relative shares in
total U.S. trade. 6\. The world's total GDP and the respective shares of
industrial and developing countries for the most recent year with available
data (1997 or 1996). 7\. The per capita GDP for the United States, Japan,
Germany, Korea, Mexico, China, India, Egypt and Russia for the most recent
year with available data (1997 or 1996). 8\. The current account balances for
Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, The Philippines, Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, Hong
Kong, Mexico, Brazil, Chile, and Argentina for the most recent three years.
9\. Monthly exchange rates since January 1997 for Thailand, Indonesia,
Malaysia, The Philippines, Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, Hong Kong, Mexico,
Brazil, Chile, and Argentina. 10\. The quarterly official reserves since
January 1994 for Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, The Philippines, Korea,
Taiwan, Singapore, Hong Kong, Mexico, Brazil, Chile, and Argentina. Project
requirements: 1\. The project should be conducted in groups of 2 or 3 (nor
more than 3). 2\. Units (e.g., million, billion) and currencies (e.g., US$,
Japanese yen) must be specified where necessary. 3\. Sources of information
must be specified for each research item. 4\. The final draft must typed with
statistical data presented in spreadsheet. 5\. Evaluation of the project will
be based on completeness, accuracy, clarity, and professional appearance. 6\.
The final project is due October 8, 1998, There will be a 5% discount of the
grade for each day of delay. 3 BADM145 International Financial Environment
Syllabus Fall 1998 Jiawen Yang Independent Research Projects Some of you may
have taken international economics 181 and 182 or similar courses in
international economics in your prior years at GWU. In this case you may
choose to do an independent research project in international trade and
finance in lieu of the specific course requirements outlined in this syllabus.
If you make such a selection, you will receive a grade for BADM145 based on
your research project. Independent research project topics: U.S. government
export support (and/or promotion) programs U.S. government export restrictions
International business opportunities for small businesses APEC: its history,
current status, and prospects Capital controls and liberalization by a
specific country (preferably a country in Asia or Latin America) Environmental
issues: international agreements Environmental issues with developing
countries Environmental issue with industrial countries U.S. anti-corruption
laws and regulations The theoretical literature on corruption Economic
development and corruption International anti-corruption efforts International
trade liberalization in services WTO and the world telecommunication industry
Infrastructure in developing countries Requirements for the independent
research: 1\. Meet with the supervisor (the instructor) at least at three
stages: selecting a topic, outline, and the first draft. 2\. The final paper
should include, but not limited to, an introduction, literature review,
current status of the issue, and references, data tables and graphs when
necessary. 3\. The final paper should be typed and double-spaced with about 20
pages in length. 4\. Grading of the project will be based on the research
efforts, adherence to the instructor's advice, and the quality of the final
paper. The final paper will be evaluated on clarity, organization, academic
contents, and professional appearance. 5\. The final paper is due October 8,
1998. There will be a 5% discount of the grade for each day of delay. 6\. Time
permitting, researchers may be asked to make presentations in class or in
break-out sessions. 4 BADM145 International Financial Environment Syllabus
Fall 1998 Jiawen Yang CLASS SCHEDULES, TOPICS, AND ASSIGNMENTS Note: Detailed
outlines and reading assignments for each class session will be described
separately. Session Day Date Topic, reading, and work assignments 1 Tuesday
August 25 The World Economy: an Introduction and Overview Readings: Handout
Lindert & Pugel: Chapter 1 Research project assignments 2 Thursday August 27
Partial Equilibrium Analyses of International Trade Readings: Handout Lindert
& Pugel: Chapter 2 3 Tuesday September 1 International Trade Theory: The
Classical View Readings: Handout Lindert & Pugel: Chapter 3 4 Thursday
September 3 International Trade Theory: The Heckscher-Ohlin Model Readings:
Handout Lindert & Pugel: Chapters 3 & 4 5 Tuesday Septmeber 8 Commercial
Policies: Partial Equilibrium Analysis Readings: Handout Lindert & Pugel:
Chapters 7 - 9 6 Thursday Septmeber 10 Commercial Policies and Current Trade
Issues Readings: Handout Lindert & Pugel: Chapters 11 - 14 7 Tuesday September
15 Mid-term Examination 8 Thursday September 17 Balance of Payments:
Definition and Basic Structure Readings: Handout Lindert & Pugel: Chapter 15 5
BADM145 International Financial Environment Syllabus Fall 1998 Jiawen Yang
Session Day Date Topic, reading, and work assignments 9 Tuesday September 22
Balance of Payments: Some Important Relationships Readings: Handout Lindert &
Pugel: Chapters 15 10 Thursday September 24 Foreign Exchange Market Readings:
Handout Lindert & Pugel: Chapter 16 11 Tuesday September 29 Interest Rate
Parity Readings: Handout Lindert & Pugel: Chapter 17 12 Thursday October I
Purchasing Power Parity and Real Exchange Rate Readings: Handout Lindert &
Pugel: Chapter 18 13 Tuesday October 6 Exchange Rate Regimes Readings: Handout
Lindert & Pugel: Chapters 20 & 24 14 Thursday October 8 Foreign Investment and
Current Issues in International Finance Readings: Handout Research projects
due 15 Tuesday October 13 Review 16 Thursday October 15 Final Examination 6

