

SOCIOLOGY 306

CULTURE OF JAPAN

SUMMER I 2002

Dr. David C. Huffman



Catalog Course Description:

A historical and cultural study of Japan, with particular attention to
religion, government, and the arts. Consideration is given to daily life in
Japan and current problems and changes.

About the Course:

This course examines various historical and cultural aspects of Japan. Topics
include: geography, language, history, visual arts, literature, and religion.
The course will particularly focus on the post WWII history of Japan with an
emphasis on the economic miracle and its effect on the economic, social, and
cultural structure of Japan. Credit in this course may be applied to the
general education requirement in world cultures.

Course Requirements:

Course requirements consist of two tests, two Internet exercises, and a web
page project. Course requirements are distributed as follows:

Two Unit Tests

|

60%  
  
---|---  
  
Internet Exercises

|

20%  
  
Web Page Project

|

_20%_  
  
Total

|

100%  
  
Grading Scale:

The approximate grading scale is:

A

|

90-100  
  
---|---  
  
B

|

80-89  
  
C

|

70-79  
  
D

|

60-69  
  
F

|

Below 60  
  


**  
**

Web Page Project:

One requirement for this course is the development of a web page to be
published on the World Wide Web. There is a large and growing assortment of
Internet web sites pertaining to various aspects of Japanese culture. One
reason for this is that so much of Japanese culture is visually oriented and a
journey through these web sites can aid in the process of learning about
Japanese culture. The purposes of the project are to allow each student to
explore their own interests in the various aspects of Japanese culture; to
receive hands-on experience in the use of the Internet as well as developing
the ability to create web pages; and to provide a resource for future students
in this class. I personally feel that this project will be both a fun and
interesting way to learn about Japanese culture.

Attendance and Participation:

There will be extensive use of slide and video presentations, and
demonstrations in this class. Class attendance is very important in order to
get the most out of this class. As a result, regular class attendance is
expected and class participation will be encouraged. Students will be
responsible for all work missed during an absence, no matter what the reason
for the absence. If persistent absences occur and the absences are interfering
with the student's progress in the class, a conference between the student and
the instructor and/or the Dean for Academic Affairs will be arranged.
Consistent class attendance and worthwhile class participation will be viewed
favorably in assigning grades for "borderline" cases.

Learning Resources:

There are three textbooks for this course and they are as follows:

Kodansha International. _Japan: Profile of a Nation_ (Tokyo: Kodansha
International, Ltd.) 1999

Soseki, Natsume. _Kokoro_ (Washington, D.C.: Regnery Publishing, Inc.) 1957

Kingston, Jeffrey. _Japan in Transformation: 1952-2000_ (Harlow, England:
Pearson Education) 2001

The class will make use of the resources available on the Internet. There will
also be extensive use of handouts, and video presentations.

Instructor Office Hours:

My office is in Bowman 120. I will have no formal office hours during the
summer, but will be available at times when I am in my office and by
appointment. If you need to reach me at times I am not in my office, call
828-5669 and leave a message on my voice mail. I will return your message as
soon as possible. My voice mail can be reached at any time of the day.

**  
**

Course Overview:

**_Date_**

|

**_Topic_**

|

**_Readings_**  
  
---|---|---  
  
Monday, June 3

|

Introduction, course overview

|

  
  
Tuesday, June 4

|

Slide program

Geography, Language

|



_Kodansha_ , pp. 22-60; 610-628  
  
Wednesday, June 5

|

Web Page Instruction

History: Pottery Cultures; Classical Period

|



_Kodansha_ , p. 79-122; Video  
  
Thursday, June 6

|

Religion: Buddhism, Shintoism

History: Medieval Period

|

_Kodansha_ , p. 498-500; 509-520

_Kodansha_ , p. 122-156; Video  
  
Friday, June 7

|

History: Edo Period

Edo Art and Literature

|

_Kodansha_ , p. 156-172; 311-317; Video

_Kodansha_ , p. 520-601; Video  
  
Monday, June 10

|

History: Meiji Restoration

_Kokoro_

|

_Kodansha_ , p. 172-183; 317-322

_Soseki_  
  
Tuesday, June 11

|

History: Taisho, Imperialism, WWII, Hiroshima

|

_Kodansha_ , p. 183-198  
  
Wednesday, June 12

|

**Test #1**

|

  
  
Thursday, June 13

|

History: American Occupation; Japanese Security, and the Economic Miracle

|

_Kingston,_ Chapter 2, 4, 6

_Kodansha,_ p. 198-199; 322-325; 300-306  
  
Friday, June 14

|

Education

Social Environment and Family Life

|

_Kodansha,_ p. 430-446; Video

_Kodansha,_ p. 394-430; 630-657; Video __  
  
Monday, June 17

|

History: US-Japan Trade Relations

History: Currency and Oil Shocks, Trade, and the Bubble (1971-1990)

|

_Kodansha,_ p. 347-359

_Kodansha,_ p. 305-311  
  
Tuesday, June 18

|

Japanese Political System

History: Post-Bubble Economy and Society

|

_Kingston,_ Chapter 3, 8,9,10

_Kodansha,_ p. 210-266  
  
Wednesday, June 19

|

Women in Japanese Society

Modern Japan

|

_Kingston,_ Chapter 7

_Kodansha,_ p. 657-690 __  
  
Thursday, June 20

|

Web Page Publication

American vs. Japanese Culture

|

_ _

Discussion  
  
Friday, June 21

|

**Test #2**

|

  
  


