  

  

  

  

  

[ ![](buttons/newabout5.gif)](anth-berk.html)  
[ ![](buttons/lib.gif)](http://www.lib.berkeley.edu/ANTH/)  
[ ![](buttons/arch.gif)](http://www.qal.berkeley.edu/arf)  
[ ![](buttons/hearst.gif)](http://www.qal.berkeley.edu/~hearst)  
[ ![](buttons/folk.gif)](http://ls.berkeley.edu/dept/folklore/FOLK.html)  

  

|

  

![](graphics/banner.gif)

  

  

  

**Department of Anthropology

  

Undergraduate Course Listings

  

Fall Semester 2000

  

**

This internal catalog is updated regularly. Continue to check the Department
bulletin board outside 232 Kroeber for changes (in Bold highlights). For
independent study courses, graduate students get CCNs from the Graduate
Office; and all undergraduates should fill out and return a signed application
with the Undergraduate Office (209 Kroeber) to obtain the CCN.

Also check graduate course listings, as graduate seminars are open to
qualified undergraduates.

**Helpful links:**

Click on the faculty person's name to read about his or her research
interests.

If the course name is underlined, click on it and get more information about
the course.

Visit the course listings [ archives](archives.html) to see course listings
from previous semesters.

Check [INFOCAL](http://infocal.berkeley.edu:5050/oar/index.html) for current
information on the schedule of classes.

[Telebears](http://www-
telebears.berkeley.edu:3402/0918085072/001002/telebears)

Click [ here](faculty.html) for Anthropology Faculty.

Click [ here](officehours.html) for current office hours.

* * *

**ANTHRO 1: INTRODUCTION TO PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY**

[L. Hager](hager.html) 4 units, TTh: 2-3:30, Wheeler Auditorium

  
  
This course will provide the student with an introduction to the primary
theories and concepts relating to Biological Anthropology. The course will
cover the three main subdisciplines of Biological Anthropology: Human Biology,
Paleoanthropology, and Primatology. Course material will be introduced to
students in a variety of ways, including visual presentations (in lecture and
section) and hands-on experiences (in section).

  
  
There will be three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion section per
week.

  
  
**Prerequisites:** None.

  
  
  
**ANTHRO 2: INTRODUCTION TO ARCHAEOLOGY**

[ R. Joyce](joyce.html) 4 units, TTh: 3:30-5, F 295 Haas

  
  
Archaeology is a conjunction of techniques and disciplines which makes
possible the study of phases and aspects of the human past that are not
documented by written records. Anthropology 2 offers an introduction to the
fundamentals of archaeological concepts and methods. In its broadest role,
archaeology attempts to treat the development of behavior from nonhuman
antecedents to the complex cultural patterns and socio-economic systems that
are documented in history, ethnography and the daily newspapers. Anthropology
sketches in bold outline aspects of what is known and thought about the
evolution of human culture and behavior from its earliest beginnings to the
present, even peering into the future. The course also examines how
archaeologists find out about the past. Much of this latter aspect of the
course will be undertaken in section discussions of excavation techniques,
dating and the study of artifacts and buildings and garbage. See
[http://mactia.berkeley.edu](http://mactia.berkeley.edu/)

  
  
**Requirements:** Mid-term examination, final examination and several problem
sets that are issued during the semester through section meetings. Each
student is required to attend a one-hour section meeting each week.

  
  
**Prerequisites:** None.

  
  
  
**ANTHRO 3: INTRODUCTION TO SOCIAL and CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY**

[K. Erwin](erwin.html) 4 units, TTh: 9:30-11, Wheeler Auditorium

  
  
Anthropology is the study of what it means to be human. This course introduces
students to anthropology via an exploration of the diversity of the human
condition, as well as to the various means through which social and cultural
anthropologists have attempted to understand what it means to be human in
specific times and places. Thus, we will read about and discuss the cultures,
beliefs, practices and lifestyles of peoples and places around the world, and
around the corner. Our aim is not only to understand "others" but also to gain
a greater understanding of ourselves as products of particular social,
historical, political, and cultural processes. The course is comparative and
wide-ranging, and will include examples from rural, urban and modern
industrial and postindustrial societies, ranging from the Middle East, Africa,
Asia and the Americas. In particular, we will consider the political economic
structures that shape peoples lives, and the processes of culture change, as
well as the ways in which people make sense of, and give meaning to, their
lives.

  
  
**Required texts:**  
A course pack of articles and several books, to include tentatively:  
Rabinow, _Reflections on Fieldwork in Morocco._  
Abu-Lughod, _Writing Women's Worlds._  
Bourgois, _In Search of Respect._ and 1-2 others.

  
  
  
**ANTHRO 24: FRESHMAN SEMINAR: "PERSPECTIVES ON IDENTITY"**

[ J. Ogbu](ogbu.html) 1 unit, M: 1-2, 111 Kroeber

  
  
The seminar will cover some current issues on identity--individual, social and
cultural. The topic will be examined from different approaches, including
anthropological and psychological approaches. Examples will be drawn from
studies in the United States and other societies.

  
  
  
**ANTHRO 112: SPECIAL TOPICS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY: "BIOARCHAEOLOGY"**

[L. Hager](hager.html) 4 units, TTh: 9:30-11 160 Dwinelle (note change in
schedule)

  
  
Skeletal material from archaeological sites provide a wealth of information on
the life histories of past human populations. Bones and teeth leave a record
of many aspects of an individual's life history including their age, sex, and
overall health. This course discusses what information the skeletal system can
give us about past people and the interpretations that can be made when these
biological data are placed within an archaeological context. We will examine
major issues in bioarchaeology, including age and sex determination, how to
identify stress, infections, injuries and levels of physical activity,
analysis of biological distance, the chemical analysis of bone, and inferences
on past behaviors such as sex/gender roles. Throughout the course we will use
case studies of human populations from different geographical and temporal
locations in the reconstruction of many past cultures. In addition, we will
examine archaeological samples from different subsistence bases as we consider
the impact on the human skeleton of the transition from hunting-gathering to a
sedentary lifestyle with the shift to urbanism and agriculturally based
economies.  
  
**Required texts:**  
Larsen, Clark S. (1997) _Bioarchaeology: Interpreting Behavior from the Human
Skeleton,_ Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England.

  
  
  
**ADDED CLASS: CCN: 02611  
ANTHRO: 112-2: SPECIAL TOPICS IN BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY: "GENOMICS,
BIOTECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY: THE IMPACT OF HUMAN GENETICS ON CULTURE AND
EVERYDAY LIFE"**

[S. Beck](beck.html) 4 units, T: 11-2, Rm. 101, 2251 College

  
  
In recent years, new biogenetic diagnostic procedures as well as inexpensive
and reliable genetic tests have become widely available in an increasing
number of societies. This accessibility of pre-symptomatic tests for both
antenatal and prenatal diagnosis in combination with techniques in
reproductive medicine such as in-vitro fertilization and pre-implantation
diagnosis will not only restructure medical systems worldwide, but it will
also transform expectations of individuals calling on medical services, e.g.
in case of illness or uncertainties concerning procreation. As a consequence
both transformations are challenging established legal regulations, religious
beliefs, and ethical norms in different cultures.  
  
Social and anthropological research targeting the emerging field of
biogenetics and biomedicine helps discern cultural transformations occurring
on a micro-level, manifesting themselves in changing concepts and practices
concerning notions of illness, heredity and kinship. On a macro-level two
recent findings might exemplify this change: an increasing appeal of genetics
in mass culture, e.g. as explanation for aggression, addiction, intelligence,
learning disabilities; a rising culture of "measure and manage," meaning that
more and more decisions in everyday life are taken on the basis of biomedical
tests. Medical anthropologists suggest that the popularization of genetic
knowledge will transform deep-rooted cultural assumptions and will lead to
changing self-conceptualizations even among those parts of the population
which are not trained in medicine or biology. There is urgent need for
research on both the discursive and material impact of genetics on bodies,
individuals and families as units in modern biomedicine whose "naturalness"
seems most obvious.  
  
As has been noted before, biomedical and genetic knowledges and procedures are
disseminated on a global, transnational scale and are impacting on
heterogeneous social, ethnic, gendered, and cultural positionings. Up to now
it remains open to debate whether the dissemination will further the
homogenization of Western and non-Western cultures, or in turn, highly
idiosyncratic modes of appropriation and indigenization as well as opposition
and resistance. To answer this question, a comparative perspective on recent
developments in biomedicine seems to be pertinent.  
  
Anthropology as a discipline with a highly developed "comparative
consciousness" and its ethical and religious orientations is especially well
prepared to deepen the understanding of the transformations due to
developments in biomedicine and genetics in a cross-cultural perspective. The
seminar will develop this cross-cultural comparative perspective in order to
analyze cultural differences both within multicultural societies and between
culturally diverse societies. Discussions will focus on case studies
addressing recent developments in the USA, Western Europe (Germany and Great
Britain) and in the Mediterranean countries. The Mediterranean case studies
will include Cyprus as a postcolonial country with a successful history of
Thalassaemia prevention which is the process of accession to the European
Union and now has to comply with European conventions in Bioethics as well as
Egypt as a rapidly modernizing Islamic country holding privileged relations
with the European Union. These case studies exemplify the diverse impacts of
biotechnologies on different cultures, traditions and institutions resulting
from the specific historical trajectories of the respective countries and
cultures. For instance, the fact that positive as well as negative eugenics--
enabled by the New Genetics--are met by fierce opposition in today's Germany
has to be understood against the backdrop of the historically unique
experience of the atrocities committed by the German Nazi regime.  
  
To establish this analytic perspective, the seminar will draw on recent
discussions in anthropology on globalization, modernization, on case studies
in the field of medical anthropology, on the interdisciplinary and highly
innovative field of science and technology studies. Students will be
introduced to concepts and methods which will enable them to cope with the
complex interplay of globalizing and localizing cultures and technologies.

  
  
  
**ANTHRO 114: HISTORY OF ANTHROPOLOGICAL THOUGHT**

[ X. Liu](liu.html) 4 units, MWF: 2-3, 145 Dwinelle

  
  
This course will present a history of anthropological thought from the mid-
nineteenth century to the mid-twentieth century and will draw upon the major
subdisciplines of anthropology. It will focus both upon the integration of the
anthropological subdisciplines and upon the relationships between these and
other disciplines outside anthropology. Three hours of lecture; one hour of
required discussion section per week.  
  
Go to <http://socrates.berkeley.edu/~ant114> for more information (course
syllabus, online forum, announcements, etc.) about the class.  
  
**Required: Selected chapters of the following texts:**  
Harris, M. 1968. _The rise of anthropological theory._  
Kuper, A. [1973] 1996. _Anthropology and anthropologists - the modern British
school._  
Stocking, G. W. 1995. _After Tylor: British social anthropology, 1888-1951._  
Evans-Pritchard, E. E. 1951. _Social anthropology._  
Levi-Strauss, C. 1963. _Structural anthropology._  
Levi-Strauss, C. 1966. _The savage mind._  
Jameson, F. 1972. _The prison house of language._  
Hawkes, T. 1977. _Structuralism and semiotics._  
Sturrock, J. [1986] 1993. _Structuralism._  
Geertz, C. 1973. _The interpretation of cultures._  
Ricoeur, P. 1981. _Hermeneutics and the human sciences._  
  
Note: A Course Reader will be prepared.

  
  
  
**ANTHRO 115: INTRODUCTION TO MEDICAL ANTHROPOLOGY (originally scheduled as
119, Special Topics)**

[P. Reynolds](reynolds.html) 4 units, MWF: 10-11 160 Kroeber

  
  
The course introduces students to the field of critical medical anthropology.
It is now widely accepted that to treat sickness we need to look at social as
well as physical pathology, and to understand what the sick and their families
are thinking. Anthropology has long specialised in the inner worlds of people
of different cultures, being particularly interested in people's experiences
and understandings as members of social groups. Medical anthropology applies
anthropological thinking and practice to the study of pain, illness, suffering
and healing. The body is seen to be both biologically given and culturally and
historically situated. Experiences of suffering, misfortune, medicine and
healing are explored in relation to the social, cultural and economic
processes in which they are embedded. The course is comparative and wide
ranging: ethnographic examples of illness, afflictions and healing are drawn
from a number of societies from China to Zimbabwe.  
  
Issues commonly understood as being related to the spirit, mind, body and
society are considered in relation to topics that include pain, distress,
ritual, magic, divination, and concepts of evil, power and control.  
  
The first section of the course introduces critical medical anthropology
through a close look at how belief and interpretation of the experiences of
illness are entwined. Ideas about possession, madness, witchcraft, voodoo,
symbols and divination are considered through the analysis of specific case
studies.  
  
This is followed by a section on the interplay of the mind in the expression
of suffering as in depression, the effects of trauma and the healing powers
assigned to memory and narrative.  
  
In the third section current concerns are briefly touched on as they affect
the body defined by attitudes towards disorders, epidemics, risk taking and
the ethics of genetic engineering.  
  
The last part of the course deals with social attempts to handle the aftermath
of conflict (as in the establishment of Truth Commissions that aim to heal
social wounds); to repair the ravages of poverty; and to regulate inequalities
around the world.  
  
**Requirements:** include a mid-term and a final take-home essay exam; a short
essay (2-3 pages) based on relevant current events; and a field project (10-12
pages).  
  
**Required texts:**  
Das, Veena; Kleinman, Arthur; Ramphele, Mamphela;  & Reynolds, Pamela (eds.).
2000. _Violence and Subjectivity._ Berkeley: University of California Press
(to be published later in the year).  
Desjarlais, Robert; Eisenberg, Leon; Good, Byron; and Kleinman, Arthur. 1995.
_World Mental Health. Problems and Priorities in Low-Income Countries._ New
York/Oxford: Oxford University Press.  
Foucault, Michel. 1987. _Mental Illness and Psychology._ Tr. Alan Sheridan.
Berkeley: University of California Press.  
Helman, Cecil. G. 2000. (4th edition). _Culture, Health and Illness. An
Introduction for Health Professionals._ Oxford: Butterworth/Heinemann.  
Reynolds, Pamela. 1996. _Traditional Healers and Childhood in Zimbabwe._
Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Press.  
  
**Recommended texts:**  
Kleinman, Arthur. 1988. _The Illness Narratives: Suffering, Healing and the
Human Condition._ New York: Basic Book.  
Krog, Antjie. 1998. _Country of My Skull._ Johannesburg: Random House.  
James, Henry. 1946. _Turn of the Screw._ Harmondsworth: Penguin Publishers.  
Turner, Victor W. 1968. _The Drums of Affliction. A Study of Religious
Processes among the Ndembu of Zambia._ London: Hutchinson and Coy.

  
  
  
**ANTHRO 121A: AMERICAN MATERIAL CULTURE**

[ L. Wilkie](wilkie.html) 4 units, TTh: 12:30-2, 277 Cory

  
  
Material culture as an expression of American socioeconomic, political,
religious, gender and ethnic values since the 17th century. Topics include:
architecture, domestic artifacts, foodways, healthcare and "pop culture."
European, African, Hispanic, Asian and Native American examples will be
considered.

  
  
**Prerequisite:** Anthropology 2 recommended.

  
  
  
**ANTHRO 122F: CALIFORNIA ARCHAEOLOGY**

[ K. Lightfoot ](lightfoot.html) 4 units, MW: 8-10, 160 Kroeber

  
  
The purpose of this course is to provide an introduction to the native peoples
of California from an archaeological perspective. The course examines the
development of diverse native Californian societies over the last 11,000
years. We begin with a brief overview of the history of archaeology in
California that considers the field methods, chronologies, and research
problems of early investigators. We then address three major research topics
that are current today. The first topic is the initial settlement of
California where we address the following questions: when was California first
settled by native peoples; what is the archaeologial evidence for the earliest
sites in California; and what were the lifeways and settlement practices of
these earliest peoples? The second topic addresses the diverse range of
hunter-fisher-gatherer lifeways that flourished in prehistoric California. As
part of this topic, we consider evidence for diverse material culture,
economic organizations, sociopolitical complexity, long distance exchange
networks, and religious practices by examining case studies of native
societies in the coastal, valley, desert and mountain regions of the state.
The final topic briefly considers native peoples responses to European
exploration and colonization in the 16th, 17th, and 18th centuries.

  
  
**Requirements:** Two midterms and a final exam will be required.  
  
**Required texts:** A Course Reader will be available from Copy Central on
Bancroft.

  
  
  
**ANTHRO 123D: ARCHAEOLOGY OF EAST ASIA**

[ J. Habu ](habu.html) 4 units, TTh: 2-3:30, 156 Dwinelle

  
  
The goal of this course is to provide a general picture of prehistoric and
protohistoric archaeology in China, Japan and Korea. The course will emphasize
the differences and similarities in archaeological studies between East Asia
and North America. It will also consider the role of archaeology in East Asian
societies today, and discuss how archaeological interpretations have been
affected by the social and political contexts in these countries. Topics to be
emphasized include changes in subsistence-settlement systems, origins and
dispersal of food production, the development of social complexity, and the
formation of states.

  
  
**Prerequisite:** Anthro 2.

  
  
  
**ANTHRO 128-1: SPECIAL TOPICS IN ANTHROPOLOGY: "PRACTICE IN THE
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SIXTH GRADE AFTERSCHOOL PROGRAM"**

[R. Tringham](tringham.html) 4 units, T: 9-11, 15, 2224 Piedmont and (choose
one) lab 1 T: 3-6 - off campus **or** lab 2 W: 1:30-4:30 - off campus

  
  
**NOTE: Meets the Method Requirement for the Anthropology major.**  
  
This course is designed to provide an opportunity for undergraduates to work
with 6th graders in exploring the world of archaeology and multimedia
technology. The students of this course will be expected to mentor the
children in the activities of a newly-established after-school program in
Roosevelt Middle School, Oakland. This program is sponsored and funded by a
collaborative venture of the Interactive University of U.C. Berkeley, the
Oakland Unified School District, and the UC Links Program of UCOP. The program
is directed by Professor Ruth Tringham and managed by Amy Ramsay for the
Archaeological Research Facility and Dept. of Anthropology.

  
  
The after-school program is designed to bring the archaeological experience to
6th graders through the medium of multimedia technology -- multimedia
authoring, WWWeb browsing, Virtual Reality Interactive games, etc. This
program will be voluntary for the 6th graders, and is being carried out under
the auspices of the newly established "Village Center" at Roosevelt School
which seeks to encourage the community as well as children in the after school
activities.

  
  
The activities of the after-school program will be devised by the students of
this class in collaboration with the children and teachers. These activities
will focus on the interpretation of archaeological materials rather than the
"grand picture" of the past; it will focus on giving archaeology some
immediacy in the children's lives by encouraging them to think of themselves
in relation to their local history and cultural heritage. The activities will
take the form of devising Virtually Real experience, games and stories through
multimedia authoring, as well as "real" role-playing games and scenes around
archaeological themes: excavation and the partial remains of food, fire,
learning, shelter, play, family etc.

  
  
The students of Anthropology 134B will work in close collaboration with the
Graduate Student Section (Anthropology 228B), in which students will be
working with the same 6th grade children in an in-class context. This latter
course is more constrained by the requirements of the school curriculum in
terms of content. We hope in Anthropology 134B to be able to address themes
and topics and ways of looking at the past that are not addressed during their
in-class participation.

  
  
**Prerequisites:** This course will feed into and from a number of
undergraduate courses in archaeology and anthropology, including the
Introduction to Archaeology, and upper division courses on method and theory.
It will also introduce students to issues of pedagogy and public archaeology.
Students from other fields are welcome to participate. Bilingual students are
strongly encouraged to apply. A course in the Introduction to Archaeology
(Anthro 2) or its equivalent and the permission of the instructor (through
interview) are the only prerequisites. . Access to an email and Internet
account are essential prerequisites, since an important component of the
course will be frequent consultation of the Course WWWebsite.

  
  
If you have taken previous Multimedia Authoring for Archaeology classes, this
would be greatly to your advantage. Those who have not had any multimedia
technology background will be assisted in catching up through self-paced
tutorials held in the Multimedia Authoring Center for Teaching in Anthropology
(MACTIA) in 2224 Piedmont.

  
  
**Requirements:** This course is essentially a practical research/service-
learning course. Participation in the Roosevelt School after-school program
(approx. 2-3 hrs one afternoon each week) is a required part of the course.
Each student will be part of the course term project to evaluate the
introduction of multimedia authoring and the archaeological experience to 6th-
graders through this after-school program. You will be expected to keep a
running log/diary of your observations. Instructions in making these
observations and making evaluations will be given during the course. A small
stipend to cover the cost of travel to the Roosevelt School will be provided.

  
  
  
**ADDED CLASS: CCN: 03518**  
**ANTHRO 133: A FIELD COURSE IN ARCHAEOLOGICAL METHODS**

[S. Silliman](silliman.html) 4 units, Sat. 8:30-5 at Petaluma Adobe State
Historic Park  
  
**On Thursday, August 31, Anthro 133 will meet at 5 p.m. in Rm. 101, 2251
College.**  
  
This course will meet the Method Requirement for the Anthropology major.
Declared majors will be given priority for enrollment through TeleBEARS. Class
Limit is 16, but wait-list yourself if the class fills up and attend the first
class meeting.  
  
This course will introduce students to archaeological field methods through
hands-on experience at an archaeological site in the Petaluma Adobe State
Historic Park, which protects part of an 1800s Mexican rancho in the San
Francisco Bay Area. The midden site to be excavated has artifacts from this
period, and it is very probable that many of these objects were used and
deposited by Native American people living and working on this rancho.
Students will participate in three aspects. First, they will learn the basics
of excavation, mapping, screening, and data recording in the field. Second,
they will learn the relationships between theoretical questions, research
design, and fieldwork in a specific setting. Third, students will see how
archaeology interfaces with different communities--academics, local Native
Americans, state agencies, "the public"--and will help foster these
interfaces.  
  
**Requirements**  
All interested students must attend the first class meeting (Thursday, August
31, 5 pm in Room 101, 2251 College) or be dropped. Qualified students will be
added from the wait-list if possible. Expectations, specific scheduling,
dates, and directions will be discussed at the first class meeting. The course
will meet on almost every Saturday of the semester at the Petaluma Adobe State
Historic Park, located about 45 minutes northwest of Berkeley. The first
Saturday class will be September 9. To participate in the course, students
must be able to work on all assigned Saturdays from 8:30 am to 5:00 pm
(excluding travel). On-campus laboratory time will be available for rainy
days. Grades will be based on a combination of **attendance,** in-field
assignments and observation, and brief writing assignments. The only
prerequisites are Anthro 2 (or its equivalent) and an interest in doing
fieldwork outdoors. A textbook entitled _Field Methods_ in Archaeology and a
small packet of readings will be assigned.

  
  
  
**ANTHRO 135: PALEOETHNOBOTANY**

[ C. Hastorf](hastorf.html) 4 units, T: 2-4, (lecture) and Th: 2-5 (lab), 16
Hearst Gym

  
  
**Instructor approval only. Come to the first day of class and apply for
admittance.  
If there is a large qualified student demand, Professor Hastorf may agree to
teach 2 sections.**  
  
This laboratory and discussion class is designed to introduce the student to
the basic approaches and techniques in archaeobotanical analysis. This is a
methods class. A series of different data types and their unique approaches
will be presented, including phytoliths, pollen, and DNA, with emphasis on
macrofloral remains. The material we will be studying in the laboratory
portion will include the major classes of plant remains likely to be
encountered in archaeological sites. The discussion will emphasize the use of
plant remains to answer archaeological questions. There will be one discussion
meeting and one laboratory every week, which will include microscope work and
some statistical analysis.

  
  
  
**ANTHRO 138A: THE HISTORY OF ETHNOGRAPHIC FILM**

[T. Anderson](tanderson.html) 4 units, MW: 4-6, 155 Kroeber

  
  
The course will trace the development of ethnographic film from its beginnings
at the turn of the century to the present. In addition to looking at seminal
works in the field, more recent and innovative productions will be viewed and
analysed. Topics of interest include the role of visual media in ethnography,
ethics in filmmaking, and the problematic relationship between seeing and
believing. Requirements include film critiques, a film proposal, and a final
exam.

  
  
**Note:** Students who plan to take Anthro 138B for their method requirement
in Spring 2000, must complete 138A.

  
  
**Prerequisites:** Anthro 3 or Anthro 114.

  
  
  
**ANTHRO 147A: COMPARATIVE GENDER SYSTEMS:**

**"GLOBALIZATION AND GENDER IN THE ASIA PACIFIC"**

[ A. Ong](ong.html) 4 units, MW: 12-2, 155 Kroeber

  
  
This course introduces students to an understanding of globalization and its
reworking of gender systems, flows, meanings, and rights in the Asia-Pacific
region, including North America. Globalization can be analytically divided
into two related global phenomena: contemporary capitalism and
transnationalism. Contemporary capitalism is the globalization of the market
system, and transnationalism refers to the intensification of human flows,
contacts, cultures, and politics across national borders occasioned by markets
and wars. Globalization then is about the reorganization of society, gender,
race, class and citizenship in relation to our market civilization that is
also transforming late socialist countries.

  
  
Our approach will link the institutional reorganization of the market and the
state to new gender arrangements, giving rise to new interests, connections,
and struggles within and across countries in the Asia-Pacific region,
including North America. We emphasize the institutional forms produced by
global processes in relation to the making and unmaking of gender labor
regimes, the effects on gender politics, the proliferation of female migrant
circuits, sex work, the feminine dimensions of consumption, political
strategies of feminists at home, and rights discourses and NGOs affecting
women's interests in Asia. The effects of globalization on gender overseas
will be linked to the reworking of gender and cultural citizenship in the
United States.

  
  
**Requirements:** Students are expected to have read assigned readings before
class, and will be called upon to answer questions. Besides serious engagement
with the readings and active participation in class, students will be required
to write a 5-6 page review on the themes from the class as a midterm. The
finals will consist of answers to 2 out of 5 questions that will be circulated
beforehand. No incompletes will be accepted.

  
  
**Required texts:**  

Chin, C. _In Service and Servitude: Foreign Domestic Workers._ Columbia U.
Press, 1998.

  
Gerway, I., A. Gupta and A. Ong. _Asian Transnationalities, Special issue of
positions._ Duke U. Press, Spring 2000.

  
Hilsdon, A. et al., eds. _Human Rights and Gender Politics in the Asia-
Pacific._ Routledge, 2000.

  
Ong, A. _Flexible Citizenship: The Cultural Logics of Transnationality,_ Duke
U. Press, 1999.

  
Sen, K. and M. Stivens, eds. _Gender and Power in Affluent Asia._ Routledge,
1998.

  
  
A Course Reader.

  
  
  
**ANTHRO 157: ANTHROPOLOGY OF LAW**

[L. Nader](nader.html) 4 units, TTh: 12:30-2, 180 Tan

  
  
An introduction to law in culture and society. Among the topics discussed will
be the use of law for dispute management, the interplay between law and
colonialism, law and ideology, legal pluralism, the evolution of law and
conception of justice, legal hegemonies and user theory in the context of
local, national, and global processes. Reading and lecture materials include
cross-cultural perspectives.

  
  
  
**ANTHRO C160: FORMS OF FOLKLORE**

[ A. Dundes](dundes.html) 4 units, TTh: 2-3:30, F 0295 Haas

  
  
**(Cross-listed with ISF 160.)**

  
  
This is usually a fairly large lecture course. It is designed for upper-
division students, though not necessarily anthropology majors. In fact, most
of the students enrolled are not anthropology majors. The course is intended
to provide an introduction to the discipline of folklore, e.g., myth,
folktale, proverb, riddle, gesture, game, etc. Similar courses at other
universities are often offered by faculty members in the English departments.
The emphasis here includes the humanistic, literary approach, but also
emphasizes the relevance of folklore materials for social scientists.

  
  
**Requirements:** Three hours of lecture per week. There is one midterm, a
final, and a course project which consists of making a collection of folklore
on the basis of fieldwork interviews conducted locally. There is considerable
reading required in the course. Readings TBA.

  
  
  
**ANTHRO 162: SPECIAL TOPICS IN FOLKLORE** ******"BALTO-FINNIC FOLKLORE AND
MYTHOLOGY"**

[U. Valk](valk.html) 4 units, MWF: 9-10, 219 Dwinelle

  
  
The Balto-Finnic peoples--Estonians, Finns, Karelians, Livonians, Vepsians and
Votes--are indigenous peoples of North Eastern Europe whose languages belong
to the Finno-Ugric subfamily of the Uralic languages. The folklore collections
of the Finnish Literature Society in Helsinki and the Estonian Folklore
Archives in Tartu are among the richest in the world, comprising more than two
million pages of manuscripts, recorded in the 19th and 20th centuries. The
Balto-Finnic cultures have relied upon oral transmission of texts, though the
influence of West European literary traditions and has been growing since the
Middle Ages. The Balto-Finnic epics--the Finnish "Kalevala" and the Estonian
"Kalevipoeg"--have worked as cultural foundations for building up the two
nations. During past few centuries the processes of urbanization have
transformed the former peasant cultures; the more traditional rural ways of
life have been preserved in some regions, however.  
  
The course will give an overall picture of the folklore of the Balto-Finnic
peoples from a comparative point of view in the context of Nordic and West
European traditions (including folk religion, folk calendar, rites of passage
and contemporary urban folklore). The generic system of folklore will be
discussed with a special focus on the songs in runo meter which was the poetic
language of artistic expression. The Balto-Finnic mythology will be analysed
using examples from the mythical songs, the literary epics and the world of
the belief legends. The perspective will be textual and diachronic but the
dynamics of tradition and the point of view of tradition bearers will be
considered as well.  
  
The main questions and problems of the course will be the following: How do we
interpret the archived orality of the past? How do we contextualise and
interpret the extinct genres of folklore? How does folklore reflect the
mentality and the social reality of the tradition bearers? How does folklore
transform in time? How is folklore used in building up identities and national
ideologies? The lectures will be illustrated by audio-visual material and
involve discussions.

  
  
  
**ANTHRO 166: LANGUAGE, CULTURE AND SOCIETY**

[A. Yurchak](yurchak.html) 4 units, MWF: 11-12, 122 Wheeler

  
  
This course will discuss the social and cultural aspects of linguistic
communication. The readings will cover the fields of sociolinguistics,
linguistic anthropology, and discourse analysis. We will discuss how different
uses of language in society facilitate communication and cause
misunderstanding, promote similarity and increase difference, establish
domination and express resistance, maintain stability and introduce change. We
will also learn how to do linguistic research in society. The course is
divided into several broad areas: _Language and Communication_ , _Linguistic
Variation and Identity_ , _Language and the Construction of Self_ , _Language
and Mass Media_ , and _Language, Globalization, and the Internet._ All the
materials are included in the Reader for the course. It also contains
additional materials (marked "Additional" in this syllabus) that are not
mandatory for course work but will help you to explore a given topic more
(e.g., for your presentation or paper--see below).  
  
**Assignments and tests:**  
Each student will conduct one research project in the course of the semester
studying some aspect of language use (e.g., on such topics as language and
national identity, gender, ethnicity, age; language in American or foreign
mass media, advertising, medical discourse, legal discourse, politics;
language and popular culture, graffiti, hip-hop, zines; language among
subcultures on Berkeley campus, fraternity members, rock musicians, social
workers, the rave scene, etc.).  
  
The topics of these projects should fit (at least in general terms) one of the
topics we discuss in class. Each student will make a short (15 min.)
presentation on this topic in class (you can also make longer joint
presentations, between two-three people). During the first two weeks, and not
later than _September 18_ , we should decide individually upon the dates of
your presentations. Feel free to e-mail me with the topics and dates you are
interested in, and/or discuss them with me during my office hours. You will
ultimately expand these projects into your final paper (10 pages long) due at
the end of the course, on _December 11_.  
  
There will also be a take-home Midterm Test (given in class on Fri., _October
20_ , due back in class on Mon., _October 23_ ). You will have to answer two
of the three offered questions with essay-answers of no more than two pages
each. The test will cover some concepts and issues we will have discussed up
to October 20.  
  
  
**ANTHRO 169B: RESEARCH THEORY/METHODS IN SOCIAL/CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY**

[J. Ogbu](ogbu.html) 5 units, MW: 10-12, 242 Hearst Gym

  
  
This is a 5-unit course which satisfies the method requirement for majors in
social-cultural anthropology. The course is designed to accomplish two things:
(a) examine theories of research methods in social/cultural anthropology, past
and present; and (b) practice these methods through supervised field research
projects. The first part will be done through lectures, assigned readings,
class discussions, and individual consultation. The second part requires each
student to carry out an approved and supervised field research project during
the semester.

  
  
  
**ANTHRO 172 AC: AMERICAN CULTURES: "MINORITIES IN AMERICA"**

[J. Ogbu](ogbu.html) 4 units, W: 2-5, 115 Kroeber

  
  
This seminar will enable students to examine and compare the sociocultural
adaptations of immigrant and non-immigrant minorities in the United States.
Further comparison will be made to a few other settler societies. Concepts
will be used to understand (a) how various groups achieved minority status
(e.g., by immigration or through conquest, slavery, colonization); (b)
subsequent treatment of the minorities by the dominant group; and (c) the
minorities' own responses to their treatment or their sociocultural
adaptations. Three broad components of the sociocultural adaptations will be
examined and compared: instrumental, relational and symbolic or
cultural/linguistic.

  
  
  
**ANTHRO 181: MIDDLE EAST AND ISLAM: "ANTHROPOLOGY OF ISRAEL AND PALESTINE"**

[R. Stein](stein.html) 4 units, TTh: 11-12:30, 155 Kroeber

  
  
This course explores anthropological perspectives on Palestinian and Israeli
history, culture, and politics. We will examine foundations of anthropological
texts on Palestine (pre-1948) and study contemporary writings on Israeli and
Palestinian society. We will situate these texts in the broader context of
cultural representations of the region (and "the Orient") in colonial texts,
contemporary popular culture, and media images. We will be particularly
concerned with the cultural expressions of nationalism in the daily lives of
these communities. Topics include: gender and nationalism; mapping and power;
violence and ethnography; practices and narratives of "peace"; and the
politics of memorialization.

  
  
  
**ANTHRO 189-1: SPECIAL TOPICS IN SOCIAL/CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY: "POPULAR
CULTURE: CONSUMPTION, IDENTITY, AND POWER"**

[R. Stein](stein.html) 4 units, W: 3-6 45 Evans (note change of schedule)

  
  
This course will examine the politics and meanings of popular culture in the
daily lives of diverse communities, and consider the ways in which "popular,"
"mass" or "low" culture has been approached in scholarly literature in the
last century. We will ask: How do individuals and communities produce and
negotiate their identities through popular cultural forms (pop music,
television, pulp fiction, cyberculture, etc.)? How are issues of race, class,
sexuality, and national identity performed and contested through acts of
consumption? What kinds of political struggles develop through these acts? Our
course will conclude with a study of popular culture in the age of
globalization. Rather than understand globalization as a homogenizing force,
we will consider the highly localized meanings and notions of community that
attend popular culture in the age of globalization. Through our readings, we
will also work to explore and redefine traditional notions of "culture" and
consider the ramifications of treating popular culture as the object of
academic inquiry.

  
  
  
**ANTHRO 189-2: SPECIAL TOPICS IN SOCIAL/CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY: "THE FIELDWORK
ENCOUNTER"**

[K. Erwin](erwin.html) 4 units, F: 9-12, Rm. 101, 2251 College (note change of
schedule)

  
  
**This course will meet the Method Requirement for the Anthro major and is
restricted to declared majors on a first come basis. (class limit: 25)**

  
  
This course offers students an opportunity to explore qualitative fieldwork
methods and dynamics from a two-fold perspective. On the one hand, students
will read accounts of fieldwork that highlight the dynamics, politics,
uncertainties, challenges, and successes of cultural anthropology's primary
research method: ethnographic fieldwork. These readings will include the now-
classic accounts of Malinowki, Bowen, and Rabinow, among others, along with
more recent articles and critiques. Secondly, students will be expected to
undertake a semester-long fieldwork project in the Bay Area, including
establishing a site and research problem, carrying out the fieldwork on a
weekly basis, and writing up a final paper. Class time will be divided between
a serious engagement with the readings, and with students' projects and own
fieldwork encounters. The reading will be more concentrated in the first part
of the semester as students establish their field projects, but time devoted
to the course will shift toward fieldwork and discussion of method based on
actual experiences as the semester progresses. The midterm exam will consist
of a critical write-up of course readings along with an interim write-up of
one's fieldwork project (site description, research problem, and methods). The
final exam will consist of a term paper in which the student presents a
critical discussion of the fieldwork encounter, evaluates his/her fieldwork
methods, and analyzes the experience in relation to course readings,
discussions, and insights. Students will be evaluated as follows: 30% midterm;
30% class participation (including active discussion of readings and
experiences); 40% final write-up.

  
  
  
**RELATED COURSES IN OTHER DEPARTMENTS**  
  
**L &S; 120: THE POETICS OF TIME AND PLACE: VIEWPOINTS ON THE MILLENNIUM**

[Ruth Tringham,](tringham.html) [Rosemary Joyce](joyce.html) and [Margaret
Conkey](conkey.html) 4 units, MW: 2-3 (lecture), plus 2 hours lab/discussion
section, 2040 VLSB

  
  
Satisfies Social Science Breadth requirement, Anthropology elective
requirement and Anthropology methods requirement. For more information check
out [
http://www.mactia.berkeley.edu/ls120/default.html](http://www.mactia.berkeley.edu/ls120/default.html)  
  
This course will celebrate the cultural construction of time and place. Lest
we think that the millennium change actually exists outside of ourselves and
our own cultural context, we shall explore the construction of time and place
in many different cultural contexts. The course will focus on how differently
people have perceived their place in the world and in time; how they have
perceived history, ancestors, the future; how they have perceived the
different scales of place; what is distant, what is familiar. Examples of the
archaeological evidence that we shall explore include monuments and artifacts
interpreted as calendars (Palaeolithic bone engravings, Mayan calendar, Chaco
Canyon, British Neolithic and Bronze Age megalithic monuments such as
Stonehenge), evidence of the demarcation of self from the other (the Great
Wall of China), evidence of land and water exploration (the settling of
continents, perception and use (or denial) of resources, exchange patterns),
evidence of the awareness of the past and attention to ancestors, and concepts
of the future heritage of the present day (Pyramids of Egypt). To bring this
challenge into immediate focus in the year 2000, we shall also look at how the
millennium itself has been constructed by our own media agents as a universal
phenomenon. We shall look at how archaeologists have participated in this
construction wittingly or unwittingly by their use of a millennium as a
standard measure of time. Since in prehistory and much of ancient history
there is little direct evidence of such perception, the challenge in this
course is to use our inferential skills and imaginations based on ours and
other anthropologists' experience of non-western cultures and the
archaeological evidence to construct these perceptions. A further challenge is
to be able to express our constructions to the rest of the world. Students
will participate in this challenge in lab/discussion sections in which
multimedia projects are authored by each discussion section working together
as a production team.  
  
**Prerequisites:** None except some curiosity about times and places other
than your own; a willingness to turn a critical eye on authority as well as
yourselves; and an enthusiasm for creative imaginative expression.

  

  

[UCB](http://www.berkeley.edu) | [Anthropology](dept.html) | [The
Major](major.html) | [Doctoral Program](anthdoc.html) | [Medical Anthropology
Program](medanthdoc.html) | [Undergraduate Courses](icatu-f00.html) |
[Graduate Courses](icatg-f00.html)

  

Contact the webeditor with any questions about this site at
[hollyh@uclink4.berkeley.edu](mailto:hollyh@uclink4.berkeley.edu).  
This page was last updated 10/11/00.  
  
---|---  
  
  

