![](bsulogo5.jpg)

Department of History and Government

GOVT 150  
**_Introduction to Public Policy_**

Instructor: Mark Croatti  
Spring 2000

  
  

* * *

CLASS TIME: | Saturday, 1:00pm - 6:00pm  
---|---  
CLASSROOM: | Glendale Baptist Christian Life Center  
OFFICE HOURS: | By appointment  
TELEPHONE: | 202-326-7086  
E-MAIL: | [ mcroatti@aaas.org](mailto:mcroatti@aaas.org?)  
FAX: | 202-682-0816  
  
* * *

**COURSE DESCRIPTION

** In this course, students will be introduced to the study of public policy
and the models political scientists use to describe and explain political
life. Emphasis will be placed on public policy questions and their efficacy to
scientific inquiry; that social relevance does not require us to reject
systematic analysis in favor of rhetoric, polemics, or activism; that
knowledge about the forces shaping public policy and the consequences of
policy decisions is socially relevant.

**

COURSE OBJECTIVE

**

By the end of the course, the student should have a clear understanding of the
following.

    1. "Who gets what" in a polity, more important, "why" and "what difference it makes".
    2. "What" policies government pursue, "why" governments pursue the policies they do, and "what" the consequences of these policies are;
    3. The nine public policy analytic models - institutional, process, group, elite, rational, incremental, game, public choice, and systems.
    4. How to utilize these nine analytic models to study certain policy areas, such as civil rights, crime and punishment, welfare and social security, antipoverty and economic opportunity, urban affairs and housing, government spending, budgeting and taxing, national defense, state and local spending and services, and civil rights.

**

READINGS

**

Two textbooks are required and one is suggested for this course. In addition,
a bibliography is provided at the end of this syllabus for research purposes -
these works can be found in area libraries.

**

Required Texts** (available at the campus bookstore)

Dye, Thomas R. 1998. _Understanding Public Policy,_ 9 th ed. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc.

Jones, Charles O. 1984. _An Introduction to the Study of Public Policy,_ 3rd
ed. North Scituate, MA: Duxbury Press.



**

Suggested Text

**

Anderson, James E. ed. 1994. _Cases in Public Policy-Making,_ 7 th ed. New
York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

**



TEACHING MODES

**

The major teaching mode will be a combination lecture-discussion-application,
in-class conference approach. This major strategy will be supplemented by

  1. Out-of-class assignments,
  2. Independent reading and writing assignments,
  3. Library assignments, and
  4. Writing and/or reading referrals.

**



ANDRAGOGICAL AND PEDAGOGICAL STYLE

**

Lecturing will be kept to a minimum in this course (at least by me). It is my
andragogical and pedagogical style to let the readings do the lecturing while
the class does the doing, thinking, creating, rejecting, building, etc. This
means that we will need real-world data in front of us to work on, think
about, analyze, organize, etc. I will provide many data sources for us to
practice on.

**



REQUIREMENTS

Student Evaluations** \- students' performance will be determined by adding
the points received from

1\. A mid-term examination 25%

2\. A final examination 25%

3\. In-class projects and attendance 20%

4\. A major research paper 30%

**

Class Attendance** \- is required of all students.

  1. No more than two absences, excluding excused absences, will be allowed. After three absences, a student will be referred to the Student Affairs Office.
  2. Excused absences are those incurred because of illness, death of an immediate family member, or other valid and verifiable reason. Documentation for such absences is required, and the student must present a statement from the Department Chair to the instructor in order to have the absence noted as "excused".
  3. The student is responsible for making up all assignments missed because of excused absences.
  4. All late essays submitted without an official excuse will be lowered one letter grade.



**

Essay Evaluations and Grade Distribution -** Essays will be evaluated
according to the following criteria:

1\. THESIS - a significant, logical, and clear central idea 10%

2\. ORGANIZATION - clear and coherent 10%

3\. DEVELOPMENT - adequate and logical 30%

4\. EFFECTIVENESS - conciseness, logic, sentence variation 20%

5\. MECHANICS - grammar, usage 30%

**

The final grade for the course** \- A numerical score will be equivalent to
the following letter grades:

90 - 100 A

80 - 89 B

70 - 79 C

60 - 69 D

Below 60 F

**

What grades say:

**

A Correct and suggestively evaluated

B Correct and shows individual input

C All factually correct

D Incomplete, too brief

F Factually wrong

**



RATIONALE FOR IN-CLASS EXAMINATIONS AND TAKE-HOME ESSAYS

**

Linguists have long realized that in order to effectively evaluate the
cognitive, metacognitive and social effective skills that are crucial to the
successful learner, a mixture of take-home assignments and in-class
examinations is called for. **** The following presuppositions seem to support
their suspicion.

  1. Examinations are to acquaint those unfamiliar with time limit and written directions but without disaster, and take-homes are not timed. Grades, individual notes, and comparing the comments should give a better idea of what is expected.

  2. Questions presuppose FACTS involved are familiar and so set a framework for discussions. Many questions have no one solution, and sometimes the best answers are those with no single answer everyone would accept.

  3. The lectures presuppose you have studied the texts beforehand and read other sources referred to, just as tests presuppose you have thought about the topics, and discussed them with others. It is taken for granted your initial, sole, and final acquaintance with the matter is not just the lecture.

  4. Take-homes are to help, not annoy. They are done at your pace, with any kind of aids you find helpful. Take them as learning opportunities, not just chores. Cooperation is indicated: you will not have to answer every question, but group-members can cover the lot. Hardy workers take on questions where the answer is not obvious, since that's how we learn. Comparing results helps; preparing for likely questions helps even more.

  5. We all have personal ways to study and review, but it is sensible to go review what you have spent time on, by keeping, reading, and revising what you have written. If your work isn't worth rereading and reworking, it wasn't worth doing in the first place. Knowledge is cumulative - be your own severest critic. Regarding assignments as something to be forgotten when handed in wastes your time. Rewriting isolates essentials, show what is peripheral, and which writing habits waste time. Supplementary Reading illuminates what was obscure, provides better examples, and brings up references you couldn't consult when you first discussed it with others.

  6. COOPERATIVE READING can be even more profitable that COOPERATIVE STUDY: we report in minutes what took hours to read. Tell others what we think is not worth reading, or what they just have to read for themselves. Setting brief but regular times for informal reports about Supplementary Readings multiples your "reading" - there is only so much one can do alone.

  7. To foster that kind of discipline, an obligatory take-home format forces you to make your own re-identifiable, reliable and worth rereading. The take-home assignments then constitute a text of your own for final examination review, future study and updating. Duplicating and exchanging results with others makes them complete.

**Extra Credit**

**

The point system is flexible in that you have the opportunity to add to your
point total by doing extra credit. Look for events that you can attend,
preferably free of charge, in your community or anywhere in the greater
Maryland-Washington-northern Virginia area. Events that qualify include
anything politically related such as lectures, government meetings (any
level), citizen hearings, campaign rallies or other events, special exhibits,
promotions by an author of a book with political implications, cultural
celebrations that include speaking time, etc. Such events are posted in local
and neighborhood newspapers, on campus bulletin boards throughout the region,
at community centers, at bookstores, at libraries, even on the Internet. By
attending a political event, you may earn five points an hour, up to 40 points
maximum, which would mean 8 hours or more of your physical presence at the
event. Although the total number of points you can earn is unlimited, I do ask
that you not spend eight hours per event. In other words, you can earn 40
points once; after that, all events must be four hours or less. This is so you
participate in short, concentrated activities rather than spend an entire
weekend at a conference and consider every moment

you spend there as extra credit time. I don't want you attending entire
conferences or taking bus trips; I want you participating in multiple but
brief experiences that are educational.

All activities require prior approval, so check with me first. Don't wait
until the last minute--put points in the bank! If you are 5 points short of
the next grade after the final, it will be too late. Get your extra credit
points while you can. You must hand write a 1-page summary for the event and
attach a flier or some other evidence of attendance.

The key to this course is participation; participation in class, on campus,
and in the community. Real Life is the best teacher of all. The more active
you are, the more you will learn, and the more you will enjoy learning it. Who
knows, you might just experience something that will inspire you to choose a
new career.

**

Extra Credit Rules

**

1\. Every event you attend must be brought to me in advance and agreed to
beforehand between you and I.

2\. The number of hours attended and the total points you will earn must be
agreed to beforehand.

3\. The type of evidence you will furnish along with your written summary as
proof of attendance must be agreed to beforehand, and it cannot consist of
more than one document.

4\. You must use the extra credit sheet provided in your syllabus for every
event you attend. Make multiple copies of the one provided in the syllabus if
you plan on attending more than one event.

5\. You must bring the sheet to me beforehand, and the sections that ask for
name of event, date, place, time, personal contact, contact title, and contact
daytime phone number must be filled out. The daytime phone number cannot be a
home number.

6\. I will then approve/reject the event for extra credit.

7\. If approved, the rest of the extra credit sheet must be filled out upon
completion of the assignment: initialed time in, initialed time out, total
hours, and contact signature. You must check in with the contact person, get
the time in initialed, and repeat this process upon check out of the event,
and then get a signature that all information initialed is valid. Non-
initialed times or unsigned sheets will not be accepted.

8\. The last class to turn in extra credit assignments is the last class
before the final: April 25. No extra credit will be accepted on the day of the
final or between the last class and the final.

9\. The hours of the event must be clearly stated in the evidence supplied
with the hand written summary.

10\. The completed extra credit sheet, along with the evidence of attendance
and your written summary, must be turned in together, stapled or fastened in
some way, at the next class (up to April 25) even if the event was the night
before. A separate extra credit sheet must be used for each event.

11\. You cannot turn in all of your extra credit assignments at once, and you
cannot turn in all or most of your extra credit work on the last class day. I
further do not want more than 6 assignments turned in on any given class day.
This means that you can attend an average of one extra event a day per week,
minus the day you spend in class, for a total of 6 events per week. Yes, if
you don't attend an event on, say, a Friday, you can attend two on a Saturday
--the 6 again represent an average of one event per day per week.

12\. In order to rent a movie, you must have attended an actual event.

13\. The number of movies you can rent per event attended is one, even if the
event was worth 40 points. It is not one movie for every 5 points of extra
credit earned. It is one movie for every event no matter how long the event
lasted.

14\. Movie reviews and event summaries must be hand written.

15\. Movie reviews must answer the questions listed in the syllabus under
Video Reports.

16\. Reviews must start by referencing the extra credit event that qualified
the reviewer to watch the movie.

17\. Extra credit summaries must reference where the event was advertised.

18\. Movies can be watched in groups, but the reviews and assessments must be
written separately.

19\. Extra credit events can be attended in groups but make sure the contact
can vouch for you as an individual and that the extra credit sheet is filled
out properly in regard to time in/out as if you were the only one who went.

20\. If you cannot secure the necessary evidence of your attendance, find a
different activity where you can.

**



Video Reports

**

If you have received extra credit for one (1) event in the community, you are
eligible to earn extra credit points for one (1) video. Do two (2) events, see
two (2) videos, etc. For example, if you attend a city council meeting, you
can rent _Norma Rae_. If you listen to an international lecture at the
University of Maryland, then you can rent _Malcolm X_. You cannot just rent
videos. You must do community-based activities to be eligible to rent a video.
You can then earn 5 points for a 1-page report on what you thought (see
question format below) of the following videos:

**

American History X  
Born on the 4th of July  
Glory  
Hoffa  
JFK  
The Trial of Lee Harvey Oswald  
Malcom X  
Nixon  
Norma Rae  
Panther **

You must photocopy the video store receipt and staple it to your one-page,
hand written review. The receipt must clearly list the name of the video and
your name as the account holder. The review will consist of the following
questions:

What was the lesson or message of the story?

Was the message convincing?

Was it well done; was the movie enjoyable?

What scene surprised you the most and why?

What scene had the biggest impact on you and why?

**

  
**



COURSE CONTENT OUTLINE

  1. Session I** \- INTRODUCTION:

  1. Presentation of Course Overview
  2. Discussion of Students' Backgrounds and Interests
  3. INTRODUCTION AND GENERAL FRAMEWORK OF ANALYSIS

    1. What is Public Policy?
    2. Some Identical Preferences and Realities
    3. Benchmarks for Analysis
    4. Models of Politics

Readings: Jones, pp. 1-19

Dye, pp. 1-38



**

  1. Session II** \- THE NATURE OF PUBLIC PROBLEMS

  1. Catalogue of Major Issue-Areas
  2. Issues and Events
  3. Civil Rights
  4. Crime, Violence, and Repression
  5. Poverty
  6. Welfare and Health
  7. Education 
  8. Urban Affairs
  9. Priorities and Price Tags
  10. Budget and Taxes
  11. Defense Policy

Readings: Jones, pp. 23-37

Dye, pp. 39-282



**

  1. Session III** \- THE POLITICS OF GETTING PROBLEMS TO GOVERNMENT

  1. Functional Activities
  2. Conditions for Getting Problems to Government
  3. Theories of Agenda Setting
  4. Types of Agendas
  5. Agenda-Setting Strategies
  6. Policy-Making Process

Reading: Jones, pp. 25-50

Dye, pp. 307-326



**

  1. Session IV -** FORMULATING POLICY PROPOSALS

  1. What is Formulation and who is involved?
  2. Institutional Limits on Formulation
  3. Types of Formulation
  4. Strategic Consideration in Formulation

Reading: Jones, pp. 51-109



**

  1. Session V -** LEGITIMATING PROGRAMS

  1. Legitimacy
  2. The Processes of Legitimization
  3. Who is involved?
  4. Majority Building

Reading: Jones, pp. 110-139



**

  1. Session VI -** IMPLEMENTING PROGRAMS

  1. Implementation Concept
  2. Who is Involved?
  3. The Role of the Bureaucracy
  4. Interpretation
  5. Application
  6. Intergovernmental Partnership

Reading: Jones, pp. 164-195



**

  1. Session VII -** EVALUATING PROGRAMS AND POLICY IMPACT

  1. What is Evaluation?
  2. The Politics of Evaluation
  3. Motivation and Criteria for Evaluation
  4. Measurement and Analysis
  5. Policy Cycles

Reading: Jones, pp. 196-232

Dye, pp. 337-355



**

  1. Session VIII -** CONCLUSION AS PRELUDE

  1. Resolution for Whom?
  2. Termination Process
  3. Types of Decision Making
  4. Policy Effects
  5. The Morality of Choice

Reading: Jones, pp. 233-254

F. Impeachment Trial: What Have We Learned About Public Policy?

**



WEEKLY CLASS DISCUSSIONS, READINGS AND ASSIGNMENTS

**



Week 1: September 7  Introductions and course overview  Dye pages: 1-38

Week 2: September 14 Policy Analysis and Models of Politics  Dye pages: 39-108

Week 3: September 21 Civil Rights and Criminal Justice Dye pages: 109-168

Week 4 September 28 Health and Welfare and Education Dye pages: 169-217

**Definition of policy area du** e

Week 5: October 5 Environmental and Defense Dye pages: 218-261

**Sub-policy areas due

**

Week 6: October 12 Economic and Tax Dye pages: 262-282

**Policy area history due

**

Week 7: October 19 International Trade & Immigration Review Dye pages: 1-282

Week 8: October 26 Mid-Term Examination  Dye pages: 283-315

Week 9: November 2 American Fed. & Inputs & Outputs Dye pages: 316-335

**Major pioneers due

**

Week 10: November 9 The Policy Making Process Dye pages: 337-355

Week 11: November 16 Policy Evaluation

Week 12: November 23 Student Presentations

Week 13: November 30 Student Presentations Review Jones pages 1-254

Review Dye pages 1-355

Week 14: December 7 Final Examination

Week 15: December 14 Final Student Papers Due

**



PUBLIC POLICY ESSAY ASSIGNMENTS

**



  1. Definition of Policy Area
  2. Definitions of Sub-areas of Selected Policy Area
  3. Brief History of the Policy Area (5 double-spaced typed pages)
  4. Five Major Pioneers of the Policy Area (3 double-spaced typed pages)
  5. Major Questions of the Policy Area
  6. Major Theories of the Policy Area
  7. Major Concepts of the Policy Area
  8. Ten Major Journals of the Policy Area

Note: Guidelines will be provided for each of these topics

Goal: A complete introductory essay fit for publication





BIBLIOGRAPHY

**

**Books

**

**** Alcaly, Roger E. and Mermelstein, David. 1976. The Fiscal Crisis of
American Cities. New York:

Vintage Books.



Allison, Graham T. 1971. Essence of Decision. Explaining the Cuban Missile
Crisis. New York:

HarperCollins Publishers.



Altshuler, Alan A. 1968. The Politics of the Federal Bureaucracy. New York:
Dodd, Mead and Co.



Brewster, Lawrence G. 1984. The Public Agenda. New York: St. Martin's Press.



Brigham, John and Brown, Don W. eds 1980. Policy Implementation. Beverly
Hills, CA: Sage

Publications.



Caiden, Gerald E. 1991. Administrative Reform Come of Age. New York: Walter de
Gruyter.



Craymer, LeRoy and Thompson, Frederick, eds. 1982. Reforming Social
Regulation: Alternative

Public Policy Strategies. Beverly Hills, CA. Sage Publications.



Denhardt, Robert B. 1995. Public Administration: An Action Orientation, 2nd
ed. Belmont, CA:

Wadsworth Publishing Co.



Derthic, Martha and Quirk, Paul J. 1985. The Politics of Deregulation.
Washington, DC: The

Brookings Institution.



Dobelstein, Andrew H. 1980. Politics, Economics, and Public Welfare. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ:

Prentice-Hall, Inc.



Fischer, Frank and Forester, John eds. 1993. The Argumentative Turn in Policy
Analysis and

Planning. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.



Ingram, Helen and Smith, Steven Rathget. Eds. 1993. Public Policy for
Democracy. Washington,

DC. The Brookings Institution.



Johnson, Michael. 1982. Political Corruption and Public Policy in America.
Monterey, CA: Brooks

Cole Publishing Co.



Kaufman, Herbert. 1981. The Administrative Behavior of Federal Bureau Chiefs.
Washington,

DC. The Brookings Institution.



Kaufmann, Franz-Xaver, ed. 1991. The Public Sector: Challenge for Coordination
and Learning.

New York: Walter de Gruyter.



Kingdom, John W. 1984. Agendas, Alternatives, and Public Policy. New York:
HarperCollins

Publishers.



Kobrak, Peter. 1994. The Political Environment of Public Management. New York:
HarperCollins

Publishers.



Kraft, Michael E. 1996. Environmental Policy and Politics Toward the 21st
Century. New York:

HarperCollins Publishers.



Levine, Charles H. and Rubin, Irene. Eds. 1980. Fiscal Stress and Public
Policy. Beverly Hills, CA

Sage Publications.



Levin, Charles H. et al. 1990. Public Administration. Challenges, Choices, and
Consequences.

New York: HarperCollins Publishers.



Light, Paul. 1985. Artful Work: The Politics of Social Security Reform. New
York: Random House.



Lineberry, Robert L. and Sharkansky, Ira. 1971. Urban Politics and Public
Policy. New York:

Harper and Row Publishers.



Lipsky, Michael. 1980. Street-Level Bureaucracy: Dilemmas of the Individual in
Public Service.

New York: Russell Sage Foundation.



May, Judith V. and Wildavsky, Aaron B. eds. 1978. The Policy Cycle. Beverly
Hills, CA: Sage

Publications.



McCurdy, Howard E. 1977. Public Administration: A Synthesis. Menlo Park, CA:
Cummings

Publishing Co., Inc.



Nachmiaas, David and Rosenboom, David H. 1980. Bureaucratic Government USA.
New York:

St. Martin's Press.



Nivola, Pietro S. 1986. The Politics of Energy Conservation. Washington, DC.
The Brookings

Institution.



Ott, David and Ott, Attiat F. 1977. Federal Budget Policy. Washington, DC. The
Brookings

Institution.



Palmer, John L. and Sawhill, Isabel V. eds. 1984. The Reagan Record.
Washington, DC: Urban

Institute.



Phillips, Kevin. 1990. The Politics of Rich and Poor. New York: Random House.



Riley, Dennis D. 1993. Public Personnel Administration. New York:
HarperCollins Publishers.



Ripley, Randall B. and Franklin, Grace A. 1984. Congress, the Bureaucracy, and
Public Policy.

Homewood, IL; The Dorsey Press.



Robertson, David B. and Judd, Dennis R. 1989. The Development of American
Public Policy.

Washington, DC. The Brookings Institution.



Rourke, Francis E. 1976. Bureaucracy, Politics and Public Policy, 2nd ed.
Boston. Little, Brown

And Co.



Schick, Allen ed. 1983. Making Economic Policy in Congress. Washington, DC:
American

Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research.



Sharp, Elaine B. 1994. The Dilemma of Drug Policy in the United States. New
York.

HarperCollins Publishers.



Stone, Deborah A. 1988. Policy Paradox and Political Reason. New York:
HarperCollins

Publishers.



Thurez, Daniel and Vigilante, Joseph L. eds. 1978. Reaching People. Beverly
Hills, CA: Sage

Publications.



Tompkins, Jonathan. 1995. Human Resource Management. New York. HarperCollins
Publishers.



Weppner, Robert S. ed. 1977. Street Ethnography. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage
Publications.



Wildavsky, Aaron. 1992. The New Politics of the Budgetary Process. 2nd ed. New
York. HarperCollins Publishers

  

**Journals**

**

American Journal of Political Science

Annals

Commentary

Journal of African Public Policy

Journal of Management Science and Policy Analysis

Journal of Politics

Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory

Law and Contemporary Problems

Policy Analysis

Policy Sciences

Policy Studies Journal

Policy Studies Review

Polity

Public Administration Review

Publius

Social Forces

Society

The American Behavioral Scientist

The American Political Science Review

The Nation

The National Journal

The National Review

The New Republic

The Public Interest

Urban Affairs Quarterly

Western Political Quarterly

**

Newspapers

**

The Christian Science Monitor

The New York Times

The Wall Street Journal

The Washington Post

**

Public Records

**

Almanacs

Congress and the Nation

Congressional Journal

Congressional Record

Editorial Research Reports

The Weekly Reports

**RESEARCH WEB PAGES**

[The White House](http://www.whitehouse.gov/)  
[The Senate](http://www.senate.gov/)  
[House of Representatives](http://www.house.gov/)  
[Supreme Court](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/)  
[National Archives](http://www.nara.gov/nara/legislative/)  
[Library of Congress](http://www.loc.gov/)  
[State of Maryland](http://www.mec.state.md.us/)  
[ Governor Parris
Glendening](http://www.mdarchives.state.md.us/msa/mdmanual/08conoff/html/01gov.html)  
[All 50 States](http://www.50states.com/)  
[FedWorld](http://www.fedworld.gov/)  
[Congressional Quarterly](http://www.cq.com/)  
[CNN](http://www.cnn.com)  
[_The Economist](http://www.economist.com/)  
[Time magazine  
[New York Times](http://www.nytimes.com/)  
[Washington Post](http://www.washingtonpost.com/)_

**INSTRUCTOR BIOGRAPHY**

Name:| Mark Croatti  
---|---  
Status:| Adjunct Professor  
How to address:| Professor Croatti  
Birthdate:| 10-25-1964  
Residence:|  [Washington, DC](http://www.washdc.org/)  
Began at Bowie State University:| 1999  
Courses taught:| GOVT 355, GOVT 150, GOVT 130  
Other teaching assignments:| [Johns Hopkins University](
http://128.220.10.71/schedule/creditschedule.cfm?CourseNumber=465103&AcYear=99-00&DeptID=215)  
[Georgetown University](
http://www.georgetown.edu/ssce/contedu/subjects/govern.htm#XINA06001)  
[United States Naval Academy]( http://www.nadn.navy.mil/)  
Education:| M.A., 1990, [University of Southern California](
http://www.usc.edu/)  
B.A., 1988, University of Southern California  
Adult Education Credential, 1991, [University of California Extension](
http://www.unex.ucla.edu/)  
Occupation:| Web page writer, the journal
_[Science](http://www.scienceonline.org/)_  
Course texts:|  _The 47th Parallel_  
Experience:| International Program Consultant, [Howard Hughes Medical
Institute]( http://www.hhmi.org/grants/international/), 1995-96  
National Archives, 1994-95  
[White House Volunteer](
http://www2.whitehouse.gov/WH/EOP/First_Lady/html/columns/HRC0429.html),
1994-95  
Capitol Hill Intern, Rep. Norm Mineta (D-San Jose), 1994  
Volunteer, Tom McEnery for Congress, 1993-94  
Intern, Governor Fife Symington (R-AZ), 1992  
Intern, Senator John Seymour (R-CA), 1988-91  
Precinct Chairman, Michael Dukakis for President, 1988  
Intern, Senator Pete Wilson (R-CA), 1987  
Intern, Ed Zschau for Congress, 1986  
Countries visited:|  [Austria, Brazil, Canada, Czech Republic, France,
Germany, Hungary, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Mexico, Palestine, United Kingdom](
http://www.odci.gov/cia/publications/factbook/country.html)  
Hobbies:| [Baltimore's Marching Ravens](
http://www.baltimoreravens.com/entertainment/band/aboutus.asp), 1996-98  
[USC Trojan Marching Band]( http://www.usc.edu/dept/band/home.html), 1986-90  
[Houston Cougar Marching Band](
http://www.uh.edu/academics/hfac/mus/new/marching_band.html), 1982-83  
California All State Honor Band and Orchestra, 1981

