Dr. Satterfield

Office: 208 Crawford Hall at SUNY Morrisville

Office Hours: 11AM-12 Noon, M-F, or by appointment

E-Mail:  [satterg@morrisville.edu](mailto:satterg@morrisville.edu)

Class:  M, W, F at 9AM, 10AM, 1PM, and 2PM



SOCS 104

World Civilization II

Spring 2002

  | ![](my%20pictures/Great%20Civil%20War%20Images/fww0104.jpg) |  
---|---|---  
  
In August 1914, war shattered over 90 years of relative peace and population
growth in Europe.  This young man says his farewells to his grandmother before
heading off to the army.  By 1918, 15.4% of German men (like the one above)
had mobilized for war.   The mobilization of mass, conscript armies twice in
the 20th century  left deep imprints on the collective memory of contemporary
Europe--and shattered millions of private dreams.

This course considers the history of the world from the age of discovery
(15th-16th centuries) to the 20th century.  Course readings and classroom
discussions will emphasize cultural exchange, (peaceful and unfriendly),
between civilizations.  Important themes will also include the expansion of
Europe overseas, the slave trade, industrialization, technological advances,
warfare, and the importance of science, freedom, pluralism, nationalism,
egalitarianism and religion as shaping forces in the modern world.  Lectures
and discussion give further emphasis to the influence of human agency in
shaping events, population growth and decline, environmental destruction, and
other factors for change.

[Return to Main Page](Index.htm)

Or Continue. . .

_Course Requirements_

Students will:

a. Read, William H. McNeill, _A History of the Human Community.   Volume II:
1500 to the Present_

b. Take two exams (the midterm and final) that will each include three _short_
essay questions (answers should be around one paragraph in length for a total
of 30 points each).  The midterm and final will include 25 multiple choice
questions.  Each exam is worth 115 points.  The total number of points for
both exams is 230 points.

c.  Read four sets of primary source documents and write four brief
interpretative papers.  The documents, which are short and not more than
several pages long, are available here at [primary source document
sets](primary_source_document_sets.htm), or in class.  Students may choose to
rewrite their papers and improve their grade.

_Attendance_

Required.  Class begins promptly on the hour.  Students should bring their
textbook and notebook to class.  Lectures do not attend lecture and the follow
up discussion will most likely do worse in the course than students who do
attend.  Students who plan to be absent on assignment/test days must notify
the instructor--two weeks in advance before the assignment is due.

_Extra Credit_

An additional document set will be made available as an extra credit
assignment; the requirements will be the same as for the other short papers.
No other extra credit assignments beyond this one will be allowed.

_Evaluation_

Two exams (midterm and final) = 230 points total

Four papers = 100 points total

330-298 = A

297-295 = A-

294-293 = B+

292-264 = B

264-262 = B-

261-260 = C+

259-231 = C

230-229 = C-

228-196 = D

_Course Calendar and Assignments_

Monday, 14 January, Introduction, Syllabus, What is History? Civilization?
Modernity? Periodization?

Wednesday, 16 January, McNeill, pp. 362-369, Chapter 15.  Overview of the
civilizations and the "savages" circa 1500.  The problem of distances, oceans
and technology.

Friday, 18 January, McNeill, pp. 369-375, Chapter 15.  The Christian kingdoms
in Iberia (with Italian help) expand.

Monday, 21 January, McNeill, pp. 375-386, Chapter 15.  Latin conquests in the
New World and Old: exploitation, epidemics and cultural exchange.

Wednesday, 23 January, McNeill, pp. 389-401, Chapter 16.  Charles V and the
Reformation.

Friday, 25 January, McNeill, pp. 401-406, Chapter 16.  King Philip II of Spain
and Dynastic and Religious Wars.  (NON SUFFICIT ORBIS--the world is not
enough).

Monday, 28 January, McNeill, pp. 406-413, Chapter 16.  Brief overview of the
expansion of the European mind: the heritage of the Renaissance.

Wednesday, 30 January.  No reading.  The Military Revolution, the expansion of
the early modern state, and the "General Crisis."

Friday, 1 February.  No reading.  The Christian cosmos and society.  Popular
culture during the "long sixteenth century, 1500-1648."

Monday, 4 February. No reading.  McNeill, pp. 416-427, Chapter 17.  Discussion
of McNeill's "World of Islam" and "Hindu Revival"

Wednesday, 6 February.  The Rest of Eurasia 1500-1700, Chapter 17.  Russia,
China and Japan.  Discussion of McNeill.  McNeill, pp. 427-436.

Friday, 8 February.  [1st Paper due](SOCS%20103%20DOC%201.htm).  McNeill, pp.
437-440, Chapter 17.  The American Indians and Europeans clash in the New
World, 1518-1714.

Monday, 11 February.  McNeill, pp. 440-444, Chapter 17.  Africa, the New World
and the African Slave Trade.

Wednesday, 13 February.  McNeill, pp. 447-454, Chapter 18.  Agricultural
Revolution, road and canal building, new forms of business organization and
economic expansion in Europe from about 1650 to 1770.

Friday, 15 February.  McNeill, pp. 454-462, Chapter 18.  European dynasties at
war and struggles for empire.

Winter Break, 18 February-22 February

Monday, 25 February.  McNeill, pp. 462-464, Chapter 18.  Constitutionalism in
England and Absolutism in France.

Wednesday, 27 February.  McNeill, pp. 464-473, Chapter 18.  The Enlightenment
and the "birth of modern paganism" (secularization of the European mind and
cultural pluralism).

Friday, 1 March.  Review for Midterm.

Monday, 4 March, Midterm, Exam One.

Wednesday, 6 March. McNeill, pp. 507-510, Chapter 20.  Beginnings of the
democratic revolutions, the American War of Independence, 1775-1781.

Friday, 8 March.  McNeill, pp. 510-515, Chapter 20.  The French Revolution
from 1789-1791:  The liberal revolution.

Monday, 11 March.  McNeill, pp. 515-522, Chapter 20.  The Radical Revolution,
Napoleon, French imperial ambitions, the balance of power and the Congress of
Vienna.

Wednesday, 13 March.  McNeill, pp. 499-505, Chapter 19 and pp. 522-523,
Chapter 20.  Slave revolt and the birth of modern Haiti, South America
struggles for independence, the end for the slave trade.  Further expansion of
Europe overseas:  America, Oceania, Australia and South Africa.

Friday, 15 March.  McNeill, pp. 523-526, Chapter 20.  Revolution and reaction
in 19th century Europe.  Liberalism, nationalism, romanticism and
conservativism.  McNeill, pp. 533-534, Chapter 20.

Monday, 18 March.  McNeill, pp. 526-533, Chapter 20.  The industrial
revolution, the first go-around, and the disruptive social consequences.

Friday, 22 March.  McNeill, pp. 479-488, Chapter 19.  European colonial rule
spreads across North Africa and the Middle East as Islam falls behind and the
Wahhab reform movements looks to the mythic "Golden Age" of prophet Muhammad.

Monday, 25 March.  [2nd Paper due](paris.htm).  McNeill, pp. 496-499, Chapter
19.  Japan's studied isolation.

Wednesday, 27 March.  McNeill, pp. 488-496, Chapter 19.  The Jewel in the
Crown:  The Raj and British India.  Britain and China, also pp. 554-556 and
pp. 557-560, Chapter 21.

Friday, 29 March.  Eastern Europe and the Middle East fall further behind the
Western nation-states.  McNeill, pp. 544-554, Chapter 21.

Spring Break, 1 April-5 April

Monday, 8 April.  Railroads and Rifles:  The United States and Japan's
startling economic leaps forward.  The American Civil War and the Meiji
Restoration. . .  and the relative backwardness of other non-European parts of
the world.

Wednesday, 10 April.  Success at all costs:  Nation-state building in Europe
and the march of militarism.  Italian Unification, German Unification and
Bismarck's Blood and Iron.

Friday, 12 April.  The second wave of industrialization and the transformation
of western continental Europe before the 20th century.  Migration, life in
cities, rise of socialist movements and labor unions.  McNeill, pp. 577-581,
Chapter 22 and pp. 594-598, Chapter 23.

Monday 15 April.  Bourgeois and working class culture.  Positivism, progress,
science and Social Darwinism.  McNeill, pp. 581-590, Chapter 22.

Wednesday, 17 April.  The Scramble for African and European Imperialism.
McNeill, pages 596, 598, and pp. 610-616, Chapter 23.

Friday, 19 April.  3rd Paper Due:  E-mail summary of Non-European Region Class
Presentations.  Russia, China, India and Islam's reactions to Europe's grab
for world dominance.  McNeill, pp. 600-605, and pp. 607-610.

Monday, 22 April.  Japan Modernizes.  Discussion of McNeill, pp. 605-607,
Chapter 23.

Wednesday, 24 April.  McNeill, pp. 624-631, Chapter 24.  The Long Fuse:
Militarism and World War I.

Friday, 26 April.  The Versailles peace settlement, world-wide economic
euphoria and then depression--international bolshevism and the rise of
fascism.

Monday, 29 April.  [4th Paper due](woman.htm).  World War II, 1939-1945.
McNeill, pp. 640-650, Chapter 24.

Wednesday, 1 May.  Savage Wars of Peace:  De-colonization, urbanization, and
the emergence of the "Third World."

Friday, 3 May.  Cold Warriors and Beatniks:  The struggle of liberal democracy
and the triumph of consumerism and western popular culture.  McNeill, Chapter
26, pp. 689-693.

Monday, 6 May.  "Big" Science, Technology and the 21st century.  McNeill,
Chapter 26, pp. 694-703.

Wednesday, 8 May.  9-11:  A Clash of Civilizations?  McNeill, Chapter 26, pp.
703-707.

Friday, 10 May.  Review for Final Exam.  [For Exam Questions Click
Here](final2.htm).

Monday, 13 May thru Thursday 16 May.  Final Exam/Exam Two.  Monday 13 May, 11
AM-2:20 PM at the the theater in STUAC.

    







