[Home](default.htm) \- [Course Syllabi](crsSyllabi.htm) \- History 281

**  
  
  
  
  
  
****Syllabus**

**History 281**

**World War II**

**Summer 1997**

**Professor Guilmartin**

| ![](Image15.gif)  
---|---  
  
###  Europe - Summer 1943

## Course Description

**Course overview and philosophy:**

History 281, The History of the Second World War, explores the origins,
conduct and outcome of the global struggle, traditionally dated 1939-45, which
engulfed most of the nations and peoples and all geographic regions of the
world. It does so by examining the factors which shaped the conflict and its
causes and which helped to determine the outcome. The course pays particular
attention to geographic and economic factors; to technological considerations;
to the interactions among policy, strategy and tactics; to the effect of the
war on ordinary people; and to the role of leadership. The material covered in
the course extends from the November 1918 Armistice and the Versailles Treaty
to the aftermath of war in 1945. The core material addresses the course of the
war from September 1939 when Germany invaded Poland to the conclusion of the
war in the Pacific with the dropping of atomic bombs on Hiroshima and
Nagasaki.

**Scheduling and administration:**

Class meets from 1330 to 1530 (1:30 to 3:30 PM) on Tuesdays and Thursdays in
Hopkins Hall, room 162. The final examination will be administered in the
normal classroom on Wednesday 27 August from 1730 to 1918 (5:30 to 7:18 PM).

My office is 148 Dulles Hall; my office hours are 0830-1100 Wednesday. I will
normally be available immediately after class to answer questions. The TA will
announce his office hours in class. If you are unable to meet us during our
published hours, you may make individual appointments.

You may tape record lectures and classroom discussions only with my explicit
permission. I do not allow professional note-taking. I and the TA will make
appropriate arrangements for those with learning disabilities and those whose
native language is not English. Contact us immediately if you are in either
category.

**Grades:**

History 281 is graded on the basis of 1,000 points, allocated as follows:

  * Quiz (Tuesday 15 July) 150 points
  * Midterm exam (Tuesday 29 July) 300 points
  * Final examination (Wednesday 27 August 1730-1918) 500 points
  * Classroom participation _50 points_
  * TOTAL 1,000 points

Grades of A through E will be awarded on the usual basis, where 90% is a
borderline A-, 80% is a borderline B-, 70% a borderline C- and so on.

**Syllabus:**

The syllabus is your basic guide to History 281.. In addition to laying out
course requirements, schedule and reading assignments, it embodies an expanded
outline of the subject matter and an implicit guide to the course methodology.

**Course requirements:**

Classroom attendance is expected and will be reflected in your participation
grade. You must take the quiz, midterm and final to receive course credit.
Students who are unable to take an examination because of unavoidable
circumstances must take a makeup. If you must be absent because of serious
illness, court appearance, military service, and so on, explain the reason to
me or the TA, if possible in advance. Document the reason for your absence and
we will make the necessary arrangements. It is your responsibility to appraise
us of the problem. I will award a grade of incomplete only in truly
exceptional circumstances.

**Examinations:**

The examinations are designed to test your ability to organize, analyze, and
explain what you know, rather than to find out what you do _not_ know. They
contain relatively few forced choices (definitions and the like; roughly
12-15% of the examination grades) and a large number of optional questions. An
exam might require you to answer, say, four out of nine or five out of eleven
one page essay questions, fewer for the quiz and more for the final. Each
essay question is printed at the top of a sheet of standard bond paper (the
same size as this one); it must be answered on the same side of the same sheet
(with allowances for those with large handwriting, who can use part or all of
the back). The optional essay questions provide a positive incentive for
increasing your depth of knowledge in selected portions of the course
material, as opposed to wider, more superficial, knowledge. In practical
terms, increased study in areas which are of interest to you should benefit
rather than penalize you.

**Texts:**

The texts are available for purchase at the Student Book Exchange. Readings
for each lesson are indicated in the syllabus. The discussion topics in the
syllabus indicate lecture material which goes beyond the readings; these are
indicated to give you an opportunity to go beyond the required material in
advance of the lecture if you so desire.

Gerhard Weinberg, _A World at Arms_ (New York, 1989) [required].  
Colin McEvedy, _The Penguin Atlas of Recent History_ (New York, 1982)
[required].  
Primo Levi, _Survival in Auschwitz_ (New York, 1993) [required].

[**Workbook**](281wb/281wb.htm) **:**

The workbook is available for purchase in Cop-Ez in the basement of Bricker
Hall for about $5.00. It is based on reduced originals of the lecture
viewgraphs with additional background material added. The margins are large,
leaving lots of space for note taking. The workbook will help you stay up with
the flow of the lectures without having to write down unfamiliar words and
expressions. It also contains maps illustrating various aspects of World War
II, so you can supplement your note taking by drawing in geographic
relationships. Note that the workbook contains only an outline of the
lectures, and in many cases important issues will be raised in the lectures
which go beyond the outline. The workbook is a supplement to note taking, not
a substitute.



**Syllabus** |    |  
---|---|---  
**Class  
****_Period_** | **_Date_** | **_Assignment and Readings_**  
**1** |  Tuesday 24 June | Nationalism, the New Diplomacy and the Unfinished
Business of World War I

 **Discussion Topics**

  * Peace, war and the morality of war
  * Policy, strategy and tactics
  * Technology, science and economics
  * The political and strategic impact of Versailles

  
**2** |  Thursday 26 June | Totalitarianism, the Great Depression, Appeasement
and the Road to War

Weinberg, _A World at Arms_ , Introduction and Chapter 1.

McEvedy, _The Penguin Atlas of Recent History_ , 2, 40-61 (skim), 62-71.

**Discussion Topics**

  * Japanese imperialism: Economic and social background; from Manchuoko, 1931, to the Marco Polo Bridge incident, 1937. 
  * The Spanish Civil War, 1936-39

  
**3** |  Tuesday 1 July | Crossing the Threshold: The Dissection of Poland,
Allied Failure and the Sitzkrieg

_A World at Arms_ , Part I, Chapter 2.

_Penguin Atlas of Recent History_ , 72-73.  
  
**4** |  Thursday 3 July | The Breaking Wave: The Blitzkrieg in the West, May-
June 1940

_A World at Arms_ , Chapter 3.

_Penguin Atlas of Recent History_ , 74-75.  
  
**5** |  Tuesday 8 July | Technology and Economics: War in the Air, at Sea,
and on the Home Front.

_A World at Arms_ , Chapters 4, 9 and 10.

**Discussion Topic**

  * Aircraft engines, aircraft design and aircraft performance.

  
**6** |  Thursday 10 July | Mediterranean and Middle Eastern Complications:
The Importance of Oil

_Penguin Atlas of Recent History_ , 76-77.  
  
**7** |  Tuesday 15 July | **QUIZ**  
**8** |  Thursday 17 July | Barbarossa: Initial Onslaught to the Gates of
Moscow

 _A World at Arms_ , Chapter 5.

_Penguin Atlas of Recent History_ , 78-79.  
  
**9** |  Tuesday 22 July | The Centrifugal Offensive from Pearl Harbor to
Midway

 _A World at Arms_ , Chapter 6.  
  
**10** |  Thursday 24 July | The Hinge of Fate, 1942: Stalingrad, The Battle
of the Atlantic, North Africa and Guadalcanal

 _A World at Arms_ , Chapters 7 and 8.

_Penguin Atlas of Recent History_ , 80-81.  
  
**11** |  Tuesday 29 July | **MIDTERM**  
**12** |  Thursday 31 July | Summer 1943: The Tide Turns

 _A World at Arms_ , Chapter 11.

_Penguin Atlas of Recent History_ , 82-83.

**Discussion Topic**

  * Signals intelligence, photo intelligence and strategic intelligence

  
**13** |  Tuesday 5 August | The Holocaust and the Horrors of Japanese
Imperialism

Levi, _Survival at Auschwitz_ .  
  
**14** |  Thursday 7 August | The Combined Bomber Offensive  
**15** |  Tuesday 12 August | D-Day and the Second Front, June-December 1944

 _A World at Arms_ , Chapters 12-14.

_Penguin Atlas of Recent History_ , 84-87.  
  
**16** |  Thursday 14 August | Closing the Ring: America on the Offensive in
the Pacific

 _A World at Arms_ , Chapter 16 to "Ending the War," page 882.  
  
**17** |  Tuesday 19 August | The End in Europe, December 1944-May 1945

 _A World at Arms_ , Chapter 15.

_Penguin Atlas of Recent History_ , 88-90.  
  
**18** |  Thursday 21 August | The End in the Far East.

_A World at Arms_ , Chapter 16, page 882-end.  
  
**19** |  Tuesday 26 August | Aftermath

 _A World at Arms_ , Conclusions.  
  
**FINAL EXAM** |  Wednesday 27 August | 1730 to 1918  
Normal Classroom  
  |   |  

