{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1
\deff0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\\*\panose
02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New
Roman CE;}{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}
{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman
Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman
Tur;}{\f43\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman
Baltic;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar\adjustright
\fs20\cgrid \snext0 Normal;}{\\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph
Font;}}{\info{\author Alex Montgomery}{\operator Alex
Montgomery}{\creatim\yr2000\mo2\dy11\hr15\min31}
{\revtim\yr2000\mo2\dy11\hr15\min32}{\version1}{\edmins1}{\nofpages7}{\nofwords2129}{\nofchars12136}{\\*\company
Montage}{\nofcharsws14903}{\vern113}}\margl1440\margr1440
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\formshade\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot
\fet0 \sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl
{\\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta
.}}{\\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta
.}}{\\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\\*\pnseclvl4
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta
)}}{\\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta
)}}{\\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta
)}}{\\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (} {\pntxta
)}}{\\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta
)}}{\\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta
)}}\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\cgrid { \par \par \par \par \par
\tab POLITICAL SCIENCE 243B \par \par THEORETICAL ISSUES IN INTERNATIONAL
SECURITY \par \par \tab STANFORD UNIVERSITY \par \tab WINTER QUARTER 2000 \par
\par \tab THURSDAYS 1:15 - 3:05 \par \par \par ROOM 160-164E \par \par \par
\par \par SCOTT D. SAGAN \par Associate Professor, Department of Political
Science \par Co-Director, CISAC \par \par \par \par Office Hours: \par \par
Wednesday, 2:00 - 4:00, Room E202, Encina Hall by appointment with Janet
Weitz, \par 3-1625 or e-mail jweitz@leland \endash Phone: 725-2715 \endash
e-mail: ssagan@stanford \par \par \par \par \par \par \par }{\page }{ Course
Description: Political Science 243B is the second course in the department's
three class sequence used to prepare students for the comprehensive PhD
examination in international relations. The seminar is therefore designed
primarily for the Politi cal Science PhD. and Masters students. Political
Science 243A (International Relations Theory) is a prerequisite; other
students will be admitted only by special permission of the instructor. \par
\par Structure and Requirements: \par \par 1. All students must attend and
participate actively in all the seminar sessions. \par \par 2. The course will
be a success only if everyone reads all the assigned readings before each
seminar. All the required books are available at the Stanford bookstore or via
an internet bookseller. The reader is available from Field Copy after the
first seminar. For each week, I also list some supplementary readings which
students may find of interest. Students are by no means expected to read these
extra readings. They are important works on each to pic in question, but are
listed here only so students can follow-up on specific interests later. \par
\par 3. Each week, starting with the seminar on February 3, one or more
students will prepare a review essay analyzing the week's reading. The essays
are to be n o longer than 12 double-spaced pages and are due via e-mail to the
instructor no later than 9 am on the day before the seminar. A good review
essay does not simply summarize the material. This is not a \ldblquote book
review.\rdblquote Instead, a good review essay will: \par \par a. Critique the
theoretical arguments. What is the causal chain posited here? Is it clear? Is
it logical? What are the independent, intervening, and dependent variables?
\par \par b. What alternative explanations might exist? Does the author
consider them and address them in a compelling manner? \par \par c. Assess
empirical tests of the theory. How would one know if the theory is correct or
not? What alternative ways of testing the validity of the theory exist? What
future research could help here? \par \par d. Compare and contrast arguments
in the literature. \par \par e. \ldblquote Add value.\rdblquote Can you offer
new insights? \par \par During the first weeks, I have assigned a few "model"
review essays (Fearon, Levy, Bendor, and Hammond), but you should not feel
obliged to follow their format in any direct manner. \par \par 4. After class
each week, all students will prepare a brief (one-page) "Research Idea" memo
outlining one research idea inspired by the class readings and discussions. In
each memo, you should discuss one "puzzle" that was raised by the readings and
discussion in class and ask how one would go about trying to solve that res e
arch puzzle. These memos are due no later than 11:59 pm on the day after the
seminar and should be e-mailed as a Word attachment to the instructor. I will
copy all of them and distribute them after the March 2 seminar. This
collection of papers will be the final assigned reading for the last seminar
on March 9. \par \par Grades: Grades will be assigned according to the
following format: 40% final exam; 40% review essay; 20% class participation.
To encourage creativity, grades will not be given for the required "research
ideas" papers. \par \par \par \par \par THURSDAY, JANUARY 6: Organization
Meeting \par \par Do not feel obligated to read these essays before class.
Read them once you find out whether you are admitted to the class. They are
reviews of the field, which will be especiall y helpful for students with
little background in the subject. In class, we will review the syllabus,
discuss the procedures for class contributions, and start choosing student
subjects for review essays. \par \par Stephen M. Walt, "The Renaissance of
Security Studies," International Studies Quarterly (June 1991). \par \par
David A. Baldwin, "Security Studies and the End of the Cold War," World
Politics (October 1995). \par \par \par \par THURSDAY, JANUARY 13: Levels-of-
Analysis and War \par \par Kenneth N. Waltz, Man, the State, and War (NY:
Columbia University Press, 1959). \par \par James D. Fearon, "Rationalist
Explanations for War," International Organizations (Summer 1995), pp. 379-414.
\par \par (Note: If you have not read Kenneth Waltz's Theory of International
Politics, do so for this meeting.) \par \par Kenneth N. Waltz, "Realist
Thought and Neorealist Theory" in Charles W. Kegley (ed.) Controversies in
International Relations Theory (New York: St. Martins Press, 1995), pp. 67-82.
\par \par \tab James D. Fearon, \ldblquote Domestic Politics, Foreign Policy
and Theories of International Relations,\rdblquote Annual Review of Political
Science, 1998, Vol. 1, pp. 289-313. \par \par \par Supplementary Reading: \par
\par J. David Singer, "The Level of Analysis Problem in International
Relations," World Politics (October 1961). \par \par Arnold Wolfers, Discord
and Collaboration (Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press, 1962), chapter 1,
pp. 3-34. \par \par \par \par THURSDAY JANUARY 20: Psychology and Decision-
Making \par \par Barbara Farnham (ed.) Prospect Theory and International
Conflict (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1994. \par \par Robert
Jervis, Perception and Misperception in International Politics (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1976), Chapters 3, 8 and 9, pp. 58-113; 319-355.
\par \par Barry O\rquote Neill, \ldblquote Risk Aversion in International
Relations Theory,\rdblquote manuscript, Center for International Security and
Cooperation, Stanford University. \par \par Richard Ned Lebow, Between Peace
and War (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1981), pp. 101-147. \par
\par Supplementary Reading: \par \par Deborah Larson, Origins of Containment
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985). \par \par John D. Steinbruner,
"The Cybernetic Paradigm," in John D. Steinbruner, The Cybernetic Theory of
Decision (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1974), pp. 47-87. \par
\par Irving Janus, Groupthink (NY: Houghton Mifflin, 1972). \par \par Yuen
Foong Khong, Analogies at War: Korea, Munich, Dien Bien Phu, and the Vietnam
Decisions of 1965 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992). \par \par
\par THURSDAY, JANUARY 27: Organizational Theory and IR \par \par Scott D.
Sagan, The Limits of Safety: Organizations, Accidents, and Nuclear Weapons
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993). \par \par Graham T. Allison,
Essence of Decision (Boston: Little Brown, 1971), chapters 3 and 4. \par \par
Jonathan Bendor and Thomas H. Hammond, "Rethinking Allison Models," American
Political Science Review (June 1992). \par \par Supplementary Reading: \par
\par Robert Art, "Bureaucratic Politics and American Foreign Policy: A
Critique," Policy \tab Sciences (December 1973). \par \par Stephen D. Krasner,
"Are Bureaucracies Important? Or Allison Wonderland," Foreign Policy, (1972),
pp. 159-179. \par \par Jeffrey W. Legro, "Military Culture and Inadvertent
Escalation in World War II," International Security (Spring 1994). \par \par
James G. March, Decisions and Organizations (Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell,
1988). \par \par David A. Welch, "The Organizational Process and Bureaucratic
Politics Paradigms: Retrospective and Prospect," International Security (Fall
1992), pp. 112-146. \par \par \par \par THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 3: The Sources and
Consequences of Military Doctrine \par \par Barry Posen, The Sources of
Military Doctrine (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1984). \par \par Jack
Snyder, "Civil-Military Relations and the Cult of the Offensive,"
International Security (Summer 1984). \par \par Elizabeth Kier, "Culture and
French Military Doctrine Before the World War II," in Peter J. Katzenstein
(ed.) The Culture of National Security: Norms and Identity in World Politics
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1996), pp. 186-215. \par \par Scott D.
Sagan, "1914 Revisited: Allies, Offenses, and Instability," International
Security (Fall 1986). \par \par Stephen Van Evera, \ldblquote Offense,
Defense, and the Causes of War,\rdblquote International Security 22, 4 (Spring
1998, 5-43. \par \par James D. Fearon, \ldblquote The Offense-Defense Balance
and War since 1648,\rdblquote Paper presented at the 1995 ISA Meetings
(mimeo). \par \par Supplementary Reading: \par \par Deborah D. Avant, "The
Institutional Sources of Military Doctrine: Hegemons in Peripheral Wars,"
International Studies Quarterly (December 1993). \par \par Jack Snyder,
Ideology of the Offensive (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1984). \par \par
Charles Glaser and Chaimm Kaufmann, \ldblquote What is the Offense-Defense
Balance and How Can We Measure It?\rdblquote International Security 22, 4
(Spring 1998), 44-82. \par \par Stephen Van Evera, "The Cult of the Offensive
and the Origins of the First World War," International Security (Fall 1984).
\par \par \par \par THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 10: Domestic Politics, War, and Peace
\par \par Bruce Russett, Controlling The Sword (Cambridge, MA: Cambridge
University Press, 1990). \par \par Jack Snyder, Myths of Empire (Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press, 1991) \par \par Henry S. Farber and Joanne Gowa,
\ldblquote Polities and Peace,\rdblquote International Security 20, 2 (Fall
1995), 123-146. \par \par Jeffrey W. Legro and Andrew Moravcsik, \ldblquote Is
Anybody Still a Realist?\rdblquote International Security 24, 2 (Fall 1999)
pp. 5-55. \par \par Edward D. Mansfield and Jack Snyder, \ldblquote
Democratization and the Danger of War,\rdblquote \tab International Security
20, 1 (1995), 5-38. \par \par Kenneth Schultz, \ldblquote Domestic Opposition
and Signaling in International Crises,\rdblquote \tab American Political
Science Review 92, 4 (December 1998).\tab \par \par Supplementary Reading:
\par \par Michael E. Brown, Sean M. Lynn-Jones, and Steven E. Miller (eds.)
Debating the Democratic Peace (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996). \par \par
Randall L. Schweller, "Domestic Structure and Preventive War: Are Democracies
More Pacific?," World Politics (January 1992). \par \par Jack S. Levy,
"Domestic Politics and War," Journal of Interdisciplinary History (Spring
1988). \par \par Bruce Bueno de Mesquita and David Lalman, War and Reason:
Domestic and International Imperatives (New Haven: Yale University Press,
1992). \par \par James Fearon, \ldblquote Domestic Political Audiences and the
Escalation of International Disputes,\rdblquote American Political Science
Review 88 (September 1994), 577-92. \par \par George Downs and David Rocke,
\ldblquote Conflict, Agency, and Gambling for Resurrection,\rdblquote \tab
American Journal of Political Science 38, 2 (May 1994), 362-80. \par \par \par
\par THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 17: Security Dilemmas in Interstate and Civil Wars
\par \par V. P. Gagnon, Jr. "Ethnic Nationalism and International Conflict:
The Case of Bosnia," International Security (Winter 1994/95), pp. 130-166.
\par \par Barry R. Posen, "The Security Dilemma and Ethnic Conflict," Survival
35 (Spring 1993), 27-47. \par \par James D. Fearon, \ldblquote Commitment
Problems and the Spread of Ethnic Conflict,\rdblquote in David Lake and Donald
Rothchild, eds., The International Spread of Ethnic Conflict (Princeton
University Press 1998) chapter 5. \par \par Robert Jervis, "Cooperation Under
the Security Dilemma," World Politics (January 1978). \par \par Charles
Glaser, \ldblquote The Security Dilemma Revisited,\rdblquote World Politics
(October 1997), pp. 171-201. \par \par Alexander Wendt, \ldblquote Anarchy is
What States Make of It: The Social Construction of Power \par
Politics,\rdblquote International Organization 46 (Spring 1992). \par \par
Randall Schweller, \ldblquote Neorealism\rquote s Status Quo Bias: What
Security Dilemma?\rdblquote Security Studies 5 (Spring 1996). \par \par Andrew
Kydd, \ldblquote Game Theory and the Spiral Model,\rdblquote World Politics 49
(April 1997). \par \par Supplementary Reading: \par \par Jack Snyder, "The New
Nationalism: Realist Interpretations and Beyond," in Richard Rosecranc4e and
Arthur A. Stein (eds.), The Domestic Bases of Grand Strategy (Cornell
University Press, 1993), pp. 179-200. \par \par Thomas F. Homer-Dixon,
"Environmental Scarcities and Violent Conflict," International \tab Security
(Summer 1994), pp. 5-40. \par \par Michael E. Brown (ed.) The International
Dimensions of Internal Conflict (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1996). \par \par David
A. Lake and Donald Rothchild, \ldblquote Containing Fear: The Origins and
Management of Ethnic Conflict,\rdblquote International Security (Fall 1996),
pp. 41-75. \par \par \par \par THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 24: Norms, Culture, and
International Security \par \par Richard M. Price, The Chemical Weapons Taboo
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press) 1997. \par \par Nina Tannenwald,
\ldblquote The Nuclear Weapons Taboo,\rdblquote International Organization
(Summer 1999). \par \par Jutta Weldes, \ldblquote The Cultural Production of
Crises: U.S. Identity and Missiles in Cuba,\rdblquote in Weldes, et al,
Cultures of Insecurity: States, Communities, and the Production of Danger
(University of Minnesota, 1999). \par \par Alastair Iain Johnston, \ldblquote
Cultural Realism and Strategy in Maoist China,\rdblquote in Peter J.
Katzenstein (ed.), The Culture of National Security: Norms and Identity in
World Politics (New York: Columbia University Press, 1996). \par \par
Supplementary Readings: \par \par Iain Johnston, Cultural Realism (Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995. \par \par Friedrich Kratochwil, Rules,
Norms, and Decisions (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1989). \par \par
Ethan Nadelman, "Global Prohibitionary Norms," International Organization
(Autumn 1990). \par \par Peter J. Katzenstein, "Coping With Terrorism: Norms
and Internal Security in Germany and Japan," in Judith Goldstein and Robert O.
Keohane (eds.) Ideas and Foreign Policy (Ithaca: Cornell University Press,
1993), pp. 265-295. \par \par Peter J. Katzenstein (ed.) The Culture of
National Security: Norms and Identity in World Politics (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1996). \par \par \par THURSDAY, MARCH 2: Proliferation \par
\par Scott D. Sagan and Kenneth N. Waltz, The Spread of Nuclear Weapons (NY:
W.W. Norton, 1995). \par \par Dana P. Eyre and Marc C. Suchman, "Status,
Norms, and the Proliferation of Conventional Weapons," in Peter Katzenstein
(ed.) The Culture of National Security (New York: Columbia University Press,
1996), pp. 79-113. \par \par Benjamin Frankel, "The Brooding Shadow: Systemic
Incentives and Nuclear Weapons Proliferation," Security Studies (Summer 1993).
\par \par Scott D. Sagan, "Why Do States Build Nuclear Weapons?: Three Models
in Search of a Bomb," International Security (Winter 96-97), pp. 54-86. \par
\par Scott D. Sagan, \ldblquote The Commitment Trap: Why the United States
Should Not Use Nuclear Threats to Deter Biological and Chemical Weapons
Attacks,\rdblquote in International Security (forthcoming, Spring 1999). \par
\par Supplementary Reading: \par \par Stephen M. Meyer, The Dynamics of
Nuclear Proliferation (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984). \par \par
Bruce Bueno de Mesquita and William H. Riker, "An Assessment of the Merits of
Selective Nuclear Proliferation," Journal of Conflict Resolution, vol. 26, no.
2, (June 1982) \par \par \par THURSDAY, MARCH 9: Review and Future Research
Ideas \par \par Read and discuss the collected "Research Ideas" memos. \par
\par \par FINAL 48 HOUR EXAM OPTIONS: \par \par 1. EARLY OPTION: Handed out in
Jeanette Marino's office (Room 161H) on FRIDAY MARCH 10 at 5pm and due MONDAY
MARCH 13 at 9am. \par \par \par \par 2. LATER OPTION: Handed out in Jeanette
Marino's office (161H) on Monday MARCH 13 at 5pm and due on THURSDAY, MARCH 16
at 9am. \par }{ \par }}

