TEMPLE UNIVERSITY  
Asian Studies Program

Asian Studies W300  
Seminar in Asian Studies  
    
Spring 1998 Tues., 2:40-4:00 945 Anderson Hall  
Primary instructor:  
Prof. Ben Stavis  
439 Gladfelter Hall  
tel: 215-204-7793 bstavis@vm.temple.edu

Other faculty in the Asian Studies program are available to help you  
define your research topics, identify literature, and review your paper.  
Any other Asian Studies faculty member may do the final reading and  
recommend a grade for this course.

    Richard Chalfen, Anthropology, Japan   
    Roman Cybriwsky, Geog and Urban Studies, Asia   
    Robert Kidder, Sociology   
    John Means, Critical Languages   
    Shigenori Nagatomo, Religion, Asia, Japan   
    Denise O'Brien, Anthropology, japan   
    Barbara Thornbury, Critical Languages, Japan   
    Kathy Walker, History, China   
    Sydney White, Anthropology   
    
 OBJECTIVES

This course is the capstone writing course in the Asian Studies Program.  
It is designed primarily for Asian Studies majors but is open to other  
students seeking an in-depth research and writing experience. While  
there are no formal prerequisites, students are expected to have taken  
several Asian Studies courses already and to have reasonably defined  
interests so that they can identify research projects at the beginning of  
the semester.

OFFICE HOURS  
Ben Stavis: 439 Gladfelter Hall,  
Tuesday and Thursday, 10:30-11:30  
Thursday, 3:00-4:00  
and at other times by appointment  
office tel: 215-204-7793  
email: bstavis@vm.temple.edu  
    
COURSE REQUIREMENTS AND GRADING  
Each student will be responsible for one major research project dealing  
with some aspect of Asia. Students will give brief oral reports about  
their projects in class and will write high quality papers, properly  
referenced, at a "professional standard" of presentation. Later in the  
syllabus I offer explanations for "proper referencing " and "professional  
standard" of presentation.  Regular attendance and participation in discussion
is required.  
    
GRADES  
Grades will be based on the following nine assignments, of which the term  
paper is by far the most important.  
Assignments Percent of Grade  
    1\. 5 possible themes                    5   
    2\. Bibliography of Asian Studies  5   
    3\. First Search                           5   
    4.WNC exercise                        5   
    5\. Footnote/Citation exercise     5   
    6\. Prospectus                           5   
    7\. Bibliography                          5   
    8\. First Draft                          20   
    9\. Final Draft                         45 

These assignments are described below.  
    
 COMPUTER USE  
This course requires students to be reasonably comfortable with computers  
to:  
    \- use email to supplement class communication.   
    \- search data bases to help develop bibliographies for term papers.   
    \- read materials on the internet for term papers.   
    \- do word processing.   
Students can use computers at any of the numerous computer labs on  
campus. The computer center offers frequent training classes on various  
types of software.

If you are using a computer and modem at home, be sure to use a Temple  
University account (accessed by modem through PPP software). By using a  
Temple account, you can access special data bases that are needed for  
this course.

My email address is:  
<bstavis@vm.temple.edu>

The Asian Studies Home Page provides links to a variety of resources  
about Asia.  
<http://www.temple.edu/asian studies>

ASSIGNMENTS:

1\. Five possible themes  
Students should make a list of five themes about Asia that seem  
potentially interesting. This list will be used to practice  
searching of data bases.

2\. JAS Bibliography  
Bibliography of Asian Studies Ref Z3001.A795 (Paley Library  
Reference Room)  
Students must report on at least 3 references dealing with one of  
their themes, using the Bibliography of Asian Studies

3\. First Search  
Library Electronic Resource, linked from Paley Library Home Page or  
Asian Studies Home Page <http://www.temple.edu/asian studies>  
Students must submit a printout of a First Search session, showing  
tagged references dealing with one of their themes.

4\. WNC exercise  
World News Connection, Library Electronic Resource, linked from  
Paley Library Home Page or Asian Studies Home Page  
<http://www.temple.edu/asian studies>  
Students must submit a printout of two articles from WNC dealing  
with one of their themes.

5\. Footnote/Citation Exercise  
Students must submit two pages, one with properly formatted  
footnotes on the bottom of the page, the other with proper citations  
and a citation list.

Two styles of footnotes/references are common in academic  
publishing. Each is excellent, but don't mix up the two systems.

Footnotes:  
In this system you make your citations with footnotes at the  
bottom of the page or at the end. Author's names are presented  
first name first, last name second. The footnote is separated  
by commas, and ends in a period. Here are examples of proper  
citation for a newspaper,(1) a book,(2) and a journal  
article.(3) An article in translation should have a double footnote,  
first for the original language and second for the translation.(4)  
    
In this system a bibliography is normally optional but is  
required for this course. The bibliography is arranged  
alphabetically, by surname of author. The entries are  
presented last name first, and separated by periods.

    Fallows, James. Looking at the Sun, The Rise of the New East   
    Asian Economic and Political System. New York:   
    Pantheon, 1994. 

References:  
In this system, references are placed in the text. Generally,  
they give in parentheses the author's surname, the year of  
publication and the page number (Fallows, 1994, p. 17).  
At the end, a list of references is critical. It is arranged  
alphabetically by surname of the author. Generally, the  
author's name is followed by the year of publication, as this  
is used in the citation. These entries are separated by  
periods.

    Fallows, James. 1994   
        Looking at the Sun, The Rise of the New East Asian   
        Economic and Political System. New York: Pantheon. 

Follow either style PRECISELY (including commas, periods, etc.)  
unless you have an extremely good reason to do otherwise. You are  
strongly urged to buy a style book that will give you complete rules  
for preparing papers for this course and all others you will do at  
Temple and beyond. Two excellent ones are Kate Turabian, Student's  
Guide for Writing Papers or Chicago Manual of Style. Both are  
available at the book store.

Note on referencing the internet:  
Your references to the internet should include two elements: who is  
responsible for the original information, and the full internet  
address (and date) that you used to access the information.

6\. Prospectus  
The prospectus (1-2 pages) is the key to starting off on a sound research  
project. While it is short, it requires substantial thought. It has the  
following three aspects:  
1\. A concise statement of the theme of the paper. This might be a  
couple of sentences. A well defined theme has clear boundaries; you  
can say what is within and what is outside your paper. It is broad  
enough to raise an interesting question, but narrow enough to be  
researchable. It also specifies the data you will use to illuminate  
your theme.  
2\. A preliminary bibliography for the paper. You should have  
located a book or two and a journal article or two. You should have  
identified at least one important author in this field.  
3\. The prospectus must be presented in proper format. Get your  
margins set up correctly and learn proper referencing, on a computer  
if at all possible. If you get the formatting and referencing  
accurate on the prospectus, then your paper is well on the road  
towards proper standards in presentation.  
As a general rule, you may follow the format of any professional,  
academic journal. Attach to your prospectus Xerox copies of a  
couple of pages of a professional academic journal that you are  
adopting as a model for formatting and referencing.

7\. Bibliography  
You must present in writing a comprehensive bibliographic search on  
your topic. Your written submission must use the referencing system  
that you are adopting for your final draft. While you should use  
the available electronic bibliography data bases and internet  
resources, you also should use the the following classic  
bibliographic tools:  
    Bibliography of Asian Studies   
    Social Science Citations Index (search on key author on your   
        topic and subject)   
   FIRST SEARCH, an electronic search and retrieval system of  
    various data bases. Accessible through the library's home   
    page as well as at the Scholars Information Center.   
    For early material, use the bibliography by G. William   
    Skinner.   
    Review back issues of professional journals. Identify two   
    professional academic journals that have published articles on   
    your topic and review a few years of those journals.   
    Doctoral Dissertations on Asia Z3001.D63   
    Dissertations Abstracts 

8\. First Draft  
Hand in a first draft (8-22 pages) and be prepared to discuss it in  
class. Explain your key question and key insight; describe the data  
that were available. Aim for a high quality of written  
presentation.

Although very private and personal, writing is also a social  
process. Your writing responds to questions other people have  
raised, incorporates ideas that others have developed, and is  
presented in a way to be accessible to others. Feedback from others  
is the fuel that keeps the iterative process between you and your  
community of readers moving in a productive direction.

9\. Final Draft  
Utilizing the feed back you have gotten on the first draft, make  
corrections and improvements. Aim for professional standard of  
presentation, and somewhere between 10 and 20 pages.  


PROFESSIONAL STANDARD OF PRESENTATION:

"Professional standard" of presentation means typed, double spaced, one  
side of the paper, reasonable margins (around 1 1/4" left and right),  
neat, accurately spelled, page numbers on the pages, and stapled  
together, etc. The final draft should, if at all possible, be printed on  
a laser printer. If you are using a dot matrix printer, print the final  
draft using "high print density." Do not use a plastic covers for your  
report; the covers just get in the way.  
Professional level of presentation requires proper grammar, including  
agreement between subject and verb, consistency in verb tense, etc. Poor  
spelling and typographic errors must be avoided. Avoid confusion of the  
plural (...s) with the possessive singular (...'s) and possessive plural  
(...s'). Misuse of homonyms such as their-there-they're, its-it's, to-  
too-two, whether-weather, due-do-dew, principle-principal, site-sight-  
cite, red-read, son-sun, capitol-capital, steel-steal, brake-break etc.,  
are unacceptable. "Spell-checker" misses these errors. You must  
proofread carefully.

In the long run, writing is one of the most valuable skills you will  
learn in college. If you need additional help in writing, please visit  
the Writing Center (B19 Weiss Hall) (204-5611) and arrange for  
specialized instruction (free).

ACADEMIC INTEGRITY  
We learn in a group environment, but we must demonstrate our mastery of  
materials on an individual basis. Misrepresenting other people's work as  
one's own is a serious breach of academic integrity. I manage the class  
on the basis of trust in each student's academic integrity, and this  
enables our class to be informal and flexible. The other side of the  
coin is that any act that undermines this trust in academic integrity is  
a serious matter.

Written assignments must be based on the student's own research and  
writing specifically for this course. If you like what another author  
says and wish to use that material, you must use quotation marks and  
footnotes to show clearly the line between your own insights and the  
insights of someone else. Failure to make this distinction clear  
constitutes plagiarism, which is a very serious violation of the  
principles of academic integrity.

Papers written for other courses can not be submitted again for this  
course. One paper may not be submitted to two courses unless there is  
prior approval from both professors.

These guidelines are explained in greater detail in the University's  
Statement on Academic Integrity, printed in the Undergraduate Bulletin.  


TENTATIVE SCHEDULE

DUE DATE BRING THIS EXERCISE TO CLASS  
Jan 20 COURSE INTRODUCTION  
Introductions and self introductions  
    The concept of a writing course   
    Sources   
    Writing:   
    Interplay between theme and data   
    Newton, standing on shoulders   
    Making a statue   
    Mental process   
    Social Process   
Jan 27 list 5 possible topics  
Feb 3 JAS Bibliography  
Feb 10 First Search  
Feb 17 WNC exercise  
Feb 24 Footnote/Citation exercise  
Mar 3 Prospectus  
Mar 17  
Mar 24 Bibliography  
Mar 31  
Ap 7  
Ap 14 First Draft  
Ap 21  
Ap 28 Final Draft

1\. Craig Whitney, "After Decade of Thatcherism, British Values have Changed,"
_New York Times_ , May 2, 1989, p. 1, 5.

2\. James Fallows, _Looking at the Sun, the Rise of the New East Asian
Economic and Political System_ (New York: Pantheon, 1994), p. 234.

3\. Abram Bergson, "Development Under Two Systems," _World Politics_ 23:4
(July 1974), pp. 579-617.

4\. Thmar Da, "Today's Comment, Because of the Ungrateful Son?" Phnom Penh
_Reaksmei_ _Kampuchea_ , Feb. 12, 1998, p. 1. FBIS-EAS-98-046 (Feb. 15, 1998),
article ID: dreas02151998000724, available from <http://wnc.fedworld.gov>.

