

**_Designing a Settlement on Mars_**

(Political Science 371: Political Design and Futuristics)

Writing Intensive



Jim Dator University of Hawaii at Manoa

Department of Political Science Spring 2000

It is highly likely that permanent human settlements in space will come into
existence within your lifetime, and that human life will begin to spread from
its apparent cradle, Earth, throughout the solar system and beyond. While
there are hundreds of thousands of persons working on the technology,
architecture, environment--and even law, economics and psychology--of human
settlements in space, almost no one is thinking about how _humans might behave
politically_ in such settlements, and how _concepts of political design_ might
be used or developed to help space settlers _live as they wish_ , rather than
as architectural forms, ground mission control, or military commanders might
dictate their behavior.

This course is one attempt to _design_ a space settlement on the basis of _how
people_ ** _want_** _to behave_ , rather than requiring them to adapt to
conditions which others have imposed on them.

But maybe you think humans should not waste their resources on space travel at
all, but rather should stay at home and create better environmental and
political structures here.

No problem! What better place to think through fundamental principles of
preferred political behaviors and conditions for facilitating them than on
Mars? Everything we do in space will have to be brought there for some
purpose. We can take nothing for granted, or because it is traditional. Thus,
any ideas we might have about preferred forms of governance on Mars should
also be useful for new political processes and activities on Earth as well.

In this class, you will work both individually, and in teams, so that you will
have the chance to broaden and strengthen your own ideas about governance and
preferred human behavior within a social, and not just an individual, context.

You also will be encouraged throughout the course to think in terms, not of
present needs and problems, but in terms of the needs of future generations--
of people yet unborn, who you will never meet, but whose lives you greatly
impact by what you do, or do not do, now.



1/11 Introduction to the class

Discussion of the syllabus

Your views of space exploration and settlement

Small group discussion

1/13 The evolution of political systems

Dator (outline of political evolution)

Lewellen, "Types of preindustrial political systems" and ""The evolution of
the state"

Lee, "Primitive communism"

Wilson, "Human groups as units of selection"

ASSIGN: Your basic political concerns (2-3 pages) DUE 1/20.

1/18 New models of governance (1)

"Aanivalta"

FIRST DAY TO POST ON LISTSERV

1/20 New models of governance (2)

Kelly, "Out of Control"

Harcones, "Personalized government"

"Political concerns" paper due

1/25 New models of governance (3)

Dator, "Space settlements and new forms of governance

FORM POLITICAL DESIGN GROUPS

1/27 The environment of Mars (Lewis)

Chartrand, "Mars: Just the facts"

Video--The planet Mars

2/1 The resources of Mars (Lewis)

Meyer and McKay, "Resources of Mars for human settlement"

Video--Quest for Mars

ASSIGN: Political Design paper (3-4 pages) DUE 2/10

2/3 New models of political-economy

Pendse, "Economic systems"

Yamaguchi, "A new economic paradigm"

Dator, "Worlds without work"

2/8 "Living and working in space"

(video and discussion)

2/10 Space history (1)

"First steps to the stars"

(video and discussion)

"Political Design" paper due

2/15 Space history (2)

Holquist, "The philosophical bases of Soviet space exploration"

Logsdon, "The race into space"

"History of space exploration"

2/17 Space present (1)

Dator, "Politics is everything"

2/22 Space present (2)

Asian space programs

Joan Johnson-Freese

2/24 Space analogs (1) (Lewis)

Video: Mars and Antarctica

Whitney, "Interpersonal compatibility"

2/29 Space analogs (2)

Costello, "Space-dwelling families"

Dator, "Earth analogs for human space settlement and exploration"

3/2 Space analogs (3)

Harris, "Influence of culture on space"

Finney, "Anthropology and the humanization of space"

Holmes, "Worldships"

ASSIGN: Space programs paper (3-4 pages). DUE 3/9

3/7 Should we go into space at all?

Matsunaga, "Hawaii's space future"

Hanson, "7 arguments against a spaceport at Ka'u"

Pivirotto, "Strategy for...Mars"



3/9 Technologies for Mars (1)

Dator, "It's only a paper moon"

"Meat!"

"Space programs" paper due.

3/14 Technologies for Mars (2)

Coates, et al., "The promise of genetics"

"Genetic Engineering home page"

"Nanotechnology"

3/16 To Terraform or not to Terraform?

Nadis, "Life on Mars"

Zubrin, "A New Martian Frontier"

Dator, "Responsible for your rose"

3/21 Habitats for Mars

Maruyama, "Designing a space community"

Maruyama, "Aesthetics and the environment of outer space"

3/23 General discussion of the course so far.

ASSIGN: Mars paper (3-4 pages). DUE 4/4

3/28, 30 Spring Vacation

4/4 Introduction to political futures (1)

Overview

Dator, "Future generations: They are our conscience"

"Mars paper" due

4/6 Introduction to political futures (2)

Alternative Futures

4/11 Introduction to political futures (3)

Visioning preferred futures

Video, (Joel Barker on visioning)

Sagan, "Dreams are Maps"

4/13 Space visions (1)

Dator, "Thinking about space futures, then, now, tomorrow"

4/18 Space visions (2)

Four space futures exercise

4/20 Space visions (3)

Preferred futures visioning exercise

4/25, 27, 5/2 Design Group reports



**_5/11 Final individual papers due_**



**ON THE ASSIGNMENTS AND OTHER MATTERS:**

**This is a Writing Intensive Course**

1\. The _primary purpose of this course_ is to help you develop your ideas
about preferred forms of governance. You will do this by imagining you are
designing a governing system for people living on Mars in the mid 21 st
Century.

Very detailed instructions about how to carry out this assignment are
contained in a separate handout. Please read it carefully, and refer to it
regularly as you proceed throughout the course.

During this course, you will learn about the evolution of political systems on
Earth, existing ideas for new or improved political systems, and various ideas
about political design.

You also will learn something about Mars--especially in contrast with Earth--
and how those differences might influence the needs and desires of people
living on Mars instead of Earth, and hence might impact your political design.

2\. In order to assist you in developing your own ideas, and in order for you
to learn what others think, **_you will be assigned to a political design
group on January 25._** You will meet with your group, face to face and
online, for the rest of the semester, preparing to make a _collective
presentation_ to the class as a whole of your political design for a Mars
settlement.

3\. Your _final own personal final report (Due on May 11) must be_ _
_individually presented__ _, however. It may either be entirely written_
(about 10-15 typewritten pages), _or in mixed media_ (exhibits, film, video,
painting, audio, performance) but always with SOME written, explanatory base
(5 or more typewritten pages). If you intend to do a mixed media final
personal project, please let me know no later than April 4.

4\. In addition to the individual final project, _there are four brief
written_ assignments. Information about these four papers is contained in a
separate handout.



5\. A listserv for this class has been created on the UH Unix computer. You
are expected to access that listserv and to place items on it for everyone to
read (and also to comment about). **_As soon after each class session as
possible, you are to send a "minute paper" to the listserv in which you
briefly discuss two things about each class session:_** (1) "The most
important things I learned from class today are....." and (2) "The questions I
have, or the things that remain unclear to me, after today's class are...." A
comment of two or three paragraphs for each of these two things each class
period should be sufficient. More would be appreciated.

You ALSO are expected to comment about what _others_ (including myself) say on
the listserv, and to use the list as a place to carry on a _continuing_
conversation about ideas generated by the articles, videos, and discussions in
class and on the list itself.

You MUST enter comments on the listserv **_at least twice a week_**. Daily
would be much better. Participation on the listserv is an essential part of
the Writing Intensive portion of this class, as well as essential to your
substantive learning.

6\. _Regular attendance and active participation in all aspects of the course
is very important_. If you miss several of the class sessions, or if you do
not participate as requested on the listserv, you should expect your grade to
be lowered.

7\. _If you miss a class during which a video is shown_ and discussed, please
view the tape either by borrowing it from me, or by viewing it at the Wang AV
Center or elsewhere. After you view the tape, write and turn in to me a 2-3
page critique on it.

8\. _Office Hours_ : My office is Social Sciences 604. I will _generally_ be
available there Mondays through Thursdays 1-3 PM. Otherwise, I am available by
appointment. Please come by, or phone 956-6601. However _the best and my
preferred way for you to communicate with me is via email_. My address is:
dator@hawaii.edu

9\. _VISIT THE WEBSITE OF THE HAWAII RESEARCH CENTER FOR FUTURES STUDIES_ :

http://www.soc.hawaii.edu/future/

10\. Because of my duties as Director of the Hawaii Research Center for
Futures Studies, I will have to miss several classes. Someone will come in to
take over my classes while I am gone, so I expect everyone to attend and
participate in class as usual. Moreover, I will take my PowerBook with me on
most trips and access my email, so you can and should continue to communicate
with me even when I am not physically in Hawaii. However, _if my absence from
some classes presents any problem to you, please discuss this with me, or
please do not take the course_.

11\. Each portion of the class described above counts as indicated towards
your final grade:

Final project 30%

Group presentation of the final project 20%

Four written assignments (5% each) 20%

Participation on the listserv 15%

Class attendance and participation 15%

TOTAL 100%

\-------



IMPORTANT WORDS ABOUT THE FINAL MARS PROJECT

Jim Dator



_Please read this now, and re-read it throughout the semester. It is essential
for your understanding of the class. It is especially important that you refer
to this guide when you first join your Political Design team; while you think
about your own preferred design and discuss it, in person and over email, with
your team; before your team reports during the final weeks of class; and as
you are preparing your own personal final project._



**The focus of this class is both your team's class presentation and your own
personal final project. Both are to specify a design which will enable the
people and other intelligences in your settlement on Mars not only to behave
as they wish but also to carry out the activity specifically assigned for you
and your Mars team.**



_Your Basic Group and Personal Task_ : To formulate a political design for a
settlement on Mars in 2050\. That settlement has a specific activity to carry
out. But how do you believe humans will want to behave on Mars, and what
structures (institutions, policies, etc.) do you believe should exist to
encourage the preferred behavior and to discourage unwanted behavior?

Population size of your community on Mars: 50,000 humans.

Location on Mars to be decided and justified by you and your team in relation
to the activity specified for your team.

You will work in a team to specify a design to satisfy the activities assigned
to your team. You will participate with your team in presenting your team's
results to the rest of the class near the end of the semester.

You also will give me your own personal final project report which may be your
own version of the group project you participated in, or something completely
different from that. You should consider incorporating in to your personal
project report, for example, any good ideas you learn from the reports of
other groups you did not participate in. Or if you and your group disagreed in
whole or part, you can express your own views in your personal final project.
If you and your group were in agreement, then incorporating the group's
decisions into your personal final report is fine.



**GIVENS, LIMITATIONS, REQUIREMENTS**

In contemplating and carrying out both the group and your own report, please
keep in mind the following:

Do not adopt entirely any existing (or previous) system of government (or
combination of existing or previous systems).

Think and design _generically_ for _functions_ , not in terms of existing
governmental institutions. For example, do NOT think in terms of traditional
institutions, such as "executive, legislative, judicial", but rather think in
terms of "what are the necessary or desired political functions and how
can/should these functions be performed?"

Examples of such "necessary or desired political functions" which might be
part of your political design include:

\--deciding policies (perhaps including group norms) on behalf of, or which
impact, everyone in the community;

\--carrying out those policy-decisions;

\--preventing/minimizing/resolving interpersonal/organizational conflicts;

\--dealing with issues between unaugmented humans, cyborg-genetically modified
humans, cyborgs, intelligent robots, and pure artificial intelligences;

\--caring for the young, the old and [what other categories??]

\--creating and caring for the 'natural' and the 'built' environment;

\--socializing the young and newcomers into group policies and norms;

\--requiring/permitting/forbidding religious beliefs and ceremonies;

\--punishing/correcting/eliminating/tolerating/enjoying/being deviants

\--creating and disseminating (and/or withholding and censoring) ideas, data,
information;

\--creating and disseminating recreational, entertainment and/or sports
facilities/activities;

\--producing and distributing food, goods, and services;

\--providing/maintaining private and communal habitats, communication and
transportation systems, pure water and clean, comfortable air, energy, waste
disposal;

\--preventing or mitigating disasters and emergencies;

\--relating your settlement to other settlements on Mars, between your
settlement and Earth; between your settlement and other space settlements;

\--interpreting the meaning/intent of the political design;

AND MORE!

Your political design may specify that (1) none/some/all of these functions
must be collectively decided upon and/or carried out, or that (2)
none/some/all must be left to "the market", or (3) to individual initiative,
or (4) to some mix between those three alternatives--or (5) you may have a
completely different way of conceptualizing the matter.



**_But the political design--the "document" that specifies these matters (but
it need not be "words on paper" or "words" at all) has to indicate what the
basic functions of governance are, and who participates in deciding,
receiving, and carrying out the functions, and how. The design must clearly
specify the rules for governance, as well as how disputes over the rules
themselves are resolved, whatever those rules require, prohibit, or are silent
on._**

In your design, _it is essential that you specify and use technologies which
will be available in 2050_ (but not existing now) as well whatever
technologies presently in use which will also be available in 2050.

However, _there can be no technological or spiritual "magic" which "makes all
people good_ ". But there can and should be genetic engineering, cyborgs,
artificial intelligence, ETs, etc.--whatever you believe will plausibly exist
in 2050.



**OTHER THINGS TO THINK ABOUT, DISCUSS, AND INCLUDE IN YOUR REPORT**

What are your assumptions about basic human nature? (Are humans basically
good, bad, mixed, perfectible, unchangeable, violent, cooperative, peaceful,
etc.?) Is there some "fundamental human nature" that needs to be taken as an
unchangeable basis for political design? Or, given either genetic engineering
or environmental design (or both), is there no such fundamental human nature,
but only specific human experiences on earth which need not determine our
political design in space?

A related question is, are humans basically Earth children, or star children?
Is the Earth our home, or is the Earth merely our cradle, but the cosmos our
home?

What are your assumptions about basic human needs/wants? (Are there any basic,
unchanging needs/wants, or are they all socially/environmentally determined?
What are they? What are the HUMAN needs/wants vs. those of any primate or
living entity, etc.?)

What are the desired human competencies (skills, abilities, etc.)(a) which
everyone must/should have; and (b) which someone, but not everyone, must have,
but which the entire community needs?

What is the mix of age, gender, ethnicity, etc.?

What is the basic habitat design (This is NOT a major focus of the project,
but habitat design does relate intimately to human behavior).





**ABOUT REPORTING YOUR RESULTS**

1\. VERY, VERY IMPORTANTLY: You must clearly show how each feature of your
design relates to each of the above design requirements.

2\. Your report must contain a timeline showing technological developments,
human activities, environmental developments, "events," etc. that are relevant
to your design.

3\. The design should probably be conceived of and described in phases (As
only ONE possible example: an initial settlement period for x number of years;
a second development phase for y number of years; with the full settlement
phase beginning at z years). If so, then answer the design questions for each
phase, with most emphasis given to the final phase.

4\. _Your personal project report_ may take any number of different forms: a
regular written essay is fine, but consider also a scenario, a short story,
letters, a movie script, an audio or video tape (but NOT of you or some other
talking head(s) essentially reading/telling me your report), a dance
presentation, opera, etc. But whatever the form, it must clearly include
responses to all of the design questions in ways I can easily perceive and
understand.



_The group report_ does not need any thing written except the timeline. It may
take a talking heads format, but I encourage you also to think in terms of
produced video, song, dance, games, or especially something interactive so
that the class gets involved in your group report. Still, the purpose is
educational, not just recreational, so don't do something "fun" unless it has
a real educational purpose.

5\. The final project personal report must include a written bibliography of
the sources actually used in developing the project. Do not pad the
bibliography.





**DESIGN LIMITATIONS** :

1\. While it is OK for you to have some pre-selection of persons going to
Mars, it is NOT OK for you to eliminate all personal and social problems by
pre-selecting only "good" people.

2\. You cannot have some catastrophe on Earth as the reason for having the
Mars settlement.

3\. You MUST show some reasonable technological evolution from the present
level and kinds of technology. The technology of the future on Mars CANNOT BE
merely that of the earth today. Note however that technological devolution is
OK if you make a plausible non-catastrophic case for it. But there must NOT be
technological "magic" to solve the design problems (e.g.., genetic engineering
cannot eliminate all undesired behavior; ETs or AIs cannot take over and make
all people behave, etc.)

4\. The major design question is how your design will elicit the kind of human
behavior you want, and how it will avoid (and/or "correct"/punish/etc.)
behavior you do not want. Thus you CANNOT expel "bad" people from the
settlement and send them back to Earth, or to one of the moons, etc. You must
deal with the existence of "deviants" on Mars.



**SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES WITH YOUR DESIGN TEAM** :

Each team should have at least ONE person who takes responsibility for
becoming expert in AT LEAST one of the following areas, so that the team as a
whole is able to decide whether and/or how to deal with each issue. This
obviously means that each person needs to become as expert as possible in
SEVERAL of these areas. This list is meant to be merely SUGGESTIVE of things
you should consider, and not an exhaustive list of everything:

1\. Major forms of government:

a. Presidential/strong executive; federalism

b. Parliamentary; unitary

c. Green; decentralization

d. Electronic direct democracy

e. Alternative dispute resolution techniques

f. Alternatives to bureaucracy

g. Various methods of elections

2\. New and emerging probable technologies

a. Artificial intelligence and artificial life

b. Genetic engineering

c. Nanotechnology

d. Alternative energy sources

e. New materials

3\. Technical aspects of space settlement

a. US space history

b. Non-US space experience (Russia, Europe, China, Japan, etc.)

c. Space architecture; various space habitat designs

d. Space Labs and Space Stations (US, USSR, etc.)

e. Space biology and medicine; life sciences in space

f. Launch and ride vehicles and propellants

4\. Technical aspects of Mars

a. Terrain

b. Atmosphere

c. Natural resources

5\. Earth analogies

a. The Biosphere experiment in Arizona

b. Settlements in Antarctica and other extreme locations

c. History of colonization and new settlements

V. **USE THESE RESOURCES** :

1\. Read recent issues of:

_Ad Astra_

_Countdown_

_Icarus_

_Journal of the British Interplanetary Society_

_Planetary Report_

_Space News_

_Space Policy_

_Spaceflight_



2\. _The Case for Mars_ (various volumes and years)

_Mars Settlement_ (ISU Summer Session, 1992)

_International Strategies for the Exploration of Mars_ (ISU Summer Session,
1997)

and many other books and articles in Hamilton Library on Mars and space
settlement



3\. **Websites**

http://igpp.ucla.edu/ssis.html Space Science Information on the Internet

http://science.nas.nasa.gov/Services/Education/SpaceSettlement/ Space
Settlement

http://www.esrin.esa.it/ European Space Agency

http://www.space-frontier.org/ The Space Frontier Foundation

http://www.nss.org/ National Space Society

http://www.twentyone-11.org/ 2111 FOUNDATION FOR EXPLORATION

http://www.isunet.edu/ ISU - International Space University



http://www.cisec.or.kr/solar/history.htm History of Space Exploration.

http://mirkwood.ucs.indiana.edu/space/space.htm History of Space Flight

http://deathstar.rutgers.edu/museum/museum.html Tsiolkovsky Museum

http://www.maximov.com/Mir/index.html Mir space station

http://www2.astrobiology.com/astro/antarctica.space.html Antarctica and The
Exploration of Space

http://sunsite.unc.edu/lunar/school/library/exotic_tec_web.html Library -
Weblinks - Exotic technology

http://pet.jsc.nasa.gov/alssee/demo_dir/nscort/biblio.html Advanced Life
Support Bibliography

http://www.bio2.edu/ Biosphere 2 Center

http://www.com/s_index.htm Space Colonies and PERMANENT

http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/mars/ Mars Exploration Program

http://spot.colorado.edu/~marscase/home.html The Case for Mars

http://www.marssociety.org/ Mars Society

http://www.nw.net/mars/marsdirect.html Mars Direct

http://www.reston.com/astro/mars/update.html The Whole Mars Catalog: Martian
Moons



4\. **Very soon, visit the Planetary Data Center and the Hawaii Space Grant
College, in the basement of Sinclair Library.** Look over their resources
(especially audio-visual material), and talk with their friendly staff
personnel.

