* * *

**W4895.001**|  **Fall 1995**|  **Richard K. Betts**  
---|---|---  
**War, Peace, and Strategy in the Twentieth Century**  
[PoliSci Homepage | [PoliSci Courses| [Undergrad info| [Grad info  
  
* * *
    
    
    
    
    
    Class: Monday/Wednesday 11:00-12:15	Professor Richard K. Betts
    Office Hours: Wednesdays 2:30-5:00,	Institute of War and Peace
    or by appointment.   Phone 854-7325	Studies,   IAB,  Room 1326
    
    
    
    Why is force often used in international relations?  What causes peace?  
    How do wars, or competitions shaped by the lurking possibility of war, 
    affect world politics and individual societies?  How can nations best 
    prepare to prevent wars or to win them if they occur?  By what standards 
    should resort to force, or strategic and tactical choices in prosecuting 
    war, be judged legitimate or immoral?  How are the prevention, 
    outbreaks, processes, and outcomes of mass violence (or crises resolved 
    without combat) determined by politics, ideology, diplomacy, technology, 
    economics, geography, military plans and strategies (conventional, 
    unconventional, and nuclear), intelligence, and arms control?  What 
    difference do weapons of mass destruction make?  Is the world safer or 
    more dangerous after the Cold War?  Can war be made obsolete?
    
    The course touches on all these questions but emphasizes problems in the 
    relation of political ends and military means.  Students must grapple 
    with the terms of reference in both dimensions.  The course is organized 
    thematically, not by cases, but illustrative examples are drawn from 
    conflicts in Europe, Asia, and the Middle East.
    
    
    Requirements:  Students must (1) complete assigned readings (denoted by 
    Arabic numerals); (2) attend lectures; (3) take the final examina-tion 
    on the scheduled date (make-up exams will not be allowed except for 
    certified medical excuse or family emergency).  Undergraduates must also 
    (4) take the mid-term exam on October 30 (optional for graduate 
    students); and (5) attend discussion sections (optional for graduate 
    students).  Books ordered in the university bookstore should be 
    purchased.  Required readings are on reserve in Lehman Library.
    
    Recommendation:  In hopes of making this course as rewarding as possible 
    for those genuinely interested in education, it is meant to be 
    challenging and difficult.  Satisfactory performance should take one-
    fourth of the time of a normal full-time job. Outstanding performance 
    may require work comparable to an elite job (the kind to which most 
    Columbia students aspire), meaning overtime.  Students who cannot or do 
    not wish to complete a demanding load of reading should not take this 
    course.  For foolish souls who do not complete the required reading it 
    may still be possible to pass the course by concentrating on items 2, 5-
    7, 15, 16, 18, 19, 21, 23-26, 30-32, 39-41.
    
    I.	Introduction:  Purpose and Character of Force
    		Does War Have a Future?
    		Concepts of National Security
    		Philosophy of War
    		Political Ends and Military Means: Rationality
    		War is Hell: Insanity and Obscenity
    		The Perspective Between Pacifism and Militarism
    		
      1.	Richard K. Betts, ed., Conflict After the Cold War: Arguments on 
    Causes of War and Peace (Macmillan, 1994):
    	 	Francis Fukuyama, "The End of History;"
     		John Mueller, "The Obsolescence of Major War;"
     		John Mearsheimer, "Why We Will Soon Miss the Cold War."
    
      2.	Carl von Clausewitz, On War, Michael Howard and Peter Paret, eds. 
    and trans. (Princeton University Press, 1976), Book I, chaps. 1, 2.  
    (NB:  Do not read a different translation without consulting the 
    instructor.  Under no circumstances read the widely available Penguin 
    edition of the Graham translation abridged by Anatol Rapaport.)
    
      3.	Sun Tzu, The Art of War, Ralph Sawyer, trans. (Westview Press, 
    1994), chaps. 3, 4, 6, 11.  (NB:  If you cannot obtain the Sawyer, the 
    Griffith, Huang, or Ames translations are acceptable.)
    
      4.	"'The Real War Will Never Get in the Books,'" in Paul Fussell, 
    Wartime (Oxford University Press, 1989), chap. 10.
    
    
    
    II.  Causes of War and Peace
    		Psychology and Anthropology: Instinct, Ritual, or the 
    		Continuation of Sport by Other Means
    		Main Paradigms: Realism and Liberalism
    		Autarky or Interdependence
    		Ideology and Fraternity
    		Marxism, Capitalism, Feudalism, Militarism
    
      5.	Kenneth N. Waltz, Man, the State, and War (Columbia University 
    Press, 1959).
    
      6.	Betts, ed., Conflict After the Cold War:
    		Thucydides, "The Melian Dialogue;"  
    		E. H. Carr, "Realism and Idealism;"
    		Geoffrey Blainey, "Power, Culprits, and Arms;"
    		Immanuel Kant, "Perpetual Peace;"
    		Robert Keohane and Joseph Nye, "Power and Interdependence;"
    		Norman Angell, "The Great Illusion;"
    
    		Geoffrey Blainey, "Paradise is a Bazaar;"
    		V.I. Lenin, "Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism;"
    		Joseph Schumpeter, "Imperialism and Capitalism;"
    		Kenneth N. Waltz, "Structural Causes and Economic Effects;"
    		Richard Rosecrance, "Trade and Power;"
    		Stanley Kober, "Idealpolitik;"
    		Michael Doyle, "Liberalism and World Politics."
    
    
    
    III.	Securing Peace:  Balance of Power and Cooperative Institutions
    		Stable International Systems
    		Unipolarity, Bipolarity, Multipolarity
    		Equilibrium or Peace
    		International Organization and "Regimes"
    		Collective Security
    
      7.	Betts, ed., Conflict After the Cold War:
    		Robert Gilpin, "Hegemonic War and International Change;"
    		Richard Ullman, "The Changed Premises of European Security;"
    		Richard K. Betts, "Collective Security and Arms Control in 
    		the New Europe;"
    		Jack L. Snyder, "Averting Anarchy in the New Europe."
    
      8.	Adam Roberts, "The United Nations and International Security," 
    Survival 35, no. 2 (Summer 1993)
    
      9.	Laurence Martin, "Peacekeeping as a Growth Industry," National 
    Interest no. 32 (Summer 1993)
    
    
    
    IV.  The Choice of War or Peace
    		The Spectrum of Choice: Concession, Compromise, Combat
    		Setting the Price of Peace: Political Stakes vs. Military 
    		Costs
    		Setting the Price of War: Blood, Treasure, and Risk
    		Deterrence and Reassurance
    		Crisis Management and "Accidental" War
    		Cases: 1914, 1938, 1962
    
     10.	Gordon Craig and Alexander George, Force and Statecraft, Second 
    Edition (Oxford University Press, 1990), chap. 15.
    
    V.	Modern War: Constraints, Conditions, Conduct
    		Geography: Natural Security and Vulnerability
    		Economy: Resources, Power, and Strategy
    		Combined Arms: Armies, Navies, Airpower
    		Campaigns and Logistics
    
     11.	Niccol¨° Machiavelli, "Money is Not the Sinews of War, Although it 
    is Generally So Considered," Book II, chap. 10 of Discourses on the 
    First Ten Books of Titus Livius, Christian E. Detmold, trans., in The 
    Prince and the Discourses (Modern Library, 1950).
    
     12.	Ethan Kapstein, The Political Economy of National Security 
    (McGraw-Hill, 1992), chaps. 1, 3, 5, 8.
    
     13.	Alan S. Milward, "War as Policy," in Betts, ed., Conflict After 
    the Cold War.
    
    
    
    VI.	Policy, Strategy, and Operations:
    		Integrating Political Ends and Military Means
    		Technology: Innovations and Interactions
    		Doctrine: Plans, Tactics, Obstacles
    		Offense and Defense: Political vs. Military
    		Preventive and Preemptive War
    		How Ends Determine Means, How Means Determine Ends
    
     14.	Michael Howard, War in European History (Oxford University Press, 
    1974), chaps. 2-6.
    
     15.	Clausewitz, On War, Book I, chap. 7; Book II, chaps. 3-4; Book 
    III, chaps. 1-5, 11, 14, 17; Book VI, chaps. 1-7, Book VII, chaps. 1-5.
    
     16.	Michael I. Handel, "Clausewitz in the Age of Technology," in 
    Handel, ed., Clausewitz and Modern Strategy (London: Cass, 1986).
    
     17.	"The Somme," in John Keegan, The Face of Battle (Viking, 1976), 
    chap. 4.
    
     18.	John J. Mearsheimer, Conventional Deterrence (Cornell University 
    Press, 1983), chaps. 2-4.
    
     19.	Betts, ed., Conflict After the Cold War:
    		Robert Jervis, "Cooperation Under the Security Dilemma;"
    		Scott D. Sagan, "1914 Revisited;"
    		Jack S. Levy, "The Offensive/Defensive Balance of Military 
    		Technology."
    
     20.	Yoav Ben-Horin and Barry Posen, Israel's Strategic Doctrine, R-
    2845-NA (RAND Corporation, September 1981).
    
    
    
    VII.  Ends and Means in Total War and Limited War
    		Proportionality of Costs and Benefits
    		Estimating Feasibility
    		Estimating the Culminating Point of Victory
    		Cases: World Wars I and II
    		Cases: Korea, Vietnam, Kuwait
    
     21.	Clausewitz, On War, Book VII, chaps. 15, 16, 22; Book VIII, chaps. 
    1-8.
    
     22.	Michael Geyer, "German Strategy in the Age of Machine Warfare, 
    1914-1945," in Peter Paret, ed., Makers of Modern Strategy (Princeton 
    University Press, 1986).
    
     23.	Samuel Eliot Morison, Strategy and Compromise (Atlantic/ Little, 
    Brown, 1958).
    
     24.	Harry G. Summers, On Strategy: A Critical Analysis of the Vietnam 
    War (Presidio Press, 1982), chaps. 1, 7-11, 15.
    
     25.	Andrew Krepinevich, The Army and Vietnam (Johns Hopkins Press, 
    1986), chaps. 1, 6-8, 10.
    
    
    
    VIII.  Society, Polity, and Power
    		Nationalism
    		State Expansion and Social Mobilization
    		Civil-Military Relations
    		Recruitment, Conscription, Organization
    		Combat Motivation: When Fighting is Dangerous to One's 	
    		Health, What Makes One Fight?
    	
     26.	Ernest Gellner, "Nations and Nationalism," in Betts, ed., Conflict 
    After the Cold War.
    
     27.	Edward Shils and Morris Janowitz, "Cohesion and Disintegration in 
    the Wehrmacht in World War II," Public Opinion Quarterly 12, no. 2 
    (Summer 1948).
    	
     28.	Omer Bartov, Hitler's Army (Oxford University Press, 1991), chaps. 
    3-4.
    
    
                                                                      
                  MONDAY, OCTOBER 30 :  MID-TERM EXAMINATION           
    
    
    IX.  When Is War Murder?  The Morality of Killing
    		Absolute vs. Utilitarian Criteria
    		Atrocities: Cold Blood and Passion
    		Is Terrorism Ever Legitimate?
    
     29.	Michael Walzer, Just and Unjust Wars (Basic Books, 1977), chaps. 
    1, 4-10, 16, 19.
    
    
    
    X.  The Nuclear Revolution (1): Theory
    		Nuclear Weapons Effects
    		Deterrence and Compellence
    		Limited War and Escalation
    		
     30.	Thomas Schelling, Arms and Influence (Yale University Press, 
    1966), chaps. 2-4.
    
     31.	Lawrence Freedman, The Evolution of Nuclear Strategy, Second 
    Edition (St. Martin's Press, 1990), chaps. 5-9, 12-16, 19, 23-25.
    
    
    XI.  The Nuclear Revolution (2): Practice
     		Two Experiences of Nuclear Weapons
    		Nuclear War Plans and Operational Doctrine
    		Cold War Crises
    		Soviet Perspectives
    
     32.	John Hersey, Hiroshima (Knopf, 1946), chap.3.
    
     33.	"Thank God for the Atom Bomb," in Paul Fussell, Thank God for the 
    Atom Bomb and Other Essays (Summit Books, 1988).
    		
     34.	Richard K. Betts, Nuclear Blackmail and Nuclear Balance (Brookings 
    Institution, 1987), chaps. 3-4.
    
    
    
    XII.	Threat Assessment and Defense Planning
    		Aggression or Security Dilemma
    		Intentions and Capabilities
    		Deterrence and Provocation
    		Intelligence and Uncertainty
    		U.S. Force Planning in the Cold War
    
     35.	Eyre Crowe, "Memorandum on the Present State of British Relations 
    with France and Germany," January 1, 1907, and Thomas Sanderson, 
    "Observations on Printed Memorandum on Relations with France and 
    Germany, January 1907," in G.P. Gooch and Harold Temperley, eds., 
    British Documents on the Origins of the War, 1898-1914, vol. 3: The 
    Testing of the Entente, 1904-6 (London: His Majesty's Stationery Office, 
    1928).  (Read carefully pp. 399-405, 414-419; skim the rest.)
    
     36.	Richard K. Betts, Surprise Attack: Lessons for Defense Planning 
    (Brookings Institution, 1982), chaps. 4-5.  
    
     37.	William W. Kaufmann, Planning Conventional Forces, 1950-1980 
    (Brookings Institution, 1980).
    
    
    
    XIII.  Arms Control and Disarmament
    		Political, Economic, and Military Rationales
    		Weapons of Mass Destruction
    		Conventional Forces
    		Arms Trade
    		Costs and Benefits of Regulation
    		Incentives for Proliferation
    		Regional Conflicts
    
     38.	Samuel P. Huntington, "Arms Races: Prerequisites and Results," 
    Public Policy: The Yearbook of the Harvard School of Public 
    Administration (Harvard University, 1958).
    
     39.	Charles H. Fairbanks, Jr. and Abram N. Shulsky, "Arms Control: The 
    Historical Experience," in Betts, ed., Conflict After the Cold War.
    
     40.	Scott D. Sagan and Kenneth N. Waltz, The Spread of Nuclear 
    Weapons: A Debate (W.W. Norton, 1995).
    
    XIV.  Conclusion: Evolving Bases of Conflict and Cooperation
    			Environmental Sources of Conflict
    			Religion
    			Power Without Force
    			Theories, Experience, and Prediction
    			Culture and Conflict
    
     41. Betts, ed., Conflict After the Cold War:
    		Myron Weiner, "Security, Stability, and Migration;"
    		Thomas Homer-Dixon, "Environmental Changes as Causes of 
    		Acute Conflict;"
    		Hanns W. Maull, "Germany and Japan: The New Civilian 
    		Powers."
    
     42.	Samuel P. Huntington, "The Clash of Civilizations," Foreign 
    Affairs 72, no. 2 (Summer 1993).
    
    
    
    
    	Supplementary Recommended Readings
    
    Supplementary recommended readings are listed for bibliographical 
    purposes, for students specializing in security studies.  Not all the 
    readings on this syllabus, especially in the recommended section, are 
    listed because their arguments are correct or convincing; indeed, some 
    are quite foolish and wrong.  They are listed as examples of ideas that 
    have been influential at some time.
    
    Graduate students in political science concentrating in security studies 
    should read in their entirety:  Thucydides, History of the Peloponnesian 
    War, Rex Warner, trans. (Penguin, 1972); E.H. Carr, The Twenty Years 
    Crisis, 1919-1939, Second Edition (London: Macmillan, 1946); Geoffrey 
    Blainey, Causes of War, Third Edition (Free Press, 1988); Robert Keohane 
    and Joseph Nye, Power and Interdependence, Second Edition (Little, 
    Brown, 1989); Hans Morgenthau, Politics Among Nations, Fifth Edition 
    (Knopf, 1973); and Kenneth Waltz, Theory of International Politics 
    (Addison-Wesley, 1979).
    
    
    
    
    	I. Introduction: The Purpose and Character of Force
    
    
    Robert Jervis, "The Future of World Politics: Will It Resemble the 
    Past?" International Security 16, no. 3 (Winter 1991/92).
    
    Michael I. Handel, Masters of War: Sun Tzu, Clausewitz and Jomini 
    (London: Cass, 1992).
    
    John Keegan, A History of Warfare (Knopf, 1994) (an attack on 
    Clausewitz).
    
    Bernard Brodie, War and Politics (Macmillan, 1973).
    
    Stanley Hoffmann, The State of War (Praeger, 1966).
    
    
    John Herz, International Politics in the Atomic Age (Columbia University 
    Press, 1959).
    
    Erich Maria Remarque, All Quiet on the Western Front, A.W. Wheen, trans. 
    (Little, Brown, 1929).
    
    Guy Chapman, A Passionate Prodigality (Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 
    1933).
    
    S.L.A. Marshall, The River and the Gauntlet: Defeat of the Eighth Army 
    by the Chinese Communist Forces November 1950 in the Battle of the 
    Chongchon River, Korea (Morrow, 1953).
    
    Tim O'Brien, If I Die In a Combat Zone, Box Me Up and Ship Me Home 
    (Delacorte, 1973).
    
    Josiah Bunting, The Lionheads (Braziller, 1972).
    
    
    
    	II.  Causes of War and Peace
    
    
    Jack Levy, "The Causes of War: A Review of Theories and Evidence," in 
    Philip E. Tetlock et al., eds., Behavior, Society, and Nuclear War, vol. 
    I (Oxford University Press, 1989).
    
    Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan.
    
    Hugo Grotius, De Jure Praedae Commentarius.
    
    Hans Morgenthau, Politics Among Nations, Fifth Edition (Knopf, 1973).
    
    Arnold Wolfers, Discord and Collaboration (Johns Hopkins Press, 1962).
    
    Kenneth N. Waltz, Theory of International Politics (Addison-Wesley, 
    1979).
    
    Richard Rosecrance and Arthur A. Stein, eds., The Domestic Bases of 
    Grand Strategy (Cornell University Press, 1993).
    
    Robert Keohane and Joseph Nye, Power and Interdependence, Second Edition 
    (Little, Brown, 1989).
    
    Hedley Bull, The Anarchical Society (Oxford University Press, 1977).
    
    Hedley Bull, Adam Roberts, and Benedict Kingsbury, eds., Hugo Grotius 
    and International Relations (Oxford University Press, 1990).
    
    J. L. Brierly, The Law of Nations, Sixth Edition (Oxford University 
    Press, 1963).
    
    Robert Keohane, ed., Neorealism and Its Critics (Columbia University 
    Press, 1986).
    
    Edward D. Mansfield, Power, Trade, and War (Princeton University Press, 
    1994)
    
    Klaus Knorr, On the Uses of Military Power in the Nuclear Age (Princeton 
    University Press, 1966).
    
    Klaus Knorr, "Is International Coercion Waning or Rising?" International 
    Security 1, no. 4 (Spring 1977).
    
    Konrad Lorenz, On Aggression, Marjorie Kerr Wilson, trans. (Harcourt, 
    Brace, and World, 1966).
    
    Anthony Storr, Human Aggression (Atheneum, 1968).
    
    Franco Fornari, The Psychoanalysis of War, Alenka Pfeifer, trans. 
    (Indiana University Press, 1966).
    
    Bruce Russett, Grasping the Democratic Peace (Princeton University 
    Press, 1993).
    
    Edward Mansfield and Jack Snyder, "Democratization and the Danger of 
    War," International Security 20, no. 1 (Summer 1995).
    
    Christopher Layne, "Kant or Cant: The Myth of the Democratic Peace;" 
    David Spiro, "The Insignificance of the Liberal Peace;" and John Owen, 
    "How Liberalism Produces Democratic Peace," all in International 
    Security 19, no. 2 (Fall 1994).
    
    
    
    	III.  Securing Peace: Balance of Power and Cooperative 
    Institutions
    
    
    Inis L. Claude, Jr., Power and International Relations (Random House, 
    1962).
    
    Inis L. Claude, Jr., Swords Into Plowshares, Fourth Edition (Random 
    House, 1971).
    
    Ernst Haas, "The Balance of Power: Prescription, Concept, or 
    Propaganda?" World Politics 5, no. 4 (July 1953).
    
    Stephen M. Walt, The Origins of Alliances (Cornell University Press, 
    1987).
    
    Edward V. Gulick, Europe's Classical Balance of Power (Norton, 1955).
    
    Albert Sorel, Europe Under the Old Regime, Francis H. Herrick, trans. 
    (Harper and Row, 1964).
    
    Henry A. Kissinger, A World Restored (Grosset and Dunlap, 1964).
    	
    F. H. Hinsley, Power and the Pursuit of Peace (Cambridge University 
    Press, 1963).
    
    A.J.P. Taylor, The Struggle for Mastery in Europe, 1848-1918 (Oxford 
    University Press, 1954).
    
    Morton Kaplan, System and Process in International Politics (Wiley, 
    1957).
    
    George Liska, Nations in Alliance (Johns Hopkins Press, 1968).
    
    Thomas J. Christensen and Jack Snyder, "Chain Gangs and Passed Bucks: 
    Predicting Alliance Patterns in Multipolarity," International 
    Organization 44, no. 2 (Spring 1990).
    
    Robert Jervis, "Security Regimes," in Stephen D. Krasner, ed., 
    International Regimes (Cornell University Press, 1983).
    
    Paul Schroeder, "Historical Reality vs. Neo-realist Theory," 
    International Security 19, no.. 1 (Summer 1994).
    
    Paul Schroeder, "The 19th-Century International System: Changes in the 
    Structure," World Politics 39, no. 1 (October 1986).
    
    G. F. Hudson, "Collective Security and Military Alliances," in Herbert 
    Butterfield and Martin Wight, eds., Diplomatic Investigations (Harvard 
    University Press, 1968).
    
    James T. Shotwell, War as an Instrument of National Policy and Its 
    Renunciation in the Pact of Paris (Harcourt, Brace, 1929).
    
    Boutros Boutros Ghali, "An Agenda for Peace: Preventive Diplomacy, 
    Peacemaking and Peace-keeping -- Report of the Secretary General 
    Pursuant to the Statement Adopted by the Summit Meeting of the Security 
    Council on 31 January 1992," (United Nations, June 1992).
    
    Boutros Boutros-Ghali, "'An Agenda for Peace': One Year Later," Orbis 
    37, no. 3 (Summer 1993).
    
    Thomas G. Weiss, "Intervention: Whither the United Nations?" Washington 
    Quarterly 17, no. 1 (Winter 1994).
    
    Bruce Russett and James S. Sutterlin, "The U.N. in a New World Order," 
    Foreign Affairs 70, no. 2 (Spring 1991).
    
    Alan L. Keyes, "Fixing the UN," National Interest no. 4 (Summer 1986).
    
    Robert W. Tucker and David Hendrickson, "America and Bosnia," National 
    Interest no. 33 (Fall 1993).
    
    Richard K. Betts, "The Delusion of Impartial Intervention," Foreign 
    Affairs 73, no. 6 (November/December 1994).
    
    Charles and Clifford Kupchan, "Concerts, Collective Security, and the 
    Future of Europe," International Security 16, no. 1 (Summer 1991).
    
    Malcolm Chalmers, "Beyond the Alliance System," World Policy Journal 7, 
    no. 2 (Spring 1990).
    
    John D. Steinbruner, "Revolution in Foreign Policy," in Henry J. Aaron, 
    ed., Setting National Priorities: Policy for the Nineties (Brookings 
    Institution, 1990).
    
    Ashton B. Carter, William J. Perry, and John D. Steinbruner, A New 
    Concept of Collective Security (Brookings Institution, 1992).
    
    Janne E. Nolan, ed., Global Engagement (Brookings Institution, 1994).
    
    John J. Mearsheimer, "The False Promise of International Institutions," 
    International Security 19, no. 3 (Winter 1994/95).
    
    Robert Keohane and Lisa Martin, "The Promise of Institutionalist 
    Theory;" Charles and Clifford Kupchan, "The Promise of Collective 
    Security;" John Ruggie, "The False Premise of Realism;" Alexander Wendt, 
    "Constructing International Politics;" and John Mearsheimer, "A Realist 
    Reply," all in International Security 20, no. 1 (Summer 1995).
    
    
    
    
    
    
    	IV.  The Choice of War or Peace
    
    
    L.C.F. Turner, Origins of the First World War (Norton, 1970).
    
    John W. Wheeler-Bennett, Munich: Prologue to Tragedy (Macmillan, 1948).
    
    Glenn D. Paige, The Korean Decision (Free Press, 1968).
    
    Robert F. Kennedy. Thirteen Days (Norton, 1969).
    
    Joseph F. Bouchard, Command in Crisis (Columbia University Press, 1991).
    
    Larry Berman, Planning a Tragedy (Norton, 1982).
    
    Scott D. Sagan, The Limits of Safety (Princeton University Press, 1993).
    
    Scott D. Sagan, "Nuclear Alerts and Crisis Management," International 
    Security 9, no. 4 (Spring 1985).
    
    Barry M. Blechman and Stephen Kaplan, eds., Force Without War (Brookings 
    Institution, 1978).
    
    Stephen Kaplan, ed., Diplomacy of Power (Brookings Institution, 1981).
    
    Alexander George, ed., Managing U.S.-Soviet Rivalry: Problems of Crisis 
    Prevention (Westview Press, 1983).
    
    Alexander George, ed., Avoiding War (Westview Press, 1991).
     
    
    
    
    	V.  Modern War:  Constraints, Conditions, Conduct
    
    
    Edward Mead Earle, "Adam Smith, Alexander Hamilton, Friedrich List: The 
    Economic Foundations of Military Power," in Peter Paret,, ed., Makers of 
    Modern Strategy (Princeton University Press, 1986).
    
    Klaus Knorr, The War Potential of Nations (Princeton University Press, 
    1956).
    
    John Brewer, The Sinews of Power: War, Money and the English State, 
    1688-1783 (Unwin Hyman, 1989). 
    
    Michael A. Barnhart, Japan Prepares for Total War: The Search for 
    Economic Security, 1919-1941 (Cornell University Press, 1987).
    
    Peter Liberman, "The Spoils of Conquest," International Security 18, no. 
    2 (Fall 1993).
    
    Martin Van Creveld, Supplying War (Cambridge University Press, 1977).
    
    Conduct of the Persian Gulf War: Final Report to Congress Pursuant to 
    Title V of the Persian Gulf Supplemental Authorization and Personnel 
    Benefits Act of 1991 (Public Law 102-25) (U.S. Department of Defense, 
    April 1992), Appendix F: "Logistics Build-Up and Sustainment."
    	
    John Gooch, ed., Decisive Campaigns of the Second World War (London: 
    Cass, 1990).
    
    Richard M. Leighton and Robert W. Coakley, Global Logistics and 
    Strategy, 1940-1943 (U.S. Department of the Army, Office of the Chief of 
    Military History, 1955).
    
    Robert W. Coakley and Richard M. Leighton, Global Logistics and 
    Strategy, 1943-1945 (U.S. Army, Office of the Chief of Military History, 
    1968).
    
    Lt. General William G. Pagonis with Jeffrey L. Cruikshank, Moving 
    Mountains: Lessons in Leadership and Logistics from the Gulf War 
    (Harvard Business School Press, 1992).
    
    Jacques S. Gansler, "Transforming the US Defence Industrial Base," 
    Survival 35, no. 4 (Winter 1993-94).
    
    Richard K. Betts, Military Readiness: Concepts, Choices, Consequences 
    (Brookings Institution, 1995).
    
    
    
    	VI.  Policy, Strategy, and Operations:
    	Integrating Political Ends and Military Means
    
    
    William H. McNeill, The Pursuit of Power: Technology, Armed Force, and 
    Society Since A.D. 1000 (University of Chicago Press, 1982).
    
    Archer Jones, The Art of War in the Western World (University of 
    Illinois Press, 1987).
    	
    Herman Hattaway and Archer Jones, How the North Won (University of 
    Illinois Press, 1983), Appendix A: "An Introduction to the Study of 
    Military Operations."
    
    Zvi Lanir, "The 'Principles of War' and Military Thinking," Journal of 
    Strategic Studies 16, no. 1 (March 1993).
    
    Larry H. Addington, The Patterns of War Since the Eighteenth Century 
    (Indiana University Press, 1984).
    
    Allan Millett and Williamson Murray, eds., Military Effectiveness (Allen 
    and Unwin, 1988), 3 volumes.
    
    Christopher N. Donnelly, "The Development of Soviet Military Doctrine," 
    International Defense Review 14, no. 12 (1981).
    
    Mary C. Fitzgerald, "Marshal Ogarkov and the New Revolution in Soviet 
    Military Affairs," Defense Analysis 3, no. 1 (1987).
    
    Timothy T. Lupfer, The Dynamics of Doctrine: The Changes in German 
    Tactical Doctrine During the First World War, Leavenworth Paper No. 4 
    (U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, July 1981).
    
    Heinz Guderian, Panzer Leader, Constantine Fitzgibbon, trans. (London: 
    Michael Joseph, 1952).
    
    Dan Horowitz, "Flexible Responsiveness and Military Strategy: The Case 
    of the Israeli Army," Policy Sciences 1, no. 2 (Summer 1970).
    
    Michael I. Handel, Israel's Political-Military Doctrine, Occasional 
    Paper No. 30 (Harvard University Center for International Affairs, 
    1973).
    
    Bernard Brodie, "Technological Change, Strategic Doctrine, and Political 
    Outcomes," in Klaus Knorr, ed., Historical Dimensions of National 
    Security Problems (University Press of Kansas, 1976).
    
    Karl Lautenschlager, "Technology and the Evolution of Naval Warfare," 
    International Security 8, no. 2 (Fall 1983).
    
    Tom Wintringham, The Story of Weapons and Tactics (Houghton Mifflin, 
    1943).
    
    I.B. Holley, Jr., Ideas and Weapons (Yale University Press, 1953).
    
    Edward Luttwak, Strategy: The Logic of War and Peace (Harvard University 
    Press, 1987).
    
    Alfred Thayer Mahan, The Influence of Seapower on History, 1660-1783 
    (Little, Brown, 1890).
    
    Julian S. Corbett, Some Principles of Maritime Strategy (London: 
    Longmans, Green, 1911).
    
    U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey, Summary Report (European War) (Government 
    Printing Office, September 1945).
    
    U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey, Summary Report (Pacific War) (Government 
    Printing Office, July 1946).
    
    [Robert E. Biles,] Bombing as a Policy Tool in Vietnam: Effectiveness, 
    Staff Study Based on The Pentagon Papers, Prepared for the Committee on 
    Foreign Relations, U.S. Senate, 92d Cong., 2d sess., October 1972.
    
    Mark Clodfelter, The Limits of Air Power: The American Bombing of North 
    Vietnam (Free Press 1989).
    
    Wallace Thies, When Governments Collide (University of California Press, 
    1980).
    
    Thomas A. Keaney and Eliot A. Cohen, Gulf War Air Power Survey Summary 
    Report (Government Printing Office, 1993).
    
    Robert A. Pape, Jr., "Coercion and Military Strategy: Why Denial Works 
    and Punishment Doesn't," Journal of Strategic Studies 15, no. 4 
    (December 1992).
    
    William D. White, U.S. Tactical Airpower: Missions, Forces, and Costs 
    (Brookings Institution, 1974).
    
    John Ellis, The Social History of the Machine Gun (Pantheon, 1975).
    
    Richard K. Betts, ed., Cruise Missiles: Technology, Strategy, Politics 
    (Brookings Institution, 1981).
    
    Stephen Van Evera "The Cult of the Offensive and the Origins of the 
    First World War," International Security 9, no. 1 (Summer 1984).
    
    
    
    	VII.  Ends and Means in Total War and Limited War
    
    
    Paul Kennedy, ed., The War Plans of the Great Powers, 1880-1914 (London: 
    Unwin Hyman, 1988).
    
    Paul Kennedy, ed., Grand Strategies in War and Peace (Yale University 
    Press, 1991).
    
    Gerhard L. Weinberg, A World at Arms: A Global History of World War II 
    (Cambridge University Press, 1994).
    
    Scott Sagan, "The Origins of the Pacific War," in Robert I. Rotberg and 
    Theodore K. Rabb, eds., The Origin and Prevention of Major Wars 
    (Cambridge University Press, 1989).
    
    Louis B. Morton, Strategy and Command: The First Two Years (Department 
    of the Army, Office of the Chief of Military History, 1962).
    
    Maurice Matloff, Strategic Planning for Coalition Warfare: 1943-1944 
    (Department of the Army, Office of the Chief of Military History, 1959).
    
    Kent Roberts Greenfield, American Strategy in World War II (Johns 
    Hopkins Press, 1963).
    
    Hanson W. Baldwin, Great Mistakes of the War (Harper, 1950).
    
    Klaus Hildebrand, The Foreign Policy of the Third Reich, Anthony 
    Fothergill, trans. (University of California Press, 1973).
    
    Norman Rich, Hitler's War Aims, 2 volumes (Norton, 1973-74).
    
    J. Lawton Collins, War in Peacetime: The History and Lessons of Korea 
    (Houghton Mifflin, 1969).
    		
    Robert E. Osgood, Limited War (University of Chicago Press, 1957).
    
    Robert E. Osgood, Limited War Revisited (Westview, 1979).
    
    Samuel P. Huntington, "Patterns of Violence in World Politics," in 
    Huntington, ed., Changing Patterns of Military Politics (Free Press, 
    1962).
    
    Douglas Blaufarb, The Counterinsurgency Era (Free Press, 1977).
    
    Eric M. Bergerud, The Dynamics of Defeat: The Vietnam War in Hau Nghia 
    Province (Westview Press, 1990).
    
    Eliot A. Cohen, "Constraints on America's Conduct of Small Wars," 
    International Security 9, no. 2 (Fall 1984).
    
    Bruce Palmer, The 25 Year War (University Press of Kentucky, 1984).
    
    Leslie H. Gelb with Richard K. Betts, The Irony of Vietnam: The System 
    Worked (Brookings Institution, 1979).
    
    
    
    	VIII.  Society, Polity, and Power
    
    
    E.H. Carr, Nationalism and After (Macmillan, 1945).
    
    Kyung-Won Kim, Revolution and International System (New York University 
    Press, 1970), selections.
    
    Myron Weiner, "The Macedonian Syndrome," World Politics 23, no. 4 (July 
    1971).
    
    Geoffrey Parker, The Military Revolution: Military Innovation and the 
    Rise of the West, 1500-1800 (Cambridge University Press, 1988).
    
    Charles Tilly, "War Making and State Making as Organized Crime," in 
    Peter B. Evans, Dietrich Rueschemeyer, and Theda Scocpol, eds., Bringing 
    the State Back In (Cambridge University Press, 1985).
    
    Bruce D. Porter, War and the Rise of the State: The Military Foundations 
    of Modern Politics (Free Press, 1994).
    
    Brian M. Downing, The Military Revolution and Political Change: Origins 
    of Democracy and Autocracy in Early Modern Europe (Princeton University 
    Press, 1992).
    
    Michael Mann, States, War and Capitalism (Blackwell, 1988).
    
    Stanislav Andreski, Military Organization and Society (London: Routledge 
    and Kegan Paul, 1954).
    
    David Schoenbaum, Hitler's Social Revolution (Doubleday, 1966).
    
    George Orwell, Homage to Catalonia (Harcourt, Brace, 1952).
    
    Jonathan Shay, Achilles in Vietnam: Combat Trauma and the Undoing of 
    Character (Atheneum, 1994).
    
    Jack Snyder, "Nationalism and the Crisis of the Post-Soviet State," 
    Survival 35, no. 1 (Spring 1993).
    
    Jack Snyder, The Ideology of the Offensive (Cornell University Press, 
    1984).
    
    Barry Posen, The Sources of Military Doctrine (Cornell University Press, 
    1984).
    
    Stephen Peter Rosen, Winning the Next War (Cornell University Press, 
    1991).
    
    Samuel P. Huntington, The Soldier and the State (Harvard University 
    Press, 1957).
    
    Samuel Finer, The Man on Horseback (Praeger, 1962).
    
    Richard K. Betts, Soldiers, Statesmen, and Cold War Crises, Second 
    Edition (Columbia University Press, 1991).
    
    Morris Janowitz, The Professional Soldier, Second Edition (Free Press, 
    1971).
    
    Alfred Vagts, A History of Militarism, Revised Edition (Free Press, 
    1959).
    
    Amos Perlmutter, The Military and Politics in Modern Times (Yale 
    University Press, 1977).
    
    Katherine Chorley, Armies and the Art of Revolution (Beacon Press, 19--
    ).
    
    George Armstrong Kelly, Lost Soldiers: The French Army and Empire in 
    Crisis, 1947-1962 (MIT Press, 1965).
    
    John Robert Ferris, Men, Money, and Diplomacy: The Evolution of British 
    Strategic Foreign Policy, 1919-1926 (Cornell University Press, 1989).
    
    Martin van Creveld, Command in War (Harvard University Press, 1985).
    
    C. Kenneth Allard, Command, Control, and the Common Defense (Yale 
    University Press, 1990).
    
    Eliot Cohen, Citizens and Soldiers (Cornell University Press, 1985).
    
    Martin van Creveld, Fighting Power: German and U.S. Army Performance, 
    1939-1945 (Greenwood, 1982).
    
    David Schoenbaum, "The Wehrmacht and G.I. Joe: Learning What from 
    History," International Security 8, no. 1 (Summer 1983).
    
    Charles Moskos, The American Enlisted Man (Sage, 1970).
    
    William Shakespeare, The Life of King Henry the Fifth, IV, iii (St. 
    Crispin's Day speech).
    
    M. Brewster Smith, "Combat Motivations Among Ground Troops," in Samuel 
    A. Stouffer, et al., The American Soldier, Vol. II: Combat and Its 
    Aftermath (Princeton University Press, 1949).
    
    S.L.A. Marshall, Men Against Fire (Morrow, 1947).
    
    James Gould Cozzens, Guard of Honor (Harcourt, Brace, 1948).
    
    
    
    	IX.  When Is War Murder?  The Morality of Killing
    
    
    Thomas Pangle, "The Moral Basis of National Security," in Klaus Knorr, 
    ed., Historical Dimensions of National Security Problems (University 
    Press of Kansas, 1976).
    
    Charles W. Sydnor, Jr., Soldiers of Destruction: The SS Death's Head 
    Division, 1933-1945, Second Edition (Princeton University Press, 1990).
    
    Christopher R. Browning, Ordinary Men: Reserve Police Battalion 101 and 
    the Final Solution in Poland (HarperCollins, 1992).
    
    Seymour M. Hersh, My Lai 4 (Random House, 1970).
    
    Pastoral Letter on War and Peace, The Challenge of Peace (National 
    Conference of Catholic Bishops, May 1983), Part II.
    
    Joseph S. Nye, Jr., Nuclear Ethics (Free Press, 1985).
    
    James Turner Johnson, Just War Tradition and the Restraint of War 
    (Princeton University Press, 1981).
    
    Michael S. Sherry, The Rise of American Air Power: The Creation of 
    Armageddon (Yale University Press, 1987).
    
    Fred Charles Ikle, The Social Impact of Bomb Destruction (University of 
    Oklahoma Press, 1958).
    
    Stanley Milgram, Obedience to Authority (Harper & Row, 1973).
    
    Max Weber, "Politics as a Vocation," in H. H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills, 
    eds., From Max Weber (Oxford University Press, 1954).
    
    
    
    	X.  The Nuclear Revolution (1): Theory
    
    
    Albert Carnesale, et al., Living With Nuclear Weapons: The Harvard 
    Nuclear Study Group (Harvard Uniiversity Press, 1983).
    
    Thomas Schelling, The Strategy of Conflict (Harvard University Press, 
    1960).
    
    Glenn H. Snyder, Deterrence and Defense (Princeton University Press, 
    1961).
    
    William W. Kaufmann, "The Requirements of Deterrence," in Kaufmann, ed., 
    Military Policy and National Security (Princeton University Press, 
    1956).
    
    Herman Kahn, On Thermonuclear War (Princeton University Press, 1960).
    
    Bernard Brodie, Escalation and the Nuclear Option (Princeton University 
    Press, 1967).
    
    Patrick Morgan, Deterrence: A Conceptual Analysis, Sage Library of 
    Social Research vol. 40 (Sage, 1977).
    
    John D. Steinbruner, "Beyond Rational Deterrence," World Politics 28, 
    no. 2 (January 1976).
    
    John D. Steinbruner, "National Security and the Concept of Strategic 
    Stability," Journal of Conflict Resolution 22, no. 3 (September 1978).
    
    Paul H. Nitze, "Assuring Strategic Stability in an Era of Detente," 
    Foreign Affairs 54, no. 2 (January 1976).
    
    Fred Ikle, "Can Nuclear Deterrence Last Out the Century?" Foreign 
    Affairs 51, no. 2 (January 1973).
    
    Warner R. Schilling, "U.S. Strategic Nuclear Concepts in the 1970s," 
    International Security 6, no. 2 (Fall 1981).
    
    Richard K. Betts, "Heavenly Gains or Earthly Losses: Toward a Balance 
    Sheet for Strategic Defense," in Harold Brown, ed., The Strategic 
    Defense Initiative (Westview, 1987).
    
    Anatol Rapaport, Fights, Games, and Debates (University of Michigan 
    Press, 1960).
    
    Anatol Rapaport, Strategy and Conscience (Harper and Row, 1964).
    
    Bruce G. Blair, Strategic Command and Control (Brookings Institution, 
    1984).
    
    Bruce G. Blair, The Logic of Accidental Nuclear War (Brookings 
    Institution, 1993).
    
    Robert Jervis, The Illogic of American Nuclear Strategy (Cornell 
    University Press, 1984).
    
    Robert Jervis, The Meaning of the Nuclear Revolution (Cornell University 
    Press, 1989).
    
    Charles Glaser, Analyzing Strategic Nuclear Policy (Princeton University 
    Press, 1990).
    
    Michael Mandelbaum, The Nuclear Revolution (Cambridge University Press, 
    1991).
    
    Barry R. Posen, Inadvertant Escalation (Cornell University Press, 1991).
    
    Pat Frank, Alas, Babylon (Lippincott, 1959).
    
    
    
    	XI.  The Nuclear Revolution (2): Practice
    
    
    David Alan Rosenberg, "The Origins of Overkill," International Security 
    7, no. 4 (Spring 1983).
    
    Fred Kaplan, The Wizards of Armageddon (Simon and Schuster, 1983).
    
    Desmond Ball and Jeffrey Richelson, eds., Strategic Nuclear Targeting 
    (Cornell University Press, 1986).
    
    Scott D. Sagan, Moving Targets (Princeton University Press, 1989).
    
    Leon Sloss and Marc Dean Millot, "U.S. Nuclear Strategy in Evolution," 
    Strategic Review 12, no. 1 (Winter 1984).
    
    David N. Schwartz, NATO's Nuclear Dilemmas (Brookings Institution, 
    1983).
    
    Desmond Ball, Politics and Force Levels (University of California Press, 
    1980).
    
    Ted Greenwood, Making the MIRV (Ballinger, 1975).
    
    Ashton B. Carter, John D. Steinbruner, and Charles A. Zraket, eds., 
    Managing Nuclear Operations (Brookings Institution, 1987).
    
    Peter Douglas Feaver, Guarding the Guardians (Cornell University Press, 
    1992).
    
    Janne E. Nolan, Guardians of the Arsenal (Basic Books, 1989).
    
    Fritz Ermarth, "Contrasts in American and Soviet Strategic Thought," 
    International Security 3, no. 2 (Fall 1978).
    
    Raymond L. Garthoff, Deterrence and the Revolution in Soviet Military 
    Doctrine (Brookings Institution, 1990).
    
    Marc Trachtenberg, History and Strategy (Princeton University Press, 
    1991).
    
    
    
    
    	XII.  Threat Assessment and Defense Planning
    
    
    NSC 68:  "A Report to the National Security Council by the Executive 
    Secretary on United States Objectives and Programs for National 
    Security," April 14, 1950.
    
    NIE-11-3-8-76 and Team B Report:  National Intelligence Estimate, 
    "Soviet Strategic Forces for Intercontinental Conflict Through the Mid-
    1980s," Vol. I: Key Judgments and Summary, December 1976;  Report of 
    Team "B," "Intelligence Community Experiment in Competitive Analysis: 
    Soviet Strategic Objectives: An Alternate View," December 1976.
    
    Roberta Wohlstetter, Pearl Harbor: Warning and Decision (Stanford 
    University Press, 1962)  
    
    Ephraim Kam, Surprise Attack: The Victim's Perspective (Harvard 
    University Press, 1988), chaps. 2-8.
    
    Robert Jervis, Perception and Misperception in International Politics 
    (Princeton University Press, 1976).
    
    Richard Ned Lebow, Between Peace and War (Johns Hopkins University 
    Press, 1981).
    
    Richard K. Betts, "Analysis, War, and Decision: Why Intelligence 
    Failures are Inevitable," World Politics 31, no. 1 (October 1978).
    
    Ariel Levite, Intelligence and Strategic Surprises (Columbia University 
    Press, 1987) (an attack on Wohlstetter, Betts, and others).
    
    Richard K. Betts, "Surprise, Scholaticism, and Strategy," International 
    Studies Quarterly 33, no. 3 (September 1989) (a counterattack on 
    Levite).
    
    Ernest May, ed., Knowing One's Enemies (Princeton University Press, 
    1984).
    
    Lawrence Freedman, U.S. Intelligence and the Soviet Strategic Threat, 
    Second Edition (Princeton University PPress, 1986).
    
    John Prados, The Soviet Estimate, Second Edition (Princeton University 
    Press, 1986).
    
    Michael I. Handel, "The Yom Kippur War and the Inevitability of 
    Surprise," International Studies Quarterly 21, no. 3 (September 1977).
    
    Michael I. Handel, ed., Intelligence and Military Operations (London: 
    Frank Cass, 1990).
    
    Klaus Knorr, "Failures in National Intelligence Estimates: The Case of 
    the Cuban Missiles," World Politics 16, no. 3 (April 1964).
    
    F.H. Hinsley, et al., British Intelligence in the Second World War, 4 
    volumes (Cambridge University Press, 1979-90).
    
    Wesley K. Wark, The Ultimate Enemy: British Intelligence and Nazi 
    Germany, 1933-1939 (Cornell University Press, 1985).
    
    James Wirtz, The Tet Offensive (Cornell University Press, 1991).
    
    Alain Enthoven and K. Wayne Smith, How Much Is Enough? (Harper & Row, 
    1971).
    
    Robert E. Osgood, NATO: The Entangling Alliance (University of Chicago 
    Press, 1962).
    
    Samuel P. Huntington, The Common Defense (Columbia University Press, 
    1961).
    
    Robert P. Haffa, Jr., Rational Methods, Prudent Choices: Planning U.S. 
    Forces (National Defense University Press, 1988), chap. 3.
    
    Michael O'Hanlon, Defense Planning for the Late 1990s: Beyond the Desert 
    Storm Framework (Brookings, 1995).
    
    Report of the Secretary of Defense to the President and Congress (U.S. 
    Department of Defense, annual).
    
    
    
    	XIII.  Arms Control and Disarmament
    
    
    Arms Control and Disarmament Agreements: Texts and Histories of the 
    Negotiations (U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, 1990).
    
    Bernard G. Bechhoefer, Postwar Negotiations for Arms Control (Brookings 
    Institution, 1961).
    
    Salvador de Madariaga, Disarmament (Coward-McCann, 1929).
    
    Thomas C. Schelling and Morton H. Halperin, Strategy and Arms Control 
    (Twentieth Century Fund, 1961).
    
    Fred Charles Ikle, How Nations Negotiate (Praeger, 1967).
    
    Hedley Bull, The Control of the Arms Race, Second Edition (Praeger, 
    1965).
    
    Jennifer E. Sims, Icarus Restrained: An Intellectual History of Nuclear 
    Arms Control, 1945-60 (Westview Press, 1990).
    
    John Newhouse, Cold Dawn: The Story of SALT (Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 
    1973).
    
    Gerard Smith, Doubletalk: The Story of SALT I (Doubleday, 1980).
    
    Strobe Talbott, Endgame: The Inside Story of SALT II (Harper and Row, 
    1979).
    
    Strobe Talbott, Deadly Gambits: The Reagan Administration and the 
    Stalemate in Arms Control (Knopf, 1984).
    
    Albert Carnesale and Richard N. Haass, eds., Superpower Arms Control: 
    Setting the Record Straight (Ballinger, 1987).
    
    Bruce Berkowitz, Calculated Risks (Simon and Schuster, 1987).
    
    Charles Fairbanks, "Arms Races," National Interest No. 1 (Fall 1985).
    
    Albert Wohlstetter, "Racing Forward or Ambling Back?" in James 
    Schlesinger et al., Defending America (Basic Books, 1977).
    
    George W. Downs, David M. Rocke, and Randolph M. Siverson, "Arms Races 
    and Cooperation," World Politics 38, no. 1 (October 1985).
    
    Merze Tate, The United States and Armaments (Harvard University Press, 
    1948).
    
    Robert Gordon Kaufman, Arms Control During the Pre-Nuclear Era (Columbia 
    University Press, 1990).
    
    Jonathan Dean, Watershed in Europe (Lexington Books, 1987).
    
    Colin S. Gray, House of Cards (Cornell University Press, 1992).   
    
    Bruce G. Blair, The Logic of Accidental Nuclear War (Brookings 
    Institution, 1993).
    
    Richard K. Betts, "Paranoids, Pygmies, Pariahs, and Nonproliferation 
    Revisited," Security Studies 2, nos. 3/4 (Spring-Summer 1993). 
    
    Janne Nolan, Trappings of Power: Ballistic Missiles in the Third World 
    (Brookings Institution, 1991).
    
    Thomas L. McNaugher, "Ballistic Missiles and Chemical Weapons," 
    International Security 15, no. 2 (Fall 1990).
    
    U.S. Congress, Global Arms Trade: Commerce in Advanced Military 
    Technology and Weapons (Office of Technology Assessment, June 1991).
    
    
    
    	XIV:  Conclusion: Evolving Bases of Conflict and Cooperation
    
    
    Robert J. Art, "A Defensible Defense: America's Grand Strategy After the 
    Cold War," International Security 15, no. 4 (Spring 1991).
    
    Stephen Van Evera, "Primed for Peace: Europe After the Cold War," 
    International Security 15, no. 3 (Winter 1990/91).
    
    Ken Booth, Strategy and Ethnocentrism (Holmes and Meier, 1979).
    
    Graham Fuller, "Islamic Fundamentalism," in Betts, ed., Conflict After 
    the Cold War.
    
    Abdulaziz A. Sachedina, "The Development of Jihad in Islamic Revelation 
    and History," in James Turner Johnson and John Kelsay, eds., Cross, 
    Crescent, and Sword: The Justification and Limitation of War in Western 
    and Islamic Tradition (Greenwood Press, 1990).
    
    Samuel P. Huntington, "America's Changing Strategic Interests," in 
    Betts, ed., Conflict After the Cold War.
    
    Shu Guang Zhang, Deterrence and Strategic Culture (Cornell University 
    Press, 1992).
    
    
    

