University of Wisconsin--Madison
Fall 1996  **Political Science 695: The Politics of the Environment**

Prof. Mark A. Pollack  
222 North Hall  
e-mail: pollack@polisci.wisc.edu  
Office Hours: Wednesday 3:30-5:00 pm  


Environmental protection is an issue at every level of governance, from local
to national to international politics; and political activity, in turn,
determines in large part the extent to which the environment is protected from
pollution and over-exploitation. In this class, we examine the politics of
environmental protection from the perspectives of all four subfields of
political science: Political theory or philosophy, American politics,
comparative politics, and international relations. Accordingly, we begin by
examining the problem of environmental protection in political theory,
considering whether, and why, the environment is morally relevant, and whether
we should seek to protect it. More specifically, we consider whether the
environment is morally irrelevant; relevant only indirectly insofar as it
affects human beings; or possesses inherent moral value independent of human
valuation of it.

Next, in the second section of the course, we turn to the the history and
politics of environmental protection in American politics, in order to
understand the nature of environmental problems in the United States, the rise
of the environmentalist movement, the role of the various American political
institutions, and the history of environmental policymaking from the 1970s to
the recent controversies regarding environment policies in the 1990s.

Third, we turn very briefly to the comparative study of environmental policy,
examining the similarities and differences in environmental policies among the
industrialized democracies, and attempting to explain these differences in
terms of factors such as political culture, the structure of domestic
political institutions, etc.

Finally, in the fourth and longest section of the course, we examine at some
length the problems of managing the international environment, including: the
management of global or regional "commons" such as the atmosphere, Antarctica,
and the world's seas and oceans; the problem of transboundary pollution, such
as acid rain; the problems of population growth and control; and emerging
problems like the perceived conflict between free trade and environmental
protection. Here, we will study theories of international environmental
cooperation, as well as empirical cases such as the the Montreal Protocol to
protect the ozone layer, and the conventions on global warming and
biodiversity signed at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janiero in 1992.  


**Course requirements** include (a) approximately 150-200 pages per week of
required readings, (b) class participation in weekly seminar meetings (20% of
the grade), (c) a series of six, one-page papers on the readings for each of
the various weeks (30%), and (d) a longer research paper of approximately 20
pages on a subject relevant to the broad themes of the course, to be chosen by
the student in consultation with the professor (50%).  
****  ****

**Required Readings**

The following books, marked with an asterisk in the syllabus, are available
for purchase from the University bookstore:

* Norman J. Vig and Michael E. Kraft, eds., _Environmental Policy in the 1990s: Reform or Reaction?_ , Third Edition (Washington, DC: Congressional Quarterly Press, August 1996). 

* Peter M. Haas, Robert O. Keohane, and Marc A. Levy, eds., _Institutions for the Earth_ (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1993). 

* Andrew Hurrell and Benedict Kingsbury, _The International Politics of the Environment_ (New York: Oxford University Press, 1992). 

Other readings are available in a course packet available on reserve at Helen
C. White Library.  
  **SCHEDULE OF TOPICS AND READINGS**  

**Week I: Introduction (4 September)**  


**Week II: Ethics and the Environment (11 September)**

Frankena, "Ethics and the Environment," in K.E. Goodpaster and K.M. Sayer,
_Ethics and Problems of the 21st Century_ (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre
Dame Press, 1979).

John Passmore, _Man's Responsibility for Nature: Ecological Problems and
Western Traditions_ (New York: Scribner, 1974), chapters 1-2.

Peter Singer, _Animal Liberation_ (New York: Avon Books, 1975), ch. 1.

Aldo Leopold, _A Sand County Almanac_ (New York: Ballantyne Books, 1991), pp.
237-64, "The Land Ethic."

Edward Johnson, "Treating the Dirt: Environmental Ethics and Moral Theory," in
Tom Regan, ed., _Earthbound_ (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1984),
pp. 336-365.

* Henry Shue, "The Unavoidability of Justice," in Hurrell and Kingsbury, pp. 373-397. 

Robert D. Bullard, "Overcoming Racism in Environmental Decisionmaking,"
_Environment_ , Vol. 36, No. 4 (May 1994), pp. 10-20, 39-44.

**Study Questions**

1\. What, in Frankena's terms, is morally relevant, the "object of morality?"
More specifically, is the environment a subject of direct moral concern, or is
the environment only indirectly relevant, insofar as it is instrumental to
morally relevant human beings?

2\. Bullard and Shue emphasize the importance of "justice" in both
international and domestic environment policy. What do they mean by "justice,"
and what sorts of policies do they believe will contribute towards achieving
it?  


**Week III: Environmentalism and Environment Policy in American Politics (18
September)**

Thomas R. Dye, _Understanding Public Policy_ , eighth edition (Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall), chapters 1, 2, and 8, pages 1-7, 17-42, and
175-98.

Henry P. Caulfield, "The Conservation and Environmental Movements: An
Historical Analysis," in James P. Lester, ed., _Environmental Politics and
Policy: Theory and Evidence_ (Durham: Duke University Press, 1989), pp. 13-56.

* Vig and Kraft, chapter 1. 

**Study Questions**

1\. What, according to Dye, is the study of public policy? What is the
subject, or "dependent variable," of such studies, and what are the
"independent variables?" What do you think should be the dependent and
independent variables for PS 695?

2\. Environmental issues were a relatively unimportant issue on the American
policy agenda until the late 1960s, when the US and other countries began to
legislate aggressively in this area. How might we explain the entry of
environmental policy onto the American political agenda? What role did public
opinion and environmental interest groups, respectively, play in this process?

3\. In their introductory essay, Vig and Kraft characterize the overall
development of environmental policy in the United States. What have been the
major phases of environmental policy development in the US, and where are we
now in terms of this development?  


**Week IV: Political Institutions and Environmental Policies in the US (25
September)**

* Vig and Kraft, chapters 2, 5-8. 

**Study questions**

1\. "Institutionalists" often argue that the nature of a country's political
institutions help shape the content of its public policies, environmental and
otherwise. How, if at all, has the federal structure of the US political
system shaped the content of its environmental policies? Has the federal
system led to greater, or lesser, environmental protection in the US? What
would be the likely result, according to the authors, of a decentralization of
environmental policymaking down to the state level?

2\. In addition to being a federal system, the US is also characterized by a
separation of powers between the executive, legislative and judicial branches.
How, if at all, has this separation of powers affected the nature of US
environmental policies?  


**Week V: Policy Dilemmas: The Evolution of Clean Air Policy in the US (2
October)**

Charles O. Jones, _Clean Air: The Policies and Politics of Pollution Control_
(Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1975), chs. 5-7 (pp. 137-210).

R. Shep Melnick, _Regulation and the Courts: The Case of the Clean Air Act_
(Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution, 1983), chs. 1, 3, 10.

Gary C. Bryner, _Blue Skies, Green Politics: The Clean Air Act of 1990 and its
Implementation_ , Second Edition (Washington, DC: Congressional Quarterly
Press, 1995), Introduction and chapters 3-5.

* Vig and Kraft, chapter 9. 

**Study questions**

1\. In _Clean Air_ , Charles O. Jones examines the making of the first Clean
Air Act of 1970. Which factors, according to Jones, explain the far-reaching
character of the 1970 Act?

2\. In _Regulation and the Courts_ , Melnick examines the role of the courts
in the enforcement of the 1970 Act and its amendments. What effect have the
Courts had on American clean air regulation, according to Melnick? Have these
effects been positive on balance, or negative?

3\. In 1990, the Bush Administration and the Congress agreed on the landmark
amendments to the Clean Air Act that are the subject of Bryner's book. What
finally broke the legislative logjam of the 1980s, according to Bryner? What
innovative aspects of environmental regulation were introduced by the 1990
amendments, and how have these been implemented in practice?  


**Week VI: US Environmental Policy in the 1990s: Advance or Retrenchment? (9
October), with Paul Pierson, Harvard University**

Paul Pierson, "The New Politics of the Welfare State," _World Politics_ , Vol.
48 (January 1996), pp. 143-79.

Norman J. Vig and Michael E. Kraft, eds., _Environmental Policy in the 1980s:
Reagan's New Agenda_ (Washington, DC: Congressional Quarterly Press 1984),
chapters 1, 4, 5, 8 and 9.

*Vig and Kraft, chapter 3. 

Clippings file on 1994 Congressional elections and the environment, to be
handed out in class.

**Study Questions**

1\. In "The New Politics of the Welfare State," Paul Pierson argues that
policy "retrenchment" is fundamentally different from policy development. Why
is retrenchment different, according to Pierson, and what light, if any, does
his analysis shed on the controversies over US environmental policies in the
1980s and 1990s?

2\. The early 1980s are widely regarded as a period of retrenchment in US
environmental policy, as a result of the election of President Ronald Reagan
in November 1980. How did the Reagan Administration challenge existing
environmental policies? How successful was the Administration in cutting back
environmental policies, and how did it do so? What factors, if any,
contributed to the maintenance of existing policies in the 1980s?

3\. Once again in the 1990s, US environmental policy has been challenged as a
result of electoral change. In what ways is the 1990s challenge similar, and
in what ways different, from the challenge of the 1980s? What would you
predict to be the likely outcome of this latest challenge to established
environmental policies?  


**Week VII: Comparative Policy Analysis and Environmental Policy (October
16)**

Arnold J. Heidenheimer, Hugh Heclo, and Carolyn Teich Adams, _Comparative
Public Policy: The Politics of Social Choice in America, Europe, and Japan_ ,
Third Edition (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1990), chapters 1, 9.

David Vogel, "The Comparative Study of Environmental Policy: A Review of the
Literature," in Meinolf Dierkes, Hans N. Weiler and Ariane Berthoin Antal,
_Comparative Policy Research: Learning from Experience_ (New York: St.
Martin's, 1987), pp. 99-170.

Joseph Badaracco, _Loading the Dice: A Five-Country Study of Vinyl Chloride
Regulation_ (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1985), ch. 1, pp. 1-7
only; chapters 2, 7.

David Vogel, _National Styles of Regulation: Environmental Policy in Great
Britain and the United States_ (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1986),
introduction.

David Vogel, "Protecting Diffuse Interests in Environmental Policymaking," in
R. Kent Weaver and Bert A. Rockman, eds., _Do Institutions Matter? Government
Capabilities in the United States and Abroad_ (Washington, DC: The Brookings
Institution, 1993).

**Study Questions**

1\. In this week's first two readings, the authors review the literature on
comparative environmental policy. Which countries do they examine, what
similarities and differences do they find among these countries, and how do
they explain both the similarities and the differences?

2\. The books by Vogel and Badaracco both point to the importance of policy
styles in the making and implementation of environmental policymaking. How
does the policy style of the United States compare with those of Britain and
other industrialized nations, and how important are differences in policy
style for the actual content of environmental policies?

3\. In Vogel's final article, the author examines the effect of national
political institutions on environmental policymaking in Britain, Japan, and
the United States. Do institutions matter for environmental policymaking
according to Vogel, and if so, how?  


**Week VIII: International Relations, the Global Commons, and International
Cooperation (October 23)**

Garrett Hardin, "The Tragedy of the Commons," in Garrett Hardin and John
Baden, eds., _Managing the Commons_ (San Francisco: W.H. Freeman and Company,
1977), pp. 16-30.

Elinor Ostrom, _Governing the Commons_ (New York: Cambridge University Press,
1990), chapter 1.

Oran Young, "International Environmental Governance," in Young, _International
Governance: Protecting the Environment in a Stateless Society_ (Ithaca:
Cornell University Press, 1994), pp. 12-32.

* Robert O. Keohane, Peter M. Haas, and Marc Levy, "The Effectiveness of International Environmental Institutions,"in Haas, Keohane, and Levy, eds., pp. 3-24. 

* Martin List and Volker Rittberger, "Regime Theory and International Environmental Management," in Hurrell/Kingsbury, Ch. 3, pp. 85-109. 

**Study Questions**

1\. What are the characteristics of a "commons," and why do these lead to
Hardin's "tragedy of the commons?" What sorts of international environmental
problems fit into the category of commons?

2\. A number of this week's authors argue that international regimes or
institutions can help solve problems of the commons. How convincing do you
find their arguments, and how might institutions and regimes help?  


**Week IX: Protecting the Commons I: Ozone, with Prof. Elizabeth DeSombre,
Colby College (October 30)**

Richard Elliot Benedick, "Protecting the Ozone Layer: New Directions in
Diplomacy," in Jessica Tuchman Matthews, ed., _Preserving the Global
Environment_ (New York: W.W. Norton and Company, 1991), pp. 112-153.

* Edward A. Parson, "Protecting the Ozone Layer," in Haas, Keohane, and Levy, eds., pp. 27-73. 

Peter M. Haas, "Banning Chlorofluorocarbons: Epistemic Community Efforts to
Protect Stratospheric Ozone," _International Organization_ , Vol. 46, No. 1
(Winter 1992), pp. 187-224.

* Barbara J. Bramble and Gareth Porter, "Non-Governmental Organizations and the Making of US International Environment Policy," in Hurrell and Kingsbury, eds., pp. 313-41. 

Elizabeth R. DeSombre and Joanne Kauffman, "The Montreal Protocol Multilateral
Fund: Partial Success Story," in Robert O. Keohane and Marc A. Levy, eds.,
_Institutions for Environmental Aid: Pitfalls and Promise_ (Cambridge: MIT
Press, 1996), pp. 91-126.

**Study Questions**

1\. The Vienna Convention of 1985, the Montreal Protocol of 1987, and
subsequent protocols to protect the earth's ozone layer are often presented as
the great success story in the protection of the global commons. Why has ozone
been such a success, according to your authors? What have been the main
challenges to the creation of a successful regime in this area, and how have
these challenges been overcome?

2\. Peter M. Haas emphasizes the importance of so-called "epistemic
communities" in the protection of the global environment. What is an epistemic
community, and what difference, if any, did this community make in the
protection of the ozone layer?

3\. What sorts of North-South issues arose in the various international
negotiations on the protection of the ozone layer? How were they addressed?
Why was the Montreal Protocol Multilateral Fund created, and how well has it
performed?  


**Week X: Protecting the Commons II: Global Warming (6 November)**

Eugene B. Skolnikoff, "The Policy Gridlock of Global Warming," _Foreign
Policy_ , No. 79 (Summer 1990), pp. 77-93.

Thomas C. Schelling, "Some Economics of Global Warming," _American Economic
Review_ , Vol. 82, No. 1 (March 1992), pp. 1-15.

Irving M. Mintzer and J.A. Leonard, eds., _Negotiating Climate Change: The
Inside Story of the Rio Convention_ (New York: Cambridge University Press,
1994), Chapters 6, 7, 9 and 13 (by Dasgupta, Kjellen, Nitze and Sebenius,
respectively).

"The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change," in Stanley P.
Johnson, ed., _The Earth Summit: The United Nations Conference on Environment
and Development (UNCED)_ (Boston: Martinus Nijhoff, 1993), pp. 57-79, skim.

David Victor and Julian E. Salt, "From Rio to Berlin: Managing Climate
Change," _Environment_ , Vol. 36, No. 10 (December 1994), pp. 6-15 and 25-32.

Clippings File of Recent Events

**Study Questions**

1\. A number of authors have argued that ozone was an "easy" case of
international cooperation, and that international cooperation on global
warming is likely to be much more difficult. What are the important
differences between the two cases? Do they really make international
cooperation in global warming more difficult than in ozone?

2\. What is the role of science and of epistemic communities in the case of
global warming? How has the epistemic community on global warming changed over
the years, and what difference, if any, has this change made to the most
recent developments in the area of global warming?  


**XI: Protecting the Commons III: The Oceans (13 November)**

* M.J. Peterson, "International Fisheries Management," in Peter M. Haas, Robert O. Keohane, and Marc A. Levy, eds., _Institutions for the Earth_ , pp. 249-305. 

"The Tragedy of the Oceans," _The Economist_ , 19 March 1994, pp. 21-22, 24.

Stephen S. Krasner, _Structural Conflict: The Third World Against Global
Liberalism_ (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1985), Chapter IX, "The
Global Commons," pp. 227-264.

* Ron Mitchell, "Intentional Oil Pollution," in Haas, Keohane, and Levy, eds. 

M.J. Peterson, "Whalers, Cetologists, Environmentalists, and the International
Management of Whaling," _International Organization_ , Vol. 46, No. 1 (Winter
1992), pp. 147-186.

**Study Questions**

1\. In different ways, Krasner and Mitchell argue that "regime design
matters," in other words, that the design of a regime can help determine its
effectiveness. How and in what ways does regime design matter in the Antarctic
Treaty, the Law of the Sea, and intentional oil pollution?

2\. Why, according to Peterson and the _Economist_ , has international
fisheries management been relatively unsuccessful?

3\. M.J. Peterson's article on whaling provides us with a somewhat different
view of the role of science, and of "epistemic communities," in the creation
and management of global environmental regimes. What has been the role of the
expert scientific community in the International Whaling Commission, and how
has that influence changed over time, according to Peterson?  


**Week XII: Transboundary Pollution, Regional Issues, and Population Control
(20 November)**

* Marc Levy, "European Acid Rain: The Power of Tote-Board Diplomacy," in Haas, Keohane and Levy, eds. 

Aaron Schwaback, "The Sandoz Spill: The Failure of International Law to
Protect the Rhine from Pollution," _Ecology Law Quarterly_ , Vol. 16 (1989),
pp. 443-71.

*Vig and Kraft, chapter 14. 

Barbara Connolly and Robert O. Keohane, "Institutions for Environmental Aid:
Political Lessons and Opportunities," _Environment_ , Vol. 38, No. 5 (June
1996), pp. 12-20, 39-42.

Barbara Connolly, Tamar Gutner, and Hildegard Bedarff, "Organizational Inertia
and Environmental Assistance to Eastern Europe," paper prepared for delivery
at the 1995 Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Association,
Chicago, 31 August-3 September, 1995.

* Barbara B. Crane, "International Population Institutions: Adaptation to a Changing World Order," in Haas, Keohane and Levy, pp. 351-393. 

Lincoln C. Chen, Winifred M. Fitzgerald, and Lisa Bates, "Women, Politics, and
Global Management," _Environment_ , Vol. 37, No. 1 (January/February 1995),
pp. 4-9, 31-33.

**Study Questions**

1\. How do transboundary environmental problems differ from the problems of
the commons? Are the same solutions likely to work for the two different
cases?

2\. How can we explain the success or failure of efforts to deal with
transboundary problems such as acid rain and pollution of the Rhine?

3\. In previous discussions of the commons, we have discussed North-South
issues at some length. What sorts of East-West issues have been raised by the
end of the Cold War, and how successful has the West been in its efforts to
aid Central and Eastern Europe in the long process of environmental clean-up?

4\. What action is possible at the international level to deal with population
problems? How successful have international programs been from Bucharest to
Cairo, and what are the main factors that might explain success and failure in
this area?

5\. Chen, Fitzgerald and Bates argue that the Cairo conference on population
control represents a watershed, and major breakthrough after the controversies
of the Bucharest and Mexico City conferences of the 1970s and 1980s. In what
way(s) was the Cairo conference indeed a watershed, and how can this watershed
be explained?  


**Week XIII: Thanksgiving Holidays!!! (27 November)**  


**Week XIV: Endangered Species and Biodiversity (4 December)**

Michael J. Glennon, "Has International Law Failed the Elephant?" _American
Journal of International Law_ , Vol. 84, No. 1 (1990), pp. 1-43.

* Andrew Hurrell, "Brazil and the International Politics of Amazonian Deforestation," in Hurrell/Kingsbury, eds., pp. 398-429. 

Peter M. Haas, Marc A. Levy, and Edward A. Parson, "Appraising the Earth
Summit: How Should We Judge UNCED's Success?" _Environment_ , Vol. 34, No. 8
(October 1992), pp. 7-11, 26-33.

Edward A. Parson, Peter M. Haas, and Marc A. Levy, "A Summary of the Major
Documents Signed at the Earth Summit and the Global Forum," _Environment_ ,
Vol. 34, No. 8 (October 1992), pp. 13-15, 34-36.

"The Convention on Biological Diversity," in Stanley P. Johnson, ed., _The
Earth Summit: The United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
(UNCED)_ (Boston: Martinus Nijhoff, 1993), pp. 81-102, skim.

Kal Raustiala and David G. Victor, "Biodiversity Since Rio: The Future of the
Convention on Biological Diversity," _Environment_ , Vol. 38, No. 4 (May
1996), pp. 17-20, 37-45.

**Study Questions**

1\. Efforts to protect endangered species, through CITES and other
international agreements, are now several decades old. How successful have
such international efforts been, and how can we explain the relative success
or failure of efforts to save endangered species?

2\. Is the Amazon rainforest the common heritage of mankind, as some American
environmentalists and Congressional representatives have argued, or is it part
of Brazil's sovereign territory? What sorts of international policies are
likely to promote the protection of the Amazon, what sorts of policies are
likely to fail, and why?

3\. In 1992, the Earth Summit attempted for the first time to negotiate a
comprehensive international agreement on biodiversity. How successful was the
Rio agreement, and how has it been implemented in the four years since Rio?  


**Week XV: The Environment and... Development, Trade, and Security (11
December)**

World Commission on Environment and Development, _Our Common Future_ (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1987), overview, pp. 1-23.

Molly Harris Owen, "Charting a Course for Sustainability: The United States
Responds to Agenda 21's Challenge," _Environment_ , Vol. 38, No. 4 (May 1996),
pp. 12-15, 30-36.

*Vig and Kraft, chapter 16. 

Jessica Tuchman Matthews, "Redefining Security," _Foreign Affairs_ (Spring
1989), pp. 162-177.

Daniel Deudney, "The Case Against Linking Environmental Degradation and
National Security," _Millenium_ , Vol. 19, No. 3 (1990), pp. 461-76.

**Study Questions**

1\. What is meant by the term "sustainable development?" Has the concept of
sustainable development made a difference to US and international economic
policies, or has it simply been a buzz-word within the international
development Community?

2\. What are the tensions, or conflict, between the goals of international
free trade and environmental protection? Can these tensions be overcome,
according to Vogel, and if so, how?

3\. Is the environment a national security issue? What are the benefits, and
the costs, of integrating environmental concerns into our definition of US
national security?

