**Seminar On**  
**Major Decisions in U.S. Policy Toward East Asia**  
**Since World War II**  
**Political Science 470**

Eric Hyer Mon.3-5:30 p.m.  
780 SWKT 793 SWKT  
ext. 84699 Office hours: TTh1-2 p.m.  
email: eric_hyer@byu.edu Homepage: http://fhss.byu.edu/polsci/hyere/index.htm

**Course Description**

Arguably, no region is more important to America's long-term prosperity and
security than Asia-Pacific. The world's most dynamic economies, the largest
U.S. export markets, and the largest U.S. trade deficits are in East Asia.
Three times during the 20th Century the U.S. went to war in the region. In the
post-Cold War era, the U.S. is widely viewed as an essential balancing force
in East Asia and a guarantor of stability in a region where territorial
disputes, nuclear proliferation, civil war and other concerns warrant our
attention.

There is a fundamental, even if artificial and unnecessary, divide between
international relations scholars and practitioners. This is probably the case
because "in theory, theory and practice are the same thing, but in practice
they are not." Therefore, academics are often uninterested in policy-relevant
questions and research; policy-makers rarely take the time to examine complex
theories of international relations before making decisions. One goal of this
course is to bridge this scholar/practitioner gap. A good theoretical
foundation will help practitioners formulate sound policy; careful analysis of
real-world case studies will help academics refine theory. Then, the gap
between theory and practice will be narrowed. Therefore,

this course is designed with three objectives in mind: to help advanced
students develop problem solving and analytic skills necessary in making and
managing foreign policy; to help students integrate knowledge of specific
cases with general theoretical concepts; and to develop writing skills.

A number of cases of American policy toward Asian countries will be carefully
studied in order to identify generic problems in foreign policy analysis,
formulation, and implementation. Especially prepared case studies as well as
declassified documents and other primary and secondary material will be used.
Students are expected to complete several writing assignments that have
specific objectives.

**Course Procedures**

Consideration of the assigned cases will proceed along both realistic and
theoretical lines. This course will be an intensive "active learning"
experience--students will "digest" information about a particular case and
then think through the rationale behind a particular policy. Each student has
a responsibility to other members of the class to be prepared and participate
in the analysis of the case. On occasion, students will be divided into teams
and assigned a specific "role" to play. This will enhance understanding of
"bureaucratic politics and policy making" in foreign policy.

**Participation, Reading, and Writing Requirements**

Students are expected to complete their study of each case before the
scheduled discussion.

To facilitate class participation and interaction, all members of the class
are enrolled on a class discussion list found on Route Y. As part of the
class, students are expected to participate in online discussions. Students
are required to send me a weekly E-mail report assessing the case discussed in
class and evaluating their own preparation and participation on a scale from a
low of 1 to a high of 5.

Under each topic is listed "Case Reading" that is required. The "General
Supplementary Reading" listed under each Issue Area and the "Supplementary
Reading" listed under each topic is recommended background reading and will be
useful in preparing written assignments. Students should do supplementary
reading if they are unfamiliar with the background of a particular case, and
use the supplementary reading in preparing written work.

Students are required to complete five writing assignments: two 5 page
memoranda; a 2 page abstract of the case that briefly characterizes the case's
contents and emphasizes the heuristic utility of the case; a 5 page
theoretical analysis of the student's case that links the case study to the
theoretical literature in the social sciences; and an 18-20 page case study.
The guidelines for writing a case and the memos are given below.

**Grading**

The course grade will be based 25 percent on participation (both student and
teacher assessment) and 75 percent on written work. A weekly self-assessment
of participation should be reported to the teacher and periodic class
assessments will be made. The teacher will also assess student participation
and evaluate written work. Attendance is required and any absence will be
counted against your grade. **_Completion of this course (along with PlSc 200)
fulfills your GE Advanced Writing requirement. To receive Advanced Writing
credit, your final paper must receive a C- or better grade._**

**Assignment Due Dates**

**Jan. 22** , Korean War memorandum; **Feb. 5** , Case Abstract; **March 5** ,
Theoretical Analysis;

**March 26** , China Human Rights memorandum; **April 2** , Case Study;
**April 25** , Revised Case Study.  


  

**WRITING ASSIGNMENTS**

During the semester I require you to complete five writing assignments, four
of which I will grade. Following is a short description of each writing
assignment. We will also discuss each assignment in class before it is due.
For assignment five, see "Guidelines for Case Writing."

1\. **Korean War _Options_** __**Memorandum** The sudden outbreak of the
Korean War caught the U.S. by surprise. President Truman requested many of his
top advisors to prepare an _Options Memo_. What are the United States'
options? Your assignment is to "Think in Time" and write such a memo in _five
pages_. Forget how the war unfolded and turned out. Place yourself in the
shoes of one of the president's advisors. What do you believe are the
president's realistic options?

Following the "Guide for Writing Memoranda" complete parts 1-5. You _should
not_ write parts 6-7; I only want to know the "options," not what your
recommendation is.

2\. **Case Abstract** (Ungraded, but it does count) An abstract is a concise
description of the paper that follows, usually limited to one single-spaced
page. The abstract tells the reader what the main issue in the case is, what
are the key policy considerations, complicating factors, etc., and the case's
heuristic utility.

Knowing where you are going is very helpful in getting you there. Writing is
much the same way. By writing an abstract before you write the case, you can
establish a general overview of the case and narrow your focus. Instead of a
proposal, write the abstract for the case you plan to write. Of course the
abstract may change some after you have researched and written the case. But,
by first doing some preliminary research and writing an abstract for your
case, you will set a course that will eventually lead to a completed case
study.

3\. **Theoretical Analysis** We use cases to illustrate or "test" theory. When
writing your case, you should have a "theoretical framework" in mind. This
will help you identify the key issues, policy questions, and guide the
presentation of the "facts" as the case unfolds.

Start by spelling out a theory (a set of assumptions and propositions) that
helps to explain and analyze the case you will write. Then, illustrate the
theory by using it to briefly analyze a few key features of your case. Limit
this theoretical analysis to five pages.

A good place to go to start identifying a theory is James E. Dougherty and
Robert L. Pfaltzgraff, Jr., eds. _Contending Theories of International
Relations._

4\. **China Human Rights Policy Memorandum** The United States faces a policy
dilemma regarding how best to promote human rights. The time is the present
and the president wants a recommendation. What are the options? What option do
you recommend, and why? Complete all seven steps of the "Guide to Writing
Memoranda." The crux of the memo is the "rationale" for your recommendation.
You should be direct and persuasive. Remember you are trying to convince the
president to adopt a policy about which you have strong convictions.

**REQUIREMENTS FOR THE CAPSTONE SEMINAR PAPER**

STANDARDS:

1\. Title Page, Abstract, and Works Cited pages

2\. Turabian ( _Chicago Manual of Style_ ) style used:

a. Quotations appropriately cited

b. arguments properly and correctly cited.  


3\. Subheadings used

4\. Spelling and punctuation correct

5\. Pages numbered

6\. Paper is approximately 4,000 words.

SUBSTANTIVE REQUIREMENTS:

1\. Clear, concise thesis statement

2\. Argument logically coherent and clearly illustrated.

3\. Causality (independent and dependent variables) clearly identified (if
applicable).

**WRITING ACROSS THE CURRICULUM**

Commenting on Maya Angelo's poetry someone once said, "that is good reading!"
She responded, "good reading is hard writing!" Writing well is not easy for
most of us, but by being conscientious we can nurture "good writing" if we
follow some basic principles. Good writing is not a "product," it is a
"process" that is painful for some people. However, if we follow some basic
guidelines, we can ease the pain and learn to be better writers, and to enjoy
it.

**Suggested Writing Strategy**

Following a four-stage process of Plan, Draft, Revise, and Edit will help you
write better. Too often, students adopt a two-step process: draft and
proofread (if they have time). On the other hand, good writers focus their
energy on planning and revising, but go through the other steps of drafting
and editing.

You should begin with the end in mind. Such an approach will help you shift
from a draft/proofread mode to a plan/revise mode. Orientation and perspective
are keys to good writing. Clearly identifying your orientation and perspective
in the planning stage will help you think in an orderly way that will be
reflected in your writing. I recommend you follow the SOAP formula: identify
the Subject, the Occasion, the Audience, and determine the Purpose. This will
set your rhetorical stance. Getting this right will make a big difference as
you write, moving you from "writer-based writing" to "reader-based writing."

Especially when writing memoranda, you must clearly express what you want the
reader to KNOW, what you want the reader to FEEL, and what you want the reader
to DO. But, this is a good thing to keep in mind in most writing.

Students who are the best writers generally share some common traits. All of
them "liked their topic," relied heavily on peer critiques, revised their
papers several times, and, let the paper "sit" for a significant period before
revising each draft (survey of Professor Glade Hunsaker's English 328 class).

**Style and Grammar**

A well written thesis statement, or overview statement is probably the most
common problem for students. A thesis, or overview statement should show the
central purpose of the essay and indicate the line of argument the writer will
follow. Do not leave the reader to discover your argument as she reads through
the entire essay.

Good grammar is a very important part of writing. Good grammar helps establish
a writer's credibility. Poor grammar not only is distracting, but it reduces
the writer's credibility in the eyes of the reader. At the university level we
assume that everybody has mastered the fundamentals of grammar. This is
frequently not so. Often, if writers are conscientious about the most common
problems, they can avoid errors. Following is a list of the twenty most common
errors: missing comma after an introductory element; missing comma in a
compound sentence; missing comma(s) with a nonrestrictive element; unnecessary
comma(s) with a restrictive element; comma splice; missing comma in a series;
vague pronoun reference; dangling or misplaced modifier; wrong word; wrong or
missing verb ending; wrong or missing preposition; missing or misplaced
possessive apostrophe (e.g. its/it's confusion); unnecessary shift in tense;
wrong tense or verb form; lack of agreement between pronoun and antecedent;
unnecessary shift in pronoun; sentence fragment; and fused sentence. Watch
carefully for grammatical errors as you edit your work. Correct use of commas
is one of the most common problems. Following are six comma rules: put a comma
before and, but, for, or, nor, yet, so, when they connect two independent
clauses; put a comma between items in a series; put a comma after an
introductory expression or afterthought that does not flow smoothly into the
sentence; put commas around the name of a person spoken to; put commas around
an interrupter, like however, moreover, etc.; put commas around nonessential
material. Punctuation is the single most important thing in making things
easier to read. The correct punctuation helps the reader follow your argument
and not have to go back and reread a sentence to find out what you mean. I
recommend two style guides: Lynn Quitman Troyka, Handbook for Writers, 3rd
Ed.(1993), or The Merriam-Webster Dictionary of English Usage.

Finally, as you draft, revise, and edit your papers, keep the following advice
in mind. Don Norton (BYU English faculty) recommends: "One should always
choose the common, familiar word, unless the 'big' word clearly is more
precise in meaning" because "the best writing is simple, concise, and direct"
(Y News March 22, 1986). Another writer argues that "clear simple writing is a
reflection of depth of thought" (The Royal Canadian Bank Newsletter). Donald
R. Snow (BYU Math faculty) points out that "people expend mental energy
reading things and you need to write to minimize their effort to understand or
they will not read what you write. As you edit your drafts you may discover
that some words or phrases you used do not really say anything and the meaning
is unchanged by just deleting them."

Writing is important. One major objective of this course is to help students
improve their writing. Your writing will make a difference in your grade for
this course, but more important, it will affect your career after graduation
more than you may now imagine.

(Little in this short essay on writing represents my original thinking. I am
indebted to Gary Hatch, English Composition Coordinator, Deirdre Paulsen,
Writing Fellows Director, and all of the participants in the Summer 1997
Advanced Writing Seminar for faculty.)

**PREPARING WRITING ASSIGNMENTS**

  * Prepare writing assignments very carefully. This will require you to know the case well.
  


  * Follow the Guide to Writing Memoranda or the Guidelines for Case Writing.
  


  * Writing assignments are individual projects. You should not cooperate with other students while writing the assignment. However, you are encouraged to explore ideas and discuss your thoughts with others or your study group before writing your first draft. Seeking peer criticism of your work before you write the final draft is strongly recommended.
  


  * Writing assignments must be wordprocessed. Computer or printer error is not an acceptable excuse for late or poorly presented work. Do not use any type of cover, simply staple the document in the upper left-hand corner.
  


  * Essays are evaluated on the basis of both substance and style. (Should you grammar inhibits my ability to get what you are saying, you gotta proplem!) Therefore, use good organization; clear and coherent sentences, and paragraphs; and follow the common canons of good grammar (complete sentences, agreement between subject and verb, appropriate use of commas, etc.). Always carefully proofread your work before handing it in; simply "spellchecking" is not adequate.

  


**GUIDE TO WRITING MEMORANDA**

  

**I. STRUCTURE**  


Usually options memoranda should include the following seven parts, in the
order listed:  


1\. **Issue** : What is the policy question to be answered, and why must it be
answered now? A few

sentences will suffice.  


2. **Background** : What is the setting for this issue? State the relevant facts of history necessary to 

understand the present milieu.  


3\. **Objectives** : What are the objectives? Avoid enumeration of vague or
tangential goals. This list should not be unwieldy. Usually some objectives
will conflict with others.  


4\. **Discussion** : What is the nature of the problem? Go beyond the
background facts to state and justify assumptions, and lay the analytical
groundwork for delineation of the options and their pros and cons.  


5\. **Options** : What are the major alternatives for action? List the pros
and cons of each?  


6\. **Recommendation** : Which option should be adopted? A short statement is
adequate.  


7\. **Rationale** : Why this recommendation? Why do the pros outweigh the
cons? This is the major

section and should clearly justify the recommended option.  


**II. GUIDELINES**  


1\. **Incentive** : Let the decisionmaker know why he should be concerned with
this issue now. Why is it an important issue? Why can't it wait?  


2\. **Assumptions** : Specify broad assumptions that frame and limit the memo.
Why are some things in or out of the memo? (E.g., "Assuming Congress would not
. . .")  


3\. **Options** : Present a clear choice of options. Make sure all major
options are considered. Omit options (1) that are irrelevant; (2) that are
unrealistic; (3) that no reasonable policymaker would support; (4) that no
reasonable policymaker would oppose. If necessary, justify why some options
are not included, or not elaborated. The presentation of options should be
pointed enough to confront the decisionmaker with the hard choices that the
issue demands. Identify sub-options, if any. Make sure the decisionmaker can
quickly observe how options differ from one another.  
    
    


4\. **Fallback** : Remember Murphy's Law and prepare the decisionmaker for the
worst. Identify the

costs if a preferred option fails. What are the fallbacks? Beware of
recommending an option that is most attractive, but that is probably
infeasible or that carries a high risk of failure.  


5\. **The Big Picture** : How does this issue relate to other issues under
consideration? Will the development of this issue and the consequences of
action taken be importantly affected by developments on other fronts? Keep in
mind the Big Picture to avoid getting bogged down in irrelevant or trivial
details. Place the immediate issue in a longer-term timeframe.  


6\. **Brevity** : Be brief. Don't tell the decisionmaker what he already
knows. Don't tell him everything you know about the issue. Put yourself in his
place: what is the minimum amount of information he needs to decide? Avoid
overly elaborate analysis and temptations to show off technical skill (use
appendices if necessary).  


7\. **Bias** : You cannot avoid having a personal point of view, but you can
avoid slanting the assumptions or options. Your expression of your preferences
will be more credible if it is openly disclosed, and if you have fully and
fairly presented alternative views. And remember your audience. Tell him what
he needs to hear, but tailor it to his sensitivities.  


Adopted from The Crisis Game Video Case, Study Guide (Harvard University,
1986).  


  

**GUIDELINES FOR CASE WRITING**

  

Your case should provoke critical thinking, critical responses, and critical
judgement. Drawing the reader into the "drama" of real-world foreign policy
dilemmas and decisions can accomplish this. I have no formula of detailed and
rigid rules that gives a failsafe guide to success. But, some general
guidelines, if followed, will be helpful.  


**General Parameters**  


1\. 18-20 double-spaced pages.  


2\. A compelling overview to "hook" the reader.  


3\. Sufficient background material to orient the reader to the policy issue
considered.  


4\. Clear subsections with subheadings identify major turning points and
decision points.  


5\. Standard documentation using endnotes, bibliography, and appendixes and
chronologies if necessary. Follow the Chicago Manual of Style.  


6\. A short (one-page) abstract characterizing the case and emphasizing the
heuristic purpose of the case.  


**General principles of good case writing:**  


1\. Tell a compelling story that engages the reader in the policy dilemma:
cost and benefits of a particular policy, contradictory preferences and
priorities, tradeoffs, etc.  


2\. Have a clear idea of what the heuristic objectives of the case are: This
is an example (or case) of. . . . From this case we learn. . . . Etc.  


3\. Highlight the ambiguities of the issue under consideration. Avoid
overanalyzing the policy options; leave "space" for the reader to think
analytically and creatively to solve the policy dilemma. This will provoke
interest and critical analysis.  


**Specific techniques of good case writing:**  


1\. Structure the case to provide a sequence of events that develops the story
of a decisionmaking dilemma. Accomplish this using quotations and reflections
of principal actors and articulating the tensions caused by policy options
over which reasonable people can disagree.  


2\. Weave the narrative and analysis to bring the reader to a "decision-
forcing" point.  


3\. Conclude by revealing how the policy makers came to terms with the dilemma
--attempted to balance costs and benefits, made value judgements, and
justified priorities. End with a sequel describing the consequences of the
actions taken.  


  

**PREPARING FOR CASE DISCUSSIONS**

  

We will be using case studies as the basis for class discussions. As noted in
the syllabus, participation represents a significant portion of your final
grade. The following guidelines and suggestions will help you achieve your
best performance.  


  * Read the assigned case meticulously.
  


  * Skim the entire case without underlining or highlighting. You will become familiar with the basic structure of the case and where the main information is.
  


  * Make a brief outline. Who is involved in the case? What problems do they face? What is their situation?
  


  * What issues does the case raise?
  


  * Reread the case. Focus on the important information located while skimming. Highlight, underline, or make marginal notes to organize the details and record new thoughts or questions generated as you reread.
  


  * Reformulate the problem. What is the case really about? What issues are central to the problem? What conflicts between ideas, perspectives, or values are involved in deciding what action to take? Whose interests are really at stake? What are the alternatives?
  


  * Form a study group and participate in the on-line discussion to help you prepare for class discussions.
  


  * Experience and research both show that preparing cases alone is not as productive (nor as interesting) as doing it in groups. Not only do study groups help to improve your own skills, you also can learn from other students' analysis and problem-solving styles.
  


  * Use the study group to present your analysis to others, to practice articulating your ideas, to get feedback on both the ideas and presentation, to compare different views, to refine and rethink positions, and to build confidence for making contributions to the case discussion with the whole class.

**SUGGESTIONS FOR CLASS DISCUSSIONS**  
**(Rules of Engagement)**

  * **If you are a quiet person, understand that good listening is as important as talking, but that contributing your ideas is critical to your learning as well as to that of your classmates. Take "freefall" risks by expressing your views without prejudging them. We want to hear what you have to say because you may have that golden perspective that helps break through confusion and ignorance.**
  * **If you are a talkative person, understand that active listening is as important as talking, and that rambling speeches, clever comments and raw opinions can inhibit your learning and that of your classmates. In other words, stay in tune and think before you speak, but do speak!**
  * **Try to make comments that connect course material with knowledge you have acquired from other sources and that connect ideas from one case to another.**
  * **Understand that your right to an opinion does not include the right to have it taken seriously by others. Nor is having an opinion necessarily laudable. An opinion is only as good as the evidence and logic that it is based upon.**
  * **The fact that an "expert" says something does not necessarily make it true! Experts can and often do make mistakes and are subject to bias. They often disagree with other experts. All this is true of your professors and case authors as well.**
  * **Beware of the tendency to view questions in either-or/all-or-none terms. The world is a complex, messy place where absolute answers are hard to find, where gray is more common than black and white, and contradictory things are often in the same package.**
  * **Realize that when our emotions are aroused our brain wants to take orders from them. It is essential, therefore, to be willing to disconnect one's brain from one's gut and heart long enough to render due process to ideas, particularly those that are unpopular or personally distasteful. Try not to offend others intentionally, but (more importantly) do not take offence.**

  * **Value tentativeness. It is OK to admit that you are unsure. It is OK to change your mind. As in life, for many questions there are often no right answers. Credit is given for answers that demonstrate thoughtfulness, careful reading, originality, and good analysis.**
  * **Understand that learning through conversation is a process that takes time. It is different for each of us just as writing skills are different for each of us, and it requires us to depend on others for ideas, not just on ourselves or on a teacher. Yet what you learn in this way you will remember far longer. Also, the interactive skills you learn in this process will be more valuable to you than the skills of memorization and passive listening which most of you have already mastered.**

**Source: Howard Gabennesch, "Creating Quality Class Discussion," _The
Teaching Professor_**

**(November 1992):5-6 as adapted and extended by Vicky Golich, Department of
Political Science, California State University, San Marcos and edited by Eric
Hyer, Department of Political Science, Brigham Young University.**

**GENERAL BACKGROUND READING**

**If you feel you need to refresh your understanding of the political science
literature on "politics of policy making," the following books are
recommended:**

**Graham T. Allison, _The Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban Missile
Crisis_.**  
**I.M. Destler, Leslie H. Gelb, and Anthony Lake, _Our Own Worst Enemy: The
Unmaking of American Foreign Policy._**  
**Morten H. Halperin, _Bureaucratic Politics and Foreign Policy._**  
**Charles W. Kegley, Jr. and Eugene R. Wittkopf, _American Foreign Policy:
Pattern and Process._**  
**Irving L. Janis, _Groupthink: Psychological Studies of Policy Decisions and
Fiascoes_.**  
**Richard E. Neustadt and Ernest R. May, _Thinking in Time: The Uses of
History for Decision Makers._**

**If you feel you need a review of the history of international relations in
East Asia or U.S. foreign policy, the following books are recommended:**

**Mark Borthwick, _The Pacific Century: The Emergence of Modern Pacific
Asia._**  
**Arthur Power Dudden, _The American Pacific: From the Old China Trade to the
Present._**  
**John Lewis Gaddis, _We Know Now: Rethinking Cold War History_ , ch.3.**  
**Roger C. Thompson, _The Pacific Basin since 1945._**  
**James C. Thomson, Peter W. Stanley, and John Curtis Perry, _Sentimental
Imperialists: The American Experience in East Asia._**  
**Stephen E. Ambrose, _Rise to Globalism: American Foreign Policy Since
1938._**  
**Gerald L. Houseman, _America and the Pacific Rim: Coming to Terms with New
Realities._** ****

**CASE DISCUSSION SCHEDULE** **I. Security Policy**

**_General Supplementary Reading:_**  
**Dean Acheson, _Present at the Creation: My Years in the State Department._**  
**Douglas Brinkley, _Dean Acheson: the Cold War Years: 1953-71._**  
**John Lewis Gaddis, _Strategies of Containment: A Critical Appraisal of
Postwar American National Security._**  
**Young Whan Kihl and Lawrence E. Grinter, eds., _Security, Strategy, and
Policy Responses in the Pacific Basin._**  
**Richard Leaver and James L. Richardson, _Charting the Post-Cold War
Order._**  
**Michael Mendelbaum, ed. _The Strategic Quadrangle: Japan, China, Russia, and
the United States in East Asia._**  
**Kenneth B. Pyle, _The Japan Question: Power and Purpose._**  
**Robert S. Ross, ed., _China, the United States, and the Soviet Union:
Tripolarity and Policy Making in the Cold War._**  
**Sheldon W. Simon, _East Asian Security in the Post-Cold War._**

**January 8 Course Introduction and Writing Across the Curriculum**

**January 22/29 The U.S. Involvement in the Korean Conflict.**

**Due Jan 22 Memorandum on U.S. Options in the Korean War (only parts 1-5).**  
**Case Reading: "Korea and the Thirties," and "Korean War Aims" (Kennedy
Cases)**

**_Supplementary Reading:_**  
**Dean Acheson, _The Korean War_.**  
**Frank Baldwin, ed. _Without Parallel: The American-Korean Relationship Since
1945._**  
**Doug Bandow, Ted Carpenter, eds. _The U.S.-South Korean Alliance: Time for
Change_.**  
**Bruce Cummings, ed. _Child of Conflict: The Korean-American Relationship,
1943-1953._**  
**Qingzhao Hua, _From Yalta to Panmunjom: Truman's Diplomacy and the Four
Powers, 1945-1953._**  
**David McCullough, _Truman_ , pp. 773-808.**  
**Glenn Paige, _The Korean Decision._**  
**William Stueck, _The Korean War, An International History._**

**February 5/12 U.S. Involvement in the Vietnam Conflict**

**Due February 5 Case Abstract**  
**Case Reading: "Americanization of the Vietnam War" (Kennedy Case) and "Nixon
Administration and Vietnam: A Case Study in Negotiation and War Termination
(Pew Case)**  
**_Supplementary Reading:_**  
**Douglas Allen and Ngo Vinh Long, eds., _Coming To Terms: Indochina, the
United States, and the War._**  
**George Ball, _The Past Has Another Pattern._**  
**Larry Berman, _Planning a Tragedy_.**  
**Richard Betts and Leslie Gelb, _The Irony of Vietnam: The System Worked._**  
**Chen Min, _The Strategic Triangle and Regional Conflict: Lessons from the
Indochina Wars_.**  
**Clark Clifford, _Council to the President,_ Ch. 24-25.**  
**Henry Kissinger, _White House Years_ , Chs. 8 and 12.**  
**David G. Marr, _Vietnam 1945: The Quest for Power._**  
**Robert S. McNamara, _In Retrospect: The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam_.**  
**Robert S. McNamara, _Argument Without End: In Search of Answers to the
Vietnam Tragedy._**

**February 26/March 5 U.S.-China Rapprochement.**  
**Due March 5, Theoretical Analysis**  
**Case Reading: "The Negotiations to Normalize U.S.-China Relations" (Pew
Case)**  
**_Supplementary Reading:_**  
**Tony Armstrong, _Breaking the Ice: Rapprochement Between East and West
Germany, the United States and China, and Israel and Egypt._**  
**Harry Harding, _A Fragile Relationship: The United States and China since
1972_.**  
**Ramon H. Meyers, ed., _A Unique Relationship: The United States and the
Republic of China under the Taiwan Relations Act._**  
**Robert G. Sutter, _China-Watch: Sino-American Reconciliation._**  
**Robert G. Sutter, _U.S. Policy Toward China: The Role of Interest Groups_.**  
**Tan Qingshan, _The Making of U.S. China Policy: From Normalization to the
Post-Cold War Era._**  
**John W. Garver, _China's Decision for Rapprochement with the United
States_.**  
**David Finkelstein, _Washington's Taiwan Dilemma, 1949-1950: From Abandonment
to Salvation._**  
**Parris H. Chang and Martin Lasater, eds., _If China Crosses the Taiwan
Strait: The International Response._**

**March 12 U.S.-Japan Security Cooperation.**  
**Case Reading: "U.S.-Japan FSX Fighter Agreement" (Pew Case).**  
**_Supplementary Reading:_**  
**Gerald Curtis, ed., _Japan's Foreign Policy After the Cold War._**  
**Michael W. Chinworth, _Inside Japan's Defense: Technology, Economics and
Strategy_.**  
**Francis Fukuyama and Kongdan Oh, _The U.S.-Japan Security Relationship After
the Cold War._**  
**Peter J. Katzenstein and Nobuo Okawara, _Japan's National Security:
Structures, Norms and Policy Responses in a Changing World._**  
**Donald M. Snow and Eugene Brown, _Puzzle Palaces and Foggy Bottom_ , Ch. 8
(FSX case study).**  
**William J. Holstein, _The Japanese Power Game: What it Means to America._**  
**Akira Iriye and Warren I. Cohen, eds., _The United States and Japan in the
Post War World._**  
**Joseph P. Kiddell, Jr., _The Politics of Japanese Defense: Managing Internal
and External Pressures._**  
**Mark Lorell, _Rising Sun Fighter: Japan, American, and the Struggle over
FSX_.**

**II. Economic Policy**

**_General Supplementary Reading:_**  
**Cal Clark and Steve Chan, eds., _The Evolving Pacific Basin in the Global
Political Economy: Domestic and International Linkages_.**  
**Mary Brown Bullock and Robert S. Litwak, eds., _The United States and the
Pacific Basin: Changing Economic and Security Relations._**  
**David B.H. Denoon, _Real Reciprocity: Balancing U.S. Economic and Security
Policies in the Pacific Basin._**  
**I.M. Destler, _Making Foreign Economic Policy._**  
**Eric Jones, Lionel Frost, and Colin White, _Coming Full Circle: An Economic
History of the Pacific Rim._**  
**James W. Morley, ed., _Driven by Growth: Political Change in the Asia-
Pacific Region._**  
**Laura D'Andrea Tyson, _Who's Bashing Whom?: Trade Conflict in High-
Technology Industries._**  
**Robert S. Walters, ed., _Talking Trade: U.S. Policy in International
Perspective._**

**March 19 "Managing" U.S.-Japanese Trade.**

**Case Reading: "The Reagan Administration, the Auto Producers, and the 1981
Agreement with Japan" (Pew Case).**  
**_Supplementary Reading:_**  
**Dennis J. Encarnation, _Rivals Beyond Trade: American versus Japan in Global
Competition._**  
**I.M. Destler, Hideo Sato, Priscilla Clapp, Haruhiro Fukui, _Managing an
Alliance: The Politics of U.S.-Japanese Relations._**  
**Alan Romberg and Tadashi Yamamoto, eds., _Same Bed, Different Dreams:
American and Japan--Societies in Transition._**  
**Endymion Wilkinson, _Japan Versus the West: Image and Reality._**

**III. Promoting "American" Values**

**_General Supplementary Reading:_**  
**Jacques Barzun, _Is Democratic Theory for Export?_.**  
**David L. Cingranelli, _Ethics, American Foreign Policy, and the Third
World_.**  
**Douglas J. Macdonald, _Adventures in Chaos: American Intervention for Reform
in the Third World._**  
**Miroslav Nincic, _Democracy and Foreign Policy: The Fallacy of Political
Realism_.**  
**Joshua Muravchik, _Exporting Democracy: Fulfilling America's Destiny._**  
**William Korey, _The Promises We Keep: Human Rights, the Helsinki Process and
American Foreign Policy._**  
**Beth Sims, _National Endowment for Democracy (NED): A Foreign Policy Branch
Gone Awry._**  
**Sara Steinmetz, _Democratic Transition and Human Rights: Perspectives on
U.S. Foreign Policy._**  
**R.J. Vincent, _Foreign Policy and Human Rights: Issues and Responses_.**  
**R.J. Vincent, _Human Rights and International Relations_.**  
**UNA-USA Policy Studies Panel on United States Foreign Policy, _United States
Foreign Policy and Human Rights: Principles, Priorities, Practice._**

**March 26 Sanctions against China following the Tiananmen Square Massacre,
1989.**  
**Due March 26 Memorandum on U.S.-China Human Rights policy.**  
**Case Reading: "Values versus Interests: The United States' Response to the
Tiananmen Massacre" (Pew Case)**  
**_Supplementary Reading:_**  
**Vladimir N. Pregelj, "Most-Favored-Nation Status of the People's Republic of
China," Issue Brief IB-89-119 (Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress,
Congressional Research Service, March 1991).**  
**_United States-People's Republic of China (PRC) Trade Relations, Including
Most-Favored-Nation Trade Status for the PRC_ , Hearings before the
Subcommittee on Trade of the House Committee on Ways and Means, 101 Cong. 2
sess. (Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1990).**  
**R. Rand le Edwards, Louis Henkin, and Andrew J. Nathan, _Human Rights in
Contemporary China._**  
**"Supporting the Development of Democracy in China," in Raymond D. Gastil,
ed., _Freedom in the World: Political and Civil Liberties, 1983-1984._**  
**Merle Goldman, "Human Rights in the People's Republic of China," _Daedalus_
112 (Fall 1983).**  
**Liu Binyan, _Tell the World._**  
**Susan L. Shirk, "Human Rights: What about China?" _Foreign Policy_ , no. 29
(Winter 1977-78).**  
**James R. Lilly and Wendell L. Willkie II, eds. _Beyond MFN: Trade with China
and American Interests._**  
**April 9/16 Student Case Presentations**

