**P.S. 215S: DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS**



FALL 1998



Herbert Kitschelt

office hours: Wednesday 3:45 - 5:00 PM and by appointment





The seminar analyses the choice and the consequences of democratic
institutions for modes of political interest intermediation, public policy-
making, and regime stability. The subject matter of the course and the
empirical evidence discussed are not confined to a particular region of the
world. In fact, the course topic lends itself to cross-regional comparison.
The course begins with three secessions considering theoretical and
methodological aspects of institutional analysis. While there has been
considerable research on the consequences of institutions, venturing into the
study of the emergence of institutions still enters in part unchartered
territory. Nevertheless, in light of the large number of democracies that have
newly appeared over the past 25 years, accounting for the emergence of
institutions is one of the research frontiers of comparative politics.



In its second and third part, the course deals at length with two institutions
that profoundly affect the governance structures of democracy, electoral laws
and legislative-executive relations. In the fourth part, we examine three
further institutions more briefly, the internal structure of legislatures,
federalism, and the role of Central Banks. The last two course sessions are
devoted to students' presentations of research projects.



BASIC READINGS



There are a number of books to be purchased from the bookstore. Articles for
the course will be available in hardcopies in the graduate student lounge and
electronically in the library's electronic reserves. The basic books are:



Cox, Gary, _Making Votes Count_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.

Knight, Jack, _Institutions and Social Conflict_. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1992.

Linz, Arturo and Arturo Valenzuela, eds., _The Failure of Presidential
Democracy_. Vol. 1. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins

University Press, 1994.

North, Douglass, _Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic
Performance_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,

1990.

Scharpf, Fritz, _Games Real Actors Play_. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press,
1997.

Shugart, Matthew Soberg, and John M. Carey, _Presidents and Assemblies_.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.

Taagepera, Rein, and Matthew Soberg Shugart, _Seats and Votes_. New Haven:
Yale University Press,

1989\. (this book is now available only in hardback; purchase is recommended,
but not required)





COURSE REQUIREMENTS



1\. TWO written reports on institutional arrangements in individual countries.
Each report is on a different institution, with three institutions to pick
from (electoral laws, executive-legislative design, federalism/territorial
division of jurisdictions). For each report, you choose a different country
from lists provided at the end of the syllabus. You may be asked to give a
brief oral report on your country's institution. Every course participant has
to circulate her/his report by e-mail to the other course participants **_no
later than on the Tuesday, 5 pm, preceding the day of the course session in
which we will discuss the materials you cover in your comment_**.

Each report: 10% of the course grade.



2\. Written comments on the course readings for two seminar sessions, with
weeks 5 and 6 and 8 through 12 eligible for choice. Circulate your comments by
e-mail to all course participants **_no later than on the Tuesday, 5 pm,
preceding the day of the course session in which we will discuss the materials
you cover in your comment_**. On one occasion you write a comment, you may be
asked to lead the seminar discussion (two course participants can do this
jointly).

Each comment: 10% of the course grade.



3\. A research paper in which you compare the choice, attempted reform or
implemented revision of _one_ democratic institution (choose from: electoral
laws, executive-legislative design, territorial jurisdictions, Central Banks)
in _at least two countries_. Please discuss your choice of topic with the
course instructor. Undergraduate papers should be in the neighborhood of 15
pages, graduate students choose between writing minor or major research
papers. Some oral presentations of preliminary research results will be
scheduled for the final two class session of the semester. Final papers must
be submitted no later than December 17, 1998. Course paper: 50% of the grade.



4\. Regular class attendance is expected. Class participation: 10% of the
grade.







**PART I: METHODOLOGICAL AND CONCEPTUAL PRELIMINARIES**







WEEK 1: _Basic Concepts -- Institutions and Democracy_ (September 2)





REQUIRED READINGS:



Douglass North, _Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance_
, pp. 3-69

Sue E.S. Crawford and Elinor Ostrom, "A Grammar of Institutions," _American
Political Science Review_ , 89 (1995) 3:

582-600.

David Collier and Steven Levitsky, "Democracy 'With Adjectives.' Conceptual
Innovation in Comparative Research,"

_World Politics_ , 49 (1997) 3: 130-51.

Jon Elster, "The Market and the Forum: Three Varieties of Political Theory,"
pp. 103-32 in Jon Elster and Aanund

Hylland, eds. _Foundations of Social Choice Theory_. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1986.

James Gardner March and Johan P. Olsen, "The New Institutionalism:
Organizational Factors in Political Life," _American_

_Political Science Review_ , 78 (1984) 3: 734-49.





FURTHER READINGS:



David Copp, Jean Hampton, and John E. Roemer, eds., _The Idea of Democracy_.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,

1993.

Robert Dahl, _Democracy and its Critics_. New Haven: Yale University Press,
1989.

David Held, _Models of Democracy_. Cambridge: Polity Press, 1987.

David Held, _Democracy and the Global Order_. Stanford: Stanford University
Press, 1995.

Stephen Holmes, "Precommitment and the Paradox of Democracy," pp. 195-240 in:
Jon Elster and Rune Slagstad, eds.,

_Constitutionalism and Democracy_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1988.

Terry Moe, "Politics and the Theory of Organization," _Journal of Law,
Economics and Organization_ , 7 (1991): 106-29.

William Riker, _Liberalism Against Populism_. San Francisco: Freeman, 1982.

Alois Schumpeter, _Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy_. New York: Harper
1946.







WEEK 2: _The Logic of Institutional Analysis_ (September 9)





REQUIRED READING:



Scharpf, _Games Real Actors Can Play_. entire



FURTHER READINGS:



Trainn Eggertsson, _Economic Behavior and Institutions_. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1990.

Jon Elster, _The Cement of Society_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1989.

Kenneth J. Koford and Jeffrey B. Miller, _Social Norms and Economic
Institutions_. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan

Press, 1991.

David Kreps, _Game Theory and Economic Modelling_. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1990.

Jane J. Mansbridge, ed., _Beyond Self-Interest_. Chicago and London: The
University of Chicago Press, 1990.

Kenneth Shepsle, "Studying Institutions. Some Lessons from the Rational Choice
Approach," _Journal of Theoretical_

_Politics_ , 1 (1989) 2: 131-47.

Sven Steinmo and Kathleen Thelen, "Historical Institutionalism in Comparative
Perspective," pp. 1-32 in Steinmo and

Thelen, _Structuring Politics_ , New York: Cambridge University Press, 1992.

George Tsebelis, _Nested Games_. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of
California Press, 1990.

Oliver Williamson, _The Economic Institutions of Capitalism_. New York: Free
Press, 1985.







WEEK 3: _The Emergence of Institutions: Design and Evolution_ (September 16)





REQUIRED READINGS:



Knight, _Institutions and Social Conflict_ , entire

North, _Institutions,..._ pp. 73-140





FURTHER READINGS:



Lee J. Alston, Trainn Eggertsson, and Douglass C. North, eds., _Empirical
Studies in Institutional Change_.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996.

Robert Axelrod, _The Evolution of Cooperation_. New York: Basic Books, 1984.

Robert Bates, "Contra Contractarianism: Some Reflections on the New
Institutionalism," _Politics and Society_ , 16 (1988):

387-401.

John N. Drobak and John V.C. Nye, eds., _The Frontiers of the New
Institutional Economics_. London: Academic Press

1997.

Jon Elster, Claus Offe, and Ulrich K. Preuss, with Frank Boenker, Ulrike
Goetting and Friedbert W. Rueb, _Institutional_

_Design in Post-communist societies. Rebuilding the Ship at Sea_. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1998.

Robert Goodin, ed., _The Theory of Institutional Design_. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1996.

Michael Hechter, Karl-Dieter Opp, and Reinhard Wippler, eds., _Social
Institutions. Their Emergence, Maintenance, and_

_Effects_. New York: Walter de Gruyter, 1990.

Jack Knight and Itai Sened, eds., _Explaining Social Institutions_. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press, 1995.

Margret Levi, _Of Rule and Revenue_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1988.

Margret Levi, "A Logic of Institutional Change," pp. 403-18 in: Karen Schwers
Cook and Margret Levi, eds., _The Limits_

_of Rationality_. Chicago: Chicago University Press 1990. (see also the
articles by Michael Taylor (222-239) and Russell Hardin (358-77) in the same
volume.

Douglass C. North, _Structure and Change in Economic History_. New York:
Norton, 1981.

Andrew Schotter, _The Economic Theory of Social Institutions_. Cambridge:
Cambridge University

Press, 1981.

Michael Taylor, "Structure, Culture, and Action in the Explanation of Social
Change," pp. 89-132 in William James Booth,

Patrick James, and Hudson Meadwell, _Politics and Rationality_. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1993.

  

**PART II: ELECTORAL LAWS**





WEEK 4: _The Variety of Electoral Laws_ (September 23)





REQUIRED READINGS:





Cox, _Making Votes Count_ , introduction (3-12), CHAPTER 3 (37-68), and browse
through Appendix A (279-302).

Taagepera and Shugart, _Seats and Votes_ , chapter 3 (19-37)





FURTHER READINGS:



Andr¨¦ Blais and Louis Massicotte, "Electoral Systems," pp. 49-82 in Lawrence
LeDuc, Richard G. Niemi, and Pippa

Norris, eds., _Comparing Democracies. Elections and Voting in Global
Perspective_. Thousand Oaks: Sage, 1996.

Mark P. Jones, "Guide to the Electoral Systems of the Americas," _Electoral
Studies_ , 14 (1995): 5-21.

Arend Lijphart, _Electoral Systems and Party Systems: A Study of Twenty-Seven
Democracies, 1945-1990_. Oxford: Oxford

University Press, 1994. appendices pp. 153-78.

Thomas T. Mackie and Richard Rose, _The International Alamanac of Electoral
History_. Third edition. Washington, D.C.:

Congressional Quarterly, 1991.

Giovanni Sartori, _Comparative Constitutional Engineering_. New York: New York
University Press, 1994. chapters 1-2.







WEEK 5: _The Impact of Electoral Laws_ (September 30)





REQUIRED READINGS:



John M. Carey and Matthew Soberg Shugart, "Incentives to Cultivate a Personal
vote: a Rank Ordering of Electoral

Formulas," _Electoral Studies_ , 14 (1995) 4: 417-39.

Cox, _Making Votes Count_ , chapters 2 (13-33), chapters 4 through 11 (69-224)
and skim chapters 12 through 14 (225-65).

Mikhail G. Filippov and Olga V. Shvetsova, Political Institutions and Party
Systems in New Democracies of Eastern

Europe. Paper delivered at the 1995 Annual Meeting of the American Political
Science Association, Chicago, 8/30 - 9/3.

Arend Lijphart, "The Political Consequences of Electoral Laws, 1945-85,"
_American Political Science Review_ , 84 (1990):

481-96.

Robert G. Moser, The Impact of Electoral Systems on New Democracies: The
Russian Case in Comparative Perspective,"

Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Political Science
Association, Washington, D.C., August 28-31, 1997.

Taagepera and Shugart, _Seats and Votes_ , chapters 7 through 13 67-155



FURTHER READINGS:



Barry Ames, "Electoral Strategy under Open-List Proportional Representation,"
_American Journal of Political Science_ ,

39 (1995) 2: 406-33.

Maurice Duverger, _Political Parties. Their Organization and Activity in the
Modern State_. New York: Wiley, 1954.

Bernard Grofman and Arend Lijphart, _Electoral Laws and their Consequences_.
New York: Agathon Press, 1986.

Richard Gunther, "Electoral Laws, Party Systems, and Elites: The Case of
Spain," _American Political Science Review_ ,

83 (1989): 835-58.

Mark P. Jones, _Electoral Laws and the Survival of Presidential Democracies_.
Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame

Press, 1995.

Richard Katz, _A Theory of Party and Electoral Systems_. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1980.

Arend Lijphart, "Democratization and Constitutional Choices in Czecho-
Slovakia, Hungary and Poland, 1989-91," _Journal_

_of Theoretical Politics_ , 4 (1992): 207-23.

Arend Lijphart, _Electoral Systems and Party Systems: A Study of Twenty-Seven
Democracies, 1945-1990_. Oxford: Oxford

University Press, 1994.

Arend Lijphart and Bernard Grofman, eds., _Choosing an Electoral System.
Issues and Alternatives_. New York: Praeger,

1985.

Scott Mainwaring, "Politicians, Parties, and Electoral Systems: Brazil in
Comparative Perspective," _Comparative_

_Politics_ , 24 (1991): 21-43.

Robert G. Moser, "The Impact of Parliamentary Electoral Systems in Russia,"
_Post-Soviet Affairs_ , 13 (1997) 3: 284-302.

Douglas W. Rae, _The Political Consequences of Electoral Laws_. New Haven:
Yale University Press, 1971.

Steven R. Reed, "Structure and Behaviour: Extending Duverger's Law to the
Japanese Case," _British Journal of Political_

_Science_ , 29 (1991): 335-56.

William H. Riker, "The Two-Party System and Duverger's Law: An Essay on the
History of Political Science," _American_

_Political Science Review_ , 76 (1982): 753-66.

Giacomo Sani and Giovanni Sartori, "Polarization, Fragmentation, and
Competition in Western Democracies," PP. 307-40

in Hans Daalder and Peter Mair, eds., _Western European Party Systems_.
Beverly Hills, Ca.: Sage, 1983.

Giovanni Sartori, "The Influence of Electoral Systems: Faulty Laws or Faulty
Method," pp. 43-68 in Bernard Grofman and Arend Lijphart, _Electoral Laws and
their Consequences_. New York: Agathon Press, 1986.

Giovanni Sartori, _Comparative Constitutional Engineering_. New York: New York
University Press, 1994. chapter 3.







WEEK 6: _The Choice and Reform of Electoral Laws_ (October 7)





REQUIRED READINGS:



Carles Boix, Choosing Electoral Rules. Structural Factors or Political
Calculations? Fourth version. Ohio State University,

April 1998.

Dieter Nohlen, "Electoral Systems and Electoral Reform in Latin America," pp.
43-58 in: Arend Lijphart and Carlos H.

Waisman, eds., _Institutional Design in New Democracies. Eastern Europe and
Latin America_. Boulder, Colo.:

Westview Press, 1996.

Adam Przeworski, _Democracy and the Market_. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1991, pp. 79-88.

Ronald Rogowski, "Trade and the Variety of Democratic Institutions,"
_International Organization_ , 41 (1987) 2: 203-23.

Taagepera and Shugart, _Seats and Votes_ , chapter 18, pp. 218-37.

Rein Taagepera, The Tailor of Marrakesh: Western Electoral Systems Advice to
Emerging Democracies. UC Irvine 1997.

downloaded from http://hypatia.ss.uci.edu/democ/papers/rein.htm





FURTHER READINGS:



Kathleen Bawn, "The Logic of Institutional Preferences: German Electoral Law
as a Social Choice Outcome," _American_

_Journal of Political Science_ , Vol. 37 (1993): 965-89.

A. M. Carstairs, _A Short History of Electoral Systems in Western Europe_.
London: Allen and Unwin, 1980.

David Chapman, _Can Civil Wars Be Avoided? Electoral and Constitutional Models
for Ethnically Divided Countries_.

London: The Institute for Social Inventions, 1991.

_Designing Electoral Regimes_ , special issue of _East European Constitutional
Review_ , Vol. 3 (Spring 1994), No. 2. (with

inventory of electoral law provisions, 65-77.

Peter Katzenstein, _Small States in World Markets_. Ithaca, New York: Cornell
University Press. pp. 136-57.

Seymour Martin Lipset and Stein Rokkan, "Cleavage Structures, Party Systems,
and Voter Alignments. An Introduction,"

pp. 1-64 in Lipset and Rokkan, eds., _Party Systems and Voter Alignments.
Cross-National Perspectives_. New York: Free Press, 1967.

Thomas F. Remington and Steven S. Smith, "Political Goals, Institutional
Context, and the Choice of an Electoral System:

The Russian Parliamentary Election Law," _American Journal of Political
Science_ , 40 (1996) 4: 1253-79.

Giovanni Sartori, _Comparative Constitutional Engineering_. New York: New York
University Press, 1994. chapter 4.

  

**PART III: EXECUTIVE-LEGISLATIVE RELATIONS**







WEEK 7: _Presidentialism and Parliamentarism_ (October 14)





REQUIRED READINGS:



John M. Carey and Matthew Soberg Shugart, "Calling Out the Tanks or Filling
Out the Forms?" pp. 1-29 in Carey and

Shugart, eds., _Executive Decree Authority_. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1998.

Thomas Baylis, "Presidents versus Prime Ministers. Shaping Executive Authority
in Eastern Europe," _World Politics_ ,

48 (1996) 3: 297-323.

Shugart and Carey, _Presidents and Assemblies_ , pp. 1-27, 76-166





FURTHER READINGS:



John M. Carey, Octavio Amorim Neto, and Matthew Soberg Shugart, "Appendix:
Outlines of Constitutional Powers in

Latin America," pp. 440-460 in Scott Mainwaring and Matthew Soberg Shugart,
eds., _Presidentialism and Democracy in Latin America_. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1997.

John M. Carey and Matthew Shugart, eds., _Executive Decree Authority_.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.

Arend Lijphart, ed., _Parliamentary versus Presidential Government_. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1992.

James McGregor, "The Presidency in East Central Europe," _Radio Free
Europe/Radio Liberty Research Reports_ , Vol. 2

(1994) 41: 23-31.

_The Postcommunist Presidency_. special issue of _East European Constitutional
Review_ , Fall 1993-winter 1994 (with

inventory of the powers of post-communist presidents, pp. 82-94).

Giovanni Sartori, _Comparative Constitutional Engineering_. New York: New York
University Press, 1994. chapters 5-7.







WEEK 8: _The Impact of Executive-Legislative Design_ (October 21)





REQUIRED READINGS:



Linz and Valenzuela, eds. _The Failure of Presidential Democracy_ ,
contributions by Linz (3-87), Lijphart (91-105), Sartori

(106-18) and Stepan and Skach (119-36).

Donald Horowitz, Lipset, Linz, and Riggs, debates on presidentialism, pp.
203-22 in: Arend Lijphart, ed., _Parliamentary_

_versus Presidential Government_. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992.

Juan J. Linz, "Introduction: Some Thoughts on Presidentialism in Postcommunist
Europe," pp. 1-15 in Raymond Taras,

ed., _Post-Communist Presidents_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.

Peter C. Ordeshook, "In

