**Brigham Young University**

**History 201, Section 5 **

**World Civilization to 1500 AD**

Fall 1999 Professor: Eric Engel Tuten

MWF, 8-8:50am Office Hours: MWF, 10-11:00 am

C-295 ESC (or by appointment)

Office: 106 KMB; Phone: 378-6408

Teaching Assistants: Shelly Taylor and Michael Carruth Home Phone: 375-8841

Office: 111KMB; Office Hours: Taylor- Carruth- eetuten@aol.com

Office Phone: 378-2891; Home Phones: /

**_Course Description_** __

This course introduces the student to the civilizations of the ancient world
from c. 3500 BC to c. 1500 AD. Through examining the political, social, and
cultural achievements of this period, the student will be better acquainted
with the roots of the Western heritage, as well as those of non-Western
traditions. An attempt will also be made to show the importance of religious
and philosophical thinking in the development of human civilizations the world
over, and to emphasize the shared aspects of the human experience regardless
of time and place. Unfortunately, a survey course of the world such as this
does not allow for in-depth analysis of every aspect of all civilizations. As
a result, one must be selective in the presentation of information. It is
hoped, however, that the topics and issues discussed will spark your interest
and lead to further study of one or more aspects of the course contents. One
of the most important roles of a teacher is to excite students to learn more
about the world around them.

**_Required Reading_** __

You will find the following **required** texts on the textbook floor of the
BYU Bookstore (upstairs):

1\. William H. McNeill, _A History of the Human Community: Prehistory to 1500_
, Vol. I.

2\. Peter Stearns, et. al, eds., _Documents in World History_ , Vol. I.

3\. Benjamin Hoff, _The Tao of Pooh_.

4\. Harold S. Kushner, _When Bad Things Happen to Good People_.

In addition to the above required texts, I have placed important **required**
**readings** in the reserve library (third floor, HBLL) or on electronic
reserve on the Internet. I have listed the specific information for these
readings under "Reserve" for each week of the course (see "Weekly Schedule"
below). I encourage you to do the assigned weekly reading so as to participate
in class discussions. Hopefully, the readings will elicit a variety of
opinions on the themes and issues addressed throughout the semester.

**_Course Requirements and Grading_**

I will assign final grades according the following requirements:

1\. 5 Reading Quizzes (each with 10 questions worth 2 points each) 100

2\. 3 two-three page Papers--two on readings and one "Internet" assignment (50
points each) 150

3\. 2 one-page Papers on "The Power of Myth" AND/OR MOA series (25 points
each) 50

4\. Midterm Exam 100

5\. Final Exam 100

__

Total points possible: 500

I will calculate grades for exams and papers, and the final course grade, on a
straight percentage of the total points earned as follows:

94-100 A 74-76 C

91-93 A- 71-73 C-

87-90 B+ 67-70 D+

84-86 B 64-66 D

81-83 B- 61-63 D-

77-80 C+

_5 Quizzes_ : The reading quizzes will consist of multiple choice, true--
false, and/or short answer questions dealing with information in both the
McNeill and Stearn texts and the reserve readings.

_3 two-three page Papers_ : The two papers on readings will be _2-3 page
thought papers_ dealing with questions about : (1) Kushner's _When Bad Things
Happen_..., plus the biblical book of _Job_ and selections from the Book of
Mormon; (2) Hoff's _The Tao of Pooh_. For the _"Internet" paper_ , you will be
required to choose one website dealing with **ancient history** and write a
2-3 page analysis of the site. I will provide a handout for each paper at
least one week before they are due. Due dates for all three papers are listed
in the "Weekly Schedule" below.

_2 one-page Papers_ : I require you either to view _two_ one-hour series (out
of six) of "Joseph Campbell and the Power of Myth" or to attend _two_
performances at the Harris Fine Arts Center (HFAC). You will write a _one-page
paper_ for each video/performance expressing your _thoughts_ ( _not_ a
summary!) on one or more aspects of the video/performance. The LRC (fourth
floor, HBLL) has the Campbell series on laser disc (LD #37). For possibilities
on the two HFAC performances, see page 6. You can turn these papers in to me
any time during the semester through **Monday, November 29 (5:00 pm)**. I will
mark down substantially any papers received after that time. I also reserve
the right to take off points for wide margins, large font size (please use the
standard 12), etc.

___Midterm Exam_ : You will take the midterm exam **at the testing center
during week 8**. I will give you a Study Guide during week 7 that will explain
the format for the exam. I will base all questions on class lectures and your
reading.

_Final Exam_ : Same format as the midterm exam and will not be comprehensive.
**You will take the final exam in the classroom**.

**_Weekly Schedule_**

_Week 1 (August 30, September 1, 3)_ :

Introduction to the course. Video: "Why Man Creates." Discussion on history
and historical methodology.

What is "prehistory"?

_Reading_ : McNeill: Preface and Chapter 1 (pp. xiii-xiv, 1-19).

Reserve: _The Global Experience_ , _Vol I_ , pp. 1-13 ("Global Conceptions of
the Cosmos and Creation").

_Week 2 (September 6--[HOLIDAY], 8, 10)_ :

Ancient river valley civilizations from the Nile to the Indus, 3500-1500 BC.

Short class discussion on the "Global Conceptions" reading from week 1.

_Reading_ : McNeill: Chapter 2 (pp. 21-47).

Stearns: pp. xv-24.

Kushner: _When Bad Things Happen to Good People_

_Book of Mormon_ : Mosiah 27; Alma 50 and 60

_Job_ (read King James Version) ( **Paper due IN CLASS Friday, September 24**
)

_Week 3 (September 13, 15, 17)_ :

Spread of civilization to rain-watered land in the ancient Near East and
eastern Mediterranean, 2000-1200 BC.

_Reading_ : McNeill: Chapter 3 (pp. 49-78).

_Week 4 (September 20, 22, 24)_ :

Development of empire and religion in the Near East, 1200-500 BC. Hebrew and
Persian monotheism.

Class discussion on Kushner papers.

_Reading_ : McNeill: Chapter 4 (pp. 79-98).

Stearns: pp. 25-31.

Reserve: _The Human Record_ , _Vol. I_ , pp. 49-50, 78-85.

_Week 5 (September 27, 27, October 1)_ :

Greek civilization to c. 500 BC.

_Reading_ : McNeill: Chapter 5 (pp. 99-120).

Stearns: pp. 77-81.

Reserve: _The Global Experience_ , _Vol I_ , pp. 53-58.

Hoff, _The Tao of Pooh_. ( **Paper due IN CLASS Friday, October 15** )

_Week 6 (October 4, 6, 8)_ :

Indian civilization to c. 500 BC.

_Reading_ : McNeill: Chapter 6 (pp. 122-141).

Stearns: pp. 57-61, 67-72.

Reserve: _The Global Experience_ , _Vol I_ , pp. 64-66, 78-80.

_Week 7 (October 11, 13, 15)_ :

Chinese civilization to c. 200 BC.

Class discussion on Hoff papers and Taoism

_Reading_ : McNeill: Chapter 7 and "Epilogue: Part I" (pp. 142-168).

Stearns: pp. 35-46.

Reserve: _The Human Record_ , _Vol I_ , pp. 24-27, 87-91.

___Week 8 (October 18, 20, 22)_ :

**TAKE MIDTERM AT TESTING CENTER (October 20-22)**

Development and expansion of the classical Mediterranean world, 500 BC to 200
AD.

_Reading_ : McNeill: Chapter 8 (pp. 169-196).

Stearns: pp. 82-96.

Reserve: _The Global Experience_ , pp. 101-103, 108-119.

_The Human Record_ , pp. 112-116, 124-128.

Sophocles' _Antigone_ (found at--
http://classics.mit.edu/sophocles/antigone.html).

( **In-class discussion on _Antigone_ TBA** )

_Week 9 (October 25, 27, 29)_ :

Buddhism, Hinduism, Christianity, and barbarian invasion, 200 BC to 600AD.

_Reading_ : McNeill: Chapter 9 (pp. 198-224).

Stearns: pp. 47-56, 62-66, 73-76.

Reserve: _The Human Record_ , _Vol I_ , pp. 130-31.

_The Global Experience_ , pp. 151-62.

Electronic Reserve: "The Axial Age."

_Week 10 (November 1, 3, 5)_ :

From Arabian unity to great world empire: the rise and development of Islamic
Empires in the Near East and India, 600-1200 AD. Discussion of _Antigone_
papers-- _Antigone_ and Mormon polygyny: what do they have in common?

_Reading_ : McNeill: Chapter 10 (pp. 226-249).

Stearns: pp. 99-120, 145-54.

Reserve: _The Human Record_ , _Vol I_ , pp. 220-226, 278-84.

_Week 11 (November 8, 10, 12)_ :

Islam continued. Growth and development of Far East civilizations and of the
Americas, 600-1200 AD.

_Reading_ : McNeill: Chapter 10 (cont.) and Chapter 11 (pp. 250-271).

Stearns: pp. 121-34

Reserve: _The Human Record_ , _Vol I_ , pp. 250-54, 273-75, 284-88.

_Week 12 (November 15, 17, 19)_ :

More barbarian invasions and migrations in Europe and development of Church
and State, 500-1200 AD. **Internet paper due BY 5:00 PM Wednesday, November
17**.

_Reading_ : McNeill: Chapter 12 (pp. 273-303).

Stearns: pp. 155-63.

Reserve: _The Human Record_ , _Vol I_ , pp. 292-96, 305-309.

_Week 13 (November 22, 24, 26--[HOLIDAY])_ :

Eurasia from 1200-1500 AD: Mongols, Japan, and Islam.

_Reading_ : McNeill: Chapter 13 (pp. 304-328).

Stearns: pp. 135-44.

Reserve: _The Human Record_ , pp. 342-47, 352-56, 372-77.

___Week 14 (November 29, December 1, 3)_ :

Developments in Western Europe, 1200-1500 AD.

_Reading_ : McNeill: Chapter 14 (pp. 330-352).

Stearns: pp. 164-83

Reserve: _The Human Record_ , pp. 214-19, 310-16, 367-71.

_The Global Experience_ , pp. 293-99

_Week 15 (December 6, 7 [MWF CLASSES], 8)_ :

Epilogue to the course. African and American civilizations.

_Reading_ : McNeill: "Epilogue: Part II" (pp. 353-360).

Reserve: _The Human Record_ , pp. 317-341, 362-367.

******Reading Days: December 9, 10; FINAL EXAM: Wednesday, December 15,
7-10:00 am, C-295 ESC**

**_Possibilities for HFAC performances_** :

1\. Greek Theatre Festival: _The Libation Bearers_ (de Jong Concert Hall)

Tuesday, October 5

King Agamemnon is slain as he enters his home upon returning from the Trojan
War. Should his son and daughter avenge his death? What if the murderer is
their own mother? Aeschylus's _Libation Bearers_ is the middle play of the
sole surviving Greek trilogy, the _Oresteia_.

$5 ($1 off presale)

2\. "The Mystical Arts of Tibet" (de Jong Concert Hall)

Saturday, October 16

Featuring the famed multiphonic singers of Drepung Loseling Monastery, the
magnificently robed Mystical Arts of Tibet play traditional long horns,
trumpets, drums, and bells to promote world healing through ancient music and
dance.

$10 ($2 off with BYU or student ID)

3\. Shiraishi (Nelke Theatre)

Saturday, October 30

The premier actress of the Wasedu Sho-Gekijo--one of the leading actresses in
the world--is Shiraishi Kayoko. "Her voice is unforgettable, anchored to the
earth, a rich alto capable of astounding variations of timbre, range, and
dynamics" ( _Christian Science Monitor_ ).

$10 ($2 off with BYU or student ID)

4\. "Shanahy" (Madsen Recital Hall)

Thursday, November 4

Shanahy has been entertaining audiences with its unique Celtic music since
1994. The Shanahy "sound" is characterized by the presence of Scottish lowland
pipes, hammered dulcimer, whistle, flute, fiddles, guitars, and voice. This
group's repertoire consists of traditional ballads, jigs, reels, strathspeys,
waltzes, and a few original pieces performed within the Celtic style.

$10 ($2 off with BYU or student ID)

5\. _Children of Eden_ by Stephen Schwartz and John Caird (Pardoe Theatre)

Wed.-Sat., November 17-20

Tues.-Sat., November 23-27

With music by Stephen Schwartz, composer of _Prince of Egypt_ and _Pippin_ ,
and lyrics by John Caird, codirector of the original _Les Miserables_ , comes
an inspirational new musical about parents, children, and faith. Through the
stories of Adam, Eve, Noah, and their offspring, _Children of Eden_ makes a
tuneful, charming, and heartfelt statement about the age-old pains and
pleasures of parenting.

$10 ($2 off with BYU or student ID)

6\. "Folk Music Ensemble" (Madsen Recital Hall)

Saturday, November 20

With a sharp blend of traditional and contemporary folk, the Folk Music
Ensemble delivers a diverse program packed with unique instruments and
talented musicians.

$8 ($3 off with BYU or student ID)

**Fulfillment of requirements for this course is based on the "old-fashioned"
idea that you, the students, are _responsible for your own education_** ****

**Please make sure you read and understand the following:**

1\. Read your syllabus so you (a) fully understand course requirements and (b)
know due dates for assignments. Now that I have informed you of this you will
be responsible for handing assignments in on time. Points will be taken off
for assignments handed in late!

2\. Take the Reading Quizzes in class the date they are given. If you miss a
Reading Quiz, you forfeit the points.

The  only exceptions to this are:

A. You contact me ahead of time (even if it means leaving a message on my home
phone) if you have a good excuse for not being available the day the Quiz is
given. In such a case, we will set up another time for you to take the Quiz.

B. Something happens to you on the way to campus/class that is completely out
of your control (i.e. car accident, car break down, alien abduction, death,
etc). In such a case, it is your responsibility to contact me ASAP after
class, so we can schedule a time that same day for you to take the Quiz.

