Sociology 711, Spring 2001  
Sociology of Work  
Professor Randy Hodson

SYLLABUS

Class hours/location: MW 1:30-3:18, Bolz 128  
Office hours:   MW 12:00-1:00 or by appointment

Course Description

This course provides a survey of the major theories, issues and empirical
literature in the sociology of work and is designed as an introduction to this
area for graduate students.  Topics covered include the nature and experience
of work, occupations and professions, organizations, international comparisons
and contemporary developments.  As with any survey course, especially a survey
course for a large and diverse area, the selection of topics and issues
covered is far from comprehensive.

Learning Objectives

1\. To provide students with knowledge concerning the nature of work, the
functioning of organizations and economic aspects of society.

2\. To introduce students to some of the important debates and issues in the
study of work, organizations and society and to the concepts necessary for
understanding these issues and debates.

3\. To develop students' abilities to engage in critical thinking concerning
both theoretical and empirical work and to evaluate its strengths and
weaknesses.

4\. To develop students' abilities to present orally in class and to engage in
considered intellectual discussions.

5\. To develop students' abilities to generate original research ideas
relevant to the issues in the sociology of work.

Requirements

1\. Students must do at least 4 of 9 weekly essays reacting to and critiquing
the week's required readings.  These must be typed, double-spaced, and be a
maximum of 3 pages in length.  The four best essays will count for 30% of the
course grade.  Essays are due on Wednesdays.

2\. Each student must prepare a written critical book review of one of the
books on the weekly book list.  The review must be typed, double-spaced, and
1000 words in length.  The review will also be presented to the class,
supplemented by an outline summarizing the book's content and handed out to
all class members before the oral presentation.  A separate handout provides
more details.  The outline, written review, and oral presentation together
constitute 20% of the course grade.

3\. Class participation in discussions will count for 20% of the course grade.
Part of class participation is writing 1-2 thoughtful discussion questions on
the week's readings.  The discussion questions are due by Noon on Tuesdays and
are to be emailed to me at r.hodson@osu.edu.

4\. A final project is also required and will count for 30% of the course
grade.  The project is due by 5:00 P.M. on Wednesday of finals week.  Students
may choose either to do a reading and conceptual coding of a workplace
ethnography or a more focused and in-depth research proposal.  Students should
schedule meetings with me to discuss their final projects by the 4th week of
class.  Separate handouts provides more details on the final projects.  


Required Reading

Freeman, Richard B. (editor).  1994.  Working Under Different Rules.  New
York:  Russell Sage.

Wharton, Amy S. (editor).  1998.  Working in America.  Mountain View, Calif.:
Mayfield.

A variety of journal articles and book chapters are also part of the required
reading.  Full citations are given below.  A copy of these readings may be
purchased at COP-EZ in the basement of Bricker Hall.  The readings are
separated into two packets to spread the expense of purchase over the quarter.

The order in which materials are listed in each section is the recommended
order of reading.

Daily Outline

Labor Process and Management Control:  March 26-April 3

WHARTON, Ch. 9:  Harry Braverman, "The Division of Labor."  
WHARTON, Ch. 8:  Elton Mayo, "The Hawthorne Experiment."  
WHARTON, Ch. 24:  Tom Juravich, "Women on the Line."  
WHARTON, Ch. 23:  Michael Burawoy, "Thirty Years of Making Out."  
(opt.) WHARTON, Ch. 25:  Laurie Graham, "On the Line at Subaru-Isuzu"

Kusterer, Kenneth.  1978.  Know-How on the Job:  The Important Working
Knowledge of 'Unskilled' Workers.  Boulder, Colo.:  Westview.  Chs. 7-9, pp.
163-194.

(opt.) Wallace, Michael and Arne L. Kalleberg.  1982.  "Industrial
Transformation and the Decline of Craft:  The Decomposition of Skill in the
Printing Industry, 1931-1978."  American Sociological Review 47:307-25.

Vallas, Steve.  1990.  "The Concept of Skill."  Work and Occupations 17,4
(November):379-98..

Form, William.  1987.  "On the Degradation of Skills."  Annual Review of
Sociology 13:29-47.  Palo Alto, California:  Annual Reviews.

WHARTON, Ch. 7:  Frederick Taylor, "Fundamentals of Scientific Management."  
WHARTON, Ch. 10:  Richard C. Edwards, "Contested Terrain."

Hodson, Randy.  1996.  "Dignity in the Workplace under Participative
Management:  Alienation and Freedom Revisited."  American Sociological Review
61,5 (October):719-38.

FREEMAN, Ch. 3:  Lisa M. Lynch, "Payoffs to Alternative Training Strategies at
Work."

(opt.) WHARTON, Ch. 44:  Andrew Abbott, "The New Occupational Structure:  What
are the Questions?"

SUPPLEMENTAL READINGS:

Halaby, Charles and David Weakliem.  1989.  "Worker Control and Attachment to
the Firm."   American Journal of Sociology 95 (November):549-91.

Tilly, Chris and Charles Tilly.  1998.  Work Under Capitalism.  Boulder,
Colo.:  Westview.  Pp. 96-112; 138-160.

Littler, Craig R.  1982.  The Development of the Labour Process in Capitalist
Societies.  London:  Heinemann.  Pp. 1-47, 186-195.

Steinberg, Ronnie J.  1990.  "The Social Construction of Skill."  Work and
Occupations 17:449-82.

Teixeira, Ruy and Lawrence Mishel.  1995.  "Skills Shortage or Management
Shortage?"  Pp. 193-205 in David Bills (ed.), The New Modern Times.

Mishel, Lawrence and Ruy A. Teixeira.  1991.  The Myth of the Coming Labor
Shortage:  Jobs, Skills, and Incomes of America's Workforce 2000.  Pp. 1-42.
Washington, D.C.:  Economic Policy Institute.

Knoke, David and Arne L. Kalleberg.  1994.  "Job Training in U.S.
Organizations."  American Sociological Review 59:537-46.

Braverman, Harry.  1974.  Labor and Monopoly Capital:  The Degradation of Work
in the Twentieth Century.  New York: Monthly Review.  Pp. 59-69, 85-151.

Edwards, Richard.  1979.  Contested Terrain:  The Transformation of the
Workplace in the Twentieth Century.  New York:  Basic.  Pp. 23-36, 48-71,
90-151.

Finlay, William.  1988.  Work on the Waterfront:  Worker Power and
Technological Change in a West Coast Port. Philadelphia: Temple University
Press.

Burawoy, Michael.  1979.  Manufacturing Consent:  Changes in the Labor Process
under Monopoly Capitalism.  Chicago:  University of Chicago Press.  Pp. 13-30,
95-120, 193-203.

Oliver Williamson.  1985.  The Economic Institutions of Capitalism.  New York:
Free Press.  Pp. 206-240.

Bendix, Reinhard.  1974.  Work and Authority in Industry.  Berkeley:
University of California Press.  Pp. 1-21.

Walton, Richard E.  1985.  "From Control to Commitment in the Workplace."
Harvard Business Review.  Pp. 76-84.

Westhues, Kenneth.  1976.  "Class and Organization as Paradigms in Social
Science."  American Sociologist 11 (February):38-49.  


The Meaning of Work: April 4-15

WHARTON, Ch. 4:  Karl Marx, "Alienated Labor."

Jencks, Christopher, Lauri Perman and Lee Rainwater.  1988.  "What Is a Good
Job?"  American Journal of Sociology 93:1322-57.

Gruenberg, Barry.  1980.  "The Happy Worker:  An Analysis of Educational and
Occupational Differences in Determinants of Job Satisfaction."  American
Journal of Sociology 86,2:247-271.

Roy, Donald.  1954.  "Efficiency and 'The Fix':  Informal Intergroup Relations
in a Piecework Machine Shop."  American Journal of Sociology 60:255-266.

Hodson, Randy.  2001.  Working with Dignity, Chapter 2.  Cambridge University
Press.

WHARTON, Ch. 1:  Teresa Gowan, ""Homeless Scavengers in San Francisco's
Underground Economy."  
WHARTON, Ch. 3:  Lillian Rubin, "Families on the Fault Line."  
WHARTON, Ch. 38:  Arlie Hochschild:  "The Emotional Geography of Work and
Family Life."  
WHARTON, Ch. 43:  Juliet Schor:  "Exiting the Squirrel Cage."

BOOK REVIEW OPTIONS:

Robert Blauner.  1964.  Alienation and Freedom.  Chicago:  University of
Chicago Press.

John Goldthorpe et al.  1968.  The Affluent Worker: Industrial Attitudes and
Behavior.  New York:  Cambridge University Press.  


 Melvin Kohn and Carmi Schooler. 1983.  Work and Personality:  An Inquiry into
the Impact of Social Stratification.  Norwood, New Jersey: Ablex.

Fine, Gary A.  1996.  Kitchens.  Berkeley:  University of California Press.

Fantasia, Rick.  1988.  Cultures of Solidarity:  Consciousness, Action, and
Contemporary American Workers.  Berkeley:  University of California Press.

Roberts, Glenda.  1994.  Staying on the Line:  Blue-Collar Women in
Contemporary Japan.  Honolulu:  University of Hawaii Press.

Stanley Aronowitz.  1973.  False Promises:  The Shaping of American Working
Class Consciousness.  New York:  McGraw-Hill.

Ospina, Sonia.  1996.  Illusions of Opportunity:  Employee Expectations and
Workplace Inequality.  Albany, N.Y.:  State University of New York Press.

Halle, David.  1984.  America's Working Man.  Chicago:  University of Chicago
Press.

Juravich, Tom.  1985.  Chaos on the Shop Floor:  A Worker's View of Quality,
Productivity, and Management.  Philadelphia:  Temple University Press.

Tilly, Chris and Charles Tilly.  1998.  Work Under Capitalism.  Boulder,
Colo.:  Westview Press.

Scott, James C.  1985.  Weapons of the Weak:  Everyday Forms of Peasant
Resistance. New Haven, Connecticut:  Yale University Press.

Edelman, Birgitta.  1997.  Shutters at Work:  Creating a World in a Railway
Yard.  Stockholm:  Studies in Cultural Anthropology.  


SUPPLEMENTAL READINGS:

Melvin L. Kohn.  1990.  "Unresolved Issues in the Relationship Between Work
and Personality."  In The Nature of Work.  New Haven, Conn.:  Yale University
Press.

Roy, Donald.  1960.  "Banana time:  Job satisfaction and informal
interactions."  Human Organization 18:156-68.

Shapiro-Perl, Nina.  1984.  "Resistance Strategies."  Pp. 193-208 in Remdy and
Sacks (eds.) My Troubles are Going to Have Troubles With Me.

O'Brien, Gordon E.  1992.  "Changing Meanings of Work,"  Pp. 44-66 in Jean F.
Hartley and Geoffrey M. Stephenson (editors),  Employment Relations: The
Psychology of Influence and Control at Work.  Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell.

Kalleberg, Arne L. and Peter V. Marsden.  1993.  "Organizational Commitment
and Job Performance in the U.S. Labor Force."  Pp. 235-257 in Richard L.
Simpson and Ida Harper Simpson (eds.), Research in the Sociology of Work.
Vol. 5:  The Meaning of Work.  Greenwich, Conn.:  JAI.

Kalleberg, Arne and Karyn Loscocco.  1983.  "Aging, Values and Rewards:
Explaining Age Differences in Job Satisfaction."  American Sociological Review
48:78-90.  


Labor Markets and Segmentation: April 16-22

Althauser, Robert P.  1989.  "Internal Labor Markets."  Annual Review of
Sociology 15:143-61.  Palo Alto, CA:  Annual Reviews.

Granovetter, Marc.  1973.  "The Strength of Weak Ties."  American Journal of
Sociology:1360-80.

Marini, Margaret Mooney and Pi-Ling Fan.  1997.  "The Gender Gap in Earnings
at Career Entry."  American Sociological Review 62 (August):588-604.

Morgan, Laurie A.  1998.  "Glass-Ceiling Effect or Cohort Effect?  A
Longitudinal Study of the Gender Earnings Gap for Engineers."  American
Sociological Review 63 (August): 479-483.  Including "comment" and "rely."

WHARTON, Ch. 19:  Rosabeth Moss Kanter, "Numbers:  Minorities and Majorities."  
WHARTON, Ch. 15:  Donald Tomaskovic-Devey:  "Sex and Racial Segregation and
Pay Gaps."  
WHARTON, Ch. 20:  Barbara Reskin, "The Feminization of Book Editing."  
WHARTON, Ch. 22:  Joleen Kirschenman and Kathryn M. Neckerman, "The Meaning of
Race for Employers."  
WHARTON, Ch. 33:  Sharon M. Collins, "The Marginalization of Black
Executives."

Milliken, Frances J. and Luis L. Martins.  1996.  "Searching for Common
Threads:  Understanding the Multiple Effects of Diversity in Organizational
Groups."  Academy of Management Review 21,2: 402-33.  


BOOK REVIEW OPTIONS:

Bridges, William and Wayne Villemez.  1994.  The Employment Relationship.  New
York:  Plenum.

Fink, Deborah.  1998.  Cutting into the Meatpacking Line:  Workers and Change
in the Rural Midwest.  Chapel Hill:  University of North Carolina Press.

England, Paula.  1992.  Comparable Worth.  New York:  Aldine de Gruyter.

Harrison, Bennett.  1994.  Lean and Mean:  The Changing Landscape of Corporate
Power in the Age of Flexibility.  New York:  Basic Books.

Moskos, Charles C. and John Sibley Butler.  1996.  All That We Can Be:  Black
Leadership and Racial Integration in the Army.  New York:  Basic.

Reskin, Barbara F. and Patricia A. Roos.  1990.  Gender Queues, Job Queues.
Philadelphia:  Temple University Press.

Williams, Bruce B.  1987.  Black Workers in an Industrial Suburb:  The
Struggle Against Discrimination.  New Brunswick, N.J.:  Rutgers University
Press.

Williams, Christine L.  1995.  Still a Man's World:  Men Who Do "Women's
Work".  Berkeley:  University of California Press.

SUPPLEMENTAL READINGS:

Acker, Joan.  "Hierarchies, Jobs, Bodies:  A Theory of Gendered
Organizations."  Gender and Society 4:139-158.

Bridges, William P. Bridges and Wayne J. Villemez.  1991.  "Employment
Relations and the Labor Market: Integrating Institutional and Market
Perspectives."  American Sociological Review 56:748-64.

Baron, James, Frank Dobbin and P.D. Jennings.  1986.  "War and Peace:  The
Evolution of Modern Personnel Administration in U.S. Industry."  American
Journal of Sociology 92:350-83.

Maria Charles.  1992.  "Cross-National Variation in Occupational Sex
Segregation."  American Sociological Review 57:483-502.

Barbara F. Reskin.  "Labor Markets as Queues:  A Structural Approach to
Changing Occupational Sex Composition."  Pp. 170-192 in Joan Huber (ed.),
Macro-Micro Linkages in Sociology.  Newbury Park, Calif.:  Sage.

Paula England and George Farkas.  1988.  "Economic and Sociological Views of
Industries, Firms, and Jobs."  Pp. 331-346 in George Farkas and Paula England
(eds.),  Industries, Firms, and Jobs: Sociological and Economic Approaches.
New York:  Plenum.

Bielby, William T. and James N. Baron.  1986.  "Men and Women at Work:  Sex
Segregation and Statistical Discrimination."  American Journal of Sociology 91
(January):759-99.

Bills, David.  1988.  "Educational Credentials and Hiring Decisions:  What
Employers Look for in Employees."  Research in Social Stratification and
Mobility 7:71-97.

England, Paula, George Farkas, B. S. Kilbourne, and T. Dou.  1988.
"Explaining Occupation Sex Segregation and Wages:  Findings from a Model with
Fixed Effects."  American Sociological Review  53:544-58.

Marsden, Peter, Arne L. Kalleberg, and Cynthia Cook.  1993\. "Gender
Differences in Organizational Commitment."  Work and Occupations 20: 368-90.

Braddock, Jomills and James McPartland.  1987.  "How Minorities Continue to Be
Excluded from Equal Employment Opportunities."  Journal of Social Issues
43:5-39.  


Unions: April 23-29

Hodson, Randy and Teresa Sullivan.  1995.  Chapter 6:  "Collective Responses
to Work."  Belmont, Calif.:  Wadsworth, pp. 149-178.

FREEMAN, Ch. 1:  "How Labor Fares in Advanced Economies."

(opt.) Cornfield, Daniel.  1991.  "The U.S. Labor Movement:  Its Development
and Impact on Social Inequality and Politics." Annual Review of Sociology
17:27-49.  Palo Alto, California:  Annual Reviews.

Freeman, Richard Freeman and James Medoff.  1984.  "A New Portrait of U.S.
Unionism" (Pp. 3-25) and "Conclusions and Implications" (Pp. 246-251) in What
Do Unions Do?  New York:  Basic.

Rogers, Joel.  1995.  "A Strategy for Labor."  Industrial Relations
34,3:367-81.

BOOK REVIEW OPTIONS:

Brody, David.  1980.  Workers in Industrial America: Essays on the Twentieth
Century Struggle.  New York:  Oxford University Press.

Cornfield, Daniel B.  1989.  Becoming a Mighty Voice:  Conflict and Leadership
Change in the United Furniture Workers of America.  New York: Russell Sage.

Freeman, Richard B. and James L. Medoff.  1984.  What Do Unions Do?  New York:
Basic.

Wellman, David.  1995.  The Union Makes Us Strong.  Cambridge:  Cambridge
University Press.

Mort, Jo-Ann.  2000.  Not Your Father's Union Movement.  New York:  Verso.

Heckscher, Charles C.  1988.  The New Unionism.  New York:  Basic Books.

Shostak, Arthur B.  1991.  Robust Unionism.  Ithaca, N.Y.:  School of
Industrial and Labor Relations Press.

Michel, Lawrence, and Paula B. Voos (editors).  1992.  Unions and Economic
Competitiveness.  Armonk, N.Y.:  M.E. Sharpe.

Turner, Lowell.  1991.  Democracy at Work:  Changing World Markets and the
Future of Labor Unions.  Ithaca, N.Y.:  Cornell University Press.

Boyer, Richard O., and Herbert M. Morais.  1955.  Labor's Untold Story.  New
York:  United Electrical, Radio and Machine Workers of America.

Lipset, Seymour Martin, Martin A. Trow, and James S. Coleman.  1956.  Union
Democracy.  Glencoe, Ill.:  Free Press.

Lipset, Seymour Martin.  1986.  Unions in Transition.  San Francisco:  ICS.

SUPPLEMENTAL READINGS:

Edwards, Richard, Paolo Garonna and Franz Todtling (eds.).  1986.  Unions in
Crisis and Beyond, pp. 1-13.  Dover, Mass.:  Auburn.

Kochan, Thomas A., Harry C. Katz and Robert B. McKersie.  1986.  The
Transformation of American Industrial Relations.  Chapter 3, pp. 47-80, "The
Emergence of the Nonunion Industrial Relations System."  New York:  Basic.

Cornfield, Daniel.  1989.  "Union Decline and the Political Demands of
Organized Labor."  Work and Occupations, 16.  


Professionals and Managers: April 30-May 6

WHARTON, Ch. 29:  Eliot Friedson, "Formal Knowledge, Power and The
Professions."

Abbott, Andrew.  1988.  The System of Professions: An Essay on the Division of
Expert Labor.  Chapters 1-4. Chicago:  University of Chicago Press, pp. 1-113.

WHARTON, Ch. 32:  Robert Jackall, "The Social Structure of Managerial Work."

(opt.) Heckscher, Charles.  1995.  White-Collar Blues:  Management Loyalties
in an Age of Corporate Restructuring.  New York:  Basic.  Chs. 8 & 9, pp.
145-184.

BOOK REVIEW OPTIONS:

Abbott, Andrew Abbott.  1988.  The System of Professions:  An Essay on the
Division of Expert Labor.  Chicago:  University of Chicago Press.

Morrill, Calvin.  1995.  The Executive Way:  Conflict Management in
Corporations.  Chicago:  University of Chicago Press.

Starr, Paul.  1984.  The Social Transformation of American Medicine.  New
York: Basic.

Bosk, Charles.  1979.  Forgive and Remember.  Chicago:  University of Chicago
Press.

Bosk, Charles.  1992.  All God's Mistakes:  Genetic Counseling in a Pediatric
Hospital.  Chicago:  University of Chicago Press.

Cassell, Joan.  1991.  Expected Miracles:  Surgeons at Work.  Philadelphia:
Temple University Press.

Brint, Steven Brint.  1994.  In an Age of Experts:  The Changing Role of
Professionals in Politics and Public Life.  Princeton, N.J.:  Princeton
University Press.

Martin, Susan Ehrlich.  1980.  Breaking and Entering:  Policewomen on Patrol.
Berkeley:  University of California Press.

Chandler, Alfred D., Jr.  1977.  The Visible Hand:  The Managerial Revolution
in American Business.  Cambridge, Mass.:  Harvard University Press.

Dalton, Melville.  1959.  Men Who Manage.  New York:  Wiley.

Barnard, Chester I.  1950.  The Functions of the Executive.  Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.

Smith, Vicki.  1990.  Managing the Corporate Interest:  Control and Resistance
in an American Bank.  Berkeley:  University of California Press.

SUPPLEMENTAL READINGS:

MacDonald, Keith M.  1995.  The Sociology of the Professions.  Chapter 1.
Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage.

Starr, Paul.  1984.  The Social Transformation of American Medicine. Pp. 3-29,
79-144.  New York:  Basic.

Freidson, Eliot.  1986.  Professional Powers:  A Study in the
Institutionalization of Formal Knowledge.  Pp. 20-61.  Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Ritzer, George and David Walczak.  1988.  "Rationalization and the
Deprofessionalization of Physicians."  Social Forces, 67.

Prechel, Harland.  1994.  "Economic Crisis and The Centralization of Control
over Managerial Process."  American Sociological Review 59:723-45.  


Clerical, Service & Marginal Employment, May 7-13

Glenn, E.N. and R.L. Feldberg.  1977.  "Degraded and deskilled:  The
proletarianization of clerical work."  Social Problems 25,1 October:52-64.

WHARTON, Ch. 40:  Robert Parker, "Temporary Clerical Workers."  
WHARTON, Ch. 36:  Nicole Woolsey Biggart, "Family, Gender, and Business in
Direct Selling Organizations.  
WHARTON, Ch. 21:  Patti Giuffre and Christine Williams, "Labeling Sexual
Harassment in Restaurants."  
WHARTON, Ch. 26:  Robin Leidner, "Over the Counter:  McDonald's."  
WHARTON, Ch. 27:  Greta Foff Paules, "'Getting' and 'Making' a Tip."  
WHARTON, Ch. 28:  Judith Rollins, "Between Women:  Domestics and Their
Employers."  
WHARTON, Ch. 35:  M. Patricia Fernandez-Kelley and Anna Garcia, "Women in the
Informal Economy of Miami and Los Angeles."  
WHARTON, Ch. 16:  William Julius Wilson, "When Work Disappears:  The World of
the New Urban Poor."

(opt.) Tilly, Chris.  1996.  Half a Job.  Philadelphia:  Temple University
Press.  Chs. 4-6, pp. 47-120.

BOOK REVIEW OPTIONS:

Wells, M. J.  1996.  Strawberry Fields:  Politics, Class and Work in
California Agriculture.  New York:  Cornell University Press.

Foner, Nancy.  1994.  The Caregiving Dilemma:  Work in an American Nursing
Home.  Berkeley:  University of California Press.

Mars, Gerald, and Michael Nicod.  1984.  The World of Waiters.  London:
George Allen and Unwin.

Lo, Jeannie.  1990.  Office Ladies/Factory Women:  Life and Work at a Japanese
Factory.  Armonk, N.Y.:  M. E. Sharpe.

Jackall, Robert.  1978.  Workers in a Labyrinth:  Jobs and Survival in a Bank
Bureaucracy.  Montclair, N.J.:  Allanheld and Osmun.

Constable, Nicole.  1997.  Maid to Order in Hong Kong:  Stories of Filipina
Workers.  Ithaca, NY:  Cornell University Press.

Cock, Jacklyn.  1989.  Maids and Madams:  Domestic Workers under Apartheid.
London:  Women's Press.

Burris, Beverly H.  1983.  No Room at the Top:  Underemployment and Alienation
in the Corporation.  New York:  Praeger.

Biggart, Nicole.  1989.  Charismatic Capitalism:  Direct Selling Organizations
in America.  Chicago:  University of Chicago Press.

Glenn, Evelyn.  1988.  Issei, Nisei, Warbride:  Three Generations of Japanese-
American Women in Domestic Service.  Philadelphia:  Temple University Press.

Rollins, Judith.  1987.  Between Women:  Domestics and Their Employers.
Philadelphia:  Temple University Press.

Hartmann, Heidi, Robert Kraut, and Louise Tilly.  1986.  Computer Chips and
Paper Clips.

Leidner, Robin Leidner.  1993.  Fast Food, Fast Talk:  Service Work and the
Routinization of Everyday Life. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Lozano, Beverly.  1989.  The Invisible Work Force:  Transforming American
Business with Outside and Home-based Workers.  New York:  Free Press.

Parker, Robert E.  1994.  Flesh Peddlers and Warm Bodies:  The Temporary Help
Industry and Its Workers.  New Brunswick, N.J.:  Rutgers University Press.

Schein, Virginia.  1995.  Working from the Margins:  Voices of Mothers in
Poverty.

SUPPLEMENTAL READINGS:

Browning, Harley and Joachim Singelmann.  1978.  "The Transformation of the
U.S. Labor Force:  The Interaction of Industry and Occupation."  Politics and
Society 8:481-509.  


Organizational Structure and Technology, May 14-20

WHARTON, Ch. 6:  Max Weber, "Bureaucracy."

Perrow, Charles.  1986.  Complex Organizations.  Chapter 1:  "Why
Bureaucracy."  Pp. 1-48.  Glenview, IL:  Scott, Foresman.

Scott, W. Richard.  1998.  Organizations:  Rational, Natural, and Open
Systems, 4th Edition.  Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:  Prentice-Hall.  Chs. 2-4, pp.
33-100.

Fligstein, Neil.  1987.  "The Interorganizational Power Struggle: Rise of
Finance Personnel to Top Leadership in Large Corporations, 1919-1979."
American Sociological Review 52,1:44-58.

Williamson, Oliver.  1981.  "The Economics of Organizations:  A Transaction
Cost Approach."  American Journal of Sociology 87,3:548-77.

Powell, Walter W.  1990.  "Neither Market Nor Hierarchy:  Network Forms of
Organization."  Pp. 295-336 in Barry M. Staw and Larry L. Cummings (eds.),
Research in Organizational Behavior, Vol. 12.  Greenwich, Conn:  JAI Press.

Edelman, Lauren B.  1990.  "Legal Environments and Organizational Governance:
The Expansion of Due Process in the American Workplace."  American
Sociological Review 95,6 (May): 1401-40.

WHARTON, Ch. 11:  Shoshana Zuboff, "In the Age of the Smart Machine."  
WHARTON, Ch. 12:  Steven Peter Vallas, "Capital, Labor, and New Technology."

BOOK REVIEW OPTIONS:

Perrow, Charles.  1986.  Complex Organizations:  A Critical Essay.  3d ed.
Glenview, Ill.:  Scott, Foresman.

Williamson, Oliver.  1985.  The Economic Institutions of Capitalism.  New
York:  Free Press.

Scott, W. Richard.  1998.  Organizations:  Rational, Natural, and Open
Systems, 4th Edition.  Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:  Prentice-Hall.

Burris, Beverly H.  1993.  Technocracy at Work.  New York:  State University
of New York Press.

Noble, David.  1984.  Forces of Production:  A Social History of Industrial
Automation.  New York:  Alfred A. Knopf.

Walsh, John.  1993.  Supermarkets Transformed:  Understanding Organizational
and Technological Innovations.  New Brunswick, N.J.:  Rutgers University
Press.

Zuboff, Shoshana.  1988.  In the Age of the Smart Machine.  New York:  Basic.

Hirschman, Albert O.  1970.  Exit, Voice, and Loyalty:  Responses to Decline
in Firms, Organizations and States.  Cambridge, Mass.:  Harvard University
Press.

Clegg, Stewart R.  1990.  Modern Organizations:  Organization Studies in the
Postmodern World.  London:  Sage.

Thomas, Robert J.  1994.  What Machines Can't Do.  Berkeley:  University of
California Press.

Simonds, Wendy.  1996.  Abortion at Work:  Ideology and Practice in a Feminist
Clinic.  New Brunswick, NJ:  Rutgers University Press.

SUPPLEMENTAL READINGS:

Baron, James and William Bielby.  1986.  "The Proliferation of Job Titles in
Organizations."  Administrative Science Quarterly 31:561-86.

Scott, W. Richard.  1998.  Organizations:  Rational, Natural, and Open
Systems, 4th Edition.  Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:  Prentice-Hall.  Chs. 8-10.

Walsh, John.  1989.  "Technological Change and the Division of Labor."  Work
and Occupations 16:165-83.

Kelley, Maryellen.  1990.  "New Process Technology, Job Design and Work
Organization."  American Sociological Review 55:191-208.  


Intl' Comparisons and Globalization, May 21-27

Dohse, Knuth, Ulrich Jurgens, and Thomas Malsch.  1985.  "From 'Fordism' to
'Toyotism'?  The social organization of the labor process in the Japanese
automobile factory."  Politics and Society 14,2:115-45.

Lillrank, Paul, and Noriaki Kano.  1989.  Continuous Improvement:  Quality
Circles in Japanese Industry.  Chapter 1:  "What is Quality Control Circle
Activity?"  Pp. 11-40.  Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Center for Japanese
Studies.

Lincoln, James R.  1990.  "Japanese Organization and Organization Theory."
Pp. 255-294 in B. M. Staw and L. L. Cummings (eds.), Research in
Organizational Behavior, vol. 12.  Greenwich, Conn:  JAI Press.

FREEMAN, Ch. 4:  Joel Rogers and Wolfgang Streeck, "Workplace Representation
Overseas:  The Works Councils Story."

FREEMAN, Ch. 6:  David Card and Richard B. Freeman, "Small Differences That
Matter:  Canada Vs. the United States."

Stark, David.  1986.  "Rethinking Internal Labor Markets:  New Insights from a
Comparative Perspective."  American Sociological Review 51 (August):492-504.

BOOK REVIEW OPTIONS:

Perrucci, Robert.  1994.  Japanese Auto Transplants in the Heartland:
Corporatism and Community.  New York:  Aldine de Gruyter.

Hsiung, Ping-Chun.  1996.  Living Rooms as Factories:  Class, Gender, and the
Satellite Factory Industry in Taiwan.  Philadelphia:  Temple University Press.

Cole, Robert.  1971.  Japanese Blue Collar:  The Changing Tradition.
Berkeley:  University of California Press.

Jacoby, Sanford M. (editor).  1995.  The Workers of Nations:  Industrial
Relations in a Global Economy.  New York:  Oxford University Press.

Lee, Ching Kwan.  1998.  Gender and the South China Miracle:  Two Worlds of
Factory Women.  Berkeley:  University of California Press.

Lincoln, James R. and Arne L. Kalleberg.  1990.  Culture, Control, and
Commitment.  London:  Cambridge University Press.

Haraszti, Miklos.  1978.  A Worker in a Worker's State.  New York:  Universe
Books.

Abegglen, James and George Stalk.  1985.  The Japanese Corporation.  New York:
Basic.

Downsizing, Flexibility and Teams, May 28-June 3

WHARTON, Ch. 17:  David M. Gordon,  "The Wage Squeeze."  
FREEMAN, Ch. 2:  Richard B. Freeman and Lawrence F. Katz, "Rising Wage
Inequality:  The United States Vs. Other Advanced Countries.  
WHARTON, Ch. 13:  Ruth Milkman, "Labor and Management in Uncertain Times."  
FREEMAN, Ch. 5:  Rebecca Blank, "Does a Larger Social Safety Net Mean Less
Economic Flexibility?"  
FREEMAN, Ch. 7:  "Lessons for the United States."

(opt.) Rifkin, Jeremy.  1994.  The End of Work.  Pp.3-41, 221-235.  New York:
Putnam.

(opt.) Block, Fred.  1990.  Postindustrial Possibilities:  A Critique of
Economic Discourse.  Chapter 7.  Berkeley:  University of California Press,
pp. 189-218.

WHARTON, Ch. 41:  Vicki Smith, "Participative Work Arrangements in a White-
Collar Service Occupation."

Appelbaum, Eileen and Rosemary Batt.  1994.  The New American Workplace:
Transforming Work Systems in the United States.  Ithaca, New York:  ILR Press.
Pp. 14-54, 161-169.

Rothschild, Joyce and Marjukka Ollilainen.  1999.  "Obscuring But Not Reducing
Managerial Control:  Does TQM Measure up to Democracy Standards?"  Economic
and Industrial Democracy 20:583-624.  


BOOK REVIEW OPTIONS:

Barker, James R.  1999.  The Discipline of Teamwork:  Participation and
Concertive Control.  Thousand Oaks, CA:  Sage.

Cole, Robert E.  1989.  Strategies for Learning:  Small-Group Activities in
American, Japanese, and Swedish Industry.  Berkeley:  University of California
Press.

Rinehart, James W., Christopher Huxley and David Robertson.  1997.  Just
Another Car Factory?  Lean Production and Its Discontents.  Ithaca, N.Y.:
Cornell University Press.

Parker, Mike.  1985.  Inside the Circle:  A Union Guide to QWL.  Boston,
Mass.:  South End Press.

Besser, Terry L.  1996.  Team Toyota:  Transplanting the Toyota Culture to the
Camry Plant in Kentucky.  Albany:  State University of New York Press.

Lillrank, Paul, and Noriaki Kano.  1989.  Continuous Improvement:  Quality
Circles in Japanese Industry.  Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Center for
Japanese Studies.

Pfeffer, Jeffrey.  1998.  The Human Equation:  Building Profits by Putting
People First.  Boston:  Harvard Business School Press.

Block, Fred.  1990.  Postindustrial Possibilities:  A Critique of Economic
Discourse.

Rifkin, Jeremy.  1994.  The End of Work:  The Decline of the Global Labor
Force and the Dawn of the Post-Market Era.  New York:  Putnam.

Drucker, Peter F.  1993.  Post-Capitalist Society.  New York:  Harper
Business.

Harrison, Bennett.  1994.  Lean and Mean:  The Changing Landscape of Corporate
Power in the Age of Flexibility.  New York:  Basic Books.

Gordon, David M.  1996.  Fat and Mean:  The Corporate Squeeze of Working
Americans and the Myth of Managerial Downsizing.  New York:  Martin Kessler.

Grenier, Guillermo J.  1988.  Inhuman Relations:  Quality Circles and Anti-
Unionism in American Industry.  Philadelphia, PA:  Temple University Press.

Piore, Michael J. and Sabel, Charles F.  1984.  The Second Industrial Divide:
Possibilities for Prosperity.  New York:  Basic Books.

Dudley, Kathryn.  1994.  The End of the Line:  Lost Jobs, New Lives in
Postindustrial America.  Chicago:  University of Chicago Press.

Bridges, William.  1994.  Job Shift:  How To Prosper in a Workplace Without
Jobs.  New York:  Addison-Wesley.

Aronowitz, Stanley and William DeFazio.  1994.  The Jobless Future:  Sci-Tech
and the Dogma of Work.  Minneapolis, MN:  University of Minnesota Press.

SUPPLEMENTAL READINGS:

Shaiken, Harley, Steven Lopez and Isaac Mankita.  1997.  "Two Routes to Team
Production:  Saturn and Chrysler Compared."  Industrial Relations 36,1:17-45.

Bluestone, Barry, and Bennett Harrison.  1982.  The Deindustrialization of
America.  Chs. 1 and 7.  New York:  Basic Books.

Special issue on "Worker Participation," Work and Occupations, vol. 15,
November 1988.  
    


Final Projects due by 5:00 P.M. on Wednesday of finals week.  


