**INTERNATIONAL CONFLICT**



PLS 472, Fall 1998,Creighton University, Meeting MWF 1:30-12:20, A431

Dr. Wise, Political Science and International Studies,
[kwise@creighton.edu](mailto:kwise@creighton.edu)

Office Hours MWF 8:30-10, W 1:30-3:30, Rm A428. Ph: 280-2847

(also by appointment and any time Dr. Wise's office door is open)



_War is a sure sign of a lack of imagination _



**COURSE DESCRIPTION**

****

For as long as human beings have lived in societies they have also engaged in
violent conflict. They have organized force and applied it for varied ends.
This course asks why and in what forms; it compares and evaluates the nature
and patterns of conflict in political settings, from the level of the family
through the global system, but emphasizes conflict in the state system. It
surveys theories that emphasize differences among political cultures, the
importance of political roles, and how social-economic-political surroundings
impel and restrain actors' use of violence. It examines the concept "power" in
relations to the concept "issue." It analyzes a number of forms of conflict,
from terrorism to ethnic violence to interstate war.



**QUESTIONS AND CONCERNS OF THE COURSE**



Questions about coercive competition and explosions of group violence have
long structured the study of international relations. In this course we will
examine these questions differently than we would in a standard "theories of
international relations" course. Our concern here will be less that of
defining "power," for example, than of examining it in contexts, historical or
current. Rather than sticking rigidly to the traditional "states matter most"
or sovereign-made law assumptions, we will sometimes assume that states either
do not exist, do not matter, or are themselves a source of conflict. We also
will test assumptions that the dynamics of politics are remarkably the same,
whether within the nuclear family, in the hands of terrorists, between
competing ethnic groups, or between states armed with nuclear weapons. This
means that any study of social conflict, regardless of its original home in a
discrete academic discipline, is fair game for increasing our understanding
and for improving our answers to **our** questions. Of course the canons by
which we will recognize the utility of research findings and the modes by
which we shall marshal them to enlarge our understanding of possible answers
to our research questions will be those of political science and international
studies.

****

**GRADING**



The instructor will base grades in this course on performance on the following
items and points:



* * * * Written Book Review (10)

Class Presentation of Book (10)

Research Paper (15)

Research Paper Tutorials and Deadlines (10)

Class Presentation of Research Findings (10)

In-Class Examinations (10 and 10)

Takehome Examination (10)

Class Participation (15)

_Violent coercion indicates a lack of intelligence _

**CRITICAL BOOK REVIEW**

__

**_Book Review Oral Presentation_**



Each student will read and report on one work from those listed in the Class
and Assignment Schedule. We will assign these to members of the class in our
first week. Note in the Class and Assignment Schedule the date for the oral
report for each work. Unless your instructor gives you permission to postpone
your presentation -- **prior** to its assigned date, you will lose one half of
your potential points for said presentation, regardless of how well you
subsequently present your book.



The oral presentation should be about twenty minutes long and cover at least
these points:



* * 1\. Title, date of original publication, pertinent background and credentials of the author(s). 

  2.     1.  
    2. Author's assumptions, stated and unstated.

* * 3\. Author's purpose in writing this work: thesis, major points.

4\. Apply everything learned (to presentation date; more in final, written
submission) about conflict; that is, link your presentation clearly to what we
have read for and/or discussed in class (about political conflict) that
relates to your book.

5\. Compare this book to related books with which you are familiar.

6\. Include any other points important or helpful for classmates.

_Presentation_. In planning your oral presentation of your book, think about
your audience (classmates) and how best you might enlarge their understanding
and appreciation of the book you are reviewing and how you might effectively
share your own analyses of the book's research questions.



_Handout_. To enhance your presentation, prepare a handout at least **one page
long** covering at least the first three points above: author, title, pub.
data; authors assumptions, theses, and main findings.

**__**

**_Written Book Review_**



Type your written report, about 1,500 words long (approximately six pages).
Submit this report by the date indicated in the Class and Assignment Schedule,
**no later**. Your instructor will accept NO late book reviews.



In writing your critical review, pay attention not only to matters of
substance and the canons of academia; pay attention also to mechanics:
spelling, word use, organization, clarity, and style. Try to improve your
skill as a writer during this course. Strunk and White's _The Elements of
Style_ is an excellent short help for writers. Try to emulate the book reviews
you will find in respected academic journals such as _The American Political
Science Review_ or, particularly, _World Politics_.



Either or both your oral and written presentations may systematically compare
two or more closely related books. If someone else is reporting on one of the
titles you will use in such a comparison, then during your oral presentation,
withhold your remarks about that particular title until the discussion of the
other student's presentation.



In place of reviewing a book listed in the syllabus, you may propose a list of
six recent, closely related, pertinent journal articles.



_If human life has no cash value, the United States made a profit on the Gulf
War _



**RESEARCH AND PRESENTATION OF FINDINGS**



Each student (or a team) will present findings of independent research (in
both written and oral forms). The written form will be due no later than 5
p.m. on the date indicated in the Class and Assignment Schedule. Note dues
dates: **tutorials** on (1) choice of question, (2) preliminary outline and
bibliography, (3) pre-presentation. Your instructor will accept NO LATE PAPERS
and will deduct one grade level from the final grade on your paper for each
tutorial date you miss regardless of your completing the required step at a
later date. You may draw your research question from anywhere in the area of
the nature of political conflict and management of conflict. Two places to
start thinking -- beyond your course materials -- might be (1) Glenn H. Snyder
and Paul Diesing's _Conflict Among Nations: Bargaining, Decision Making, and
System Structure in International Crises_ and (2) Anatol Rapoport "s _The
Origins of Violence: Approaches to the Study of Conflict_.



_Tutorials_.



At the **first tutorial** each student (or team) will discuss and arrive at a
research question for his or her semester-long effort. This tutorial will take
place before the fourth regularly scheduled class meeting.



At the **second tutorial** each student (or team) will have cleared with the
instructor a two to four page typed document containing the following:



* * \--Thesis statement/formal research problem (NOT a simple "topic")

\--Projected outline of the completed research paper

* * \--List of the intended research steps

\--Sample bibliography with an evaluation of the availability and quality of
resources.

At the **third tutorial** each student (or team) will again meet with the
instructor to discuss progress toward completion of the research project. At
this tutorial the student or team should offer either (1) a first draft of the
paper, including documentation, or (2) an annotated, bibliographic outline
including a fully written introduction and conclusion. Also present at this
time the **class handout**.



_Format of the Final Paper_. Typed, double-spaced, about 15 pages (about 4,000
words), citations/notes at the bottom of the pages (which is easy if you use
the WordPerfect or MSWord software available on computers in the Data Lab);
either traditional or scientific documentation form. Expository notes must be
at the bottom of the page. If you document at the conclusion of the paper
instead of the foot of the page, please call the citation section  "End
Notes." **Annotate** each source, either in the first citation or in the
_Bibliography of Works Cited_ which you will include at the close of your
paper.



In both substance and form, strive to emulate a respected academic journal
such as _World Politics_ or _International Security_. For style and related
concerns see the comments above in the section about writing the book review.



_Class Presentation_. Oral presentation of your research findings should be
about 20 minutes long, plus discussion time. Your instructor will publish the
schedule of presentations about the time of the second tutorial. They will
fall in the last two weeks of the semester. This presentation should convey
your starting assumptions, research question(s), hypotheses or propositions
tested, and especially important findings. In preparing your presentation
outline and class handout, ask yourself:  "What have I learned through this
research that will benefit my classmates given the subject matter of this
course?" Obviously you will improve the quality of your research if you ask
yourself this question throughout your entire research endeavor, including in
your choosing your research problem and formulating your hypotheses and
propositions. (See Vasquez for an alternate research form.)



_Academic Honesty_. Do your own work. Pay your intellectual debts
appropriately. Know what plagiarism is and do not plagiarize. Do not invent
sources. A student will not receive credit for any assignment containing
plagiarism or dishonest citations and will NOT have a chance to re-do the
work. If a student persists in violating this rule Dr. Wise will refer the
case to the CCAS Committee on Academic Policy. The student's route of appeal
is to Dr. Wise, Dr. Wunsch (chair of the Department of Political Science and
International Studies), and the CCAS Committee on Academic Policy.



_We outgrew slavery; we can outgrow violence _



**EXAMINATIONS**



Both the two **In-class** examinations and the **Takehome** examination will
be cumulative and comprehensive. They will cover everything pertaining to the
course to that point.  "The course" means: assigned reading, whether discussed
in class or not; book review reading you should have done by that point; class
discussions, whether you were present or not. For the in-class examinations,
please use **bluebooks**. For the takehome examination, please **type** ; and
please run your examination through a **spellchecker/grammarchecker**.





**ATTENDANCE AND CLASS PARTICIPATION**



Class participation is crucial in this course. Your instructor expects you to
share actively in the teaching duties. Hence, your instructor will take roll
each session. A student must redress any absence by submitting a **written
evaluative summary** of each class missed, excused or unexcused. This summary
should cover the assigned reading, any book reviews presented, class
discussion, and any other class activity. Classmates will need to help each
other judiciously in this matter because your instructor will **not** have the
time to go over a class with a student who was absent. Your instructor will
date, sign, and return your makeup work; you should keep it on file at least
until you receive your course grade. If an illness or other unavoidable cause
leads to an unbroken absence longer than two weeks, that student shall discuss
with the instructor how best to make up the work so that the two of them can
arrive at a satisfactory plan for covering the material missed.



Failure to redress an absence or otherwise following the rules in the previous
paragraph will result in a reduction of one letter grade in the final course
grade. An otherwise "A" performance for the semester, for example, would
become a final grade of "F" if a student at the close of the semester has four
or more unredressed absences. Your instructor will **not** award an  "I" or
"X" to enable you to make up an unredressed absence.



GRADING NOTE: Dr. Wise will award an "I" for the course only if the student
secures from Creighton College, fills out, and submits to him in timely
fashion the proper form for filing for an Incomplete. Do **not** assume that
unfinished work means an automatic  "Incomplete" grade. A student should ask
Dr. Wise to put in writing any extension or variance he makes in requirements.
Dr. Wise will turn in final grades as early as 24 hours after the last date
the class schedule indicates an assignment is due. Hence anything you turn in
after the deadline risks receiving a zero (F).



**REQUIRED READINGS**



Diehl, ed. _Dynamics of Enduring Rivalries_.

[GT]Ganguly and Taras. _Understanding Ethnic Conflict._

Holsti. _State, War, and the State of War_.

Lukes, ed. _Power_.

Vasquez. _The War Puzzle_.

Any journal article and web site Dr. Wise assigns.



**BOOKS FOR REVIEW**



Waltz, Kenneth. _Theory of International Relations_.

Hirschbein, Ron. _What if They Gave a Crisis and Nobody Came?: Interpreting
International Crises._

George, Alexander L., ed. _Avoiding War: Problems of Crisis Management_.

Craig, Gordon A. and Alexander L. George. _Force and Statecraft: Diplomatic
Problems of Our Time_.

Calvert, Peter. _Revolution and International Politics_ , 2nd ed.

Manwaring, Max G. and William J. Olson, eds. _Managing Contemporary Conflict:
Pillars of Success_.

Combs, Cindy C. _Terrorism in the Twenty-First Century_.

Gaddis, John Lewis. _The United States and the End of the Cold War:
Implications, Reconsiderations, Provocations_.

Stoessinger, John G. Why Nations Go to War. 7th ed.





**CLASS AND ASSIGNMENT SCHEDULE**



**Introduction**



Discussion of the nature of learning in a seminar. Survey of the course
syllabus. Consideration of the course's emphases. Meeting each other and our
authors.



_Assignment:_ Look over the introductory portions of each required work for
this class and find sections of the Library stacks (e.g., JX section) and
journals (e.g., _World Politics_ , _International Security_ ) that are
pertinent to this course. Sign up for **FIRST TUTORIAL**. This will be with
Dr. Wise before end of business on September 2. Note that in the second class
meeting you will select which book to review.

****

**Thoughts and Theories (a beginning list which you will expand) to keep in
mind throughout the semester:**

****

**Biological - Social Perspectives on Conflict**



Do wars begin only in the human mind? Can they end only there? Can they be
prevented only there? What is the rational actor model, game theory, strategic
mode of thought? We will note the classical arguments of which is the greater
cause: human nature or social order

****

**Cross National and Cross Cultural Studies of Conflict**



If states disappear, taking "nationalism" with them, will conflict remain? If
ethnic groups all learned a common language, would communication cure all
social ills? Are some cultures or some political systems more prone to
violence than others? Does the answer change if one distinguishes between
internal and external violent action? What is the role of ideology?

****

**Week One and Two: Power**

****

Read Lukes. Be prepared to choose the book you wish to review. Check whether
the book is available in a convenient library or book store. Consider the
fighting in Bosnia in the early 1990s as an illustration for the varied
versions of "power" visible in the essays in Lukes. Meet for your **first
tutorial** by September 2.

****

**Week Three: Historical Perspectives on Conflict**



Is history the record of conflict? Read Holsti. Link his thoughts to other
theories and studies with which you are familiar. Begin building for yourself
a conceptual framework with which to order and interpret the diverse materials
of this semester's study. Consider the questions of "strong and weak states"
as explanatory variables. Reflect on the South American situations Holsti
describes. Sign up for your **SECOND TUTORIAL**. Last date for this tutorial
is October 2. At your second tutorial be prepared to show in typed form the
elements of a research proposal that your instructor spelled out in the
syllabus section devoted to the second tutorial: problem, propositions,
feasibility.



_Review_ : Craig and George. _Force and Statecraft_



**Weeks Four, Five, Six: Causes of Conflict**



Read Vasquez. Are you beginning to form your own theory of conflict? Does it
pass Vasquez's tests? Are you using more formal theory than he is? Or are you
being more descriptive, less analytical than he is? Last day for **second
tutorial** is October 2.



_Review_ Waltz _Theory and International Relations_

_Review_ Calvert. _Revolution and International Politics_

_Review_ Stoessinger _Why Nations Go to War_



**First Examination: October 7** (Bring Bluebook)



**Weeks Seven, Eight: Enduring Rivalries**



Read Diehl. Which of Holsti's and Vasquez's tests, standards for thinking, and
constraints on theory do Diehl's authors meet? Expose any underlying, unvoiced
assumptions. What enduring conflicts may have resolved themselves in recent
decades? Which ones are in their first stages?



_Review_ Gaddis. _The United States and the End of the Cold War_

****

**FALL BREAK**



**Week Nine: Case Study of The United States in Vietnam**



Your instructor will examine the conflict in Southeast Asia in which the
United States pursued questionable goals will questionable results. What kind
of conflict was "Vietnam": colonial, civil war, invasion, geostrategic
aggression, ideological, national liberation?



_Assignment_ : Be prepared to participate in the analysis and interpretation
of the events by forming as many questions as you can about actors and their
motivations in this conflict. Hundreds of books in Creighton's libraries can
provide the chronological information you may wish to begin your
understanding. But concentrate on grasping what might have been driving the
policies that intersected in war.



Sign up for **THIRD TUTORIAL**. Last day for this tutorial will be November
13. Each student is to turn in at this tutorial a first draft of his or her
final research paper. At minimum this paper must include an Introduction and
Conclusion and, between, an outline with sources listed with each outline item
and annotations for each such citation.



_Review_ Manwaring and Olson _Managing Contemporary Conflict_



**Week Nine: Case Study of Eastern Europe in Transition**



Read Ganguly and Taras. Deciding what to focus on as "conflict" in Eastern
Europe is a major challenge. Change -- its magnitude, geopolitical spread, and
speed -- is an obvious intermediate explanation of current frictions. Earlier
lack of change helps explain the eruptive nature of the current changes. If we
go beyond the "change" level of analysis to seek explanations, we find
diverging views. Why? How much credit/blame can we attribute to various
persons, groups, or "forces"? What links might there be between what we find
to be "causes" and what routes of conflict management appear open or closed to
whom?



_Assignment_ : Get access to a map of Europe. Identify the 15 members of the
European Union, the members of EuroNATO. Can you identify Albania? Where are
the Baltic States? Their names? The Balkans?



**Week Nine: Regional Conflict and Terrorism**

****

_Review_ Combs. _Terrorism in the Twenty-First Century_. Does terrorism make
the  "weak" strong?

_Review_ George _Avoiding War_

****

_Assignment_ : Where are Moldova? Uzbekistan? Rwanda? Congo? Afghanistan?
Somalia? Cambodia? Sudan? Sri Lanka? Why should you know? You can get much of
this information in the Library Reference publication: _Facts on File_. Pay
attention to the news media accounts of the Central American and the African
situations. Check the _Reader's Guide_ for comprehensive reviews of United
States' relations with these regions. Prepare three discussion questions (not
"fact" questions) to help us bring into focus the disparate elements of these
affairs.

****

**Week Ten: Case Study of The Middle East**



Again, we will try to use all the elements we have learned to date to analyze
and draw conclusions about the sources and nature of conflict in this regional
dispute whose repercussions course through most of the industrialized world.
What is the role of arms races? The question of the "spread" of nuclear and
other ABC weapons?



_Assignment_ : Think of the particulars of the Middle East -- actors, values,
institutions -- as grist or evidence for our discussions, not as the points of
the discussion.



**Weeks Eleven, Twelve: Case Studies from GT**

****

_Review_ Hirschbein _What if They Gave a Crisis and Nobody Came?_



Last date for **Third Tutorial** is November 13.

****

**Second Examination: November 23** (Bring Bluebook)



**Oral Research Presentations November 30-December 9**



Your instructor will hand out a list of who will present a report on what on
which day. This should be available at the conclusion of the second tutorials.
Course Evaluation and Semester Review on December 11.

**Receive Takehome Examination on December 11. Takehome is due Wednesday,
December 16, 10 a.m., A428 or mailbox in A430's Secretary's Office.**

****

**_____________________**



In addition to works your authors and texts' bibliographies cite, note the
following:



**BIBLIOGRAPHY (Preliminary)**



Axelrod, Robert. The Evolution of Cooperation. Basic Books.



Baldwin, David A. Economic Statecraft. Princeton.



Baldwin, David A. ,ed. Neorealism and Neoliberalism: The Contemporary Debate.
Columbia.



Blainey, Geoffrey. The Causes of War. The Free Press.



Brown, Michael E., Sean M. Lynn-Jones, and Steven E. Miller, eds. The Perils
of Anarchy: Contemporary Realism and International Security. MIT.



Combs, Cindy C. Terrorism in the Twenty-First Century. Prentice Hall.



Craig, Gordon A. and Alexander L. George. Force and Statecraft: Diplomatic
Problems of Our Time. Oxford.

Delmas, Phillipe. The Rosy Future of War. Free Press.



Domke, William. War and the Changing Global System. Yale.



Evans, Peter. "The Eclipse of the State? Reflections on Stateness in an Era of
Globalization," World Politics, October 1997, 62-87.



Feldstein, Martin. "EMU and International Conflict," Foreign Affairs,
November/December 1997, 60-73.



Freedman, Lawrence, ed. War. Oxford.



George, Alexander L., ed. Avoiding [Inadvertent] War: Problems of Crisis
Management . Westview Press.



Glaser, Charles L. "The Security Dilemma Revisited," World Politics, 171-201.



Howard, Mochael. The Causes of Wars and other essays. 2nd ed. Harvard.



Huntington, Samuel P., Jr. The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of
World Order. Simon and Schuster.



Klare, Michael T. and Yogesh Chandrani. World Security: Challenges for a New
Century. 3rd ed. St. Martin's.



Keohane, Robert O. After Hegemony: Cooperation and Discord in the World
Economy. Princeton.



Kolodziej, Edward A. and Roger E. Kanet, eds. Coping With Conflict After the
Cold War. Johns Hopkins.



Lynn-Jones, Sean M. and Steven E. Miller, eds. Global Dangers: Changing
Dimensions of International Security. MIT.



Mansfield, Edward. Power, Trade, and War. Princeton.



Morgenthau, Hans J. Politics Among Nations: The Struggle for Power and Peace.
Revised by Kenneth W. Thompson. McGraw-Hill.



Murray, Williamson and Allan R. Millett, eds. Military Innovation in the
Interwar Period. Cambridge.



Nye, Joseph S., Jr. Understanding International Conflicts. Longman.



Pape, Robert. Bombing to Win: Air Power and Coercion in War. Cornell.



Rapoport, Anatol. The Origins of Violence: Approaches to the Study of
Conflict.

Transaction.



Ruane, Joseph and Jennifer Todd. The Dynamics of Conflict in Northern Ireland:
Power, Conflict, and Emancipation. Cambridge.



Sagan, Scott D. and Kenneth N. Waltz. The Spread of Nuclear Weapons: A Debate.
Norton.



Snyder, Glenn H. and Paul Diesing. Conflict Among Nations: Bargaining,
Decision Making, and System Structure in International Crises. Princeton.



Stoessinger, John G. Why Nations Go to War. 7th ed. St. Martin's.



Thompson, William R. On Global War: Historical-Structural Approaches to World
Politics. Columbia University of South Carolina Press.



Tromp, Hylke, ed. War In Europe: Nuclear and Conventional Perspectives.
Avebury.



Walt, Stephen. Revolution and War. Cornell.



Waltz, Kenneth N. Man, The State, and War: A Theoretical Analysis. Columbia.



Zacher, Mark W. "The Decaying Pillars of the Westphalian Temple: Implications
for International Order and Governance," in Governance without Government:
Order and Change in World Politics, edited by James N. Rosenau and Ernst-Otto
Czempiel.

Cambridge.



Zhang, Shu Guang. Mao's Military Romanticism: China and the Korean War.
Kansas.





**_Periodicals_**

__

__

Barbiari, Katherine. "Economic Interdependence: A Path to Peace or a Source
for Interstate Conflict," Journal of Peace Research, 1996, 33:29-49.



Blanton, Shannon Lindsey. "Images of Conflict: The Case of Ronald Reagan and
El Salvador," International Studies Quarterly, March 1996, 23-44.



Bobrow, Davis B. "Complex Insecurity: Implications of a Sobering Metaphor,"
International Studies Quarterly, December 1996, 435-450.



Cioffi-Revilla, Claudio. "Origins and Evolution of War and Politics,"
International Studies Quarterly, March 1996, 1-22.



Copeland, Dale C. "Economic Interdependence and War: A Theory of Trade
Expectations," International Security, Spring 1996, 5-41.



Dalin, Zhang. "On the Japan-U.S. Joint Declaration on Security," International
Studies, CIIS, 1997, 1-11.



Gasiorowski, Mark J. "Economic Interdependence and International Conflict:
Some Cross Naional Evidence," International Studies Quarterly, March1986,
23-38.



Homer-Dixon, Thomas F. "Environmental Scarcities and Violent Conflict,"
International Security, Summer 1994, 5-40.



Kaysen, Carl. "Is War Obsolete?" International Security, Spring1990, 42-64.



Lake, David A. "Leadership, Hegemony, and the International Economy: Naked
Emperor or Tattered Monarch with Potential?" International Studies Quarterly,
September 1993, 459-489.

McMillian, Susan M. "Interdependence and Conflict," Mershon International
Studies Review, May 1997, 33-58.



Moran, Theodore. "Grand Strategy: The Pursuit of Power and the Pursuit of
Plenty," International Organization, 1996, 175-206.



Papayoanou, Paul A. "Interdependence, Institutions, and the Balance of Power,"
International Security, Spring 1996, 42-76.



Pollins, Brian. "Global Political Order, Economic Change, and Armed Conflict:
Coevolving Systems and the Use of Force," American Political Science Review,
1996, 103-117.



Putnam, Robert D. "Diplomacy and Domestic Politics: The Logic of Two-Level
Games," International Organization, Summer 1988, 427-460.



Reinicke, Wolfgang H. "Global Public Policy," Foreign Affairs,
November/December 1977, 127-138.



Ron, James. "Varying Methods of State Violence," International Organization,
Spring 1997, 275-300.



Rose, Gideon. "The Exit Strategy Delusion," Foreign Affairs, January/February
1998, 56-67.



Sagan, Scott D. "Why Do States Build Nuclear Weapons? Three Models in Search
of a Bomb," International Security, Winter 1996-97, 54-86.



Sweeney, John. "Stuck in Haiti," Foreign Policy, Spring 1996, 143-151.



Vasquez, John A. "Distinguishing Rivals That Go to War from Those That Do Not:
A Quantitative Comparative Case Study of the Two Paths to War," International
Studies Quarterly, December 1996, 531-558.



Waltz, Kenneth N. "The Emerging Structure of International Politics,"
International Security, Fall 1993, 44-79.





