**_United States Foreign Policy_**  
**Political Science 376 - Section 001**  
**Brigham Young University**  
**Spring Semester 2000**

**Instructor: William Ruger**  
**Classroom: ESC - C261**  
**Class Meetings: MWF 12:00 - 1:50 p.m.**

**Office: SWKT 930**  
**Office Hours: MWF 2:00-3:00 p.m., and by appointment**  
**Office Phone: 378-9754**  
**E-Mail Address:[william_ruger@byu.edu](mailto:william_ruger@byu.edu)**  
**Web Site Address: http://fhss.byu.edu/polsci/Ruger/ruger.htm**

* * *

  
**Course Description**

This course is intended to serve as an in-depth exploration of the subject of
United States foreign policy. It will focus on three main topics: (1) the
history of U.S. foreign policy; (2) the process by which foreign policy is
made and implemented in the U.S.; and (3) important issues for current U.S.
foreign policy.  
**Course Requirements**

_Reading, Attendance, and Participation_

Students should critically engage the required reading prior to each class.
Keeping up with the reading will help you understand the lectures and more
fully contribute to class discussion (although it should be understood that
lectures _ARE NOT_ exercises in restating the reading). **Caveat emptor: If
you cannot or do not want to meet the rigorous reading demands of this course,
you probably should not enroll in this class.** In addition to the course
reading, I require that you keep current on relevant national and
international news by reading a major newspaper such as _The New York Times_
(local papers such as the _Salt Lake Tribune_ or _Deseret News_ are not
appropriate for meeting this requirement). Finally, I reserve the power to
modify the reading assignments with appropriate prior notice.

As for attendance, I believe that you are all adults trying to build your
store of human capital through an investment in education. I expect,
therefore, that you will come to class and I will not need to call the roll on
a daily basis. You should understand, however, that your exam grades will be
better if you regularly attend class.

Because appropriate preparation and active, sensible class participation will
facilitate your learning (especially your verbal communication skills) and
that of your classmates, I wholeheartedly welcome appropriate questions and
comments. Please do not be shy. Due to the nature of this course, active
discussion of the issues is critical in order for this to be an enjoyable and
educational experience for all. This will often necessitate that I call on
students at any time to join the discussion.

_Exams_

There will be two exams: a midterm and a final. Exam questions will be drawn
from the required reading, lectures, discussion, and other course materials.
The final is cumulative. The midterm examination is worth **35%** of your
final grade. The final examination is worth **35%** of your final grade.

No late exams will be given unless you have proof of a serious reason for not
taking an exam at the scheduled time (for example, a doctor's note on official
stationary stating that you were unable to take the test for medical reasons).
This policy is designed to maximize fairness.

_Written Work_

All serious students should be actively honing their written communication and
research skills during their college careers. To facilitate your improvement
in these areas, each student must participate in a group research project
which will result in a significant paper.

Each group's paper should consist of a careful, critical analysis of an
important policy issue in U.S. foreign policy. The paper should concisely lay
out the policy issue (which can often be framed in terms of a question),
summarize relevant historical information relating to the topic, lay out the
various arguments concerning the issue (the reader should be able to
understand the complete range of opinions on your issue after reading this
section), and spell out your group's view. This final section should be
especially dense and must include an in-depth critique of competing arguments,
a serious analysis of how your view best meets U.S. interests (which you
should spell out clearly), and a statement of the relative costs/benefits of
this position.

A few examples of acceptable issues/questions you might want to tackle are:
(1) Should the United States seek to further enlarge NATO?; (2) Grand strategy
choice; (3) Should the United States defend Taiwan (ROC) if China (PRC)
attacks the island?; (4) Issues dealing with trade policy; (5) Should the U.S.
purchase the F-22?; (6) What role should human rights play in U.S. foreign
policy?; (7) Does the U.S. spend too little, too much, or just enough on
foreign aid?

Students should form groups of three members with those who want to work on
the same issue. These groups should be finalized by the end of the add period
and reported to me.  
Groups have significant freedom to choose their own paper topic but I reserve
the right to reject topics that are inappropriate for this class. _Each group
must hand in a concise explanation of its paper topic on Friday, May 5, 2000._
It should be typed and no longer than half a page. Groups that fail to do so
will be penalized half a grade on the final paper. I will alert those whose
topics are unacceptable as soon as possible after May 5. No group should hand
in a final paper whose topic I did not pre-approve.

The final paper is due **in class** on _Friday, June 2, 2000._

The paper is worth **30%** of each group member's final grade. Your individual
grade will be based on the quality of the paper as well as your overall
contribution to the project output. To assess this last aspect, each student
will be required to complete an evaluation form that I will provide which asks
you to evaluate the contributions of each group member, including yourself.
Free-riders will be penalized appropriately.

Make sure to clearly place the following on the title page of your group
paper: the full title of the paper, your names, the course title and number,
and the date. Please paginate the paper in the middle of the bottom of the
page starting with page two. Make sure you use standard spacing, fonts, and
margins. Please staple your paper in the upper left hand corner. Please do not
place the paper in a folder or binder; such additions are unnecessary and
wasteful (both economically and environmentally). I would appreciate it if you
would use footnotes instead of endnotes or internal citation. Be sure to
include a complete bibliography.

Late papers will be penalized a half-grade per day (including weekend days and
holidays). Papers will be considered late for **any** reason except family or
medical emergency (which must be documented). _I will not give extensions for
computer-related problems._ This means it is unwise to plan on writing the
paper the night/morning before it is due and printing it right before class.
Late papers must be turned in to the Political Science Department secretary
during regular office hours. When you turn it in, you must have the secretary
log it in the department log book, write the date on the paper, and sign it.
This policy is meant to maximize fairness.

Unfortunately, cheating occurs even here at BYU. Plagiarism is a form of
cheating and is obviously unacceptable as well as immoral. **PLAGIARISM WILL
NOT BE TOLERATED** and will be dealt with severely. Please use proper (i.e.,
Turabian) citation where necessary.

For helpful tips to improve your writing, see the new 4th edition of William
Strunk, Jr. and E.B. White's classic book, _The Elements of Style_.

**Evaluation**

The breakdown of your grade will be as follows:

Paper - 30%  
Midterm - 35%  
Final - 35%

I think you will find that my grading is fair. By fair, I mean you are likely
to find that the grade you receive will be exactly what you have earned. I
want to warn you ahead of time that this is a tough class. I agree with
Columbia University professor Richard Betts who tells his students, **"In hope
of making this course as rewarding as possible for those genuinely interested
in education, it is meant to be challenging and difficult. Satisfactory
performance should take one-fourth [or one-fifth] of the time of a normal
full-time job. Outstanding performance may require work comparable to an elite
job (the kind to which most Columbia [and BYU] students aspire), meaning
overtime"** (Betts' syllabus for "War, Peace, and Strategy in the Twentieth
Century").

**A New Class Resource: My Web Site**

Starting this semester, students will now be able to consult my web site for a
cornucopia of information regarding this course, politics, political science,
and other subjects. It is located at
**http://fhss.byu.edu/polsci/Ruger/ruger.htm.**

Students may use my site to access the library reserve catalogue and
electronic reserve. They can also consult an electronic version of the course
syllabus (or syllabi from other classes I teach), read important speeches and
documents in the history of U.S. foreign policy, and find my office phone
number or e-mail address. Students may also utilize the site as a gateway to
other sites relevant to politics, history, and political science. Finally,
students are encouraged to regularly check the "Class Postings" section of my
site in order to get up to date announcements pertinent to the course and
course assignments.

**A Note on Office Hours**

As stated above, my scheduled office hours are from 2:00 to 3:00 p.m. on
Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays. I am also available by appointment for your
convenience.

I have noticed that students rarely visit professors during office hours. If
students do come in, the visit is usually immediately preceding (to ask for
hints on what questions will be on the test) or following (to complain about a
grade) an examination. Although my door is open at those times, I would
recommend that students use my office hours throughout the semester. By
holding office hours, a professor is essentially telling you that he is
available for individual instruction during that time period. Considering
class sizes these days, students should regularly utilize office hours as a
supplement to regular class hours. I have had several students in the past who
were clearly struggling with the course material and did not take advantage of
office hours. As you can guess, I was not surprised when they did not earn the
top grades. If you are having trouble understanding something, stop by during
office hours for help. I want to help so do not be afraid to ask questions and
do not feel that I will think less of you if you require additional
assistance. None of us is perfect and we all need help at times in our life.

One caveat is in order. If your problem is cognitive, I am most willing to
help you. However, if your problem is that you do not attend classes or are
slothful in regards to your assignments, I will not allow my (and your fellow
students') office hours to be used as a substitute for your own consistent
hard work.

**A Note for Students with Disabilities**  
If you have a documented disability registered with Brigham Young University,
please see me immediately in order that I may make reasonable arrangements to
accommodate you appropriately.

**Required Reading Available for Purchase at the BYU Bookstore**  


I recommend that students purchase the following books:

Stephen E. Ambrose and Douglas G. Brinkley. _Rise to Globalism: American
Foreign Policy Since 1938_. 8 th ed. rev. New York: Penguin Books, 1997.

Stephen D. Cohen, Joel R. Paul, and Robert A. Blecker. _Fundamentals of U.S.
Foreign Trade Policy: Economics, Politics, Laws, and Issues_. Boulder:
Westview Press, 1996. ISBN 0-8133-1747-9 (paper)

William Ruger, compiler. _U.S. Foreign Policy_. Foreign Affairs Custom
Anthology, 1999.

Bruce M. Russett. _No Clear and Present Danger: A Skeptical View of the U.S.
Entry Into World War II_. 25th anniv ed. Boulder: Westview Press, 1997. ISBN
0813331951 (paper)

_The New York Times_ \- available by subscription at a special student rate

**Recommended Reading Available for Purchase at the BYU Bookstore**

William Strunk, Jr. and E.B. White. _The Elements of Style_. 4 th ed. Boston:
Allyn and Bacon, 2000.

**Required reading not available for purchase at the BYU Bookstore will be
available at one of the following places: on electronic reserve (Digital Media
Library) on the library's web site, at the reserve desk in the library (under
Political Science 376 or Political Science 170), in the 376 box outside my
office, or on my web site.**

* * *

Course Outline Part I - Introduction to U.S. Foreign Policy

Part II - The History of U.S. Foreign Policy

  * -General Themes
  * -The Founding Period, the Monroe Doctrine, and Expansion

  * -The Spanish-American War

  * -World War I
  * -The Interwar Period
  * -World War II
  * -The Cold War Era
  * -The Post-Cold War Era

Part III - The Making and Implementation of Foreign Policy

  * -The Constitutional Context
  * -The Systemic Context
  * -The Presidency and the Bureaucracy
  * -The Congress
  * -Public Opinion, Interest Groups, and the Media

Part IV - Major Foreign Policy Issues and Debates in the Post-Cold War Era

  * -Grand Strategy
  * -Foreign Economic Policy: Trade, Aid, and Sanctions

Part V - Regional Policies

  * -Eurasia: NATO, Europe, and Russia
  * -The Middle East
        * -East Asia **_Schedule of Readings and Other Assignments_**

**PART I - INTRODUCTION TO U.S. FOREIGN POLICY**

**April 26 - Course Orientation and Etceteras**

**April 28 - Introduction**

REQUIRED READING:

Seyom Brown. _The Faces of Power: United States Foreign Policy from Truman to
Clinton_. 2 nd ed. New York: Columbia University Press, 1994. Chapter 1.

Alexander L. George and Robert O. Keohane. "The Concept of National Interests:
Uses and Limitations." Chap. in _Presidential Decisionmaking in Foreign
Policy: The Effective Use of Information and Advice_. Boulder: Westview Press,
1980.

Stephen D. Krasner. "A Statist Approach to the Study of Foreign Policy." Chap.
in _Defending the National Interest: Raw Materials Investments and U.S.
Foreign Policy_. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978.

Samuel P. Huntington. "The Erosion of American National Interests." _Foreign
Affairs_ 76:5 (September/October 1997): 28-49.  


RECOMMENDED READING:  


Robert J. Art. "Geopolitics Updated: The Strategy of Selective Engagement."
_International Security_

23:3 (Winter 1998/99): 79-113. See pages 83-101.

Charles A. Beard. _The Idea of National Interest: An Analytical Study in
American Foreign Policy_. New York: Macmillan, 1934.

H.W. Brands. "The Idea of the National Interest." _Diplomatic History_ 23:2
(Spring 1999): 239-261.

Charles B. Marshall. "The National Interest." _Department of State Bulletin_ ,
May 5, 1952.

Fred A. Sondermann. "The Concept of the National Interest." _Orbis_ 21:1
(Spring 1977): 121-138.

Senator Robert A. Taft. "What Are the Purposes of a Foreign Policy?" Chap. in
_A Foreign Policy For Americans_. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1952\.

**PART II - THE HISTORY OF U.S. FOREIGN POLICY**

**May 1 - General Themes, the Founding Period, the Monroe Doctrine, Expansion,
and the Spanish-American-Cuban War**

REQUIRED READING:

Jerald A. Combs. _The History of American Foreign Policy_. 2 nd ed. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1997.  
Preface.

Louis J. Halle. _Dream and Reality: Aspects of American Foreign Policy_. New
York: Harper and Brothers, 1958. Chapter 1.

George Washington's Farewell Address (1796)

John Quincy Adams' July 4th Address (1821)

John L. O'Sullivan. "The Great Nation of Futurity." (1839)

Jerald A. Combs. "The Spanish-American War and the Decision for Empire." Chap.
in _The History of American Foreign Policy_. 2 nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill,
1997.

William McKinley's War Message (April 11, 1898)

American Anti-Imperialist League Program (October 17, 1899)

Senator Albert J. Beveridge's speech supporting American imperialism (1900)

NOTE: Students without a basic understanding of the history of U.S. foreign
policy should peruse one of the standard general texts. A few of these
include:

Jerald A. Combs. _The History of American Foreign Policy_. 2 nd ed. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1997.

Thomas G. Paterson, J. Garry Clifford, and Kenneth J. Hagan. _American Foreign
Relations: Volumes I and II_ 5 th ed. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin, 2000\.

Samuel Flagg Bemis. _A Diplomatic History of the United States._ 5 th ed. New
York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1965.  
Thomas A. Bailey. _A Diplomatic History of the American People_. 10 th ed.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall,1980.

RECOMMENDED READING:

Hans J. Morgenthau. _In Defense of the National Interest: A Critical
Examination of American Foreign Policy_. New York: Knopf, 1951; Lanham, Md.:
University Press of America, 1982. Chapter 1.

Felix Gilbert. _To the Farewell Address: Ideas of Early American Foreign
Policy_. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1961. Chapter 5.

James Madison's War Message (1812)

The Monroe Doctrine (December 2, 1823)

James K. Polk's Inaugural Address (March 4, 1845)

Jonathan R. Dull. _A Diplomatic History of the American Revolution_. New Haven
: Yale University Press, 1985.

James H. Hutson. _John Adams and the Diplomacy of the American Revolution_.
Lexington: University of Kentucky Press, 1980.

Max Savelle. _The Origins of American Diplomacy: The International History of
Anglo-America, 1492-1793_. New York: Macmillan, 1967.

Robert W. Tucker and David C. Hendrickson. "Thomas Jefferson and American
Foreign Policy." _Foreign Affairs_ 69:2 (Spring 1990): 135-156.

Harry Ammon. "The Monroe Doctrine: Domestic Politics or National Decision."
_Diplomatic History_. 5:1 (Winter 1981): 53-70.

Ernest R. May. _The Making of the Monroe Doctrine_. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1975.

Ernest R. May. "Response to Harry Ammon." _Diplomatic History_ 5:1 (Winter
1981): 71-73

John Hay's Open Door Note (September 6, 1899)

William Graham Sumner. "The Conquest of the United States By Spain." Phi Beta
Kappa address at Yale University (1899)

The Roosevelt Corollary (December 6, 1904)

John A.S. Grenville and George Berkeley Young. _Politics, Strategy, and
American Diplomacy: Studies in Foreign Policy, 1873-1917._ New Haven Yale
University Press, 1966.

Stuart Creighton Miller. _"Benevolent Assimilation": The American Conquest of
the Philippines, 1899-1903._ New Haven: Yale University Press, 1982.

Robert Endicott Osgood. _Ideals and Self-Interest in America's Foreign
Relations: The Great Transformation of the Twentieth Century_. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1953.

**May 3 - World War I, the Interwar Era, and World War II**

REQUIRED READING:

Jerald A. Combs. "Europe, America, and World War I." Chap. in _The History of
American Foreign Policy_. 2 nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997\.

Nicholas John Spykman. _America's Strategy in World Politics: The United
States and the Balance of Power_. New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company, 1942.
Chapters 11,14,15, and 447-457.

RECOMMENDED READING:

Woodrow Wilson's War Message (April 2, 1917)

Dissenting speech by Senator Robert LaFollette (April 4,1917)

John W. Coogan. _The End of Neutrality: The United States, Britain, and
Maritime Rights, 1899-1915._ Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1981.

Edward H. Buehrig. _Woodrow Wilson and the Balance of Power_. Gloucester,
Mass.: Peter Smith, 1968.

Robert Divine. _The Illusion of Neutrality_. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1962.

Raymond A. Esthus. "Isolationism and World Power." _Diplomatic History_ 2:2
(Spring 1978): 117-129.

Ernest R. May. _The World War and American Isolation, 1914-1917._ Cambridge,
Harvard University Press, 1959.

Ernest R. May. _The Coming of War, 1917._ Chicago: Rand-McNally, 1963\.

Manfred Jonas. _Isolationism in America, 1935-1941_. Ithaca: Cornell
University Press, 1966; Chicago: Imprint Publications, 1990.

The Atlantic Charter (August 1941)

Franklin Roosevelt's War Message (December 8, 1941)

Harry Elmer Barnes, ed. _Perpetual War for Perpetual Peace: A Critical
Examination of the Foreign Policy of Franklin Delano Roosevelt and Its
Aftermath_. Caldwell, Idaho: Caxton, 1953.

Charles A. Beard. _American Foreign Policy in the Making, 1932-1940_. New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1946.

Charles A. Beard. _President Roosevelt and the Coming of War, 1941_. New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1948.

Robert A. Divine. _The Reluctant Belligerent: American Entry into World War
II._ New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1965.

John W. Dower. _War Without Mercy: Race and Power in the Pacific War_. New
York: Pantheon Books, 1986.

Gerald K. Haines. "Roads to War: United States Foreign Policy, 1931-1941." In
_American Foreign Relations: A Historiographical Review_. ed. Gerald K. Haines
and J. Samuel Walker, 159-185. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press, 1981.

Patrick J. Hearden. _Roosevelt Confronts Hitler: America's Entry Into World
War II_. Dekalb: Northern Illinois Press, 1987.

Charles C. Tansill. _Back Door to War: The Roosevelt Foreign Policy,
1933-1945._ Chicago: Regnery, 1952.

**May 5 - World War II (continued)**

REQUIRED READING:

Bruce M. Russett. _No Clear and Present Danger: A Skeptical View of the U.S.
Entry Into World War II_. 25th anniv ed. Boulder: Westview Press, 1997.

  * \- Your paper topic assignment must be handed in today.

**May 8 - The Cold War Era**

**REQUIRED READING:**

**Stephen E. Ambrose and Douglas G. Brinkley. _Rise to Globalism: American
Foreign Policy Since 1938_. 8 th ed. rev. New York: Penguin Books, 1997.
Chapters 4,5,6,7,8 and 9.**

**RECOMMENDED READING:**

**X [George F. Kennan]. "The Sources of Soviet Conduct." _Foreign Affairs_ 25
(July 1947): 566-582.**

**Winston S. Churchill's "Iron Curtain" Speech (March 5, 1946)**

**The Truman Doctrine (March 12, 1947)**

**NSC-68 (April 7, 1950)**

**Herbert Hoover. "Our National Policies in This Crisis." _Vital Speeches_ ,
Jan 1, 1951.**

**Joseph P. Kennedy. "Present Policy Is Politically and Morally Bankrupt."
_Vital Speeches_ , Jan 1, 1951.**

**John Lewis Gaddis. "The Origins of the Cold War: 1945-1953." Chap. in
_Russia, the Soviet Union, and the United States: An Interpretive History_. 2
nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, 1990.**

**Robert J. Art. "The United States: Nuclear Weapons and Grand Strategy." In
_Security with Nuclear Weapons?: Different Perspectives on National Security_.
ed. Regina Cowen Karp, 57-99. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991.**

**Seyom Brown. _The Face of Power: Constancy and Change in United States
Foreign Policy from Truman to Clinton_. 2 nd ed. New York: Columbia University
Press, 1994.**

**John Lewis Gaddis. _We Now Know: Rethinking Cold War History_. New York :
Oxford University**  
**Press, 1997.**

**John Lewis Gaddis. _Russia, the Soviet Union, and the United States: An
Interpretive History_. 2 nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Publishing Company,
1990.**

**John Lewis Gaddis. _The Long Peace: Inquiries Into the History of the Cold
War_. New York: Oxford University Press, 1987.**

**John Lewis Gaddis. _Strategies of Containment: A Critical Appraisal of
Postwar American National Security Policy_. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1982.**

**John Lewis Gaddis. _The United States and the Origins of the Cold War,
1941-1947._ New York: Columbia University Press, 1972.**

**Raymond L. Garthoff. _Detente and Confrontation: American-Soviet Relations
from Nixon to Reagan_. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institute, 1985.**

**Michael J. Hogan. _The Marshall Plan: America, Britain, and the
Reconstruction of Western Europe, 1947-1952._ New York : Cambridge University
Press, 1987.**

**Timothy Ireland. _Creating the Entangling Alliance: The Origins of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization_. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1981.**

**Melvyn P. Leffler. _A Preponderance of Power: National Security, the Truman
Administration, and the Cold War_. Stanford: Stanford University Press,
1992.**

**Melvyn P. Leffler. "The Interpretative Wars Over the Cold War, 1945-1960."
In _American Foreign Relations Reconsidered, 1890-1993_. ed. Gordon Martel,
106-124. New York: Routledge, 1994.**

**Walter Lippman. _The Cold War: A Study in U.S. Foreign Policy_. New York:
Harper and Row, 1947. (Critic of Kennan)**

**Robert A. Taft. _A Foreign Policy for Americans_. Garden City, NY:
Doubleday, 1952.**

**May 10 - The Cold War Era (continued)**

**REQUIRED READING:**

**Stephen E. Ambrose and Douglas G. Brinkley. _Rise to Globalism: American
Foreign Policy Since 1938_. 8 th ed. rev. New York: Penguin Books, 1997.
Chapters 10,11,12, and 14.**

**RECOMMENDED VIEWING: "The Missiles of October" (Available at the LRC)**

**RECOMMENDED READING:**  
**Lyndon Johnson's speech at Johns Hopkins University on Vietnam (April 7,
1965)**

**J. William Fulbright on Vietnam (May 5, 1966)**

**Hans J. Morgenthau. "What Should We Do Now?" _Look Magazine_ , August 9,
1966.**

**Steven L. Spiegel. _World Politics in a New Era_. 2nd ed. Fort Worth:
Harcourt Brace College Publishers, 1998. Chapter 4.**

**Andrew Krepinevich. _The Army and Vietnam_. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1986.**

**Harry G. Summers, Jr. _On Strategy: A Critical Analysis of the Vietnam War_.
Novato, CA : Presidio Press, 1982.**

**Robert W. Tucker. _Nation or Empire: The Debate Over American Foreign
Policy_. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1968.**

**May 12 - The Cold War Era (continued) and the Post-Cold War Era**

**REQUIRED READING:**

**Stephen E. Ambrose and Douglas G. Brinkley. _Rise to Globalism: American
Foreign Policy Since 1938_. 8 th ed. rev. New York: Penguin Books, 1997.
Chapters15,16,17, and 18.**

**Michael Mandelbaum. "Foreign Policy as Social Work." _Foreign Affairs_ 75:1
(January/February 1996): 16-32.**

**William Clinton's speech on Kosovo (March 24, 1999)**

**RECOMMENDED READING:**

**George W. Bush and Skowcroft. _A World Transformed_. New York : Knopf,
1998.**

**Raymond L. Garthoff. _The Great Transition: American-Soviet Relations and
the End of the Cold War_. Washington, D.C. : Brookings Institution, 1994.**

**Philip Zelikow and Condoleezza Rice. _Germany Unified and Europe
Transformed: A Study in Statecraft_. Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1995, 1997.**

**William C. Wohlforth. "Realism and the End of the Cold War." _International
Security_ 19:3 (Winter 1994/95): 91-129.**

**Micah L. Sifry and Christopher Cerf, eds. _The Gulf War Reader: History,
Documents, Opinions_. New York: Times Books, Random House, 1991.**

**Michael R. Gordon and Bernard E. Trainor. _The Generals' War: The Inside
Story of the Conflict in the Gulf_. Boston : Little, Brown, 1995.**

**Lawrence Freedman and Efraim Karsh. _The Gulf Conflict, 1990-1991: Diplomacy
and War in the New World Order_. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1993.**

**Robert W. Tucker. _The Imperial Temptation: The New World Order and
America's Purpose_. New York: Council on Foreign Relations Press, 1992.**

**Stephen Biddle. "Victory Misunderstood: What the Gulf War Tells Us about the
Future of Conflict." _International Security_ 21:2 (Fall 1996): 139-179.**

**David Rieff. "A New Age of Liberal Imperialism?" _World Policy Journal_ 16:2
(Summer 1999): 1-10.**

**Alvin Z. Rubinstein, ed. _The Clinton Foreign Policy Reader: Presidential
Speeches with Commentary_. New York: M.E. Sharpe, 2000.**

**Sherle R. Schwenninger. "World Order Lost: American Foreign Policy in the
Post-Cold War World." _World Policy Journal_ 16:2 (Summer 1999): 42-71.**
**PART III - THE MAKING AND IMPLEMENTATION OF FOREIGN POLICY**

**May 15 - The Constitutional and Systemic Context**

**REQUIRED READING:**

**_The Constitution of the United States of America_**  
**Louis Fisher. "The Constitutional Framework." Chap. in _Presidential War
Power_. Lawrence, Kansas: University Press of Kansas, 1995.**

**Michael J. Glennon. "The Gulf War and the Constitution." _Foreign Affairs_
70:2 (Spring 1991): 84-101.**

**Paul E. Peterson. "The President's Dominance in Foreign Policy Making."
_Political Science Quarterly_ 109:2 (Summer 1994): 215-234.**

**RECOMMENDED READING:**

**Louis Henkin. _Foreign Affairs and the United States Constitution_. 2 nd ed.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996.**

**Gary M. Stern and Morton H. Halperin. _The U.S. Constitution and the Power
to Go to War: Historical and Current Perspectives_. Westport, Connecticut:
Greenwood Press, 1994.**

**May 17 - The Presidency**

**REQUIRED READING:**

**Cecil V. Crabb, Jr. and Pat M. Holt. "The Executive Branch and Foreign
Affairs: Locus of Decision Making." Chap. in _Invitation to Struggle:
Congress, the President, and Foreign Policy_. 4 th ed. Washington, D.C.: CQ
Press, 1992.**

**Aaron Wildavsky. "The Two Presidencies." In _The Two Presidencies: A Quarter
Century Assessment_. ed. Steven A. Shull, 11-25. Chicago: Nelson-Hall
Publishers, 1991.**

**William C. Banks and Jeffrey D. Straussman. "A New Imperial Presidency?
Insights from U.S. Involvement in Bosnia." _Political Science Quarterly_ 114:2
(Summer 1999): 195-217.**

**Charles W. Kegley, Jr., and Eugene R. Wittkopf. "The Role of Executive
Departments and Agencies in Foreign Policy Making." Chap. in _American Foreign
Policy: Pattern and Process_. 5 th ed. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1996.**

**RECOMMENDED READING:**

**Geoffrey Kemp. "Presidential Management of the Executive Bureaucracy." In
_U.S. Foreign Policy: The Search for a New Role_ , ed. Robert J. Art and Seyom
Brown, 32-48. New York: Macmillan, 1993.**

**Paul E. Peterson, ed. _The President, the Congress, and the Making of
Foreign Policy_. Norman, Oklahoma: University of Oklahoma Press, 1994.**

**Steven A. Shull, ed. _The Two Presidencies: A Quarter Century Assessment._
Chicago: Nelson-Hall Publishers, 1991.**  
**James M. McCormick. _American Foreign Policy and Process_. 3 rd ed. Itasca,
Illinois: F.E. Peacock Publishers, 1998. Chapters 9 and 10.**

**Jeffrey T. Richelson. _The U.S. Intelligence Community_. 4 th ed. Boulder:
Westview Press, 1999.**

**Mark M. Lowenthal. _Intelligence: From Secrets to Policy_. Washington, D.C.:
CQ Press, 2000.**

**_May 19 or 20_ \- MIDTERM EXAMINATION - 35%**  
**Exam administered at the testing center. You may take the exam on Friday,
May 19 th or Saturday, May 20th. You have as much time as you require as long
as you take the exam in one sitting during normal testing center hours. No
lecture. No office hours.**

**May 22 - The Presidency and the Bureaucracy**

**REQUIRED READING:**

**Graham T. Allison and Morton H. Halperin. "Bureaucratic Politics: A Paradigm
and Some Policy Implications." _World Politics_ 24: Supplement (Spring 1972):
40-79. Full text available on the internet at <http://www.jstor.org/cgi-
bin/jstor/listjournal>.**

**Stephen D. Krasner. "Are Bureaucracies Important? (Or Allison Wonderland)."
_Foreign Policy_ 7 (Summer 1971).**

**RECOMMENDED READING:**

**Graham Allison and Philip Zelikow. _Essence of Decision: Explaining the
Cuban Missile Crisis_. 2 nd ed. New York: Longman, 1999**  
**Robert J. Art. "Bureaucratic Politics and American Foreign Policy: A
Critique." _Policy Sciences_ (December 1973): 467-490.**

**Jonathan Bendor and Thomas H. Hammond. "Rethinking Allison's Models."
_American Political Science Review_ 86:2 (June 1992):301-322.**

**Edward Rhodes. "Do Bureaucratic Politics Matter?: Some Disconfirming
Evidence from the Case of the U.S. Navy." _World Politics_ 47:1 (Oct., 1994):
1-41.**

**May 24 - Congress**

**REQUIRED READING:**

**Charles W. Kegley, Jr., and Eugene R. Wittkopf. "The Role of Congress in
Foreign Policy Making." Chap. in _American Foreign Policy: Pattern and
Process_. 5 th ed. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1996.**

**James M. Lindsay. "Congress and Foreign Policy: Why the Hill Matters."
_Political Science Quarterly_ 107: 4 (Winter 1992-93): 607-628.**

**RECOMMENDED READING:**

**Louis Fisher. "Congressional Checks on Military Initiatives." _Political
Science Quarterly_ 109:5 (Winter 1994-95): 739-762.**

**Jerel A. Rosati. _The Politics of United States Foreign Policy_. 2 nd ed.
Forth Worth: Harcourt Brace College Publishers, 1999. Chapter 12.**

**James M. Lindsay. _Congress and the Politics of U.S. Foreign Policy_.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994.**

**Barry M. Blechman. "The Congressional Role in U.S. Foreign Policy."
_Political Science Quarterly_ 106:1 (Spring 1991):17-32.**

**Louis Fisher and David Gray Adler. "The War Powers Resolution: Time to Say
Goodbye." _Political Science Quarterly_ 113: 1 (Spring 1998): 1-20.**

**Ryan C. Hendrickson. "War Powers, Bosnia, and the 104th Congress."
_Political Science Quarterly_ 113:2 (Spring 1998): 241-258.**

**May 26 - Public Opinion, Interest Groups, and the Media**  
**REQUIRED READING:**

**John Mueller. "The Common Sense." _The National Interest_ 47 (Spring 1997):
81-88..**

**Richard Bernstein and Ross H. Munro. "The New China Lobby." In _The Domestic
Sources of American Foreign Policy: Insights and Evidence_ , 3rd ed., ed.
Eugene R. Wittkopf and James M. McCormick, 71-83. Lanham, Md: Rowman and
Littlefield, 1999.**

**Warren P. Strobel. "The CNN Effect: Myth or Reality." In _The Domestic
Sources of American Foreign Policy: Insights and Evidence_ , 3rd ed., ed.
Eugene R. Wittkopf and James M. McCormick, 85-93. Lanham, Md: Rowman and
Littlefield, 1999.**

**Jonathan Mermin. "Television News and American Intervention in Somalia: The
Myth of a Media-Driven Foreign Policy." _Political Science Quarterly_ 112:3
(Fall 1997): 385-403.**

**RECOMMENDED READING:**

**Gabriel Almond. _The American People and Foreign Policy_. New York: Praeger,
1950.**

**James Burk. "Public Support for Peacekeeping in Lebanon and Somalia:
Assessing the Casualties Hypothesis." _Political Science Quarterly_ 114:1
(Spring 1999): 53-78.**

**Douglas C. Foyle. _Counting the Public In: Presidents, Public Opinion, and
Foreign Policy_. New York: Columbia University Press 1999.**

**Ole R. Holsti. _Public Opinion and American Foreign Policy_. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press, 1996.**

**Ole R. Holsti. "Public Opinion and Foreign Policy: Challenges to the Almond-
Lippman Consensus." _International Studies Quarterly_ 36 (1992): 439-466.**

**Bruce W. Jentleson. "The Pretty Prudent Public: Post Post-Vietnam American
Opinion on the Use of Military Force." _International Studies Quarterly_ 36
(1992): 49-74.**

**Walter Lippmann. _Public Opinion_. New York: Macmillan, 1922; New York: Free
Press Paperbacks, 1997.**

**Alan Monroe. "Consistency Between Public Preferences and National Policy
Decision." _American Politics Quarterly_ 7 (1979): 3-19.**

**John E. Mueller. _Policy and Opinion in the Gulf War_. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1994.**

**John E. Mueller. _War, Presidents, and Public Opinion_. New York, Wiley,
1973.**

**Norman H. Nie, Sidney Verba, and John R. Petrocik. _The Changing American
Voter_. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1979.**

**Benjamin I. Page and Robert Y. Shapiro. _The Rational Public: Fifty Years of
Trends in Americans' Policy Preferences._ Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1992.**

**Philip Powlick. "The Sources of Public Opinion for American Foreign Policy
Officials." _International Studies Quarterly_ 39 (1995): 427-452.**

**John E. Rielly, ed. _American Public Opinion and U.S. Foreign Policy, 1999._
Chicago: Chicago Council on Foreign Relations, 1999. Full text available on
the internet at <http://www.ccfr.org/publications/opinion/AmPuOp99.pdf>**

**Richard Sobel, ed. _Public Opinion in U.S. Foreign Policy: The Controversy
Over Contra Aid_. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 1993.**

**John R. Zaller. _The Nature and Origins of Mass Opinion_. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press,**  
**1992.**

**Richard Davis. _The Press and American Politics: The New Mediator_. 2 nd ed.
Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1996. Chapters 20 and 21.**

**Jonathan Mermin. _Debating War and Peace: Media Coverage of U.S.
Intervention in the Post-Vietnam Era._ Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1999.**

**PART IV - MAJOR FOREIGN POLICY ISSUES AND DEBATES IN THE POST-COLD WAR ERA**

**May 31 - Grand Strategy**

**REQUIRED READING:**  
**Barry R. Posen and Andrew L. Ross. "Competing Visions for U.S. Grand
Strategy." _International Security_ 21:3 (Winter 1996/7): 5-53.**

**William Kristol and Robert Kagan. "Toward a Neo-Reaganite Foreign Policy."
_Foreign Affairs_ 75:4 (July/August 1996): 18-32.**

**Eugene Gholz, Daryl G. Press, and Harvey Sapolsky. "Come Home America: The
Strategy of Restraint in the Face of Temptation." _International Security_ 21:
4 (Spring 1997): 1-43.**

**RECOMMENDED READING:**

**Madeleine K. Albright. "The Testing of American Foreign Policy." _Foreign
Affairs_ 77:6 (November/December 1998):50-64.**

**Robert J. Art. "Geopolitics Updated: The Strategy of Selective Engagement."
_International Security_**  
**23:3 (Winter 1998/99): 79-113.**

**Robert J. Art. "A Defensible Defense: America's Grand Strategy After the
Cold War." _International Security_ 15:4 (Spring 1991): 5-53.**

**Zbigniew Brzezinski. _The Grand Chessboard: American Primacy and Its
Geostrategic Imperatives_. New York: Basic Books, 1997.**

**Ted Galen Carpenter. _A Search for Enemies: America's Alliances after the
Cold War_. Washington, D.C.: Cato Institute, 1992.**

**Ted Galen Carpenter. _Beyond NATO: Staying Out of Europe's Wars_.
Washington, D.C.: Cato Institute, 1994**

**Samuel P. Huntington. "America's Changing Strategic Interests." _Survival_
33:1 (January/February 1991): 3-17.**

**Samuel P. Huntington. "Why International Primacy Matters." _International
Security_ 17:4 (Spring 1993).**

**Charles A. Kupchan and Clifford A. Kupchan. "Concerts, Collective Security,
and the Future of Europe." _International Security_ 16:1 (Summer 1991).**

**Christopher Layne. "From Preponderance to Offshore Balancing: America's
Future Grand Strategy." _International Security_ 22:1 (Summer 1997): 86-124.**

**Christopher Layne. "Rethinking American Grand Strategy: Hegemony or Balance
of Power in the Twenty-First Century?" _World Policy Journal_ 15:2 (Summer
1998): 8-28.**

**Michael Lind. "Pax Atlantica: The Case for Euramerica." _World Policy
Journal_ 13:1 (Spring 1996): 1-7.**

**Joshua Muravchik. _The Imperative of American Leadership: A Challenge to
Neo-Isolationism._ Washington, D.C.: AEI Press, 1996.**

**Eric A. Nordlinger. _Isolationism Reconfigured: American Foreign Policy for
a New Century_. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995.**

**Ronald Steel. _Temptations of a Superpower_. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1995.**

**Stephen Van Evera. "Why Europe Matters, Why the Third World Doesn't:
American Grand Strategy After the Cold War." _Journal of Strategic Studies_
13:2 (June 1990): 1-51.**

**June 2 - Foreign Economic Policy: Trade, Aid, and Sanctions**

**REQUIRED READING:**

**Stephen D. Cohen, Joel R. Paul, and Robert A. Blecker. _Fundamentals of U.S.
Foreign Trade Policy: Economics, Politics, Laws, and Issues_. Boulder:
Westview Press, 1996. Chapters 1, 2, 5, and 6.**

  * **\- Your paper is due today in class.**

**RECOMMENDED READING:**

**I. M. Destler. _American Trade Politics_. 3rd ed. Washington, D.C.:
Institute for International Economics, 1995.**

**John Whalley and Colleen Hamilton. _The Trading System After the Uruguay
Round_. Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics, 1996.**

**June 5 - Foreign Economic Policy: Trade, Aid, and Sanctions (continued)**

**REQUIRED READING:**

**Stephen D. Cohen, Joel R. Paul, and Robert A. Blecker. _Fundamentals of U.S.
Foreign Trade Policy: Economics, Politics, Laws, and Issues_. Boulder:
Westview Press, 1996. Chapters 7, 8, 13, 14, and 15.**

**John T. Rourke, ed. "Issue 9: Should the Developed North Increase Aid to the
Less Developed South?" Chap. in _Taking Sides: Clashing Views on Controversial
Issues in World Politics_. 8 th ed. Guilford, Conn: Duskin/McGraw-Hill, 1998.
Pages 168-185. (Includes reprinted articles by James P. Grant, "Jumpstarting
Development," and the editors of The Economist, "The Kindness of Strangers")**

**Richard N. Haass. "Sanctioning Madness." _Foreign Affairs_ 76:6
(November/December 1997): 74-85.**

**RECOMMENDED READING:**

**Eric J. Labs. _The Role of Foreign Aid in Development_. Washington, D.C.:
Congressional Budget Office, 1997. Pages TBA.**

**Carol Graham & Michael O'Hanlon. "Making Foreign Aid Work." _Foreign
Affairs_ 76:4 (July/August 1997): 96-104.**

**Gary Clyde Hufbauer, Jeffrey J. Schott, and Kimberly Ann Eliot. _Economic
Sanctions Reconsidered_. 2 nd rev. ed., 2 vols. Washington, D.C.: Institute
for International Economics, 1990.**

**John Mueller and Karl Mueller. "Sanctions of Mass Destruction." _Foreign
Affairs_ 78:3 (May/June 1999): 43-53.**

**Robert A. Pape. "Why Economic Sanctions Do Not Work." _International
Security_ 22:2 (Fall 1997): 90-136.**

**Kimberly Ann Elliott. "The Sanctions Glass: Half Full or Completely Empty?"
_International Security_ 23:1 (Summer 1998): 50-65.**

**Robert A. Pape. "Why Economic Sanctions Still Do Not Work." _International
Security_ 23:1 (Summer 1998): 66-77.**

**PART V - REGIONAL POLICIES**

**June 7 - Eurasia: NATO, Europe, and Russia**

**REQUIRED READING:**

**Stephen M. Walt. "The Ties That Fray: Why Europe and America Are Drifting
Apart." _The National Interest_ 54 (Winter 1998/99): 3-11.**

**C. Fred Bergsten. "America and Europe: Clash of the Titans." _Foreign
Affairs_ 78:2 (March/April 1999): 20-34.**

**Richard Pipes. "Is Russia Still an Enemy?" _Foreign Affairs_ 76:5
(September/October 1997): 65-78.**

**NATO. "Purposes and Principles of Enlargement." Chap. in _Study on NATO
Enlargement_. September 1995. Full text available on the internet at
<http://www.nato.int/docu/basictxt/enl-9502.htm>**

**The U.S. Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation. "NATO
Enlargement." Undated. Full text available on the internet
at<http://www.nato.int/usa/info/enlargement.htm>**

**Michael E. Brown. "The Flawed Logic of NATO Expansion." _Survival_ 37:1
(Spring 1995): 34-52.**

**Bruce Russett and Alan C. Stam. "Courting Disaster: An Expanded NATO vs.
Russia and China." _Political Science Quarterly_ 113:3 (Fall 1998): 361-382.**

**Robert J. Art. "Creating a Disaster: NATO's Open Door Policy." _Political
Science Quarterly_ 113:3 (Fall 1998): 383-403.**

**RECOMMENDED READING:**

**John J. Mearsheimer. "Back to the Future: Instability in Europe After the
Cold War." _International Security_ 15:1 (Summer 1990): 5-56.**

**Stephen Van Evera. "Primed for Peace: Europe After the Cold War."
_International Security_ 15:3 (Winter 1990/91): 7-57.**

**Martin Feldstein. "EMU and International Conflict." _Foreign Affairs_ 76:6
(November/December 1997): 60-73.**

**William Pfaff. "The Coming Clash of Europe with America." _World Policy
Journal_ 15:4 (Winter 1998/99: 1-9.**

**Charles A. Kupchan. "Rethinking Europe." _The National Interest_ 56 (Summer
1999): 73-79.**

**Grigory Yavlinsky. "Russia's Phony Capitalism." _Foreign Affairs_ 77:3
(May/June 1998): 67-79.**

**Alexei K. Pushkov. "Don't Isolate Us: A Russian View of NATO Expansion."
_The National Interest_ 47 (Spring 1997): 58-62.**

**Amos Perlmutter and Ted Galen Carpenter. "NATO's Expensive Trip East: The
Folly of Enlargement." _Foreign Affairs_ 77:1 (January/February 1998): 2-6.**

**Ted Galen Carpenter and Barbara Conry, eds. _NATO Enlargement: Illusions and
Reality._ Washington, D.C.: Cato Institute, 1998.**

**Michael Mandelbaum. "Preserving the New Peace: The Case Against NATO
Expansion." _Foreign Affairs_ 74: 3 (May/June 1995): 9-13.**

**June 9 - The Middle East**

**REQUIRED READING:**

**Daniel Byman, Kenneth Pollack, and Gideon Rose. "The Rollback Fantasy."
_Foreign Affairs_ 78:1 (January/February 1999): 24-41.**

**Zbigniew Brzezinski, Brent Skowcroft, and Richard Murphy. "Differentiated
Containment." _Foreign Affairs_ 76:3 (May/June 1997): 20-30.**

**Graham E. Fuller and Ian O. Lesser. "Persian Gulf Myths." _Foreign Affairs_
76:3 (May/June 1997): 42-52.**

**RECOMMENDED READING:**

**James Bill. _The Eagle and the Lion: The Tragedy of American-Iranian
Relations_. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1988.**

**Efraim Karsh and Inari Karsh. _Empires of the Sand: The Struggle for Mastery
in the Middle East, 1789-1923_. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1999.
(This is helpful for gaining an understanding of Middle East political
history)**

**June 12 - East Asia**

**REQUIRED READING:**

**Thomas J. Christensen. "China, the U.S.-Japan Alliance, and the Security
Dilemma in East Asia." _International Security_ 23:4 (Spring 1999): 49-80.**

**Rajan Menon. "The Once and Future Superpower." _Bulletin of the Atomic
Scientists_ 53:1 (January/February 1997): 29-34.**

**Doug Bandow. "Old Wine in New Bottles: The Pentagon's East Asia Security
Strategy Report." Cato Policy Analysis No. 344. May 18, 1999. Full text
available on the internet at<http://www.cato.org/pubs/pas/pa344.pdf>**

**Richard Bernstein and Ross H. Munro. "The Coming Conflict with America."
_Foreign Affairs_ 76:2 (March/April 1997): 18-32.**

**Bates Gill. "Limited Engagement." _Foreign Affairs_ 78:4 (July/August 1999):
65-76.**

**Gerald Segal. "Does China Matter?" _Foreign Affairs_ 78:5 (September/October
1999): 24-36.**

**RECOMMENDED READING:**

**Michael G. Gallagher. "China's Illusory Threat to the South China Sea."
_International Security_ 19:1 (Summer 1994): 169-194.**

**Bates Gill and Michael O'Hanlon. "China's Hollow Military." _The National
Interest_ 56 (Summer 1999): 55-62.**

**Zalmay M. Khalilzad, et al. _The United States and a Rising China: Strategic
and Military Implications_. Santa Monica, CA: Rand, 1999.**

**Robert S. Ross. "Beijing as a Conservative Power." _Foreign Affairs_ 76:2
(March/April 1997): 33-44.**

**Denny Roy. "Hegemon on the Horizon? China's Threat to East Asian Security."
_International Security_ 19:1 (Summer 1994): 149-168.**

**Gerald Segal. "East Asia and the 'Constrainment' of China." _International
Security_ 20:4 (Spring 1996): 107-135.**

**David Shambaugh. "Containment or Engagement of China? Calculating Beijing's
Responses." _International Security_ 21:2 (Fall 1996): 180-209.**

**Michael D. Swaine and Ashley J. Tellis. _Interpreting China's Grand
Strategy: Past, Present, and Future._ Santa Monica, CA: Rand, 2000.**

**Doug Bandow. "Free Rider: South Korea's Dual Dependence on America." Cato
Policy Analysis No. 308. May 19, 1998.**

**Full text available on the internet
at<http://www.cato.org/pubs/pas/pa-308es.html>**

**Ted Galen Carpenter. "Let Taiwan Defend Itself." Cato Policy Analysis No.
313. August 24, 1998. Full text available on the internet
at<http://www.cato.org/pubs/pas/pa-313.html>**

**Robert S. Ross. "The Geography of the Peace: East Asia in the Twenty-first
Century." _International Security_ 23:4 (Spring 1999): 81-118.**

**Michael O'Hanlon. "Stopping a North Korean Invasion: Why Defending South
Korea Is Easier Than the Pentagon Thinks." _International Security_ 22:4
(Spring 1998): 135-170.**

**_FINAL EXAMINATION - 35%_ \- The final examination will be administered in
your regular classroom and will be cumulative. Your final is scheduled for
Wednesday, June 14th, from 1:00 p.m. to 2:50 p.m.**

