![](linocut.gif)New Deal America  
History 395, Fall 1998  
Tuesday & Thursday, 11:00-12:20, Norton 214

Instructor: Dr. Gail Radford, 583 Park Hall  
(w) 645-2181, ext. 583; (h) 886-5592  
E-mail: [radford@buffalo.edu](mailto:radford@acsu.buffalo.edu)  
Office Hours: Thursdays 2:00-4:00, and by appointment

(Illustration: Charles Turzak, _Depression--Man with Shovel_ , 1935, linocut,
2.75x2".)

**_Course Description_**

This course explores one of the most dramatic periods of U.S. history, a
transformative moment in American political and cultural life with
consequences that reverberate in our own times.  The economic collapse of the
1930s known as the "Great Depression" encouraged Americans to rethink core
assumptions about how society should be organized and to make major changes in
our mode of government, changes that are generally lumped together under the
rubric of the "New Deal." The innovations of the New Deal era were
controversial in their own time-and they remain so today. Indeed, one could
argue that images of this period serve as a benchmark in American political
life, with politicians and commentators continually promising either to roll
back the New Deal or carry on its legacy. For this reason, the course will
concentrate not only on what happened during the 1930s and how people at the
time understood and evaluated the changes they were experiencing, but also on
what these changes mean for us today.

Students will be encouraged to develop their own perspectives based on reading
and discussing a variety of first-hand accounts, written and video discussions
by historians and other after-the-fact commentators, and contemporary news
articles on New Deal topics currently under debate, such as Social Security,
federal funding for the arts, and the proper way to remember President's
Roosevelt's disability.

The course also aims to introduce students to the historical materials that
are becoming available on the world wide web. Some of the required reading
will be found on the web, and students are encouraged to browse in various
sites that will be announced in class, especially the New Deal Network's
award-winning website at  [newdeal.feri.org](http://newdeal.feri.org).
Everyone should plan on coming by the instructor's office hours to introduce
yourself sometime during the course. People with limited experience using the
internet should come by early in the semester for hands-on coaching.

**_Books_**

You should purchase:

Robert S. McElvaine, _The Great Depression: America 1929-1941_ , 2nd ed.
(1993).

Upton Sinclair, _I, Candidate for Governor: And How I Got Licked_ ([1934];
1994).

Alice Lynd and Staughton Lynd, eds., _Rank and File: Personal Histories by
Working-Class Organizers_ ([1973]; 1988).

David A. Shannon, ed., _The Great Depression_ ([1960]; 1990).

**_Course Requirements and Grading_**

1\. **Exams** : There will be a midterm and a cumulative final. Each will
count for 25% of your final grade for the course. The readings and lectures
complement each other; you are responsible for all material covered in either
context.

**2\. Short Assignments** : There will be 14 opportunities, of which 10 must
be taken, to write short (1-2 page) assignments that will be graded on a pass-
fail basis. Since active participation is a key goal of the course, the grade
for the short assignments will count for 30% of the final grade. Students who
receive a passing grade on 10 of these will get an "A" for this (30%) portion
of the course grade. Nine passing assignments will be an "B," eight will be a
"C," seven a "D," and six or less an "F." These assignments should be typed or
computer-printed (although limited exceptions are possible). Since the purpose
of these assignments is to help students think through issues as they are
covered in the course and to be able to come to class ready to discuss them-
credit cannot be given unless the assignment are turned in during the class
when they are due. Also, no credit can be given for one of these assignments
if the writer is unable to attend the class. Everyone can skip four of these
assignments with no penalty. However, each person must turn in an initial
paper first or second week of class.

**3\. Paper** : There will be a 4-5 page paper on issues raised by Upton
Sinclair's book. (More specific instructions will be explained later in the
course.) The paper will be due Nov. 3, and will count for 20% of the grade.
Students can rewrite this paper for a higher grade. To take this option, come
in for a consultation with the instructor during office hours, and turn in the
rewritten paper together with the original by the last class on Dec. 10.
(Rewrites will not be accepted unless these conditions are met.)

* * *

  
**_Course Schedule and Reading Assignments_**  

* * *

  
Week 1

Readings: McElvaine, chapter 1; Shannon, chapter 1

Classes  
    Sept. 1 Course Introduction   
    Sept. 3 Memories of the Great Depression and the New Deal   
        Short Assignment #1 Due  

* * *

  
Week 2

Readings: McElvaine, chapters 2 & 3; "Experiment in Balance," by UB art
curator Lisa Fischman, pamphlet for the show of WPA prints currently on
display at the UB Art Gallery, _on reserve_

Classes  
    Sept. 8 America in the 1920s   
    Sept. 10 Work Relief for Artists: _This class will meet at the UB Art Gallery_   
        Short Assignment #2 Due 

* * *

  
Week 3

Readings: McElvaine, chapter 4; Shannon, chapter 3; "Dust Bowl" by William
Cronon, in Alan Brinkley, et al., _American History_ , 8th ed., vol. 2 (1991),
_on reserve_

Classes  
    Sept. 15 The Economy Crumbles   
    Sept. 17 The Environmental Crisis of the 1930s   
        Short Assignment #3 Due 

* * *

  
Week 4

Readings: Shannon, chapter 4; Joan M. Crouse, _The Homeless Transient in the
Great Depression: New York State, 1929-1941_ (1986), chapters 3-4, _on
reserve_

Classes  
    Sept. 22 U.S. Welfare Policies before the 1930s   
    Sept. 24 The Relief Crisis in the Early Years of the Depression   
        Short Assignment #4 Due 

* * *

  
Week 5

Readings: McElvaine, chapters 5 & 6; Franklin D. Roosevelt, "Extemporaneous
Remarks at Thanksgiving Day Party at Warm Springs, Georgia (1934),
_<http://newdeal.feri.org/speeches/1934g.htm>_

Classes  
    Sept. 29 What Do People Mean When they Talk About the New Deal Coalition?   
        American Politics in the Early 20th Century   
    Oct. 1 Who was Franklin Roosevelt?   
        Short Assignment #5 Due   

* * *

  
Week 6

Readings: McElvaine, chapter 7; Crouse, "The Federal Transient Program in New
York State, chapter 6 in Crouse, _The Homeless Transient,_ _on reserve_ ;
Martha Bruere, Report to Harry Hopkins on conditions in Buffalo, New York
(Nov. 1934); <http://newdeal.feri.org/hopkins/hop26.htm>

Classes  
    Oct. 6 The Early New Deal   
    Oct. 8 The New Deal comes to New York State   
        Short Assignment #6 Due   

* * *

  
Week 7

Readings: Andrew Bergman, "The Gangsters," chapter 1 of _We're in the Money:
Depression America and Its Films_ (1971), _on reserve_

Classes  
    Oct. 13 **Exam**   
    Oct. 15 _Public Enemy_ : Why Were Gangster Movies So Popular in the 1930s?   
        Short Assignment #7 Due   

* * *

  
Week 8

Readings: McElvaine, chapter 10; Sinclair, pages 1-99

Classes  
    Oct. 20 Upton Sinclair and the "End Poverty in California" Campaign   
    Oct. 22 Dr. Townsend's Pension Plan   
        Short Assignment #8 Due   

* * *

Week 9

Readings: Sinclair, pages 99-249; Shannon, chapter 8

Classes  
    Oct. 27 Roosevelt's Social Security Legislation   
    Oct. 29 Could Sinclair Have Won the Governorship of California?   
        Short Assignment #9 Due   

* * *

  
Week 10

Readings: McElvaine, chapters 11 & 12; Steve Forbes, "How to Replace Social
Security," _Wall Street Journal_ 12/18/96; Robert Eisner, "Cut Social
Security? No, Expand It," _Wall Street Journal_ 12/10/97; Rod Watson, "If We
Only Knew the Truth About Social Security, We Might Not Be So Scared,"
_Buffalo News_ 1/8/98; Robert W. Tracinski, "Let's Privatize This National
Rip-Off, _Philadelphia Inquirer_ 7/28/98, _on reserve_

Classes  
    Nov. 3 The Second Phase of the New Deal   
        Upton Sinclair Paper Due   
    Nov. 5 Current Debates about New Deal Welfare Programs (esp., Social Security)   
        Short Assignment #10 Due   

* * *

  
Week 11

Readings: McElvaine, chapter 13; Lynd and Lynd, "Introduction" and oral
testimonies of Ellis and Anderson (pages IX-66)

Classes  
    Nov. 10 The Rise of Industrial Unions; General Strikes & Sitdowns   
    Nov. 12 Sit-Down Strikes in Flint, Michigan   
        Short Assignment #11 Due   

* * *

  
Week 12

Readings: Lynd and Lynd, oral testimonies of Nowicki, Patterson et al., and
Sylvia Woods (pages 59-121); "Labor Campaign Highlights Workers' Right to
Unionize," _New York Times_ , 6/25/98; "UAW Fears Futility of Future Strikes
if GM Realigns Manufacturing As Planned," _Buffalo News,_ 7/3/98; E.J. Dionne,
Jr., "The General Motors Fight," _Washington Post National Weekly Edition_ ,
8/10/98, _on reserve_

Classes  
    Nov. 17 What Were Workers Fighting for in the 1930s?   
    Nov. 19 The Meaning of the Labor Struggles of the 1930s for Today   
        Short Assignment #12 Due   

* * *

  
Week 13  
    Nov. 24 No class-considered as a Wednesday for the UB fall semester   
    Nov. 26 No class-Thanksgiving   

* * *

  
Week 14

Readings: "A New Deal for the Arts," Online exhibit of the National Archives
at <http://www.nara.gov:80/exhall/newdeal/newdeal.html>_;_ William Graebner,
"Norman Rockwell and American Mass Culture: The Crisis of Representation in
the Great Depression," vol. 22, _Prospects_ ; _on reserve_ ; "Artistic Freedom
for Taxpayers," _National Review_ , 10/27/89, "Comparisons of WPA and NEA
Sentiments," _Knight-Ridder/Tribune News Service_ , 8/8/97; Bernard A.
Weisberger, "Federal Art for Whose Sake?" _American Heritage_ , 12/92; _on
reserve_

_Optional:_ Interested in finding out what New Deal art projects were done in
your home town? There is a comprehensive list for New York State at
<http://newdeal.feri.org/ndart/>.

Classes  
    Dec. 1 New Deal Cultural Programs   
    Dec. 3 Should the Federal Government Support the Arts Today?   
        Short Assignment #13 Due   

* * *

  
Week 15

Readings: McElvaine, chapters 14 & 15; Francis MacDonnell, "The Emerald City
was the New Deal'": E.Y. Harburg and _The Wonderful Wizard of Oz_ ," _Journal
of American Culture_ (1990), _on reserve_

Classes  
    Dec. 8 The New Deal Winds Down   
    Dec. 10 _The Wizard of Oz_ -An Allegory for the New Deal?   
            ... and: Exam Review   
        Short Assignment #14 Due   

* * *

  
**Final Exam** : Time and place to be announced.

