CASPER COLLEGE

DEPARTMENT OF VISUAL ARTS



**ART   2410     CERAMICS I:  HANDBUILDING  AND  WHEEL  THROWING**

**SYLLABUS**



Lecture Hours: 2         Laboratory Hours: 4
Credits: 3

Class Time:     6:30-9:20 pm               Days:   Monday & Wednesday
Room: VA 110

Instructor:        Pat Sherwood

Office:             VA 118
Home Phone: 436-8820

Office Hours:  MW  5:30-6:30 pm
Studio Phone: 436-9988

Office phone:   268-2673
E-mail:  [patsher@trib.com](mailto:patsher@trib.com)



**Course Description:**  

A course in the basic and fundamental processes and ideas in the making of
contemporary ceramic objects.



**Prerequisites:** None



**Objectives:**

1.     To acquire knowledge of _basic fundamentals of pottery making_ , and its _historical and present-day significance_.

2.     To develop _craftsmanship_ and _good design judgment_ as it relates to various clay techniques.

3.     To develop a _creative attitude_ through the medium of clay and glaze.

4.     To discover the _creative possibilities and limitations_ of the medium.



**Methods of Teaching and Procedures:**

1.     Lectures followed by demonstrations and laboratory experiences.

2.     Audio-visual aids in the form of movies, slides, and actual specimens from private collections.

3.     All students are expected to follow the outlines closely,  contacting the instructor for individual help on all projects as needed.

4.     Students will work at their own speed, keeping in mind the importance of sound craftsmanship and good design.  **NO WORK WILL BE FIRED UNTIL APPROVED BY THE INSTRUCTOR.**   Trinkets will not be fired.

5.     Students are strongly encouraged to maintain a _sketchbook_ during this class.   Whether a spiral bound notebook or a bound artist's sketchbook with acid-free paper, the point is to have a single book to contain the notes made during demonstations and lectures, and the sketches you are required to make before making pots.

6.     All slip decorations must be fully covered by glaze; and all glazed pieces must be properly dry-footed.  Cracked or poorly-jointed pieces will not be fired, nor will pieces not meeting the requirements of the project.  Pitchers or mugs without handles will not be fired.

7.     All pieces must be present at the final critique, missing work will receive zero credit.  (If misfortune strikes, bring the pieces).











**Examinations and Evaluations:**

1.     Attendance, meeting deadlines, individual progress, attitude, craftsmanship, and interest will be factors in grading.

2.     A series of four quizzes will be given, and will cover information both from the reading assignments in the textbook and from lectures.

3.     A Research Paper which will be due at the beginning of class Monday before mid-term break.

4.     At the end of the semester each student will prepare an exhibit of his or her finished work for critique and grading.  Each student will be held responsible for completion of the projects as listed in the Outline of Assignments. Attached is a copy of the evaluation form, which lists the point value of each project.  Craftsmanship, design and execution are all considered, as well as attendance, meeting deadlines, individual progress, attitudes and interest.



**Required Text(s):**

            _THE CRAFT OF THE POTTER, A PRACTICAL GUIDE TO MAKING POTTERY_ ,     by Michael Casson.  This text is available at the bookstore.



**Other sources of information:**

At the library you will find a large number of books about the field of
ceramics:  historical and contemporary pottery and pottery-making,
biographies, histories, and the science of ceramics.  The magazines _American
Craft_ and _Ceramics Monthly_ , are available in both the current periodical
section, and back issues in the bound volumes section of the library.

** **

**Tools** :  Elephant Ear Sponge                Fettling Knife
Large Sponge

            Black Rubber Kidney Rib       Wood Modeling Tool             Cutting Wire

            Metal Kidney Rib                    Plastic Ruler                           Trimming Tool

            Trimming Needle                    Calipers                                  2 Bamboo Brushes

            Surform Plane            

Sources:  Goedicke's Arts and Crafts (120 W. 2nd St), has assembled a kit of
all items above.  Hobby Lobby is also said to be carrying some pottery tools.
Hardware stores for the plane.

                                   

**Supplies:         **Sketch book, padlock, old towel, plastic bucket (about 1
gallon size)



**Clay:    **Clay is purchased through the **BUSINESS OFFICE**  (in the Admin
Bldg). Clay will be issued to you by the instructor in exchange for the
receipt from the business office.   The price of clay includes the cost of
glaze, decorating materials,  and firing.   **_DO NOT BRING CLAY FROM ANY
OTHER SOURCE INTO THIS DEPARTMENT!_**

_ _

**Last Date to change to Audit status or withdraw with a "W" grade:**    See
current catalog.



**Students Rights and Responsibilities:   **Please refer to the Casper College
Student Conduct and Judicial Code for information concerning your rights and
responsibilities as a Casper College student. ****

** **

It is the policy of Casper College to provide appropriate accommodations to
any student with a documented disability.  If you have need for accommodation
in this course, please make an appointment with the instructor at your
earliest convenience.

**ART 2410   \--  CERAMICS I**

**OUTLINE OF CLASS ASSIGNMENTS**



**Clay** : **  ** All Ceramics I assignments will be made only with _low-fire
clay_ , either red or white.



**HANDBUILDING ASSIGNMENTS**



**Skills** :  Learn by hands-on experience the physical handling
characteristics of clay, and some of its limits.  Learn the basic skills of
hand-building by pinching, coiling, and slab methods;  basic decorating
techniques; the use of various hand tools; and the safe operation of equipment
such as slab rollers.  Learn to identify and avoid various hazards:
ergonomic, materials, equipment. Begin think beyond objects made, to how
mastery of technique allows expression and communication.

**Method** :  The first three weeks of the semester will be devoted
exclusively to handbuilt projects.  Some will not be finished in the first
three weeks, and must be finished outside of class.  Read the text for a
detailed explanation of these techniques before the first class session.
Demonstrations will be given at the start of each new assignment. __



1\. **  FOUR PINCH BOWLS**,  Make four pinch bowls:  (1)  Burnished, no foot,
pit-fired; (2) Burnished, footed, pit-fired;  (3) Footed, majolica-glazed,
glaze-fired; (4) Textured, footed.

            Goals #1 and 2: Become acquainted with clay, and some of its possibilities/limitations.



2.  **ONE PINCH HOLLOW-FORM COVERED JAR** , your choice of decoration and firing.

           

3.  **TILES PROJECT**.   Make eight 4"x 4" x 3/8" thick tiles, and decorate as follows:(1) Mishima (2) Slip painting or feathering  (3) Marbling  (4) Sgraffito  (5) Carving  (6)Piercing  (7) Impressing or Sprigging   (8)  Majolica glazed,  with overglaze stain decoration.   Combinations encouraged.

            Goals:  (1) To improve technical skills, and (2)  To stimulate interest in decorating.



4.  **COIL-BUILT PROJECT    **"HISTORY REPEATS ITSELF".

Recreate an Historical Pot.  Go to the Library and look through as many books
of historical pottery as you can locate.  Pick your favorite pot that is at
least 100 years old.  It is to be decorated with some type of decoration.  Any
decoration on the pot is to be adapted to sgraffito method of decoration.
(Consult with the instructor if you feel a different method of decoration
would be more appropriate for your piece).  Identify the time frame and place
where it was made.  Make a good quality Xerox of the pot and bring it to class
with you.  DO NOT BRING THE LIBRARY BOOK INTO THE CLASSROOM.  Build this pot
by the coil method as closely to the original as possible.  It is to be at
least 12" in height.

            Goals:  (1)  To increase observational skills, (2)  To improve technical skills, and

                        (3)  To enhance appreciation and knowledge of historical pottery



5.  **SLAB-BUILT PROJECT**

Create a clay object by the slab method of construction.  This is to have a
minimum dimension in height or width of 12".  The decoration on this piece is
to be reflective of your research of another culture (Japanese, Chinese, East
Indian, American Indian, etc.), or is to address a current political, social
or other issue about which you have strong feelings.

            Goals:  (1)  To stimulate interest in art as a form of communication, (2)  To improve                                     technical skills, (3)  To provide a forum for personal comment in the visual realm.

**WHEEL   THROWING  ASSIGNMENTS**



**Method** :  These assignments are to be made on the potter's wheel.



**Skills** :   To become proficient at the potter's wheel, each student will
need to learn the following steps for the making of wheel-thrown pottery:  (1)
Wedging or Kneading, (2) Centering, (3) Opening, (4) Pulling Up, (5) Shaping,
(6) Finishing rims and lips, (7) Initial Trimming, (8) Removal from the Wheel
Head, (9) Decorating techniques, (10) Decorating at the appropriate times,
(11) Drying to trimming consistency, (12) Trimming, (13) Pulling and attaching
handles, (14) Drying so as to prevent cracking and warping, (15) Proper
handling of greenware so as to prevent damage, (16) Proper handling of bisque-
fired ware so as to avoid glazing problems, (17) Glazing and overglaze stain
techniques, (18) Dry-footing, (19) Finishing the work after glaze firing.
Each of these steps are clearly explained in the text.  Please read these
pages before the first working session of class, and continue to refer to the
appropriate pages as required.  Numerous demonstrations will be given by the
instructor.  Sketches will be required before beginning any project.

            ( **Hint** :  The goal is to have an even wall thickness throughout the piece, so throw smoothly and steadily, avoiding jerky movements and quick starts and stops.  Release the clay VERY slowly and gently at the end of a pull, letting the tension slowly go out of your fingers before removing your hands from the clay).



**Decorations** : **   **All throwing projects are to be decorated from the
following list of techniques.  There are 6 throwing assignments.  Plan 50% of
the decorations from the slip techniques and 50% from the glaze decoration
techniques.  ( **Hint** :  Remember that slips must be applied to soft or
leatherhard clay).



                        _Slip Techniques_                                                _Glaze Techniques_

                        1.  Hakeme (coarse brush)                              1.  Free brush overglaze stains __

                        2.  Slip Painting                                                           a.  Realistic

                        3.  Mishima (inlaid clay)                                             b.  Abstract

                        4.  Slip Trailing                                                           c.  Patterns

                        5.  Feathering                                                  3.  Stamped Patterns

                        6.  Marbling (clay or slip)                               4.  Wax Resist

                        7.  Sgrafitto (scratch through)                         5.  Wax resist/Stain layering







1.  **CYLINDERS**

Cylinders are a very important form for the potter, being the basic form from
which many other shapes are derived.  Students will practice for the first two
weeks throwing cylinders with straight walls 7" high and 3-4" in diameter,
following carefully the sequence listed above.  All practice cylinders are to
be cut down the center with the cutting wire and examined for thickness and
evenness.  _None of these early cylinders are to be saved_.   Part way through
this time you will be taught to pull a handle, and after each student
completes five good cylinders to the  instructor's satisfaction, one will be
kept for attaching a handle, thus becoming your first mug.



2.  **BOWLS**

Make a set of three (3) matching bowls with turned feet.  They must match in
size, shape, and decoration.  Make certain that the feet are _not too wide nor
the bowls too heavy_.   These are to be of your own design, but within the
size limits, and must have a turned foot.  You will be instructed how to make
footed bowls of three basic shapes.  Make at least one bowl of each shape,
then choose one of the shapes for your set.  Consult the instructor on design
of the first bowl before proceeding.    (Hint:  Whenever making sets, throw
them all at the same sitting, and make one or two extra, for something always
seems to happen to one of the pieces, making in unusable).



3.  **COVERED JARS**

Design and make two covered jars at least 6-12" in height, one with a flanged
lid, and one with an inset lid.  The jars should be as large as you are
skillfully capable of making.   The lids must be functional and carefully
designed and crafted _to fit._   Each jar must be designed to successfully
accommodate the lid.  _Unlidded jars or jars with poorly fitting lids will not
be fired_. These jars may or may not have turned feet.   (Hint:  Make the lid
fit the jar by measuring with the calipers.  Throw the lids at the same time
as the jars, and with the same clay.  At leatherhard, allow the lid to dry on
the jar).



4.  **WATER   PITCHER  WITH   HANDLE**

Make a pitcher or jug with a pulled handle, big enough to hold 2 to 4 cups of
liquid.  Practice pulling handles and lips on practice cylinders.  It is
important that the handle be fastened to the pitcher while it is leatherhard
or softer. . _  No pitcher without a handle will be fired.  _(Hint:  Allow the
handled pitcher to dry overnight in the damp room before putting out for final
drying).   ****



5.  **MATCHING MUGS OR CUPS**

Make 6 matching cups or mugs with pulled handles to match the water pitcher in
assignment #4  above.  The shape, color, decoration, etc. should be such as to
make a complete matching set. _No mug or cup without a handle will be fired._
(Hint:  Allow the mugs/cups to dry overnight in the damp room before putting
out for final drying).



6.  **DECORATIVE    BOTTLE  OR  VASE**

Design and make a bottle or vase.  It may or may not have a turned foot.  It
can be plain or highly decorative as several examples in text.  However, make
the decoration enhance the form that you have created.









**REMEMBER!**

Clay must be thoroughly wedged and centered.

Make certain no plaster fragments get into your clay.

Keep wedging table clean _at all times,_  not just at the end of the day.

Clean your wheel and work area thoroughly each day, including sweeping the
floor in your area.

Do not leave unfinished work or tools out when not in the lab.

_The last day for throwing will be 3 weeks prior to the last class._

_  
_

**ART 2410   \--  CERAMICS I**

**_ _**

**Mid-Term Report Requirements**



Due Date: _____________________  (Monday of the week before mid-term break
begins).



            Your mid-term report is to help acquaint you in some amount of detail with some historical aspect of _ceramics_ with which you may be unfamiliar, or to acquaint you with an important ceramic artist, or for you to become more knowledgeable regarding some forming or decorative technique.   The choice of topic is yours, so make it something you find interesting.  The library has a large selection of books regarding the field of ceramics.

            The text of the paper is to be between _4-6 pages_ of double-spaced typed material.   It does not need to be footnoted in the conventional manner of writing research papers.  Do provide a _bibliographic page_ and _cite at least two (2) sources other than the class textbook_.   Also, include at least five (5) _electronic reproductions_ (i.e., photocopies) of pictures of wares supporting the subject of your paper.



SUGGESTED TOPICS

**_Personalities_** __

Michael Cardew                                                          Shoji
Hamada

Bernard Leach
Peter Voulkos

Joshua Wedgewood                                                    George Ohr

Ninsei
Ruth Duckworth

Bernard Palissy
Thomas Toft

Pablo Picasso
Della Robbia Family



**_Techniques_**

Sgrafitto
Slip/Engobe

Mishima
Terra Sigillata

Raku Firing
Egyptian Paste

Bone China
Enamels/Lusters

Salt Glaze Firing
Primitive/Pit Firing

American Indian Firing                                               Slip
Trailing



**_Kinds/Types of Wares_**

Greek Attic Figure Painting                                        Yi-Hsing
Stoneware

Sung Dynasty Wares                                                  Tsu Chou
Wares

Chien Wares
Inca Pottery

Tang Dynasty Wares/Figurines                                   Jomon Pottery

Han Dynasty Wares                                                    Yi
Dynasty Porcelain

Haniwa Tomb Figures                                                German Salt
Glaze Pottery

Medieval English Jugs
6 Old Kilns (Japan)

English Slip Trailing                                                   Santa
Clara Pueblo

Southwest American Indian                                        Hopi Wares

San Ildefonso
Islamic Pottery

Acoma Pottery                                                Delft Wares

Italian Majolica
French Faiance  
**FINAL PROJECT REVIEW - CERAMICS I**

** **

**Student Name: ______________________________**

** **

**Handbuilding Assignments & Points**

|

Completed

|

Ex

|

AA

|

Av

|

BA  
  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
1.  Four Pinch Bowls

 (a  Burnished, no foot, pit-fired   50

 (b  Burnished, footed, pit-fired    50

 (c  Footed, majolica, glaze-fired   50

 (d  textured, footed,your choice   50

|



___________________________

<td width=30 valign=top style='width:29.55pt;border-top:none;border-left:
none;border-bottom:solid black .75pt;border-right:solid black .75pt; mso-
border-top-alt:solid black .75pt;mso-border-left-alt:solid black .75pt;
padding:0i

