![POSITION VACANCIES](/News/kulama/images/position.vacancies.gif)  
[Professional vacancies archive](/news/job.vacancies.html)

The University of Hawai`i is an equal opportunity/affirmative action
institution. All qualified applicants will be considered, regardless of race,
sex, age, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, disability, marital
status, arrest and court record, sexual orientation or status as a disabled
veteran or veteran of the Vietnam era. Women, members of minority groups,
veterans and persons with disabilities are encouraged to apply. (Persons with
hearing disabilities may call 1-711 or 643-8833.) Applicants with hearing or
speech impairments may use the TDD relay service by calling 1-711.

Employment is contingent on satisfying employment eligibility verification
requirements of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986. Appointments
to positions are subject to statutory residency requirements, campus
recruitment guidelines and the collective bargaining agreement. APT applicants
with re-employment rights or priority status are responsible for informing the
recruiting unit, which will verify eligibility with the employing unit as
provided by the BU 08 contract.

Official transcripts must have the official seal of and be mailed directly
from the degree-granting institution to the address indicated.

Civil Service vacancy announcements are available for viewing at the Office of
Human Resources, Post Office Building, UHM campus, Monday-Friday, 7:45
a.m.-4:30 p.m. and via the OHR home page at
[www.hawaii.edu/dhmr/ohr/](http://www.hawaii.edu/dhmr/ohr/#EMPLOYMENT).

* * *



Managerial Positions

**DEAN,** Outreach College. The University of Hawai`i at Manoa invites
applications and nominations for Dean of the Outreach College (#89080, M11-E).
**About the University:** The University of Hawai`i at Manoa is a
comprehensive, Research I University as designated by the Carnegie Foundation
for Advancement of Teaching. It is located in the metropolitan city and county
of Honolulu with a population of 850,000. With 19 schools and colleges, the
Manoa campus enrolls more than 17,000 students in 90 undergraduate
disciplines, 88 master's programs, 56 doctoral programs, including the JD and
MD and 44 undergraduate and graduate certificates. There are nearly 4,600
permanent faculty and staff at Manoa. The University's diverse population
reflects the ethnic and cultural heritage of the State and Pacific Basin.
Because of the University's location, many of its programs place special
emphasis on Hawai`i, Asia and the Pacific. **The College:** Outreach College
administers the operations of the Manoa Summer Sessions and the Accelerated
Credit Programs (evening classes) and provides leadership and administrative
support for outreach education, lifelong learning and distance education both
at and from the Manoa campus. The college is innovative and entrepreneurial in
approach and collaborates with the 18 academic schools and colleges at Manoa
in designing and offering classes, institutes and programs of study for
students during the summer, at night and at distant locations. Outreach
College also administers a number of non-credit programs in service and
outreach to the state and international communities and it sponsors a number
of cultural programs and events throughout the year. The college is largely
funded by revenues it generates via tuition and fees and charges for non-
credit courses, institutes, special events and conferences. It has a budget of
approximately $10,000,000 in fiscal year 1999. **Responsibilities:** The dean
reports directly to the senior vice president and executive vice chancellor
and serves as the chief academic and executive officer of the college with
responsibility for the academic programs, non-credit programs and the various
areas of community service. The dean leads the college in providing access to
quality lifelong learning opportunities, the development and implementation of
year-round programs and by utilizing emerging distance learning technologies.
The dean oversees the conference center which meets the needs of Manoa and
other state agencies in organizing and managing conferences, institutes and
symposia. The dean is responsible for planning, organizing, directing and
evaluating programs, faculty, staff and facilities of the college and for
overseeing the fiscal viability of the college as a self-supporting unit of
Manoa. **Minimum Qualifications:** PhD or equivalent scholarly achievement; 5
years in academia with professorial level of achievement or equivalent;
demonstrated managerial and leadership skills and ability to work with various
University academic and support units in coordinating programs; service to
education or in a profession at regional and national or international levels;
and 3 years of administrative experience at the level of departmental chair or
higher. **Desirable Qualifications:** Demonstrated leadership in working with
higher administration, faculty, students, and with other units within a
university, and the wider State and international communities; commitment to
and experience in establishing, maintaining and assessing collaborative
educational and service programs; excellent communication skills; commitment
to cultural diversity; experience working in a multi-campus University or
comparable system; knowledge and application of emerging technologies for
distance education; ability to foster creative community and cultural
programming; and a record of attracting and managing external research and
training funds and/or evidence of entrepreneurial ability within an
educational setting. **Application Process:** Applications should include a
letter specifying how the candidate fulfills the minimum and any additional
qualifications for the position, a curriculum vitae, and the names, addresses
(including e-mail), and telephone and facsimile numbers of five references.
The application should be addressed to: Dean Patricia L. Ewalt, Chair,
Outreach College Dean Search Committee, c/o Office of the Senior Vice
President and Executive Vice Chancellor, University of Hawai`i at Manoa, 2444
Dole Street, Bachman 105, Honolulu, HI 96822. Inquiries may be directed to
Dean Ewalt at 808-956-6300. Review of applications will begin approximately
08/02 and will continue until a successful candidate is appointed. **Salary:**
Competitive and commensurate with experience.

**UNIVERSITY STAFF COUNSEL** , M05-M, Office of the Senior Vice President for
Legal Affairs and University General Counsel, University of Hawai`i, full-
time; general funds; to begin approximately 08/99, subject to availability of
funding. **Duties:** Provides day-to-day legal advice and service to
University administrators in such areas as employment law, contract law,
legislation and torts. Duties include performing legal research and analysis
under the direction of senior University attorneys, reviewing contractual
documents and representing the University in federal and state courts, as well
as in administrative hearings and in arbitrations. **Minimum Qualifications:**
Law degree from an accredited school of law; admission to the Hawai`i State
Bar and licensed to practice in the federal courts; and one (1) year of
experience as a licensed attorney. Experience must include exposure to civil
litigation, trial and appellate practice. Ability to communicate effectively
with diverse constituents in higher education. **Desirable Qualifications:**
Experience in legal issues facing public institutions of higher learning,
including, but not limited to, contract administration, affirmative action,
student affairs, athletics, intellectual property, human resources and
employment issues. **Beginning Salary:** $52,116. **Applications:** The
following should be provided: (1) A letter specifying how the minimum and
desirable qualifications of the position are met; (2) a resume; and (3) the
names, addresses and phone numbers of three (3) professional references.
Application materials should be sent to Mr. Edward Yuen, Office of the Senior
Vice President for Legal Affairs and University General Counsel, 2442 Campus
Road, Room 102, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Deadline for Applications:** 07/26.
**Inquiries:** Mr. Edward Yuen (808) 956-2113.

Faculty Positions

**ASSISTANT PROFESSOR,** #84914, College of Tropical Agriculture & Human
Resources, Human Resources Department, full time, general funds, non-tenure
track, to begin 08/99, pending position clearance and availability of funds.
**Duties** : Teach two large undergraduate sections of human development or
other family resources courses as needed. Conduct related research and
scholarly activities, provide service to the university and the community,
advise students, advise at least one student organization and contribute to
program development. **Minimum Qualifications** : Doctorate in child and/or
family studies with a specialty in infancy and childhood preferred.
Demonstrated excellence in teaching, especially of large sections of
undergraduate courses. **Desirable Qualifications** : Research and
publications in the field. Experience in supervising graduate assistants.
**Pay Range:** I3; minimum $2,887/month. **To Apply** : Send cover letter,
vitae and names and phone numbers of three work related references to: Barbara
Harger, Department of Human Resources, 2515 Campus Road, Miller 110, Honolulu,
HI 96822\. **Inquiries** : 956-2250. **Closing Date** : 8/02.

**ASSISTANT PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE,** Position No. 085029T, M3, Department of
Medicine, John A. Burns School of Medicine, full-time, 11-month, temporary,
private funds, position to begin approximately 09/99 for one year, annually
renewable depending on performance and/or funding, non-tenurable, subject to
availability of grant funds. Position to be situated at Kuakini Medical Center
campus. **Duties:** Develop academic career in geriatrics, provide supervision
to residents and fellows in the care of older patients, participate in ongoing
research and education with collaborators in Japan, develop research/medical
education grant-funded projects. **Minimum Qualifications:** MD degree; board
eligible or board certified by the American Board of Internal Medicine, 2-year
fellowship in geriatric medicine, certified (or eligible for certification) in
geriatric medicine and demonstrated ability in teaching. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Familiarity with the problems of minority elderly, teaching
and clinical skills, and Japanese language skills. **Minimum Annual Salary:**
$78,924. Send updated curriculum vitae, bibliography and three letters of
recommendation to Patricia Lanoie Blanchette, MD, MPH, Geriatric Medicine
Program, John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawai`i, 347 No.
Kuakini St., HPM-9, Honolulu, HI 96817. **Closing Date:** 08/02.

**LECTURER IN PHILIPPINE DRAMA AND FILM** , Department of Hawaiian and Indo-
Pacific Languages and Literatures. Contingent upon registration, position
availability and funding for fall 1999. **Duties:** To teach the course,
modern Philippine drama and film, maintain office hours and prepare syllabus
and reports relative to teaching and student progress; work under the
supervision of the Ilokano and Philippine Theatre Program coordinator in
integrating teaching efforts with the other faculty in the program. **Minimum
Qualifications:** BA in relevant field and demonstrated evidence of successful
college teaching. **Desirable Qualifications:** MA or higher degree in
relevant field. **Minimum Salary:** $1,000 per credit per semester. Send
letter of application, together with resume, phone number and if applicable,
visa status, letters from three current references to Dr. Rama Nath Sharma,
Chairman, Department of Hawaiian and Indo-Pacific Languages and Literatures,
University of Hawai`i at Manoa, 2540 Maile Way, Spalding Hall 255, Honolulu,
HI 96822. **Telephone:** (808)956-8672. **Closing Date:** 08/02 or until needs
are met.

**JUNIOR RESEARCHER (Chemistry),** position number 084453T (temporary), 80 to
100% FTE, one year, beginning approximately 08/99, renewal pending
availability of fund. **Duties** : Studies of fluorinated retinoids and
carotenoids and protein complexes. Ground and excited state properties of
polarized polyenes. To carry out organic synthesis, isolation,
characterization and spectroscopic studies (uv/vis, FT-ir, CD and/or solution-
protein-solid NMR), of free and protein bound chromophores. **Minimum**
**Qualifications** , recent PhD in photochemistry with experience in chemical
synthesis or other appropriate physical organic background. **Desirable
Qualifications** : experience in retinoid, carotenoid and their protein
complexes or other polarized polyenes, or experience in time resolved
spectroscopy. **Pay Range** : minimum monthly salary $2,220. **To Apply** :
submit by closing date a complete cv and two letters of recommendation to
Professor Robert S. H. Liu, Department of Chemistry, University of Hawai`i,
Honolulu, HI 96822\. **Closing Date** : 08/02. **Inquiries** : Robert S. H.
Liu, Tel: 808-956-5723, FAX: 808-956-5908, e-mail:
[rliu@gold.chem.hawaii.edu](mailto:rliu@gold.chem.hawaii.edu)

**LECTURER** **(Music Teacher),** University Laboratory School, fall 1999 and
spring 2000. **Duties:** Under general supervision, teach three orchestra
courses (each course is 3 credit hours and meets daily): Intermediate
Orchestra, grades 7-8; Junior Concert Orchestra, grades 9-10; Senior Concert
Orchestra, grades, 11-12. **Minimum Qualifications:** Bachelor's degree in
music or music education. **Desired Qualifications:** Master's degree in music
or appropriate field. Teaching experience in subject and grade level.
**Minimum Salary:** $1,000 per credit hour; $9,000 per semester for the 3
classes. **To Apply:** send application letter and resume to David Oride,
University Laboratory School; 1776 University Avenue, Castle Memorial Hall
Room 130, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Inquiries:** 956-7706. **Closing Date:** 08/02
or until position is filled.

**POSTDOCTORAL FELLOW** , CTAHR, Dept. of Biosystems Engineering and
Department of Tropical Medicine, full time for one year, to begin immediately,
with renewal dependent upon performance and availability of funds. **Duties:**
To study the expression of a malaria vaccine polypeptide in tobacco cells;
development of various expression constructs with different promoters and
enhancers, codon optimization of the malaria vaccine polypeptide,
agrobacterium-mediated transformation, plant tissue culture and
characterization of the vaccine polypeptide expression. **Minimum
Qualifications:** PhD in plant molecular biology or biotechnology with
experience in DNA cloning, creating expression constructs and transformation
of plants with foreign genes. **Desirable Qualifications:** Proven ability to
conduct research and publish results. **Minimum Annual Stipend:** $28,000,
commensurate with experience. **To Apply:** Submit curriculum vitae, copies of
major publications and the names of three references to Dr. Robert Bugos,
Department of Biosystems Engineering, University of Hawai`i, Honolulu, HI
96822, and Dr. Sandra Chang, Department of Tropical Medicine, University of
Hawai`i, Honolulu, HI 96816. **Inquiries:** e-mail
[bugos@hawaii.edu](mailto:bugos@hawaii.edu) or
[sandrac@hawaii.edu](mailto:sandrac@hawaii.edu). **Closing Date** : 08/02.

**JUNIOR SPECIALIST (Counselor);** UH at Hilo; Position No. 86542T; Office of
Student Services, full-time, general funds, temporary, to begin approximately
08/99. Extension of position dependent upon funding and position clearance.
**Duties:** Provide a full range of educational, career and personal
counseling services to students, including students with disabilities; provide
classroom instruction for students with special educational needs; may require
availability during late afternoon/evening hours. **Minimum Qualifications:**
Master's degree in counseling, student personnel work or related field; three
years experience providing educational, career and personal counseling in
higher education; demonstrated ability to establish effective counseling
relationships with students of diverse abilities and backgrounds. **Desirable
Qualifications:** PhD in clinical or counseling psychology; experience working
with addictions, compulsions, eating disorders; experience conducting support
groups for students; experience conducting college success courses for high
risk students. **Pay Range:** S2 with a minimum of $2,669/month. **To Apply:**
Submit letter addressing how you meet the minimum and desirable
qualifications; resume, transcripts (official transcripts must be submitted
prior to employment) and three current professional letters of reference to:
Gail Makuakane-Lundin, Interim Vice Chancellor, Office of Student Services,
University of Hawai`i at Hilo, 200 W. Kawili St., Hilo, HI 96720-4091.
**Inquiries:** (808)974-7335. **Closing Date:** Postmarked no later than
08/02.

**JUNIOR SPECIALIST (Counselor);** UH at Hilo; Position No. 86447; Pay Range
S2; Office of Student Services, full-time general funds, to begin
approximately 08/99. **Duties:** To provide a full range of educational,
career and personal counseling services to students, including students with
disabilities; provide classroom instruction for students with special
educational needs; may require availability during late afternoon/evening
hours. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree in counseling, student
personnel work or related field; three years experience providing educational,
career and personal counseling in higher education; demonstrated ability to
establish effective counseling relationships with students of diverse
abilities and backgrounds. **Desirable Qualifications:** PhD in clinical or
counseling psychology; experience working with addictions, compulsions, eating
disorders; experience conducting support groups for students; experience
conducting college success courses for high risk students. **Minimum Monthly
Salary:** $2,566. **To Apply:** Submit cover letter addressing how you meet
the minimum and desirable qualifications; resume, transcripts (official
transcripts must be submitted prior to employment) and three current
professional letters of reference to: Gail Makuakane-Lundin, Interim Vice
Chancellor, Office of Student Services, University of Hawai`i at Hilo, 200 W.
Kawili St., Hilo, HI 96720-4091. **Inquiries:** (808) 974-7335. **Closing
Date:** Postmarked no later than 08/02.

**JUNIOR SPECIALIST, (** Temporary/Full-time), **** Office of the Chancellor.
**** The University of Hawai`i-West O`ahu is a small, upper-division
institution offering liberal arts and professional studies programs.
**Responsibilities** : Provide administrative and academic support to the
chancellor of UH West O`ahu including, but not limited to, the following:
assist in researching and drafting reports and documents on a variety of
academic and policy areas; coordinate recruitment and marketing endeavors with
faculty and professional contacts; initiate and monitor transfer and
articulation agreements with other educational institutions. **Minimum
Qualifications** : Master's degree from an accredited college or university,
with primary coursework in business, public administration, higher education
administration or the liberal arts; one year of experience in higher education
administration assistance or equivalent administrative or academic support
experience. **Desirable Qualifications** : Coursework beyond the master's
level in a relevant field; understanding of issues in higher education;
research and data analysis skills; excellent written and verbal communication
skills; knowledge of UH system policies and procedures; prior experience in
higher education administration. **Minimum Salary** : $30,792, actual salary
commensurate with experience and availability of funds. **To Apply** : Submit
(1) a resume; (2) a brief one-page statement outlining how you meet the
minimum and desirable qualifications; and (3) the names and phone numbers of
three references to Chancellor's Office; University of Hawai`i-West O`ahu;
96-129 Ala Ike; Pearl City, HI 96782 by 08/09. Anticipated date of employment
is 09/01, pending availability of funds and all necessary clearances.

**GRADUATE ASSISTANT,** Drawing on Community Language Resources to Improve
Foreign Language Education; National Foreign Language Resource Center, Office
of the Dean, College of Languages, Linguistics and Literature, UH Manoa, .50
FTE, fall semester, 1999, to begin 09/01-12/31, pending funding availability.
**Duties:** Develop curriculum materials and present workshops/courses for
teachers for a project focused on capitalizing on community language resources
in developing programs and products to improve foreign language education at
the K-12 level (primarily at the high school level); produce related written
resource materials and project summaries. **Minimum Qualifications:** graduate
status in ESL, foreign language education or a related field; foreign and/or
second language teaching experience; experience in curriculum development;
ability to produce written materials for dissemination. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Master's degree in ESL, foreign language education or a
closely related field; teacher-training experience and/or college-level
teaching experience; knowledge of sociolinguistics, ethnography, second
language acquisition and current approaches to language pedagogy including
language awareness, student as ethnographer and foreign and heritage language
partnership approaches to language learning. **Minimum Monthly Salary:**
$1,198.50 (.50 FTE, GA-1). **To Apply:** Application forms and information
relating to the duties and selection process may be obtained from the National
Foreign Language Resource Center, 1859 East-West Rd., #106. **Inquiries:**
956-9424. **Closing Date:** Submit completed application and documents to the
NFLRC by 08/02.

**INSTRUCTOR IN EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES,** Position No. 87440, Kapi`olani
CC, 11-months, full-time, general funds, tenurial, to begin approximately
09/01, pending funding and position clearance. **Duties:** Under general
supervision to teach courses in emergency medical services, develop teaching
strategies, instructional materials and methods which: 1) use computer
instruction where appropriate, 2) integrate instruction of appropriate
thinking skills into course content, 3) use competency-based instruction, 4)
emphasize writing as an important skill for students and 5) address the needs
of community college students; develop and maintain an approved program of
professional self-development; maintain at least one office hour for each
course taught; counsel students; identify student learning needs and implement
constructive responses to them; prepare and revise course objectives and
syllabi; plan, organize and carry out independently instructional and non-
instructional assignments, perform related duties as assigned. Evening classes
and instructional assignments involving distance education may be assigned as
part of regular workload. **Minimum Qualifications:** a) Master's in health
sciences, nursing, or EMS and current ACLS Instructor certification and one of
the following: (1) current EMT-P certification by the National Registry of
Emergency Medical Technicians, and current Hawai`i certification as an MICT
(or certification in progress) or (2) Registered Nurse and current Hawai`i
State license as an RN; OR b) Bachelor's in Health Sciences, Nursing, or EMS,
three years related work experience* including teaching, and current ACLS
Instructor certification, and one of the following: (1) current EMT-P
certification by the National Registry of Emergency Medical Technicians, and
current Hawai`i certification as an MICT (or certification in progress) or (2)
Registered Nurse and current Hawai`i State license as an RN; OR c) associate
degree (MICT) and a baccalaureate degree in any field, five years related work
experience*, and current ACLS Instructor certification, and one of the
following: (1) current EMT-P certification by the National Registry of
Emergency Medical Technicians, and current Hawai`i certification as an MICT
(or certification in progress) or (2) Registered Nurse and current Hawai`i
State license as an RN; OR d) Medical Doctor and current Hawai`i license as a
MD; current ACLS Instructor certification, board eligible, or board certified
in emergency medicine. If no qualified applicants are available, others will
be considered for appointment as acting instructor. *Work experience prior to
degree completion may be accepted if it has occurred within the last five
years. **Desirable Qualifications:** Community college or equivalent teaching
experience in the health field. Pay Range: C2A; minimum $3,122/month. Salary
commensurate with education and experience. **To Apply:** Send community
college application (CC Personnel Form 27A), official transcripts, three
letters of recommendation attesting to job performance and a brief statement
outlining how you meet the minimum and desirable qualifications to: Edward J.
Kalinowski, Chairperson, Department of Emergency Medical Services, Kapi`olani
Community College, 4303 Diamond Head Road, Honolulu, HI 96816. **Closing
Date:** 08/02. All minimum qualifications must be met by the effective date of
appointment. **Inquiries:** 734-9330.

**INSTRUCTOR, (Intensive English Program),** Position No.83832T, Hawai`i CC,
.50 part-time, temporary, non-tenurial, 11-month to begin approx. 10/99,
pending position clearance and availability of special funds. Includes
evening, weekend and off-campus assignments. **Duties:** Under the direction
of the Intensive Program Coordinator, responsible for teaching, developing,
marketing, implementing and coordinating the Intensive English Program for
Hawai`i Community College. Specific duties to include: teach English as a
Second Language classes; coordinate student assistance and activities program;
promote and market the program both locally and abroad; develop curriculum
materials; keep up to date on new immigration rules and regulation; and
perform other instructional and administrative duties as required. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Master's degree in TESL or linguistics. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Three years of teaching experience in an Intensive English
Program. Experience in ESL curriculum development. Experience working with
computer-assisted instruction programs. Experience working effectively with
international students. Knowledge of current theory and methodology in ESL.
Knowledge of INS regulations pertaining to F-1 students. Knowledge of
University of Hawai`i fiscal procedures. Prior administrative experience in an
Intensive English Program. **Pay Range:** C2A; minimum $1,561/month. **To
Apply:** Submit postmarked by closing date: (1)application (CC Form 27A),
(2)transcripts(copies are acceptable, however, official transcripts will be
required at time of hire). (3)names of three current references familiar with
job performance,(4)a statement outlining how you meet the minimum and
desirable qualifications and (5)resume to: Director of Continuing Education
and Training, Hawai`i CC, OCET, 200 West Kawili Street, Hilo, HI 96720-4091.
Letters of recommendation are welcome. An incomplete application will not be
considered. Materials submitted will not be returned. **Inquiries:**
(808)974-7531. **Closing Date:** 08/02.

**RESEARCHER,** Position No. 86002T, Cancer Research Center of Hawai`i at
Manoa, full-time, 11-month, non-tenure-track, to begin 09/99. **Duties:**
Conducts basic and translational research projects in the area of molecular
tumor biology in the director's laboratory. Develops grants, contracts and
patents. **Minimum Qualifications:** MD plus at least four years of effective
research in molecular biomedical sciences at the rank of associate professor
or equivalent. **Desirable Qualifications:** Board certification in clinical
pathology or equivalent, extensive experience in biochemistry and molecular
biology with a translational focus as evidenced by pertinent publications and
patents. **Minimum Salary:** $62,376, commensurate with qualifications and
experience. **To Apply:** Send letter of application and curriculum vitae to
Director, Cancer Research Center of Hawai`i, University of Hawai`i, 1236
Lauhala Street, Honolulu, HI 96813. **Closing Date:** 08/01.





Administrative, Professional and Technical (APT) Positions

**UH RESEARCH ASSOCIATE II** : Position #81112T; UHM, Food Science and Human
Nutrition (FSHN); full-time; federal funds; to begin 08/99 to 05/31/2000,
renewal dependent upon contract extension and availability of funds.
**Duties** : Assist principal investigator (PI) in the FSHN in a funded
project "Quality of Tropical Fruits Irradiated as a Quarantine Treatment for
Fruit Fly Control" by carrying out the following tasks: help prepare sensory
evaluation panels of various fruit samples; collect, organize and
statistically analyze the data; prepare and chemically analyze some of the
fruit samples; learn to operate the Hawai`i Research Irradiator and irradiate
samples as needed; pick up fruit samples from an orchard, a market, or the
airport as needed; help prepare summary of experimental results. **Minimum
Qualifications** : Graduation from an accredited four-year college or
university with a major in food science and human nutrition, science or
closely related fields. Ability to use statistical software for data analysis.
Knowledge of the principles of the field of learning in which the work is to
be performed; methods, materials, procedures and techniques used in research
or experimental laboratory work, practical and potential values of research
and experimentation in the field involved. Ability to understand and follow
complex oral and written instructions, to prepare written reports of test
results and analyses, to participate in the evaluation and analysis of
existing techniques and procedures and to assist in experimentation. Or any
equivalent combination of training and experience. **Desirable
Qualifications** : Graduation from an accredited four-year college or
university with major in engineering, literature or humanities. Ability to use
instruments indicated (except the irradiator). **Pay Range** : PO3;
$2,482/month. **To Apply** : Submit completed APT application (UH Form 64), a
copy of university transcripts, an updated curriculum vitae to Dr. James H.
Moy, Dept. of Food Science and Human Nutrition, University of Hawai`i, 1920
Edmondson Rd., Honolulu, HI 96822\. **Closing Date** : 08/02. **Inquires** :
808-956-3853 (Tel); 808-956-8663 (Fax); or e-mail
[jmoy@hawaii.edu](mailto:jmoy@hawaii.edu)

**UH STUDENT SERVICES SPECIALIST II** , Position No. 80096, UH Manoa,
Admissions and Records Office, full-time, general funds, to begin
approximately 08/99. **Duties** : Develop and carry out recruitment plans for
eligible, prospective applicants to the UHM, involving specific activities
designed to increase the percentage of admitted students who enroll; develop a
campus visitation program for admitted students; conduct a variety of
individual and group oral presentations to and correspond with potential
applicants, applicants, parents, school officials and the general public
regarding UHM program offerings, admissions policies, procedures and issues;
plan, coordinate and implement a high school visitation program for the
Admissions Office, targeted admissions activities including college fairs,
counselor orientations, etc.; schedule visits, assign staff, contact the
schools, instruct staff on their responsibilities and create follow-up
contacts with the schools, travel to and visit schools, attend activities,
conduct presentations both on and off campus/island; plan, coordinate and
implement a telephone communication program with applicants admitted to UHM
and direct mail programs targeting prospective applicants, students who are
admitted to UHM and students who have indicated their intention to enroll at
UHM; develop and update Admissions and Records brochures, flyers, viewbook,
literature and other promotional materials related to UHM admissions; assist
academic departments in publicizing their programs to prospective students;
work with the Office of University Relations to enhance the image of UHM to
increase the recruitment of undergraduate students; recruit, train and
supervise student employees to implement these programs; maintain a database
of prospective applicants; determine applicants' eligibility for admission by
evaluating admissions documents; evaluate transcripts from other institutions
and determine transferability of course work; perform other duties as assigned
by immediate supervisor. **Minimum Qualifications** : Graduation from an
accredited four-year college or university with major coursework in education,
social science or related field; three years of progressively responsible
professional experience in providing educational services, counseling, or
other assistance to students and student groups, including experience with
diverse ethnic and socioeconomic groups; or any equivalent combination of
experience and training which provides the following knowledge, abilities and
skills: considerable knowledge of programs and organizations, their purposes
and functions typical of an institution of higher education; the policies and
regulations as applied to the recruitment of students, including diverse
ethnic and socioeconomic students, typical of an instituion of higher
education; the policies and procedures related to the admission of
undergraduate applicants; the policies and procedures related to the transfer
of credits; the techniques and procedures involved in academic and personal
counseling. Considerable understanding of the content of undergraduate
education and the nature of the undergraduate experience at UHM or at a
comparable research institution. Some knowledge of the principles and
practices of modern office management. Ability to communicate effectively both
orally and in writing; establish and maintain effective working relationships
with students, faculty, staff, external school officials, community groups and
members of the general public; learn and apply specific policies, procedures
and techniques needed to effectively perform all assigned tasks; use a
computer and selected software/programs; plan, schedule and review the work of
others; work outside normally scheduled work hours, including evenings,
weekends and holidays, as directed; travel off island, including neighbor
islands, mainland and foreign countries, several times a year for up to
approximately a month at a time for purposes including visitations,
presentations and college fairs; drive to multiple on and off-campus sites to
conduct presentations, visitations, etc. ranging on a daily to weekly basis.
Possess a valid driver's license. Access to a motor vehicle. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Experience and knowledge of UHM's student information system
(ISIS); computer skills including use of word processing (Microsoft Word) and
database software. Considerable knowledge of University programs and
organizations, their purposes and functions typical of an institution of
higher education; of the policies and regulations of the University system as
applied to the recruitment of students, including diverse ethnic and
socioeconomic students, typical of an institution of higher education. **Pay
Range** : P06, $2,797/month. **To Apply** : Submit, postmarked by the closing
date, an APT application (UH Form 64), letter of application, resume, names,
addresses, phone numbers of three references to Janice Heu, Admissions and
Records Office, University of Hawai`i at Manoa, 2600 Campus Rd., Rm. 1,
Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date** : 08/02. **Inquiries** :Jan Heu,
956-8975.

**UH STUDENT HOUSING COORDINATOR II** ; Position No. 80598; UH Manoa, Student
Housing; full-time; revolving funds, to begin 09/99. **Duties:** Supervise
full-time and student employees. Administer/manage a residential complex
(staff selection, training, supervision  & evaluation; direct/supervise
adjudication of student conduct and discipline; counsel/advise students and
student groups; safety & security; crisis intervention and emergency response;
prepare/administer operating and capital improvement budgets). Involves some
evening, night and weekend work hours. **Minimum Qualifications:** Graduation
from an accredited four year college or university with some coursework in
student personnel, psychology, social work, counseling and guidance,
education, human resource management, business administration or related
field. Three years experience in the management of student residence halls or
comparable group work experience; or any equivalent combination of education
and experience which provide the following knowledge, abilities and skills:
Ability to understand the commitment to the educational and student
development objectives of student housing; plan, direct and supervise the
activities of a variety of full-time and part-time employees; work
independently, organize, set priorities and make decisions under pressure;
cooperatively work with others of diverse cultures/backgrounds including
various segments of university, community organizations and residents; use
personal computer, word processing and spreadsheet applications. Considerable
knowledge of post secondary educational institute and student
housing/residential life policies and procedures; student activities programs;
variety of general housekeeping/maintenance practices; general administrative
principles and practices. Knowledge of group living needs, current student
value systems and student personnel practices. **Desirable Qualifications:**
Master's degree from an accredited college or university in a related field.
Thorough knowledge of student development theory. General knowledge of
budgeting and fiscal policies and procedures including procurement and
personnel. Four years experience in supervisory capacity. Experience with
Windows applications and presenting programs and/or workshops to small and
large group audiences. Knowledge of federal, state and city regulations. **Pay
Range:** PO7, $2,910/month. **To Apply:** Submit to Search Committee, Student
Housing Services, 2555 Dole Street, Honolulu, HI 96822: 1) a 2 page letter of
how you meet minimum and desirable qualifications, 2) an APT Application for
Employment (UH Form 64), 3) official college transcript(s), 4) names and phone
numbers of three work related references. **Closing Date:** 08/02.
**Inquiries:** 956-4008.

**UH COMPUTER SPECIALIST I;** Position No. 80484; UH Manoa, Information
Technology Services, Management Information Systems; full-time; permanent;
general funds; to begin approximately 08/99. **Duties:** Provide application
programming support for the student administrative systems. Includes
developing new programs, system maintenance, testing, documentation, data and
file conversion, production coordination, training, troubleshooting and
technical support. **Minimum Qualifications:** Graduation from an accredited
four year college or university with major course work in computer science or
related fields and other course work in fields related to administrative
and/or academic information technology programs or systems which are the
subject of analysis; or any equivalent combination of education and experience
which provides the following knowledge, abilities and skills: Knowledge of:
Electronic data processing coding practices necessary for programming
instructions for an electronic computer and peripheral equipment; Terminology,
accepted practices and procedures of the programs or systems analyzed and
supported; Applicability of data processing to a variety of situation and
processes; Statistical analysis methods and techniques; One or more computer
programming languages; Block diagramming, flow charting and procedural report
presentation; and Limitations, capabilities, uses and service requirements of
the electronic computer and allied equipment. Ability to: Prepare clear,
detailed programs of instruction for efficient machine utilization; and Work a
variable work schedule and to work outside normally scheduled work hours
including day, night, weekend and/or holiday hours, as directed. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Familiarity with SCT,s ISIS system; Knowledge of: NATURAL;
PERT charts and scheduling of production for computer reports; Definition of
parameters and report generation specifications; and PC databases,
spreadsheets and word processing. Ability to: Train users in an IBM PC and
host environment for interactive record updating, editing and correction of
data; Supervise student help; and Define efficient retrieval programs for
customized reports and ad hoc queries. **Pay Range:** P03, $2,482/month. **To
Apply:** Submit cover letter, APT application (UH Form 64), resume,
transcripts & three letters of reference to Information Technology Services,
Administrative Services, 2425 Campus Road, Sinclair Library 10, Honolulu, HI
96822. Applications postmarked after the closing date will not be considered.
**Closing Date:** 08/02. **Inquiries:** 956-5657.



Re-advertisement of ad that appeared in _Ku Lama_ on 05/28

**UH COMPUTER SPECIALIST III,** Position No. 80039, Honolulu CC, full-time, 11
months, general funds, to begin approximately 09/99, pending position
clearance and availability of funds. **Duties:** Consult with directors and
high level administrators to define informational requirements in the
computerization of an interactive student information system. Develop, debug
and maintain complex customized programs in applications that include Day
School, Servicemembers Opportunity Colleges Associate Degree (SOCAD) and
Apprenticeship's Aldrich Computer Services Student Information System.
Develop, debug and maintain complex, non-credit, windows based student
information system. Conduct research and develop Internet and WWW interfaces
and applications. **Minimum Qualifications:** Graduation from an accredited
four-year college or university with major course work in computer science or
other coursework in fields related to computer programming and systems
analysis. Two years of progressively responsible professional experience in
the design of electronic computer programs. Considerable knowledge of
electronic data processing coding practices necessary for programming
instructions for an electronic computer and peripheral equipment;
applicability of data processing to a variety of situations and processes; and
block programming, flow charting and procedural report presentation.
Considerable knowledge of statistical analysis methods and techniques.
Considerable knowledge of at least two computer programming languages.
Knowledge of terminology, accepted practices and procedures of the programs or
systems analyzed. Some knowledge of Microsoft Access and HTML. Knowledge of
the limitations, capabilities, uses and service requirements of the IBM 370
and/or DEC computers and allied equipment. Ability to prepare clear, detailed
programs of instruction for efficient machine utilization. Ability to
establish and maintain effective working relationships with others. Or any
equivalent combination of education and/or experience. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Knowledge of Userbase DBMS. Familiarity with student
information systems. **Pay Range:** P07; minimum $2,910/month with a temporary
shortage differential of $303. **To Apply:** Send APT Application for
Employment (UH Form 64), license(s) and transcript(s) verifying minimum
educational qualifications (official or copy) to Director of Administrative
Services, Honolulu Community College, 874 Dillingham Blvd., Honolulu, HI
96817\. An incomplete or late application will not be considered. Materials
submitted will not be returned. If selected for the position, appointment is
contingent upon verification of all minimum qualifications, including official
transcript(s), license(s), certificate(s) and work experience documentation.
Minimum qualifications must be met by the closing date. **Closing Date:**
08/02. **Inquiries:** 845-9141.

**UH COMPUTER SPECIALIST III,** Position No. 81531, Leeward CC, full-time,
general funds, to begin approximately 08/99. **Duties:** Responsible for
participation in the development, installation, maintenance and modification
of administrative software for the college's Student Information System (SIS)
consisting of several large, integrated data systems. Writes complex programs
using BASIC, DCL, UserBase and other languages and customized programming on
VAX and PC equipment; provides training, support, consultation and problem
resolution to users; advises supervisor and other administrators on policies,
equipment and software acquisitions and technical specifications related to
the SIS. Works with other support staff and as appropriate provides training
and develops technical specifications for work and serves as campus
representative and liaison with other institutions on SIS related matters.
**Minimum Qualifications:** Graduation from an accredited four-year college or
university with major course work in computer science and other course work in
fields related to student information program or system analysis; and two
years of progressively responsible professional experience in designing and
developing computer programs. Considerable knowledge of electronic data
processing and coding practices necessary for programming instructions for
integrated systems; b) considerable knowledge of statistical analysis methods
and techniques; c) considerable knowledge of block diagraming, flow charting
and procedural report presentation; d) considerable knowledge of two computer
programming languages; e) knowledge of the limitations, capabilities, uses and
service requirements of computer equipment; f) knowledge of the terminology,
accepted practices and procedures of the programs and/or systems analyzed; g)
ability to prepare clear, detailed programs of instruction for efficient
machine utilization; h) ability to establish and maintain effective working
relationships with colleagues, faculty, administrators and staff, consultants
and the public; and i) ability to plan and supervise the work of sub-
professional and student programming personnel. Or any equivalent combination
of education and/or experience. **Desirable Qualifications:** Considerable
knowledge of more than two computer programming languages. **Pay Range:** P07;
$2,910/month with a temporary shortage differential of $303. **To Apply:**
Submit to Human Resources Office, Leeward CC, 96-045 Ala Ike, Pearl City, HI
96782: 1) APT application (UH Form 64), 2) graduate and undergraduate
transcript(s) showing degrees and course work to date appropriate to the
position (transcript copies are acceptable; however official transcripts will
be required at the time of hire), 3) a brief one- page statement outlining how
you meet the minimum qualifications, 4) three letters of recommendation
(optional) attesting to job performance and personal character and 5) resume
(optional). Original signature required on application. All requested
documents/information must be postmarked by the closing date and become the
property of the College. Failure to submit all required documents shall deem
an application to be incomplete. **Closing Date:** 08/02. **Inquiries:**
455-0326.

**UH EDUCATIONAL & ACADEMIC SUPPORT SPECIALIST (2 Positions); **Position Nos.
81557 & 81565; Library, Kapi`olani CC; full-time; general funds; to begin
approximately 09/99. **Duties:** Provide reference services to students and
faculty using print, non-print and electronic information resources; provide
one-to-one and group instruction in the use of library resources; help
librarians develop and conduct activities for the library's online labs;
provide interlibrary loan services; compile statistics; help librarians
prepare and conduct studies designed to evaluate and improve reference
services; help librarians develop and produce library instructional and
informational materials; perform regular upkeep for microform readers, A/V
equipment and other library machines; supervise student employees in the
reference area; conduct online searches for materials acquisitions and gift
accessions; supervise library operations in the absence of librarians. Some
evening and week-end hours required. **Minimum Qualifications:** Graduation
from an accredited four-year college or university with some coursework in
library studies or related field. Ability to follow and issue complex
directions, perform high-level public service, use computers and common
software. Some knowledge of: library services, practices, procedures and
terminology; library classification system and subject headings; library
filing rules; reference sources, including various CD-ROM and online resources
and research methods and searching techniques. Ability to: perform highly
effective reference interviews independently and accurately determine the
level of assistance needed by the requestor; complete complex reference
transactions independently; formulate and follow a complex search strategy
through several reference and circulating resources and in various collections
with minimal direction from a reference librarian; use computerized software
utilized by the library on mainframe and microcomputers; lead students in
educational activities and exercises; understand and apply a variety of
instructions, policies and procedures received in oral and written form; train
and supervise civil service employees and student workers regularly employed
to perform tasks in the reference area; organize, assign, supervise and review
the work of others; communicate clearly in oral and written formats to convey
information about library services and collections and about service
procedures; instruct others in the operation of a variety of information
equipment; deal tactfully with others; understand file and collection
maintenance for numerous library files in manual and computerized formats. Or
any equivalent combination of education and/or experience. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Reference experience that includes print and electronic
resources. Some knowledge of Library of Congress classification system and
subject headings; various CD-ROM and online resources and their searching
techniques to retrieve information from the CARL online catalog, InfoTrac
Magazine Index, the Hawai`i Newspaper Index, etc. **Pay Range:** P01,
$2,292/month minimum. **To Apply:** Submit APT Application for Employment (UH
Form 64), transcripts (official or copies, official transcript(s) required at
time of hire), resume with names, addresses and telephone numbers of three
professional references and a one-page statement outlining how you meet the
minimum and desirable qualifications to Terry Webb, PhD, Head Librarian,
Kapi`olani Community College, 4303 Diamond Head Road, Honolulu, HI 96816.
**Closing Date:** 08/02. **Inquiries:** 734-9267.

**UH ADMINISTRATIVE AND FISCAL SUPPORT SPECIALIST,** Pos. No. 81986T; Pacific
Biomedical Research Center, 50% FTE, temporary, federal funds, beginning
approximately 08/99. **Duties:** Responsible for providing services to the
Native Hawaiian Health Research Program. Reconcile accounts with UH/RCUH
financial reports; maintain document files and prepare budget statements
reflecting account expenditures. Administer procurement and personnel matters,
ensuring accuracy of documents in compliance with the rules, guidelines and
procedures of the UH/RCUH. Provide activity leader(s) with recommendations on
matters relating to financial, purchasing, property and personnel subjects
based on available administrative guidelines. Provide information as
requested, consulting with the PBRC fiscal officer as necessary, or other UH
resource personnel. Prepare specific financial responses, reports and summary
reports. Create and analyze charts of accounts, records, and financial reports
utilizing electronic spreadsheets. Establish accounts for new contracts and
grants; maintaining balances. Arrange travel, accommodations and site visits.
Ensure accuracy of travel documents in compliance with the policies and
procedures of the UH. Assist in preparing financial reports; coordinate the
schedule for research seminars and workshops. Maintain documents for
maintenance contracts, correspondences, reports, procurement inventory and
other standard office records. Assist in writing job descriptions and
advertisements for UH/RCUH personnel positions. Prepare and review personnel,
fiscal and procurement documents; prepare and review expenditure documents
including requisitions, purchase orders, authorization for payment forms, etc.
in compliance with the policies and procedures of the UH, and federal and
state regulations. **Minimum Qualifications:** Graduation from an accredited
four-year college or university with some coursework in accounting, personnel
administration or related field; or any equivalent combination of training and
experience which provides the following knowledge, abilities and skills: Some
knowledge of the practices and techniques of modern business management.
Ability to understand and follow complex oral and written instructions.
Ability to communicate orally and in writing. Ability to analyze, interpret
and apply financial and general administrative rules and regulations to a wide
variety of work situations. Ability to use a personal computer, including a
variety of software. **Desirable Qualifications:** Work experience in
administering contracts and grants in a post-secondary institution, hospital
or related setting. Familiarity with biomedical and clinical terminology
related to studies in diabetes and cardiovascular disease risk factors.
Experience with communicating technical operations of research to community
lay persons. Experience working in a native Hawaiian health research or
related setting. Experience with UH and RCUH fiscal and personnel procedures.
**Pay Range:** P01, $1,146/month (@ 50% FTE). **To Apply:** Submit cover
letter and completed APT application (UH Form 64) to: Native Hawaiian Health
Research, 3675 Kilauea Avenue, Hon. HI 96816. **Closing Date:** 08/02.

Research Corporation

For a comprehensive listing of all active RCUH regular job vacancies, you may
refer to the RCUH job vacancy bulletin board located at Sakamaki D-100 or at
any Hawai`i State Employment Service.

**ADMINISTRATIVE SPECIALIST** \- ID#99184. Electric and Hybrid Vehicle
National Data Center (EHV NDC) and Bio-Photonics Project, Department of
Electrical Engineering. Full-Time, RCUH Non-Civil Service, federal and private
funds, to begin immediately, continuation is dependent upon
program/operational needs, satisfactory work performance and availability of
funds. Position located at University of Hawai`i--Manoa campus. **Minimum
Monthly Salary:** $2,075. **Duties:** Provides administrative support services
for the principal investigator, handles accounting/fiscal work:
prepares/processes service orders, budget status reports, purchase orders,
cash reimbursements and payments, travel arrangements and travel completion;
maintains project spreadsheet; maintains principal investigator's schedules
and address files; handles daily correspondence & e-mail; maintains files and
inventory of equipment, books and software; answers phone calls and provides
general office support/management. Performs other duties as assigned.
**Minimum Qualifications:** Bachelor's degree from an accredited four-year
college or university or graduation from high school with two to three years
experience. Some experience performing fiscal, secretarial and administrative
duties with demonstrated ability to work independently in the organization and
execution of various office functions. Knowledge of the practices and
techniques of fiscal/bookkeeping and office administration. Good verbal and
written communication skills. Working knowledge of word processing,
spreadsheet, scheduling and database software. Knowledge of general office
practices and procedures. **Desirable Qualifications:** Extensive experience
using Microsoft Excel, Word and Outlook software. Significant secretarial
experience. Prior fiscal/bookkeeping experience. **Inquiries:** Dr. David Y.
Y. Yun, 956-7627. Application Requirements: Send cover letter (note ID#) with
narrative on your qualifications for the position, resume with salary history,
the names and phone numbers of three work related references and copy(ies) of
diploma(s) and/or certificate(s) used to qualify for position to the Director
of Human Resources, Research Corporation of the University of Hawai`i, 2530
Dole Street, Sakamaki Hall D-100, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date:** 07/16.

**ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE ASSISTANT** \- ID#99186. Haumana Biomedical Program,
Pacific Biomedical Research Center (PBRC). Regular, Part -Time, (50% FTE),
RCUH Non-Civil Service position, located at the University of Hawai`i at Manoa
in Honolulu, HI. Continuation of employment is dependent upon
program/operational needs, satisfactory work performance and availability of
funds. **Minimum Monthly Salary:** $899 @ 50% FTE. **Duties:** Responsible for
managing the office and all programmatic operations related to the biomedical
research initiative. **Minimum Qualifications:** High school diploma and
additional business/office related training. 1-3 years of related work
experience. Promotes biomedical research in the University and among ethnic
minority populations in Hawai`i; ability to follow complex oral and written
communication; proficient in Microsoft and Excel spreadsheets for grant
submissions. Ability to lift 20 lbs. **Desirable Qualifications:** Substantial
experience and familiarity with UH and RCUH policies and procedures; valid
driver's license for occasional transportation of reports and fiscal documents
on/off UH campus. **Inquiries:** Healani Chang, 734- 4711. **Application
Requirements:** Send cover letter (note ID#) with narrative on your
qualifications for the position, resume with salary history, the names and
phone numbers of three work related references and copy(ies) of diploma(s)
and/or certificate(s) used to qualify for position to the Director of Human
Resources, Research Corporation of the University of Hawai`i, 2530 Dole
Street, Sakamaki Hall D-100, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date:** 07/16.

**VISITOR CENTER TOUR GUIDE** \- ID#99187. Mauna Kea Observatories Support
Services, Regular, On-Call - 10% F.T.E., RCUH Non-Civil Service position with
the Mauna Kea Observatories Support Services (MKSS). Continuation is dependent
upon program/operational needs, satisfactory work performance and availability
of funds. **Minimum Hourly Rate:** $10.78/Hr. **Duties:** Conducts summit
tours, explains visitor center features and presents the evening stargazing
program at the Onizuka Center for International Astronomy located at Hale
Pohaku, on the Island of Hawai`i. Informs visitors of the hazards of Mauna Kea
and various features that are available. Other duties as assigned. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Graduation from high school. Some experience dealing with
the general public. Knowledge of the location of astronomical objects, such as
planets and nebula, and the ability to locate them in the telescope field of
view. Must possess a valid driver's license. Must be able to obtain medical
clearance to work at high altitudes. Must be able to work continuously at
9,200 feet and occasionally at 14,000 feet. **Desirable Qualifications:**
Bachelor's degree from an accredited four year college or university in
speech, public relations, astronomy or education. Experience as a tour guide,
park ranger, or teacher. Familiarity with Mauna Kea and its various features.
Experience operating astronomical telescopes. Experience working at high
altitudes. **Inquiries:** Gail Forbes, (808) 935-3371. **Application
Requirements:** Send resume with ID# and salary history, the names and phone
numbers of three work related references and copy(ies) of diploma(s) and/or
certificate(s) used to qualify for position to the Director of Human
Resources, Research Corporation of the University of Hawai`i, 2530 Dole
Street, Sakamaki Hall, D-100 Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date:** 07/19.

**Research Opportunities at East-West Center**

The East-West Center Energy and Economic Development Project would like to
meet interested and/or qualified persons to discuss paid research
opportunities. Working closely with other researchers, the successful
applicant will conduct research with particular emphasis on oil, natural gas
and electricity issues in the Asia-Pacific region. Research issues will
include but not be limited to: global, regional and domestic energy markets,
including supply and demand, prices, trade flows, barriers, etc; government
policies including reforms, deregulation, liberalization and privatization and
energy-environmental linkages. The researcher is expected to immediately
immerse her/himself in energy related issues; acquire necessary skills to do
the research within a certain period of time and be a team player who can also
work independently and become a skilled writer of energy-related project
reports. Possible public-speaking requirements in conference and corporate
briefing settings. **Qualifications:** Master's degree. Any discipline related
to and/or work experience in energy is desirable but not necessary. However,
interest in energy research especially in oil, natural gas and electricity is
a must. Graduate degrees preferred in economics (applied or theoretical),
business, engineering, geography and urban planning. Other disciplines will be
considered especially if s/he possesses strong analytical skills and
sufficient knowledge about economics (e.g., intermediate undergraduate
courses). Familiarity with computers, preferably Microsoft Office 97.
Knowledge in computer programming is desirable but not necessary upon
starting. Capacity to learn new things, self-motivation and capability to
undertake research and report writing. Strong skills in English.
**Remuneration:** Pay will be related to qualifications and experience. **To
apply:** Application is accepted until June 30. Please send resume to Wawan
Prawiraatmadja, e-mail: [wawanp@hawaii.edu](mailto:wawanp@hawaii.edu) or fax:
(808) 944-7559. Selected applicants will be contacted for interview.

**PROFESSIONAL PATIENTS IN WOMEN'S HEALTH:** Women interested in women's
health issues needed to work in conjunction with UH Medical School students.
**Duties:** to be trained to work with medical students in on-going medical
school programs to teach breast and pelvic clinical skills. Must be available
for several schedules that span the academic year: on Monday evenings (or
Tuesday when Monday is a holiday), seven times a year; and eight Saturday
morning sessions to be scheduled between January and March. Availability for
scheduled sessions is crucial. $23 per hour. Interested women please send
name, address, e-mail address, phone number(s), and a one-page statement about
self, interest in program and related background experience in teaching,
health, and other related areas of knowledge to:
[kok@hawaii.edu](mailto:kok@hawaii.edu) or to: Coordinator, Professional
Patients Program, John Burns School of Medicine, Department of Ob-Gyn, 8th
floor, Kapi`olani Medical Center, 1319 Punahou Street, Honolulu, HI 96826. No
phone calls please. Coordinator will reply promptly with detailed information
about program, interview and training. **Closing date:** September 15.



