**COURSE SYLLABUS

** **

Department:** Human Development and Learning

**

Course Number:** HDAL 5230

**

Course Title:** Advanced Developmental Psychology

**

Semester Hours:** Three(3)

**

Date of this Revision of Syllabus:** Spring 2000

**

Text(s) and/or Required Readings:

**

Berger, K. S. & Thompson, R. A. (1994). The developing person through the life
span. NY: Worth Publishing.

**

Catalog Description:** A survey of the principles of human development
throughout the life span.

**

Additional Course Information:** Relationship of Course to College and Program
Philosophy and Goals: Students in this course will have the opportunity to
develop critical thinking skills which will enable them to conceptualize the
developing person through the life span. Cultural differences and similarities
will be addressed.

**

Course Objectives:** This course is designed to assist the student in becoming
knowledgeable about the principles of human development across the life span.
The emphasis across all areas of development will be life themes, transitions,
and skills as well as developmental issues.

Specifically, The students who successfully complete this course should be
able to:

1)  Explain the foundations of developmental psychology;

2)  Categorize theoretical approaches to life-span development;

3) Demonstrate knowledge of perceptual development across the life cycle;

4) Identify and discuss theories of cognitive development;

5)  Explain social and emotional development;

6)  Summarize sex-role development;

7)  Compare and contrast theories of moral development;

8)  Discuss developmental psychopathology;

9) Use and evaluate current applications of developmental psychology;

10) Debate the issues of nature/nurture, continuity/discontinuity, and
deficit/difference as they relate to developmental psychology.

11) Within the context of the nature\nurture as deficit\difference
controversy, analyze cultural diversity as it relates to development.

**

Course Topics:

**

Concerns of Developmental Psychology

Theoretical Approaches

Attachment and Affiliation

Death and Dying

Nutrition

Identity

Memory

Language Development

Parenting

Personality

Play and Leisure

Self-Concept

Sex Differences

Temperament

Work

**

Class Activities and Requirements:** This class will involves such activities
as discussion, debates, didactic presentations, small group problem solving,
and classroom projects.

Students will take examinations and prepare a research proposal to fulfill
class requirements using database searches on CD-Rom and videotapes and\or
video disks.

**

Field Experience Requirements:** Visit a nursery, school, and Senior Citizens
center

**

Supplementary Readings and Materials:

**

Ainsworth, M. D. S. (1989). Attachments beyond infancy. _American
Psychologist_ , 44 (4), 709-716.

Elkind, D. (1988). _The hurried child: Growing up too fast too soon_. NY:
Addison-Wesley.

**

Bibliography:

**

Ainsworth, Mary D. Salter. (1973). The development of infant-mother
attachment. In Bettye M. Caldwell and Henry N. Ricciuti (Eds.), _Review of
child development research_ (Vol. III). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Ainsworth, Mary D. Salter. (1985). Attachments across the life-span. _Bulletin
of the New York Academy of Medicine_ , 61, 792-812.

Ainsworth, Mary D. Salter and Bell, Silvia M. (1970). Attachment, exploration,
and separation: Illustrated by the behavior of one-year-olds in a strange
situation. _Child Development_ , 41, 49-67.

Allan, Graham. (1989). _Friendship: Developing a sociological perspective_.
Boulder, CO: Westview.

Allison, Paul D., and Furstenberg, Frank F. (1989). How marital dissolution
affects children: Variations by age and sex. _Developmental Psychology_ , 25,
540-549.

Amaro, Hortensia, Fried, Lise E., Cabral, Howard, and Zuckerman, Barry.
(1990). Violence during pregnancy and substance use. _American Journal of
Public Health_ , 80, 575-579.

Amato, Paul R., and Keith, Bruce. (1991). Parental divorce and adult well-
being: A meta-analysis. _Journal of Marriage and the Family_ , 53, 43-58.

American Society on Aging. (1992). _Serving elders of color: Challenges to
providers and the Aging Network._ San Francisco: American Society of Aging.

Anthony, E.J. (1987). Risk, vulnerability, and resiliance: An overview. In
E.J. Anthony and B.J. Cohler (Eds.), _The invulnerable child_. NY: Guilford.

Antonucci, Toni C. (1990). Attachment, social support, and coping with
negative life events. In E. M. Cummings, A. L. Green, and K. H. Karraker
(eds.), _Life-span developmental psychology: Vol. 11. Stress and coping across
the life-span_. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Aquilino, William S. (1991). Family structure and home-leaving: A further
specification of the relationship. _Journal of Marriage and the Family_ , 53,
999-1010.

Archer, Sally L., and Waterman, Alan S. (1990). Varieties of identity
diffusions and foreclosures: An exploration of the sub-categories of the
identity statuses. _Journal of Adolescent Research_ , 5, 96-111.

Arenberg, David. (1982). Changes in age with problem-solving. In Fergus I.M.
Craik and Sandra Trehub (Eds.), _Aging and cognitive processes_. NY: Plenum.

Arlin, Patricia K. (1984). Adolescent and adult thought: A structural
interpretation. In Michael L. Commons, Francis A. Richards, and Cheryl Armon
(Eds.). _Beyond formal operations: Late adolescent and adult cognitive
development_. NY: Praeger.

Arlin, Patricia K. (1989). Problem solving and problem finding in young
artists and young scientists. In Michael L. Commons, Jan D. Sinnot, Francis A.
Richards, and Cheryl Armon (Eds.). _Adult development: Vol 1. Comparisons and
applications of developmental models_. NY: Praeger.

Asher, Steven R. (1983). Social competence and peer status: Recent advances
and future directions. _Child Development_ , 54, 1427-1434.

Asher, Steven R., and Renshaw, Peter D. (1981). Children without friends:
Social knowledge and social skill training. In Steven R. Asher and John M.
Gottman (Eds.), _The development of children's friendships_. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.

Aslin, Richard N. (1987). Visual and auditory development in infancy. In Joy
Doniger Osofsky (Ed.), _Handbook of infant development_ (2nd ed.). NY: Wiley.

Aslin, Richard. (1988). Visual perception in early infancy. In Albert Yonas
(Ed.), _Perceptual development in infancy_. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Astington, J. W., Harris, P. L., and Olson, D. R., (Eds.). (1988). _Developing
theories of mind_. NY: Cambridge University Press.

Axia, Giovanna, and Baroni, Rosa. (1985). Linguistic politeness at different
age levels. _Child Development_ , 56, 918-927.

Axline, Virginia. (1964) _Dibs in search of self_. NY: Ballantine.

Bahrick, H. P. (1984). Semantic memory content in permastore: Fifty years of
memory for Spanish learned in school. _Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General_ , 113, 1-35.

Ball, Jean A. (1987). _Reactions to motherhood_. NY: Cambridge University
Press.

Baltes, Paul B. (1987). Theoretical propositions of life-span developmental
psychology: On the dynamics between growth and decline. _Developmental
Psychology_ , 23, 611-626.

Baltes, Paul B., and Baltes, Margret M. (1990). Psychological perspectives on
successful aging: The model of selective optimization with compensation. In
Paul B. Baltes and Margret M. Baltes (Eds.), _Successful aging: Perspectives
from the behavioral sciences_. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

Baltes, Paul B., and Lindenberger. (1988). On the range of cognitive
plasticity in old age as a function of experience: 15 years of Intervention
research. _Behavioral Therapy_ , 19, 283-300.

Baltes, Paul B., Smith, Jacqui, and Staudinger, Ursula. (1992). Wisdom and
successful aging. In T. Sonderegger (Ed.), _Psychology and aging: Nebraska
symposium on motivation_ (Vol. 39). Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.

Band, Eve Brotman, and Weisz, John R. (1988). How to feel better when it feels
bad: Children's perspectives on coping with everyday stress. _Developmental
Psychology_ , 24, 247-253.

Bandura, Albert. (1977). _Social learning theory_. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.

Bandura, Albert. (1981). Self-referent thought: A developmental analysis of
self-efficacy. In John H. Flavell and Lee Ross (Eds.), _Social cognitive
development: Frontiers and possible futures_. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.

Bandura, Albert. (1989). _Social foundations of thought and action: A social
cognitive theory_. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Bandura, Albert. (1989). Social cognitive theory. In R. Vasta (Ed.), _Annals
of Child Development_ (Vol. 6). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

Bane, Share DeCroix. (1991). Rural minority populations. _Generations_ , 27
(3), 63-65.

Bardo, Michael T., and Mueller, Charles W. (1991). Sensation seeking and drug
abuse prevention from a biological perspective. In Lewis Donohew, Howard E.
Sypher, and William J. Bukoski (Eds.), _Persuasive communication and drug
abuse prevention_. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Barnett, Rosaline C., Marshall, Nancy L., and Singer, Judith D. (1992a). Job
experiences over time, multiple roles, and women's mental health: A
longitudinal study. _Journal of Personality and Social Psychology_ , 62,
634-644.

Barnett, Rosaline C., Marshall, Nancy L., and Pleck, Joseph H. (1992b). Men's
multiple roles and their relationship to men's psychological distress.
_Journal of Marriage and the Family_ , 54, 358-367.

Bassuk, E.L., and Rosenberg, L. (1990). Psychosocial characteristics of
homeless children and children with homes. _Pediatrics_ , 85, 257-261.

Bateson, Mary Catherine. (1990). _Composing a life_ New York: Plume.

Baumrind, Diana. (1967). Child-care practices anteceding three patterns of
preschool behavior. _Genetic Psychology Monographs_ , 75, 43-88.

Baumrind, Diana. (1971). Current patterns of parental authority.
_Developmental Psychology_ , 4 (Monograph 1), 1-103.

Baumrind, Diana. (1982). Are androgynous individuals more effective persons
and parents? _Child Development_ , 53, 44-75.

Baumrind, Diana. (1987). A developmental perspective on adolescent risk-taking
behavior. In C.E. Irwin (Ed.), _Adolescent social behavior and health_. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Baumrind, Diana. (1989). Rearing competent children. In William Damon (Ed.),
_New directions for child development: Adolescent health and human behavior_.
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Baumrind, Diana. (1991). The influence of parenting style on adolescent
competence and substance use. _Journal of Early Adolescence_ , 11, 56-95.

Baumrind, Diana. (1991). Parenting styles and adolescent development. In
Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, Richard Lerner, and Anne C. Peterson (Eds.), _The
encyclopedia of adolescence_. New York: Garland.

Bayley, Nancy. (1955). On the growth of intelligence. _American Psychologist_
, 10, 805-818.

Bayley, Nancy. (1966). Learning in adulthood: The role of intelligence. In
Herbert J. Klausmeier and Chester W. Harris (Eds.), _Analysis of concept
learning_. New York: Academic Press.

Belmont, John M. (1989). Cognitive strategies and strategic learning: The
socio-instructional approach. _American Psychology_ , 44, 142-148.

Belsky, Jay and Rovine, Michael. (1987). Temperament and attachment security
in the Strange Situation. _Child Development_ , 58, 787-795.

Belsky, Jay, Steinberg, Laurence, and Draper, Patricia. (1991). Childhood
experience, interpersonal development, and reproductive strategy: An
evolutionary theory of socialization. _Child Development_ , 62, 647-670.

Belsky, Jay, and Vonda, Joan. (1989). Lessons from child abuse: The
determinants of parenting. In Dante Cicchetti and Vicki Carlson (Eds.), _Child
maltreatment: Theory and research on the causes and consequences of child
abuse and neglect_. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

Bem, Sandra L. (1974). The measurement of psychological androgyny. _Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology_ , 42, 155-162.

Bem, Sandra L. (1981). Gender schema theory: A cognitive account of sex
typing. _Psychological Review_ , 88, 354-364.

Bem, Sandra L. (1985). Androgyny and gender schema theory: A conceptual and
empirical integration in T.B. Sondegegger (Ed.), _Nebraska symposium on
motivation 1984: Psychology and gender_ (Vol. 32). Lincoln, NE: University of
Nebraska Press.

Bem, Sandra L. (1989). Genital knowledge and gender constancy in preschool
children. _Child Development_ , 60, 649-662.

Bengston, Vern L., Rosenthal, Carolyn, and Burton, Linda. (1990). Families and
aging: diversity and heterogeneity. In Robert H. Binstock and Linda K. George
(Eds.), _Handbook of aging and the social sciences_ (3rd ed.). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.

Berg, Cynthia A., and Sternberg, Robert J. (1985). A triarchic theory of
intellectual development during adulthood. _Developmental Review_ , 5,
334-370.

Berg, Robert L., and Cassells, Joseph E. (1990). _The second fifty years:
Promoting health and preventing disability_. Washington, DC: National Academy
Press.

Berndt, Thomas. (1989). Friendships in childhood and adolescence. In William
Damon (Ed.), _Child development today and tomorrow_. San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass.

Bigelow, B.J. (1977). Children's friendship expectations: A cognitive
developmental study. _Child Development_ , 48, 246-253.

Bingham, C. Raymond, Miller, Brent C., and Adams, Gerald R. (1990). Correlates
of age at first sexual intercourse in a national sample of young women.
_Journal of Adolescent Research_ , 5, 7-17.

Bjorklund, David. (1990). (Ed.) _Children's strategies: Contemporary views of
cognitive development_. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Blake, Judith. (1989). _Family size and achievement_. Berkeley, CA: University
of California Press.

Blieszner, Rosemary, and Hamon, Raeann R. (1992). Filial responsibility:
Attitude, motivators, and behaviors. In Jeffrey W. Dwyer and Raymond R. Coward
(Eds.), _Gender, families, and elder care_. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Bloch, Marianne N. (1989). Young boys' and girls' play at home and in the
community: A cultural ecological framework. In Marianne N. Bloch and Anthony
D. Pellegrini (Eds.), _The ecological context of children's play_. Norwood,
NJ: Ablex.

Bornstein, Marc H., Tal, Joseph, and Tamis-Lemonda, Catherine S. (1991).
Parenting in cross-cultural perspective: The United States, France, and Japan.
In Marc H. Bornstein (Ed.), _Cultural approaches to parenting_. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.

Bower, T.G.R. (1989). _The rational infant: Learning in infancy_. New York:
Freeman.

Bradley, Robert H., and Caldwell, Bettye M. (1984). The HOME inventory and
family demographics. _Developmental Psychology_ , 20, 315-320.

Bronfenbrenner, Urie. (1979). _The ecology of human development: Experiments
by nature and design_. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Bronfenbrenner, Urie. (1985). Freedom and discipline across the decades. In G.
Becker, H. Becker, and L. Huber (Eds.), _Ordnung and Unordnung_. Weinheim,
Germany: Beltz Berlag.

Bronfenbrenner, Urie. (1986). Ecology of the family as a context for human
development research perspectives. _Developmental Psychology_ , 22, 723-742.

Bruner, Jerome Seymour. (1983). _Child's talk: Learning to use language_. New
York: Norton.

Bruner, Jerome Seymour. (1986). _Actual minds, possible worlds_. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.

Busse, Ewald W. (1985). Normal aging: The Duke longitudinal studies. In M.
Bergener, Marco Ermini, and H.B. Stahelin (Eds.), _Thresholds in aging_.
London: Academic Press.

Carnegie Council on Adolescent Development. (1989). _Turning points: Preparing
American youth for the 21st century_. New York: Caregie Corporation.

Chickering, Arthur W. (1981). Conclusion. In Arthur W. Chickering (Ed.), _The
modern American college: Responding to the new realities of diverse students
and a changing society_. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Children's Defense Fund. (1990). _Children 1990: A report card, briefing book,
and action primer_. Washington, DC: Children's Defense Fund.

Chomsky, Carol. (1969). _The acquisition of syntax in children from five to
ten_. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Chomsky, Noam. (1968). _Language and mind_. New York: Harcourt, Brace, World.

Chomsky, Noam. (1980). _Rules and representations_. New York: Columbia
University Press.

Cohen, David. (1987). _The development of play_. New York: New York University
Press.

Coles, Robert. (1990). _The spiritual life of children_. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin.

Cook, Ellen P. (1985). _Psychological androgyny_. Oxford, England: Pergamon.

Cox, Maureen V. (1986). _The child's point of view: The development of
cognition and language_. New York: St. Martin's Press.

Crain, W. (1992). _Theories of development: Concepts and applications_ (3rd
ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Crittenden, Patricia M., and Ainsworth, Mary D.S. (1989). Child maltreatment
and attachment theory. In Dante Cicchetti and Vicki Carlson (Eds.), _Child
maltreatment: Theory and research on the causes and consequences of child
abuse and neglect_. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

Daro, Deborah. (1988). _Confronting child abuse_. New York: The Free Press.

de Villiers, Jill G. and de Villiers, Peter A. (1986). _The acquisition of
English_. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Dixon, Roger A. (1992). Contextual approaches to adult intellectual
development. In Robert J. Sternberg and Cynthia A. Berg (Eds.), _Intellectual
development_. New York: Cambridge University Press.



Dixon, Roger A. and Baltes, Paul B. (1986). Toward life-span research on the
functions and pragmatics of intelligence. In Robert J. Sternberg and Richard
K. Wagner (Eds.), _Practical intelligence_. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.

Dunn, Judy. (1988). _The beginnings of social understanding_. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

Dunn, Judy. (1992). Siblings and development. _Current Directions in
Psychological Science_ , 1, 6-9.

Dweck, Carol S., and Elliott, Elaine S. (1983). Achievement motivation. In
Paul H. Mussen (Ed.), _Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 4. Socialization and
personality development_. New York: Wiley.

Eaves, L.J., Eysenck, H.J., and Martin, N.G. (1989). _Genes, culture and
personality_. London: Academic Press.

Elkind, David. (1974). _Children and Adolescents: Interpretive essays on Jean
Piaget_. New York: Oxford University Press.

Elkind, David. (1978). _The child's reality: Three developmental themes_.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Elkind, David. (1985). Egocentrism redux. _Developmental Review_ , 5, 218-226.

Erikson, Erik H. (1963). _Childhood and society_. (2nd ed.). New York: Norton.

Erikson, Erik H. (1968). _Identity, youth, and crisis_. New York: Norton.

Erikson, Erik H. (1975). _Life history and the historical moment_. New York:
Norton.

Erikson, Erik H., Erikson, Joan M., and Kivnick, Helen Q. (1986). _Vital
involvement in old age_. New York: Norton.

Farrell, Michael P., and Rosenberg, Stanley D. (1981). _Men at midlife_.
Boston: Auburn House.

Ferber, Marianne A., and O'Farrell, Brigid. (1991). _Work and family: Policies
for a changing work force_. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

Fiati, Thomas A. (1991). Cross-cultural variation in the structure of
children's thought. In Robbie Case (Ed.), _The mind's staircase: Exploring the
conceptual underpinning of children's thought and knowledge_. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.

Flavell, John H. (1985). _Cognitive development_ (2nd ed.). Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice Hall.

Fodor, J. (1983). _The moduality of mind_. Cambridge, MA MIT Press.

Fowler, James W. (1981). _Stages of faith: The psychology of

human development and the quest for meaning_. New York: Harper & Row.

Fowler, James W. (1986). Faith and the structuring of meaning. In Craig
Dykstra and Sharon Parks (Eds.), _Faith development and Fowler_. Birmingham,
AL: Religious Education Press.

Freud, Sigmund. (1964). _An outline of psychoanalysis: Vol 23. The standard
edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud_. James Strachey
(Ed. and Trans.). London: Hogarth Press. (Original work published 1940).

Fries, James F. (1990). The compression of morbidity: Progress and control. In
M. Bergener, M. Ermini, and H.B. Stahelin (Eds.), _Challenges in aging_. New
York: Academic Press.

Garbarino, James. (1989). An ecological perspective on the role play in child
development. In Marianne N. Bloch and Anthony D. Pellegrini (Eds.), _The
ecological context of children's play_. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.

Gardner, Howard. (1983). _Frames of mind: The theory of multiple
intelligences_. New York: Basic Books.

Garmezy, Norman. (1985). Stress-resistant children: The search for protective
factors. In J.E. Stevenson (Ed.), _Recent research in developmental
psychopathology_. Oxford, England: Peramon.

Gatz, Margaret, Bengston, Vern L., and Blum, Mindy J. (1990). Caregiving
families. In James E. Birren and K. Warner Schaie (Eds.), _Handbook of the
psychology of aging_ (3rd ed.). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

Gelles, Richard J. (1988). _Intimate violence_. New York: Simon and Schuster.

Gesell, Arnold, Ames, Louise Bates, and Ilg, Frances L. (1977). _The child
from five to ten_ (rev. ed.). New York: Harper  & Row.

Getzels, J.W., and Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1976). _The creative vision: A
longitudinal study of problem finding in art_. New York: Wiley.

Gilligan, Carol. (1981). Moral development. In Arthur W. Chickering (Ed.),
_The modern American college: Responding to the new realities of diverse
students and a changing society_. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Gilligan, Carol. (1982). _In a different voice: Psychological theory and
women's development_. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Gilligan, Carol, and Attanucci, J. (1988). Two moral orientations: Gender
differences and similarities. _Merrill-Palmer Quarterly_ , 34, 223-237.

Gilligan, Carol, and Murphy, John M., and Tappan, Mark B. (1990). Moral
development beyond adolescence. In Charles N. Alexander and Ellen J. Langer
(Eds.), _Higher stages of human development_. New York: Oxford University
Press.

Goetz, T.E., and Dweck, Carol. (1980). Learned helplessness in social
situations. _Journal of Personality and Social Psychology_ , 39, 246-255.

Goodnow, Jacqueline J., and Collins, W. Andrew. (1990). _Development according
to parents: The nature, sources, and consequences of parents' ideas_.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Gutmann, David. (1987). _Reclaimed powers: Toward a new psychology of men and
women in later life_. New York: Basic Books.

Hall, G. Stanley. (1904). _Adolescence: Its psychology and its relations to
physiology, anthropology, sociology, sex, crime, religion and education_. New
York: Appleton.

Harter, Susan. (1990). Processed underlying adolescent self-concept formation.
In Raymond Montemayor, Gerald R. Adams, and Thomas P. Gullotta (Eds.), _From
childhood to adolescence: A transitional period_? Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Haskins, Ron. (1989). Beyond metaphor: The efficacy of early childhood
education. _American Psychologist_ , 44, 274-282.

Hatfield, Elaine. (1988). Theories of romantic love. In Robert J. Sternberg
and Michael L. Barnes (Eds.), _The psychology of love_. New Haven, CT: Yale.

Herzog, Christopher, Dixon, Roger A., and Hultsch, David F. (1990). Metamemory
in adulthood: Differentiating knowledge, belief, and behavior. In Thomas M.
Hess (Ed.), _Aging and cognition: Knowledge organization and utilization_.
North-Holland: Elsevier.

Horn, John L., and Hofer Scott M. (1992). Major abilities and development in
the adult period. In Robert J. Sternberg and Cynthia A. Berg (Eds.),
_Intellectual development_. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Horney, Karen. (1967). _Feminine psychology_. Harold Kelman (Ed.). New York:
Norton.

Hsu, L.K. George. (1990). _Eating disorders_. New York: Guilford.

Hunter, Mic. (1990). _Abused boys: The neglected victims of sexual abuse_.
Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.

Hunter, Laura Russell, and Membard, Polly Hunter. (1981). _The rest of my
life_. Stamford, CT: Growing Pains Press.

Inhelder, Barbel, and Piaget, Jean. (1958). _The growth of logical thinking
from childhood to adolescence_. New York: Basic Books.

Jefferys, Margot (Ed.). (1989). _Growing old in the twentieth century_.
London: Routledge.

Jessor, Richard, Donovan, John E., and Costa, Frances M. (1991). _Beyond
adolescence: Problem behavior and young adult development_. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.

Johnson, Clifford M., Mirands, Leticia, Sherman, Arloc, and Weill, James D.
(1991). _Child poverty in America_. Washington, DC: Children's Defense Fund.

Johnson, Tanya Fusco. (1991). _Elder mistreatment: Deciding who is at risk_.
New York: Greenwood.

Jung, Carl. (1933). _Modern man in search of a soul_. New York: Harvest.

Kagan, Jerome. (1984). _The nature of the child_. New York: Basic Books.

Kagan, Jerome. (1989). Temperamental contributions to social behavior.
_American Psychologist_ , 44, 668-674.

Kagan, Jerome, and Snidman, Nancy. (1991). Infant predictors of inhibited and
uninhibited profiles. _Psychological Science_ , 2, 40-44.

Kail, R. (1990). _The development of memory in children_ (3rd ed.). New York:
Freeman.

Kastenbaum, Robert J. (1986). _Death, society, and the human experience_.
Columbus, OH: Merrill.

Kastenbaum, Robert. (1992). _The psychology of death_. New York: Springer-
Verlag.

Katzell, Raymond A., and Thompson, Donna E. (1990). Work motivation: Theory
and practice. _American Psychologist_ , 45, 144-153.

Kaufman, Sharon R. (1986). _The ageless self_. Madison, WI: University of
Wisconsin Press.

Keith, Pat M., and Schafer, Robert B. (1991). _Relationships and well-being
over the life stages_. New York: Praeger.

Kelvin, Peter, and Jarret, Joanna A. (1985). _Unemployment: Its social and
psychological effects_. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

Kramer, Dierdre A., and Melchior, Jacqueline. (1990). Gender, role conflict,
and the development of relativistic and dialectical thinking. _Sex Roles_ ,
23, 553-575.

Kroger, Jane. (1989). _Identity in adolescence: The balance between self and
other_. London: Routledge.

Kubler-Ross, Elisabeth. (1969). _On death and dying_. New York: Macmillan.

Kubler-Ross, Elisabeth. (1975). _Death: The final stage of growth_. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Lamb, David R. (1984). _Physiology of exercise: Response and adaptation_ (2nd
ed.). New York: Macmillan.

Leach, Penelope. (1989). _Babyhood_ (2nd ed.). New York: Knopf.

Lee, John Alan. (1988). Love-styles. In Robert J. Sternberg and Michael L.
Barnes (Eds.), _The psychology of love_. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Lee, Valerie E., Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, and Schnur, Elizabeth. (1988). Does Head
Start work? A 1 year follow-up comparison of disadvantaged children attending
Head Start, no preschool, and other preschool programs. _Developmental
Psychology_ , 24, 210-222.

Lester, David. (1989). Self-destructive tendencies and depression as
predictors of suicidal ideation in teenagers. _Journal of Adolescence_ , 12,
221-223.

Le Vine, Robert A. (1989). Cultural influences in child development. In
William Damon (Ed.), _Child development today and tomorrow_. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.

Levinson, Daniel J. (1978). _The seasons of a man's life_. New York: Knopf.

Levinson, Daniel J. (1986). A conception of adult development. _American
Psychologist_ , 41, 3-13.

Levy, G.D., and Carter, D.B. (1989). Gender schema, gender constancy, and
gender-role knowledge: The roles of cognitive factors in preschoolers' gender-
role sterotype attributions. _Developmental Psychology_ , 25, 444-449.

Lewis, Michael, and Michalson, Linda. (1983). _Children's emotions and moods_.
New York: Plenum.

Lewis, Michael, Sullivan, M.W., Stanger, C., and Weiss, M. (1989). Self
development and self-conscious emotions. _Child Development_ , 60, 146-156.

Liston, Daniel P. and Zeichner, Kenneth M. (1991). _Teacher education and the
social conditions of schooling_. New York: Routledge.

Loevinger, J. (1976). _Ego development_. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Lovelace, Eugene A. (1990a). Basic concepts in cognition and aging. In Eugene
A. Lovelace (Ed.), _Aging and cognition: Mental processes, self-awareness, and
interventions_. North-Holland: Elsevier.

Lovelace, Eugene A. (1990b). Cognitive aging: A summary overview. In Eugene A
Lovelace (Ed.), _Aging and cognition: Mental processes, self-awareness, and
interventions_. North-Holland: Elsevier.

Lovelace, Eugene A. (1990c). Aging and metacognitions concerning memory
function. In Eugene A Lovelace (Ed.), _Aging and cognition: Mental processes,
self-awareness, and interventions_. North-Holland: Elsevier.

Lowman, Rodney M. (1991). _Career assessment_. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.

Lowrey, George H. (1986). _Growth and development of children_ (8th ed.).
Chicago: Year Book Medical Publishers.

Maccoby, Eleanor Emmons. (1980). _Social development: Psychological growth and
the parent-child relationship_. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanich.

Maccoby, Eleanor Emmons. (1988). Gender as a social category. _Developmental
Psychology_ , 24, 755-765.

Mahler, Margaret. (1968). _On human symbiosis and the vicissitudes of
individuation_. New York: International Universities Press.

Mahler, Margaret S., Pine, Fred, and Bergman, Anni. (1975). _The psychological
birth of the human infant: Symbiosis and individuation_. New York: Basic
Books.

Marcia, James E. (1980). Identity in adolescence. In Joseph Adelson (Ed.),
_Handbook of adolescent psychology_. New York: Wiley.

Maslow, Abraham H. (1968). _Toward a psychology of being_ (2nd ed.).
Princeton, NJ: Van Nostrand.

Maslow, Abraham H. (1970). _Motivation and personality_ (2nd ed.). New York:
Harper  & Row.

Maslow, Abraham H. (1971). _The farther reaches of human nature_. New York:
Penguin.

Masten, Ann S. (1992). Homeless children in the United States: Mark of a
nation at risk. _Current Directions in Psychological Science_ , 1, 41-43.

Masters, William M., and Johnson, Virginia E. (1981). _Human sexual response_.
Boston: Little, Brown.

Masters, William M., and Johnson, Virginia E. (1981). Sex and the aging
process. _Journal of the American Geriatrics Society_ , 29, 385-390.

McCrae, Robert R., and Costa, Paul T. (1984). _Emerging lives, enduring
dispositions: Personality in adulthood_. Boston: Little, Brown.

McCrae, Robert R., and Costa, Paul T. (1990). _Personality in adulthood_. New
York: Guilford.

Miller, Patricia H. (1983). _Theories of developmental psychology_. San
Francisco: Freeman.

Miller, Patricia H., and Aloise, Patricia A. (1989). Young children's
understanding of the psychological causes of behavior: A review. _Child
Development_ , 60, 257-285.

Mitchell, John J. (1986). _The nature of adolescence_. Calgary, Alberta:
Detselig.

Murphy, John M., and Gilligan, Carol. (1980). Moral development in late
adolescence and adulthood: A critique and reconstruction of Kohlberg's theory.
_Human Development_ , 23, 77-104.

Murphy, Lois Barclay, and Moriarty, Alice E. (1976). _Vulnerability, coping,
and growth: From infancy to adolescence_. New Haven: Yale University Press.

Neugarten, Bernice L., and Neugarten, Dail A. (1986). Changing meanings of age
in the aging society. In Alan Pifer and Lynda Bronte (Eds.), _Our aging
society: Paradox and promise_. New York: Norton.

Newman, K. (1988). _Falling from grace: The experience of downward mobility in
the American middle class_. New York: The Free Press.

Nisan, Mordecai. (1987). Moral norms and social conventions: A cross-cultural
comparison. _Developmental Psychology_ , 23, 719-725.

Nugent, J. Kevin, Lester, B.M., and Brazelton, T.B. (1989). _The cultural
context of infancy_. (Vol.I). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.

Oakes, Jeanne, and Lipton, Martin. (1990). _Making the best of schools: A
handbook for parents, teachers, and policymakers_. New Haven: Yale University
Press.

Ochs, Elinor. (1988). _Culture and language development_. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.

Ory, Marcia G., and Warner, Huber R. (1990). _Gender, health, and longevity_.
New York: Springer.

Osgood, Nancy J. (1992). _Suicide in later life_. Lexington MA: Lexington
Books.

Palmore, Erdman B. (1990). _Ageism: Negative and positive_. New York:
Springer.

Pascarella, Ernest T., and Terenzini, Patrick T. (1991). _How college affects
students: finding and insights from twenty years of research_. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.

Paunonen, Sampo V., Jackson, Douglas N., Trzebinski, Jerzy, and Forsterling,
Friedrich. (1992). Personality structure across cultures: A multimodal
evaluation. _Journal of Personality and Social Science_ , 62, 447-456.

Pervin, Lawrence A. (1990). _Handbook of personality: Theory and research_.
New York: Guilford.

Piaget, Jean. (1951). _Play, dreams, and imitation in childhood_. New York:
Norton.

Piaget, Jean. (1952a). _The origins of intelligence in children_. Margaret
Cook (Trans.). New York: International Universities Press.

Piaget, Jean. (1952b). _The child's conception of number_. London: Routledge
and Kegan Paul.

Piaget, Jean. (1954). _The construction of reality in the child_. Margaret
Cook (Trans.). New York: Basic Books.

Piaget, Jean. (1959). _The language and thought of the child_ (3rd ed.).
Marjorie Gabain and Ruth Gabain (Trans.). London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.

Piaget, Jean. (1970a). _The child's conception of time_. A.J. Pomerans
(Trans.). New York: Basic Books.

Piaget, Jean. (1970b). _The child's conception of movement and speed_. G.E.T.
Holloway and M.J. Mackenzie (Trans.). New York: Basic Books.

Piaget, Jean. (1972). Intellectual evolution from adolescence to adulthood.
_Human Development_ , 15, 1-12.

Piaget, Jean. (1976). _The grasp of consciousness: Action and concept in the
young child_. Susan Wedgewood (Trans.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Piaget, Jean. (1980). Intellectual evolution from adolescence to adulthood. In
Rolf E. Muuss (Ed.), _Adolescent behavior and society: A book of readings_
(3rd ed.). New York: Random House.

Piaget, Jean, and Inhelder, Barbel. (1963). _The child's conception of space._
F.J. Langdon and J.L. Lunzer (Trans.). London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.

Piaget, Jean, and Inhelder, Barbel. (1974). _The child's construction of
quantities: Conservation and atomism_. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.

Plomin, Robert. (1990a). _Nature and nurture: An introduction to human
behavioral genetics_. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.

Plomin, Robert. (1990b). The role of inheritance in behavior. _Science_ , 248,
183-188.

Plomin, Robert, DeFries, J.C., and McClearn, Gerald E. (1990). _Behavioral
genetics: A primer_. New York: Freeman.

Rice, Mabel L. (1984). Cognitive aspects of communicative development. In
Richard L. Schiefelbusch and Joanne Pickar (Eds.), _The acquisition of
communicative competence_. Baltimore, MD: University Park Press.

Rice, Mabel L. (1989). Children's language acquisition. _American
Psychologist_ , 44, 149-156.

Rice, Mabel, and Schiefelbusch, R. (Eds.). (1989). _The teachability of
language_. Baltimore, MD: Brookes.

Rierden, Jill, Koff, Elissa, and Stubbs, Margaret. (1988). Gender, depression,
and body image in early adolescents. _Journal of Early Adolescence_ , 8,
109-117.

Robins, Lee, and Rutter, Michael. (1990). _Straight and devious pathways from
childhood to adulthood_. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

Rourke, Byran P. (1989). _Nonverbal learning disabilities: The syndrome and
the mode_. New York: Guilford Press.

Ruble, D. (1983). The development of social comparison processes and their
role in achievement-related self-socialization. In E.T. Higgins, D.N. Ruble,
and W.W. Hartup (Eds.), _Social cognition and social development_. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.

Rutter, Michael. (1991). Nature, nurture, and psychopathology: A new look at
an old topic. _Development and Psychopathology_ , 3, 125-136.

Rutter, Michael, and Garmezy, Norman. (1983). Developmental psychopathology.
In Paul H. Mussen (Ed.), _Handbook of child psychology: Vol.4. Socialization,
personality and social development_. New York: Wiley.

Rybash, John M., Hoyer, William J., and Roodin, Paul A. (1986). _Adult
cognition and aging: Developmental changes in processing, knowing, and
thinking_. New York: Pergamon.

Saarni, C. (1989). Children's understanding of strategic control of emotional
expression in social transactions. In C. Saarni and P.L. Harris (Eds.),
_Children's understanding of emotion_. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.

Sagi, A., Lewkowicz, K.S. (1987). A cross-cultural evaluation of attachment
research. In L.W.C. Tavecchio and M.H. van Ijzendoorn (Eds.), _Attachment in
social networks_. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.

Salthouse, Timothy A. (1991). _Theoretical perspectives on cognitive aging_.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Salthouse, Timothy A. (1992). The information-processing perspective on
cognitive aging. In Robert J. Sternberg and Cynthia A. Berg (Eds.),
_Intellectual development_. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Scarr, Sandra. (1985). Constructing psychology: Making facts and fables for
our times. _American Psychologist_ , 40, 499-512.

Schaffer, H. Rudolf. (1984). _The child's entry into a social world_. New
York: Academic Press.

Schaie, K. Warner. (1989a). Individual differences in rate of cognitive change
in adulthood. In Vern L. Bengston and K. Warner Schaie (Ed.), _The course of
later life_. New York: Springer.

Schaie, K. Warner. (1989b). Perceptual speed in adulthood: Cross-sectional and
longitudinal studies. _Psychology and Aging_ , 4, 443-453.

Schaie, K. Warner. (1990a). Intellectual development in adulthood. In James E.
Birren and K. Warner Schaie (Eds.), _Handbook of the psychology of aging_. San
Diego, CA: Academic Press.

Schaie, K. Warner. (1990b). The optimization of cognitive functioning in old
age: Predictions based on cohort-sequential and longitudinal data. In Paul B.
Baltes and Margret M. Baltes (Eds.), _Successful aging_. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.

Schaie, K. Warner. (1990c). Individual differences in rate of cognitive change
in adulthood. In Vern L. Bengston and K. Warner Schaie (Eds.), _The course of
later life_. New York: Springer.

Schein, Edgar H. (1990). Organizational culture. _American Psychologist_ , 45,
109-119.

Sheehy, Gail. (1976). _Passages: Predictable crisis of adult life_. New York:
Dutton.

Sheehy, Gail. (1992). _The silent passage_. New York: Random House.

Siegler, Robert. (1983a). Information processing approaches to development. In
Paul H. Mussen (Ed.), _Handbook of child psychology: Vol.1. History, theory,
and methods_. W. Kessen (Vol. Ed.). New York: Wiley.

Siegler, Robert. (1983b). Five generalizations about cognitive development.
_American Psychologist_ , 38, 263-277.

Siegler, Robert. (1986). _Children's thinking_. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.

Silver, A.A., and Hagin, R.A. (1990). _Disorders of learning in childhood_.
New York: Wiley.

Sinclair, David. (1989). _Human growth after birth_. New York: Oxford.

Sinnot, Jan D. (Ed.). (1989). _Everyday problem solving_. New York: Praeger.

Skinner, B.F. (1953). _Science and human behavior_. New York: Macmillan.

Skinner, B.F. (1957). _Verbal behavior_. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.

Skinner, B.F. (1972). _Beyond freedom and dignity_. New York: Knopf.

Snow, Catherine E. (1987). Language and the beginning of moral understanding.
In Jerome Kagan and Sharon Lamb (Eds.), _The emergence of morality in young
children_. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Spearman, Charles. (1927). _The abilities of man_. New York: Macmillan.

Spelke, Elizabeth. (1987). The development of intermodal perception. In Philip
Salapatek and Leslie Cohen (Eds.), _Handbook of infant perception: Vol 2. From
perception to cognition_. Orlando, Fl: Academic Press.

Stanton, Annette L., and Dunkel-Schetter, Christine (Eds.). (1991).
_Infertility_. New York: Plenum.

Steinberg, Lawrence. (1990). Interdependency in the family: Autonomy, conflict
and harmony in the parent-adolescent relationship. In Shirley S. Feldman and
G.R. Elliot (Eds.), _At the threshold: The developing adolescent_. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.

Steinberg, Lawrence, Mounts, Nina S., Lamborn, Susan D., and Dornbusch,
Sanford M. (1991). Authoritative parenting and adolescent adjustment across
various ecological niches. _Journal of Research on Adolescence_ , 1, 19-36.

Stern, Daniel N. (1985). _The interpersonal world of the infant_. New York:
Basic Books.

Sternberg, Robert J. (1985). _Beyond IQ: A triarchic theory of human
intelligence_. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

Sternberg, Robert J. (1988). Intellectual development: Psychometric and
information-processing approaches. In M.H. Bornstein and M.E. Lamb (Eds.),
_Developmental psychology: An advanced textbook_ (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.

Sternberg, Robert J. (1990). _Wisdom: Its nature and development_. New York:
Cambridge University Press.

Sternberg, Robert J., and Barnes, Michael L. (Eds.). (1988). _The psychology
of love_. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Stipek, Deborah J., and Mac Iver, D. (1989). Developmental change in
children's assessment of intellectual competence. _Child Development_ , 60,
521-538.

Streitmatter, Janice L. (1988). Ethnicity as a mediating variable of early
adolescent identity development. _Journal of Adolescence_ , 11, 335-346.

Streitmatter, Janice L. (1989). Identity status development and cognitive
prejudice in early adolescents. _Journal of Early Adolescence_ , 9, 142-152.

Sullivan, Susan A., and Birch, Leann L. (1990). Pass the sugar, pass the salt:
Experience dictates preference. _Developmental Psychology_ , 26, 546-551.

Sutherland, David H., Olshen, Richard A., Biden, Edmund N., and Wyatt, Marilyn
P. (1988). _The development of mature walking_. Philadelphia: Lippincott.

Sutton-Smith, Brian. (1986). _Toys as culture_. New York: Gardner Press.

Taitz, L.S., and Wardley, B.L. (1989). _Handbook on child nutrition_. New
York: Oxford.

Taylor, Shelly E. (1989). _Positive illusions: Creative self-deception and the
healthy mind_. New York: Basic Books.

Tharp, Roland G. (1989) Psychocultural variables and constants: Effect on
teaching and learning in the schools. _American Psychologist_ , 44, 349-359.

Tharp, Roland G., and Fallimore, Ronald. (1988). _Rousing minds to life:
Teaching, learning, and schooling in social context_. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.

Thompson, Ross A. (1990). Emotion and self-regulation. In R.A. Thompson (Ed.),
_Socioemotional development: Nebraska symposium on motivation_ (Vol. 36).
Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.

Thompson, Ross A. (1991). Attachment theory and research. In Melvin Lewis
(Ed.), _Child and adolescent psychiatry: A comprehensive textbook_. Baltimore,
MD: Williams and Wilkins.

Tillich, Paul. (1958). _Dynamics of faith_. New York: Harper and Row.

Torres-Gil, Fernanda M. (1992). _The new aging_. New York: Auburn.

Turiel, Elloit, Smetana, Judith G., and Killen, Melanie. (1991). Social
Context in social cognitive development. In William M. Kurtines and Jacob L.
Gewirtz (Eds.) , _Handbook of moral behavior and development: Vol.2.
Research_. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

UNICEF. (1990). _Children and development in the 1990's: A UNICEF sourcebook_.
New York: United Nations.

United Nations. (1990). _Human Development Report, 1990_. New York: United
Nations Development Program.

United Nations. (1991). _Human Development Report, 1991_. New York: Oxford
University Press.

Vaillant, George E. (1977). _Adaptation to life_. Boston: Little Brown.

Vanderkolk, Barber Schwartz, and Young, Ardis Armstrong. (1991). _The work and
family revolution_. New York: Facts on File.

Van Ijzendoorn, M.H., Kroonenberg, P.M. (1988). Cross- cultural patterns of
attachment: A meta-analysis of the Strange Situation. _Child Development_ ,
59, 147-156.

Vygotsky, Lev S. (1987). _Thinking and Speech_. N. Minick (Trans.). New York:
Plenum.

Wagner, Richard K., and Sternberg, Robert J. (1986). Tacit knowledge and
intelligence in the everyday world. In Robert J. Sternberg and Richard K.
Wagner (Eds.), _Practical intelligence_. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.

Walker, Lawrence J. (1988). The development of moral reasoning. _Annals of
Child Development_ , 55, 677-691.

Walker, Lawrence J., deVries, Brian, and Trevethan, Shelley D. (1987). Moral
stages and moral orientations in real-life and hypothetical dilemmas. _Child
Development_ , 58, 842-858.

Wallerstein, Judith S., and Blakeslee, S. (1989). _Second chances: Men, women
and children a decade after divorce_. New York: Ticknor  & Fields.

Wang, Margret C., Reynolds, W.C., and Walberg, Herbert J. (Eds.). (1988). _The
handbook of special education: Research and practices_. Oxford, England:
Pergamon.

Waterman, Alan S. (1985). Identity in the context of adolescent psychology. In
Alan S. Waterman (Ed.), _Identity in adolescence: Processes and contents: Vol.
30. New directions in child development_. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Watson, John B. (1967). _Behaviorism_ (rev. ed.). Chicago: University of
Chicago Press. (Original work published 1930).

Werner, Emmy E., and Smith, Ruth S. (1982). _Vulnerable but invincible: A
study of resilient children_. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Werner, Emmy E., and Smith, Ruth S. (1992). _Overcoming the odds: High risk
children from birth to adulthood_. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

Whitbourne, Susan Krauss. (1985a). _The aging body_. New York: Springer-
Verlag.

Whitbourne, Susan Krauss. (1985b). The psychological construction of the life
span. In James E. Birren and K. Warner Schaie (Eds.), _Handbook of the
psychosocial of aging_. (2nd ed.). New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.

Whitbourne, Susan Krauss, Zuschlag, Michael K., Elloit, Lisa B., and Waterman,
Alan S. (1992). Psychosocial development in adulthood: A 22 year sequential
study. _Journal of Personality and Social Psychology_ , 63, 260-271.

Whiting, Beatrice Blyth, and Edward, Carolyn Pope. (1988). _Children of
different worlds: The formation of social behavior_. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

Willis, Sherry L. (1990a). Current issues in cognitive training research. In
Eugene A. Lovelace (Ed.), _Aging and cognition: Mental processes, self-
awareness, and interventions_. North Holland: Elsevier.

Willis, Sherry L. (1990b). Introduction to the special section on cognitive
training in later adulthood. _Development Psychology_ 26, 875-878.

Willis, Sherry L., and Nesselroade, Carolyn S. (1990). Long-term effects of
fluid ability training in old-old age. _Developmental Psychology_ , 26,
905-910.

Wilson, B.L., and Corcoran, T.B. (1988). _Successful secondary schools_. New
York: Falmer Press.

Winger, Gail, Hofmann, Frederick G., and Woods, James H. (1992). _A handbook
on drug an alcohol abuse_. New York: Oxford University Press.

Wolfe, D.A. (1987). _Child Abuse: Implications for child development and
psychopathology_. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Woodhead, Martin. (1991). Psychology and the cultural construction of
"children's needs." In Martin Woodhead, Paul Light, and Ronnie Carr (Eds.),
_Child development in social context: Vol. 3. Growing up in a changing
society_. London: Routledge.

Wrightsman, Lawrence S. (1988). _Personality development in adulthood_.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Yost, J. Kelley, and Mines, Robert A. (1985). Stress and alcoholism. In Thomas
E. Bratter and Gary G. Forrest (Eds.), _Alcoholism and substance abuse:
Strategies for clinical intervention_. New York: The Free Press.

**COURSE SECTION INFORMATION

** **

Course Number:** HDAL 5230

**

Course Title:** Advanced Developmental Psychology

**

Credit Hours:** Three (3)

**

Semester:** Spring 2000

**

Instructor:**

**

Office Number:

** **

Telephone:

** **

Office Hours:**

**

Course Management and Evaluation Policies:**

**

Class Meeting Schedule:

**





*Approved by the Council of Chairs at the September 17, 1992 Meeting.

