Fitchburg State College Early Childhood Education EDUC 4050 Senior Seminar in
Early Childhood

Credit: 4.0  
PREREQUISITES:   Twenty credits of Early Childhood Education or permission of
instructor.

INSTRUCTOR:  
PHONE:  
OFFICE HOURS:  


**CATALOG DESCRIPTION:**  
This course covers an examination of the historical perspectives and
philosophical orientations in the field of early childhood education. Specific
attention is given to an analysis of current issues and programs. Practicum
experiences will be required. Required of Early Childhood majors.  
    
**TEXTS:** TBA

**PRE-PRACTICUM REQUIREMENTS:**

_HOURS:  _ 30 hrs.

_SITE:_   Two Early Childhood Education programs of different types, including
at least one program which integrates children with and without identified
special needs.

_DESCRIPTION OF ACTIVITIES:_  
 Each student will prepare a framework to organize and analyze information
s/he will gather during  visits to three different  early childhood education
programs, arrange for and execute the visits, and prepare a written report of
each program. While visiting each program for the equivalent of one full
service day, the student will observe a representative sample of the program's
services, interview program personnel who serve critical functions, and
collect written descriptions of the program.  
    
**STUDENT LEARNING OBJECTIVES:**

The student will:

1\. Analyze and think critically about teaching and learning .  NAEYC 2.1.7,
5.1  
 [SLA # 1,3,4,5,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14]

2\. Communicate clearly, understandably, and sensitively; listening and
interacting with colleagues as they organize and share information and
insights. NAEYC 2.1.7 [SLA # 3,4,5,6,12,13 ]

3\. Review historical highlights of early childhood education and consider
current educational practices and issues from an historical perspective. NAYEC
2.1, 2.1.6, 2.2, 2.4.5, 5.2, 5.3,  
 5.4, 5.5, 5.7 [SLA # 1,3,5,12,13,14 ]

4\. Review a variety of philosophical perspectives, considering implications
of various assumptions for selection of educational goals and applications.
NAEYC 2.1, 2.1.6,2.1.7 2.2, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.7  [SLA #
1,3,5,7,8,9,10,12,13,14]

5\. Consider the rationale for an inclusive educational environment structured
to serve all learners equitably and responsibly, a school where everyone
belongs and individual educational needs are met in a mutually responsive and
supportive environment. NAEYC 2.1.6, 2.2, 2.4.5, 5.2, 5.3  
  [SLA # 1,3,4,5,7,8]

6\. Reflect on their own educational decisions and present assumptions which
have influenced these decisions.  NAEYC 5.1, 5.5, 5.7, 6.4 [SLA # 4,5,9,10]

7\. Review principles of evaluation and research which are important for early
childhood teachers as decision-makers. NAEYC 2.1, 2.1.7, 5.1, 5.5, 6.4 [SLA #
1,4,5,7,8,11,12,13,14]

8\. Consider relevant legislation and their own legal and moral responsibility
as members of the teaching profession.  NAEYC 2.4.5, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.7,
6.4 [SLA # 1,3,4,5,7,8]

9\. Review, extend, and refine library search skills. NAEYC 5.5 [SLA #
2,12,14]  


**TECHNOLOGY FOCUS:**

 Students will have access to the Mac Laboratory in order to search the
Internet, complete homework assignments and explore various topics and issues
related to Early Childhood Education.

**COURSE CONTENT:**

A. Analysis of Early Childhood Education Programs  
 1\. Child Care Forms  
 2\. Child Care Quality  
 3\. Frameworks for Analysis

B. Historical Perspectives in Education  
 1\. Highlights of the historical roots of education in the U.S.  
 2\. Historical perspectives for Early Childhood Education  
 3\. The history of selected federal and state legislative decisions and its
impact upon students, educators, and schooling in the U.S.  
 4\. Educational decisions for the future; Lessons of our history

C. Philosophical Assumptions and Educational Decisions  
 1\. Highlights of historically significant philosophical perspectives  
 2\. Implications of various philosophical assumptions for choice of
educational goals and practices.  
 3\. Reflective Educators: Examining the relationships among our assumptions,
goals, and practices

D. Models of Early Childhood Education  
  1\. Historical models and approaches: selected examples  
 2\. Current models and approaches: selected examples  
 3  Historical, philosophical, psychological, and sociological aspects of
selected models

E. Principles of Educational Research and Evaluation  
 1\. The Scientific Method  
 2\. Educational decision-making - research and evaluation  
 3.  Understanding published research reports 

F. Educational Issues  
 1\. Fundamental educational issues: selected examples  
 2\. Current educational issues: selected examples  
 3\. Current issues and major challenges in Early Childhood Education:
selected examples  


**PRIMARY INSTRUCTIONAL STRATEGIES**

__x__ Lecture  
_____ Laboratory  
__x__ Discussion/Questioning  
__x__ Pre-Practicum  
_____ Viewing/Listening/Answering  
_____ Role playing/simulation  
__x__ Problem finding/solving  
__x__ Independent learning  
_____ Discovery  
_____ Field Trips  
_____ Interviewing  
__x__ Computer applications  
__x__ Collaborative learning groups  
_____ Data Collection  
__x__ Reflective response  
__x__ Other: Debate

**STUDENT LEARNING ACTIVITIES**

The student will:

1\. Read primary and secondary professional sources, listen, and observe
carefully  (i.e.: identify and formulate questions; organize thoughts on
issues and topics; integrate material from readings, lectures, discussions,
and program visit project; note similarities and differences of information
from different sources) for the purpose of acquiring information and thinking
critically about educational history, philosophy, research principles, models,
and issues.  NAEYC #2.1.7,  2.1,  2.1.6,  2.2. 2.4.5, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5,
5.7 [SLO #1,3,4,5,7,8 ]

2\. Participate in a library search skills instruction session and practice
the skills presented.  
 NAEYC#5.5 [SLO #9 ]

3\. Present main ideas and thought-provoking questions in written form  for
each assigned reading.  
 NAEYC# 2.1.7,5.1,2.1,2.1.6,2.2,2.4.5,5.2,5.3.5.4,5.5,5.7,6.6 [SLO
#1,2,3,4,5,8 ]  
    
4\. Prepare written "issue analysis reports"  for selected issues prior to
class debates. NAEYC# 2.2, 2.4. 5, 2.1.6,  2.1.7,  5.1,  5.2,  5.3, 6.4 [SLO #
1,2,5,6,7,8 ]

5\. Share ideas and questions from readings and experiences during large and
small group topic discussions and issue debates. NAEYC#2.1, 2.1.6, 2.1.7, 2.2,
2.4.5, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.5, 5.7, 6.4 [SLO # 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8]

6\. Facilitate small group discussions of specific topics.NAEYC# 2.1.7 [SLO
#2]

7\. Develop a framework for analyzing Early Childhood Education programs.  
       NAEYC#  2.1.6, 2.1.7, 2.2, 2.4.5, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3,5.4, 6.4 [SLO #1.4.5.7.8 ] 

8\. Visit, analyze, and prepare a written report of each Early Childhood
Education program visited.  
 NAEYC#. 2.1.6,  2.1.7, 2.2,  2.4.5, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 6.4  [SLO #
1,4,5,7,8]

9\. Describe a specific educational decision in writing, determine possible
alternative decisions, and reflect upon the rationale for each alternative.
NAEYC# 2.1.6, 2.1.7, 5.1, 5.5, 6.4 [SLO #1,4,6 ]

10\. Present in writing five personal assumptions which guide his/her
decisions as an educator.  
 NAEYC# 2.1.6, 2.1.7, 5.1, 5.5, 6.4 [SLO #1,4,6 ]

11\. Critique a published report of an educational research project.
NAEYC#2.1, 2.1.7, 5.1, 5.5,6.4.[SLO #1,7]

12\. Working  with a team , study a selected educational issue and prepare for
an oral debate or panel presentation of the issue which will engage the whole
class as an active audience.  
 NAEYC#  2.1.6,  2.1.7, 2.2, 2.4. 5, 5.1,  5.2,  5.3, 5.5, 6.4 [SLO #
1,2,3,4,7,9]  
    
13\. Engage in a debate or panel discussion of an educational issue,
presenting evidence orally to support one side of the issue. NAEYC#  2.1.6,
2.1.7, 2.2, 2.4. 5, 5.1,  5.2,  5.3, 5.5, 6.4  [SLO # 1,2,3,4,7]

14\. Submit an individual written presentation  which provides documented
discussion of each side of the debated issue. NAEYC# 2.1.6,  2.1.7, 2.2, 2.4.
5,  5.1,  5.2,  5.3, 5.5, 6.4  [SLO # 1,3,4,7,9]

    
**METHODS OF STUDENT EVALUATION   (See Appendix B: Course Evaluation)**

The degree to which a student has achieved the course objectives will be
determined by the:

1.  number of program visits completed and the quality of oral and written reports submitted. 

2\. participation as scheduled in the assigned team debate or panel discussion
and the quality of the team's presentation.

3\. quality and timeliness of individually prepared written presentation of
the debated issue.

4\. quantity of class sessions attended and the quantity and quality
(thoughtfulness) of oral contributions to discussions within small and large
groups.

5\. quantity, quality, and timeliness of written preparations for class
discussions ( e.g., written responses to assigned readings).

6\. quality of thought reflected in the final statement of personal
philosophical assumptions.  


**Selected References**

Allen,K.E. (1992). The exceptional child: Mainstreaming in early childhood
education. (2nd ed.). Albany, N.Y.: Delmar.

Banks, J.A. and Banks, C.M. (Eds.) (1993). Multicultural Education: Issues and
Perspectives (2nd ed). Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon.

Berres, M. & Knoblock, P. (Eds.) (1987). Program models for mainstreaming:
Integrating students with moderate to severe disabilities. Rockville, MD:
Aspen Publishers.

Bradekamp, S. (Ed.) (1987). Developmentally appropriate practice in early
childhood programs serving children from birth through age 8: Expanded
edition. Washington, D.C.: NAEYC.

Brooks, J.G. & Brooks, M.G. (1993). In search of understanding: the case for
constructivist classrrooms. Alexandria, VA: ASCD.

Children¨ªs Defense Fund. (1990). Children 1990. Washington, D.C.: Children¨ªs
Defense Fund.

Cobb, P., Wood,T., and Yackel, E.(1990). Classrooms as learning environments
for teachers and researchers. In R. Davis, C. Maehr, and N. Noddings (Eds.)
Constructivist views on the teaching and learning of mathematics  (pp.
125-146). Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

*Crichlow, W., Goodwin, S., Shakes, G., & Swartz, E. (1990). Multicultural ways of knowing: Implications for practice. Journal of Education, 172. pp. 102-116. 

*Cummins, J. (1986). Empowering minority students: A framework for intervention. Harvard Educational Review, 56(1). pp. 18-25. 

Eisenhart, M., Behm, L., and Romagnano, L. (1991). Learning to teach:
Developing expertise or rite of passage?. Journal of education for teaching
17:51-71.

Eisenhart, M. and Borko, H. (1993). Designing classroom research: Themes,
issues, and struggles. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.

Elliott, J. (1990). Teachers as researchers: Implications for supervision and
for teacher education. Teaching and teacher education 6(1): 1-26.

Feeney, S., & Kipnis, K. (1989). The National Association for the Education of
Young Children Code of ethical conduct and statement of commitment, Young
Children, 45(1) 24-29.

Gardner, H. (1991). The unschooled mind: How children think and how schools
should teach. N.Y.: Basic Books.

Garrison, J. (1986) Some principles of postpositivistic philosophy of science.
Educational researcher 15(9):12-18.

Gartner, A. & Lipsky, D.K. (1987). Beyond special education: Toward a quality
system for all students.Harvard Education Review. 5 (4), 367-395.

Goffin, S.G. (1994). Curriculum models and early childhood education:
Appraising the relationship. N.Y.: Merrill.

Goffin, S.G., & Lombardi, J. (1989).  Speaking out: Early childhood advocacy.
Washington, DC: NAEYC.

Good, T.L. and Brophy, J.E. (1991). Looking in classrooms (5th ed.). N. Y.:
Harper-Collins Publishers, Inc.

Greenwood, G.E. & Parkay, F.W. (1989). Case studies for teacher decision
making. N.Y.: Random House.

Heshusius, L. (1991). Curriculum-based assessment and direct instruction:
Critical reflections of fundamental assumptions. Exceptional Children. 57(4),
315-328.

Heward, W.L. and Cavanaugh, R.A. (1993) Educational equality for students with
disabilities. In J.A. Banks and C.A. McGee Banks (Eds.). Multicultural
education: Issues and perspectives (2nd ed.). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.

Hollins, E.R. & Spencer, K. (1990). Restructuring schools for cultural
inclusion: Changing the schooling process for African American youngsters.
Journal of Education, 172. pp. 93-95.

Hopkins, D.(1985). A teacher¨ªs guide to classroom research. Philadelphia, PA:
Open University Press.

Jackson, P.W. (1990). Life in classrooms. N.Y.: Teachers College Press.

Jenkins, J.R. Pious, C.G., & Jewell, M. (1990). Special education and the
regular education initiative: Basic assumptions.Exceptional Children. 57(5),
454-461.

Jensen, M.A.,& Chevalier, L.W. (1990). Issues and advocacy in early childhood
education. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.

Knight, G.R. (1982). Issues & alternatives in educational philosophy. Berrien
Springs, MI: Andrews University Press.

*Kassler, S.A. (1991). Alternative perspectives on early childhood education. Early Childhood Research Quarterly. 6(2). pp. 183-187. 

Kauchak, D. & Eggen, P. (1993). Learning and teaching: Research-based methods.
(2nd ed.). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.

Lande, J.S., Scarr, S., & Gunzenhauser, N. (Eds.). (1989). Caring for
children: Challenge to America. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

LeCompte, M., Millroy, W., and Preissle, J. (Eds.), (1992). The handbook of
qualitative research in education. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

Levine, D.U. and Lezote, L.W. (1990). Unusually effective schools: A review
and analysis of research and practice. Madison, WI: National Center for
Effective Schools Research and Development.

Massachusetts Board of Education (1992). A focus on integration: Including all
students. Boston, MA: Massachusetts Department of Education.

Meisel, C.J. (1986). Mainstreaming handicapped children: Outcomes,
controversies, and new directions. Hillsdale: Erlbaum.

*Pearmen, E.L., Barnhart, M.W., Huang, A.M. & Mellblom,C. (1992). Educating all students in school: Attitudes and beliefs about inclusion. Education and training in mental retardation. 27. pp. 176-182. 

Sadker, M., Sadker, D., & Long, L. (1993). Gender and educational equality. In
J. A. Banks and C. A.McGee Banks (Eds.)  Multicultural education: Issues and
perspectives (2nd ed.). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.

Salisbury, C.L. (1991). Mainstreaming during the early childhood years.
Exceptional Children. (October/November). pp. 146-154.

Schulz J.B. (1993). Teaching students with disabilities in the regular
classroom. In J.A. Banks and C. A. McGee Banks (Eds.). Multicultural
education: Issues and perspectives (2nd ed.). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.

Slavin, R. (1987). Ability grouping and student achievement in elementary
schools: A best-evidence synthesis. Review of Educational Research, 57. pp.
293-336.

Slavin, R., & Madden, N. (1989). What works for students at risk: A research
synthesis. Educational Leadership. 46(5), 4-13.

Spady, W.G., & Marshall, K.J. (1991). Beyond traditional outcome-based
education.  Educational Leadership. 49(2),67-72.  
Standards for Quality Programming for Young Children: Early Childhood
Education and the Elementary School Principal. (1990). National Association of
Elementary School Principals, 1615 Duke Street, Alexandria, VA, 22314. (703)
684-3345.

Stainback, W., Stainback, S., & Wilkinson, A. (1992). Encouraging peer
supports and friendships. Teaching Exceptional Children. 24(2),6-11.

Stainback, W., & Stainback, S(Eds). (1990). Support networks for inclusive
schooling: Interdependent integrated education. Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes
Publishing Co.

Stainback, S., Stainback W., & Forest, M. (1989). Educating all students in
the mainstream of regular education. Baltimore, MD: Paul H Brookes Publishing
Co

Tharp, R. and Gallimore, R. (1988). Rousing minds to life: Teaching, learning,
and schooling in social context. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Tobin, J.J., Wu, D.Y.H., and Davidson, D.H. (1989). Preschool in three
cultures: Japan, China, and the United States. New Haven: Yale University
Press.  
Tower, C. (1987). How schools can help combat child abuse and neglect. (2nd
ed.). NEA.

Wang, M. C., Reynolds, M. C., & Walberg, H.J. (1991). Handbook of Special
Education: Research and practices.  N.Y: Pergamon Press.

Warger, C. (1988). A resource guide to public school early childhoood
programs. Alexandria, VA: ASCD.  
Weikart, D. & Schweinhart, L. (1993). Significant benefits: The High Scope
Perry Preschool study through age 27. Ypsilanti, Michigan: Educational
Research Foundation.

Wittrock, M.C.(Ed.), (1986). Handbook of research on teaching (3rd ed.). N.Y.:
Macmillan.  
Zigler, E., & Finn-Stevenson, M. (1992). Children: Development and social
issues. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole Publishing Company.

Zigler, E. F., and Lang, M.E. (1990). Child care choices: Balancing the needs
of children, families and society. New York: Free Press.

**APPENDICES**

A. Course Requirements............................................... p. 10

B. Student Tasks and Evaluation...................................... p. 11

C. Guidelines and Format for Debate (Oral and Written Presentation).. p. 12-15

D. "Issue Analysis Report" Format and Guidelines .....................p. 16-17

E. Calendar ..........................................................p. 18-19

F. Debate Preference Survey ..........................................p. 20  


**APPENDIX A: COURSE REQUIREMENTS**

_1\. Attendance Policy:_  
    
 Attendance is mandatory for all class sessions and pre-practicum visit
commitments. No cuts are permitted for class sessions.

_2\. Professional Requirements:_  
    
      Students are expected to participate with a collegial spirit and professional manner in class activities and discussions, including debate team preparations for issue presentation. Each student is responsible for the timely fulfillment of all assigned tasks. A major responsibility of each student is preparation for, and regular participation in, class discussion and activities. 

      A professional attitude, commitment and demeanor is required during each pre-practicum contact. The student is absolutely obligated to fulfill any commitment that has been made to families, schools, or agencies and to operate in a professionally responsible manner at all times. 

_3\. Education Department Grading and Evaluation Policy:_

 a. The Education Department faculty considers demonstration of competence in
written and oral communication a necessary part of all teacher education
courses and practica. Therefore, the student's use of spelling, grammar and
all other aspects of written and oral communications, as well as abilities to
demonstrate competence in all other certification standards as appropriate to
the requirements of each course, are considered in the Department's grading
and evaluation policy.

 b. For each course offered by the Education Department, unless the student
satisfactorily completes the course pre-practicum as designated in the
syllabus, the student will not receive a course grade above 1.0, regardless of
the arithmetic average of the grades for portions completed.

 For Senior Seminar in Early Childhood no grade above a "0" or "Inc" will be
given to a student who fails to complete any of the course requirements,
regardless of the arithmetic average of the grades for portions completed.  


**APPENDIX B: STUDENT TASKS AND EVALUATION**

PRACTICUM (30%)

\-- Preparation, execution, and reporting of three whole-day visits (your
class schedule may require six half-day visits) to three different types of
early childhood education programs. Include at least one program that
integrates children with and without identified special needs.  
\-- Analyze each program using a framework developed through class
participation. (two or three pages per program)  
\-- Present each program orally and in writing according to course schedule.

SPECIFIC ISSUE ANALYSIS AND DEBATE -- personal and team responsibility (30%):

\-- Focus on a relevant issue in the field of education. Consider historical,
philosophical, empirical, programmatic aspects of the issue. Include
information from text, library research, interviews with practitioners,
parents, and children, as well as personal experience.  
\-- Oral presentation format: individual reports, debate teams, and panel
discussions.  
\-- Written presentation format: clear, complete, concise and well documented
statement of issue, pro and con positions, main points of debate, and relevant
supporting information. (Final written presentation to be submitted within one
week after the oral presentation for full credit.)

CONTRIBUTION TO DISCUSSION IN EACH CLASS AND PREPARATION FOR DISCUSSION (30%):

\-- Readings as designated in syllabus: Submit one 8 1/2 x 11 page for each
reading; on front summarize 5-10 ideas you plan to share from reading during
class discussion; on back list 2 thought provoking questions that you can use
to facilitate discussion about the reading.

\-- Issue analysis reports as designated in syllabus

\-- Thoughtful oral contribution during large and small group topic
discussions.

\-- Lead small group discussion of specific topics.

FINAL EXAM:  Personal statement of your philosophy of education (10%)

* * *

* * *

**[Early Childhood Education Syllabi](child)**

