![POSITION VACANCIES](/News/kulama/images/position.vacancies.gif)  
[Professional vacancies archive](/news/job.vacancies.html)

The University of Hawai`i is an equal opportunity/affirmative action
institution. All qualified applicants will be considered, regardless of race,
sex, age, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, disability, marital
status, arrest and court record, sexual orientation or status as a disabled
veteran or veteran of the Vietnam era. Women, members of minority groups,
veterans and persons with disabilities are encouraged to apply. (Persons with
hearing disabilities may call 1-711 or 643-8833.) Applicants with hearing or
speech impairments may use the TDD relay service by calling 1-711.

Employment is contingent on satisfying employment eligibility verification
requirements of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986. Appointments
to positions are subject to statutory residency requirements, campus
recruitment guidelines and the collective bargaining agreement. APT applicants
with re-employment rights or priority status are responsible for informing the
recruiting unit, which will verify eligibility with the employing unit as
provided by the BU 08 contract.

Official transcripts must have the official seal of and be mailed directly
from the degree-granting institution to the address indicated.

Civil Service vacancy announcements are available for viewing at the Office of
Human Resources, Post Office Building, UHM campus, Monday-Friday, 7:45
a.m.-4:30 p.m. and via the OHR home page at
[www.hawaii.edu/dhmr/ohr/](http://www.hawaii.edu/dhmr/ohr/#EMPLOYMENT).

* * *

Faculty Positions

**PSYCHIATRY INSTRUCTOR** , Class Code 99220, Position No. 088310T. Pay Range
I2, University of Hawai`i School of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, 100%
FTE, 11-month, federally funded, temporary, non-tenurable, to begin
approximately 08/16 pending position clearance and funding availability, and
is annually renewable dependent on funding and/or performance. **Duties:**
Develop and teach HIV/AIDS related programs for health and human services
professionals on O`ahu and neighbor islands. **Minimum Qualifications:**
Master's degree in mental health/health discipline, teaching/clinical
experience with HIV/AIDS. **Desirable Qualifications:** Local teaching
experience, cultural sensitivity, computer literacy, and knowledge of local
HIV service community. **Minimum Annual Salary:** $33,312. Salary commensurate
with qualifications and experience. Send CV and 3 letters of recommendation to
Jane A. Waldron, PhD, Director, AIDS Education Project, Department of
Psychiatry, 1319 Punahou Street, #633, Honolulu, HI 96826. **Closing Date:**
07/07. Continuous recruitment until position is filled; however, only
applications postmarked by 07/07/99 are assured of receiving full
consideration.

**LECTURERS IN MUSIC THEORY AND CONTEMPORARY ENSEMBLE** , UH Manoa, Dept. Of
Music. Subject to availability of funding and enrollment, part-time non-
tenurable to begin fall 1999. **Duties: for Music Theory:** teach
undergraduate theory courses as assigned; **for Contemporary Ensemble:**
performing and/or directing contemporary music. Recruitment of students for
this ensemble. **Minimum Qualifications:** **for Music Theory:** Master's
degree in music, with strong background in music theory; **for Contemporary
Ensemble:** Master's degree in music; knowledge of contemporary repertoire.
**Desirable Qualifications:** **for Music Theory:** Evidence of successful
teaching. Degree in music theory or composition. **for Contemporary
Ensemble:** College teaching experience in contemporary music, good
organizational skills. **Minimum Salary:** $1,000 per credit hour. Submit
resume, including the names, addresses and phone numbers of three references
to Chairperson, Music Department, University of Hawai`i at Manoa, 2411 Dole
Street, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date:** Continuous recruitment.

**INSTRUCTOR, CC (Cooperative Education Coordinator)** , Position No. 86812T,
Honolulu CC, full-time, 9-month, non-tenurial, possible renewal, general
funds, temporary, to begin approximately 08/01-06/30/00, pending position
clearance and availability of funds. **Duties:** To teach cooperative
education classes and to coordinate cooperative education experiences,
including developing work sites, overseeing training agreements, managing
records, and complying with laws and regulations pertaining to student
employment and internships. Travel throughout O`ahu is required; work under
the guidance of colleagues to develop an understanding of student needs in
discipline or area of primary responsibility; begin to provide college and
community service; and participate in professional and self-development
activities. Duties and responsibilities may include instructional assignments
involving distance education. Maintain at least one office hour per day Monday
through Friday. Possible evening, weekend, and off-campus assignments.
**Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree in any field or bachelor's in any
field plus 3 years related work experience or associate degree in any field
plus 5 years related work experience or 15 college credits plus 7 years
related work experience including training. **Desirable Qualifications:**
familiarity with occupational education/community college programs; job
placement experience; ability to follow complex oral and written instructions;
ability to maintain positive relations with faculty, students and employers;
computer knowledge and skills (word processing, database, Web page/Internet);
teaching experience at the community college level; knowledge of Total Quality
Management (TQM) principles and practices; willingness to learn; willingness
to work flexible hours. **Pay Range:** C2; minimum $2,669/monthly. **To
Apply:** Send community college application for faculty or
executive/managerial positions (CC Personnel Form 27A) and transcript(s)
verifying minimum educational qualifications (official or copy) to Karen
Kelly, Assistant Dean, Honolulu CC, 874 Dillingham Blvd., Honolulu, HI.,
96817. An incomplete or late application will not be considered. Additional
documentation such as a letter of application describing how the applicant
meets the minimum qualifications and desirable qualifications in relation to
stated duties is welcome. Materials submitted will not be returned. If
selected for the position, appointment is contingent upon verification of all
minimum qualifications and any additional qualifications used to justify an
above minimum salary, including official transcript(s), license(s),
certificate(s) and work experience documentation. All minimum qualifications
must be met by effective date of hire. **Closing Date:** 07/07. **Inquiries:**
845-9141.

**LECTURER IN BUSINESS LAW** , Leeward CC, fall 1999, part-time, for lecturer
applicant pool. Non-tenurial, pending availability of funds and actual
staffing requirements. May be for Leeward CC day, evening or weekend offerings
on- and off-campus. **Duties:** Teach assigned courses in the discipline;
maintain minimum of one office hour per week for each course taught; prepare
course syllabus and reports related to teaching and student progress; work
under supervision of discipline coordinator/division chairperson in
integrating teaching efforts with other instructors in the discipline area.
Duties and responsibilities may include work with multi- media presentations
and distance education instruction. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's in
business administration or master's in accountancy with course work in
business law or law degree. All minimum qualifications must be met by the
effective date of appointment. **Desirable Qualifications:** Teaching
experience at community college level. Demonstrated ability to work with adult
learners. Familiarity with competency-based instruction and behavioral
objectives. Demonstrated ability to communicate clearly. **Pay Range:**
$1,000/minimum per credit hour. **To Apply:** Submit to Human Resources
Office, Leeward CC, 96-045 Ala Ike, Pearl City, HI 96782: 1) Faculty or
Executive/Managerial (CC Personnel Form 27A) application form, 2) graduate and
undergraduate transcript(s) showing degrees and course work to date
appropriate to the position (transcript copies are acceptable; however,
official transcripts will be required at the time of hire), 3) a brief one-
page statement outlining how you meet the minimum and desirable
qualifications, 4) three letters of recommendation (optional) attesting to job
performance and personal character, and 5) resume (optional). Separate
documents and application materials must be submitted for each position.
Original signature required on application. Failure to submit all required
documents shall deem an application to be incomplete. **Closing Date:**
Continuous recruitment until needs are met. **Inquiries:** 455-0326. All
requested documents and information become the property of the College.
Employment offer is contingent upon satisfying the employment eligibility
verification requirement of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986.

**INSTRUCTOR (Human Services)** ; position number 87154, Maui CC, half-time,
9-month, non-tennure leading, beginning approximately 08/99, pending position
clearance, availability of funding and actual staffing requirements.
**Duties:** Plan, organize, and teach courses in education (including early
childhood), human development and human services; assist in coordinating
program with community agencies; develop courses needed to keep human services
curriculum appropriate for agency requirements; advise students and
participate in faculty and administrative committees and in-service training.
Work independently and collaboratively with colleagues to identify; plan,
develop, and implement learning strategies to meet student, special
population, college, and community needs. Evening, weekend, television,
distance education and off-campus (i.e Moloka`i, Lana`i, Hana) classes may be
assigned as part of regular work load. Perform related duties as asigned.
**Minimum Qualifications:** Master's in early childhood education, human
services or related field or bachelor's in early childhood education, human
services or related field and 3 years of experience. All minimum
qualifications must be met by the effective date of appointment. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Ability to do Child Development Associate Certificate (CDA)
training; experience in community college teaching including non-traditional
modes; experience in teaching and administering early childhood programs;
community agency experience; experience in program development and in
supervising work practicum students. Knowledge of emergent curriculum: Reggio
and other innovative approaches to early childhood education. Demonstrated
ability to communicate clearly verbally and in writing; demonstrated ability
to work with people from diverse cultural backgrounds and diverse abilities.
**Pay Range:** Minimum Annual Salary: $32,028. **To Apply:** Submit by
**Closing Date** a completed Community College faculty or executive/managerial
application form (CC Personnel form 27A), official graduate and undergraduate
transcripts showing degree and couse work to date appropriate to the position
(transcript copies are acceptable; however, official transcripts sent directly
to Maui CC from the institution granting credit will be required at the time
of hire), resume, one to three page discussion of how you meet the desirable
qualifications and three letters of recommendation attesting to job
performance and personal character. All requested documents and information
must be received by the **Closing Date** and become the property of the
college. **Closing Date:** 07/20. **Inquiries:** (808) 984-3234 or e-mail
[flo.wiger@mauicc.hawaii.edu](mailto:flo.wiger@mauicc.hawaii.edu). E-mail and
FAX applications are not accepted.

**INSTRUCTOR (Counselor)** , University Center on Maui, Position No. 88017,
Maui CC, temporary, NTE 6/30/2000; annually renewable with possible conversion
to permanent, non-tenurable, 11-month, beginning approximately 06/99, pending
position clearance and availability of funds. **Duties:** Under the direction
of the dean of students, with input from the University of Hawai`i center
director, identifies, plans, develops, implements, evaluates, and modifies
comprehensive and systematic strategies to recruit students, and provide
academic, career, and personal counseling to a wide range of students. Duties
include but are not limited to: developing, executing and modifying a
recruitment plan; academic and educational planning; career and life planning;
personal counseling; graduation and transcript evaluation; disseminating
general financial aid information and academic progress verification. Provides
liaison and resource support for all University of Hawai`i center
baccalaureate and graduate distance learning programs, including provision of
local student support services and liaison work with Maui CC Student Services.
Assist in the planning, review, and publicity of program and course offerings.
Work with the Maui CC registrar and other campus registrars to deliver
comprehensive and systematic registration and other Admissions and Records
services. Conduct orientations for center students and faculty. Assist in on-
going needs assessments and long-range planning activities for delivery of
baccalaureate and graduate degree programs for Maui County residents. Provide
general information regarding the center's brokered programs' admissions
procedures to the public at large. Compile, prepare, report and interpret data
on student demographic, enrollment, retention, graduation, and other variables
to describe and assess the center's student population. Assist in the
development of grant proposals and reports. Proctor examinations. Assist with
planning and execution of commencement ceremonies. Outreach, evening and
weekend responsibilities will be assigned as part of the workload. New and
changing responsibilities reflective of programmatic needs may be assigned.
**Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree in counseling and guidance,
counseling psychology, college student personnel services, human resources (to
include both CTAHR and personnel); or bachelor's degree with three years of
professional work experience in counseling and guidance, counseling
psychology, college student personnel services, human resources (to include
both CTAHR and personnel) or related field. **Desirable Qualifications:**
Demonstrated ability to provide academic, career, life and personal counseling
and other educational services to students pursuing higher education programs.
Familiarity with baccalaureate and graduate requirements as well as the
objectives of distance learning programs. Experience in program planning,
execution, and evaluation. Ability to work with students, faculty, staff,
administrators and the community. Experience in working with a computerized
information management system. **Pay Range:** C2A, minimum $3,122/month,
commensurate with qualifications and experience. **To Apply:** Submit by
**Closing Date** a completed Community College faculty application form (CC
Personnel Form 27A), resume, official graduate and undergraduate transcript(s)
showing degrees and course work to date appropriate to the position
(transcript copies are acceptable, however, official transcripts sent directly
to Maui CC from institution granting credit will be required at the time of
hire); three letters of recommendation attesting to job performance and
personal character and resume to the Dean of Student Services, Maui Community
College, 310 Kaahumanu Avenue, Kahului, HI 96732. An incomplete application
will not be considered and documents submitted will not be returned. All
minimum qualifications must be met by the effective date of appointment.
**Closing Date:** 07/07. **Inquiries:** (808) 984-3268.

**INSTRUCTOR (Information And Computer Science)** ; position #82660, Maui CC,
full-time, 9-month, tenure leading, beginning approximately 08/99, pending
position clearance, availability of funding, and actual staffing requirements.
**Duties:** Teach a range of computer science courses. Work independently and
collaboratively with colleagues to identify, plan, develop, and implement
learning strategies to meet student, special population, college, and
community needs. Evening, weekend, television, distance education, and off-
campus (i.e. Moloka`i, Lana`i, Hana) classes may be assigned as part of the
regular work load. Provide academic support to students (i.e. advising and
counseling). Provide college and community service. Participate in
professional development activities. Perform related duties as assigned.
**Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree in information and computer
science or related field or bachelor's degree in information and computer
science or related field and three (3) years related work experience. All
minimum qualifications must be met by the effective date of appointment. If no
qualified applicants available other will be considered on an acting bases.
**Desirable Qualifications:** Course work and/or experience using good
programming principles and practice as well as the newer programming
languages. Work experience in business, government, industry and/or non-profit
organizations, requiring practical application of academic skills. Course work
and/or experience with networking and data communications working theory and
practice. Knowledge through course work and/or experience of educational
technology, distance education, and alternative educational delivery systems.
Demonstrated ability to communicate clearly both verbally and in writing.
Teaching experience, preferably at post secondary level, in non-traditional
modes and with attention to learning outcomes. Record of service to the
community. Demonstrated ability to work with people from diverse cultural
backgrounds and with diverse abilities. **Pay Range:** Minimum Annual Salary:
$32,028. **To Apply:** Submit by Closing Date 1) a completed Community College
Faculty or Executive/Managerial application form (CC Personnel form 27A), 2)
official graduate and undergraduate transcripts showing degree and course work
to date appropriate to the position (transcript copies are acceptable;
however, official transcripts sent directly to Maui C C from institution
granting credit will be required at the time of hire), 3) resume, 4) a one to
three page discussion of how you meet the desirable qualifications and 5)
three letters of recommendation attesting to job performance and personal
character. All requested documents and information must be received by the
closing date and will become the property of the college. Mail to: Dean of
Instruction, Maui Community College, 310 Ka`ahumanu Avenue, Kahului, HI 96732.
**Closing Date** : 07/20. **Inquiries:** 984-3234 or e-mail
[flo.wiger@mauicc.hawaii.edu](mailto:flo.wiger@mauicc.hawaii.edu). E-mail and
fax applications are not accepted.

**INSTRUCTOR IN BOTANY** , Position No. 83487, Windward CC, beginning 08/99,
full-time tenurial, pending position clearance and availability of funds.
**Duties:** Under general supervision, teach college level courses in botany,
ethnobotany, and microbiology; contribute to instruction in general biology;
may also involve teaching horticulture classes offered in the Agricultural
Technology Program; manage a Tropical Plant and Orchid Identification
Facility; perform assigned related duties, including preparing and revising
course outlines, developing curriculum, participating in departmental,
college, and/or university committees, advising students, assisting with
campus student activities, and teaching community service and in-service
training courses; participate in and contribute to Department of Natural
Science special programs and activities such as Polynesian Voyaging, the
Marine Option Program, Hoa`aina RS/GIS Center, and the Hawai`i Space Grant
Consortium Program; coordinate with the science laboratory technician the
acquiring and maintaining of equipment, supplies, and organisms used for
biological science instruction; be able to independently plan, organize and
carry out instructional and non-instructional assignments; maintain office
hours. Duties may require teaching evenings and Saturdays and may include
instructional assignments involving distance education. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Master's degree in a biological science with 18 graduate
level credits in plant science. **Desirable Qualifications:** Teaching
experience in botany, ethnobotany, microbiology, and/or horticulture; specific
knowledge of Asian, Pacific, especially Hawaiian, ethnobotany; knowledge of
tropical plant identification; knowledge of biotechnology applications (e.g.,
plant tissue culture, cytogenetics, etc.) for biological science instruction;
knowledge of regulations and procedures for the acquisition and culture of
organisms used for biology instruction; knowledge of community colleges, their
mission and community college students; ability to work with students, peers
and administrative staff; experience with Polynesian voyaging related
education activities; effective oral and written communication skills. **Pay
Range:** C2; minimum $2,669/mo. **To Apply:** Submit the following to the Dean
of Instruction, Windward CC, 45-720 Kea`ahala Road, Kane`ohe, HI 96744: 1)
Faculty or Executive/Managerial Application Form (CC Personnel Form 27A), 2)
transcripts (copies are acceptable, however, official transcripts will be
required prior to hiring) or list of courses taken, 3) vitae and 4) three (3)
letters of recommendation. All requested materials must be postmarked by the
closing date and will not be returned. **Closing Date** : 06/22. **Inquires:**
235- 7424.

**INSTRUCTOR IN E-COMMERCE** , Position No.082326, Leeward CC, full-time,
9-month, tenurial, general funds, beginning fall 1999, pending position
clearance, availability of funds, and actual staffing requirements. May be for
Leeward CC day, evening, or weekend offerings on- and off-campus. **Duties:**
Under general supervision teach range of college-level business and
electronic-commerce courses as well as other related courses which may be
developed, and perform related work as assigned. Related work activities
include, but are not limited to, advising and counseling students, assisting
in campus-related student activities; participating in faculty/administrative
committees, community service and in-service training; maintaining an approved
program of professional self-improvement, collecting data and preparing
reports, preparing/ adapting/revising course objectives; independently
planning, organizing, and carrying out instructional and non-instructional
assignments. Will include instructional assignments involving distance
education and Web course planning, development, delivery and evaluation.
**Minimum Qualifications:** Master's in information and computer science; or
Master's in business with coursework in business computer applicaitons; or
master's in education technology with course work in computer applications; or
bachelor's in information and computer science and three years related work
experience; or bachelor's in business with coursework in business computer
applications and 3 years related work experience. Minimum qualifications must
be met by the effective date of appointment. **Desirable Qualifications:**
Academic background and teaching experience especially in business; knowledge
of Web site design (e.g., typography, layout, color, aesthetics); demonstrated
ability in database design, development and management for Web interface;
ability to program in HTML, Java, Visual Basic and Active X; knowledge of
networking; ability to develop and maintain an e-commerce site; knowledge of
security protocol management; knowledge of legal aspects and liabilities
(e.g., copyright, privacy, intellectual property rights); demonstrated ability
to develop marketing plans; knowledge of transaction systems; demonstrated
ability in curriculum development; demonstrated ability to communicate
effectively; demonstrated ability to work with students, faculty, staff,
administration and community on an individual/informal basis. **Pay Range:**
C2; minimum $2,669/month. **To Apply:** Submit to Human Resources Office,
Leeward CC, 96-045 Ala Ike, Pearl City, HI 96782: 1) Faculty or
Executive/Managerial (CC Personnel Form 27A) application form, 2) graduate and
undergraduate transcript(s) showing degrees and course work to date
appropriate to the position (transcript copies are acceptable; however,
official transcripts will be required at the time of hire), 3) a brief one-
page statement outlining how you meet the minimum and desirable
qualifications, 4) three letters of recommendation (optional) attesting to job
performance and personal character and 5) resume (optional). Separate
documents and application materials must be submitted for each position.
Original signature required on application. All requested
documents/information must be postmarked by the closing date and become the
property of the college. Failure to submit all required documents shall deem
an application to be incomplete. **Closing Date** : 07/07. **Inquiries:**
455-0326.

**INSTRUCTOR IN ACCOUNTING** , Position No. 082461, Leeward CC, full-time,
9-month, tenurial, general funds, beginning fall 1999, pending position
clearance, availability of funds, and actual staffing requirements. May be for
Leeward CC day, evening or weekend offerings on- and off-campus. **Duties:**
Under general supervision teach a range of vocational and transfer-level
accounting and computer courses and perform related work as assigned. Related
work activities include, but are not limited to, advising and counseling
students, assisting in campus-related student activities; participating in
faculty/administrative committees, community service, and in-service training;
maintaining an approved program of professional self-improvement, collecting
data and preparing reports, preparing/adapting/revising course objectives;
independently planning, organizing, and carrying out instructional and non-
instructional assignments. May include instructional assignments involving
distance education. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree in accounting
or MBA including 18 credits in accounting (graduate or undergraduate) or
bachelor's degree in accounting and 3 years related work experience in
accounting. Minimum qualifications must be met by the effective date of
appointment. **Desirable Qualifications:** Course work, experience, or
teaching a full range of vocational as well as transfer-level accounting
courses, business computer systems and computer accounting systems as well as
other business applications software (word processing, spreadsheet, etc.);
teaching experience at the community college level; familiarity with
competency-based instruction and behavioral objectives; demonstrated ability
to work with adult learners; demonstrated ability in curriculum development;
demonstrated ability to communicate effectively; demonstrated ability to work
with students on an individual/informal basis. **Pay Range:** C2; minimum
$2,669/month. **To Apply:** Submit to Human Resources Office, Leeward CC,
96-045 Ala Ike, Pearl City, HI 96782: 1) Faculty or Executive/Managerial (CC
Personnel Form 27A) application form, 2) graduate and undergraduate
transcript(s) showing degrees and course work to date appropriate to the
position (transcript copies are acceptable; however, official transcripts will
be required at the time of hire), 3) a brief one-page statement outlining how
you meet the minimum and desirable qualifications, 4) three letters of
recommendation (optional) attesting to job performance and personal character
and 5) resume (optional). Separate documents and application materials must be
submitted for each position. Original signature required on application. All
requested documents/information must be postmarked by the closing date and
become the property of the college. Failure to submit all required documents
shall deem an application to be incomplete. **Closing Date** : 07/07.
**Inquiries:** 455-0326.

**INSTRUCTOR (English Writing)** , Position Nos. 086818V and 086814V, variable
FTE ranging from 50% FTE to full-time, contingent on course offerings and
student demand; non-tenurial, general funds, to begin approximately fall 1999,
pending position clearance, availability of funds, and actual staffing
requirements. May be for Leeward CC day, evening, or weekend offerings on- and
off-campus. **Duties:** Under general supervision, teach composition at the
developmental and college levels and perform related work as assigned. Related
work activities include, but are not limited to, advising and counseling
students, assisting in campus-related student activities; participating in
faculty/administrative committees, community service, and in-service training;
maintaining an approved program of professional self-improvement, collecting
data and preparing reports, preparing/adapting/revising course objectives;
independently planning, organizing, and carrying out instructional and non-
instructional assignments. Duties and responsibilities may include
instructional assignments involving distance education. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Master's in English; or master's in education with writing
specialty; or master's in English as a second language; or master's in
linguistics. (To teach developmental, college freshman composition, business
and/or technical writing.) All minimum qualifications must be met by the
effective date of appointment. **Desirable Qualifications:** Course work,
experience, or training in teaching composition to adult native speakers of
English; course work, experience, or training in teaching English as a second
language to adults; teaching experience at the community college level;
familiarity with competency-based instruction and behavioral objectives;
demonstrated ability to work with adult learners; teaching experience in
developmental and college-level composition; experience with lab-supported
writing instruction; familiarity with computer-assisted instruction and/or
word processing for the teaching of English composition. Demonstrated ability
in curriculum development; demonstrated ability to communicate effectively;
demonstrated ability to work with students on an individual/informal basis.
**Pay Range:** C2; minimum $2,669/month. **To Apply:** Submit to Human
Resources Office, Leeward CC, 96-045 Ala Ike, Pearl City, HI 96782: 1) Faculty
or Executive/Managerial (CC Personnel Form 27A) application form, 2) graduate
and undergraduate transcript(s) showing degrees and course work to date
appropriate to the position (transcript copies are acceptable; however,
official transcripts will be required at the time of hire), 3) a brief one-
page statement outlining how you meet the minimum and desirable
qualifications, 4) three letters of recommendation (optional) attesting to job
performance and personal character and 5) resume (optional). Original
signature required on application. One application may be filed for both
positions. All requested documents/information must be postmarked by the
closing date and become the property of the college. Failure to submit all
required documents shall deem an application to be incomplete. **Closing
Date** : 07/07. **Inquiries:** 455-0326.

**POSTDOCTORAL FELLOW** , UHM Pacific Biomedical Research Center, full time
for one year, to begin 07/99, with renewal dependent upon performance and
availability of funds. **Duties:** Participate in collaborative and
independent experiments on transgenic shrimp relative to gene transformation
efficiency, disease and stress resistance. **Minimum Qualifications:** PhD in
genetics, molecular biology or biotechnology, or an appropriate related
discipline with profound experience in DNA cloning, gene isolation and
characterization. Experience is required in molecular techniques such as
genomic library construction, gene screening, DNA identification and
sequencing, PCR, micro-injection, and electroporation. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Experience with transgene expression and analyses. **Minimum
Annual Stipend:** $30,000, commensurate with experience. **To Apply:** Submit
curriculum vitae and three letters of recommendation to Dr. Piera Sun, Pacific
Biomedical Research Center, University of Hawai`i, 1993 East-West Road,
Honolulu, HI 96822. **Inquiries:** 956-5067 or e-mail
[piera@pbrc.hawaii.edu](mailto:piera@pbrc.hawaii.edu). **Closing Date** :
07/07.

**LECTURERS** , College of Education for fall 1999 and spring 2000, contingent
upon registration and availability of funds. Positions are part-time, non-
tenure for lecturer candidate pool. **Duties:** To teach various undergraduate
or graduate courses in the following areas: elementary or secondary teacher
education including supervision of student teachers, special education, health
education, physical education, athletic training, school administration,
higher education administration, educational foundations and educational
psychology. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's or doctorate degree in
appropriate field. Teaching experience in the appropriate field. **Minimum
Salary:** $1,000 per credit hour. **To Apply** , send letter of application
with curriculum vitae and three work-related references to College of
Education, 1776 University Avenue, Honolulu, HI 96822. Address letter to
appropriate department as follows: Teacher Education & Curriculum Studies--
Elementary or Secondary Program, Special Education, Kinesiology & Leisure
Science, Educational Administration, Educational Foundations, or Educational
Psychology. **Closing Date** : continuous recruitment.

**ASSISTANT RESEARCHER** , position no. 85603T, Hawai`i Institute of
Geophysics & Planetology, School of Ocean & Earth Science & Technology, full-
time, temporary, federal funds, to begin approximately 08/99, subject to
availability of funds. **Duties:** Conduct research on long-range infrasonic
wave propagation in the Central Pacific. Procure land permits and equipment,
and coordinate site surveys. Organize and direct the installation of a CTBT
infrasound array in Hawai`i. **Minimum Qualifications:** PhD in oceanography,
geophysics, physics, or related with research experience on acoustic and
seismic wave propagation. At least three years of post-PhD university or
industrial experience conducting basic and applied research on infrasonic wave
propagation in the atmosphere. **Desirable Qualifications:** Experience in
wave propagation in the atmosphere with a focus on explosion monitoring. Field
experience with the installation of pressure sensors in extreme environments
and expertise in digital signal processing. **Pay Range:** R3, minimum $3,377
per month commensurate with qualifications and experience. **To Apply:**
submit letter of application, curriculum vitae, and the names and contact
information of three references to Dr. Klaus Keil, Director, Hawai`i Institute
of Geophysics  & Planetology, 2525 Correa Road, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing
Date** : 07/07. **Inquiries:** 956-8761.

**ASSISTANT RESEARCHER** , Position #85508T; CTAHR, Dept. of Biosystems
Engineering, 50% time, may be increased to 75% time dependent upon
availability of funds; temporary, federal funds, non-tenure track, to begin
approximately 07/99 for five months, continuation dependent upon availability
of funds. **Duties:** To conduct comparative economic analyses of different
pest management regimes for cabbage production; develop economic model and
linkage to existing biological simulation model; interview farmers on
production costs and practices; prepare technical reports; conduct library
research; and assist investigators with project implementations as required.
**Minimum Qualifications:** PhD in economics, agricultural economics or
related field. Experience in economic analyses and modeling of agricultural
production and resource management; proficiency in using relevant computer
programs for recording and analysis of data; experience in word processing,
spreadsheets, database, mathematical programming and econometrics
applications. **Desirable Qualifications:** Proven ability to conduct research
and publish results. **Minimum Monthly Salary:** $ 1688.50 (50%) R3-1. **To
Apply:** Send cover letter with narrative on your qualifications for the
position, resume, and the names and phone numbers of three work-related
references to: Dept. of Biosystems Engineering, University of Hawai`i at
Manoa, 3050 Maile Way, Gilmore 111, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date** :
07/07 **Inquiries:** to Ping Sun Leung (808) 956-8562. Fax (808) 956-9269.

**ASSISTANT PROFESSOR OF CHEMISTRY** , temporary, Position Number 84852, full-
time, general funds, fall 1999 semester only, non-tenurable, Department of
Chemistry, University of Hawai`i at Manoa. **Duties:** Teach Chemistry
333/333L, Instrumental Analysis/Instrumental Analysis Laboratory; and
Chemistry 161, General Chemistry I. **Minimum Qualifications:** PhD in
chemistry with expertise in the subject matter; university-level teaching
experience. **Desirable Qualifications:** Recent research publications in
instrumental analysis. **Salary:** $17,322 for one semester. Applications:
Send resum e and names & phone numbers of 3 references to E. F. Kiefer, Chair,
Department of Chemistry, University of Hawai`i at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822.
**Closing Date** : 07/07.

**INSTRUCTOR, CC Developmental Studies (Math)** , Position No. 86854, Honolulu
CC, full-time, 11-month, tenurial, general funds, to begin approximately
08/99, pending position clearance and availability of funds. **Duties:** To
instruct students in basic skills and applied math in self-paced open-
entry/open-exit learning; possible assignments to teach other math courses
numbered under 100 only; conduct testing and assessment and develop
individualized plans of learning; recruit, train, and supervise tutors;
develop/modify self-paced learning materials; conduct orientation for incoming
students; collect data and prepare reports; prepare and revise course
objectives; perform related duties as assigned. Work under the guidance of
colleagues to develop an understanding of student needs in discipline or area
of primary responsibility; work independently and with the guidance of
colleagues to develop, select and implement strategies to meet student needs;
begin to provide college and community service; and participate in
professional and self-development activities. Maintain at least one office
hour per day Monday through Friday. Some evening, weekend and off-campus
assignments. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree in math or master's
degree in education with major in math or master's degree in education with
bachelor's degree in math. **Desirable Qualifications:** Some teaching
experience. Teaching basic skills and applied math in a learning center;
developing learning/instrutional materials for self-paced, open-entry/open-
exit programs of learning; assessing academic needs of students and developing
individualized programs of learning; supervising tutors; teaching adults in
multi-cultural setting; evidence of interest in how students learn; evidence
of ability to work cooperatively with people of diverse backgrounds. **Pay
Range:** C2; minimum $3,122/monthly. **To Apply:** Send community college
application for faculty or executive/managerial positions (CC Personnel Form
27A) and transcript(s) verifying minimum educational qualifications (official
or copy) to the Office of the Assistant Dean of Instruction, Honolulu CC, 874
Dillingham Blvd., Honolulu, HI., 96817, ATTN: Arlene Yano. An incomplete or
late application will not be considered. Additional documentation such as a
letter of application describing how the applicant meets the minimum
qualifications and desirable qualifications in relation to stated duties is
welcome. Materials submitted will not be returned. If selected for the
position, appointment is contingent upon verification of all minimum
qualifications and any additional qualifications used to justify an above
minimum salary, including official transcript(s), license(s), certificate(s)
and work experience documentation. All minimum qualifications must be met by
effective date of hire. **Closing Date** : 07/07. **Inquiries:** 845-9141.

**INTERCHANGE COORDINATOR** , International Programs, Outreach College, UH-
Manoa; casual. **Duties:** As assistant to the coordinators of international
programs and under direct supervision of the new intensive courses in English
coordinator, this individual takes on the responsibility of ensuring the
smooth operation of the Interchange program throughout the year. He/she is
responsible for the planning, organization, administration, and development of
the program and all personnel-related matters. In addition, the principle
responsibilities of the position include the integration and coordination of
the program between the teachers and coordinators and of the various
International Programs components. Contact below for full job description.
**Minimum Qualifications:** Bachelor's degree in ESL or related field from an
accredited 4-year institution; one year full-time experience teaching ESL/EFL
to adult learners; familiarity with current theories of second language
instruction, ESL teaching methodology, and second language acquisition;
demonstrated organizational and office management proficiency; experience in
personnel management and demonstrated ability to work professionally with
students and staff; fluent command of spoken and written English; ability to
communicate effectively both in writing and orally with faculty, staff, other
departments, domestic and foreign students and the general public;
demonstrated good clerical skills, organizational skills and attention to
detail; availability to work on weekends or in the evening when necessary.
**Desirable Qualifications:** MA in ESL or related field; experience in ESL
curriculum and program development; experience organizing extra-curricular
events and language-based activities; familiarity with the principles of
foreign student interactive acculturation; experience interviewing, hiring,
and supervising employees; experience in establishing and tracking multi-level
employee schedules; experience establishing and maintaining a productive
office environment; familiarity with UH personnel and fiscal procedures;
familiarity with Mac OS applications. **Pay Range:** $13.50/hour. **To
Apply:** Submit letter of application, resume, and two recent letters of
recommendation to Judy Ensing, New Intensive Courses in English Coordinator,
Outreach College, University of Hawai`i at Manoa, 2500 Dole St., Krauss 004,
Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date** : Continuous recruitment until position
filled. **Inquiries:** Judy Ensing, 956-3414.





Administrative, Professional and Technical (APT) Positions

**UH EDUCATIONAL SPECIALIST III** , Manoa Writing Program, College of
Languages, Linguistics and Literature, Class Code 92207, Full-time, General
Funds. Beginning date: 08/02. **Minimum Monthly Salary:** $3,058. **Duties:**
Direct UHM writing placement; supervise scorers; oversee exam-score data,
analysis, and maintenance. Oversee all aspects of WI course designations and
coordinate faculty board activities. Serve as program liaison with UH offices;
with public and private schools and the community. Construct, update, and
implement program's master calendar; assist in long-term program planning and
assessment. Author grant proposals, research reports and funding requests as
assigned. Participate in assessment activities. Direct operation and
maintenance of computer network, software, and Web site. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Graduation from an accredited four-year college or
university with major course work in written composition or related field;
three years of work experience in the assessment of writing, provision of
instruction with expository writing, or writing program administration; or any
equivalent combination of education and experience which provides the
following knowledge, skills and abilities: Thorough knowledge of teaching with
writing, writing placement and writing assessment. Knowledge of relevant post-
secondary and secondary educational institutional policies and academic
procedures. Ability to coordinate writing placement. Ability to use computers
and software applications for data management, word processing, spreadsheets,
statistical analysis and Web site development. Ability to establish and
maintain effective working relationships and to communicate effectively with
administrators, faculty, staff, and the general public. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Master's degree with course work in writing, assessment, or
program administration; graduate course work with emphasis in composition or
rhetoric; post-MA work in field related to duties; thorough knowledge of:
program and writing assessment; discourse communities; writing processes  &
development; cognitive & social theories of writing. Experience with writing-
program administration; experience with reporting results of research;
experience as college or high-school teacher in relevant field. **To Apply:**
Inquiries, or letter of application, resume, transcripts, APT application and
3 letters of recommendation, should be addressed to Dr. Thomas Hilgers,
Director, Manoa Writing Program, 2545 McCarthy Mall, Bilger 104, Honolulu, HI
96822. **Phone:** 956-6660. **Closing Date** : 07/07. APT position no. 81997.

Readvertisement of ad that appeared in _Ku Lama_ on 04/23

**UH SCIENTIFIC INSTRUMENT TECHNICIAN I** , #81412T, HI Natural Energy
Institute, full-time, private funds. To begin approximately 07/16. **Duties:**
Modify, repair, operate and maintain high-yield charcoal pilot plant and high-
yield charcoal laboratory reactor. Construct, modify, repair, operate and
maintain supercritical biomass gasifier to convert biomass into hydrogen and
other gases. Provide technical advice on selection of components for
fabrication. Record and perform preventive maintenance procedures on
scientific instruments. Develop and maintain internal manual documenting
operating and maintenance procedures for equipment of original design.
Maintain inventory of equipment and parts. Perform purchasing/procurement
activities such as ordering parts and components and maintain stocks of
essential spare parts as necessary. Train, supervise and evaluate
undergraduate/graduate students and visiting personnel of industrial sponsor
in the use of scientific research instruments, sample handling techniques and
data acquisition and interpretation. Perform other duties as required.
**Minimum Qualifications:** Completion of vocational training in one or more
mechanical trades and three years of journeymen experience in one or more
mechanical trades or crafts, of which one year must have involved scientific
instrument construction and repair; or any equivalent combination of
experience and training which provides the following knowledge, skills and
abilities: Through knowledge of the tools, equipment, materials, methods and
practices of one or more of the mechanical trades as it relates to the
construction of scientific instruments. Considerable knowledge of the tools,
equipment, materials, methods and practices in scientific instrument repair
and maintenance. Considerable knowledge of the hazards and safety precautions
of scientific instrument construction, operation and repair. Knowledge of
basic laboratory techniques and methods in natural sciences. Knowledge of
electronics or related subjects. Ability to execute precision work and to make
mathematical computations. Ability to diagnose problems and make constructive
recommendations. Ability to understand and follow complex oral and written
instructions. Ability to supervise assigned staff as needed as it relates to
the construction, operation, repair and maintenance of instruments. Establish
and maintain effective work relationships with students, faculty, research
personnel and others contacted in the course of work. Skill in fabrication,
modifications and repair of scientific equipment constructed from metal,
plastic, wood or related materials. **Pay Range:** P07, $2,802/month. **To
Apply:** Submit letter of application, completed UH APT Form 64, and the names
and phone numbers of three work-related references to Personnel Officer,
Hawai`i Natural Energy Institute, 2540 Dole Street, Holmes 246, Honolulu, HI
96822. Incomplete applications will not be considered. **Closing Date** :
Postmarked by 07/07. **Inquiries:** Dr. Michael Antal, Jr. at (808) 956-7267.

**UH EDUCATIONAL SPECIALIST III** ; Position Number 81845T; Hawai`i Institute
of Geophysics & Planetology, School of Ocean Earth Science and Technology;
100% FTE, temporary, annually renewable pending availability of funding.
**Duties:** The educational specialist III in charge of the NASA Pacific
Regional Planetary Data Center (PRPDC) has responsibility for administering
and coordinating a state-wide program in support of educational space-related
activities in Hawai`i, and particularly the University of Hawai`i. The
incumbent plans, supervises, and participates in workshops, media
presentations and planetary programs; promotes the use of planetary data for
educational and research purposes in the state; institute programs directed at
meeting the space science informational need of the people of Hawai`i;
maintains contact with print and electronic media regarding educational
activities; and represents the University of Hawai`i in planning and
coordinating space science activities with the national Data Facilities of
NASA as well as international data centers (e.g. Japan, China, England,
France). Other duties which involve the acquisition, identification,
archiving, and circulation of photographic, cartographic, digital and other
such educational products and materials include: direct the operation and
maintenance of the data center's computer system, NASA's image processing
workstations, and CD-ROM disk readers; train users in the operation of the
systems; continue the development of the center's planetary data base
management system; identify, hire, train and supervise data center assistants;
maintain and coordinate cooperation between the University and the national
network of regional data centers; direct the identification, acquisition, and
maintenance of audio-visual and computer equipment for archiving, retrieving,
and displaying planetary data; identify and acquire photographic and
cartographic products from U.S. and foreign space programs for housing in the
University of Hawai`i PRPDC; direct cataloging, archiving and retrieval of all
forms of planetary data housed in PRPDC, attend the national data center
administrator's annual meetings; participate in related workshops as needed;
prepare semi-annual written progress reports of PRPDC educational activities
to send to NASA headquarters. **Minimum Qualifications:** Graduation from an
accredited four-year college or university with major course work in physical
or life sciences and related course work in graphics, photography and
audiovisual techniques; and two years of related work experience in archiving,
retrieval or scientific digital and analog data using computers; manage a
complex facility; work with national, international and community
organizations. Ability to communicate effectively, both orally and in writing,
with the general public, faculty, University, state and federal officials;
ability to establish and maintain effective working relationships with
project-related staff and the general public; or any equivalent combination of
training and experience. **Pay Range:** P9, $3,277 per month. **To Apply:**
submit APT Application for Employment (UH Form 64) with a resume and cover
letter to the Hawai`i Institute of Geophysics  & Planetology/SOEST, Attn:
Sharisse Nakasone, 2525 Correa Road, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Inquiries:**
956-3128. **Closing Date** : applications must be postmarked no later than
07/07.

**UH COMPUTER SPECIALIST II** , Position No. 81427, Kaua`i CC, Computer
Services; 0.50 FTE, general funds, to begin approximately 08/99, pending
position clearance and availability of funds. **Duties:** Provide user support
to diagnose, troubleshoot, and repair both software and hardware problems;
advise faculty, staff and administrative users of the various administrative
and academic computer systems; assess and analyze the computer needs and
requirements in designing, writing, and modifying appropriate computer
programs for administrative and academic computer systems; install software
and hardware in computer labs and provides technical assistance to lab
coordinators; and assist with the installation and maintenance of the campus
network LAN system and WAN communication equipment. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Graduation from an accredited college or university with
major course work in computer science, and other course work in fields related
to administrative and academic programs or systems which are subject of
analysis; and one year of experience in the design of electronic computer
programs. Considerable knowledge of: Electronic data processing coding
practices necessary for programming instructions for an electronic computer
and peripheral equipment; The applicability of data processing to a variety of
situations and processes; Block diagraming, flow charting, and procedural
report presentation. Knowledge of: Statistical analysis methods and
techniques; The terminology, accepted practices, and procedures of the
programs of systems analyzed; and at least two computer programming languages.
Some knowledge of the limitations, capabilities, uses, and service
requirements of the electronic computer and allied equipment. Ability to
prepare clear, detailed programs of instruction for efficient machine
utilization. Or any equivalent combination of education and experience.
**Desirable Qualifications:** Ability to: Install, diagnose and troubleshoot
hardware and software on IBM/Compatible and Macintosh computers and
peripherals in stand-alone as well as networked environments; Integrate
computers using multiple protocols in a network environment; Install and
troubleshoot modems, network hubs and related data communications hardware;
Work effectively in a multi-cultural environment; Provide clear and concise
documentation. General knowledge of various network protocols including IPX,
TCP/IP and LAT. Experience with Microsoft Disk Operating System, Windows
3.1/3.11/NT/95, LINUX, Intranetware 4.11. Experience in design of electron
computer programs in an application development environment or in languages
such as BASIC, C, or PASCAL. Effective oral and written communication skills.
**Pay Range:** P05, $2,688/month. **To Apply:** Submit the following: 1)
Completed APT Application for Employment (UH Form 64), 2) transcript(s)
showing degrees and course work appropriate to the position (copies are
acceptable, however, official transcripts will be required at the time of
hire), 3) a one-page summary stating how you meet the minimum and desirable
qualifications, 4) one or more letters of recommendation attesting to job
performance and personal character and 5) resume to the Computer Services
Manager, Kaua`i Community College, 3-1901 Kaumuali`i Highway, Lihue, HI
96766-9591. Original signature required on application. All requested
documents/information must be postmarked by the closing date and become the
property of the college. All minimum qualifications must be met by effective
date of appointment. **Closing Date** : 07/07. **Inquiries:** 245-8342.

**UH COMPUTER SPECIALIST IV** , Position No. 81535; Office of Technology
Transfer and Economic Development, full-time, permanent, general funds, to
begin approximately 08/01. **Duties:** Develop, test, debug and maintain on-
line intellectual property management system using Visual Interdev and other
programming tools: evaluate existing system, determine user needs and describe
development options, specify and undertake required development work. Serve as
webmaster: design and layout the format and content of Web pages, construct
interactive forms, develop web/database interfaces, create and manipulate
graphics and multimedia and PDF files, report on system activity and other
topics. Manage and administer servers, including web, database and domain name
servers: perform routine system administration tasks. Perform operating system
upgrades and maintenance for DOS, Mac OS, Windows 95/98/NT and UNIX (Solaris).
Perform software upgrades and maintenance for all systems. Troubleshoot and
resolve computer-related problems including: personal computer
hardware/software; network software and hardware including cabling, routers
and hubs. Install new computing and communications equipment and upgrade
existing systems. Review and evaluate software- and computer-related seed
capital and other intramural funding proposals and make recommendations
regarding technical feasibility and commercial potential. Act as liaison with
UH Information Technology Services and outside vendors, make recommendations
on the selection, purchase and installation of computer equipment and
software. Provide help desk services, and plan, schedule and conduct training
for users. Perform other duties as assigned. **Minimum Qualifications:**
Graduation from an accredited four-year college or university with major
course work in information and computer science, management information
systems or related field and other course work related to administrative
systems. Three years progressively responsible professional experience in
system analysis and design of electronic computer programs, including
experience with Internet Web sites, database application, and the
administration of computer and telecom systems. Thorough knowledge of
electronic data processing, block diagramming, flow-charting, statistical
analysis methods and techniques, and procedural report presentations.
Considerable knowledge of programming languages such as Visual Basic, HTML,
PERL and TCL. Considerable knowledge of the limitations, capabilities, uses,
and service requirements of electronic computers, operating systems and
platforms, and peripheral equipment. Considerable knowledge of the
terminology, capabilities, accepted practices and procedures of the programs
or systems analyzed. Considerable knowledge of various database accessing
methods, including webserver/database interfaces. Considerable knowledge of
network hardware, protocols and interface layers. Considerable knowledge of
the internet and its capabilities, limitations and security issues. Ability to
prepare detailed programs of instruction for efficient machine utilization.
Ability to establish and maintain effective working relationships with others
including administrators, program directors, colleges, staff, other
departments and users. Ability to define, document and explain programs and
reports to users. Ability to define efficient retrieval programs for
customized reports and ad hoc queries. **Desirable Qualifications:** Master's
degree in information and computer science, management information systems or
related field. Previous work experience in university setting and familiarity
with state, federal and RCUH regulations, policies and procedures related to
purchasing, contracts, and personnel administration. Ability to work in
unstructured work setting. **Pay Range:** P09, $3,212/month. **To Apply:**
Submit cover letter, APT application (UH Form 64), resume, transcripts and
three letters of references to Associate Director, Office of Technology
Transfer  & Economic Development, 2800 Woodlawn Dr. #280, Honolulu, HI 96822.
**Closing Date** : 07/07. **Inquiries:** 539-3817.

**UH ADMINISTRATIVE AND FISCAL SUPPORT SPECIALIST** , Position No. 81397,
Library Services, Hamilton Library, full-time, special funds to begin 07/99,
pending position clearance. **Duties:** Assist in performing personnel and
fiscal functions involving payroll, procurement, budget preparation, auditing
and processing of personnel transactions, leave accounting and student
employment for the library's special funds operations. Position requires early
morning work schedule, Monday through Friday. **Minimum Qualifications:**
Graduation from an accredited four-year college or university with some course
work in business administration, human resources management, public
administration or related field; or any equivalent combination of training and
experience which provides the following knowledge, skills and abilities: some
knowledge of modern business management practices and techniques; ability to
understand and follow complex oral and written instructions; knowledge of
principles and techniques of operations planning and budget procedures;
ability to understand and follow complex oral and written instructions;
ability to analyze, interpret and use sound logic and judgment in application
of a variety of personnel, financial and administrative rules and regulations;
ability to establish and maintain effective working relationships.
**Desirable:** Ability to work in a detail-oriented environment and pursue
assignments/problems to their final completion/resolution. **Pay Range:**
P0-1, $2,292/mo. **To Apply:** Submit, postmarked by **Closing Date** , an APT
application (UH Form 64), resume, college transcripts and names of three
references to Personnel Officer, Hamilton Library, 2550 The Mall, Honolulu, HI
96822. **Closing Date** : 07/07. **Inquiries:** 956-7207.



Readvertisement and extension of closing date of ad that appeared in _Ku Lama_
on 04/02

**UH BOOKSTORE MANAGER I** ; Position no. 80129; Maui CC; Full-time; Revolving
funds; begin approx. 07/99; **Duties:** Manages the daily operations of the
Maui Community College Bookstore. Ensures proper merchandising, publicity and
good customer relations; Purchases all books and general merchandise for the
Maui CC Bookstore; Prepares store for  "Book Rush" periods, Develops marketing
program to provide the campus with a variety of items suitable to the needs of
the campus community; Responsible for the store's accounting and fiscal
controls; Trains and supervises regular and temporary employees at the Maui CC
Bookstore; Performs other related duties as assigned. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Two years of work experience in retail sales, including
experience in merchandise planning, buying and selling; and inventory and
expense analysis and control; and location and layout design; and graduation
from an accredited four year college or university with major course work in
business administration including course work in marketing; or any equivalent
combination of experience and training which provides the following
knowledges, abilities and skills: Knowledge of the theories, principles and
practices of retail sales management; Knowledge of the theories, principles
and practices of organization and management; Ability to analyze and interpret
sales and statistical data and to apply economic order quantity formulae;
supervise the work of a small group of subordinates in a manner conducive to
optimal performance and high morale; and, interpret policies, rules and
regulations and apply them to complex work situations. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Work experience in a college or university bookstore;
Ability to use various computer applications, such as data entry, word
processing and spreadsheets. **Pay Range:** P05; $2,548/month. **To Apply:**
Submit APT Application for Employment (UH Form 64), and original or copy of
transcripts (original required if hired) to Auxiliary Enterprises Personnel
Office, 2440 Campus Road, Honolulu, HI 96822 **Closing Date** : 07/07.
**Inquiries:** 956-4316.

**UH COMPUTER SPECIALIST III** ; position no. 81954; UH Manoa, CTAHR, Planning
and Management Syst

