**History 201: History of the United States through ca. 1830  
****Syllabus  
University of Oregon  
**[**Matthew Dennis**](http://darkwing.uoregon.edu/~mjdennis/dennis.htm)

![](PILGRIMS.JPG)

[**_Announcements_**](hist201_announce.htm)

Lecture: [time and place]  
CRN [ ]

|

[classroom]  
  
---|---  
  
Office Hours: [ ]

|

[office/phone];
[mjdennis@darkwing.uoregon.edu](mailto:mjdennis@darkwing.uoregon.edu)  
  
**Graduate Teaching Fellows**  

|

  
  
**Introduction**  
This course examines the creation of America -- socially, culturally,
economically, politically -- in the colonial, revolutionary, and early
national periods (roughly, through ca. the 1830s). It is the first term of a
three-quarter introductory survey of United States history; each term may be
taken separately, and students are not obliged to take all three terms.
History 201 satisfies Group Requirements as a social science course.

Using chronology as a framework, this course will emphasize the social and
material context and the changing nature and structure of early American life.
As a survey it cannot be exhaustive in its coverage, nor does it emphasize the
simple accummulation of facts. Instead we encourage students to expand their
understanding of the past by situating facts within contexts -- the "big
picture" -- and to develop their abilities to think and write analytically and
historically.

Specific attention will focus particularly on the experiences of various
Americans -- native, African, European; women, men, children; enslaved and
free; poor and rich -- their interactions with each other and their "New
World," and their roles in determining the course of American social,
political, and economic development. We will emphasize as well the
environmental context of early American history, examining how environments
shaped life and in turn were modified ("improved" and degraded) by human
action.

Students in this course will not merely "consume" history but _produce_ some
of their own. They will grapple individually and collectively with a variety
of "primary sources" -- the evidence historians examine to reconstruct and
interpret the past -- and develop skills in historical detection, analysis,
proper use of evidence, and writing. Confronting the sources, students should
learn not only about the early American past but how history is constructed by
historians.

**Course Format and Requirements  
**_Format_  
This class will meet for lectures three times weekly. In addition, each
student is required to enroll in a discussion group that meets for one hour
every week. Although lectures, readings, and discussions are carefully
coordinated, each will introduce material not available elsewhere. Therefore,
attendance at lectures and discussion sessions, and careful reading of all
assignments, is crucial to success in the course. Attendance will be taken at
weekly discussion sessions. These sessions are particularly important: they
provide an opportunity to clarify and respond to issues raised in lectures and
readings; they are the setting for fully participatory, lively discussion and
debate; and they are students' best source of information and guidance on
practical matters, like paper assignments and tests.

Students should also be aware that this course will utilize the web to
communicate information and assignments, particularly through its website; in
addition, instructors may employ email discussion lists, or require submission
of short assignments through such means. Students should have email accounts
and become familiar with computing facilities on campus, unless you have other
off-campus access to the internet.

_Requirements_  
Students' grades will be based on their performance on the following:

  * three short papers (first @ 15%, second two @ 20% each).
  * a mid-term exam in class, Monday, November 1 (10%).
  * a final exam, Wednesday, December 8, at 10:15 AM (20%).
  * quality of performance in discussion sessions (15%).

_Papers  
_ Information on papers will be available through discussion leaders and
posted on the course website. Please note that the dates for submitting
written work are firm. Late papers will be penalized, or not accepted at all.
Extentions will be granted only in extraordinary circumstances.

_Exams_  
Both the mid-term and final exams will be "blue book" essay tests, requiring a
student to formulate a clear, convincing thesis or argument in response to a
question, to present that thesis systematically, and to support it with
specific evidence drawn from lectures, discussions, and reading assignments.
Specific information about particular exams will be available through your
discussion leaders and posted on the course website as exams approach.

_Required Readings  
_ The following books are required reading. They are available in paper
editions at the UO Bookstore. In addition, some required reading and visual
materials will be placed on e-reserve through the Knight Library, or be
available through the course website.

  * William Bruce Wheeler and Susan D. Becker, eds., _Discovering the American Past: A Look at the Evidence_ , 4th ed. (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1998), vol. 1.
  * Frederick M. Binder and David M. Reimers, eds., _The Way We Lived: Essays and Documents in American Social History_ , 4th ed. (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2000), vol. 1. [Note: the bookstore ordered the 3d edition instead of the 4th. I have made the necessary adjustment to the syllabus -- please use the edition you have.]

These readings are designed to complement -- but not simply to overlap with --
the lectures. Moreover, they provide the raw material for producing historical
knowledge in lectures, discussions, exams, and papers. Students should
complete each week's readings during the week listed on the syllabus. Students
will be expected to have completed their weekly reading assignments in
preparation for their discussion session meetings.

_Students with Disabilities_  
Every effort will be make to accommodate students with disabilities. If you
have a documented disability and anticipate needing accommodations in this
course, please make arrangements to meet with me soon. Please request that the
Counselor for Students with Disabilities send a letter verifying you
disability.

**Weekly Themes and Lecture Schedule  
**_follow the links below to lecture topics,_[ _readings_](hst201_read.htm) _,
and paper assignments_

  * [Week 1: Before Columbus and in his Wake](hist201_wk1.htm)
  * [Week 2: Colonial Beachheads/Experiment: Virginia and Massachusetts Bay](hist201_wk2.htm)
    * [ Paper 1 due Monday, October 11](wk2_paper1.htm)
  * [Week 3: Settlement and Unsettlement in 17th-century America](hist201_wk3.htm)
  * [Week 4: Servitude, Slavery, Resistance](hst201_wk4.html)
    * [Paper 2 due Friday, October 29](wk4_paper2.htm)
  * [Week 5: America at Mid-18th Century: Transformation and Turmoil](hst201_wk5.html)
  * [Week 6: Revolutionary America](hst201_wk6.html)
    * Mid-term Exam, Wednesday, November 3, in class
  * [Week 7: Inventing the Republic](hst201_wk7.html)
  * [Week 8: A "More Perfect Union"?](hst201_wk8.html)
  * [Week 9: Perfecting America](hst201_wk9.htm)
    * [Paper 3 due Monday, November 22, in class](wk8_paper3.htm)
    * Thanksgiving holiday, Thursday-Friday November 25-26.
  * [Week 10: Transformation of the Early Republic](hst201_wk10.htm)
  * Final Examination, Wednesday, December 8, 10:15 AM 



![painting of Pueblo deer and buffalo dance](pueblodance.JPG)





