**[University of Massachusetts Boston](http://www.umb.edu/index.html)  
Economics Department  
![Econ 395 Syllabus](_derived/economic1.htm_cmp_blends110_bnr.gif)**

[![Up](_derived/up_cmp_blends110_gbtn.gif)](kim.htm) [![Styles for Research
Papers](_derived/styles.htm_cmp_blends110_gbtn.gif)](styles.htm)
[![Plagiarism](_derived/plagiari.htm_cmp_blends110_gbtn.gif)](plagiari.htm)
[![Teaching
Goals](_derived/teaching.htm_cmp_blends110_gbtn.gif)](teaching.htm) [![Office
Hours](_derived/officehrs.htm_cmp_blends110_gbtn.gif)](officehrs.htm)
[![Welcome](_derived/index.html_cmp_blends110_gbtn.gif)](index.html) [![Site
Directory](_derived/directory.htm_cmp_blends110_gbtn.gif)](directory.htm)
[![Handbook](_derived/handbook.htm_cmp_blends110_gbtn.gif)](handbook.htm)
[![Faculty](_derived/faculty.htm_cmp_blends110_gbtn.gif)](faculty.htm)
[![Newsletter](_derived/newslet.htm_cmp_blends110_gbtn.gif)](newslet.htm)
[![Class
Schedules](_derived/schedule.htm_cmp_blends110_gbtn.gif)](schedule.htm)  
  
---  
  
| The Economics of Social Welfare | Professor Marlene Kim  
---|---  
Economics 395 | Office: Wheatley 5-085; phone 287-6954  
Fall 2000 | Office Hours M 1:30-2:30 pm, 5-6 pm  
MWF 12:30-1:20 pm | W 1:30-2:30 pm, and by appointment  
Wheatley 1-057 |  
  
**  
Course Description** : Why are some people poor, and what should we as a
nation do about it, if anything? This course will explore the debate
surrounding these questions. It will survey who the poor are, the policies we
have now that address poverty, and a wide range of proposals to reform our
poverty policies. In doing so, we will survey competing explanations for the
causes of and solutions to poverty. We will also examine critiques of various
poverty policies, including our current social welfare programs.

**Course Requirements** : Students are expected to come to class having read
the material and being prepared to discuss the reading material and contribute
to the class discussion. There will be two papers due in class, one of which
will be a research paper (described on attached sheet) due December 1. The
other paper, due on October 30, will be graded on your understanding of the
three schools of thought that you will learn. There will also be a final
examination on December 18th which will be mostly essay and short (paragraph)
definitions. This examination will be closed book. I will hand out a list of
long essay questions that you should study; one to three of them will appear
on your final exam.

There is a lot of reading for this course. You should not take the course if
you cannot devote a lot of time reading. There are 3 books assigned for this
course, as well as a collection of articles. The books include the following,
and are available in the student bookstore in the Administration Building:

Rebecca Blank. _It Takes A Nation: A New Agenda for Fighting Poverty_.
Princeton University Press, 1997.

Bradley Schiller. _The Economics of Poverty and Discrimination_. Prentice-
Hall, NJ, 2001.

Sar Levitan, Garth Mangum, and Stephen Mangum. _Programs in Aid of the Poor_.
Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore. 1998. This book is recommended but
will not be required.

Other articles that you will have to read are available on reserve in the
Healey Library. I also have one copy of the packet of articles that you can
copy at your own expense.

**Grading** : Class participation and attendance contributes 20% of your
grade. Class participation means demonstrating that you have read the assigned
reading material and contributing to the class's understanding of the subject
matter. Each of the two papers are worth 25% of your grade. The final
examination is worth 30%. Because this is an alternative approaches course,
much of your grade (especially on your midterm paper and on the final
examination) will focus on your understanding of the 3 competing schools of
thought we will examine and how well you apply these viewpoints to current
problems and debates regarding social welfare.

**Course Objectives:** Students completing this course will be able to

* Understand the current debates about welfare and poverty alleviation policies  
* Understand differences between the Bush and Gore proposals regarding poverty and low- income policies.  
* Understand the underlying assumptions and disagreements among competing policy proposals  
***** Evaluate policy proposals for their effectiveness in addressing poverty  
* Hold your side of any debate regarding social welfare policy no matter which side you take  
***** Know the history of social welfare programs and how the US compares to
some European countries.

**Plagiarism/Cheating** : You will be severely punished for plagiarism, which
includes paraphrasing work without citing your source, or quoting work without
putting quotation marks around the attributed work and citing your source. You
MUST cite all your sources. In other words, any ideas, opinions, facts, and
statements that are not solely yours but that you have read in researching
your paper must be properly cited. You cannot omit any cites, even if you use
the same source over several paragraphs. If in doubt, cite. You also must
submit a paper YOU have written for this class. If someone else has written
the paper for you or if you submit a paper that you previously submitted for
another class, you will be prosecuted for cheating. If you have any questions
about these issues you should talk to me. The University has severe punishment
for these actions, and I have failed students for committing them.

The following outline of the course will probably be modified once I know
students' paper topics.

_

Course Outline

_

I. Overview of poverty: Who are the poor? How is poverty defined?

Sept. 6: Organization of the class. Fire drill.

Sept. 8: How is poverty defined in the US? What are the problems with this
definition?  
            Levitan, pp. 1-14; Schiller 16-41. 

Sept. 11: Who are the poor in the US? What problems are they likely to have?  
            Schiller, pp. 42-47; Levitan pp 14-37; Blank, chapter 1.

Sept. 13 Overview of Poverty Policies  
            Blank, 83-88; 98-132; Schiller pp. 1-10.  
**    **         **Paper topics due**

II. What Causes Poverty? What are the Solutions?

    A. The Conservative School of Thought. (1+ week)

    Excerpts from Charles Murray, _Losing Ground_ , pp. 56-95; 154-166; 197-201; 227-232  
    Excerpts from Lawrence Meade, _The New Politics of Poverty_ , pp. 7-15; 45-57.

    B. What Causes Poverty? The Liberal School of Thought. (2+ weeks)

    Blank, pp. 4-9; chapter 2; pp. 83-98 of chapter 3; ch 6; pp. 290-293.  
    Schiller chapters 3-10.  
    Kozol, chapter 2 (in reader), "Other People's Children: North Lawndale and the South  
    Side of Chicago."

    C. What Causes Poverty? The Radical School of Thought (1-2 weeks). (All readings for this   
    section are in the reader.)

    Piven and Cloward, Chapter 1, "The Historical Sources of the Contemporary Relief Debate."  
    Piven and Cloward, Chapters 1-2 from _Regulating the Poor_.  
    Excerpts from Michael Katz, _In the Shadows of the Poorhouse_ , pp. 3-26, 30-36, 47-57, 103-109.  
    Chapter 5 of Jeremy Brecher's _Strike_ , "Don't Starve--Fight"  
    New York Times article. 

III. Social Welfare and Social Insurance Programs. What are they? Do they
Work?

    A. First, how do we evaluate them? (1 class)  
    Blank pp 93-132  
      
    B. Public assistance. (2-3 classes)   
    Schiller, chapter 11; Blank chapter 4; Levitan chapters 2-3.

    C. Social insurance. Schiller chapter 12.

    D. Employment policies. Schiller chapters 13, 14. 

IV. How Can We Improve Social Welfare Policies?

    A. European Programs (1-2 classes)  
    "Half Empty or Half Full? The Swedish State in Transition"; "Denmark: The Costs of the   
    Welfare State"; A Society without Poverty--the Norwegian Experience."

    B "A Welfare Reform Based on Help for Working Families."

    C. Schiller, chapter 15

    D. Blank, chapter 7

    E. The privatization debate.   
    Blank, chapter 5.  
    Should We Privatize Social Security? "Social Security Isn't Broken," "Rampant Bull: Social   
    Security and the Market."

    F. Future changes in social welfare 

    Blank, chapter 5, 6.

V. Student Reports on Welfare and Social Insurance Issues--Dec 1-Dec 13\.

Paper #1. Midterm Exam. Due

Completely describe the conservative, liberal, and radical schools of thought
regarding the causes of and solutions to poverty. What evidence does each
perspective use to justify its ideas?

 Research Paper. Due Dec. 1

You are required to write a 5 page paper, double spaced, and typed (12 point),
due on December 1. You will need to do research in a library in order to
complete this project. Do not simply surf the web. You will need to examine
books, magazines, articles, newspapers, and journals that discuss your topic.
You need to cite the sources that you use in the text of your paper and
include a bibliography as well. You will be graded on the extent of the
research you perform as well as the depth of your analyses of the subject. You
should be sure to discuss your paper with me, especially if you are having
problems finding sources.

On September 13, you need to submit to me a paper topic. During the last two
weeks of class, you need to give an oral presentation to the class,
summarizing your findings in 10 minutes. You need to distribute to the class a
one page fact sheet about your topic. (E.g. an outline of Bush's prescription
drug plan and cost vs. Gore's.) I will assign oral presentation dates by paper
topic.

Students are encouraged to get help writing these papers from the Student
Learning Center on campus. They can read a rough draft and give you
constructive suggestions for improvement.

The following topics are only suggestive. You can do a paper on another topic,
but you must first discuss the topic with me.

1\. Homelessness. What is the extent of homelessness, and what is its cause?
What are the solutions? Be sure to evaluate the solutions using the evaluation
criteria discussed in class. Authors who have written about this subject
include Joel Blau and Christopher Jencks.

2\. Discuss a local economic development project or low-income organization.
Be sure to describe the purpose of the project or organization, as well as how
it plans to achieve its goal. Evaluate the project or organization, using the
evaluation criteria we discussed in class.

3\. Describe the social welfare policies in either Sweden, Denmark, Holland,
Norway, or Finland. Evaluate them, using the evaluation criteria we discussed
in class.

4\. Contrast two proposals to reform Social Security. Evaluate the proposals
using the criteria we discussed in class.

5\. Discuss a social welfare or social insurance policy in Massachusetts, and
evaluate it, using the criteria we discussed in class. Be sure to describe
what problem the policy is trying to remedy.

6\. Describe contrasting proposals of Bush and Gore regarding a social welfare
or social insurance policy or problem (e.g. health insurance for children;
drug prescription programs for the elderly; Social Security remedies; reducing
child poverty). Evaluate each, using the criteria we discussed in class. (For
this paper you will need to do research from newspapers and magazines).  
  
  
  
---

