**CLEVELAND STATE UNIVERSITY**

**MAXINE GOODMAN LEVIN COLLEGE OF URBAN AFFAIRS**

**FALL SEMESTER 2000**

**Ethics in the Public Sector PAD 634/UST 634/PDD 634**

**Time:** Tuesdays 6:00 - 9:30

**Faculty:** Dr. Jennifer Alexander

**Office:** 110A Urban Affairs

**Office Hours:** Wednesdays 9:00 - 11:30 and by appointment

**Purpose and Objectives:**

The purpose of this course is to help students develop the awareness, skills,
and value framework necessary to act ethically, both as citizens and as
administrators in public and nonprofit management. The course develops
awareness of the meaning of ethics and ethical behavior through a review of
the evolution of ethical thought as represented in moral philosophy, moral
psychology and political essays. The course then examines professional ethics
relevant for public administration and nonprofit management. Finally,

the course reviews strategies for implementing ethical practices both at the
level of the individual and the organization. At the conclusion of the course,
it is hoped that students will have begun to:

  * build skills in moral reflection and ethical decision-making
  * cultivate an attitude of moral obligation and personal responsibility in those students who intend to pursue a career in the public service.
  * acquire an awareness of the discretionary power that public administrators exert and the moral responsibility that their choices entail;
  * examine ethical standards and values necessary for professions directed to public service and how to implement them.

**Learning Approach:**

My orientation as a public service educator is based on particular value
premises that I will state at the outset in order that students will
understand my normative viewpoint, be clear about my expectations, and have
the opportunity to engage in a beneficial learning experience.

**Individual human dignity and equality** : Each of us is a unique and
valuable human being with her/his own capacities and experiences to contribute
to class. Due to our common humanity, we are entitled to equal respect from
one another.

**Self-responsibility** : We are each responsible for our own learning and it
is up to us as individuals to make the class relevant to our own growth.

**Critical thinking** : One hallmark of an educated person is the ability to
question the assumptions, evidence, and arguments inherent to the opinions and
beliefs of others, or oneself. This requires open-minded skepticism and
analytical thinking.

**Participatory learning** : People learn best when they take responsibility
for their own learning and directly participate in the learning process on
three levels: cognitive, affective, and experiential. This occurs through
dialogue and by applying theory to practice.

**Freedom of thought, speech, and mutual respect** : The best atmosphere for
learning is one in which individuals feel free to speak their opinions and
respect the rights of others to express their own views.  
  

**Instructor responsibilities** : My responsibilities as an instructor are to
set the direction of the course, to provide resource material, and lay a
foundation for understanding the ethical dilemmas presented to citizens and
public servants vis a vis government, to facilitate a positive learning
climate, to hold students accountable for their learning, and to provide
support and encouragement for student learning and growth.

**Student responsibilities** : My expectations concerning your
responsibilities as a student are - to prepare and actively participate in the
class, to promptly complete course assignments, to use the opportunity to
build your understanding, skills, and ethical commitment to your profession,
and to contribute to the learning experience of others in the class.

**Texts:**

Callahan, Joan C. (1988) **Ethical Issues in Professional Life**. New York:
Oxford University Press.

Cooper, Terry (1990) **The Responsible Administrator: An Approach to Ethics
for the Administrative Role** (3rd ed). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Dostoevsky, F. "The Grand Inquisitor" in **The Brothers Karamozov**.

**Doctoral Students** :

Young, Iris Marion (1990) **Justice and the Politics of Difference**.
Princeton: Princeton University Press

**Additional Readings** are available through the receptionist for xeroxing
and are identified in the syllabus by ******. ****

**Format:**

This course will be conducted as a **seminar** which means that students are
expected to fully prepare the material and be ready to discuss it with
colleagues. In the first few classes the instructor will lay an ethics
foundation for students with some participatory learning. In the remainder of
the classes, each session will be divided into two parts: the first part will
focus on a discussion of the readings, the second half will consist of
material in the form of presentations, exercises, or case studies that attempt
to highlight a topic. Thus, the course is intended to emphasize interactive
learning that combines a number of methods to integrate ethics theories with
moral conduct in our public organizations. Written assignments will stress
personal application of ideas.

**Course Evaluation** :

Grade evaluations will be based on four requirements:

Participation and summaries 5%

. Film Review 5%

Midterm essay exam 35%

Case Analysis 20%

Final essay exam 35%

_**Participation/ Summaries:_ (10%) **

Since it is assumed that participation is essential to learning, students are
expected to prepare assignments carefully, to attend class, actively
participate, and interact on a collegial level with one another. Full and
prompt attendance is expected.

Typewritten reading summaries are assigned on some of the readings through the
course. They _will not be accepted late_.  
  

**_Essay Exams:_ (35%; 35%)**

There will be two essay exams for the course, the mid-term will be an in-class
exam worth 35% of the grade; the final will be cumulative and worth 35% of the
final grade.

_**Case Analysis of Ethical Decision-Making:**_ **(20 %)**

This assignment involves a seven to ten page paper (typed and double-spaced
with footnotes and bibliographic references when necessary) in which you
analyze an ethical dilemma _ **related to public administration or nonprofit
ethics**_. This may be either a dilemma which you have experienced personally,
or confronted by someone you know. In either case you may change the names and
incidental facts to protect the identities of persons or organizations. If
neither of these situations apply, you may use a case study that we have not
covered in class. For learning purposes, we will use the ethical decision-
making model presented in Terry Cooper's book, _The Responsible
Administrator_. Thus, the paper should **(1)** clearly describe the dilemma,
including pertinent background data, **(2)** present an application of the
ethical decision-making method, and **(3)** offer a resolution of the problem.

**CLASS SCHEDULE**

**August**

**29 th Course Orientation, Overview and Context:**

**September**

**5 th Definition of Terms and Foundational Issues**

**Readings:**

Callahan, Joan, **Ethical Issues in Professional Life** , Ch 1

**12 th Moral Agency and Professionalism**

**Readings:**

** Cooper, David, **Value Pluralism, Professionalism and the Foundations of
Ethics** , "The Zimbardo Experiment", pp. 1-18; and Chapter 2.

Callahan, Joan, **Ethical Issues in Professional Life** , Ch 2, #1 Professions

and Professionalization; Ch. 4, #14 "The Professional-Client

Relationship.

**19 th Philosophical Foundations of Ethics: **

**Teleology/Consequentialism or The Ultimate Good**

**__Readings:** _Select **three** among the following four brief works_ :

_****_** Aristotle, "The End for Human Nature"

_****_** Jesus, "The Sermon on the Mount"

_****_** John Stuart Mill, "Higher and Lower Pleasures"

_****_** M. K. Gandhi, "Truth and Ahimsa"

**26 th Philosophical Foundations of Ethics: **

**Deontology/Nonconsequentialism or Deciding What is Right**

**Readings:**

Cooper, David, **Value Pluralism, Professionalism and the Foundations of
Ethics** , Ch. 8  
  

_****_** John Locke, Our Rights in the State of Nature

_****_** John Rawls, The Main Idea of the Theory of Justice ****

**Written Exercise for Class:**

Read the following two essays then compare and contrast the logic of their

arguments based on the philosophies of ethics covered to date: ****

**_**_** _Socrates' dialogue with Crito_

**_****_ Martin Luther King _Letter from a Birmingham Jail_

**October**

**3 rd Psychological Foundations of Ethics: Moral Development**

**Readings:**

Cooper, David, **Value Pluralism, Professionalism and the Foundations of
Ethics** , Ch. 4-5

**Assignment:** Chapter summaries

**10 th Human Freedom and Institutional Authority**

**Readings:**

****** "The Grand Inquisitor" in **The Brothers Karamozov** , Dostoevsky ****

**17 th Mid-Term Exam**

**24 th The Context of Administrative Responsibility in a Bureaucracy**

**Readings:**

****** Pugh, Darryl "The Origins of Ethical Frameworks in Public
Administration"

in James Bowman (ed.), **Ethical Frontiers in Public Management** San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

** Rohr, John (1978) "Regime Values," in **Ethics for Bureaucrats** ,

New York: Marcel Dekker:

**Assignment:** Chapter and article summaries ****

**31 st** **Responsible Conduct** **within Public and Nonprofit
Organizations:**

**Readings:**

Cooper, Terry (1990) **The Responsible Administrator** Intro, Ch. 1-2

**Assignment:** Chapter summaries ****

**November**

**7 th** **Integrating Ethics within Organizations; Individual vs. Collective
Responsibility**

**Readings:** ****

Cooper, Terry (1990) **The Responsible Administrator** , San Francisco:

Jossey-Bass. Chs. 3-5

Callahan, Joan, **Ethical Issues in Professional Life** , Ch 8, Individual

and Collective Responsibility, #33 and #35 by Peter French.  
  

**Assignment:** Chapter summaries

**14 th Safeguarding Ethical Autonomy; Professional Dissent **

**Readings:**

Cooper, Terry (1990) **The Responsible Administrator** Chs. 6-8

Callahan, Joan, **Ethical Issues in Professional Life** , Ch 9,
Whistleblowing,

#40, 41 and 42.

**Assignment:** Case of the Space shuttle Challenger

**21 st Film: The Cider House Rules**

**Assignment:** Two-page typewrittten analysis of professional integrity

of Dr. Wilbur Larch or (b) discussion of meaning of

the metaphor of the cider house "rules" in the context

of ethics.

**28 th** **Recurring Moral Dilemmas: Deception and Informed Consent**

**Readings:**

Callahan, Ch. 5, 6

*** * * * CASE ANALYSIS PAPER DUE! * * * ***

**December**

**6 th Recurring Moral Dilemmas: Privacy and Confidentiality, Review for
Final**

**** **Readings:**

Callahan, Ch. 7

**Assignment:** Case analysis

**12 th _* * * * * * * * FINAL EXAM * * * * * * * * *_**  
  
  
  

