[![The
Major](buttons/navamsmajoryellow.gif)](major.html)[![Faculty](buttons/navamsfacultyyellow.gif)](faculty.html)[![Courses](buttons/navamscoursesyellow.gif)](courses.html)[![Handbook](buttons/navamshandbookyellow.gif)](handbook.html)[![Options](buttons/navamsoptionsyellow.gif)](options.html)[![Careers](buttons/navamscareersyellow.gif)](careers.html)[![Resources](buttons/navamsresourcesyellow.gif)](resources.html)[![News](buttons/navamsnewsyellow.gif)](news.html)

SMITH COLLEGE  
AMERICAN STUDIES 202a

Methods in American Studies  
Fall 1999  
---  
  
Daniel Horowitz![spacer](images/1pixel.gif)Email:
[DHorowit@smith.edu](mailto:DHorowit@smith.edu) | Wright 119  
---|---  
Office Hours  
     Tuesdays 3-5  
     Wednesdays 2-4 | ext. 3588  
home 585-0354  
  
**#** copy available in course pack at CopyCat Print Shop, 32 Pleasant Street,
586 1332  
***** available at Smith College book store or Neilson reserve  
  
**Course Books**

Peter Barry, _Beginning Theory_  
Lizabeth Cohen, _Making a New Deal_  
Jos¨¦ Lim¨®n, _Dancing With the Devil_  
George Lipsitz, _Time Passages_  
Lisa Lowe, _Immigrant Acts_  
Lucy Maddox, _Locating American Studies_  
Robert Orsi, _Thank You, St. Jude_  
Janice Radway, _Reading the Romance_ (use 1991 edition)  
Tricia Rose, _Black Noise_  
Susan Tucker, ed., _Telling Memories Among Southern Women_  
Jane Tompkins, _Sensational Designs_  
Shane White and Graham White, _Stylin'_

**Methods in American Studies** focuses on the varied approaches one can use
to study, think about, and analyze a culture, in this case that of the United
States. Along with the additional books listed under "Suggested Readings," the
common and required texts offer us the skills, questions, theories we rely on
as we ask ourselves questions like:

     what makes a culture work or not work?     how do we think about the relationships among different groups?     what are the relationships among different aspects of a society, such as its politics and its mass culture?     what is the relationship between theory and data?     what possibilities and limitations are there to the stances authors take?     what are the strengths and weaknesses of different approaches or methods? 

A note on Web Sites. The American Studies Association, the national
professional organization in the field, has established the Crossroads
project, which is the place to begin any search. Among the sites with which it
will connect you are syllabi for other courses, discussion groups in the
fields, and sources for data (such as the many at the Library of Congress).
You can reach this site via the American Studies web page on Smith.edu

I will begin here with other sites of interest. Please bring additional ones
to my attention.

[xroads.virginia.edu/~1930s/DISPLAY/39wf/frame.htm](http://xroads.virginia.edu/~1930s/DISPLAY/39wf/frame.htm)
on the World's Fair in New York in 1939, developed as part of the American
Studies Program at University of Virginia by a graduate student. Wonderful
visuals and analysis.
[jefferson.village.virginia.edu/vshadow2](http://jefferson.village.virginia.edu/vshadow2)
developed by Professor Edward Ayers as a response to the standard view of the
Civil War, one encapsulated in the Ken Burns documentaries. Emphasis on local
history.
[Dept.english.upenn.edu/~afilreis](http://Dept.english.upenn.edu/~afilreis)
Syllabus for course on 1950s
[www.nara.gov/nara/nail.html](http://www.nara.gov/nara/nail.html)     National
Archives and Record Administration, 125,000 Digital images of historical
photographs, maps, charts, and texts.
[www.conelrad.com](http://www.conelrad.com)     web site on Cold War culture

**September 7:** Introduction

**September 9:** A History of American Studies

    ***** Gene Wise, " 'Paradigm Dramas' " (1979), in Maddox, _Locating American Studies_. 

I assign the article by Wise largely to help students answer the question
"What is American Studies" and to provide them with a sense that the field has
a relatively long and complicated past. Pay particular attention to what he
labels as the "intellectual history synthesis" in American Studies, for it was
this approach that is the base point of later changes. What is the
relationship of this approach to the Cold War? What elements from his list on
pp. 306-07 do you find still acceptable as a statement of American culture?
After Humpty Dumpty fell off the wall in the late 1960s, what new elements too
its place (see pp. 331-32)? Two decades after Wise wrote, can we see the
emergence of yet another synthesis in the emphasis on race, class, and gender?
If so, what are the challenges and limitations of such a focus?

**Week of September 13:**

    ***** Robert Orsi, _Thank You, St. Jude: Women's Devotion To the Patron Saint of Hopeless Causes_ (1995) 

     Tuesday: Preface, 1-94  
    Thursday: 95-211. 

    **Thurs. September 16: draft of short paper due in class**  
![spacer](images/1pixel.gif) (optional)

    Mr. Orsi will speak at Smith, late afternoon, Thursday, September 16 

This is the first time I have used this book and I decided to do so for
several reasons. It enables us to focus on American religion, a subject that
academics often shy away from and that has a miniscule place in the Smith
education. More importantly for our purposes, Orsi's book serves several
useful purposes as we begin to examine how to interpret a culture. First, it
provides a compelling example of cultural history, in this case a history of
the traditions of popular religion, especially among women, in the Roman
Catholic tradition. So think about it in contrast with other kinds of history
(political, social) with which you are familiar. Secondly, Orsi uses several
distinctive sources that enable him to recover the world view of ordinary
Americans, whose consciousness is often out of reach to scholars. Finally,
Orsi uses a variety of techniques-history, anthropology, textual analysis-that
together offer an exemplary example of what students in American Studies can
do.

**Week of September 20:** The Debate Over American Studies

**Short (4 page) paper due Thursday September 23** (bring to class).

    

Tuesday:     ***** Henry Nash Smith, "Can American Studies Develop a Method?"
(1957), in Maddox.  
***** Bruce Kuklick, "Myth and Symbol in American Studies" (1972) in Maddox.  
**#** Susan Willis, "Learning From the Banana" (1987)  
***** Alice Kessler-Harris, "Cultural Locations: Positioning American Studies
in the Great Debate" (1992), in Maddox.  
***** Ramon Guiterrez, "Community, Patriarchy And Individualism: The Politics
of Chicano History and the Dream of Equality" (1993), in Maddox.  
***** Peter Barry, _Beginning Theory: An Introduction to Literary and Cultural
Theory_ (1995), "Ten Tenets of liberal humanism," pp. 16-21; "The Transition
To Theory," pp. 32-36.

Written over thirty years apart, the articles by Smith, Kuklick, Willis,
Kessler-Harris, and Guiterrez reflect major changes in the history of American
Studies. Smith, a professor of English, is wrestling with the issue of the
place of "high" culture in the study of an entire culture. Pay particular
attention to the evaluations he places on mass or popular culture and to high
culture. Think carefully about the issue of whether the best way to comprehend
an entire culture is through its most "quality" or elite expressions.
Kuklick's essay is the one of the most important critiques of Smith's position
and more generally of the approach Wise identified as the "intellectual
history synthesis" and others have called the "myth and symbol" approach.

Willis wishes to eliminate Smith's hierarchical stance--to examine bananas in
elite literature and in supermarkets as equally valid ways into the study of a
society. How convincing is she in this effort? In addition, she offers us a
brief discussion of neo-Marxism. How useful do you find her analysis of the
dynamics of the economic system as it affects our daily lives? Think also of
her article as part of an attempt to provide a cultural analysis of everyday
life, one in which she applies literary analysis and a way of "reading" common
experiences. Then Kessler-Harris connect debates within American Studies with
contemporary discussions of multi-culturalism. Guiterrez applies key concepts
in cultural studies to the lives of Chicanos. Barry provides important
background information on the shift from liberal humanism (represented in
large measure by Smith) and more theoretical approaches you will encounter
throughout the semester.

Thursday: Contemporary Issues in American Studies     ***** Kevin Mumford,
"Homosex Changes: Race, Cultural Geography and the Emergence of the Gay"
(1996), in Maddox.     ***** Barry, _Beginning Theory_ , "Lesbian/gay
criticism," pp. 139-53.     ***** K. Scott Wong, "The Transformation of
Culture: Three Chinese Views of America" (1996) in Maddox.     ***** George
Lipsitz, "Listening to Learn and Learning to Listen: Popular Culture, Cultural
Theory, and American Studies" (1990), in Maddox.     ***** Barry, _Beginning
Theory_ , "Structuralism," pp. 39-59 and "Post-Structuralism and
deconstruction," pp. 61-79.

The articles by Mumford, Wong, and Lipsitz represent recent emphases in
American studies: gay/lesbian studies, Asian American studies, and the attempt
to develop a theory of culture that both relies on high theory and gives
importance to low culture. Once again, Barry provides accessible treatments of
key issues: lesbian/gay criticism, as well as some of the literary theories
that undergird what others write.

**Week of September 27:** Literary Historicism and Canon Formation

Tuesday:     ***** Jane Tompkins, _Sensational Designs: The Cultural Work of
American Fiction, 1790-1860_ (1985).  
Introduction and chapters 1, 5, 6, and 7     ***** Barry, _Beginning Theory_ ,
"New historicism and cultural materialism," 172-89.     ***** Nina Baym,
"Melodramas of Beset Manhood: How Theories of American Fiction Exclude Women
Authors" (1981), in Maddox.

Thursday: selections from     **#** Nathaniel Hawthorne, _Scarlet Letter_
**#** Susan Warner, _Wide Wide World_     **#** Harriet Beecher Stowe, _Uncle
Tom's Cabin_

In this immensely influential and controversial book, Tompkins launched a
feminist reconsideration of the canon--the list of widely accepted classics in
literature or in any other field. What do you think of her argument that most
if not all judgments about quality are relative to the conditions under which
they were produced? What does Tompkins mean by "cultural work"? Are you
willing to use this as your yardstick for making literary judgments about the
excerpts on childhood written by Stowe, Warner, and Hawthorne? Can you think
of circumstances under which it would be possible to reconcile popularity and
quality? As you read the selections from novels of the 1850s, think about how
applicable are the arguments of Tompkins. Finally, in what ways does Baym
provide another perspective on issues of canon formation and gender?

**Week of October 4:** An Anthropology of Literary Culture

    

***** Janice Radway, _Reading the Romance: Women, Patriarchy, and Popular
Literature_ (1984, use 1991 edition).      Tuesday: Introduction, chapters 1,
2, and 3  

Thursday: chapters 4, 5 (157-8 and 183-5), 6 and Conclusion     Barry,
_Beginning Theory_ , "Psychoanalytic criticism," pp. 96-118; "Feminist
criticism," pp. 121-36.

This is also an immensely influential book. Written by a literary scholar, who
is a recent president of the American Studies Association, it involves an
anthropology of reading. In addition, Radway uses psychoanalytic, Marxist,
feminist, and literary theories. How do you evaluate the balance between
theory and data? What you do think of the relationship of anthropologist and
subjects?

**Week of October 11:** Anthropology, Participant Observation, Latinos, and
Post-Modernism

    **Thurs. October 15: draft of short paper due, (bring to class)** (optional) 

     Tuesday: no classes 

    

Thursday:     ***** Jos¨¦ Lim¨®n, _Dancing With the Devil: South Texas_ (1994),
preface, 5-17, and 76-94, 97-207     **#** Clifford Geertz, "Deep Play: Notes
on the Balinese Cockfight" (1992)      Barry, _Beginning Theory_ ,
"Postmodernism," 81-94; "Marxist Criticism," pp. 156-70.     **#** T. J.
Jackson Lears, "The Concept of Cultural Hegemony: Problems and Prospects"
(1985)

The article by Geertz is an immensely influential one, not only among
anthropologists but also among historians and literary critics. Central to
what Geertz does here is tell us how to think of worldly events as "texts"
that we can "read" and in turn of culture as a series of texts. How does he
move beyond what Henry Nash Smith said about culture, texts, and hierarchy?
Can you think of ways of applying what Geertz says modern America? In
addition, think about the stance here of the anthropologist to the people he
is studying. In _Dancing With the Devil_ , Lim¨®n offers us an example of a
kind of anthropology quite different from that of Geertz. Think about how
Lim¨®n and Geertz differ in how they position themselves via a vis the people
they study. In addition, consider Lim¨®n's use of post-modernism, something he
explores in both the economy and the culture. Finally, the article by Lears
explores the work of Antonio Gramsci, an Italian Marxist of the 1930s, who has
influenced many cultural analysts.

**Week of October 18:** Asian Americans and Cultural Studies

**Second short (6 page) paper due Thursday October 21** (bring to class).
Topics to be discussed beforehand.

    

***** Lisa Lowe, _Immigrant Acts: On Asian American Cultural Politics_ (1996)

    

Tuesday: preface and chapters 1, 3     ***** Barry, _Beginning Theory_ ,
191-200.     Thursday, chapters 5, 7, and Epilogue

In _Immigrant Acts_ , Lowe offers an example of contemporary thinking in
cultural studies. Especially important are her materialist critique, her
emphasis on sources of the oppositional, and her use of concepts key to post-
modernists: decentering, subaltern, fluid identities, hybridity, and border
crossing.

**Week of October 25:** Art History: Historicism and Formalism

    

Tuesday:     **#** Roque, Oswaldo R., "The _Oxbow_ by Thomas Cole: Iconography
of an American Landscape Painting" (1984)     **#** Alan Wallach, "Thomas Cole
and the Aristocracy" (1981)     **#** Alan Wallach, "Making A Picture of the
View from Mt. Holyoke" (1993)

     Thursday-no class. American Studies Association meeting in Montreal 

A new generation of art historians (including John Davis) is transforming the
study of art history by combining a broadened sense of appropriate visual
material with the perspectives of history and cultural studies. I bring
together several articles, all of them focused on the work of Thomas Cole. I
do so in order to provoke a discussion of the alternative approaches art
historians use in examining the same subject.

**Week of November 1:** Social History, Hegemony and Popular Culture

    

***** Lizabeth Cohen, _Making a New Deal: Industrial Workers in Chicago,
1919-1939_ (1990)

     Tuesday: Introduction, pp. 94-97, chapter 3, pp. 160-62, 208-11, 246-49     Thursday: chapters 6-8, and Conclusion

_Making a New Deal_ is a powerful example of the new social history. Implicit
in the book is an analysis of the relationship between economic forces and
social changes. Cohen also offers us a subtle analysis of the development of
consumer culture. How does she envision the relationship between mass-produced
goods, ethnic groups, and individual identity? Take a look at her footnotes:
on what kinds of sources does a social historian like Cohen rely? Based on
what she does, how can we say social history different from cultural history,
as practices by Orsi or Limon.

**Week of November 8:** Cultural History and Expressive Culture

    

***** Shane White and Graham White, _Stylin': African American Expressive
Culture from Its Beginning to the Zoot Suit_ (1998)

    

Tuesday:     White and White, 1-124     ***** Alexander Saxton, "Blackface
Minstrelsy and Jacksonian Ideology" 1975), in Maddox.

     Thursday: White and White, 125-262

This book is an example of cultural history that examines popular forms of
expression from a variety of perspectives. Keep an eye out how the kinds of
sources the Whites use. Think about their discussion of transgressive
behavior, the centrality of the display of bodies, and the class dynamics of
the stylin'. Also, think about this book in tandem with Making a New Deal, as
providing another example through which to understand the differences between
cultural and social history.

    **Thurs. November 12, (bring to class): for long paper, one page statement of intent, including the name of the book you will read and the questions you hope to focus on.**

**Week of November 15:** Oral History

    

***** Susan Tucker, ed., _Telling memories Among Southern Women: Domestic
Workers and Their Employers in the Segregated South_ (1988)

     Tuesday: Acknowledgements, Preface, 12-67, and 69-101     Thursday: 145-279

Oral history provides a powerful way of recovering the past, especially for
people and relationships for which the written evidence is slim. _Telling
Memories_ recaptures the complex relationships between African American
domestic Workers in the South and their white, female employees-and between
the editor/interviewer and the subjects of the study. As you read, think not
only of the lives revealed but also of the choices Susan Tucker made. What
different did it make if the interviewer was African American or white? What
is the impact of the introductions and head notes with which Tucker introduces
the sections? How did the choices she made about editing the material affect
what you read? How can we interpret the photographs she provides at the end of
the book?

**Week of November 22:** Film, Narrativity, and Objectivity

    

Tuesday: Oliver Stone's "JFK"     **#** readings in course packet: Tom Wicker,
"Does `J.F.K.' Conspire Against Reason?"; Oliver Stone, "`J.F.K.' Via the
Director's Viewfinder"; " _AHR Forum_ : JFK and the Culture of Violence,"
articles by Marcus Raskin, Michael Rogin, Robert A. Rosenstone; Stanley
Karnow, "JFK."

Stone's docudrama and the controversy over it allows us to explore a number of
issues involved in interpreting a culture: the problems of analyzing visual
materials, the existence of narratives and counter-narratives, the blending of
genres, the nature of objectivity.

    Thursday: no class-Thanksgiving 

**Week of November 29:** Expressive Culture: Music and Race,

    

***** Tricia Rose, _Black Noise: Rap Music and Black Culture in Contemporary
America_ (1994)

     Tuesday: ix-xvi and 1-96     Thursday: 99-185

This is the first time I have used this book. I chose it partly to give some
attention to music and, along with the books by the Whites and ticker, to help
move race closer to the center of the course. In the context of this course,
Rose provides us with another

    **Thursday December 2** (optional): draft due of long paper. bring to class 

**Week of December 6:** Recapitulation--Where It's At

    

***** George Lipsitz, _Time Passages: Collective Memory and American Popular
Culture_ (1990)

     Tuesday, preface, chapters 1, 3, and 4     Thursday, chapters 5-6 and 9-11

The publication of this book by Lipsitz marked the emergence of many
characteristics of American Studies--the emphasis on popular culture, the
sources of opposition in a capitalist economy, the role of repressed memory,
the importance of the experience of "minority" cultures.

**Week of December 13:** Multi-Culturalism

    

Tuesday: **#** Jos¨¦ Lim¨®n, "Tex-Sex-Mex: American Identities, Lone Stars, and
the Politics of Racialized Sexuality" (1997)

    _Lone Star_ , the movie

The movie "Lone Star" and Lim¨®n's commentary on it enable us to think about
issues of multi-culturalism and border crossing.

**LONG PAPERS DUE Tuesday December 14, 5 p.m., Wright 119 (under the door).**

This is a writing intensive course. **Each student will select one of the
three papers for which she will hand in a draft a week before the paper itself
is due.** With that paper, and in other contexts, I will work with each
student with the goal of improving her ability to communicate effectively in
her written work.

Requirements: For purposes of evaluation, the assignments will be weighted as
follows:

| First short paper (4 pages) | 20%  
---|---  
Second short paper (6 pages) | 25%  
Long paper (10 pages) | 35%  
General class discussion | 20%  
  
The short papers will be on the common readings. The long paper and the
presentation will be on the same book, drawn from the list of Suggested
Readings or from similar material.

Grades on late papers will be lowered one step (e.g. from B minus to C plus)
every 48 hours after the deadline. Only "acts of God" or verifiable illness
will serve as justification for an extension.

![black line](images/black540x1.gif)

**SUGGESTED READINGS**

What follows comes in two parts. The first focuses selectively on books that
reflect what I consider some of the major trends in American Studies. The
second is a less selective list covers a longer period of time and a wider
variety of fields.

    **1\. Fact and Fiction: Narratives, Objectivity and Memory**

Janet Malcolm, _The Silent Woman: Sylvia Plath and Ted Hughes_  
Nell I. Painter, _Sojourner Truth: A Life, a Symbol_  

E.L. Doctorow, _Book of Daniel_      , _Ragtime_      , _World's Fair_
James E. Goodman, _Stories of Scottsboro_  
Robert Berkhofer, Jr., _Beyond the Great Story: History as Text and Discourse_
(1991)

    

Among the recent movies that raise questions along these lines are
"Pocahontas"     "Malcolm"     "Nixon"     "Mississippi Burning"     "Amistad"
"Saving Private Ryan"

    **2\. Border Crossing, Transnationalism, and Identity**

     Jose Saldivar, _Border Matters: Remapping American Cultural Studies_      Hamid Naficy, _The Making of Exile Cultures_      Neil Foley, _The White Scourge: Mexicans, Blacks, and Poor Whites in Texas Cotton Culture_     Ruben Martinez, _The Other Side_     Renato Rosaldo, _Culture and Truth: The Remaking of Social Analysis_ (1989)      Gloria Anzaldua, _Borderlands/La Frontera: The New Mestiza_      Juan Flores, _Divided Borders: Essays on Puerto Rican Identity_ (1993)      Antonio Benitez-Rojo, _The Repeating Island: The Caribbean and the Postmodern Perspective_ (1992)      Laura Browder, _Ethnic Performance and American Identities_ (1998)      Ann DuCille, _Skin Trade_ (1996)      Lesley Ferris, ed., _Crossing the Stage: Controversies on Cross-Dressing_ (1993)      Marjorie Garber, _Vested Interests: Cross-Dressing and Cultural Anxiety_ (1992)      Susan Gubar, _Racechanges: White Skins, Black Face in American Culture_ (1997)      Saidiya Hartman, _Scenes of Subjection: Terror, Slavery, and Self-Making in 19th Century America_ (1997)      Diane W. Middlebrook, biography of Billy Tipton (1998)     Michael Rogin, _Black Face, White Noise: Jewish Immigrants  
  Jewish Immigrants in the Hollywood Melting Pot_ (1996)     essays in
_American Quarterly_ , September 1995 issue     Richard Delgado and Jean
Stefancic, _Critical White Studies: Looking Behind the Mirror_ (1997)  

Ruth Frankenberg, ed., _Displacing Whiteness: Essays in Social and Cultural
Criticism_ (1997)      , White Women, _Race Matters: The Social Construction
of Whiteness_ (1993)      Noel Ignatiev, _How the Irish Became White_
Philip J. Deloria, _Playing Indian_      Grace Elizabeth Hale, _Making
Whiteness: The Culture of Segregation in the South, 1890-1940_ (1998)
George Lipsitz, _The Possessiveness Investment in Whiteness: How White People
Profit from Identity Politics_ (1998)      Toni Morrison, _Playing in the
Dark: Whiteness and the Literary Imagination_ (1992)  

David R. Roediger, _The Wages of Whiteness: Race and the Making of the
American Working Class_ (1991)     _, Towards the Abolition of Whiteness:
Essays on Race, Politics and the Working Class_ (1994)      , ed., _Black on
White: Black Writers on What It Means to be White_ (1998)      Fatimah Tobimg
Rony, _The Third Eye: Race, Cinema and Ethnographic Spectacle_ (1996)
Werner Sollors, _Neither Black Nor White Yet Both: Thematic Explorations of
Interracial Literature_ (1997)      Ann Douglas, _Terrible Honesty: Mongrel
Manhattan in the 1920s_ (1995)      John Demos, _Unredeemed Captive: A Family
Story from Early America_      Gary Y. Okihiro, _Margins and Mainstreams:
Asians in American History and Culture_ (1994)

    **3\. Reading Non-traditional Texts**

     Kenneth L. Ames, _Death in the Dining Room and Other Tales of Victorian Culture_ (1992)      Richard Handler and Eric Gable, _The New History in an Old Museum: Creating the Past at Colonial Williamsburg_ (1998)      Karal Ann Marling, _Graceland: Going Home with Elvis_     Brian Ward, _Just My Soul Responding: Rhythm and Blues, Black Consciousness, and Race Relations_ (1998)      Wendy Kozol, _**Life** 's America: Family and Nation in Postwar America_ (1994)     Dell Upton, _Holy Things and Profane: Anglican Parish Churches in Colonial Virginia_ (1986)      Michael Lesy, _Wisconsin Death Trip_      Erika Doss, _Spirit Poles and Flying Pigs: Public Art and Cultural Democracy in American Communities_ (1995)      William Cronon, _Changes in the Land: Indians, Colonists, and the Ecology of the Land_      Julie D'Acci, _Defining Women: Television and the Case of Cagney & Lacey_     W.T. Lhamon, Jr., _Raising Cain: Blackface Performance from Jim Crow to Hip Hop_ (1998)      Susan Bordo, _Twilight Zones: The Hidden Life of Cultural Images from Plato to O.J._      Katherine C. Grier, _Culture and Comfort: Parlor Making and Middle-Class Identity, 1850-1930_      Joshua Gamson, _Freaks Talk Back: Tabloid Talk Shows and Sexual Nonconformity_

    **4\. Participant Observation**

    

a. **Genre of Journalism as Sociology**      William Finnegan, _Cold New
World: Growing Up in a Harder Country_ (1998)      Kathryn Waterson, _Women in
Prison: Inside the Concrete Womb_ (1973; revised and expanded, 1996)
Patricia Hersch, _A Tribe Apart: A Journey into the Heart of of American
Adolescence_ (1998)      Gini Sikes, _8 Ball Chicks: a Year in the Violent
World of Girl Gangsters_ (1996)

    

b. **More Scholarly**      Janice A. Radway, _A Feeling for Books: The Book-
of-the- Month Club, Literary Taste, and Middle-Class Desire_ (1998)

    **5\. Simply Important Books**

     Mike Davis, _City of Quartz_      Michael Denning, _The Cultural Front_

![black line](images/black540x1.gif)

**Longer List**

**Classical American Studies**

     Leo Marx, _Machine in the Garden: Technology and the Pastoral Ideal in America_ (1964)      R.W.B. Lewis, _The American Adam; Innocence, Tragedy and Tradition in the Nineteenth Century_ (1955)      Marvin Meyers, _The Jacksonian Persuasion; Politics and Belief_ (1960)      John W. Ward, _Andrew Jackson: Symbol for an Age_ (1955)      David Potter, _People of Plenty: Economic Abundance and the American Character_ (1954)      Alfred Kazin, _On Native Grounds: An Interpretation of American Prose Literature_ (1947)      Oliver Larkin, _Art and Life in America_ (1949)      Daniel J. Boorstin, _Americans: The Colonial Experience_ (1958) 

**Recent Literary History**

     Eric J. Sundquist, _To Wake the Nations; Race in the Making of American Literature_ (1992)      Richard Brodhead, _Cultures of Letters: Scenes ofReading and Writing in Nineteenth-Century America_ (1993)      Sacvan Berkovitz, _The Office of the Scarlet Letter_      Donald Pease and Amy Kaplan, ed. _Cultures of United States Imperialism_ (1993)      Donald Pease, ed., _Revisionary Interventions into the Americanist Canon_      Carol Shloss, _In Visible Light: Photography and the American Writer, 1840-1940_ (1987)      Richard Slotkin, _Regeneration Through Violence: The Mythology of the American Frontier: 1600-1860_ (1973)      Richard Slotkin, _The Fatal Environment: The Myth of the Frontier in the Age of Industrialization, 1800-1890_ (1985)      Annette Kolodny, _The Lay of the Land: Metaphor as Experience and History in American Life and Letters_ (1975)      Annette Kolodny, _The Land Before Her: Fantasy and Experience of the American Frontiers, 1630-1860_ (1984)     

Sacvan Berkovitz, _Puritan Origins of the American Self_ (1975)      ,
_American Jeremiad_ (1978)      Cecelia Tichi, _Shifting Gears: Technology,
Literature, and Culture in Modernist America_ (1987)      Bryan J. Wolf,
_Romantic Re-Vision: Culture and Consciousness in 19th-Century American
Painting and Literature_ (1982)      Michael Rogin, _Subversive Genealogy: The
Politics and Art of Herman Melville_ (1983)      Carolyn Porter, _Seeing and
Being: The Plight of the Participant Observer in Emerson, James, Adams and
Faulkner_ (1981)      R. Jackson Wilson, _Figures of Speech: American Writers
and the Literary Marketplace from Benjamin Franklin to Emily Dickinson_ (1989)
Walter Benn Michaels, _The Gold Standard and the Logic of Naturalism_ (1987)
Michael Denning, _Mechanic Accents: Dime Novels and Working Class-Culture in
America_ (1987)      David Leverenz, _Manhood and the American Renaissance_
(1989)      Houston A. Baker, _Modernism and the Harlem Renaissance_      Nina
Baym, _Novels, Readers, and Reviews; Responses to Fiction in Ante-Bellum
America_ (1984)      David S. Reynolds, _Beneath the American Renaissance: The
Subversive Imagination in the Age of Emerson and Melville_ (1988)      Joanna
Braxton, _Black Women Writing Autobiography_      Claudia Tate, _Domestic
Allegories of Political Desire: The Black Heroine's Text at the Turn of the
Century_

**Recent Art History**

     Barbara Novak, _Nature and Culture_      Angela Miller, _Empire of the Eye: Landscape Representations and American Cultural Politics_      Hugh Honour, _The Black Presence in Art_ , vol. IV     Ellen Wiley Todd, _The `New Woman' Revisited: Painting and Gender Politics on Fourteenth Street_ (1993)      David Lubin, _Picturing a Nation: Art and Social Change in Nineteenth-Century America_ (1994)      Joy Kasson, _Marble Queens and Captives: Women in Nineteenth-Century Sculpture_ (1990)      William H. Truettner, ed., _The West As America: Reinterpreting Images of the Frontier, 1820-1920_ (1991)      Michael Leja, _Reframing Abstract Expressionism: Subjectivity and Painting in the 1940s_ (1993)      Erika Doss, _Benton, Pollock, and the Politics of Modernism_

**Who Controls the Canon?**

     Harold Bloom, _The Western Canon: The Books and School of the Ages_ (1994)      Elaine H. Kim, _Asian American Literature_      Sau-Ling Cynthia Wong, _Reading Asian American Literature_      bell hooks, _Feminist Theory: From Margin to the Center_ (1984)      E.D. Hirsch, _Cultural Literacy: What Every American Needs to Know_ (1987)      Alan Bloom, _Closing of the American Mind: How Higher Education Has Failed Democracy and Impoverished the Souls Of Today's Students_ (1987)      Elizabeth V. Spelman, _Inessential Women: Problems of Exclusion in Feminist Thought (1988)_      Dinesh D'Souza, _Illiberal Education: The Politics of Race and Sex on Campus_ (1991)      Darryl J. Gless and Barbara H. Smith, _The Politics of Liberal Education_      Arnold Krupat, _The Voice in the Margins: Native American Literature and the Canon_ (1989)      Peter Nabokov, _Native American Testimony: A Chronicle of Indian-White Relations from Prophesy to the Present, 1492-1992_ (1992)      Paula Gunn Allen, _The Sacred Hoop: Rediscovering the Feminine in American Indian Traditions_ (1986)      Hertha Dawn Wong, _Sending My Heart Back Across the Years: Traditional and Innovation in Native American Autobiography_ (1992)      Greg Sarris, _Keeping Slug Woman Alive: A Holistic Approach to American Indian Texts_ (1993)      Ramon Sandilvar, _Chicano Narrative: The Dialectics of Difference_ (1990)      Guillermo Hernandez, _Chicano Satire: A Study of Literary Culture_ (1991) 

**Popular Modes of Expression**

     Ann Douglas, _The Feminization of American Culture_ (1977)      Roland Barthes, _Mythologies_      John Cawelti, _Adventure, Mystery, and Romance: Formula Stories as Art and Popular Culture_ (1976)      Will Wright, _Six Guns and Society: A Structural Study of the Western_ (1975)      Lawrence Levine, _Black Culture and Black Consciousness: Afro-American Folk Thought From Slavery to Freedom_ (1977)      Richard Dorson, _American Folklore_ (1959)      Greil Marcus, _Mystery Train: Images of America in Rock 'n' Roll Music_      Donald Lazere, _American Media and Mass Culture: Left Perspectives_

**Oral History**

     Alistair Thomson, "Fifty Years On: An International (Perspective on Oral History," _Journal of American History_ , 85 Sept. 1998): 581-610.     Paul R. Thompson, _Voice of the Past: Oral History_ (1988)      Theodore Rosengarten, _All God's Dangers: The Life of Nate Shaw_      Jacquelyn D. Hall, et al., _Like a Family: The Making of a Southern Cotton Mill World_ (1987)      Michael Frisch and Milton Rogovin, _Portraits in Steel_ (1993)      Tom E. Terrell and Jerrold Hirsch, ed., _Such as Us: Southern Voices of the Thirties_ (1978)      Marilyn David, _Mexican Voices/American Dreams: An Oral History of Mexican Immigration to the United States_      John Tateishi, _And Justice for All: An Oral History of the Japanese American Detention Camps_ (1984)      Wesley Brown and Amy Ling, _Visions of America: Personal Narratives from the Promised Land_ (1993) 

**Race, Class, and Gender**

     Eric Lott, _Blackface Minstrelsy and the American Working Class_ (1993)      Tomas Almaguer, _Racial Fault Lines: The Historical Origins of White Supremacy in California_ (1994)      Rudolfo Acuna, _Occupied America: A History of Chicanos_ (1988)      Mauricio Mazon, _The Zoot Suit Riots: The Psychology of Symbolic Annihilation_      Kenneth L. Stewart and Arnoldo De Leon, _Not Room Enough: Mexicans, Anglos, and Socioeconomic Change in Texas, 1850-1900_ (1993)      Robert S. McElvaine, ed., _Down and Out in the Great Depression: Letters from the Common Man_ (1983)     

Werner Sollors, ed., _Invention of Ethnicity_ (1989)      , _Beyond Ethnicity:
Consent and Descent in American Culture_ (1986)      Peter Rose, _Mainstream
and Margins: Jews, Blacks and Other Americans_ (1983)      Sarah Deutsch, _No
Separate Refuge: Culture, Class and Gender on an Anglo-Hispanic Frontier
1880-1940_ (1987)      Nancy Grey Osterud, _Bonds of Community_      Nancy F.
Cott, _The Bonds of Womanhood: "Women's Sphere" in New England, 1780-1835_
(1977)      Carol Smith-Rosenberg, _Disorderly Conduct: Visions of Gender in
Victorian America_      Karen Lystra, _Searching the Heart: Women, Men, and
Romantic Love in Nineteenth-Century America_ (1989)      Laurel Ulrich, _A
Midwife's Tale_      Susan Strasser, _Never Done: A History of American
Housework_      William J. Wilson, _Declining Significance of Race: Blacks and
Changing American Institutions_ (1978)      James Axtell, _The Invasion
Within_      James Merrell, _The Indians' New World_      John Demos, _The
Unredeemed Captive_  

Ronald Takaki, _Strangers from a Different Shore_      , _A Different Mirror:
A History of Multicultural America_ (1993)      , _Iron Cages: Race and
Culture in Nineteenth- Century America_      Min Zhou, _Chinatown: The
Socioeconomic Potential of an Urban Enclave_      Peter Kwong, _The New
Chinatown_      Camille Paglia, _Sexual Personae_      Richard White, _"It's
Your Misfortune and None of My Own," A History of the American West_ (1991)
Patricia Limerick, ed., _Trails Toward a New Western History_      Douglas
Monroy, _Thrown Among Strangers: The Making of Mexican Culture in Frontier
California_ (1990)      David J. Weber, _The Spanish Frontier in North
America_ (1992)  

Donald Worster, _Rivers of Empire: Water, Aridity, and the Growth of the
American West_ (1988)      , _Under Western Skies: Nature and History in the
American West_ (1992)      Philip Kasinitz, _Caribbean New York: Black
Immigrants and the Politics of Race_ (1992)

**Hegemony**

     Elizabeth Fox-Genovese, _Within the Plantation Household_      Eugene Genovese, _The Political Economy of Slavery_      Eugene Genovese, _The World the Slaveholders Made_      Philip Greven, _The Protestant Temperament: Patterns of Child-Rearing, Religious Experience, and Self in Early America_      Alan Trachtenberg, _The Incorporation of America_      James Joll, _Antonio Gramsci_      Walter Adamson, _Hegemony and Revolution: A Study of Antonio Gramsci's Political and Cultural Theory_      Joseph Femia, _Gramsci's Political Thought: Hegemony, Consciousness, and the Revolutionary Process_      Bryan D. Palmer, _Descent into Discourse: The Reification of Language and the Writing of Social History_

**Interpreting Media**

     Michael Schudson, _Advertising: The Uneasy Persuasion_      Stuart Ewen, _Captains of Consciousness_      William Leiss, et al., _Social Communication in Advertising_      Lawrence Levine, _High Brow/Low Brow_      Herbert J. Gans, _Popular Culture and High Culture_      Michael Parenti, _Inventing Reality: The Politics of The Mass Media_     

Raymond Williams, _Television: Technology and Cultural Form_      , _Marxism
and Literature_      , _Keywords_      , _Culture and Society_      Robert
Sklar, _Movie-Made America_      Lary May, _Screening Out The Past_      Rosa
Linda Fregoso, _The Bronze Screen: Chicana and Chicano Film Culture_ (1993)
George Bluestone, _Novels into Films_      Editors of _Cahiers du Cinema_ ,
"John Ford, `Young Mr. Lincoln,'" in _Movies and Methods_ , ed. Bill Nichols
Herbert Gans, _Deciding What's News_      Todd Gitlin, ed., _Watching
Television_ (1986)      Todd Gitlin, _The Whole World is Watching_ (1980)
Todd Gitlin, _Inside Primetime_ (1983)      David Marc, _Comic Visions:
Television Comedies and American Television_ (1989)      Mark Crispin Miller,
_Boxed In: The Culture of TV_ (1988)      E. Ann Kaplan, _Rocking Around the
Clock: Music Television, Postmodernism and Consumer Culture_ (1987)      John
Fiske, _Television Culture: Popular Pleasures and Politics_ (1987)      Robert
C. Allen, _Channels of Discourse: Television and Contemporary Criticism_
(1987)     Horace Newcomb, _Television: The Critical View_ (1987)      Alan
Trachtenberg, _Reading American Photographs: Images as History, Matthew Brady
to Walker Evans_ (1989)      Ella Taylor, _Prime-Time Families: TV Culture in
Postwar America_ (1989)      Stanley Cavell, _Pursuits of Happiness_

**Material Culture**

     Grant McCracken, _Culture and Consumption: New Approaches to the Symbolic Character of Consumer Goods and Activities_ (1988)      Thomas Schlereth, _Artifacts and the American Past_      John A. Kouwenhoven, _The Arts in Modern Civilization_      Henry Glassie, _Folk Housing in Middle Virginia: A Structural Analysis of Historic Artifacts_      Susan Sontag, _On Photography_      William Stott, _Documentary Expression and Thirties America_      Michael Lesy, _Real Life: Louisville in the Twenties_      Peter B. Hales, _Silver Cities: The Photography of American Urbanization, 1839-1915_      Roy Rosenzweig and Warren Leon, _History Museums in the United States_ (1989)      Roy Rosenzweig, et al., _Presenting the Past: Essays on History and the Public_ (1986)      Donald Meinig, _The Shaping of America_      James Deetz, _In Small Things Forgotten_      Dolores Hayden, _The Grand Domestic Revolution_      John Stilgoe, _Borderland_      Simon Bronner, _Grasping Things: Folk Material Culture and Mass Society in America_

**Anthropology, Sociology, and American Life**

     Karen McCarthy Brown, _Mama Lola: A Vodou Priestess in Brooklyn_ (1991)      Carol Greenhouse, _Praying for Justice: Faith, Order, and Community in an American Town_ (1986)      Marvin Harris, _America Now: The Anthropology of a Changing Culture_      Mark P. Leone, _Roots of Modern Mormonism_      Elizabeth Lawrence, _Rodeo: An Anthropologist Looks at the Wild and the Tame_      William F. Whyte, _Street Corner Society_      Elliot Liebow, _Tally's Corner: A Study of Negro Streetcorner Men_      Rosalie H. Wax, _Doing Fieldwork_ [and see critique by Peter Suzuki, in _Dialectical Anthropology_ , 6 (1981): 23-60 and especially 10 (1986): 186-213.]     Lillian Rubin, _Worlds of Pain_      Herbert Gans, _Levittowners_      Herbert Gans, _Urban Villagers_      Myron Glazer, _Promise and Problems of Field Work_      Rick Fantasia, _Culture of Solidarity_      William Kornblum, _Blue Collar Community_      Susan Ostrander, _Women of the Upper Class_      Carol B. Stack, _All Our Kin_      Bettylou Valentine, _Hustling and Other Hard Work_      Barbara Meyerhof, _Number Our Days_      Kai Erikson, _Everything in Its Path_      Daniel Bell, _The Cultural Contradictions of Capitalism_      Erving Goffman, _The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life_      Erving Goffman, _Frame Analysis: An Essay on the Organization of Experience_      Erving Goffman, _Gender Advertisements_      Herbert Gans, _Middle American Individualism_      Katherine S. Newman, _Falling From Grace: The Experience of Downward Mobility in the American Middle Class_      Peter Berger and Thomas Luckman, _The Social Construction of Reality_      George Marcus and Michael Fischer, _Anthropology as Cultural Critique: An Experimental Moment in the Human Sciences_      James Clifford, _The Predicament of Culture_      James Clifford and George Marcus, ed., _Writing Culture: The Poetics and Politics of Ethnography_      Peggy R. Sunday, _Fraternity Gang Rapes: Sex, Brotherhood, and Privilege on Campus_ (1990)      Ruth Horowitz, _Honor and the American Dream: Culture and Identity in a Chicano Community_ (1985)      Oscar Lewis, _La Vida: A Puerto Rican Family in the Culture of Poverty--San Juan and New York_ \- use in conjunction with Eleanor Leacock, introduction to _The Culture of Poverty_

**The Holistic View from Abroad**

     Margaret Mead, _And Keep Your Powder Dry_      D.W. Brogan, _American Character_      Jean F. Revel, _Without Marx or Jesus_      Geoffrey Gorer, _American People_      Jean Baudrillard, _America_ (1989)      D.H. Lawrence, _Studies in Classic American Literature_

**American Politics**

     Theodore J. Lowi, _The End of Liberalism_ (1969)      James David Barber, _Presidential Character_      Clinton Rossiter, _Conservatism in America_      Michael Kammen, _The Machine That Would Go of Itself_      Jeffrey Goldfarb, _The Cynical Society: The Culture of Politics and the Politics of Culture in American Life_      Alexis DeToqueville, _Democracy in America_      Matthew Crenson, _The Unpolitics of Air Pollution: A Study of Non-Decisionmaking in the Cities_ (1971)      Graham T. Allison, _Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban Middle Crisis_      Raymond Wolfinger and Steven Rosenstein, _Who Votes?_      Richard Fenno, Home Style: _House Members in Their Districts_ (1978)      Doris Graber, _Mass Media and American Politics_ (1989)     Stephen Ansolabehere, Roy Behr, _The Media Game: American Politics in the Television Age._      Deborah A. Stone, _Policy Paradox and Political Research_

**American Culture Studies**

     Joyce Appleby, Lynn Hunt, and Margaret Jacob, _Telling The Truth About History_      Gina Marchetti, _Romance and the 'Yellow Peril': Race, Sex, and Discursive Strategies in Hollywood Fiction_      James S. Moy, _Marginal Sights: Staging the Chinese in America_      Wei-Ming, Tu, _The Living Tree: The Changing Meaning of Being Chinese Today_ (1994)      Elizabeth Buck, _Paradise Remade: The Politics of Culture and History in Hawai'i_      Hillel Schwartz, _Never Satisfied: A Cultural History of Diets, Fantasies, and Fads_      Lynn Hunt, _The New Cultural History_      Carolyn Merchant, _Ecological Revolutions: Nature, Gender and Science in New England_ (1989)      Barbara Ehrenreich, _Fear of Falling: The Inner Life of the Middle Class_ (1989)      Robert Bellah, et al., _Habits of the Heart_      Robert Wuthnow, _The Restructuring of American Religion_ (1988)      Elizabeth Long, _The American Dream and the Popular Novel_ (1985)     

T. J. Jackson Lears, _No Place of Grace_      , _Fables of Abundance._  

Christopher Lasch, _Culture of Narcissism_      , _Minimal Self_      , _True
and Only Heaven_      David Hall, _Worlds of Wonder, Days of Judgment_  

Martha Banta, _Imagining American Women_      , _Taylored Lives: Narrative
Productions in the Age of Taylor, Veblen and Freud_ (1993)

**To explore**

     James Borchert, _Alley Life in Washington_      Kenneth Gergen, _The Saturated Self_      Herman Grey, _Watching Race_      Robin Kelly, _Race Rebels_      Maria Damon, _The Dark Side of the Street_      David W. Noble, _The End of American History_      Paula Rabinowitz, _Labor and Desire_

**Queer theory:**

     Thomas Foster, Carol Siegel, and Ellen E. Berry, ed. _The Gay 90's: Disciplinary and Interdisciplinary Formations in Queer Studies_      Eve K. Sedgwick, ed., _Novel Gazing: Queer Readings in Fiction_      Lisa Lowe and David Lloyd, ed., _The Politics of Culture in the Shadow of Capital_      John Gillis on memory     Mary Louise Pratt, _Imperial Eyes_      John VanMaanen, _Tales of the Field: On Writing Ethnography_      Mike Dyson     Susan Crarts, ed., _My Music_      Michael Walser, _Running with the Devil: Power, Gender and Madness in Heavy Metal Music_      Andrew Ross, ed., _Microphone Fiends_      Elijah Anderson, _Street Wise: Race, Class, and Change in an Urban Community_      Elizabeth Buck, _Paradise Remade: The Politics of Culture and History in Hawai'a_ (1993)      James S. Moy, _Marginal Sights: The Staging of the Chinese in America_      Sarat and Kearn, _Law in Everyday Life_      Hale, _Making Whiteness_      Hill, _Whiteness_      Appiah and Guttmann, _Color Conscious_      Bernard, _Birth of Whiteness_

**Critical Race Theory**

     Michael Omi and Howard Vincent, _Racial Formation in the U.S 1960s-1980s_

**Critical White Studies**

**PRESENTATIONS**

There is a close relationship between a paper and a presentation -- they both
cover roughly the same ground. In making an oral presentation, draw on what
you will write, or visa versa. Nonetheless, a paper and presentation are
different. Think about how a presentation should be different from a paper.
Consider tactics of delivery and engagement that professors and peers have
used and that you have found helpful. Most of those who make presentations
begin with some nervousness -- that is something everyone in the audience will
understand. Try to avoid reading word-for-word from printed material. Aim for
a style that is more conversational. Remember who your audience is -- try to
get your listeners engaged in what you are saying. Work for your audience to
connect what you are doing with what they have read and discussed throughout
the course. Remember how unfamiliar they are with the material you are
presenting. Think about developing and delivering your paper in a way that
interests, engages, and provokes.

Plan to talk for no more than 20 minutes. Most students come to a presentation
with enough to say to last that much and much more. Leave time for questions.  
  
[![The
Major](buttons/navamsmajoryellow.gif)](major.html)[![Faculty](buttons/navamsfacultyyellow.gif)](faculty.html)[![Courses](buttons/navamscoursesyellow.gif)](courses.html)[![Handbook](buttons/navamshandbookyellow.gif)](handbook.html)[![Options](buttons/navamsoptionsyellow.gif)](options.html)[![Careers](buttons/navamscareersyellow.gif)](careers.html)[![Resources](buttons/navamsresourcesyellow.gif)](resources.html)[![News](buttons/navamsnewsyellow.gif)](news.html)

  

