**CASPER COLLEGE COURSE SYLLABUS**

** **

**SEMESTER:** Summer 2000



**COURSE NUMBER & TITLE**: EDCI 1420 - Education Seminar - Mathematics, Theory
II



**LECTURE HOURS** : 1 **LAB HOURS:** 0 **CREDITS:** 1



**CLASS TIME:** 7:50-9:30 A.M. **DAYS:** TH **ROOM:** PS 106



**INSTRUCTOR'S NAME:** Pete Wildman



**INSTRUCTOR'S OFFICE:** PS 344 **OFFICE PHONE** : 268-2506



**OFFICE HOURS:** MWTHF:11:30-12:30 A.M.

T: 9-9:40 A.M.

Other times by appointment or just drop by \- I am often around in addition to
these hours

If you can not get me in person, please contact me by e-mail at
[pwildman@acad.cc.whecn.edu](mailto:pwildman@acad.cc.whecn.edu) or
[peterw@trib.com](mailto:peterw@trib.com). I check my e-mail many times daily!



**COURSE DESCRIPTION:** (From the Casper College Catalog)



EDCI 1420 Seminar in Education "Mathematics" \- Theory II (1 L, 1 CR)



This course will cover activities parallel to the topics discussed in Math
1105. The course is scheduled to meet in two hour sessions every other week
during the semester and class activities are coordinated with the topics
currently begin covered in Math 1105. Students will be expected to attend and
actively participate in all sessions and activities

**PREREQUISITES:**



None



**GENERAL OBJECTIVES:**

This course along with Math 1105 is designed to prepare students to teach math
as elementary or junior high school teachers. EDCI 1420 will focus on
educational pedagogy - or the particular practice of teaching this material.
We will look at a variety of physical models for instruction, computers,
calculators and other educational issues. You will get some practice and
exposure to a variety of techniques for exposing students to these topics.

**SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES**

** **

Specifically you will be introduced to probability models, simulations,
statistical models, geometric constructions, geometric models and measurement
models. You will get a tremendous amount of hands-on experience with this as
this material lends itself to this naturally. Through both the activities and
assignments in the course you will receive a solid introduction to
manipulative and methods for effective instruction

** **

**MATERIALS NEEDED FOR THE COURSE:**

** **

There is no textbook for this course. All the material will be presented
during the seminar sessions. You will find it helpful to have a simple
scientific calculator for use during these sessions. Whichever calculator you
choose to buy - it should have power, root and fraction capabilities. If you
have any questions about calculators-please do not hesitate to ask.

** **

**METHODOLOGY:** In most seminar sessions we will begin with a demonstration
or a discussion of a particular idea or model as a group. Then we will break
up into groups and work together on an assignment. The assignment is due the
next seminar session. Occasionally I will ask you to work alone on a project.
If you have any questions during a seminar session please do not hesitate to
ask! There is no such thing as a stupid question! Your active participation in
this course is critical - please make an effort to attend each seminar session
and actively participate with your group.









**EVALUATION CRITERIA** : Scores on an idea/lesson portfolio, a teaching
presentation, class assignments and class participation will determine your
grade in this course.



¡§       Each student will maintain a mathematics idea/lesson portfolio. Ideas
can be gathered from the course, outside reading, periodicals, each others,
practice teaching, etc..Especially encouraged are ideas of unique methods to
introduce math concepts. The idea file will be collected at the end of the
semester. Specific rules for idea files will be given in a separate handout.



¡§       Each student will prepare a mathematics teaching presentation. These
will be presented during the final class session. Specific information on the
structure and requirements for the demo will be given later in the course.



¡§       Each student should complete and hand in the handouts given at each
session (One handout per group is okay)



Your grade in this course will be determined as follows: You grade in this
course is separate from Math 1105: Theory of Arithmetic II. The points
possible for each section listed above are:



Idea File 100 pts

Teach Demo 100 pts

Assignments 100 pts

Participation 100 pts



The assignment grade will be determined by an average of your total points
earned on assignments and your attendance and active participation in class
will determine the participation grade. Your final grade will be determined by
an average of the total possible points. You are guaranteed the traditional
grading scale (90%+ A, 80-89% B, 70-79% C, 60-69% D, 59%- F), but I reserve
the right to lower this scale if necessary.



**LAST DATE TO CHANGE TO AUDIT STATUS OR TO WITHDRAW**



Friday July 14, 2000



**STUDENT RIGHTS & RESPONSIBILITIES**



Please refer to the Casper College Student Conduct and Judicial Code for
information concerning your rights and responsibilities as a Casper College
student.

** **

**TENTATIVE SCHEDULE WITH CONTENT**

** **

Some seminar session topics may change



6/13- Intro to course - Statistical models

6/20 \- Probability games and models

6/27 \- A simulation from biology!

7/6 \- Geometric models - Tangrams & geoboards

7/13 \- Tesselations!

7/20 \- An introduction to the TI-73 and its use in elementary school math

7/27- Measurement and outdoor geometry

8/3 \- Teaching demos (idea files are also due)



** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

**TENTATIVE SCHEDULE WITH COURSE CONTENT**

** **

**COURSE: Math 1105 - Theory of Arithmetic II**

**TEXT: Mathematics for Elementary School Teachers, Bassarear**

**SEMESTER: Summer 1999**

** **

**  
**

**6/7- Intro to course, 7.1 : Representing data**

**6/9- Finish 7.1, Start 7.2: Distributions**

**6/11-Finish 7.2**

**6/14-7.3: probability**

**6/16-Finish 7.3, Start 7.4 Chance and counting**

**6/18: finish 7.4**

**6/21-8.1 basic concepts of geometry**

**6/23-8.2 Two dimensional figures**

**6/25-Finish 8.2**

**6/28-Review day**

**6/30-Test #1**

**7/2-8.3: Three-dimensional figures**

**7/5 - HOLIDAY NO SCHOOL**

**7/7- 9.1 Translations, Reflections, Rotations**

**7/9- Finish 9.1, do 9.2 symmetry**

**7/12-9.3 Similarity**

**7/14 Review day**

**7/16: Test #2**

**7/19: 10.1 systems of measurement**

**7/21: 10.2 Perimeter and area**

**7/23: 10.3 Surface area and volume**

**7/26: Appendix A constructions**

**7/28: Review day**

**7/30: Test #3**

