  |

|

**SYLLABUS for EMAT 4690/6690 Using Computers in Mathematics Instruction**  
  
---  
  


_Instructor_ :

> James W. Wilson  
>  105 Aderhold Hall, (Office in Rm 110-F)  
>  Telephone: 542-4552  
>  Internet Address: [**http://jwilson.coe.uga.edu**](../../../Default.html)  
>  E-mail address: **[jwilson@coe.uga.edu](mailto:jwilson@coe.uga.edu)**

* * *

_**Office hours:**_ **** I maintain an open door policy for office hours. I
come to the office early each morning and if I am not tied up in a meeting or
talking to another student I am available to you.

EMAT 4680: Under our program guidelines, students should enroll concurrently
in EMAT 4680 and EMAT 3500. If you are going to follow our undergraduate
program and have not already taken EMAT 3500, discuss this situation with me.

Prerequisites for EMAT 4690/6690: MATH 2210 and EMAT 4680/6680. If you do not
have these prerequisites, please talk with me.

* * *

**Course Description**

This follow-up course to EMAT 4680/6680, as outlined on this web site, and is
an extension of EMAT 4680/6680 in at least two senses. First, the course aims
to develop more depth with the use of various software applications to engage
in mathematics investigations, to organize pedagogical demonstrations, and to
set up problem explorations. The emphasis here is on mathematical
investigations through the presentation of essays. Second, it will emphasize
the development of units of material (e.g. sequences of lessons) that might be
used with secondary school students.

The students may use application software owned by the Department of
Mathematics Education and carry out the course using primarily Macintosh
computers. Student owned software and/or Windows computers may also be used.
The emphasis is on exploration of various mathematics contexts to learn
mathematics, to pose problems and problem extensions, to solve problems, and
to communicate mathematical demonstrations.

The following software will be used:

  1. Graphing Calculator 3.1 or 3.2. (Also known as NuCalc 2.0 for Windows) 
  2. Geometer's Sketchpad 4.01 
  3. Excel 
  4. xFn 
  5. Microsoft Word 
  6. Other software as needed 
  7. Handheld devices
  8. Web Page Development Software
  9. Netscape 4.79 or Internet Explorer 5.1
  10. FTP software

* * *

**Course Assignments**

There is no textbook. Course assignments, files, and materials will be given
via the network and submitted via the network. Of course, some material will
be presented and discussed in class. Communication will be facilitated via
e-mail and each student should have an e-mail account.

**Your Web Site. IMPORTANT!!!**

You will continue to build your own Web Site as begun in the EMAT 4680/6680
course. You can of course read your web page from anywhere with Internet
access. Use FTP access if you wish to place material on your web site from off
campus. There is a bit of a learning curve . . .

**Teams:** You are encouraged to work in teams of 2 or 3 people if it
facilitates productivity. If you are more productive as a "lone eagle" then
work alone. When you work in teams, however, it might be to some advantage to
form different teams for different projects.

* * *

**Projects/Course Requirements:**

There will be two kinds of projects: Instructional units and "essays."

An **instructional unit** will be a set of materials you put together to use
with real or hypothetical students. A rule of thumb is to develop material to
use for about 10 days of mathematics instruction. Each of you should
participate in a team that produces at least one instructional unit. The IU
should be placed on the shared files when you are satisfied with it and at the
end of the course each of you can copy off to your own disks the IUs from the
whole group.

**Essays:** What is an essay? It is your presentation/write-up of a
mathematical investigation. An important criterion is that it communicates
something you have done with mathematics and can share with others --
students, fellow teachers, informed citizens, my mother (how is that for a
test of whether it communicates?). A model might be a Mathematics Teacher
article, but communication does not have to be limited to the printed page and
putting your essays on the web site allows use of the hypertext format and the
various application tools to add visuals to your presentation.

How many essays are required? That depends. Say three. But, three trivial
things will not suffice; one really profound treatise will suffice. If you are
going to produce essays on small ideas (not necessarily small essays) then do
more than 3. If you get involved in a major work, maybe one is enough. For
example, a treatise was produced two years ago showing 25 or more
demonstrations and proofs of relationships with arbelos (an arrangement of
three related semicircles). Unfortunately we did not keep a computer copy. One
participant from this quarter plans to develop a presentation of inversion
geometry with Geometer's Sketchpad. These are probably worth a lot more than
an Excel page that generates the Pascal triangle.

* * *

[**CLICK HERE**](../../../EMT669.html) **for EMAT6690 DOCUMENTATION**

* * *

**Contextual Teaching and Learning (CTL)**

I would like either one essay (or more) or an instructional unit to examine
the mathematics of some workplace environment. I will try to provide some
examples and reaction. The CTL literature is built around the notion that a
vital part of our preparation of teachers should attend to the preparation of
their students for the workplace (as an alternative to academia). See:

  * **[The mathematics of irrigation systems.](../../../EMT668/EMAT6680.2000/Mylod/Math7200/Project/Irrigation.html)**
  * [**Geology surface mapping.**](http://jwilson.coe.uga.edu/EMT725/Envir/Three.Point.html)
  * **[Pollution](../../../EMT725/Envir/Volume.html) **
  * **[Cleanup Golf Course Maintenance](../../../EMT725/Bob2/Golf/GolfGreen.html) **

**Students' Work**

  * **[North Georgia Hydro.](../../../EMT668/EMAT6680.2000/Westmoreland/CTL/CTL.html)**
  * [**Math In Context: Statistical Process Control**](../EMT668/EMAT6680.2001/Sikes/emat6690/essayprocesscontrol/essayprocesscontrol.html)
  * [**The Golden Ratio in Art and Architecture**](../EMT668/EMAT6680.2001/Youn/EMAT6690/Essay%201/Introduction.html)
  * [**Landscaping**](../EMT668/EMAT4680.2000/Laws.Casey/EMAT4690/landscaping/landscaping.html)






 * * *


 **Portfolio Notion**



 Essentially, the essays and the unit are the summary of your work in the
course. Collectively they are a portfolio of your "best work." You can decide
what goes into the portfolio and when it is ready. It is assumed that essays
that you have finished and submitted can be shared at the end of the quarter
so that anyone that wants an electronic copy can take it from the shared
folder. Material that is sent to me via e-mail is does not go directly into
the shared folder.



 **Time on computers:** You can not expect to accomplish what you should from
this course without time on the computers that is in addition to the time we
have in class. The usual expectation of 2 hours study outside of class for
every hour in class is probably a minimum. Our class will be in Room 111/113
using the PowerPC G3 and G4 computers. Other Macintosh laboratories in
Aderhold are available to you and we can help you get some software to run on
computers away from the university.



 * * *


 **OBJECTIVES**



   * To become familiar with and operational on Macintosh computer systems. 
   * To use application software to solve mathematics problems. 
   * To use application software to create mathematics demonstrations.
   * To use application software to construct new ideas of mathematics for yourself. 
   * To engage in mathematical investigations using software applications. 
   * To engage in some independent investigations of mathematics topics from the secondary school curriculum or appropriate for that level. 
   * To communicate mathematics ideas that arise from mathematics applications on the Macintosh 
   * To communicate mathematics ideas via the Macintosh applications. 
   * To use general tools such as word processing, paint programs, spread sheets on the Macintosh to facilitate mathematics investigations and communication about mathematics investigations.




 * * *


 **Attendance:** You are expected to attend class. If you have to miss for
reasons other than illness, see me prior to the absence. If you are ill, your
first priority is your health and the health of others. See me afterward and
we will work with you.



    
   |   |  
  
  


 The Department of Mathematics Education



 University of Georgia



 (C)2001



 ****

