**EMAT 4680**

**Computers in Mathematics Education, Spring Semester, 1999.**  
    


January 7 - May 5

8:00 - 9:15 a.m. Tues., Thurs

**Instructors** : John Olive, 105F Aderhold Hall, 542-4557

> > Keith Leatham, 105H Aderhold Hall, 542-4543

>>

>> e-mail: jolive@coe.uga.edu kleatham@coe.uga.edu

**Office hours** : John: 9:30 - 11:30 a.m. Tuesday and Thursday and by
appointment

> > > Keith: by appointment

**Course Description**.

(Borrowed freely from Dr. James W. Wilson's course description)  
    
    

This course will concentrate on using various software applications to solve
mathematics problems, to organize pedagogical demonstrations, and to set up
problem explorations. The students will use application software owned by the
Department of Mathematics Education and will carry out the course using
primarily Macintosh computers.

The emphasis is on exploration of various mathematics contexts to learn
mathematics, to pose problems and problem extensions, to solve problems, and
to communicate mathematical demonstrations.  
    


**Software and other technologies**

1\. _Geometer's Sketchpad_

GSP is a dynamic geometric construction package with features that include
construction tools, measurement tools transformation tools, and animation
tools.

2\. _The Graphing Calculator 2.0_

The Graphing Calculator comes as part of the Power Macintosh Operating System.
It is also available for Windows machines. It is a program for graphing
functions in two and three variables, animating functions, and other
utilities. It also graphs relations. The distinction between a relation
grapher and a function grapher is an important one from both mathematical and
pedagogical considerations.

3\. _Excel Spreadsheet_

Excel is a second generation spreadsheet program that allows creation and
manipulation of a data array and the immediate graphing of selected subsets of
the array.

4\. _Netscape Navigator/Communicator_

This is a Web Browser that we shall use for exploring the World Wide Web. We
shall be taking part in a special project with the Math Forum on the Web.

5\. _LCSI Microworlds_

Microworlds is an environment for Logo programming. We shall use it to explore
"Turtle Geometry" and function concepts.

6\. _FATHOM_

This is a new dynamic software environment that is being developed for
exploring statistics and probability. We shall be testing a Beta version of
the software.

7\. _Macintosh tool programs for word processing and drawing_

It is useful to be able to go from any application program to present output
within a discussion and to print that discussion on the printed page.
Microsoft Word 6.0 is one of several word processing programs available.
Various "paint" programs provide useful drawing capabilities.

8\. _Graphing Calculators and CBL's_

We shall be using TI-83 Graphing Calculators for exploring algebraic ideas. We
shall also use the Calculator-Based Laboratory (CBL) along with the TI-83 to
collect real-time data and graph it.

**Course Requirements**

The required text for this course is the Student Edition of **_The Geometer's
Sketchpad_ , **available from the UGA bookstore. This will be the primary
software used during this course and EMAT 4690. The student edition costs
approximately $40 and includes everything that is in the full-price individual
package except for a three-ring binder! This will be the students' very own
copy that they can use on their home machines or on one classroom machine when
they are in schools. (It should be removed from the school machine when they
leave the school.) More importantly, this will provide students with full
documentation on the program and thus allow them to explore the capabilities
of the software in much greater depth than any course handouts can provide.

The class will use fully ethernet networked computers in Room 111/113. Most
assignments will be given and turned in via the network. We will have access
to and learn to use various network tools. All students will be required to
have an active e-mail account as electronic mail will be the primary mode of
communication outside of class.

Students will need a few High Density (HD) 2 Mb capacity 3.5" disks.

For those who can not resist killing off a few trees, there is a printer . . .

**Electronic Portfolios**

All work for this course will be kept in Electronic Portfolios. These will be
saved on students' floppy disks as well as in the instructor's shared folder
on his hard drive. Each week there will be challenge or follow-up
investigations based on the classroom explorations. At least one of these
follow-up investigations will be written up and saved in the students'
electronic portfolios along with the results of the classroom explorations.

**Reports on the _Standards_ and other readings**

Students will be required to write a report on how the new NCTM _Standards_
documents provide for the use of technology in the mathematics teaching and
learning enterprise. These reports will be included in their electronic
portfolios and should include example activities to illustrate the
recommendations. Short reflections on other assigned readings will also be
included in their portfolios.

**Final Project**

The Final Project for this course will be the development of a teaching unit
that makes use of at least one of the technological tools that students have
been using in this class. This unit will be a group effort and should cover at
least four lessons with students. At the midpoint of the semester students
will form into groups of four to choose a topic for their final project. The
intent is to implement this project with high school students during the next
semester (as part of EMAT 5360).

**Final Exam/Presentation**

The final exam will be the presentation of the groups' Projects to the rest of
the class, including class participation activities. These presentations will
take place during the final exam period: 8:00 - 11:00 a.m., Wednesday, May 5,
1999.

[Schedule of Topics](Schedule99.html) **Grading**

Grading will be based on the following criteria:

> \- Participation in class activities and discussions . . . . (10% of total
grade)

>

> \- Electronic Portfolios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . (50% total)

>

>> Classroom investigations (5%)

>>

>> Follow-up activities (20%)

>>

>> Reports on the _Standards_ (20%)

>>

>> Reflections on readings (5%)

>

> \- Final Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . (25% total)

>

>> Group effort (15%)

>>

>> Individual effort (10%)

>

> \- Final Presentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . .(15% total)

>

>> Group effort (10%)

>>

>> Individual effort (5%)

**Time on computers**

Students can not expect to accomplish what they should from this course
without time on the computers that is in addition to the time we have in
class. The usual expectation of 2 hours study outside of class for every hour
in class is probably a minimum. There are several Macintosh laboratories
available in this building and across campus.

**A note on computers**

We are scheduled to hold this class in Room 111/113 with a laboratory of
Macintosh Power PC computers. The Power PCs are in the family of the most
advanced computers in the Macintosh line. There are some additional Macintosh
computers in Rooms 228, 229, 615, and in the EMAT office area (Rm. 105G). _MS
Windows_ versions of some applications are available.

