### Quasars, Black Holes, and the Universe (PHYS 145) 2000 Syllabus

  
  
What is this course about?  | [What are some specific course
goals?](objectives.htm) | Course Problems: PHYS 145 and Problem Based Learning  
---|---|---  
Course Requirements  | Readings  | [Detailed Class Schedule](00schedule.htm)  
What are discussion sections, and how are they related to the large class?  |
Frequently Asked Questions about Working in Groups | Why should I learn how to
work in groups?  
[Course Policies (attendance, exams, academic honesty)](policies.htm) | [Study
Tips](studytips.htm) | Course Instructors  
[Assignment Due Dates and Exam Dates ](assignment.dates.htm) | [Linked Course
Webpages](weblinks.htm) | [Description of in-class activities](activities.htm)  
[Discussion Section Assignments](assignment.topics.htm) | [Information about
Group D courses in general](groupD.htm) | [Harry's Hotline](hotline.htm)  
  
**Information of current interest**

Information relevant to the University Faculty Senate Committee on General
Education, specifically with regards to the questions being asked about
pathways courses, can be obtained at

<http://www.udel.edu/physics/phys145/pathways.short.htm>

A more detailed description of the ten goals of the General Education Program
can be found at

_<http://www.udel.edu/facsen/reports/>_

  
  

The answer key for the final exam can be found by [clicking here.
](final.anskey.htm) Challenges are due by midnight tonight, preferably over
email but also by calling Harry's Hotline (831-2986).

A final exam review sheet can be found by [clicking here. ](final.info.htm)

_The [overheads](overheads3.htm) for the last part of the course have been
posted to the web.

There are three webpages which are relevant to the last section of the course.
Each can be accessed by clicking on its URL, which is provided here:

[theory.htm](theory.htm)_ is the handout on theory distributed on November 20.

[evolution.htm](evolution.htm)_ is the brief description of the theory of
evolution, presented in class on November 27.

[darwin.einstein.god.htm](darwin.einstein.god.htm)_ is my article, written
some years ago but with a brief update, on the relationship between science
and religion.

For information on the second hour exam, including a set of essay questions,
some of which will actually appear on the exam, [click here. ](he2info.htm)

_For copies of the overheads which were used in class, relating to Problems 2,
3, and 4 (the material which is on the second hour exam), [click
here](overheads2.htm).

_For the big assignment topic (due October 25), [click here.
](big.assignment.htm)

_For a worked-out example in relativity which uses algebra,[ click here.
](http://www.udel.edu/physics/phys145/99/synchro.htm)

_For the answers to the objective section of the first exam, [click here.
](h1.answers.htm)

_For a set of essay questions, some of which will actually appear on the first
hour exam,[ click here.](h1.essays.htm)

_For some specific information about the first hour exam, including the
questions from the reader which are relevant to topics covered on the first
exam,[ click here. ](exam1info.htm)

_For a copy of the overheads which were used in the classes prior to the first
hour exam, [click here.](overheads1.htm)

[For information on the waiting list and this course's application of the
University's Seat Claim policy, click here.](/seatclaim.htm)

* * *

_This syllabus, which is available in full form on the World Wide Web,
outlines course objectives, policies, exam dates, and meeting times. Previous
experience shows that small changes in the class schedule may occur during the
year -- though the exam times will remain the same.  **WHAT IS THIS COURSE
ABOUT?**  
---  
  
PHYS 145 is a course which focuses on a few particularly exciting areas in the
field of astronomy and life science, a few important, big questions. It
differs from many other entry-level science courses in that it is not a survey
course and makes no pretense of "covering" all of one field. Black holes and
the Universe are the two main topics covered in the course. (Quasars have
diminished in importance over the years but are still in the course title.)
Because the course is carefully and narrowly focussed, students can get a
feeling for how science is done, because students in this course can learn
almost as much about these areas of science as researchers know, in spite of
the absence of high-level mathematics in this course. Students develop a
feeling for science as a living, growing way of understanding our place in the
Universe, rather than as a collection of well-understood facts which are to be
memorized, dutifully regurgitated on exams, and forgotten almost immediately
thereafter.

##### Course Problems or Driving Questions  
  
---  
  
In the spirit of problem-based learning, five major problems, or driving
questions, serve as organizers for the course. These driving questions are:

1\. How do we find black holes?

2\. What are black holes really like?

3\. How does gravity and high speed travel affect the behavior of space and
time?

4\. Where did it all come from? (Put differently, what is the life cycle of
the Universe?)

5\. Where did complex life forms come from?

[Click on this sentence for a more complete description of problem-based
learning, including the major University of Delaware initiative in this
topic.](pbl.htm)

_It really is remarkable that we can understand that this extraordinarily
complex Universe that we live in is the product of a fairly simple beginning,
the Big Bang, and a small set of reasonably well understood forces which are
responsible for the creation and evolution of the contents of the Universe:
galaxies, stars, planets, and people. Gravity, nuclear physics, and the
properties of gases can explain the evolution of stars and galaxies.
Biological evolution can explain the development of complex life forms,
including human beings. To may thinkers, one of the most important human
achievements has been our understanding of these forces, so that by sitting on
a tiny rockball, off in the far reaches of the Milky Way Galaxy, observing the
Universe, and understanding our observations, we can come to a remarkably
complete understanding of how it all came to be.

**[Why are we offering group D courses, and how are they structured to meet
the needs of general-audience students?](groupD.htm)**

**[What are some specific course objectives?](objectives.htm)**

##### Back to the top of this page  
  
---  
  
  
  

##### Course Requirements  
  
---  
  
_ Here is how your grade is determined:  Participation points from group work
in class | 10 %  
---|---  
Written assignments to be turned in at the BEGINNING of class - mostly in
discussion section  | 10 %  
Participation points from discussion | 5 %  
Big Written Assignment | 14 %  
First Hour Examination | 18 %  
Second Hour Examination | 18 %  
Final Examination | 25 %  
Total  | 100 %  
  
Grades in this class are determined on an absolute scale. 93% and above earns
you an A; 90-92.9% earns you an A-, 87-89.9 % is a B+, 83-86.9% is a B,
80-82.9 % is a B-, 77-79.9 % is a C+, 73-76.9% is a C, 70-72.9 % is a C-,
67-69.9 % is a D+, 63-66.9% is a D, 60-62.9 % is a D-, and anything below 60%
is an F. If an exam turns out to be unexpectedly difficult, exam grades may be
adjusted upwards (but they are never adjusted downwards).

Note that many course assignments may be distributed over e-mail or the world
wide web.You should regularly check your e-mail account at UD, or have UD
e-mail forwarded to an account which you do check.

##### Back to the top of this page  
  
---  
  
#####

##### _What readings do you need to do in order to succeed in this course?  
  
---  
  
You need to buy three books for this course: Rees's Before the Beginning,
Weiner's The Beak of the Finch (both available at the bookstore) and
"Readings," a course packet from Copy Maven. Contents of the course packet are
listed on a separate web page;
[/readings/copymaven/htm](/readings.copymaven.htm).

##### [Click here to obtain a detailed class schedule. ](/00schedule.htm)  
  
---  
  
##### [Click here to obtain a list of dates for assignments and
exams.](assignmentlist.htm)  
  
---  
  
##### What are discussion sections, and how do they relate to the large class?  
  
---  
  
_On Thursdays and Fridays you will meet with your discussion section TA in a
smaller group than is the case in the large class. These discussion sections
will always involve group work, rather than lecture. For each week, there will
be a specific assignment for discussion section (which counts for a grade),
and much of what you in discussion section will be group work. The activities
for group work have been specifically selected as being ones which will work
better in a small class.

The topics in discussion section are listed in the [main class
schedule.](00schedule.htm) __ The due dates for discussion section assignments
are in this schedule and in a separate list of [assignments and test
dates](assignment.dates.htm). _The assignments themselves will be posted no
later than four days ahead of time in a separate list of [assignment
topics](assignment.topics.htm).

##### WHY SHOULD I LEARN HOW TO WORK IN GROUPS?  
  
---  
  
_You are working in groups in this course for two reasons:

  * Ninety years of research and thousands of studies show that, when collaborative learning is done right, students learn better when they work in groups. 
  * In the 21st century workplace, you will be working in teams. If you have team skills, you will thrive. I'm an optimistic person and don't want to be very specific about what happens if you don't have team skills, but most Delaware students should be able to figure this out. See a separate [webpage on teams](/teams.htm). 

##### Back to the top of this page  
  
---  
  
  
_Answers to miscellaneous questions: (click on the question to get to an
answer)  
---  
  
[How can I, as a student, provide feedback to the professor?
](student.feedback.htm)

[What are the course policies about deadlines, class conduct, academic
dishonesty, etc.? ](policies.htm)

[](00schedule.htm)[What can I do to help me study for an exam?
](studytips.htm)

[How can I do a better job working in groups?](groups.htm)_

  
  
**Course Instructors**  
---  
  
The lead instructor is Harry Shipman, 124 Sharp Lab, phone 831-2986 (office);
731-7758 (home). Please do not call me at home unless your call is of an
emergency nature. Office hours: Monday 2:30-3:30, Tuesday 2:00-3:30, or by
appointment. I am available to talk to students any time I am in my office,
which usually means normal working hours. "Office hours" are times when I will
do my best to actually be in my office, though there may be rare times when
committee meetings or travel commitments will take me away from the office
then. If you have a quick question, one easy way to contact me is by e-mail.
My electronic mail address is "harrys@udel.edu" Feel free to stop by at most
times other than my office hours, but you might want to call first to make
sure I'm in my office, not at the Math/Science Education Resource Center,
working with colleagues in the College of Education on science education
research, visiting a Delaware school, working on NASA business, or at the ice
arena. Please try to avoid dropping by my office immediately before this class
(MWF before 10 AM) or my other class (MWF from noon - 1:30 PM). That is when I
prepare this class and if you interrupt my class preparation you and many
other students will immediately suffer the consequences.

Teaching Assistants: Jeff Henderson and Maddy Pachter-Vail will be
facilitating discussion sections and will also be available for your
questions. They are undergraduates who have been successful students in this
course. If you would like to meet with them to discuss the course, please
email them to set a time and place. Their email addresses are:

Jeff Henderson : [jhen@udel.edu](mailto:jhen@udel.edu)

_Maddy Pachter-Vail: [maddypv@udel.edu](mailto:maddypv@udel.edu)

##### Back to the top of this page

_This page is maintained by and copyrighted by Harry L. Shipman, Annie Jump
Cannon Professor of Physics and Astronomy, University of Delaware.
([harrys@udel.edu)](mailto:\(harrys@udel.edu\))

_Most recent revision: February 5, 2001

  
  

