mte405 Syllabus

## [OAKLAND UNIVERSITY](http://www.oakland.edu/)

## [DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS AND STATISTICS](http://www.math.oakland.edu/)

## STUDENT INFORMATION SHEET AND SYLLABUS

**COURSE:** MTE 405, Special Topics, 2 Credits

**SEMESTER:** Fall, 2001

**INSTRUCTOR:** [Professor Jerrold
Grossman](http://www.oakland.edu/~grossman), 346 SEB, (248) 370-3443, e-mail:
[grossman@oakland.edu](mailto:grossman@oakland.edu)

**WHAT WILL WE BE DOING IN THIS CLASS?:** Having a lot of fun exploring some
miscellaneous topics in mathematics, both in class and on your own. Although I
have some ideas for what we can do, nothing is firm, and suggestions from the
members of the class can alter specifics of what we study. Each week will
probably involve something new and different. There is no particular topic
that "must" be covered -- there is so much mathematics out there, relevant to
the K-8 curriculum, that whatever we choose will be beneficial to you. The
idea is for you to further increase your problem-solving abilities and learn
more about the breadth and depth of the subject. (Throughout this course,
"mathematics" is to be interpreted broadly, including statistics, computer
science, and applied mathematics, as well as what one might consider
traditional "math".)

**CLASS MEETING:** The class meets Tuesdays from 5:30 until 7:17 p.m., perhaps
with a short break in the middle. Attendance at every class is required, and
class participation is important. There will be some work for you to do
outside of class.

**OFFICE HOURS AND CONTACT INFORMATION:** Rather than listing formal office
hours, let me just state that I am usually around most of every day, except
when in meetings. You can always make a definite appointment if you wish.
Please contact me by telephone (370-3443) or
[e-mail](mailto:grossman@oakland.edu) any time you have a question. There is a
World Wide Web page devoted to the course. The intent is that this web page
will contain lots of useful information, as well as a link to a [discussion
board](http://www2.oakland.edu/ouforums/logon.cfm?forum=MTE405FALL2001) so
that you can chat among yourselves. The URL is
<http://www.oakland.edu/~grossman/MTE405/>.

**PREREQUISITES:** The prerequisite for this course is MTE
[210](http://www.oakland.edu/~grossman/MTE210/mte210.html)-211 (plus a lot of
mathematical curiosity). Most of you have had quite a few math classes,
including precalculus or calculus, so I am confident that you have the
necessary background knowledge and skills.

**TEXTBOOK:** We will use [_The Heart of Mathematics: An Invitation to
Effective
Thinking_](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1559534079/qid=967233222/sr=1-1/104-9839352-0722301)
by Burger and Starbird (Key College Publishing, 2000) at least to some extent.
Note that it comes with a manipulative kit I'll also probably provide handouts
of other necessary materials.

**CALCULATORS AND COMPUTERS:** You should probably have a scientific (or
fancier) calculator; some of the things we work on may require it. If there's
interest, we could take a look at some mathematical software such as computer
algebra systems (like maple) or a wonderful geometry tool called [The
Geometer's Sketchpad](http://www.keypress.com/product_info/sketchpad3.html).
These are both available on machines in the computer labs on campus.

**ASSESSMENT:** I don't plan to give any formal tests in this class, although
this is negotiable. Your course grade will be based on the various things you
hand in during the semester, with each item weighted more or less equally.
Class participation will also be considered when assigning grades.

**PROJECTS:** I envision the main work of this course to be a series of
explorations, done in groups of about three, both in class and outside of
class. You will hand in reports of the results of these investigations, and we
will discuss the results in class.

**OTHER REQUIREMENTS:** (1) Two short book reports on books you have read
during the term. One should be a biography (or autobiography) of a
mathematician, or a book on the history of mathematics, or a book on race,
gender, or ethnicity as it relates to math; and the other should be some sort
of popular math book -- something for a general audience (not a textbook that
teaches something to a student in a course but a book about mathematics that
someone might read for general enjoyment or enlightenment). I'll provide lots
of [suggestions](http://www.oakland.edu/~grossman/MTE405/books.html). You can
do these in either order. One is due on October 23, and the other is due the
last day of class. (2) A short report on your exploration of the World Wide
Web for some interesting mathematics or mathematics education material. Hone
in on one good site, and critically report on it. I'll give some
[suggestions](http://www.oakland.edu/~grossman/MTE405/links.html) on where to
start looking. This is due on November 20.

**ACADEMIC HONESTY:** Cheating is a serious academic crime. Oakland University
policy requires that all suspected instances of cheating be reported to the
Academic Conduct Committee for adjudication. Anyone found guilty of cheating
in this course will receive a course grade of 0.0, in addition to any penalty
assigned by the Academic Conduct Committee. In this course, projects are to be
the sole work of the group; do not consult with other groups or people outside
of class (except me). Remember to give proper citation to material obtained
elsewhere (books, the Web, etc.).

* * *

Return to [MTE 405 home page](http://www.oakland.edu/~grossman/MTE405/).  
Last modified: August 14, 2001.

* * *

