# Syllabus

  
MAC 1105 College Algebra  
Credits 03  
Summer 2002  
  
_Instructor:_ Pina  
  
_Office Hours:_  
  
_E-mail Address:_  
  
_Discussion Section Leader:_  
  
_Tutorial Hours (Science and Engineering 299L):  
_  
_E-mail Address:_  
  
_Description:_ MAC 1105 is a fast-paced Algebra course designed to prepare
students for university level courses using Mathematics. Topics include
systems of equations, rational exponents, radicals, linear, quadratic,
polynomial, exponential and logarithmic functions. Students intending to
satisfy general education requirements in Mathematics should consider taking
MGF 1106 Mathematics for Liberal Arts I, MGF 1107 Mathematics for Liberal Arts
II and/or an Introductory Statistics course. Note: Introductory Statistics has
a prerequisite of either MGF 1106, MGF 1107, or MAC 1105.  
  
_Textbook:_ __Algebra and Trigonometry__ \- by Michael Sullivan, Prentice Hall
6 th Edition 1999.  
Prerequisites: Intermediate or High School Algebra.  
  
_Software:_ _[MathPro Explorer 3.0](mathpro.html)_ This software will be used
in the computer lab component of the course. The MathPro computer lab
assignments are can be completed on-line on any computer that has the MathPro
5 plugins installed on its web browser however, it is HIGHLY recommended that
you complete your MathPro computer assignments in the Deparment of
Mathematical Sciences computer labs. The Department of Mathematical Sciences
has computer labs located in Science and Engineering 271 and 231 that have the
requisite plugins installed in the Internet Explorer browser. Do not confuse
the Computer Lab with the Discussion (Tutorial) Section class for which you
registered. Purchasing this software package is required. The software package
is bundled with any new purchase of the 6th edition of the textbook. These
labs can be completed in one of the Mathematics computer Labs during the hours
of operation of the Mathematics Computer Lab or at your own convenience on a
computer with MathPro 5 installed before the due date of an assignment.
Instructions on how to access the course site will be given in your lecture
session.  
  
_Website:_ _http://www.math.fau.edu/Pina/Website/index.html_ \- Any important
information pertaining to College Algebra is disseminated via our website.
Each student must check the web site at least three times per week. Computers
are available throughout campus. For example, every student has access to the
computer lab in the University Center on campus. As a consequence, ignorance
of posted information is not a valid justification for missed or changed
assignments, room changes, testing times, etc. The Update Page is the page
that must be accessed for this type of information.  
  
_Lectures_ meet Monday, Wednesday and Friday and are the main presentation of
the material in the course. These lectures will closely follow the course
outline which will be handed out during the second lecture meeting of the
course.  
  
_Discussion (Tutorial) Sections_ meet once a week on the day that you chose
during registration. Either a homework assignment will be due or a quiz will
be administered when you attend your discussion class. Your main resource
person is your discussion section leader. He/she is available during his/her
tutoring hours in the Math Tutorial Lab to help you. It is required for you to
check with him/her periodically to verify that your quizzes have been properly
handled and recorded. Also, be certain that you agree with your total points
and that your grade correctly reflects your scores in the course. Your grade
is subject to being raised or lowered if there is a recording error or
computational error. Keep all of your quizzes! If there is a problem
concerning your discussion section which you do not feel free to discuss with
your discussion leader, please contact Philip Pina, in the Science and
Engineering Building, room 237.  
  
_Course Grade:_ The course grade is based on 900 points accumulated as
follows:  
  
Tests  |   |   |   | 500 points | 55.56%  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
Quizzes and Homework  |   |   |   | 100 points | 11.11%  
MathPro  |   |   |   | 100 points | 11.11%  
Final Exam  |   |   |   | 200 points | 22.22%  
  
  
_Homework:_ The [course outline](outline.html) contains assignments of
homework problems and the [course calendar](calendar.html) will be followed
fairly closely. Any changes will be announced in class and posted on the
course web page. You should spend a _minimum_ of two hours per night on this
course. The homework problems represent the _minimum_ number of problems you
should do in each section and should serve as a basis for your questions in
your discussion sections. _  
  
Quizzes and Homework:_ Quizzes will usually be based on previous week's
material, although each student should verify the topics to be covered on the
quizzes with their discussion section leader. Makeup quizzes will not be
given. You should discuss each quiz within a week with your discussion leader
if there is a grading error or any other problem. Quizzes will not be reviewed
at the end of the semester. Homework will be collected randomly. Each student
must follow the format given for homework assignments that are to be turned
in.  
  
_Computer Lab Component:_ MathPro Computer Lab Assignments will have specific
due dates for groups of assignments. Students should work the warm-up
exercises first before attempting to complete an assigned computer lab. There
will be no recourse for errors obtained as a result of a student's failure to
review proper input procedure. Consider yourself duly warned! You _must_ get
at least 5 correct answers to receive credit toward your grade. Incorrect
answers do not count against you. Each subsection (e.g. 2.4.3) assigned will
be worth 3 points. The total possible number of points that a student can earn
is 102. The MathPro is worth in effect one exam.  
  
_Exams:_ Five exams will be taken in rooms to be assigned on the days and
times stated in the schedule of courses. Each exam will count in a student's
final grade with the possibility of a makeup exam replacing one of the exam
scores. No Exam grades will be dropped. Exams require a valid picture
identification card. Only FAU Owl Cards or a Florida Driver's License will be
accepted!  
  
_Makeup Policy:_ In general, _no makeups_ will be given for quizzes and labs.
For this reason, only the best 10 of the weekly quiz or homework scores will
count toward a student's grade. A makeup exam will be given for each of the
five exams at or near the end of the semester. The makeup examination can only
help a students grade. The Makeup Test X score will replace the Test X score,
where X is the exam that the student chooses to retake. However, these exams
are multiple choice and are more comprehensive. A student is allowed to take
only one makeup examination. No partial credit will be given on makeup exams.  
  
_Attendance Policy:_ A student may have at most 5 unexcused absences. Any
student with a combined total of 6 or more unexcused absences will receive a
grade of F. Roll will be taken in both lecture and discussion sections. The
total missed days (lecture + discussion section) must be less than six. For
example, Jill has missed 3 lecture days and 3 discussion sections. Jill
receives a grade of F in the course.  
  
_Academic Honesty:_ Florida Atlantic University expects students to be honest
in all of their University class work. Please remember that you committed
yourself to academic honesty when you registered as a student here at FAU. The
Department of Mathematical Sciences expects you to follow the academic
guidelines as stated in the course catalog. Matters of violations of academic
dishonesty are pursued to the fullest extent. DO NOT CHEAT! _  
_  

  
[ UPDATE](update.html) | [5TH EDITION BOOK
WEBSITE](http://www.prenhall.com/bookbind/pubbooks/sullivan2/) |
[SYLLABUS](syllabus.html) | [CALENDAR](Calendar.html) | [5TH EDITION
OUTLINE](outline.html) | [6TH EDITION OUTLINE](6outline.html)  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
  
  
* * *

