#  [![](mini.gif)](http://www.csuchico.edu/)

#  [Department of Education](http://www.csuchico.edu/educ/index.html)

**215 Modoc Hall**  
**(530) 898-6421**

**_[LIBRARY MEDIA TEACHER SERVICES CREDENTIAL PROGRAM](index.html)_**

**Course Syllabus for**  
**EDCI 356B:**  
**Collection Development: Evaluation, Selection,**  
**and Acquisition of Resources**  
**For Fall Semester 2000**

______________________________________________________

**Instructor Information** :

Barbara Carey

Instructor, LMT Services Credential Program and Library Media Consultant.

Credentialed and experienced Library Media Teacher in elementary, middle,
junior high, and high school library media centers; K-14 teacher; and
Administrator.

Recently retired from position as Coordinator of Library and Audiovisual
Services for Butte County Office of Education's Instructional Resource Center
and is active as a library media consultant and library automation systems
trainer, as well as university instructor.

Phone:Day and evening (530)
343-4735.Email:[bcarey@csuchico](mailto:bcarey@csuchico)

Office hours:By appointment.Phone or email.

_______________________________________________________________________

**Purpose:**

This course will focus upon gaining thorough knowledge and practical
application of current policies, processes, and procedures for development of
high quality print, non-print, and electronic collections and Internet
connections for K-12 school library media centers.

________________________________________________________________________

**Course Description:**

The course will include the following areas:

*Overview of collection development and its relationship to the success of a school library media center, including written and approved policies. 

*Assessment of current collection and collection mapping by staff, students, parents, and Selection Committee to determine resource needs. 

*Methods for selection and evaluation of resources. 

*Procedures for acquisition of resources which meet budgetary, curriculum, and standardsconsiderations. 

*Maintenance of collection.

________________________________________________________________________

**Calendar and Locations:**

Friday classes= 6:00 to 9:00 p.m.

Saturday classes= 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., with 12:00 to 1:00 off for lunch,
unless otherwise noted.

Visits to other locations will be announced.

*Friday, March 3 - Holt 111 

*Saturday March 4 - Holt 111 

_Focus: Introduction to school library collection development_. Discussion of
course requirements and expectancies; course projects; textbooks and research
resources; collection analysis and mapping; collection policies and their
components; online resources; curriculum and standards; equity and diversity;
funding; district and library library/media plans. Examine established
collection development policies. Assign: Evaluate and begin map of a real
school library collection; begin portfolio; begin bibliography of resources.

*Friday, March 10 - Holt 111 

*Saturday, March 11 - BCOE-IRC and Library 226

a.m. \- Orientation & tour - Butte County Office of Education IRC

p.m. -Library 226

_Focus: Assessment of collection._ Review and authenticate previous
assignments. Research and discuss: Assessment of current collection vs.
proposed maps.

Assessment goals and tools. Weeding of collection. Research of library
organizations and their positions; intellectual freedom; filtering; challenges
to collection; censorship; how to locate resources.

*Friday, March 17 - Holt 111

Presentation to class by two publishers' representatives.

*Saturday, March 18 - Holt 111

_Focus: Selection and evaluation of resources in diverse formats._ Review and  

authenticate previous assignments. Research and discuss: Online and print
selection tools. Publishers and distributors.Outsourcing. Support from library
automated systems. "Consideration" databases. Selection
policies."Reconsideration" policy. Replace or repair. Diversity and equity.
Board approval. Evaluation procedures and tools for print, electronic, and
online resources.

*Friday, March 24 - Meriam Library and Holt 111

4:00 \- 5:00\- Visit to Meriam Library's Acquisition Department and
orientation to collection development procedures by Julie Rankin.

5:30 \- 8:00 - Holt 111 - Presentation to class by library automation systems
representative regarding benefits of automation in collection development
procedures.

*Saturday, March 25 - Holt 111 and Tehama COE IMC 

a.m. Holt 111

p.m. Orientation to collection development process at Tehama County Office of
Education

_Focus: Acquisition of resources._ Review and authenticate previous
assignments. Research and discuss: Funding, budget, your accounting office
procedures. Repair and preservation. Lost/damaged funds. Publishers and
vendors. Purchase orders and "consideration" database. Discounts and hits.
Donations. Tracking and receiving. Quality control.

*Friday, March 31 - Holt 111 

*Saturday, April 1 - Library 226 

_Focus: Review and authenticate previous assignments. Discuss final
assignments and projects_. _Maintenance of collection._ Maximize access. MARC
records. Library automation. Currency and functionality. Report to educational
community. Update district and school plans. Oral presentation, with support
materials, by each student of his/her course projects.

________________________________________________________________________

**Course Objectives:**

Library Media Teacher candidates will become knowledgeable about and
proficient in the many important aspects of school library/media collection
development.

Upon completion of this course, candidates will have:

*assessed the resource needs and interests of students and faculty of a chosen school library; 

*evaluated and mapped the current school library collection; 

*     located and evaluated new resources to suit the needs of the evaluated school library collection; 

*matched selected resources in a wide variety of formats to curriculum needs and state and local standards; 

*developed a selection and acquisition plan and proposed acquisition map for the 

selected school library.

*utilized a new understanding of collection development through the creation of an annotated bibliography of valuable websites, publisher and vendor sources, print and non-print resources, electronic resources, and other outstanding sources of information which will be of value to course classmates and to the candidate in her or his role of School Library Media Teacher. 

*demonstrated knowledge and understanding of major issues in school library collection development through writings, class discussions, and sharing of information gained through readings and online searches: Information Power; national, state, and local guidelines and policies; intellectual freedom, censorship and challenges to resources; new information technologies; equity of access, and diversity of population.

________________________________________________________________________

**Textbook and Other Resources:**

_Required Text:_

*Loertscher, David V. and Blanche Woolls. _Building a School Library Collection Plan: A Beginning Handbook with Internet Assist_. San Jose: Hi Willow Research and Publishing, c1999.

_Required Reading:_

*      American Association of School Librarians. _Information Power : Building Partnerships for Learning._ Chicago: American Library Association, c1998.

* _Check It Out : Assessing School Library Media Programs : A Guide for_

_School District Education Policy and Implementation Teams_. San Jose, CA: Hi
Willow Research and Publishing, c1998.

*Loertscher, David V _. Reinvent Your School's Library in the Age of Technology._ San Jose, CA: Hi Willow Research and Publishing, c1998. 

_Other Recommended Reading for Assignments and Projects:_

*California Department of Education. _Challenge Standards for Student Success: Language Arts_ (Also published for History Social Science, Mathematics). Sacramento, CA: California Department of Education, c1997.

*California Department of Education. _Suggested Copyright Policy and Guidelines for California's School Districts_. Sacramento, CA: Calif. Dept. of Education, c1991.

*California School Library Association. _From Library Skills to Information Literacy: A Handbook for the 21 st Century_. Castle Rock, Colorado: Hi Willow Research and Publishing, 1997. 

*Doll, Carol A. and Pamela Petrick Barron. _Collection Analysis for the School Library Media Center: A Practical Approach_. Chicago: American Library Association, c1991.

*Evans, G. Edward. _Developing Library and Information Center Collections._ 4 th edition. Englewood, Colorado: Libraries Unlimited, Inc., c2000.

* _Every Child a Reader: The Report of the California Reading Task Force.  _Sacramento, California: California Department of Education, c1995.

* _Intellectual Freedom Manual_. Chicago, Illinois: American Library Association, c1992.

*Loer, Stephanie. _Classics for Young Readers: An Annotated List of the Most Time-Honored Books for Children Preschool through Young Adult._ Boston: The Boston Globe, c1997.

*Loertscher, David V. _Collection Mapping in the LMC: Building Access in a World of Technology._ Castle Rock, Colorado: Hi Willow Research and Publishing, c1998.

* _School Library Standards_. Fresno, CA: Fresno County Office of Education, 1998.

*Schrock, Kathleen. _Evaluating Internet Web Sites: An Educator's Guide_. Manhattan, Kansas: The Master Teacher, c1997.

*Slote, Stanley. _Weeding Library Collections: Library Weeding Methods_. Englewood, Colorado: Libraries Unlimited, Inc., c1997.

*Smith, Jane Bandy. _Achieving a Curriculum-Based Library Media Center Program ; the Middle School Model Change_. American Library Association, c1995.

*Valenza, Joyce Kasman. _Power Tools : 100+ Essential Forms and Presentations for your School Library Information Program_. Chicago:

American Library Association, c1998. (Includes book, forms, CD-ROM)

_______________________________________________________________________

**Assignments and Responsibilities:**

The focus of this class will be on discovery and sharing; on visits to
collection development centers; orientations by experts in collection
development; on hands-on projects in actual school libraries; and on practical
applications via real-life collection development projects.Each student will
be expected to complete the following:(Details will be discussed in class and
written assignments given.)

  1. Library Mapping Project: Analysis and map of a school library collection (or an approved section); analysis of the needs of students and faculty (including curriculum and standards); and proposed collection map (including purchase proposals); list collection analysis and mapping tools which were used.

2.Develop a draft of a school or district Collection Development Policy,
including

a policy for handling challenges. We will be analyzing several current
collection

development policies. If feasible, this policy draft may be developed for each

student's adopted school library. We will study and discuss the components of

high quality collection development policies.

3.Compile annotated bibliography and/or webography of citations of resources

(web sites, print materials, electronic resources, places, etc.) which you
think are

excellent for collection development. This will be part of your portfolio and
also

shared with your classmates. Bring computer disks for compilation of
yourcitations.

4.Build a portfolio of your accomplishments, interests, visits, and valuable
insights

for this course which may also become part of your program portfolio.

5.Weekly assignments - on time and in writing that aligns with graduate level

expectancies (Correct spelling, grammar, punctuation, sentence structure,

double-spaced).

________________________________________________________________________

**Grading Criteria; Point Values:**

You are important to the success of this course and you will be expected to
attend and participate in all class sessions, visits to other locations, and
in online work. Any missed time from our Friday and Saturday commitments must
be discussed with the instructor prior to the missed time except in the case
of dire emergencies. In order to pass the course, you must complete all
assignments.

CSU, Chico Standards for Graduate Level Courses:

> A -- Superior Work: A level of achievement so outstanding that it is
normally attained by relatively few students.

>

> B -- Adequate Work: A level of achievement indicating adequate competence in
the subject matter/skill. This level will usually be met by a majority of
students in the class.

>

> C -- Minimally Acceptable Work: A level of achievement which meets the
minimum requirements of the course.

>

> F -- Unacceptable Work: A level of achievement which fails to meet the
minimum requirements of the course. Not passing. Because a C is the minimal
acceptable grade for a 300-level course, a D grade is not allowed.

________________________________________________________________________

**Web Resources:**

Links to World Wide Web sites which are excellent resources for the study of
school library collection development are provided to students on the WebCT
site for this course.

\-------------------------------------------------------------

(EDCI356B Syllabus updated 081000 by Barbara Carey

Copyright 2000 by Barbara Carey)

* * *

**CSU Department of Education Links**

* [Department of Education](http://www.csuchico.edu/educ/index.html)
* [Department of Education Information](http://www.csuchico.edu/educ/doe.html)

**CSU-Library Media Teacher Program Web Pages**

* [The Course of Study for the School Library Media Teacher Services Credential](http://www.csuchico.edu/~pmilbury/index.html)
* [The Masters of Arts in Education Option in School Library Services](http://www.csuchico.edu/~pmilbury/ma-lmt.html)
* [Library Media Teacher Services Credential Course Offerings](http://www.csuchico.edu/~pmilbury/courses.html)

* * *



