## Math 1290 Calculus for Modeling (Biology)  
Syllabus

### Fall 2000  
Prof. Peckham

* * *

  * **Instructor** : Bruce Peckham, Assoc. Professor, Dept. of Mathematics and Statistics 
  * Office: 104 Campus Center, 726-6188, bpeckham@d.umn.edu 
  * Office Hours: MF 11-12am, TW 1-2pm, or by appointment  
  

  * **Graduate Teaching Assistant** : Chad Pierson 
  * Office: 152 Campus Center, 726-7153, cpierso1@d.umn.edu 
  * Office Hours: MW 2:00-3:00; T 12:00-1:00  
  

  * **Meeting times** : MWThF 10:00 - 10:50 in MWAH 191,  
Odd Tuesdays: 10-10:50 in Library 120  
Even Tuesdays: 10:00-11:50 in SBE 45 Computer Lab. (9/12, 9/26, 10/10, 10/24,
11/7, 11/21, 12/5)  
  

  * **Text** : Calculus for Biology and Medicine by Claudia Neuhauser 

### Syllabus

The course will cover standard topics in differential calculus, integral
calculus, and introductory differential equations. Topics include limits,
continuity, derivatives and applications of derivatives; integration, the
fundamental theorem of calculus, integration techniques; differential
equations. Applications to biology are used throughout the course. The
material is mostly covered in Chapters 1-7 of the Neuhauser text. Some
supplemental material, not included in the text, may occasionally be presented
in lecture.

### Course Prerequisites

Precalculus (Math 1250) or advising placement via the Math Placement exam.

### Comparison to Calc I, Math 1296

Roughly 80% of the material in the two courses is the same. Math 1290 will
skip a few 1296 topics and cover others in less depth. Math 1290 will add an
introduction to differential equations. In addition, the applications in Math
1290 will focus on biology and ecology, while in 1296 applications are chosen
from a variety of areas of science and engineering. (Students who take Math
1290 will be able to register for Calculus II (Math 1297) if they wish to
continue on in Mathematics.)  
In summary: Math 1290 covers the parts of Calculus most necessary to allow the
inclusion of an introduction to differential equations.

### Grading (Dates are tentative)

    
    
    Exam 1:	   		Fri. Oct. 6			Ch's 1,2,3 	15%
    Exam 2:	   		Tues. Nov. 7			Ch's 4,5	18%
    Exam 3:	   		Th. Dec. 7			Ch's 6,7	20%
    Final Exam: 		Tues. Dec. 19 8-10am		Cumulative	30%
    HW, Quizzes and Labs:							17%
    Total:								       100%
    

### General policy statement

Lectures, labs, material in the text, and homeworks are all intended to
complement each other. No one is a replacement for any of the others. You are,
in general, expected to learn material which is covered via any of these
sources.

### Homework and Quizzes

Homework will be assigned daily in class. Unless otherwise indicated, it is
expected to be completed before the next lecture. All work should be shown for
homework handed in. Adhere to the ``Minimum Standard Requirements For
Mathematics and Statistics Homework/Lab Assignments.'' You are encouraged to
look at and/or try problems other than those assigned, as well. It is often
instructive to read the problems at the end of each section and think about
how you would solve them, even if you don't actually attempt to solve them.
Assignments will be confirmed by email, and all past and current assignments
will be posted on the web at `www.d.umn.edu/~bpeckham/Math1290.html'.

### Computer Labs

There will be 7 computer labs as part of the course. We will use several
software packages: Excel, Mathematica, and some software specifically for
differential equations. This software is available from the Lab Server from
any PC Lab on campus. No prior knowledge of PC's or the software used is
required.

### Calculators

Use of graphing calculators is encouraged but not required. They will probably
be allowed on exams and quizzes, but exams and quizzes will be written to
minimize the benefit of having a calculator.

### Missed Exams or Quizzes

Missed quizzes or exams will be assigned a zero score unless you provide a
valid _written, signed_ (by a Doctor, for example) excuse for your absence;
unless it is not possible to do so, you must provide verbal notice _ahead of
time_ to your instructor for an absence. Arrangements for a makeup should be
made as soon as you know you will miss. Do not wait for the next class. You
can leave the instructor a message 24 hours a day by phone or email.
Oversleeping, poor preparation, slight colds, and cold weather are _not_ valid
excuses.

### Liberal Education Statment

This course satisfies the UMD Liberal Education requirement for Category Two:
Math, Logic, and Critical Thinking. The Calculus is a universal mathematical
tool that is used in many diverse areas including business, economics,
boilogy, geology, chemistry, physics, and engineering. Whenever measured
quantities change with respect to time, or other variables, calculus is
probably involved. This course develops the fundamentals of calculus suitable
for applications in the life and earth sciences. By the end of the term, the
successful student should understand the importance that calculus plays in
modeling real-world phenomena by constructing and analyzing numerous models
selected from ecology, wildlife/fisheries management, epidemiology,
physiology, groundwater diffusion, and siesmic phenomena.

### Disabilities

Please inform me of any disabilities of which I should be aware in order to
provide for equitable participation.

### Tutoring

Help is usually available M-F at the Tutoring Center in CCtr 40. Schedules are
posted there.

* * *

  * [Go to the Fall 2000 Math 1290 Home Page](Math1290.html)
  * [Go to Bruce Peckham's Home Page](index.html)
  * [Go to the Department of Mathematics and Statistics Home Page ](http://www.d.umn.edu/math)

* * *

This page (http://www.d.umn.edu/~bpeckham/www) is maintained by Bruce Peckham
([bpeckham@d.umn.edu](mailto:bpeckham@d.umn.edu)) and was last modified on
Tuesday, 16-Jan-2001 14:43:19 CST.

* * *

