**T 102 MATHEMATICS FOR ELEMENTARY TEACHERS II **

****

**IUN SPRING 2002**

** **

**H430 04:00P-05:15P MW RH215**

** **

INSTRUCTOR: Dr. Vesna Kilibarda

E-MAIL: [vkilibar@iun.edu](mailto:vkilibar@iun.edu)

URL: <http://www.math.iun.edu/vesna/vkilib.htm>

PHONE: (219) 980-6591 (w)

OFFICE: Hawthorn Building, Room 447

OFFICE HOURS: M  W  R  
1:00-4:00  1:00-4:00 3:00-5:00.



COURSE

DESCRIPTION: Math for elementary teachers II is the second course of the
three-semester sequence for prospective elementary teachers. Topics to be
covered include rational and irrational numbers, elementary probability and
statistics.



PURPOSE: As a teacher of mathematics you will need to meet the requirements of
the _Reflective Professional_ as described in the Division of Education
Conceptual Framework, and meet the criteria provided in the document,
_Standards for Teachers of Mathematics_ published by the Indiana Professional
Standards board. Many aspects of this course are intended to project you on
your journey to becoming a reflective and effective teacher of mathematics.



In T102 students should develop numbers sense (including estimation and
reasonableness of results) and an understanding of the use of number concepts,
operations, and properties and the role of algorithms and of place value. In
setting the view of these ideas in the curriculum, students should be able to
extend the number systems from the whole numbers to real numbers, while
including a discussion of the extension of the operations, properties, and
ordering. Notions of fractions, decimals, percents, ratio, and proportion will
be developed through problems with an applied flavor.



Students will have a variety of experiences in the collection, organization,
representation, analysis, and interpretation of data. Key statistical concepts
include measures of central tendency, measures of variation (range, standard
deviation, interquartile range, and outliers), and general distributions.

Representation of data will include various types of graphs, including bar,
line, circle, and pictographs, as well as line plots, stem-and-leaf plots, box
plots, histograms, and scatter plots. Probability of simple and compound
events and its use in quantifying uncertainty will be built into students'
experiences.



Students will have opportunities to explore empirical probability from
simulations and from data they have collected and to analyze theoretical
probability on the basis of a description of the underlying sample space.
Probability trees and simulations using objects such as spinners, dice, or
slips of paper will be used to solve problems.

PREREQUISITE: T 101\.



PROCEDURE: The students are expected to read the text and come to class
prepared to discuss ideas and have concepts clarified. Each class meeting will
include a review and discussion of previously assigned work and an
introduction of new material. Most students make normal progress with around
six hours of study each week outside class. Please see me if you have
difficulty keeping up with the schedule.



HOMEWORK:  Homework is an essential activity for you to achieve success in
this class. We will discuss previously assigned homework problems in the
beginning of each class period **.** Students are encouraged to work together
to complete their homework assignments. I will post homework assignments on my
web site http://www.math.iun.edu/vesna/vkilib.htm



QUIZZES:  We will have one quiz per week during the last 15 minutes of a
class. Every quiz will consist of 2-4 homework problems from the set of
homework problems assigned previous week. All quizzes will count toward your
semester quiz score of 100 points.



PROJECT:  The project will allow students to explore in greater depth a
particular topic of interest. Students should work in groups of 2-4 and submit
one written project per group. You must use at least two Library resources
(book/journal) and two Internet resources. Cite all your sources and clearly
state which portion of your project is your contribution. Save your paper in a
program of your choicein at least two places. The paper in all drafts must
comply with the following minimal requirements:



，        The text of the paper must be typed. Pictures should be inserted
using appropriate software. If your project has an animation or dynamic
component, you may refer to it in your narrative and attach a floppy disk.

，        The paper must be formatted as to leave ample space for your
instructor's comments and questions.

，        Papers must be stapled. No paper clips or folded corners.

，        Papers must be written in standard edited written English and free of
mistakes both in grammar and spelling.

，        Papers must be turned in at the due date. No late papers will be
accepted.



More importantly, the paper should, **in a coherent, logically organized
narrative** , strive toward meeting the following criteria:



，        The problem-topic must be clearly identified and presented.

，        A detail analysis must be conducted, possibly addressing the problem-
topic from different points of view.

，        The potential of the mathematical models and technology must be fully
exploited.





Formulate your problem and share your idea of solving it on March 4 (10% of
the project's grade). If you need help in finding a topic please come to talk
with me well in advance. First written draft of your project is due on **March
20** (10% of the project's grade). The final paper (80% of the project's
grade) is due on April 22.



.

EXAMS: You will take two chapter exams. These exams will not be

cumulative. A comprehensive final examination will be given on

Wednesday, May 1 from 4:00 - 6:00 pm. Each exam will consist of problems
related to the topics we covered in class.

Please have in mind that it is your explanation to the problem that matters
the most; your conclusion should follow from your reasoning.



TEXT: _Mathematical Reasoning for Elementary Teachers,_ Second Edition,
Long/DeTemple



SUPPLIES: A graphing calculator is required. Most class demonstrations will be
done using Texas Instruments TI-83 graphing calculator. You may rent a
graphing calculator in the IUN library.

COURSE

OUTLINE: **Fractions and Rational Numbers** 6.1-6.3

**Decimals and Real Numbers** 7.1-7.4

**Test I** (02/25/02)

**Statistics: The Interpretation of Data** 8.1-8.3

**Test II** (04/15/02)

**Probability** 9.1-9.3

**Project** (04/22/02)

**Final Exam** Wednesday, May 1 from 4:00 - 6:00 pm.

GRADING:  All tests, a project, and a semester total of quizzes are worth 100
points. Your grade will be determined by the arithmetic mean of your scores.
Grading intervals will be:

[90-100] points A

[80-90) points  B

[70-80) points C

[60-70) points D

[0-60) points F



MATH LAB: The Math Lab is located in HH436. Students may receive drop-in
tutoring. This is an excellent place to get help or find classmates for group
sessions. Hours for the MATH LAB are:

M \- R  9:00 AM - 8:00 PM

F-S 9:00 AM - 3:00 PM





BIBLIOGRAPHY: _The Reflective Professional. Division of Education_ , Indiana
University Northwest, 1999

__

_Standards for Teachers of Mathematics_. Indiana Professional Standards Board,
1999







