# HiPSS 191: Humanism and Science, 1450-1600

**Winter Quarter 1994**

****

**Instructor:** Brian W. Ogilvie  
**Mailbox:** Social Sciences 207  
**Phone:** 684-0446, 8 AM to 10 PM  
**E-mail:** b-ogilvie@uchicago.edu or ogil@midway.uchicago.edu [no longer
valid as of June 1997]. Students are encouraged to use e-mail to contact the
instructor.  
**Office hours:** Monday, 1 PM to 3 PM, and Thursday, 9 AM to 11 AM, in the
Fishbein Center (SS 207), and by appointment. **There will be no office hours
on Monday, January 10.**

* * *

Navigating this document:

  * Course description
  * Course requirements
  * Books on order
  * Readings
  * Course schedule with required readings and assignments
    * January 5: Introduction to humanism
    * January 12: Humanism and education
    * January 19: Humanism and printing
    * January 26: Transmission and recovery of the texts
    * February 2: Philology as a science
    * February 9: Humanism and the mechanical arts
    * February 16: Humanism and natural history
    * February 23: Humanism and astronomy
    * March 2: Humanism and medicine
    * March 9: Anti-humanism in the sciences; conclusions
    * **March 16: Final papers due!**
  * Additional readings
    * Medieval and Renaissance science
    * Humanism and Renaissance scholarship
    * Biographical dictionaries 

* * *

This tutorial focuses on the relation between humanism and the sciences
between 1450 and 1600. The first part of the course addresses the character of
Renaissance humanism, humanism's impact on education, and humanist philology.
The second part of the course focuses on humanism in particular aspects of
early modern science. The final meeting will concentrate on anti-humanism in
the sciences during and after the sixteenth century; we will also attempt to
draw some conclusions about the importance of humanism to science.

* * *

##  Course requirements

1\. Because the tutorial is focused on discussion, attendance at all meetings
and close examination of the required readings is expected of all students.
Participation in class discussion will account for 25% of the final course
grade.

For each class session, each student is required to write two discussion
questions, along with one or two sentences stating why they are worth
discussing, and submit them to the instructor by 4 PM on the Monday preceding
the class meeting. These questions will not be graded, but failure to submit
them will be penalized in the discussion grade. Students are encouraged to
meet and discuss these questions among themselves, but each student must hand
in two different questions. The purpose of this assignment is to ensure that
the discussion addresses issues which you find interesting and to identify any
readings which are particularly difficult and need special attention.

2\. In addition to class discussion, there will be two short (4-5 pp.) papers
and one long (10-12 pp.) paper required. The two short papers will be on
topics to be assigned; the final paper is to be on a topic chosen by the
student after consultation with the instructor. The short papers will each
account for 20% of the final course grade; the long paper will account for the
remaining 35%.

The first paper will be assigned on January 19 (3rd week) and will be due at
1:30 PM on January 26 (4th week). The second paper will be assigned on
February 9 (6th week) and will be due at 1:30 PM on February 16 (7th week).
Both papers will be returned the week after they are due. _Late papers will
not be accepted_ unless approved by the instructor _by the preceding Friday_.
The final paper will be due at 1:00 PM on March 16 (the Wednesday of Exam
Week).

* * *

##  Books on order at the Seminary Co-op

There are two books on order at the Seminary Co-op Bookstore: Anthony Grafton,
_New worlds, ancient texts: The power of tradition and the shock of discovery_
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1992), and Elizabeth Eisenstein, _The
printing revolution in early modern Europe_ (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1983). We will be using these books for background reading throughout
the course. All other readings will be distributed in class or on reserve at
the Regenstein Library.

* * *

##  Readings

There will be approximately 100-120 pages of reading each week, plus
occasional background and suggested readings. Because many of the writings we
will be discussing have not been translated into English or any other modern
language, I will be preparing and distributing translated extracts. A detailed
list of assigned readings is found in the course schedule below. In addition,
there are several books which you may want to use for reference and for
further reading on particular subjects, which are listed at the end of the
syllabus.

* * *

#  Course schedule, with assigned readings

##  1) January 5: Introduction to humanism

###  Readings

  * Francesco Petrarca (Petrarch), "A disapproval of an unreasonable use of the discipline of dialectic"; "An Averroist visits Petrarch"; "Petrarch's aversion to Arab science"; and "A request to take up the fight against Averroes"; all in Ernst Cassirer et al., ed., _The Renaissance philosophy of man: Selections in translation_ (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1948).

  * Lorenzo Valla, "The glory of the Latin language," in _The portable Renaissance reader,_ ed. James Bruce Ross and Mary Martin McLaughlin (Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin Books, 1977; other eds.), pp. 131-135.

  * Angelo Poliziano, "Praelectio to Aristotle's _Prior Analytics_ , entitled `Lamia.'"

* * *

##  2) January 12: Humanism and education

###  Readings

  * Pier Paolo Vergerio, "De ingenuis moribus," in W. H. Woodward, _Vittorino da Feltre and other humanist educators_ (New York: Bureau of Publications, Teachers College, Columbia University, 1963).

  * Battista Guarini, "De ordine docendi et studendi," in Woodward, _Vittorino da Feltre_.

  * Desiderius Erasmus, "De ratione studii," _Literary and educational writings,_ vol. 2, Collected works of Erasmus, 24 (Toronto, Buffalo, and London: University of Toronto Press, 1978).

  * Johannes Sturm, "De ratione studiorum gymnasii Hieronymitani Leodii iudicium."

  * Anthony Grafton and Lisa Jardine, _From humanism to the humanities: Education and the liberal arts in fifteenth- and sixteenth-century Europe_ (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1986), ch. 1.

  * Paul F. Grendler, _Schooling in Renaissance Italy: Literacy and learning, 1300-1600_ (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1989), ch. 5.

  * Background: Grafton, _New worlds, ancient texts,_ chapter 1: "A bound world: The scholar's cosmos" (pp. 11-58).

* * *

##  3) January 19: Humanism and printing

[Next time include some material regarding privileges and other protections
for writers and publishers.]

##

First paper assignment will be passed out.

###  Readings

  * Aldo Manuzio, "The life of a scholar-printer," in _The portable Renaissance reader,_ pp. 396-401.

  * Johannes Muller (Regiomontanus), printing prospectus.

  * Hieronymus Hornschuh, _Hornschuh's Orthotypographia, 1608_ , ed. Philip Gaskell and Patricia Bradford (Cambridge: The University Library, 1972).

  * Martin Movemius, letter to Johannes Amerbach, in _Amerbachkorrespondenz_ , ed. Alfred Hartmann, vol. 1 (Basel: Verlag der Universitatsbibliothek, 1942).

  * Conrad Leontorius, letter to Johannes Amerbach, in _Amerbachkorrespondenz_ , vol. 1.

  * Erasmus, letter 732, to Beatus Rhenanus, in _Collected works of Erasmus_ , vol. 5, _Letters 594 to 841, 1517 to 1518_.

  * John Monfasani, "The first call for press censorship: Niccolo Perotti, Giovanni Andrea Bussi, Antonio Moreto, and the editing of Pliny's _Natural history_ ," _Renaissance Quarterly_ 41 (1988): 1-31.

  * Elizabeth L. Eisenstein, "The permanent Renaissance," in _The printing revolution in early modern Europe_ (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983), pp. 109-144.

  * Karen Reeds, "Publishing scholarly books in the sixteenth century," _Scholarly Publishing_ 14 (1983): 259-74.

* * *

##  4) January 26: Transmission and recovery of the texts

First paper assignment due at 1:30 PM.

###  Readings

  * Petrarca, letters to Marcus Varro and Quintilian, in _Rerum familiarum libri,_ trans. Aldo S. Bernardo, vol. 3 (Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1985).

  * Poggio Bracciolini, _Correspondence_ (selection).

  * Beatus Rhenanus, preface to editio princeps of Velleius Paterculus.

  * Thomas Gechauf, preface to editio princeps of Archimedes.

  * R. H. Rouse, "The transmission of the texts," in _The legacy of Rome: A new appraisal_ , ed. Richard Jenkyns (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992).

  * Paul Lawrence Rose, _The Italian Renaissance of mathematics: Studies on humanists and mathematicians from Petrarch to Galileo_ (Gen eve: Droz, 1975), ch. 2.

  * Background: Grafton, _New worlds, ancient texts,_ chapter 3: "All coherence gone" (pp. 95-157).

* * *

##  5) February 2: Philology as a science

First papers returned.

###  Readings

  * Lorenzo Valla, _De falso credita et ementita Constantini donatione_ (selection).

  * Angelo Poliziano, _Miscellaneorum centuria secunda_ (selection).

  * Erasmus, letters 325 and 396, in _Collected works of Erasmus_ , vol. 3, _Letters 298 to 445, 1514 to 1516_.

  * Anthony Grafton, "The scholarship of Poliziano and its context," in _Defenders of the text_ (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1991).

  * John F. D'Amico, _Theory and practice in Renaissance textual criticism_ (Berkeley, Los Angeles, and London: University of California Press, 1988), pp. 8-38, 71-101.

* * *

##  6) February 9: Humanism and the mechanical arts

Second paper assignment will be passed out.

###  Readings

  * Vitruvius, _De architectura_ , book 1 (selection).

  * Columella, _De re rustica_ , book 1 (selection).

  * Georg Agricola, _De re metallica_ (selection).

  * Leon Battista Alberti, _De re aedificatoria_ (selection).

  * Leonardo da Vinci, _Notebooks_ , ed. and transl. Jean Paul Richter (New York: Dover Publications, 1970), vol. 1, [[section]][[section]]9-22.

  * Giannozzo Manetti, _De dignitate et excellentia hominis_ (selection).

  * David Summers, _The judgment of sense: Renaissance naturalism and the rise of aesthetics_ (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987), pp. 235-51, 259-65.

  * Erwin Panofsky, "Artist, scientist, genius: Notes on the `Renaissance-Dammerung'," in _The Renaissance: Six essays_ (New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1962).

* * *

##  7) February 16: Humanism and natural history

Second paper assignment due at 1:30 PM.

###  Readings

  * Conrad Gessner, prefatory material to _Historia animalium_.

  * Excerpts from Aristotle, Pliny, a medieval bestiary, and Gessner on the natural history of animals.

  * Excerpts from _Hortus sanitatis,_ Dioscorides, Mattioli's commentary on Dioscorides, Carolus Clusius, and John Gerard on the natural history of plants.

  * F. David Hoeniger, "How plants and animals were studied in the mid-sixteenth century," in _Science and the arts in the Renaissance_ , ed. John W. Shirley and F. David Hoeniger (Washington: Folger Shakespeare Library; London and Toronto: Associated University Presses, 1985).

  * Charles G. Nauert Jr, "Humanists, scientists, and Pliny: Changing approaches to a classical author," _American Historical Review_ 84 (1979): 72-85.

  * Karen M. Reeds, "Renaissance Humanism and botany," _Annals of Science_ 33 (1976): 519-42.

  * Background: Grafton, _New worlds, ancient texts,_ chapter 4: "Drugs and diseases: New World biology and Old World learning" (pp. 159-193).

* * *

##  8) February 23: Humanism and astronomy

Second papers returned.

###  Readings

  * Regiomontanus, "Oration" on the dignity of mathematics, trans. Noel Swerdlow.

  * Nicolaus Copernicus, _De revolutionibus orbium coelestium_ (selection).

  * Noel M. Swerdlow, "Science and humanism in the Renaissance."

  * Robert S. Westman, "Proof, poetics, and patronage: Copernicus's preface to _De revolutionibus_ ," in _Reappraisals of the Scientific Revolution_ , ed. David C. Lindberg and Robert S. Westman (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990).

  * Anthony Grafton, "Humanism and science in Rudolphine Prague: Kepler in context," in _Defenders of the text_ (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1991), pp. 178-203.

  * Elizabeth L. Eisenstein, "Resetting the stage for the Copernican revolution," in _The printing revolution in early modern Europe,_ pp. 204-225.

  * Suggested: Noel M. Swerdlow, "The recovery of the exact sciences of antiquity: Mathematics, astronomy, geography," in _Rome reborn: The Vatican Library and Renaissance culture_ , ed. Anthony Grafton (Washington, DC, New Haven, and the Vatican City: Library of Congress, Yale University Press, and the Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, 1993).

* * *

##  9) March 2: Humanism and medicine

###  Readings

  * Erasmus, "Encomium medicinae," _Literary and educational writings,_ vol. 7, Collected works of Erasmus, 29 (Toronto, Buffalo, and London: University of Toronto Press, 1989).

  * Andreas Vesalius, "The preface to _De fabrica corporis humani_ [ _sic_ ] 1543," trans. B. Farrington, _Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine_ 25 (1932): 1357-1366.

  * Girolamo Mercuriale, _De modo studendi,_ trans. Richard J. Durling, in "Girolamo Mercuriale's _De modo studendi,_ " _Osiris_ 2nd. ser. 6 (1990): 181-195.

  * R. Palmer, "Medical botany in northern Italy in the Renaissance," _Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine_ 78 (1985): 149-59.

  * Nancy G. Siraisi, "Giovanni Argenterio and sixteenth-century medical innovation," _Osiris_ 2nd. ser. 6 (1990): 161-180.

  * Vivian Nutton, "`Prisci dissectionum professores': Greek texts and Renaissance anatomists," in _The uses of Greek and Latin: Historical essays_ , ed. A.C. Dionisotti, Anthony Grafton, and Jill Kraye (London: Warburg Institute, 1988).

  * Suggested: Nancy G. Siraisi, _Medieval and early Renaissance medicine: An introduction to knowledge and practice_ (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990), or Siraisi, "Life sciences and medicine in the Renaissance world," in _Rome reborn: The Vatican Library and Renaissance culture_ , ed. Anthony Grafton (Washington, DC, New Haven, and the Vatican City: Library of Congress, Yale University Press, and the Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, 1993).

* * *

##  10) March 9: Anti-humanism in the sciences; conclusions

###  Readings

  * Rene Descartes, _Discourse on the method_ (selections).

  * Francis Bacon, _The advancement of learning_ (selections).

  * Pamela O. Long, "Humanism and science," in _Renaissance Humanism: Foundations, forms, and legacy_ , ed. Albert Rabil Jr., Vol. 3 (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1988).

  * Grafton, _New worlds, ancient texts,_ chapter 5: "A New World of learning," and Epilogue (pp. 195-256).

* * *

##  March 16: Final papers due at 1:00 PM in the Fishbein Center!  

* * *

#  Additional readings: Reference and background

###  On late medieval and Renaissance science

  * David C. Lindberg, _The beginnings of Western science: The European scientific tradition in philosophical, religious, and institutional context, 600 B.C. to A.D. 1450_ (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992). The most recent survey. Quite good, and sets out the state of the sciences before they were affected by the humanist movement. On reserve.

  * A. C. Crombie, _Augustine to Galileo_ (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1961). A classic, opinionated survey. On reserve.

  * Allen G. Debus, _Man and nature in the Renaissance_ (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978). Good overview of the Renaissance sciences, though not very detailed on any subject.

  * Marie Boas Hall, _The scientific Renaissance, 1450-1630_ (New York: Harper  & Row, 1962). Out of date, but still useful. On reserve.

  * Norman Kretzmann, Anthony Kenny, Jan Pinborg, and Eleonore Stump, ed., _The Cambridge history of later medieval philosophy: From the rediscovery of Aristotle to the disintegration of scholasticism, 1100-1600_ (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982).

  * Charles B. Schmitt, Quentin Skinner, Eckhard Kessler, and Jill Kraye, ed., _The Cambridge history of Renaissance philosophy_ (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988). The Renaissance volume contains a number of useful articles on broad subjects. The medieval volume is more narrowly focused on Aristotelianism.

  * George Sarton, _Appreciation of ancient and medieval science during the Renaissance, 1450-1600_ (New York: A. S. Barnes  & Co., 1955). This work is dated and incomplete but still offers a wealth of information on Renaissance editions of classical writers on natural philosophy. On reserve.

###  Humanism and Renaissance scholarship

  * Albert Rabil Jr., ed., _Renaissance humanism: Foundations, forms, and legacy_ , 3 vols. (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1988). Contains short articles on humanism in Italy and the North and humanism and the scholarly disciplines. On reserve.

  * Anthony Grafton, "The Renaissance," in _The legacy of Rome: A new appraisal_ , ed. Richard Jenkyns (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992). A good, brief introduction to the Renaissance attitude toward antiquity. On reserve.

  * Anthony Grafton, ed., _Rome reborn: The Vatican Library and Renaissance culture_ (Washington, DC, New Haven, and the Vatican City: Library of Congress, Yale University Press, and the Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, 1993). Essays by a number of well-known scholars on various aspects of Renaissance learning as seen in the collections of the Vatican Library. On reserve.

  * _The Oxford classical dictionary_ and _The Oxford companion to classical literature._ Renaissance humanists made frequent references to classical authors and events. These two references have brief articles on aspects of classical history and literature. They must be used with caution, however, since modern scholars have had access to texts and centuries of scholarly tradition unavailable to humanists, whose understanding of things classical was often quite different from ours.

###  Biographical dictionaries

  * Peter G. Bietenholz and Thomas B. Deutscher, ed., _Contemporaries of Erasmus: A biographical register of the Renaissance and Reformation_ , 3 vols. (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1985-87).

  * _Dictionary of scientific biography._ Both of these works contain useful biographies of major and minor figures. The entries in the _DSB_ are generally more detailed than those in _Contemporaries of Erasmus;_ the latter, however, while limited to people mentioned in Erasmus's correspondence, contains entries for many scholars who are not in the _DSB_.

  * Those who read French will find the _Biographie universelle_ edited by Michaud to be an invaluable reference work. The national biographical dictionaries, such as the _Dictionary of national biography_ (British), the _Dizionnario biografici degli Italiani_ (incomplete), and the _Allgemeine deutsche Biographie_ are also useful.

If you would like to read in more detail about any of the subjects discussed
in class, please see me for suggestions.

##

* * *

[Please send comments to
[ogilvie@history.umass.edu](mailto:ogilvie@history.umass.edu).]

