![UIlogoV.GIF \(1614 bytes\)](../Images/web_pictures/UIlogoV.GIF) |

**MATH   EDUCATION**  
---|---  
  
|  
---  
  
**[Syllabus](Syllabus418.htm)**  
  
  
**[Schedule](schedule418.htm)**  
[**On-Line**](../disc3_toc.htm)  
  
**[Home](../index.htm)**  
  


**Syllabus**

**Edte 418 -- IDENTIFYING AND CORRECTING MATH DEFICIENCIES (3 cr.) **

**Edte 404-07 -- ST: Math Methods Classroom Field Lab (1 cr.) **

CLASS:  8:30-9:20 TTH  
LAB:  9:30-10:20 MWF  
and  
9:30-10:20 TH as required

Gwen Kelly, Professor, College of Education, University of Idaho

(in cooperation with the Mathematics Department, M107 committee and Kirk
Trigsted, MSAC Director)

** Office** : Room 409 **Phone** : 885-6190 **E-mail** : gkelly@uidaho.edu

** Office Hours:** Posted on door

** Course Objectives:   **

  * to acquire knowledge of diagnostic strategies, common student misconceptions, and remedial strategies (focus on algebra) for teaching mathematics to all secondary students  

  * to develop skills for teaching mathematics (focus on algebra) to small groups of students and to individual students  

  * to examine some professional resources appropriate for teaching secondary students who need remediation in mathematics (focus on algebra)  

  * to develop a thorough understanding of the pre-college algebra curriculum  

  **Course Activities to Attain Objectives:  **

> **Class Structure** : The Edte 418 class will meet for 1 hour on Tuesdays
and Thursdays. This time will be devoted to the development of background,
including skills and conceptual understanding. These meetings will consist of
three different parts with three different focuses.

>

>> **Focus 1** : **Math Content and Problem Areas.   **One focus will be on
algebra problems and their effect on students. Twice a month we will hold a
faculty meeting with Kirk Trigsted, the MSAC director. During this time the
subject will be the M107 students and related activities. Your homework for
these sessions will be to work out specific assigned problems to practice the
formats and problems presented during the session. You will be responsible for
meeting outside class (most of this time will be spent using the on-line
discussion provided on the class web site) with your colleagues to check your
work and determine which problems you need to discuss further and/or for which
ones you need to seek additional information. Your work may be collected by
the instructor and used to evaluate your growth and progress toward the
objectives of the class.

>>

>> **Focus 2** : **Math Teaching Strategies and Resources.   **A second focus
will be on ways to match content with learner characteristics to make teaching
more effective.  On Tuesdays and Thursdays when we are not meeting with Kirk
seminar sessions will be conducted in Ed 408.   During this time we will study
specific resources for developing teaching strategies/skills and the
examination of resources for use with pre-college students. Your homework for
these sessions will consist of reading and writing assignments. These will be
handed in, discussed in class, and used to evaluate your growth and progress
toward the objectives of the class.

>>

>> **Focus 3** :  **Secondary Algebra Curriculum.**   One of the best ways to
understand any curriculum is to teach it and/or observe it being taught.  This
focus will engage in the later.  On MWF from 9:30-10:20 you will attend and
carefully observe all teaching sessions, excluding test days, of a M107
section.  The purpose of these observations will be to obtain information
about the algebraic content addressed, the methods/approaches used, and to
observe student reactions and responses. These observations combined with
careful working of, and deep thinking about, problems and methods presented
are essential if you are to provide focused, successful tutoring/assistance to
the M107 students who struggle to master these concepts/skills.

** Field Labs** **(additional 1 cr.)** : If you perform at an acceptable level
(to be identified by the instructor, the MSAC director, and the M107
committee) on the algebra skills test(s) administered the first week of class
you will participate in the field lab conducted during the fall 2000 semester.
All applications of the material studied in class will take place in field
labs. There are two parts to the field labs. Requirements are described below.

** Part 1** : In pairs:

> 1.  plan and deliver at least one exam review session during the semester,
(one 2 hr session during the semester -- TBA)

>

> 2.  observe and serve as a coach for at least one of your classmate's review
sessions and at least one study group session. (one 1 hr and one 2 hr session
during the semester)  

**Part 2:**   Individually:

> 1.  maintain an active and productive study group throughout the semester.
Attendance of M107 students will be required  **NOTE: these groups will be
formed Sept 7, 9:30-10:20.   You will attend this session and may be asked to
attend other Thursdays during the semester.  **

>

>  2.  tutor 1 hour per week in the MSAC (times TBA)

>

> Since university policy states that two hours of field lab are equivalent to
1 hour of lecture the one credit lab generates 2 hours per week for hands-on
experiences (we will use this time for 1 hr of study group per week and 1 hr
of MSAC tutoring per week).  The exam review and the coaching will be factored
in as study time.

>

>  According to university policy the three-credit class generates 3 hours per
week of class contact hours and 9 hours per week for reading, preparation,
acquisition of backgrounds information, etc. (we will meet for 2 hours per
week of class and 3 hours per week of observation, leaving 7 hours per week
for study, reading, writing of assignments, cooperative group work, etc.).

** Optional Extension** **s** :

> 1.  If you are interested in extending the study of teaching algebra at
other grade levels and have time to participate in an additional experience
the instructor can form a learning for this purpose.  Some of the topics that
could be investigated:

>

>   * Software to explore algebraic concepts.  For example, MATH CONNECTIONS:
ALGEBRA I & II software.

>   * Applying algebra to real-world problem solving. Mastery of a JASPER
WOODBURY EPISODE (using algebra concepts/skills).

>   * Using manipulatives to visualize mathematical ideas. Mastery of the
ALGEBRA TILES and Problem Solving in Mathematics algebra units.

>   * Using pre and post testing to organize instruction. Mastery of
ALGEBRIDGE.

>

>

> 2.  the M107 class will be involved in a team building and problem solving
exercise called Rescue at Boone's Meadow during the week of Sept 11.  An
eighth grade class at Kendrick High School will also be solving this problem
during that week.  If you wish you may observe these lessons.  See the
instructor regarding time and place.

**Required texts** :

> Driscoll, Mark . Research within Reach: Secondary School Mathematics.
Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

>

> U of Maryland, College Park. Insights into Secondary School Students'
Understanding of Mathematics.

>

> Rosnick, Peter. The Math Tutor. New York: Longman.

>

> Lial, M, Hornsby, J., Miller, C.  Intermediate Algebra: with Early Functions
and Graphing.  (Sixth edition).  Menlo Park, CA: Addison Wesley. ** (on loan
from the MSAC)**

** Readings will be selected from the following which are on reserve in the
IMC**.  

Ginbsburg, Herbert P. Assessing the Arithmetic Abilities and Instructional
Needs of Students. Austin, Texas: Pro-Ed.

Insights Bibliography (U of I network on Hickory -- Classes - Ed - Elem/Sec)

** Course Requirements/Projects:   **

> 1\. General background: Carefully read all assigned material. Keep well-
organized notes and summaries of readings. Participate actively in class-
seminar discussions of these readings.   Attend all M107 classes and keep good
observational notes on student reactions to problems and information.  Try to
focus on how the students are thinking about algebra and how they understand
the material and solve problems.

>

> 2\. Field Experiences: Successful completion of requirements as outlined
above. Both parts require the maintenance of a professional log/journal
documenting what you did, how you did it, and what you learned from the
experience. This log/journal should provide evidence of your professional
growth/learning, a record of your efforts for you and the instructor, and a
source of information and examples for discussions. These logs/journals will
be periodically reviewed so keep them current (it would be good practice to
update them every weekend) and ready for evaluation on a moment's notice (see
the rubric included) . These logs/journals need to document your use of
appropriate background information/reading studied.

>

> 3\. Content Skills: Achievement of a very high score on the algebra post
test (similar to the M107 final).

>

> 4.  Behavior:  Demonstration of professional behavior at all times is
expected.

** Evaluation** :

> Learning is not the result of just collecting points on assignments and
exams. Your grade will reflect a composite of the quality of work you submit
on all assignments. Below you will find a general rubric to serve as a guide
for evaluating work. To receive an excellent or proficient score you must
demonstrate a serious commitment to directing your own learning. This is the
first step in making the transition from thinking dependently like a student
("tell me what to do and how to do it") to taking more initiative and
responsibility like a teacher ("I must understand what I am expected to do and
determine what I need to know and how I can best accomplish it").

|

## Scoring Rubric

#  Scoring of 4: Excellent Response

 The student has demonstrated a full and complete understanding of all
concepts and processes. The student has addressed the task in a mathematically
and professionally sound manner. The response contains evidence of the
student's competence in problem-solving and reasoning, computing and
estimating and communicating to the full extent that these processes apply to
the specified task.

The response shows evidence of the student's ability to make connections
between some or all of the following: the K-6 math curriculum, children's
cognitive development of mathematical competence, effective classroom
organizational models for math instruction and effective math assessment
practices, and lesson plan development for diverse learners.

#  Scoring of 3: Proficient Response

The student has demonstrated a reasonable understanding of the essential
mathematical concepts and

process embodied in this application. The student's response contains most of
the attributes of a mathematically and professionally sound approach and
evidence of competence with appropriate professional and mathematical
processes, but contains flaws that counter evidence that the student
comprehends the essential mathematical and professional ideas addressed by
this task. Such flaws include errors ascribable to faulty reading, writing, or
drawing skills; errors ascribable to insufficient non-mathematical or non-
professional knowledge; and errors ascribable to negligent or inattentive
execution of mathematical or professional processes.

#  Scoring 2: Marginal Response

The student has demonstrated a limited understanding of some of the concepts
and process embodied in this application. The student's response contains some
of the attributes of an appropriate response, but lacks convincing evidence
that the student fully comprehends the essential professional and mathematical
ideas addressed by the task. Such deficits include evidence of insufficient
professional or mathematical knowledge; errors in fundamental mathematical
procedures or pedagogy; and other omissions, or anomalies that bring into
question the extent of the student's understanding of these concepts and
processes.

#  Score of 1: Unsatisfactory Response

The student has demonstrated merely an acquaintance with the topic. The
student's response is associated with the task in the item, but contains few
attributes of an appropriate response. There are significant omissions or
anomalies that indicate a basic lack of comprehension in regard to the
professional and mathematical ideas and procedures necessary to adequately
address the specified task. No evidence is presented to suggest that the
student has the ability to solve or teach such problems and topics.  
  
---  
  
**Class attendance is extremely important.  **

> Extra credit work will NOT be assigned. Late assignments will not be graded.
If you find it necessary to be absent from a tutoring session, you are
expected to call ahead (well in advance) and speak with Kirk at the MSAC
(885-5717). If you find it necessary to be absent from a planning session
and/or presentation, you are expected to notify your teammates and make
appropriate arrangements with them. Responsibility is critical.

>

> It is also vital that you conduct yourself in a  professional manner at all
times.  As juniors/seniors you know what professional behavior means.  Failure
to act and/or respond to situations appropriately may effect your grade and/or
your ability to participate in any or all activities outlined.  Participation
in class and in a helping role with students is a privilege not a right.



