SYLLABUS for MGF 2131 - 002

CHAOS and FRACTALS

Fall 2000

**Class time** : Monday, 11:00am to 12:15pm **room** LIF 268, Wednesday,
11:00am to 12:15pm **room** SCA 216 (computer lab)

**Instructor** : [ Natasa Jonoska](http://www.math.usf.edu/~jonoska)

**Office hours** : Room PHY 320, MW 10am - 11am, TR 11am-12pm or by an
appointment.

**Phone:** 4 - 9566, **e-mail:** jonoska@math.usf.edu

**Text book:** _Chaos, Fractals and Dynamics_ by _Robert L. Devaney_ ,
published by _Addison-Wesley 1990_.

Please be aware that this course satisfies the USF undergradute requirements
for General Education - Quantitative Methods and Math Gordon Rule.

**Course Objective and Outline.** This course is a very basic introduction to
the mathematical subject of dynamics. This subject studies objects in motion
and their long term behavior. Many notions that will be introduced in the
course are new and are captivating for mathematicians and non-mathematicians
alike. We will investigate dynamical systems that will have predictable
behavior and those that have chaotic behavior.

We will cover 9 chapters of the book, and maybe also Chapter 10 if time
permits. We will start with notions of orbits, iteration, periodic and fixed
points and will end with chaos. There is no specific prerequisite for that
material except high school algebra.

Monday hours will be regular classes (lectures and discussions) and Wednesday
hours will be in a computer lab. We will use some (very limited) software that
is already available, but we will do most of the examples by writing simple
programs in Maple. About 45-50 minutes each lab work will concentrate on the
material covered in the previous class. The remaining 25-30 minutes will be
left for individual work on specified assignments.

**Tentative Schedule:**

Aug. 28: Introduction to the subject.

Aug. 30: (lab) Introduction to Maple and its environment. First lab assignment
(LAS) is assigned. First assignment [ in pdf format ](hwk1.pdf) and [ in
postscript format ](hwk1.ps)

Sep. 6: Maple cont. (lab work)

Sep. 11: Chapter 1. Sep. 13: (lab) Second LAS assigned, first LAS is due.
Second assignment [ in pdf format ](hwk2.pdf) and [ in postscript format
](hwk2.ps)

Sep. 18: Chapter 2; Sep. 20: lab

You can find a list of procedures in Maple that can be used for investigating
dynamics of functions (checking orbits of certain points) [ here ](orbit1.htm)
or [ here (Maple worksheet)](orbits.mws).

Sep. 25: Chapter 3; Sep. 27: (lab) Third LAS is assigned, second LAS is due.
Third assignment [ in pdf format ](hwk3.pdf) and [ in postscript format
](hwk3.ps)

Oct. 2: Chapter 4; Oct. 4: lab

Oct. 9: Chapter 4 cont.; Oct. 11: (lab) review for test, fourth LAS assigned,
third LAS is due. Fourth assignment [ in pdf format ](hwk4.pdf) and [ in
postscript format ](hwk4.ps)

**0ct. 16: Mid-term Test;** Oct. 18: lab work for Chapter 4

Oct. 23: Chapter 5; Oct. 25: (lab) fifth LAS is assigned, fourth LAS is due.
Fifth assignment [ in pdf format ](hwk5.pdf) and [ in postscript format
](hwk5.ps)

Oct. 30: Chapter 5 cont.; Nov. 1: lab You can find some procedures in Maple
for iterating complex functions [ here (Maple worksheet)](complex.mws).

Nov. 6.: Chapter 6; Nov. 8: (lab) sixth LAS is assigned, fifth LAS is due.
Sixth assignment [ in pdf format ](hwk6.pdf) and [ in postscript format
](hwk6.ps)

Some programs for getting Julia sets can be obtained [ here (Maple
worksheet)](julia.mws).

Nov. 13: Chapter 7; Nov. 15: lab

To see the Mandelbrot set for the quadratic family of functions, (also Julia
sets) we can visit [Modeling And Simulation Tools for Education
Reform](http://storm.shodor.org/eoe/mandy/index.html) developed by the Shodor
Education Foundation Inc. in cooperation with the Natial Center for
Supercomputing Applications. It is useful to visit [ Robert Devaney's web
site](http://math.bu.edu/DYSYS/applets/index.html) and explore Julia sets and
Mandelbrot sets.

Nov. 20: Chapter 7 cont. and Chapter 8.; Nov. 22: (lab) seventh LAS is
assigned, sixth LAS is due. Seventh assignment [ in pdf format ](hwk7.pdf) and
[ in postscript format. ](hwk7.ps)

Nov. 27: Chapter 8 cont. and Chapter 9; Nov. 29 (lab).

Dec. 4: Chapter 9; Dec. 6. (lab) seventh LAS is due, review for the final.

**Final Exam:** Monday, December 11, 10:30am - 12:30pm **Grading policy:**
There will be one mid-term test on October 16 and a mandatory comprehensive
final exam. Each test (mid-term and the final exam) weights 35% of the grade,
the remaining 30% will be obtained from the lab assignments done after each
chapter (there will be 6-7 such assignments).

_A plus/minus grading system will be used to assign final grades._ **No make
up** tests will be allowed unless a prior notice of absence is given, or in
the case of an emergency.

**Attendance.** No attendance will be taken, but the instructor will not be
responsible for missed materials or subject covered in class due to absence.

**I and S/U grades:** An incomplete grade may be assigned only in case when
the student is passing the course with C or better average and due to some
dire circumstances such as sickness or family death prevent the student from
completing the course. The last day to drop/withdraw a course is October 27.

Students who wish to take the course on S/U basis must complete a written
contract with the instructor within the first **three** weeks of the semester.
Forms are available in the office of Mathematics Department. An "S" grade is
given if the grade is "C" or better. The student should be aware that there
are restrictions on the courses that can be taken on an S/U basis and should
consult the catalog for further information.

**Students who anticipate the necessity of being absent from class due to the
observation of a major religious observance must provide notice of the date(s)
to the instructor, in writing, by the second class meeting.**

_Students are advised to be aware of the USF academic dishonesty policy (page
44 of the 2000-2001 Undergraduate Catalig)._  

* * *

_Natasha Jonoska_  
_2000-08-25_

