GENERAL BIOLOGY PROGRAM **AUBURN UNIVERSITY** **131 Cary Hall** **Auburn, AL
36849-5508** **Phone: (334) 844-5145** **Fax: (334) 844-4065**

* * *

  


The General Biology Program is responsible for the teaching of freshman-level
biology courses at Auburn University. Approximately 4,700 students take at
least one of the eight courses taught in this program.

The Program is housed in Cary Hall, which contains two lecture rooms and five
laboratory rooms, along with offices and research laboratories for
faculty/staff and graduate students.

General Biology courses are taught by faculty and staff belonging to the two
biological sciences departments within the College of Sciences and
Mathematics. These two departments, Botany and Microbiology, and Zoology and
Wildlife Science, contribute the personnel that teach both the lab and lecture
components of these courses.

There are two major sequences of biology courses. The major's sequence
currently comprises 3 quarter-long courses: BI 101 (Principles of Biology), BI
102 (Plant Biology), and BI 103 (Animal Biology). Under the semester system,
the general topics now covered in these three courses will be rearranged into
2 semester-long courses: BIOL 1020 (Principles of Biology) and BIOL 1030
(Organismal Biology).

The non-major's sequence also comprises 3 quarter-long courses: BI 105
(Perspectives in Biology), BI 106 (Human Biology), and BI 107 (Environmental
Biology). Under the semester system, these courses will be become 2 semester-
long courses: BIOL 1000 (Introductory Biology) and BIOL 1010 (A Survey of
Life).

There are also two Honors versions of major's biology courses: Honors
Principles of Biology (BI 171) and Honors Animal Biology (BI 173). Pedagogy in
these courses differs from the standard major's courses, and instructors have
more latitude in customizing class to their area of research expertise.
**CHALLENGE EXAMS**

The General Biology Program offers Challenge Exams for BI 101, 102, 103, 105,
and 106. You can take these exams in place of taking the course. The
qualifying exams are 100 multiple choice questions each. You must score 70 or
above to pass. If you pass, we will report your passing score to the
Registrar's Office and your Dean's Office, and you will receive 5 credits.
NOTE THAT YOU CAN ONLY CHALLENGE A PARTICULAR COURSE ONLY ONCE. If you score
less than 70 on the challenge test, you must take the course to receive credit
for it.

The syllabi for these courses are provided below on this web page. You can use
these to determine what topics our courses cover, and therefore what you need
to know to do well on the challenge tests.

When you are ready to take a challenge exam, just come by room 131 Cary Hall
and ask for the Office Manager. Office hours are from 7:45 - 11:45 and 12:45 -
4:45 Monday thru Friday. Make sure you allow yourself enough time to complete
the exam before the office closes for lunch or for the day. Most students can
complete a challenge exam in 1.5 hr or less.

* * *

**SCIENCE MAJORS**

**BI 101 PRINCIPLES OF BIOLOGY (5). Lec. 4, Lab 3\. Integrated principles of
biology with emphasis on organic macro-molecules, bioenergetics, cell
structure and function, heredity, evolution and ecology. For the science-
oriented curriculum. Credit is not allowed for both BI 101 and 105 or BI 101
and SM 101. **[Syllabus](Syllabus_101.html)

**BI 102 PLANT BIOLOGY (5). LEC 4, lab. 3 Pr., BI 101 or BI 171. The
morphology, physiology, relationships, distribution and importance of plants.
For the science-oriented curriculum. **[Syllabus](Syllabus_102.html)

**BI 103 ANIMAL BIOLOGY (5). LEC. 4, LAB.3 Pr., BI 101 or BI 171. Morphology,
physiology, relationships, distribution and importance of animals. For the
science-oriented curriculum. Credit will not be allowed for both BI 103 and
106. **[Syllabus](Syllabus_103.html)   **NON-SCIENCE MAJORS**

**BI 105 PERSPECTIVES IN BIOLOGY (5). LEC. 4, LAB 2. Principles of biology
with emphasis on the relationship between humankind and modern biological
science. Topics include cell biology, inheritance, evolution and introduction
to ecology. For the student satisfying a general education requirement in
natural science. Cannot be used to meet major or minor requirements in
biological science. Credit will not be allowed for both BI 101 and 105 or SM
101 and BI 105.** [Syllabus](Syllabus_105.html)

**BI 106 HUMAN BIOLOGY (5). LEC. 4, LAB. 1. Pr., BI 101 or 105 or BI 171 or SM
101. Introductory human anatomy and physiology with emphasis on recent
improvements in health care. For the student satisfying a general education
requirement in natural science. Cannot be used to meet major or minor
requirements in biological science. Credit is not allowed for both BI 106 and
BI 103.** [Syllabus](Syllabus_106.html)

**BI 107 ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY. (5). LEC. 4, REC. 1\. Pr., BI 101 or 105 or BI
171 or SM 101. An introductory ecological approach to understanding human
impact and dependence on the natural environment. Broad topics include
ecosystems, nutrient cycles, pollution, pest management, conservation of
natural resources, energy and human population. For the student satisfying a
general education requirement in natural science. Cannot be used to meet major
or minor requirements in biological science.** [Syllabus](Syllabus_107.html)
**HONOR COURSES**

**BI 171: PRINCIPLES OF BIOLOGY (5). Lec 4, Lab. 3\. Offered Winter Quarter
only. Integrated principles of biology with emphasis on organic macro-
molecules, bioenergetics, cell structure and function, heredity, evolution,
and ecology. This course is designed specifically for students in the honors
curriculum. Students who take BI 171 will not be given credit for BI 101 or BI
105.** [Syllabus](Syllabus_171.html)

**BI 173: ANIMAL BIOLOGY (5). Lec. 4, Lab. 3. BI 171 or BI 101. Offered Spring
Quarter only. The morphology, physiology, relationships, distribution, and
importance of animals. This course designed specifically for the Honors
student curriculum. Students who take BI 173 will not be given credit for BI
103 or BI 106.** [Syllabus](Syllabus_173.html)

* * *

  [LONG RANGE SCHEDULE FOR
BIOLOGY](http://www.auburn.edu/academic/science_math/cosam/downloads/biolong.htm)  
  
   [SEMESTER COURSES](Semester_intro.html)

