

EDU 658 (001)  
**Assessment Techniques in P -12 Mathematics**

3 hours credit

Tuesdays  
4:30 - 7:15 p. m.

August 21 - December 11, 2001  
BEP 204

**>![](658syllabus%20_files/image002.jpg)**

**_"Providing for the educational needs of all students"_**

The College of Education will prepare exemplary educators who demonstrate the
knowledge, skills, and professional dispositions necessary to provide for the
educational needs of all students in a diverse and technological society. In
assessing and evaluating mathematics, a reflective professional educator knows
how to evaluate student progress in mathematics and how to modify teaching
approaches to meet the needs of the students. This ability is grounded in a
thorough knowledge of mathematics as well as knowledge of the current research
and theories on assessment and evaluation. This forms the basis for theories
and research on how best to teach mathematics to students of any age. These
theories and research are reflected in recommendations from state and national
organizations

The College of Education is aware of the necessity to support effective
experienced teachers in each of the Experienced Teacher Standards
(<http://www.kde.state.ky.us/oapd/curric/TPGF/exp_teacher_stds.PDF>)  as
established by the Kentucky Education Professional Standards Board. The
objectives of EDU 658 are derived from the essential knowledge, established
and current research findings, and sound professional practices as they relate
to all of the NCTM _Principles and Standards_ as well as the Kentucky's Core
Content for Assessment, Program of Studies in Mathematics, and Experienced
Teacher Standards particularly: Standard III (Designs/Plans Instruction),
Standard V (Implements/Manages Instruction), Standard VI
(Assesses/Communicates Learning Results), and Standard VII (Reflects/Evaluates
Teaching/Learning).

The evaluation measures of this course will assess the student's understanding
of these standards and his/her ability to apply these concepts to the
teaching/learning process.



**Professor:** Linda Sheffield, Ph. D.     **Email address** :
Sheffield@nku.edu

**Office** : BEP 262             **Phone** : 572-5431

**Office Hours** : Monday 9:00 - 11:00 a.m.; Tues. and Thurs. 12:00 - 2:00
p.m. and by appointment

**Homepage** : <http://www.nku.edu/~sheffield/>

**Blackboard.Com** \- <http://learnonline.nku.edu>. This class will be web-
enhanced and all students should follow the Student Login Directions to enter
the class on-line.

**Texts:** Clarke, D. (1997). _Constructive Assessment in Mathematics:
Practical Steps for Classroom Teachers._ Berkeley, CA: Key Curriculum Press.

National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (1995). _Assessment standards for
school mathematics_. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

**Recommended:** Ashlock, R. B. (7 th Edition). (1998). _Error patterns in
computation_. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Simon and Schuster.

Becker, J. P. and Shimada, S. (eds.). (1997) _The open-ended approach: A new
proposal for teaching mathematics_. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers
of Mathematics.

Mathematical Sciences Education Board. (1993). _Measuring up: Prototypes for
mathematics assessment_. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (2000). _Principles and standards
for school mathematics_. Reston, VA: NCTM.

**Internet Readings** : NCTM _Principles and Standards_
(<http://standards.nctm.org/>);

Kentucky's Core Content for Assessment
(<http://www.kde.state.ky.us/oapd/curric/corecontent/core_content_index_version_30.asp>),
Kentucky's Program of Studies in Mathematics
(<http://www.kde.state.ky.us/oapd/curric/Publications/ProgramofStudies/>), and
Kentucky's Experienced Teacher Standards ([
_http://www.kde.state.ky.us/oapd/curric/TPGF/exp_teacher_stds.PDF_](http://www.kde.state.ky.us/otec/epsb/standards/new_teach_stds.asp)).

**Rationale:** The focus of this course is on the use of assessment to improve
teaching and learning. This includes the use of formative and embedded
evaluation including diagnostic measures, observations, interviews, pretests,
cognitive processes and connecting curriculum instruction and assessment as
well as summative evaluation including standardized and criterion
referenced/standards-based assessment and rubrics. Current authentic
assessment techniques such as open-response questions, open-ended questions,
performance tasks and portfolios will be included. Links are made among all
types of assessment and state and national mathematics standards and core
content.

This course places particular emphasis on the College of Education themes of
intellectual vitality, assessment and evaluation, technology and diversity.
EDU 658 specifically addresses the Kentucky Experienced Teacher Standards
identified below (means of assessment noted in boldface).An * indicates an
item that is acceptable for inclusion in the student's portfolio.

**Standard III: Designs/Plans Instruction.** The teacher designs/plans
instruction that develops student abilities to use communication skills, apply
core concepts, become self-sufficient individuals, become responsible team
members, think and solve problems, and integrate knowledge.

Performance Criteria:

3.1      focuses instruction on one or more of Kentucky's Learning Goals and
Outcomes.  
**KCCT Assessment Project** (project)*           **Open-Ended Project**
(project)*

3.9 Develops and implements appropriate assessment strategies and processes.  
**KCCT Assessment Project** (project)*           **Open-Ended Project**
(project)*  
**Class Presentation** (class assignment)

**Standard V: Implements/Manages Instruction** : The teacher
introduces/implements/manages instruction that develops student abilities to
use communication skills, apply core concepts, become self-sufficient
individuals, become responsible team members, think and solve problems and
integrate knowledge.

5.1 uses appropriate questioning strategies to help students solve problems
and think critically.  
**KCCT Assessment Project** (project)*           **Open-Ended Project**
(project)*  

5.14 identifies student misconceptions, provides guidance; and offers students
continuous feedback and progress toward expectations.  
**Error Patterns** (class assignment)

**Standard VI: Assesses and Communicates Learning Results:** The teacher
assesses learning and communicates results to students and others with respect
to student abilities to use communication skills, apply core concepts, become
self-sufficient individuals, become responsible team members, think and solve
problems, and integrate knowledge.

Performance Criteria:  
6.1 selects and uses appropriate assessments  
**Class Presentation** (class assignment)

6.2 assesses student performance using the established criteria and scoring
guides consistent with Kentucky's assessment program.  
**KCCT Assessment Project** (project)*

**Standard VII: Reflects/Evaluates Teaching/Learning**

7.1 assesses and analyzes the effectiveness of instruction.  
**Open-Ended Project** (project)*

7.2 makes appropriate changes to instruction based upon feedback, reflection,
and assessment results.  
**Open-Ended Project** (project)*

All students must have accounts for Email and WebPages on the university's
mainframe computer to assist them in accessing the latest technology and to
help them keep in touch with each other and the professor. In addition, all
students must log on to the class at Blackboard.com for web-based course
support.

**Objectives**

At the completion of the course, the student should be able to:

  1. Distinguish between formative, embedded, and summative mathematics evaluation and give exemplars for each area.
  2. Describe the recommendations of the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics _Principles and Standards_ and the Kentucky Mathematics _Program of Studies_ and _Core Content for Assessment_ for assessing mathematics and give the rationale and research that led to these recommendations.
  3. Use a variety of assessment strategies, including technology and physical models, appropriate for enhancing students learning mathematics. This includes ideas for evaluating special populations of students.
  4. Write objectives related to the Kentucky Program of Studies and Core Content for Assessment in mathematics, and plan assessment and learning experiences on the concrete, connecting, and abstract levels.
  5. Develop alternative methods of testing, assessment, and evaluation.

**Student Requirements and Experiences:**

  1. Attend all class sessions and participate in class discussions, web-based discussions and projects, and lab activities. Attendance will be taken.
  2. Complete assigned readings and technology assignments and be prepared to discuss, analyze and apply the ideas gleaned from them.
  3. Successfully complete a final exam.
  4. Complete weekly assignments either individually or in cooperative learning groups as assigned. Check for email and/or Blackboard.com assignments and discussions regularly.
  5. Prepare a **class presentation** on formative or summative evaluation, or assessment for student recognition. See the Class Presentation Guidelines on the course website at <http://www.nku.edu/~sheffield/edu658.html> or <http://learnonline.nku.edu> for details.
  6. Complete the **KCCT Assessment Project**. See the KCCT Assessment Project Guidelines on the course website at <http://www.nku.edu/~sheffield/edu658.html> or <http://learnonline.nku.edu> for details.
  7. Complete the **Open-Ended Project**. See the Open-Ended Project Guidelines on the course website at <http://www.nku.edu/~sheffield/edu658.html> or <http://learnonline.nku.edu> for details.

      If you prefer, you may substitute a project of comparable or superior quality related to the course objectives. Dr. Sheffield must approve your project before you begin and you must work out scoring guidelines jointly with her. This must be done at least one month before the assigned project is due.

This syllabus outlines the minimum requirements for successful completion of
the course. Fulfillment of only the minimum requirements does not
automatically correlate to superior performance. For a complete description of
the requirements for superior (and other) performance requirements, please
refer to the scoring guidelines for each assignment and the Graduate Student
Handbook.

All assignments must be typed or word-processed. Handwritten assignments will
not be accepted. NOTE: A separate reference list (in APA style) must be
included with all final projects (KCCT Assessment Project, Open-ended Project
and class presentations). All sources should be recent unless given for
historical reference. Be sure to follow all copyright laws, especially those
pertaining to use of electronic materials.

**Optional**

Students have the option of receiving a maximum of six points extra credit for
one of the following activities (or other option approved by the instructor).
Extra credit assignments are due no later than November 27, 2001.



  * Review three mathematics assessment articles from three different recent (within last 5 years) journals. These articles must be different from articles used for other assignments. For each article, include the full reference in APA format, a one-page word-processed critique, and a copy of the article. Each critique must have the following three sections: 
    1. Brief summary of the article (Labeled)
    2. Critical evaluation of the article (Labeled)
    3. Suggestions for applying information from the article to your own teaching (Labeled)



  * Attend a mathematics education conference or school district mathematics professional development related to mathematics assessment and report on at least three sessions. You must include the name and date(s) of the conference or professional development, the name of each presenter and title of each session attended. For each of the sessions, include a one-page summary of the topics discussed. A minimum of three one-hour sessions is required.You may use the NKCTM meeting on November 8th for this. This assignment is due no later than one week after the conference or professional development.

**Evaluation**

The grade will be proportioned as follows:

KCCT Assessment Project

|

50 pts.  
  
---|---  
  
Open-Ended Project

|

50 pts.  
  
Daily assignments, online discussions, class participation, etc.

|

25 pts.  
  
Student Presentation

|

50 pts.  
  
Final Exam

|

75 pts.  
  
Total

|

250 pts.  
  
**Grading Scale**

**

92% - 100% (230 - 250 pts.)

|

A  
  
---|---  
  
85% - 92% (213 - 230 pts.)

|

B  
  
75% - 85% (188 - 212 pts.)

|

C  
  
0 - 75% (below 188 pts.)

|

F  
  
**

**PROFESSIONALISM:** Much of the following information has been specified
within various categories contained in this syllabus. Professional behavior is
expected of all students.

This course is part of an accredited preparation program that leads to
professional certification. Students are required to demonstrate behavior
consistent with a professional career. In particular, students are expected
to:

  * Attend all class meetings. The professor must be notified of any absences in advance. Absences may require the completion of make-up assignments.
  * Prepare carefully and completely for class.  Students must be ready to discuss all readings thoughtfully.
  * Complete all assignments on time. Exceptions or extensions may be granted only if the professor is notified in advance.
  * Collaborate responsibly with colleagues. Students must fulfill their collegial responsibilities in all coursework.
  * Interact professionally with classmates. Students must demonstrate respectful standards of behavior during class discussion. In addition, university coursework is not an appropriate place for nonprofessional guests. Audio or video taping of class sessions is appropriate only during lectures, and only with the professor's prior consent.

Failure to demonstrate the above behaviors will have an immediate and severe
impact on a student's grade. Consistent shortcomings in the above areas will
lead to a student's dismissal from the Teacher Education Program. See the NKU
and College of Education Code of Ethics for details.

The instructor reserves the right to make changes in the syllabus, and/or
class calendar if circumstances so dictate.

10% of the original point value of an assignment is deducted for assignments
that are up to one week late. Additional points will be deducted for
assignments that are later. Assignments will not be acceptable after 2 weeks
except in extreme instances

Cheating, plagiarism, and illegal copying of software will not be tolerated.
This includes the unlawful use of material found on the Internet.

If an exam is missed due to an unavoidable situation, the instructor may allow
a make-up. It may be different than the original exam. It may be written or
oral. Any exam may be subject to oral questioning. You must contact the
instructor immediately if an exam is missed.

**Reference List:**

Ashlock, R. B. (7th Edition). (1998). _Error patterns in computation_. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Simon and Schuster.

Becker, J. P. and Shimada, S. (3eds.). (1997 _) The open-ended approach: A new
proposal for teaching mathematics_. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers
of Mathematics.

Clarke, D. (1997). _Constructive Assessment in Mathematics: Practical Steps
for Classroom Teachers._ Berkeley, CA: Key Curriculum Press.

Kulm, G. _Assessing higher-order thinking in mathematics_. Washington, D. C.:
American Association for the Advancement of Science.

Ma, L. (1999) _Knowing and teaching elementary mathematics: Teachers'
understanding of fundamental mathematics in China and the United States_. New
York: Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc.

Mathematical Sciences Education Board. (1993).  _Measuring up: Prototypes for
mathematics assessment_. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (2000),  _Principles and
standards for school mathematics_. Reston, VA: NCTM.

National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (1995). _Assessment standards for
school mathematics_. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

Sheffield, L. and Cruikshank, D. (2000). _Teaching and learning elementary and
middle school mathematics._ (4 th ed.). New York: John Wiley.

Webb, N.L. & Coxford, A. F. (Eds.). (1993) _Assessment in the mathematics
classroom_. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

**Professional journals/related publications:**

**NCTM** : _Teaching Children Mathematics_

_Mathematics Teaching in the Middle School_

_Mathematics Teacher_

_Journal for Research in Mathematics Education_

_Principles and Standards for School Mathematics: Navigations Series_

**SSMA** : _School Science & Mathematics_

**KCTM** : _Kentucky Math Journal_

**ISTE** :  _Learning and Leading with Technology_

(Several other publications related to special interest groups/topics)

**Useful Web sites:**

  * Kentucky Council of Teachers of Mathematics: <http://www.kctm.org/>
  * Kentucky Department of Education: _http://www.kde.state.ky.us/_
  * National Council of Teachers of Mathematics: [_http://www.nctm.org/_](http://www.nctm.org/)
  * Northern Kentucky Council of Teachers of Mathematics: <http://www.nku.edu/~nkctm/>
  * Northern Kentucky University Mathematics Education: [http://www.nku.edu/~mathed](http://www.nku.edu/~mathed/)/
  * Northern Kentucky University College of Education: [_http://www.nku.edu/~education/_](http://www.nku.edu/~education/)
  * School Science and Mathematics: [_http://www.ssma.org/_](http://www.ssma.org/)
  * Dr. Sheffield: <http://www.nku.edu/~sheffield>
  * Marco Polo Internet Content for the Classroom: <http://marcopolo.worldcom.com/>

## APA EDITORIAL STYLE

  * For web citations: [http://www.apastyle.org/elecref.html](http://www.apa.org/journals/webref.html)
  * Other citations: <http://www.apa.org/journals/faq.html> [http://www2.gasou.edu/library/broch_ref/apastyle.pdf](http://www2.gasou.edu/library/broch_ref/bibliog.html)  

**Student Information Form**

On the form below, please fill in your name, email address, phone number and
address. These will be kept confidential. Please sign in the space provided to
acknowledge that you have received and understand the course syllabus. In
addition, please sign to acknowledge that you are willing to have your work
appear for professional development in print or electronic form.

\----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Name _______________________________________        Date ___________

Home phone number _________________ Best time to call _________________

Other phone number where you can be reached (work, etc.) _________________

Email address: _________________________________________

Please list all mathematics and mathematics education that you have taken.





I have read and understand the information contained in the syllabus for EDU
658, Assessment Techniques for P - 12 Mathematics.

Student Signature ______________________________________ (Do not print.)

Date _____________________



I give Dr. Linda Sheffield permission to use my mathematics work and/or photos
for the purpose of sharing with other teachers and education professionals. I
understand that this material might appear in written or electronic form,
including booklets, disks, digital photos, and web pages.

Signature__________________________________________

Name printed ________________________________     Date ______

Address: __________________________________________________

____________________________________________________________

If you would prefer that your name **not** appear on these materials, please
sign here.  ___________________________

