![Course Syllabus](_derived/333syllabus.html_cmp_blends110_bnr.gif)  
---  
[![Home](_derived/home_cmp_blends110_vbtn.gif)](./)  
[![Courses](_derived/courses.htm_cmp_blends110_vbtn.gif)](courses.htm)

 [MATH 201](http://www.mtsu.edu/~dmiller/201.html) Geometry for Elementary
Teachers

[MATH 332](http://www.mtsu.edu/~dmiller/332.htm) Teaching Mathematics in
Grades 5-8  

[MATH 333](http://www.mtsu.edu/~dmiller/333.htm) Teaching Mathematics in
Grades 9-12

 [MATH 610](610.html) Mathematics for Teachers

[MATH 632](632.html) Mathematical Problem Solving

[MATH 633](633.htm) Algebra for Teachers

[MATH 634](634.html) Geometry for Teachers

[SHAPES](geometricshapes/shapes.html) IN THE REAL WORLD

| |

## MATH 333 - TEACHING MATHEMATICS IN GRADES 9-12 COURSE SYLLABUS \- SPG SEM
98

|  Office: |  KOM 455 |  Telephone: |  898 5472  
---|---|---|---  
 Office Hours:  |  To be announced |  e-mail: |  dmiller@frank.mtsu.edu  
  |   |  Fax:  |  898 5422  
  
Prerequisite: | Admission to the teacher education program and completion of
the mathematics core (122, 221, 222, 312, 346, STAT 314). MATH 331 & 332 are
highly recommended.  
---|---  
Text: | A book of readings available at the bookstore  
Purpose: | This is a pre-professional course designed specifically for the
preparation of secondary school teachers of mathematics. Its purpose is to
prepare people to teach topics from the secondary school curriculum.  
Objectives: | Using the NCTM's _Curriculum and Evaluation Standards for School
Mathematics_ as a professional reference, the objectives of this course will
be directed towards the construction of knowledge in three domains; knowledge
of content, knowledge of pedagogy, and knowledge of students. Readings,
activities, assignments, and presentations will be designed to prepare
students to (1) teach mathematical concepts, skills, and generalizations; (2)
teach mathematical reasoning couched within a problem solving paradigm; (3)
make connections between different fields of mathematics, between mathematics
and other subject areas and between mathematics and real world applications;
(4) communicate their understanding of mathematical ideas orally and in
writing; (5) utilize a variety of assessment strategies in the development of
a comprehensive evaluation scheme; (6) appreciate and describe the historical
evolution of the mathematics curriculum; (7) utilize technology in the
teaching and learning of secondary mathematics; and, (8) implement small
group, whole group, and individual educational programs of study in secondary
school mathematics. In addition, another objective of this course will be to
prepare students to become independent, life-long learners capable of setting
individual goals and objectives for continued professional development.  
Attendance: | This is a pre-professional course taking a student-centered
approach to learning. In-class activities will not be conducive to out-of-
class completion. Your presence and active involvement in all classroom
activities and discussions are a necessary ingredient to the success of this
course. As prospective teachers you should show a positive attitude and
exhibit an interest in this class and its members. Every effort should be made
to make the course as meaningful as possible.  
Evaluation: | It will be each student's responsibility to ask questions about
material presented in class. Questions may be directed to the instructor or a
peer if the question is in reference to material covered during a peer
presentation. The final grade in this course will be an average of all scores
received as a result of completing the assessment activities. The standards
for receiving a letter grade will be: A = 90-100; B = 80-89; C = 70-79; D =
60-69; below 60 will receive an F.  
General Info:  | The last day to drop a course without a grade is February
4th. The last day to drop a course and receive a "W" is March 4th. A grade of
"I" will be given only in accordance with University Policy. Any student who,
because of a disabling condition, may require some special arrangements in
order to meet course requirements should contact the instructor as soon as
possible but no later than the end of the second week of classes to make
necessary accommodations.  
  
Assessment Activities:

Article critiques - 5 @ 10 pts each. Each one page critique must be typed or
word processed. Single space the reference listing at the top of the page with
your name typed in the upper, right-hand corner. The reference should be
written in APA style ( _Publication manual of the American Psychological_
Association, Fourth Edition). The body of the paper must be double spaced.
Each critique should be divided into two sections. The first section, one or
two paragraphs, should summarize the article. Subtitle it Summary. The second
section, one or two paragraphs, should be your reaction to what has been
presented. Write this section in first person. Subtitle these paragraphs
Reaction. Following is an example of a reference in APA style:

Miller, L. D. (1992). Teacher benefits from using impromptu writing prompts in
algebra classes. _Journal_ for Research in Mathematics Education, 23(4),
329-340.



Peer presentations - Each student will make two presentations to the class.
The first lesson will feature a standard from the _Curriculum and Evaluation
Standards for School Mathematics_ which is on reserve at the library. One
standard will be assigned to individual students. This presentation will
utilize PowerPoint and will be 15 minutes in length. The second presentation
will be a demonstration of a Hyperstudio tutorial covering a topic of choice
approved by the instructor. Students will work in pairs or triads. The
demonstration will be 15 minutes in length. Each presentation will be
evaluated by both instructor and peers. The instructor will evaluate the oral
presentation (25 pts), a written lesson plan implemented during the oral
presentation (25 pts), and the PowerPoint/Hyperstudio software. Peers will
evaluate the oral presentation (25 pts). Total points: 200



Problem solving - During the semester you will be given four problems or
mathematical investigations to complete individually and six to complete in
cooperative learning groups. Each group will submit one solution. Each person
in the group will be awarded the same number of points for the activity unless
otherwise designated by the group. Each problem will be worth 10 points. Total
points: 100



Review of secondary mathematics. Student teachers from the Fall Semester 1995
were asked to suggest topics and/or activities for MATH 333 which would make
it a more beneficial experience in respect to preparing for student teaching.
Their first suggestion was to review the content in all mathematics courses
covered in the secondary curriculum; that is, Algebra I, Algebra II, Geometry,
Pre-calculus, and calculus. To accommodate this suggestion, I will give you 50
problems throughout the semester which reflect the content taught in secondary
mathematics. Each problem will be worth 1 point. These problems will be
disseminated in class but will be worked out-of-class. Total points: 50



Final examination: The final examination of this course will cover the
material presented during the semester, both mathematical knowledge and
pedagogical knowledge. This test will be worth 100 pts.



School observation/participation - Five hours of observation/participation
experiences in a high school are required. This activity will either be
arranged by yourself (self-placement) or by personnel in the College of
Education. While there are no points allocated to the completion of this task,
failure to complete the observations will result in an "I" for the semester.

![](_themes/blends/blesepa.gif)

[Course Syllabus](333syllabus.html) |

Announcements |

Assignments  
---|---|---  
[](333.html)

[](333.html)

[Return to MATH 333 Home Page](333.html)



  
  
[![Home](_derived/home_cmp_blends110_hbtn.gif)](./) [![MATH
201](_derived/201.html_cmp_blends110_hbtn.gif)](201.html) [![MATH
333](_derived/333.htm_cmp_blends110_hbtn.gif)](333.htm) [![MATH
633](_derived/633.htm_cmp_blends110_hbtn.gif)](633.htm) [![MATH
634](_derived/634.html_cmp_blends110_hbtn.gif)](634.html) [![MATH
610](_derived/610.html_cmp_blends110_hbtn.gif)](610.html) [![MATH
632](_derived/632.html_cmp_blends110_hbtn.gif)](632.html) [![MATH
332](_derived/332.htm_cmp_blends110_hbtn.gif)](332.htm) Last update: May 26,
2000  
L. Diane Miller  
[dmiller@mtsu.edu](mailto:dmiller@mtsu.edu)

Copyright 2000.  L. Diane Miller  
  
---

