**

DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS - MAT 143AA and AB

COURSE SYLLABUS

SIENA HEIGHTS UNIVERSITY

**

**Spring 2002**

**Instructor:** Toni Carroll |  ****

**Office Hours:** MTTh 9:00 - 10:00  
---|---  
****

**Telephone:** 264-7658 |

MT 1:15 - 4:00  
****

**Office Number: SCI** -33 |

  
****

**Prerequisites:** High school Algebra II or MAT 102 |

  
  


**_

MATERIALS:

_**

__ _****_

> 1\. Larson/Farber. Elementary Statistics, 2E, Prentice Hall  
>  2\. Student study guide to accompany the text  
>  3\. Minitab Student Edition  
>  4\. TI-83 Graphing Calculator  
>  5\. BlackBoard Course Management System  
>  6\. Web Enhancement

_**COURSE OUTCOMES:**_

This course is designed to give the student a working knowledge of descriptive
and inferential statistics and probability that can be applied to his/her own
discipline. Assessed by exams, data projects, and online quizzes.

The student will demonstrate abilities in: organizing data, descriptive
statistics, probability and probability distributions, sampling distributions,
estimation of population parameter, correlation, and hypotheses testing.
Assessed by exams, data projects, and online quizzes.

The student will demonstrate the necessary skills to enter and interpret data
using statistical software and the graphing calculator. Assessed by exams,
data projects, Minitab labs, and online quizzes. ** __**

**_

COURSE METHODS:

_**

In class students will discuss the concepts of contemporary statistics (from
viewing and reading) and develop skills in problem solving and computation by
working examples. Quizzes and projects will be online, as will opportunities
for communication. Students will keep a notebook of worked examples and
written homework assignments. Students are expected to be active participants
in discussions. Successful completion of this course requires substantial out
of class study time. Exams are comprehensive. There are no exam make-ups. Blue
books are required for exams. Students are encouraged to form study groups.

Homework assignments are found online with Blackboard.. Quizzes based on
homework are given online for each chapter.

**Problem Sets:**  
Sets of problems have been selected to help you achieve the goals of the
course. Answers to problems are in the back of the textbook and in the Student
Study Guide. Problems are good sources for discussions.

**Threaded Discussions:** These discussions provide online class discussions.
Here is an opportunity to talk about ideas from class.

**Data Analysis Projects:**  
Data analysis is at the core of statistics. There will be sample projects for
your perusal online (see external links). Because of time constraints, most of
the data analysis projects you will do will be less complex. However, you
should study the online projects in great detail before doing the projects
assigned.

**Lab Experiences:**  
Each student purchases a TI-83 calculator and the Minitab software. The
calculator has many features that make calculations in statistics easier. The
textbook explains in great detail how each calculation is made  "by hand."
However, students are encouraged to use the TI-83 procedures in each chapter
to make the calculations easily and quickly.

Minitab is statistical software that not only calculates statistics, but also
draws graphs and charts. All the text and graphics generated by Minitab can be
copied and pasted into an MS Word document. Hence, you can write a report
using narrative, statistics, and graphics. Data project reports are all
created using Minitab and MSWord. Several Minitab lab experiences will give
you experience using Minitab and integrating it with MS Word.

  

**_

ON GETTING THROUGH THE COURSE:

_**

For many students, this course will contain unfamiliar conceptual material. It
is expected that 2 or 3 hours of outside work will be required for every hour
of class plus work on the computer! Students with strong background or
aptitudes may require less than 2 hours study per class hour. At times, some
students may need to spend more time. It is expected that the student will
seriously devote his/her time and energy to his/her education. Any student who
experiences difficulties beyond a reasonable allocation of time and effort
should come to my office for assistance. Tutors are avilable for this class
through my office and through the Student Support Services Department.

**Expectations for written reports** :

The assignment is prepared using word processor and Minitab, TI-interactive,
or captured images from the TI-83 calculator. All mathematics is correct with
no conceptual errors. All requirements of the assignment are met. The report
as a whole is cohesive and includes an introduction explaining the goal and
methodology as well as a conclusion summarizing results. Correct grammar,
spelling, and structure are used throughout. [Click here for criteria for
reports.](http://www.sienahts.edu/%7Etoni/Statistics/criteria.html)  

**_

LEARNING OUTCOMES

_**

The Mathematics program has learning outcomes that we believe all students
enrolled in our courses will enjoy accomplishing. The student will:

1. read and understand mathematics, differentiating between correct and incorrect mathematical reasoning;  
---  
2. effectively communicate mathematics to others, writing and speaking; (Assessed by exams, data projects, and online quizzes.)  
3. demonstrate abilities to work independently and in-groups to develop mathematical models using appropriate modern technologies  
4. demonstrate a mathematical maturity leading to independent investigations, increased responsibility for learning, and participation in the professional mathematics community.  
5. demonstrate mastery of course content. (Assessed by exams, data projects, and online quizzes.)  
The general education learning outcomes receiving major emphasis in this
course are C1 and B2. The writing required for activities and data projects
address C1 while homework assignments and quizzes satisfy B2.  
**_

Assessment Criteria:

_**

Regular exams, online quizzes, data projects and written assignments will
determine the course grade. Quizzes, assignments, and projects are found
online with Blackboard. In studying statistics students are encouraged to work
in groups in order to achieve comprehensive understanding. Complete honesty is
expected in written work with proper acknowledgments to sources. Any student
engaging in any act of academic dishonesty will be given a failing course
grade and reported to the appropriate college authorities.

**_GRADING SCALE:_ ** |  **_

BASED ON: _**  
---|---  
  
A = 90% and above

B = 80-89%

C = 70-79%

D = 60-69%

E = Below 60%  |

see Blackboard  
  


**A summary of what you need to do to be successful in the class:**  

Read chapters and study examples  

Write comprehensive summaries for each chapter

Do problems sets using calculators

Study online projects  

Do online quizzes  

Do Minitab labs  

Do data analysis projects  

Do well on exams  

Communicate with professor and with students about the course in threaded
discussions  

See additional information in Blackboard.

TC spring 2002

