  
   ![](/Templates/Standard/logo.gif)    |  |  **Jackson Community College  
Information Center**  
---  
**[Register now](http://www.jccmi.edu/StudentDevelopment/RegForm.asp)**  
|

[ About JCC](/Navigation/MenuDisplay.asp?Menu=A)  

|

[Academics](/Navigation/MenuDisplay.asp?Menu=B)  

|

[Student Information](/Navigation/MenuDisplay.asp?Menu=C)  

|

[](http://www.jccmi.edu/BIDC/ProDev/)  

|

[Distance Learning](/Navigation/MenuDisplay.asp?Menu=E)  
  
  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
[Business and Industry](/Navigation/MenuDisplay.asp?Menu=F)  

|

[Human Resources](/Navigation/MenuDisplay.asp?Menu=G)  

|

[Home](http://www.jccmi.edu)  

|

[Coming Events](/Navigation/MenuDisplay.asp?Menu=I)  

|

[Services Available](/Navigation/MenuDisplay.asp?Menu=J)  
  
  
![ ](/Templates/Standard/space.gif)  
  
  **Search JCC**  
|  
---  
  
**_Online Orientation_**

[JCC's Campus](/studentdevelopment/orientation/campus.html)

[College Catalog and Class Schedule](schedule_catalog.html)

[College Calendar](calendar.html)

[Selecting an Appropriate Class Load](class_load.html)

[Schedule Changes](schedule_changes.html)

[Program Selection](program.html)

[Degree Requirements](degree.html)

[Academic Grades](grades.html)

[College Support Services](support_services.html)

[Cost of College](cost.html)

[General Rules and Regulations](rules.html)

[Conclusion](conculsion.html)  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

|

**Glossary**

* * *

>  
>

> **Academic Year** \- The semesters of Fall, Spring and Summer, in that
order, make up one academic year, roughly from late August to the early part
of the following August.

>

> **Academic Probation** \- Overall GPA for the semester of less than 2.0.
Financial aid recipients are required to pass 67% of all credits attempted.
Withdrawing or receiving less than a 2.0 may jeopardize future financial aid.

>

> **ACT** \- A nationally standardized test provided by American College
Testing (ACT) mostly to high school students to determine skills in English,
Math, Reading, Scientific Reasoning.   If students have a recent (within 3
years) ACT score of at least 18 in Math and an 18 composite, they don't have
to take JCC Course Placement. They may proceed with orientation and
registration.

>

> **Add** \- You can add a class without an instructor's written permission up
until the end of the  "Add/Drop 100% Refund" period.

>

> **Advanced Placement** \- Some institutions accept AP test results, taken by
high school juniors and seniors, for college credit.   [JCC
policy](http://www.jccmi.edu/Transfer/appolicy.htm)  Policies vary from
college to college.

>

> **Associate Degree** \- Also called a 2-year degree, consists of about 60 or
more credit hours (about 20 classes) that follows a list of courses to take
(degree requirements).   Few students complete this in two years.  JCC
Associate degrees must all fulfill outcomes set by the Board of Trustees.
Most students planning to transfer work toward an **Associate of Arts** or an
**Associate of Science**.

>

> **Associate of Applied Science Degrees** \- These are specialized Associates
that have specific skill sets as well as an array of general education courses
that fulfill the outcomes set by the JCC Board of Trustees.   These usually do
not meet MACRAO.  Students wanting to transfer after earning an Applied
Science degree need to consult their transfer college and advisors early to be
sure of choosing classes that will best transfer.

>

> **Associate of Arts** \- An associate degree that concentrates on social
science and humanities selections, allowing about 24 credits of elective
credits.

>

> **Associate of Science** \- An associate degree that concentrates on science
and math with about 24 credits of elective credits.

>

> **Bachelor Degree** \- Four-year colleges and universities grant [Bachelor
degrees](http://www.jccmi.edu/Transfer/JCCDegrees/), which are comprised of
about 124 credits.  Students can transfer up to 60 credits from community
colleges to count toward a Bachelor degree, with some exceptions.  Always
check with your transfer college for admissions rules and consult JCC
[Transfer Guidesheets](http://www.jccmi.edu/Transfer/JCCDegrees/) and academic
advisors.

>

> **Basic Classes** \- See "Developmental Courses," "General Education," or
"MACRAO."

>

> **Billing Contact Hour** \- The actual time spent with the instructor in
class, plus scheduled times in labs and clinicals, over the course of the
semester.   Tuition and technology fees are based on the number of Billing
Contact Hours.  Billing hours are usually the same number as Academic credits,
but in some cases are more.  For example, a 4-credit biology class with a lab
is usually 5 billing contact hours.

>

> **Catalog** \- Contains policy, degree requirements, course descriptions and
resource information for JCC.   A new catalog takes effect about every two to
three years. Each year the catalog maybe updated with a supplement that
announces any changes in degrees, programs or courses.

>

> **Catalog of Entry** \- The catalog current at the time you started at JCC.
If you maintain continuous enrollment, you follow the requirements listed in
your Catalog of Entry, or a more recent catalog of your choice.

>

> **Certificates** \- College certificates are generally 30 - 50 credit hours
(about 10-16 classes) and concentrate on specific skills with few general
education courses.

>

> **Certifications** \- Some occupations as for about 12-20 credits (4-6
classes) taken in a very specific curriculum.   These help the student toward
state licensing or other credentialing, and may count toward a Certificate or
Associates degree.  Examples are Child Development Associate (CDA),
Corrections Officer, and Emergency Medical Technician (EMT).

>

> **Class Schedule** \- The booklet printed, and posted on the web, each
semester listing details of when and where classes will be held for a specific
semester.   The Class Schedule also summarizes key policies, lists Student
Center and Bookstore hours, and lists the calendar of important dates for the
semester.

>

> **CLEP** \-  "Collegiate Level Examination Program" provides a way for
students to place into more advanced classes and to receive credit.  Policies
vary in institutions; [JCC's policy.](http://www.jccmi.edu/Transfer/clep.htm)

>

> **Course Section** \- The same course is offered at a variety of times.
Each of these classes has its own section number.  For example MTH 110 section
12 might meet on Monday nights and MTH 110 section 13 might meet on Tuesday
nights.  
>

> **Credit by Exam** \- Some JCC courses may allow you to earn credit by
testing out of the course.   This credit may not count at other colleges.
[JCC policy.](http://www.jccmi.edu/Transfer/finalcr.htm)

>

> **Credit for Work or Life Experience** \- See  "Portfolio"

>

> **Credit Hour** \- Academic credit based on the time spent in class.
Roughly, a 3-credit class means you spend 3 hours a week in class with an
instructor over the length of the semester.

>

> **Continuous Enrollment** \- Registered for at least one class in any
semester during an academic year:   Fall, Spring or Summer.

>

> **Co-requisite** \- A class that must be taken at the same time as another
particular class because of the relationship of materials.   Often this is a
lab or discussion group.  Be sure to look in the co-requisite column in the
Class Schedule or in the Course Description listed in the Catalog.

>

> **Course Placement** \- An assessment at JCC to determine your need for
further preparation for college-level work.   If you do not have recent ACT
scores of 18 or higher in Math and Composite or previous passing college
grades, you will be asked to complete Course Placement prior to enrolling in
academic courses for grades.

>

> **Cumulative GPA** \- Your overall GPA earned over your entire time at JCC.

>

> **Developmental Courses** \- Your success at college classes depends upon
your entry level skills at reading, writing and mathematics.   Your need for
developmental courses is identified by your Course Placement results.
Developmental courses (ENG 101, 102, 109, 110 and in some cases MTH 110) do
not count toward college degrees as they are considered preparatory.  
>

> **Dropped** -  To withdraw from a class after you have registered for it and
the class has started.  Dropping a class before the "Add/Drop Period" for 100%
refunds does not effect your transcript.  Dropping after this 100% refund
period leaves a W (Withdrawal) on your permanent transcript record.

>

> **Electives** \- Some degrees offer you options as to classes you can take
that aren't listed specifically in the requirements.   Read the degree
requirements carefully.  Some degrees restrict your elective choices to
specific types of courses **.**

>

> **FAFSA -** This Free Application for Federal Student Aid is a federal form
that must be filled out and mailed or completed over the
[Internet](http://www.jccmi.edu/StudentDevelopment/Financial_aid.html). We
recommend completing this at least 6-8 weeks prior to the beginning of your
first semester.  It must be renewed each year.  File your renewal by April 1
of each year for the best change at federal and state funds for the following
Fall semester.  
>

>

> **FERPA** \- The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) of 1974
provides:   Protection of a student's right to privacy of information that JCC
has in its possession concerning the student; and, a reasonable guideline for
release or disclosure of such information as is required by federal and state
law and as is necessary for the effective functioning of the College.

>

> **General Education** \- A variety of courses that the JCC faculty and Board
of Trustees believes is necessary to be well-rounded, educated citizens who
can think critically, express themselves clearly, and learn continuously in an
ever-changing and challenging world.   General education disciplines are:
English, Mathematics, Science, Social Science, Humanities, and Health/physical
fitness.  Also see MACRAO.

>

> **GPA** \- Grade Point Average, based on honor points earned divided by the
number of credits.  
>

> **Holds** \- A hold on your record falls into several categories:

>

>   * **Developmental** \- you either need to provide ACT scores or take
Course Placement; or you need to successfully complete developmental courses;

>   * **Library** \-- you need to return materials or pay fines

>   * **Academic** \-- your GPA is under 2.0 or you don't pass 67% of your
attempted credits

>   * **Business Office** \-- for students who owe money to the college or
have defaulted

>   * **Dean** \-- students who have been dismissed from the college for
violating laws or certain college policies

>

>

> **Honor Points** \-- Honor points are figured by multiplying the grade
earned in the class by the number of credit hours.

>

> **Lower Division** \- courses at community colleges, which provide mostly
100 and 200 level courses as noted by the course numbers (such as MTH 251 and
ENG 131), are considered freshman and sophomore level, or lower division.

>

> **MACRAO** \- This acronym stands for the Michigan Association of Collegiate
Registrars and Admissions Officers Articulation Agreement.   The
[MACRAO](http://www.jccmi.edu/Transfer/JCCDegrees/) helps students transfer
from Michigan community colleges into 4-year colleges and universities by
providing an agreed upon assortment of classes to take that fulfill general
education requirements toward a Bachelor degree.

>

> **Official Transcript** \- The copy of your transcript that is issued and
mailed directly from one institution to another.   JCC accepts only official
transcripts for evaluating transfer credit.

>

> **Portfolio** \- If you feel you meet the learning objectives of particular
courses because of your work or personal experience, take GEN 022 Portfolio, a
one-credit class to collect and demonstrate your knowledge.   You may be able
to receive credit for the equivalent class at half the tuition rate.
[Portfolio credit](http://www.jccmi.edu/Catalog/CATALOG.HTM#prior), will count
toward a JCC degree but may not transfer.

>

> **Pre-requisites** \- Certain college courses need a certain level of skills
or knowledge as you begin the class in order to succeed in the class.   Talk
with the instructor or an advisor to see if you meet the pre-requisites.
These are also listed in Course Descriptions in the Catalog and at the end of
each discipline listing in the Class Schedule.

>

> **Program of Study** \- Basically, the degree or certificate you are working
on becomes your program of study.   If you are planning to transfer to a
4-year institution, your program of study might be listed here as a transfer
program, such as Education or Psychology.

>

> **Registration** \- The period of time during which you can enroll
(register) for classes for a specific semester.

>

> **Schedule** \- See  "Class Schedule."

>

> **Scholarships** \- Money made available students based on academics,
program of study or financial need.
[Scholarships](http://www.jccmi.edu/StudentDevelopment/Financial_aid.html) are
not paid back and usually have conditions the student must maintain.  For
example, departmental scholarship recipients must carry at least 12 credits
and maintain at least a 2.0 GPA.

>

> **Syllabus** \- A document from an instructor containing a course outline,
assignments, attendance and grading policies, and office hours.   The syllabus
is usually handed out to students on the first day of class.

>

> **Transcript** \- Your legal and historical record of courses attempted and
completed along with all grades.   Transcripts may not be changed unless there
has been a clerical error.  You may request a transcript for your own use or
have official copies sent to other institutions or employers by contacting
[Records &
Registration.](http://www.jccmi.edu/StudentDevelopment/Transcripts.html)

>

> **Transfer** \- Moving the credits earned at one college to another in order
to complete a degree or certificate.

>

> **Upper Division** \- courses at the junior and senior level (300- and
400-level) usually only available through 4-year colleges and universities
that grant bachelor degrees.

  
---  
  
* * *

 To report problems with this page, please email
[webmaster@jackson.cc.mi.us](mailto:webmaster@jackson.cc.mi.us)  
  

