[![](USF.logo.gif)](http://web.usf.edu)  
**[International Student& Scholar Services](default.htm)** **  
_Academic Life_**

> Your first impressions of academic life in the United States may be
confusing. International students often comment that US students are
competitive but don't seem to study very hard and that in spite of the
informality of the classroom, the professors are very demanding. Some of these
apparent contradictions can be explained by the values that underpin them.
Creativity, tolerance, and flexibility are, in general, valued above tradition
and respect for authority in the United States. Teaching styles and classroom
attitudes vary widely and are influenced by many different factors. Even where
tradition does dictate professorial or student behavior, the patterns may not
be evident to someone coming from a different tradition.

**Who Is Your Teacher?**

> Professors are the core of the teaching staff at most institutions in the
United States. Full professors generally teach lecture courses, seminars, and
courses for graduate students and upper-class undergraduates. A professor's
informal style of dress or speech must not be taken to mean that he or she has
a relaxed attitude toward assignments, class attendance, or the quality of
your work. Informal attire and the omission of titles in interpersonal
communication are common in American university teaching; but beneath this
largely informal surface lies a wide variety of individual expectations and
preferences concerning student behavior.

>

> In large research universities such as USF, many discussion sessions and
labs are led by teaching assistants (TAs), some of whom may be foreign.
Teaching assistants are most often graduate students pursuing a masters or
doctoral degree. You should feel free to approach them with your questions
indeed, you will probably be on a first-name basis from the beginning of the
course and you should not hesitate to ask their advice about course work,
grades, or other matters.

**Assistantships: A Special Note for Graduate Students**

> Since research universities began operating in the United States, graduate
students have assisted professors by teaching undergraduate students. Teaching
assistants (TAs) not only relieve their professor of some teaching
responsibilities (often so that the professor can spend more time doing
research); they also learn how to teach the subject matter of their own field
of study. In many fields, the experience and training gained as a TA are
viewed as necessary preparation for becoming a faculty member. TAs may be in
charge of lab and discussion sections, or they may be required to grade the
homework and exams given by the professor. In some cases, TAs may give
lectures. The responsibilities of TAs vary considerably from department to
department, and even year to year in a graduate student's time as a student.
For example, the TA may begin by grading papers, then take charge of a lab,
and finally teach the class.

>

> If you are given a research assistantship, you will be expected to assist a
faculty member, or perhaps a group of faculty members, in performing research
related to your field of study. You can expect to work about 10-20 hours per
week at times when you are not taking classes. Many research assistants (RAs)
work at night and on the weekends.

>

> Before you receive an teaching assistantship, you will be required to
demonstrate that your spoken English skills are adequate for teaching. Please
contact your department or the English Language Center to determine which
methods are accepted at USF for demonstrating your spoken English proficiency.

**The TA's Challenge: American Classroom Etiquette**

> American students probably do not behave in class as you and your fellow
students would. In the American system, a teacher must earn respect; it does
not come automatically with the position. To earn that respect, you will be
expected to teach like an American university teacher.

>

> You will need to get used to the fact that some American students call their
teachers by their first names, especially their lab instructors or discussion-
section leaders. This is not a sign of disrespect. There are some other
student behaviors that you may find surprising or that would be considered
disrespectful in your country. For example, students may sit in class with
their feet on the chair or desk in front of them. They may eat, drink, or even
sleep in class!

>

> To be a successful TA in the United States, you must understand the expected
roles of students and teachers. You may have to learn new ways of teaching,
ways that are now unfamiliar to you. In American higher education, students
are often asked to evaluate their teachers. Negative student evaluations may
mean that your teaching assistantship will not be renewed.

>

> The job of a teaching assistant is not an easy one. Some departments invest
more than others in developing the teaching skills of their TAs. To get the
most out of your situation, consult with experienced TAs on your campus and
learn exactly what is expected of you.

**Lectures, Seminars, etc.: Methods of Instruction**

> **Lectures** are the primary form of undergraduate instruction in US
institutions. Lecture courses may enroll as many as 500 students or be as
small as 20 or 30 students. Although attendance may not be recorded, you are
nevertheless expected to attend. Material covered in a lecture class may be
closely related to the reading assignments or may be completely new material.
Doing the reading before attending class is a sure way to improve your
comprehension of the lecture. You might wish to record lectures on tape,
especially if you are having trouble following spoken English in your first
weeks of school.

>

> **Discussion section** (also called a recitation, review, or quiz section)
is a class in which material presented in a lecture is reviewed and discussed.
(Not all lecture courses include discussion sections.) Discussion is
considered an important element of American education; indeed, "class
participation" may count for a certain percentage of your grade. If you do not
feel confident about giving your opinion in class, be ready to answer basic
questions about the material. You can also ask questions of the instructor
after class or during office hours.

>

> Professors are required to keep regular office hours and will usually
announce them during the first or second class period. **Office hours and
appointments** are intended specifically to provide student-professor contact.
Some instructors prefer to make individual appointments with students. It is
recommended that you visit your instructor only during his or her office hours
unless you make an appointment for another time. Also, professors will often
hand out an outline of the course, known as a syllabus. This guide is designed
to help you understand the goals and format of the course. If you have any
questions about the syllabus, ask the instructor.

>

> In so-called **independent studies or guided research courses** , you may
study a topic under the direction of a professor but without any classroom
instruction. Such arrangements are usually reserved for advanced
undergraduates and graduate students. They generally involve a great deal of
reading or work in a laboratory but allow you to focus on a topic of
particular interest to you.

>

> **Seminars** are often associated with undergraduate honors courses or
graduate study. Seminar courses usually enroll fewer than 20 students. They
often cover specialized topics and involve discussions and presentations by
the students under the supervision of the professor. Some smaller colleges
offer many undergraduate courses in the form of seminars.

>

> **Internships** are practical work or training experiences that allow
students to apply in a work situation what they have learned in class. Some
institutions offer academic credit for internships; others do not. Please
consult with an international student adviser before considering any off-
campus work opportunities.

>

> **Quizzes, Tests, and Examinations**  
>  US colleges and universities frequently test students, particularly
undergraduates. Quizzes short tests on assigned material are used most
frequently in language and mathematics courses. "Pop quizzes" are unannounced
tests given by the professor to see if students are keeping up with their
reading assignments or to verify that students understand the material being
presented in the course.

>

> Examinations may call for specific, short replies or for longer responses in
the form of essays. Often examinations are a combination of both forms. So-
called objective questions have only one right answer. Types include true-or-
false, sentence completion ("fill in the blanks"), multiple choice, and
matching. They cover a broad range of material and demand a particular type of
study. If the class is large, you may be asked to record your answers on a
machine-readable form. In such cases, be sure you understand how you are to
mark your answers on the answer sheet. Students sometimes fail machine-graded
exams simply because they put their answers in the wrong place. If you have a
question, be sure to ask.

>

> Many exams include one or two questions requiring essays of several pages or
several questions requiring only a paragraph or two. Essay questions generally
specify how you are to approach the material. The questions may be long or
short. Terms often used in essay questions are analyze, compare and contrast,
criticize, define, describe, discuss, evaluate, explain, illustrate,
interpret, justify, outline, prove, review, summarize, and trace. You will
become familiar with these forms soon enough, but if you have trouble, see
your instructor, your academic adviser, or the international student adviser.

>

> **Homework**  
>  The typical undergraduate course involves three hours of lectures each
week, an additional lab or discussion section, reading assignments, quizzes
and tests, a mid-term examination, and a final examination, as well as one or
more research papers or projects. Keeping up with the work is important.

>

> International students are sometimes dismayed by the amount of reading
assigned for their courses, especially if English is not their native
language. It is important, therefore, to be clear about the role of the
reading assignments in a course. In some courses, the reading is central; you
must read the texts closely and know the material for exams. In other courses,
readings may be supplementary or optional. It probably will not be possible
for you to read thoroughly everything that is assigned. You will have to
prioritize: read the most important material first and carefully; then skim
the less important assignments.

>

> An important distinction exists between group work and individual work. In
general, papers, homework assignments, quizzes, and tests should be done
individually, and evidence (or even suspicion) of collaboration can result in
a failing grade for the work or expulsion from the class or institution.
Studying with others is a good idea, but before you collaborate with others on
homework, papers, or tests, make sure the professor has specifically
authorized such collaboration.

>

> The ability to use computers is essential to success in a U.S. college or
university today. Most US professors do not accept handwritten papers (except
exams). US students typically write their papers on computers. A list of
computer laboratories can be found in the Schedule of Courses, or ask your
professor or academic adviser.

**Academic Services and Information**

> There are several offices on campus that offer help to students in their
efforts to achieve academic, personal, and professional success. The services
listed below are among those you are most likely to use.

>

> **Academic Advising**  
>  Every student at USF is assigned an academic adviser. Your adviser will
help you plan an academic program that meets university requirements and your
own needs. It is, however, your responsibility to ensure that you meet all
departmental, college, and university requirements for graduation. If you have
academic concerns or problems, your adviser can help you. Graduate students
and upper division undergraduates will be assigned advisers through their
academic departments.

>

> **Difficulties**  
>  If you find yourself falling behind or feeling terribly pressured about
your assignments, discuss your problem with the professor or teaching
assistant after a class or during office hours. Do not hesitate to get help if
you are having academic problems. Research papers are another aspect of
homework that may seem overwhelming. Some students are unable to express
themselves clearly or eloquently in written English; others do not know how to
use the research tools in the library; others may not be familiar with
American academic writing styles and conventions. Many American students share
these problems, and help is seldom far away. USF offers assistance and
workshops on academic skills.

>

> In your writing, you will be expected to know when and how to "paraphrase"
or summarize another writer's ideas in your own words. If you are not a native
English speaker this may seem difficult even foolhardy and you may be tempted
to quote your sources word for word. Because this practice can lead to a
charge of "plagiarism" (see below), it is essential that you acquire the skill
of paraphrasing. You will find that if you truly understand the ideas you are
dealing with, you will be able to express them clearly. Find an instructor or
US student, perhaps a volunteer tutor or conversation partner, who will read
your papers, point out passages that are unclear, and help you find phrasing
that conveys your meaning. You may have to sacrifice the elegance of the
original quotation, but your paper will gain coherence from the effort you put
into synthesizing all of the material you use. The _**Writing Center**_ ,
located at CPR 257, 974-9572, offers free help with writing and editing
papers.

>

> **Plagiarism** is the use of another's words or ideas without acknowledgment
of their source. Although in some cultures incorporating the words of revered
scholars is an important part of the style of academic writing, it is not
acceptable in the United states; indeed, it is considered a serious offense.
The consequences of proven or even suspected plagiarism can be severe (for
example, a failing grade or expulsion from class or the university). Borrowed
words and ideas must always be clearly documented. If you expect to experience
writing difficulties, you should get help as soon as possible.

>

> **Grades**  
>  International students sometimes find that their US classmates are
preoccupied with grades. This can be explained partly by the spirit of
individual competition that is fostered and supported by American society. It
is also a pragmatic matter, as grades are an important factor in gaining
admission to graduate school or getting a job after graduation. The basis for
grading in each course will be determined by the professor. The weight given
to exams, papers, class participation, and other factors will be clearly
specified at the beginning of the term.

>

> USF employs three systems of grading: a numerical system, a supplemental
credit-no credit system, and a limited pass-no grade system. Students will
experience the numerical system in most courses. For an explanation of the
grading system and the grade-point system, and other academic matters, refer
to the Academic catalog. Please ask your academic adviser for clarification if
you need it.

[Adapted with permission from NAFSA's International Student Handbook (AT&T,
1996).]

**_For further information, please call (813) 974-5102_**

Page Top| [Social Life](sociallife.htm) | [ISSS Home](default.htm) |
[International Affairs Center](http://web.usf.edu/~iac/) | [USF
Home](http://usfweb.usf.edu)

_Updated 01/24/2001. (C) 1999-2001, [ USF International Affairs
Center](mailto:iac@iac.usf.edu).  
Please send comments, questions, or suggestions to the
[Webmaster](mailto:jmiller@iac.usf.edu)._

