## EDCI 660: Introduction to Secondary Mathematics Teaching

### Summer 1997

Instructor: Dr. Lynn Stallings  
674 College of Education Building

404-651-0201 | [lstallings@gsu.edu](mailto:lstallings@gsu.edu) |
<http://www.gsu.edu/~mstlls>  
---|---|---  
  
  *   
**Office hours:** Mondays 10 AM-2 PM and by appointment.  
  
**Course web page:** [http://www.gsu.edu/~mstlls/edci660.html  
  
](http://www.gsu.edu/~mstlls/edci896.html)**Required text:  
** Brumbaugh, D., Ashe, D., Ashe, J., & Rock, D. (1997). _Teaching Secondary
Mathematics._ Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.  
  
**Program theme  
** The goals, content, and organization of this course are intended to support
the College of Education's theme, "Creating Effective Contexts for Learning."  
  
**Course objectives**

  * Begin developing your teaching ability through practice and reflection. Become comfortable with a variety of instructional strategies for developing critical thinking, problem solving, and performance skills.
  * Discuss and experiment with the innovative teaching strategies and activities.
  * Explore the classroom management strategies used by middle and secondary teachers.
  * Become more knowledgeable about and more critical users of technologies useful to mathematics teachers, including spreadsheets, graphing calculators, dynamic geometry software, e-mail, the worldwide web, listservs, discussion groups, and manipulatives.
  * Become knowledgeable about current issues in mathematics education. Form and be able to defend your stance on these issues.
  * Continue in your growth as professionals including interpersonal skills, verbal skills, written skills (clarity, coherence, mechanics), responsiveness to feedback, attendance, and sensitivity to equity issues.
  * Become more knowledgeable about and more critical users of a wide variety of resources appropriate to secondary mathematics educators, including professional journals and electronic media.
  * Deepen your understanding of secondary school mathematics topics and develop strategies for teaching these topics.
  * Viewing mathematics from diverse perspectives will help you to further understand mathematics as a dynamic, human endeavor. 

  
**COURSE REQUIREMENTS:  
** JOURNAL: due weekly by Tuesday (10%)One journal entry should be turned in
to Dr. Johnston and me by Tuesday of each week (starting July 1st). A topic
will be provided some weeks; other times, you will write up a reflection on
the week's activities. The same entry may be copied to Dr. Johnston and me OR
you may write separate entries for each of us. These may be submitted
electronically (lstallings@gsu.edu and hjohnston@gsu.edu) or by any other
means.

LABS: due throughout the quarter (20%) All labs done in class must be
completed and turned in by the next class session. You will also create labs
on your own that will be graded for thoroughness, effectiveness, and
mathematical content.

RESOURCE BOOK: due Thursday, July 17th and Thursday, August 7th (40%) The
resource book will be a collection of resource materials that you will be able
to use as a teacher. This resource book must also show that you are
knowledgeable of ways to find information about mathematics and mathematics
education. You must use professional journals (The Mathematics Teacher) and
the Internet resources; you may use other resources including textbooks,
software, an interview with a practicing educator, relevant adolescent
literature, etc. The resource book should demonstrate your efforts to deepen
your knowledge of underlying mathematics and of effective teaching strategies
and activities. Relevant class activities should be included.

TECHNOLOGY COMPETENCIES: due throughout the quarter (10%) You will be asked to
demonstrate competency on a variety of technologies either by in-class
activities and demonstrations, by turning in a product, or by an interview-
type examination. You must demonstrate competencies on spreadsheets, graphing
calculators, e-mail, web navigation, web searching, web page creation, digital
camera use, listserv use, discussion group use, and creation of a PowerPoint
presentation.

RESEARCH SUMMARY AND PRESENTATION: due on July 29th (10%) Select some area of
the 5-12 school (see handout to sign up for topics) that interests you. I will
provide a chapter that reviews research on that topic. You will be responsible
for reading that chapter and a research study that it discusses. You will
prepare a short paper (one or two page) summarizing that research and giving
suggestions for teachers. These papers will be copied and distributed to the
class. We may also publish them on the web.

EDUCATIONAL ISSUES SUMMARY AND PRESENTATION: due on July 31st (10%) Select
some educational issue that interests you. You will prepare a short paper (one
or two page) informing the reader about that issue and, in a separate section,
presenting your opinion. These papers will be copied and distributed to the
class. We may also publish them on the web.

Grading scale: A (92-10) B (83-91) C (74-82) D (70-73)

**Comments**

  * :Students are expected to attend every class and may be docked half a letter grade for the second unexcused absence and every one thereafter.
  * This course syllabus provides a general plan for the course; deviations may be necessary.
  * The GSU honor code will be enforced.
  * Student work to be returned at the end of the quarter will be placed on the bookshelf next to the coke machine on the 6th floor of the CoE.
  * Late work will be accepted at the discretion of the instructor. Any late work accepted will lose a letter grade for each date it is late.

  
  

* * *

_Last modified: Monday, June 23, 1997_ | [Return to Lynn's home page.  
](http://www2.gsu.edu/~mstlls)Contact [Lynn.
](http://www2.gsu.edu/~mstlls/contact.html)  
---|---

