
    
    
    * * *
    
    
    **Syllabus for Fall 2001 Math 1550 Section 15**
      
      
    
    
    * * *

Course Title and Department: _  Analytic Geometry and Calculus I (Course 1550,
Section 15), Louisiana State University (LSU) Department of Mathematics  
  
Meeting Time and Place: _  MTuWThF, 11:40AM-12:30PM in 134 Lockett Hall,
except as noted in [ course
calendar](http://www.math.lsu.edu/~malisoff/1550_15_topics.html). Other
calendric information relevant to this course is contained in the LSU [Fall
Semester 2001 Academic
Calendar](http://www.math.lsu.edu/~malisoff/calendar.pdf).  
  
Instructor, Instructor's Office, and Instructor's Telephone Number:_  Dr.
Michael Malisoff,   252 Lockett Hall,   (225) 578-6714  
  
Office Hours:_  MTuWThF, 11:10AM-11:35AM. These hours are specifically set
aside to answer students' questions, but students are encouraged to ask
questions during class as well (subject to the restrictions indicated below).  
  
Class Web Page:_  [
http://www.math.lsu.edu/~malisoff/1550_15.html](http://www.math.lsu.edu/~malisoff/1550_15.html).
Important [ announcements pertaining to this
class](http://www.math.lsu.edu/~malisoff/1550_15_announcements.html) will be
posted in this web page and also announced in class. Additionally, links to
on-line calculus practice problems will be available on the class web page.  
  
Required Purchases:_  All students in this class are required to obtain the
following text: Stewart, James, _Calculus Early Transcendentals, Fourth
Edition_ , Brooks/Cole Publishing Company, New York, 1999 (ISBN
0-534-36298-2). Readings and homework will be assigned from this book.
Students are not required to purchase any calculators or other items for this
course, other than the textbook.  
  
Prerequisites:_  Placement into Math 1550 by LSU mathematics department, or
Math 1022 (Plane Trigonometry), or Math 1023 (College Algebra and
Trigonometry). You must satisfy the prerequisites before enrolling in this
course.  
  
Course Description:_   This is a five hour introductory calculus course
designed primarily for engineering majors and certain other technical majors.
Students enrolling in this course are assumed to have facility in the
following Precalculus topics: functions, graphing, solving quadratic
equations, exponential, logarithmic and trigonometric functions. No prior
exposure to calculus is assumed. This is a general education course designed
to fulfill part of the analytical reasoning requirements at LSU. A course
calendar listing the topic for each day of this course will be distributed in
class and posted on the [class web
page](http://www.math.lsu.edu/~malisoff/1550_15.html). This calendar is
subject to change. Changes in this schedule will be announced in class and
posted on the class web page. The goal of this course is to prepare students
to succeed in important higher-level courses with mathematical content, such
as Advanced Calculus, Partial Differential Equations, and Nonlinear Control.  
  
Calculator Policy:_   Students should not use any calculator with graphing
capabilities to do problems for this course. However, students are allowed to
use scientific calculators. Students attempting to use a graphing calculator
during a test or final exam in this course may have their calculator
confiscated.  
  
Homework Policy:_  No homework will be collected for grading. Each day, lists
of assigned homework problems will be announced in class and posted on the
[class web page](http://www.math.lsu.edu/~malisoff/1550_15.html). In addition,
students should read the textbook sections indicated on the [course
calendar](http://www.math.lsu.edu/~malisoff/1550_15_topics.html) before those
sections are discussed in class, with the exception of the topic of the first
class meeting. Students are allowed to collaborate with others while working
on the homework. It is the responsibility of the student to learn to do all
the assigned problems. During class time and office hours, students are
encouraged to ask the instructor how to do the homework, subject to the
restrictions given below.  
  
Evaluation:_  There will be four in-class tests, each worth 100 course points.
Dates for these tests will be given in the [course
calendar](http://www.math.lsu.edu/~malisoff/1550_15_topics.html) and are
subject to change. In addition, there will be a comprehensive final exam worth
200 course points. The formats for the tests and final exam will be announced
later. The time and location for the final exam will be announced later.
Students are allowed to use any books and notes while taking the four tests
and final, but they are not allowed to collaborate with others in the class
during the tests or final exam, nor are they allowed to use graphing
calculators. During the tests and final exam, students must sit quietly, keep
their eyes on their own paper, and avoid the appearance of academic
dishonesty. Course grades will be assigned based on the total number of course
points earned as follows: A=401-600, B=301-400, C=201-300, D=101-200. Any
request for a make-up exam must be accompanied by a verifiable excuse. There
will be no extra credit in this course.  
  
Student Conduct:_  Students must at all times conduct themselves in a manner
consistent with current LSU policy, as expressed in the LSU [ Code of Student
Conduct](

http://appl003.lsu.edu/slas/dos.nsf/$Content/Code+of+Conduct?OpenDocument).
All students enrolled in this course have a responsibility for adhering to the
highest possible standards of integrity and honesty in every aspect of their
academic careers. Students are advised that the penalties for academic
dishonesty can be severe, and that ignorance is never an acceptable defense at
LSU. Students are not permitted to talk during class without first raising one
of their hands for permission from the instructor to speak. Students should
not eat or drink or smoke during class time, nor should they wear any perfumes
or cologne during class time, nor are they allowed to loiter anywhere in
Lockett Hall. Use of cell phones, pagers, walkmen, and similar devices is not
permitted during class time. Students who cause a disturbance during class
time may be expelled from the class or from the university. While attendance
is not used to determine grades, excessive absence from class is strongly
discouraged. Students absent from class are responsible for learning all the
material covered and all the announcements made in their absences, and for
obtaining all materials distributed during their absences.  
  

* * *

