

**EDUC 893: SEMINAR IN EDUCATIONAL ANTHROPOLOGY**

**Dr. Evelyn Jacob, Fall 1998**



**COURSE GOALS**

This course examines theory and research in educational anthropology and
related work from educational sociology, which offer rich and varied
approaches to the study of education. Because many of you taking the course
will want to use an approach or approaches to culture as part of your
conceptual framework for a research study, the course is organized around
different ways culture is conceptualized and examined. Using this basic
structure, we will examine how scholars have used these different approaches
to study (1) the educational engagement and performance of "cultural groups"
and (2) classrooms, schools, programs and innovations.  
  
Through this course you will:  
  
1\. Know and be able to critically analyze cultural theories as used in
research on "cultural groups" and in research on classrooms, schools, programs
or innovations.  
  
2\. Be able to relate cultural theories and research from educational
anthropology and sociology to an educational topic of your choice.  

**READINGS**

**Texts** (Available in the GMU bookstore)  
  
Davidson, A. L. (1996). Making and molding identity in schools: Student
narratives on race, gender, and academic engagement. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.  
  
Hostetler, J. A.,  & Huntington, G. E. (1992). Amish children: Education in
the family, school, and community. 2nd ed. Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich.

Jacob, E., & Jordan, C. (Eds.). (1993). Minority education: Anthropological
perspectives. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.  
  
MacLeod, J. (1995). Ain't no makin' it: Aspirations and attainment in a low-
income neighborhood. Boulder, CO: Westview.  
  
**Other Required Readings** (Available in a packet in the Copy Shop, Rm. 117
Johnson Center)  
  
Eisenhart, M. (in press). Changing conceptions of culture and ethnographic
methodology: Recent thematic shifts and their implications for research on
teaching. To appear in V. Richardson (Ed.), The Handbook of Research on
Teaching (4th ed.).

Jacob, E. (1987). Qualitative research traditions: A review. Review of
Educational Research, 57, pp. 10-18.

Borko, H., & Eisenhart, M. (1986). Students' conceptions of reading and their
reading experiences in school. Elementary School Journal 86(5): 589-611.

Muncey, D., & McQuillan, P. (1996). Reform and resistance in schools and
classrooms: An ethnographic view of the Coalition for Essential Schools (pp.
pp. 3-5, 16-18, and 45-68). New Haven: Yale University Press.

Jacob, E. (1997). Context and cognition: Implications for educational
innovators and anthropologists. Anthropology & Education Quarterly 28(1):
3-21.

Gallimore, R., & Goldenberg, C. (1993). Activity settings of early literacy:
Home and school factors in children's emergent literacy. In E. Forman, N.
Minick, & C. A. Stone (Eds.), Contexts for learning: Sociocultural dynamics in
children's development (pp. 315-335). New York: Oxford University Press.

Yackel, E., Cobb, P., & Wood, T. (1991). Small-group interactions as a source
of learning opportunities in second-grade mathematics. Journal for Research in
Mathematics Education, 22(5):390-408.

Ogbu, J. (1995). Cultural problems in minority education: Their
interpretations and consequences--Part One: Theoretical background. Urban
Review, 27: 192-193 (whole article = pp.189-205].

Ogbu, J., & Simons, H. (1998). Voluntary and involuntary minorities: A
cultural-ecological theory of school performance with some implications for
education. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 29(2): 155-188.

Foley, D. E. (1991). Reconsidering anthropological explanations of ethnic
school failure. Anthropology and Education Quarterly, 22(1): 60-86.

Gibson, M. (1997). Complicating the immigrant/involuntary minority typology.
Anthropology and Education Quarterly, 28(8): 431-454.

Mehan, H. (1992). Understanding inequality in schools: The contribution of
interpretive studies. Sociology of Education, 65: 1-20.

Luykx, A. (1996) From Indios to Profesionales: Stereotypes and student
resistance in Bolivian teacher training. In B. Levinson, D. Foley, & D.
Holland (Eds.), The cultural production of the educated person: Critical
ethnographies of schooling and local practice (pp. 239-272). Albany, NY: SUNY
Press.

Nespor, J. (1997). Tangled Up in School (Preface, Introduction, & Ch. 1).
Mahweh, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. [NOTE: This reading is not in the course packet.
The book is on reserve in Johnson Center Library.]

Jacob, E. (1995). Reflective practice and anthropology in culturally diverse
classrooms. Elementary School Journal, 95(4), 451-463.

Jacob, E., Johnson, B., Finley, J., Gurksi, J., & Lavine, R. (1996). One
student at a time: A team's cultural inquiry process, Middle School Journal,
27(4): 29-35.

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS AND GRADES**  

**1\. Class Participation** \--30%  
  
**Class Discussions**. You are expected to read assignments carefully and
critically before each class. I will provide questions to help guide your
reading, and I expect you to prepare brief written responses to the questions
before class. The class will be run as a seminar and you are expected to
actively participate in class discussions. Participation will be graded on a
regular basis throughout the semester.  
  
**Listserv Discussions**. I have a listserv set up for this class. You are
expected to read postings at least weekly and to actively participate in
discussions of them.  
  
Criteria for evaluation of class and electronic discussions: evidence of
careful and analytic reading of the assignments, thoughtfulness of questions
raised, and the relevance and thoughtfulness of remarks to subjects under
discussion.  
  
**2\. Written Projects** \--60%  
  
I'd like your written work in the course to provide the opportunity for you to
(a) extend and deepen your understanding of different approaches to culture
and (b) apply a cultural approach or approaches to an educational topic of
particular interest to you. For those of you interested in using an approach
to culture as part of your conceptual framework for a research study, you
could use the written assignments in this course as a way to build a
foundation for that framework.  
  
In order that you get feedback early in your work, I would like you to submit
two written projects, with the second building on the first. The first written
project (20% of grade) is due Oct. 21, the second written project (40% of
grade) is due Dec. 9. The final project needs to involve analytical
consideration of the material, not just description. (See suggestions below.)  
  
I will meet with each of you early in the semester to discuss your written
projects. After we have an agreement about what you will do for your projects,
send me a short email summarizing what you will do for your written projects.  
  
Suggestions for possible written projects:  
  
(1) The first project might involve further examining one approach to culture
examined in the first half of class and applying it to a selected topic in
education (a possible dissertation topic, for example). The second project
might involve examining the same educational topic from two different
approaches to culture (presumably including the one examined in the first
project) with the goal of evaluating the usefulness of the two "lenses" for
your study of the topic.  
  
(2) The first project might be a (descriptive) review of a subset of studies
on a particular topic which use one or more cultural approaches. The second
project might be an analytic review of a broader set of studies on the same
topic with the goal of identifying unresolved questions and areas for future
study.  
  
(3) The first project might involve examining an approach to culture in depth,
possibly examining how the approach has developed over time. The second
project could involve applying that cultural approach to a particular
educational topic.  
  
Criteria for evaluation: selection of appropriate topic(s), use of cultural
perspective(s), demonstration of thorough and thoughtful command of topic(s)
and understanding of the approaches(es) to culture examined, clear
organization and writing, analytic and conceptual treatment of topic(s) in
second project.  
  
**3\. Oral Presentations on Written Projects** \--10%  
  
You will each give a brief presentation to the class of your written projects.
The goals of the presentation are to convey to the class what you have learned
that is of interest to the whole class, to link your written projects to the
ongoing conversations we've had in class, and to get feedback from class
members on your work.  
  
Criteria for evaluation: clear and indepth discussion of project, linking it
in an appropriate way to required readings; completion of presentation within
allotted time.  

**COURSE OUTLINE**

  
**9/2 Introduction to the course.**

Eisenhart (in press), Changing conceptions of culture and ethnographic
methodology, pp. 1 - top of p. 4

**Holistic Approaches to Culture**

  
**9/9 Education within a cultural group** **(Culture as a "way of life")**

Jacob (1987). Qualitative research traditions, pp. 10-18

Jacob and Jordan book, Ch. 2

Hostetler and Huntington book

**9/16 Holistic approaches to cultures constructed in schools**

Borko & Eisenhart (1986). Students' conceptions of reading and their reading
experiences in school

Muncey & McQuillan (1996), Reform and resistance in schools and classrooms,
pp. 3-5, 16-18, 45-68 (Ch. 3)

Related Reading: Jacob and Jordan book, Ch. 10 (Eisenhart & Graue)  
  
**9/23 Cultural differences approach to education**

Eisenhart (in press), top of p. 4 - top of p. 8

Jacob and Jordan book, Chs. 1 (Overview), 3, 4, and 5

**9/30 Culture and cognition: Cultural-historical (Sociocultural) approach**

Jacob (1997). Context and cognition

Gallimore & Goldenberg (1993). Activity setting of early literacy

Yackel, Cobb, & Wood (1991). Small-group interactions as a source of learning
opportunities in second-grade mathematics

**Culture as Ways of Life and Involving Negotiation**

**10/7 Cultural-ecological theory**

Eisenhart (in press), top of p. 8 - top of p. 10

Jacob and Jordan, Chs. 6, 7, and 8

Ogbu (1995), Cultural problems in minority education, pp. 192-193.

Ogbu & Simons (1998), Voluntary and involuntary minorities

**10/14 Mid-semester Break  
  
10/21 Reports on First Written Projects **

* First written project due

**Culture and Social Class: Ways of Life and Negotiation**

**10/28 Social and cultural reproduction**

Eisenhart (in press), top of p. 10 - bottom of p. 14

MacLeod book, Chs. 1-8 and Appendix

Related Reading:

MacLeod book Chs. 9-11

Anyon , J. (1981). Social class and school knowledge. Curriculum Inquiry,
11(1); 3-42. (on reserve)

**11/4 Critiques of cultural differences, cultural-ecological approach, and
social reproduction**

Jacob and Jordan book, Chapter 11 [re. cultural-ecological approach]

    Foley (1991), Reconsidering anthropological explanations of ethnic school failure [re. cultural differences and cultural-ecological approach]  

    Gibson (1997), Complicating the immigrant/involuntary minority typology [re. cultural-ecological approach]  

    Mehan (1992), Understanding inequality in schools [re. social reproduction]
     
    Related Reading:

Levinson, B. (1992). Ogbu's anthropology and the critical ethnography of
education: A reciprocal interrogation. International Journal of Qualitative
Studies in Education, 5(3): 205-225. (on reserve)

Trueba, H. (1991). Comments on Foley's "Reconsidering anthropological
explanations..." Anthropology and Education Quarterly, 22:87-94. (on reserve)

**Cultural Identity**

**11/11 Identity and Academic Engagement**

     Eisenhart (in press), bottom of p. 14 - bottom of p. 24
     
    Davidson (1996) book: Introduction, Chs. 1-3, 6, 7-9

**Cultural Productions**

**11/18 Cultural Productions and the Study of Education**

Eisenhart (in press), bottom of p. 24 - 47

Luykx (1996), From Indios to Profesionales

Nespor (1997), Tangled Up in School, Preface, Introduction, & Ch. 1 [NOTE:
This reading is not in the course packet. The book is on reserve in the
Johnson Center Library.]

**Using Various Approaches to Address Educational Puzzlements**

**11/25 The Cultural Inquiry Process (CIP) and the CIP Web Site**

Jacob (1995). Reflective practice and anthropology in culturally diverse
classrooms

Jacob, Johnson, Finley, Gurksi, & Lavine (1996). One student at a time

Related Reading: Jacob and Jordan book: Ch. 12

**12/2 No Class (AAA meetings) -- Work on Final Projects  
  
12/9 Reports on Second Written Projects. Course Conclusion. Course
Evaluations.**

*Second written project due  

**OFFICE HOURS**

  
My office is A333 Robinson; my phone is 703-993-3138. My office hours are
Mondays and Wednesdays 2:45-3:45 pm and other times by appointment.  
  
My email address is ejacob@gmu.edu. I encourage you to use email to
communicate queries to me that do not require face-to-face discussion. I also
encourage you to use email to communicate with other members of the class.  

