SAN FRANCISCO STATE UNIVERSITY  
DEPARTMENT OF GEOSCIENCES |

 Fall 1999  
---|---  
  
METEOROLOGY 302

**_The Violent Atmosphere and Ocean_**

Section 1

(Schedule Number 28582)

_Website_ :
**[http://tornado.sfsu.edu/geosciences/classes/m302/m302_02.html](m302_01_F99.html)**

  _Credit:_ 3 Semester Units  |

  _Room/Time_ : TH604; MWF 0910-1000  
---|---  
  
_Prerequisites_ : None.

_Instructor_ : John P. Monteverdi, Professor of Meteorology; TH613

Phone Ext. 87728; Email: [montever@sfsu.edu  
](mailto:%20montever@sfsu.edu)

_Office Hours_ : MW 8-9; Th 10-Noon or by appointment at many hours.

  **The Segment III Cluster "Our Violent Planet"**

Meteorology 302 fulfills a portion of the _Science_ requirement of the **Our
Violent Planet** cluster in Segment III of the General Education program. This
course is also a Core Course in Area II: **Physical Science** of the Liberal
Studies degree program.

Students should note that in order for this course to count towards fulfilling
your General Education Segment III requirement you must: (i) fulfill the other
requirements of the cluster (found on page 178 of the _Schedule of Classes_ );
and, (ii) be at least a Junior while taking any course in the cluster. The
other classes in the cluster are Geology 302 (The Violent Earth) and ONE of
the following: (a) Geography 402 (CESD) (The Climatic Challenge); (b)
Geography 600 (CESD) Environmental Problems and Solutions; and/or (c) PLSI 354
(Politics, The Environment and Social Change).  
---  
  
**Scope of the Course**



The general function of any course in the General Education program is to
provide students with the information which is a fundamental underpinning for
any well-educated individual. Students may rightfully argue that they have
enough troubles filling out their majors program without the added burden of
taking on coursework which seems at best peripheral and at worst totally non-
relevant to their educational goals. I believe that this attitude is expedient
and the end result of its implementation is that the student, upon graduation,
is not the least bit "well-rounded". Such a student has limited ability to
make informed judgments about the issues which confront him or her beyond
those which fall into their narrow field of interest.

In the case of the present course, the instructor has designed the content to
help students become aware of some of the interesting and important aspects of
their immediate environment. In terms of immediate impact on the environment,
severe local storms, major extratropical and tropical cyclones produce more
damage and loss of life than any other weather event. The controls on these
physical processes can be understood at a conceptual level by the educated
layperson.

The science portion of the General Education program is also designed to
expose the student to the ways in which scientists do research. The definition
of and testing of a hypothesis is fundamental to the advancement of any
discipline and is termed the "scientific method". It is the instructor's
experience that students generally have a poor conception of what is involved
in application of the scientific method in the study of a problem. The present
course is designed to help initiate the student to the scientific method by
presenting them with the results of a number of varied research efforts into
the understanding of destructive storms. Hopefully, the students will then be
able to distinguish between the conclusions of valid scientific research
efforts and those of "fringe scientists" even though both may be given equal
weight in the media.

Segment III of General Education has an additional goal beyond those listed
above. Courses in this segment should show that advancement in a particular
field has occurred because of interdisciplinary cooperation; hence the Segment
III title **Relationships of Knowledge**.

In the case of severe weather pheonmena, oceanographers and geologists can
contribute much to our understanding of the local controls on meteorological
events. For example, sea-surface temperature and soil moisture patterns have
dramatic effects on a number of phenomena spanning many scales, from the
development of thunderstorm clusters to the path, number and strength of
winter storms. Flooding and mudslides have as much to do the local geology and
geomorphology as they do to excessive rainfall. While a detailed overview of
region-specific events is covered in other courses (e.g., Metr 356--California
Weather Events), the instructor will stress these general interelationships
when appropriate to illustrate the degree to which "severity" of storms and
other weather events is determined as much by human patterns of settlement as
it is to the strength of the weather event itself.

Finally, since no student has fulfilled the goals of a university education
unless he or she can communicate the learned information to others, one of the
requirements of Segment III is that students learn to pass on important
information in an effective manner, both verbally and in written form. Since
this class is relatively small, this will be accomplished by both brief
written assignments and in brief oral reports.

**Logistics of the Course**

When one examines the weather-related "disasters" the last several years, five
events stand out clearly in terms of loss of life and damage to property. The
flooding in the Midwest last summer and in southern California last January
and February, the so-called "storm of the century" which raked the East Coast
last winter, Hurricane Andrew's path of destruction across southern Florida
and Louisiana in 1992 and the Andover, Kansas tornado of April 1991. These
events were associated with weather phenonmena termed "severe storms" by most
people. In the case of the "storm of the century", a type of extratropical
cyclone termed a "meteorological bomb"; the floods in the Midwest and southern
California very strong extratropical cyclones with embedded severe
thunderstorms associated with El Nino; and, the damage in Andover, KS with a
type of tornado-producing thunderstorm termed a "supercell."

My special background and area of expertise is severe and unusual storms.
Lectures will be supplemented with my own slides and video tapes of two of the
types of storms which we will be discussing. The personal tornado videos were
obtained on annual research trips to the Great Plains to study severe
thunderstorms. This year's trip is May 20 through 6 June.

The point of view for this course will be to delve into the physical
mechanisms that produce these three types of explosive storms: a)
extratropical cyclones ("bombs"); b) tropical cyclones; and, c) tornadic
supercell thunderstorms. Although some overview of general meteorology will be
provided, NO SPECIAL KNOWLEDGE IN EARTH SCIENCE OR METEOROLOGY IS PRESUPPOSED.
There are no prerequisites for this course, although the instructor
presupposes that the students have had exposure to high school geography,
earth science, and mathematics.

The class will be of lecture format. _Tests and assignments will be based upon
the lecture notes_ , supplemented by reading materials from the textbooks and
handouts. **Although attendance will NOT be taken, students are responsible
for getting the lecture notes from a friend or another student.**

**Course Plan**

TWO TAKEHOME WRITING ASSIGNMENTS worth 10% each for a total of 20%.

HOMEWORKS worth a total of 10%.

CLASS PARTICIPATION worth 5% (Note Taking For Website).

TWO MIDTERMS worth 20% each for a total of 40%.

ONE FINAL (Comprehensive) worth 25% of the grade.

**\----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------**

**Please Note: Ordinarily, there will be no MAKE-UP quizzes or exams, and late
assignments will not be accepted. If there is a compelling reason you must
miss an exam or assignment, you _MUST_ contact me beforehand to arrange for a
make-up date or extension.**

**\----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------**

**Textbooks**

_General Meteorology Background_

Anthes, Richard A.,1997: _Meteorology_ , Prentice Hall (Paperbound), 214 pp.

_Impact of Weather Phenomena and Disasters on People_

Morgan, M. and Moran J., 1997: _Weather and People_ , Prentice Hall
(Paperbound), 200 pp.

_Tornadoes and Hurricanes_

Bluestein, H., 1998: _Tornado Alley_ , Oxford University Press.

Duedall, I and Williams, J., 1998: _Florida Hurricanes and Tropical Storm_ s.
University of Florida Press.

**Important Dates**

**Labor Day Holiday** Monday 6 September

**Homework 1** : Dist: Friday 10 September

Due: Wednesday 15 September

**Writing Assignment #1** : Dist: Wednesday 15 September

Due: Wednesday 22 September

**Last Day to Drop** Wednesday 22 September

**Midterm #1** Wednesday 6 October

**Homework 2:** Dist: Friday 15 October

Due: Wednesday 20 October

**Writing Assignment #2** : Dist: Monday 1 November

Due: Monday 8 November

**Midterm #2** Monday 22 November

**Thanksgiving Recess** Thursday-Sunday 25-28 November

**Final Exam** Wednesday 15 December 0810-1030

