![](houseline.gif)

SAMPLE SYLLABUS

Assessment of the Learner

ED N503 3 HOURS

**BELINDA D. LAZARUS, Ph.D.**

**VIRTUAL OFFICE HOURS: M - F 9-10am and 7:00-8:00pm at  
**[_**Belinda Lazarus**_](mailto:blazarus@fob-f1.umd.umich.edu)

This site is [![](bobbyapproved.gif)](http://www.cast.org/bobby/).



[**Home**](default.html) | [**TEXT**](syllabus.htm#TEXT) |
[**TOPICS**](syllabus.htm#TOPICS) | [**OUTCOMES**](syllabus.htm#OUTCOMES) |
[**ASSIGNMENTS**](syllabus.htm#ASSIGNMENTS) |
[**INCOMPLETES**](syllabus.htm#INCOMPLETES) |
[**READINGS**](syllabus.htm#READINGS) | [**TOP**](syllabus.htm#TOP)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
_**Dear Students,**_

_**Welcome to Assessment of the Learner. Assessment is the cornerstone of
instructional planning for students with disabilities. In this course you will
gain an understanding of the assessment process and how it guides
instructional decisions like what we teach, how we teach, when we teach, how
much we teach, etc.**_

_**The course addresses three major areas. First, the whole area of assessment
including standardized tests and informal strategies, how to prepare for and
conduct assessments, and how to select tests and strategies to ensure results
that are valid and unbiased will be examined. Second, tests and strategies for
assessing academic achievement, specific academic areas, and learning aptitude
are described. And, finally, ways to interpret and use assessment data are
addressed.**_

_**The on-line version of ED N503 enables students to complete the entire
course at their own pace -- anytime, anywhere. The formal term for anytime-
anywhere learning is asynchronous learning. Students, will learn the content
by reading the assignments, visiting specific web sites, participating in an
on-line discussions and then completing and submitting competencies for
grading. Once you have completed all of the sessions, I will send to you a
final exam that you complete and submit via email to me. You may do all of the
sessions at your own pace (e.g., 4 weeks, all semester, 10 weeks, etc.). Only
the on-line discussions have deadlines.**_

_**The course syllabus contains a thumbnail sketch of the class. More detailed
information is provided by the relevant link found on the course home page.
Throughout the course we will discuss a wide range of topics and get to know
each other as we learn together.**_

> > > > > > > > > > >

>>>>>>>>>>>     _**![](smileybut.gif)**__**Belinda**_

    
    
    _**![](bar3.gif)**_

_**![](ag_ball6.gif)**__**TEXT**_

[_**TEXT**_](syllabus.htm#TEXT) | [_**TOPICS**_](syllabus.htm#TOPICS) |
[_**OUTCOMES**_](syllabus.htm#OUTCOMES) |
[_**ASSIGNMENTS**_](syllabus.htm#ASSIGNMENTS) |
[_**INCOMPLETES**_](syllabus.htm#INCOMPLETES) |
[_**READINGS**_](syllabus.htm#READINGS) | [_**TOP**_](syllabus.htm#TOP)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
> **McLoughlin, J., & Lewis, R. ****_Assessing special students_** **.
Columbus, OH: Merrill Publishing Co.**

_**![](bar3.gif)**_

_**![](ag_ball6.gif)**__****__****COURSE DESCRIPTION****_

> **Formal and informal assessment strategies used in the identification and
service of students with handicaps are described. Technical and operational
aspects of standardized testing, curriculum based assessment, and informal
strategies are described.** **PREREQUISITES** **: Graduate standing or
permission of the instructor and C501**

>

> _**![](line_for.gif)**_

_**![](ag_ball6.gif)**__****__**TOPICS**_

[_**TEXT**_](syllabus.htm#TEXT) | [_**TOPICS**_](syllabus.htm#TOPICS) |
[_**OUTCOMES**_](syllabus.htm#OUTCOMES) |
[_**ASSIGNMENTS**_](syllabus.htm#ASSIGNMENTS) |
[_**INCOMPLETES**_](syllabus.htm#INCOMPLETES) |
[_**READINGS**_](syllabus.htm#READINGS) | [_**TOP**_](syllabus.htm#TOP)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
> **1\. SPED Assessment: Definitions and Components  
>  2\. Steps in Assessment  
>  3\. Selection of Assessment Tools  
>  4\. Standardized Testing  
>  5\. School Performance  
>  6\. Informal Assessment  
>  7\. Learning Aptitude  
>  8\. Assessing Classroom Behavior  
>  9\. Reading and Written Language Assessment  
>  10\. Math Assessment  
>  11\. Using and Reporting Assessment Data  
>  12\. Early Childhood, Family Assessment  
>  13\. Assessing Adults**

![](pawswalk2.gif)

_**![](ag_ball6.gif)**__**OUTCOME**_ _ **S**_

1\. describe and distinguish between assessment, testing, and diagnosis;
formal and informal assessment and related terms;

2\. provide examples of formal and informal assessment;

3\. describe and distinguish among the various purposes for conducting
assessment of students referred for possible SPED services;

4\. describe and distinguish among the possible persons who may contribute to
the team approach to assessing SPED students;

5\. provide examples of the functions and contributions of each team member

6\. describe the hierarchy of the steps in educational assessment;

7\. distinguish among all of the steps in the assessment hierarchy;

8\. provide practical examples of each step in the assessment hierarchy; and

9\. generally, describe the development of the IEP.

10\. describe, distinguish among, and recognize examples of the legal,
professional, and evaluative criteria that are essential in the selection of
an assessment tool;

11\. describe measurement scale, norm groups, reliabilities, validities, and
measurement error;

12\. distinguish among and provide examples of the various measurement scales,
reliabilities and validities;

13\. evaluate the technical quality of standardized tests with respect to
norms, reliabilities, validities, and measurement error;

14\. describe and interpret test scores; and

15\. describe and evaluate suggestions for promoting non-biased assessment.

16\. Describe and demonstrate the preparations of the tester, testing
environment, student, participants, and equipment;

17\. Describe and practice adherence to standardized administra-
tion,observation of student behavior, recording student responses, and
establishing rapport with student;

18\. Describe and practice scoring tests and interpreting results; and

19\. Describe ways to modify the test and avoid bias in testing and
interpreting results.

20\. Describe the purposes of assessments of school performance;

21\. Compare and contrast individual and group administered tests;

22\. Provide examples of various sources of information in the assessment of
school performance;

23\. Describe administration, scoring and interpretative considerations of
frequently used global measures of assessment;

24\. Administer, score, and interpret the WJ-R, PIAT-R, and KTEA.

25\. cite the advantages of informal strategies;

26\. describe, compare and list examples of all informal strategies;

27\. when provided with examples of situations, select and support your
selection of the most appropriate informal strategy;

28\. discuss how data from informal and formal strategies can be used to
describe student performance and help in selection instructional materials and
strategies;

29\. describe strategies that help control for informant bias;

30\. describe learning aptitude; distinguish between intellectual performance
and adaptive behavior;

31\. preview and practice several IQ tests;

32\. describe IQ testing within the historical development of IQ tests;

33\. practice the best uses of the results of IQ tests;

34\. discuss a variety of test of adaptive behavior;

35\. describe and distinguish among the factors that affect classroom
behavior, such as actions, attitudes, self-esteem, environment, and peer
relations;

36\. discuss and examine various measures of behavior, attitude, self-esteem,
and environmental factors;

37\. discuss and distinguish among the aspects of the environment that affect
behavior;

38\. recognize, describe, and use various measures of behavior, self-esteem,
environment, attitude, and interactions;

39\. Describe and distinguish among the purposes for assessing reading, kinds
of assessment, and current practices;

40\. Discuss selection criteria for various kinds of reading assessment;

41\. Describe environmental factors that need to be assessed in the evaluation
of reading and written language; and

42\. Recognize and practice various forms of assessment for spelling,
handwriting, and composition.

43\. Describe and distinguish among purposes of assessing mathematics;

44\. Describe and distinguish among the various mathematics skills that need
to be assessed and provide examples of formal and informal methods to assess
each area;

45\. Explain and provide examples of instructional, interpersonal, and
physical environmental factors that need to be assessed as well as ways to
assess environmental factors;

46\. Conduct an error and response analysis on a hypothetical worksheet.

47\. analyze assessment results and report them in a useful manner;

48\. compose an interpretive report of assessment data;

49\. establish linkages among various types of assessment data and the IEP.

50\. distinguish among the areas that are assessed in the monitoring and
evaluation of the IEP;

51\. discuss ways to monitor and analyze data to evaluate the effectiveness of
the IEP; and

52\. practice monitoring the IEP.

53\. describe the purposes and issues associated with EC assessment;

54\. discuss measures to identify developmental problems and corresponding
educational interventions;

55\. discuss measures and practices used to identify school readiness skills
and educational interventions; and

56\. describe the critical areas evaluated in family assessment and strategies
for assessing the family.

57\. describe general components of vocational preparation;

58\. discuss areas assessed in vocational and career assessment and select
instruments and strategies to assess vocational skills, aptitudes, and
interests; and

59\. recognize and discuss current practices in college assessment along with
the relationship between college assessment and vocational/career assessment.

    
    
    ![](sniffbasswalk2.gif)
    
    
    _****__**![](ag_ball6.gif)**__****__**ASSIGNMENTS**_

[_**TEXT**_](syllabus.htm#TEXT) | [_**TOPICS**_](syllabus.htm#TOPICS) |
[_**OUTCOMES**_](syllabus.htm#OUTCOMES) |
[_**ASSIGNMENTS**_](syllabus.htm#ASSIGNMENTS) |
[_**INCOMPLETES**_](syllabus.htm#INCOMPLETES) |
[_**READINGS**_](syllabus.htm#READINGS) | [_**TOP**_](syllabus.htm#TOP)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
      
    
    _**READING ASSIGNMENTS**_

> _**![](Blue_Arrow2325.gif)Reading assignments and web sites that correspond
with each topic are required.. Students must read the chapter in the textbook
and visit the web sites before participating in the online discussion.**_

    
    
    _**![](laptop0b.gif)**__**DISCUSSIONS**_

> _**![](Blue_Arrow2325.gif)**__**Participation in online discussions is
required for each topic in the course. You may read and post messages in the
discussions at anytime of the day. The discussions enable students to interact
with each other and to discuss the readings, web sites, and issues related to
the topic. Student participation in the discussion is graded, so for specific
instructions for each course discussion, read the syllabus and grading
criteria for the course in which you are enrolled.**_

    
    
    _**![](letter.gif)TOPICAL ASSIGNMENTS**_

> _**![](Blue_Arrow2325.gif)**__**Guided notes, competencies, checkpoints,
and/or other assignments are required for each topic. These assignments
require students to respond on the basis of readings, web site visits, and
information that has been discussed in the online discussions.**_ _ ** For
specific instruction read the syllabus **__**and grading criteria for the
course in which you are enrolled.**_

    
    
    _****__**![](papermov.gif)**__**FINAL EXAM OR PROJECT**_

> _**![](Blue_Arrow2325.gif)**__****__**A final exam or final project that
requires students to apply knowledge to practical situations is required for
each course. For specific instruction read the syllabus **__**and grading
criteria for the course in which you are enrolled.**_

_**![](ag_ball6.gif)**__****INCOMPLETES****_

> _**Incompletes will be considered only in accordance with UM-D policy which
states that a compelling, personal reason must be documented, 70% of the
coursework must be completed, and a contract for completion must be secured
and filed by the student. The course instructor sets the requirements for
completion of the contract.**_

    

_**![](ag_ball6.gif)**__**Additional**_ _ **Readings**_

[_**TEXT**_](syllabus.htm#TEXT) | [_**TOPICS**_](syllabus.htm#TOPICS) |
[_**OUTCOMES**_](syllabus.htm#OUTCOMES) |
[_**ASSIGNMENTS**_](syllabus.htm#ASSIGNMENTS) |
[_**INCOMPLETES**_](syllabus.htm#INCOMPLETES) |
[_**READINGS**_](syllabus.htm#READINGS) | [_**TOP**_](syllabus.htm#TOP)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  


  1. **Bennett, R.E. (1983). Research and evaluation priorities for special education assessment.** ** _Exceptional Children_** **,** ** _50_** **, 110-117.**
  2. **Blankenship, C. (1985). Using curriculum-based assessment data to make instructional decisions.** ** _Exceptional Children_** **,** ** _52_** **, 233-238.**
  3. **_Brown vs Board of Education of Topeka_** **. (1954). 547 U.S. 483.**
  4. **Balow, I.H., Hogan, T.P., Farr, R.C., & Prescott, C.A.(1986). ****_Metropolitan Achievement Test 6: Language Diagnostic Tests_** **: San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation.**
  5. **CTS/McGraw-Hill. (1985).** ** _California Achievement Test_** **. Monterey, CA:Author.**
  6. **Dunn, L.M., & Markwardt, P.C. (1970). ****_Peabody Individual Achievement_** ******_Test_** **. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service.**
  7. **Edwards, J. (1989). Test review: Peabody Individual Achievement Test-Revised.** ** _Journal ofPsychoeducational Assessment_** **,** ** _7_** **, 264-271.**
  8. **Farr, R.C., Prescott, G.A., Hogan, T.P., & Balow, I.H. (1986). ****_Metropolitan Achievement Tests 6: Reading Diagnostic Tests_** **. San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation.**
  9. **Fuchs, D., & Fuchs, L.S. (1986). Test procedure bias: A meta-analysis of examiner familiarity effects.** ** _Review of Educational Research_** **,** ** _56_** **, 243-262.**
  10. **Fuchs, D., Fuchs, L., Benowitz, S., & Barringer, K., (1987). Norm-referenced tests: Are they valid for use with handicapped students?. ****_Exceptional Children_** **,** ** _54_** **, 263-271.**
  11. **Hogan, T.P., Farr, R.C., Prescott, C.A., Balow, I.H. (1986).** ** _MetropolitanAchievement Test 6: Mathematics Diagnostic Tests_** **. San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation.**
  12. **Johnson, P. (1984). Prior knowledge and reading comprehension testbias.** ** _Reading Research Quarterly_** **.** ** _14_** **, 219-239.**
  13. **Kaufman, A., & Kaufman, N. (1985a). ****_Kaufman Test of Educational_** ******_Achievement_** **. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Corporation.**
  14. **Kaufman, A., & Kaufman, N. (1985b). ****_Kaufman Test of EducationalAchievement, Brief Formmanual_** **. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Corporation.**
  15. **Kaufman, A., & Kaufman, N. (1985c). ****_Kaufman Test of Educational Achievement, Comprehensive Form manual_** **. Circle Pines, MN:American Guidance Corporation.**
  16. **Lazarus, B.D., & McKenna, M. C. (1996). How special educators assess reading: Some concerns. ****_Reading Psychology_** **.**
  17. **Maddus, G.F., Kellaghan, R., Rawkow, E.A., & King, D.J. (1970). The sensitivity of school measures. ****_Harvard Educational Review_** **.** ** _49_** **, 207-230.**
  18. **Markwardt, F.D. (1989).** ** _Peabody Individual Achievement Test-Revised_** **.Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service.**
  19. **Prescott, G.A., Balow, I.H., Hogan, T.R., & Farr, R.C. (1984). ****_Metropolitan  
Achievement Tests 6: Survey Battery_** **. San Antonio, TX: The Psychological
Corporation.**

  20. **Ross, R.P. (1990). Consistency among school psychologists in evaluating discrepancy scores: A preliminary study.** ** _Learning Disabilities_** ******_Quarterly_** **,** ** _13_** **, 209-219.**
  21. **Salvia, J., & Hughes, C. (1990). ****_Curriculum-based assessment: Testing what is taught_** **. New York, NY: MacMillan Publishing Co.**
  22. **Salvia, J. & Ysseldyke, J.E. (1988). ****_Assessment in special and remedial education_** **. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Co.**
  23. **Shanahan, T., Kamil, M.L., & Tobin, A. W. (1982). Cloze as a measure of intersentential comprehension. ****_Reading Research Quarterly_** **,** ** _17_** **, 229-255.**
  24. **_State ex. rel. Beattie v. Board of Education of City of Antigo (Wis.)_** **.(1919). 172 NW 153.**
  25. **U.S. Department of Education.** ** _To assure the free, appropriate public education of all handicapped children_** **. Tenth Annual Report to Congress on the Implementation of  
P.L. 94-142, The Education for All Handicapped Children Act, 1988.**

  26. **Wechsler, D. (1974)** ** _Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-Revised_** **.New York: Psychological Corporation.**
  27. **Lipson, N.Y., & Wixson, K.K. (1991). ****_Assessment and instruction of reading disability:An interactive approach_** **. New York: Harper Collins.**
  28. **Woodcock, R.W., & Dahl, MN. (1971). ****_A common scale for the measurement of person ability and test item difficulty_** **(AGS Paper No. 10). Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service.**
  29. **Woodcock, R., & Mather, N. (1989). ****_Woodcock-Johnson Tests of Achievement Standard and Supplemental Batteries examiner's manual_** **. Allen, TX: DLM.**
  30. **Ysseldyke, J.E., & Shinn, M.R. (1981). Psychoeducational evaluation. InJ.M. Kauffman & D.P. Hallahan (Eds.). ****_Handbook of special education_** **. Englewood Cliffs, NJ. Prentice Hall.**

[_**TEXT**_](syllabus.htm#TEXT) | [_**TOPICS**_](syllabus.htm#TOPICS) |
[_**OUTCOMES**_](syllabus.htm#OUTCOMES) |
[_**ASSIGNMENTS**_](syllabus.htm#ASSIGNMENTS) |
[_**INCOMPLETES**_](syllabus.htm#INCOMPLETES) |
[_**READINGS**_](syllabus.htm#READINGS) | [_**TOP**_](syllabus.htm#TOP)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
LAST UPDATE: Jan-02

_**Web site developed and maintained by**_[ _ **Belinda
Lazarus**_](mailto:blazarus@fob-f1.umd.umich.edu) _ ****__**  
  
![](copyrigh.gif) Author. This site cannot be duplicated, used for profit, or
excerpted without the written permission of the author . The author wishes to
thank Realm Graphic's, Graphics Station and Eric's Animated Gifs for the great
graphics and the authors of all of the hyperlinks that are included on this
page. **_

