[**mainpage**](../../home.html) | ![Early Childhood Education at Columbia
College Chicago](38-title.gif)  
---|---  
[**index**](../index.html)  
[**early child**](index.html) **[mainpage](../index.html)** |
[Curriculum](courses.htm) || [Current Term](a.current.htm) ||
[Profiles](profiles.htm) || [Gallery](gallery.htm) || [Related
Sites](sites.htm)  
---|---  
  


  |

38-3200 **Construction of Ideas**

Fall Semester 1999

* * *

Eleanor Nicholson, PhD

Voice: 312-755-2250

FAX: 312-755-2255

Email: Halsbarn@aol.com

Office Hours by Appointment

Class Time: Mondays, 4:30 p.m.-7:30 p.m.

At Erikson Institute

**Course Description** : Students examine a network of "big ideas" in the
disciplines of science, math, humanities, and the social sciences. This course
provides a framework for understanding the concepts, habits of mind, and
skills characteristic of professionals in each of the disciplines. The goal of
the course is to prepare teachers to: a) recognize important concepts, and b)
become effective in facilitating children's emerging understandings and skills
in the various domains of thinking as these understandings surface in the
classroom life.

**Further Description:** Classes will be a mixture of the presentation of
ideas, concepts, and skills followed by discussion, activities, hands-on
investigation, and student demonstrations of games and activities.

**Course Rationale** : This course is required for the Early Childhood
Education teacher certification program, based on Illinois State Board of
Education requirements. It is open to those students who have been formally
admitted to the professional education sequence, as well as other Columbia
students who have demonstrated the required academic skills.

**Prerequisites:** Permission of Program Coordinator required.

Strong, college-level reading and writing skills are necessary, as are basic
word processing skills. Appropriate reading and writing skills can be
demonstrated by scores on the College diagnostic assessment examination, or a
grade of "B" or better in English Composition I and II (52-1101 and 1102).
Ideally, program students take this course after having completed Child
Development.

**Erikson Attendance Policy:** "Attendance at every class session is a
requirement for all Erikson courses. There are no exceptions. One excused
absence per semester is permitted. All other absences will result in a lowered
grade. Tardiness will also result in a lowered grade. If you are more than 10
minutes late to a class session, you will be considered tardy. In all cases,
call before classes to alert the instructor that you will be absent (just as
you would in a work situation)."

"Children are not allowed in Erikson classes."

**Course Objectives:** Students will

1\. Develop an understanding of the dynamics of teaching/learning by
reflecting on their own learning processes as they explore the construction of
ideas in the young child.

2\. Identify, explore and apply major concepts about cognition, including the
theory of multiple intelligences, and will recognize that the growth of
understanding in general as well as within curricular disciplines is a
developmental process.

3\. Investigate the relationship between procedural and propositional
knowledge and the role of the affective domain in the construction of ideas.

4\. Recognize the role of process and play in effective learning, the
influence of home culture on the way a child may express concepts and
procedures, and the importance of developing good listening and facilitating
skills that allow children to represent and explain their level of
understanding and to demonstrate problem-solving strategies.

5\. Identify and explore the fundamental processes that characterize the
construction of ideas and will recognize the Big Ideas characteristic of a
discipline-i.e., major processes, concepts, skills, and strategies specific to
mathematics, science, social studies, or the humanities.

6\. Recognize benchmarks that indicate a child's developmental growth in the
understanding of these Big Ideas.

7\. Develop an understanding of the power of integrated curriculum, with
special emphasis on the important role of the arts in the teaching/learning
process.

8\. Design and reflect on curriculum activities and experiences that
contribute to understanding in mathematics, science, social studies, and the
humanities in a way that takes into account individual children's
developmental level and special needs.

9\. Consider developmentally appropriate use of technology in helping children
construct and consolidate their understanding and in responding to special
needs.

10\. Further their ability to write expository prose at a level appropriate
for university work.

**Required Texts:**

Armstrong, T. (1994). _Multiple intelligences in the classroom_. Alexandria,
VA: ASCD.

Charlesworth, R., & Lind, K. K. (1995). _Math and science for young children_
(2nd ed.). Delmar.

**Course Requirements** :

1\. Arrive promptly for all class sessions. See Erikson Institute attendance
policy on previous page.

2\. Complete all required readings before the class for which they are
assigned.

3\. Complete all assignments. Always keep a copy of work that you have
submitted. Tardiness in submitting, or failure to complete, an assignment will
be reflected in the course grade as will lack of participation in class/group
activities.

4\. Maintain a reflective journal.

5\. Satisfactorily complete required Games projects, as described, and
complete final project

**Evaluation** : Letter grades are interpreted in the following manner

_**A** Excellent_ , outstanding work, carried out with a thoroughness which
leads to original insights and observations

_**B** Above Average_ , strong work which thoroughly completes course
requirements

_**C** Average_ , minimally meets course requirements

_**D** Below Average_ , work is unacceptable, reflects lack of understanding
or misunderstandings, as well as lack of needed effort

_**F** Failing_ , failing by all standards

The rubric used in grading the mechanics of all written assignments in the
Early Childhood Education program will be distributed.

**Final grades** will be based on:

Class Participation 20%

Maintenance of Journal 15%

Completion of three games 15% for each one

Final project 20%

This syllabus may be amended as the course proceeds. You will be notified of
all changes.

**SYLLABUS OVERVIEW** ， Each of the following curricular areas will have a
three-week focus:

Mathematics, Science, Social Studies, and Humanities/Arts

1\. What are the Big Ideas and the focus for teaching/learning in the targeted
domain?

2\. What is a specific problem in that domain that pertains to our city of
Chicago?

3\. What games and activities can you develop that reflect your learning in
the targeted domain? ，

Assignments for each three-week block will follow a set pattern:

1\. There will be a set of readings, along with a reading response journal
entry for each chapter or reading.

2\. You are expected to keep a readings response journal that the instructor
will examine on a regular basis. Each entry should be done on a separate page.
When responding to something you've read, list the title, author and no more
than three sentences, summarizing the main idea of the reading, followed by
your response that does one or more of the following:

a) relates the concepts in the article to personal experience or beliefs
and/or

b) articulates a question or concern that is important to you personally and
that is raised by the article. Frequently include in your journal your
responses to class activities, as well as your experiences in your practicum.
，

**Educational Game Project** : Making and Writing

1\. By week 3 of each cycle, you will have devised and facilitated the playing
of a game that develops mathematical, scientific, and/or social science
learning.

2\. At least two of the three games must be developmentally appropriate for
4-6-year-olds. Any materials (boards, pieces) necessary for playing the game
are to be presented. Students are to oversee the game being played by
individuals for whom the game is developmentally appropriate.

3\. Procedure: ， The first draft of the game paper is due the third week of
the cycle. This paper will be returned in one week with the instructor's
comments. The paper will include a set of clear instructions on how to play
the game with a summary statement of "How to succeed/win at the game" and
strategy hints for play. ，

The paper must state the specific mathematical concepts and processes
(procedural and propositional knowledge) that will be developed or enhanced by
playing the game. ，

A reflective report on an experience of the game being played-discuss what
went well, as well as what modifications you might make as a result of
watching the game being played. (This reflective piece on the game may be
included in the re-writing of the first draft.) ，

The rewritten report is due on the second week of the following cycle. In
rewriting their report, students will consider the instructor's comments as
well as their own reflection on the project. ，

**For the Humanities cycle** , students will create a culminating project
instead of a game. The project must use one of the humanities to represent
some aspect of your personal association with Chicago (a model, work of
graphic art, performance of music, dramatization, video) along with a written
paper that reflects on how this representation has engaged the student in the
teaching/learning process, with special reference to Big Ideas explored in the
course.

**CONSTRUCTION OF IDEAS IN CHILDHOOD WEEK BY WEEK FOCUS**

**Week 1** : What does it mean to construct ideas? How are ideas constructed?
What are ideas constructed about? Beginning with our own experience, we will
reflect on the dynamics of the teaching/learning process. ， What is process?
What is the difference between procedural and propositional knowledge? ， What
can we find out about multiple intelligences? Why is it important to know
about them?

Readings for next week: ， Armstrong, Multiple Intelligences in the Classroom,
Preface, Introduction, Chapters 1 and 2

**Weeks 2, 3, and 4** : Big Ideas in Mathematics October 4 Activities,
discussion, and reflection on readings Focus on basic mathematical processes
and identification of Big Ideas in mathematics.

October 4: ， Charlesworth & Lind, Math and Science for Young Children,
pp.1-23, 87-159 ， Handout: Ginsburg, "Children's Arithmetic: How They Learn It
and How You Teach It."

October 11: Chicago problem: The White City-mathematics and measurement
activities Assignment for next week: Preparation of draft of paper and math
games for presentation

October 18: Mathematical Learning and Mathematical Games Readings for next
week: ， Charlesworth & Lind, "Science in the preprimary and primary grades"
53-85; 224-233; 278-87.

**Weeks 5, 6, and 7** : Big Ideas in Science

October 25: Focus on basic scientific processes and identification of Big
Ideas in science

November 1: Chicago problem: Water, water everywhere Assignment: Begin work on
Graceland assignment Prepare science game and draft of paper for presentation

November 8 Presentation of science games and the construction of science
learning

Assignment for next week: ， Handout: chapters 3 and 4 from The Emotional
Development of Young Children by Marion Hyson, pp. 42-75. ，

Armstrong, chapters 5 and 12.

**Weeks 8, 9, and 10** : Big Ideas in the Social Sciences

November 15: Focus on basic social science processes and identification of the
Big Ideas in the social sciences. What is the science in the study of human
beings and their relationships? Assignment: Complete all aspects of Graceland
assignment, including journal

November 20: (Saturday) Walk through Graceland Cemetery with E. for those who
are free to do so. November 22 Chicago problem: Giants and the Common Men

November 29: Social science games and the construction of learning in the
social sciences

Assignment for next week: Armstrong, chapters 6 and 7

**Weeks 11, 12, 13** Big Ideas in the Humanities

December 6 What are the humanities? What is the humanities/ social science/
science, etc. interface? We will discuss rhetoric, criticism, and the
mechanics of the arts-form, function, aesthetics, among other topics. Reading
for next week: To be assigned Assignment: You must come to class with a
proposal for your final project.

December 13 Integrating learning through the humanities. Students must have a
proposal for their final projects.

Assignment: Students must attend/ participate in some formal arts/humanities
experience over the holiday break-theatre, concert, architectural walking
tour, art exhibit, dance performance. Reflections on this experience must be
thoroughly described in your response journal, which will be handed in on
January 3.

January 3 Chicago problem: Whose Arts Are They? Final two weeks Putting it all
together

January 10 and January 17: Presentation of Culminating Projects Reflection and
Review GIANTS AND THE COMMON MAN GRACELAND CEMETERY AND THE SOCIAL SCIENCES A.

Components of this assignment are as follows:

1\. Viewing of the video "Giants and the Common Man."

2\. A walking trip through Graceland Cemetery

3\. A paper on one of the persons described in the film

4\. An entry in your journal reflecting on the entire unit. Unlike other
journal entries, this will be shared with the class.

B. The viewing

1\. Go to the second floor of the Museum of Broadcast Communications at the
Cultural Center. Enter by the Washington Street entrance and the Museum is
directly to your left.

2\. Once on the second floor, go into the Archives (on your right) and ask at
the desk for the video. (You will have to pay $2.00, but if you bring me a
receipt, you will be reimbursed.)

3\. The people at the desk will show you where to go and what to do.

4\. You can watch the video alone if you wish or, if you and some of your
classmates can arrange mutually convenient times, up to four people can view
the film at the same time. (No more than four, please)

5\. Watch the film before you visit Graceland!!

C. Graceland Cemetery

1\. Graceland Cemetery is at the northeast corner of Irving Park and Clark
Street. It is open daily through the daylight hours.

2\. I will lead a group through Graceland on Saturday, November 20, at an hour
convenient to the greatest number of students who can join us.

3\. If you can't join us, you must have visited on your own in time to
complete your journal entry for the November 22 class.

D. The biographical paper

Each of you is to prepare a paper of three to five pages in length on one of
the individuals described in the video. You will draw the name of that person
out of a hat. You must cite three sources of printed information in addition
to what you learn from the video and find on the Internet. Your paper must
include references and a bibliography in the APA style described in your
Writers' Handbook.

E. The journal

You may find this Graceland activity a moving experience; I hope so. Either
through prose, poetry, or drama, express your response in your journal.

F. Both the paper and the journal entry will be shared with the class on
November 22.



[return to course descriptions](courses.listing.htm) || top  
---|---  
| [Disclaimer](../../disclaimer.html) | **![](logo.gif)**

  | (C) 1998 Columbia College Chicago  
600 South Michigan Avenue  
Chicago, IL 60605-1996  
Telephone: 312-663-1600  
---|---|---|---

