**CASPER COLLEGE COURSE SYLLABUS**

** **

**SEMESTER** : Spring 2002 __

_ _

**COURSE NUMBER & TITLE:** EDCI 1420 - Education Seminar - Mathematics, Theory
II

**LECTURE HOURS** : 1 **CREDITS:** 1  
**CLASS TIME** : 12:00-1:50 P.M. **DAYS** : W (Alternates with Math 1105)  
**ROOM:** TBA  
**INSTRUCTOR'S NAME:** Pete Wildman  
**INSTRUCTOR'S OFFICE:** PS 344 **OFFICE PHONE:** 268-2506

** **

**OFFICE HOURS: ** 9-10 a.m. W

10-12 TH (in math lab)

11-12 MWTHF

1:30-2:30 T,TH

Other times by appointment or just drop by - I am often around in addition to
these hours. If you can not get me in person , please contact me by e-mail at
pwildman@acad.cc.whecn.edu or [peterw@trib.com](mailto:peterw@trib.com). I
check my e-mail many times each day!



**COURSE DESCRIPTION:** (From the Casper College Catalog)



EDCI 1410 Seminar in Education "Mathematics" \- Theory II (1L, 1CR)



This course will cover activities parallel to the topics discussed in Math
1105. The course is scheduled to meet in two hour sessions every other week
during the semester and class activities are coordinated with the topics
currently being covered in Math 1105. Students will be expected to attend and
actively participate in all sessions and activities



**PREREQUISITES:**



Concurrent enrollment in Math 1105



**GENERAL OBJECTIVES:**



This course along with Math 1105 is designed to prepare students to teach math
as elementary or junior high school teachers. This course will focus on
educational pedagogy - or the particular practice of teaching primary
mathematics. We will look at physical models for instruction, computers,
calculators and other educational issues and aides. You will get practice and
an introduction to a variety of techniques for introducing mathematics to
elementary age school children.



**SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES:**



Specifically you will be introduced to statistics - both data analysis and
measurement activities, probability, geometry from visualization, geometry as
measurement, and measurement. You will get a tremendous amount of hands-on
experience with this as this material lends itself to this naturally. Through
both the activities and assignments in the course you will receive a solid
introduction to manipulatives and methods for effective instruction.

** **

** **

**MATERIALS NEEDED FOR THE COURSE:**

** **

There is no textbook for this course. All the material will be presented
during the seminar sessions. You will find it helpful to have a calculator for
use during the sessions - a TI-73 is an excellent choice. If you have any
questions about calculators - please don't hesitate to ask.



**METHODOLOGY:** In most seminar sessions we will begin with a demonstration
or a discussion of a particular idea or model as a group. Then we will break
up into groups and work together on an assignment. The assignment is due the
next seminar session. If you have any questions during a seminar session -
please don't hesitate to ask! There are no stupid questions! Your active
participation in this course is critical - please make a solid effort to
attend each seminar session and actively participate with your group.



**EVALUATION CRITERIA:** Your grade in this course will be determined by
scores on a technology assignment, a teaching  "demonstration", class
assignments and class participation.



Each student will do a technology assignment. Specific Information will be
given in a separate handout. The Technology Assignment is due in Seminar #5
(March 27)



Each student will prepare a mathematics teaching demonstration. These will be
presented during the final class session (May 8). Specific information on the
structure and requirements for the demo will be given later in the course.



Each student should complete and hand in the handouts given at each session.
(One handout per  
group is okay) - the Handout is due the next seminar session - **NO LATE
ASSIGNMENTS WILL BE ACCEPTED**. However I will ask each student to turn in an
individual assessment of the activity and your grade on each assignment is
worth 30 points - of which 15 will be a  "group" grade and 15 will be on the
individual assessment. You are permitted to miss one assignment - your lowest
assignment grade will be dropped



Your grade in this course is separate from your grade in Math 1105 Theory of
Arithmetic II. The points possible for each section listed above are:



Technology Assignment  100 pts.  
Teach Demo 100 pts.

Assignments 180 pts.  
Participation 20 pts.



The participation grade will be determined by your attendance and active
participation in class.

Your grade will be determined by an average of these total points possible.
You are guaranteed a standard grade distribution scale (90% + A, 80-89% B,
70-79% C, 60-69% D, 59% - F), but I reserve the right to lower this scale if
needed.



**LAST DATE TO CHANGE TO AUDIT STATUS OR TO WITHDRAW WITH A "W" GRADE**



Friday March 22, 2002

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

**HELPFUL SUGGESTIONS:** What should you do if you are confused?? Ask
questions! Please do not hesitate to ask questions! There are many ways to get
additional help



，          Ask questions during class If you are too intimidated to ask -
write me a note, I'll answer the question next class period



，          Ask me for additional help. You can come see me outside of class
during my office hours (listed above). If these times are not convenient, then
please see me to make an appointment! I am often around in addition to these
times, so don't hesitate to stop by or give me a call. I want to help



，          Go to the math lab. You can get additional help from the workers in
the Math Lab. The Math Lab is located in PS 104\. The hours for the math lab
will be announced!



，          Form a study group with your friends - this is a great way to learn



**_Let's make this a great semester!!!!_**

** **

**STUDENT RIGHTS & RESPONSIBILITIES:**

** **

Please refer to the Casper College Student Conduct and Judicial Code for
information concerning your rights and responsibilities as a Casper College
student.

It is the policy of Casper College to provide appropriate accommodations to
any student with a documented disability. If you have a need for accommodation
in this course, please make an appointment to see me at your earliest
convenience.

Also, if you have a problem with the instruction given in this class, please
see the instructor first, then the chairman of the Math department, then the
Physical Science Department chairman, and then the dean of Instruction and
lastly the College President. The problem can usually be resolved at about the
first step. Also do not wait until the last week of class to make your desires
known.  



**TENTATIVE COURSE SCHEDULE WITH CONTENT**



  

Some seminar session topics may change. However the dates of the seminars are
fixed!



1/23 - Seminar #1 - Probability Games

2/6 - Seminar #2 - Probability simulations

2/20 - Seminar #3 - Statistics acitivity

3/6 - Seminar #4 - Mathematics and Literature

3/27 - Seminar #5 - Geometry manipulation (TECHNOLOGY ASSIGNMENT DUE)

4/10 - Seminar #6 - Geometry visualization

4/24 - Seminar #7 - Measurement Seminar

5/8 - Seminar #8 - Teaching demonstrations





