**Amarillo College Course Syllabus**

**FALL 2001**



**COURSE NAME:**

**MATH 1350 Foundations of Mathematics I**



**PREREQUISITE:**

MATH 1314 or consent of department chair. **For education majors.**



**COURSE DESCRIPTION:**

Elementary concepts of sets, functions, numerations systems, number theory,
and properties of the natural numbers, integers, rational, and real number
systems with an emphasis on problem solving and critical thinking.



**INSTRUCTOR:**

Name: Carrol Spears

Office: E 201 B

Phone: 345-5523 (W) ; 355-0338 (H)

Office Hours: MWF 11:00 - 12:00 ; TTh 8:15-9:15; Other times as needed.

E-mail: spears-cm@actx.edu



**TEXTBOOK:**

_Mathematical Reasoning for Elementary Teachers,_ 2nd edition.



**AUTHORS:**

Long and De Temple, Addison Wesley Longman Publishing Company.



**PERFORMANCE/LEARNING OBJECTIVES:**

After completing this course, the student will be able to demonstrate
knowledge of the following topics:



1. Exploration of basic problem solving strategies.

2. Description of patterns using multiple formats.

3. Introduction to set terminology and notations.

4. Exploration of relations, operations, and properties.

5. Interpretation of different uses of numbers.

6. Properties of operations-commutative, associative, distributive, etc.

7. Development and application of algorithms for whole number operations.

8. Exploration of estimation and mental arithmetic techniques.

9. Review solution techniques for simple linear equations and inequalities.



**INSTRUCTIONAL METHOD/EXAMINATIONS:**

**  
**

This class is designed to meet the mathematics requirements for elementary
education majors. The course is a study of the real number system. Topics
include an examination of whole numbers, integers, rational, and irrational
numbers with an emphasis on place value and the associated operations. Topics
from numeraton systems, number theory, and the theory of sets will be
developed as needed. Problem solving strategies and appropriate use of
technology will be integrated throughout the course.

We will explore mathematics at a conceptual, problem-solving level. You will
be discovering why algorithms for the four basic operations work, using
concrete material to give meaning to the four basic operations, and solving a
wide variety of problems using a variety of mathematical and pedagogical
approaches. We will work to develop teaching skills as well as a manipulative
kit to be used in a public school classroom. We will attend a conference. We
may be able to observe an actual 1st grade classroom. The experiences you
receive in this course are designed to help you become a more flexible and
confident learner of mathematics. It is this attitude that you will ultimately
pass on to your students.

**RESPONSIBILITIES--FACULTY** : I have the responsibility and commitment to
help you develop appropriate content knowledge of mathematics, its real-world
applications, its historical context, and its roots in diverse cultures. I
have the responsibility and commitment to choose and implement the appropriate
instruction strategies for you. I have the responsibility and commitment to my
own continuing professional development. If you ever have any concerns or
problems with the class, my door is open. I am available to assist you during
office hours or anytime that I am on campus. Telephone calls are welcome. We
can work out a mutual time that I can work with you.

**STUDENTS:** You have the responsibility to be active participants in all
collaborative learning experiences in mathematics. You have the responsibility
to take risks in order to learn mathematics and you must recognize that taking
risks is essential to learning mathematics. You have the responsibility to
seek and identify connections within mathematics, between mathematics and
other fields, and between the mathematics you study and mathematics you will
teach. You have the responsibility to demonstrate a commitment to the
continued study of mathematics and educational issues.

**EVALUATION** :

Math 1350 meets MWF from 10:00 - 10:50 in room E 207. There will be three
hours of lecture per week for 16 weeks. Work and study outside of class should
take at least 6 hours per week. The final grades of A (90-100), B (80-89), C
(70-79), D (60-69), and F (below 60) will be computed as the average of the
earned grades from: (5 exams + a comprehensive final exam + a homework-daily
activity-projects grade)/7.

**Exams** will be assigned in class at appropriate times during the semester.
Exams are scheduled in advance to ensure that you will be able to attend class
on exam day. **Make-up** tests will not be given except at my discretion, but
every student will be allowed to retake (or make-up) one test at the end of
the semester. Tests are taken during class time unless a retest is to be taken
or I make other arrangements. Do tests neatly in **pencil** and **show all
possible work**.

  

Students will need to **work appropriate sections in the text** to gain
proficiency in the material. Daily activities and projects will be assigned in
class. One project will be to build a set of manipulatives. You will attend
one of two conferences on a Saturday. There will be written assignments which
may include writing activities, concept maps, and problems. Written work must
be **neat** to be accepted. Do the work in **pencil, circle** **or highlight**
answers, and **don** **=** **t use spirals**. **Show all the work** the way I
give it to you in class. Write the **original problem**. **Draw** pictures,
charts, etc. Be sure to **attempt** **each type of homework problem** , even
if not assigned, to ensure complete understanding of the material for the
test. **Staple** each section, i.e. staple 6.1, staple 6.2, etc. and write
your **name** and **section #** at the top. It is possible that the homework
may not be returned until later in the semester. You will participate in
individual and group activities using manipulatives, and may be asked to turn
in and/or report on your work. You will be graded on the clarity of your
ideas, the correctness of the mathematics used, and your overall presentation.

The single most important criteria in my handling of unusual situations is my
understanding of your intent. Feel free to come by my office anytime for help
or just to visit. By all means, if you have a problem with the class, come to
me and discuss it. Let=s work together and make this class a valuable learning
experience.

Under no circumstances will cheating be tolerated. Anyone caught cheating will
receive a grade of AF@ for the semester grade.





**FINAL EXAMINATION** :

The final exam for this course will be given on Monday, December 10, 2001 at
10:30 am.

** **

**ATTENDANCE POLICY:**

Poor course performance has been linked to poor class attendance. Attendance
is essential. Absences will directly affect your grade because writing
activities, quizzes, and/or collaborative activities will occur during most
classes. You must attend and be on time to earn those points. Three absences
are considered excessive. These standards will be used in reporting to any
state agency that supports students and requires satisfactory progress as
measured by attendance. Each absence should be discussed with the instructor
outside of class time. Please remember the deadline for dropping a class at AC
during the Fall Semester is Wednesday, November 21, 2001. If you stop
attending class and do not officially drop the course by this deadline, you
will receive an AF@ for the course.



**TENTATIVE SCHEDULE:** (This schedule is subject to change by the instructor
at any time.)



Chapter 1: 1.2, 1.3, 1.4

Chapter 2: 2.1, 2.2, 2.3

Chapter 3: 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 3.5

Chapter 4: 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5

Chapter 5: 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5

Chapter 6: 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5



**FOOD/DRINK:**

It is the policy of the Mathematics Department that food and drink be allowed
in the classroom setting, at the instructor=s discretion, but food and drink
are not allowed in the Computer Labs. Food and drink are acceptable in my
classroom but you are responsible for cleaning up any messes.



**PHONE/PAGERS:**

**  
**

It is the policy of the Mathematics Department that cell phones and pagers
must be turned off or in silent mode in the classrooms and the Computer Labs.
I, however, do not mind phones and pagers but I ask that you keep calls to
emergencies only.



**GRAPHING CALCULATOR CHECKOUT:**

Students unable to afford the purchase of a graphing calculator can apply to
the Adult Students Program for the privilege of checking one out for the
semester. Students that

a) receive a Pell Grant, or b) receive public assistance services are eligible
as long as calculators are available. These calculators are checked out on a
Afirst come, first served@ basis.



If you do not meet the above criteria but cannot afford to purchase your own
calculator, you may discuss your situation with the Adult Students advisors.
Exceptions may be made in some cases. Take a copy of your schedule to the
Adult Students Office located in the Student Services Building between 8:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. You must complete and application
and be enrolled in a math class to receive this assistance.



**Students who lose (due to accident / theft / any other mishap) or damage in
any way a loaner graphing calculator will be required to replace the lost,
stolen, or damaged calculator with a new TI-83 or TI-83 Plus graphing
calculator.**



**DISABILITY STATEMENT:**

Any student who, because of a disabling condition, may require some special
arrangements in order to meet course requirements should contact Accessibility
Services (SS-125, Phone 371-5436) as soon as possible.

