

**MAT 141 (002)**

**MATHEMATICS FOR ELEMENTARY AND MIDDLE GRADES TEACHERS II**

TUESDAY, THURSDAY 10:50 a.m. - 12:05 p.m.

AST 255

Spring, 2002



**Note:** This course is open only to students majoring in early grades and
middle grades education.

**Prerequisite:** Math 140 with a grade of C or better, High School Algebra I
and II and Geometry (B or better); Math 97 and Math 99 or the equivalent.If
you are unsure, take the mathematics placement test from Health, Counseling,
and Testing Center, UC 366, 572-6373.

**Instructor** :  Dr. Linda Sheffield

**Office:** BEP 262

|

**Phone:** 572-5431

|

[**email:** Sheffield@nku.edu](mailto:Sheffield@nku.edu)  
  
---|---|---  
  
**Office Hours**

|

Tuesday, Thursday 9:00 - 10:30 a.m., 12:30 - 2 pm and by appointment  
  
[Blackboard.com site: http://learnonline.nku.edu](http://learnonline.nku.edu)

|

[Class website: http://www.nku.edu/~sheffield](http://www.nku.edu/~sheffield)  
  
|

|

|

|  
  
**Text:** Long, C. T., & DeTemple, D. W. (2000). _Mathematical Reasoning for
Elementary Teachers_. New York: Addison Wesley.

**Note that you will need Internet access to check NKU email, access the class
website, and participate in coursework on Blackboard.com.**

**You must also read the Math General Syllabus at**[
**http://www.nku.edu/~math/GeneralSyllabus.html**](http://www.nku.edu/~math/GeneralSyllabus.html)

**Course Description:** The main emphasis of this course will be on the basics
of mathematics.  Knowledge of this is essential for the intelligent teaching
of mathematics at any level.Topics for the second semester of Mathematics for
Elementary Teachers include geometry, measurement, and algebra.(This
corresponds to Ch. 10 - 14 of the text.)You are expected to attain an
understanding of the conceptual foundations of these topics and a practical
concrete knowledge enabling him/her to pose and solve problems in these areas
and to explain the topics to others.The course will be taught in a manner
consistent with the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics _Principles
and Standards for School Mathematics_ , and you will be expected to take an
active part in constructing your own knowledge of mathematics through active
investigations of interesting problems.In addition to the NCTM Standards of
Algebra, Geometry and Measurement, you are expected to use the standards of
Problem Solving, Reasoning and Proof, Communication, Connections, and
Representation. You are expected to work individually and in small groups
during class as well as when doing homework, studying for exams and working on
projects.Appropriate tools for the course include graphing calculators,
computer programs such as _Geometer's Sketchpad_ , physical models such as
geometric solids, dot and graph paper, compasses and protractors, and most
importantly, an inquiring mind.

Written, oral, and visual modes of communication are essential to
understanding and doing mathematics. You will need to be actively engaged in
making observations, seeking patterns, and making and testing conjectures.
These should be discussed and analyzed with others in small groups as you work
on homework and projects.

During the course, you will work both individually and cooperatively on
problem solving activities. When appropriate, calculators and physical models
will be an essential part of these investigations. Problems should be
approached with a desire to discover all that you can about any given problem.
The solution to the initial problem should be looked upon as the beginning of
this investigation. This solution should lead you to some interesting
extensions where you ask such questions as: Why? What if I changed this&? Is
that always true? Is that ever true? Is there another way to solve this? How
can I convince someone that this is correct?

As you solve problems, you should always be on the lookout for connections.
You should try to connect the solutions from one problem to those you have
solved earlier as well as connect the mathematics you are learning to everyday
problems and to other subject areas. You should use your mathematical
reasoning and inquiry skills to connect the abstract concepts to real world
examples, physical models, and pictures and diagrams.

Keep in mind that this is a mathematics class and not a methods class. We will
often use manipulatives during class to give you a strong foundation for the
mathematics that underlies the elementary and middle grades curriculum. The
Chinese refer to this as developing a "profound understanding". It is
important for you to master this profound understanding yourself so that you
will later be able to share this with your own students.

**Objectives** :  At the completion of the course the students should be able
to:

  1. Correctly explain and give examples of basic concepts related to each of the topics listed above.
  2. Pose and solve problems in a variety of ways requiring the use of the basic concepts connected with each of the given topics.
  3. Construct physical and visual models and make connections within mathematics and to other subject areas for each of the basic concepts.

**Student Requirements**



  1. Do assigned readings and problems from the text and other sources both individually and in small groups. It is important not only that you have read the text before coming to class, but also that you have worked diligently on the problems. Even if you cannot solve all the problems in any given homework set, you need to work on them to be able to understand the discussions during class. I suggest that you get a notebook for this class and separate it into three sections. In one section, put terms, vocabulary, important concepts and questions that arise as you read the chapters in the book. In another section, put your notes from class. In the third section, put the answers to the homework problems including questions that arise as you work them. There are answers to several of the problems in the back of you book. In addition, at the reserve desk in the LRC, you will find a copy of the Instructor's Solution Manual where you can find all the problems worked out. If you are really stuck on a problem, you may want to check this out. University guidelines recommend that you spend two hours outside of class preparing for each hour in class. The average student should expect to spend at least 6 hours per week on this class; some of you will need to spend considerably more time. Homework will be assigned daily. Individual homework will not generally be collected, although you are responsible for knowing how to solve all the problems assigned. Many quizzes will take problems directly from the homework. Assigned homework is considered a minimal amount needed for a well-prepared student to be successful in this class. Many of you will need additional practice and should complete additional problems. It is strongly recommended that you work all assigned problems and read each section to be discussed before each class session. You may want to set up a study group with two or more students in the class to work and discuss the homework. Five-ten minutes should be spent during each class period going over any questions on the homework. Time will not permit solving all the problems in class. Participation in class and evidence of having completed assignments will be considered for grading purposes. You will be expected to work problems on the board during class and to participate in discussions on Blackboard.com between classes. If you have difficulty with any section, be sure to come to talk to me immediately. You may also get help in the Learning Assistance Center, BEP 230, where you may find a free tutor.
  2. Participate fully in class and on Blackboard.com. Attendance will be taken and the Blackboard discussion board will be monitored. This is the time to bring up those questions that you have in your notebooks from your readings and from doing the **** homework. During class, in addition to showing the solutions to homework problems on the board and taking an active part in discussing any of the material that I will present, you will also frequently be investigating problems cooperatively with your classmates. If you must miss a class for any reason, be sure to notify me as soon as possible and get notes on what you have missed from one of your classmates. During class each day, you will be expected to be an active learner, participating fully, sharing solutions, asking questions whenever necessary, suggesting new interesting avenues to explore, and taking notes on new information learned. Following class each day, you should rework any problems that might have been troublesome during class, follow up on extension ideas, complete the homework for the following class period, work on portfolio problems, discuss assignments with your classmates (in person and/or via Blackboard.com), read the section for the next class, visit me or the Learning Assistance Center with any problems, and prepare for any tests or quizzes.
  3. Successfully complete exams and quizzes. Quizzes will be given approximately once for each chapter. The top five quizzes will be counted towards the grade. Although homework may not be collected, homework problems often appear on tests and quizzes. All tests, including the final exam, will be comprehensive. You will be expected to have a graphing calculator in class each day, and you generally may use it on homework, quizzes, and exams.
  4. Complete mathematics portfolio problems either individually or in small groups. Portfolio problems will be longer problems that you will be expected to work individually or cooperatively with other students. You may choose a group of up to three people (including yourself) and you will be given approximately two weeks to work each of these problems. You may wish to use your solutions to these problems in your own Education portfolio.
  5. Complete individual assignments. These will be shorter than the portfolio problems and must be done individually.

# Grades Recorded

Individual Problems (3)

|

20 pts. each

|

60 pts.  
  
---|---|---  
  
Portfolio Problems (3)

|

30 pts. each

|

90 pts.  
  
Quizzes (best 5)

|

10 pts. each

|

50 pts.  
  
Class Participation

|

|

25 pts.  
  
Exams (3)

|

100 pts. each

|

300 pts.  
  
Comprehensive Final  Exam - Thurs., May 2, 10:10 - 12:10

|

200 pts.

|

_200_ pts.  
  
Total

|

|

725 pts.  
  
Quizzes may be given at any time and may not be announced. Exams will each
cover approximately 2 chapters and will be announced at least one class period
in advance.Each exam after the first will be cumulative. The questions from
quizzes and exams will come from class discussions, homework, readings,
individual and portfolio problems, and the textbook. Grades will be available
on Blackboard.com as soon as assignments are graded.

Midterm grades will be given in accordance with university policy.

**Extra Credit  
** Occasional bonus problems or extra credit assignments may be given.

**Grading Scale**

90% - 100%

|

A  
  
---|---  
  
80% - 89%

|

B  
  
70% - 79%

|

C  
  
60% - 69%

|

D  
  
0 - 59%

|

F  
  
  1. The instructor reserves the right to make changes in the syllabus, and/or class calendar if circumstances so dictate.
  2. Quizzes may not be made up. A missed quiz will be scored as a zero.Your lowest quiz grade will be dropped.
  3. Cheating, plagiarism, and illegal copying of software will not be tolerated.
  4. If an exam is missed due to an unavoidable situation, the instructor may allow a make-up. It may be different than the original exam. It may be written or oral. Any exam may be subject to oral quesioning. You must contact the instructor before the next class period if an exam is missed.
  5. Please get in touch when you foresee a prolonged absence.Also, please do not just disappear from class or from school.Talk to someone and go through the proper procedures if you are withdrawing.  The **last day to drop** with a grade of W is March 22, 2002.
  6. Students should expect to spend at least 5-7 hours per week in course-related work outside of class time, as stated in the catalog.

\----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Student Information Form**

On the form below, please complete all information.  These will be kept
confidential.  Please sign in the space provided to acknowledge that you have
received and understand the course syllabus.

Name _______________________________________        Date ___________

email address ________________________________________

Home phone number _________________ Best time to call __________

Other phone number where you can be reached (work, etc.) ________

Classification (fr, soph, jr, sr, post bac, etc.) ____________________

Have you used a graphing calculator before? _______    If so, which one?
_____________

Have you used Geometer's Sketchpad before? _______         If so, where?
________________

**Mathematics Background**

Name of High School _________________________          Year Graduated
________________

**High School Mathematics Courses             Grade Received**

Algebra I
_____________

Algebra II
_____________

Geometry
_____________

_____________________________                          _____________

_____________________________                          ______________

**University Mathematics Courses**

**Course Title                                                   Grade
Received         University                 **

Math 140
_____________            _________________

___________________________________              _____________
__________________

___________________________________              _____________
__________________

___________________________________              _____________
__________________



Number of hours per week on job or similar outside commitment this semester
________ =  J

Number of credit hours for which you are enrolled      ______________  = H

ComputeJ + 3 H = ____________________

I have read and understand the information contained in the syllabus for Math
141: Math for Elementary/Middle Grades Teachers.

Student Signature ______________________________________

