![Yale College Freshman Handbook, 2002¨C2003](../media/fhheader.gif) |  
---|---  
|

[**front page**](../index.html) ** | [table of contents](contents.html) |
[yale college dean's office](HTTP://www.yale.edu/yalecol/)**

|  |  
  
* * *

|  
|

# **Chapter 7**

## **General Academic Information**

    Interpreting Course Numbers  
Course Selection Period (A.K.A. "Shopping Period")  
Course Syllabi  
Credit/D/Fail Option  
Final Exams and Term Papers  
Reading Period  
Dates and Deadlines  
Writing  
Opportunities to Improve Your Writing  
Tutors in Mathematics and Science  
Center for Language Study  
Computing  

    Classroom Technology  
    Plagiarism and Documentation     

Within the framework of the distributional requirements and the distributional
guidelines, each student has the opportunity to formulate an individual
program of study. Most general and administrative particulars concerning a
student's choice appear in the Academic Regulations chapter of the [_Yale
College Programs of Study_](http://www.yale.edu/ycpo/ycps/) (YCPS); others are
matters of common sense and common courtesy. In this chapter are explanations
of some procedures you may find useful, some suggestions for planning your
program, and some bits of advice.

**Interpreting Course Numbers**

Fall-term courses are indicated by the letter "a," spring-term courses by the
letter "b," and year courses by the Arabic number alone, without any letter.
Departments number their courses according to different schemes, and course
numbers do not necessarily have anything to do with whether courses are more
advanced or more difficult. In some departments courses are numbered in an
ascending order, going from introductory to intermediate and advanced. In
others, courses are grouped primarily by subject matter, with the result that
the number of a course (usually with the exception of the 400 range) bears no
particular relation to its level of difficulty. More precise indications about
the level of a course will be found in the introduction to each department's
entry in the YCPS and sometimes in subheads ("Introductory," "Intermediate,"
"Advanced") in the course listings. Read both introductions and course
descriptions carefully, and choose the course best suited to your preparation.
While it is important to take courses that fully test your abilities, it is
also important not to overreach yourself. For suggestions about finding the
right level of placement, see "Choosing Courses at the Proper Level" in
[chapter 8](chapter8.html) below.

**Course Selection Period (a.k.a. "Shopping Period")**

At the beginning of each term, Yale has a course selection period of about two
weeks. During this time you can investigate courses that may interest you
before you have to sign up for them. This registration system lets you look
over a variety of alternatives as you plan your freshman program. By exploring
and evaluating courses before formally enrolling in them, you have the
opportunity of making well-informed and well-grounded choices.

The course selection period is popularly known as the "shopping period," but
that phrase is a misnomer. Students may refer to themselves as shoppers, but
members of the faculty do not think of themselves as vendors, nor their
courses as goods on display. To begin with, courses start at their first
scheduled meeting. Classes conducted during the first two weeks of the term
are regular, full-fledged classes in which lectures are given and readings
assigned. Instructors do not repeat their first lectures or delay course
assignments during the course selection period. It is up to the student who is
investigating a course to keep up with it during this period.

Sometimes you may wish to investigate two courses that meet at the same time.
If so, do it in a way that is not discourteous or disruptive. The best way is
to attend the courses on different days, not during the same period. _Under no
circumstances should you leave a classroom in the middle of a lecture._ During
the course selection period you must strike a balance between your need to
explore and your responsibility to get the term's work started. Make a
conscientious effort to use the course selection period well.

Clearly the number of courses you can actually attend during the course
selection period is limited. You may decide almost at once on three or four
courses and have time to look into only a few of the others that interest you.
To focus your investigation, read the course descriptions in the YCPS
carefully. Then, since those descriptions are brief, check readings and
assignments for courses that appeal to you.

**Course Syllabi**

The best way to find out about readings and assignments is from course
syllabi. Most instructors prepare a syllabus and a reading list for each
course they teach. These materials are typically distributed during the first
class meeting, but many instructors also post their syllabi on the Web at
[_classes.yale.edu/browse.html._](http://classes.yale.edu/browse.html) Online
syllabi enable students to peruse the content of a course without attending
the first lecture, although in some cases online syllabi are posted after
classes begin.

In the fall, if a course syllabus is not yet on line, check the Cross Campus
Library or local bookstores. They sometimes post book lists supplied by
instructors, and these book lists are valuable sources of information.

If you still have questions about a course after looking at its syllabus and
book list, seek out the instructor at the end of class, during scheduled
office hours, or by appointment.

**Credit/D/Fail Option**

Many Yale College courses may be taken on a Credit/D/Fail basis rather than
for a letter grade. The faculty judged that the Credit/D/Fail option would be
particularly useful to freshmen. A student may take up to four courses
Credit/D/Fail. No more than two courses a term may be taken Credit/D/Fail, and
at least two courses each term _must_ be taken for letter grades. In addition,
no more than one course credit may be taken Credit/D/Fail in any
distributional group for the purpose of satisfying the distributional
requirements. Students must declare their intention to take a course
Credit/D/Fail by the day their schedules are due, but until two weeks after
midterm in the fall term and one week after classes resume following spring
recess, they may convert the Credit/D/Fail option to a letter grade. After
these dates no conversion is possible. These deadlines are strictly enforced.

Freshmen who want to earn acceleration credits through work in advanced
courses should not use the option in those courses, since acceleration credit
is awarded only for grades of B, B+, A-, or A.

**Final Exams and Term Papers**

Courses typically end with a final examination or its equivalent, often a term
paper, but sometimes with a final hour test, a take-home examination, or some
other substitute. A zero in parentheses in the data line of a course
description in the YCPS means that the instructor may be planning a term paper
or some other substitute for a final examination; any other number in
parentheses means that a final will be required. Note, though, that this
indication of a final exam or a term paper (or other substitute) represents
only the instructor's intention at the time the YCPS was prepared. Instructors
have final authority to establish course requirements and usually state them -
including whether or not there will be an exam or a paper - during the first
class meeting. Check the syllabi of the courses you intend to take to find out
what your obligations are.

**Reading Period**

Reading period lasts about a week and comes between the end of classes and the
beginning of final examinations. During this time, students review or augment
their course work and prepare for final examinations. Most courses do not meet
during reading period. Courses that do meet are marked "Meets RP" in the YCPS.
Sometimes, however, when the phrase does not appear, an instructor may still
set review sessions or schedule extra classes during reading period.

**Dates and Deadlines**

The Academic Regulations, [chapter III of the
YCPS](http://www.yale.edu/ycpo/ycps/chapters/chapter3a.html), contain most of
the rules governing the requirements and options in the curriculum, including
a number of important deadlines and dates. Many of these deadlines and dates
are given in the "Summary of Pertinent Deadlines" at the beginning of the
YCPS. There are deadlines, for example, for withdrawing from a course,
converting from the Credit/D/Fail option to a letter grade, or applying for a
leave of absence. You should know that these deadlines are strictly enforced
at Yale. Always consult the academic regulations to be sure that you act in
accordance with them.

**Writing**

The first distributional guideline emphasizes the importance of good writing:
"To suppose that anyone who cannot write clearly can think clearly is an
illusion: words are the most basic tools of thought. Those who cannot use them
skillfully will be handicapped not only in communicating ideas to others, but
also in defining, developing, and understanding those ideas themselves."

You learn to write well by writing. In your freshman year, plan to take some
courses in which papers will be read carefully for style as well as for
substance. Critical response to your writing is important for your entire
education, no matter what major you choose, and courses that provide such
criticism are of the greatest value if taken at the outset of your studies.
The earlier you become an informed critic of your own writing, the more the
written work in all your courses is likely to improve.

**Opportunities to Improve Your Writing**

The English department offers courses at several introductory levels that will
give you practice in writing. See "English Language and Literature" in
[chapter 10](chapter10.html) for a full description of the various levels of
expository writing courses and the explanation of the appropriate AP and SAT
scores for each level. Writing intensive courses, writing tutors, and the
booklet "Writing Prose" (see below) also provide opportunities to improve your
writing.

Writing intensive courses combine the study of a subject matter with special
attention to writing. Teaching fellows pay special attention to students'
writing in small sections of these courses, which may be in the humanities,
the social sciences, or the sciences. Recent courses that have been designated
writing intensive include AFAM 110a, Freedom and Identity in Black Culture;
ASTR 140a, Frontiers and Controversies in Astrophysics; E&EB 380a, Population
Biology; ITAL 369b, Italian Cinema; PHIL 117b, History of Modern Philosophy;
PLSC 114b, Introduction to Political Philosophy; RLST 110a, Introduction to
the Hebrew Bible; and SOCY 229a, Mass Media and Mass Culture. A list of
writing intensive courses is available on the Web at
[_www.yale.edu/bass._](http://www.yale.edu/bass/)

In addition, writing tutors associated with the twelve residential colleges
will discuss with you the written work required in any course and help you
with writing problems from the conception of a paper to the polishing of its
final version. Writing tutors hold regular office hours, which are posted in
their colleges and on the Web at
[_www.yale.edu/bass._](http://www.yale.edu/bass/)

Finally, "Writing Prose," a booklet prepared by faculty members from
departments throughout the University, contains an invaluable collection of
precepts, explanations, and suggestions about writing. A copy will be included
in your registration packet. You should find it useful not just during your
freshman year, but later, too. Keep it handy for ready reference throughout
your time at Yale.

**Tutors in Mathematics and Science**

Just as writing tutors can work with you on your writing, so mathematics and
science tutors - assigned to the residential colleges - can help you in those
subjects. The tutors are graduate students in mathematics or science who have
offices in the residential colleges. They are prepared to help you learn how
to work through problems or new concepts in your mathematics, science, or
engineering courses with which you might have difficulty. Their office hours
are posted at each residential college dean's office and on the Web at
_[www.yale.edu/mstutor.](http://www.yale.edu/mstutor/) _ You may also contact
the director in the Yale College Dean's Office at 110 SSS (432-2914).

**Center for Language Study**

The Center for Language Study (CLS) provides coordination and support for the
more than fifty languages taught at Yale. In addition, it oversees the
Directed Independent Language Study program ([
_www.cls.yale.edu/dils_](http://www.cls.yale.edu/dils/)) and provides guidance
to students who wish to fulfill the foreign language requirement in a language
not taught at Yale. The CLS maintains a range of multimedia lab and classroom
facilities. Students will find foreign language video and audio materials in
the CLS labs, as well as computers that support work with multimedia and
foreign languages. Many courses also take advantage of the CLS instructional
and testing facilities. The CLS facilities are open to all language learners
at Yale, whether or not they are formally enrolled in language courses. The
CLS is currently located at 212 York Street; during the 2002-2003 academic
year it will move to 370 Temple Street. More information, including lab and
office hours, is on the Web at [_www.cls.yale.edu._](http://www.cls.yale.edu/)

**Computing**

Computers are invaluable academic tools. You may use computers to write
papers, prepare lab reports, complete homework assignments, view course
information, and communicate with instructors. Network-oriented tasks can be
performed from your own networked computer (see
[_www.yale.edu/sc/network_](http://www.yale.edu/sc/network/)) or from a
computer cluster (see [_www.yale.edu/cluster_](http://www.yale.edu/cluster/)).

You may find the Yale University Library Web site ([
_www.library.yale.edu_](http://www.library.yale.edu/)) particularly useful for
academic endeavors, and can access your Yale grades and financial information
from the Yale University Student Systems Web site (
_[www.yale.edu/sis](http://www.yale.edu/sis/)_ ). Many other resources,
including the _Yale College Programs of Study_ (
_[www.yale.edu/ycpo/ycps](http://www.yale.edu/ycpo/ycps/)_ ), a searchable
database of the current term's courses (
_[www.yale.edu/courseinfo](http://www.yale.edu/courseinfo/)_ ), and course
syllabi and supplements (
_[classes.yale.edu/browse.html](http://classes.yale.edu/browse.html)_ ) are
also available on line. The YaleInfo (
_[www.yale.edu/yaleinfo](http://www.yale.edu/yaleinfo/)_ ) and Student
Computing ( _[www.yale.edu/sc](http://www.yale.edu/sc/)_ ) Web pages serve as
good guides to information of interest to Yale students.

Please note that all students are required to abide by the University's
policies for computer usage. These may be found on line at
_[www.yale.edu/policy](http://www.yale.edu/policy/)._

_Classroom Technology_

Many classrooms, lecture halls, and seminar rooms at Yale are equipped with
Internet access and video and computer projection capabilities. In addition,
classes have access to a set of teaching laboratories with Windows, Macintosh,
or Unix computers available to every student. When not in use for classes,
these labs supplement the more than twenty student computer clusters.

**Plagiarism and Documentation**

Plagiarism - even when inadvertent - is a grave breach of academic integrity.
To understand how to fulfill your responsibilities as a scholarly writer,
study two documents carefully. One is [appendix F of the _Undergraduate
Regulations_](http://www.yale.edu/ycpo/undregs/pages/appendF.html) (which you
will receive later in the summer), "Cheating, Plagiarism, and Documentation."
The other is the booklet ["Sources: Their Use and
Acknowledgment,"](http://www.dartmouth.edu/~sources/) to be distributed at
registration. Together these two explanations of the practices for using and
acknowledging sources will help you avoid using other people's ideas without
proper acknowledgment. Keep these materials easily accessible as you write
papers. "Sources," like "Writing Prose," should be one of the standard
reference tools for all your work at Yale.

|  |  
  
* * *

|  
|

[**front page**](../index.html) ** | [table of contents](contents.html) |
[yale college dean's office](HTTP://www.yale.edu/yalecol/)**

|  |  
![Yale College Freshman Handbook, 2002¨C2003](../media/fhheader.gif) |  
|  |  |  
  




