  
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/imagelib.nsf/Lookup/dot_clear/$file/dot_clear.gif)|
**ESSE 694: Integrating Math Across the Early Childhood Curriculum**  
  
---|---  
[![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/reddiam/$file/reddiam.gif)](/webroot/instr/ed/awakefie.nsf/pages/694observe)|
[ Observation Sites](/webroot/instr/ed/awakefie.nsf/pages/694observe)  
| |

**INSTRUCTOR** : Alice P. Wakefield  
**Office Phone:** (757) 683-6016  
**Office Hours:** by appointment  
  
**E-mail:** **** [[mailto:awakefie@odu.edu](mailto:awakefie@odu.edu)]  
**ESSE 694 Web Site:** **<http://www.odu.edu/awakefie>**  
(Click on ESSE 694)  
**FAX:** (757) 683-5593  
  
Students are expected to subscribe and USE the ESSE 694 Listserve. Handouts
will be distributed through the list-serve. To subscribe go to:
<http://list.odu.edu/listinfo/esse694aw>  
Directions for use of the discussion forum can be found at  
<http://sametime.odu.edu/sametime/STHelp/H_USING_DISCUSSIONS_951_OVER.html>  
  
**_COURSE DESCRIPTION_** : ESSE 694, Integrating Mathematics Across the
Curriculum, PK-3, is a graduate-level class with a theory-into-practice goal.
The focus for this class will be to develop and use teaching strategies and
techniques in the content area of mathematics which are based on Piaget's
theory of constructivism and are compatible with the NCTM Standards and the
Virginia SOLs. Practical ways of encouraging logico-mathematical thinking in
young children, PK-3, and the natural integration of mathematics across the
elementary curriculum will be emphasized.  
  
**_PURPOSE_** : Integrating Mathematics Across the Curriculum has the four-
fold purpose of acquainting and/or assisting the professional educator with:  
  
1\. the logico-mathematical operations which are developmentally appropriate
for ALL children between the ages of four and eight years old including those
with gifts, disabilities and/or developmental delays;  
  
2\. the value of using a scientific learning theory to plan for instruction
instead of following textbook-prescribed methods of instruction;  
  
3\. techniques for promoting positive and long-lasting attitudes in all
children toward math thinking and real-life problem solving;  
  
4\. determining appropriate methods of integrating mathematics across the
elementary curriculum that address the NCTM and Virginia Standards of
Learning.  
  
**_TEXTBOOKS_** **:** *Textbooks are available in Webb Center. **Required
readings are available on Electronic Reserve at:
_<http://www.lib.odu.edu/services/>_ Click on Accessing Course Reserve
Materials by instructor and enter Wakefield in the search bar. Submit search
then click on ESSE 694. To view any of the electronic reserve materials, enter
your social security number as the user name and the word viva as the
password.. Print out the selection.  
  
__ *Kamii, C. K. (2000). _Young children reinvent arithmetic_ , 2nd Ed. New
York: Teachers College Press.  
  
**Wakefield, A. P. (Ed.) (2000). _Integrating math across the early childhood
curriculum_. Norfolk, VA: ODU Monarch Copy Center.  
  
*Wakefield, A.P. (Ed.) (2000). _Connecting constructivist math to the Virginia SOLs_. Norfolk, VA: ODU Monarch Copy Center.  
  
*Wakefield, A. P. (1998). _Early Childhood Number Games_ : _Teachers reinvent math instruction_. Needham, MA: Allyn  & Bacon.  
  
  
**_COURSE OBJECTIVES_** **:** Upon completion of this course, the student
should be able to:  
  
1\. design and demonstrate interactive games and word problems that require
all children, including children with gifts, disabilities and/or developmental
delays, to think, talk about and use numbers and number operations (synthesis
and application);  
  
2\. develop criteria for analyzing the value of arithmetic objectives and
standards (e.g., VA & NCTM), curriculum and prescribed teaching methods and
make appropriate adaptations and accommodations as necessary to meet the
individual needs of your learners. (synthesis, analysis);  
  
3\. analyze the value of promoting classroom autonomy in the intellectual,
emotional, social, and moral development of young children (analysis);  
  
4\. develop teaching strategies and design classroom environments for
maintaining and encouraging the interest of young children in figuring out
math problems for themselves (synthesis);  
  
5\. identify examples of how logico-mathematical thinking is naturally
integrated across the elementary curriculum and describe ways of encouraging
this (comprehension);  
  
6\. develop and apply criteria for evaluating the evidence of progress
children show as they move through multiple levels of logico-mathematical
thinking (application, synthesis and evaluation);  
  
7\. establish positive, collaborative relationships with families by
developing ways to share evidence of progress with the parents of the children
you teach (application, synthesis).  
  
  
**_LEARNER RESPONSIBILITIES_** **:**  
  
1\. Students and instructor alike will share the responsibility for evolving
uses of class time which are valuable to each person involved. It is expected
that students share information and act as resources to each other. If a
student must miss a class, he or she is expected to have the initiative
necessary to cover properly the material missed. Because much can be learned
within the give and take of class discussion, excessive absences (including
tardiness and/or leaving class early) or carrying on exclusive conversations
will result in a lowered class participation grade.  
  
2\. The instructor views her role as observer, facilitator and participant. It
is the responsibility of each student to explore ways of using this resource
to maximize his/her learning.  
  
3\. It is expected that students stay current with all readings and
assignments. Assignments, written materials and examinations, etc. are due on
the assigned date.  
  
4\. Assignments will be based upon the needs of the students as a group and as
individuals to meet the objectives of the course. Therefore, it is the
responsibility of the student to evolve alternative assignments and
experiences with the group and the instructor if this seems necessary to
promote personal interest or growth. Any personal changes proposed need to be
made early in the semester.  
  
**_ACCOMMODATING STUDENTS WITH SPECIAL LEARNING NEEDS_** **:**  
  
In accordance with University policy, a student who wishes to receive some
instructional accommodation because of a documented sensory and/or learning
disability should meet with the instructor to discuss those accommodations.  
  
**_ATTENDANCE POLICY_** **:**  
  
Please see Section One of LEARNER RESPONSIBILITIES and Number 6 of COURSE
REQUIREMENTS. For information on documenting an extended illness or family
emergency through the Office of Disability Services, please call 683-4655.  
  
**_STANDARDS FOR ACCEPTABLE WRITTEN WORK & ODU HONOR PLEDGE_** **:**  
  
All submitted written work must be clear and free of spelling and grammatical
errors. Papers produced on a word processor with a spelling checker are
preferred. See the ODU 2000-2002 Catalog (p. 37) for policy for submission of
written work to more than one class. Each student must abide by the ODU honor
code which states "I pledge to support the Honor System of Old Dominion
University. I will refrain from any form of academic dishonesty or deception,
such as cheating or plagiarism. I am aware that as a member of the academic
community, it is my responsibility to turn in all suspected violators of the
Honor System. I will report to an Honor Council hearing if summoned."  
  
**_GRADUATE GRADING SCALE:_**  
  
A 96 - 100 Excellent A- 93 - 95 Excellent  
B+ 88 - 92 Good B 85 - 87 Good  
B- 83 - 84 Fair C+ 78 - 82 Poor  
C 75 - 77 Poor C- - 74 Poor  
**** (D+ D D- Not Used) F 0 - 73 Fail  
  
  
**_COURSE REQUIREMENTS_** **:**  
  
1\. Study all assigned readings (text and on e-reserve) and be prepared for
class discussions. React in your journal to all readings and record along with
protocols of at least two of the four suggested empirical studies. Text guide
questions will be distributed on the ESSE 694 listserve. Use both your math
journal and web site as tools for thinking. Bring your journal to class, as we
will use it in class discussions. Journals will be collected on the **eighth**
class and **fourteenth** class. (Obj. 1-7) (20%)  
  
2\. Review, discuss and critique local school district, Virginia and NCTM
standards and curriculum guidelines for mathematics. Newly revised Virginia
Standards can be found at:
<http://www.pen.k12.va.us/VDOE/Instruction/Math/grkcf.pdf> (Obj. 2) Visit
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics web site at:
<http://www.nctm.org>.  
  
3\. With one or two of your classmates, develop and _field test_ original,
interactive games that encourage math thinking and that support the Virginia
SOLs. To establish student interest, begin your game development by observing
the children at Newsome Park. This will be followed by a return visit in which
you will field test your games. Each student will present a total of two
games, one on the **seventh** class and another on the **eleventh** class.
Record protocols of field tests in your math journal. Supply classmates with
handout or computer file of game description. Handout should follow format
used in EARLY CHILDHOOD NUMBER GAMES and address the Virginia SOLs. Game
evaluative criteria is posted at: <http://fargrazers.com> (Click on Syllabus,
then on FAQ & FYI about 694). Game titles will be added to the Constructivist
Math SOL Matrix. (Objs. 1 & 4) (20%)  
  
4\. With one or two of your classmates, develop and categorize (Carpenter et
aux, 1993) 10 word problems each, using constructivist learning principles. To
establish student interest, begin your word problem development by observing
the children at Newsome Park. This will be followed by a return visit in which
a master teacher will mentor you as you teach one of your problems in a math
lesson. Video tape this lesson. Each student will contribute the 7 best,
tested and refined word problems to the Constructivist Math SOL Matrix. A
suggested format for submitting your 7 word problems is posted at:
<http://fargrazers.com> (Click on ESSE 694, then Syllabus, then on FAQ & FYI
about 694). Visit word problem web sites at: <http://www.mathstories.com/> and
<http://www.wm.edu/education/Faculty/Mason/pscmain.html> and
<http://www.fargrazers.com> (As above, then click on Resources and Links).
(Objs. 1 & 4) (10%)  
  
5\.  **In-service teachers** : Complete a four-hour Math Recovery tutoring
project with a student who is falling behind in math. Submit a two-page report
describing your plans, how they were executed, and evaluated. Include any math
representations by the student that indicates progress. **Pre-service
teachers** will observe constructivist math teachers for four hours. The first
organized math observation trip will be January 24th at Newsome Park
Elementary School. (Alternate observation sites are listed on the math web
site at:  <http://fargrazers.com> ).This observation trip will be followed by
a participation trip in which you work with master math teachers field testing
your games and your word problems. Summarize your observation/participation
experience and describe (be specific) how you could apply ideas from your
experience with your future students. Submit "Summary/Application" and be
prepared to share on the **twelfth** class. (Objs. 4-7) (20%)  
  
6\. Demonstrate proficiency on mid-term and final examinations. Culminating
project may be substituted for final exam by those students who earned B+ or
better on the mid-term exam. (Objs. 1-7) (10%  & 10%)  
  
7\. Class participation includes effort on shared assignments, empirical
studies, 100% attendance, active involvement in class work and discussions and
support for all presenters. See section on Learner Responsibilities. (Objs.
1-7) (10%)  
  
* * * * *  
  
[![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/reddiam/$file/reddiam.gif)](/webroot/instr/ed/awakefie.nsf/pages/faqmath)|
[ FAQ & FYI about ESSE 694](/webroot/instr/ed/awakefie.nsf/pages/faqmath)  
|  
[![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/reddiam/$file/reddiam.gif)](/webroot/instr/ed/awakefie.nsf/pages/esse694)|
[ ESSE 694 ](/webroot/instr/ed/awakefie.nsf/pages/esse694)  
|  
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/pixel/$file/pixel.gif)|
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/pixel/$file/pixel.gif)|  
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/pixel/$file/pixel.gif)|
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/pixel/$file/pixel.gif)|  
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/pixel/$file/pixel.gif)|
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/pixel/$file/pixel.gif)|  
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/pixel/$file/pixel.gif)|
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/pixel/$file/pixel.gif)|  
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/pixel/$file/pixel.gif)|
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/pixel/$file/pixel.gif)|  
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/pixel/$file/pixel.gif)|
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/pixel/$file/pixel.gif)|  
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/pixel/$file/pixel.gif)|
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/pixel/$file/pixel.gif)|  
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/pixel/$file/pixel.gif)|
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/pixel/$file/pixel.gif)|  
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/pixel/$file/pixel.gif)|
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/pixel/$file/pixel.gif)|  
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/pixel/$file/pixel.gif)|
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/pixel/$file/pixel.gif)|  
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/pixel/$file/pixel.gif)|
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/pixel/$file/pixel.gif)|  
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/pixel/$file/pixel.gif)|
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/Files.nsf/Lookup/pixel/$file/pixel.gif)|  
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/imagelib.nsf/Lookup/dot_clear/$file/dot_clear.gif)|
![](http://web.odu.edu/webroot/admin/lib/imagelib.nsf/Lookup/dot_clear/$file/dot_clear.gif)|  

