From: Marc Bregman <strmchr@u.washington.edu>

Subject: Jerusalem Syllabus

Dear Friends,

I received a surprising number of requests for copies of the bibliography of
my course on "Jerusalem in Jewish Legend and Lore" which I mentioned on
H-JUDAIC. I am attaching it and the course description below. If you need hard
copy in addition to this email form, please let me know and I'll put it in the
mail to you. Any criticisms, comments or additional suggestions would of
course be much appreciated. With best wishes for a pleasant summer,

Marc Marc Bregman, Stroum Professor, Jewish Studies Program Jackson School of
International Studies University of Washington

# University of Washington

Henry M. Jackson School of International Studies

Jewish Studies Program

## Jerusalem in Jewish Lore and Legend

(SISJE 490A/NearE 496 -- Spring Quarter 1996)

Instructor: Marc Bregman (Stroum Professor)

This course will explore some of the many legends about the holy city of
Jerusalem in Jewish traditon. The literary core will be the ten midrashic
texts collected and elaborated in Daniel Sperber's Midrash Yerushalem. From
these texts, we will expand out to discuss broader issues such as the nature
of sacred place and the heavenly city and the comparison of collateral
material about Jerusalem from Christian and Islamic tradition.

Time and Location Thursdays, 1:30-3:20 PM, Denny Hall 314

Optional Hebrew Text Study Component There will be an optional Hebrew Text
Study component which will consist of supervised reading of the original
Hebrew texts anthologized in Sperber's Midrash Yerushalem. Students may take
this extra unit for credit or may audit (see the instructor for details). The
meetings will take place following the regular class on Thursdays, 3:30-4:40
PM.

Instructor's Office Hours Thursdays, 12:20-1:20 PM (or by appointment)
Thompson 326 Tel. 685-1518

Email address: strmchr@u.washington.edu

Course Requirements Students are expected to attend all class sessions and
actively participate in classroom discussion of assigned texts. There will be
no final examination. Grades will be based primarily on a final paper which
will be due on the last day of class, May 30.

Final Paper Students are encouraged to develop their own topics for the final
paper in consultation with the instructor. The course bibliography is provided
to assist in developing topics and subsequent research. Students taking the
course for 3 credits should submit papers 8-12 pages in length; students
taking the course for 5 credits should submit papers 12-18 pages in length.
However, clarity of presentation is far more important than length in
determining the grade. Your paper should begin with a clear statement of the
particular topic you have selected. The body of your paper should develop with
logical continuity. It may be a good idea to subtitle separate sections. Your
paper should end with a brief summary of your discussion including your own
conclusions. Whether or not you decide to present your discussion in some
chronological order, it is important to try to historically contextualize any
pre-modern sources you cite (brief biographical information about persons
cited and brief bibliographical information about any written sources). Your
paper should be carefully documented with footnotes or endnotes and
bibliography. If you have any question about how to prepare your paper, please
do not hestitate to discuss them with the instructor at any stage, during
office hours, by phone or email.

## University of Washington Henry M. Jackson School of International Studies
Jewish Studies Program

Jerusalem in Jewish Lore and Legend (SISJE 490A/NearE 496 -- Spring Quarter
1996)

Instructor: Marc Bregman (Stroum Professor)

Bibliography

Texts for Classroom Use

Daniel Sperber, Midrash Yerushalem -- A Metaphysical History of Jerusalem
(Jerusalem: World Zionist Organization, 1982).

Zev Vilnay, Legends of Jerusalem (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society,
1973).

Midrash and Aggadah (General Studies)

Gunter Stembergr, Introduction to the Talmud and Midrash (Edinburg: T&T Clark,
1996).

Barry W. Holtz, "Midrash" in Back to the Sources: Reading the Classical Jewish
Texts, edited by Barry W. Holtz (New York: Summit Books, 1984), pp. 177-211.

Marc Bregman, "Isaak Heinemann's Classic Study of Aggadah and Midrash"
(English Summary of Darkhey Ha-Aggadah, typescript).

Joseph Heinemann, "The Nature of the Aggadah" (translated by Marc Bregman), in
Midrash and Literature, ed. G. Hartman and S. Budick (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1986), pp. 41-55.

Shalom Spiegel, Introduction to Legends of the Bible by Louis Ginzberg
(Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 1956). Also available in The Jewish
Expression edited by Judah Goldin (New York: Bantam Books, l970).

Hananel Mack, The Aggadic Midrash Literature (Tel-Aviv: MOD Books, 1989).

Avigdor Shinan, The World of the Aggadah (Tel-Aviv: MOD Books, 1990).

Jerusalem Bibliography (on reserve)

Reuven Hammer, The Jerusalem Anthology: a Literary Guide (Philadelphia: Jewish
Publication Society, 1995) [also available in Abridged Traveler's Edition].

Jerusalem, edited by John M. Oesterreicher and Anne Sinai (New York: John Day,
1974).

Francis E. Peters, Jerusalem :The Holy City in the Eyes of Chroniclers,
Visitors, Pilgrims, and Prophets from the Days of Abraham to the Beginnings of
Modern Times, (Princeton,: Princeton University Press, 1985.

City of the Great King: Jerusalem from David to the Present, edited by Nitza
Rosovsky (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1996).

Samuel C. Heilman, A Walker in Jerusalem (New York: Summit Books, 1986).

Howard Schwartz, Next Year in Jerusalem : 3,000 Years of Jewish Stories New
York: Viking, 1996).

Joachim Jeremias, Jerusalem in the Time of Jesus, (Philadelphia: Fortress
Press, 1969).

Charles D. Matthews, Palestine, Mohammedan Holy Land (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1949; reprinted New York: AMS Press, 1980).

The Life of Muhammad, translation from Abd al-Malik ibn Hisham's adaptation of
Ishaq's Sirat Rasul Allah with introduction and notes by A. Guillaume (London-
New York: Oxford University Press, 1955, 1967, 1978) [on Muhammad's night
journey to Jerusalem].

Francis E. Peters, Jerusalem and Mecca: The Typology of the Holy City in the
Near East (New York: New York University Press, 1986).

Amikam Eldad, Medieval Jerusalem and Islamic Worship: Holy Places Ceremonies,
Pilgrimage (Leiden: Brill, 1995).

Jerusalem in Old Engravings and Illustrations, edited by Ely Schiller
(Jerusalem: Ariel, 1977).

The First Photographs of Jerusalem: the Old City, edited by Ely Schiller
(Jerusalem: Ariel, 1978.

Rivka Gonen, Jerusalem Yesterday and Today: Drawings and Etchings from the
Israel Museum Collection and Contemporary Photographs (Jerusalem: The Israel
Museum, 1994).

Additional Bibliography and Resources

James D. Purvis, Jerusalem, the Holy City: a Bibliography, (St. Meinrad, Ind.:
American Theological Library Association and Scarecrow Press, 1988-1991), Atla
Bibliography Series 20, two volumes.

The Jewish Book Annual 53 (1995-1996), Charles Cutter, "Jerusalem: A Select
Bibliography of Books in English, 1985- 1994", pp. 29-40; Yohai Goell,
"Selected Hebrew Books on Jerusalem, 1985-1994", pp. 41-50.

Jerusalem Catalog (Jerusalem, The Joint Authority for Jewish Zionist
Education, 1994).

Internet/Web Sites

The Jerusalem Mosaic http://ftp.cc.huji.ac.il/jerusalem.html

Virtual Tour of Jerusalem http://ftp.cc.huji.ac.il/md.vjt/

Jerusalem Through the Windows of Time
http://www.jer1.co.il/orgs/ped/jerintro.html







