MWF 9:05-9:55                                              Professor Annie
Rose

302 Willard                                                     408 Weaver

                                                                      Mailbox:  105 Weaver

                                                                      3-0105 (direct); 5-1367 (messages); 237-5175 (home)

                                                                      Email:  acr5@psu.edu

                                                                      Office Hours:  Tues. 1:15-2:15,  Fri., 12:15-2:00,

                                                                      or by appt.



**  American Judaism **

**  **

**Jewish Studies/Religious Studies 412**



Fall 2001



_Overview and Goals _

_  _

In 1945, American Jewry composed the preeminent Jewish community in the world.
The Holocaust had decimated European Jewry and all but destroyed European
Jewish culture.  Israel was not yet a nation.  American Jews, totaling around
4.5 million, enjoyed relative safety, freedom, and power.  Perhaps, however,
the very prosperity of the American community made it unusually susceptible to
the key problem in modern Jewish history:  how to balance tradition and
change.  Can one reform Judaism so much that modernizers may no longer be
considered Jews?  Can gender arrangements be modified without betraying
traditional law?  Can Jews tolerate the free discussion promised by liberalism
and still defend themselves against anti-Semitism?



This course considers these and other questions that have confronted American
Jews in the past half century.  Jews, along with Americans overall, exercise
significant personal freedom, and one consequence is that American Jewish life
is characterized by both choice and diversity.  The social and religious
landscape we will consider rarely seems peaceful, and its turbulence is often
a consequence of the range of passionate commitments.  Two events stand in the
background of American events:  the Holocaust and the establishment of the
state of Israel.  Both raise continuing issues for American Jewry and remind
us that a course focused on Jews in a single nation must look at its subject
in international perspective.



The class covers four main themes:



1.   American Jewish life at the end of World War II

2.   Conflicts between orthodox and liberals since the 1960s

3.   The American legacy of the Holocaust and the founding of Israel

          4.   Gender issues in American Judaism



The class is intended to be a discussion course, and I invite everyone to
participate fully.



_Course Requirements_



Course work includes six essays, ranging from 250 to 2,000 words (1 to 8 typed
pages), and class attendance and participation.  Papers 1-5 are each worth 10%
of the final grade; paper 6 is worth 25%, and class attendance and
participation together are worth 25%.



_Papers_ :  Specific paper assignments are described under their due dates in
the syllabus.  In general, papers 1-3 focus on course readings, paper 4 grows
out of a library exercise, paper 5 is a proposal for the long paper, and paper
6 is an extended essay on a topic of your choice.  All essays will be about
500-750 words (2-3 pages) with the exception of the proposal and long essay.
I ask you to make a brief oral presentation (5-10 minutes) about Paper 6 in
order to get feedback from other students.  The presentation will not be
graded.



In all cases, I have tried to structure the course so that you will have a
chance to discuss your ideas for papers informally in class before you write
and to exchange a draft of the paper with another student for peer review.  I
will also meet with each of you at least once during the semester to discuss
your writing and interests.  Because one purpose of the essays is to measure
your grasp of course materials, I encourage you to incorporate readings and
films in a substantial way into your papers.  For papers where I suggest a
theme, you may instead write on a topic of your choice.  It is probably a good
idea to speak to me in advance.



All papers will be graded on the basis of argument, evidence, and mechanics.
A sample grading sheet appears at the end of the syllabus.  If you cannot
submit a paper on time, please discuss the reason for the paper's delay with
me in advance.  Normally, papers should be submitted on paper (vs. by email or
on disk).



_Class attendance and participation_ :  The class is primarily a discussion
seminar.  I expect students to be prepared to contribute to discussion of each
day's reading.  The study questions in the syllabus reflect some of the issues
that interest me (I hope others will interest you as well).  I encourage you
to keep a journal of comments on the readings to help you prepare for class
and write the essays; but the journal is not a requirement.  If you have a
reason for missing class, please let me know in advance.  An attendance sheet
will be circulated at each class meeting.



_Books _



The following books are required reading.  They may be purchased at the Penn
State Book Store or other area bookstores.  One copy of each is also on
reserve at Pattee Library. You do not have to buy the books, but all
assignments are required.



Samuel G. Freedman, _Jew vs. Jew:   The Struggle for the Soul of American
Jewry_

Barbara Kessel, _Suddenly Jewish:   Jews Raised as Gentiles Discover their
Jewish Roots_

Deborah Lipstadt, _Denying the Holocaust:   The Growing Assault on Truth and
Memory_

Pamela Nadell, _Women Who Would Be Rabbis:   A History of Women's Ordination_

Philip Roth, _Goodbye Columbus and Five Short Stories _

_  _

There is also a _course packet_ prepared by Procopy available at the Student
Book Store (330 E. College Ave., 237-7616).   A list of the contents of the
packet appears at the end of the syllabus.  A copy of the packet will be on
reserve at Pattee.  In conformity with Penn State policy, the packet on
reserve will be printed on dark paper to prevent photocopying (and violation
of copyright laws).



_Notes _



_Disability Statement_ :  The Pennsylvania State University encourages
qualified persons with disabilities to participate in its programs and
activities. If you anticipate needing any type of accommodation in this course
or have questions about physical access, please tell the instructor as soon as
possible.



_Academic Integrity Statement_ :  Penn State defines academic integrity as the
pursuit of scholarly activity in an open, honest, and responsible manner.
Dishonesty of any kind will not be tolerated in this course.  This includes,
but is not limited to, cheating, plagiarizing, fabricating information, and
submitting the work of another person or work previously used without
informing me.  Students who are found to be dishonest will receive academic
santions.



Aug.     22  (W)            Introduction



            24  (F)            No class.  I will be out of town.



**American Exceptionalism?   Jewish Life in America after World War II**



            27  (M)            Tables from _The Jew in the Modern World_ (numbers 2, 5, 9, 11, 14, 16, 17, 18,                     19); Holocaust map from Evyatar Friesel, _Atlas of Modern Jewish History_ (course packet)



What do these statistics and this map tell us about Jewish life before,
during, and after World War II?  Some themes include immigration, economic
prosperity, assimilation, and victimization.  How, more specifically, does the
situation of the American Jewish community fit in the worldwide picture?



            29  (W)            Isaac Bashevis Singer, "Short Friday" (1964)  (course packet)



I. B. Singer (1904-91), born in Poland, produced fiction in Yiddish throughout
a long career; he received the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1978.  "Short
Friday" may be used here as a baseline for what traditional Jewish life in
eastern Europe was like.



What does the story show us about Judaism as a system of study, worship, and
behavior?  How were gender roles arranged in this traditional world?  How
would you explain the story's conclusion?



            31  (F)            Philip Roth, "Goodbye, Columbus" (1959), in _Goodbye, Columbus and Five_ _Short Stories_ , sections 1-4



In this portrait of American Jewry in the 1950s, what role does religious
observance have in the lives of American Jews?  Does the story make an
implicit distinction between Judaism as a religion and Jews as an ethnic group
or people?  Does Roth suggest that there are multiple kinds of Jews in
America, and if so, are their relations amicable?  How, overall, are the lives
of the Jews in the story different from the experiences of Singer's
characters?



Sept.    3    (M)            Labor Day.



            5    (W)            Roth, "Goodbye, Columbus," section 5-6



To what extent is Roth critical of the Jews he portrays?



_Film_ :  _Goodbye, Columbus_ (begin)



            7    (F)            Roth, "Goodbye, Columbus," sections 7-8



What is the significance in the story of the black boy who likes Gauguin?  Why
does the story end as it does?  Does it strike you as important that the film
was made in the late 1960s?



_Film_ :  _Goodbye, Columbus_ (conclude)



            10  (M)            _Draft of Paper 1_ due.   Also, conclude discussion of "Goodbye, Columbus,"                   story and film. 



Please write a paper of 500-750 words on the following question:  Do features
of Judaism or Jewishness of the 1950s, as portrayed by "Goodbye, Columbus,"
persist in the American Jewish community today?  If you like, you may compare
changes and/or continuities seen in Judaism over the past half-century with
developments in other American religious communities.



Please bring a draft of your paper to class to exchange with another student
for feedback.  We will use the remaining time to conclude discussion of the
story and film.



**Drawing Battle Lines Over Tradition?**



            12  (W)            _Paper 1 due_.   Samuel Freedman, _Jew vs. Jew_ , prologue and ch. 1 (up to "Who                      is a Jew?), pp. 13-70



Philip Roth depicted tensions in American Jewish life in the 1950s.  To what
extent are the conflicts described by Freedman different, both in the
configuration of groups and level of animosity?  Was Israel relevant to the
way Roth thought about American Jewry in the 1950s; how have Israeli politics,
in the view of Freedman, affected later American Jewish life?



            14  (F)            Freedman, _Jew vs. Jew_ , "Who is a Jew?" (in ch. 1) and ch. 2 (up to "Judaism                      and Gender"), pp. 71-114



Do ordinary people (Anne and Bill) seem unfairly trapped in Denver's (and
America's) rabbinical politics?  Or, said differently, how important is it to
have strict and consistent standards for conversions?  How does the Israeli
situation affect events in America?  Do you know how other American religious
groups handle conversions?



            17  (M)            No class.  Meetings with me to discuss your first papers and other interests in                           408 Weaver.



            19  (W)            Freedman, _Jew vs. Jew_ , "Judaism and Gender" (in ch. 2) and ch. 3 (up to                      "Israel and America"), pp. 115-61



Does the controversy over the _Imahot_ in Los Angeles's  "Library Minyan" seem
petty in light, for example, of the continuing struggle for survival of
Israel?



            21  (F)            Freedman, _Jew vs. Jew_ , ch. 5 (up to "Unity and Pluralism), pp. 227-74



_Debate_ :  Who is right in this controversy, Yale or the Orthodox families?



I will ask half of the students to defend each viewpoint, and we will have an
informal debate.  The assignment of sides will take place on Wednesday, Sept.
19.  You should think about possible arguments; on Friday, there will be some
time at the beginning of class to get together with your group to plan your
arguments.



            24  (M)            _Draft of Paper 2_ due.



Please write a 500-750 word essay on the following question:  Sometimes
winning an argument isn't worth the amount of conflict the controversy causes.
Which of the battles described by Freedman seems to you most worth fighting,
despite the cost in ill feelings, and why?



Please bring your essay to class to exchange with another student.



**The Ongoing Legacy of the Holocaust**



            26  (W)            _Paper 2 due_.   Gideon Hausner, "Six Million Accusers," and Hannah Arendt,                               selection from _Eichmann in Jerusalem_ (course packet)



Both Hausner and Arendt were involved in the trial of Nazi war criminal Adolf
Eichmann in Israel in 1961, Hausner as the prosecutor and Arendt as a
journalist (and philosopher).  While Hausner casts the Holocaust as a moral
drama of the most profound kind, Arendt depicts Eichmann as a pathetic though
also tragic embodiment of the modern bureaucratic mentality.  Which view do
you think is closer to the truth?



                              _Film_ :  _America and the Holocaust_ (begin)



            28  (F)            _Film_ :  _America and the Holocaust_ (conclude)



Oct.      1    (M)            Discussion of Hausner and Arendt readings, and
the film.



What was the nature of America's role in the Holocaust?  Does either of the
interpretations of Hausner and Arendt -- that the Holocaust was a moral
tragedy or unfortunate consequence of bureaucratic life -- explain America's
response to European events?



            3    (W)            David Ben Gurion and Jacob Blaustein, "An Exchange of Views" (course                         packet)



What was the initial American response (at least as represented by Blaustein)
to the establishment of Israel?  Do you find it surprising?  How do American
Jews view Israel today?



            5    (F)            Barbara Kessel, _Suddenly Jewish_ , prologue, introduction, and ch. "Crypto-                        Jews"



For a variety of reasons, some American adults discover that they are Jewish
by heritage and didn't know it.  Kessel's book introduces the complex
psychology of Jewish identity, involving potential pride and a sense of
belonging but also shame at being part of a disparaged minority (Jewish self-
hatred).



What kinds of situations lead the loss of awareness of one's Jewishness?  Why
is fear of acknowledging one's Jewishness sometimes strong, contending with a
desire to know who you are?  Why did _conversos_ over the centuries maintain
private Jewish traditions at all?



            8    (M)            Mid-semester break.



            10  (W)            Kessel, _Suddenly Jewish_ , chs. "Hidden Children" and "Children of Survivors"



What are some of the motives and family dynamics that contribute to the "loss"
of Jewish identity of both children hidden by parents during the Holocaust and
the children of survivors in Europe, Israel, and America?  What impact do you
think the process of recovery for these individuals has had on the American
Jewish community today?  Can you think of other ethnic and/or religious groups
that experience similar identity issues?



            12  (F)            Kessel, _Suddenly Jewish_ , ch. "Adoptees" and conclusion



How, if at all, is the situation of adoptees different from that of Jews
involved in the Holocaust?  What do you think of the impression some people
have that Jews share a "genetic memory?"  Is there something deeper than
religion and culture that binds Jews together?



            15  (M)            Deborah Lipstadt, _Denying the Holocaust_ , preface to paperback edition, chs. 2-                    3               



What is Lipstadt's goal in writing this book?  Why does she think history
"matters?"  How does she contruct her case that Holocaust denial grew from
anti-Semitism?



            17  (W)            Lipstadt, _Denying the Holocaust_ , chs. 5, 8, and 9



What is it about our contemporary culture (including academic culture) that
made it relatively easy for Holocaust deniers at least to raise doubts about
what were once considered uncontested facts about the Holocaust?  Lipstadt
positions herself as the champion of "truth" (see the subtitle); does she
establish her credibility as an objective voice?  If she does not, does the
value of her argument disappear?



            19  (F)            Lipstadt, _Denying the Holocaust_ , ch. 10



_Debate_ :  Should college newspapers have run the ad placed by Holocaust
deniers at all (even, for example, with editorials explaining its underlying
prejudice)?



The class will be divided into two sides on Oct. 17; please think about
arguments that might be used in defense of your position.  You will have time
to get together with other group members on Friday before the debate begins.



            22  (M)            Richard Rubenstein, selection from _After Auschwitz_ (course packet)



No doubt for many people worldwide the Holocaust shook their faith in God's
presence in history.  Traditionalists, both Jews and Christians, often explain
the Holocaust as punishment of God's chosen people for straying from the law.
In this reading, Dean Heinrich Gr¨¹ber of the German Evangelical church
articulates this viewpoint.  Rubenstein, an American Conservative rabbi as
well as a theologian, disagrees and has spent the decades since the first
publication of _After Auschwitz_ in 1966 trying to arrive at an understanding
of God that may both make sense and sustain the Jewish community.   What are
Rubenstein's thoughts?



            24  (W)            _Draft of Paper 3_ due.



Please write an essay of 500-750 words:  Some American Jews feel that the
level of attention to the Holocaust in America today means that Jewish
victimization is spotlighted at the expense of an appreciation of Jewish
achievements.  Do you agree?



Please bring a draft of your essay to class to exchange with another student.



            26  (F)            _Paper 3 due_.   UN General Assembly Resolution on Palestine; Albert Einstein,                       selection from _Out of My Later Years_ (course packet)



In the view of the UN and Albert Einstein (1879-1955), what was the relation
of the founding of Israel to the destruction of much of European Jewry and the
Nazi ideology that allowed this to happen?  Einstein was a prominent Zionist
from the 1920s on, long before Zionism was a popular movement in America.  He
left Germany in 1933 with the rise of Hitler to power and spent the rest of
his life in Princeton, New Jersey.



            29  (M)            _Library Exercise_.   Please meet in the Microform Reading Room of Pattee                       Library.



_Question_ :  How has the opinion of Israel of American Jews or other
Americans changed between 1948 and the present, if at all?



I ask you to write an essay of 500-750 words to answer this question, due on
Nov. 5.



One way to investigate this question is to compare newpaper coverage of
Israeli affairs at two points in time, one early and one late.  You might
choose a mainstream newspaper such as the New York _Times_ or the Washington
_Post_ or, instead, Jewish periodicals such as _Commentary_ (for the 1940s and
1950s) and _Tikkun_ or _Moment_ today.   You might also consider the Penn
State _Daily Collegian_.   Christian publications are also an interesting
possiblity.



You might target crucial dates in Israeli history:  UN resolution on
Palestine, Nov. 29, 1948; the Suez campaign, beginning Oct. 29, 1956; the Six-
Day War, beginning June 5, 1967; the massacre of Israel athletes at the Munich
Olympics, summer 1972; the Yom Kippur War, beginning Oct. 6, 1973; the death
of Golda Meir, Dec. 8, 1978; the Israeli-Egyptian Peace Treaty, Mar. 26, 1979;
peace agreement with the Palestinians, Sept. 3, 1993; assassination of Yitzhak
Rabin, Nov. 4, 1995.  You could look at periodicals on or around these dates.



When you write up your conclusions, be sure to say exactly who you believe
held the opinions you document.  Americans are clearly not all of one mind.
Although this exercise is an attempt to get at "American" opinion about
Israel, there will be a number of different viewpoints.



            31  (W)            Class discussion based on your findings.



Nov.      2    (F)            _Draft of Paper 4_ due.   Please bring  a draft
of your paper to class to exchange                      with a partner.



**Gender Issues:   From Adam and Eve to the Present**



            5    (M)            _Paper 4 due_.   Blu Greenberg, "Women"; Jacob Neusner, selection from the                          _Mishnah_ (course packet)



Is it possible to say that the sacred Jewish texts such as the Mishnah
(compiled 70-200 C.E.) contain not only rules about women's role but
assumptions about the nature and value of women?  To what extent does this
traditional wisdom remain authoritative among American Jews today (think, for
example, about discussion in Freedman, _Jew vs. Jew_ )?  Blu Greenberg, who is
Orthodox, seems optimistic about women's growing recognition and
participation.  Do you agree?



            7    (W)            Genesis 1-3 and Exodus 20, from the _Tanakh_ (course packet)



What are the views of men and gender relations more generally in these
biblical passages?  Are there other passages in the Hebrew Bible that you
think are relevant to men's traditional role in Judaism?  If so, please bring
the citations to class.



            9    (F)            Pamela Nadell, _Women Who Would Be Rabbis_ , ch. 2



What social and cultural factors encourage some women to think of seeking
rabbinical training at the turn of the twentieth century?  Why didn't these
women carry through more effectively on their plans?  What were the reactions
of the men they encountered to their ambitions, and were these responses
understandable?  What is the ideological slant of Nadell's book?



            12  (M)            _Paper 5 due_.  



The paper is a proposal, or plan, for your long paper.  Paper 5 should be
about 250 words; Paper 6 should be about 2,000 words.



For the proposal, please indicate what your subject is (a solid explanation
answering the "what" question), what analytical question(s) you will ask, what
your major sources will be, and what method of interpretation you will use to
understand the evidence you collect.



You may choose any subject relevant to American Judaism from the middle of
this century to the present.  I encourage you to be creative and to consider,
for example, the fine arts, politics, education, leisure, and other areas that
we have not been able to cover in this class.  If you have an interest in
comparing trends in American Judaism to developments in other religious or
ethnic groups, that would be an appropriate approach to the paper.  If you
have questions about whether your topic is acceptable, please ask me.



            14  (W)            Nadell, _Women Who Would Be Rabbis_ , ch. 3



_Debate_ :  Should women be ordained as rabbis?  Although this is now the case
in all except Orthodox circles, what are the arguments pro and can, and do
they have merit?



The class will be divided into two sides; please think about arguments for
your position.  You will have time to meet with others in your group today in
class.



            16  (F)            Nadell, _Woman Who Would Be Rabbis_ , ch. 4



Why did women ultimately gain ordination, first in Reform Judaism in 1972?



            19  (M)            Leviticus 20.13; Ezra 10; excerpts from Central Conference of American &nb

