MWF 11:15-12:05                                            Professor Anne Rose

218 Willard                                                       408 Weaver

                                                                        Mailbox:  105 Weaver

                                                                        3-0105 (direct); 5-1367 (messages); 237-5175 (home)

                                                                        Email:  [acr5@psu.edu](mailto:acr5@psu.edu)

                                                                        Office hours:  Wednesday, 12:15-1:30; Friday, 10-11



**Modern Judaism:   Jewish Studies/Religious Studies 114 **

**  **

**Spring 2000 **



_Description and Goals _

During the eighteenth century -- the age of Enlightenment -- nations in Europe
and the Americas began to recognize Jews as citizens for the first time in
history.  The doors of ghettos opened, literally and figuratively, and both
the Christian majority and Jewish minority began to change in an atmosphere of
freedom.  "Modern Judaism" refers to the Jewish culture that has grown up
since Jewish emancipation.



Choice, diversity, and change itself are the most basic characteristics of
modern Judaism.  While some Jews have taken advantage of secular opportunity
and assimilation, others have deepened their commitment to Jewishness through
Zionism or a return to Orthodoxy.  Either way, Jews have continued to
encounter anti-Semitism in modern times alongside more liberal attitudes.
Studying modern Judaism involves trying to understand why these diverse
experiences occurred.



The course begins with an introduction to Jewish experiences in modern
America.  Nineteenth-century Jewish social success and its consequences for
religious tradition is the next course theme.  The twentieth-century Jewish
experience has often been characterized by conflict:  in the Holocaust, the
formation of Israel, and contemporary black-Jewish relations in America.  The
course concludes with these recent struggles.



Many course readings are personal narratives (reminiscences or letters) and
works of fiction (a short story, play, and several novels).  Films, slide
presentations, and guest speakers supplement the readings.  Although there are
occasional lectures, the course is primary a discussion class.



The goal of "Modern Judaism" is to investigate issues in Jewish history and
culture since Jewish emancipation in a way that shows the diversity of Jewish
life and promotes reflection and debate among ourselves.



_Assignments and Grading _

_  _

Course requirements include three papers, a journal, and class attendance and
participation.  The papers are weighted as follows:  a 500-word (2-page)
essay, 15%; 750-word (3-page) essay, 15%; and 1250-word (5-page) essay, 20%.
A 250-word proposal for the long (1250-word) essay is required, but will not
be graded.  The journal constitutes 25% of the final grade.  Class attendance
and participation also constitute 25% of the final grade.



_Papers_ :  Paper assignments are described in the syllabus under the due date
for each one.  In general, I encourage you to write on texts and themes that
you like and both to analyze and react to the subjects of papers.  Class time
will be reserved for peer review of each essay.  Papers will be graded on the
basis of argument, evidence, and technical accuracy.  A sample grading sheet
appears at the end of the syllabus.  The grades of late papers may be affected
by tardiness.  If you have a problem that will delay a paper, please speak to
me in advance.



_Journal_ :  The goal of the journal is to help you identify what is important
in the readings and give you an opportunity to record your reactions.  I would
like you to make an entry for each reading assignment.  A good entry will do
more than summarize the reading:  it will also identify the relationship of
the reading to other course texts and themes and show your response to the
material.  Although I encourage you to be creative, your journal may consist
of answers to the study questions in the syllabus.  Each journal entry should
be a minimum of five sentences.  Please write in your journal before class in
order to facilitate class discussion.  Journal entries on films, slides, and
speakers are not required, but are encouraged.  I will collect all the
journals on Feb. 16 to give you feedback.



_Class attendance and participation_ :  An attendance sheet will be circulated
during each class for students to sign.  If you have a legitimate reason for
missing class, please let me know.  Classes will consist of discussions unless
otherwise noted.  Please bring the text of the day's reading to class in order
to facilitate discussion.



_Books and Course Packet _

_  _

The following books are required reading.  They may be purchased at the Penn
State Bookstore and other area bookstores.  One copy of each is also on
reserve at Pattee Library.



Debra Kaufman, _Rachel's Daughters:   Newly Orthodox Jewish Women_

Amos Elon, _Founder:   A Portrait of the First Rothschild and His Time_

Abraham Cahan, _The Rise of David Levinsky_

Solomon Perel, _Europa, Europa:   A Memoir of World War II_

Amos Oz, _Panther in the Basement_

Anna Deavere Smith, _Fires in the Mirror:   Crown Heights, Brooklyn, and Other
Identities_



There is also a _course packet available at the Student Bookstore only_ (330
E. College Ave., 237-7616).   It has been prepared by Procopy.  A list of the
contents of the packet appears at the end of the syllabus.  A copy of the
course packet will be on reserve at Pattee Library.  In conformity with Penn
State policy, the packet on reserve will be printed on dark paper to prevent
photocopying (and violation of copyright laws).



I do not require that you buy the books and packet, but I do require that you
read them.  You may chose to read some or all on reserve at Pattee.



_Note_



The Pennsylvania State University encourages qualified persons with
disabilities to participate in its programs and activities.  If you anticipate
needing any type of accommodation in this course or have questions about
physical access, please tell the instructor as soon as possible.





Jan.      10             (M)            Introduction



**Jewish Tradition and Modern Choices**  



            12            (W)            Isaac Bashevis Singer, "Short Friday" (packet)



What was traditional Jewish culture like?  This story by I. B. Singer
(1904-91), winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1978, may serve as a
baseline against which to measure the changes of "modern Judaism."  What do
you learn about traditional Jewish religious practices and customs from this
story?  Why do you think Singer wrote such a story in 1964, the date of its
publication?



            14            (F)            Alan Dershowitz, "Leaving Brooklyn," from _Chutzpah_ (1991) (packet)



Was the Orthodox community of Dershowitz's childhood like that portrayed in
Singer's story?  Why did Dershowitz change?  Did he reject Judaism?



            17            (M)            Debra Kaufman, _Rachel's Daughters_ , pp. 1-10, 15-32, 36-52



Kaufman, writing in 1991, describes women (and their husbands) who have made
very different choices than Dershowitz about how to be Jewish.  In what sense
have they returned to Orthodoxy?  Why did they do so?  Is the Orthodoxy they
practice like that described by Singer?  Have they, in other words, been able
to return to tradition in modern America?



            19            (W)            Kaufman, _Rachel's Daughters_ , pp. 67-86



How is control of sexuality central to modern Jewish Orthodoxy?  Is there an
implicit criticism of modern American sex culture in the choices of these
women?  Do you think Orthodox sexual rules reduce women to second-class
status?  Is Orthodox sexuality puritanical in the sense that it seeks to deny
sexual gratification?



            21            (F)            Kaufman, _Rachel's Daughters_ , pp. 90-95, 102-06, 113-26



In what sense are the modern Orthodox like other religious fundamentalists
(most obviously Christian or Muslim) in their family values?  Do you think
their family attitudes make sense in our society?  Do you think Orthodox sects
will continue to grow in the future?



            24            (M)            **Draft of Paper 1 due**.



Please write a 500-word (2-page) essay on this question:  What do you think is
the most significant development in Judaism in recent decades?



You may base your answer on course readings, material from outside the class
(something from the newspaper, TV, or internet, for example), or your own
experience.  You might focus on a specific event, person, or piece of
literature or art to illustrate your answer.  But if you describe a
development more broadly, be sure to include some specific examples to give
substance to your argument.



I have phrased the question to ask for both a solid, well-illustrated argument
and your own opinion.  You need to do more than say this is what you think;
make a good case for your view.  But don't be afraid, on the other hand, to
let your reader know that this is your assessment.  It is appropriate to use
the first person if you wish.



Bring a draft of your paper to class today to exchange with a partner who will
offer suggestions for revision.



**Emancipation:   Europe and America, 1789-1933**



            26            (W)            **Paper 1 due**.



_Slide presentation_ :  European Jewry:  Synagogues, Clothing, and Art.



            28            (F)            Edward Flannery, _Anguish of the Jews_ ; Martin Luther, _Vom Schem_                          _Hamphoras_ ; Judith Banki, "The Image of Jews in Christian Teaching" (all in packet)



Anti-Semitism has long been an unfortunate part of the Christian heritage.  It
is against the historical background of anti-Semitism that we must see the
rise of modern Judaism.



How does Flannery suggest that anti-Semitism affected the daily lives of Jews
in pre-modern Europe?  Did the Reformation, represented here by Martin Luther,
improve Christian-Jewish relations?  Why or why not?  According to Banki, has
anti-Semitism continued to affect Christian teaching even in recent times?  Do
you agree with her findings?



            31            (M)            Amos Elon, _Founder:   A Portrait of the First Rothchild and His Time_, ch. 1



What was life like for Jews in Frankfort when Meyer Rothschild was born there
in 1744?  Although social and political freedoms for Jews came only toward the
end of Rothschild's life in 1812, why was Frankfort still a good place for
Jews to make money?  How did wealth affect Rothschild's freedom?  Did Meyer's
education prepare him for a vocation in business and, more broadly, for the
demands of the modern world?  



Elon's book has excellent illustrations.  Please study the illustrations and
be prepared to comment on them in class discussions.



Feb.     2            (W)            Elon, _Founder_ , ch. 2-3



What personal qualities do you think propelled Rothschild's growing success?
Did he have to turn his back on traditional Judaism in order to make his mark
in the world?  Politically, did he favor republicanism?  What was his attitude
toward poor Jews in particular?



            4            (F)            Elon, _Founder_ , chs. 4-5



What role did women play in the Rothschild family business?  Does their role
seem consistent with traditional Judaism?  Did luck contribute to the growing
Rothschild family fortune?  Were the political rights that followed the French
Revolution the key to Jews' social success?



            7            (M)            Elon, _Founder_ , ch. 6-7



How did Jews gain political rights in Frankfort?  Were Rothschild's sons like
the father?  Did differences between father and sons suggest, more broadly,
the future direction of European Jewish development?



            9            (W)            Selection from U.S. Constitution (packet)



How did the Constitution's position on religious freedom -- so briefly stated
-- help Jews?



_Slide presentation_ :  Early American Jewish Portraits and Synagogue Designs.



            11            (F)            Rebecca Gratz, _Letters_ , ed. by David Philipson; Gratz, letter dated Oct. 31,                            1819 (packet)



Rebecca Gratz (1781-1869) was the daughter of a Philadelphia merchant and a
contemporary of the sons of Meyer Rothschild.  Does she seem to you an
Enlightened person, eager to participate in society beyond Judaism?  Were
there limits to her tolerance of Christian values and society?  Did she remain
committed to Judaism?  Does it surprise you that a Jewish woman of her time
was as well educated and influential as Gratz was?  Do you think there was a
difference between the situation of Jews in Europe and America at that time?



            14            (M)            Abraham Karp, "The Zionism of Warder Cresson" (packet)



In Philadelphia's small Jewish community, Rebecca Gratz must have either known
Warder Cresson (1798-1860) or at least known of his conversion from Quakerism
to Judaism in 1848, after which he chose to be called Michael Boaz Israel.
There is no question that Cresson was an unusual person, but what does his
strange story tell us about the attitude of American Christians to Jews at
that time?  How do you think American Jews, such as Rebecca Gratz, would have
reacted to Cresson?



            16            (W)            Louis Schmier, _Reflections of Southern Jewry:   The Letters of Charles_                         _Wessolowsky, 1878-1879_ (packet)



Do the life and observations of Charles Wessolowsky (1839-1904) indicate that
freedom for American Jews increased during the nineteenth century?  Does his
immigration from Germany suggest that there was greater opportunity for Jews
in America than in Europe?  What were Wessolowsky's reactions to slavery and
racial segregation?



**Bring your journals to class to be collected and returned with comments.**



            18            (F)            Abraham Cahan, _The Rise of David Levinsky_ , pp. 3-57



Abraham Cahan (1860-1953), born in Russia, edited the Yiddish newspaper _The
Jewish Daily Forward_ in New York from 1903 until 1951.   _The Rise of David
Levinsky_ (1917) is considered a classic story of the American experience of
Eastern European Jewish immigrants.   To understand the novel, perhaps it will
help to know that Cahan was a socialist.



We have seen that Jews were emancipated in western Europe beginning around
1800.  Did they possess similar freedoms in Russia?  What role did anti-
Semitism play in David's decision to come to America?  Did his education
prepare him for modern American society?



            21            (M)            Cahan, _David Levinsky_ , pp. 85-111, 168-76



David seems to think that he has to choose between Judaism and American
success, that he can't have both.  Did nineteenth-century Jews in western
Europe and America feel this way?  Do you think David's transformation,
including his religious indifference, was typical of Jews of his time?  Do
Jews today feel a similar tension between being American and being Jewish?



            23            (W)            Cahan, _David Levinsky_ , pp. 376-81, 387-99, 403-24, 442-47



David now becomes successful in the garment business.  Along the way, he has a
frustrating affair with Dora, the wife of his friend Max (Book IX).  Then he
decides that he needs to marry and becomes engaged to Fanny Kaplan, but along
the way again falls in love with Anna Tevkin.



In light of Cahan's portrayal of Misses Kaplan and Tevkin, what were some of
the social roles of well-to-do American women around 1900?  How do these women
compare with other Jewish women we have studied in this class?



_Film_ :  _The Rise and Fall of the Borscht Belt_ (Part I)



            25            (F)            Cahan, _David Levinsky_ , pp. 492-530



What are some of the different types of Jews portrayed in the novel
(socialists, capitalists, intellectuals, etc.)?  Can a reader make any
generalizatons, based on the novel, about what the American Jewish community
was like in 1917?  Does David find happiness?  Why or why not?  If we believe
the novel, is there something about modernity that is inherently frustrating
for Jews?  Have other modern Americans felt the same frustration?



Does the film on the "Borscht Belt" show you a different image of the American
Jewish experience, or does it confirm the impression created by _David
Levinsky_?  



Film:  _The Rise and Fall of the Borscht Belt_ (Part II)



            28            (M)            Conclude discussion of _David Levinsky_ and _The Rise and Fall of the Borscht_                         _Belt _

_  _

Mar.     1            (W)            **Draft of Paper 2 due**.



Please write a 750-word (3-page) essay on this subject:  The Jewish person of
the era of emancipation (approximately 1789-1933) that I most admire is
_____________________.  Explain your choice.  Give a balanced assessment of
the person's accomplishments and shortcomings; admiration does not have to
involve only praise.



You may write on someone we have studied in class (including a fictional
character such as David Levinsky) or anyone else you might know about or know
personally (possibly a member of your family).  If you would like to
investigate a person not covered in course materials, I recommend an anthology
called _The Jew in the Modern World_ , edited by Paul Mendez-Flohr and Jehuda
Reinharz.  If you ask me for other sources, I will try to make suggestions.



Bring a draft of the paper to class and exchange it with another student in
the interest of getting feedback and making revisions.



            3            (F)            **Paper 2 due**.



Spring break, Mar. 6-10.



**Trials and Triumphs of Modern Judaism, 1933-Present **

**  **

            13            (M)            _Slide Presentation_ :  Palestine before Israel:  Nineteenth-Century                                    Photographs



Zionism, emerging primarily in Eastern Europe in the late nineteenth century,
raised a basic and skeptical question about nineteenth-century Jewish
progress:  Were emancipation and assimilation sufficient and appropriate goals
for Jews, or should Jews seek to restore Jewish identity in a Jewish homeland?
Today Jews almost universally embrace Zionism.  But until the rise of Nazism
there was much conflict among Jews about whether Zion should be restored at
all.



Nor was there agreement about where Zion should be if a Jewish state became a
reality.  Many locations, including Uganda and Australia, were proposed as
alternatives to Palestine.  The photographs included in this presentation show
what Palestine was like in the middle of the nineteenth century, just at the
time that Zionist discussions began.

           

            15            (W)            Theodor Herzl, "A Solution to the Jewish Question" (1896); _Hatikvah_                                  (packet)



During his short life Theodore Herzl (1860-1904) became a major advocate of
Zionism.  Why did he believe that a Jewish political state was essential to
Jewish well-being?  Can you imagine that Meyer Rothschild or Rebecca Gratz
would have agreed?



Zionism was not only an ideology but also a culture that included songs such
as _Hatikvah_ , now the Israeli national anthem.  How did _Hatikvah_ seek to
inspire Jews with Zionist goals?   Is it significant that the song is in
Hebrew and not Yiddish?



            17            (F)            _Film_ :  _Triumph of the Will _

_  _

Much as Zionism was an expression of modern nationalist feeling -- usually
termed "nationalism" \-- so, sadly and ironically, was Nazism.  Leni
Riefenstahl (b. 1902) produced _Triumph of the Will_ in the 1930s as a
powerful propaganda film for the Third Reich.   The film helps to establish
the ideological and emotional context of the Holocaust.



            20            (M)            Solomon Perel, _Europa, Europa_ (1990; English translation 1997), preface,                          prologue, chs. 1-2



Why did members of the Perel family respond to the rise of Nazism as they did?
Should they have taken different defensive measures?  Is it fair for us to ask
if they might have behaved differently?



            22            (W)            Perel, _Europa, Europa_ , chs. 3-4



Do you think any person would have developed a "double identity" in
circumstances similar to those of Solomon/Josef?  Did Solomon have a personal
philosophy?  What was it?  Did his own core values help him to keep a critical
perspective on Nazism, including its racial theories?



_Film_ :  _Europa, Europa_ (1991) (begin)



            24            (F)            Perel, _Europa, Europa_ , chs. 5-9



Solomon knew that it was irrational and dangerous to go to Lodz.  Why did he
go, then?  What did he find there?  Was his experience unique, or do you think
other Jews -- such as Jewish children hidden in Catholic convent schools or
Jews forced for work for the Nazis -- feel a similarly split identity?



_Film_ :  _Europa, Europa_ (conclude)



            27            (M)            Perel, _Europa, Europa_ , chs. 10-12



What was Perel's experience after the war like?  Why did he finally write this
book after so many years?



Today we will also discuss the film based on the book.



            29            (W)            Albert Einstein, selections from _Out of My Later Years_ (packet)



_Time_ recently acknowledged that one of its principal reasons for naming
Albert Einstein (1879-1955)  "Man of the Century" was his ethical writings, in
addition to his well-known scientific contribution (see 12/31/99 issue).  An
unobservant Jews yet still a religious man, Einstein left Germany in 1933 and
settled in Princeton, New Jersey.  How do these writings show both his
identity as a Jew and his moral critique of modern society?



            31            (F)            **Investigate topic for Paper 3.   Proposal will be due April 10**.



Please use this class period to investigate a possible topic for your final
paper.



For the last paper, I ask you to write a 1250-word (5-page) essay on an
important twentieth-century Jewish individual, event, piece of writing or art
(including films or music), or issue.  Where appropriate, I encourage you to
look at your subject from a variety of Jewish viewpoints or both Jewish and
non-Jewish viewpoints.  In other words, I hope you will take a broad
analytical perspective on your subject.



Please focus on analysis rather than narrative.  Once you have established who
or what you are writing about, ask questions about the subject's meaning:  Why
did the person behave as he or she did? Why did events unfold as they did?
Why did participants see the issues as they did?  Why does this topic
contribute to a deeper understanding of twentieth-century Judaism?  These are
just a few examples of analytical questions.



I do not intend this to be a major research paper, but I do want you to use
several well-selected primary and secondary sources.



For the _proposal_ , please write 250 words to explain what your topic is, why
you believe it is significant, what specific sources you plan to use, what
difficulties you might encounter in your work, and how you plan to solve those
problems.  The proposal will not be graded, but I will comment on it.



Apr.      3            (M)            Amos Oz, _Panther in the Basement_ ,
chs. 1-11



In this fictionalized memoir, the contemporary Israeli novelist Amos Oz looks
back at his own coming of age in the context of the establishment of the state
of Israel in 1948.



What is the personal background of Proffy's family and neighbors?  How do they
feel about the British?  About the Arabs?  About Jewish independence?  What is
the significance of Proffy's relationship with Sergeant Dunlop?



            5            <

