## Proposal to NEH Challenge Grant Office for funds to establish Maryland
Institute for Technology in the Humanities (MITH), submitted 1 May, 1998  
  
---  
  
  * I. INTRODUCTION
  * II. CONTEXT
  * III. MITH AND ITS PROGRAMS A. Programs 1\. Fellows  
2\. Polyseminar  
3\. Faculty Training  
4\. Undergraduate Citation  
5\. Teacher Training  
6\. Conference  
7\. MOOs and Web Site  
B. MITH'S Physical Center  
C. Technology  
D. Staffing  

  * IV. MITH AND ITS IMPACT  

  * V. PRIOR CHALLENGE GRANT SUPPORT  

  * VI. FUNDRAISING PLAN  

  * VII. CONCLUSION  

  
---  
  
## I. INTRODUCTION

Humanities scholars at the University of Maryland, College Park, are
pioneering efforts to apply the emerging technologies to teaching and
scholarship. Electronic archives, teaching applications, and other research
tools have been developed in the fields of American studies, art, art history
and archaeology, comparative literature, English, foreign languages, gay and
lesbian studies, cinema studies, history, history and philosophy of science,
linguistics, music, philosophy, and women's studies. These efforts may be
defined as the achievements of "early adopters." They have been encouraged on
the campus by existing programs such as those of the Committee on Creative
Humanities Applications in the New Technologies (CHANT) and the Committee for
New Technologies (CNT), both in the College of Arts and Humanities (see
Appendix I for Institutional Context). They build upon Maryland's eminence in
academic computing and information technologies and their applications in
instruction and research. The University, therefore, seeks now with NEH
Challenge Grant support to move existing innovative approaches to humanities
applications of technology beyond early adopters into the university
mainstream and out to the wider educational community. By establishing the
Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities (MITH) as a locus to
facilitate the integration of emerging technologies into humanities research,
teaching, and learning, the achievements of these early adopters and their
pertinence to the majority of faculty will expand the humanities into new
territories.

The University of Maryland (UM), a designated national supercomputing and
Internet2 center, is one of the best networked and computer-supported
universities in the world. UM boasts more _wired_ classrooms than most other
institutions of higher learning. These include multi-platform teaching
theaters and classrooms, foreign language teaching facilities, and a variety
of technology-enhanced departmental classrooms and laboratories. Computing
resources for scholarship and research in the humanities are comparably
strong. These efforts are reinforced by humanities-related initiatives in non-
humanities departments: Computer Science, Political Science (Project ICONS),
and most significantly for the agenda sketched here, the Libraries (see
Appendix I for Institutional Context).

The highest-end humanities teaching and research facility (Professor Frederick
Suppe's __Venus Alive!__ ), for example, exceeds the computational
capabilities of many science departments. The successful candidate for Campus
Chief Information Officer, referring to this facility and emphasizing that
campus power-users are frequently not where one would typically expect,
acknowledged that, at UM, humanities are at the forefront of technology
innovation.

The establishment of the MITH will give critical mass to the University's
substantial and significant pioneering efforts. MITH will create an essential
unifying physical presence as well as, through its web-based projects and
programs, a virtual campus for this dispersed College, thereby creating an
intellectual identity based on shared discourse and interests. Additionally,
as a central (literal and virtual) coordinating facility dedicated to
producing projects in the College's various departments and to providing
access to materials, MITH will provide an umbrella organization for the
conception, production, maintenance, and enhancement of electronic resources
indispensable for realizing UM's twenty-first century teaching, research, and
outreach missions. MITH will offer a center for sharing information, tools
(hardware and software), and opportunities for synergistic development that
the present lack of structure makes painfully difficult.

While digital resources are key for research and teaching projects in several
humanities departments, the development of these resources throughout the
College is achieved ad hoc through frustrating negotiation, or grant-by-grant,
project-by-project, class-by-class, and conference-by-conference. Furthermore,
as in most large universities, the departments that comprise the College of
Arts and Humanities are housed in buildings spread across the campus,
physically segregating departments with common intellectual interests. Thus
students, faculty, staff, the College, the University, and the surrounding
communities have been robbed of the benefits of coordination and collaboration
that an Institute will make possible.

With NEH Challenge Grant endowment funds, MITH will be established within the
University's main research library, adjacent to that library's Electronic Text
Center, thereby emphasizing the role of the University of Maryland Libraries
as the laboratory of the humanities and underscoring the centrality of texts
and archival materials in all humanities endeavors. Locating the MITH facility
in McKeldin Library brings many benefits. The Libraries are currently re-
engineering their public services and creating three discipline-based teams:
arts and humanities, social sciences and allied professions, and science and
technology. The arts and humanities team will be housed in McKeldin in close
proximity to MITH and the Electronic Text Center. This will permit discipline
experts (faculty), content experts (librarians), and information technology
experts to work together in the development of curriculum, teaching
applications, and research.

Indeed, the Libraries have several nascent digital library projects that will
add original materials to the corpus already being created by the faculty.
These include digitized full motion video (drawn from the Libraries' Nonprint
Media Department) and original radio and television broadcasts (drawn from the
Broadcasting Archives in Special Collections). Similarly, the Performing Arts
Library is digitizing musical performances in a cooperative venture with
Indiana University Libraries. MITH will create a dynamic field for diffusion
of innovation in humanities technology available to the world-wide community
as ideas and projects of individual scholars influence one another in the
production of new knowledge.

As a humanities institute fostering emerging forms of communication and
critical inquiry, MITH will facilitate the interdisciplinary exchange that the
current explosion of digitally mediated information demands, enabling a fluid
K-16 transfer of knowledge and cross-fertilization of ideas. The goals of MITH
are threefold: (1) to generate and foster the development of innovative
projects that respond to the traditional interests of the humanities while
nurturing emerging modes of scholarship and learning; (2) to guarantee
aggressive outreach of these new technological approaches not only to the
faculty members and students of UM, but also to the state educational
community in grades K-12; (3) and, in support of goals one and two, to provide
advanced technological resources for the creation, deployment, and
dissemination of technology-based scholarship and instruction. The facility
will include office space, study facilities for the resident fellows, training
areas, a conference room/computer studio, and advanced technology rarely seen
outside the hard sciences.

## II. CONTEXT

Key elements of an Institute for Technology in the Humanities already exist at
UM, serving students and professors, high schools throughout the state,
scholarly and general audiences throughout the world. Though there are others
in various stages of development, three projects-- _ _Venus Alive!__ , the
__Dickinson Electronic Archives__ , and the __Caesarea Project__ \--will serve
to illustrate the technological sophistication, diversity, and outreach of the
many developing and ongoing projects in the UM's College of Arts & Humanities
(see Appendix II: Digital Initiatives in the College, for detailed
descriptions of the wide range of teaching/research projects and their
intellectual/artistic significance).

The Maryland History and Philosophy of Science Program (CHPS) emphasizes study
of the practices, epistemology, and history of scientific modeling and
visualization in an attempt to understand how science and its knowledge has
changed as science has become computationally-intensive with massive archived
scientific sets. CHPS initiatives integrate direct experience with scientific
modeling and visualization using actual scientific data sets with
sophisticated philosophical analyses.

Research and instruction are most fully integrated in the _Venus Alive!_
project. It is ground-breaking in both its research methods and curricular
innovations. The project exemplifies technology's potential for transforming
and fusing humanities research and undergraduate education.

Frederick Suppe, Professor of Philosophy and CHPS Chair, has been a
participant-observer on the NASA Magellan mission to Venus, which returned
more data than all prior planetary missions (over a 1/10-th of a terabyte).
Since Venus is shrouded in dense clouds, all that is known about the planet
comes from computer modeling and visualization of radar returns, changes in
satellite accelerations, data from a few US and Russian probes, and simulation
modeling. Suppe's research, funded by three NSF grants and significant special
UM support, culminates in a history of Venus exploration, __Venus Alive!
Modeling Scientific Knowledge__ , that pioneers new epistemological
understandings of how modeling yields knowledge in ways that challenge
traditional philosophical understandings of science. Suppe has the same data
available to planetary scientists and exceptional computer modeling
capabilities. As he writes the history, he "redoes" the science using the
historical and contemporary data sets. This requires developing new
historiographical methods which have contributed insights into a history that
would otherwise have remained hidden.

From its inception, this pioneering research has been infused into
undergraduate instruction. For an entire semester 30-40 students in the
introductory philosophy of science course (PHIL 250; see
[_http://carnap.umd.edu:90/phil250/Syllabus_250S98.html_](http://carnap.umd.edu:90/phil250/Syllabus_250S98.html))
mostly freshmen and sophomores from diverse fields, study the history of Venus
science using computer modeling to replicate key historical episodes and
investigate unsolved scientific questions using actual historic and later NASA
and Russian data sets. Specialized GUI tutorial interfaces allow students to
use the actual high-end research software in addition to a variety of web-
based, virtual reality, and other special original multimedia software. Custom
CD-ROMs, dedicated web-servers, and a high-end CHPS lab support course
activities. The level of historical, philosophical, and scientific
sophistication achieved is far beyond the range of conventional upper-level
courses for advanced undergraduate and graduate students.

Students--mostly undergraduates taking independent studies courses--develop
software. A cadre of graduate students combine more advanced modeling,
exploration of philosophical issues raised by the modeling, and software
development. They present their work at national scientific and humanities
meetings. MITH will support the integration into other course development of
similar practices that rely on the most current research.

One of several initiatives revolutionizing and reimagining editorial praxes
and textual distribution, the __Dickinson Electronic Archives__ project (
_<http://jefferson.village.virginia.edu/>_

_dickinson/_ ) is being developed under the supervision of literary critic and
theorist Martha Nell Smith, Associate Professor of English, and Head of the
Dickinson Editing Collective (DEC). Through this initiative, an international
group of scholars is reediting Emily Dickinson's writings, expanding access to
her poetic techniques, making available crucial Dickinson papers that have
been out-of-reach for the past century, and sponsoring online discussions on a
number of topics relating to Dickinson's work.

Persuaded that Emily Dickinson "published" her work by circulating it in her
letters, and in the manuscript books she made and left for posterity to
discover after her death, the DEC maintains that print translations of her
work, which erase most of her visual poetics, make practically unimaginable
that world of Dickinson's. Thus, the DEC is editing images of her manuscripts
for electronic publication so that all her readers can enjoy her graphic
productions. By gaining a more vivid and nuanced sense of the hand-to-hand
circulation of her work, Dickinson's twenty-first century readers will deepen
their understanding of her poetic project and its significance for her
nineteenth-century culture, for American literary history, and for twenty-
first century literary study.

Use of this growing Dickinson archive has already proved to be a profoundly
enriching force in the undergraduate and graduate classroom. For example, in
her role as co-director of a FIPSE-sponsored project, "Whitman, Dickinson, and
Teaching American Literature with New Technologies" ([
_http://warthog.cc.wm.edu/Whitman/FIPSE/1997_ _ _FIPSE_ _ _funding_ _
_proposal.html_](http://warthog.cc.wm.edu/Whitman/FIPSE/1997_FIPSE_funding_proposal.html)),
and as part of her teaching mission at UM, Professor Smith has been developing
a course "Dickinson & Whitman in Manuscript, Print, and Digital Cultures" at
both the undergraduate and graduate levels (for the Spring 1998 syllabus, see
_<http://www.inform.umd.edu/ARHU/Depts/English/englfac/MNSmith/748syll.html>_
).

The __Dickinson Electronic Archives__ are routinely used by scholars and
readers across the United States, Asia, and Europe, and in classrooms in
Tokyo, Trondheim (Norway), Berlin, and Innsbruck, as well as throughout the
country. The potential, therefore, of this project's outreach is already being
realized, geographically as well as pedagogically. Resources provided by MITH
will permit the integration of the Dickinson project into an even wider range
of American literature, poetry, history, and art courses at UM. MITH will
support wider use of Romantic Circles (see Appendix II) and other literary
databases.

The Combined Caesarea Expeditions (CCE; _<http://www.inform.umd.edu/Caesarea>_
), a joint archaeological research initiative sponsored by UM and the
University of Haifa, offers a final example. In addition to the sponsoring
institutions, scholars from Temple University, Trinity College in Connecticut,
Tufts University, the Universities of Oklahoma and South Dakota, and other
institutions also participate. The project is focused on the study of Caesarea
Maritima, a port city founded on the Mediterranean coast by King Herod the
Great between 22 and 10 B.C.E. Caesarea served as the main port and
administrative capital of Herod's kingdom. Eventually, the city became the
headquarters for the ancient Roman domination of Palestine, and was the site
from which Pontius Pilate ruled, where the Apostle Paul was imprisoned, and
where the famous Jewish Revolt of the first century C.E. began. The site
remained active through the era of the Crusades, and thus embodies the great
transitions that mark the history of the Old World during and just after the
first millennium C.E.: the shift from paganism to Christianity in the Roman
empire; the earliest years of interaction among paganism, Judaism and
Christianity; the evolution of Islam in the Middle East; the attempt by
European Christianity to restrict the expansion of Islam; and the response of
Islam to the Christian incursions of the Crusades.

The CCE uses advanced technology directly in its field work; information about
the excavated strata on the site and the artifacts and other materials
recovered through the excavations is stored in the Caesarea Data Archive, a
database designed to allow for transatlantic retrieval of project information
by scholars collaborating in the project. Architectural remains at the site
are recorded in a related database, the Caesarea Graphics Archive, which
stores information about all of the structures discovered at Caesarea and at
nearby contemporaneous ancient sites.

Narrative information about the site is maintained on the project's web site
at UM that disseminates information about the project and also serves as a
recruitment tool for the 200 students who annually join the excavation at
Caesarea. Following the 1998 field season, this web site will be expanded to
include curriculum materials on the years of Caesarea's occupation designed to
serve K-12 constituencies. This curriculum project is funded by the NEH
through a Humanities Focus Grant (see Appendix III).

The resources provided by MITH will be used by the Caesarea project to develop
an expanded range of database applications serving the research functions of
the project. Pre-college MITH fellows will have opportunities to continue the
development of the curriculum materials currently piloted under the NEH
Humanities Focus Grant.

These three examples suggest the range of "early adopter" projects at UM. More
importantly, they demonstrate the preparedness of the institution to maximize
the resources MITH will provide, and to employ these resources in the service
of a broad base of faculty.

## III. MITH AND ITS PROGRAMS

## A. Programs

MITH will support an array of programs that address the needs of both high-end
early adopters, and those faculty and students who have not fully integrated
electronic resources into their research practices or their classrooms. These
include

  * MITH Fellows
  * Polyseminar
  * Faculty Training
  * Undergraduate Citation
  * Teacher Colloquium and Summer Institute
  * Conference
  * MOO's and web sites



### 1\. Fellows

MITH will have both resident and associate (virtually linked) fellows, and in
the first years of existence will offer fellowships to faculty within the
College; fellowships will then be made available to researchers at other
institutions. Fellowships will offer a one-semester course release to
professors developing their research and teaching in ways that implement and
creatively exploit electronic resources. One-semester appointments as MITH
Faculty Fellows will be awarded to eight faculty annually. Awards will be made
on the basis of an annual competition judged by the Academic Director together
with members of the Internal Advisory Board. In selecting Fellows, MITH will
favor proposals that demonstrate the most promise for integrating research,
pedagogical, and outreach components. All MITH FacultyFellows will be expected
to hold three virtual office hours each week in which they are available to
K-16 faculty and UM students.

### 2\. Polyseminar

Together with the Director of MITH, Fellows will develop a theme, ideally
linked to aspects of their projects, for an annual Polyseminar that will
evolve into discussions on critical issues (e.g., electronic discourse, social
construction of knowledge, credibility of evidence, and organization of
information on the Internet). Each Fellow will be responsible for conducting
one MITH Polyseminar session and for participating in a virtual asynchronous
segment of the Polyseminar. Thus, the MITH Polyseminars will facilitate
interdisciplinary dialogue that will begin with the campus and extend beyond
its boundaries into cyberspace. Papers can be posted to a web-based computer
conference and opened up to international asynchronous discussion. UM is
currently selecting a web-based computer conferencing system for campus use
that will facilitate the asynchronous portion of the Polyseminar. (See further
discussion of asynchronous or virtual Polyseminar on page 15 in section under
MOOs.)

### 3\. Faculty Training

In addition to supporting the eight MITH Faculty Fellows each year and as part
of its mainstreaming mission, MITH will offer technology summer training each
year for forty humanities faculty. The goal of the institute will be to offer
an introduction to the whole spectrum of technology available for transforming
pedagogy ranging from the exceptional resources of the MITH Virtual Archive,
servers, and work stations to what can be achieved on a standard faculty
workstation.

Together with MITH Faculty Fellows, the MITH director will develop the
syllabus for the summer institute. During the institute, MITH graduate and
undergraduate staff and the Instructional Developer will provide basic
technical training and support and will be available to faculty participants
throughout the summer. Small-group, discipline-specific training sessions,
such as how to create a class archives, virtual exhibition of cultural
artifacts, or a student edited hypertext edition of a play, will take place in
the MITH conference room while full group sessions will take place in the
training facility. By providing basic training to a substantial number of
faculty over the summer, MITH will transform teaching and learning. Changes
will include

  * encouraging significant numbers of faculty to use digitally mediated resources in their humanities classrooms;
  * changing the dynamics of the classroom to a collegial/collaborative model;
  * allowing humanities faculty to model research methodology in the classroom in ways similar to scientists in the laboratory;
  * exposing students to multiple editions, sources, documents, and data to encourage personal/multiple constructions of meaning;
  * engaging students in authentic tasks that contribute to scholarship as opposed to rote learning and assimilation of data; and
  * teaching real critical thinking skills.

Transforming pedagogy in the humanities through available technology will
extend beyond curricular changes in individual courses. The new technologies
have the potential to promote the development of the skills essential for
students to achieve success in graduate education and in the professional
world. Faculty who develop their expertise in using electronic resources
effectively can begin to teach the kinds of research methodologies to
undergraduates that are usually reserved for the graduate level, i.e., in-
depth searches, work with archival materials, editing, establishing a
socio/historical context for received information, and the analysis of
conflicting viewpoints and information.

### 4\. Undergraduate Citation

Intensive faculty training in integrating technology into teaching will have
enormous benefits for students as well. Exposure to technology in the
humanities classroom will reveal for students not only new arenas for
conducting research and communicating knowledge, but will provide career
avenues that they may not have considered. Students who are interested in
pursuing fields that require both a humanities background and technological
skills will have the opportunity to earn a citation in Interdisciplinary
Multi-Media and Technology, supported and facilitated by MITH.

The courses outlined for the Citation represent current offerings (see
Appendix IV). While interdisciplinary, this Citation, developed by Professor
Ruth Lozner, will be housed within the Department of Art. The required English
course, "The Computer and the Text, Hypermedia as Critical Expression," will
provide a broad contextual base. Students will be able to customize their
interests from the menu of recommended courses. This Citation will provide an
intellectual and practical framework and direction for students entering the
competitive workforce of the twenty-first century. It will give humanities
students the skills to design with text, music, speech, still images, and
video. MITH will provide for the citation program not only state-of-the-art
technical facilities for developing high-end projects, but will foster a
collegial atmosphere with exposure to multiple disciplines.

### 5\. Teacher Training

Besides making it possible to reach and train UM faculty and students who are
not yet using technology extensively in their research and classrooms, the
Challenge Grant will make it possible for MITH to take a leadership role in
the infusion of technology in the state's secondary school humanities
curriculum, a model that can be easily replicated across the nation by other
university/school partnerships.

Outreach to the state will be predicated on an attempt to reach as many
secondary school humanities teachers as possible throughout an entire school
district. Because the University is located in Prince George's County and has
an ongoing relationship with Northwestern High School, MITH will concentrate
on providing training first to teachers in this county. Twelve humanities
teachers from Prince George's County high schools will be chosen for one-year
fellowships by the MITH director together with the Internal Advisory Board.
The selection criteria will include innovative ideas for integrating
technology into the high school humanities classroom, the creation of online
courses across schools, and the use of MITH web technology in support of high
school humanities courses. Over the course of the year, the twelve teachers
from Prince George's County will be invited to attend the Polyseminar with the
MITH University Fellows.

These teachers will also participate in a colloquium (eight sessions) focusing
on pedagogical approaches to digitally mediated curriculum transformation.
Some of the issues teachers will discuss will include how technology can
foster constructivist models for teaching and learning; student-centered,
problem-based interactive classrooms; distributed knowledge approaches to
learning; and collaboration across disciplines. University and secondary
school educators who have successfully used digital resources in their
teaching will demonstrate their approaches at the colloquium. For example,
teachers and university faculty who have integrated material from the American
Memory Collection of the Library of Congress' National Digital Library into
their social studies and American literature courses or who have taken their
students on virtual field trips to the National Gallery of Art or the National
Museum of American Art, will be asked to demonstrate their classroom use of
these online resources. In addition to receiving basic technology training
during colloquium sessions and through online tutorials, the twelve teachers
will have access to all MITH facilities, resources, and support staff during
their tenure. The colloquium will be open to university faculty as well.

At the conclusion of the colloquium, each teacher will select two colleagues
from the same school to begin developing a humanities project during a one-
week institute the following summer. All projects will foster the use of
digital technology to develop research and critical thinking skills essential
for high school students to survive in the professional world.

MITH staff will provide intensive technical training, and MITH Faculty Fellows
and humanities faculty will offer rigorous content support for the thirty-six
teachers participating in the summer institute. Following the institute,
teacher teams will continue to develop their projects over the summer for
implementation in the classroom. During this time, they will have access to
all MITH campus resources, including staff technical assistance. The teachers'
projects will be supported by the MITH server and mass-store technology. In
the following academic year, the thirty-six institute participants will
implement their projects in the classroom with continuing technical support
from MITH. All participants will be expected to present their projects at
appropriate venues--staff meetings; PTA meetings; local, state, and national
teacher conferences--and to conduct basic online tutorials at some of these
venues. They will be able to demonstrate online sources for instruction such
as WebTeacher, supported by the National Cable Television Association and Tech
Corps, that provides assistance and web tutorials on everything from
electronic mail to Java and CGI script. Institute participants will be
expected to be available to assist their colleagues who are eager to use
digital technology in the classroom.

### 6\. Conference

All of MITH's activites--from high-end research and development projects to
instruction enhanced by digital technology--will be showcased at an annual
international conference that will have a variety of platforms for
dissemination: plenary sessions with pre- and post-conference online posting
of papers, demonstrations and workshops, sessions on pedagogy, and hands-on
training sessions. The purpose of this conference will be to project the
research agenda of MITH into the international academic community by
highlighting the work of MITH Fellows and the University's humanities faculty.
The Director and the Internal Advisory Board will function as an editorial
board to identify web-publishable conference papers. A major emphasis in the
annual conference will be the blurring of K-16 boundaries and the fostering of
collaborative projects across these boundaries.

### 7\. MOOs and Web Site

MITH's web site will be a major force in contributing to the erasure of
academic boundaries by creating a central resource shared by a varied
educational community. With the purchase of a server, MITH will be able to
create its own MOO ("Multi-User Dimension, Object Oriented"), a real-time
online environment that allows for virtual classrooms, seminars, conferences,
and a range of other kinds of scholarly and pedagogical exchange and
interactions. The MOO will foster MITH's outreach mission, bringing into
virtual contact MITH Fellows and

associated faculty with scholars, teachers, and business leaders from around
the country--and, potentially, around the world.

Initially, we envision building, "furnishing", and developing the following
"rooms":

\--The Virtual Auditorium, which would be used for special events, formal
guest lectures by speakers from around the world, and the demonstration of our
Fellows' own work to a larger online audience. MITH Fellows will each be
obliged to give one virtual lecture during their tenure, forming the core of a
series of virtual lectures that MITH will offer each year.

\--Virtual Classrooms, where faculty and students who are interested in the
integration of technology and the humanities can meet for informal lectures,
presentations, or open discussions. These rooms will be programmed in
different configurations: informal discussion areas where speakers must queue
up and only two or three are allowed to speak at once (but an unlimited number
of others can "listen"); and one-way "lecture halls."

\--Virtual Polyseminar, in conjunction with the MITH Polyseminar, and
participated in by humanities faculty and students at UM, 15 virtual
participants from around the country will be selected through a competitive
process to join the Polyseminar. The virtual participants will be asked each
week to complete the assigned reading, post a position paper, and meet for two
hours in the MOO with the other members of the Polyseminar. At the end of its
term, each Polyseminar will mount a virtual Colloquium where interested
parties from around the country can join the members of the seminar in a
discussion of its findings.

\--A Teachers Lounge, where secondary school and university teachers from
around the country who are interested in the integration of technology and the
humanities will log-in for real-time live communication, posting assignments
and curriculum ideas, queries to colleagues, meetings,

or help from other teachers on the teaching of art history, foreign languages,
history, and literature.

\--Virtual Offices, where MITH Fellows can meet interested teachers, scholars,
and students for discussion of issues of mutual interest. Each MITH Fellow
will be obliged to hold at least 3 virtual office hours each week ( see
section on MITH Fellows, page 9).

\--Virtual "Worlds": online pedagogical or research "spaces" for exploratory
learning, including navigating famous locations, real or imaginary will be
created. These worlds can easily be programmed as places for virtual "artifact
handling": the examination and studying of everything from an Aeolian harp
(complete with image and sound), to a poet's rare manuscript or rough-draft
notebook, to a nineteenth-century "Claude glass" (a special curved mirror for
viewing and sketching "picturesque" landscapes)--each teaching valuable
historical and cultural lessons through interaction and questioning, an active
engagement in the process of discovery.

The web site will offer a virtual intellectual hub for MITH. It will connect
the component parts with links to associated projects, offer a gateway to
asynchronous web-based computer conferencing discussions and the synchronous
collaborative MOO spaces, and provide a link to humanities resources on the
web. Several different navigational systems will offer a variety of ways to
find and discover information depending on interests and expertise. For
example, a search engine will be designed to facilitate locating resources on
the site by both keyword and a series of linked topic areas. This important
function of tying the humanities together and offering resources is central to
the goals of MITH and offers the humanities community, as a whole, a
comprehensive resource site.

## B. MITH'S Physical Center

The Libraries will provide the site for MITH. McKeldin Library, the research
library on the campus, is in the process of reconfiguring space to house an
Electronic Text Center (ETC) that will be adjacent to MITH. Strategically
placed to emphasize its connections to already existing structures and its
centrality for the future of humanities research at UM, the ETC will also abut
the most public of MITH's facilities--the Computer Studio. For use by current
and past fellows, as well as by student developers, pre-college teachers, and
other program participants, this Studio will house work stations with
equipment and software for the creation and analysis of digital text and
images, and office space for faculty fellows pursuing long-term electronic
text projects. In addition to this Studio, a nearby electronic seminar room
will have multiple uses: it will be used as a training facility for digital
research projects for faculty and graduate students in the Arts and Humanities
and pre-college teachers; for demonstration of electronic resources and
research projects; and for faculty to share ideas on the application of
computing to humanities research and teaching.

The adjacent ETC will house additional work stations that will provide access
to humanities full-text and bibliographic databases acquired by the Libraries
and available through the web. In addition, proximity to computer laboratories
and user instruction rooms in McKeldin Library will provide additional
facilities for training K-16 faculty.

## C. Technology

The technological heart of MITH is a humanities adaptation of web-delivered
archiving capabilities hitherto found only in the most data intensive
subfields of the hard sciences and then processed only by regional or
international consortia such as SCEC and IRIS for seismic earthquake data or
by NASA for space science data sets. Such technology elevates MITH from a
center for promoting more effective faculty use of technology in research and
teaching to a complete infrastructure and delivery system capable of radically
transforming the humanities while conveying archived hypertext primary
materials routinely and affordably into undergraduate courses, the K-12
schools, and the general public. Web delivery of the Virtual Archives ensures
that even low-end modem-connected computers can access and use these
materials, thus expanding humanities scholarship and research materials on an
unprecedented, yet affordable scale.

The high-end technology that complements MITH's UNIX Virtual Archives will
facilitate a creative and transforming use of the Virtual Archive web
resources. The technology will include high-end MacIntosh G3 graphics
workstation towers with full video capabilities and Silicon Graphics UNIX work
stations (such as those used to create the animations for _Jurassic Park_ ) to
support advanced digital narrative activities. The Computer Studio will have
ten two-person work stations connected to a link system and projection TV for
displaying work by Fellows, faculty, and students at their respective work
stations (see Appendix V for equipment).

Computer capabilities will double every eighteen months. The Virtual Archive
UNIX equipment is modular; it is designed for incremental upgrading and will
be phased in as demand grows, thus assuring a long useful life. The work
stations will be replaced on a phased two-year schedule. Most replaced
equipment will be bumped-down to other public access arts and humanities
instructional technology facilities. Each MITH Faculty Fellow will take a
replaced workstation back to his or her academic unit on a cost-sharing basis
with that particular unit. Over time this strategy will make conveniently
located high-end technology **routinely** available to faculty and to students
for course use while maintaining state-of-the-art capabilities in MITH.
Outright expenditures in addition to **$20,000 from the College of Arts and
Humanities** will provide seed money for acquiring the initial cohort of work
stations. **Replacement equipment will be financed by funds from the College
of Arts and Humanities, Academic Information Technology Services (aITs),
existing faculty work station and campus Instructional Technology matching
funds programs, and a cost-sharing assessment to the Faculty Fellows'
department as a pre-condition of being a Fellow.**

## D. Staffing

MITH will be staffed by a half-time Academic Director selected from senior
tenured faculty in the College of Arts and Humanities following an internal
search conducted through the Office of the Dean of the College of Arts and
Humanities with participation from the academic departments in the College and
the University's information technology programs. The Dean of the Libraries
and the Dean of the College of Arts and Humanities will make the three-year
appointment. The Director will report to both the Dean of the Libraries and
the Dean of the College of Arts and Humanities. The faculty member selected
will be released from two courses. **The College of Arts and Humanities will
provide half of the required funds for this position.** The Academic Director
will administer MITH with the assistance of a full-time Instructional
Development staff member **(whose salary and benefits will be provided
entirely by the Dean of the Libraries)** , **** an Internal Advisory Board (to
include the Deans of Arts and Humanities, the Libraries, and the Director of
aITs), and an External Advisory Board. In practice, the Academic Director will
work with a committee structure provided by the Internal Advisory Board and
the current Fellows. The Director will shape and implement the agenda of MITH,
be involved in the search for matching monies, and will supervise the
Instructional Development staff member. The Director will participate in the
selection of MITH Faculty Fellows and pre-college Fellows and in setting the
agendas for the Polyseminar, the annual conference, and the colloquium for
pre-college teachers and its follow-up summer sessions. The Director, together
with the current year's Fellows, will organize the annual summer training
sessions for the forty faculty.

The Instructional Development staff member will be a full-time employee with
general managerial oversight of the graduate and undergraduate students, the
four workstudy students, and the facilities. **(Funding for the graduate
students will be contributed by the Dean of the Graduate School, funding for
the undergraduate students will be contributed by the Dean of the College of
Arts and Humanities, and the workstudy students will be contributed by the
University.)** The primary responsibility of the Instructional Development
staff member will be to work with K-16 faculty and students to create
classroom applications, develop testbeds of digitized humanities materials,
and create training programs for late-adopters of classroom instructional
technology (IT). This person will have expertise in the humanities, IT, and
curriculum development, and will establish a close working relationship with
the Campus' Center for Teaching Excellence. Also housed in MITH will be the
College's Computing Associate (CCA). The CCA's task currently is to provide an
interface between the faculty and the technology.

## IV. MITH AND ITS IMPACT

Three curriculum transformation projects on the University of Maryland campus
provide instructive models for how MITH will affect students and will
transform faculty roles. The Curriculum Transformation project has offered
faculty summer training for including material by and about women in
traditional courses. This project has profoundly altered traditional
humanities courses. The Lilly Teaching Fellows and the Center for Teaching
Excellence have drawn attention to teaching in ways never dreamed of on this
campus. All three projects suggest ways in which change can be instituted and
managed even on a large campus.

For students, the effect of studying in an electronic environment is a
powerful learning experience. English and Theater majors might search a
hypermedia edition of _The Taming of the Shrew_ , using snatches of film
adaptations and video clips of productions to analyze gender roles. In an art
history course, students might examine Seurat's _La Grande Jatte_ through
digital images of its various preliminary painting and sketch studies that
comprise much of Seurat's corpus, thus analyzing the evolution of the painter,
his painting, and the pointillist style.

In an American History course, a student could reconstruct a socio-historical
event or movement by searching online digital archives (e.g. the Library of
Congress' American Memory Collection Project, the National Archives, the
National Gallery of Art, and the National Museum of American Art) for original
sources that include digital images, sound files, film clips, and original
scanned documents.

In a comparative literature course, students exposed to questions of narrative
and narrativity, will examine the relationship between reader and text through
the application of the processes of digital narration. Faculty will create
hypertextual and virtual reality narratives. These will take students into
immersive forms of the narrative experience which in turn will open new
perspectives on the ancient art of story telling and its multiple forms.

The digital resources that will open up scholarship along new pathways will be
available to graduate students writing dissertations, faculty doing original
research, students in local community colleges and high schools, elementary
and middle-school teachers, senior citizens, and other adults. This multi-
form, multi-purpose usage is made possible by the content of--and access to--
the clips, images, sounds, and other digital materials provided by the MITH
Digital Archives, and created by members of the MITH community.

## V. PRIOR CHALLENGE GRANT SUPPORT

In 1980, UM received its first challenge grant from the National Endowment for
the Humanities. Funds from this Challenge Grant established the Harvey
Meyerhoff Professorship in Jewish History and the Joseph and Rebecca Meyerhoff
Center for Jewish Studies. The University's undergraduate major in Jewish
Studies was established when the Challenge Grant was received, and its
administration was placed under the aegis of the Meyerhoff Center. Currently,
with three endowed professorships and several state-supported faculty lines,
the Jewish Studies Program offers exemplary courses in Jewish History, Hebrew
language and literature, Bible, Rabbinics, Jewish philosophy, and Yiddish
language and literature. The

program also sponsors research projects, conferences, seminars, and lectures
as well as community and public programs.

The Meyerhoff Center functions as an interdisciplinary program that draws its
members from a number of different departments, including Asian and Eastern
European Languages, Comparative Literature, English, History, Philosophy, and
Women's Studies. In addition to its core members, the Center includes a number
of associate members, whose research or teaching interests intersect with the
teaching of the Jewish Studies Program, and who have collaborated on Meyerhoff
Center projects. A faculty director responsible for coordinating the academic
program and for securing external support for new and existing initiatives
directs the Center. This successful administrative format provides the model
adopted for MITH.

## VI. FUNDRAISING PLAN

The College of Arts and Humanities has a history of attracting funding for
projects that include the use of technology in the humanities. In the past ten
years, more than a dozen substantial projects have received support. Funds
from major granting agencies such as NEH, FIPSE, NSF, and the Annenberg CPB
Project have leveraged additional funding from organizations such as WGBH
Boston, French National Television, the Smithsonian's Lemelson Center,
Portuguese National Television, the Army Research Institute, NIMH, and NSA. In
addition, technology vendors such as Apple and AT&T have invested in the
support of technology in the College by providing equipment for instructional
use.

The implementation of MITH is occurring at a particularly opportune time at
the University of Maryland. The University's comprehensive fund-raising
campaign, a $350 million

effort, was publicly announced in October, 1997; gifts totaling nearly $150
million have been committed to date.

Priorities of this campus-wide effort include increasing endowed funds to
support chairs, professorships, fellowships and scholarships; funding for
capital projects, including a state-of-the-art performing arts facility; and
endowed program funds and seed funds with an emphasis on interdisciplinary
efforts. This enhancement of our academic infrastructure is designed to
prepare the University for an expanded role in the twenty-first century and
addresses a broad range of needs. Within the College of Arts and Humanities,
MITH represents a key program initiative for the University's capital
campaign.

Fundraising for the Challenge Grant will be coordinated through the Office of
Corporate and Foundation relations in University Advancement. This office
generated in excess of $30 million in corporate and foundation support for
University initiatives in the last fiscal year. Consequently, the matching
requirements of the Challenge Grant fall well within the range of the office's
past performance. NEH guidelines allow ten percent of a Challenge Grant to be
expended on behalf of raising the matching funds. The University of Maryland
requests less than half of this allowable amount confident that this level of
support, combined with the University's investment in fundraising, will assure
that MITH will remain a priority throughout the campaign.

In addition to MITH's prominence as a campaign priority, there are other
significant factors that build a natural constituency for the success of the
fund raising and program-related outcomes: the University's strength in
information and applied technology through its research agenda and academic
curricula; correspondingly strong funding, research and contractual
relationships with leaders in the information technology industry; the
emergence of the Washington, DC metropolitan area, essentially, the home
community for the University, as a national center for advanced technology
industry; and a solid base of support from the local and national foundation
communities. These factors have led the University in recent years to receive
substantial support for its technology-based initiatives from corporations
such as AT&T, Hewlett Packard, IBM, Lockheed Martin, Lucent Technologies, and
Silicon Graphics.

Based in part on past performance, but in mind of the opportunity an NEH
Challenge Grant presents for securing new commitments and support, the
University anticipates obtaining the following gifts toward providing the $2.2
million needed to match the NEH award:

1 Donor @ $500,000 $500,000

3 Donors @ $250,000 $750,000

3 Donors @ $100,000 $300,000

9 Donors $50,000 $450,000

Gifts under $50,000 $200,000

## VII. CONCLUSION

The University of Maryland is poised to take this step at this particular
moment. Several factors define the moment. Most noteworthy is the convergence
of interests which characterizes the collaboration between the College of Arts
and Humanities, the Libraries, and Academic Information Technology Services.
The vision they share informs these pages. Without this collaboration, the
institution would repeat its history of bold dreams hostage to the vagaries of
grant getting. Without the impetus of this collaboration, the sharing of vital
resources would not have occurred.

The desire for individual units to work together, the desire for faculty to
convene in a central location is powerful and urgent. Large and bureaucratic
as the institution might appear to outsiders, it has demonstrated its capacity
for change and for adaptation. The College of Arts and Humanities, in
particular, is ready to lead its talented faculty through a transformative
intellectual experience which NEH endowment funds would make possible.

