| [![FSU Home Page](images/bluseal2.gif)](http://www.uncfsu.edu)[![Dept. of
Government and
History](images/g&h.gif)](http://www.uncfsu.edu/w4/dpt/ghp/index.htm)**Hist
500, Historiography--Syllabus**  
[Announcements](announce.htm) | [Description](descrip.htm) |
[Resources](texts.htm) | [Outline](outline.htm) | [Requirements](requirem.htm)
| [Communication](commun.htm) | [Syllabus](syllabus.htm) | [Home](index.htm)  
---  
  
NOTE: Print this out for use in class. However, the official syllabus for this
course is the website, NOT any printed version. Students are responsible for
checking the website regularly for updates and other information

#### Locator Information

|

**Course** |

**Instructor**  
---|---  
  
  * Semester/Year: **Fall, 1999**
  * Semester Hours of Credit: **3**
  * Section: **01**
  * Class Meeting Days and Time: **W 6:00-8:50 p.m.**
  * Class Location: **TSA 102**

|

  * Instructor: **Dr. John I. Brooks III**
  * Office Location: **TSA 113**
  * Office Phone: **486-1945**
  * Alternate Phone (Dept.): **486-1573**
  * E-Mail: [jbrooks@chi1.uncfsu.edu](mailto:%20jbrooks@chi1.uncfsu.edu)
  * Office Hours: **MWF 9:00-11:00, TR 12:30-1:30, W 4:00-5:50**

  
  
####  Course Description

This course introduces students to fundamental questions about the nature of
history and to the varieties of history that different answers to these
questions have inspired.  Students will investigate the kinds of questions
historians ask about the past, the relationship between theory and evidence in
historical writing, and the varieties of evidence historians use to
reconstruct the past.

#### Objectives

At the end of this course, successful students will have the following
knowledge and skills:

  * **Knowledge** :
    * philosophical issues related to the nature of history
    * contemporary approaches to history
    * recent historiographical controversies

  * **Skills** :
    * ability to write a critical review
    * ability to research and discuss historiographical issues
    * ability to use the Internet to research historiographical debates

#### Teaching Strategies

This class is taught as a seminar. Students should be prepared to discuss
assigned readings weekly, to lead discussions as assigned, and to present the
results of their own research in class.  Students should also be prepared to
discuss the works and presentations of guest speakers.

#### Schedule of Assignments and Due Dates

**No.** | **Assignment** | **Weight** | **Due Date**  
---|---|---|---  
01 | First presentation | 5% | See [Outline](outline.htm) and
[Guidelines](assign/pres.htm) for specific assignments and due dates.  
02 | First historiographic essay | 20%  
03 | First essay critique | 5%  
03 | Second presentation | 5%  
04 | Second historiographic essay | 20%  
05 | Second essay critique | 5%  
06 | Third presentation | 5% | Dec. 1  
07 | Third historiographic essay | 20% | Dec. 8  
08 | Participation | 15% |  
09 | Attendance make-up report (optional--up to 2) | excuses one absence or
two tardinesses |  
  
**Note** : All take-home assignments for this class must be submitted
electronically as well as on paper. For guidelines, see [Submitting Electronic
Files](http://www.uncfsu.edu/w4/fac/jbrooks/Frms/ElecFile.htm).

#### Evaluation

Grades and their numerical equivalents are as follows:

**Numeric Score** | **Letter Grade**  
---|---  
92 or above | A  
83-91 | B  
73-82 | C  
72 or below | F  
Incomplete |

I  
  
After the first exam and before the second, students will receive a **Student
Grade Report** detailing grades received, attendance, and participation.
Students with questions about anything on their Report should discuss them
with the instructor.

**Incompletes** are granted only if the student is unable to complete specific
course requirements for reasons beyond his or her control. Incompletes are
granted only if the student contacts the instructor before the end of the
term, and then only if the instructor agrees that the circumstances merit an
incomplete. The student and the instructor must complete an Incomplete Grade
Form. **Students who do not contact the instructor before the end of the term
will receive a grade of F (0) on all missing work.**

####  Course Policies

#### Late Work

Students are responsible for all work assigned in this class, whether or not
they are present. Assignments must be completed on time. **Late work** will be
penalized one letter grade unless you have a good excuse, and no assignments
will be accepted more than one week late.

Students may **rewrite** two of the essays. Rewrites are due one week after
the instructor hands graded assignments back to the class, whether or not you
attend class that day.

**Make-ups** for missed examinations and quizzes are given at the discretion
of the instructor. The absence must be excused under the same conditions as
absence from class. In general, make-ups must be taken within one week of the
original date of the exam.

#### Attendance

Attendance is required. **Excessive absence** (more than 2 absences for weekly
classes) can affect the participation grade.

**Tardiness** disrupts the class and is also discouraged. Any student arriving
after the instructor has finished calling the roll may be considered tardy,
and two incidents of unexcused tardiness count as one unexcused absence.
Students who arrive late should check with the instructor at the end of class
to make sure they are not marked absent.

Students are expected to remain in class until they are dismissed, unless they
have received prior permission from the instructor to leave early. **Early
departure** from class will be treated the same as tardiness--two such
occurrences will constitute an unexcused absence.

**Excuses** for tardiness and absence will be accepted at the discretion of
the instructor. Written documentation may be required, especially for lengthy
or repeated problems. Students should bring excuses to the instructor's
attention as soon as possible--before the event if it is foreseeable,
immediately after if not. Excuses for tardiness should be discussed with the
instructor immediately after the class for which the student is tardy; excuses
for absence should be discussed the first day the student returns to class.
With rare exceptions, **excuses will not be accepted after these dates**.

Students may make up **one** unexcused absence or **two** unexcused
tardinesses by writing a report on the material covered during the missed
class. The report must be typed, 2-3 pages long (500-750 words).

#### Participation

All students are expected to come to class prepared to discuss the assigned
material. This implies that students should read the material before class.
Perfect comprehension is not expected at the beginning of class, but students
should be familiar with the topic and the major points, and they should have
identified areas they do not understand well enough to ask focused,
intelligent questions about them. The instructor reserves the right to give
unannounced quizzes or other assignments to check students' preparation.

There are three principal ways students can participate:

  1. by asking and answering questions in class, 
  2. by contributing to their team, and 
  3. by discussing courses material with the instructor during office hours. 

Students are expected to observe normal courtesy in class. They are expected
to pay attention to the instructor, to take detailed notes, to refrain from
personal conversation, and to avoid any other behavior that disturbs others. A
student who does not observe these courtesies may be asked to leave the room.

#### Academic Honesty

Students should be aware that a university is a community of scholars
committed to the discovery and dissemination of knowledge and truth. Without
freedom to investigate all materials, scrupulous honesty in reporting
findings, and proper acknowledgment of credit, such a community can not
survive. Students are expected to adhere to the highest traditions of
scholarship. Infractions of these traditions, such as plagiarism (cheating),
are not tolerated. Misrepresenting someone else's words or ideas as one's own
constitutes plagiarism. In cases where plagiarism occurs, the instructor has
the right to penalize the student(s) as he or she thinks appropriate. One
guideline holds that the first offence results in failure of the assignment,
the second offence in failure of the course.

Team assignments require a special note. Each member of the study team is
expected to contribute to the assignment. Every member of the team gets the
same grade for the assignment. A student who does not contribute is
essentially misrepresenting someone else's words and ideas as one's own. This
is academic dishonesty, and it will be treated as such.

### Outline

Readings for specific dates may vary slightly from the following table as the
pace of the class dictates. Students are responsible for keeping up with any
such changes, which will also be posted on this web site.

Underlined readings are links to web sites. Students are responsible for
learning how to use the World Wide Web to get readings. Students should print
out copies of the readings to bring to class. Plan ahead--the Web is a great
learning resource, but glitch happens. Do not tell me you could not get the
reading because the server went down ten minutes before class.

Readings marked "reserve" are available from the circulation desk of Chesnutt
Library. Students should also make copies to bring to class.

Assignments for presentations and critiques are indicated by the student's
initials in the right-hand columns. See [Requirements](requirem.htm) for more
information.

**Unit** | **Date** | **Topic: Reading** | **Assignments**  
---|---|---|---  
  
01 | Aug 18 | **Introduction** | **Pres.** | **Crit.**  
  
02 | Aug 25 | **Problems of Historical Knowledge** : Wilson, chs. 1-2; Daniel
Goldhagen, ["Ordinary Germans and the
Holocaust"](http://www.historyplace.com/pointsofview/goldhagen.htm); [Recent
Writings by Daniel Goldhagen](http://www.goldhagen.com/welcome.html), esp.
["The New Discourse of Avoidance"](http://www.goldhagen.com/nda0.html); Norman
Finkelstein, "[Articles and Reviews relating to the Goldhagen
Thesis](http://www.normanfinkelstein.com/articles.html)" (see esp.
[Finkelstein's Response To
Goldhagen](http://www.normanfinkelstein.com/goldhagenresponse.html));
Blumenthal, "[A Scholarly Dispute on the Cause of the
Holocaust](http://www.normanfinkelstein.com/nyt.html)"; [H-Net Discussion
Log](http://www.h-net.msu.edu/logs/)\--keyword search on "Goldhagen" and
"Finkelstein" | AS | JV  
  
03 | Sep 1 | **History and Theory--Interpretations of Andrew Jackson** :
Davidson and Lytle, ch. 4; [Frederick Jackson Turner, "The Significance of the
Frontier in American
History](http://wsrv.clas.virginia.edu/~tsawyer/DRBR/turnerth.txt)"; Rogin,
_Fathers and Children_ (reserve) |  RT | MJ  
  
04 | Sep 8 | **Social History and Visual Evidence** : Wilson, ch 4; Davidson
and Lytle, ch. 8; Riis, _[How the Other Half
Lives](http://www.cis.yale.edu/amstud/inforev/riis/title.html);_ guest
speaker, Dr. Tom Hennessey |  MJ | MK  
  
  | Sep 15 | Cancelled due to hurricane |   |  
  
05 | Sep 22 | **Social History and Oral Evidence** : Wilson, ch 4; Davidson
and Lytle, ch. 7; [American Slave Narratives: An Online
Anthology](http://xroads.virginia.edu/~HYPER/wpa/wpahome.html); Gordon-Reed,
_Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings: An American Controversy_ (reserve) |  MK
| AS  
  
06 | Sep 29 | **History and the Human Sciences** : Wilson, ch. 3; [Geertz,
Thick Description](http://xroads.virginia.edu/g/DRBR/geertz2.txt); Le Roy
Ladurie, _Montaillou_ (reserve) |  EG | BM  
  
07 | Sep 29 | **Intellectual History** : Davidson and Lytle, ch. 3;
Fliegelman, _Declaring Independence_ (reserve);  Stephen E. Lucas, ["The
Stylistic Artistry of the Declaration of
Independence"](http://www.nara.gov/exhall/charters/declaration/decstyle.html);
[The Declaration of
Independence](http://www.nara.gov/exhall/charters/declaration/declaration.html)
| BM | EG  
  
08 | Oct 6 | **Problems of Local History** : Johnson, "The Civil Rights
Movement in North Carolina"; guest speaker, Dr. Stanley Johnson | JV | RT  
  
09 | Oct 13 | **Actors--Gender** : Wilson, ch. 5; Davidson and Lytle, ch. 13;
Betty Friedan, "[The Sexual Solipsism of
Freud](http://werple.net.au/~lynnbea/lib/friedan.htm)" | MJ | MK  
  
10 | Oct 20 | **Rational Actor Theory and Public Policy--The Decision to Drop
the Atomic Bomb** : Wilson, ch. 5; Davidson and Lytle, ch. 12; [The Enola Gay
and the Atomic Bomb](http://www.nhk.or.jp/nuclear/e/text/sumiso.htm) (canceled
version); [The Enola Gay
Exhibit](http://www.nasm.edu/GALLERIES/GAL103/gal103.html) (final version);
[H-Asia Smithsonian Enola Gay Exhibit
Controversy](http://www.h-net.msu.edu/~asia/threads/thrdenola.html); guest
speaker, Dr. Claude Hargrove | RT | MJ  
  
11 | Oct 27 | **Postmodernism and History** : Wilson, ch. 5, 6; Foucault,
"[What Is an
Author?](http://www.georgetown.edu/irvinemj/english016/texts/foucault.html)";
Jean Baudrillard, [In the Shadow of the
Millennium](http://www.ctheory.com/a61.html); Baudrillard,[ DisneyWorld
Company](http://www.ctheory.com/e25-disneyworld_comp.html); __[Disneyland
Paris Home Page](http://www.disneylandparis.com/disney/smain.htm); [Tokyo
DisneyLand Official Home Page](http://www.tokyodisneyland.co.jp/); Pollan,
[Town Building is No Mickey Mouse
Operation](http://hellskitchen.net/develop/news/mp121497.html) |  MK | AS  
  
12 | Nov 3 | **World History 1** : Wilson, ch. 7; Feiermann, "Africa in
History" (reserve), Oyler, TBA; guest speaker, Dr. Dianne Oyler | JV | BM  
  
13 | Nov 10 | **World History 2** : Wilson, ch. 7; Klor de Alva, "The
Postcolonization of (Latin) American Experience" (reserve); Corse, TBA; guest
speaker, Dr. Theron Corse | EG | RT  
  
14 | Nov 17 | **History and the Future** : Wilson, review; TBA | BM | JV  
  
15 | Nov 24 | [**Virtual Discussion--History and
Quantification**](http://courses.uncfsu.edu/discusshist500/Default.htm):
Wilson, ch. 3; Dowdle, "The Protomodern Presidency" (reserve); Davidson and
Lytle, ch. 5, pp. 103-11 |  AS | EG  
  
16 | Dec 1 | **Student Presentations** |    |  
  
17 | Dec 8 | **Student Presentations** |    |  
  
#### Bibliography

#### Textbooks![wlsncov.jpg \(5279 bytes\)](images/wlsncov.jpg)

  * Davidson, James West and Mark H. Lytle. _After the Fact: The Art of Historical Detection._ 3d ed. McGraw-Hill, 1992.
  * Rampolla, Mary Lynn.  _A Pocket Guide to Writing in History._ 2d ed.   New York: Bedford/St. Martin's, 1998.
  * Wilson, Norman J. _History in Crisis? Recent Directions in Historiography._ Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1998.

####  Reserve (Chesnutt Library)

  * Brooks, John I., III. _The Eclectic Legacy: Academic Philosophy and the Human Sciences in Nineteenth-Century France._ Newark, Delaware: University of Delaware Press, 1998.
  * Dowdle, Andrew J. "The Protomodern Presidency." Unpublished paper. 1999.
  * Feiermann, Steven. "Africa in History: The End of Universal Narratives." In _After Colonialism: Imperial Histories and Postcolonial Displacements,_ 40-65. Edited by Gyan Prakash. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995.
  * Gordon-Reed, Annette. _Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings: An American Controversy._
  * Johnson, Stanley. "The Civil Rights Movement in North Carolina." Unpublished paper. 1999.
  * Klor de Alva, Jorge. "The Postcolonization of (Latin) American Experience." In _After Colonialism: Imperial Histories and Postcolonial Displacements_. Edited by Gyan Prakash. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995.
  * Le Roy Ladurie, Emmanuel. _Montaillou: Promised Land of Error._ New York: Vintage Books, 1979.
  * Rogin, _Fathers and Children: Andrew Jackson and the Subjugation of the American Indian._ New York: Vintage Books, 1976.

#### Web Resources

  * "American Slave Narratives: An Online Anthology." 1996-1998. <<http://xroads.virginia.edu/~HYPER/wpa/wpahome.html>> (16 August 1999).
  * Baudrillard, Jean. "DisneyWorld Company." 4 March 1996\. __<<http://www.ctheory.com/e25-disneyworld_comp.html>> (16 August 1999).
  * ___. "In the Shadow of the Millennium." September 1998\. <<http://www.ctheory.com/a61.html>> (16 August 1999).
  * "Disneyland Paris Home Page." <<http://www.disneylandparis.com/disney/smain.htm>> (16 August 1999).
  * "The Enola Gay and the Atomic Bomb." January 1995. <<http://www.nhk.or.jp/nuclear/e/text/sumiso.htm>> (16 August 1999).
  * "The Enola Gay Exhibit." 9 January 1999. <<http://www.nasm.edu/GALLERIES/GAL103/gal103.html>> (16 August 1999).
  * Finkelstein, Norman G. "[Articles and Reviews relating to the Goldhagen Thesis](http://www.normanfinkelstein.com/articles.html)". <<http://www.normanfinkelstein.com/articles.html>> (16 August 1999).
  * Friedan, Betty. "The Sexual Solipsism of Freud." 1963\. <<http://werple.net.au/~lynnbea/lib/friedan.htm>> (16 August 1999).
  * Goldhagen, Daniel J. "Ordinary Germans and the Holocaust". 1996. <<http://www.historyplace.com/pointsofview/goldhagen.htm>> (16 August 1999).
  * ___. "Recent Writings by Daniel Goldhagen". <<http://www.goldhagen.com/welcome.html>> (16 August 1999).
  * Geertz, Clifford. "Thick Description: Toward an Interpretive Theory of Culture." 17 Sep 1994. <<http://xroads.virginia.edu/g/DRBR/geertz2.txt>> (16 August 1999).
  * [](http://www.h-net.msu.edu/)H-Asia Smithsonian Enola Gay Exhibit Controversy. 10 Feb.- 25 Sept. 1995. <<http://www.h-net.msu.edu/~asia/threads/thrdenola.html>> (16 August 1999).
  * H-Net, Humanities and Social Sciences Online. <<http://www.h-net.msu.edu/>> (16 August 1999).
  * Pollan, Michael. "Town Building is No Mickey Mouse Operation." 14 December 1997. <<http://hellskitchen.net/develop/news/mp121497.html>> (16 August 1999).
  * Riis, Jacob. _How the Other Half Lives._ New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1890. Hypertext ed. David Phillips, 1995. __ <<http://www.cis.yale.edu/amstud/inforev/riis/title.html>> (16 August 1999).
  * Tokyo DisneyLand Official Home Page. <<http://www.tokyodisneyland.co.jp/>> (16 August 1999).
  * Turner, Frederick Jackson. "The Significance of the Frontier in American History." <<http://wsrv.clas.virginia.edu/~tsawyer/DRBR/turnerth.txt>[>](http://wsrv.clas.virginia.edu/~tsawyer/DRBR/turnerth.txt) (16 August 1999).

  
  
* * *

Created by John I. Brooks III ([e-mail](mailto:jbrooks@chi1.uncfsu.edu); [home
page](http://spacer.uncfsu.edu/f_brooks/index.htm)). Last updated 08/18/99.  
  
---

