**HIEU 507 MODERN THEORY: MARX, ARENDT, SARTRE, FOUCAULT**

Allan Megill, University of Virginia, Fall 1999

**111 Rouss Hall, 3:30-6:00 pm Mondays**

c:\wpdocs\0syllabi\50799des.yes

  
  

**COURSE DESCRIPTION AND REQUIREMENTS**

  
  

**Note** : For full information about this course, you need to have in your
possession both this handout and the handout headed "Syllabus/Bibliography."
_You should read both handouts carefully_.

**assiatic mode of production?**

**INSTRUCTOR CONTACT INFORMATION** : _Office Location_ : 221 Randall Hall.

  
  

_Office Hours_ : Tu Th 3:30-4:30, **and by arrangement**. You should not feel
confined to my scheduled office hours. An efficient means of arranging an
appointment is by e-mailing me, at _megill@virginia.edu_ ; it is best to
e-mail me a day or two in advance. Often, I can arrange meetings at other
times than the official hours (Friday afternoons are often a good time to see
me, and sometimes Wednesday afternoons). **Note:** On occasion I shall have to
cancel office hours because of other obligations. It is helpful, therefore, to
contact me ahead of time even if you plan to come during regularly scheduled
hours. I cannot _guarantee_ my presence at any particular scheduled office
hour, unless you have alerted me that you will be coming to see me then.

  
  

_Telephone Numbers_ : _Office_ : 924-6414 (voicemail after several rings if
there is no answer). _Home_ : 971-8744 (answering machine after several
rings). You shouldn't hesitate to phone me at home: I far prefer working there
to working in Randall Hall. If we are otherwise occupied we generally don't
answer the phone; but avoid 5 pm-9:30 pm, and don't phone later than 10:30 pm.

_E-mail_ : megill@virginia.edu or amegill@yahoo.com

  
  

_Instructor's personal home page_ : http://www.people.virginia.edu/~adm9e

  
  

_Course home page_ : http:/toolkit.virginia.edu/HIEU507-1 Note: Most course
handouts will be available via either the course home page or my personal home
page. You should look for course announcements on the course home page. The
easiest way to get to the toolkit is probably via the library HOME page. Click
on toolkit.

  
  

**Course Subject and Rationale** : In this course we shall examine four major
theorists: Karl Marx, Hannah Arendt, Jean-Paul Sartre, and Michel Foucault.
What unites the last three of these thinkers is the common conviction that we
can no longer rely on "the firm basis of traditional values" (as Arendt put it
in 1946). They also respond, in one way or another, to the looming shadow of
Marx. Each of these thinkers could easily be the subject of an entire
semester's work, and so our examination of them will necessarily be selective
in character: we cannot do justice to any of these thinkers over a period of
only thirteen or fourteen weeks. But at least we can gain insight into some
interesting aspects of each thinker's work: what you do with that insight
later is up to you.

  
  

In recent years I have become interested in the commitment of many Western
thinkers in the seventeenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth centuries to what I
call "embedded rationality" -- that is, their commitment to the notion that
some sort of rationality is to be found _in_ the world (Hegel and Marx are two
thinkers in whom such a commitment is evident). Much twentieth-century theory
is a matter of trying to discern how to respond to the collapse of the more or
less unquestioned authority of embedded rationality. In my book _Prophets of
Extremity: Nietzsche, Heidegger, Foucault, Derrida_ (Berkeley and Los Angeles:
University of California Press, 1985), I focused on the "crisis thought" that
can be discerned in the four thinkers mentioned in the subtitle. I am now less
interested in crisis thought as such than I am in _any_ attempt to respond to
the collapse of the authority of traditional values, whether it abets a sense
of crisis or not. It seems to me that, not crisis as such, but the attempt to
respond to crisis, is what is distinctive about twentieth-century theory.

  
  

It is in the light of these concerns that I have chosen to focus in this
course on Marx, Arendt, Sartre, and Foucault. Why these thinkers in
particular? The choice is in some degree arbitrary, but not entirely so. One
thing that can be found in at least part of the work of three of the four
thinkers is a concern with ethics. Such a concern is very much present in
Arendt, and it is no accident that the course begins with a consideration of
her work. As for Foucault, I was struck in the first half of the 1980s by what
seemed to be his "aestheticist" wish to replace ethics with art or style. But
it is now clear that in the last several years of his life (he died
unexpectedly in June 1984, of complications from AIDS) there was something of
a shift in his interests toward ethics and related concerns (although he
himself would probably have said that in his last work he was simply
continuing concerns that had been there in the beginning). Sartre's concern
with ethics was highlighted by the posthumous publication of his _Notebooks
for an Ethics_. Marx did not at any point articulate an ethics (as Eugene
Kamenka showed, years ago, in _The Ethical Foundations of Marxism_ ). This was
perhaps a fault, a weakness, in his perspective. In some sense he thought he
could rely on solid foundations that the more recent thinkers no longer are
confident of. They were thus, perhaps, forced back to an ethics.

  
  

In our reading of works by the four thinkers in question, I propose that we
pay particular attention to what they say that is relevant to the political
and ethical domains. A key question is: given a society in which people
disagree about many basics of belief and orientation, how is trust possible? I
tend to assume that trust is a precondition for common action in any social
order, or at least in any social order that one would want to live in, if
there is a choice. Of course, in the absence of trust one cannot say "trust
me." Trust has preconditions of its own, and one important question is what
those preconditions are.

  
  

We should also try, insofar as possible, to think about how our society, and
our experience of that society, can be illuminated by, and can illuminate,
what these thinkers have to say.

  
  

**Mode of Operation** : We shall read selectively in the writings of the four
theorists, and even more selectively in the secondary literature. Very often I
shall assign to one or two students the task of discussing and commenting on a
particular reading: sometimes these will be readings that the class in general
will not be doing. _Do_ expect frequent assignments to explicate something,
and to report back a bout it by e-mail. Characteristically, each week I shall
begin by speaking for 10-15 minutes in an attempt to situate the reading for
that week and to pose some issues for discussion. We shall then discuss the
reading. The class e-mail list will play an important role in our work.

  
  

**Requirements in Brief:** The requirements are to do the reading, to
participate in discussion, to introduce, on occasion, readings in class, to
write several short reaction pieces or class summaries to be posted on the
class e-mail list, and, _most important_ , to write a paper. The course is
mainly intended to provide an opportunity for students to explore in some
depth a topic related to one or another of the four thinkers. I envisage a
paper of ca. 20 double-spaced pages on some aspect of the work of one of the
theorists, or on the literature concerning the theorist, or on a problem with
which the theorist was concerned.

  
  

The nature of the material and level of the course dictate that students
should have some background in political theory, intellectual history,
religious studies (especially theology), or philosophy. While the course is
open to qualified upper-level undergraduates and to graduate students, pre-
enrollment data suggest that most students in the course will be
undergraduates.

  
  

**Requirements in Greater Detail** : Because this is an advanced
undergraduate/graduate class, significant contributions to class proceedings
will be required.

  
  

**(a)** The student will be expected to offer several summative and critical
reports over the course of the semester. Very often I will, in effect, "hand"
a student something--a chapter, an article--to be explicated for the benefit
of the class in general. The student should seek to clarify the piece of
reading, linking it to the more general themes of the course. It is expected
that these reports will be (a) clear, (b) accurate, and (c) interesting to the
class in general. They should also be short: a characteristic error by
students, when making oral reports in particular, is to speak too long, losing
sight of the class's wandering attention. But even written reports should be
fairly brief.

  
  

**(b)** Additionally, one or two students will be responsible each week for
summarizing in writing what was said in the class for that week
(characteristically, one student handles the first half of the class and the
other student the second half). Before 6 pm on the following Sunday, the
student will be expected to have posted a one- or two-page summary of the
preceding week's discussion to the class mailing list,
**hieu507-1@toolkit.virginia.edu**.

Each student is expected to consult his or her e-mail regularly. The class
toolkit gives automatic access to a class e-mail list.

  
  

**(c)** A major part of the course requirements is careful completion of the
reading. The student is expected to be able to contribute in class to the
discussion of the reading. To some extent (to be determined by the size and
needs of the class), students may be asked to provide "reading reactions" to
fellow class members prior to our meeting to discuss the reading in question,
although it is best to avoid any vast flurry of e-mail messages.

  
  

It is expected that students will access their e-mail late Sunday or early
Monday before the class meeting time, in order to read and think about the
summaries of the preceding class meeting and about any other items that have
been posted. It is hoped that this will improve the quality of discussion.
Students are also encouraged to respond to the discussion by making postings
after the class meets.

  
  

**Students should be aware that special care needs to be taken in making
e-mail postings.** A certain tentativeness of expression may well be advisable
in your e-mail correspondence. Remember that irony is easier to miss in
electronic statements than in statements made face to face.

  
  

( **d** ) The most important single requirement is the writing of a research
paper. For the purposes of this course, I define a "research paper" as a paper
that advances an original argument concerning some aspect of the material of
the class. (Note that this is a wider definition of "research paper" than the
one that normally applies in, for example, 800-level graduate seminars in
history, where a research paper would usually be a paper that relies in some
important measure on the examination of primary sources in the original
language.) See the "Syllabus/Selective Bibliography" for this course: in
Section 1 of that handout (especially Section 1.A) I give some guidance
concerning the search for a paper topic, and the Selective Bibliography itself
may give you a start. Note also that, as noted in that handout, it is required
that you arrange your work in such a way that by **Wednesday, October 6,
1999** you and I will be in agreement that you have a plausible paper
proposal. One can imagine a wide variety of possible topics, but the
possibilities _must_ be thoroughly discussed with the instructor. The due date
is **Wednesday, December 8, 1999** by 4 pm (although some negotiation with
regard to the due date is possible).

  
  

( **e** ) **Grading protocol** : You should assume that quality of class
participation (including discussion in class, plus particular presentations
you make in class, plus e-mail contributions) counts for about 50% of the
grade, and the paper for the remaining 50%. I should say that, in practice, I
tend to see the paper as summative of what you have learned in the class

**Books** : The following books have been ordered at the University of
Virginia Bookstore:

  
  

Hannah Arendt: _Between Past and Future_ ; _On Revolution_ ; _Eichmann in
Jerusalem_ ; _The Human Condition_.

Michel Foucault: _Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth_ ( _Essential Works of
Foucault_ , vol. 1).

Jean-Paul Sartre: _Critique of Dialectical Reason_ , vol 1 (not yet in as of
Sept 6).

Karl Marx: _Early Writings_ ; _Later Political Writings_.

