Science, Technology, and Society 200

Prof. Paul N. Edwards

Stanford University, Winter 1997

M 3:45-5:05, STS Seminar Room

Credit: 4 units with term paper, 2 units without (thesis students only)



## Senior Colloquium

## in

## Science, Technology, and Society



This year's Senior Colloquium provides an opportunity for graduating STS
seniors to examine some of the most basic conceptual problems in this field in
greater depth. Recent scholarship will provide students with theoretical
frameworks for considering problems such as human-machine interactions, the
cultural construction of technological risk, and the relationships among
technology and democracy in the modern state. Term papers will give students
the chance to use the concepts and problems raised in the readings by
exploring a technology policy issue of their choice.



**_Requirements:_**



Your grade will be based on how well you fulfill the following course
requirements.

(1) **Leading a class discussion** on a set of readings. This involves (a)
reading the material carefully, (b) preparing a short handout summarizing the
salient issues raised by the readings, (c) preparing a set of questions for
discussion, and (d) leading the discussion.

For this assignment you will work together with another student. Both of you
must help lead the discussion.

(2) **Class attendance.** The full participation of every student is vital to
the success of a small seminar like this one. You may skip one class for any
reason without penalty. For each missed class beyond this limit, you will
**lose one-third of a letter grade** on your final grade. For example, if you
missed a total of three classes and your course grade was an A, you would
receive a B+ instead.

(3) **Term paper.** You will write a 3500-4500 word paper on a topic of your
choice. The paper must draw upon the theories and approaches developed in the
course readings. This assignment has three parts.

> (a) A 300-word _prospectus,_ describing your topic and your initial approach
to it, is due in class on January 27th. You _must_ turn this in when it is
due, but you can change your topic later by turning in another prospectus
before February 10th.

>

> (b) A _full-length,_ _high quality_ _draft_ is due February 27th. It will be
returned a week later with comments and suggestions for revisions. This is a
serious deadline.

>

> (c) The _final version,_ edited, revised, and proofread, is due at the final
class meeting on March 13th.

>

> You will be graded on the quality of your writing as well as the content of
your analysis.

**Extension policy** on all written assignments: anyone who needs extra time
can take an **automatic extension** **of up to three days** (measured from the
class period when the assignment is due). This applies to **_all_** course
deadlines. Papers and exams can be turned in after the extension period, but
they will be penalized one-third of a letter grade for each additional day
they are late. There will be NO EXCEPTIONS to this policy.

**Grade options:** Seniors not writing theses receive four credits for this
course. Those writing theses receive two credits and are not required to write
a term paper; thesis students' grade will be based on class participation and
discussion leadership. All students **must take a letter grade** in the
course.

**Auditing** the course is allowed, with permission of the instructor.
However, auditors must agree to attend all classes, do the reading, and
participate in discussions (so why not register and get credit?)



**Required Texts:**

Merritt Roe Smith, ed., _Does Technology Drive History?_ (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1994).

Harry Collins and Trevor Pinch, _The Golem: What Everyone should know about
Science_ (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993).

Diane Vaughan, _The Challenger Launch Decision_ (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1996)

Shoshana Zuboff, _In the Age of the Smart Machine: The Future of Work and
Power_ (New York: Basic Books, 1988).

Richard Sclove, _Democracy and Technology_ (New York: Guilford Press, 1995)

Bruno Latour, _Aramis, or the Love of Technology_ (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1996)



**Instructor:**

Prof. Paul Edwards, STS Program, Bldg. 370 Rm. 111, ext. 3-6817, email
pedwards@pcd

Office hours Tu/Th 2:00-3:00, and by appointment.



**Course Schedule**

  
* Readings marked (R) are contained in the Course Reader.

Monday 1/13 -- **Introduction**

> Reading: Collins and Pinch, _The Golem._ Read the Preface, Introduction, and
Conclusion. Also read at least 5 of the book's 7 chapters (choose those which
interest you most).

>

> _\-- Guidelines for discussions and final papers distributed --_

_Monday 1/20 is Martin Luther King Day, so our second class will be
**rescheduled** to:_

Tuesday, 1/21, 6-7:30 P.M. -- **Technological Determinism**

> Reading: Smith, _Does Technology Drive History?_

>

> Required: pp. 1-36, 53-142, 217-236

Monday 1/27 -- **Technology, Society, and Organizations**

> Reading: Latour, _Aramis, or the Love of Technology_

>

> _\-- Prospectus for final paper due in class --_

Monday 2/3 -- **Critiques of** **Social Constructivism**

> Reading: Gross and Levitt, _Higher Superstition,_ chapters 1 and 2 (R)

>

> Selected documents on the "Sokal affair" (R)

Monday 2/10 -- **Technology and Politics**

> Reading: Sclove, _Democracy and Technology_

_Monday 2/17 is President's Day, so class will be **rescheduled** to:_

Tuesday, 2/18, 6-7:30 p.m. -- **Technology and Power**

> Reading: Zuboff, _In the Age of the Smart Machine_ (pp. 19-123, 315-386)

>

> Recommended: Zuboff, pp. 124-173, 245-310

Monday, 2/24 -- **Technology and Organizational Culture**

> Reading: Vaughan, _The Challenger Launch Decision_

Thursday, 2/27

> _\-- Final paper drafts due at my office by 5:00 PM --_

>

> _\-- NO EXTENSIONS --_

Monday, 3/3 -- **Environmental Science, Technology, and Policy**

> Reading: Hays, "Three Decades of Environmental Politics" (R)

>

> Jasanoff, "Science, Politics, and the Renegotiation of Expertise at EPA" (R)

>

> Jasanoff, "Acceptable Evidence in a Pluralistic Society" (R)

>

> _\-- Final paper drafts returned for revision --_

Monday 3/10 -- **Conclusion**

> No reading assignment: general class discussion.

>

> _\-- Final paper due in class --_

