**Fall 2000** |

**[David Walker](../../faculty/walker.html)**  
---|---  
  
**English 332** |

**Rice 24, (440) 775-8584**  
  
**MWF, 2:30-3:20**  
**King 341** |

**Office hours: MF, 3:30-5  
TTh, 1:30-3:00  & by appt**  
  
|

**E-mail:[David.Walker@oberlin.edu](mailto:david.walker@oberlin.edu)**  
  
### **MODERN POETRY II: IMAGISM TO POSTMODERNISM**

**_Texts_ :**

    Ezra Pound, _Selected Poems_ (New Directions)      T. S. Eliot, _The Waste Land and Other Poems_ (Penguin)     William Carlos Williams, _Selected Poems_ , ed. Tomlinson (New Directions)     Wallace Stevens, _The Palm at the End of the Mind_ (Vintage)     Federico Garcia Lorca, _Selected Poems_ (New Directions)     Anna Akhmatova, _Poem Without a Hero and Selected Poems_ (Oberlin)      (plus selected poems by Marianne Moore and Pablo Neruda in a photocopied packet) 

**_Course requirements_ :** regular attendance and participation; small-group
meetings in preparation for Friday discussions; two short papers (3-4 pages);
a longer paper (10-12 pages) due at the end of the semester; and a final
exercise. _I consider regular attendance and active participation in
discussion to be integral parts of the course._ Please feel free to see me
whenever you have questions or problems you'd like to talk about, or to email
me ( _[David.Walker@oberlin.edu](mailto:david.walker@oberlin.edu)_ ) with
quick questions or comments. My office is Rice 24 (x8584); office hours are MF
3:30-5:00, TTh 1:30-3:00, and other times by appointment.

> > **_A note on goals and methods_ :**

On one level, the purpose of this course is to introduce you to some of the
world's best poetry written in the modern period, between (roughly) 1910 and
1945. At the same time, we'll be using this material to develop an
understanding of the intellectual and aesthetic context in which these works
were produced, the large and amorphous set of tendencies loosely known as
Modernism. It's important to understand that not everything written in the
modern period is Modernist, nor is it always easy to categorize: there's no
airtight definition on which all critics would agree. Most discussions of
modernist art, though, would emphasize the following tendencies: (1)
deliberate reaction against what were perceived as the worn-out conventions of
late 19th-c. art (Pound's "make it new"); (2) self-conscious formal
experiment; (3) reflection of central developments in modern intellectual
history (Darwin, Freud, Jung, Marx...); (4) heightened use of irony; and (5)
new challenges for the reader/viewer. We'll want to keep this list of issues
in mind, challenging and/or adding to them as necessary, as we study the
individual poets.

Modernism was an international movement concentrated in Europe and the U.S.,
much too diverse in its schools and factions to be adequately encompassed in a
single semester; rather than survey dozens of poets superficially, I've chosen
to study a representative few in some depth. We will focus on five American
poets (two of whom were expatriates), and will use a Spaniard, a Russian, and
a Chilean to suggest the international scene. This means, regrettably, leaving
out primary attention to Italian Futurism and Hermeticism, French Surrealism,
and German Expressionism, among other schools. I hope the course will
encourage you to read more widely in the period, and I will allow you the
option of writing your final paper on a modernist poet other than those we're
studying. I have also arranged to use the resources of the art museum
periodically as a way of getting at modernism from a different but highly
relevant angle (see schedule below).

Modernist art _is_ inherently difficult, for reasons we'll discuss. Although
we'll be paying serious attention to theoretical and historical concerns, in
order to do the poems justice it will be necessary to spend the bulk of class
time on careful, sustained, close reading. As a central modernist tenet has
it, poetry is made not of ideas, but of words. If you're not prepared to share
an interest in the intricacies of poetic language, texture, and form, then
this class is probably not for you. I will also expect you to spend
substantial time outside class coming to terms with the assigned poems
(reading, rereading, discussing with each other, getting help from the reserve
reading, etc.): the better prepared you are by the time you show up for class,
the more productive our discussions are apt to be. By the end of the semester
I hope you will all be confident and informed readers of modern poetry; it
will take considerable effort, individually and collectively, for that to be
accomplished, but the rewards should be considerable.

I will expect active participation in discussion from each member of the
class; this means, first of all, preparing carefully, noting issues in the
day's reading that seem to you particularly worth talking about. (I strongly
encourage you to write all over your text as you read: making notes to
yourself, marking passages that seem especially important or problematic,
etc.) It also means listening and responding thoughtfully to each other in
class, not just talking to hear yourself talk. Good discussion in a class this
size doesn't usually happen automatically; it depends on everyone's
willingness to cultivate the skills required. I'd like this class to feel like
a genuine community, and for each of you to be committed to bringing that
about.

**_Syllabus_ :**

W 9/6 |

Introduction  
---|---  
  
F 9/8 |

Imagism, the Self, and the Modernist Moment: read Pound's "A Retrospect" and
poems by Swinburne, Dowson, and H.D. (all handouts)  
  
**EZRA POUND (1885-1972)**

M 9/11 |

from _Ripostes_ (1912): Portrait d'une Femme (16); from _Lustra_ (1916): The
Garden (26), Salutation (26), The Spring (27), A Pact (27), Les Millwin (30),
A Song of the Degrees (31), In a Station of the Metro (35)  
[ _Reserve reading_ : Kenner, _The Pound Era_ : "Imagism"]  
---|---  
  
W 9/13 |

from _Lustra_ : Alba (36), The Encounter (36), The Tea Shop (37), The Lake
Isle (38), Villanelle: The Psychological Hour (39); from _Cathay_ __ (1916):
The Beautiful Toilet (50), The River-Merchant's Wife: A Letter (52)  
[ _Reserve_ : _The Pound Era_ : "The Muse in Tatters" and "The Invention of
China"]  
  
F 9/15 |

"Hugh Selwyn Mauberley" (all poems 61-77)  
  
**T. S. ELIOT (1888-1965)**

M 9/18 |

Poems from _Prufrock and Other Observations_ (1917): The Love Song of J.
Alfred Prufrock, Portrait of a Lady, Preludes, Rhapsody on a Windy Night,
Morning at the Window, Hysteria  
[ _Reserve_ : Pound, "TSE," in his _Literary Essays_ , 418-22]  
---|---  
  
W 9/20 |

from _Poems 1920_ : Gerontion, Sweeney Erect, A Cooking Egg, The Hippopotamus,
Whispers of Immortality, Sweeney Among the Nightingales  
[ _Reserve_ : Eliot's "Tradition and the Individual Talent" (1919), in his
_Selected Essays_ and numerous anthologies; also online at
http://www.bartleby.com/200/sw4.html]  
  
F 9/22 |

Class preparation: review this week's reading  
_(_ ** _Class meets in the Print Study Room of the art museum, with Stephan
Jost, Curator of Academic Programs and Exhibitions_ : **art of the '10s and
'20s: post-Impressionism and Cubism.)  
  
M 9/25 |

_The Waste Land_ (1922). Read the whole poem but ignore Eliot's notes.  
  
W 9/27 |

_The Waste Land_. Reread the poem. Read the notes. Look at the copy of the
facsimile of the manuscript on reserve. There's also a hypertext version
available at http://eliotswasteland.tripod.com , though beware that some of
its links are a little screwy.  
  
F 9/29 |

Discussion.  
  
**WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS (1883-1963)**

M 10/2 |

from _Al Que Quiere!_ (1917): Apology (16), Pastoral (17), El Hombre (20), To
a Solitary Disciple (23), Dedication for a Plot of Ground (25); from _Sour
Grapes_ (1921): To Waken an Old Lady (31), The Widow's Lament in Springtime
(34), The Lonely Street (35)  
[ _Reserve_ : "Yours, O Youth" in Williams' _Selected Essays_ , __ 32-37]

> > > **_SHORT PAPER #1 DUE_**  
  
---|---  
  
W 10/4 |

from _Spring and All_ (1923): Spring and All (39), The Pot of Flowers (40),
The Farmer (41), At the Faucet of June (46), The Eyeglasses (48), The Right of
Way (49), To Elsie (53), The Red Wheelbarrow (56)  
[ _Reserve_ : sample the prose from _Spring and All_ , in _Imaginations_ ]  
  
F 10/6 |

from _Collected Poems 1921-1931_ : Young Sycamore (61), Poem (70), Nantucket
(72), This is Just to Say (74), Death (78), The Botticellean Trees (80), The
Descent of Winter (82)  
  
M 10/9 |

> > [Yom Kippur -- no class]  
  
W 10/11 |

from _An Early Martyr_ (1935): Flowers by the Sea (91), The Locust Tree in
Flower (94), View of a Lake (95), To a Poor Old Woman (97), Proletarian
Portrait (98), The Yachts (101); from _Complete Collected Poems 1906-1938_ :
Autumn (124), The Term (125), The Poor (129), The Defective Record (130)  
  
F 10/13 |

from _The Broken Span_ (1941): The Last Words of My English Grandmother (139),
A Portrait of the Times (141), Against the Sky (142); from _The Wedge_ (1944):
A Sort of a Song (145), Burning the Christmas Greens (148), The Semblables
(152), The Forgotten City (155), The Bare Tree (157)  
  
**FALL BREAK, OCTOBER 14-22**  
---  
  
**WALLACE STEVENS (1879-1955)**

M 10/23 |

from _Harmonium_ (1923): Cy Est Pourtraicte (3), *Sunday Morning (5), Peter
Quince at the Clavier (8), The Silver Plough-Boy (11), Six Significant
Landscapes (15), *Thirteen Ways of Looking at a Blackbird (20)  
---|---  
  
W 10/25

  |

The Death of a Soldier (35), *Metaphors of a Magnifico (35), Nuances of a
Theme by Williams (39), *Anecdote of the Jar (46), *The Snow Man (54), Tea at
the Palaz of Hoon (54), *A High-Toned Old Christian Woman (77)  
  
F 10/27 |

Class preparation: review this week's reading.  
( ** _Class meets in the Print Study Room in the art museum_ : **art of the
'30s: photography, Precisionism, etc.)  
  
M 10/30 |

from _Ideas of Order_ (1936): The Sun This March (92), Autumn Refrain (94),
*The Idea of Order at Key West (97), *Evening Without Angels (100), Sailing
After Lunch (111), Mozart, 1935 (115), Sad Strains of a Gay Waltz (116),
*Farewell to Florida (125)  
  
W 11/1 |

from _Parts of a World_ (1942): A Rabbit as King of the Ghosts (150), The
Dwarf (152), Loneliness in Jersey City (153), Poetry is a Destructive Force
(157), *The Poems of Our Climate (158), Dry Loaf (162), *The Man on the Dump
(163), The Latest Freed Man (165)  
  
F 11/3 |

Connoisseur of Chaos (166), Man and Bottle (173), *Of Modern Poetry (174),
*Landscape With Boat (176), Mrs. Alfred Uruguay (186), The Well-Dressed Man
With a Beard (190), Poem Written at Morning (197)  
  
**MARIANNE MOORE (1887-1972)**

M 11/6 |

To a Steam-Roller (1915), Critics and Connoisseurs (1916), Sojourn in the
Whale (1917), Roses Only (1917), Black Earth (1918), The Fish (1918), Poetry
(1919), England (1920)

**_SHORT PAPER #2 DUE_**  
---|---  
  
W 11/8 |

When I Buy Pictures (1921), A Grave (1921), Marriage (1923), Silence (1924)  
  
F 11/10 |

To a Snail (1924), An Octopus (1924), The Steeple-Jack (1932), The Frigate
Pelican (1934)  
  
**FEDERICO GARCIA LORCA (1896-1936)**

M 11/13 |

Ballad of the Little Square (7), Half Moon (29), Snail (33), The Street of the
Mutes (45), The Little Mute Boy (51), The Little Mad Boy (51), In Another Mode
(57), Useless Song (59), Song of the Barren Orange Tree (63)  
---|---  
  
W 11/15 |

Somnambule Ballad (65), The Faithless Wife (69), Ballad of One Doomed to Die
(81), Ballad of the Spanish Civil Guard (85), Your Childhood in Menton (111),
The Dawn (123)  
  
F 11/17 |

Lament for Ignacio Sanchez Mejias (135), Gacela of Unforeseen Love (157),
Gacela of the Terrible Presence (159), Gacela of the Dark Death (165), Gacela
of the Flight (167)  
  
**ANNA AKHMATOVA (1889-1966)**

M 11/20 |

Introduction (7); "He loved three things..." (31), Confusion (35), Evening
(37), "Flowers and non-living things..." (38), "God's angel..." (49), "I have
learned to live..." (50), "It smells of fire..." (51), "At my neck..." (59),
Calumny (67), "Submit to you?..." (69), Lot's Wife (71), "Finally we have
found..." (73)  
---|---  
  
W 11/22 |

Requiem (75-92)  
  
F 11/24 |

[Thanksgiving break]  
  
**EZRA POUND**

M 11/27 |

Cantos I-III, XIII, XLIX (96-105, 114-17, 141-42)  
[ _Reserve_ : Kenner, _The Pound Era_ : "The Cantos--I"; Williams, _Selected
Essays_ : "Excerpts from a Critical Sketch: A Draft of Thirty Cantos"]  
---|---  
  
W 11/29 |

Cantos LXXIV-LXXXIII (153-78)  
[ _Reserve_ : _The Pound Era_ : "The Cage"]  
  
F 12/1 |

Reread Wednesday's assignment  
  
> > **PABLO NERUDA (1904-1973)**

M 12/4 |

selected earlier poems, pp. 1-6 of handout (tr. Nathaniel Tarn, W. S. Merwin,
and Anthony Kerrigan)  
---|---  
  
W 12/6 |

_The Heights of Macchu Picchu_ (tr. David Young), parts I-VII  
  
F 12/8 |

_Macchu Picchu_ , parts VIII-XII  
  
M 12/11 |

Final exercise  
  
W 12/13 |

Conclusions

  
  
Su 12/17 |

**_FINAL PAPER DUE_**  
  
> >  

