**_PREJUDICE, DISCRIMINATION AND MORALITY: Phil 140-001_**

Fall, 2001

Val 140.001 TTh 1:15-2:30

Room: Old Main120

  

Instructor: Larry Ashley

Office: 140a Old Main, tel 2015; e-mail: ashleyl

Office hours: TTh 3:00-4:00; W 3:00-4:00

In this class we will address three main topics: racism, sexism and
homophobia. For each of these topics we will attempt to understand

1\. What the _reality_ is which underlies each topic

2\. What the _history_ is of each area of discrimination

3\. What the _ideal_ is for each topic and

4\. What proposals we can make to bring about _change_ toward the ideal.  


_TEXTS:_

Paula Rothenberg: _Racism and Sexism: an Integrated Study_

Ron Takaki: _A Different Mirror_  


_COURSE REQUIREMENTS:_

PAPER #1. At the end of the fifth week of class, you will hand in a 4-page,
typed, grammatically polished paper. It can be longer than this, but not
shorter. The paper will consist of a reaction and analysis of whichever of the
assignments has most interested you of those you read during the previous
weeks.

If you are dissatisfied with your level of accomplishment on Paper #1, you may
submit a makeup paper (with exactly the same guidelines as the first attempt).
Your grade cannot be lowered by a makeup attempt; it can only be raised or
remain the same. You must return your original paper to me with the makeup
effort so I can compare your progress. No other provisions for makeup work are
or will be provided.  


FINAL PAPER. You will hand in a 5-page(minimum) paper drawn from the material
we have covered since the College Break, due before 4:00 pm, on the last day
of classes. I will arrange office reviews of First drafts for those who wish
them, but to take advantage of this structure you will have to prepare a first
draft early, so budget your time accordingly. _NO late submissions of first
drafts accepted_.

Your submitted paper should go into more depth than the first paper, employ
the concepts we have developed in class, be logically presented and _must_ be
written with attention to style and grammar. More will be said about the
details of these assignments in class, but you should budget your time for
these assignments now. No excuses other than those certified by the Dean will
be accepted for late entries.  
    
    


**The Discussion pages: http://www.cortland.edu/www/philosophy/discuss.htm**

The students will be introduced to the local WWW discussion pages in the first
week of

classes. From the second week of class on, each student must contribute _an
entry per_

_week on the readings_ (Area 2 of the Discussion Page) or the News topic of
the week (Area 1

of the page). This work, performed throughout the semester, forms one fifth of
the student's

total grade, and should be respected as an important class obligation. Entries
shall be assessed

as to their _timeliness_ and _perceptiveness_.  


_The entry on the readings is basically an obligation to provide a proposal
for class discussion_

_on the readings assigned._  


_The entries on the News topic may also be discussed in class. They are a bit
more demanding_

_on student initiative, as they must not be off-the-cuff, but reasoned
responses. This may_

_require the student to use the WWW or the library on occasion to become
better informed on_

_the issue embedded in the news topic._  


**Outside reports** : Each student will be required to attend at least two
outside lectures,

demonstrations, etc during the course of the semester which are related to the
course topic.

Each student will submit a simple two-page summary of the main points of the
event they

attended. You may, though it is not required, include your reaction, either of
your assumed

identity or as yourself.  


**Your grade will be determined as follows:**

Paper #1 =20%

Paper #2 =30%

Quizzes, assignments and Discussion room =40%

Outside reports =10%  


**Attendance:**

Because of the "workshop" nature of this course, attendance is mandatory.
Policies for attendance outlined in the College Handbook will be followed. You
will be penalized for excessive absences. You will also be expected to
schedule conferences with me during the semester; failure to keep an
appointment you schedule without calling to cancel will be considered an
absence from class.  
    
    
  
  
  

**_Class schedule_**

Week 1:

**Aug 28** : Intro to course; intro each other

**Aug 30** : Reality check: _True Colors_

explore <http://www.cortland.edu/www/philosophy/discuss.htm>

and develop a response to the article in area #1

Week 2:

**Sep 4** : MacIntosh "White Privilege"Rothenberg, 163-168; Your privileges?
Mine?

**Sep 6:** _Fairer Sex_ ; Rothenberg, 21-29

Week 3:

**Sep 11: Tools** : **social constructions**. Rothenberg:45-59, 410-420

**Sep 13:** **Tools: Defining prejudice and discrimination**. Rothenberg:
95-107; 186-196  


Week 4:

**Sep 18:** **Tools** : **macroscopic analysis:** Rothenberg: 139-143, **_Read
this article at least three times before class_**

**Sep 20** : **Ethnic profiles and beginning history** : Rothenberg: pp
324-336, Pp 427-435; Takaki, Intro, p1-17

Week 5:

**Sep 25** : **History and National documents** : Rothenberg, 436-440; Takaki,
pp 18-76

**Sep 27** : **History and National documents** , Rothenberg, pp. 441-448;
Takaki, pp 79-166  


Week 6:

**Oct 2** : Take a rest from Rothenberg! Takaki, pl66-221

**Oct 4** : **History and National documents:** Rothenberg, pp 448-459;
Takaki, p 225-276  


Week 7:

**Oct 9** : **History and documents:** ; Rothenberg, 459-474; Takaki: p
277-339

**Oct 11** : **History and documents:** Rothenberg, 30-45, 367-373, 474-478;
Takaki, p340-366  


**_Fall Break_**  


Week 8.1:

**Oct 18** : **Postwar and National documents:** _Rothenberg_ , 478-505;
Takaki, 373- 428  


Week 9:

**Oct 23.** **Topic 1. Class in the** US- _Rothenberg_ , 168-182; 257-277

**Oct 25** : **Topic 1: Class in the US:** Johnny Washington; income exercise  


Week 10:

**Oct 30. Topic 2: How do you rate a country'?** _Rothenberg_ : 277-319

**Nov 1** : **Topic 3: Stereotypes and Language-** _Rothenberg:_ 511-526  


Week 11:

**Nov 6** : **Topic 4: Media impact-,** _Rothenberg-_. 563-572, 353-355,
527-535

**Nov 8** : **Topic 5: Native Americans.** Handouts  


Week 12:

**Nov 13** : **Topic 5: Native Americans-,** Handouts

**Nov 15** : **Topic 6: Cycles of Oppression: The Personal and the
Institutional-,** Handout: _Rothenberg_. 373-371; 95-100  


Week 8.2:

**Nov 20** : -- **Topic 7: Gay/lesbian issues--Media images**  


**_Thanksgiving break_**  


Week 13:

**Nov 27** : **Topic 7: Gay/lesbian issues**

**Nov 29** : TBA or makeup  


Week 14:

**Dec 4** : **Topic 8: Proposals for change,** _Rothenberg_ , 535-549,
572-582. 588-595

**Dec 6** : **Topic 8: Proposals for change: Affirmative action.-**
_Rothenberg,_ , 595-636  


Week 15:

**Dec 11** : CTEs, wrapup

