**ENGL/HIST 3300.01W**  
**Studies in American Culture**  
**Spring Semester 2002**  
**TR 12:30 pm - 1:45 pm**  
**(TLC 1117)**

**Dr. David W. Newton**  
Office: TLC 2252  
836-6512 (please leave a message with the secretary if I am not in)  
dnewton@westga.edu  
http://www.westga.edu/~dnewton  
Office Hours: Arranged by appointment

**Course Description and Objectives**

This course will emphasize analyzing cultural meaning, knowledge and values
through the examination of texts and contexts connected to the study of
American culture. Beginning with theories and methods of inquiry which define
the interdisciplinary contexts of American Studies as an academic discipline,
we will examine a variety of cultural situations and productions and explore
how individuals, groups and institutions interact in ways that giving meaning
to experience. Through a close reading of a variety of texts (e.g., historical
documents, literature, film, Internet resources and material artifacts), we
will work toward developing an approach that will enable us to analyze
critically the process involved in the ongoing creation, maintenance and
transmission of cultural meaning about America. Topics will include American
mythology and national identity; conflicting representations of Nature in
American history, literature and culture; the tensions between industry,
technology and the pastoral ideal; and the construction of ethnicity and
gender in America. Along the way, we will have the opportunity to explore some
America's most distinctive features: the American frontier and the American
Western; Disney World; the Vietnam War; the shopping mall; television and
print advertising; historical monuments; and local cultural landscapes.

**NOTE** : This is writing intensive course. By successfully completing this
course, you can receive WAC (Writing Across the Curriculum) credit toward
graduation. The goals of WAC are to encourage students to use writing as a way
to learn, to show students how to write effectively in their disciplines and
to improve students' writing skills. All students majoring in disciplines in
the School of Arts and Sciences are required to satisfy the WAC requirements
for WAC to graduate: These requirements include at least two 3000/4000 level W
courses for a total of 6 hours with at least 3 of these hours in the major.
Additional WAC certification is also available. See the 1999-2000
undergraduate catalog for details

**Learning Outcomes**  
Students will become familiar with the theories and methods that contribute to
the interdisciplinary focus of American Studies.  
Student will learn the major periodic divisions of American social and
intellectual history and the issues relevant to various American identities.  
Students will develop a critical understanding of the strengths and weaknesses
of traditional approaches to American Studies.  
Students will demonstrate in both oral and written work a critical facility
combining two or more disciplines.  
Students will demonstrate their command of academic English and of the tenets
of sound composition by means of thesis-driven analytical prose.  
Students will demonstrate their ability to use technology for academic
purposes.

**Required Texts**  
* Does the Frontier Experience Make America Exceptional? Richard Etulain, editor. St. Martin's, 1999. ISBN: 0312183097 (paperback).   
* West of Everything: The Inner Life of Westerns. Jane Tompkins. Reprint edition. Oxford UP (Trade), 1993. ISBN: 0195082680 (paperback).   
* Riders of the Purple Sage (Penguin Twentieth-Century Classics). Zane Grey. Introduction by Jane Tompkins. Penguin USA (Paperback), 1990. ISBN: 0140184406.   
* Course Reading Packet. Available online and on reserve in the library.   
* Additional materials will be placed on my website or on reserve in the library. 

Course Evaluation  
15%  Presentation/Homework Assignments (includes oral presentations and
written reports);  
10% Response Essay I;  
15% Response Essay II;  
20%  Midterm Examination;  
20%  Final Examination;  
20%  American Studies Research Project.

**NOTE** : Your response papers and presentation assignments are writing-to-
learn activities in which you will be using the writing exercise itself to
come to terms with the material we have read. Your responses will be used to
generate class discussion as well as to help you gain confidence in your
abilities to read and write about what you have learned. They will be
evaluated in terms of these expectations. The research project may grow out of
the initial work you've done on the response papers. ALL of these written
assignments should conform to the standards of college-level, academic
writing.

**Grading Scale**  
 Students will be assigned a letter grade for each assignment ranging from A+
to F based on the  following numerical scale. The numerical grade will be used
when calculating the final average at the  end of the semester.  
  97-100 = A+ | 87-89 = B+  | 77-79 = C+  | 67-69 = D+  | below 60 = F  
---|---|---|---|---  
94-96   = A  | 84-86 = B  | 74- 76 = C  | 64-66 = D |  
90-93   = A-  | 80-83 = B-  | 70- 73 = C-  | 60-63 = D- |  
  
**Attendance Requirement** s  
Improving your critical thinking and presentation skills requires commitment
and concentrated effort. Therefore, careful preparation and active
participation are crucial to your success in this course. I expect you to be
present and on time for all class meetings. Readings and other assignments
should be completed in advance of each class. You should come prepared to
participate actively in our class discussions. Because of the collaborative
nature of our work, you should make every effort to be present and prepared
when others are depending on you.  If you are going to be absent from class,
you should let me know, preferably in advance. Late work will not be accepted
unless you make arrangements with me in advance and you have a legitimate
reason (a serious medical or family emergency) for turning in work after it is
due. In the case of excused absences, it is your responsibility to make
arrangements with me to complete assignments you have missed immediately upon
your return to class. Failure to follow these guidelines will result in a zero
or grade reduction for work not submitted on time. You will not be able to
make up missed in-class assignments or group work done in class, and you will
not receive credit for these assignments.  
    
    
**  If you find it unavoidable to miss class, be aware of the following
guidelines**:  
    
a) no distinctions will be made between excused and unexcused absences. Four
absences are allowed during the course of the semester. Every absence
thereafter will result in a one-third letter grade reduction of your final
grade in the course, regardless of the nature of the absence;  
b) roll will be taken during every class period at the beginning of class. If
you arrive late, it is your responsibility to let me know so you are not
counted absent;  
c) it is your responsibility to keep up with your absences and tardies;  
d) you should use your allotted absences wisely. Unplanned or unexpected
occurrences are likely, so be prepared to use absences for these events only;  
e) entering class late and leaving class before it is over is distracting for
me and others taking the course and will count as an unexcused absence, unless
you have a legitimate excuse for doing so.

**NOTE: Excessive absences or tardiness from class may result in your
administrative withdrawal from this course with a grade of F.**

**Homework Assignments, Presentations and Classroom Activities**  
Throughout the course, you will be expected to complete outside reading and
homework assignments, written and oral classroom presentations, and other
classroom activities. These assignments are designed to reinforce the
information presented in reading assignments and lectures. Some of these
assignments will be collaborative (group work). Others will give you an
opportunity to present information to the class for consideration and
discussion. In-class and out-of-class writing assignments are designed to
assist you with your reading and to help you generate ideas for your critical
essays. We will work on a variety of writing assignments, including brief
response papers and collaborative writing activities. These writing
assignments will give you an opportunity to offer your own insights into and
observations about the material we are reading, as well as raise questions and
ideas you may want to develop later. You should keep these assignments in a
loose-leaf notebook (or folder). You will not be able to make up assignments
that are missed due to unexcused absences. Throughout the course you also will
be assigned individual and group reports to be presented to the entire class.
These presentations will focus on the reading assignments or topics we are
discussing in class. Presentations will be assessed on the basis on
organization, clarity, and presentation style. I will provide you with
instructions for these assignments as the course progresses.

**Response Papers**  
In addition to oral presentations and other brief writing assignments, you
will write two response papers (2-3 typewritten pages each). Each paper will
address a specific topic related to the assigned readings or topics we are
covering in the course. I will give you more specific information about the
requirements for each paper later in the course. All papers are due in class
on the day specified in the syllabus. Papers turned in late will be lowered
one letter grade for each day late (24 hours after the original due date and
time). If you have to turn in a paper late, you should contact me in advance
and let me know. NOTE: I realize that extenuating circumstances sometimes
occur; therefore, you are allowed one excused late response paper, turned in
by the next day without penalty, if you notify me in advance.

**Midterm and Final Examinations**  
Examinations will be based on readings assignments, course lectures, and other
materials presented in class. For each examination students will be expected
to know the major terms and figures, concepts and theories related to the
study of American culture that will be presented in reading assignments and
course lectures. Consequently, students should be thoroughly familiar with
each reading assignment and be prepared to take notes during class.
Examinations cannot be taken late or scheduled at an alternate time unless you
have a serious medical emergency or another legitimate reason for doing so. In
the event that such circumstances arise, you must let me know in advance to
schedule an alternate time to take the examination. Otherwise, late exams will
be marked down one letter grade for each day they are late. I will provide you
with a brief study guide prior to each exam.

**American Studies Project**  
The American Studies Project (includes 8-10 pages of type-written analysis)
will represent the culmination of your study in this course and should reflect
your understanding of some of the critical methods used in American Studies
and how to employ them in creating an academic project of your own design.
Your project can focus on any aspect of American Studies related to this
course that interests you the most, pending my final approval.  Your project
should be interdisciplinary in scope and should seek to incorporate various
disciplines (such as history, literature, art and sociology) and mediums (such
as a written narrative or analysis, visual aides, Internet hypertext media,
and/or material artifacts).  I will provide you with more specific details
about the requirements for the project in the weeks ahead. The project is due
on the date listed in the syllabus.  Projects turned in late will be marked
down one letter grade for each day they are late. I will be glad to meet with
you outside of class to discuss specific research topics. The project is a
formal academic assignment and will be assessed on the basis of structure,
content, grammar, writing style, proper paper format, and documentation of
sources.

**Technology Classroom**  
All of our class meetings will take place in TLC 1-117. This is a technology
classroom and contains computer terminals, VCR and projector equipment, and
other technology to assist us with our studies. You should become familiar
with how to use this technology for the purposes of this class. I will assist
you if this is new to you. However, additional information can be found online
at the UWG Technology / Surfing Guide:

http://www.westga.edu/~techlife/

Classroom Guidelines: 1) No food or drinks allowed in the classroom; 2)
Computers are NOT to be used for playing games, reading or responding to
email, internet surfing or doing other work while class is in session (do so
and you risk losing points from their final participation grade); 3) The
printer should not be used to print out reading assignments; 4) The printer
should not be used to print out any materials during class. Bring assigned
papers to class already printed out. There is a computer lab with printers on
the first floor of the TLC; 5) Please turn off all cell phones and pagers
before entering class; 6) Bring a floppy disk with you to save your work; do
not save them to the computer.

**Plagiarism & Academic Dishonesty**  
 UWG defines plagiarism as taking personal credit for the words and ideas of
others as they are presented in electronic, print, and verbal sources. I
expect that students will accurately credit sources in all assignments. An
equally dishonest practice is fabricating sources or facts; it is another form
of misrepresenting the truth. Plagiarism is grounds for failing the course.
Any student caught submitting materials (in part or whole) as their own work
from online websites will fail the course automatically and be referred to the
Academic Discipline Council.

**Conferences and Outside Assistance**  
I will be glad to meet with you outside of class to discuss your work in this
class, the writing assignments or the texts we are studying. If you are having
trouble with the material in this class or have questions and/or concerns you
would like to discuss, please set up a time a meet with me. You can also
schedule an appointment with the university writing center (located on the
first floor of the TLC).

**NOTE** : Please make a xerox copy of all written work you turn in to me, in
case it is misplaced or lost. Save your work on a computer disk! I will not
give you credit for work you claim to turn in but that I do not have in my
possession.  


