**

AEGL-289/Survey of British Literature, II

3 Credits

Summer 1999

Mrs. Law



I. Required Texts: _The Norton Anthology - The Major Authors** ,_ _one volume_

edition, M. H. Abrams, ed., 6th ed.

**_Hard Times** , Charles Dickens, Norton, 1997_

**_The Holt Handbook_ , **4th ed. or **_The Brief Holt Handbook** , 2nd _

_ed. ,Kirsner and Mandell_

**_

II. Course Objectives:** The history of British literature is one of the
richest literary legacies that exists. In it we see the evolution of many
significant genres and traditions such as satire, the dramatic monologue,
sonnet form, and the elegy. The literature is also an important point of
access to intellectual history, the history of ideas, many of which we still
struggle with as they impaact our culture. The design of this course is to
introduce the student to some of these through a study major literary
traditions and authors that make up British literary history from the 18th
century through the early 20th century. **** Some of the highlights of the
course will be a study of Swift and satire and Dickens and the Victorian
novel. In the early 19th century we will deal with the various elements of the
Romantic tradition as they occur in Wordsworth, Coleridge, and Keats. In the
Victorian period special attention will be given to the emergence of the
female literary voice as we study two lyric poets: Christina Rossetti, and
Emily Bronte. Tennyson and Browning and their contributions to the dramatic
monologue will be another important topic in our Victorian survey. In the
early 20th century we will study significant trends in modern literature
overviewing some of the works of Thomas Hardy, Joseph Conrad, D. H. Lawrence,
Katherine Mansfield, T. S. Eliot, and W. H. Auden.



The course is devised so that you will have ample opportunity to the master
objective details of a work as well as important concepts. To help keep you up
to date on reading assignments, which will enable you to get the maximum out
of class discussion/lecture periods, you can expect regular objective quizzes
on assigned readings. The largest part of the grade will be three essay exams.
The paper element will consist of a project which surveys the principal
critical resources on a specific work. More information on this will be
forthcoming.

**

III. Course Requirements and Grade Composition:

**

Quiz grade-------------------------------------------------10%

Course project---------------------------------------------30%

Three, 1 hour exams----------------------------------------60%



**

IV. Grading Scale

93-100--------------A

83-92----------------B

72-82----------------C

63-71----------------D

62 and below------F

V. Reading Assignments: **Reading all assignments carefully and entirely is an
obvious requirement for success in this course. I would also suggest that you
take notes as you read, re-read, and prepare for class. In this way you will
come to class prepared to discuss major ideas in the work(s), as well as
questions you have about it (them). To encourage you to take notes, I will
allow you to use them to take in-class quizzes.

**

VI. Class Attendance Policy:** Students are obligated for all assigned
material whether they are present or not. Punctual and regular attendance is
necessary for the successful completion of all courses. **Three** legal
absences are permitted in this summer class. At the fourth absence I reserve
the right to fail you unless viable documentation (i. e. a doctor's excuse in
the event of an illness) can be produced. In conclusion, since this course is
composed of specific lectures on assigned readings, as well as class
discussion, regular attendance is advised.

**

VII. Missed Quiz Policy:** Quizzes may not be made up unless you have a
credible reason for your absence.

**

VIII. Paper Due Date:** The course paper due date is given on the syllabus.
Papers will not be accepted after this date.

**

IX. Conferences:** Please feel free to see me during my office hours if you
have problems or questions about your papers or any other aspect of the
course.

**

X. University Disabled Student Policy:** If you have a learning or physical
disability which might affect you performance in this class, please inform me
and Counseling Services in order to verify your status and provide you with
appropriate assistance.

**

XI.** **Office:** A-9

**

Office Hours:** M-Th/ 12-1pm or stop after class or call to make an appt.

**Office Phone#: 803-648-6851 (ex. 3416)











































**

July 6 Introduction

July 7 Overview: the 18th century in English literature

Skim the introductory section on The Restoration and the 18th century i  in
Norton (819-841)

_

_Read carefully Swift's "Description of a City Shower" and

"Verses on the Death of Dr. Swift", pp. 886-897

July 8 _ **_Gulliver's Travels** , Book IV

July 9 _ _Alexander Pope: **The Rape of the Lock

**

July 12_ _Pope's **Essay on Man

**

July 13 _ _Introduction Romanticism: Skim pp. 1261-1279. Read carefully

pages 1341-1352. Poems: 1352-1355; 1378-1382_

_

July 14 _ _Wordsworth: pp. 1328-1341; Coleridge: pp 1481-1483; poems 1487-

1506

_

July 15 _Coleridge: Christabel, pp1506- 1527_

July 16 _Keats: selected sonnets, To Autumn, and Eve of St. Agnes

July 19 Keats: Ode on a Grecian Urn and To a Nightingale

July 20 **Test #1: the 18th century and Romantics

**

July 21 The Victorian Age : Read the Introduction to the Victorian Age

in Norton; Hard Times, Chapters 1-5.

July 22 **Reading Day for Hard Times

**

July 23 Dickens: Hard Times

July 26 Victorian Poetry: Tennyson and Browning : selected poems

July 28  Christina Rossetti: Goblin Market and Selected poems

Emily Bronte: Selected poems (handout)

July 29  **Test #2: The Victorians

**

July 30  The 20th Century: Thomas Hardy: Selected poems

Joseph Conrad's **Heart** **of Darkness_ , _Book** I

Aug _2 _ Joseph_ _Conrad: H **eart of Darkness**_ , _Books II and III

_

Aug. 3 _D. H. Lawrence and Katherine Mansfield: "The Horse- Dealer's_
_Daughter" and "The Daughters of the Late Colonel"

Aug. 4 Selections from T. S. Eliot and W. H. Auden

_

_

_

**































































**

