**Welcome to the Syllabus of**

Understanding Human Nature

**The development of the social sciences from the Scientific Revolution
(16-17th centuries) to the present with emphasis on the problem of method and
views of human nature and  in the context of European intellectual history**

**A  Web Based Course Not Yet Offered by  
Dr. [Roy J. deCarvalho](../index.htm) of the [History
Department](http://www.hist.unt.edu/) at the [University of North
Texas](http://www.unt.edu)  
  For more information [e-mail](mailto:roy@unt.edu) the instructor**



|  |  |

**[Course home
page](http://webct.courses.unt.edu/SCRIPT/HIST4010RD/scripts/serve_home)  
(userid/password required)** |  
---|---|---  
**Warning** | **Course description** | **Instructor information**  
---|---|---  
**Objectives and outcomes** | **Course organization** | **Deadlines**  
**Requirements** | **How to take exams** | **Textbooks**  
**Special accommodation** | **Conference board** | **Surf the net report**  
**E-mail your teacher** | **How to register and   get started** | **Course
topics**  
  
  
**WARNING** |

**If in order to learn you need to be externally motivated, need to be
challenged in order to get things done, study only under the pressure of
teachers and examinations, love the human and traditional teacher-student
classroom interaction, and/or   hate computers, then this web based course is
not for you. On the other hand, if you like to learn at your own pace, if you
are self motivated, find the traditional classroom instruction rigid, would
like to learn while surfing the net, have minimal internet skills, want to
take a college class at the privacy of your home, and like a flexible course
schedule, then this course is for you. **  
---|---  
**COURSE DESCRIPTION** | **The development of the social sciences from the
Scientific Revolution (16-17th centuries) to the present with emphasis in the
problem of method and views of human nature and  in the context of European
intellectual history.**

 **This course discusses the attempt to understand human nature through the
methods of science. In so doing, it provides an overview of the emergence of
the social sciences. The main emphasis is on the period from the Scientific
Revolution to the early twentieth century. This period encompasses the first
appearance of the sciences of political economy, sociology, anthropology,
statistics, experimental and phenomenological psychologies, as well as the
abortive sciences of social physics, phrenology and criminal anthropology.**

**Two types of questions will be continuously asked throughout the course. The
first is related to the problem of method (did the human sciences imitate the
methods of the natural sciences or develop their own methods). The second
question relates to how extra-scientific biases, such as views of human
nature, affect the formulation and development of theories. An attempt will be
made to relate the emergence of the human sciences to the history of science
and of European intellectual history.**

**This is an introductory level course. It requires no background in
philosophy, history or social sciences. It is suitable as an introductory
course in history or humanities and is recommended for social/behavioral
sciences students deficient in the history of their disciplines.**  
**INSTRUCTOR INFORMATION** | **Instructor ....................... Roy J.
deCarvalho, Ph.D.  
Office .............................. Wooten Hall, Room 238  
Telephone ....................... (940)565-4209 or (940)565-2288 (messages)  
E-mail address ............... [roy@unt.edu](mailto:roy@unt.edu)  
Home page ..................... <http://courses.unt.edu/rdecarvalho>  
Office hours ...................
<http://courses.unt.edu/rdecarvalho/hours.htm>  
Course Syllabus .............
[http://courses.unt.edu/rdecarvalho/HNAT/index.htm](http://courses.unt.edu/rdecarvalho/HST1/index.htm)  
Course Home Page.........
[http://webct.courses.unt.edu/SCRIPT/HIST3000RD/scripts/serve_home](http://webct.courses.unt.edu/SCRIPT/HIST4010RD/scripts/serve_home)**  
**OBJECTIVES & OUTCOMES** | **We all during the course of life ask ourselves,
"what is human nature?" The course focuses on how thinkers throughout history
have dealt with this perplexing question. Although the course does not supply
a clear-cut answer on what human nature truly is, it nevertheless enhances the
student's knowledge of the social sciences by providing an historical
perspective on the attempt to understand human nature and the methods used to
do it.**

 **The goal of the course is thus to enrich the students' knowledge of the
history of the social sciences and European intellectual history and help them
formulate their own understanding of human nature.**  
**COURSE ORGANIZATION** | **As a web based course students meet and do all
course work in virtual space. Anyone anywhere in the world with a reliable
internet connection and minimal internet knowledge can enroll in this course.
There are no meetings in the traditional physical classroom. The course
utilizes the new technology of the information age in order to deliver and
improve upon traditional undergraduate education in history. It also seeks to
familiarize students with on-line communications and   introduce students to
the internet as a working environment and research tool.  **

**The course home page is the main entrance to the course facilities. Only
registered students with a valid userid/password can access the course home
page at  
[http://webct.courses.unt.edu/SCRIPT/HIST3000RD/scripts/serve_home](http://webct.courses.unt.edu/SCRIPT/HIST5040RD/scripts/serve_home).**

**The most important facilities of the course home page are: _Conference
Board_ , _Chat Room_ , _Student Reports_ , and _Module 1-28_. The other
facilities allow students to e-mail the instructor and WebCt technical
support, change password, and link with the virtual UNT Librarian, instructor
home page, course syllabus and a technical guide to WebCt. The _Calendar_
reminds students of the various stages, tasks and deadlines of the course.**

**The _Class Conference Board_ is the course's virtual classroom where
students and instructor meet regularly. It resembles a Usenet newsgroup though
technically much more sophisticated. It is divided into several forums (each
module has its own forum, for example). It allows students to post messages
and discuss with their peers and instructor course related matters. Students
are expected to read the Class Conference Board at least every other day.
Internet etiquette applies. Vigorous intellectual debate about course related
matters is expected.**

**The _Chat Room_. Participation in the chat room is not a course requirement.
It is a 24 hours   lounge where students can meet synchronously and "talk"
freely. In several rooms all chat is recorded. In other rooms, however, all
chat is erased as soon as students leave the room.**

**The facility, _Student Reports_ , archives students' surf-the-net reports
posted at the Class Board. Once students post a review at the Class Board it
is assumed that they automatically give permission to archive their work and
make it available to students of other sections of this course. Students who
do not wish to give this permission or who wish to keep their work anonymous
should notify the instructor during the first week of classes.**

**_Modules 1-28_ , introduce the student to classic or basic knowledge of the
field.Those are the notes students should have written if taking the
traditional classroom delivery of this course. At the end of each module  a
"WWW Links" page lists names and topics related to the lecture notes. Students
are required to write the surf-the-net report discussing the World Wide Web
resources on the name or concept of their choice.**  
**DEADLINES** | **All work related to each module, including the module's exam
and surf-the-net report, must be completed before the mid-term exam. After
that date previous modules will be closed and the next ones introduced. The
modules vary in size and it is assumed that a semester has 17 weeks (119
days).**

 **  
**

|     | **Begin date of module** | **End date of module  
and exam day** | **Number of study days**  
---|---|---|---  
**Modules 1-7** |  - | - | **26**  
**Exam   1** | - | - | **-**  
**Modules 8-14** |  - | - | **27**  
**Exam   2** | - | - | **-**  
**Modules 15-21** |  - | - | **32**  
**Exam   3** | - | - | **-**  
**Modules 22-28** |  - | - | **34**  
**Exam 4** |  - | - | **-**  
**REQUIREMENTS** | **Students are required:**

  * **to have minimal computer/internet skills (e.g, they must know how to e-mail, participate in an internet bulletin board and surf the net)**
  * **to study the web lectures of each of the modules**
  * **to write 25 surf-the-net report for any of the 28 modules**
  * **to read two texbooks**
  * **actively participate in course related discussions at the bulletin board**
  * **initiate e-mail exchanges with the instructor at least once per module**
  * **to take four exams (testing knowledge of the lectures)**

**The course has 28 modules. Each module requires the student to complete the
following steps:**

  * **to read the lectures**
  * **to write a surf-the-net report around 1000 words (25 reports out of 28 modules)**
  * **to participate at the class conference board**
  * **to interact by e-mail with the instructor**
  * **to complete all work as scheduled**



| **Activity** | **Description** | **% of grade**  
---|---|---  
**Exams** | **There are four non-cumulative exams. Each exam is 5% of the
final grade. Exams test knowledge of the lecture notes.** | **20%**  
**Surf the net reports** | **Students surf the net and write a report (around
1000 words) about the net resources on the topic(s) of the module.   Reports
are  posted  at the class bulletin board.  25 reports required.  Each is 2% of
the final grade.** | **50%**  
**Participation** | **Students engage in meaningful discussions about the web
reports, course related topics and reading of the two texbooks at the class
conference board.** | **20%**  
**Contact** | **Students must initiate at least one e-mail exchange per module
with the instructor. Students are strongly encouraged to contact the
instructor at any time.** | **10%**  
**HOW TO TAKE EXAMS** | **All four exams are on-line. When students are ready
to take an exam's module they must e-mail   the teacher and request the
internet address of their exam web site. **

**Students should take the on-line exam in no more than 60 minutes.   They
should type the entering or beginning time in the first box and the exit time
at the end of the exam. The software also keeps the time students opened the
file and the time they submit the file. A discrepancy between their time of
entry and exit and the machine time record greater then 5 minutes will
automatically invalidate the exam. Divide your time wisely by not dedicating
more than one  third (20 minutes) of the total exam time (60 minutes) to each
section of the exam.**

**Students are allowed to open the web exam file only once, e.g., they are
allowed to take the exam only once. There is a counter at the end of the exam.
It should read 1. If you exit and re-open the file the counter will list a 2,
meaning that the file was opened twice. Any number rather then a 1 at the
counter will automatically invalidate the exam.   **

**In the multiple choice exam click on the right answer's button. If you
change your mind clicking at another option will erase the first choice.   In
the identification section of the exam type the id and your answer to each of
the three ids in the separate answering boxes. Write your choice of essay exam
(e.g., type the essay question) and your answer in the appropriate box.**

**The ids and essay exams answering boxes have a maximum of 65 characters per
line. Do not exceed that number of characters by entering a line break and
starting a new line.**

**You will find an exact copy of these instructions in a box at the top of the
exam. Skip it and go straight to the exam so that you will not waste time re-
reading instructions. Remember, your exam will be invalidated if you take more
than 60 minutes time to complete it and/or open the exam site more than
once.**  
**TEXTBOOKS** |

  * **Peter J. Bowler, _Evolution: The History of an Idea_ (Berkeley: University of  
California Press, 1984), ISBN 0520063864.**

  * **Leslie F. Stevenson, _Seven Theories of Human Nature_ (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1974), ISBN 0198750331.**

  
**SPECIAL ACCOMMODATIONS** | **Any  person with special circumstances covered
by  the American with Disabilities Act should register with the office of
Disability Accommodation, Suite 318A, University Union Building, and also
inform the instructor of  this class. Reasonable adjustment will be made to
accommodate the special needs of students with disabilities where such
adjustments are necessary to provide equality of educational access**.  
**CONFERENCE BOARD** | **Participation at the Class Conference Board is a pre-
requisite for the completion of this course and 20% of the final grade.   All
surf-the-net reports will be posted at the Class Conference Board. Students
are expected to engage in meaningful discussions, criticism and commentaries
of  their peers'  net reports and any other course related (and also not so
related)  topic, including discussions about the texbooks. Internet etiquette
should be followed. **  
**SURF THE NET REPORT** | **By taking this course students are participating
at a very unique pedagogical experiment. There are no precedents for the "surf
the net report." It replaces the old book or library report but because of the
nature of the medium it should have its own distinctive features. The nature,
scope and format of "surf the net reports" should be the first topic of
discussion at the Class Conference Board. Students should introduce themselves
to the board as soon as they are officially enrolled in this course and their
first posting should delineate their views of such reports. I expect vigorous
debate at the Board not only about the intellectual content of the reports but
also the nature, scope and format of academic "surf-the-net reports." **

 **At the end of each module a "WWW Links" home page lists names and topics
related to the lecture notes. Students are required to write the surf-the-net
report discussing the World Wide Web resources on the name or concept of their
choice. "First come, first serve" policy observed in order to prevent multiple
reports on the same item. Students should post their claim over a concept or
name in the Class Board. The report should also be posted at the Class
Conference Board and will be archived at the facility Student Reports. **

**It is assumed that students give permission to archive their work and make
it available to students of other sections of this course. Students who do not
wish to give this permission or who wish to keep their work anonymous should
notify the instructor during the first week of classes.**

**Please note that this is a web report (just like the old library or book
report) not a mere listing of web sites. Your report can be topic or site
centered. A topical report discusses various web sites with information about
a specific topic. A site centered report rather focuses on one specific site
that specializes in the topic of your choice. Both types of reports should
examine the site's content, appearance, structure and any other relevant
feature.**

**The length of each report should be around 1000 words.**  
**E-MAIL   YOUR TEACHER** | **Students are encouraged to initiate e-mail
exchange with their teacher as often as possible. They must report to the
teacher by e-mail about their progress at least once per module. E-mail
contact with the instructor is 10% of the total grade. When ready to take an
exam students must   request from their teacher that an exam be placed at the
History Help Center. Dr. deCarvalho's  e-mail address is:
[roy@unt.edu](mailto:roy@unt.edu).**  
**HOW TO REGISTER & GET STARTED** | **Students register for this course
exactly as they register for all UNT course. For the appropriate code or
information on how to register see the[Schedule of
Classes](http://www.unt.edu/pais/catsched.htm).  Web-based Courses are listed
both under the Department of History schedule of courses and under the
separate section,   Distance Education and Web-Based Courses. **

**Students officially enrolled in this class need to get in touch with Dr.
deCarvalho ([roy@unt.edu](mailto:roy@unt.edu)) in order to get the user id and
password that allows them to enter the course home page where links to all the
course facilities are located.**

**Officially the first day of classes of the[Academic
Calendar](http://www.unt.edu/pais/catsched.htm) also applies to this course.
Students should  initiate by e-mail their first contact with the instructor,
introduce themselves to the Class Conferencing Board, and start Module 1
during the first week of classes. **

**All students need in order to get started is the user id and password. As
soon as they register for this class they should send Dr. deCarvalho an e-mail
([roy@unt.edu](mailto:roy@unt.edu)) requesting their user id and password.
This could also be the right time for students to introduce themselves to the
instructor.**

**All dates and schedules of   the [Academic
Calendar](http://www.unt.edu/pais/catsched.htm)   and all regulations of the
[Undergraduate Catalog](http://www.unt.edu/pais/catsched.htm) apply. Students
who do not follow the course, [History Department](http://www.hist.unt.edu/),
[College of Arts and Sciences](http://www.cas.unt.edu/), and
[University](http://www.unt.edu)  regulations or do not reply within two weeks
to e-mail from the instructor  will be automatically dropped from the course
with a W or WF grade. The grade of incomplete will be granted only in
exceptional cases (see regulations at the [Undergraduate
Catalog](http://www.unt.edu/pais/catsched.htm), specifically the sections on
the Grading System and the Incomplete).**  
**COURSE TOPICS** | **1\. INTRODUCTION TO THE HISTORY OF THE SOCIAL SCIENCES**

  * **The problem of understanding human nature**
  * **The historiography of the history of science and the social sciences**
  * **The problem of method**
  * **Views on human nature**

**2\. ANCIENT, MEDIEVAL AND RENAISSANCE VIEWS ON HUMAN NATURE**

  * **Plato and the soul**
  * **Aristotle and the rational soul**
  * **St. Augustine and the faculties of the soul**
  * **Hippocrates and Galen: the theory of the 4 humors or temperaments**
  * **Renaissance views: astrology, macrocosm & microcosm**

**3\. THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL SCIENCES**

  * **The Scientific Revolution and the mechanistic philosophy**
  * **The problem of method: from the natural to the social sciences**
  * **Descartes and the beginning of modern philosophy  
1\. systematic doubt  
2\. the cogito  
3\. Cartesian dualism**

  * **Locke  
1\. critique of faculty psychology  
2\. tabula rasa, perceptions and association of ideas  
3\. the Molyneux problem**

  * **Hobbes' mechanistic view of Man**
  * **Hume's empiricism, inductivism, sensation and causation**
  * **Montesquieu's environmental determinism**
  * **Kant's categories of the mind**
  * **Berkeley's idealism**

**4\. THE ORIGINS OF SOCIETY**

  * **The problem: from the state of nature to polished society; why the interest in this problem**
  * **Lucretius: individuals - > sex -> families -> society**
  * **Berkeley: society as a cluster of atoms**
  * **Hobbes: The Leviathan and the warfare in the state of nature**
  * **Locke: natural rights in the state of nature**
  * **Rousseau: the social contract**
  * **Adam Fergusson: man is a social entity**

**5\. THE FIRST DISTINCT SOCIAL SCIENCE: CLASSICAL POLITICAL ECONOMY**

  * **The problem: what are the origins of wealth?**
  * **Background of the Industrial Revolution**
  * **The mercantilists: gold and trade**
  * **The Physiocrats: Quesney and the circulation of wealth**
  * **Adam Smith: the invisible hand and the division of labor**
  * **Ricardo: the labor theory of value**
  * **Karl Marx: labor, the capitalist and industrial order**

**6\. AUGUSTE COMTE'S POSITIVISM AND SOCIOLOGY**

  * **The problem: The French Revolution, the social sciences and the reconstruction of society**
  * **Jeremy Bentham and Utilitarianism**
  * **St. Simon and the new social order**
  * **Auguste Comte  
1\. the law of the 3 stages  
2\. positivism  
3\. social physics or sociology  
4\. The new religion of science  
5\. influence on the social sciences**

**7\. THE ORIGINS OF THE STATISTICAL METHOD IN THE SOCIAL SCIENCES**

  * **The problem: mathematical regularities in social phenomena**
  * **The idea of progress  
1\. Turgot's _Discourse on Universal History_ (1750)  
2\. Condorcet and the progress of the human mind  
3\. William Godwin: human perfectibility  & socialist policies  
(c). Malthus**

  * **The background: 18th cent. population controversies**
  * **Malthus' _Essay on Human Population_ (1798)**
  * **Geometrical and mathematical growth; oscillations or gluts**
  * **The Malthusian debate**
  * **Social physics and political arithmetics**
  * **John Graunt's _Observations on the Bills of Mortality_ (1660)**
  * **William Petty and political arithmetics**
  * **Adolphe Quetelet  
1\. social physics, anthropometry and astronomy  
2\. the average man and the law of error: _On Man_ (1835)**

  * **Explanation of regularities in vital statistics  
1\. Sussmilch:  "Divine order"  
2\. Laplace: mathematical causes**

  * **Social statistic  
1\. factory act of 1833**  
**2\. the British statistical societies of the 1830's  
3\. Francis Galton and Eugenics**

**8\. PHRENOLOGY**

  * **The problem: human differences and biological reductionism**
  * **Franz Joseph Gall's organology  
1\. cerebral localization:  "the brain is the organ of the mind"  
2\. Gall's rejection of Locke  
3\. plurality of faculties  
4\. social implications of phrenology: **

  * **Johann Cristoph Spurzheim and George Combe**
  * **The popularization of phrenology: The Fowler brothers (Lorenzo and Orzon)**

**9\. PRELUDE TO DARWIN**

  * **The problem: types, species or varieties?**
  * **The origin of the races: the biblical view (Ham, Shem and Jephet)**
  * **Natural History  
1\. early 18th cent. - Linnaeus' natural history  
2\. middle 18th cent. - Buffon's environment degeneration  
3\. late 18th cent. - Johann P. Blumenbach's collection of skulls**

  * **The monogenist/polygenist controversy  
1\. Lord Kames: races are species  
2\. James C. Prichard: monogenism  
3\. W. S. Morton: _Crania Americana_  
4\. Louis Agassiz and Cuvier's catasthrophies  
5\. Josiah C. Nott, Daniel G. Brinton and Franklin Glidden: **

  * **Separate creations: John Mitchell & Newton's optics and density of the skin**
  * **The myth of the Aryan race: the problem: European racial origin(s)  
1\. Sanscript and the _Rig Veda_  
_2._ William Jones' Indo-European language group  
3\. Scholarship in historical linguistics: J. Grimm and Frederich Max Muller
**

  * **Anthropometry, craniology and physical anthropology  
1\. Camper and the  "facial angle"  
2\. Retzius and the "cephalic index" (brachycephalic and dolichocephalic)**

  * **Inequality among the races and anthropo-sociology  
1\. Gobineau: _The Inequality of Races_ (1853)  
2\. Lapouges: the cephalic index and anthropometry**

  * **Discovery of pre-history  
1\. the problem of the  "missing link"  
2\. Lord Monboddo and the great chain of being  
3\. the anti-diluvian man:  
Boucher de Perthes  
Cuvier's geology of Paris and theories  
Danish "kitchen middens" \- Thomsen 1810's  
Swiss lake dwellers - Lake Constance 1850's  
4\. cave explorations:  
Joseph Prestwick and the Brixham cave  
Rev. William Buckland and Kent's cavern  
the Pitdown hoax **

**10\. DARWIN AND SOCIAL DARWINISM**

  * **Darwin's _Origins of the Species_ (1859)  
1\. development of the idea  
2\. evolution by natural selection**

  * **Other evolutionary theories  
1\. Alfred Russell Wallace in Malaysia  
2\. Lamarck's  "hereditary transmission of acquired characteristics"  
3\. Chamber's _Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation_ (1844)**

  * **Herbert Spencer's social Darwinism  
1\. _Social Statics_ (1850)  
2\. Von Baer's embriology   & Spencer's _Developmental Hypothesis_ (1857):  
from homogeneous to heterogeneous**

  * **The term "survival of the fittest"**

**11\. EUGENICS**

  * **The problem: artificial selection of human nature?**
  * **Galton's anthropological work**
  * **Galton and a Darwinian definition of Eugenics**
  * **" Hereditary Talent and Character" (1865)**
  * **" Hereditary Genius" (1869)**
  * **_Inquiries Into Human Faculty_ (1883)**
  * **Statistical investigations**
  * **The questionnaire method**
  * **Studies on twins**
  * **Psychometric studies**
  * **Visual ability**
  * **Regression and the correlation coefficient**
  * **Karl Pearson  
1\. early secularism: ethics of free thought and the women's' question  
2\. biometry, the discovery of Galton and statistic ideas  
3\. the eugenics lab**

  * **The eugenic movement in America  
1\. the Jukes and insanity  
2\. the physical fitness movement  
3\. genetics and social issues**

**12\. SCIENCE OF CRIMINOLOGY**

  * **The problem of crime: environmental vs biological causation**
  * **Views of the Enlightenment: prevention vs punishment**
  * **Cesare Beccaria and Jeremy Bentham utilitarianism**
  * **Environment vs biological causation:  
1\. J. C. Prichard - moral insanity  
2\. A. B. Morel - theory of degeneration  
3\. phrenology - the development of innate capacities  
4\. criminal statistics and education  
5\. A. B. Guery's Atlas of crime**

  * **Cesare Lombroso's positive school of criminology  
1\.  "born criminal"  
2\. the criminal type: atavism and stigmata **

  * **Galton's composite photography**
  * **Gabriel Tarde's imitation theory**

**13\. HISTORY OF ANTHROPOLOGY: THE AMERICAN INDIAN**

  * **Christianity and the American Indian:**
  * **The puritan interpretation and the _Jesuit Relations_ (1750)**
  * **Early interpretation of the American Indian  
1\. 18th cent Ulloa  
2\. Jefferson vs Buffon  
3\. William Robertson and Albert Gallatin**

  * **Henry R. Schoolcraft: _Algic Researches_ (1851)**
  * **Lewis Henry Morgan: _Ancient Society_ (1877)**

**14\. HISTORY OF ANTHROPOLOGY:  
BRITISH EVOLUTIONARY ANTHROPOLOGY**

  * **The problem: to explain "primitive man"**
  * **Evolutionary anthropology and the comparative method**
  * **Archbishop Whatley's degeneration theory (vs evolution)**
  * **J. F. McClennan's "primitive marriage"**
  * **Henry Maine's patriarchal society**
  * **E. B. Tylor _Primitive Culture_ (1871)  
1\.  "culture" as a psychic unit  
2\. doctrine of survivals**

**15\. HISTORY OF ANTHROPOLOGY:  
REVOLT AGAINST EVOLUTIONARY ANTHROPOLOGY**

  * **The diffusionist challenge of evolutionary anthropology  
1\. A. C. Haddon in Torres Strait  
2\. S. Ratzel's center of radiation  
3\. Gabriel Tardes' imitation  
4\. Elliot Smith and the importance of Egypt  
5\. Brastislav Malinowski: social meaning**

  * **Franz Boas and cultural relativism  
1\. from geography to ethnography  
2\. cultural relativity and the historical method  
3\. Boas on race: critique of a racial type  
4\. the Boasians: Ruth Benedict's _Patterns of Culture_ (1934); Margaret Mead
and sex in the Samoa Islands**

**16\. PROFESSIONALIZATION OF THE SOCIAL SCIENCES IN AMERICA: REVOLT AGAINST
SOCIAL DARWINISM**

  * **Review of Herbert Spencer**
  * **Social Darwinism in America: William Graham Summer**
  * **Rejection of social Darwinism:**
  * **Lester Ward's telesis; _Applied Sociology_ (1888)**
  * **The professionalization of sociology  
1\. Albion Small's social pathology; _The Science of Sociology_ (1894)  
2\. Franklin H. Gidding's group csns  & social stability  
3\. The American Social Science Association (mid 19th cent)  
4\. The American Economic Association (1884)**

**17\. PROFESSIONALIZATION OF THE SOCIAL SCIENCES IN AMERICA:  
SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY**

  * **The problem: the individual and the social self  
1\. William James' pragmatism and functionalism  
2\. E. C. Thorndike's educational psychology  
3\. Charles H. Cooley's  "looking glass self"  
4\. G. H. Mead: "me" and "I"**

  * **Child psychology  
1\. James M. Baldwin's stages of child development  
2\. G. Stanley Hall and the case studies of adolescent**

**18\. PROFESSIONALIZATION OF THE SOCIAL SCIENCES IN AMERICA: HUMAN ECOLOGY**

  * **The 19th cent social survey movement in England  
1\. the work of the statistical societies in London and Manchester  
2\. Frederick Le Play and the  "family budget"  
3\. Patrick Gedes and the outlook tower in Edinburgh  
4\. Charles Booth and the London poor**

  * **Social organization and urban ecology in Chicago  
1\. the problem: social organization and disorganization  
2\. Robert Park and the diversity of life in Chicago  
3\. Howard W. Zorbaugh's _Gold Coast and Slam_ (1929)  
4\. Znaniecki and Thomas study on the Polish peasant**

  * **Social relations and industrial psychology  
1\. economy and business cycles: Wesley Mitchell  
2\. the psychology of advertising: Walter Dill Scott  
3\. Frederick W. Taylor and  "Taylorism"  
4\. Elton Mayo, the Hawthorne effect and industrial relations**

**19\. SOCIOLOGY IN THE CONTINENT: DURKHEIM**

  * **The problem: the individual and society  
1\. cellular model: R. Virchow  
2\. organic model: Herbert Spencer  
3\. Frederick Le Play's _The European Worker_ (1855)  
4\. Alfred Espinas' _Animal Societies_ (1877)  
5\. Hippolyte Taine and Gabriel Tarde's theories of imitation**

  * **Durkheim**
  * **Mechanical vs organic solidarity**
  * **On the methodology of the social sciences and social facts**
  * **Political economy and the division of labor**
  * **On suicide: egoistic, altruistic and anomic**
  * **On the collective conscience**
  * **Impact on the social sciences**

**20\. SOCIOLOGY IN THE CONTINENT: MAX WEBER**

  * **Introduction: history as science**
  * **German idealism**
  * **Marxism and historical determinism**
  * **Historicism: the unique in history**
  * **Weber: from philosophy to sociology  
1\. causal analysis vs search for laws  
2\.  "understanding" and ideal types  
3\. examples:  charisma, Protestant ethics and rise of capitalism, Merton's
puritanism and rise of modern science**

**21\. EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY AND BEHAVIORISM**

  * **The rise of experimental psychology**
  * **J. Muller's "specific nerve energies"**
  * **Gustav Fechner and psychophysics (1850)**
  * **Herman Helmholtz and physiological psychology**
  * **Wilhelm Wundt and the Leipzig lab for experimental psychology**
  * **Ebbinghaus' studies on memory**
  * **The Wurzburg school: images of thought**
  * **Gestalt psychology in Germany**
  * **American psychology  
1\. William James and functionalism  
2\. Thorndike and animal intelligence**

  * **Behaviorism  
1\. J. B. Watson:  "Psychology as the Behaviorist view it" (1913)  
2\. Skinner and the S-R contingencies**

**22\. FREUD AND THE UNCONSCIOUS**

  * **The problem: the unconscious**
  * **Early views on the unconscious  
1\. Mesmer's  "animal magnetism"  
2\. William B. Carpenter's "unconscious cerebration"  
3\. Galton's "antechamber of the conscious"  
4\. Charcot, hypnotism and hysteria**

  * **Breuer, hypnotism, Anne O. and the talking therapy**
  * **Freud as a mechanist and biologist:**
  * **Psychodynamics: repression - > displacement -> transference**
  * **The importance of sexuality**
  * **The seduction theory and its rejection**
  * **The aedipus and electra complex**
  * **Social psychology**
  * **The id, ego and superego**
  * **Civilization and its discontents**
  * **Freud's dissenters  
1\. Alfred Adler's individual psychology  
2\. Jung's collective unconscious  
3\. G. Stanley Hall's fear, anger and hunger**

**23\. PHENOMENOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY**

  * **The problems: methods and views of human nature  
1\. from the natural to the social sciences  
2\. Comte's positivism and Watson's behaviorism**

  * **Introduction to phenomenology  
1\. literally: the science of the phenomena  
2\. critique of objectivity and statement of subjectivity  
3\. the science of the mental  
4\. the vices and virtues of behaviorism and phenomenology  
5\. two paradigms in the social sciences: **

  * **Experimental vs experiential**

**24\. EXISTENTIALISM AND EXISTENTIAL PSYCHOLOGY**

  * **Introduction to existentialism  
1\. the problem of defining existentialism  
2\. dissatisfaction with traditional philosophy  
3\.  "existence proceeds essence"  
4\. the study of inner experience (subjectivity); example: the statistics of
death**

  * **The discovery of subjectivity  
1\. Descartes' cogito  
2\. Kant's categories of the mind  
3\. Hegel's being-in-itself and being-for-itelf  
4\. Brentano's intentionality  
5\. Dilthey's human meaning  
6\. genealogy of this knowledge**

  * **Edmund Husserl - the father of phenomenology  
1\. _Phenomenological psychology_ (1925)  
2\. _The Crisis of European Sciences_ (ca1938)  
3\. critique of psychologism  
4\. exact sciences and the task of phenomenology**

  * **Husserl: the phenomenological method  
1\. the phenomenological reduction and the natural attitude  
2\. the transcendental reduction  
3\. the eidetic reduction**

  * **The existentialist critique of Husserl  
1\. transcendentalism within subjectivity?  
2\. Heidegger's return to subjectivity: Dasein and being-in-the-world  
3\. Sartre and the problem of   Husserl's transcendental ego**

  * **Martin Heidegger  
1\. return to the immediate human experience  
2\. Dasein and being-in-the-world  
3\. Daseinsanalysis: Ludwig Binswanger and Medard Boss**

  * **Jean-Paul Sartre and existential psychoanalysis**
  * **Sartre's works:  
1\. _The Transcendence of the Ego_ (1936)  
2\. _The Nausea_ (1937)  
3\. _The Emotions_ (1939)  
4\. _The Psychology of Imagination_ (1940)  
5\. _Being and Nothingness_ (1943) **

  * **Sartre and the problem of the ego: the fridg theory**
  * **Being-in-itself and being-for-itself:  
1\.  "consciousness is what it is not and is not what it is"  
2\. being and nothingness  
3\. condemned to be free -> decision -> anxiety  
4\. bad faith and authenticity; the project  
5\. the "project" compared with Daseinsanalysis, Freud and Watson**

  * **Values and morals: _Existentialism and Humanism_ (1947)**
  * **Life as a paradox and a conflict _The Wall_ , _Nausea_ , _No Exit_**
  * **_Dirty Hands_ and the problem of authenticity**
  * **Sartre's conversion to Marxism**

**25\. HUMANISTIC PSYCHOLOGY**

  * **Introduction to humanistic psychology**
  * **William James and G. Stanley Hall**
  * **The personologists**
  * **Early history of humanistic psychology**
  * **Carl Rogers' concept of growth and client-centered therapy**
  * **Abraham Maslow's self-actualization and peak experiences**
  * **Gordon Allport's personality traits**
  * **Rollo May existential analysis**
  * **Humanistic psychology and existential psychology compared**
  * **Other:  
1\. logotherapy of Viktor Frankl  
2\. psychopathology of Karl Jaspers**

**26\. HISTORY OF PSYCHICAL RESEARCH**

  * **The problem: was there a "warfare" between science and religion?**
  * **19th cent spiritualism: an attempt at a scientific religion**
  * **The foundation of the Society for Psychical Research (1882)**
  * **Myers' subliminal self**
  * **Parapsychology in America: J. B. Rhine**

**27\. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN THE SOCIAL SCIENCES**

  * **Moderninsm and post-modernism**
  * **Cognitivism and neo-cognitivism in psychology**

**28\. CONCLUSION**

  * **Kuhn's notion of paradigm and the history of the social sciences  
1\. the problem of method in the history of the social sciences  
2\. was the history of the social sciences determined by**

  * **Objective science or meta-scientific views on human nature?**
  * **Did the social sciences contribute to our knowledge of people and society?**

  
|  | **[Course home
page](http://webct.courses.unt.edu/SCRIPT/HIST4010RD/scripts/serve_home)** |
[**Dr. deCarvalho home page**](../index.htm) | [**History
Department**](http://www.hist.unt.edu/)  
---|---|---  
[**University of North Texas**](http://www.unt.edu) | [**College of Arts and
Sciences**](http://www.cas.unt.edu) | [**Center for Distributed
Learning**](http://www.unt.edu/cdl/)  
[**Academic calendar**](http://www.unt.edu/pais/catsched.htm) | [**Schedule of
classes**](http://www.unt.edu/pais/catsched.htm) | [**Undergraduate
catalog**](http://www.unt.edu/pais/catsched.htm)  
  
**Number of visitors since January 11** , **2000** :  
![Hit
Counter](../_vti_bin/fpcount.exe/rdecarvalho/?Page=HNAT/index.htm|Image=4)  
**Site maintained by[Roy J. deCarvalho](mailto:roy@unt.edu)  
Last updated:  October 11, 2001**

