![](../../Tom%27smediafolder/media,%20images,%20etc/pennstatebigbluelogowbg.gif)



Speech Communication 503  
  
Fall 1999  
  
Tuesday-Thursday 1:00 - 2:15 p.m.  
  
309 Sparks Building

Listserv:
[![](../../Tom%27smediafolder/media,%20images,%20etc/paw3.gif)](mailto:L-SPCOM503-1@LISTS.PSU.EDU)
|

Thomas W. Benson  
227 Sparks Building  
  
(814) 865-4201

[t3b@psu.edu](mailto:t3b@psu.edu)

office hours: Tuesdays & Thursdays 2:30-4:00 p.m.  
  
---|---  
  
**Seminar in Rhetorical Criticism**

A graduate seminar in the practice of rhetorical criticism, with an emphasis
on the working practices of critics of primarily oral, written, and media
texts in the discipline of speech communication. Students will read widely in
rhetorical criticism and interpretive theory and will write an extended
seminar paper. The seminar is conceived as an intensive, advanced workshop in
rhetorical criticism.

  
(1) August 24 - Tuesday

|

  
**Introduction.**  
  
---|---  
  
(2) August 26 - Thursday

|



**Preliminary Considerations: Theory, Scope, and Method in Rhetorical
Criticism**. Read Benson, "Beacons and Boundary Markers: Landmarks in
Rhetorical Criticism"; Herbert A. Wichelns, "The Literary Criticism of
Oratory," in Benson, _Landmarks_ ; Medhurst, "The Academic Study of Public
Address: A Tradition in Transition"; Donald C. Bryant, "Some Problems of Scope
and Method in Rhetorical Scholarship." In Medhurst, _Landmarks_.  
  
(3) August 31- Tuesday

|

Loren D. Reid, "The Perils of Rhetorical Criticism," in Medhurst, _Landmarks_
; Benson, "History, Criticism, and Theory in the Study of American Rhetoric,"
in Benson, _American Rhetoric_ ; Michael C. Leff, "Cicero's Redemptive
Identification," in Nothstine, Blair, Copeland, _Critical Questions_ ;
Lawrence W. Rosenfield, "The Anatomy of Rhetorical Discourse" (on [electronic
reserve](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)).  
  
(4) September 2 - Thursday

|



**Rhetoric as a Way of Doing: Rhetoric as situated, instrumental action**.
Read Marie Hochmuth Nichols, "Lincoln's First Inaugural"; Halford Ross Ryan,
"Harry S. Truman"; E. Culpepper Clark and Raymie McKerrow, "The
Historiographical Dilemma in Myrdal's American Creed: Rhetoric's Role in
Rescuing a Historical Moment," in Brock, Scott, and Chesebro, _Methods of
Rhetorical Criticism_ , 3d ed..  
  
(5) September 7 - Tuesday

|

Stephen E. Lucas, "Justifying America: The Declaration of Independence as a
Rhetorical Document," in Benson, _American Rhetoric_ ; Barnet Baskerville,
"Must We All Be Rhetorical Critics?"; Stephen Lucas, "The Schism in Rhetorical
Scholarship," in Medhurst, _Landmarks_  
  
(6) September 9 - Thursday

|



**Rhetorical Criticism and the Crisis of Neo-Aristotelianism**. Ernest Wrage,
"Public Address: A Study in Social and Intellectual History"; Wayland Maxfield
Parrish, " The Study of Speeches"; Marie Hochmuth  [Nichols], "The Criticism
of Rhetoric"; Edwin Black, "The Practice of Rhetorical Criticism"; G. P.
Mohrmann, "Elegy in a Critical Grave-Yard," in Medhurst, _Landmarks_ ; Carroll
C. Arnold, "Lord Thomas Erskine: Modern Advocate," in Benson, _Landmarks_ ;  
  
(7) September 14 - Tuesday

|

William Nothstine, Carole Blair, and Gary A. Copeland, "Professionalism and
the Eclipse of Critical Invention"; Roderick P. Hart, "Wandering with
Rhetorical Criticism"; Michael M. Osborn, "The Invention of Rhetorical
Criticism in My Work," in Nothstine, Blair, and Copeland, _Critical Questions_
; Edwin Black, "Ideological Justifications" (on [electronic
reserve](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)).  
  
(8) September 16 - Thursday

|



**Public Address as a Field of Study and as a Field of Activity**. Read Thomas
W. Benson, ed., _Rhetoric and Political Culture in Nineteenth-Century America_
, pp. 1-90.  
  
(9) September 21 - Tuesday

|

Continued discussion of _Rhetoric and Political Culture in Nineteenth-Century
America_ , pp. 91-183.  
  
(10) September 23 -Thursday

|



**Rhetoric as a way of knowing**. Read Robert L. Scott, "On Viewing Rhetoric
as Epistemic: Ten Years Later"; Robert L. Scott and James F. Klumpp, "A Dear
Searcher into Comparisons"; James W. Chesebro, "Computer Science as a
Rhetoric," in Brock , Scott, and Chesebro, _Methods of Rhetorical Criticism_ ;
Robert L. Scott, "A Rhetoric of Facts: Arthur Larson's Stance as a Persuader";
John Angus Cambell, "Darwin and _The Origin of Species_ : The Rhetorical
Ancestry of an Idea," in Benson, _Landmarks_.  
  
(11) September 28 - Tuesday

|

Edwin Black "Gettysburg and Silence" (on [electronic
reserve](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)); Michael Hyde, "Medicine,
Rhetoric, and Euthenasia: A Case Study in the Workings of a Postmodern
Discourse" (on [electronic reserve](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/));
Michael Calvin McGee, "'The Ideograph: A Link Between Rhetoric and Ideology"
(on [electronic reserve](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)); John Louis
Lucaites and Celeste Michelle Condit, Reconstructing Equality: Culturetypal
and Counter-Cultural Rhetorics in the Martyred Black Vision" (on [electronic
reserve](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)).  
  
(12) September 30 - Thursday

|



**Ideology, Dramatism , Fantasy, Myth, and Narrative as ways of rhetorical
knowing**. Kenneth Burke, "The Rhetoric of Hitler's Battle," in Benson,
_Landmarks_ ; Bernard Brock, "Rhetorical Criticism: A Burkeian Approach
Revisited"; David S. Birdsell, "Ronald Reagan on Lebanon and Grenada:
Flexibility and Interpretation in the Application of Kenneth Burke's Pentad";
Ernest G. Bormann, "Fantasy and Rhetorical Vision: The Rhetorical Criticism of
Social Reality"; Rita C. Hubbard, "Relationship Styles in Popular Romance
Novels, 1950-1983," in Brock, Scott, and Chesebro, _Methods of Rhetorical
Criticism_.  
  
(13) October 5 - Tuesday

|

Walter R. Fisher, "The Narrative Paradigm: An Elaboration"; James S. Ettema
and Theodore L. Glasser, "Narrative Form and Moral Force: The Realization of
Innocence and Guilt through Investigative Journalism," in Brock, Scott, and
Chesebro, _Methods of Rhetorical Criticism_ ; Janice Hocker Rushing,
"Evolution of the 'New Frontier' in _Alien_ and _Aliens_ : Patriarchal
Evolution of the Feminine Archetype" (on [electronic
reserve](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)); Philip Wander, "The Ideological
Turn in Modern Criticism" (on [electronic
reserve](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)); Raymie McKerrow, "Critical
Rhetoric: Theory and Praxis" ([electronic
reserve](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)).  
  
(14) October 7 - Thursday

|



**Rhetoric as a way of being**. Read T. Benson, "Rhetoric as a Way of Being,"
in _American Rhetoric_ ; Karlyn Kohrs Campbell, "The Rhetoric of Women's
Liberation: An Oxymoron"; Carole Spitzack and Kathryn Carter, "Women in
Communication Studies: A Typology for Revision"; Jonathan Culler, "Reading as
a Woman," in Brock, et al., _Methods of Rhetorical Criticism_ ; Karlyn Kohrs
Campbell, "Stanton's "Solitude of Self": A Rationale for Feminism," in Benson,
_Landmarks_.  
  
October 12 - Tuesday

|

Fall Break -- no classes  
  
(15) October 14 - Thursday

|

Edwin Black, "The Second Persona," in Benson, _Landmarks_ ; Maurice Charland,
"Constitutive Rhetoric: The Case of the Peuple Quebecois," in Nothstine,
Blair, and Copeland, _Critical Questions_ ; James Darsey, "The Legend of
Eugene Debs: Prophetic Ethos as Radical Argument" (on [electronic
reserve](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)); Thomas W. Benson, "Rhetoric and
Autobiography: The Case of Malcolm X" ([electronic
reserve](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)); Kenneth Burke, "Antony on Behalf
of the Play" ([electronic reserve](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)).  
  
(16) October 19 - Tuesday

|



**Rhetoric, cultural politics, and the public**. Gerard Hauser,
"Administrative Rhetoric and Public Opinion: Discussing the Iranian Hostages
in the Public Sphere"; Richard B. Gregg, "The Rhetoric of Denial and
Alternity," in Benson, _American Rhetoric_ ; Roland Barthes, "From Work to
Text"; Tamar Liebes, "Cultural Differences in the Retelling of Television
Fiction"; Lawrence Grossberg, "Is There Rock after Punk?" in Brock, Scott, and
Chesebro, _Methods of Rhetorical Criticism_.  
  
(17) October 21 - Thursday

|

Carole Blair, Marsha S. Jeppeson, and Enrico Pucci, Jr., "Public Memorializing
in Postmodernity: The Vietnam Veterans Memorial as a Prototype," in Nothstine,
Blair, and Copeland, _Critical Questions_ ; Michael Calvin McGee, "In Search
of 'The People': A Rhetorical Alternative" (on [electronic
reserve](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)); Michael Calvin McGee, "Text,
Context, and the Fragmentation of Contemporary Culture" (on [electronic
reserve](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)); Michael Leff, "Interpretation
and the Art of the Rhetorical Critic" (on [electronic
reserve](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)); Michael Leff, "Rhetorical Timing
in Lincoln's House Divided Speech" (on [electronic
reserve](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)); Karen Altman, "Consuming
Ideology: The Better Homes in America Campaign" ([electronic
reserve](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)).  
  
(18) October 26 - Tuesday

|



**Genre, the constraints of form, and the rhetorical resources of language**.
Read Karlyn Kohrs Campbell and Kathleen Hall Jamieson, "Introduction to _Form
and Genre_ " and "Inaugurating the Presidency"; in Brock, Scott, and Chesebro,
_Methods of Rhetorical Criticism_ ; Lawrence W. Rosenfield, "Central Park and
the Celebration of Civic Virtue," in Benson, _American Rhetoric_ ; Hermann G.
Stelzner, "'War Message,' December 8, 1941: An Approach to Language"; Michael
C. Leff and G. P. Mohrmann, "Lincoln at Cooper Union: A Rhetorical Analysis of
the Text," in Benson, _Landmarks_.  
  
(19) October 28 - Thursday

|

Stephen E. Lucas, "Genre Criticism and Historical Context: The Case of George
Washington's First Inaugural Address," in Benson, _Landmarks_ ; Michael Leff,
"Textual Criticism: The Legacy of G. P. Mohrmann," in Medhurst, _Landmarks_ ;
Martin J. Medhurst and Thomas W. Benson, " _The City_ : The Rhetoric of
Rhythm" (on [electronic reserve](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)); B. L.
Ware and Wil A. Linkugel, "They Spoke in Defense of Themselves: On the Generic
Criticism of Apologia" (on [electronic
reserve](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)); Richard Fulkerson, "The Public
Letter as a Rhetorical Form: Structure, Logic, and Style in King's 'Letter
from Birmingham Jail'" ([electronic
reserve](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)); Martin J. Medhurst, "The
Politics of Prayer: A Case Study in Configurational Interplay," in Benson,
_American Rhetoric_.  
  
(20) November 2 - Tuesday

|



**First draft of seminar paper due**. No reading assignment for this class
period--to give you a little extra time to work on your paper--but please do
not miss class, as we will be exchanging drafts for peer review.  
  
(21) November 4 - Thursday

|

[National Communication Association](http://www.natcom.org) meets in Chicago.
No class meeting.  
  
(22) November 9 - Tuesday

|



**Interpreting the rhetoric of movements**. Read Carroll C. Arnold, "Early
Constitutional Rhetoric in Pennsylvania," in Benson, _American Rhetoric_ ;
Robert S. Cathcart, "Movements: Confrontation as Rhetorical Form," and Celeste
Condit Railsback, "The Contemporary American Abortion Controversy: Stages in
the Argument," in Brock, et al., _Methods of Rhetorical Criticism_ ; Elizabeth
Walker Mechling and Jay Mechling, "The Campaign for Civil Defense and the
Struggle to Naturalize the Bomb," in _Critical Questions_ ; Leland Griffin,
"The Rhetorical Structure of Historical Movements" (on [electronic
reserve](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)); Leland Griffin, "The Rhetorical
Structure of the Antimasonic Movement" (on [electronic
reserve](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)); Herbert Simons, "Requirements,
Problems, and Strategies: A Theory of Persuasion for Social Movements" (on
[electronic reserve](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)).  
  
(23) November 11 - Thursday

|



**The issue of theory in criticism; the criticism of politics; and the
politics of academic gatekeeping**. William L. Nothstine, "Public, Private,
and Pseudo-Private: Ethics and Images in the Collapse of the PTL Ministry";
Robert L. Ivie,"The Metaphor of Force in Prowar Discourse: The Case of 1812";
Martha Solomon, "The Rhetoric of Dehumanization: An Analysis of Medical
Reports of the Tuskegee Syphilis Project"; Philip Wander, "The Rhetoric of
American Foreign Policy"; Bryan C. Taylor, " _Reminiscences of Los Alamos_ :
Narrative, Critical Theory, and the Organizational Subject," in Nothstine,
Blair, and Copeland, _Critical Questions_.  
  
(24) November 16 - Tuesday

|

James Darsey, "Must We All Be Rhetorical Theorists? An Anti-Democratic
Inquiry" (on [electronic reserve](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)); Carole
Blair, Julie R. Brown, and Leslie A. Baxter, "Disciplining the Feminine" (on
[electronic reserve](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)); Roderick Hart,
"Contemporary Scholarship in Public Address: A Research Editorial"; "Doing
Criticism My Way: A Reply to Darsey"; "Theory-Building and Rhetorical
Criticism: An Informal Statement of Opinion" (on [electronic
reserve](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)).  
  
(25) November 18 - Thursday

|



**Presentation of seminar papers**.

Melanie Selfridge, "The Passover Seder Considered."

Tracy Wilt, "Troubling Apologia: Clarence Thomas's 'I Am a Man, a Black Man,
an American.'"  
  
(26) November 23 - Tuesday

|



**Presentation of seminar papers**.

Steve Martin, "Anti-Conspiracy and Anti-Propaganda Rhetoric in 'Joe Worker and
the Story of Labor': The Use of the Comic Book Form."  
  
November 25 - Thursday

|

Thanksgiving. No classes.  
  
(27) November 30 - Tuesday

|



**Presentation of seminar papers**.

Marlin Bates, "Clinton, the Bombing of Iraq, and Impeachment: A Failure in
Counter-Narrative."  
  
(28) December 2 - Thursday

|



**Presentation of seminar papers**.

Dave Dzikowski, "A Rhetorical Analysis of Public Radio Underwriting
Announcements."  
  
(29) December 7 - Tuesday

|



**Presentation of seminar papers**.

Jing Yin, "Telling Stories: A Study of News Reports of the Hong Kong
Handover."

Heather Norton, "Constructing Patriots: Construction of Patriot Movement and
Southern Poverty Law Center Identity in _False Patriots: The Threat of Anti-
Government Extremists_."  
  
(30) December 9 - Thursday

|



**Presentation of seminar papers**.

Andrea Gregg

Dan Smith, "Rhythmic Contagion: Humanist Subjectivity and Rhetorical Studies."  
  
Monday, December 13

|

Final Exams begin. Term paper due.

[![](../../Tom%27smediafolder/media%20SpCom%20503%20Fall%201999/spcom503f99classphototn.jpg)](spcom503f99classphoto.htm)  
  




**Seminar Papers**  
  
---  
  
**Seminar Papers** : You are asked to prepare a major, article-length seminar
paper--a rhetorical analysis of a single text or group of texts. Subject the
text to a close textual analysis, situated in whatever contexts (theoretical,
situational, historical) seem appropriate to support interpretive work. A
central feature of the seminar will be the sequential preparation of the
paper, followed by shared editorial consultation and thorough rewriting. The
product will, it is hoped, be a manuscript that might be thought of as an
"expanded" journal article, which, with some judicious cutting, could be
submitted for publication review to a journal. The manuscript will be
"expanded" in the sense that it will probably contain a more extended review
of context and earlier scholarship, and perhaps more detailed description,
than some editors would have space for in a journal.  
  
Major dates for paper development (all these assignments are due, typed,
double-spaced, one side of paper only, with a title page, on the dates
indicated):  
  
September 7. **Topic** due, in writing. Briefly identify the text(s) you wish
to analyze and the central critical problems or questions you wish to
investigate. What is the text? Where is it available? What, at this point,
strike you as issues, questions, or problems worth investigating? (1-2 pages)
It is strongly suggested that you talk with me before choosing a text for
analysis. In any case, do not choose a text that you have written on for
another class.  
  
September 16. **Research proposal**. (2-4 pp.) A description of the topic you
have chosen, the central question you will address in your analysis, the
significance of your study, critical procedures that seem likely to be
productive, relevant theoretical and methodological considerations,
definitions of key terms, brief identification of the scholarly literatures
most likely to contextualize your study (previous studies of your text, of
similar texts, of similar questions, theoretical perspectives, descriptions of
method or uses of methods similar to those you propose). Preliminary
bibliography.  
  
September 30. **Review of literature**. By this time you should have
identified the scholarly literature (books, journal articles, and
dissertations) bearing on (1) your research question, (2) the text you have
chosen to analyze, (3) your mode of analysis, and (4) major theoretical
issues, if any, that drive or are interrogated by your proposed analysis.
Early in the semester, schedule a session with a research librarian at Pattee
Library for advice on searching the literature bearing on your topic. You
should be familiar with LIAS (including the UNCOVER and ERIC databases), with
_Dissertation Abstracts_ , and with various indices to scholarly literature
that are available on CD-ROM. Be sure to consult standard bibliographies in
the field, especially R. Matlon, _Index to Journals in Communication Studies
through 1990_ ; for journals in speech communication since 1990, you may need
to leaf through by hand; note that the Matlon Index is also available on CD-
ROM as "Commsearch"--a copy is available in Pattee Library. In this paper (a
revised version of which will become part of your final paper), "review" the
literature so as to give both an overview of the literature and a focused
account of how it bears on your own project. A careful review at this point
will allow you to identify, in the final paper, the ways in which your own
findings confirm, extend, modify, or contradict the existing literature.  
  
October 14. **Context** \--political, historical, organizational, ideological;
production and reception. History and authenticity of the text. Just 2-3 pages
for this assignment, though you will by this time have gathered much more than
enough information than that.  
  
November 2. **First draft** of paper due. A complete and finished version of
the paper, suitable for formal review. Include title page, abstract, paper,
endnotes if any, and list of works cited.  
  
November 3 - 16. **Editorial reviews** of first draft. Each student will read
and respond in writing to several other student papers with suggestions for
revisions.  
  
November 18 - December 9. Final **oral reports** to class.  
  
December 13. **Seminar paper due**.  
  
**Paper Style**. In preparing your papers, follow the style guidelines
presented in the _MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers_ , 4th edition.
Use the citation method that employs a list of works cited and parenthetical
references in the text. If you use commentative notes in addition, use
endnotes rather than footnotes. It is a good idea for a writer to have a basic
grammar reference handy; one widely used guide that I recommend is Diana
Hacker, _A Writer's_ _Reference_ , 3rd ed. (New York: St. Martin's, 1995).  
  

**On-line participation**  
  
---  
  
**Computer**. Students will be expected to be able to use the Penn State
computer access system, including ELECTRONIC MAIL and the WORLD WIDE WEB to
participate in the seminar. Workshops are offered by the Center for Academic
Computing. Computer assignments will include twice-weekly exchanges of notes
on the reading for the week. It is expected that seminar papers will be
prepared on a microcomputer word processing system, to allow for precision of
formatting and ease of revision. For those who do not own computers, there are
labs available on campus.  
  
**Electronic Mail and Class Electronic Discussion**. The primary discussions
in this seminar will be conducted face-to-face, on Tuesday and Thursday
afternoons, and throughout the rest of the week on the computer. Although it
is hoped that participation will be intense and ongoing, at least the
following deadlines must be met: A contribution to discussion 24 hours before
each class meeting, in which you offer some questions (with supporting
citations, thoughts, or suggestions) for possible discussion in class or on-
line. You are also invited to participate in ongoing followup on-line
conversations that extend some aspect of class discussion or raise an issue
that did not make it into the discussion. In your contributions, please try to
frame a proposition or question for discussion, relate it to some part of the
readings, quote or paraphrase the relevant passage in the reading (including a
page reference), and sketch a reasoned discussion-opener. In these
conversations, your opinions are important, but we should also work beyond
mere clash (or coincidence) of opinion to mutual enlightenment and a shared
willingness to learn new ways of thinking. Send your notes for class
discussion to the Listserv address
[L-SPCOM503-1@lists.psu.edu](mailto:L-SPCOM503-1@lists.psu.edu). To be sure
that you are listed as a member of the discussion list, forward your e-mail
address and your name to me by electronic mail --
[t3b@psu.edu](mailto:t3b@psu.edu). If you use more than one e-mail account, I
can list more than one address for you.  
  

**Academic Integrity**  
  
---  
  
**Academic Integrity**. Submission of all written work in this course is taken
to imply that the work is your own unless otherwise indicated. Please be
careful to document the work of others where appropriate. Under no
circumstances submit for credit in this course any work that has been
submitted in other courses. In selecting a text for critical analysis for your
seminar paper, do not write about a text that is part of the syllabus of other
courses you have taken without special permission.  
  

**Grades**  
  
---  
  
**Grades**. All elements of your work in this seminar will be considered in
formulating a final grade for the course--participation (in class and on-line)
20%; written work (including first and final drafts of the seminar paper,
progressive development of various stages of the paper, and editorial comments
on peer reviewed papers) 80%.  
  

**Texts**  
  
---  
  
Benson, Thomas W., ed. _American Rhetoric: Context and Criticism_. Carbondale:
Southern Illinois University Press, 1989.  
  
Benson, Thomas W., ed. _Landmark Essays on Rhetorical Criticism_. Davis, CA:
Hermagoras Press, 1993.  
  
Benson, Thomas W., ed. _Rhetoric and Political Culture in Nineteenth-Century
America_. East Lansing: Michigan State University Press, 1997.  
  
Brock, Bernard L., Robert L. Scott, and James W. Chesebro, eds. _Methods of
Rhetorical Criticism: A Twentieth-Century Perspective_. 3rd ed. Detroit: Wayne
State University Press, 1989.  
  
Medhurst, Martin J., ed. _Landmark Essays on American Public Address_. Davis,
CA: Hermagoras Press, 1993.  
  
Nothstine, William L., Carole Blair, and Gary A. Copeland. _Critical
Questions: Invention, Creativity, and the Criticism of Discourse and Media_.
New York: St. Martin's Press, 1994.  
  

**Additional Readings**  
  
---  
**  
** It is expected that you will be reading widely in rhetorical criticism
during the semester, particularly in areas that support the development of
your seminar paper. The following books and articles are recommended as a
starting point--for grounding this course and for exploring other ways of
conceiving the subject. Even so, the following works are only a sample. The
emphasis of the following readings is heavily, but not exclusively, directed
to writings in the discipline of Speech Communication, but it seems clear from
reading the best critics that rhetorical criticism is an interdisciplinary
field of practice, drawing widely on theoretical, historical, philosophical,
and literary work in the humanities and human sciences.  
  
**Books:  
  
** Andrews, James R. _The Practice of Rhetorical Criticism_. New York:
Longman, 1990.  
  
Arnold, Carroll C. _Criticism of Oral Rhetoric_. Columbus, OH: Merrill, 1974.  
  
Bitzer, Lloyd F., and Edwin Black. _The Prospect of Rhetoric_. Englewood
Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1971.  
  
Black, Edwin. _Rhetorical Criticism: A Study in Method_. New York: Macmillan,
1965.  
  
Black, Edwin. _Rhetorical Questions_. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1992.  
  
Booth, Wayne C. _The Company We Keep: An Ethics of Fiction_. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1988.  
  
Booth, Wayne C. _The Rhetoric of Fiction_. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1961.  
  
Brigance, W. Norwood, ed. _A History and Criticism of American Public
Address_. 2 vol. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1943.  
  
Campbell, Karlyn Kohrs, ed. _Women Public Speakers in the United States,
1800-1925: A Bio-Critical Sourcebook_. Westport: Greenwood Press, 1993.  
  
Farrell, Thomas B. _Norms of Rhetorical Culture_. New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1993.  
  
Foss, Sonja K., ed. _Rhetorical Criticism: Exploration and Practice_. Prospect
Heights, IL: Waveland, 1989.  
  
Hart, Roderick P. _Modern Rhetorical Criticism_. Glenview, IL: Scott,
Foresman/Little, Brown, 1990.  
  
Herrick, James A. _The Radical Rhetoric of the English Deists: The Discourse
of Skepticism, 1680-1750_. Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press,
1997.  
  
Hochmuth, Marie, ed. _A History and Criticism of American Public Address_.
Vol. 3. New York: Russell  & Russell, 1955.  
  
Hogan, J. Michael, ed. _Rhetoric and Community_. Columbia, SC: University of
South Carolina Press, 1998.  
  
Jamieson, Kathleen Hall. _Eloquence in an Electronic Age: The Transformation
of Political Speechmaking_. New York: Oxford University Press, 1988.  
  
Leff, Michael C., and Fred J. Kauffeld, eds. _Texts in Context: Critical
Dialogues on Significant Episodes in American Political Rhetoric_. Davis, CA:
Hermagoras Press, 1989.  
  
Mailloux, Steven. _Rhetorical Power_. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,
1989.  
  
Medhurst, Martin J., ed. _Beyond the Rhetorical Presidency_. College Station,
TX: Texas A &M University Press, 1996.

Medhurst, Martin J., Robert L. Ivie, Philip Wander, and Robert Scott. _Cold
War Rhetoric: Strategy, Metaphor, and Ideology_. Revised edition. East
Lansing: Michigan State University Press, 1997.  
  
Nichols, Marie Hochmuth. _Rhetoric and Criticism_. Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana
State University Press, 1963.  
  
Peterson, Tarla Rai. _Sharing the Earth: The Rhetoric of Sustainable
Development_. Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press, 1997.  
  
Poulakos, Takis. _Speaking for the Polis: Isocrates' Rhetorical Education_.
Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press, 1997.  
  
Thonssen, Lester, A. Craig Baird, and Waldo W. Braden. _Speech Criticism_. 2d
ed. New York: Ronald Press, 1970.  
  
Wallace, Karl R., ed. _History of Speech Education in America: Background
Studies_. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1954.  
  
Wertheimer, Molly Meijer. _Listening to Their Voices: The Rhetorical
Activities of Historical Women_. Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina
Press, 1997.  
  
White, Eugene E. _The Context of Human Discourse: A Configurational Criticism
of Rhetoric_. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1992.  
  
  
**Articles:  
  
** Some of these materials are available on-line through Pattee Library's
electronic reserve system; point your internet browser to
[http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu ](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)  
  
Altman, Karen E. "Consuming Ideology: The Better Homes in American Campaign."
_Critical Studies in Mass Communication_ 7 (1990): 286-307.  
  
Baskerville, Barnett. "Joe McCarthy: Briefcase Demagogue." _Today's Speech_ 2
(September 1954): 8-15.  
  
Benson, Thomas W. "Another Shooting in Cowtown." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_
67 (1981): 347-406.  
  
Benson, Thomas W. "Rhetoric and Autobiography: The Case of Malcolm X."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 60 (1974): 1-13. On electronic reserve.  
  
Benson, Thomas W. "The Rhetorical Structure of Frederick Wiseman's " High
School"." _Communication Monographs._ 47 (1980): 233-261.  
  
Benson, Thomas W. "The Rhetorical Structure of Frederick Wiseman's "Primate"."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 71 (1985): 204-217.  
  
Benson, Thomas W. "The Senses of Rhetoric: A Topical System for Critics."
_Central States Speech Journal_ 29 (1978): 237-250.  
  
Birdsell, David S. "Ronald Reagan on Lebanon and Grenada: Flexibility and
Interpretation in the Application of Kenneth Burke's Pentad." _Quarterly
Journal of Speech_ 73 (1987): 267-279.  
  
Bitzer, Lloyd. "The Rhetorical Situation." _Philosophy and Rhetoric_ 1 (1968):
1-14.  
  
Black, Edwin. "Electing Time." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 59 (1973):
125-129.  
  
Black, Edwin. "Gettysburg and Silence." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 80
(1994): 21-36. On electronic reserve.  
  
Black, Edwin. "Ideological Justifications." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 70
(1984): 144-150. On electronic reserve.  
  
Black, Edwin. "A Note on Theory and Practice in Rhetorical Criticism."
_Western Journal of Speech Communication_ 44 (1980): 331-336.  
  
Black, Edwin. "Secrecy and Disclosure as Rhetorical Forms." _Quarterly Journal
of Speech_ 74 (1988): 133-150.  
  
Black, Edwin. "The Sentimental Style as Escapism, or the Devil with Dan'l
Webster." _Form and Genre: Shaping Rhetorical Action_. Ed. Karlyn Kohrs
Campbell and Kathleen Hall Jamieson. Falls Church, VA: Speech Communication
Association, 1978.  
  
Blair, Carol, Julie R. Brown, and Leslie A. Baxter. "Disciplining the
Feminine." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 80 (1994): 383-409. On electronic
reserve.  
  
Bormann, Ernest G. "Fantasy and Rhetorical Vision: The Rhetorical Criticism of
Social Reality." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 58 (1973): 143-159.  
  
Browne, Nick. "The Spectator-in-the-Text: The Rhetoric of _Stagecoach_." _Film
Quarterly_ (December 1975): 26-38.  
  
Browne, Stephen H. "Edmund Burke's Letter to a Noble Lord: A Textual Study in
Political Philosophy and Rhetorical Action." _Communication Monographs_ 55
(1988): 215-229.  
  
Browne, Stephen H. "'Like Gory Spectres': Representing Evil in Theodore Weld's
American Slavery As It Is." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 80 (1994): 277-292.  
  
Browne, Stephen H. "The Political Uses of Pastoral: Rhetorical Dynamics in
John Dickinson's First Letter from a Farmer in Pennsylvania." _Quarterly
Journal of Speech_ 76 (1990): 46-57.  
  
Browne, Stephen H. "Reading Public Memory in Daniel Webster's Plymouth Rock
Oration." _Western Journal of Communication_ 57 (1993): 464-477. On electronic
reserve.  
  
Burke, Kenneth. "Antony on Behalf of the Play." _The Philosophy of Literary
Form_. 3d ed. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1973\. 329-343. On
electronic reserve.  
  
Campbell, Karlyn Kohrs. "The Rhetoric of Women's Liberation: An Oxymoron."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 59 (1973): 74-86.  
  
Cox, Robert. "The Die Is Cast: Topical and Ontological Dimensions of the
_Locus_ of the Irreperable." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 68 (1982): 227-239.  
  
Darsey, James. "From "Gay is Good" to the Scourge of AIDS: The Evolution of
Gay Liberation Rhetoric, 1977-1990." _Communication Studies_ 42 (1991): 43-66.  
  
Darsey, James. "The Legend of Eugene Debs: Prophetic "Ethos" as Radical
Argument." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 74 (1988): 434-452. On electronic
reserve.  
  
Darsey, James. "Must We All Be Rhetorical Theorists?: An Anti- Democratic
inquiry." _Western Journal of Communication_ 58 (1994): 164-181. On electronic
reserve.  
  
Farrell, Thomas, and Thomas Goodnight. "Accidental Rhetoric: The Root
Metaphors of Three Mile Island." _Communication Monographs_ 49 (1981):
271-300.  
  
Fisher, Walter R. "Narration as a Human Communication Paradigm: The Case of
Public Moral Argument." _Communication Monographs_ 51 (1984): 1-22.  
  
Gregg, Richard B. "The Criticism of Symbolic Inducement: A Critical-
Theoretical Connection." _Speech Communication in the 20th Century_. Ed.
Thomas W. Benson. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1985. 41-62.
On electronic reserve.  
  
Gregg, Richard B. "The Ego-Function of the Rhetoric of Protest." _Philosophy
and Rhetoric_ 4 (1971): 71-91.  
  
Griffin, Leland M. "The Rhetorical Structure of the Antimasonic Movement."
_The Rhetorical Idiom_. Ed. Donald Bryant. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press, 1958. 145-160. On electronic reserve.  
  
Griffin, Leland M. "The Rhetorical Structure of Historical Movements."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 38 (1952): 184-188. On electronic reserve.  
  
Hart, Roderick P. " Contemporary Scholarship in Public Address: A Research
Editorial." _Western Journal of Speech Communication_ 50 (1986): 283-295. On
electronic reserve.  
  
Hart, Roderick P. "Doing Criticism My Way: A Reply to Darsey." _Western
Journal of Communication_ 58 (1994): 308-312. On electronic reserve.  
  
Hart, Roderick P. "Theory-Building and Rhetorical Criticism: An Informal
Statement of Opinion." _Central States Speech Journal_ 27 (1976): 70-77. On
electronic reserve.  
  
Hikins, James W. "The Rhetoric of 'Unconditional Surrender' and the Decision
to Drop the Atomic Bomb." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 69 (1983): 379-400.  
  
Hill, Forbes. "Conventional Wisdom--Traditional Form--The President's Message
of November 3, 1969." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 58 (1972): 373-386.  
  
Hyde, Michael J. "Medicine, Rhetoric, and Euthanasia: A Case Study in the
Workings of a Postmodern Discourse." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 79 (1993):
201-224. On electronic reserve.  
  
Ivie, Robert L. "Metaphor and the Rhetorical Invention of Cold War
'Idealists'." _Communication Monographs_ 54 (1987): 165-182.  
  
Jamieson, Kathleen Hall. "Generic Constraints and the Rhetorical Situation."
_Philosophy and Rhetoric_ 6 (1973): 162-170.  
  
Jasinski, James. "The Feminization of Liberty, Domesticated Virtue, and the
Reconstitution of Power and Authority in Early American Political Discourse."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 79 (1993): 146-164.  
  
Leff, Michael. "Dimensions of Temporality in Lincoln's Second Inaugural."
_Communication Reports_ 1 (1988): 26-31.  
  
Leff, Michael. "Interpretation and the Art of the Rhetorical Critic." _Western
Journal of Speech Communication_ 44 (1980): 337-349. On electronic reserve.  
  
Leff, Michael. "Introduction: Rhetorical Criticism: The State of the Art."
_Western Journal of Speech Communication_ 44 (1980): 264.  
  
Leff, Michael. _Rhetorical Timing in Lincoln's House Divided Speech_.
Evanston, IL: Northwestern University, 1983. On electronic reserve.  
  
Leff, Michael. "Textual Criticism: The Legacy of G. P. Mohrmann." _Quarterly
Journal of Speech_ 72 (1986): 377-389.  
  
Leff, Michael, and Gerald P. Mohrmann. "Lincoln at Cooper Union: A Rhetorical
Analysis of the Text." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 60 (1974): 346-358.  
  
Leff, Michael, and Andrew Sachs. "Words the Most Like Things: Iconicity and
the Rhetorical Text." _Western Journal of Speech Communication_ 54 (1990):
252-273. On electronic reserve.  
  
Lewis, William F. "Telling America's Story: Narrative Form and the Reagan
Presidency." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 73 (1987): 280-302.  
  
Ling, David A. "A Pentadic Analysis of Senator Edward Kennedy's Address to the
People of Massachusetts, July 25, 1969." _Central States Speech Journal_ 21
(1970): 81-86.  
  
Lucaites, John Louis, and Celeste Michelle Condit. "Reconstructing
<Equality>: Culturetypal and Counter-Cultural Rhetorics in the Martyred Black
Vision." _Communication Monographs_ 57 (1990): 5-25. On electronic reserve.  
  
Lucas, Stephen E. "The Renaissance of American Public Address: Text and
Context in Rhetorical Criticism." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 74 (1988):
241-260.  
  
Lucas, Stephen E. "The Schism in Rhetorical Scholarship." _Quarterly Journal
of Speech_ 67 (1981): 1-20.  
  
McGee, Michael C. "The Fall of Wellington: A Case Study of the Relationship
between Theory, Practice, and Rhetoric in History." _Quarterly Journal of
Speech_ 63 (1977): 28-42.  
  
McGee, Michael Calvin. "The 'Ideograph': A Link Between Rhetoric and
Ideology." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 66 (1980): 1-16. On electronic
reserve.  
  
McGee, Michael C. "In Search of 'The People': A Rhetorical Alternative."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 61 (1975): 235-49. On electronic reserve.  
  
McGee, Michael Calvin. "Social Movement as Meaning." _Central States Speech
Journal_ 34 (1983): 74-77.  
  
McGee, Michael Calvin. " "Social Movement": Phenomenon or Meaning?" _Central
States Speech Journal_ 31 (1980): 233-244.  
  
McGee, Michael Calvin. "Text, Context, and the Fragmentation of Contemporary
Culture." _Western Journal of Speech Communication_ 54 (1990): 274-289. On
electronic reserve.  
  
McKerrow, Raymie E. "Critical Rhetoric: Theory and Praxis." _Communication
Monographs_ 56 (1989): 91-111. On electronic reserve.  
  
Medhurst, Martin J. "Public Address and Significant Scholarship: Four
Challenges to the Rhetorical Renaissance." _Texts in Context_. Ed. Michael C.
Leff and Fred Kauffeld. Davis, CA: Hermagoras Press, 1989\. 29-42.  
  
Medhurst, Martin J., and Thomas W. Benson. " "The City": The Rhetoric of
Rhythm." _Communication Monographs_ 48 (1981): 54-72. On electronic reserve.  
  
Mohrmann, Gerald P., and Michael Leff. "Lincoln at Cooper Union: A Rationale
for Neo-Classical Criticism." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 60 (1974):
459-467.  
  
Murphy, John M. "Civic Republicanism in the Modern Age: Adlai Stevenson in the
1952 Presidential Campaign." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 80 (1992): 313-328.  
  
Ong, Walter J. "The Writer's Audience Is Always a Fiction." _Interfaces of the
Word_. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1977\. 53-81.  
  
Osborn, Michael. "Archetypal Metaphor in Rhetoric: The Light-Dark Family."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 1967 (1967): 115-126.  
  
Peterson, Tarla Rai. "The Rhetorical Construction of Institutional Authority
in a Senate Subcommittee Hearing on Wilderness Legislation." _Western Journal
of Speech Communication_ 52 (1988): 259-276.  
  
Rosenfield, Lawrence W. "The Anatomy of Critical Discourse." _Speech
Monographs_ 35 (1968): 50-69. On electronic reserve.  
  
Rosenfield, Lawrence W. "The Experience of Criticism." _Quarterly Journal of
Speech_ 60 (1974): 489-496.  
  
Rushing, Janice Hocker. "Evolution of 'The New Frontier' in _Alien_ and
_Aliens_ : Patriarchal Co-optation of the Feminine Archetype." _Quarterly
Journal of Speech_ 75 (1989): 1-24. On electronic reserve.  
  
Rushing, Janice Hocker. "The Rhetoric of the American Western Myth."
_Communication Monographs_ 50 (1983): 14-32.  
  
Scott, Robert L. "On Viewing Rhetoric as Epistemic." _Central States Speech
Journal_ 38 (1967): 9-17.  
  
Simons, Herbert W. "Requirements, Problems, and Strategies: A Theory of
Persuasion for Social Movements." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 56 (1970):
1-11. On electronic reserve.  
  
Solomon, Martha. "Ideology as Rhetorical Constraint: The Anarchist Agitation
of "Red Emma" Goldman." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 74 (1988): 184-200.  
  
Solomon, Martha. "The "Positive Woman's" Journey: A Mythic Analysis of the
Rhetoric of STOP ERA." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 65 (1979): 262-274.  
  
Solomon, Martha. "The Rhetoric of STOP ERA: Fatalistic Reaffirmation."
_Southern Speech Communication Journal_ 44 (1978): 42-59.  
  
Solomon, Martha. ""With Firmness in the Right": The Creation of Moral Hegemony
in Lincoln's Second Inaugural." _Communication Reports_ 1 (1988): 32-37.  
  
Stelzner, Hermann G. "The Quest Story and Nixon's November 3, 1969 Address."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 57 (1971): 163-172.  
  
Wander, Philip. "The Ideological Turn in Modern Criticism." _Central States
Speech Journal_ 34 (1983): 1-18. On electronic reserve.  
  
Ware, B. L., and Wil A. Linkugel. "They Spoke in Defense of Themselves: On the
Generic Criticism of Apologia." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 59 (1973):
273-283. On electronic reserve.  
  
White, Eugene E. "Solomon Stoddard's Theories of Persuasion." _Speech
Monographs_ 29 (1962): 235-259.  
  
Wilson, John F. "Harding's Rhetoric of Normalcy, 1920-1923." _Quarterly
Journal of Speech_ 48 (1962): 406-411.  
  
Wilson, John F. "Rhetorical Echoes of a Wilsonian Idea." _Quarterly Journal of
Speech_ 43 (1957): 271-272.  
  
Wrage, Ernest J. "Public Address: A Study in Social and Intellectual History."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 33 (1947): 451-457.  
Zarefsky, David. "The State of the Art in Public Address Scholarship." _Texts
in Context_. Ed. Michael C. Leff and Fred Kauffeld. Davis, CA: Hermagoras
Press, 1989. 13-28.

=====

This syllabus may be accessed on the world wide web at
<http://www.personal.psu.edu/t3b>  
  
Double click here to return to [Tom Benson's home
page](http://www.personal.psu.edu/t3b)

