



Speech Communication 503  
Spring 1997  
  
Monday 2:30-5:30  
219 Thomas Building  
Listserv:

[spcom503@psuvm.psu.edu](mailto:spcom503@psuvm.psu.edu) |

Thomas W. Benson  
227 Sparks Building  
  
(814) 865-4201  
e-mail:

t[3b@psu.edu](mailto:t3b@psu.edu)

  
office hours: Tues 1-4:30 and by appt.  
  
---|---  
  

**Seminar in Rhetorical Criticism  
  
**

A graduate seminar in the practice of rhetorical criticism, with an emphasis
on the working practices of critics of primarily oral, written, and media
texts in the discipline of speech communication. Students will read widely in
rhetorical criticism and interpretive theory and will write an extended
seminar paper. The seminar is conceived as an intensive, advanced workshop in
rhetorical criticism.  
  

(1) January 13:

|

**Introduction.**  
  
---|---  
  
(2) January 20:

|

**Preliminary Considerations: Theory, Scope, and Method in Rhetorical
Criticism**. Read Benson, "Beacons and Boundary Markers: Landmarks in
Rhetorical Criticism"; Herbert A. Wichelns, "The Literary Criticism of
Oratory," in Benson, _Landmarks_ ; Medhurst and Benson, "Rhetorical Studies in
a Media Age," in Medhurst and Benson, _Rhetorical Dimensions_ ; Medhurst, "The
Academic Study of Public Address: A Tradition in Transition"; Donald C.
Bryant, "Some Problems of Scope and Method in Rhetorical Scholarship"; Loren
D. Reid, "The Perils of Rhetorical Criticism," in Medhurst, _Landmarks_ ;
Benson, "History, Criticism, and Theory in the Study of American Rhetoric," in
Benson, _American Rhetoric_ ; Michael C. Leff, "Cicero's Redemptive
Identification," in Nothstine, Blair, Copeland, _Critical Questions_ ; Lloyd
Bitzer, "The Rhetorical Situation"; Lawrence W. Rosenfield, "The Anatomy of
Rhetorical Discourse"; Wayne C. Brockriede, "Rhetorical Criticism as
Argument," in Medhurst and Benson, _Rhetorical Dimensions_.  
  
(3) January 27:

|

**Rhetoric as a Way of Doing: Rhetoric as situated, instrumental action**.
Read Marie Hochmuth Nichols, "Lincoln's First Inaugural"; Halford Ross Ryan,
"Harry S. Truman"; E. Culpepper Clark and Raymie McKerrow, "The
Historiographical Dilemma in Myrdal's American Creed: Rhetoric's Role in
Rescuing a Historical Moment," in Brock, Scott, and Chesebro, _Methods of
Rhetorical Criticism_ , 3d ed. ; Stephen E. Lucas, "Justifying America: The
Declaration of Independence as a Rhetorical Document," in Benson, _American
Rhetoric_ ; Barnet Baskerville, "Must We All Be Rhetorical Critics?"; Stephen
Lucas, "The Schism in Rhetorical Scholarship," in Medhurst, _Landmarks_.  
  
(4) February 3:

|

**Rhetorical Criticism and the Crisis of Neo-Aristotelianism**. Ernest Wrage,
"Public Address: A Study in Social and Intellectual History"; Wayland Maxfield
Parrish, " The Study of Speeches"; Marie Hochmuth (Nichols), "The Criticism of
Rhetoric"; Edwin Black, "The Practice of Rhetorical Criticism"; G. P.
Mohrmann, "Elegy in a Critical Grave-Yard," in Medhurst, _Landmarks_ ; Carroll
C. Arnold, "Lord Thomas Erskine: Modern Advocate," in Benson, _Landmarks_ ;
William Nothstine, Carole Blair, and Gary A. Copeland, "Professionalism and
the Eclipse of Critical Invention"; Roderick P. Hart, "Wandering with
Rhetorical Criticism"; Michael M. Osborn, "The Invention of Rhetorical
Criticism in My Work," in Nothstine, Blair, and Copeland, _Critical Questions_
; Edwin Black, "Ideological Justifications," in Medhurst and Benson,
_Rhetorical Dimensions_.  
  
(5) February 10:

|

**Rhetoric as a way of knowing**. Read Robert L. Scott, "On Viewing Rhetoric
as Epistemic: Ten Years Later"; Robert L. Scott and James F. Klumpp, "A Dear
Searcher into Comparisons"; James W. Chesebro, "Computer Science as a
Rhetoric," in Brock , Scott, and Chesebro, _Methods of Rhetorical Criticism_ ;
Robert L. Scott, "A Rhetoric of Facts: Arthur Larson's Stance as a Persuader";
John Angus Cambell, "Darwin and _The Origin of Species_ : The Rhetorical
Ancestry of an Idea," in Benson, _Landmarks_ ; Farrell Corcoran, "KAL 007 and
the Evil Empire: Mediated Disaster and Forms of Rationalization"; Kathleen
Hall Jamieson, "The Role of Drama and Data in Political Decisions," in
Medhurst and Benson, _Rhetorical Dimensions_ (and supplement).  
  
(6) February 17:

|

**Dramatism , Fantasy, Myth, and Narrative as ways of rhetorical knowing**.
Kenneth Burke, "The Rhetoric of Hitler's Battle," in Benson, _Landmarks_ ;
Bernard Brock, "Rhetorical Criticism: A Burkeian Approach Revisited"; David S.
Birdsell, "Ronald Reagan on Lebanon and Grenada: Flexibility and
Interpretation in the Application of Kenneth Burke's Pentad"; Ernest G.
Bormann, "Fantasy and Rhetorical Vision: The Rhetorical Criticism of Social
Reality"; Rita C. Hubbard, "Relationship Styles in Popular Romance Novels,
1950-1983"; Walter R. Fisher, "The Narrative Paradigm: An Elaboration"; James
S. Ettema and Theodore L. Glasser, "Narrative Form and Moral Force: The
Realization of Innocence and Guilt through Investigative Journalism," in
Brock, Scott, and Chesebro, _Methods of Rhetorical Criticism_ ; Janice Hocker
Rushing, "Evolution of the 'New Frontier' in _Alien_ and _Aliens_ :
Patriarchal Evolution of the Feminine Archetype," in Medhurst and Benson,
_Rhetorical Dimensions_.  
  
(7) February 24:

|

**Public Address as a Field of Study and as a Field of Activity**. Read Thomas
W. Benson, ed., _Rhetoric and Political Culture in Nineteenth-Century
America_.  
  
(8) March 3:

|

**Rhetoric as a way of being**. Read T. Benson, "Rhetoric as a Way of Being,"
in _American Rhetoric_ ; Karlyn Kohrs Campbell, "The Rhetoric of Women's
Liberation: An Oxymoron"; Carole Spitzack and Kathryn Carter, "Women in
Communication Studies: A Typology for Revision"; Jonathan Culler, "Reading as
a Woman," in Brock, et al., _Methods of Rhetorical Criticism_ ; Karlyn Kohrs
Campbell, "Stanton's "Solitude of Self": A Rationale for Feminism"; Edwin
Black, "The Second Persona," in Benson, _Landmarks_ ; Maurice Charland,
"Constitutive Rhetoric: The Case of the Peuple Quebecois," in Nothstine,
Blair, and Copeland, _Critical Questions_.  
  
March 10-14

|

**Spring Break.** No classes.  
  
(9) March 17:

|

**Rhetoric, cultural politics, and the public**. Gerard Hauser,
"Administrative Rhetoric and Public Opinion: Discussing the Iranian Hostages
in the Public Sphere"; Richard B. Gregg, "The Rhetoric of Denial and
Alternity," in Benson, _American Rhetoric_ ; Roland Barthes, "From Work to
Text"; Tamar Liebes, "Cultural Differences in the Retelling of Television
Fiction"; Lawrence Grossberg, "Is There Rock after Punk?" in Brock, Scott, and
Chesebro, _Methods of Rhetorical Criticism_ ; Carole Blair, Marsha S.
Jeppeson, and Enrico Pucci, Jr., "Public Memorializing in Postmodernity: The
Vietnam Veterans Memorial as a Prototype," in Nothstine, Blair, and Copeland,
_Critical Questions_ ; Charles F. Altman, "The Medieval Marquee: Church Portal
Sculpture as Publicity"; and Todd Gitlin, "We Build Excitement," in Medhurst
and Benson, _Rhetorical Dimensions_ (supplement); Bruce Gronbeck, "Audience
Engagement in _Family_ "; Charles U. Larson and Christine Oravec, " _A Prairie
Home Companion_ and the Fabrication of Community"; John Fiske, "The Discourses
of TV Quiz Shows or School + Luck = Success + Sex," in Medhurst and Benson,
_Rhetorical Dimensions_.  
  
(10) March 24:

|

**Genre, the constraints of form, and the rhetorical resources of language**.
Read Karlyn Kohrs Campbell and Kathleen Hall Jamieson, "Introduction to _Form
and Genre_ " and "Inaugurating the Presidency"; in Brock, Scott, and Chesebro,
_Methods of Rhetorical Criticism_ ; Lawrence W. Rosenfield, "Central Park and
the Celebration of Civic Virtue," in Benson, _American Rhetoric_ ; Hermann G.
Stelzner, "'War Message,' December 8, 1941: An Approach to Language"; Michael
C. Leff and G. P. Mohrmann, "Lincoln at Cooper Union: A Rhetorical Analysis of
the Text"; Stephen E. Lucas, "Genre Criticism and Historical Context: The Case
of George Washington's First Inaugural Address," in Benson, _Landmarks_ ;
Michael Leff, "Textual Criticism: The Legacy of G. P. Mohrmann," in Medhurst,
_Landmarks_ ; Richard P. Fulkerson, "The Public Letter as a Rhetorical Form:
Structure, Logic, and Style in King's 'Letter from Birmingham Jail'"; Martin
J. Medhurst and Thomas W. Benson, " _The City_ : The Rhetoric of Rhythm," in
Medhurst and Benson, _Rhetorical Dimensions._  
  
(11) March 31:

|

**First draft of seminar paper due**. No reading assignment for this class
period--to give you a little extra time to work on your paper--but please do
not miss class, as we will be exchanging drafts for peer review.  
  
(12) April 7:

|

**Interpreting the rhetoric of movements**. Read Carroll C. Arnold, "Early
Constitutional Rhetoric in Pennsylvania," in Benson, _American Rhetoric_ ;
Robert S. Cathcart, "Movements: Confrontation as Rhetorical Form," and Celeste
Condit Railsback, "The Contemporary American Abortion Controversy: Stages in
the Argument," in Brock, et al., _Methods of Rhetorical Criticism_ ; Elizabeth
Walker Mechling and Jay Mechling, "Kind and Cruel America: The Rhetoric of
Animal Rights"; Barry Brummett, "A Pentadic Analysis of Ideologies of Two Gay
Rights Controversies," in Medhurst and Benson, _Rhetorical Dimensions_.  
  
(13) April 14:

|

**The issue of theory in criticism; the criticism of politics; and the
politics of academic gatekeeping**. Thomas W. Benson, "Killer Media:
Technology, Communication Theory, and the First Amendment," in Medhurst and
Benson, _Rhetorical Dimensions_ ; Elizabeth Walker Mechling and Jay Mechling,
"The Campaign for Civil Defense and the Struggle to Naturalize the Bomb";
William L. Nothstine, "Public, Private, and Pseudo-Private: Ethics and Images
in the Collapse of the PTL Ministry"; Robert L. Ivie,"The Metaphor of Force in
Prowar Discourse: The Case of 1812"; Martha Solomon, "The Rhetoric of
Dehumanization: An Analysis of Medical Reports of the Tuskegee Syphilis
Project"; Philip Wander, "The Rhetoric of American Foreign Policy"; Bryan C.
Taylor, " _Reminiscences of Los Alamos_ : Narrative, Critical Theory, and the
Organizational Subject," in Nothstine, Blair, and Copeland, _Critical
Questions_.  
  
(14) April 21:

|

**Presentation of seminar papers**.  
  
(15) April 28:

|

**Presentation of seminar papers**.  
  
  

=====================================  

**Seminar Papers** : You are asked to prepare a major, article-length seminar
paper--a rhetorical analysis of a single text or group of texts. Subject the
text to a close textual analysis, situated in whatever contexts (theoretical,
situational, historical) seem appropriate to support interpretive work. A
central feature of the seminar will be the sequential preparation of the
paper, followed by shared editorial consultation and thorough rewriting. The
product will, it is hoped, be a manuscript that might be thought of as an
"expanded" journal article, which, with some judicious cutting, could be
submitted for publication review to a journal. The manuscript will be
"expanded" in the sense that it will probably contain a more extended review
of context and earlier scholarship, and perhaps more detailed description,
than some editors would have space for in a journal.  
  
Major dates for paper development (all these assignments are due, typed,
double-spaced, one side of paper only, with a title page, on the dates
indicated):  
  
January 27. **Topic** due, in writing. Briefly identify the text(s) you wish
to analyze and the central critical problems or questions you wish to
investigate. What is the text? Where is it available? What, at this point,
strike you as issues, questions, or problems worth investigating? (1-2 pages)
It is strongly suggested that you talk with me before choosing a text for
analysis. In any case, do not choose a text that you have written on for
another class.  
  
February 10. **Research proposal**. (2-4 pp.) A description of the topic you
have chosen, the central question you will address in your analysis, the
significance of your study, critical procedures that seem likely to be
productive, relevant theoretical and methodological considerations,
definitions of key terms, brief identification of the scholarly literatures
most likely to contextualize your study (previous studies of your text, of
similar texts, of similar questions, theoretical perspectives, descriptions of
method or uses of methods similar to those you propose). Preliminary
bibliography.  
  
February 24. **Review of literature**. By this time you should have identified
the scholarly literature (books, journal articles, and dissertations) bearing
on (1) your research question, (2) the text you have chosen to analyze, (3)
your mode of analysis, and (4) major theoretical issues, if any, that drive or
are interrogated by your proposed analysis. Early in the semester, schedule a
session with a research librarian at Pattee Library for advice on searching
the literature bearing on your topic. You should be familiar with LIAS
(including the UNCOVER and ERIC databases), with _Dissertation Abstracts_ ,
and with various indices to scholarly literature that are available on CD-ROM.
Be sure to consult standard bibliographies in the field, especially R. Matlon,
_Index to Journals in Communication Studies through 1990_ ; for journals in
speech communication since 1990, you may need to leaf through by hand; note
that the Matlon Index is also available on CD-ROM--a copy is available in
Pattee Library. In this paper (a revised version of which will become part of
your final paper), "review" the literature so as to give both an overview of
the literature and a focused account of how it bears on your own project. A
careful review at this point will allow you to identify, in the final paper,
the ways in which your own findings confirm, extend, modify, or contradict the
existing literature.  
  
March 17. **Context** \--political, historical, organizational, ideological;
production and reception. History and authenticity of the text.  
  
March 31. **First draft** of paper due. A complete and finished version of the
paper, suitable for formal review. Include title page, abstract, paper,
endnotes if any, and list of works cited.  
  
March 31 - April 14. **Editorial reviews** of first draft. Each student will
read and respond in writing to several other student papers with suggestions
for revisions.  
  
April 21, 28. Final **oral reports** to class.  
  
May 5. **Seminar paper due**.  
  
**Paper Style**. In preparing your papers, follow the style guidelines
presented in the _MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers_ , 4th edition.
Use the citation method that employs a list of works cited and parenthetical
references in the text. If you use commentative notes in addition, use
endnotes rather than footnotes. It is a good idea for a writer to have a basic
grammar reference handy; one widely used guide that I recommend is Diana
Hacker, _A Writer's_ _Reference_ , 3rd ed. (New York: St. Martin's, 1995).  
  
**Computer**. Students will be expected to be able to use the Penn State
computer access system, including ELECTRONIC MAIL, NEWSGROUPS, and the WORLD
WIDE WEB to participate in the seminar. Workshops are offered by the Center
for Academic Computing. Computer assignments will include twice-weekly
exchanges of notes on the reading for the week. It is expected that seminar
papers will be prepared on a microcomputer word processing system, to allow
for precision of formatting and ease of revision. For those who do not own
computers, there are labs available on campus.  
  
**Electronic Mail and Class Electronic Discussion**. The primary discussions
in this seminar will be conducted face-to-face, on Monday afternoons, and
throughout the rest of the week on the computer. Although it is hoped that
participation will be intense and ongoing, at least the following deadlines
must be met: (1) A contribution to discussion each Saturday afternoon by 5
p.m. responding to the reading that is assigned for the following Monday. (2)
A followup contribution by Wednesday at 5 p.m. extending --with specific
reference to the week's reading--some aspect of class discussion (or raising
an issue that did not make it into the discussion). Occasionally, the
instructor will supply the question or an alternate assignment. When there is
no assigned topic, please try to frame a proposition or question for
discussion, relate it to some part of the readings, quote or paraphrase the
relevant passage in the reading (including a page reference), and sketch a
reasoned discussion-opener. In these conversations, your opinions are
important, but we should also work beyond mere clash (or coincidence) of
opinion to mutual enlightenment and a shared willingness to learn new ways of
thinking. Send your notes for class discussion to the Listserv address

[spcom503@psuvm.psu.edu](mailto:spcom503@psuvm.psu.edu)

  
To be sure that you are listed as a member of the discussion list, forward
your e-mail address and your name to me by electronic mail \--

  
t[3b@psu.edu](mailto:t3b@psu.edu)

  
If you use more than one e-mail account, I can list more than one address for
you.  
  
**Academic Integrity**. Submission of all written work in this course is taken
to imply that the work is your own unless otherwise indicated. Please be
careful to document the work of others where appropriate. Under no
circumstances submit for credit in this course any work that has been
submitted in other courses. In selecting a text for critical analysis for your
seminar paper, do not write about a text that is part of the syllabus of other
courses you have taken without special permission.  
  
**Grades**. All elements of your work in this seminar will be considered in
formulating a final grade for the course--participation (in class and on-line)
20%; written work (including first and final drafts of the seminar paper,
progressive development of various stages of the paper, and editorial comments
on peer reviewed papers) 80%.  
  
**Texts** :  
  
Benson, Thomas W., ed. American Rhetoric: Context and Criticism. Carbondale:
Southern Illinois University Press, 1989.  
  
Benson, Thomas W., ed. _Landmark Essays on Rhetorical Criticism_. Davis, CA:
Hermagoras Press, 1993.  
  
Benson, Thomas W., ed. _Rhetoric and Political Culture in Nineteenth-Century
America_. East Lansing: Michigan State University Press, 1997.  
  
Brock, Bernard L., Robert L. Scott, and James W. Chesebro, eds. _Methods of
Rhetorical Criticism: A Twentieth-Century Perspective_. 3rd ed. Detroit: Wayne
State University Press, 1989.  
  
Medhurst, Martin J., ed. _Landmark Essays on American Public Address_. Davis,
CA: Hermagoras Press, 1993.  
  
Medhurst, Martin J., and Thomas W. Benson, eds. _Rhetorical Dimensions in
Media_. 2d ed. Dubuque: Kendall/Hunt, 1996; please note that the 2d edition
(dated 1991) is now published with a 1996 "supplement" that contains four
additional chapters.  
  
Nothstine, William L., Carole Blair, and Gary A. Copeland. Critical Questions:
Invention, Creativity, and the Criticism of Discourse and Media. New York: St.
Martin's Press, 1994.  
  
**Additional Readings:  
  
** It is expected that you will be reading widely in rhetorical criticism
during the semester, particularly in areas that support the development of
your seminar paper. The following books and articles are recommended as a
starting point--for grounding this course and for exploring other ways of
conceiving the subject. Even so, the following works are only a sample. The
emphasis of the following readings is heavily, but not exclusively, directed
to writings in the discipline of Speech Communication, but it seems clear from
reading the best critics that rhetorical criticism is an interdisciplinary
field of practice, drawing widely on theoretical, historical, philosophical,
and literary work in the humanities and human sciences.  
  
**Books:  
  
** Andrews, James R. _The Practice of Rhetorical Criticism_. New York:
Longman, 1990.  
  
Arnold, Carroll C. _Criticism of Oral Rhetoric_. Columbus, OH: Merrill, 1974.  
  
Bitzer, Lloyd F., and Edwin Black. _The Prospect of Rhetoric_. Englewood
Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1971.  
  
Black, Edwin. _Rhetorical Criticism: A Study in Method_. New York: Macmillan,
1965.  
  
Black, Edwin. _Rhetorical Questions_. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1992.  
  
Booth, Wayne C. _The Company We Keep: An Ethics of Fiction_. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1988.  
  
Booth, Wayne C. _The Rhetoric of Fiction_. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1961.  
  
Brigance, W. Norwood, ed. _A History and Criticism of American Public
Address_. 2 vol. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1943.  
  
Campbell, Karlyn Kohrs, ed. _Women Public Speakers in the United States,
1800-1925: A Bio-Critical Sourcebook_. Westport: Greenwood Press, 1993.  
  
Farrell, Thomas B. _Norms of Rhetorical Culture_. New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1993.  
  
Foss, Sonja K., ed. _Rhetorical Criticism: Exploration and Practice_. Prospect
Heights, IL: Waveland, 1989.  
  
Hart, Roderick P. _Modern Rhetorical Criticism_. Glenview, IL: Scott,
Foresman/Little, Brown, 1990.  
  
Hochmuth, Marie, ed. _A History and Criticism of American Public Address_.
Vol. 3. New York: Russell  & Russell, 1955.  
  
Jamieson, Kathleen Hall. _Eloquence in an Electronic Age: The Transformation
of Political Speechmaking_. New York: Oxford University Press, 1988.  
  
Leff, Michael C., and Fred J. Kauffeld, eds. _Texts in Context: Critical
Dialogues on Significant Episodes in American Political Rhetoric_. Davis, CA:
Hermagoras Press, 1989.  
  
Mailloux, Steven. _Rhetorical Power_. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,
1989.  
  
Nichols, Marie Hochmuth. _Rhetoric and Criticism_. Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana
State University Press, 1963.  
  
Thonssen, Lester, A. Craig Baird, and Waldo W. Braden. _Speech Criticism_. 2d
ed. New York: Ronald Press, 1970.  
  
Wallace, Karl R., ed. _History of Speech Education in America: Background
Studies_. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1954.  
  
White, Eugene E. _The Context of Human Discourse: A Configurational Criticism
of Rhetoric_. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1992.  
  
  
**Articles:  
  
** Some of these materials are available on-line through Pattee Library's
electronic reserve system; point your internet browser to
<[http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)>  
  
Altman, Karen E. "Consuming Ideology: The Better Homes in American Campaign."
_Critical Studies in Mass Communication_ 7 (1990): 286-307.  
  
Baskerville, Barnett. "Joe McCarthy: Briefcase Demagogue." _Today's Speech_ 2
(September 1954): 8-15.  
  
Benson, Thomas W. "Another Shooting in Cowtown." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_
67 (1981): 347-406.  
  
Benson, Thomas W. "Rhetoric and Autobiography: The Case of Malcolm X."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 60 (1974): 1-13. On electronic reserve.  
  
Benson, Thomas W. "The Rhetorical Structure of Frederick Wiseman's " High
School"." _Communication Monographs._ 47 (1980): 233-261.  
  
Benson, Thomas W. "The Rhetorical Structure of Frederick Wiseman's "Primate"."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 71 (1985): 204-217.  
  
Benson, Thomas W. "The Senses of Rhetoric: A Topical System for Critics."
_Central States Speech Journal_ 29 (1978): 237-250.  
  
Birdsell, David S. "Ronald Reagan on Lebanon and Grenada: Flexibility and
Interpretation in the Application of Kenneth Burke's Pentad." _Quarterly
Journal of Speech_ 73 (1987): 267-279.  
  
Bitzer, Lloyd. "The Rhetorical Situation." _Philosophy and Rhetoric_ 1 (1968):
1-14.  
  
Black, Edwin. "Electing Time." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 59 (1973):
125-129.  
  
Black, Edwin. "Gettysburg and Silence." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 80
(1994): 21-36.  
  
Black, Edwin. "A Note on Theory and Practice in Rhetorical Criticism."
_Western Journal of Speech Communication_ 44 (1980): 331-336.  
  
Black, Edwin. "Secrecy and Disclosure as Rhetorical Forms." _Quarterly Journal
of Speech_ 74 (1988): 133-150.  
  
Black, Edwin. "The Sentimental Style as Escapism, or the Devil with Dan'l
Webster." _Form and Genre: Shaping Rhetorical Action_. Ed. Karlyn Kohrs
Campbell and Kathleen Hall Jamieson. Falls Church, VA: Speech Communication
Association, 1978.  
  
Blair, Carol, Julie R. Brown, and Leslie A. Baxter. "Disciplining the
Feminine." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 80 (1994): 383-409. On electronic
reserve.  
  
Bormann, Ernest G. "Fantasy and Rhetorical Vision: The Rhetorical Criticism of
Social Reality." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 58 (1973): 143-159.  
  
Browne, Nick. "The Spectator-in-the-Text: The Rhetoric of _Stagecoach_." _Film
Quarterly_ (December 1975): 26-38.  
  
Browne, Stephen H. "Edmund Burke's Letter to a Noble Lord: A Textual Study in
Political Philosophy and Rhetorical Action." _Communication Monographs_ 55
(1988): 215-229.  
  
Browne, Stephen H. "'Like Gory Spectres': Representing Evil in Theodore Weld's
American Slavery As It Is." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 80 (1994): 277-292.  
  
Browne, Stephen H. "The Political Uses of Pastoral: Rhetorical Dynamics in
John Dickinson's First Letter from a Farmer in Pennsylvania." _Quarterly
Journal of Speech_ 76 (1990): 46-57.  
  
Browne, Stephen H. "Reading Public Memory in Daniel Webster's Plymouth Rock
Oration." _Western Journal of Communication_ 57 (1993): 464-477. On electronic
reserve.  
  
Burke, Kenneth. "Antony on Behalf of the Play." _The Philosophy of Literary
Form_. 3d ed. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1973\. 329-343. On
electronic reserve.  
  
Campbell, Karlyn Kohrs. "The Rhetoric of Women's Liberation: An Oxymoron."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 59 (1973): 74-86.  
  
Cox, Robert. "The Die Is Cast: Topical and Ontological Dimensions of the
_Locus_ of the Irreperable." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 68 (1982): 227-239.  
  
Darsey, James. "From "Gay is Good" to the Scourge of AIDS: The Evolution of
Gay Liberation Rhetoric, 1977-1990." _Communication Studies_ 42 (1991): 43-66.  
  
Darsey, James. "The Legend of Eugene Debs: Prophetic "Ethos" as Radical
Argument." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 74 (1988): 434-452.  
  
Darsey, James. "Must We All Be Rhetorical Theorists?: An Anti- Democratic
inquiry." _Western Journal of Communication_ 58 (1994): 164-181. On electronic
reserve.  
  
Farrell, Thomas, and Thomas Goodnight. "Accidental Rhetoric: The Root
Metaphors of Three Mile Island." _Communication Monographs_ 49 (1981):
271-300.  
  
Fisher, Walter R. "Narration as a Human Communication Paradigm: The Case of
Public Moral Argument." _Communication Monographs_ 51 (1984): 1-22.  
  
Gregg, Richard B. "The Criticism of Symbolic Inducement: A Critical-
Theoretical Connection." _Speech Communication in the 20th Century_. Ed.
Thomas W. Benson. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1985. 41-62.
On electronic reserve.  
  
Gregg, Richard B. "The Ego-Function of the Rhetoric of Protest." _Philosophy
and Rhetoric_ 4 (1971): 71-91.  
  
Griffin, Leland M. "The Rhetorical Structure of Historical Movements."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 38 (1952): 184-188.  
  
Hart, Roderick P. " Contemporary Scholarship in Public Address: A Research
Editorial." _Western Journal of Speech Communication_ 50 (1986): 283-295. On
electronic reserve.  
  
Hart, Roderick P. "Doing Criticism My Way: A Reply to Darsey." _Western
Journal of Communication_ 58 (1994): 308-312. On electronic reserve.  
  
Hart, Roderick P. "Theory-Building and Rhetorical Criticism: An Informal
Statement of Opinion." _Central States Speech Journal_ 27 (1976): 70-77. On
electronic reserve.  
  
Hikins, James W. "The Rhetoric of 'Unconditional Surrender' and the Decision
to Drop the Atomic Bomb." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 69 (1983): 379-400.  
  
Hill, Forbes. "Conventional Wisdom--Traditional Form--The President's Message
of November 3, 1969." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 58 (1972): 373-386.  
  
Hyde, Michael J. "Medicine, Rhetoric, and Euthanasia: A Case Study in the
Workings of a Postmodern Discourse." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 79 (1993):
201-224.  
  
Ivie, Robert L. "Metaphor and the Rhetorical Invention of Cold War
'Idealists'." _Communication Monographs_ 54 (1987): 165-182.  
  
Jamieson, Kathleen Hall. "Generic Constraints and the Rhetorical Situation."
_Philosophy and Rhetoric_ 6 (1973): 162-170.  
  
Jasinski, James. "The Feminization of Liberty, Domesticated Virtue, and the
Reconstitution of Power and Authority in Early American Political Discourse."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 79 (1993): 146-164.  
  
Leff, Michael. "Dimensions of Temporality in Lincoln's Second Inaugural."
_Communication Reports_ 1 (1988): 26-31.  
  
Leff, Michael. "Interpretation and the Art of the Rhetorical Critic." _Western
Journal of Speech Communication_ 44 (1980): 337-349.  
  
Leff, Michael. "Introduction: Rhetorical Criticism: The State of the Art."
_Western Journal of Speech Communication_ 44 (1980): 264.  
  
Leff, Michael. _Rhetorical Timing in Lincoln's House Divided Speech_.
Evanston, IL: Northwestern University, 1983.  
  
Leff, Michael. "Textual Criticism: The Legacy of G. P. Mohrmann." _Quarterly
Journal of Speech_ 72 (1986): 377-389.  
  
Leff, Michael, and Gerald P. Mohrmann. "Lincoln at Cooper Union: A Rhetorical
Analysis of the Text." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 60 (1974): 346-358.  
  
Leff, Michael, and Andrew Sachs. "Words the Most Like Things: Iconicity and
the Rhetorical Text." _Western Journal of Speech Communication_ 54 (1990):
252-273. On electronic reserve.  
  
Lewis, William F. "Telling America's Story: Narrative Form and the Reagan
Presidency." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 73 (1987): 280-302.  
  
Ling, David A. "A Pentadic Analysis of Senator Edward Kennedy's Address to the
People of Massachusetts, July 25, 1969." _Central States Speech Journal_ 21
(1970): 81-86.  
  
Lucaites, John Louis, and Celeste Michelle Condit. "Reconstructing
<Equality>: Culturetypal and Counter-Cultural Rhetorics in the Martyred Black
Vision." _Communication Monographs_ 57 (1990): 5-25. On electronic reserve.  
  
Lucas, Stephen E. "The Renaissance of American Public Address: Text and
Context in Rhetorical Criticism." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 74 (1988):
241-260.  
  
Lucas, Stephen E. "The Schism in Rhetorical Scholarship." _Quarterly Journal
of Speech_ 67 (1981): 1-20.  
  
Lucas, Stephen E. "The Schism in Rhetorical Scholarship." _Quarterly Journal
of Speech_ 67 (1981): 1-20.  
  
McGee, Michael C. "The Fall of Wellington: A Case Study of the Relationship
between Theory, Practice, and Rhetoric in History." _Quarterly Journal of
Speech_ 63 (1977): 28-42.  
  
McGee, Michael Calvin. "The 'Ideograph': A Link Between Rhetoric and
Ideology." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 66 (1980): 1-16. On electronic
reserve.  
  
McGee, Michael C. "In Search of 'The People': A Rhetorical Alternative."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 61 (1975): 235-49. On electronic reserve.  
  
McGee, Michael Calvin. "Social Movement as Meaning." _Central States Speech
Journal_ 34 (1983): 74-77.  
  
McGee, Michael Calvin. " "Social Movement": Phenomenon or Meaning?" _Central
States Speech Journal_ 31 (1980): 233-244.  
  
McGee, Michael Calvin. "Text, Context, and the Fragmentation of Contemporary
Culture." _Western Journal of Speech Communication_ 54 (1990): 274-289. On
electronic reserve.  
  
McKerrow, Raymie E. "Critical Rhetoric: Theory and Praxis." _Communication
Monographs_ 56 (1989): 91-111. On electronic reserve.  
  
Medhurst, Martin J. "Public Address and Significant Scholarship: Four
Challenges to the Rhetorical Renaissance." _Texts in Context_. Ed. Michael C.
Leff and Fred Kauffeld. Davis, CA: Hermagoras Press, 1989\. 29-42.  
  
Medhurst, Martin J., and Thomas W. Benson. " "The City": The Rhetoric of
Rhythm." _Communication Monographs_ 48 (1981): 54-72.  
  
Mohrmann, Gerald P., and Michael Leff. "Lincoln at Cooper Union: A Rationale
for Neo-Classical Criticism." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 60 (1974):
459-467.  
  
Murphy, John M. "Civic Republicanism in the Modern Age: Adlai Stevenson in the
1952 Presidential Campaign." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 80 (1992): 313-328.  
  
Ong, Walter J. "The Writer's Audience Is Always a Fiction." _Interfaces of the
Word_. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1977\. 53-81.  
  
Osborn, Michael. "Archetypal Metaphor in Rhetoric: The Light-Dark Family."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 1967 (1967): 115-126.  
  
Peterson, Tarla Rai. "The Rhetorical Construction of Institutional Authority
in a Senate Subcommittee Hearing on Wilderness Legislation." _Western Journal
of Speech Communication_ 52 (1988): 259-276.  
  
Rosenfield, Lawrence W. "The Anatomy of Critical Discourse." _Speech
Monographs_ 35 (1968): 50-69.  
  
Rosenfield, Lawrence W. "The Experience of Criticism." _Quarterly Journal of
Speech_ 60 (1974): 489-496.  
  
Rushing, Janice Hocker. "Evolution of 'The New Frontier' in _Alien_ and
_Aliens_ : Patriarchal Co-optation of the Feminine Archetype." _Quarterly
Journal of Speech_ 75 (1989): 1-24.  
  
Rushing, Janice Hocker. "The Rhetoric of the American Western Myth."
_Communication Monographs_ 50 (1983): 14-32.  
  
Scott, Robert L. "On Viewing Rhetoric as Epistemic." _Central States Speech
Journal_ 38 (1967): 9-17.  
  
Simons, Herbert W. "Requirements, Problems, and Strategies: A Theory of
Persuasion for Social Movements." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 56 (1970):
1-11.  
  
Solomon, Martha. "Ideology as Rhetorical Constraint: The Anarchist Agitation
of "Red Emma" Goldman." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 74 (1988): 184-200.  
  
Solomon, Martha. "The "Positive Woman's" Journey: A Mythic Analysis of the
Rhetoric of STOP ERA." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 65 (1979): 262-274.  
  
Solomon, Martha. "The Rhetoric of STOP ERA: Fatalistic Reaffirmation."
_Southern Speech Communication Journal_ 44 (1978): 42-59.  
  
Solomon, Martha. ""With Firmness in the Right": The Creation of Moral Hegemony
in Lincoln's Second Inaugural." _Communication Reports_ 1 (1988): 32-37.  
  
Stelzner, Hermann G. "The Quest Story and Nixon's November 3, 1969 Address."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 57 (1971): 163-172.  
  
Wander, Philip. "The Ideological Turn in Modern Criticism." _Central States
Speech Journal_ 34 (1983): 1-18.  
  
Wander, Philip. "The Ideological Turn in Modern Criticism." _Central States
Speech Journal_ 34 (1983): 1-18.  
  
Ware, B. L., and Wil A. Linkugel. "They Spoke in Defense of Themselves: On the
Generic Criticism of Apologia." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 59 (1973):
273-283.  
  
White, Eugene E. "Solomon Stoddard's Theories of Persuasion." _Speech
Monographs_ 29 (1962): 235-259.  
  
Wilson, John F. "Harding's Rhetoric of Normalcy, 1920-1923." _Quarterly
Journal of Speech_ 48 (1962): 406-411.  
  
Wilson, John F. "Rhetorical Echoes of a Wilsonian Idea." _Quarterly Journal of
Speech_ 43 (1957): 271-272.  
  
Wrage, Ernest J. "Public Address: A Study in Social and Intellectual History."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 33 (1947): 451-457.  
  
Zarefsky, David. "The State of the Art in Public Address Scholarship." _Texts
in Context_. Ed. Michael C. Leff and Fred Kauffeld. Davis, CA: Hermagoras
Press, 1989. 13-28.  
  
**Speeches** (just a sample of some canonical texts--some of which are
referred to in critical essays assigned for class reading):  
  
Andrews, James R., and David Zarefsky, eds _. Contemporary American Voices:
Significant Speeches in American History 1945-Present_. New York: Longman,
1992.  
  
Lincoln, Abraham. "Address at Cooper Institute, New York City, February 27,
1860." _Lincoln: Speeches and Writings_. New York: The Library of America,
1989. 111-130. Vol. 2.  
  
Reid, Ronald F., ed. _Three Centuries of American Political Discourse_.
Prospect Heights: Waveland Press, 1988.  
  
Washington, George. "First Inaugural Address." _The Writings of George
Washington_. Ed. John C. Fitzpatrick. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing
Office, 1939. 291-296. Vol. 30.  
  
  
  
This syllabus may be accessed on the world wide web at
<<http://www.personal.psu.edu/t3b>>

