  
draft version -- still under revision

![](../../Tom%27smediafolder/media,%20images,%20etc/pennstatebigbluelogowbg.gif)



Speech Communication 503  
  
Fall 2001  
  
Tuesday-Thursday 9:45-11:00 a.m.  
  
309 Sparks Building

Listserv:
[![](../../Tom%27smediafolder/media,%20images,%20etc/paw3.gif)](mailto:L-SPCOM503@LISTS.PSU.EDU)  
  
class photos
[![](../../Tom%27smediafolder/media,%20images,%20etc/paw3.gif)](sp503fall2001classphotos.htm)
|

Thomas W. Benson  
227 Sparks Building  
  
(814) 865-4201

[t3b@psu.edu](mailto:t3b@psu.edu)

office hours: Tuesdays & Thursdays 11:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon.  
  
---|---  
  
**Seminar in Rhetorical Criticism**

A graduate seminar in the practice of rhetorical criticism, with an emphasis
on the working practices of critics of primarily oral, written, and media
texts in the discipline of speech communication. Students will read widely in
rhetorical criticism and interpretive theory and will write an extended
seminar paper. The seminar is conceived as an intensive, advanced workshop in
rhetorical criticism.

  
(1) August 21 - Tuesday

|

  
**Introduction.**  
  
---|---  
  
(2) August 23 - Thursday

|



**Preliminary Considerations: Theory, Scope, and Method in Rhetorical
Criticism**. Read Benson, "Beacons and Boundary Markers: Landmarks in
Rhetorical Criticism"; Herbert A. Wichelns, "The Literary Criticism of
Oratory," in Benson, _Landmarks_ ; Medhurst, "The Academic Study of Public
Address: A Tradition in Transition"; Donald C. Bryant, "Some Problems of Scope
and Method in Rhetorical Scholarship." In Medhurst, _Landmarks_.  
  
(3) August 28- Tuesday

|

  
Loren D. Reid, "The Perils of Rhetorical Criticism," in Medhurst, _Landmarks_
; Benson, "History, Criticism, and Theory in the Study of American Rhetoric,"
in Benson, _American Rhetoric_ ; Lawrence W. Rosenfield, "The Anatomy of
Rhetorical Discourse," in Burgchardt, _Readings_ ; Browne, Stephen H. Reading
Public Memory in Daniel Webster's Plymouth Rock Oration. _Western Journal of
Communication_ , 57, 464-477 (on electronic reserve); Black, Edwin. The
Sentimental Style as Escapism, or the Devil with Dan'l Webster. _Form and
Genre: Shaping Rhetorical Action_. Ed. Karlyn Kohrs Campbell and Kathleen Hall
Jamieson. Falls Church, VA: Speech Communication Association, (1978). 75-86
(on electronic reserve).  
  
(4) August 30 - Thursday

|



**Rhetoric as a Way of Doing: Rhetoric as situated, instrumental action**.
Read Marie Hochmuth Nichols, "Lincoln's First Inaugural"; Halford Ross Ryan,
"Harry S. Truman"; E. Culpepper Clark and Raymie McKerrow, "The
Historiographical Dilemma in Myrdal's American Creed: Rhetoric's Role in
Rescuing a Historical Moment," in Brock, Scott, and Chesebro, _Methods of
Rhetorical Criticism_ , 3d ed.  
  
(5) September 4 - Tuesday

|



Stephen E. Lucas, "Justifying America: The Declaration of Independence as a
Rhetorical Document," in Benson, _American Rhetoric_ ; Barnet Baskerville,
"Must We All Be Rhetorical Critics?"; Stephen Lucas, "The Schism in Rhetorical
Scholarship," in Medhurst, _Landmarks_  
  
(6) September 6 - Thursday

|

**  
Rhetorical Criticism and the Crisis of Neo-Aristotelianism**. Ernest Wrage,
"Public Address: A Study in Social and Intellectual History"; Wayland Maxfield
Parrish, " The Study of Speeches"; Marie Hochmuth  [Nichols], "The Criticism
of Rhetoric"; Edwin Black, "The Practice of Rhetorical Criticism"; G. P.
Mohrmann, "Elegy in a Critical Grave-Yard," in Medhurst, _Landmarks_ ; Carroll
C. Arnold, "Lord Thomas Erskine: Modern Advocate," in Benson, _Landmarks_ ;  
  
(7) September 11 - Tuesday

|



Karlyn Kohrs Campbell, "An Exercise in the Rhetoric of Mythic America"; Forbes
Hill, "Conventional Wisdom--Traditional Form--The President's Message of
November 3, 1969"; Excerpts from Edwin Black, _Rhetorical Criticism_ , in
Burgchardt, _Readings_ ,; Edwin Black, "Ideological Justifications" (on
electronic reserve); Benson, Thomas W. Another Shooting in Cowtown _Quarterly
Journal of Speech_ 67 (1981): 347-406 (on electronic reserve).  
  
(8) September 13 - Thursday

|



**Public Address as a Field of Study and as a Field of Activity**. Read Thomas
W. Benson, ed., _Rhetoric and Political Culture in Nineteenth-Century America_
, pp. 1-90.  
  
(9) September 18 - Tuesday

|

  
Continued discussion of _Rhetoric and Political Culture in Nineteenth-Century
America_ , pp. 91-183.  
  
(10) September 20 -Thursday

|



**Rhetoric as a way of knowing**. Read Robert L. Scott, "On Viewing Rhetoric
as Epistemic: Ten Years Later"; Robert L. Scott and James F. Klumpp, "A Dear
Searcher into Comparisons"; in Brock , Scott, and Chesebro, _Methods of
Rhetorical Criticism_ ; Robert L. Scott, "A Rhetoric of Facts: Arthur Larson's
Stance as a Persuader"; John Angus Cambell, "Darwin and _The Origin of
Species_ : The Rhetorical Ancestry of an Idea," in Benson, _Landmarks_.  
  
(11) September 25 - Tuesday

|



Edwin Black "Gettysburg and Silence" (on electronic reserve); Michael Hyde,
"Medicine, Rhetoric, and Euthenasia: A Case Study in the Workings of a
Postmodern Discourse"; Michael Calvin McGee, "'The Ideograph: A Link Between
Rhetoric and Ideology"; John Louis Lucaites and Celeste Michelle Condit,
Reconstructing Equality: Culturetypal and Counter-Cultural Rhetorics in the
Martyred Black Vision," in Burgchardt, _Readings_.  
  
(12) September 27 - Thursday

|



**Ideology, Dramatism , Fantasy, Myth, and Narrative as ways of rhetorical
knowing**. Kenneth Burke, "The Rhetoric of Hitler's Battle," in Benson,
_Landmarks_ ; Bernard Brock, "Rhetorical Criticism: A Burkeian Approach
Revisited"; David S. Birdsell, "Ronald Reagan on Lebanon and Grenada:
Flexibility and Interpretation in the Application of Kenneth Burke's Pentad";
Ernest G. Bormann, "Fantasy and Rhetorical Vision: The Rhetorical Criticism of
Social Reality"; Rita C. Hubbard, "Relationship Styles in Popular Romance
Novels, 1950-1983," in Brock, Scott, and Chesebro, _Methods of Rhetorical
Criticism_.  
  
(13) October 2 - Tuesday

|



Walter R. Fisher, "The Narrative Paradigm: An Elaboration"; James S. Ettema
and Theodore L. Glasser, "Narrative Form and Moral Force: The Realization of
Innocence and Guilt through Investigative Journalism," in Brock, Scott, and
Chesebro, _Methods of Rhetorical Criticism_ ; Janice Hocker Rushing,
"Evolution of the 'New Frontier' in _Alien_ and _Aliens_ : Patriarchal
Evolution of the Feminine Archetype" (on electronic reserve); Philip Wander,
"The Ideological Turn in Modern Criticism"; Raymie McKerrow, "Critical
Rhetoric: Theory and Praxis," in Burgchardt, _Readings_.  
  
(14) October 4 - Thursday

|



**Rhetoric as a way of being**. Read T. Benson, "Rhetoric as a Way of Being,"
in _American Rhetoric_ ; Karlyn Kohrs Campbell, "The Rhetoric of Women's
Liberation: An Oxymoron"; Carole Spitzack and Kathryn Carter, "Women in
Communication Studies: A Typology for Revision"; Jonathan Culler, "Reading as
a Woman," in Brock, et al., _Methods of Rhetorical Criticism_ ; Karlyn Kohrs
Campbell, "Stanton's "Solitude of Self": A Rationale for Feminism," in Benson,
_Landmarks_ ; Sonja Foss and Karen A. Foss, "The Construction of Feminine
Spectatorship in Garrison Keillor's Radio Monologues," in Burgchardt,
_Readings_.  
  
October 9 - Tuesday

|

Fall Break -- no classes  
  
(15) October 11 - Thursday

|



Edwin Black, "The Second Persona," in Benson, _Landmarks_ ; Maurice Charland,
"Constitutive Rhetoric: The Case of the Peuple Quebecois," in Benson,
_Landmarks_ ; James Darsey, "The Legend of Eugene Debs: Prophetic Ethos as
Radical Argument" (on electronic reserve); Thomas W. Benson, "Rhetoric and
Autobiography: The Case of Malcolm X" (electronic reserve); Kenneth Burke,
"Antony on Behalf of the Play" (electronic reserve).  
  
(16) October 16 - Tuesday

|



**Rhetoric, cultural politics, and the public**. Gerard Hauser,
"Administrative Rhetoric and Public Opinion: Discussing the Iranian Hostages
in the Public Sphere"; Richard B. Gregg, "The Rhetoric of Denial and
Alternity," in Benson, _American Rhetoric_ ; Cindy Griffin, "Rhetoricizing
Alienation: Mary Wollstonecraft and the Rhetorical Construction of Women's
Oppression," in Burgchardt, _Readings_.  
  
(17) October 18 - Thursday

|



Michael Calvin McGee, "In Search of 'The People': A Rhetorical Alternative"
(on electronic reserve); Michael Calvin McGee, "Text, Context, and the
Fragmentation of Contemporary Culture" (on electronic reserve); Michael Leff,
"Interpretation and the Art of the Rhetorical Critic" (on electronic reserve);
Michael Leff, "Rhetorical Timing in Lincoln's House Divided Speech" (on
electronic reserve); Karen Altman, "Consuming Ideology: The Better Homes in
America Campaign" (electronic reserve); Carole Blair, Marsha S. Jeppeson, and
Enrico Pucci, Jr., "Public Memorializing in Postmodernity: The Vietnam
Veterans Memorial as Prototype," in Burgchardt, _Readings_.  
  
(18) October 23 - Tuesday

|



**Genre, the constraints of form, and the rhetorical resources of language**.
Read Karlyn Kohrs Campbell and Kathleen Hall Jamieson, "Introduction to _Form
and Genre_ " and "Inaugurating the Presidency"; in Brock, Scott, and Chesebro,
_Methods of Rhetorical Criticism_ ; Lawrence W. Rosenfield, "Central Park and
the Celebration of Civic Virtue," in Benson, _American Rhetoric_ ; Hermann G.
Stelzner, "'War Message,' December 8, 1941: An Approach to Language"; Michael
C. Leff and G. P. Mohrmann, "Lincoln at Cooper Union: A Rhetorical Analysis of
the Text," in Benson, _Landmarks_.  
  
(19) October 25 - Thursday

|



Stephen E. Lucas, "Genre Criticism and Historical Context: The Case of George
Washington's First Inaugural Address," in Benson, _Landmarks_ ; Michael Leff,
"Textual Criticism: The Legacy of G. P. Mohrmann," in Medhurst, _Landmarks_ ;
Martin J. Medhurst and Thomas W. Benson, " _The City_ : The Rhetoric of
Rhythm" (on electronic reserve); B. L. Ware and Wil A. Linkugel, "They Spoke
in Defense of Themselves: On the Generic Criticism of Apologia" (on electronic
reserve); Richard Fulkerson, "The Public Letter as a Rhetorical Form:
Structure, Logic, and Style in King's 'Letter from Birmingham Jail'"
(electronic reserve); Martin J. Medhurst, "The Politics of Prayer: A Case
Study in Configurational Interplay," in Benson, _American Rhetoric_.  
  
(20) October 30 - Tuesday

|



**First draft of seminar paper due**. No reading assignment for this class
period--to give you a little extra time to work on your paper--but please do
not miss class, as we will be exchanging drafts for peer review.  
  
(21) November 1 - Thursday

|

[  
National Communication Association](http://www.natcom.org) meets in Atlanta.
No class meeting.  
  
(22) November 6 - Tuesday

|



**Interpreting the rhetoric of movements**. Read Carroll C. Arnold, "Early
Constitutional Rhetoric in Pennsylvania," in Benson, _American Rhetoric_ ;
Robert S. Cathcart, "Movements: Confrontation as Rhetorical Form," and Celeste
Condit Railsback, "The Contemporary American Abortion Controversy: Stages in
the Argument," in Brock, et al., _Methods of Rhetorical Criticism_ ; ; Leland
Griffin, "The Rhetorical Structure of Historical Movements" (on electronic
reserve); Leland Griffin, "The Rhetorical Structure of the Antimasonic
Movement"; Herbert Simons, "Requirements, Problems, and Strategies: A Theory
of Persuasion for Social Movements," in Burgchardt, _Readings_.  
  
(23) November 8 - Thursday

|



**The issue of theory in criticism; the criticism of politics; and the
politics of academic gatekeeping**. James Darsey, "Must We All Be Rhetorical
Theorists? An Anti-Democratic Inquiry" (on electronic reserve); Carole Blair,
Julie R. Brown, and Leslie A. Baxter, "Disciplining the Feminine" (on
electronic reserve); Roderick Hart, "Contemporary Scholarship in Public
Address: A Research Editorial"; "Doing Criticism My Way: A Reply to Darsey";
"Theory-Building and Rhetorical Criticism: An Informal Statement of Opinion"
(on electronic reserve).

  
  
(24) November 13 - Tuesday

|

**Reading speaking**. Michael Leff,  "Textual Criticism: The Legacy of G. P.
Mohrmann"; Michael Leff, "Dimensions of Temporality in Lincoln's Second
Inaugural"; Martin J. Medhurst, "Reconceptualizing Rhetorical History:
Eisenhower's Farewell Address," in Burgchardt, _Readings_ ; Michael Leff,
"Rhetorical Timing in Lincoln's House Divided Speech" (on electronic reserve).  
  
(25) November 15 - Thursday

|



**Presentation of seminar papers** :

Ned O'Gorman, "The Style of Criticism: Marshall McLuhan's _Understanding Media
" _  
Sharon Auker, "The Image of Nursing as Portrayed by U.S. Newspapers: A
Discourse Analysis"

  
  
(26) November 20 - Tuesday

|



**Presentation of seminar papers** :  
  
  
Katie Langford, "Anti-federalist Discourse as an Organizing Principle in
Justice Antonin Scalia's Cruel and Unusual Punishment Opinions"  
John Saunders, "The Rhetoric of Dr. Seuss's Histories"

  
  
November 22 - Thursday

|

Thanksgiving. No classes.  
  
(27) November 27 - Tuesday

|



**Presentation of seminar papers** :  
  
Roger Stahl, "Phantom Bodies: Genetic Fingerprinting and the Edges of
Corporeality"  
Lyn J. Freymiller, "Generic Infidelity and Televisual Immediacy: Charles
Spencer and Princess Diana's Eulogy"  
Matthew Peters, "Resistance to the New Role of Women in the Media: A
Rhetorical Analysis of _The_ _Sopranos "_

  
  
(28) November 29 - Thursday

|



**Presentation of seminar papers** :  
  
Sarah Worley, "The Use of Genre as a Tool for Deflection: An Analysis of
George W. Bush's Inaugural Address"  
Ben Henderson, "Mythopoetics and a New Christian Masculinity: John Eldredge's
_Wild at Heart "_  
Dave Tell, "The Man and the Message: A Case Study in Timothy Dwight's
Prophetic Rhetoric"

  
  
(29) December 4 - Tuesday

|



**Presentation of seminar papers** :  
  
  
Sandy French, "Rhetorical Vision and Misunderstanding in the Rhetoric of Bill
Gates"  
Monika Alston, "Fanny Jackson Coppin and Her Industrial Crusade Rhetoric"

  
  
(30) December 6 - Thursday

|



**Presentation of seminar papers** :  
  
Mitch Reyes, "Reading _Pi_ as a Reconstitutive Rhetorical Text "  
Lee Fortner  
Katie Gibson



  
  
Monday, December 10

|

Final Exams begin. **_Term paper due._** Department mailboxes are in 232
Sparks Building.

  
  




**Seminar Papers**  
  
---  
  
**Seminar Papers** : You are asked to prepare a major, article-length seminar
paper--a rhetorical analysis of a single text or group of texts. Subject the
text to a close textual analysis, situated in whatever contexts (theoretical,
situational, historical) seem appropriate to support interpretive work. A
central feature of the seminar will be the sequential preparation of the
paper, followed by shared editorial consultation and thorough rewriting. The
product will, it is hoped, be a manuscript that might be thought of as an
"expanded" journal article, which, with some judicious cutting, could be
submitted for publication review to a journal. The manuscript will be
"expanded" in the sense that it will probably contain a more extended review
of context and earlier scholarship, and perhaps more detailed description,
than some editors would have space for in a journal.  
  
Major dates for paper development (all these assignments are due, typed,
double-spaced, one side of paper only, with a title page, on the dates
indicated):  
  
September 4. **Topic** due, in writing. Briefly identify the text(s) you wish
to analyze and the central critical problems or questions you wish to
investigate. What is the text? Where is it available? What, at this point,
strike you as issues, questions, or problems worth investigating? (1-2 pages)
It is strongly suggested that you talk with me before choosing a text for
analysis. In any case, do not choose a text that you have written on for
another class.  
  
September 13. **Research proposal**. (2-4 pp.) A description of the topic you
have chosen, the central question you will address in your analysis, the
significance of your study, critical procedures that seem likely to be
productive, relevant theoretical and methodological considerations,
definitions of key terms, brief identification of the scholarly literatures
most likely to contextualize your study (previous studies of your text, of
similar texts, of similar questions, theoretical perspectives, descriptions of
method or uses of methods similar to those you propose). Preliminary
bibliography.  
  
September 27. **Review of literature**. By this time you should have
identified the scholarly literature (books, journal articles, and
dissertations) bearing on (1) your research question, (2) the text you have
chosen to analyze, (3) your mode of analysis, and (4) major theoretical
issues, if any, that drive or are interrogated by your proposed analysis.
Early in the semester, schedule a session with a research librarian at Pattee
Library for advice on searching the literature bearing on your topic. You
should be familiar with LIAS (including the UNCOVER and ERIC databases), with
_Dissertation Abstracts_ , and with various indices to scholarly literature
that are available on CD-ROM. Be sure to consult standard bibliographies in
the field, especially R. Matlon, _Index to Journals in Communication Studies
through 1990_ ; for journals in speech communication since 1990, you may need
to leaf through by hand; note that the Matlon Index is also available on CD-
ROM as "Commsearch"--a copy is available in Pattee Library. In this paper (a
revised version of which will become part of your final paper), "review" the
literature so as to give both an overview of the literature and a focused
account of how it bears on your own project. A careful review at this point
will allow you to identify, in the final paper, the ways in which your own
findings confirm, extend, modify, or contradict the existing literature.  
  
October 11. **Context** \--political, historical, organizational, ideological;
production and reception. History and authenticity of the text. Just 2-3 pages
for this assignment, though you will by this time have gathered much more than
enough information than that.  
  
October 30. **First draft** of paper due. A complete and finished version of
the paper, suitable for formal review. Include title page, abstract, paper,
endnotes if any, and list of works cited.  
  
November 1-13. **Editorial reviews** of first draft. Each student will read
and respond in writing to several other student papers with suggestions for
revisions.  
  
November 15 - December 6. Final **oral reports** to class.  
  
December 10. **Seminar paper due**.  
  
**Paper Style**. In preparing your papers, follow the style guidelines
presented in the _MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers_ , 4th edition.
You may use the citation method that employs a list of works cited and
parenthetical references in the text, or an endnote style (in which case you
should also include a bibliography). If you use commentative notes in
addition, use endnotes rather than footnotes. It is a good idea for a writer
to have a basic grammar reference handy; one widely used guide that I
recommend is Diana Hacker, _A Writer's_ _Reference_ , 3rd ed. (New York: St.
Martin's, 1995).  
  

**On-line participation**  
  
---  
  
  
**Electronic Mail and Class Electronic Discussion**. The primary discussions
in this seminar will be conducted face-to-face, on Tuesday and Thursday
mornings, and throughout the rest of the week on the computer. Although it is
hoped that participation will be intense and ongoing, at least the following
deadlines must be met: A contribution to discussion 24 hours before each class
meeting, in which you offer some questions (with supporting citations,
thoughts, or suggestions) for possible discussion in class or on-line. You are
also invited to participate in ongoing followup on-line conversations that
extend some aspect of class discussion or raise an issue that did not make it
into the discussion. In your contributions, please try to frame a proposition
or question for discussion, relate it to some part of the readings, quote or
paraphrase the relevant passage in the reading (including a page reference),
and sketch a reasoned discussion-opener. In these conversations, your opinions
are important, but we should also work beyond mere clash (or coincidence) of
opinion to mutual enlightenment and a shared willingness to learn new ways of
thinking. Send your notes for class discussion to the Listserv address
[L-SPCOM503@lists.psu.edu](mailto:L-SPCOM503@lists.psu.edu). If you use more
than one e-mail account, I can list more than one address for you.  
  

**Academic Integrity**  
  
---  
  
**Academic Integrity**. Submission of all written work in this course is taken
to imply that the work is your own unless otherwise indicated. Please be
careful to document the work of others where appropriate. Under no
circumstances submit for credit in this course any work that has been
submitted in other courses. In selecting a text for critical analysis for your
seminar paper, do not write about a text that is part of the syllabus of other
courses you have taken without special permission.  
  

**Grades**  
  
---  
  
**Grades**. All elements of your work in this seminar will be considered in
formulating a final grade for the course--participation (in class and on-line)
20%; written work (including first and final drafts of the seminar paper,
progressive development of various stages of the paper, and editorial comments
on peer reviewed papers) 80%.  
  

**Texts**  
  
---  
  
  
Benson, Thomas W., ed. _American Rhetoric: Context and Criticism_. Carbondale:
Southern Illinois University Press, 1989.  
  
Benson, Thomas W., ed. _Landmark Essays on Rhetorical Criticism_. Davis, CA:
Hermagoras Press, 1993.  
  
Benson, Thomas W., ed. _Rhetoric and Political Culture in Nineteenth-Century
America_. East Lansing: Michigan State University Press, 1997.  
  
Brock, Bernard L., Robert L. Scott, and James W. Chesebro, eds. _Methods of
Rhetorical Criticism: A Twentieth-Century Perspective_. 3rd ed. Detroit: Wayne
State University Press, 1989.  
  
Burgchardt, Carl R., ed. Readings in Rhetorical Criticism. 2d ed. State
College, PA: Strata, 2000.  
  
Medhurst, Martin J., ed. _Landmark Essays on American Public Address_. Davis,
CA: Hermagoras Press, 1993.  

**Electronic Reserves**  
  
---  
  
A selection of readings in rhetorical criticism is available to registered
students through the Penn State libraries electronic reserve system. The
following works are on electronic reserve. You may link to the electronic
reserves by clicking the "course reserves" link at
[![](../../Tom%27smediafolder/media,%20images,%20etc/paw3.gif)](http://www.lias.psu.edu/servicedir.html)

  
Altman, Karen E. Consuming Ideology: The Better Homes in American Campaign
Critical Studies in Mass Communication 7 (1990): 286-307.  
  
Benson, Thomas W. Another Shooting in Cowtown Quarterly Journal of Speech 67
(1981): 347-406.  
  
Benson, Thomas W. Rhetoric and Autobiography: The Case of Malcolm X Quarterly
Journal of Speech 60 (1974): 1-13.  
  
Black, Edwin. Gettysburg and Silence. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 80, (1994):
21-36.  
  
Black, Edwin. Ideological Justifications. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 70,
(1984): 144-150.  
  
Black, Edwin. Secrecy and Disclosure as Rhetorical Forms. Quarterly Journal of
Speech, 74 (1988): 133-150.  
  
Black, Edwin. The Sentimental Style as Escapism, or the Devil with Dan'l
Webster. Form and Genre: Shaping Rhetorical Action. Ed. Karlyn Kohrs Campbell
and Kathleen Hall Jamieson. Falls Church, VA: Speech Communication
Association, (1978). 75-86.  
  
Blair, Carol, Julie R. Brown, and Leslie A. Baxter. Disciplining the Feminine.
Quarterly Journal of Speech 80 (1994): 383-409.  
  
Browne, Stephen H. Reading Public Memory in Daniel Webster's Plymouth Rock
Oration. Western Journal of Communication, 57, 464-477.  
  
Burke, Kenneth. Antony on Behalf of the Play. The Philosophy of Literary Form.
3d ed. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1973. 329-343.  
  
Darsey, James. The Legend of Eugene Debs: Prophetic Ethos as Radical Argument
Quarterly Journal of Speech 74 (1988): 434-452.  
  
Darsey, James. Must We All Be Rhetorical Theorists?: An Anti- Democratic
inquiry. Western Journal of Communication 58 (1994): 164-181.  
  
Fulkerson, Richard P. The Public Letter as a Rhetorical Form: Structure,
Style, and Logic in Kings Letter from Birmingham Jail.. Quarterly Journal of
Speech 65 (1979): 121-136.  
  
Gregg, Richard B. The Criticism of Symbolic Inducement: A Critical-Theoretical
Connection. Speech Communication in the 20th Century. Ed. Thomas W. Benson.
Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1985. 41-62.  
  
Gregg, Richard B. The Ego-Function of the Rhetoric of Protest. Philosophy and
Rhetoric 4 (1971): 71-91.  
  
Griffin, Leland M. The Rhetorical Structure of Historical Movements. Quarterly
Journal of Speech 38 (1952): 184-188.  
  
Griffin, Leland M. The Rhetorical Structure of the Antimasonic Movement. The
Rhetorical Idiom. Ed. Donald C. Bryant. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,
1958\. 145-160.  
  
Hart, Roderick P. Contemporary Scholarship in Public Address: A Research
Editorial. Western Journal of Speech Communication 50 (1986): 283-295.  
  
Hart, Roderick P. Doing Criticism My Way: A Reply to Darsey. Western Journal
of Communication 58 (1994): 308-312.  
  
Hart, Roderick P. Theory-Building and Rhetorical Criticism: An Informal
Statement of Opinion. Central States Speech Journal 27 (1976): 70-77.  
  
Hyde, Michael J. Medicine, Rhetoric, and Euthanasia: A Case Study in the
Workings of a Postmodern Discourse. Quarterly Journal of Speech 79 (1993):
201-224.  
  
Leff, Michael. Interpretation and the Art of the Rhetorical Critic. Western
Journal of Speech Communication 44 (1980): 337-349.  
  
Leff, Michael. Rhetorical Timing in Lincoln's House Divided Speech. Evanston,
IL: Northwestern University, 1984. pp.3-20. Published by Northwestern
University's Department of Speech Communication.  
  
Leff, Michael and Sachs, Andrew. Words the Most Like Things: Iconicity and the
Rhetorical Text. Western Journal of Speech Communication, 54, 252-273.  
  
Lucaites, John Louis, and Celeste Michelle Condit. Reconstructing :
Culturetypal and Counter-Cultural Rhetorics in the Martyred Black Vision.
Communication Monographs 57 (1990): 5-25.  
  
McGee, Michael Calvin. The 'Ideograph': A Link Between Rhetoric and Ideology.
Quarterly Journal of Speech 66 (1980): 1-16.  
  
McGee, Michael C. In Search of 'The People': A Rhetorical Alternative.
Quarterly Journal of Speech, 61 (1975): 235-49.  
  
McGee, Michael Calvin. Social movement as meaning. Central States Speech
Journal, 34 (1983): 74-77.  
  
McGee, Michael Calvin. Text, Context, and the Fragmentation of Contemporary
Culture. Western Journal of Speech Communication, 54 (1990): 274-289.  
  
McKerrow, Raymie E. Critical Rhetoric: Theory and Praxis. Communication
Monographs 56 (1989): 91-111.  
  
Medhurst, Martin J., and Thomas W. Benson. The City": The Rhetoric of Rhythm.
Communication Monographs 48 (1981): 54-72.  
  
Rosenfield, Lawrence W. The Anatomy of Critical Discourse.Speech Monographs 35
(1968): 50-69.  
  
Rosenfield, Lawrence W. The Experience of Criticism. Quarterly Journal of
Speech, 60 (1974): 489-496.  
  
Rushing, Janice Hocker. Evolution of 'The New Frontier' in Alien and Aliens:
Patriarchal Co-optation of the Feminine Archetype. Quarterly Journal of Speech
75 (1989): 1-24.  
  
Simons, Herbert W. Requirements, Problems, and Strategies: A Theory of
Persuasion for Social Movements. Quarterly Journal of Speech 56 (1970): 1-11.  
  
Wander, Philip. The Ideological Turn in Modern Criticism. Central States
Speech Journal 34 (1983): 1-18.  
  
Ware, B. L., and Wil A. Linkugel. They Spoke in Defense of Themselves: On the
Generic Criticism of Apologia. Quarterly Journal of Speech 59 (1973): 273-283.

  
  

**Additional Readings**  
  
---  
**  
** It is expected that you will be reading widely in rhetorical criticism
during the semester, particularly in areas that support the development of
your seminar paper. The following books and articles are recommended as a
starting point--for grounding this course and for exploring other ways of
conceiving the subject. Even so, the following works are only a sample. The
emphasis of the following readings is heavily, but not exclusively, directed
to writings in the discipline of Speech Communication, but it seems clear from
reading the best critics that rhetorical criticism is an interdisciplinary
field of practice, drawing widely on theoretical, historical, philosophical,
and literary work in the humanities and human sciences.  
  
**Books:  
  
** Andrews, James R. _The Practice of Rhetorical Criticism_. New York:
Longman, 1990.  
  
Arnold, Carroll C. _Criticism of Oral Rhetoric_. Columbus, OH: Merrill, 1974.  
  
Bitzer, Lloyd F., and Edwin Black. _The Prospect of Rhetoric_. Englewood
Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1971.  
  
Black, Edwin. _Rhetorical Criticism: A Study in Method_. New York: Macmillan,
1965.  
  
Black, Edwin. _Rhetorical Questions_. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1992.  
  
Booth, Wayne C. _The Company We Keep: An Ethics of Fiction_. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1988.  
  
Booth, Wayne C. _The Rhetoric of Fiction_. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1961.  
  
Brigance, W. Norwood, ed. _A History and Criticism of American Public
Address_. 2 vol. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1943.  
  
Campbell, Karlyn Kohrs, ed. _Women Public Speakers in the United States,
1800-1925: A Bio-Critical Sourcebook_. Westport: Greenwood Press, 1993.  
  
Farrell, Thomas B. _Norms of Rhetorical Culture_. New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1993.  
  
Foss, Sonja K., ed. _Rhetorical Criticism: Exploration and Practice_. Prospect
Heights, IL: Waveland, 1989.  
  
Hart, Roderick P. _Modern Rhetorical Criticism_. Glenview, IL: Scott,
Foresman/Little, Brown, 1990.  
  
Herrick, James A. _The Radical Rhetoric of the English Deists: The Discourse
of Skepticism, 1680-1750_. Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press,
1997.  
  
Hochmuth, Marie, ed. _A History and Criticism of American Public Address_.
Vol. 3. New York: Russell  & Russell, 1955.  
  
Hogan, J. Michael, ed. _Rhetoric and Community_. Columbia, SC: University of
South Carolina Press, 1998.  
  
Jamieson, Kathleen Hall. _Eloquence in an Electronic Age: The Transformation
of Political Speechmaking_. New York: Oxford University Press, 1988.  
  
Leff, Michael C., and Fred J. Kauffeld, eds. _Texts in Context: Critical
Dialogues on Significant Episodes in American Political Rhetoric_. Davis, CA:
Hermagoras Press, 1989.  
  
Mailloux, Steven. _Rhetorical Power_. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,
1989.  
  
Medhurst, Martin J., ed. _Beyond the Rhetorical Presidency_. College Station,
TX: Texas A &M University Press, 1996.

Medhurst, Martin J., Robert L. Ivie, Philip Wander, and Robert Scott. _Cold
War Rhetoric: Strategy, Metaphor, and Ideology_. Revised edition. East
Lansing: Michigan State University Press, 1997.  
  
Nichols, Marie Hochmuth. _Rhetoric and Criticism_. Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana
State University Press, 1963.  
  
Peterson, Tarla Rai. _Sharing the Earth: The Rhetoric of Sustainable
Development_. Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press, 1997.  
  
Poulakos, Takis. _Speaking for the Polis: Isocrates' Rhetorical Education_.
Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press, 1997.  
  
Thonssen, Lester, A. Craig Baird, and Waldo W. Braden. _Speech Criticism_. 2d
ed. New York: Ronald Press, 1970.  
  
Wallace, Karl R., ed. _History of Speech Education in America: Background
Studies_. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1954.  
  
Wertheimer, Molly Meijer. _Listening to Their Voices: The Rhetorical
Activities of Historical Women_. Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina
Press, 1997.  
  
White, Eugene E. _The Context of Human Discourse: A Configurational Criticism
of Rhetoric_. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1992.  
  
  
**Articles:  
  
** Some of these materials are available on-line through Pattee Library's
electronic reserve system; point your internet browser to
[http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu ](http://reserve.libraries.psu.edu/)  
  
Altman, Karen E. "Consuming Ideology: The Better Homes in American Campaign."
_Critical Studies in Mass Communication_ 7 (1990): 286-307.  
  
Baskerville, Barnett. "Joe McCarthy: Briefcase Demagogue." _Today's Speech_ 2
(September 1954): 8-15.  
  
Benson, Thomas W. "Another Shooting in Cowtown." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_
67 (1981): 347-406.  
  
Benson, Thomas W. "Rhetoric and Autobiography: The Case of Malcolm X."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 60 (1974): 1-13. On electronic reserve.  
  
Benson, Thomas W. "The Rhetorical Structure of Frederick Wiseman's " High
School"." _Communication Monographs._ 47 (1980): 233-261.  
  
Benson, Thomas W. "The Rhetorical Structure of Frederick Wiseman's "Primate"."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 71 (1985): 204-217.  
  
Benson, Thomas W. "The Senses of Rhetoric: A Topical System for Critics."
_Central States Speech Journal_ 29 (1978): 237-250.  
  
Birdsell, David S. "Ronald Reagan on Lebanon and Grenada: Flexibility and
Interpretation in the Application of Kenneth Burke's Pentad." _Quarterly
Journal of Speech_ 73 (1987): 267-279.  
  
Bitzer, Lloyd. "The Rhetorical Situation." _Philosophy and Rhetoric_ 1 (1968):
1-14.  
  
Black, Edwin. "Electing Time." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 59 (1973):
125-129.  
  
Black, Edwin. "Gettysburg and Silence." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 80
(1994): 21-36. On electronic reserve.  
  
Black, Edwin. "Ideological Justifications." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 70
(1984): 144-150. On electronic reserve.  
  
Black, Edwin. "A Note on Theory and Practice in Rhetorical Criticism."
_Western Journal of Speech Communication_ 44 (1980): 331-336.  
  
Black, Edwin. "Secrecy and Disclosure as Rhetorical Forms." _Quarterly Journal
of Speech_ 74 (1988): 133-150.  
  
Black, Edwin. "The Sentimental Style as Escapism, or the Devil with Dan'l
Webster." _Form and Genre: Shaping Rhetorical Action_. Ed. Karlyn Kohrs
Campbell and Kathleen Hall Jamieson. Falls Church, VA: Speech Communication
Association, 1978.  
  
Blair, Carol, Julie R. Brown, and Leslie A. Baxter. "Disciplining the
Feminine." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 80 (1994): 383-409. On electronic
reserve.  
  
Bormann, Ernest G. "Fantasy and Rhetorical Vision: The Rhetorical Criticism of
Social Reality." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 58 (1973): 143-159.  
  
Browne, Nick. "The Spectator-in-the-Text: The Rhetoric of _Stagecoach_." _Film
Quarterly_ (December 1975): 26-38.  
  
Browne, Stephen H. "Edmund Burke's Letter to a Noble Lord: A Textual Study in
Political Philosophy and Rhetorical Action." _Communication Monographs_ 55
(1988): 215-229.  
  
Browne, Stephen H. "'Like Gory Spectres': Representing Evil in Theodore Weld's
American Slavery As It Is." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 80 (1994): 277-292.  
  
Browne, Stephen H. "The Political Uses of Pastoral: Rhetorical Dynamics in
John Dickinson's First Letter from a Farmer in Pennsylvania." _Quarterly
Journal of Speech_ 76 (1990): 46-57.  
  
Browne, Stephen H. "Reading Public Memory in Daniel Webster's Plymouth Rock
Oration." _Western Journal of Communication_ 57 (1993): 464-477. On electronic
reserve.  
  
Burke, Kenneth. "Antony on Behalf of the Play." _The Philosophy of Literary
Form_. 3d ed. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1973\. 329-343. On
electronic reserve.  
  
Campbell, Karlyn Kohrs. "The Rhetoric of Women's Liberation: An Oxymoron."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 59 (1973): 74-86.  
  
Cox, Robert. "The Die Is Cast: Topical and Ontological Dimensions of the
_Locus_ of the Irreperable." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 68 (1982): 227-239.  
  
Darsey, James. "From "Gay is Good" to the Scourge of AIDS: The Evolution of
Gay Liberation Rhetoric, 1977-1990." _Communication Studies_ 42 (1991): 43-66.  
  
Darsey, James. "The Legend of Eugene Debs: Prophetic "Ethos" as Radical
Argument." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 74 (1988): 434-452. On electronic
reserve.  
  
Darsey, James. "Must We All Be Rhetorical Theorists?: An Anti- Democratic
inquiry." _Western Journal of Communication_ 58 (1994): 164-181. On electronic
reserve.  
  
Farrell, Thomas, and Thomas Goodnight. "Accidental Rhetoric: The Root
Metaphors of Three Mile Island." _Communication Monographs_ 49 (1981):
271-300.  
  
Fisher, Walter R. "Narration as a Human Communication Paradigm: The Case of
Public Moral Argument." _Communication Monographs_ 51 (1984): 1-22.  
  
Gregg, Richard B. "The Criticism of Symbolic Inducement: A Critical-
Theoretical Connection." _Speech Communication in the 20th Century_. Ed.
Thomas W. Benson. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1985. 41-62.
On electronic reserve.  
  
Gregg, Richard B. "The Ego-Function of the Rhetoric of Protest." _Philosophy
and Rhetoric_ 4 (1971): 71-91.  
  
Griffin, Leland M. "The Rhetorical Structure of the Antimasonic Movement."
_The Rhetorical Idiom_. Ed. Donald Bryant. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press, 1958. 145-160. On electronic reserve.  
  
Griffin, Leland M. "The Rhetorical Structure of Historical Movements."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 38 (1952): 184-188. On electronic reserve.  
  
Hart, Roderick P. " Contemporary Scholarship in Public Address: A Research
Editorial." _Western Journal of Speech Communication_ 50 (1986): 283-295. On
electronic reserve.  
  
Hart, Roderick P. "Doing Criticism My Way: A Reply to Darsey." _Western
Journal of Communication_ 58 (1994): 308-312. On electronic reserve.  
  
Hart, Roderick P. "Theory-Building and Rhetorical Criticism: An Informal
Statement of Opinion." _Central States Speech Journal_ 27 (1976): 70-77. On
electronic reserve.  
  
Hikins, James W. "The Rhetoric of 'Unconditional Surrender' and the Decision
to Drop the Atomic Bomb." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 69 (1983): 379-400.  
  
Hill, Forbes. "Conventional Wisdom--Traditional Form--The President's Message
of November 3, 1969." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 58 (1972): 373-386.  
  
Hyde, Michael J. "Medicine, Rhetoric, and Euthanasia: A Case Study in the
Workings of a Postmodern Discourse." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 79 (1993):
201-224. On electronic reserve.  
  
Ivie, Robert L. "Metaphor and the Rhetorical Invention of Cold War
'Idealists'." _Communication Monographs_ 54 (1987): 165-182.  
  
Jamieson, Kathleen Hall. "Generic Constraints and the Rhetorical Situation."
_Philosophy and Rhetoric_ 6 (1973): 162-170.  
  
Jasinski, James. "The Feminization of Liberty, Domesticated Virtue, and the
Reconstitution of Power and Authority in Early American Political Discourse."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 79 (1993): 146-164.  
  
Leff, Michael. "Dimensions of Temporality in Lincoln's Second Inaugural."
_Communication Reports_ 1 (1988): 26-31.  
  
Leff, Michael. "Interpretation and the Art of the Rhetorical Critic." _Western
Journal of Speech Communication_ 44 (1980): 337-349. On electronic reserve.  
  
Leff, Michael. "Introduction: Rhetorical Criticism: The State of the Art."
_Western Journal of Speech Communication_ 44 (1980): 264.  
  
Leff, Michael. _Rhetorical Timing in Lincoln's House Divided Speech_.
Evanston, IL: Northwestern University, 1983. On electronic reserve.  
  
Leff, Michael. "Textual Criticism: The Legacy of G. P. Mohrmann." _Quarterly
Journal of Speech_ 72 (1986): 377-389.  
  
Leff, Michael, and Gerald P. Mohrmann. "Lincoln at Cooper Union: A Rhetorical
Analysis of the Text." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 60 (1974): 346-358.  
  
Leff, Michael, and Andrew Sachs. "Words the Most Like Things: Iconicity and
the Rhetorical Text." _Western Journal of Speech Communication_ 54 (1990):
252-273. On electronic reserve.  
  
Lewis, William F. "Telling America's Story: Narrative Form and the Reagan
Presidency." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 73 (1987): 280-302.  
  
Ling, David A. "A Pentadic Analysis of Senator Edward Kennedy's Address to the
People of Massachusetts, July 25, 1969." _Central States Speech Journal_ 21
(1970): 81-86.  
  
Lucaites, John Louis, and Celeste Michelle Condit. "Reconstructing
<Equality>: Culturetypal and Counter-Cultural Rhetorics in the Martyred Black
Vision." _Communication Monographs_ 57 (1990): 5-25. On electronic reserve.  
  
Lucas, Stephen E. "The Renaissance of American Public Address: Text and
Context in Rhetorical Criticism." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 74 (1988):
241-260.  
  
Lucas, Stephen E. "The Schism in Rhetorical Scholarship." _Quarterly Journal
of Speech_ 67 (1981): 1-20.  
  
McGee, Michael C. "The Fall of Wellington: A Case Study of the Relationship
between Theory, Practice, and Rhetoric in History." _Quarterly Journal of
Speech_ 63 (1977): 28-42.  
  
McGee, Michael Calvin. "The 'Ideograph': A Link Between Rhetoric and
Ideology." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 66 (1980): 1-16. On electronic
reserve.  
  
McGee, Michael C. "In Search of 'The People': A Rhetorical Alternative."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 61 (1975): 235-49. On electronic reserve.  
  
McGee, Michael Calvin. "Social Movement as Meaning." _Central States Speech
Journal_ 34 (1983): 74-77.  
  
McGee, Michael Calvin. " "Social Movement": Phenomenon or Meaning?" _Central
States Speech Journal_ 31 (1980): 233-244.  
  
McGee, Michael Calvin. "Text, Context, and the Fragmentation of Contemporary
Culture." _Western Journal of Speech Communication_ 54 (1990): 274-289. On
electronic reserve.  
  
McKerrow, Raymie E. "Critical Rhetoric: Theory and Praxis." _Communication
Monographs_ 56 (1989): 91-111. On electronic reserve.  
  
Medhurst, Martin J. "Public Address and Significant Scholarship: Four
Challenges to the Rhetorical Renaissance." _Texts in Context_. Ed. Michael C.
Leff and Fred Kauffeld. Davis, CA: Hermagoras Press, 1989\. 29-42.  
  
Medhurst, Martin J., and Thomas W. Benson. " "The City": The Rhetoric of
Rhythm." _Communication Monographs_ 48 (1981): 54-72. On electronic reserve.  
  
Mohrmann, Gerald P., and Michael Leff. "Lincoln at Cooper Union: A Rationale
for Neo-Classical Criticism." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 60 (1974):
459-467.  
  
Murphy, John M. "Civic Republicanism in the Modern Age: Adlai Stevenson in the
1952 Presidential Campaign." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 80 (1992): 313-328.  
  
Ong, Walter J. "The Writer's Audience Is Always a Fiction." _Interfaces of the
Word_. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1977\. 53-81.  
  
Osborn, Michael. "Archetypal Metaphor in Rhetoric: The Light-Dark Family."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 1967 (1967): 115-126.  
  
Peterson, Tarla Rai. "The Rhetorical Construction of Institutional Authority
in a Senate Subcommittee Hearing on Wilderness Legislation." _Western Journal
of Speech Communication_ 52 (1988): 259-276.  
  
Rosenfield, Lawrence W. "The Anatomy of Critical Discourse." _Speech
Monographs_ 35 (1968): 50-69. On electronic reserve.  
  
Rosenfield, Lawrence W. "The Experience of Criticism." _Quarterly Journal of
Speech_ 60 (1974): 489-496.  
  
Rushing, Janice Hocker. "Evolution of 'The New Frontier' in _Alien_ and
_Aliens_ : Patriarchal Co-optation of the Feminine Archetype." _Quarterly
Journal of Speech_ 75 (1989): 1-24. On electronic reserve.  
  
Rushing, Janice Hocker. "The Rhetoric of the American Western Myth."
_Communication Monographs_ 50 (1983): 14-32.  
  
Scott, Robert L. "On Viewing Rhetoric as Epistemic." _Central States Speech
Journal_ 38 (1967): 9-17.  
  
Simons, Herbert W. "Requirements, Problems, and Strategies: A Theory of
Persuasion for Social Movements." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 56 (1970):
1-11. On electronic reserve.  
  
Solomon, Martha. "Ideology as Rhetorical Constraint: The Anarchist Agitation
of "Red Emma" Goldman." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 74 (1988): 184-200.  
  
Solomon, Martha. "The "Positive Woman's" Journey: A Mythic Analysis of the
Rhetoric of STOP ERA." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 65 (1979): 262-274.  
  
Solomon, Martha. "The Rhetoric of STOP ERA: Fatalistic Reaffirmation."
_Southern Speech Communication Journal_ 44 (1978): 42-59.  
  
Solomon, Martha. ""With Firmness in the Right": The Creation of Moral Hegemony
in Lincoln's Second Inaugural." _Communication Reports_ 1 (1988): 32-37.  
  
Stelzner, Hermann G. "The Quest Story and Nixon's November 3, 1969 Address."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 57 (1971): 163-172.  
  
Wander, Philip. "The Ideological Turn in Modern Criticism." _Central States
Speech Journal_ 34 (1983): 1-18. On electronic reserve.  
  
Ware, B. L., and Wil A. Linkugel. "They Spoke in Defense of Themselves: On the
Generic Criticism of Apologia." _Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 59 (1973):
273-283. On electronic reserve.  
  
White, Eugene E. "Solomon Stoddard's Theories of Persuasion." _Speech
Monographs_ 29 (1962): 235-259.  
  
Wilson, John F. "Harding's Rhetoric of Normalcy, 1920-1923." _Quarterly
Journal of Speech_ 48 (1962): 406-411.  
  
Wilson, John F. "Rhetorical Echoes of a Wilsonian Idea." _Quarterly Journal of
Speech_ 43 (1957): 271-272.  
  
Wrage, Ernest J. "Public Address: A Study in Social and Intellectual History."
_Quarterly Journal of Speech_ 33 (1947): 451-457.  
Zarefsky, David. "The State of the Art in Public Address Scholarship." _Texts
in Context_. Ed. Michael C. Leff and Fred Kauffeld. Davis, CA: Hermagoras
Press, 1989. 13-28.

=====

This syllabus may be accessed on the world wide web at
<http://www.personal.psu.edu/t3b>  
  
Double click here to return to [Tom Benson's home
page](http://www.personal.psu.edu/t3b)

