[GU Home](http://www.georgetown.edu) |

[Pharm Grad Program](gradprog.html) |

[Neuroscience Grad Program](http://neurosci.georgetown.edu/)  
---|---|---  
  
##  Cell Biology  
Biology 363  \-  Fall 2001

**THIS COURSE MAY SATISFY THE BIOCHEMISTRY REQUIREMENT**  
CHECK WITH DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES

Professor Ellen J. Henderson   Office: 406 Reiss Office Hours: Monday and
Thursday, 2:30-4:00 or by appointment (to schedule, contact Ms. Sara Fisher,
Reiss 406) e-mail: henderse@georgetown.edu; Phone: 687-5702

Course Goals:

*Integration of your pre-existing knowledge of biological systems and their chemical properties into an understanding of cellular functions and their mechanisms 

*Understanding the state-of-the-art of in cell biology 

*Being able to apply your knowledge/understanding to new information and situations through analytical problem solving 

Course Requirements and Evaluation Criteria:

*Examinations 75% 

*Laboratory reports 20% 

*Poster and bioethics laboratories 5% 

*Class participation (during lecture and laboratory periods) will be used to decide course grades in borderline cases) 

*Office hour visits: at least two are required from each student and making these visits (or not) will also be used to decide course grades in borderline cases) 

There are no preset scores for grading. Grades will be based on distribution
of class scores and will be "B" centered.

  Dates Topic

8/29-31 Introduction; learning style inventories

Subject Block A: Control of Gene Expression

9/5-12

Subject Block B: Membrane Structure and Function

9/14-28 Hydrophobicity, membrane lipids, model

systems, the Fluid Mosaic Model of integral and peripheral proteins, membrane
asymmetry

10/3 HELP SESSION for Exam I

Subject Block C: Bioenergetics and Solute Transport

10/5-10/15 Mitochondria, chloroplasts and bioenergetics; solute transport by
various membrane systems.

Subject Block D: The Cytoskeleton and the Extracellular Matrix

10/17-31 Components of the cytoskeleton, mechanical

activities of cells, external adhesion and

the extracellular matrix.

11/7 HELP SESSION for Exam II

Subject Block E: Protein Traffic in Cells

11/2-19 Organelles, synthesis, sorting and cycling of membranes, endo- and
exocytosis.

Subject Block F: Excitation-response Coupling, Growth Control

11/21-12/7 Transmitter/hormone receptor mechanisms,

oncogenes, cell cycle and cancer.

CUMULATIVE FINAL EXAMINATION: Dec. 14, 4:00-6:00 pm officially, but three
hours will be allowed.

Revised Laboratory Schedule, Fall 2001

(October 15, 2001)

Aug. 29 No lab - see ASSIGNED PROBLEMS and Learning Style Inventory for next
week.

Sept. 5 Review of assigned problems; turn in Learning Inventory scores (your
name, your AC-CE and AE-RO scores)

Sept. 12 Experiment: Use of radioisotopes in cell biology

Sept. 19 Experiment: Permeability of liposomes

Sept. 26 Experimental design - group activity

Oct. 3 EXAMINATION I

Oct. 10 Experiment: Properties of Cell Surfaces

Oct. 17 Experiment: Transport in Yeast

Oct. 24 Cell lysis and fractionation discussion & focus groups

Oct. 31 Experimental design - group activity

Nov. 7 EXAMINATION II

Nov. 14 Regeneration of flagella

Nov. 21 No lab: Happy Thanksgiving

Nov. 28 Bioethics discussion/debates

Dec. 5 Experimental design - group activity

Help Sessions and Office Hours:

Prof. Henderson will hold a weekly evening help session - time/place TBA. Mr.
Hickey and I will post office hour SIGN-UP SHEETS for each week. Please sign
up in advance if possible. If no one signs up by the start of the office
hours, we may not be available. If you can't come during these office hours,
make appointments or leave a message in mail boxes in room 406, by voice mail,
or e-mail with a phone number and so appointments can be made.

Examinations:

There will be two 100 point "midterm" exams and one cumulative final
examination worth 200 points. The lowest 100 points of exams (e.g., one half
the final exam if it is your lowest percentage score) will be dropped, leaving
300 exam points

Laboratories:

Lab reports will vary from 5 to 20 points. There will be three labs in which
your lab group will write a joint report and all group members will receive
the same score.

Bioethics debates:

One laboratory will be devoted to debates between lab groups on subjects
arising from contemporary advances in biological science that have significant
ethical implications. A list of possible topics will be offered and the class
will vote on the three to be selected. The "rules" for the debates will be
distributed later.

Poster session:

Student lab groups will select a cell biological topic (to then be approved by
the instructors) on which they will read at least four recent scientific
papers (not review articles) and present during that laboratory period a
poster summarizing the current knowledge in this area. The topic cannot be one
on which a group member is conducting senior thesis research. Begin now to
think about topics. The teaching staff will be happy to assist you in reading
primary scientific papers which can be difficult if you are not experienced in
reading them.

Grading of the posters will be by all the students in that laboratory period
and the teaching staff. Specific guidelines for the posters will be
distributed later.

The Honor code:

The highest standards of academic integrity must be maintained. Exams are
closed book. While group homework is encouraged, lab reports are all to be
individual work unless specifically assigned as a lab group report.
["Plagiarism," one of the most common forms of academic dishonesty,often
committed accidentally, = adopting or imitating the language or ideas of
another and representing them as one's own work. When you do present the ideas
of another, you must provide a citation of the source from which you took the
material.]

Learning Style Inventories:

What are they for?

As an experiment this year, to attempt to improve my teaching and your
learning, you will all be asked to complete a Learning Style Inventory test
and report your results to the instructors.

How will we use student learning style information? The Learning Style
Inventory tests will give us a profile of the diversity of learning styles in
the class. These will be used to assign teams for laboratory work and you
should consider using them to form study groups for work outside class. Try to
include students from all four general learning styles in your study groups
and use the different skills each can contribute.

The instructors will endeavor to include teaching approaches that are
effective with diverse learning styles (most faculty are of a single type).

Once you know your own learning style, see if you can include other learning
styles in your study, rather than mostly only using the style you prefer.

How to Improve Both Your Memory and Your Test-taking Skills!

Despite the fact that memorization alone will not serve you very well in
advanced courses, memorizing at least some basic material is still important.
Also, a major goal of your studying is to learn and to be prepared to explain
what you have learned and what you believe to be true. Some guidelines to help
students study were published in the Washington Post (August 7, 2001). They
were taken from a book, "The How to Study Book," by psychology professor Alan
S. Brown of Southern Methodist University. You may find them helpful.

1\. Try to study orally, especially if you are an auditory person. Say the
information out loud to yourself. If you are visual, make a diagram or
outline. If you are kinesthetic, make the learning more active by copying and
recopying your notes.

2\. Find a study location that has an optimal amount of background noise and
activity. If it's too quiet, you will doze off. If it is too distracting, your
attention will wander to what is around you. Just right, and you will stay on
task.

3\. Plan frequent short breaks. Don't try to study for too long at a stretch
(more than an hour).

4\. If you are studying for a test, try to make your study conditions resemble
the test conditions. Studying is like a dress rehearsal for a play, except
that the play is the test. For example, practice writing answers down - just
thinking or saying the answers won't be as effective because you won't be
doing this on the test. Don't study in your pajamas; you won't be wearing
those during the test, will you?

5\. When you have long lists to learn, the best way is to make acronyms as cue
words to help retrieve the information. Roy G. Biv is the colors of the
spectrum (in order): red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet. HOMES
is the great lakes: Huron, Ontario, Michigan, Erie, Superior.

6\. An addition not in the article. When doing the homework problems in The
Problems Book, meet with your study group and take turns verbally explaining
the answers to each other. This will help you find the right words; thinking
in your mind that you understand it and writing a clear and convincing answer
on an exam are two very different things! If you are not clear, your study
group members can give you that feedback.

Analytical Problem Solving

What Is It?

It is using what you have learned to analyze new information. This requires
creative and synthetic thinking. How does new information or data fit within
the complex sets of knowledge you already have? How can you use that knowledge
to generate an idea or hypothesis that will explain or account for the new
information? Does the new information challenge what you already knew or does
it fit right in? Does your hypothesis make sense, is it both specific and
logical?

This is what will be the nearly complete emphasis on exams. Being able to
repeat memorized information is simply not enough. You must be able to pull
your knowledge from its storage sites and apply it to really have demonstrated
understanding of what you have learned.

There will be lots of help and practice for doing this, from homework
assignments in The Problems Book, from in-class problem-solving exercises, and
from group exercises in the laboratories.

Use your study group to practice as well. Take turns explaining the answers to
problems to others in your group.

Thinking that you understand the problem and can answer it is very different
from being able to explain it clearly to another person, such as the teaching
staff, on an exam.  
  
---  
  
  
  
  

