Biology 3409 Syllabus, Fall 2001 Biology 3409 - Evolution

Course Syllabus, Fall 2001

Lectures 10:40-11:30 AM, MW, Classroom Office Building B45

Section meetings in 115 Biosci and other locations given in the lab manual.

<http://www.cbs.umn.edu/class/biol/3409/>

"Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution." T.
Dobzhansky

This course explores the foundations of evolutionary biology. We will examine
the divergence of biological forms through history with an emphasis on
presently existing biological diversity. We will investigate the genetic
mechanisms of evolution and illustrate them with examples of ongoing
evolution. A primary objective of the course is that students learn
evolutionary principles and develop the capability of applying these
principles to understand how the biological world has evolved and continues to
evolve. The course includes lectures and weekly section meetings for labs,
discussions, and computer simulation exercises. The course readings are drawn
primarily from Futuyma's _Evolutionary Biology_ (3nd edition, 1998). This text
is available in the bookstore and will be on reserve in McGrath (St. Paul
Central) Library. The lab manual is also available at the bookstore.

**Class schedule**

    
    
    Sept 5  Introduction   	 Ch. 1
            Lanyon and Shaw         
    
    Sept 10 The Tree of Life: Classification and Phylogeny  Ch. 5 pp. 87-107
            Lanyon   
    
    Sept 12 A History of Life on Earth      Ch. 7 pp. 165-176
            K. Curry         
    
    Sept 17 The Tree of Life: Classification and Phylogeny   Ch. 5 pp. 107-123
            Lanyon   
    
    Sept 19 Evolving Lineages in the Fossil Record  Ch. 6 127-142, 154-162
            Lanyon   
    
    Sept 24 How Darwin Became an Evolutionary Biologist     Ch. 3
            J. Beatty        
    
    Sept 26 How Darwin Came to his Theory of Evolution by    Natural Selection
            J. Beatty
    
    Oct 1   The Geography of Evolution      Ch. 8 pp. 201-209, 216-225
            Lanyon   
    
    Oct 3   Variation       Ch. 9, pp. 231-245
            Shaw       
    
    Oct 8   Quantitative traits     Ch. 9, pp. 247-251; 
            Shaw    Chapter 14, pp. 413-418
    
    Oct 10  Sources of genetic variation    Ch. 9, pp. 245-247
            Shaw    Ch. 10, pp. 283-286, 267-276
    
    Oct 15   FIRST MIDTERM EXAM      
    
    Oct 17  Sources of genetic variation (cont.)    Ch. 10, pp. 276-283.
            Shaw      
    
    Oct 22  Population structure and genetic drift  Ch. 11, 297-316.
            Shaw      
    
    Oct 24  The theory of natural selection         Ch. 13, pp. 365-381;
            Shaw    pp. 384-390.
    
    Oct 29  Quantitative traits under selection     Ch. 14 pp. 418-425, Fig. 14.10
            Shaw    pp. 428-433, 436-437
    
    Oct 31  Natural selection and adaptation        Ch. 12 pp. 337-362
            Lanyon  Ch. 14, pp. 402-406
    
    Nov 5   The interplay of evolutionary processes Ch. 11, 316-317.
            Shaw    Ch. 13, 381-383
    
    Nov 7   Species Ch.15 pp.447-456
            Lanyon   
    
    Nov 12   SECOND MIDTERM EXAM     
    
    Nov 14  Species Ch. 15, pp. 456-478
            Lanyon   
    
    Nov 19  Speciation      Ch. 16, pp. 481-498
            Lanyon   
    
    Nov 21  Speciation      Ch. 16, pp. 498-508
            Shaw
    
    Nov 26  Evolution of Species Interactions       Ch. 18, pp. 539-548
            Lanyon   
    
    Nov 28  Evolution of Species Interactions       Ch. 18, pp. 548-557
            Shaw     
    
    Dec 3   Molecular evolution     Ch. 11; pp. 320-326
            Shaw    Ch. 22; pp. 625-634
    
    Dec 5   Evolution of Behavior   Ch. 20
            Lanyon   
    
    Dec 10  Development and Evolution       Ch. 23
            Lanyon   
    
    Dec 12  Evolution of Biological Diversity       Ch. 25
            Lanyon   
    
    Dec 20  Final Exam: 8 am - 10 am         
    

**Course Procedures**

1\. Laboratory and discussion sections will be led by teaching assistants from
the Graduate Program in Ecology, Evolution and Behavior, who, in addition to
guiding you through the lab exercises, will amplify and explain points from
the lectures, help you with questions, and lead discussion of problem sets.
Course evaluations indicate that students consider section meetings a valuable
aid in understanding the course material; we urge you to prepare thoroughly,
and use them to your best advantage. Grades earned on assignments based on lab
exercises (see attached schedule), as well as lab quizzes, will contribute to
your overall grade for the course.

2\. There will be two midterm examinations, given on Oct 15 and Nov 12. The
final exam, on Dec 20, will be comprehensive, and will be designed for the
two-hour period. All three exams will have the same format, including
calculations, questions requiring brief essays, multiple choice, and true-
false questions. Scoring of exam questions will be distributed to eliminate
differences in grades due to graders; a single staff member will grade a given
question for the entire class. If you are seriously ill and cannot attend an
examination, please notify us before the test.

3\. Problem sets and lab writeups will be assigned to be due according to the
attached schedule. Problem Sets must be turned in at the beginning of class on
Monday of the week they are due. They will be graded for a maxium of half
credit if they are turned in by the beginning of the following class. At that
time, answer keys will be posted on the course website and in the lab, and it
will no longer be possible to earn credit for the assignment.

4\. Course grades will be determined on the basis of a composite score, as
follows:  

    
    
    Evaluation:     Lecture assignments     10%
                    5 problem sets          20%
                    Lab assignments         20%
                    Midterm I               15%
                    Midterm II              15%
                    Final exam              20%

The Uniform Grading Policy of the University of Minnesota sets the following
standards of achievement for a given grade:  
A -- achievement that is outstanding relative to the level necessary to meet
course requirements.  
B -- achievement that is significantly above the level necessary to meet
course requirements.  
C -- achievement that meets the course requirements in every respect.  
D -- achievement that is worthy of credit even though it fails to meet fully
the course requirements.

5\. Academic Integrity: "The administration, faculty, staff, and students of
the Universtiy of Minnesota are committed to academic integrity and respect
for intellectual property. Plagiarism is one form of intellectual dishonesty.
Simply put, plagiarism is representing someone else's intellectual property as
your own. Intellectual property can take many forms--a whole term paper, an
idea or insight, a photograph, a drawing, a song, a unique way of wording
something, a discovery, etc. The simple cure for plagiarism is to err on the
side of caution." (from Swan and Bridwell-Bowles,
<http://cisw.cla.umn.edu/plagiarism.html>).

In this course, students are encouraged to study together, helping each other
to understand evolutionary concepts. Students are also encouraged to work
together during lab sessions and on problem sets. However, assignments turned
in for a grade must be the work of the student whose name appears on it, not a
copy of another student's work.

6\. Students with disabilities that affect their capacity to participate fully
in class or to meet all course requirements are encouraged to bring this to
the attention of one of the instructors as soon as possible so that
appropriate accommodations can be arranged. For information on the University
of Minnesota's policies, procedures and resources for students with
disabilities, please consult the website: <http://disserv3.stu.umn.edu/AG-S/>

7\. In certain cases, if justified (e.g., extended illness, family emergency,
or other unforseen circumstances that prevent completion of the course), a
grade of Incomplete may be granted, but this must be requested from Dr. Shaw
or Dr. Lanyon before the end of the semester. An Incomplete entitles you to
complete unfinished work by the end of the following semester. It may not be
used to improve standing scores. A student must be passing the course to
qualify.

**Biology 3409 Staff, Fall 2001**

Ruth Shaw, 206 Ecology, Phone: 624 7206, email:
[rshaw@superb.ecology.umn.edu](mailto:rshaw@superb.ecology.umn.edu)  
Scott Lanyon, 100F Ecology, Phone: 624 7217, email:
[slanyon@biosci.umn.edu](mailto:slanyon@biosci.umn.edu)  
Muir Eaton, 209 Ecology, email:
[muireaton@hotmail.com](mailto:muireaton@hotmail.com)  
Andy Jones, 203 Ecology, email:
[jone0597@tc.umn.edu](mailto:jone0597@tc.umn.edu)  
Melody Ng, 207 Ecology, email:
[melody.y.ng-1@tc.umn.edu](mailto:melody.y.ng-1@tc.umn.edu)  
Janet Anderson, CBS laboratory services coordinator

Course website: <http://www.cbs.umn.edu/class/biol/3409/>

Graduate student offices in the Ecology Building do not have telephones, but
messages may be left for the teaching assistants in the office of the
Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Behavior, 625 5700.

Office hours: Dr. Shaw will be available in 206 Ecology, Wednesdays, 1:30 -
2:30, and by appointment. Dr. Lanyon will be available in 100F Ecology,
Mondays, 1:00-2:00, and by appointment. Teaching assistants will announce
office hours at the first section meetings.

