![](../headani.gif)

****GLOBAL CHANGE 1 - FALL 2001 SYLLABUS****

![](../print_icon.gif)[ Format for printing](/syllabus1.html)

_Registration_  

Global Change I- Physical Processes is taught every fall term, and is cross-
listed in 5 different UM departments with the following course numbers:
UC/NRE/BIO 110, AOSS/GEOSCI 171. Students are not required to register within
the department of their concentration; this course holds Natural Science
distribution credit for all cross-listings.

_Course Requirements_

**Lectures**  
Lectures meet from 12:00 noon to 1:00 pm Monday, Wednesday and Friday in 1400
Chemistry. The lecture will begin promptly at 12:10, please arrive early
enough to find a seat before the lecture starts. There will usually be
important announcements at the beginning of lecture.  
  
Reading materials for the class will be available as lecture notes and
articles on our UM course tools web site, located at:

_<http://www.coursetools.ummu.umich.edu>_

You will need to login with your UM uniqname to access the site, through "My
Courses." If you encounter any difficulties, you should contact the course
support staff ([ _globalchange@umich.edu_](mailto:globalchange@umich.edu))
immediately, as all students will be expected to check the site regularly for
announcements and assignments. The material in the lecture notes is not
identical to that presented in class. The on-line lecture notes serve as both
textbook and coursepack, while also connecting you to material on other Web
sites.

THERE ARE NO REQUIRED TEXTBOOKS OR COURSEPACKS TO PURCHASE; supplemental
reading materials will occasionally be distributed in class. The only costs
you will incur are for printing lecture notes and other Web materials.  
  
**Lab/Discussion**  
Your presence at lab/discussion sessions is mandatory. The lab/discussion
section meets for two hours per week, in a discussion classroom or an ITD
computer classroom. LAB SECTIONS BEGIN ON MONDAY, SEPT 10 in the classroom
listed on your student schedule.

**Projects**  
There is one term project for this course, which will be a group research
paper presented in a web page. Students are expected to organize themselves
into small teams of 2-3 to develop an implementation plan for a term project
related to the course material. Suggestions for project topics will be
provided, but the choice will be left to each team with guidance from the lab
instructors.  
  
**Tests**  
There will be two one-hour midterm exams and a two-hour final exam (Friday
Dec. 14, 1:30-3:30 pm in 1400 Chem). The tests will be comprised of a mixture
of multiple choice and short-answer questions. Material from the lectures,
labs, and required readings (both on-line and handouts) will be covered on
exams. The final exam will emphasize material covered since the second
midterm, but will also involve concepts studied before the midterm.  

**Evaluation Activities**  
Global Change is an experimental course that we are constantly trying to
improve. All students are expected to participate in our evaluation
activities, which will occur throughout the term and can be accessed from the
web page. These consist of short, weekly questionnaires and 2 term
assessments. Students who do not participate in these activities will lose
points from their participation grade (see below).

  
_Grading_  

The class will use a point system for determining final grades:

Midterms: 200 points  
Final: 150 points  
Lab/Discussion Sessions: 180 points  
Term Project: 180 points  
Term Web Assessments: 20 points  
Lecture Activities: 30 points

The final grade will be out of approximately 750 points. Extra credit points
may be offered for certain activities or assignments.

  
_Professors_

| **[David Allan](http://www-personal.umich.edu/%7Edallan/)** , School of
Natural Resources and Environment  |

_[dallan@umich.edu](mailto:dallan@umich.edu)_  
  
---|---  
**[George Kling](http://www.biology.lsa.umich.edu/people/faculty/gwk.html)** ,
Department of Biology  |

_[gwk@umich.edu](mailto:gwk@umich.edu)_  
  
**[Perry Samson](http://www-personal.engin.umich.edu/%7Esamson/)** ,
Department of Atmospheric, Oceanic, and Space Sciences

|

_[samson@umich.edu](mailto:samson@umich.edu)_  
  
**[James
Teeri](http://www.biology.lsa.umich.edu/people/faculty/jateeri.html)** ,
Department of Biology

|

_[jateeri@umich.edu](mailto:jateeri@umich.edu)_  
  
**[Ben van der Pluijm](http://www-personal.umich.edu/%7Evdpluijm/)** ,
Department of Geological Sciences, Program Director for UC Academic Minor in
Global Change

|

_[vdpluijm@umich.edu](mailto:vdpluijm@umich.edu) _  
  
      
_Graduate Student Instructors_

**Beth Hahn** , School of Natural Resources and Environment |

_[bahahn@umich.edu](mailto:bahahn@umich.edu)_  
  
---|---  
**Jaye Kain** , Department of Geological Sciences |

_[jmkain@umich.edu](mailto:jmkain@umich.edu)_  
  
**Katy Keller** , Department of Biology  |

_[kateak@umich.edu](mailto:kateak@umich.edu)_  
  
**Tim Maull** , School of Natural Resources and Environment |

_[timmaull@umich.edu](mailto:timmaull@umich.edu)_  
  
**Jo Opdyke** , School of Natural Resources and Environment |

_[jopdyke@umich.edu](mailto:jopdyke@umich.edu)_  
  
  
_Support Staff_

**Laura Brunengraber** , Webmaster and Course Coordinator |

[_lbruneng@umich.edu_](mailto:lbruneng@umich.edu)  
  
---|---  
**[Eric Dey](http://www-personal.umich.edu/%7Edey/)** , School of Education,
Course Assessment Director |

[_dey@umich.edu_](mailto:dey@umich.edu)  
  
**[Peter Knoop](http://www-personal.umich.edu/%7Eknoop/)** , School of
Information, Instructional Technology Consultant

|

[_knoop@umich.edu_](mailto:knoop@umich.edu)  
  
_Office Hours_  
  
The Global Change Office is located in 4534 CC Little Building (Geological
Sciences); all GSI office hours will be held there, unless otherwise
indicated. There is a mailbox for Global Change in 2534 CCL.  
  
Professors will have office hours by appointment, although students are
encouraged to first use the Course Tools discussion environment to pose
questions or comments about the material. To do this, enter the course tools
site, select the  "Discussions" link, select the appropriate topic, and then
click on "Respond". This enables all of the course instructors and students to
be aware of questions and to give their feedback.  

09/03/01 19:09

