**BIOLOGY 1400**

Biology for General Education

Spring 2002

University Policies | Course Grading | Other Course Policies **

* * *

**LECTURE:** MWF, 9:00-9:50 PM, 102 Lewis Science Center (LSC)

**LAB SECTIONS:** Wednesday, 8:00-9:50 AM (sequence #6217), 126 LSC  
Thursday, 8:00-9:50 AM (sequence #6218), 126 LSC  
Thursday, 10:50 AM-12:40 PM (sequence #6219), 126 LSC  
Thursday, 2:40-4:30 PM (sequence (#6220), 126 LSC

**INSTRUCTORS:** Dr. Ben Waggoner  
020 Lewis Science Center  
Office phone: 450-5037  
Office hours: Monday, Wednesday, 2:00-5:00 PM Department phone: 450-3146  
Department FAX: 450-5914  
E-mail: [benw@mail.uca.edu](mailto:benw@mail.uca.edu)  
Office hours: Monday and Wednesday, 2:00-5:00 PM, or by appointment

**Graduate Assistants:**

  * Amanda Williams (Thursday, 8:00-9:50)   
Office: 124-G Lewis Science Center  
Office Hours: Monday 9:00-11:00 AM, Wednesday 3:00-5:00 PM  
E-mail: [amandalenore@yahoo.com](mailto:amandalenore@yahoo.com)

  * Heather Stottman (Thursday, 10:50-12:40)   
Office: 008 Lewis Science Center  
Office Hours: TBA  
E-mail: [aedan@hotmail.com](mailto:aedan@hotmail.com)

  * Fumiyo Kubo (Wednesday, 8:00-9:50, Thursday 2:40-4:30).   
Office hours: TBA

**TEXTS:** Mathis, M. 2002. _Biology 1400 Laboratory Manual._ Available at UCA
Bookstore.

NOTE: We are field-testing some new labs for this course. Some labs will be
done differently from the way they are described in the printed manual, and
others that we will do are not in the manual at all. Supplementary lab
handouts will be provided to you as needed, at least one week in advance if at
all possible.

**WWW:** <http://faculty.uca.edu/~benw/biol1400/>. (If you're reading this,
you're there.) Here you can access lecture notes, slide presentations, old
exams, schedules, and other course materials (including this syllabus).

**UNIVERSITY POLICIES**

You are encouraged to familiarize yourselves thoroughly with all policies
listed in the Student Handbook, including but not limited to:

**Sexual harassment policy:** Sexual harassment by any faculty member, staff
member, or student is a violation of both law and university policy and will
not be tolerated at the University of Central Arkansas.   Sexual harassment of
employees is prohibited under Section 703 of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act
of 1964 and sexual harassment of students may constitute discrimination under
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972. More information is available
beginning on page 93 of the 2000-2001 Student Handbook, with which you are
encouraged to familiarize yourselves thoroughly.

**Disabled students:** The University of Central Arkansas adheres to the
requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. If you need an
accommodation under this Act due to a disability, contact the UCA Office of
Disability Services at 450-3135. More information is available beginning on
page 26 of the 2000-2001 Student Handbook, with which you are encouraged to
familiarize yourselves thoroughly. <

**Statement on academic misconduct:** The University defines academic
misconduct as follows:

  1. In connection with the taking of, or in contemplation of the taking of any examination, any student who (a) knowingly discovers or attempts to discover the contents of an examination before the contents are revealed by the instructor; (b) obtains, uses, attempts to obtain or use any material or device dishonestly; or (c) supplies or attempts to supply to any other person any material or device dishonestly; or (d) during the course of an examination obtains or attempts to obtain unauthorized information from another student or from another student's test materials. 
  2. Any misrepresentation of academic work by a student as the product of their own study and efforts. 
  3. The unauthorized possession, taking, or copying of solutions manuals or computerized solutions for homework or research problems assigned by a professor and/or instructor. 

In the event an instructor determines that a student has engaged in academic
misconduct, the instructor will meet with the student and inform him/her of
the action or sanction the instructor deems appropriate. More information is
available beginning on page 26 of the 2000-2001 Student Handbook, with which
you are encouraged to familiarize yourselves thoroughly (also see "Other
Course Policies" below).

**COURSE GRADING POLICY**

Grades will be calculated on the following basis.

Lecture midterm exams: 3 x 100 = 300 pts.  
Lecture final exam: 1 x 200 = 200 pts.  
Lab practical exams: 2 x 50 = 100 pts.  
Lecture quizzes: 10 x 5 = 50 pts.  
Lab quizzes: 10 x 5 = 50 pts.  
Lab critical thinking exercises: 5 x 10 = 50 pts.  
Participation and discretionary: 50 pts.

**Total: 800 points**

There will be no curve and no extra credit given; please do not ask. Grades
will be assigned as follows:

**800-720 pts. (90-100%) = A**  
**719-640 pts. (80-89%) = B**  
**639-560 pts. (70-79%) = C**  
**559-480 pts. (60-69%) = D**  
**479-0 pts. (0-59%) = F**

**Lecture tests and quizzes:** There will be three midterm exams, as well as a
final exam, based on the material covered in lecture. All of these will be
multiple-choice format and graded by Scantron.

There will also be thirteen weekly quizzes in lecture; these will be worth 5
points each, and will be given at unpredictable times and dates. Usually there
will be one each week, but I reserve the right to give more than one a week,
or else to skip a week. I will drop the lowest three when figuring your grade.

All tests and quizzes will be based on the material covered in lecture.
Anything not covered in lecture will not be covered on tests, even if it is in
the textbook. The textbook should be used to reinforce the lecture material-
not to replace it! The on-line lecture notes will follow the lectures closely,
but they cannot and should not substitute for attending class and taking
notes.

**Lab tests and quizzes:** Each lab will begin with a 5-point written quiz.
These may focus on **both** the previous week's material **and** the current
lab material. (This makes it a really good idea to read the lab manual
**before** the lab meeting. . . ) There will be thirteen of these. Again, I
will drop the lowest three when figuring your grade.

There will also be a mid-term and a final lab practical exam, which will
involve answering questions based on actual specimens or other materials seen
in the lab exercises.

**OTHER COURSE POLICIES**

**Attendance:** After the first few lecture and lab meetings, attendance will
not be taken. You are presumed to be adults, responsible for the consequences
of your own actions, and able to cope with the consequences of missing class.

If you miss a lab, you may attend a different lab section that week. However,
you **must** clear it, in advance, with the lab instructors involved. Do not
switch lab sections without clearance; there may not be space for you in the
section you try to switch into. If you need to switch lab sections
permanently, you will need to go through the formal Add/Drop procedure;
contact your instructor for more information.

**Academic honesty:** Anyone caught cheating on a test or quiz will
automatically receive a grade of zero for that test or quiz. If in doubt, see
the above section on "Statement on Academic Misconduct" for the official
definition of cheating.

**Test make-ups:** Make-up exams and quizzes will _not_ be given, either in
lecture or lab. However, your grade will be prorated if you miss a test or
quiz due to: personal illness; death or illness in your family; participation
in a sanctioned intervarsity athletic event; or an unforeseen emergency, For
example, if you break your leg on the day of a 100-point lecture exam, I would
calculate your grade on the basis of 700 possible earned points, rather than
800\.

To be excused, absences _must_ be documented _if at all possible_ with a dated
note or other written evidence from your doctor, coach, auto mechanic, parole
board, arresting officer, etc. You have three days after returning to class to
present your documentation; no extensions will be given. Do not count on
having your absence excused if you cannot present documentation. An unexcused
absence for an exam or quiz will result in a grade of zero for that
assignment.

**Classroom etiquette:** The reason for lectures and labs is to provide, to
the best of the instructor's and the university's abilities, a place where you
can learn about biology. Even if you are not particularly interested in
learning biology, you are paying for the opportunity to attend this class-both
directly, through your tuition and fees, and indirectly through state taxes.
Therefore, in this class, you are expected to act in ways that do not
interfere with anyone else's opportunity to learn -- in other words, do not
distract, disturb, or interfere with other students during a lecture or lab.
Distracting other students effectively robs them of the money they have paid
to be here. Interfering with the instructor also interferes with other
students' learning. Take it from me: it is very difficult to lecture
effectively if a student is distracting, interrupting, or being openly
disrespectful to the instructor.

If you must come to class late, please enter quietly and seat yourself towards
the side of the room. Walking in front of the instructor is very distracting,
as is walking in front of other students. If you know that you will have to
leave a lecture early, please sit near an exit, so that you can leave with a
minimum of disturbance.

If you have a cell phone, beeper, or other device, turn it off before coming
to class -- unless you have a _very_ good reason for keeping it on (i.e. you
are a law enforcement officer or emergency medical technician who might need
to be paged or summoned at any moment, or you are a parent whose children or
their caregiver must stay in contact with you). If you absolutely must receive
a cell phone call or pager summons in class, please take the call outside as
quickly as possible.

Chatting with your neighbors should be done outside the classroom. Please keep
comments to yourself during a lecture. Sleeping during class will not be
penalized, but please do not snore.

There are few things more annoying than a group of students gathering up their
books and preparing to leave before the instructor has finished speaking.
Please wait until the instructor has signalled that the lecture is over before
you prepare to leave.

You will be asked to leave the class if you exhibit repeated disruptive
behavior or any type of threatening or violent behavior. If you do not leave,
the UCA police will be called in to assist you. Fighting, vandalism, or
threats made to any student or instructor will be handled by standard
disciplinary procedures as outlined in the student handbook. Such acts could
result in expulsion from the University, or expulsion from the course with a
grade of WF (withdraw, failing) which counts as a grade of F on your
transcript and GPA.

