# ![](USA.GIF)![](mrbclogo1.gif)

# ENST 377/EEB 377

# Spring 2000

[![](ORCSMissRver%26Bluffs2.JPG)](orcs.htm)
[![](BalmoralMdA1.JPG)](balmoral.htm) [![](longwood.JPG)](longwood.htm)
[![](Groupphoto.JPG)](group.htm)

## [![](HOME-OFF.GIF)](enst_home.htm)

![](syllabus-on.gif)

## [![](announce-off.gif)](announcements.htm)

## [![](fieldtrips-off.gif)](field_trips.htm)

[![](projects-off.gif)](class_projects.htm)

###  [Spring 2000 Class Projects are now available on the
web!](research_projects.htm)



### [Home page address: http://www.tulane.edu/~kidder/Enst%20377/enst_home.htm
](http://www.tulane.edu/~kidder/Enst%20377/enst_home.htm)

  Dr. Tristram R. Kidder Anthropology Annex (7041 Freret St.) 862-3048 Office
Hours: M, W, F 11:00-11:50 or by appointment   Dr. Henry L. Bart, Jr. 213
Dinnwidie Hall 861-5191 Office Hours: M, W 2:30 or by appointment   **Class
Meeting Time:** Monday and Wednesday 3-4:15 & Monday 4:15-7:15 ("Lab")
**_Location:_** Newcomb Hall, Room 115

This course is an interdisciplinary colloquium dealing with the Mississippi
River Basin. It is intended for an undergraduate audience. The goal of the
course is to give students a broad overview of the important social and
environmental issues surrounding the Mississippi River. We seek to encourage
an understanding and appreciation of the river from a holistic perspective.
The emphasis in the course is on experiential learning &emdash; "out-of
classroom" field trips, where students have the opportunity to see, firsthand,
important issues related to the Mississippi River, its environment, culture,
and the historic changes wrought upon the River, and their effects. To this
end, eleven (11) [field trips](field_trips.htm) are planned over the course of
the semester, and students receive an extra credit hour of "field work"
("Lab") for participating in them. The class will meet twice weekly (Monday
and Wednesday afternoons) for an hour and 15 minutes. Wednesdays are generally
reserved for in-class lectures; Mondays are reserved for local field trips or
lectures and class discussion. Transportation will be provided for all local
field trips. Field investigations to more distant locations are scheduled for
three weekends during the semester. One trip will be to west-central
Mississippi and northeast Louisiana, one will be to the mouth of the
Mississippi River, and one to the Gulf of Mexico. Transportation will be
provided on all of these trips, but students will bear the costs of meals and
special (very inexpensive) lodging arrangements. Since lecture time is
limited, students will be given reviews and other key readings on topics to be
covered. Lectures will emphasize the main points of each topic so that
students will have something to draw from on field trips. Drives to and from
field trip destinations will give us ample time to discuss the issues involved
in greater detail.

The course is organized into three sections: the first deals with the natural
environmental setting and summarizes geology, hydrology, and biology of the
Lower Mississippi River. We will visit the Bonne Carre Spillway and Jean
Lafitte National Park during this phase. The second section of the course
deals with the influence of the River on human cultural development. This
section proceeds through the different phases of historic development in the
Mississippi Valley, investigating the reciprocal relationship between river
and culture. Trips to prehistoric archaeological sites, antebellum homes,
Civil War battlefields, river flood control facilities, the French Quarter,
and industrial complexes along the river are planned. The final section of the
course deals with the impact of humans on the Mississippi River. During this
time we will explore many of the ways humans have modified the Mississippi
River and the environmental consequences of these modifications. Trips to the
Louisiana Universities Marine Consortium (LUMCON), the industrial corridor,
chemical plants, the Industrial Canal Navigation Lock Complex and other Corps
of Engineers' facilities are planned for this section.

**Readings** : There are only two assigned "texts" for this course. One is
John Barry's _Rising Tide_ , and the other is Mark Twain's _Life on the
Mississippi_. Both books will be available in the bookstore. To supplement
lectures we will assign specific articles or book chapters. These readings are
listed below in the syllabus and are listed in full in the
[bibliography](enst377biblio.htm). To facilitate easy distribution of assigned
readings they will be placed on reserve in both the office of the Department
of Environmental and Evolutionary Biology (EEBiology) (310 Dinnwidie Hall) and
in the office at the Anthropology Building (1021 Audubon St.). Students are
expected to complete the readings prior to coming to the class for which they
are assigned. We have also compiled a series of web links for students to read
or explore. These links are generally informational, but many contain useful
articles or are good sources for better understanding the river and how it may
be studied. Please take time to look through these links before coming to
class or before we embark on a field trip.

**Grading** : Final course grades are based on the evaluation of four
performance categories: attendance, a regular journal, a group research
assignment, and a final exam.

  * **Attendance** : 20% of final course grade. Students are expected to attend class regularly and to participate in field trips.
  * [**Journal**](enst_377_journal.htm): 20% of final course grade. Students will be expected to keep comprehensive journals, including photos, sketches, and notes during the course of the semester's field work. Student journals will be reviewed once a month for completion (not for content) and returned the next class. Tips on how to keep a good journal can be found [Here](enst_377_journal.htm). The final completed version of your Journal must be turned in at the final exam (Thursday, May 4, 1:00-5:00)
  * [**Research Project**](research_projects.htm): 35% of course grade. The class will work as a whole to create a web page that will inform visitors about the river and its many aspects. Students will collaborate in a small group sub project on some important topic related to the River. The small group project will form one part of the course web page. Final projects will be completed in stages, with deadlines for each stage. The final product will be in the form of an HTML Web page suitable for linking to the class web page. Each group will make a short oral presentation on the last day of class. This presentation will summarize the group project, its data, and conclusions. Further discussion of the research project and a list of research themes can be found [Here](research_projects.htm).
  * **Final Exam** : 25% of course grade. A comprehensive final exam will be given during the scheduled exam period ( **Thursday, May 4, 1:00-5:00 PM** ). [The Review sheet for the exam can be seen here](examrevw.html)

The course satisfies elective requirements in Ecology, Evolution, and
Organismal Biology (EEOB), the Environmental Studies Program (ENST), and
Architecture. Students wishing to have this course satisfy requirements in
other departments should consult advisors in those departments.



### Date

|

### Topic

|

### Lecturer

|

### [Reading](enst377biblio.htm)

|

### Assignments/Deadlines

|

### Web sites  
  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
Wed. Jan. 12

|

Introduction

|

Kidder/Bart

|

|

|  
  
Mon. Jan. 17

|  NO CLASS MLK Holiday |

|

|

|  
  
Wed. Jan. 19

|

Geological Setting

|

M. Allison

|

Saucier 1994: Chs. 2, 3, & 8 & 1996

|

|

[Whole Lot of Shaking](http://quake.wr.usgs.gov/QUAKES/FactSheets/NewMadrid/)  
  
Mon Jan. 24

|  Field Trip: Bonne Carre Spillway |

E. Lyon

|

|

Selection of Research Topic/Group Assignment

|

[Bonne Carre Spillway](http://www.mvn.usace.army.mil/pao/bcarre/bcarre.htm)  
  
Wed. Jan. 26

|

Hydrology/Sedimentary Geology

|

H. Bart

|

Kolb & Van Lopik 1966; Coleman 1988

|

|

[Digital Hydrology Watershed
lab](http://www.ncsa.uiuc.edu/Cyberia/RiverWeb/Projects/DWHL/Understand/storm.html)  
  
Mon. Jan. 31

|

Biogeochemistry

|

T. Bianchi

|

|

|  
  
Wed. Feb. 2

|

River Continuum

|

D. Heins

|

Vannote et al. 1980; Ward & Stanford 1983

|

Journals Due

|  
  
Mon. Feb. 7

|  Field Trip: Jean Laffitte |

Bart/Kidder

|

Baker, Kilgore & Kasul 1991; Smith &Winkley 1996

|

Group Summary & Bibliography

|  
  
Wed. Feb. 9

|

Colonial Times

|

C. Vella

|

Usner 1992: Chs. 1-2, 5-6; Vella Ch. 1

|

|  
  
Sat.-Mon. Feb. 12-14

|  Poverty Point Field Trip |

Kidder/Bart/Walls

|

Brain 1988: Parts 1 & 3

|

|

[Poverty Point](http://www.crt.state.la.us/crt/ocd/arch/poverpoi/mapopo.htm);
[Vicksburg](http://www.cr.nps.gov/delta/civwar.htm)  
  
Mon. Feb. 14

|  Poverty Point Field Trip |

Kidder/Bart/Walls

|

|

|  
  
Wed. Feb. 16

|

River of Discovery

|

T. R. Kidder

|

Twain, _Life on the River_

|

|

[Sultana](http://sultana.org/);
[Slavery](http://www.cr.nps.gov/delta/slave.htm#cotton); [Civil
War](http://www.cr.nps.gov/delta/cwindex.htm); [Mark
Twain](http://users.telerama.com/~joseph/mtwain.html)  
  
Mon. Feb 21

|  Field Trip: French Quarter |

E. Cizek

|

|

|  
  
Wed. Feb. 23

|

20th Century

|

T. Fitzmorris

|

|

|  
  
Mon. Feb. 28

|

Rising Tide

|

J. Barry

|

Barry, _Rising Tide_

|

Journals Due; Research Project status report

|

[1993 Flood](http://www.wes.army.mil/EL/flood/fl93home.html)  
  
Wed. March 1

|

The Corps of Engineers

|

[E. Lyon](http://home.earthlink.net/~edwinlyon/mississi.htm)

|

|

|

[New Orleans District](http://www.mvn.usace.army.mil/); [Vicksburg
District](http://www.usace.army.mil/inet/organization/actlist2.htm#DISTRICT);
[Waterways Experiment Station](http://www.wes.army.mil/)  
  
Mon-Sun March 6-12

|  MARDI GRAS |

|

|

|  
  
Mon. March 13

|  Field Trip: Avondale Shipyards [NOTE time change: we leave at 1:30 PM] |

Kidder/Bart/Walls

|

|

|  
  
Wed. March 15

|

Environmental Ethics

|

M. Zimmerman

|

G. Hardin, _Tragedy of the Commons_ and Other Readings

|

|  
  
Sat. March 18

|  Head of Passes Field Trip |

COE

|

|

|

[N.O. COE District Water Control
Data](http://www.mvn.usace.army.mil/eng/edhd/watercon.htm)  
  
Mon. March 20

|  NO CLASS |

|

|

|  
  
Wed. March 22

|

Environmental Justice

|

T. Roberts

|

|

|  
  
Mon. March 27

|  Field Trip: Holy Cross/Industrial Canal Lock |

J. Yakubick

|

|

|  
  
Wed. March 29

|

Pollution epidemiology

|

P. Andrews/B. Luckett

|

Chen et al. 1998

|

|  
  
Mon. April 3

|  Field Trip: "Cancer Alley" |

D. Malek-Wiley

|

|

|  
  
Wed. April 5

|

Water Quality

|

J. Bollinger

|

|

Journals Due

|

[Magnesium leaching](http://www.execpc.com/~magnesum/leaching.html)  
  
Mon. April 10

|  Field Trip: Chevron Belle Chase Plant |

Kidder/Bart

|

|

Preliminary draft of Research Project due

|  
  
Wed. April 12

|

Dead Zone/Subsidence

|

D. Reed

|

Gosselink & Sasser 1995

|

|

[Oxygen Depletion in Coastal Waters](http://state-of-
coast.noaa.gov/bulletins/html/hyp_09/hyp.html)  
  
Sat-Sun April 15-16

|  LUMCON Field Trip |

Bart/Kidder

|

Anderson 1994, 1997; Rabelais et al. 1996; Turner & Rabelais 1994

|

|

[LUMCON](http://www.lumcon.edu/)  
  
Mon. April 17

|  Field Trip: Norco/Shell |

Myers

|

|

|  
  
Wed. April 19

|

Race & Migration

|

M. Guillory

|

|

|  
  
Mon. April 24

|

Research Presentations

|

Class

|

|

Final draft of Research Project placed on web

|  
  
Wed. April 26

|

The River & Music

|

B. Raeburn

|

|

|

[River of Song](http://www.pbs.org/riverofsong/); [Jazz on the
River](http://www.tulane.edu/~lmiller/raeburn/rivboatintro.htm)  
  
Final Exam: **Thursday, May 4, 1:00-5:00 PM**



    
    
    _Page created: 12/13/99
    Last Updated: 01/24/00_

