# ![](../USA.GIF)![](../mrbclogo1.gif)

# ENST 377/EEOB 377/DSTP 377

# Fall 2001

[![](BC/PIC00006.JPG)](../ORCSMissRver%26Bluffs2.JPG)
[![](../BalmoralMdA1.JPG)](../BalmoralMdA1.JPG)
[![](../longwood.JPG)](../longwood.JPG)[
](../group.htm)[![](PP/PIC00069.JPG)](/Macintosh%20HD/Claris%20Home%20Page%203.0/Enst%20377/Field%20trip%203%20images/ENST%202000%20Coles%20Creek%203.JPG)

## [![](../HOME-OFF.GIF)](../enst_home.htm)

![](../syllabus-on.gif)

## [![](../announce-off.gif)](../announcements.htm)

## [![](../fieldtrips-off.gif)](../field_trips.htm)

[![](../projects-off.gif)](../class_projects.htm)

# [![](../images/compass.gif)](../MRBClinks.htm) [Links](../MRBClinks.htm)

### [Home page address:
http://www.tulane.edu/~mrbc/enst_home.htm](http://www.tulane.edu/~mrbc/enst_home.htm)

# [Final Exam Review](examrevwfall2001.htm)

# [Final Exam](Final2001F.html)

## [_The Student Web Projects can be seen by clicking
here_](http://www.tulane.edu/~mrbc/2001/2001projects.htm)

[ ](../../student%20web/2001/2001projects.htm) [Dr. Tristram R.
Kidder](mailto:kidder@tulane.edu) Anthropology Annex (7041 Freret St.)
862-3048 Office Hours: T, Th 11:00-11:50 or by appointment
<http://www.tulane.edu/~kidder>   [Dr. Scott Wall](mailto:swall@tulane.edu)
113 Richardson Memorial Hall 865-5389 Office Hours: T, Th 11:00-11:50 or by
appointment   [Nicole Youngman](mailto:nyoungm@tulane.edu) 865-9834 Office
Hours: by appointment   [Click here to see photographs of the
instructors](../instructors.htm)   **Class Meeting Time:** Tuesday and
Thursday 2-3:15 & Tuesday 3:30-6:00 PM ("Lab") **_Location:_** Jones Hall room
204; Jones Hall room 108 (Tuesday "Lab")

This course is an interdisciplinary colloquium dealing with the Mississippi
River Basin. It is intended for an undergraduate audience. The goal of the
course is to give students a broad overview of the important social and
environmental issues surrounding the Mississippi River. We seek to encourage
an understanding and appreciation of the river from a holistic perspective.
The emphasis in the course is on experiential learning, or "out-of classroom"
field trips, where students have the opportunity to see, firsthand, important
issues related to the Mississippi River, its environment, culture, and the
historic changes wrought upon the River, and their effects. To this end, ten
(10) [field trips](../field_trips.htm) are planned over the course of the
semester, and students receive an extra credit hour of "field work" ("Lab")
for participating in them. The class will meet twice weekly (Tuesday and
Thursday afternoons) for an hour and 15 minutes. Tuesdays are reserved for
local field trips or lectures and class discussion; Thursdays are are used for
in-class lectures. Transportation will be provided for all field trips. Field
investigations to more distant locations are scheduled for three weekends
during the semester. One trip will be to west-central Mississippi and
northeast Louisiana, one to the Gulf of Mexico, and one is a Saturday trip
along the Mississippi River Industrial corridor (a.k.a., Cancer Alley).
Transportation will be provided on all of these trips, but students may bear
the costs of meals and special (very inexpensive) lodging arrangements. Since
lecture time is limited, students will be given reviews and other key readings
on topics to be covered. Lectures will emphasize the main points of each topic
so that students will have something to draw from on field trips. Drives to
and from field trip destinations will give us ample time to discuss the issues
involved in greater detail.

The course is organized into three sections: the first deals with the natural
environmental setting and summarizes geology, hydrology, and biology of the
Lower Mississippi River. We will visit the Jean Laffitte National Park , and
the Louisiana Universities Marine Consortium (LUMCON) during this phase. The
second section of the course deals with the influence of the River on human
cultural development. This section proceeds through the different phases of
historic development in the Mississippi Valley, investigating the reciprocal
relationship between river and culture. Trips to prehistoric archaeological
sites, antebellum homes, Civil War battlefields, river flood control
facilities, and industrial complexes along the river are planned. The final
section of the course deals with the impact of humans on the Mississippi
River. During this time we will explore many of the ways humans have modified
the Mississippi River and the environmental consequences of these
modifications. Trips to the industrial corridor, industrial facilities, the
Industrial Canal Navigation Lock Complex and other Corps of Engineers'
facilities are planned for this section.

**Readings** : There are only three assigned "texts" for this course. One is
_Mississippi Floods_ , by Anuradha Mathur and Dilip da Cunha, another is John
Barry's _Rising Tide_ , and the other is Mark Twain's _Life on the
Mississippi_. Both books will be available in the bookstore. To supplement
lectures we will assign specific articles or book chapters. These readings are
listed below in the syllabus and are listed in full in the bibliography. To
facilitate easy distribution of assigned readings they will be placed on
reserve in both Howard-Tilton Memorial Library and the Architecture Library.
Students are expected to complete the readings prior to coming to the class
for which they are assigned. We have also compiled a series of web links for
students to read or explore. These links are generally informational, but many
contain useful articles or are good sources for better understanding the river
and how it may be studied. Please take time to look through these links before
coming to class or before we embark on a field trip.

**Grading** : Final course grades are based on the evaluation of four
performance categories: attendance, a regular journal, a group research
assignment, and a final exam.

  * **Attendance** : 20% of final course grade. Students are expected to attend class regularly and to participate in all field trips.
  * [**Journal**](../enst_377_journal.htm): 20% of final course grade. Students will be expected to keep comprehensive journals, including photos, sketches, and notes during the course of the semester's field work. Student journals will be reviewed once a month for completion (not for content) and returned the next class. Tips on how to keep a good journal can be found [Here](../enst_377_journal.htm). The final completed version of your Journal must be turned in at the final exam (Sunday, December 16, 1:00-5:00)
  * [**Research Project**](../research_projects.htm): 35% of course grade. Students will work in small groups of 2-4 individuals to create both a final verbal/visual presentation and a linked web site that will inform visitors about the river and its many aspects. The small group project will be presented to the class on the dates listed in the syllabus and the completed web sites will be linked to the course web page. Final projects will be completed in _stages_ , with _deadlines_ for each stage. For the in-class presentation, each group (and each member of the group) will make a short oral presentation to the class. This presentation will summarize the group project, its data, and conclusions. The final product will be in the form of an HTML Web page suitable for linking to the class web page. Further discussion of the research project and a list of research themes can be found [Here](../research_projects.htm).
  * **Final Exam** : 25% of course grade. A comprehensive final exam will be given during the scheduled exam period ( **Sunday, Dec. 16, 1:00-5:00 PM** ). A printed review for study of possible examination topics will be made available prior to the exam.

The course satisfies elective requirements in Ecological and Evolutionary
Biology (EEOB), the Environmental Studies Program (ENST), and Architecture
(DSTP). Students wishing to have this course satisfy requirements in other
departments should consult advisors in those departments.



### Date

|

### Topic

|

### Lecturer

|

### Reading

|

### Assignments/Deadlines

|

### Web sites  
  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
Thurs. Aug. 30

|

Introduction

|

Kidder/Wall

|

|

|  
  
Tues. Sept. 4

|  Field Trip: Jean Laffitte National Park |

Wall/Kidder/Seelaus

|

|

|

[Jean Laffitte National Park](http://www.nps.gov/jela/)  
  
Thurs. Sept. 6

|

Geological Setting

|

M. Allison

|

Saucier 1994: Chs. 2, 3, & 8 & 1996

|

Selection of Research Topic/Group Assignment

|  
  
Tues. Sept. 11

|

Biogeochemistry

|

B. McKee

|

Kolb & Van Lopik 1966; Coleman 1988

|

|

[Digital Hydrology Watershed
lab](http://www.ncsa.uiuc.edu/Cyberia/RiverWeb/Projects/DWHL/Understand/storm.html)  
  
Thurs. Sept 13

|

The Barataria Basin

|

M. Comardelle

|

Twain, _Life on the River_

|

|

[Barataria National Estuary Project](http://www.btnep.org/default.htm); [Coast
2050](http://coast2050.nwrc.gov/); [Coastal Wetlands Restoration and
Protection Act](http://www.lacoast.gov/)  
  
Sat. Sept. 15-Sun., Sept. 16

|  Field Trip: LUMCON |

Wall/Kidder/Bart?

|

Anderson 1994, 1997; Rabelais et al. 1996; Turner & Rabelais 1994

|

|

[Oxygen Depletion in Coastal Waters ](http://state-of-
coast.noaa.gov/bulletins/html/hyp_09/hyp.html);
[LUMCON](http://www.lumcon.edu/)  
  
Tues. Sept. 18

|

River Continuum

|

H. Bart

|

Baker, Kilgore & Kasul 1991; Vannote et al. 1980; Ward & Stanford 1983

|  **__Journals Due__** |  
  
Thurs. Sept. 20

|

Colonial Times

|

B. Meneray

|

|

|

[Sultana](http://sultana.org/); [Nile of the New World
(NPS)](http://www.cr.nps.gov/delta/home.htm)  
  
Tues. Sept. 25

|  Field Trip: Magazine Street |

T. Fitzmorris

|

J. Barry, _Rising Tide_

|

|  
  
Thurs. Sept. 27

|  NO CLASS |

|

|

|  
  
Tues. Oct. 2 ( _ _Note time change__ _: 4:30-6:00 PM_ )

|

New Orleans Topography

|

R. Campanella

|

|

Group Summary & Bibliography Due

|  
  
Thurs. Oct. 4

|

The Corps of Engineers

|

[E. Lyon](http://home.earthlink.net/~edwinlyon/mississi.htm)

|

Smith &Winkley 1996

|

|

[New Orleans District](http://www.mvn.usace.army.mil/); [Vicksburg
District](http://www.mvk.usace.army.mil/); [Waterways Experiment
Station](http://www.wes.army.mil/); [Mississippi River and Tributaries Project
brochure](http://www.mvn.usace.army.mil/pao/bro/misstrib.htm)  
  
Friday, Oct. 5-Sun. Oct. 7

|  Poverty Point Field Trip |

Kidder/Bart?/Wall

|

J. McPhee, _Control of Nature_

|

|

[Poverty Point](http://www.crt.state.la.us/crt/ocd/arch/poverpoi/mapopo.htm);
[Vicksburg National Military Park](http://www.nps.gov/vick/home.htm)  
  
Tues., Oct. 9

|

River in Literature

|

R. Mark

|

|  **__Journals Due_ ;_Research Project status report Due** |

[Mark Twain](http://users.telerama.com/~joseph/mtwain.html)  
  
Thurs., Oct. 11

|  NO CLASS |

|

|

|  
  
Tues., Oct. 16

|  Field Trip: Bonne Carre Spillway |

Wall/Kidder

|

Davis, _Historical Perspective_ in Colten, ed., _Transforming New Orleans_ ,
pp. 84-106.

|

|

[Bonne Carre Spillway ](http://www.mvn.usace.army.mil/pao/bcarre/bcarre.htm);
[1993 Flood](http://www.wes.army.mil/EL/flood/fl93home.html); [NOAA River
Forecast Center](http://www.srh.noaa.gov/lmrfc/)  
  
Thurs., Oct. 18

|

Environmental Ethics

|

M. Zimmerman

|

G. Hardin, _Tragedy of the Commons_ and Other Readings

|

|  
  
Tues., Oct. 23

|  Field Trip: Holy Cross/Industrial Canal Lock |

Kidder/Wall

|

|

|

[Animated lock demonstration
(USACE)](http://www.mvp.usace.army.mil/navigation/locks_and_dams/animated_lock/);
[IHNC brochure (PDF format
only)](http://www.mvn.usace.army.mil/pao/bro/IHNC_Bulletin1.pdf); [IHNC lock
replacement project](http://www.mvn.usace.army.mil/prj/ihnc/index.asp)  
  
Thurs., Oct. 25

|

Environmental Justice

|

Monique Hardin

|

Burby, _Baton Rouge_ , in Colten, ed., _Transforming New Orleans_ , pp.
160-177; Colten, _Too Much of a Good Thing_ , in Colten, ed., _Transforming
New Orleans_ , pp. 141-159.

|

|  
  
Sat., Oct. 27

|

|

|

|

|  
  
Tues., Oct. 30

|

Pollution epidemiology

|

P. Andrews/B. Luckett

|

Chen et al. 1998

|

|

[American Cancer Society
"Statistics"](/Macintosh%20HD/Claris%20Home%20Page%203.0/Enst%20377/ENST3772001/cancer_sites.htm)  
  
Thurs., Nov. 1

|

Water Quality

|

L. Steinberg

|

|

|

[N.O. COE District Water Control
Data](http://www.mvn.usace.army.mil/eng/edhd/watercon.htm)  
  
Tues., Nov. 6

|  Field Trip: Davis Pond |

B. Baird, J. Fredline

|

Gosselink & Sasser 1995

|

|

[Brown Marsh Phenomenon](http://www.lacoast.gov/brownMarsh/index.htm); [Davis
Pond brochure (USACE)](http://www.mvn.usace.army.mil/pao/dpond/davispond.htm)  
  
Thurs., Nov. 8

|  NO CLASS |

|

|

|  
  
Sat., Nov. 10

|  Field Trip: Industrial Corridor & Evergreen Plantation |

Kidder/Wall/Frickle

|

|

|  
  
Tues., Nov. 13

|  Field Trip: New Orleans Water Treatment Plant |

|

|

|

[Sewerage & Water Board of N.O.](http://www.swbnola.org/index.html)  
  
Thurs., Nov. 15

|

Mississippi Sediments

|

B. Coakley; R. Campanella

|

|  **__Journals Due__** |  
  
Tues., Nov. 20

|  NO CLASS |

|

|

|  
  
Thurs., Nov. 22

|  NO CLASS (THANKSGIVING) |

|

|

|  
  
Tues., Nov. 27

|

The River & Music

|

B. Raeburn

|

|

|

[River of Song](http://www.pbs.org/riverofsong/); [Jazz on the
River](http://www.tulane.edu/~lmiller/raeburn/rivboatintro.htm)  
  
Thurs. Nov. 29

|

Research Presentations

|

Class

|

|

|  
  
Tues. Dec. 4

|

Research Presentations

|

Class

|

|  **Final draft of Research Project placed on web** |  
  
Thurs. Dec. 6

|  Research Presentations (if necessary!) |

Class

|

|

|  
  
Final Exam: **Sunday, December 16, 1:00-5:00 PM**

    
    
    _Page created: 8/23/01
    Last Updated: 12/07/01_

