**

COURSE SYLLABUS

BME 5030: Introduction to Molecular Biology for Engineers

**

Section No: 56136

Time: 3:30 - 5:20 Tues, Thurs

Room: 2220 Bioengineering Center

Instructor: John Cavanaugh

Office location: Room 2206, Bioengineering Center

Phone number: 313-577-3916 Fax: 313-577-8333

E-mail address: cavanau@rrb.eng.wayne.edu

Web page: http://ttb.eng.wayne.edu for the Bioengineering Center, then click
on "John Cavanaugh."

Office Hours: 2:00 - 3:30 Tuesday and Thursday or by appointment

**

Course objectives:** The objectives of this course are for the student to
attain the following:

1\. An appreciation of how genetic engineering and biotechnology will
influence health  care in the next century.

2\. A basic understanding of the structure and function of cells.

3\. Knowledge of the types of chemicals in a cell and their function.

4\. A working knowledge of genes and how genes are expressed (DNA to RNA to
protein)

5\. A familiarity with the tools used in genetic engineering and molecular
biology.

6\. An understanding of how the various techniques of molecular biology are
applied.

7\. The ability to synthesize objectives 1 through 6 into an oral and written
report  addressing a major topic or application in molecular biology.

**

Course Prerequisites:** Required: None.

Recommended: Engineering Physiology (BME 5010). An undergraduate course in
chemistry and an undergraduate course in biology are also recommended.

**

Student responsibilities:

**

The student's ability to meet objectives 1-7 will be evaluated as follows:

The percent of the total grade for each evaluation is shown in parentheses.

Objective 1: Written homework assignment and class participation (15%)

Objectives 2 - 4: Closed book examination (20%)

Objectives 5 - 6 : Open book examination (30%)

Objective 7: Final report (10% oral version, 25% final written version)





**

Required text:

**_

Molecular Biology Made Simple and Fun

_

by David P. Clark and Lonnie D. Russell

Cache River Press, 1997

**

Material fee requirements:

**

$10 for handouts that are in addition to the course textbook.

**

Grading Policy:

**

The final grade will be divided as shown under student responsibilities.

The following is the grade range for graduate students:

A 93-100

A- 86-92

B+ 81-85

B 76-80

B- 71-75

C+ 66-70

C 61-65

C- 56-60

F  less than 55

The above grading scale applies to undergraduate students except as follows:

D+ 51-55

D 46-50

D- 41-45

F 40 or less

**

Homework assignment and class participation in week 2:** The student is to
read the 1/11/99 issue of Time Magazine from page 42 to page 91. (Reading the
ads is not required)! Each student is to write a _short outline_ for each
article. The outline should be divided into three areas as follows:

1\. Major issues

2\. What are the key techniques in molecular biology discussed in each
article?

3\. What else do you want to know based on this article (technical and
otherwise?)

The outline for each article need not be longer than one-half page. They may
be handwritten or typed. The purpose of this exercise is for you to read the
article critically. The issues presented in these articles will introduce you
to some of the major technologies we will be discussing in this course.



IN SHORT, EACH STUDENT IS TO TURN IN TEN OUTLINES, ONE FOR EACH OF THE TEN
TOPICS SHOWN BELOW. THESE ARE DUE AT THE BEGINNING OF THE CLASS PERIOD OF
JANUARY 18. KEEP AN EXTRA COPY FOR YOURSELF TO USE IN CLASS DISCUSSIONS ON
JANUARY 18 AND 20.

The following are articles (and pages) to be discussed:

44-51, 54-55 Mapping our DNA **

56-60 Genetic testing for diseases **

62-63 DNA technology in criminal cases *

64-67 Testing and manipulating the genes of potential offspring **

68-73 Gene therapy to treat diseases **

74-77 Cloning **

79-83 New drugs based on genetic your profile **

84-85 Eugenics *

86-88 Genetically engineered food **

89-91 Genetic engineering in the future *

The articles will be presented by the students in the class periods on January
18 and 20. Articles labeled ** will be a shared presentation by two students.
Articles labeled * will be by one student. You have 20-25 minutes for each
presentation labeled ** and 10-15 minutes for those labeled *.

**

Exam and quiz policies:**

**

The first examination** will be closed book. The format of the exam will be
multiple choice and short answer.

**

The second examination** will be open book and open notes. The format of the
exam will be short answer and essay questions.

**

Final report:** The final written report is due Thursday, April 27th. It can
be turned in prior to that date. The report will consist of 15-25 pages of
text (double spaced) plus tables, figures and references. The report will be
on a particular topic of your choice that focuses on an area of molecular
biology. The report should go into some depth on a specific area and should
not be just a repeat of material covered in the course. EACH REPORT WILL BE
PUT TOGETHER BY A TEAM OF TWO TO FOUR STUDENTS. A report should be about eight
pages per student, double spaced.

Examples of topics:

-The potential for joint regeneration using genetic engineering.

-Restoring cardiac blood flow with DNA.

-Molecular biology techniques for studying spinal cord injury.

-Various ethical issues in genetic engineering.

**

Late work and make-up examination policy:** Taking examinations or giving
reports other than on the days listed in the attached schedule will only be
allowed for exceptional personal reasons. These must be discussed with the
instructor at least two weeks prior to the exam or report date except in the
case of unforseen emergencies. An unforseen medical emergency must have
written documentation with the physicians signature. Attending a work meeting
is not a valid reason for postponing an exam or delaying a report.

**

Attendance policy:** Attendance at lectures is not mandatory for this course
but regular attendance can help grades in borderline cases, as in adjusting a
high C+ to a B-.

**

Due Dates for all major assignments:** See attached schedule.

**

Dates of all exams and reports:** See attached schedule.

**

Cheating policy:**

There will be no talking between students during any examination or copying
material from one exam to another. In the closed book exam, no materials,
including computers, calculators or printed materials, are allowed. In the
open book exam, all materials are allowed. The consequences of cheating on an
examination will be a failing grade for the course.

Each written report must be the work of the students assigned to that report.
No two reports can be on an identical topic.

Take-home exams and written reports must be in your own words.

**

Policy on withdrawal:

**

Please note that the LAST day to drop a class with a tuition refund is Monday,
January 24.

Also note that the College of Engineering DOES NOT ALLOW Withdrawal from
courses after the FIFTH week of classes except under exceptional
circumstances. FAILING of a class is NOT an acceptable excuse for withdrawal
after the 5th week.

**

Policy on deferred grades:

**

A grade of 'I' will only be assigned if the student IS NOT currently failing
the class and if there is NOT a substantial quantity of work yet to be
completed. An 'I' grade MUST be made up within one year of assignment of the
grade.

# [Bio Data: John M Cavanaugh](jmcbio.html)

#

## [BME 5030: Course Schedule](5030-2000SCD.html)

[Main Page](jmcweb.html)

[Top of the Document](5030-2000SYL.html)

