####  Widener University  
College of the Arts and Sciences  
BIOLOGY 306  
DEVELOPMENTAL BIOLOGY  
Fall 2000

**Curriculum:**   This is a course in three parts, each part designed to allow
you to acquire specific knowledge and skills in Developmental Biology.  In the
lecture component current understanding of developmental processes will be
examined. In  the "standard" laboratory component, you will have the
opportunity to observe and manipulate developing organisms, thus acquiring
first hand knowledge of development and skills in handling and observation. In
the third component of the course you will research, design, conduct and
report an independent investigation on genes in development.

**Dr.[Frances E. Weaver](http://www.science.widener.edu/~weaver)**  
**Office:** Kirkbride 438, ext. 4519  
**Office hours:** Office Hours MW 3:00-4:00; T 11:00-12:00 and 1:00-2:00, TH
2:00-3:00  
**Email:**
[weaver@pop1.science.widener.edu](mailto:weaver@pop1.science.widener.edu)

**Text:** S.F. Gilbert, _Developmental Biology_ , 6th edition, Sinauer
Associates, Sunderland, MA; 1999  
**Lab Atlas:** G.C. Schoenwolf,   _Laboratory Studies of Vertebrate and
Invertebrate Embryos_ , 7th ed., Prentice Hall NJ, 1995  
**A laboratory manual prepared for this course will also be distributed at no
cost to you.**  
[A limited compendium of on-line resourses for this
course.](http://www.science.widener.edu/~weaver/resources2000.htm)

**Other supplies:**  
3 ring binder for lab handouts and a notebook for laboratory, preferably
spiral or cloth bound.  **Lab coats are required,** dissecting kits are
recommended. _An Email account, available for free from Widener ITS is also
required._

**Course Requirements:** **Lecture Portion:** |  
---|---  
Two exams  | 300  
One compulsory "final" exam  | 150  
**Standard laboratory component:** |  
Review of  laboratory notebook* | 70 (collected twice)  
**Research based laboratory component:**  
First draft of literature review: Genes and development. | 30  
Journal club  | 20  
Second draft of literature review, first draft of methods | 50  
Genes and development mini project power point or web based presentation. | 30
points based on instructor evaluation.  
20 points based on peer evaluations.  
Peer evaluation of mini project reports | 30  
Final written report of research project  | 100  
  
Your final grade will be based on the percentage of the 750 possible points
that you earn. +/- grading will be used in this course.

* _Laboratory "ends" when the exercise is completed, that might be in three days time.   Embryos will develop (or not) at their own pace!  Please be informed that considerable out of class effort is required in this course. Failure to complete out of class observations or experimentation or to competely record these in your laboratory notebook will considerably reduce your grade!_

**Email and course web page:** Every student must submit their email address
to the instructor. Announcements and other information will be posted to your
email account.   Check your email account frequently!  The course web page
contains a copy of this syllabus and will be used to point to you to
electronic resources for the content of this course.

**Attendance: Attendance is required.** There are no make-ups for missed
lectures or labs. You will receive a grade of zero for any missed lab. It is
usually not possible to obtain materials for an additional lab period. _Exams
may be made-up only under extreme, documented circumstances and at my
convenience!_ You may request to take an exam early, but be aware that early
exams (or make-ups) differ in content and format from scheduled exams.

**Useful information:** I am here every day and you are welcome in my office
or laboratory at any time.  Voice mail and e-mail operate 24 hrs. a day and I
can access both from off-campus.  The cork board on the office door has yet to
fall off, but if you are unable to reach me by any of these means; you may
leave a message with the Science Office, KH407, ext. 4003.

**Alternative testing** : I provide alternative testing to students with
documented special needs. Just ask.  
**Alternative note taking:** You may tape record the lectures and review
sessions for your personal use.

**Disclaimer:**   I  reserves the right to modify the syllabus, this may
include, but is not limited to, changes in the order of laboratories to
accommodate shipping and preparation schedules. Changes will be announced in
class or by email.

**Academic Integrity:   The Science Division strongly enforces Widener
University's policy on academic integrity, section F of the student
handbook.**    The most common violations are submitting collaborative work
when _not authorized_ to do so, and plagiarism.    Either of these violations
means that you expect to be given credit for _work that is not your own,_ and
that is _clearly_ academic fraud.   If you do violate the University policy,
I will not hesitate to fail you in this course, regardless of your academic
standing!  

* * *

**Biology 306**  
**Developmental Biology**  
**Fall 2000**  
**LECTURE SEQUENCE**  
Please note: topics rarely fit neatly into 50 minute blocks. Material will
"spill over" as is necessary.

  
**Date** | **Topic** | **Chapter (pages)**  
---|---|---  
9/8 | Intro-the anatomical tradition | 1 (p.8-22), please send me an email  
9/11-9/15 | Life Cycles and developmental patterns;  
The Germ Line  | 2, 19  
9/18-9/22 | Eggs, Sperm and Fertilization  | 7  
9/25-9/29 | Early Developmental Processes: Illustrated by Invertebrates | 8
(to page 251)  
**10/2** | **Exam I** |  
10/4-10-6 | Development of Polarity:  
Illustrated by Drosophila | 9 (all, with films)  
10/9-10/13 | Early Development of Vertebrates | 10  
10/16-10/18 (10/20-10/23 Fall Break) | "" | 11  
10/25-10/27 | "" | 11  
10/30-11/3 | CNS and Sensory Organs; Neural Crest  | 12 (skip p. 386 to p. 399
begin again with eyes)  
13 (to page 422)  
11/6-11/10 | Mesodermal Organs | 14  
11/13-11/17 | Mesoderm and Endoderm | 15  
11/20 | **Exam II** |  
11/22 | Limb Development | 16  
11/22;11/27-12/1 | Limb Development, Sex Determination | 16, 17 to page 533  
12/4-12/8 | Selected Topics |  
12/11-12/15 | Selected Topics | peer reviews due 12/15  
  
**_FINAL EXAM DURING FINALS WEEK to be scheduled by the registrar._**  

* * *

**Biology 306**  
**Fall 2000**  
**  LABORATORY SEQUENCE**  
**Please note the laboratory sequence is written in such a way as to allow for
repetition of laboratories as necessary. Please come prepared to have fun and
be flexible! Bring your atlas with you each week.**

*observations continue beyond this period.   
  Date | Exercise | What is due on this day:  
---|---|---  
9/14 | Differentiation in _Dictyostelium discoideum.   _Regeneration in
_Lumbriculus*  _ |  
9/21 | Gametes and Gametogenesis, Meiosis and fertilization _Sea Urchins_ (if
available) _, Chylamydomonas, Oedogonium_ |  
9/28 | _Xenopus, zebra fish* ****_ and _sea urchin*_ (if available)
fertilization and early development.   Data collection for _Lumbriculus_ |
Laboratory notebook  
10/5 | Genes and Development project  
RT-PCR and Internet research |  
10/12 | Gene and Development project  
gel electrophoresis and sub-cloning (or repeat RT-PCR) |  
10/19 | Genes and Development project  
continuation. | First draft of literature review and project plan.  
10/26 | _Drosophila_ development: observations, larval development, imaginal
disk dissection and inversion | go over papers suggested for journal club  
11/2 |   **Journal Club  ** | Journal club presentation  
11/9 |  Chick development I: Observations  
Blastoderm explanation and _cardia bifida*_ |  
11/16 | Chick development II: Blastoderm explanation and _cardia bifida*
(repeat if needed) ;_ Staining embryos for cartilage* | Second draft of
literature review, first draft of methods.  
11/23 | Thanksgiving Holiday |  
11/30 | Manipulation of Zebra fish development* |  
12/7 | Mammalian development* ; clean up day | Laboratory Notebook  
12/14 | Presentations | Presentation and materials  
Peer reviews of presentations due 12/15 in class.  
  
**         Final report of research project is due on December 19th by 5 p.m.,
this date may be affected by the final exam schedule.**  

* * *

  
**Laboratory Notebooks:** Each student will keep a detailed, dated laboratory
notebook of all activities in the lab, which will include, but are not limited
to, all methodologies, observations (many of which **will** take place outside
of the scheduled lab period) including drawings, raw and analyzed data,
discussions and suggestions for future experiments or improvements to the lab.  
Lab notebooks will be collected and graded as indicated, and returned to each
student the following week (or sooner as necessary).  I expect your lab
notebook to _improve_ each time it is turned in.   A GOOD LAB NOTEBOOK IS
PRECISE, DETAILED AND LEGIBLE!!!!!

* * *

  

* * *

  
This page is maintained by Dr. Frances E.
[Weaver](mailto:weaver@pop1.science.widener.edu), and was last revised on
August 31, 2000  
[Return to Dr. Weaver's page](index.html)  


