### History 881.01  
Seminar in Women's History: Women's Movements



`This is a seminar designed to provide experience in the research and writing
of a scholarly paper based on primary source material in the area of women's
history. It will meet **both** autumn and winter quarters, and students
**must** complete both quarters of the seminar. The theme for this year is
"Women's Movements," with no limitation to a particular chronological period
or geographical area. `



`**REQUIRED ARTICLES:** (available for purchase at COP-EZ, 060 Bricker Hall
and to read in 164 Dulles Hall)`

` Hilda Smith, "Feminism and the Methodology of Women's History," in
__Liberating Women's History__ , ed. Berenice Carroll (Urbana: University of
Illinois Press, 1976).`

`Joan Kelly-Gadol, "The Social Relations of the Sexes: Methodological
Implications of Women's History," __Signs__ 1 (Summer 1976), 809-823. `

` Linda Gordon, "What Should Women's Historians Do? Politics, Social Theory,
and Women's History," __Marxist Perspectives__ 3 (1978), 128-136.`

` Nancy A. Hewitt, "Beyond the search for sisterhood: American women's history
in the 1980s," __Social History__ 10 (1985), 299-321. `

` Louise Tilly, "Gender, Women's History, and Social History," comments by Gay
L. Gullickson and Judith M. Bennett, and response by Tilly, __Social Science
History__ 13 (1989), 439-80.`

` Iris Berger, Elsa Barkeley Brown, and Nancy A. Hewitt, "Symposium:
Intersections and Collision Courses: Women, Blacks, and Workers Confront
Gender, Race, and Class," __Feminist Studies__ 18 (1992), 283-326.`

` Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham, "African-American Women's History and the
Metalanguage of Race," __Signs__ 17 (Winter 1992): 251-274.`

` Joan W. Scott, "Women's History," in __New Perspectives on Historical
Writing__ , ed. Peter Burke (University Park, Pa.: Pennsylvania State
University Press, 1992), pp. 42-66.`

`Kathleen Canning, "Feminist History after the Linguistic Turn: Historicizing
Discourse and Experience," __Signs__ __ 19 (1994), 368-404.`

`Jennifer Terry, "Theorizing Deviant Historiography: Feminist Theoretical
Lineages of Deviant Historiography: A Retrospective Preface," in __Feminists
(Re)Vision History__ , ed. Ann-Louise Shapiro (New Brunswick: Rutgers
University Press, 1994), pp. 276-303.`



`**CLASS SCHEDULE:**`

` Sept. 27: Introduction: Writing Women's History`

`Oct. 4: Conceptual frameworks in women's history:`

`Central issues for researching and writing women's history`

`Reading: Article packet`

`Oct. 11: Definition of topics`

`Time for a definite topic! Before this class, each student should see me to
discuss her/his topic and to choose the most relevant existing article or book
chapter for the rest of the class to read. Each student will be responsible
for placing a copy of the article or chapter on reserve in 164 Dulles by this
class period. These pieces should be read by the entire class in preparation
for our discussion of the secondary literature on October 25.`

`From 3:30 to 3:50, we will meet to hear the grand announcements of topics. At
4:00 we will go the library for a presentation on resources for women's
historians by Linda Krikos, Women's Studies Librarian.`

`Oct. 18: The research process (the nitty-gritty aspects)`

`Oct. 25: The secondary literature`

`Each student will give a short (ca. 15-minute) presentation on the state of
the literature on her/his topic. This means identifying what has been done and
what has not been done, briefly analyzing the state of knowledge in this area,
and focusing on common themes that emerge from the literature. In addition,
all students will have read the articles on reserve in 164 Dulles in order to
facilitate intelligent exchange among class members. Discussion will be
facilitated by assigned research partners.`

`**A very short (1-3 page) written analysis of the secondary literature,
accompanied by a complete bibliography, is due in class on October 25. Bring a
copy for your research partner and a copy to place on reserve in 164
Dulles.**`

` Nov. 1: No class: time for preparation of research proposals`

`Nov. 8-29: Presentation of research proposals (scheduled as needed)`

`Each student will present in class a fully-developed research proposal that
follows the guidelines for either the Graduate School Alumni Research Awards
or the Elizabeth Gee Research Grants in Women's Studies. Note that in either
case you must discuss existing research on your topic, describe the focus of
your research and your research questions, describe the sources and approach
or methodology, and explain the significance of the topic.`

`On the Thursday before we meet to discuss your proposal, bring me a copy,
give a copy to your research partner, and also deposit a copy in 164 Dulles.
Every student must read all of the proposals and come to class prepared to
comment on and discuss them, but each of you will have special responsibility
for the proposal of your research partner. This special responsibility will
entail facilitating the discussion, providing your own critique of the
proposal, and summarizing and concluding the discussion. For every proposal,
be prepared to ask questions, make suggestions, discuss problems, and offer
praise. In order to enhance our discussions, all students will be expected to
provide some written comments on each proposal, one copy of which should be
given directly to the author and a second copy of which should be given to me.
These written comments, prepared in advance in response to your reading of the
draft, should serve as the basis for our discussion in class.`

`**The final proposal is due December 6.**`



`**COURSE REQUIREMENTS:**`

` 1. Regular attendance and active participation in class, including written
comments on all proposals.`

`2. A short paper on the secondary literature.`

`3. A research proposal.`

`My office is 212 Dulles Hall (phone 292-0156). My office hours are Monday
1:30-2:30, Tuesday 10:30-11:30, and Wednesday 1:30-2:30. You may also make an
appointment with me at another time. `

