The University of Hawai'i is an equal opportunity/affirmative action
institution. All qualified applicants will be considered, regardless of race,
sex, age, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, disability, marital
status, arrest and court record, sexual orientation, or status as a disabled
veteran or veteran of the Vietnam era. Women, members of minority groups,
veterans, and persons with disabilities are encouraged to apply. Deaf and
hard-of-hearing persons may call 1-711 or 643-8833.

Employment is contingent on satisfying employment eligibility verification
requirements of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986. Applicants for
APT positions must be legal residents of the State of Hawai'i at the time of
application and must complete UH Form 64 "Application for Employment." APT
applicants with re-employment rights or priority status are responsible for
informing the recruiting unit, which will verify eligibility with the
employing unit as provided by the BU 08 contract.

Official transcripts must have the official seal of and be mailed directly
from the degree-granting institution to the address indicated.

##  Faculty Positions

Correction of ad as appeared in _Ku Lama_ on 09/13 **

TEMPORARY ASSISTANT/ASSOCIATE/ FULL PROFESSOR** , Position Number 84810T, half
time, 9-month appointment, non-tenurable, to begin approximately 10/27 to
07/31/97, pending manpower clearance. This is a joint appointment with the
Department of Psychology and the Pacific Center for PTSD, Department of
Veteran's Affairs. **Duties:** To serve as liaison with Veteran's
Administration and participate in training and research programs between the
VA and UH. Incumbent will perform research, graduate teaching and clinical
training in PTSD or related areas such as chronic mental illness,
neuropsychology, family/marital therapy and substance abuse. **Minimum
Qualifications:** ASSISTANT PROFESSOR: Ph.D. from approved APA-approved
Psychology program, participation in APA-approved internship, strong record of
scholarly activities, post Ph.D. professional experience. ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR:
In addition to assistant professor minimum qualifications, five years post
Ph.D. professional experience. PROFESSOR: In addition to assistant professor
minimum qualifications, seven years post Ph.D. professional experience.
**Desirable Qualifications:** Experience in graduate teaching and clinical
supervision. **Minimum Monthly Salary:** ASSISTANT PROFESSOR: $1,443.50 (50%);
ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR: $1,826 (50%); PROFESSOR: $2,221.50 (50%). To Apply: Send
letter of application, resume, and three letters of recommendation to Director
of Clinical Studies, Department of Psychology, 2430 Campus Road, Gartley 110,
Honolulu, HI 96822. All applicants need to apply to both UH and VA to be
considered for the position. Concurrence from both institutions needed for
offer to be made. VA **Inquiries:** Associate Director of Education, Pacific
Center for PTSD, phone 566-1546. **Closing Date:** 09/30.

**

LIBRARIAN II** , Position No. 86307T, Library Systems Office, Hamilton
Library. Full-time, temporary, special funds, to begin approximately 11/01 to
06/30/97, possibility of extension pending availability of funds and needs of
department. **Responsibilities** : Under the general direction of the UHCARL
Application Support Manager, provide direct professional support for the
development, maintenance and operation of CARL application software. Analyze
problems and respond to questions reported about the UHCARL automated network;
work with staff to develop functional specifications for new products and
enhancements to existing code; test all new products and releases, develop
documentation and conduct training for system users. Candidate will work with
a team of systems librarians, computer programmers/operators, technicians.
Write to the address below to obtain a full description of duties and
responsibilities. **Minimum Qualifications** : ALA accredited MLS; previous
experience using an automated system in an academic library; ability to
translate technical library or computer concepts into terms understandable by
non-technical library professional and para-professional staff; excellent
interpersonal and communication skills are required, as evidenced by positive
recommendations from colleagues and supervisors. Must be able to work early
morning, evening hours, weekends and/or holidays as scheduled. **Desired
Qualifications** : One year of progressively responsible professional library
experience; knowledge and experience with USMARC format; experience with CARL
software; knowledge of personal computers; aptitude for learning new
technologies. **Pay Range** : $33,312-$49,296 annual. To Apply: Submit letter
of application, resume and names of three references to Personnel Officer,
University of Hawai'i Library, 2550 The Mall, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing
Date** : 10/14. **Inquiries:** 956-7207.

**

ASSISTANT PROFESSOR** , I3, Position No.84813 Department of Ethnic Studies
Full-time, tenure track, effective 08/01/97. **Duties:** To develop and teach
courses on the history and contemporary conditions of African Americans; to
teach a variety of courses dealing with race and class in Hawai'i and the
United States; maintain an active program of research and publication; share
in academic advising, supervision of internships, participation in department,
college, and university committees, and participate in community service
related to professional expertise. **Minimum Qualifications:** PhD in Social
Sciences or Humanities with record of research productivity in area of
specialization; experience in teaching African American Studies and/or Ethnic
Studies; commitment to interdisciplinary studies and knowledge of and
experience with African American communities. **Desirable Qualifications:**
Knowledge of and experience with undergraduate advising and curricula;
knowledge of and experience with Hawai'i's multi ethnic population. **Minimum
Salary:** $34,644 (commensurate with experience and subject to collective
bargaining increases). To apply: Send letter of application, curriculum vitae
and three letters of recommendation to Professor Dean Alegado, Acting Chair,
Ethnic Studies Department, University of Hawai'i at Manoa, East-West Road 4,
Room 4D, Honolulu, HI 96822-2383. **Closing Date:** 10/31.

**

ASSISTANT/ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR** , Position No. 83960, I-3 or I-4, School of
Architecture, full-time, general funds, tenure track, 9-month, to begin Fall
1997\. **Duties:** Primary responsibilities are to teach computer applications
and computer-aided architectural design and/or urban design studios; conduct
research; and perform university and professional services. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Professional degree in architecture. Professional experience
in the areas of responsibility. **Desirable Qualifications:** Advanced degree;
teaching experience; record of research and innovation in design processes and
computer applications. **Rank And Salary:** Rank and salary commensurate with
qualification and experience. Application Procedures: Send letter of
application; curriculum vitae; names, addresses and telephone numbers of three
references; statement of educational philosophy. Address application or
inquiry to: Dean's Office, School of Architecture, University of Hawai'i at
Manoa, 2410 Campus Road, Room 201, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Phone:** (808)
956-3469. Facsimile: (808) 956-7778. Review of applications will begin on
11/15 and will continue until the position is filled.

**

ASSISTANT/ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR** , Position No. 85011, I-3 or I-4, School of
Architecture, full-time, general funds, tenure track, 9-month, to begin Fall
1997\. **Duties:** Primary responsibilities are to direct/coordinate
curriculum in architectural history and theory; direct and develop related
media resources; teach undergraduate and graduate courses; conduct research;
and perform university/professional services. **Minimum Qualifications:**
Earned doctorate in architectural history or theory. Experience in teaching
and research. Scholarly background is expected in both eastern and western
architecture. **Desirable Qualifications:** Good publication and research
record on eastern architecture. **Rank And Salary:** Minimum Salary: $34,644
for assistant professor; $43,824 for associate professor. Rank and salary
commensurate with qualification and experience. Application Procedures: Send
letter of application; curriculum vitae; names, addresses and telephone
numbers of three references; statement of educational philosophy. Address
application or inquiry to: Dean's Office, School of Architecture, University
of Hawai'i at Manoa, 2410 Campus Road, Room 201, Honolulu, HI 96822.
**Phone:** (808) 956-3469. Facsimile: (808) 956-7778. Review of applications
will begin on 11/15 and will continue until the position is filled.

**

RESEARCH ASSISTANT** , Position No. 082018T; Philosophy in the Schools
Project, Philosophy Dept., UH Manoa; half-time, to begin 10/21 until 06/30/97,
with the possibility of extension dependent upon availability of funds.
**Duties:** 1\. Work in public school classrooms assisting teachers
participating in the Philosophy in the Schools Project. 2. Assist in the
preparatiion (editing, printing, and distribution) of the Project newsletter.
3\. Assist the director in planning annual conference. 4. Assist in the
development of multi-cultural project-related materials. **Minimum
Qualifications:** 1\. MA in Philosophy. 2. Minimum of two years classroom
experience working with Philosophy for Children curriculum materials. 3.
Successful completion of Philosophy 492. **Desirable Qualifications:** 1\.
Prior experience with preparation of a newsletter. 2. Prior experience in
development of curriculum materials. **Minimum Monthly Salary:** $1,065.
**Inquiries:** Dr. Thomas Jackson, 956-7287. To Apply: Send curriculum vita to
Dr. Thomas Jackson, Philosophy Department, 2530 Dole St., Honolulu, HI 96822\.
**Closing Date:** All applications must be received by 10/14-4:30 p.m.

**

INSTRUCTOR II, MATHEMATICS** (Pos. No. 82723), Windward CC, 9 months, full-
time, tenurial, beginning 01/02/97, pending position clearance, availability
of funds, and actual staffing requirements. **Duties:** Under general
supervision, teach developmental and/or college level courses in Mathematics
and perform assigned related work including, but not limited to,
preparing/revising course outlines, developing curriculum, developing
alternate delivery systems for mathematics courses, participating in
departmental, faculty, and administrative committees, community service, and
in-service training, advising students, assisting with campus student
activities, and providing assistance as a math resource instructor in The
Learning Center. Other responsibilities may include collecting data, preparing
reports, and teaching community service and in-service training courses. Must
be able to independently plan, organize and carry out instructional and non-
instructional assignments. May require teaching evening, Saturdays, and at
off-campus sites. Duties and responsibilities may include instructional
assignments involving distance education. Maintain office hours. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Master's degree in Mathematics (M.A. in Mathematics, or M.S.
in Mathematics, or M.A.T. in Mathematics) from an accredited institution.
**Desirable Qualifications:** Successful teaching experience at the community
college level in developmental, and college level mathematics courses as
substantiated by student and peer assessments. Experience and/or background in
using microcomputers and/or graphing calculators in teaching mathematics.
Experience as resource instructor in learning lab environment. Ability to work
with students, peers, and staff, as well as DOE personnel and students.
Knowledge and understanding of the community college philosophy. Demonstrated
commitment to professional self-improvement. **Pay Range:** C2, minimum
$2,669/month. To apply: Submit the following requirements postmarked by
closing date to Acting Dean of Instruction, Windward CC, 45-720 Kea'ahala
Road, Kane'ohe, HI 96744: 1) application (CC Personnel Form 27A), 2)
transcript(s) (copies acceptable, however, official transcripts will be
required at time of hire), 3) three letters of recommendations, and 4) one
page statement outlining how applicant meets the minimum and desirable
qualifications. All minimum qualifications must be met by the effective date
of hire. An incomplete application will not be considered and materials will
not be returned. **Inquires:** 235-7424. **Closing Date:** 10/25.

Readvertisement of ad as appeared in _Ku Lama_ on 05/10 **

INSTRUCTOR IN ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE;** Position No. 83420; Hawai'i CC,
full-time, 9-month appointment, to begin approximately 01/97, tenurial,
pending position clearance and availability of funds. May include
instructional assignment involving distance education. Possible evening,
weekend, and off- campus assignments. **Duties:** Under general supervision to
instruct students in transfer and non-transfer level Administration of Justice
(AJ) courses; develop an understanding of student needs in discipline or area
of primary responsibility, work independently to develop, select and implement
strategies to meet student needs; advise and counsel students, assist in
campus- related student activities; participate in faculty and administrative
committees, community service, and in-service training; maintain an approved
program of professional self- improvement; collect data and prepare reports;
prepare, adapt, and revise course objectives; independently plan, organize,
and carry out instructional and non-instructional assignments. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Master's degree in AJ, or Bachelor's degree in AJ and 3
years experience in AJ or Associate degree in AJ and 5 years experience in AJ,
or 15 college credits in AJ and 7 years experience (including training) in the
field of AJ. **Desirable Qualifications:** Evidence of successful experience
teaching AJ in a community college; experience in program development and
coordination. Ability to communicate clearly and to work with students on an
informal, individual basis. Knowledge and understanding of the community
college philosophy. **Pay Range:** C2; minimum $2,669/mo. To Apply: Submit
postmarked by closing date, (1) application (CC Form 27A), (2) transcripts
(copies are acceptable; however, official transcripts will be required at the
time of hire), (3) a statement outlining how you meet the minimum and
desirable qualifications, and (4) resume to: Dr. Trina Nahm- Mijo, Professor,
Hawai'i CC, Social Science & Humanities Division, Chairperson, 200 West Kawili
St., Hilo, HI 96720-4091. Letters of recommendation are welcome. An incomplete
application will not be considered. Materials submitted will not be returned.
All minimum qualifications must be met by the effective date of employment.
**Inquiries:** (808) 933-3421. **Closing Date:** 10/14.

**

ADULT/FAMILY NP OR PSYCH NP/CNS (Hawai'i State Hospital) and PSYCHIATRIC
CLINICAL NURSE SPECIALIST (OR NP/CNS) (** For rural mental health services on
the Big Island of Hawai'i). **** University of Hawai'i at Manoa, School Of
Nursing and Hawai'i State Hospital (HSH)/Adult Mental Health Joint-
Appointments. Full-Time positions, 6-month contract with possible renewals,
eleven-month joint-appointments. **Duties:** 80% service, 20% teaching.
Qualifications: Master's in Nursing and current clinical expertise in Adult or
Family Health and/or Psych/Mental Health. Three years experience. **Minimum
qualifications for University instructional ranks:** Instructor: Master's in
Nursing and current clinical expertise. Assistant Professor: Doctorate,
Master's in Nursing and current clinical expertise. Associate Professor:
Doctorate, Master's in Nursing, prior undergraduate and graduate teaching
experience, current clinical expertise, and publications. All positions
require current Hawai'i RN licensure or eligibility. **Salary Ranges
(Annual):** for Instructor, $33,312-$49,296; for Assistant Professor,
$40,524-$59,976, for Associate Professor, $51,264-$75,888. Salaries dependent
on experience and qualifications. Starting date: 01/01/97 or earlier, subject
to position clearance and availability of funds. Submit letter of application,
curriculum vitae and three letters of reference to: Mary J. Amundson, PhD, RN,
CS, FAAN, University of Hawai'i at Manoa, School of Nursing, 2528 The Mall,
Webster Hall, Honolulu, HI 96822. T **elephone:** (808)956-5291. **Closing
Date:** First screening date, 10/15; continuous recruitment until positions
are filled.

**

ASSISTANT/ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR,** position numbers 82106, and 83434, College of
Business Administration, School of Accountancy, full-time, general funds,
tenure-track to begin approximately 08/01/97, subject to position clearance
and availability of funds. **Duties** : Teaching and Research to advance at
least one of the College's strategic thrusts in international, information
technology or executive education, as applied to Accounting. **Minimum
Qualifications** : **Assistant:** Ph.D. in Accounting or AACSB Terminal
Qualification, demonstrated ability to carry out and publish research, and
demonstrated ability in teaching at the university level. **Associate** : Same
as Assistant and in addition, a minimum of four years of full-time college or
university teachings at the rank of Assistant Professor or equivalent.
**Desirable Qualifications:** CPA, CMA, professional accounting experience,
proven ability to teach tax, accounting systems, governmental accounting, and
auditing, expertise in international accounting with an Asian/Pacific focus,
information technology, and executive education. **Salary:** Commensurate with
qualifications and experience with a minimum of $43,824 (Assistant); $55,452
(Associate). Submit a letter of application and curriculum vitae to Dr. Jeff
Gramlich, Recruiting Chair, College of Business Administration, School of
Accountancy, University of Hawai'i at Manoa, 2404 Maile Way, BusAd D-306,
Honolulu, HI 96822. Email: gramlich@acctcy.cba.hawaii.edu. World Wide Web
address: http://soa.cba.hawaii.edu. Closing Date: 10/21.

**

LECTURERS** , Department of Anthropology, temporary, part-time general funds
(pending availability of funds and actual staffing requirements). **Duties:**
To teach any of the following courses: Anth 150, Human Adaptation; 464,
Hawaiian Archaeology; or 645, Historic Preservation. **Minimum
Qualifications:** M.A. in anthropology with all requirements for the Ph.D.
except the dissertation completed. **Additional Minimum Qualifications for
Anth 464:** specialization in Hawaiian archaeology, and field experience in
Hawaiian archaeology. **Minimum Qualifications for Anth 645:** M.A. in
anthropology, working experience in federal historic preservation, in state
and local historic preservation, and in cultural resource management
consulting business; formal training in and experience with historic
preservation laws and statutes such as the National Historic Preservation Act,
the Archaeological Resources Protection Act, the Native American Graves
Protection and Repatriation act, and Chapter 6E (H.R.S.) are mandatory.
Demonstrated skill in the preparation of historic preservation planning
documents such as National/Hawai'i Registers of Historic Places nomination
forms, cultural resource management plans, and preservation plans is highly
desirable. **Minimum Salary:** $925 per credit. To apply: send letter of
application, syllabus for each course for which you are applying, vitae and
three potential references to Dr. Ben R. Finney, Chair, Personnel Committee,
Department of Anthropology, University of Hawai'i, 2424 Maile Way, Porteus
346, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date:** 10/14.

**

TEMPORARY ASSISTANT PROFESSOR** , I3, Position No. 88775T, Department of
Anthropology, University of Hawai'i at Manoa, part-time (50% FTE), 9-month
appointment for Spring 1997. **Duties:** Teaching two undergraduate courses in
Japanese culture and society and advising students. **Minimum
Qualifications:** an earned doctorate in anthropology and research experience
in Japanese culture. **Desirable Qualifications:** previous teaching
experience in Japanese culture and society. **Salary Range:** $8,661 to
$10,956 based upon experience and qualifications. To apply: send letter of
application, vitae, three potential references to Dr. Ben R. Finney, Chair,
Personnel Committee, Department of Anthropology, 2424 Maile Way, University of
Hawai'i, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date:** 10/14.

Correction to ad as appeared in _Ku Lama_ on 9/13

**

ASSISTANT/ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR,** Position 088815T, I3-M/I4-M Department of
Surgery, UH, John A. Burns School of Medicine. Federal funds, annually
renewable depending on performance and/or funding. Part-time (25% FTE), 11
month, temporary, non-tenurable. To begin approximately 11/01; subject to
position clearance and availability of funds. **Duties:** Teach, supervise,
and train residents and medical students; serve on department committees;
conduct research; perform related work as assigned. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Assist. Prof.: M.D. degree, residency trained and/or board
certified, demonstrated ability in teaching and patient care or equivalent.
Assoc. Prof.: Same as Assistant plus four years in the rank of Asst. Prof. or
of other medical training and experience, or equivalent. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Training in general surgery and advanced laproscopic
surgery. **Minimum Annual Salary (at full time):** Asst.: $78,924; Assoc.:
$92,340. Salary to commensurate with qualifications and experience. To Apply:
Send CV, letter of application and 3 letters of recommendation to J. Judson
McNamara, M.D., Chairman and Professor, Department of Surgery, UH School of
Medicine, 1356 Lusitana St., 6th fl., Hon. HI. 96813. **Closing Date:** 10/14.
**Inquiries:** Dr. J. Judson McNamara, Department of Surgery, 586-2920.

##  Administrative, Professional and Technical (APT) Positions

**UH ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER I,** Position No. 81439T, Library External
Services Program, Hamilton Library, full-time, temporary, special funds to
begin approx. 11/01/96 to 06/30/97, possibility of extension, pending
availability of funds, needs of the program and satisfactory performance of
duties. **Duties:** Provides a full range of administrative support services
for the Library's External Services Program and assist in all fiscal,
personnel and client related matters involving this unit. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Graduation from an accredited four-year college or
university with major course work in business administration; includes courses
in fundamentals of financial accounting, public and/or personnel
administration; and one year of progressively responsible experience in
financial or cost accounting or any equivalent combination of training and
experience which provides: Knowledge of: the principles, practices and
techniques of asset, liability, revenue and expenditure accounting; theories,
principles and practices of organization and management; principles and
practices of personnel administration. Ability to: analyze, interpret and
apply financial and general administrative rules; plan and supervise the work
of subordinates. **Desirable Qualifications:** Knowledge of computer
accounting, spreadsheet and/or word processing software programs in either the
DOS or Macintosh environments; familiarity with academic libraries; experience
with front-line customer service; supervisory experience. **Pay Range:** PO3,
$2,235/month. To Apply: Submit, postmarked by the closing date, an APT
applicatin (UH Form 64), resume, college transcripts and names of three
references to Personnel Officer, Hamilton Library, 2550 The Mall, Honolulu, HI
96822. **Closing Date:** 10/14. **Inquiries:** 956-7207.

##  Research Corporation

**For a comprehensive listing of all active RCUH regular job vacancies, you
may refer to the following: RCUH Job Vacancy Bulletin Board located at
Sakamaki Hall D-100 or at any Hawai'i State Employment Service.

Listings are also posted at the following locations on UH Manoa Campus:

Business Administration Bldg., Rm A413 Castle Memorial Annex, Rm 101Institute
of Geophysics, Rm 131Holmes Hall, Rm 246 Marine Science Bldg., Rm 312St. John,
Rm 101

RESEARCH ASSOCIATE III, ** Cancer Research Center of Hawai'i, Regular, Full-
Time, RCUH Non-Civil Service, Federal funds, to begin approximately 10/96,
continuation is dependent upon program/operational needs, satisfactory work
performance, and availability of funds. Position located in Honolulu, HI.
**Minimum Monthly Salary:** $2,425. **Duties:** Work with the Principal
Investigator to design and perform experiments to isolate and characterize and
regulatory sequences and DNA binding proteins of the N-myc oncogene in a
neuroblastoma model system; and to determine whether changes in these control
elements affect tumor cell response to differentiating agents and metastic
potential. Oversee laboratory operations, trains personnel in lab protocol,
maintain cell stock, lab supplies, etc. Assist in designing experiments,
organize and maintain records, analyze results, etc. for use in publications.
Other duties as assigned. **Minimum Qualifications:** Bachelor's degree from
an accredited four year college or university in biology, chemistry or
biochemistry; one year progressively responsible work-related experience in
molecular and cellular biological techniques; good verbal and written
communication skills; working knowledge of laboratory techniques, materials,
procedures, and safety practices. Supervisory ability and knowledge of cell
and molecular biology; working knowledge of word processing, spreadsheet and
graphic computer applications. Or an equivalent combination of experience and
training which provides knowledge, abilities, and skills to perform the job.
**Desirable Qualifications:** Prior experience in molecular biology,
performing transfection and reporter gene assays, designing and making
molecular constructs and mutants, mini and maxi plasmid preps, DNA gel shift
and foot printing assays, PCR, sequencing, Northern, Southern, Western
blotting, immunocytochemistry, in vitro invasion assays, immunoprecipitations,
nuclear run-off assays, DNA crosslinking, tissue culture, maintenance of
bacterial and mammalian cells stocks. **Inquiries:** Dr. Randal Wada, (310)
206-5625 before 9/17/96, or (808) 586-2963 after 9/17/96. Application
Requirements: Send cover letter (note Recruitment No.) with narrative on your
qualifications for the position, resume with salary history, the names and
phone numbers of three work related references, and copy(ies) of diploma(s)
and/or certificate(s) used to qualify for position to the Director of Human
Resources, Research Corporation of the University of Hawai'i, 2530 Dole
Street, Sakamaki Hall D-100, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date:** 9/26.
Recruitment No. 96-226.

**

NATIONAL DATA CENTER MANAGER,** Electric and Hybrid Vehicle National Data
Center, Department of Electrical Engineering, Full-Time, RCUH Non-Civil
Service, Federal funds, to begin approximately 10/96, continuation is
dependent upon program/operational needs, satisfactory work performance, and
availability of funds. Position located at the University of Hawai'i Manoa
campus, Honolulu, HI. **Minimum Monthly Salary:** $3,058. **Duties:** A highly
motivated technology/business manager for the National Data Center (NDC) to
plan and guide the transition from a funded technology development project to
a self-sustaining (non-profit or for-profit) entity in the growth area of
(Web-based) network commerce. Manage the day-to-day operations of the NDC:
supervise staff, develop procedures and structure for data management, and
coordinate efforts for NDC services and technical support. Promote data
sharing and enrich content and value of the EHV data base; enhance technical
capabilities to market the NDC's services on the Web; create, manage, and add
value to the data base to establish mechanisms for performing data analyses,
simulation and modeling, results presentation and graphic visualization. Other
duties as assigned. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree from an
accredited college or university in engineering, technology, or business.
Three years professional experience in high technology industry. Integration
skills and technological knowledge of the Internet, the Web, on-line database
and engineering simulation. Or an equivalent combination of experience and
training which provides knowledge, abilities, and skills to perform the job.
**Desirable Qualifications:** Desire to participate in the opportunity area of
network commerce as an independent entity. Leadership, strategic planning,
technical coordination and integration skills. **Inquiries:** Dr. David Yun,
956-7627. Application Requirements: Send cover letter (note Recruitment No.)
with narrative on your qualifications for the position, resume with salary
history, the names and phone numbers of three work related references, and
copy(ies) of diploma(s) and/or certificate(s) used to qualify for position to
the Director of Human Resources, Research Corporation of the University of
Hawai'i, 2530 Dole Street, Sakamaki Hall D-100, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing
Date:** 9/30. Recruitment No. 96-221.

