**PHIL 330, Fall 2001 **

**Professor Joan Callahan**

**T,Th 12:30 - 1:45, CP 222**

**PROFESSIONAL ETHICS**

**THIS COURSE CAN BE USED TO FULFILLPART OF THE CROSS-DISCIPLINARY REQUIREMENT
OF THE UNIVERSITY STUDIES PROGRAM**

**Supplementary materials for this course are collected
at:[http://www.uku.edu/~buddy/330packet.htm](330packet.htm)**



**(1) OFFICE HOURS: Breckinridge 112, Tuesdays and Thursdays 2-4 and by
appointment **

**(2) PHONE AND EMAIL: Women's Studies Program Office: 257-1388. If you need
to leave a message, I will get back to you as quickly as possible. I am often
most efficiently reached by Email at: buddy@pop.uky.edu **

**(3) GENERAL EXPECTATIONS: It is expected that you will have done the reading
assigned for a given day before coming to class on that day. What is said in
lecture and raised in discussion will presuppose that you have done the
reading with care. Philosophy takes place in discussion, and it is expected
that you will have questions on the readings which will help to direct our
discussions. For better or for worse, you can expect to be called on in this
class: to help explain the readings, to offer your considered judgment on a
question, and so on. You will most enjoy and benefit most from this course if
you come to class prepared to participate. A word of caution: reading
philosophy takes time. You should plan on reading most of the material at
least twice. It is crucial that you not let yourself fall behind on the
readings -- the exams will be taken from them, and falling behind can become
irreparable.**

**(4) WRITTEN REQUIREMENTS / PERCENTAGES OF FINAL GRADE:**

******(a) two short (3-4 pages) case responses, prepared for and used in class
case discussions (15% each)**

**(b) a third case study, prepared as a position paper (6-8 pages) and used in
class case discussion (25%)**

**(c) an hour-long, in-class midterm exam (20%)**

**(d) a two hour-long, in-class final exam (25%)**



**(5) Your CASE RESPONSES should be carefully prepared in advance of class
discussions. They need not be typed, but should be legible. Good written work
shows care in style and presentation, as well as in content. N.B.: All
students are to prepare the first case, but it is up to you to decide whether
to submit a formal write-up as a practice exercise.[Click here for guidance on
preparing case responses.](CASES.htm) **

**Required written case responses, required notes: **

**1\. Students with last names beginning A-M are to prepare cases #2, #4, and
#8.**

**2\. Students with last names beginning N-Z are to prepare cases #3, #5, and
#7. Keep in mind that Cases #7 and #8 are to be prepared as position papers
(more on papers below).**

**3\. Everyone is to prepare notes for cases #6, #9, #10, and #11. These notes
will not be graded formally, but they will be collected and evaluated and the
quality of preparation they indicate will be taken into account as part of
your class participation. Your assigned case write-ups, your position paper,
and your case notes should reflect familiarity with the lecture material and
with readings we have done which are relevant to the issue(s) raised by the
case. You are strongly encouraged to write up case #1 as a practice case.**

**(6) Your POSITION PAPER is to focus on the case you are assigned, but your
write up is to be presented as a sustained essay rather than in the case
response format that is outlined in the material on preparing cases. Your
papers should be typed, double-spaced, and they should employ a proper
notation form for any notes (which it is expected they will contain). More
will be said in class on writing papers; but you should think of doing in a
paper much the same of what you do in a case response, with the main
difference simply being moving away from the bare outline form of a case
response to an essay form for a paper. See Appendix II of the Callahan
text.[Click here for additional guidance on preparing papers.](papers.htm) **

**(7) The EXAM QUESTIONS will be taken verbatim from the relevant
study/discussion questions, most of which are in the main text. Study
questions on material not in the main text are in the xeroxed materials and on
the web.[Click here for the supplementary study questions.](330quest.html)
There will be study questions on all of the assigned material, so be sure to
keep up with the reading. Plan on working through the study questions as
preparation for the exams. It is often helpful (and fun) to work in study
groups, and I encourage you to do that. The regular final exam will cover
material after the midterm. Except in the most extraordinary circumstances,
students who miss the midterm will take a cumulative final. (This is an option
to be avoided.) **

**(8) GRADING POLICY: As indicated previously, your final grade will be
determined on the bases of your written work and prepared participation. In
order to receive full credit for your written case responses and position
paper, you must be (1) in class on the day of the discussion, (2) having
prepared your response or paper in advance of the discussion. _N.B._ : If you
are not in class for the discussion or have not prepared your write-up or
paper prior to the discussion, you will receive a maximum of 1/2 credit for
your write-up or paper. Since discussion is a crucial part of this course, you
are expected to be present and prepared to discuss _all_ of the cases, whether
or not you are assigned to write the case. Attendance will be taken on days we
have case discussions so that I'll have full records to use for the
participation portion of your grade and to use if your final average makes you
a candidate for an upward curve. **

**(9) If you find yourself having ANY problems with the material, please raise
questions in class and/or come and get help. That is what I am here for.**

**REQUIRED TEXTS AND OTHER MATERIALS**

**[C] Joan C. Callahan, ed. _Ethical Issues in Professional Life_ (NY: Oxford
University Press, 1988). **

**[W] Daniel E. Wueste, ed. _Professional Ethics and Social Responsibility_
(Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield, 1994) **

**[S] on the syllabus indicates that material is supplementary. You will need
to pick up most of this material from the web. One article (Callahan & Powell)
will be provided in photocopy in class.**

**********************************************************************************

**From the web syllabus folowing, you can link to each of the supplementary
materials, except the Callahan & Powell article. Supplementary materials
(except Callahan & Powell) are also collected together on the web at:
[http://www.uky.edu/~buddy/330packet.htm](330packet.htm). A photocopy of the
Callahan & Powell article will be handed out in class. **

**********************************************************************************

**SYLLABUS**

**I. BASICS AND BACKGROUND**

**Th 8/23**

**(1) Introduction to the Course**

**Read Syllabus carefully**

**(2) Introduction to Case Studies**

**[C] Preface; Ch.1: pp. 1-6; Appendix II ; [P] 'Preparing Cases'**

**[Click here for guidance on preparing cases](CASES.htm) **

**T 8/28**

**(1) Philosophy & Moral Philosophy **

**[C] Ch.1: pp. 6-10**

**(2) Facts, Values, & What Morality Is Not **

**[C] Ch.1: pp. 10-15**

**Th 8/30**

**(1) Philosophical Method**

**[P] Logic Assignment, write exercises and review sample answers**

**[Click here for the Logic Assignment and Sample Answers.](LOGIC.htm) **

**(2) Moral Argument**

**[C] Ch.1: pp. 15-21**

**T 9/4**

**Getting Started on Case Responses**

**[C] Review Appendix II**

**[P] Review 'Preparing Cases'**[ **Click here for'Preparing
Cases'**](CASES.htm)

**CASE #1: Medicine. [C] Ch.1, p.3: 'Divided Loyalties.' Should you tell this
man's wife that he is histocompatible? This case is to be prepared by
everyone. You may and are encouraged (but are not required) to submit a write-
up as practice for the required write-ups.
____________________________________________________________________________**

**II. PROFESSIONS AND PROFESSIONALIZATION **

**Th 9/6**

**(1) The Concept of a Profession**

**[C] Ch.2: Intro; Bayles**

**(2) Is Professionalization Always Desirable?**

**[C] Ch.2: Hughes; Barber; Merrill**

**T 9/11**

**CASE #2: Law: [C] Ch.1, p. 3: 'The Candid Client.' Question for response: Do
you report this woman's guilt in the other murder to the authorities? Write-
up, names A-M. **

**______________________________________________________________________________**

**III. OCCUPATIONAL V. ORDINARY MORALITY?**

**Th 9/13**

**Strong Role Differentiation in Law and Politics**

**[C] Ch.3: Intro; Freedman; Wasserstrom; Nagel**

**T 9/18**

**Strong Role Differentiation in Business**

**[C] Ch.3: Carr; Gillespie**

**[C] Ch. 10: Friedman; Anshen**

**Th 9/20**

**CASE #3: Counseling: 'Protecting the Child Abuser.' [C] Ch. 7. Respond to
Question #1.  
Write-up, names N-Z. **

**______________________________________________________________________________**

**IV. MODELS OF THE PROFESSIONAL/CLIENT RELATIONSHIP**

**T 9/25 Models**

**[C] Ch.4: Intro; Callahan; Bayles**

**Th 9/27**

**CASE #4: Medicine/Pharmacy. [C] Ch.5: 'The Potent Placebo.' Respond to
Question #5.  
Write-up, names A-M. **

**______________________________________________________________________________**

**V. RECURRING ISSUES INVOLVING AUTONOMY: INFORMED CONSENT, DECEPTION, PRIVACY
& CONFIDENTIALITY**

**T 10/2**

**(1) Criteria for Informed Consent: Information**

**[C] Ch.6: Intro; CANTERBURY v. SPENCE; Gorovitz**

**(2) Criteria for Informed Consent: Volition**

**[C] Ch.6: Mitford; Cohen**

**Th 10/4**

**Euthanasia & Physician-Assisted Suicide **

**[W] Feinberg**

**T 10/9**

**CASE #5: Physician-Assisted Suicide?: [P] 'Please Let Me Die.'[Click here
for the case.](PLEASEcase.htm)** **Respond to the question with the case.
Everyone should come prepared with notes.**

**______________________________________________________________________________**

**Th 10/11 -- MIDTERM EXAMINATION: The examination questions will be taken
verbatim from the relevant study questions in the textbook and from the
supplementary study questions in the xeroxed class materials (i.e., any
questions mentioning assigned readings thus far).**

**PLEASE BRING BLUEBOOKS FOR THE EXAM
______________________________________________________________________________
**

**T 10/16**

**Paternalistic Deception**

**[C] Ch.5: Intro; Ellin; Collins; Bok 1,2**

**Th 10/18**

**CASE #6: Veterinary Medicine: [C] Ch. 6: 'Back From the Dead.' Respond to
question 3.  
Write-up, names N-Z.**

**T 10/23**

**Nonpaternalistic Deception**

**[C] Ch.5: Nelson; Leiser**

**[C] Ch.3: Review Carr; Gillespie**

**Th 10/25**

**Privacy**

**[C] Ch.7: Intro; _Newsweek_ ; Parent; Pinkard **

**[P] Callahan and Powell (article will be handed out in class)**

**T 10/30**

**CASE #7: Dentistry/Surgery. [P] 'HIV Positive Health Care Providers.'[Click
here for the case.](HIV.htm)** **Are Bill and Sandra morally obligated to
inform their clients of their HIV status? Write-up, names N-Z; prepare as a
paper. NB: THIS REVERSES THE ALPHABETICAL ORDER OF CLASS ASSIGNMENTS, WITH N-Z
HANDING IN ASSIGNMENTS BEFORE A-M. **

**Th 11/1**

**Confidentiality**

**[C] Ch.7: Tobriner; Clark; Bok**

**T 11/6**

**CASE #8 Counseling Revisted. [P] 'Conflicts, Confidentiality, and Informed
Consent.'[Click here for the case.](SOCWRK1case.htm)** **Respond to the
questions with the case. Write-up, names A-M, prepare as a paper. NB: THIS
REVERSES THE ALPHABETICAL ORDER OF CLASS ASSIGNMENTS, WITH N-Z HANDING IN
ASSIGNMENTS BEFORE A-M.**

**______________________________________________________________________________**

**VI. INDIVIDUAL AND COLLECTIVE RESPONSIBILITY AND CULTURES WITHIN
ORGANIZATIONS AND PROFESSIONS**

**Th 11/8**

**(1) Conceptual Issues**

**[C] Ch.8: Intro; French #1; Danley**

**(2) Individual Responsibility Within Organizations**

**[C] Ch.8: French #2**

**T 11/13**

**Individual Responsibility Within Professions**

**[C] Ch.8: Muyskens; [W] Callahan**

**Th 11/15**

**CASE #9: Engineering. [C] Ch.9: 'The Space Shuttle Challenger.' Respond to
question 3.  
Everyone should come prepared with notes. **

**______________________________________________________________________________**

**VIII. ACCESS TO PROFESSIONAL SERVICES**

**T 11/20**

**Access to Medical Services**

**[C] Ch.10: McCullough**

**Th 11/22 Thanksgiving Holiday**

**T 11/27**

**Case #10: Politics/Legislation. [C] Ch. 10: 'Care for the Uninsured.'
Respond to Question #1.  
Everyone should come prepared with notes. **

**Th 11/29**

**Access to Legal Services**

**[C] Ch.10: Kaufman, Freedman Study Questions 1,2,5-8**

**CASE #11: Law. [C] Ch.11: 'The Loyal Agent Falters.' Respond to question 1.  
Everyone should come prepared with notes.**

**T 12/4 Finishing up and review for Final -- BRING ANY QUESTIONS YOU HAVE ON
THE STUDY QUESTIONS**

*******************

**FINAL EXAM: TUESDAY, DECEMBER 11, 10:30 - 12:30**

**Exam questions will be taken _verbatim_ from the relevant study questions in
the text and supplemental study q uestions for the final. Relevant study
questions from the text will include any that mention one of the readings
assigned since the midterm.**

**PLEASE BRING BLUEBOOKS FOR THE EXAM.**

*********************************************************

