English 550/640 syllabus

  
  
(with thanks to Anne Janowitz's wonderful book for the course's title).  
  

### Course Description | Course Calendar  
  
Texts and Bulkpack | Course Requirements  
  
Office Hours and Other Information

  
  

* * *

  
  

## CGS 550/640: ENGLAND'S RUINS: INVENTING BRITISH LITERATURE, 1700-1900

  
  
  
Professor Michael Gamer  
Office: 203 Bennett Hall, phone 898-7346  
Class meets: Tuesday, 6:30-9:10  
Office Hours: Tues 4:30-6:30, after class  
Place: Bennett 319  
Key in on Paris to register: 197550640  
  

### TEXTS: Available at Penn Book Center, 222-7600

  * Bronte, Charlotte. [Jane Eyre](../../Etexts/bronte.janeeyre). 
  * Bronte, Emily. [Wuthering Heights.](../../Etexts/bronte.wuthering)
  * Clare, John. Selected Poetry and Prose. Ed. Raymond Williams. (Methuen, ISBN#0416411207). 
  * Hardy, Thomas. Poems: Hardy (Everyman, ISBN#0679443681). 
  * Stevenson, Robert Louis. [The Strange Case of Dr. Jeckyll and Mr. Hyde](http://www.bibliomania.com/Fiction/stevensn/index.html). (Everyman, ISBN#0460871978) 
  * Walpole, Horace. Castle of Otranto and Hieroglyphic Tales. (Everyman, ISBN#0460871986) 
  * Wilde, Oscar. [The Picture of Dorian Gray ](http://www.bibliomania.com/Fiction/wilde/index.html)(Norton, ISBN#0393955680) 
  
  
  

### BULKPACK for Course available at Wharton Reprographics in the Basement of
the Wharton School.

  
  

### Course Description

In this class, we'll explore a range of texts written in Britain during two
centuries of political idealism and agitation, and government repression and
reform. At a time when Britain itself is undergoing incredible economic and
political changes both at home and abroad, its poets become actively
interested in producing writing that is ostentatiously British--either by
self-consciously placing themselves within an identifiable national lineage,
or by inventing new genealogies out of the fragments of British history. As an
object that contains both history and its absence, that is a fragment and yet
implies the complete object, and that through its incompleteness forces us to
complete it, ruins become invested with multiple significances in England
beginning in the early 18th C. They become the basis for early theories of
psychology as well as for thinking about how language and narrative works.
Most importantly, they almost viscerally lay out for History its task--of
accounting in language for what materially is disintegrating. In representing
what no longer is present, however, History as a discipline increasingly comes
under fire beginning in 1750, precisely because it must imagine and make
coherent that which either no longer exists or lacks coherence. In its
broadest sense, then, this course will explore the relation between History
and Literature by focusing on that troubling hybrid called Historical
Literature.  
  
  

## COURSE REQUIREMENTS:

  
  

### Reading:

This course will run as a seminar; this means that we'll run class in
discussion, and that you will not see me lecture for more than 10 minutes at a
stretch. My goal is to provide you with conceptual and theoretical keys to
reading British literature before 1900--keys that will make you sensitive to
the anxieties and pleasures of these strange and wonderful writers.
Consequently, we will be reading poetry, novels, plays, and theoretical essays
from the time period, so you can see how a concept like "the passions" or
"terror" gets treated in a variety of mediums and forms. We also periodically
will read modern critical essays where such essays improve our ability to
understand and enjoy these materials. For the most part, the reading will
average around 7-9 hours a week, sometimes less. However, there are three
weeks where we are reading longer novels, so plan for these texts to take you
longer to read well.  
  

### WRITING:

**Your Job As Agenda Setter** : The 4 Response Essays. During the semester, I
ask that you write at least four short response essays (around 500 words,
which means NO MORE THAN than 2 pages double-spaced), which you should bring
to that particular class meeting. I call them response essays because they
should have a clear focus and argument; on the other hand, they do not need to
be formal essays, and given the short length you should probably skip your
introduction and get straight to what you want to put forward. It is perfectly
okay to begin them with as direct a statement as "I think that [this
particular moment in a text] is a good starting point for discussion because
the moment I understand that it meant [blank] then I knew that the book was
really about [blank]." (You fill in the [blanks]). Write the essays so that
they are easily understood when read aloud; the key is to allow yourselves to
be creative and curious and to have fun with these! In class, I'll ask who
wants to read theirs aloud, and often that's the way we'll start class.  
  
**Your Job As Respondent** : Each week, we will have at least one person who
will be our designated "respondent". Their job will be to respond to one of
the essays read and to focus discussion for the first part of class. I'll ask
each of you to do this at least once during the semester, and I hope that
you'll relax and have fun with both the essays and your formal responses: you
may want to use it as a medium to ask questions of the writer, to agree or
disagree, and to relate issues that come up to ideas that we've discussed in
previous weeks. You may also, in the process, share with us some of your own
ideas for what the agenda of the class should be. I use this format because it
will make the classroom more democratic and more of a real conversation,
rather than one in which we only hear from a few voices repeatedly and from
some of you never. I also do this because the only way that this class will be
enjoyable and worthwhile is if we all contribute to it with seriousness,
honesty, and pleasure.

Since we all have various responsibilities during the semester, you may choose
which weeks you wish to write response essays. At the beginning of class on
September 12, we will also choose our various weeks to be Respondents.  
  
**The Final Paper** (15 pages or more): The other function of your short
essays during the semester is that they will give me an opportunity to read
you work and to give you suggestions concerning your ideas. You may hit upon a
wonderful idea while reading Horace Walpole that would become an even more
wonderful long essay, and part of my role will be to suggest ways that you can
pursue various ideas that show up in undigested form in your short essays.
Sometime before the middle of November, you should come and talk to me about a
paper idea. You may also want to write an abstract of what you want your paper
to argue--particularly if your work schedule makes it impossible to come see
me. I want to suggest strongly, though, that you come see me and that you do
this relatively often--there are simply certain kinds of intellectual work
that one can do one-on-one that one cannot do in a classroom.  
  
The paper itself should approach the style and conventions of a modern
scholarly essay, particularly in its level of research and the rigor of its
argumentation. You should get to work on this relatively early in the
semester.  
  

* * *

  
  

## COURSE CALENDAR

  
  
Sept 10: Introduction to the class. Dryden, Epic, Ruins, Monuments, and
["Ozymandius."](../../Etexts/shelleysmith)  
  
Sept 17: Poetics, Epitaphs, and Loss: The Poetry of Thomas Gray. Read the
poems by [Thomas Gray](../202/gray), and the critical essays on Thomas Gray,
in the bulkpack.  
  
Sept 24: History, Fiction, and the problem of Historical Fiction. Reading:
Horace Walpole, Castle of Otranto (1764; make sure you read Walpole's two
introductions); Horace Walpole, Introduction to Hieroglypic Tales (1785--the
tales themselves are hysterical, by the way); [Clara Reeve, Introduction to
The Old English Baron (1778)](../../Romantic/englishbaron.html); William
Godwin, "On History and Romance" (ca. 1797).  
  
Oct 1: Sensibility and the Problem of Feeling. Reading: Oxford English
Dictionary Entries for "Sensibility," "Sentiment," and "Sentimental"; Edmund
Burke, ["On Taste" (1758)](../../Etexts/burke.taste); Henry MacKenzie, The Man
of Feeling (1771); Hannah More, ["Sensibility; a Poetical
Epistle"](../../Etexts/more.html) (selections, 1782); Charlotte Smith,
[Elegiac Sonnets (selections, 1784)](../../Etexts/smith.sonnets); Helen Maria
Williams, ["To Sensibility" (1786)](../../Etexts/williams.html).  
  
Oct 8: Terror and Enlightenment: The Romantic Fragment Poem. Reading: David
Hume, ["On Superstition and Enthusiasm"](../../Etexts/hume.superstition) (ca.
1750; Immanuel Kant, ["An Answer to the Question: What is
Enlightenment"](../../Etexts/kant.html) (1784); Helen Maria Williams, ["Part
of an Irregular Fragment, Found in a Dark Passage of the Tower"
](../../Etexts/williams.html)(1786); Samuel Taylor Coleridge,
[Chistabel,](http://www.lib.virginia.edu/etext/stc/Coleridge/poems/Christabel.html)
[Kubla
Khan,](http://www.lib.virginia.edu/etext/stc/Coleridge/poems/Kubla_Khan.html)
and [The Pains of
Sleep](http://www.lib.virginia.edu/etext/stc/Coleridge/poems/Pains_of_Sleep.html)
(composed 1797-99, and 1803; published as a book in 1816).  
  
Oct 15: NO CLASS--FALL BREAK.  
  
Oct 22: Gothic Drama: Terror and the Problem of Tragedy. Reading: Anna Letitia
Aikin (later Barbauld) and John Aikin, ["On the Pleasure Derived from Objects
of Terror"](../../Etexts/barbauldessays) (1773); David Hume, ["Of
Tragedy"](../../Etexts/hume.tragedy) (ca. 1750); Edmund Burke, [A
Philosophical Enquiry into the Origins of Our Ideas of the Sublime and
Beautiful](../../Etexts/burke.sublime) (1757, selections); Joanna Baillie,
_Orra_ (1812); Marlon Ross, "Joanna Baillie."  
  
Oct 29: A Ruined Marriage and Marrying a Ruin. Reading: Charlotte Bronte,
[Jane Eyre](../../Etexts/bronte.janeeyre) (1847); Sandra Gilbert and Susan
Gubar, "A Dialogue of Self and Soul: Plain Jane's Progress" (1979).  
  
Nov 5: Ruining the Romantic Poet. Reading: Read Raymond Williams, Introduction
to Selected Poems of John Clare; John Clare, Selected Poems of John Clare;
Edward Strikland, "Boxer Byron: A Clare Obsession."  
  
Nov 12: Landscape, Generations, and Genealogies of Ruin. Reading: Emily
Bronte, [Wuthering Heights](../../Etexts/bronte.wuthering) (1847).  
  
Nov 19: Ruined Women, Fragmented Subjectivities, and Seriality: Dr. Jeckyll
and Jack the Ripper. Reading: Robert Louis Stevenson, [The Strange Case of Dr.
Jeckyll and Mr. Hyde](http://www.bibliomania.com/Fiction/stevensn/index.html)
(1886); Judith Walkowitz, "Jack the Ripper" (from City of Dreadful Delight:
Narratives of Sexual Danger in Late-Victorian London {1992]); and Stephen
Heath, "Psychopathia Sexualis: Stevenson's Strange Case."  
  
Nov 26: A Ruined Century: Decadence & the 1890s. Read Oscar Wilde, [The
Picture of Dorian Gray ](http://www.bibliomania.com/Fiction/wilde/index.html)
(1891).  
  
Dec 3: Ending the Century and a New Poetics of History. Read Thomas Hardy,
Poems (Everyman).  
  
FINAL PAPERS DUE DECEMBER 10.

