**ART 2102:101 TYPOGRAPHY     TR 1-2:50                                 **

**INSTRUCTOR:   Barbara Yale-Read**

**FALL 2001**  





**OFFICE: Room 213A (inside room 213)**

**OFFICE HOURS: posted on door of 213**

#  PHONE NO: 262-2220

**E-MAIL:[yalereadb@appstate.edu](mailto:yalereadb@appstate.edu)**

**URL:<http://www.acs.appstate.edu/yaleread/>**





**DROP DATES:**

8/21/01: Last day to add a class, change the section of a class, change a
course from credit to audit, or choose the pass-fail option.

10/17/01: Last day to drop a class; last day to withdraw without academic
penalty

**PREREQUISITES:** Foundations sequence; must have taken or be taking GDI. All
prerequisites must be passed with a grade of  "C" OR BETTER.  

                 



**COURSE DESCRIPTION:** Typography is an introductory course in the graphic
design sequence which has as its focus a broad study of typography. Class
discussions, assignments and lectures will focus on basic typographical
terminology and various typesetting methods. The course will include an
analysis of both historical and contemporary trends in type design, and the
application of typography to the field of graphic design. Various course
activities include reading, lecture, visual presentations, discussion
(critiques of work in progress and finished work), and creative work.
Students are required to participate in course lectures, discussions, design
assignments, and course exams.





**COURSE OBJECTIVES:   **

1.  To provide an overview of the expressive and aesthetic dimensions of typography.

2.  To introduce students to typesetting techniques, including the use of the Macintosh computer

3.  To develop a critical perspective on the technological, cultural and aesthetic qualities of typography.

4.  To explore the use of typography in design (contemporary and historical).

5.  To apply the elements of design to diverse methods of composition.

6.  To solve design problems while working within specified limitations.

7.  To develop skills involved in verbal presentation of one's work (discussion of design concepts, reasons for selection of particular styles)

8\. To enhance technical proficiency





**COURSE POLICIES:**

E-mail me from your preferred e-mail address within the first week of school.
Course Syllabus, assignments, and examples of projects will be available on my
website (see URL above). If you miss class, your assignments should be readily
available from your computer.



Attendance is required for all scheduled classes; both for studio working
periods and for lectures, critiques, discussions, presentations.  You are
allowed two excused absences from class. You will be expected to be on time
for class, which means that you must be there within 10 minutes of the
beginning of the scheduled period.  If you are more than 15 minutes late for
class, you will receive 1/2 of an absence. If you leave early, you will be
counted absent. More than two missed classes will result in the lowering of
your final grade by one fourth of a letter grade for each additional absence.
It is imperative that you keep track of your absences; failure to attend class
will result in lowered grades and may keep you from passing the class.



All assigned work will be due by a specified deadline, which will usually be
within ten minutes of the beginning of the class on the assigned date.  No
work will receive a passing grade after a deadline has passed. You may redo
work which has been submitted on time, but you are limited to 2 redos per
semester.



All students are required to participate in class discussion and critiques.
It is beneficial for you to communicate with your classmates; the interchange
of ideas will often lead to better solutions to design problems.  It is also
healthy for you to evaluate the work of others, and to avoid feeling
intimidated or persecuted. It is also important that you pay attention when
work other than your own is being discussed; the common rules of politeness
should apply here.





**COURSE GRADING:** Evaluation for this course will come from the following:

1\. Creative problem solving; use of the elements of design creatively to
arrive at unique, interesting solutions to design problems.

2\. Technical proficiency-accuracy and degree of finish in presentation of
work.

3.  Attitude, meeting deadlines and attendance.

4.  Midterm and Final exam. (20% of final grade)

5.  Projects will be weighted according to how long they take (a 2 week project will not be worth as much as a 3 week project). 



** **

**GRADING SCALE:**

A+             97-100

A               94-96

A-              90-93

B+             87-89

B               84-86

B-              80-83

C+             77-79  

C                74-76  

C-              70-73  

D+              67-69  

D                64-66  

D-              60-63

F                59 or below





"IMPORTANT:  The grade of "C" is considered the average for evaluations given
in this course. If a submitted project meets the minimal stated requirements
of the project -- for design/concept, preparatory work, and craft, -- a grade
of "C" will be given. Work that exceeds basic expectations will earn higher
points in the B range; work that is exceptional earns an A or A+. Conversely,
work that does not even minimally meet the criteria for a project will earn
one of the failing grades for this course -- a C-, D range

grade or F."





A= Excellent.  Outstanding, innovative approach to the problem. Goes well

beyond the requirements.

B= Above Average.  Goes beyond the basic requirements of the problem.

C= Average. Satisfies the basic requirements of the problem.

D= Below Average. Does not satisfy the basic requirements of the problem.

Problems with procedure and attitude.

F= Failure. Falls well below University standards in solving the basic

requirements of the problem. Severe attitude and procedure problems.





The instructor will keep an accurate record of the student's performance
during work-up critiques. Final projects will be given two grades; concept-
design (50%) and technique craftsmanship (50%). The work-up critique process
will be used in evaluating the concept-design. Neat presentation (matting,
acetating, backing) is also a consideration for final grades. Projects will be
handed in the following form: matted with a neutral mat board (to be used for
everything in your portfolio) covered with acetate, and with matching paper
covering the folded acetate on the back.  Job bags should be 1/2 of a full
size sheet of backing paper, and not portfolios, or large tag board envelopes.
They should be securely glued with Elmer's glue and allowed to dry before
putting work inside. You will probably need two job bags. Job bags should
contain all of the materials - thumbnails, roughs, comps, research prepared
for the project. Work not presented in this manner will be subject to a drop
of one full letter grade.



** **

**TEXTBOOKS:**

Clair, Kate, _A Typographic Workbook_

Meggs, Phillip, The _History of Graphic Design._

Carter, Rob, _American Typography Today_



** **

** **

** **

** **

**MATERIALS AND SUPPLIES:**

(Available from Purveyor's, Art Mart or Boone Drug (Cheap Joe's))



Speedball Nibs #B6, B5 and B2 (you may purchase other "B" series sizes for
projects)

Penholder (1 or more to fit pen nibs)

25 sheets good drawing paper (18" x 24") to do practice exercises for
lettering assignment

(Aquabee Satin Finish #806 is recommended)

Dr Martin's Black Star Waterproof India Ink (Matte or HiCarb)

Tracing Pad (14" x 17")  

Layout Pad (14" x 17")

Metal ruler (with pica scale)

T-Square (24", preferably steel)

Dividers

Triangle (30-60-90) (with inking edge)

Proportion wheel

Drafting tape

Technical pen and ink

Ruling pen (the best you can afford)

Lead holder with 2H lead

Kneaded eraser

X-acto knife and blades (#11)

White-out (Pelikan Graphic White or Pro-White or Dr. Martens Bleed-Proof
White)

Paint brushes (Winsor Newton Series 7 are best --  #000, # 1-3

Zip disk(s)



The following materials may be purchased as needed:

Designer's colors (opaque gouache) (a complete set of 8 colors of M. Graham
gouache may be purchased at Purveyor's)

Illustration board

Colored papers



**PROJECTS:**

** **

15% - HISTORY OF TYPOGRAPHY: HAND LETTERING

                  Roman capital letters:  4 practice exercises, 1 matted/acetated project, size to be determined-symmetrical quotation about letters/alphabet

Roman minuscule letters: 4 practice exercises, 1 matted/acetated project, size
to be determined- asymmetrical layout using Haiku poem



12% - HISTORY OF TYPOGRAPHY:

                  Typographer Commemorative T-Shirt



12% - HISTORY OF TYPOGRAPHY:

                  A Victorian Political Type Poster



12% - HISTORY OF TYPOGRAPHY:

Twentieth Century Typographer Series Exhibition Poster



15% - TYPOGRAPHIC VARIATIONS  within changing parameters: 3 exercises, 2
mounted computer prints, 2 matted/acetated computer prints (black and white)

                  a.  Typographic composition: line, grid, ABA

                  b.  Using the Macintosh computer, spacing

                  c.  Preparation of camera-ready art

                  d.  expressive qualities of type



19%  - GRAPHIC ITINERARY The grid and its use in a multi-page project: 1-8" x
10" booklet

                  a.  combining concept, type and pictures

                  b.  using type and graphics to convey information            



15% - Midterm and Final Exams







