![](graphics/stictoc4.gif)

#### English 242, The History of English Literature II: 1700-1900

* * *

  * **Scenario**
  * **Technical Summary**
  * **Catalog Description**
  * **Syllabus**
  * [**The Scenarios for the Tic-Toc Project**](scenario.htm#one)
  * [**Summary (in Table Form) of All Scenarios**](table.htm) 

* * *

### Scenario:

In this scenario, English 242 is being used as a model of a course delivered
via the Internet and other distance learning technologies.

English 242, a standard UIC sophomore level survey course which would easily
transfer to other universities, would be offered as a distance learning course
in which a member of the English faculty taught in one of UIC's TV/Media
studios and oversaw 25 adjuncts hired expressly for this purpose who were
spread over the entire University of Illinois system. Most adjuncts were
scheduled into distance learning centers at Chicago, Urbana, Rockford, and
Peoria, and each was responsible for four sections of 25 students. The course
cap, therefore, was a total of 2500 students.

The schedule is built on the lecture-discussion model: the faculty member
lectures 2 times a week, with students and adjuncts able to ask questions and
make comments via a two-way system in the learning centers. The recorded
lectures (with comments and questions from the remote sites) could also be
distributed via videotape to students and adjuncts who were unable to commute
to the distance learning sites.

Some of the adjuncts teach their discussion sections face-to-face in
classrooms spread over the entire state; others teach in media studios to
students in even more remote locations, and communicate via one-way television
(adjunct to student), and two-way fax and telephone; still others offer their
discussion sections only via the Internet on modem or ethernet connections.

Some of the computer sections are offered asynchronously via listservs,
newsgroups, and HyperNews (interactive web pages), while others are fully
synchronous using MOO and WOO technology in which students and teaching
assistant/adjunct meet in virtual classrooms and in real time.

The registration process required students to make choices: whether they would
attend the lectures in one of the four distance learning sites or receive the
lectures via video, and whether they would attend the discussion sections by
traveling to a remote site, or by computer. If by computer, they would also
choose whether they wished to attend in synchronous or asynchronous mode. Of
course, all potential students were give a course information packet that
detailed all the choices.

The original model for this scenario was from a course taught by Mark Canuel,
an assistant professor at UIC, which he taught in a traditional classroom for
UIC students.

* * *

### Technical Summary:

[**Computer Content of Course:**](models.htm) [**Distance Learning
Model**](models.htm#dist)

[**Percent of Internet Use:**](glossary.htm#internet) For most participants,
low to very low. Students and faculty in Internet modules would have 100%
scores in this area.

[**Percent Face-to-Face Contact:**](glossary.htm#f2f) 0% between senior
faculty and students, 33% for students and teachers in small discussion
groups, 0% for students and faculty members in Internet modules.

[**Percent of Technical Training Needed by Students:**](glossary.htm#techstud)
0% for all participants, except for those in the Internet discussion groups.

[**Technical Training Needed by Faculty:**](glossary.htm#techfac) Extensive

[**Percent Lecture:**](glossary.htm#lect) 67%

[**Percent Discussion or Other Student Centered
Activity:**](glossary.htm#disc) 33%

[**Percent Use of Computer Classroom:**](glossary.htm#cc) 33% for participants
in Internet discussion groups. 0% for other participants.

[**Percent Use of Multimedia Facilities:**](glossary.htm#mm) 100% for senior
faculty. 33% for offsite faculty teaching in media rooms. 0% for online
sections.

[**Attendance Requirements:**](glossary.htm#att) Mostly traditional. Variable
for Internet users.

[**Inclass Worktime:**](glossary.htm#icwt) 0%

[**Out of Class Worktime:**](glossary.htm#ocwt) Varies

[**Computer Skill Requirements:**](glossary.htm#skill) Medium to High for
Internet participants, Low otherwise

[**Equipment Requirements:**](glossary.htm#equip) Extensive

[**Use of Printed Textbooks or Other Materials:**](glossary.htm#texts) Medium
to High (books and other texts could be supplied to students via mail order
before the beginning of the course).

[**Software Requirements:**](glossary.htm#software) Medium to High for
Internet participants, None otherwise.

Note: this section of the scenario uses Claudine Keenan's typology of the
[**three models for teachers**](models.htm) in online environments.

* * *

### Catalog Description of English 242, The History of English Literature II:
1700-1900:

**3 Hours.** A survey of significant literary works, from a number of critical
perspectives. Prerequisite: 6 hours of English from among Engl 101-113,
including Engl 101.

* * *

### Syllabus:

ENGLISH 242 (43368, 43373) Fall 1996

The History of English Literature II: 1700-1900  

Class Hours and Location: TR 9:30AM-10:45AM 221 DH

Instructor: Mark Canuel

Office Hours: Tuesdays 11-12 AM, 2-3 PM and Thursdays, 11-12 AM, 2008
University Hall

Required Texts: Abrams, M. H. _A Glossary of Literary Terms_. 5th ed., New
York: Holt, 1988.

Abrams, M. H. et. al., eds. _Norton Anthology of English Literature_. 6th ed.,
2 vols. New York: Norton, 1993.

Austen, Jane. _Pride and Prejudice_. Edited by Tony Tanner. Harmondsworth:
Penguin, 1972.  

* * *

### Syllabus:

####  The Restoration and Eighteenth Century:

#### Wit, Reason, Taste  

(8/27,29) Milton, _Paradise Lost_ (1667; review of Books 1 [1-491 4 [lines
440-491], 12 [lines 542-605])

John Dryden,  "Mac Flecknoe" (1682)

Alexander Pope, "The Rape of the Lock" (1714), "Epistle to Dr. Arbuthnot"
(1735)

(Abrams: "Augustan age, " "burlesque, " "epic," "great chain of being,"
"heroic couplet," "neoclassic and romantic," "satire")  

(9/3,5) Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, _Letters_ (1763 [xerox]); "Epistle from
Mrs. Yonge to Her Husband" (w.1724)

Anne Finch, Countess of Winchelsea, "The Introduction" (w.1689?)

Jonathan Swift, _Gulliver's Travels_ (1735)  

(9/10,12) Jonathan Swift, _Gulliver's Travels_ , cont'd.

Joseph Addison, _The Spectator_ ( "The Aims of the Spectator" [3/12/17111,
"Wit: True, False, Mixed" [3/11/1711])

Sir Richard Steele, The _Tatler_ ( "The Gentleman; The Pretty Fellow"
[5/28/1709])

Samuel Johnson, _Rambler_ No. 4 ( "On Fiction," [3/31/1750])

(Abrams: "essay")  

* (9/17, 19) Samuel Johnson, "The Vanity of Human Wishes" (1749), _Dictionary_ (1755;  "Preface" and selections), _Rasselas_ (1759; Chapters 1,2,3,10,11,16,18,19,22, 26,29,32,44,45,49) 

James Boswell, The _Life of Samuel Johnson, LL.D_. (1791;  "Plan of the _Life_
," "Johnson Meets His King" [2435-6], "Fear of Death")  

*PAPER #1 DUE IN CLASS ON THURSDAY 9/19  

#### The Romantic Period:

#### Revolution and Reaction  

(9/24,26) Mary Wollstonecraft, A _Vindication of the Rights of Woman_ (1792;
selections)

William Blake, _Songs of Innocence and Experience_ (1794; selections), _The
Marriage of Heaven and Hell_ (1790-3)

(Abrams: enlightenment,  "feminist criticism," "Romantic period")  

(10/1) MIDTERM EXAM

(10/3) William Wordsworth, Preface to _Lyrical Ballads_ (1802),  "Lines
Composed a Few Miles Above Tintern Abbey. " (1798), "We Are Seven" (1798), "A
Slumber Did My Spirit Seal" (1800), "Nutting" (1800)

(Abrams: "ballad," "fancy and imagination," "meter")  

(10/8,10) Samuel Taylor Coleridge, "The Rime of the Ancient Mariner" (1798),
"Kubla Khan" (1816), _Biographia Literaria_ (1817) (Chapters 13,17
[selections])

Wordsworth, _The Prelude_ (1850; books 1,5 [ "Boy of Winander"], 6 ["Crossing
Simplon Pass"])

(Abrams: "confessional poetry," "form and structure")  

(10/15,17) Byron, _Don Juan_ (Dedication [xerox], canto 1, 1819)

Percy Bysshe Shelley,  "Mont Blanc" (1817), "Hymn to Intellectual Beauty"
(1817)

(Abrams: "drama," "rhetorical figures [apostrophe]")  

(10/22,24) Shelley, "Ozymandias" (1818), "Ode to the West Wind" (1820), _A
Defense of Poetry_ (w.1821) (selections)

John Keats,  "Ode to Psyche" (1820), "Ode to a Nightingale" (1819), "Ode on a
Grecian Urn" (1820), "To Autumn" (1820), "The Eve of St. Agnes" (1820), "La
Belle Dame Sans Merci: A Ballad" (1820)

(Abrams: "archaism," "ode," "Spenserian stanza," "synesthesia")  

(10/29,31) Jane Austen, _Pride and Prejudice_ (1813)

(Abrams:  "character and characterization," "novel")  

(11/5) Jane Austen, _Pride and Prejudice_ , cont,d.  

#### The Victorian Age:

#### Moralists, Imperialists, Aesthetes, Decadents  

(11/7) Thomas Carlyle, _Past and Present_ (1843; selections) John Stuart Mill,
_On Liberty_ (1869; selections)

Matthew Arnold,  "The Function of Criticism at the Present Time" (1864)

John Henry Cardinal Newman, _The Idea of a University_ (1852; selections)

(Abrams:  "Victorian Period")  

(11/12,14) Victorian Prose, cont'd.

Matthew Arnold, "Dover Beach" (1867), "Stanzas From the Grand Chartreuse"
(1855)

Gerard Manley Hopkins, "Carrion Comfort" (1885), "No Worst, There Is None"
(1885)

(Abrams: "meter [sprung rhythm]")  

*PAPER #2 DUE IN CLASS THURSDAY 11/14  
  
(11/19,21) Alfred, Lord Tennyson, "The Lady of Shallott" (1842), "The Lotos-
Eaters" (1842), "Ulysses" (1860)

Robert Browning, "My Last Duchess" (1842), "Fra Lippo Lippi" (1855)

Algernon Charles Swinburne, "The Garden of Proserpine" (1866)

Ernest Dowson, "Cynara" (1896)

(Abrams: "aestheticism and decadence," "dramatic monologue," "point of view
[fallible or unreliable narrator]")  

(12/3,5) Lewis Carroll, _Through the Looking Glass_ (1871;  "Jabberwocky,"
"Humpty Dumpty's Explication of Jabberwocky"')

Oscar Wilde, _The Importance of Being Ernest_ (1895)

(Abrams:  "comedy [of manners]," "wit, humor, and the comic")  

NOTES:

1\. Attendance: your presence at all classes is required; attendance will be
taken. Your participation in discussions is expected, whenever possible.

2\. Papers: there are two papers, both of which should be between 4 and 6
pages (no more!). The topics will be handed out and discussed in class two
weeks before the papers are due. They should be typed, double-spaced, and
proof-read for spelling, punctuation, and grammar. Diana Hacker's _A Writer's
Reference_ is an excellent and simple book to consult or Problems that might
arise in these areas (but any manual of style will give you the help you
need).

3\. Documentation in Papers: You may cite by line number in parentheses after
a quotation or summary when referring to poems-e.g.,  "My heart aches, and a
drowsy numbness pains / My sense" (12)--unless the context is unclear. If this
is the case, you should add a shortened version of the title before the line
number ("Nightingale, " 1-2) . Prose writing can be cited by page number in
the same fashion. You needn't worry about footnotes, as we are all using the
same texts.

An exception to this rule: if you have consulted sources other than those that
have been assigned for the class, you must cite them properly. There are many
ways to cite sources; consult Hacker's _A Writer's Reference_ or another
manual of style as a guide.

4\. Exams: There will be midterm and final examinations for this course; the
format will be explained in class. The midterm is listed on the syllabus, and
the final examination date and time will be announced as soon as possible.

5\. Grading: Papers will count for 50% of your final grade, exams for 50%
(approximately 20% for midterm, 30% for final). Poor attendance will affect
your final grade.

6\. office hours: You should feel free to come see me during my office hours--
or make an appointment to see me at some other time. If you have _any_
question or _any_ issue to raise about the readings, a paper assignment, an
exam, or some other aspect of the course, lease don't hesitate to come talk
with me.

* * *

[**The Scenarios for the Tic-Toc Project**](scenario.htm#one)

[**Summary (in Table Form) of All Scenarios**](table.htm)

