  |  
---|---  
  |

| ![](images/stpauls.jpg) |

**_Online_** **ENG 222  
****Survey of British Literature II**

**SNL #69171  
****Summer Session I, 2001**  

**Instructor: _[Heather Hoyt  
](mailto:Heather.Hoyt@asu.edu)_****See below for Office Hours.***

**_  
_ With audio lectures by _Dr. Dan Bivona_**

| ![](images/lawcrt.jpg)  
---|---|---  
  


**_Course Rationale:_**

ENG 222 surveys British literature from the early 19th century through the
late 20th century. While we cannot possibly do an exhaustive job of treating
the three major literary genres (we do some justice to the novel and poetry
but very little to drama), we will be discussing representative works from
each of the major movements and periods. Since this is a survey course, there
is no pretense to thematic unity. Rather, some lectures will touch on the
broad spectrum of literary, historical, and intellectual issues out of which
this literature emerged; others will focus on the literary works under
discussion for the week

**_REQUIREMENTS:_**

**_Class Participation:_ ** Since this course will be conducted online, class
participation is essential for generating productive discussions related to
the readings and lectures. Class participation will count as **40%** of your
grade and includes the following:

a)      Daily postings to the discussion ( **due** by 8PM (PST) of each class
day);  
b)     Weekly responses to the readings ( **due** by 9 _AM_ (PST) on Monday
_morning_ of each week);  
c)      Periodic quizzes on the readings.

***Note:** Late postings or responses will **_not_** receive credit. Please be
aware of PM  & AM differences in the deadlines. Failure to participate in 4 of
the online class discussions will result in a grade of "E" for the
course.{Attendance is reflected daily by your active participation in online
class discussions and is absolutely essential to success in this course.}

**_Discussion Guidelines:_**

**Daily Postings:** Each student must participate in the daily online
discussions by posting thoughtful (i.e., analytical  & critical) comments
about the readings, themes, and lectures for the day. Students are encouraged
to post a question along with their comments to solicit responses from the
class. When responding to other students, do _not_ simply say  "yes"/"no" or
"I agree"/"disagree." [Nor will emoticons be sufficient means to express your
intellectual opinion.] Your postings must demonstrate that you have read _and_
thought about the material for the day. Each student will be responsible for
initiating at least one discussion during the course; thus, students will
provide daily discussion prompts that directly engage their interest in the
readings, lectures, and themes.

Online discussions will be conducted in a "forum" in which you may post "new
threads" (new topics of discussion) or "reply" to postings made under an
existing thread (topic). Do not simply create new threads when you respond
unless you are initiating a new topic in the forum.

**Weekly Responses:** Students will be assigned to small groups of 3-4
members. Group discussions will be held using the  "Groups" feature of
Blackboard. Each group will address a weekly prompt--one the group proposes or
one assigned by the instructor--for which the group must submit a 2-page
response. To ensure that all group members are participating, each member will
be responsible for analyzing a particular reading in terms of the prompt. The
group members must then share and discuss their analyses online among
themselves. Finally, the group members will synthesize the individual analyses
into one response paper submitted in Word (or rich text format) via the
"Digital Drop Box" (found in the "User Tools" area of Blackboard). The weekly
response should _not_ be merely a string of separate analyses, but should show
how all the analyses interrelate to formulate a cohesive group argument.

***Note:** The instructor(s) will be monitoring the daily postings and small
group discussions to make sure everyone is participating and to help steer the
discussions as needed.

**Communication Etiquette:** Remember that _everyone_ in the class will read
your discussion postings, so consider how your words may be interpreted. In
other words, use common sense and discretion before posting. The same applies
when e-mailing individuals and group members in the class.

**_Individual Preparation:_** Take comprehensive notes on your reading and
have all reading assignments completed by the day on which they are due to be
discussed.

**_Critical Papers:_** Two 5-7 page critical essays, one due in the middle of
the term ( **30%** ) and one at the end ( **30%** ), will count for **60%** of
your grade.  Topics for the critical papers will be made available on the
Blackboard site 2 weeks before the paper is due. Papers will be due by **6PM**
AZ time on the date indicated. Late papers will _not_ be accepted. Submit your
papers via the  "Digital Drop Box" (found in the "User Tools" area of
Blackboard).

One of the purposes of this online syllabus is to point you toward websites,
which provide additional information about writers, about writing essays, and
about literary theory. You are also encouraged to e-mail your instructor,
_[Heather Hoyt](mailto:Heather.Hoyt@asu.edu)_ , with questions about paper
topics. If you have questions about getting started on a paper, you can help
by providing a thesis paragraph and asking for a response to it. General
grading guidelines for the critical papers can be found
_[here](http://www.public.asu.edu/~dbivona/papers.html)_.

**Note:** We expect that your papers will conform to _ASU guidelines on
academic honesty_. That is, we expect that all work is your  own except for
that which you have explicitly cited on your "Works Cited" page. This means
you must cite ideas and words borrowed from online sources as well as from
books and articles found in the library. If you have further questions about
this policy, see the statement issued by the Women's Studies Program
_[here](http://www.asu.edu/clas/womens_studies/honest.htm)_. It provides a
succinct summary of the  policy in effect in this class.

**_Sources of Information:_**

If you are interested in a readable introduction to basic theoretical issues,
start by taking a look at [USD's Literary Criticism & Theory
page](http://www.usd.edu/engl/literarytheory.html). For links to sites that
offer help with rhetorical terms or with mythological background, see
_[Starting Point for Literary
Research](http://www.kingsu.ab.ca/~angela/literary.html)_. *Essays written for
this class should conform to the conventions set out in the _[MLA Format and
Citation Guide](http://owl.english.purdue.edu/handouts/research/r_mla.html)_.
You may find it useful to consult a writing handbook. The following are
currently available on the Web: _[Elements of
Style](http://www.bartleby.com/141/)_ , and _[Online English
Grammar](http://www.edunet.com/english/grammar/)_. You should also make use of
a dictionary, such as the _[WWWebster
Dictionary](http://www.m-w.com/dictionary)_.

You should be familiar with the website for _[ASU's Hayden
Library](http://www.asu.edu/lib/)_. For useful general sources of information
about literary topics  consult the following: _[Literary Resources
Page](http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/Lit/)_ , _[Encyclopedia
Britannica](http://www.britannica.com)_ , and _[Voice of the
Shuttle](http://vos.ucsb.edu/)_. For online literary texts  try these sites:
_[Modern English
Collection](http://etext.lib.virginia.edu/modeng/modeng0.browse.html)_ , _[The
Online Books Page](http://digital.library.upenn.edu/books/)_ , and
_[Literature Online (Chadwyck-Healey; ASU
only)](http://lion.chadwyck.com/home/home.cgi?source=config2.cfg)_. The latter
database is also useful for keyword, phrase, and line searches of British and
American poetry, British drama, and some fiction (the online fiction
collection of this database is presently rather small). You may also find the
_[British History Timeline](http://www.britannia.com/history/time1.html)_ a
useful source of historical background information as well as the
_[Encyclopedia of British History,
1700-1930](http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/Britain.html)_. While there is
not much online literary criticism currently available, you may find the _[IPL
Online Literary Criticism site](http://www.ipl.org/ref/litcrit/)_ and
_[Literary Criticism on the Web](http://start.at/literarycriticism)_ useful.
For a more extensive list of useful online sources, see the  "links" frame on
_[Dan Bivona's home page](http://www.public.asu.edu/~dbivona/index.html)_.

**_Required Text:_**

_The Norton Anthology of English Literature, Vol. 2_ , 7th Ed.

This book can be purchased at the ASU Bookstore or through an online
bookseller, like [Amazon.com](http://www.amazon.com/).

Most required readings in the schedule below come from the Norton Anthology. *
**Note:** The first page number to each selection is given, but you are
responsible for _all pages_ for each assigned reading in the text. Many
required readings will be found on specified websites listed below. The links
in brackets will take you to websites that provide further information on
specific topics. For a list of paper topics for the first critical paper, see
"Paper 1 Topics" in Blackboard. For a list of paper topics for the second
critical paper, see "Paper 2 Topics" in Blackboard.

**_*Office Hours:_**

Due to the online nature of this course, your instructor will be available to
answer questions via e-mail. She will regularly check e-mail in the morning
and late afternoon. Messages sent in the evening will be checked the following
morning.

****Note:** The following schedule is subject to change. Announcements will be
posted for any changes.**

**_![](images/ancient.jpg)The Romantic Period_**

**Wordsworth and Coleridge**

**T, 5/29:** Introduction: Romantic Period overview *[See "Problems of Origin
I" Lecture link in Blackboard]

**W, 5/30:** Romantics and the Problem of Origins:

["Ode. Intimations of Immortality from the Recollections of Early Childhood"
](http://www.bartleby.com/101/536.html)(287),["We Are
Seven,"](http://www.bartleby.com/145/ww124.html) (224); ["Lines composed a few
miles above Tintern Abbey"](http://www.bartleby.com/145/ww138.html) (226)

Additional resources {[John
Locke](http://www.ilt.columbia.edu/projects/digitexts/locke/understanding/title.html);
[Michael Gamer's List of Romantic
Links](http://www.english.upenn.edu/~mgamer/Romantic/index.html); [William
Wordsworth](http://www.usd.edu/~tgannon/txts/wordsbio.txt), [The Romantic
Period, 1785-1830
](http://citd.scar.utoronto.ca/English/ENGB02Y/Romantics.html)[Preface to
Lyrical
Ballads](http://www.library.utoronto.ca/utel/rp/criticism/lyrb1_il.html)}

**Th, 5/31:** Romantics and the Problem of Origins: Inventing Childhood
(Wordsworth) *[Review first Lecture in Blackboard]

**Unrestricted Course Withdrawal: 5/31-6/5

**F, 6/1:** Romantics and the Problem of Origins: *[See "Problems of Origin
II" Lecture link in Blackboard]

Self as Source (Coleridge): ["The Rime of the Ancient Mariner"
](http://etext.lib.virginia.edu/stc/Coleridge/poems/Rime_Ancient_Mariner.html)(422);
["Dejection: An
Ode"](http://etext.lib.virginia.edu/stc/Coleridge/poems/Dejection_An_Ode.html)
(459); ["Kubla
Khan"](http://etext.lib.virginia.edu/stc/Coleridge/poems/Kubla_Khan.html)(439)

Additional resources {[Coleridge's Biographia Literaria. Vol.
I](http://www.library.utoronto.ca/utel/rp/criticism/bio_l_0.html) ; [Kant's
_Prolegomena_](http://www.utm.edu/research/iep/text/kant/prolegom/prolegom.htm);
[A Coleridge Archive](http://etext.lib.virginia.edu/stc/Coleridge/stc.html)}

**M, 6/4:** Wordsworth and Coleridge discussion continued

**T, 6/5:** Natural Supernaturalism and the Familial Ideology:

[Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley](http://www.desert-fairy.com/life.shtml):
_[Frankenstein or, The Modern
Prometheus](http://etext.lib.virginia.edu/etcbin/browse-mixed-
new?id=SheFran&images=images/modeng&data=/texts/english/modeng/parsed&tag=public)_

**W, 6/6:** Hating What You Make: _Frankenstein_ continued

**Restricted Course Withdrawal: 6/6-6/15

**Th, 6/7:** Shelley, **** cont'd

Additional resources {[Byron's
"Manfred"](http://www.litgothic.com/Texts/manfred.html); [P.B. Shelley's
Prometheus Unbound](http://www.bartleby.com/139/shel116.html); [A Review of
Frankenstein by Sir Walter
Scott](http://www.english.udel.edu/swilson/mws/bemrev.html); [The Victorian
Web on "The
Sublime"](http://landow.stg.brown.edu/victorian/sublime/sublimeov.html)}

**F, 6/8:** Shelley, cont'd.

Another resource {[Prometheus
Library](http://prometheus.cc.emory.edu/library.html)}

**_![](images/JWLadyOfShalott.jpg)The Victorian Period_**

**Aestheticism Versus the Victorian Notion of Duty**

**M, 6/11:** The Pleasures of Pain: [John
Keats](http://www.bartleby.com/222/0401.html)

["Ode on Melancholy"](http://www.bartleby.com/101/628.html) (853), ["Ode on a
Grecian Urn"](http://www.bartleby.com/101/625.html) (851), ["Ode to a
Nightingale"](http://www.bartleby.com/101/624.html) (849);

[Edmund Burke, "A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the
Sublime and Beautiful"
(excerpts)](http://www.english.upenn.edu/~mgamer/Romantic/burke.sublime)
(online)

Additional resource {Aristotle, _[Poetics](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/ptext?doc=Perseus%3Aabo%3Atlg%2C0086%2C034&query=1447a.%3A8)_ }

**T, 6/12:** Evangelical Reform and the Evolution of  "Victorian" Manners:

*[See Evangelical Lecture link in Blackboard];  Dickens, ["What Christmas is as We Grow Older"](http://www.mastertexts.com/Dickens_Charles/Some_Christmas_Stories/Chapter00002.htm) (online) 

Additional resources {[Landow on
Religion](http://landow.stg.brown.edu/victorian/religion/relov.html), [Landow
and "The Doctrines of Evangelical
Protestantism"](http://landow.stg.brown.edu/victorian/religion/evangel2.html);
[Browse Landow's Victorian
Web](http://landow.stg.brown.edu/victorian/victov.html)}

**W, 6/13:** Darwinism and Victorian Culture:  *[See Darwin Lecture link in
Blackboard]  

Tennyson, ["In
Memoriam"](http://www.geocities.com/%7Espanoudi/poems/books/tennyson/tennyson04.html)
[focus on verses LV-LVI (pp1250-1252 in text)]; access additional links in
lecture.

**_ **First Critical Paper Due**  
_**

> [See "Paper 1 Topics" in Blackboard]

**Th, 6/14:** Angel in the House versus the Fallen Woman: *[See Lecture link
in Blackboard]

[Status of Women in 19th C England: An
Overview](http://members.tripod.co.uk/HastingsHistory/19/overview.htm#proslink)
(online); Tennysonian Melancholy:
["Mariana,"](http://www.library.utoronto.ca/utel/rp/poems/tennyson1.html)
(1202) ["The Lady of
Shalott"](http://www.library.utoronto.ca/utel/rp/poems/tennyson4.html) (1204),
["Locksley
Hall"](http://www.library.utoronto.ca/utel/rp/poems/tennyson11.html) (1219)

**F, 6/15:** Fallen Woman continued:

Christina Rosetti, ["Goblin Market"](http://www.crocker.com/~lwm/goblin.html)
(1589) and [Michael
Field,](http://www.sappho.com/poetry/historical/m_field.html) "To Christina
Rossetti" (1744); J.S. Mill, ["The Subjection of
Women"](http://melbecon.unimelb.edu.au/het/mill/women.htm), Ch 1 (1155)

*[See Utilitarianism Lecture link for more about J.S. Mill & Middle Class Liberalism]

Additional resources {Plato's
[Symposium](http://plato.evansville.edu/texts/jowett/symposium.htm) and
[Phaedrus](http://plato.evansville.edu/texts/jowett/phaedrus.htm); [The 1885
Criminal Law Amendment](http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/Lconsent.htm) ;
[Rictor Norton's Essays on Gay History and
Literature](http://www.infopt.demon.co.uk/rcnorton.htm); [John Addington
Symonds, "A Problem in Greek
Ethics"](http://www.infopt.demon.co.uk/symfram1.htm); [Michel Foucault
Links](http://www.synaptic.bc.ca/ejournal/foucault.htm)}

**M, 6/18:** Fallen Woman continued:

Wilde, ["The Harlot's House"](http://netpoets.com/classic/071005.htm) (1750)
and Shaw, _[Mrs. Warren's
Profession](http://authorsdirectory.com/c/wrpro10.htm)_ (1810); [ Josephine
Butler](http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/Wbutler.htm), ["Social
Purity"](http://www.indiana.edu/%7Eletrs/vwwp/butler/social.html) (online)

**T, 6/19:** The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction:
[Aestheticism and the
Decadents](http://landow.stg.brown.edu/victorian/victov.html)

*[See Aestheticism Lecture links in Blackboard]

[Algernon Charles
Swinburne](http://landow.stg.brown.edu/victorian/swinburne/acsrel.html),
["Hymn to
Proserpine"](http://www.library.utoronto.ca/utel/rp/poems/swinburn5.html)
(1625), ["The Triumph of
Time"](http://www.library.utoronto.ca/utel/rp/poems/swinburn20.html) (online),
["The Garden of](http://www.library.utoronto.ca/utel/rp/poems/swinburn6.html)
[Proserpine"](http://www.library.utoronto.ca/utel/rp/poems/swinburn6.html)
(1628), ["Ave Atque
Vale"](http://www.library.utoronto.ca/utel/rp/poems/swinburn24.html) (1631);
Matthew Arnold, [Ch 4 of Culture and
Anarchy](http://www.public.asu.edu/%7Edbivona/secure/heb&hell.html) (use
lectures ID & password to access)

Additional resources
{[Epicurus](http://landow.stg.brown.edu/victorian/decadence/epicurus.html);
Walter Benjamin, ["The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical
Reproduction"](http://pixels.filmtv.ucla.edu/community/julian_scaff/benjamin/benjamin.html);
[The Baudrillard
Project](http://www.uta.edu/english/cgb/baud/seduce/strategy.html); Donna
Haraway, ["A Cyborg
Manifesto"](http://www.stanford.edu/dept/HPS/Haraway/CyborgManifesto.html);
Victor Margolin, ["The Politics of the
Artificial"](http://mitpress.mit.edu/e-journals/Leonardo/isast/articles/margolin.html)}

**W, 6/20:** Aestheticism and Decadence continued:

[Walter Horatio Pater](http://www.trill-home.com/pater/), ["The Child in the
House"(online)](http://www.rci.rutgers.edu/%7Epiez/hercproj/pater/ch-
house.txt) , ["Conclusion" to _The Renaissance_](http://www.trill-
home.com/pater/renaissance/conclusion.html) (1642)

**Th, 6/21:** British Imperialism: Conrad and _Heart of Darkness_

**[See Modernism & Conrad lecture link in Blackboard.]

[Joseph Conrad](http://www.acsu.buffalo.edu/~csicseri/author.htm), _[Heart of
Darkness](http://www.acsu.buffalo.edu/~csicseri/) _ (1957-2017); [Timeline of
British
Empire](http://landow.stg.brown.edu/victorian/history/empire/empireov.html);
[Introduction to
Imperialism](http://landow.stg.brown.edu/victorian/history/empire/Empire.html)
(latter two readings online)

**F, 6/22:** Conrad, cont'd

_Heart of Darkness_ , Part II

**M, 6/25:** Conrad, cont'd

_Heart of Darkness_ , Part III

**_![](images/EmpirMap.jpg)The Modern Period_**

**T, 6/26:** Modernism  & Culture
([Modernity](http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/gthursby/mod/) ;[Modernism
Resources)](http://vos.ucsb.edu/shuttle/eng-mod.html)

Conrad, cont'd.

Achebe's "response" to _Heart of Darkness_ (2035)

**W, 6/27:** Modernism, cont'd

**_**Second Critical Paper Due**  
_** [See "Paper 2 Topics" in Blackboard]

[William Butler Yeats](http://www.lit.kobe-u.ac.jp/~hishika/yeats.htm),
["Easter, 1916
](http://www.geocities.com/Athens/5379/IHaveMetThem.html)(2104); ["The Second
Coming"](http://www.geocities.com/Athens/5379/TheSecondComing.html) (2106);
["Sailing to
Byzantium"](http://www.geocities.com/Athens/5379/yeats_TheTower.html) (2109);
["Crazy Jane Talks with the
Bishop,"](http://www.geocities.com/Athens/5379/WordsForMusicPerhaps_VI.html)(2116);
["Under Ben Bulben"](http://www.geocities.com/Athens/5379/UnderBenBulben.html)
(2121)

**Th, 6/28:**

[T.S. Eliot](http://www.bartleby.com/people/Eliot-Th.html): ["Tradition and
the Individual Talent"](http://www.bartleby.com/200/sw4.html) (2395) and ["The
Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock"](http://www.bartleby.com/198/1.html) (2364)

**F, 6/29:** Final discussion  & end-of-course online surveys.

* * *

__  
  
  |  
  




