ENL3251 Victorian Literature CRADDOCK

Fall 2001  MWF5th period, Section 2776

Office: TUR 4332

email: craddoc@nervm.nerdc.ufl.edu

phone: 392-6650x259

my web page (copies of syllabus and useful web links):
http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/pcraddoc  
[NEW: POEM CHECK
LIST](http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/pcraddoc/poemchecklist.htm)  
Office Hours: M,W 6th period, AND BY APPOINTMENT

Required books: Altick, _Victorian People and Ideas_ ; Abrams et al., eds.,
_Norton Anthology of English Literature_ ,Vol. IIb, seventh edition. You will
also need a package of 3x5 index cards. Books are available at Goerings
bookstore, University and 13th.

The goal of this course is to look at some of the exciting work written during
the long reign of Queen Victoria (1837-1901) in two ways: in as close an
approximation as we can achieve of the way in which its original readers would
have understood and appreciated the work, and in terms of our own age: what
this literature tells us that may be of permanent human value, or that may
enable us to see something about ourselves that a modern perspective obscures.
Omitting the novel, which is the focus of another course, we will concentrate
on poetry and nonfictional prose, with some attention to drama. **The dates on
which assignments are listed below are the dates on which they are to be
_completed_.** Your grade will be based on the following factors, each of
which is explained in detail after the list of reading assignments and due
dates for papers.

      * Two critical papers: 25% each
      * One historical paper: 25%
      * Unannounced Reading quizzes: 15%. These will stress matters of fact.
      * Class performance: 10%
ASSIGNMENT LIST

Readings are to be _Completed_ on the date listed. You may turn in the papers
one class meeting after the date listed IF AND ONLY IF you can show that you
have made some progress on the paper on the date listed. Extensions may be
granted for good reasons. Rewrites are welcome, and I will gladly discuss
drafts with you. PLAGIARISM is intolerable; the _minimum_ penalty for
plagiarized work, or any other form of academic dishonesty, will be a 0 on the
assignment. Since an F is averaged as not less than 50, the numerical
advantages of doing your own work should be obvious.

August

W 22 Introduction--the Victorian age, course requirements.

F 24 How to analyze poems, essays, plays. Those who miss this class meeting
owing to late registration should **see me for extra help** if they are
inexperienced in dealing with any of these literary forms.

M27  Read Altick, pp. 1-33; Norton 1043-66. To discuss: similarities and
differences between these two introductions to the "same" age. What is a
historical and/or literary "age"?

W 29 Carlyle, Introduction (1066-1070), Portraits of contemporaries (1070-77);
also see Norton web site (http://www.wwnorton.com) for additional "portraits."  
        [Carlyle on the Web](http://ourworld.compuserve.com/homepages/malcolmi/CARLYLEA.HTM)   
F31 Newman, Introduction and excerpts from _The Idea of a University_
(1119-1128)

**September**  
M 3 LABOR DAY

W 5 Altick, pp. 33-72

F 7 Carlyle, _The French Revolution_ and _Past and Present_ , 1103-1119;
issues: what is "history" for; where are the "heroes" [Engels'
review](http://csf.colorado.edu/psn/marx/Archive/1844-DFJ/carlyle.htm)

M 10 Mill, 1137-73

W 12 Victorian Issues: The Woman Question 1719-1739; also, Norton Topics on
Line, same title (see web links, below)

F 14 Elizabeth Barrett Browning, 1173-1180; 1195-98; also (on line) "A Year's
Spinning" and "A Musical Instrument"

M 17  Barrett Browning _Aurora Leigh_ excerpts, 1180-94; Tennyson, _The
Princess_ excerpt on pp 1229-30

W 19 Altick 73-113

F 21 Tennyson, Introduction; stories and songs 1198-1230, 1280-81; "Poems in
Progress " 2869-2873

M 24 Complete discussion of Tennyson assignment.

W 26  Altick 114-64

F 28  Tennyson, _In Memoriam_ 1230-1280;   also, on line, "The _In Memoriam_
Web" (see web links, below)

October

M 1  Tennyson, _Idylls of the King_ , 1282-1304; "Flower in the Crannied Wall"
and  "Crossing the Bar" 1304

W 3 Victorian Issues: Evolution 1679-96; also, Norton Topics On Line **First
Paper due**

F 5 Arnold, _Culture and Anarchy_ 1528-34, "Literature and Science,"1545-58

M 8  T. H. Huxley 1558-1570

W 10 Altick 165-200

F12  Robert Browning, Introduction, poems from "Porphyria's Lover"  to "Childe
Roland to the Dark Tower Came" (1345-1367)

M 15 Complete discussion of Browning assignment.

W 17 Altick 201-37

F 19 R. Browning, poems from "Fra Lippo Lippi" to "Rabbi Ben Ezra" (1373-1418)

M 22 Complete discussion of Browning assignment

W 24 Altick 238-68

F 26 Emily Bronte, 1418-1425; Christina Rossetti, 1583-65)

M 29 Charles Dickens, 1333-45; George Eliot, 1454-1469

W 31 Altick 269-98 **Second Paper due**  


November

F 2 HOMECOMING--No Class.

M 5 Arnold 1471-1504

W 7 Arnold 1504-1528

F 9  Victorian Question: Industrialism 1696-1719 (and see Norton Topics On
Line)

M 12  HOLIDAY--Veterans' Day

W 14 Meredith 1570-73; DG Rossetti 1573-83

F 16 Morris, 1605-21; Swinburne, 1621-35

M 19 Criticism as art: Ruskin, 1273-98; Pater, 1526-34; Wilde, 1616-18;
1620-28; Gilbert, 1676-78

W 21 Altick 299-309

F 23 **HOLIDAY**

M 26  Hopkins, 1648-62

W 28 Wilde, _The Importance of Being Earnest_ , 1761-1804

F 30 LAST PAPER DUE

December  
M 3 Shaw, _Mrs. Warren's Profession_

W 5   _LAST CLASS MEETING_

F 7  Last day to turn in projects and rewrites--NOT A CLASS DAY. Good luck
with exams; happy holidays.

PAPER TOPICS (you may do the critical papers and the historical paper in any
order).

CRITICAL  PAPERS

    * Topic A: Victorian poets had very strong views about the relationship between form and meaning. Choosing two different poems we have read this semester, either both by the same poet or by different poets (sections of _In Memoriam_ count as separate poems), analyze **the ways in which specific formal qualities of the poems enhance and support the meaning and emotional effects** they are designed to convey. If these instructions mean little or nothing to you, DON'T GUESS--come see me. If you would like to discuss a poem or poet that is in the Norton but was not assigned, that's probably okay, but check with me to be sure. Note that when discussing two or more poems, you still need to write one whole paper, not two half papers with little or no connection between them. Again, if this instruction doesn't mean much to you, SEE ME.
    * Topic B: Discuss the merits and defects of some work or works we have read this semester (other than the one you use for topic A), in two ways: the way it would have appeared to you, had you been living at the time the work was published; and the way it appears to you now. Account for the similarities and differences between these two responses. This is an opinion paper so far as the continuing value or loss of value of the work is concerned, but it is essential that your claims about what would have been thought of it at the time BE BASED ON EVERYTHING you have read in the course, not on the vague assumptions about what is "Victorian" that you came into the course with. NOTE: brief excerpts included in the sections called "Victorian Questions" in Norton are NOT "works we have read this semester." You may write about one of these works ONLY IF you read the whole thing.
HISTORICAL PAPER (CHOOSE A OR B--NOT BOTH!)

    * A. Investigate some aspect of Victorian life such as advertising, popular amusements, the Irish Famine, marriage laws, servants, education, fashions, medicine, foreign missionaries--anything that interests you. Write a _research paper_ about your results for an audience of students like yourself. N.B. select and cite your sources carefully; try to include some primary resources, such as articles from Victorian newspapers and journals, letters and diaries of Victorian people, published reports of Parliamentary debates and investigations, etc. Note: this paper, like any report of a factual investigation, must be properly documented and include arguments based on factual evidence. A mere list of facts is not a research paper; neither is a bunch of opinions, whether your own or those of books you have consulted. It is essential to include both information and conclusions about that information, with careful indication of the relationship between them. Notice that good information comes from two sources: (1) documents written at the time being studied and based on the writer's own knowledge (primary sources) and (2) investigations of such documents and evidence by qualified authorities in the field (secondary sources). If you use secondary sources, whether books or electronic, be sure the authors know what they are talking about and that the information is not out of date. Again, if these instructions do not make sense to you, SEE ME.
  * OR
    * B. Write a descriptive and evaluative review of a twentieth-century work that attempts to reconstruct life in Victorian Britain, such as the novels of A.S. Byett, one of several series of detective novels (Elizabeth Peters' novels about Victorian archaeologist Amelia Peabody Emerson are hilarious), films such as _Angels and Insects_. Consider what a writer or film-maker may accomplish by setting his/her work in a past era, and why the Victorian period might have been chosen. It will be essential to use what you have learned about Victorian life and thought in this course in writing this paper; don't revert to making assertions about what was "Victorian" that were simply your vague ideas before you took the course. NOTE: Films based on Victorian novels do not count, but a film of a novel by a twentieth-century author that was set in Victorian Britain, such as _The French Lieutenant's Woman_ , would count, as would the novel without the film.
  


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


CLASS PERFORMANCE (ATTENDANCE CARDS). Class preparation and attendance count
10% of your grade in the course. Everyone starts with a 50 in class
performance. At every class meeting you will turn in a 3x5 index card giving
your name and the date.  You get 1 point for doing so.  In addition, if you
choose to add a comment or question about the reading assigned for that class,
you will receive an additional point if what you say on the card shows that
you have actually been reading and thinking.   If you participated in class
discussion, this is a good opportunity to remind me that you did so--"I
brought up the question of how Tennyson uses mythology." In that case, too, I
will give you extra "class performance" credit.  If you are absent, you may
turn in a card about the reading if the absence was excused.  If you earn a
total of more than 100 points in this aspect of the course, the additional
points will be considered "extra credit."  You may also earn extra credit
points for **point projects** , described below. **Point Projects** You may
earn 1-5 points, roughly proportional to the amount of work required, for
short projects.

        * Typical one-point projects: identify a useful book, article, or website and supply that information to the class on a 3x5 card; sufficient information must be supplied so that the other students can find the material.
        * Typical two-three points projects: write a short summary of a relevant article or encyclopedia entry. Your account must be in your own words and must not be more than 100 words long. Another project is to choose a year from within the period we are studying and list the five most important events of that year **that are not already mentioned in Altick's timeline.**
        * Typical three-five point projects: write a 1-2 page report on some aspect of daily life in the Victorian period--clothes, food, art, politics, factories, etc.--or a 1-page summary comment about a scholarly book dealing with the period or authors we are studying, or a 1-2 page review of a Victorian work we have not read, or of which we have only read part. Or a group might prepare and perform a selection from one of the two playwrights we will read at the end of the semester.
        * If you have other ideas, let me know.

  * [WEB LINKS](http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/pcraddoc/vicwebs01.htm)

