[ main page ](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/home.html) |  [
current  
courses ](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/current.html) |  [
previous  
courses ](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/previous.html) |  [
student  
projects ](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/student.html) |  [
links ](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/links.html)  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
[**ENGL 3316  
Spring 1999
**](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/3316/3316S99.html)

[ announcements
](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/3316/3316S99_ann.html)

[ syllabus
](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/3316/3316S99_syll.html)

[ handouts
](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/3316/3316S99_hnd.html)

[ assignments
](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/3316/3316S99_asgn.html)

[ related links
](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/3316/3316S99_link.html)

|  

**English 3316: Literature of the Victorian Age **

****Spring 1999: 111 R. Cullen 10:00-10:50 MWF

Dr. Natalie M. Houston  
236-A Roy Cullen  
office hours: M 1:00-3:30 and by appointment  
713-743-2970  
[houston@bayou.uh.edu ](mailto:houston@bayou.uh.edu)

  

**Course Description**

This course serves as an introduction to a rich variety of Victorian texts and
to the social and cultural contexts that produced them. Students will gain
interpretive and analytical skills to enhance their understanding of novels
and poetry written during one of the most complex and challenging periods in
modern history. At the heart of the course lies a question that was as
critical for Victorian readers as it is for us today: in an industrial,
consumerist society, what is the purpose of art and literature? How does
literature offer writers and readers ways to understand and even critique
their society? What kinds of (necessary?) escape does art offer? What purpose
does fantasy serve? What kinds of truths can only be told through creative
forms?

**Course Objectives**

By the end of the semester, you should be able to:

  * analyze passages from novels by explaining their significance for the structure and meaning of the work as a whole;
  * analyze and understand poetry, including basic discussions of poetic form;
  * discuss the relation of the course texts to their historical period.

**Course Requirements/Grading**

  * keep up with the reading
  * class participation (10%)
  * two short papers (2 p.) (20%)
  * one longer paper (4-5 pages) (25%)
  * formal analysis of a poem (15%)
  * final exam -- The exam will contain passage identifications and essay questions covering the entire semester's work. (30%)

**Reading Assignments**

Please read all of the poems listed for a given day, even though we might not
discuss each one equally during that hour. We have five class sessions
scheduled per novel; I will tell you in advance how far you need to read to
keep up with class discussion. In general, try to have the novel finished by
the fourth day. If it seems as though many of you are not doing the reading, I
will resort to giving quizzes, but I'd rather not have to.

We will be reading _Lady Audley's Secret_ (F only) over the course of the
entire semester, in installments, as it was originally published. **DO NOT
READ AHEAD OF THE ASSIGNED INSTALLMENT!!** You will have plenty of other
reading to be doing, and the point of reading in installments is to gain a
more accurate sense of how 19th-century fiction was originally read.

**Class Participation**

You should come to each class with some questions or ideas written down about
the day's reading, or some passages marked that you would like to discuss.
Although we generally think of reading as a solitary, silent, experience,
that's not how most readers in the nineteenth-century experienced the works on
our syllabus. By discussing these texts with other readers you can not only
emulate that historical experience but also vastly improve your analytical and
critical faculties. Each of you has shared responsibility for what happens in
this course and for what you get from it. Each of you has a unique perspective
that you bring to a text that could enrich other readers' understanding. I
look forward to hearing from each of you during the semester.

**Attendance/Late Papers**

I understand university education as a contractual system enacted among
adults. Therefore, you can and must take responsibility for your own
education. My attendance policy is as follows. (A) If you actively participate
in class discussion and miss only 0-1 classes, your final course grade will be
raised 3%. (B) If you participate in class discussion and miss 2-3 classes,
your final course grade will be raised 2%. (C) At my discretion, if you
contribute a lot to discussion _or_ have very good attendance, but do not fit
either of the above categories, your course grade may be raised 1%. (D) If you
miss _4 or more consecutive_ classes, I will assume you have dropped the
course unless you contact me before the next class day.

I can assure you, however, that although I do not penalize you for missing a
class now and then, if you miss a considerable number of class days your
grades on course assignments and exams will suffer simply because you will
lack the knowledge and skills required to complete those assignments
successfully.

Assignments are due in class on the day indicated on the syllabus. They will
be automatically dropped half a letter grade for each course day (MWF) after
that before I receive the paper. I will only officially receive papers on
those three days of the week. For example: if your paper is due on Monday, but
you turn it in on Tuesday or on Wednesday, the highest grade you could receive
would be an A-. Exceptions in the case of serious illness or personal
circumstances can be made. You may turn late materials in during class, or to
my mailbox in the English department, or under my office door.

**Required Texts**

Buckley, J., ed., _Poetry of the Victorian Period_ (Addison-Wesley)

Braddon, M. E., _Lady Audley's Secret_ (Oxford)

Bronte, C., _Jane Eyre_ (Penguin)

Gaskell, E., _North and South_ (Penguin)

Stoker, B., _Dracula_ (Broadview)

Wilde, O., _The Importance of Being Earnest and Other Plays_ (Oxford)

******Reading Schedule**

Unless otherwise noted, selections are in the Buckley poetry anthology.

W 1/20 Introduction

F 1/22 Introduction

_1832-1842_

M 1/25 Alfred Tennyson, "Mariana," "Lady of Shalott"

W 1/27 Alfred Tennyson, "Lady of Shalott," "The Lotos-Eaters"

F 1/29 Alfred Tennyson, "The Lotos-Eaters"; Mary Elizabeth Braddon, _Lady
Audley's Secret_ (chapters 1-3, through "Hidden Relics")

_1842-1846_

M 2/1 Robert Browning, "My Last Duchess," "Soliloquy of the Spanish Cloister"

W 2/3 Robert Browning, "The Laboratory"

F 2/5 Emily Bronte, "Remembrance"; _Lady Audley's Secret_ (chapters 4-7,
through "After a Year")

_1847_

M 2/8 Charlotte Bronte, _Jane Eyre_

_**PAPER 1 DUE (2 p.)_** ****

W 2/10 Charlotte Bronte, _Jane Eyre_

F 2/12 Charlotte Bronte, _Jane Eyre_ ; _Lady Audley's Secret_ (chapters 8-12,
through "Still Missing")

M 2/15 Charlotte Bronte, _Jane Eyre_

W 2/17 Charlotte Bronte, _Jane Eyre_

F 2/19 Elizabeth Barrett Browning, "The Cry of the Children"; _Lady Audley's
Secret_ (chapters 13-16, through "Robert Audley Gets His Cong e")

_1848-1850_

M 2/22 Elizabeth Barrett Browning, "The Runaway Slave at Pilgrim's Point"
(handout)

W 2/24 Elizabeth Barrett Browning, "Sonnets from the Portuguese"

F 2/26 Elizabeth Barrett Browning, "Sonnets from the Portuguese"; _Lady
Audley's Secret_ (chapters 17-2, through "Mrs. Plowson")

**_PAPER 2 DUE (2 p.)_**

M 3/1 Alfred Tennyson, "In Memoriam"

W 3/3 Alfred Tennyson, "In Memoriam"

F 3/5 Catch-up day; _Lady Audley's Secret_ (chapters 3-5, through "Clara")

M 3/8 Dante Gabriel Rossetti, "The Blessed Damozel"

W 3/10 Dante Gabriel Rossetti, "Sister Helen"

F 3/12 No _LAS_ assignment; discussion of illustrations

**_POEM ANALYSIS DUE_** __

SPRING BREAK

_1855-1858_

M 3/22 William Morris, "The Haystack in the Floods"

W 3/24 William Morris, "The Defence of Guenevere"

F 3/26 Robert Browning, "Love in a Life," "Life in a Love," "Any Wife to Any
Husband"; _Lady Audley's Secret_ (chapters 6-8, through "So Far and No
Farther")

M 3/29 Elizabeth Gaskell, _North and South_

W 3/31 Elizabeth Gaskell, _North and South_

F 4/2 Elizabeth Gaskell, _North and South_ ; _Lady Audley's Secret_ (chapters
9-11, through "In the Lime-Walk")

M 4/5 Elizabeth Gaskell, _North and South_

W 4/7 Elizabeth Gaskell, _North and South_

F 4/9 Christina Rossetti, "Song," "After Death," "Remember," "An Apple
Gathering"; _Lady Audley's Secret_ (chapters 12-1, through "The Red Light in
the Sky")

_1862-1881_

M 4/12 Christina Rossetti, "Goblin Market"

W 4/14 Christina Rossetti, "Goblin Market"

F 4/16 Dante Gabriel Rossetti, "The House of Life" (selections TBA); _Lady
Audley's Secret_ (chapters 2-4, through "The Hush that Succeeds the Tempest")

_1895-1897_

M 4/19 Bram Stoker, _Dracula_

**_PAPER 3 DUE (4-5 p.)_**

W 4/21 Bram Stoker, _Dracula_

F 4/23 Bram Stoker, _Dracula_ ; _Lady Audley's Secret_ (***chapters 5-7,
through PART of "Ghost-Haunted")

M 4/26 Bram Stoker, _Dracula_

W 4/28 Bram Stoker, _Dracula_

F 4/30 Oscar Wilde, "The Importance of Being Earnest"; _Lady Audley's Secret_
(chapters 7 -end)

M 5/3 Oscar Wilde, "The Importance of Being Earnest"

**_EXAM_** __date/time posted in official exam schedule  
  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---

