Prof. Wendy Moffat Office: EC310  
Freshman Seminar x1499; e-mail: moffat  
11 MWF; EC 406 Hours: M 1-3, W 2-4, Th 9-10 and by appt.  

       

**  
** **Fall 2000 Freshman Seminar: Victorian London**  
  
Required Texts: (*Available for purchase in the College Bookstore)

Ackroyd, _The Trial of Elizabeth Cree *  
_ BBC/PBS, _The 1900 House_ (A/V Room, Waidner-Spahr Library)  
Dickens, _Bleak House_ (Norton Critical) *  
Leigh, _Topsy Turvy_ (A/V Room, Waidner-Spahr Library) _  
_ Reisz, _The French Lieutenant's Woman_ (A/V Room, Waidner-Spahr Library)

I also recommend: Armstrong, _Study is Hard Work_ ; Hacker: _A Writer's
Reference_  
  
**Course URL** : http://courseinfo.dickinson.edu/courses/fs-22-FA00/  
Writing Center Consultant: Erin Lawrence

  
During the time Queen Victoria reigned (1832-1901), London developed into the
most important and complex city in Europe. As its population swelled and
diversified, the city became a crucible for many of the issues we associate
with urban life today: extremes of poverty and wealth; the role of government
in shaping society; the growth of urban areas and changing attitudes towards
nature; the technological and social changes wrought by Industrial Capitalism;
the impact of science on religious values; the role of women and working
people as the century advances; the sense of national identity as it's
engendered by urban identity. Using representations of London from a variety
of forms--especially fiction, social history, and film--we will study the
multiple ways that the Victorians themselves, and we today, make sense of the
city of London.

  
  
  
**Reading Assignments:  
**  
Sat. Aug. 26 First class: syllabus review and the issues (1:30-2:30)  
NB Class meets in EC 107  
View _1900 House_ Parts I-II in Bechtel Room, W-S Library 3-5pm

**Historiography  
**  
Mon. 28 _1900 House_ Discussion [class meets in EC 107]

30 Kavanagh, "Ideology" [class meets in EC 406]  
Paper #1 assignment: "The ideology of _1900 House,_ " 2-3 pages

Sept. 1 Class in Waidner-Spahr Library with Julie Bockenstedt, Librarian  
"Treasure Hunt for On-Site Resources"

Sept. 4 **Paper #1 Due** : discussion of "ideology" in practice

6Group presentations: sharing the wealth (distribute copies of one-page group
reports to HUB boxes by 5pm on Sept. 5) Sign-up to meet with Ms. Bockenstedt

**Bleak House and London  
**  
Sept. 8 Dickens, _Bleak House_ , to ch. 10;  **paper #2 assignment distributed
(2-3 pages)  
**

     Research one aspect of Victorian material culture found in _Bleak House_ and demonstrate how understanding this illuminates the novel for you. Use at least five sources, and at least 3 different kinds of sources. Credit for creativity.

11 _Bleak House_ , to ch. 20

13 The Norton Critical Bleak House: resources and contexts **  
**  
15 _Bleak House_ , to ch. 30  
**All groups must meet with Ms. Bockenstedt by this date.  
**

18 _Bleak House_ , to ch. 35

20 **Paper #2 due** : Discussion of papers; **Paper #3 assignment
distributed**  
Close reading a chapter of _Bleak House._ (4-6 pages)

22 _Bleak House_ , to ch. 40

  
25 _Bleak House_ , to ch. 50

27 **Draft of paper #3 due** : Writing Workshop in-class

29 _Bleak House_ , to ch. 55

  
Oct. 2 Social history and _Bleak House:_ Reflections

4 _Bleak House_ , to ch. 60 _  
_  
6 end of _Bleak House!  
_  
  
9 Dickens' Working Plans for _Bleak House_  
  
11 **Final, revised draft of Paper #3 due;** discussion of revising strategies
**  
**  
Fall pause  
**  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Film Depictions of Victorian London  
**  
Oct. 16View _The French Lieutenant's Woman_ (outside of class);  
class discussion: "reading" a film  
**assignments for paper #4 [historiography of Victorian London] and annotated
bibliography distributed**

18 Ideology and _The French Lieutenant's Woman  
_  
20 Material culture and _The French Lieutenant's Woman  
_

Oct. 23 Social History and _The French Lieutenant's Woman  
_  
25 View _Topsy Turvy_ (no class)

27 Close Reading _Topsy Turvy_ : discussion

  
30 Ideology and _Topsy Turvy_

Nov. 1 Material culture and _Topsy Turvy  
_  
3 Social History and _Topsy Turvy_

**A Modern View of Victorian London  
**  
6 Ackroyd, _The Trial of Elizabeth Cree  
_  
8 Ackroyd's Method _  
_  
10  **Paper #4 due: historiography of Victorian London**

  
13 Ackroyd, _The Trial of Elizabeth Cree_

15 Ackroyd, _The Trial of Elizabeth Cree_

17 Ackroyd, _The Trial of Elizabeth Cree_

  
20 Ackroyd, _The Trial of Elizabeth Cree  
_  
Thanksgiving Break

27 Novel versus film: discussion

29 **Annotated Bibliographies Due  
**  
Dec. 1 Last Class: Course Evaluation [Blackboard hoard keys due]

**Course requirements:**

The readings are difficult and sometimes voluminous. **** This is a class for
beginners, which means that I do not expect you to know anything about the
literature or history of the period. I will expect every student to be engaged
actively in the life of the class; be willing to contribute to discussion
thoughtfully and energetically, come to class prepared every day, take
responsibility for your learning.  
**  
Don't plagiarize: see the college handbook for a definition of plagiarism.  
**  
In order to pass the class you must submit all assignments, including the
Blackboard hoard. You **must consult our designated writing center tutor for
papers three and four** ; papers are due in class on the date specified; late
papers will receive a grade of F; papers which have required writing center
consultation and for which I do not receive a valid consultant's report will
receive a grade of F. Film viewings are a required part of the class. **

Blackboard Technological and Pedagogical Experiment: **

I will expect students to contribute to the intellectual life of the classroom
using Blackboard in two ways: first, with frequent, relevant, and thoughtful
contributions to the "threaded discussion"; second, with contributions to the
common hoard on Blackboard, through adding external links, creating relevant
webpages, etc. I am not going to quantify the number of required entries for
the "threaded discussion" because I want to play it by ear. I will assess the
quality of your contributions. I will reward thoughtful, explorative engaged
dialogue presented in a style commensurate with formal written expression. As
to the second method, each student will be required to contribute three items
to the Blackboard hoard, only one of which can be ready-made, such as an
external link or copy of a printed resource. The other two you must craft
yourself. Be sure to sign your work, or call it to my attention, so I can
attribute it to you. At the end of the semester, a special portion of the
course evaluation will be devoted to your assessment of the value of the
Blackboard experiment.

**Writing and Grading:**  
Your papers will emphasize different approaches and skills: paper #1 is a
diagnostic critical analysis, which will be graded, but will not count toward
your final grade; paper #2 is an explication of material culture (10% of your
final grade); paper #3 is a close reading of Bleak House which will be drafted
in stages (25% of your total grade, only final draft receives a grade); paper
#4 is an exercise in historiography and research (25 % of your final grade);
and an annotated bibliography (20% of your final grade). The remaining 20% of
the grade reflects your contributions to the class in discussion, group work,
and the hoard.

If you have any questions about your progress in the course, please come to
see me in person during my office hours or at another time of mutual
convenience. Technology can be wonderful, but there's no substitute for human
interaction.  
  

