**HOME SWEET HOME**

**Domestic Architecture and American Culture**

** **

****

Instructor:  Sarah Mullen

Office: GAR 418, 471-7277

Office Hours:  TTH 3:30-5:00

[skmullen@mail.utexas.edu](mailto:skmullen@mail.utexas.edu)

|

****

TTH: 2:00-3:30

GAR 311

#25845  
  
---|---  
  
From the New England saltbox to the modern-day "McMansion," and from the
southern shot-gun house to Buckminster Fuller's Dymaxion domes, the American
house represents nearly four centuries of architectural innovation and
experimentation.  Yet the home is more than an architectural icon:  it has
played a major role in the development of the American cultural landscape and
has also become a fundamental symbol of the American dream.  In this class we
will explore the American home as an object signifying complex and often
contradictory ideals of community and family, private and public life,
originality and tradition, individualism and conformity, poverty and plenty.



This course will progress more or less chronologically, beginning with the
Colonial Era and concluding with manifestations of the contemporary domestic
landscape.  Along the way, we will ask ourselves challenging questions about
domestic architecture:  Why study houses? Why do American houses look the way
they do? What is distinctive about American domestic architecture? What
factors account for the changes in American homes over time?   What do houses
tell us about American history and culture? In the end, our goal will be to
look at, think about, comprehend, and cogently discuss the world in which we
live.

** **

**Readings:   **

The following required books **** are available for sale at the UT Co-op.
There is one copy of each book on two-hour reserve at the UGL Reserves Desk.
You will also need to purchase a course reader, which is for sale at Speedway
Copies in the basement of Dobie.

** **

Alex Kotlowitz, _There Are No Children Here_



Andrew Ross, _The Celebration Chronicles_



Tom Wolfe, _From Bauhaus to Our House_



Gwendolyn Wright, _Building the Dream:   A Social History of Housing in
America_

** **

**Course Requirements:**

** **

  * Five 1-page papers (15%)
  * One 3-page paper (10%)
  * Two exams (20% each)
  * One 10-page term paper (25%)
  * Attendance and Participation (10%)



In each of the five short (1 page, typed, single-spaced) papers, you will
summarize and comment on one of the required readings.  Note that I have
assigned six short papers, so you'll have one freebie.



The 3-page (typed, double-spaced) paper will be an outline and proposal for
your term paper.  This assignment is due approximately halfway through the
semester, so you'll have plenty of time to write and research the longer
paper.  In the weeks leading up to the due date, I'll be holding office hour
conferences to discuss your ideas for paper topics.  The final term paper will
be a minimum of 10 pages, typed and double-spaced.



My policy for missed exams is as follows.  Failure to take any exam will
result in a grade of zero.  I will give makeup exams for excused absences
(i.e. in writing) for full credit.  I will also give makeup exams for
unexcused absences, but the highest possible grade is a 70.  Any student who
misses a scheduled makeup exam will receive a zero for that exam.



You will write the 10-page term paper in lieu of taking a final exam, so you
will not be tested on the readings following the second exam.  However, short
quizzes on these readings are _very likely_ , so you must continue to prepare
all assignments in the last third of the class.



**Office Hours and Appointments:**  

My office hours will be after class each Tuesday and Thursday, but I am also
available for appointments if these times do not suit your schedule.  You can
contact me by email, which I check frequently, or in emergency situations by
telephone at 479-7912 (but not after 10 pm, please.)  You can also try to
reach me by telephone in my office:  471-7277.  My office is on the 4th floor
of Garrison Hall and is not handicapped-accessible.  If you need to meet with
me in an accessible location, that's easy to arrange--just let me know.

** **

**Class Schedule:**

We will spend part of each class discussing the assigned readings , so your
diligent attention to all assignments is essential.  Every Monday and
Wednesday evening, I will email a list of questions to each of you, which you
will be expected to prepare for class discussion the next day.   Please note
that you will need to read each assignment before the day on which it appears
in the schedule.  For example, you should come to class on Thursday, January
17 having read and  prepared to discuss the Dell Upton selection.



Note that I have assigned three books-- _From Bauhaus to Our House, There Are
No Children Here, and The Celebration Chronicles_ --each of which you will
read in its entirety.  Keep this in mind as the semester progresses; I
recommend reading these books at a moderate pace, so you're not stuck reading
them at the last minute.  The good news is that I think you'll find these
books very enjoyable, and they may even be the sort of thing you'd like to
read before bedtime.  __



On Saturday, April 20 we will be taking a tour of the Charles Moore House here
in Austin.  Located just west of campus, the Moore House is a significant
architectural landmark, as it was designed by one of America's most important
postmodern architects as his own residence.  This tour is optional but highly
recommended; the admission fee is $4.

** **

**Week 1**

**         **1/15:  Introduction and Orientation



1/17:  Why study the house?  

Read: Wright, xv-xix and Upton, "An American Icon" in course reader.

**Week 2**

1/22:  Colonial Traditions.  

Read:  "Articles of Agreement for Springfield, Massachusetts," and Ierley,
"The Genealogy of the House" and "The House A-Building," all in course reader.



1/24:  The New Nation. **1 page summary due.**  

Read: Bushman, "Houses and Gardens" in course reader.

**Week 3**

1/29:  Slave Housing.  ****

Read:  Wright, 41-57 and Internet exhibition, "Back of the Big House:  The
Cultural Landscape of the Plantation" at
<http://www.gwu.edu/~folklife/bighouse/index.html>



1/31:  City Life.

Read:  Wright, 21-40 and Warner, "Spatial Patterns of Rapid Growth" and
"Industrialization" in course reader.

** **

** **

**Week 4**

2/5:  Housing for Workers.

Read:  Wright, 58-72, and Crawford, "Textile Landscapes, 1790-1850" in course
reader.



2/7:  The Proper House.  **1 page summary due.** ****

Read:  Wright, 73-89 and Grier, "Imagining the Parlor" in course reader.

**Week** ******5** ****

2/12:  Reforms

Read: Gilfoyle, "Strumpets and Misogynists:  Brothel 'Riots' and the
Transformation of Prostitution in Antebellum New York City'" and Downing,
"Cottage Residences," in course reader.

           

2/14:  NO CLASS.  Optional (but highly recommended) tour of Architecture
Library with Janine Henri, Head Librarian.  Meet Ms. Henri at the Circulation
Desk at 2:00 p.m. ****

**Week 6**

2/19:  Discussion and Review



2/21:  **First Exam**

**Week 7**

Appointments to discuss paper topics begin this week.  Sign up sheets will be
posted at GAR 418.



2/26:  Victorian Suburbs.  ****

Read:  Wright, 96-113, and Olmsted and Vaux, "Plan for Riverside, Illinois" in
course reader.



2/28:  Multifamily Dwellings.

Read:  Wright, 114-151.

**Week 8**

**          **Appointments to discuss paper topics continue.  Sign up sheets
will be posted at GAR 418.

** **

3/5:  Bungalows.

Read:  Wright, 158-176 and Robertson, "House and Home in the Arts and Crafts
Era:  Reforms for Simpler Living" in course reader. ****



3/7:  Women at Home.  **1 page summary due.**

Read:  Hayden, "The Grand Domestic Revolution," and Beecher and Stowe, "The
American Woman's Home" in course reader.

**Week 9**

NO CLASS!  Have a wonderful Spring Break.

**Week 10**

3/19:  Company Towns.  ****

Read:  Wright, 177-192, and Crawford, "Designers and the 'New' Company Towns"
and "The Search for a Style" in course reader. ****



3/21:  Frank Lloyd Wright.  **3 page outline and proposal due.**

Read:  Wright, "The Art and Craft of the Machine" in course reader.

# Week 11

3/26:  High Modernism.  Read:  Wolfe, _From Bauhaus to Our House_ (in
entirety), __ and Hitchcock and Johnson, "The International Style" in course
reader.



3/28:  Discussion and Review.  ****

** **

** **

** **

**Week 12**

4/2:   **Second Exam**



4/4:  Public Housing.  ****

Read:  Wright, 220-239 and Kotlowitz,  _There are No Children Here_ (in
entirety). ****

**Week 13**

4/9:  Ranch Houses.  **1 page summary due.**

Read:  Jackson, "The Westward Moving House" and May, "Western Ranch Houses"
in course reader. ****



4/11:  Postwar Solutions

Read:  Wright, 240-261, and  Gans, "Levittown and America" in course reader.

# Week 14

4/16:  Midcentury Modern.  **1 page summary due.**

Read:  McCoy, " _Arts and Architecture_ Case Study Houses " in course reader
and Hine, "Taking Off" and "A New Place" in course reader.



4/18:  White Flight  

Read:  Baxandall and Ewen, "Suburban Segregation" and "The Battle for
Integration" in course reader.  ****

** **

**          **4/20:  Tour of the Charles Moore House.  Please bring $4 for
admission. ****

**Week 15**

4/23:  The Postmodern House

Read:  Venturi, "Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture" and Klotz,
"Postmodern Architecture" in course reader



4/25:  New Urbanism. **1 page summary due.**  

Read:  Ross, _The Celebration Chronicles_ (in entirety). ****

# Week 16

            4/30:  Contemporary Issues

Read:  Blakely and Snyder, "Forting Up;" Garber, "The Trophy House;" and
Brooks, "Castle in a Box" all in course reader.



5/2:  **Final Papers Due in GAR 303 at 5:00 p.m.   No late papers will be
accepted!**

  





