[ main page ](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/home.html) |  [
current  
courses ](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/current.html) |  [
previous  
courses ](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/previous.html) |  [
student  
projects ](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/student.html) |  [
links ](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/links.html)  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
[**ENGL 3316  
Spring 2000
**](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/3316/3316S00.html)

[ announcements
](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/3316/3316S00_ann.html)

[ syllabus
](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/3316/3316S00_syll.html)

[ handouts
](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/3316/3316S00_hnd.html)

[ assignments
](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/3316/3316S00_asgn.html)

[ related links
](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/3316/3316S00_link.html)

|  

**English 3316: Literature of the Victorian Age **

****Spring 2000: MW 4:00-5:30 McElhinney 105

Dr. Natalie M. Houston  
236-A Roy Cullen  
office hours: MW 2:30-3:30 and by appointment  
713-743-2970 [nhouston@uh.edu ](mailto:nhouston@uh.edu)  

  

**Course Description**

This course serves as an introduction to a rich variety of Victorian texts and
to the social and cultural contexts that produced them. Students will gain
interpretive and analytical skills to enhance their understanding of novels
and poetry written during one of the most complex and challenging periods in
modern history. At the heart of the course lies a question that was as
critical for Victorian readers as it is for us today: in an industrial,
consumerist society, what is the purpose of art and literature? How does
literature offer writers and readers ways to understand and even critique
their society? What kinds of (necessary?) escape does art offer? What purpose
does fantasy serve? What kinds of truths can only be told through creative
forms?

  

**Course Objectives**

By the end of the semester, you should be able to:

  * analyze passages from novels by explaining their significance for the structure and meaning of the work as a whole;
  * analyze and understand poetry, including basic discussions of poetic form;
  * discuss the relation of the course texts to their historical period.

  

**Course Requirements/Grading**

  * keep up with the reading
  * one short paper (2 p.) (10%)
  * one longer paper (5-7 pages) (25%)
  * formal analysis of a poem (15%)
  * course participation (25%)
  * final exam -- The exam will contain passage identifications and essay questions covering the entire semester's work. (25%)

  

**Reading Assignments**

Please read all of the poems listed for a given day, even though we might not
discuss each one equally during that hour. We have several class sessions
scheduled per novel; I will tell you in advance how far you need to read to
keep up with class discussion. If it seems as though many of you are not doing
the reading, I will resort to giving quizzes, but I'd rather not have to.

We will be reading _Lady Audley's Secret_ (W only) over the course of the
entire semester, in installments, as it was originally published. **DO NOT
READ AHEAD OF THE ASSIGNED INSTALLMENT!!** You will have plenty of other
reading to be doing, and the point of reading in installments is to gain a
more accurate sense of how 19th-century fiction was originally read.

  

**Poem Analysis/Papers**

Papers are due on 2/9 and 4/24. I will give out detailed assignments at least
one week before the due dates. See my late paper policy below. At midterm
(3/8), a formal analysis of a poem that we have not read in class (I will
provide the text) will be due.

  

**Course Participation**

Course participation, as I understand it, encompasses all of your interactions
with me and with your colleagues. Your participation grade includes both your
generous and willing participation in classroom discussion and group
activities and the timeliness of your written work. Your classroom attendance
is factored into your final grade separately, as explained below.

  

****_Class Discussion_

You should come to each class with some questions or ideas written down about
the day's reading, or some passages marked that you would like to discuss.
Although we generally think of reading as a solitary, silent, experience,
that's not how most readers in the nineteenth-century experienced the works on
our syllabus. By discussing these texts with other readers you can not only
emulate that historical experience but also vastly improve your analytical and
critical faculties. Each of you has shared responsibility for what happens in
this course and for what you get from it. Each of you has a unique perspective
that you bring to a text that could enrich other readers' understanding. I
look forward to hearing from each of you during the semester.

  

_Late Journals/Papers_

10% of your final course grade depends upon the timeliness of your work. If
all of your work is turned in on time, you will receive full points for this
component of your grade. Late work reduces your timeliness score. _I will not
accept papers more than one week after the original due date without
documentation of a medical or family emergency._

  

_Attendance_

I understand university education as a contractual system enacted among
adults. Therefore, you can and must take responsibility for your own
education. My attendance policy is as follows.

  * If you actively participate in class discussion and miss only 0-1 classes, your final course grade will be raised 4%. 
  * If you participate in class discussion and miss 2-3 classes, your final course grade will be raised 2%. 
  * At my discretion, if you contribute a lot to discussion _or_ have very good attendance, but do not fit either of the above categories, your course grade may be raised 1%. 
  * If you miss _3 or more consecutive_ classes, I will assume you have dropped the course unless you contact me before the next class day.
  

I can assure you, however, that although I do not penalize you for missing a
class now and then, if you miss a considerable number of class days your
grades on course assignments and exams will suffer simply because you will
lack the knowledge and skills required to complete those assignments
successfully.

  

**Required Texts**

Braddon, Mary Elizabeth, _Lady Audley's Secret_ (please use either the Penguin
or Oxford edition)

Dickens, Charles _David Copperfield_ (Oxford)

Eliot, George _The Mill on the Floss_ (Oxford)

Wilde, Oscar, _The Picture of Dorian Gray_ (Broadview)

_The Broadview Anthology of Victorian Poetry and Poetic Theory_ , ed. Thomas
Collins and Vivienne Rundle

  

**Reading Schedule**

  

W 1/19 Introduction

  

___1832-1842_

M 1/24 Alfred Tennyson, "Mariana," "Lady of Shalott," "The Palace of Art"

W 1/26 Alfred Tennyson, "Lady of Shalott," "The Lotos-Eaters"

Mary Elizabeth Braddon, _Lady Audley's Secret_ (chapters 1-3, through "Hidden
Relics")

  

___1842-1846_

M 1/31 Robert Browning, "My Last Duchess," "The Laboratory," "Porphyria's
Lover," "Johannes Agricola in Meditation"

W 2/2 Letitia E. Landon (LEL) "The Factory" [1835]

Elizabeth Barrett Browning, "The Cry of the Children" __

Eliza Cook, "Song of the Ugly Maiden" __

_Lady Audley's Secret_ (chapters 4-7, through "After a Year")

  

_1849-1850_

M 2/7 Charles Dickens, _David Copperfield_

W 2/9 _David Copperfield_

_Lady Audley's Secret_ (chapters 8-12, through "Still Missing")

**_PAPER DUE (2 p.)_** __

M 2/14 _David Copperfield_

_Note: Feb 15 is the last day to drop without a grade_

W 2/16 Elizabeth Barrett Browning, "The Runaway Slave at Pilgrim's Point"

_Lady Audley's Secret_ (chapters 13-16, through "Robert Audley Gets His Cong
e")

M 2/21 _David Copperfield_

W 2/23 Elizabeth Barrett Browning, "Sonnets from the Portuguese"

_Lady Audley's Secret_ (chapters 17-2, through "Mrs. Plowson")

M 2/28 _David Copperfield_

W 3/1 _David Copperfield_

_Lady Audley's Secret_ (chapters 3-5, through "Clara")

M 3/6 Alfred Tennyson, "In Memoriam A. H. H." (selections)

W 3/8 Alfred Tennyson, "In Memoriam A. H. H." (selections)

No _LAS_ assignment; discussion of illustrations

**_POEM ANALYSIS DUE_** __

SPRING BREAK

  

_1850-1862_

M 3/20 Dante Gabriel Rossetti, "The Blessed Damozel," "Jenny," "The
Woodspurge," "Found (For a Picture)"

W 3/22 William Morris, "The Haystack in the Floods," "The Defence of
Guenevere"

_Lady Audley's Secret_ (chapters 6-8, through "So Far and No Farther")

M 3/27 George Eliot, _The Mill on the Floss_

W 3/29 George Eliot, _The Mill on the Floss_

_Lady Audley's Secret_ (chapters 9-11, through "In the Lime-Walk")

M 4/3 George Eliot, _The Mill on the Floss_

_Note: last day to withdraw from a course_

W 4/5 George Eliot, _The Mill on the Floss_

_Lady Audley's Secret_ (chapters 12-1, through "The Red Light in the Sky")

M 4/10 George Meredith, _Modern Love_

W 4/12 Adelaide Anne Procter, "A Woman's Question," "A Woman's Answer," "A
Woman's Last Word"

_Lady Audley's Secret_ (chapters 2-4, through "The Hush that Succeeds the
Tempest")

  

___1862-1890_

M 4/17 Christina Rossetti, "Goblin Market," "Song," "After Death," "An Apple
Gathering"

W 4/19 Algernon Charles Swinburne, "At a Month's End"

Dante Gabriel Rossetti, from the "House of Life": "Nuptial Sleep," "Silent
Noon," "The Landmark," "Soul's Beauty," "Body's Beauty"

_Lady Audley's Secret_ (***chapters 5-7, through PART of "Ghost-Haunted")

M 4/24 Oscar Wilde, _Picture of Dorian Gray_

Oscar Wilde, "Impressions," "Symphony in Yellow"

**_PAPER DUE (5-7 p.)_**

W 4/26 Oscar Wilde, _Picture of Dorian Gray_

_Lady Audley's Secret_ (chapters 7 -end)

M 5/1 Oscar Wilde, _Picture of Dorian Gray_

Wrap-up

  

******Final Exam:** Friday, May 5, 5:00-8:00 p.m.  
  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---

