### English 2112B

World Literature II

####

M: 6:30-9:15

Newton 2204

Dr. Richard Flynn

Office: Newton 2218B

Phone: 681-0150

Email:[rflynn@gsvms2.cc.gasou.edu](mailto:rflynn@gsvms2.cc.gasou.edu)

Homepage:[www2.gasou.edu/facstaff/rflynn](http://www2.gasou.edu/facstaff/rflynn)

Office Hours: MW 10-12 a.m., F 12-12:50, and by appointment.

**Text** : Wilkie and Hurt. _Literature of the Western World 5th ed._ , Volume
II. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2001.

* * *

**Course Objectives** :

1\. To familiarize you with some of the important works of world literature
from the late 17th century to the present.

2\. To help you learn to read these works in social, political, and historical
context.

3\. To help you learn to become an attentive and thoughtful reader of literary
texts.

4\. To provide you with some background for further literary study.

* * *

**Course Requirements** : Regular attendance; regular preparation of reading;
2 tests, which will include either quotation identification or essay questions
or both; one short paper; and a final exam with both quotation identification
and an essay.

* * *

**Grading Policy** :

Tests and papers: 60%

Participation: 15%

Final: 25%

* * *

**Attendance Policy** : Regular attendance is required; Because the course
meets only once a week, it is unlikely that you will be able to pass the tests
without attending class. Therefore, you may miss no more than 2 classes
without your grade being affected adversely.

* * *

|

###

**Academic Honesty:**

Cheating, including but not limited to plagiarism, will result in an F for the
course, and the filing of charges with the Office of Judicial Affairs, at the
very least. Please familiarize yourself with the code of conduct regarding
academic honesty.

  
  

|

### **A word about reading:**

The major work of this course involves reading, and there is a substantial
amount of it. [Department
policy](http://www2.gasou.edu/litphi/courses/worldlit.html) states that the
amount of reading you can expect in World Literature courses is about 800-1000
pages. Because the reading load is substantial, if you believe that you will
be unable to keep up with the reading, you may want to consider taking this
course at such a time as you will be able to keep up. Furthermore, reading
literature is not like reading a textbook; it requires time for reflection
and, often, re-reading. For department information regarding what is taught in
World Literature classes, please visit the World Literature Web Page at
<http://www2.gasou.edu/litphi/courses/worldlit.html>

.

* * *

## Tentative Syllabus

  

#### **

N.B. I reserve the right to make changes, including additions to or deletions
from the syllabus. You are responsible for these changes.**

|

### Internet Resources

I have attempted to make this syllabus as richly interactive as I can by
providing useful internet links in the body of the syllabus. Though it is no
substitute for the [library](http://www2.gasou.edu/library/), the internet
contains much useful information for the study of World Literature. A general
guide to humanities research, [The Voice of the
Shuttle](http://vos.ucsb.edu/), is also a good place to begin looking for
information that may complement, supplement, and enrich your reading of the
texts. I encourage you to take advantage of the links I have provided and hope
that they will help you gain a fuller experience of the reading. There is also
a special website that the publishers of your text have designed at
[www.prenhall.com/wilkie](http://www.prenhall.com/wilkie). Finally, please
help me keep the links current by reporting broken links and 404 (Error-Not
Found) messages to me at [rflynn@gasou.edu](mailto:rflynn@gasou.edu).

* * *

**Week 1**  
  

8/27: Introduction to the course

* * *

**Week 2**

9/7:

## N.B.: A Friday

Neoclassicism and Romanticism 1-17

[Voltaire](http://www2.lucidcafe.com/lucidcafe/library/95nov/voltaire.html),
[_Candide_](http://sac.uky.edu/~amgarv0/candide.htm) 310-379. [Link to
information on Leibniz](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/leibniz-mind/)

[A Study guide for
_Candide_](http://www.penguinclassics.com/US/resources/readers_guides/r_voltaire_candide.html)

[Web Resources on The
Enlightenment](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/modsbook10.html#The
Enlightenment)

* * *

**Week 3**

9/10:
[Rousseau](http://www2.lucidcafe.com/lucidcafe/lucidcafe/library/96jun/rousseau.html),
428-60; [Descartes](http://www.lucidcafe.com/library/96mar/descartes.html)
(405-408)

[Mind and Body: Rene Descartes to William
James](http://serendip.brynmawr.edu/Mind/Table.html)

* * *

**Week 4**

9/17: Moliere, [_Tartuffe_](http://www-
personal.ksu.edu/~lyman/english233/Tartuffe0.htm)

[Jefferson](http://www.skyenet.net/~gerryr/title.htm), 423-426 and
[Wollstonecraft](http://www.ehche.ac.uk/study/schsubj/human/english/mw.htm),
1134-1137.

[Another Jefferson site with many of his texts
available](http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/P/tj3/tj3.htm)

[Jefferson on Slavery (excerpt from _Notes on the State of Virginia_
)](http://www.infinet.com/~eplurib/jeffslav.htm)

[Full Text of Wollstonecraft's _A Vindication of the Rights of
Woman_](gopher://wiretap.spies.com:70/00/Library/Classic/woman.txt)

## [Important: Essay Question for Test 1](2112essay1.htm)

* * *

**Week 5**

9/24 TEST 1

* * *

**Week 6**

10/1 Return of Tests

N.B.: October 3rd is the last day to withdraw without academic penalty.

Begin Romanticism [Romantic Chronology (Interactive
timeline)](http://english.ucsb.edu:591/rchrono/) [Literary Resources--
Romanticism](http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/Lit/romantic.html)

[Goethe](http://members.aol.com/KatharenaE/private/Pweek/Goethe/goethe.html),
465-636

[Detailed Study Guide for
_Faust_](http://www.wsu.edu:8080/~brians/hum_303/faust.html)

[Another Faust resource page.
](http://people.clemson.edu/~pammack/lec202/goethe.htm)

* * *

**Week 7**

10/8: [Blake](http://jefferson.village.virginia.edu/blake/), _Songs
of[Innocence](http://members.aa.net/~urizen/innocence/soi.html) and
[Experience](http://members.aa.net/~urizen/experience/soe.html)_ (657-685)
[Brief bio. of Blake](http://198.247.176.53/biography.html)

[Wordsworth](http://www.usd.edu/~tgannon/words.html) 693-707

["Infant Babe" passage from _The Prelude_](Infant_Babe.html)

[The New Child: British Art and the Origins of Modern Childhood,
1730-1830](http://www.uampfa.berkeley.edu/exhibits/newchild/)

* * *

**Week 8**

10/15: [Whitman](http://www.iath.virginia.edu/whitman/) 1061-1077

[Dickinson](http://www.iath.virginia.edu/dickinson/) 1105-1116 & handout

[

### Dickinson Handout

](DICKINSO.htm)

* * *

**Week 9**

10/22: [Douglass](http://www.history.rochester.edu/class/douglass/HOME.html)
994-1060;
[Darwin](http://landow.stg.brown.edu/victorian/darwin/darwinov.html),
2182-2187; [Marx](http://landow.stg.brown.edu/victorian/religion/phil2.html)
and Engels, 2173-2181

[Study Guide for _The Communist
Manifesto_](http://www.wsu.edu:8080/~brians/hum_303/manifesto.html)

* * *

**Week 10**

10/29: [Ibsen](http://www.ibsen.net/), 1326-1373

* * *

**Week 11**

11/5: Test 2

* * *

**Week 12**

11/12 The Twentieth Century: Moderns and Contemporaries

**[

## Click here for Paper Topic

](papertopicfall2001.htm)**

[Historical Atlas of the Twentieth
Century](http://users.erols.com/mwhite28/20centry.htm)

[Modernism Timeline](http://faculty.washington.edu/eckman/timeline.html)

[Modernism links](http://faculty.washington.edu/eckman/links.html)

[Index of Web Sites on
Modernism](http://www.modcult.brown.edu/people/Scholes/modlist/Title.html)

[Contemporary Postcolonial and Postimperial Literature in
English](http://landow.stg.brown.edu/post/misc/postov.html)

[Modern and Contemporary American
Poetry](http://www.english.upenn.edu/~afilreis/88/home.html)

[Literature of the
Holocaust](http://www.english.upenn.edu/~afilreis/Holocaust/holhome.html)

[Literature and Culture of the American
1950s](http://www.english.upenn.edu/~afilreis/50s/home.html)

Read Introduuction to Moderns and Contemporaries, 1443-1452

[Conrad](http://www.stfrancis.edu/en/student/kurtzweb/conrad.htm) 1491-1551

[Heart of Darkness Hypertext with study guide and links
page](http://www.acsu.buffalo.edu/~csicseri/)

[Conrad page on Victorian
Web](http://www.scholars.nus.edu.sg/landow/victorian/authors/conrad/conradov.html)

* * *

**Week 13**

11/19

[Achebe](http://landow.stg.brown.edu/post/achebe/achebeov.html) 2080-2172.

[Things Fall Apart Study
Guide](http://www.wsu.edu:8080/~brians/anglophone/achebe.html)

[Excerpts from Achebe's An Image of Africa: Racism in Conrad's Heart of
Darkness](http://www.cwrl.utexas.edu/~benjamin/316kfall/316kunit3/studentprojectsspring/group1/achebe.html)

* * *

**Week 14**

11/26 [Freud](http://lcweb.loc.gov/exhibits/freud/) 2198-2201;
[Rilke](http://www.kirjasto.sci.fi/rmrilke.htm) 1619-1626

[Archaic Torso of
Apollo](http://www.wmich.edu/english/tchg/lit/pms/gr/Rilke.html) and [A Rilke
Website](http://www.mtsu.edu/~dlavery/rmrind.htm)

[Joyce](http://www.2street.com/joyce/) 1540-1569

[Autobiography, Narrative, and the Freudian Concept of Life History, by Jens
Brockmeier (available through Project Muse--may not be available off-
campus)](http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/philosophy_psychiatry_and_psychology/v004/4.3brockmeier01.html)

* * *

**Week 15**

## [Final Exam Question: this is the entire exam](FINESS2112Fall2001.htm)

12/3 [Baldwin](http://www.geocities.com/SoHo/Courtyard/1858/index.html)
1990-2015. [Baldwin Resource
File](http://falcon.jmu.edu/~ramseyil/baldwin.htm)

[Fugard](http://www.wsu.edu/~brians/anglophone/fugard.html) 2049-2083.

[Website with Fugard
links](http://www.smpcollege.com/litlinks/drama/fugard.htm)

**Paper due.**

Review and advice for final exam.

* * *

  

| **Final Exam: Monday, December 10 from 6;30-8:30 p.m.**

