[ main page ](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/home.html) |  [
current  
courses ](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/current.html) |  [
previous  
courses ](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/previous.html) |  [
student  
projects ](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/student.html) |  [
links ](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/links.html)  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
**ENGL 3301  
Fall 1999**

[ announcements
](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/3301/3301F99_ann.html)

[ syllabus
](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/3301/3301F99_syll.html)

[ handouts
](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/3301/3301F99_hnd.html)

[ assignments
](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/3301/3301F99_asgn.html)

[ related links
](http://www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/3301/3301F99_link.html)

|  

**English 3301: Introduction to Literary Studies **

****Fall 1999: 109 R. Cullen 11:30-1:00 T/TH

Dr. Natalie M. Houston  
236-A Roy Cullen  
office hours: Th 1:00-2:00 & 4:00-5:00 and by appointment 713-743-2970

  
www.hfac.uh.edu/english/faculty/houston/home.html  
nhouston@uh.edu

**Course Description**

This course introduces students to recent modes of thought and discourse in
advanced literary study. We will focus on two major Victorian novels, reading
them through a variety of critical lenses. Students will gain a working
knowledge of recent critical theory as well as practice in writing different
kinds of critical prose. This course will strengthen students' analytic and
writing skills and prepare them for further advanced study of English
literature.

**Course Objectives**

By the end of the semester, you should be able to:

  * articulate a close reading of selected passages from literary works;
  * understand key terms and concepts of contemporary critical theory;
  * use critical theory in producing your own readings of literary texts.

**Course Requirements/Grading**

  * keep up with the reading 
  * two short papers (10% and 15%) 
  * group presentation (15%)
  * midterm exam (15%)
  * final exam (20%)
  * course participation (25%)

**Reading Assignments**

I expect you to finish the day's assigned reading before class and to be
prepared with some questions or thoughts about it. This is a challenging
class: you may find some of the theoretical readings quite difficult to follow
or comprehend. Rest assured that if you find something confusing, so do your
fellow students, who will all benefit from your sharing those passages with
us. I may at times give you specific directions for how to prepare a given
reading.

**Short Papers**

Two short (2-4 p.) papers are due on 9/9 and 10/28. I will give out detailed
assignments one week before the due dates. See my late paper policy below.

**Group Presentation**

During the second week of class, you will sign up for a presentation
text/date. Groups of 3-4 students are responsible each Tuesday during the
theory section of the course for making a handout for the class and leading
the discussion. In the handout you will identify key terms and ideas from the
reading and pose some questions to start the discussion.

After each group's presentation, each member of the class will fill out a peer
evaluation form for that group. I will collect these forms. These peer
evaluations will contribute to your course grade in two ways:

  * 5% of the presenters' grade will be determined by the peer evaluations;
  * your active listening skills and thoughtful evaluation of your peers will constitue a large part of your participation grade (see below).

I will collect the peer evaluations and summarize their comments and scores in
a report for the presenters which maintains anonymity of the evaluators.

**Exams**

The midterm exam on 11/9 will cover the four theorists. It will consist of
term identifications and short answer questions. The final exam on 12/14 will
focus on _Dracula_. You will be asked to perform a close reading of selected
passages and to write two essays in which you apply one or more of the
theorists to the novel.

**Course Participation**

Course participation, as I understand it, encompasses all of your interactions
with me and with your colleagues. Your participation grade includes both your
generous and willing participation in classroom discussion and group
activities and the timeliness of your written work. Your classroom attendance
is factored into your final grade separately, as explained below.

_Class Discussion_

You should come to each class with some questions or ideas written down about
the day's reading, or some passages marked that you would like to discuss.
Each of you has shared responsibility for what happens in this course and for
what you get from it. Each of you has a unique perspective that you bring to a
text that could enrich other readers' understanding. I look forward to hearing
from each of you during the semester. ****

_Peer Evaluations_

Your respectful attention to your peers' presentations and careful evaluation
of their performance will not only contribute to your understanding of the
subject material, but will also contribute to the 15% of your final grade that
covers your general participation in the course. Bear in mind, too, that your
peers will be evaluating your performance as well. Each member of the class
deserves fair evaluation.

_Late Journals/Papers_

10% of your final course grade depends upon the timeliness of your work. If
all of your work is turned in on time, you will receive full points for this
component of your grade. Late work reduces your timeliness score. _I will not
accept papers more than one week after the original due date without
documentation of a medical or family emergency._

_Attendance_

I understand university education as a contractual system enacted among
adults. Therefore, you can and must take responsibility for your own
education. My attendance policy is as follows.

  * If you actively participate in class discussion and miss only 0-1 classes, your final course grade will be raised 4%. 
  * If you participate in class discussion and miss 2-3 classes, your final course grade will be raised 2%. 
  * At my discretion, if you contribute a lot to discussion _or_ have very good attendance, but do not fit either of the above categories, your course grade may be raised 1%. 
  * If you miss _3 or more consecutive_ classes, I will assume you have dropped the course unless you contact me before the next class day.

I can assure you, however, that although I do not penalize you for missing a
class now and then, if you miss a considerable number of class days your
grades on course assignments and exams will suffer simply because you will
lack the knowledge and skills required to complete those assignments
successfully.

**Required Texts**

Novels: Charlotte Bronte, _Jane Eyre_ (1847); Bram Stoker, _Dracula_ (1897)

Theory: Michel Foucault, _The History of Sexuality_ ; Mary Poovey, _Uneven
Developments: The Ideological Work of Gender in Mid-Victorian England_ ;
Edward Said, _Orientalism;_ Eve Sedgwick, _Between Men: English Literature and
Male Homosocial Desire._

All texts should be available at the UH bookstore. __

**Assignment Schedule**

T 8/24 Introduction

Th 8/26 Charlotte Bronte, _Jane Eyre_ chapters 1-9

T 8/31 _Jane Eyre_ chapters 10-19

Th 9/2 _Jane Eyre_ chapters 20-26

T 9/7 _Jane Eyre_ chapters 27-32

Th 9/9 _Jane Eyre_ chapters 33-end

**Short paper due (2 p.)**

T 9/14 Foucault, Part One and Part Two

presenters:_____________________________________________

Th 9/16 Foucault discussion

*Note: Monday, 9/20 is the last day to drop a course without a grade. 

T 9/21 Foucault, Part Three and Chapters 1 and 2 of Part Four

presenters:_____________________________________________

Th 9/23 Foucault discussion

T 9/28 Poovey, Chapters 1 and 2 (presenters will focus on chapter 2)

presenters:_____________________________________________

Th 9/30 Poovey discussion

T 10/5 Poovey, Chapter Five

presenters:_____________________________________________

Th 10/7 Poovey discussion

T 10/12 Said, Introduction and Section I of Chapter One

presenters:_____________________________________________

Th 10/14 Said discussion

T 10/19 Said, Sections II and IV of Chapter One

presenters:_____________________________________________

Th 10/21 Said discussion

T 10/26 Sedgwick, Introduction and Chapter One

presenters:_____________________________________________

Th 10/28 Sedgwick discussion

**Short paper due (2-4 p.)**

T 11/2 Sedgwick, Chapters Five and Nine

presenters:_____________________________________________

Th 11/4 Sedgwick discussion

*Note: Friday, 11/5 is the last possible day to drop or withdraw (with a grade).

T 11/9 **Midterm exam**

Th 11/11 Bram Stoker, _Dracula_ chapters 1-5

T 11/16 _Dracula_ chapters 6-12

Th 11/18 _Dracula_ chapters 13-18

T 11/23 _Dracula_ chapters 19-24

Th 11/25 NO CLASS: Thanksgiving holiday

T 11/30 _Dracula_ chapters 25-end __

Th 12/2 Wrap-up

**EXAM:** Tuesday, December 14, 11:00-2:00  
  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---

