Patterns in Civilization: Death in Japan and Europe

This is a tentative syllabus, based on earlier versions of the course. Reading
and writing assignments will be similar but specific selections may change
depending on availability of books from publishers, review of student comments
from prior semesters, and current interests of the instructors. We hope to
develop an electronic chat-room to ameliorate at least marginally the
shortcomings imposed by the large-lecture format, but exactly how this will
work and fit into the course requirements remains to be determined, so it is
not mentioned on the tentative syllabus.  

  
  

**Details about Time and Place**

506:113-01 (Index # unknown) Fall, 2000

Instructors: Rudolph Bell & Donald Roden Lectures: Voorhees 105 - CAC

Bell: tel: 932-7738; office Van Dyck 100 (hours ?) Lectures: Mon. & Wed. 5th
period (2:50 to 4:10 p.m.)

Roden: tel: 932-6834; office Van Dyck 223C (hours ?) e-mail
rbell@rci.rutgers.edu  
  

**Guiding Statement**

Welcome to our course, Patterns in Civilization, a cross-cultural approach to
the subject of global history. We shall focus this semester on death as a
problem in the history of Europe and Japan from the moment these territories
constituted themselves as autonomous civilizations, beginning with the eighth
century, and continuing to the present.  

Of all the Old World's civilizations, the two in least direct contact until
the modern era were Europe and Japan, for they were separated geographically
and culturally by Islam and China. That there should have been significant
differences in the ways these two civilizations dealt with death needs less
explanation, therefore, than the fact that there were amazing similarities
between them. How to we explain these similarities? What do they tell us about
the process of historical explanation? To what extent may our introductory
exploration of Japanese and European civilizations enrich our understanding of
other societies, and of humanity in general?  

**Rules**

Although this is a large class, feel free to raise questions at any time. If
you do not understand something, probably anywhere from 2 to 300 other
students also are confused, so ask -- either on the spot, after class, or stop
by during office hours.  

We expect you to come to class regularly, read the assigned texts by the dates
listed in the syllabus, and complete all written work as outlined below. Late
arrivals and early departures are disruptive to fellow students; do NOT
schedule this class back-to-back with a class on another campus.  

**Required Reading**

The following books are required for the course; they have been ordered at the
Rutgers Bookstore at Penn Plaza.  

_The Tale of Genji_ by Murasaki Shikibu

_Song of Roland_ (Sayers, translator)

_The Inferno_ by Dante Alghieri (Ciardi, translator)

_Kokoro_ by Natsume Soseki

_Frankenstein_ by Mary Shelley

_The Death of Ivan Ilych_ by Leo Tolstoy

_Duino Elegies_ by Rainer Maria Rilke

_The White Hotel_ by D. M. Thomas

_The Sound of the Mountain_ by Yasunari Kawabata  
  
There is also a reading packet.  

**Grading**

Your grade for the course will be determined using the following weights:  

30 % for ink-spills and journals (see below)

30 % for in-class midterm - standard 80-minute test using identifications and
one essay

40 % for the final exam - standard 3-hour test at assigned time during final
exam period; consists of identifications and one essay, covering work for the
entire semester but with emphasis primarily on material after the midterm.  
  

**Special Needs**

Any student with a disability is urged to see us early in the semester to make
whatever arrangements are necessary to support a successful learning
experience in this course.  

**Required Written Work**

Ink-spills (a.k.a pop quizzes) and journals will be assigned without advance
notice. They are the way we take attendance, recognize students who come to
class prepared, and allow you to make a more personal, intellectual response
to individual course readings than is possible with the two in-class
examinations.  
  
Ink-spills are done in class, say fifteen minutes of writing, with your books
and notes in front of you, on a question we pose on the spot.  
  
Journal entries are done outside of class, 2-3 typed pages, also consulting
your readings but requiring no "research" or use of secondary sources, in
response to a question we give out during the class preceding the due date for
the journal.  
  
There are no make-ups for ink-spills and no allowances for lateness on journal
entries. In short, if you want a good grade in this course you will have to
come to class regularly and do the readings as assigned. Our hope is that
keeping up in this way also means you will do well on the midterm and final
examinations.  
  
  
**Schedule of Lectures, Films, and Reading Assignments**  
  

**DATE TOPIC READING**  

**WEEK 1**  

Wed., Sept. 6 Introduction  
  
Mon., Sept. 11 Japanese Myth and Religion - Packet readings - Kojiki excerpts
+  
  

**WEEK 2**  

Wed., Sept. 13 Japan's Courtly Tradition - I _\- Tale of Genji_  
  
Mon., Sept. 18 Japan's Courtly Tradition - II - more _Genji_  
  

**WEEK 3**  
  
Wed., Sept. 20 Early Samurai Tradition - I Packet readings - _Tales of Heike_  
  
Mon., Sept. 25 Early Samurai Tradition - II Packet readings - more _Tales of
Heike_  
  

**WEEK 4**  
  
Wed., Sept. 27 Judeo-Christian Tradition Packet readings - Leviticus 21;
Gospels

Mon., Oct. 2 The Age of Heroes - _Song of Roland_  
  

**WEEK 5**

Wed., Oct. 4 European Civilization Emerges - _The Inferno_  
  
Mon., Oct. 9 Hell and Lay Culture - more _Inferno_  

**WEEK 6**  
  
Wed., Oct. 11 Black Death - Packet readings - Boccaccio  
  
Mon., Oct. 16 Martyrdom - Film: "Passion of Joan of Arc," Carl-Theodore Dreyer  

**WEEK 7**  
  
Wed., Oct. 18 MIDTERM EXAMINATION

Mon., Oct. 23 Public Deaths of a King and a Shogun - Packet readings  

**WEEK 8**

Wed., Oct. 25 Man and Mad Science - _Frankenstein_  
  
Mon., Oct. 30 Romantic Suicide - Opera recording of "Aida" + packet for
libretto  

**WEEK 9**  
  
Wed., Nov. 1 Romanticism, Friendship, and the New Self - _Kokoro_  
  
Mon., Nov. 6 The New Self and Suicide - packet readings, General Nogi  

**WEEK 10**

Wed., Nov. 8 Petty Death - _The Death of Ivan Ilych_  
  
Mon., Nov. 13 Great Death - _Duino Elegies_  

**WEEK 11**  
  
Wed., Nov. 15 Sex, Freud, and Death - _The White Hotel_ , prologue and parts
1-3

Mon., Nov. 20 Holocaust and Israel - _The White Hotel_ , parts 4-6  

**Thanksgiving BREAK**

  
  

**WEEK 12**  
  
Mon., Nov. 27 Virility and Death - Packet readings, Ernest Hemmingway and
Yukio Mishima  
  
Wed., Nov. 29 Ambiguous Death - Film: Kurosawa's "Ikiru," part I + packet  

**WEEK 13**  
  
Mon., Dec. 4 Film: Kurosawa's "Ikiru," part II

Wed., Dec. 6 Traditional Aesthetics and Modernism - _Sound of the Mountain_  

**WEEK 14**  

Mon., Dec. 11 Great and Petty Death in Japan - more _Sound of the Mountain_  
  
Wed., Dec. 13 Concluding Observations

  
  
  
  

**END OF SYLLABUS**

