**_Renovating Shakespeare_**

**_English 328 : Syllabus

* * *

_**[Home](renovating_shakespeare.htm)





**

Katherine Rowe

|

[krowe@brynmawr.edu](mailto:krowe@brynmawr.edu)  
  
---|---  
  
English 328, Spring 2000

|

Office hours: Thursday 1-3 and by appt.  
  
T 1-3 or 1-4, as per schedule

|  
  
**

"Reading any [rewritten Shakespeare play] is like an attempt to see beloved
features in a mist or in encircling gloom. Literally, Shakespeare is 'smeared
over' by the inferior stuff so proudly vaunted by the perpetrators. It is
almost like a rouged corpse&emdash;a thing too ghastly to conceive of."
&emdash;George Odell, _Shakespeare From Betterton to Irving_ (1920)

This course has three goals. First, to study the cultural history of the
Shakespearean corpus&emdash;adapted, borrowed from, revised, rouged and
burlesqued to serve very different interests in different periods. Second, to
introduce you to advanced research techniques and the digressive delights of
the library. Third, to take you through the challenging and satisfying process
of writing a long, analytic essay.

**18 Jan.** Introduction: (re)Producing Shakespeare. Heminge and Condell, The
First Folio "To the Great Variety of Readers"; Shakespeare snapshots



1660-1760: **The Making of the National Poet**



**5 Jan**. Bardolatry and Performance. Readings: Bohanan, "Shakespeare in the
Bush;" Holderness, "The Cultural-Materialist's Guide to Stratford-upon-Avon";
Worthen, "Authority and Performance"

**1 Feb.** _Macbeth_. Readings: Foucault, "What is an Author?"Garber, "The
Male Medusa"

**8 Feb.** Restoration _Macbeth_. Readings: Davenant, _Macbeth_ , "A
Proposition for the Advancement of Morality;" Heylyn, history of Macbeth
(reprinted as the "Argument" to Davenant)

> >  

**Victorian Characters: Prosing Shakespeare**



**15 Feb.** _Othello_. Selected readings in early modern climate theory;
Foucault, "Nietzsche, Genealogy, History"; Schechner, Introduction to _The
Future of Ritual_ ; Goffman, "Performances"; Roach, "Black Skin / White
Masks"; ASSIGN topics for group presentations and **START READING**.

**21 Feb.** Library session. (NOTE: class rescheduled for Monday night.)
Printed research aids: STC, other library collections, microfilm, printed
bibliographies, concordances, DNB, sources, editions and adaptations, prompt-
books, performance history, reception. Electronic research aids: cd-roms, MLA
and A &H on-line databases, Lexis/Nexis, web resources. Readings: _Romeo and
Juliet._ **KEEP READING** on your presentation topic

> GROUP PRESENTATIONS: readings researched and selected by the group

**25 Feb.** Groups I: xerox and assign readings for 29 Feb

**29 Feb.** Shakespeare as national export, **c. 18-19**. Othello (Moor), Iago
(Venetian), Macbeth (Scot, Englishman, American?). Astor Place riots, 1849;
Charles Lamb on staging _Othello;_ African American Othellos; blackface
traditions: Betterton to Olivier

**3 Mar.** Group II: xerox and assign readings for 14 March



> > **[ Spring break]**



**14 Mar.** Sentimental heroines, c. 18-19: Desdemona, Juliet, Ophelia, Lady
Macbeth. Readings: writings selected by the class, from the journals of Mrs.
Siddons; Helena Faucit Martin; Charles and Mary Lamb, _Tales from Shakespeare_
; Mary Cowden Clarke, _The Girlhood of Shakespeare's Heroines_ ; Louisa May
Alcott, "A Double Tragedy;" Henry James, _The Tragic Muse_



**20th Century: Looking for Shakespeare High and Low**



**21 Mar.** _Hamlet_. Readings/viewings: Jenkins, Introduction to the Arden
edition, 13-81: "Publication," "The Texts," "The Editorial Problem"; silent
Hamlet s (Bernhardt or Nielsen, if available); Olivier, Gibson or Kurasawa;
Folger web archive; reviews

**28 Mar.** Readings/viewings: _Romeo and Juliet by William Shakespeare_ ,
Zeferrelli; _Romeo+Juliet_ , Baz Luhrmann; "In Fair Verona: Media, Spectacle
and Performance," Donaldson et al,
[**http://polyglot.mit.edu/html/shakespeare/html-
onwhite/card01.html**](http://polyglot.mit.edu/html/shakespeare/html-
onwhite/card01.html) **;** TBA: something on Shakespeare and globalization

**4 Apr.** PROSPECTUS and ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY due. Workshops in class:
writing to a reader, So What?, claims; Readings: Booth, _The Craft of
Research_ , ch. 3-4.; Flower on "writer- and reader-based" prose



**Oral Presentations as per schedule. Class meets 1-4.**



**11 Apr**. _Oral Presentations_

**18 Apr.** _Oral Presentations_

**25 Apr.** _Oral Presentations_

**4,5 or 6 May** NYC outing: CUNY performance of Davenant's _Law Against
Lovers_ (adaptation of _Measure for Measure_ and _Much Ado About Nothing_ )



**Last day of exam period:**

**ESSAYS DUE** in my LC 108 box by noon (with title page and 100 word Pr ecis)



**Course Details**



**Website of course resources** :

>

>
[**http://www.brynmawr.edu/Library/Docs/renovating_shakespeare.htm**](renovating_shakespeare.htm)



**Texts**

  * **Plays: you need to own and bring to class a scholarly or college edition of the following** : 
    * William Shakespeare, Romeo and Juliet, Hamlet, Macbeth , Othello
  * Other readings: a sourcebook of required readings available on reserve at Canaday; see the handout of key titles
  * Optional ( **at the BMC Bookstore** ): you will be consulting these throughout the semester: Gibaldi and Achtert, _The MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers_ ; Booth, et al, _The Craft of Research._



**Goals and Requirements**

1\. **This is a discussion-driven course**. The success of the class will
depend in large part on your regular preparation, attendance, and
participation. Your contributions, in the form of questions, comments,
disagreements and challenges, will form a substantial part of your grade. More
importantly, these contributions will enhance the pleasure of writing a long
essay in community, where you can test your ideas with others working on
similar topics. To this end, you will be expected to lead discussion,
collaborate on several assignments, and present your work orally in its early
stages of development.

2\. **Short writing assignments**. These include a short research project
leading up to a group presentation, an annotated bibliography due with the
prospectus, a pr ecis introducing the final essay, and prospectus review.
**NB** : A short, dramaturgical study of a single scene or character may be
substituted for the annotated bibliography. Much of this work will be
circulated among the class, in hard copy or by email. **Expect to check your
email regular** ly.

3\. **A formal, oral presentation** of your argument to the class. We will
schedule ten-minutes for each talk, in panels of five, with time left over for
questions. You may wish to prepare handouts or other visual aids. Make sure
you practice your presentation ahead of time, and time it.

**3A. Performance option: students may present their own adaptation of a play
by directing and/or performing in a scene or scenes from the play, in lieu of
the oral presentation. (The final essay for the course should then build on
the critical issues articulated in performance, and give a full account of the
projected adaptation, as a whole.) Students wishing to select this option
should register with me by the third week of the course.**

4\. **A final essay,** approx. 5000 words, on a topic of your choice and
approved by me. Essays must conform to the _MLA Handbook_ guidelines for
style. Include your 100-word precis of the essay on the title page. Proofread
carefully: reading a paper out loud is an excellent way to catch errors in
mechanics, logic and style. Review a draft of your essay with your writing
tutor or another experienced reader. Please pay attention to the guidelines
for length: a paper that is too long will fare no better than one that is too
short. _Document ideas that you didn't work out on your own_ (consult the MLA
Handbook or ask for guidance if you are unsure about proper attribution).
Always keep hard copies of papers you hand in; make frequent backups on disk.





[HOME](renovating_shakespeare.htm)

