**

American History II** H106; section C893  
Fall, 1999 Saturday 12:00-2:40 in CA 217

**

Professor R. Henry** Office Hours: S 10:30-11:45  
                                    or by appointment at 274-7463

Introduction:

American history is a very important part of our lives and it does not just
include understanding how our past influences our future. Studying American
history helps us learn to analyze how and why social, political, and cultural
factors have culminated to create historical events, such as the close of
Reconstruction, the Gilded Age, Jim Crow, Women's Suffrage, and World Wars I
and II. In our survey of American history this course will cover a time span
of 134 years (1865 to the present).

Since this course only meets once a week, I will alternate how the first and
second half of class will be broken down. On some days I will lecture in the
first half and on others days group discussions based on the readings will be
presented first. In hopes of creating an interesting class discourse, I have
selected a concise text, three outside readings, and many interesting hand-
outs. This may seem like a lot of reading; but, do not worry, I do not want
you to memorize all this information.

The most important concepts that I expect each student to learn from this
course are: 1) that students be familiarized with the social, political, and
cultural events that sparked excitement on many different occasions; 2) help
students learn to critically analyze the whats, whys, and hows that shape the
panoramic view of America and Americans, and 3)learning to communicate their
ideas clearly and concisely on paper will be my final goal.

Course Materials:

All Students are expected to have and read:

(All Books are available at the IUPUI Bookstore and Main Library)

_

Brinkley, Alan, _Unfinished Nation: A Concise History of the American People,
Volume Two: From 1865_ and Study Guide (Second Edition) (hereafter referred to
as just by chapter)

McMurtry, Larry, _Crazy Horse_ (1999)

Decosta-Willis, Miriam ed., _The Memphis Diary of Ida B. Wells: An Intimate
Portrait of the Activist as a Young Woman_ (1995)

Clegg III, Claude Andrew, _An Original Man: The Life and Times of Elijah
Muhammad_ (1997)

_



Course Requirements and Expectations:

(Students must fulfill these requirements to pass)

**

1)** A __**midterm**__ and a __**final exam**__ , that will include fill in
the blanks and essay questions, The exams will be administered in class.
Students are expected to take tests and exams at the appointed times. __**No
exceptions**__ will be made __**unless**__ we have discussed any difficulties
prior to the exams.

**

2)** __**Two**__ __**2-3 page**__ __**critical book reviews**__ based on the
two outside readings: _An Original Man_ and _Crazy Horse_. A hand-out will be
distributed in the second week of class explaining how to write a book review.
If you get a grade lower than what you expected you may rewrite the first book
review, as long as you do so within the next week after it is handed back.
Your papers will be due __**at the beginning**__ of class, __**none will be
accepted afterwards**__. The only way I will accept a late paper is if there
are __**direr circumstances**__ that were beyond your control.

**

3)** There will be hand-outs that have readings complimenting the text book
materials. You are expected to read and answer the essay questions in
preparation for class discussion. I advise you to do this part of your
homework because three of these assignments will be taken up and graded
__**without prior announcement**__. The essay questions will be counted as
quizzes. If it appears that no one is doing the readings I will begin taking
up the essay questions on __**a weekly basis**__ and the __**maximum amount of
points required to pass for this class will increase**__. I will pass out an
amendment to the syllabus reflecting this change.

**

4)** Each student can miss 3 classes--no questions asked-- without any
difficulties. Otherwise, once you have missed three classes attendance is
mandatory. Attendance will be taken after the break, during the second half of
class. Half a letter grade will be taken off your final grade for every class
that is missed after the first three. You are also expected to participate in
class discussion. It will hurt your grade considerably if you do not
participate. Those that have problems speaking in class should come see me for
helpful hints.

**

5)** __**Cheating**__ on exams and other forms of intellectual dishonesty,
notably __**plagiarism**__ , will not be tolerated and will result in a
failing grade for the work in question. If you are caught plagiarizing it
could also result in a failing grade for the semester and it could lead to
disciplinary actions by the university. Consult the Indiana University
Bulletin, 1998-2000: School of Liberal Arts, p.20-21, or the relevant parts
about academic misconduct published in the Code of Student Ethic for the
university's rules.



Grading:

The grading system will be based on a scale from 0 to 400. Four hundred points
are the maximum points available (that is if everyone completes the essay
assignments and participates in class discussions).

**

Final Exam** \- 100 points

**

Midterm** \- 100 points

**

Essay Questions/Quizzes** \- 25 points each for a total of 75 points possible

**

Critical Reviews** \- 50 points each with 100 points possible

**

Class participation** \- 25 points of which 10 points goes to your role as
discussion leader for your group.

_**

Final Grades**_ will be determined according to the following _**scale:

**__

A - 360-400_ \- Excellent

_

B - 320-359_ \- Very Good/Well above Average

_

C - 280-319_ \- Good/Average College Work

_

D - 240-279_ \- Poor/Below Average

_

F - 0-239_ \- Unacceptable

**

Schedule of Events:

August 28**\- Introduction to the course and read "Charles Sumner," "Terrorism
in the South," and "The Reconstruction Introduction" hand-out

**

September 4**\- Chapter 15 - Reconstruction and the end of the Civil War

**

September 11**\- Chapter 16 pages 454-470 - The West

_

Crazy Horse_ Chapters 1-10

**

September 18** \- Chapter 16 pages 470-486 - finish up _Crazy Horse_ and have
read  "Nat Love, The Adventure of Deadwood Dick" hand-out

**__

Critical Book Review #1 DUE

__

September 25** \- Chapters 17 & 18 - Industrial Supremacy and the Age of the
City and have read "The Gilded Age Introduction", "Victorian Dress &
Attitudes," and "Andrew Carnegie, A Talk to Young Men" hand-outs

**

October 2** \- Chapter 19 & 20 Crisis and the Rise of Progressivism and have
read "Black Soldiers and the White Man's Burden" and "Pollock v. Farmer's Loan
and trust Co." hand-outs

**

October 9** \- Discussion of Midterm

_

The Memphis Diary, Ida B. Wells_ and have read "Jane Addams "Utilization of
Women in the City Government" hand-out

**

October 16** \- Chapters 22 & 23 - National Reform and have read "Woodrow
Wilson, The New Freedom" hand-out (Further Discussion of Midterm)

**

October 23** \- **_Midterm

_

October 30** \- Chapters 24, 25 & 26 - The Economy, Depression and New Deal
and have read "Langston Hughes, 'I Too,' "The Klansman's Manual," "War,
Normalcy and Mass Consumption," "The Great Depression and the New Deal," and
"Ann Marie Low, Dust Bowl Diary" hand-outs

**

November 6** \- Chapters 27 & 28 World War II and have read "Neutrality Act of
1938" and "A. Philip Randolph, Address to the Policy Conferences of the March
on Washington Movement" hand-outs

**

November 13** \- Chapters 29 & 30 - McCarthyism & Civil Rights and have read
"Harry Truman, Speech Before Congress," "United State Senate, Censure of
Senator McCarthy," and "Chief Justice Earl Warren, Decision on Brown v. Board
of Education of Topeka" hand-outs

**

November 20 **\- _An Original Man_ Chapters 1-7 and have read  "Malcolm X,
Speech, 1964" hand-out

**

December 4** \- _An Original Man_ Chapters 8-the Epilogue

**__

Critical Book Review #2 DUE

__

December 11** \- Chapters 31 ,33, 34 - Liberalism, Reganomics, Modern Times
and have read Lyndon B. Johnson, Speech on "Great Society," Ronald Reagan,
Annual Message to Congress on the State of the Union and Jesse de la Cruz,
Oral History hand-outs **( _FINAL EXAM ESSAY QUESTIONS WILL BE HANDED OUT!)

_

December 18** \- The _**Final Exam**_ will be administered **during our
regular class period

**

