
    
    
                       COURSE REQUIREMENTS--SPRING SEMESTER, 1997
    
     RELIGION IN AMERICAN LIFE AND THOUGHT TO 1840:              TR 9:30-
     10:50
     FROM THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND TO MORMONISM                     Wren 200
    
          NOTE:  As the semester proceeds, please be sure to notify the
          instructor of any typos or mistakes on this syllabus, or of any
          questions that arise that it leaves undiscussed.
    
                               INSTRUCTOR AND OFFICE HOURS
     David L. Holmes (OFFICE:  304 Christopher Wren)
     OFFICE HOURS:  Wednesdays, 9-11 a.m.  And for 10 minutes after each
     of his
     classes, in the classroom or the adjacent hallway, for matters that
     require
     brief consultations only.  The instructor's schedule of classes is:
     MW, 4-
     5:20 (Wren 100); TR, 9:30-10:50 (Wren 200); TR, 12:30-1:50 (Tucker
     120).
     Students who wish to see him at such times would be wise to be in the
     classroom when the class ends, for the instructor will inevitably
     leave if
     no one is waiting.  He is also available for walks with individual
     students.
    
                                  PURPOSE OF THE COURSE
     This course is one of three surveys of American religion taught by the
     instructor.  It has no prerequisites; many who enroll have previously
     taken
     no Religion courses.
    
     Religion 345 tells the story of religion in the United States through
     the
     period in which the percentage of Protestants in the nation began to
     decline. Religion 346 begins with the Irish immigrations of the 1840s
     and
     carries the story of American religion through the pluralism of the
     1990s.
    
     Religion 347 adds alternative religious groups--Christian and non-
     Christian--that are not yet part of the mainstream of American
     religion. It
     is the only one of the courses in American religious history that
     requires
     one prerequisite. (This course, for example, is among the courses that
     qualify as a prerequisite.)  Please note that Judaism is handled in
     the
     courses taught by Mr. Raphael or by visiting instructors in Judaica.
    
     This course will:
          1) tell the story of the religious dimension of American life and
     thought through 1840;
          2) analyze the background, development, beliefs, and worship of
     the
     Christian religious groups present in America through 1840;
          3) place the early history of the colony and state of Virginia
     and of
     the College of William and Mary within the larger context of the
     history of
     American religion; and
          4) introduce students to church and domestic architecture, to the
     buildings and programs of Colonial Williamsburg, and to the historic
     preservation of America's past.
    
     Although Rel. 345 will spend the greatest amount of time on religion,
     the
     instructor has designed the course to serve as a broad introduction
     to the
     American experience.  Thus the readings, lectures, and project will
     also
     cover architecture, social history, education, transportation,
     historic
     preservation, and other aspects of American history and culture.  In
     addition, the course gives students a more informed idea of what it
     means
     to live adjacent to Colonial Williamsburg and to be part of the
     ongoing
     history of the College of William and Mary.
    
                                     GUEST LECTURERS
     James E. Wootton, Curator, Ash-Lawn-Highland:  The Home of James
     Monroe,
     Albemarle County, VA.
    
                       COURSE REQUIREMENTS AND PERCENTAGE OF GRADE
     The course requires a semester project counting 30% of the semester
     grade.
     It also requires three tests counting, respectively, 25%, 25%, and
     20% of
     the semester grade.
    
     In former years this course had a midsemester (30%), a project (30%),
     and
     a comprehensive final examination (40%).  As an experiment this year,
     the
     instructor has revised the requirements in a way that should reduce
     pressure and make the course more enjoyable.
    
     The testing this year will not be cumulative, for example; once class
     members have completed the material on a test, they will not be
     tested on
     it again.  In conversations or on the course evaluations, the
     instructor
     would like to know how students react to this experiment.  Should this
     format be retained in future years--or how should it be adjusted?
    
     The tests and project for this course are as follows:
    
          a) Test 1 (at the end of Segment 4)--consisting of an objective
     section and one essay, with some choice on both.  It will occur
     before the
     start of many midsemesters at the College and will count 25% of the
     semester grade.  It will test the lectures as well as the reading of
     three
     assigned books.
    
          b) Test 2 (at the end of Segment 9)--consisting of objective
     questions
     only, with some choice.  Occuring after most courses at the College
     have
     completed their midsemesters, it will count 25% of the semester grade.
     It will test the lectures as well as the reading of three assigned
     books.
    
          c) An historical and architectural semester project, due to the
     instructor at any time between March 27 and April 15 (but not later).
      The
     most significant requirement of the course, it will be done by teams
     and
     count 30% of the semester grade.  A detailed description appears in
     the
     appendix.  To hold down Xeroxing costs, the instructor will
     distribute full
     instructions for the project early in the semester by e-mail or by
     disk (WP
     5.1).
    
          d) Test 3 will test the final four segments of the course only.
     Consisting of an objective section and no essays, it will count 20%
     of the
     semester grade and require no more than ninety minutes to complete.
     It
     will test the lectures and the reading of one of the assigned books.
    
          In addition, students will be required to take a pleasant drive
     of
     four or so hours duration during daylight on old roads as part of a
     team of
     two or three students.  By the beginning of class on Tuesday,
     February 4,
     each team will submit a two-page summary of the sights they saw on the
     drive.   Although the instructor does not grade these two-page
     summaries,
     he will return any that are poorly done for rewriting.
    
          Finally, students can have three (3) points added to their
     second test
     by attending the annual James Madison Society debate on American
     politics.
     Lasting 75-90 minutes, it will occur at 7 p.m. on the evening of
     February
     20.  The case for the Republican Party will be argued by a William
     and Mary
     alumnus active in Republican politics.  The case  for the Democratic
     Party
     will be argued by a William and Mary alumnus active in Democratic
     politics.
     The Society selects debaters who will especially appeal to a college-
     age
     audience.  Prior to the debate, the instructor will announce the
     names and
     biographical background of the debaters during class.
    
          The debate will include questions from the audience.   After the
     debate, the two participants will meet with any of the audience who
     wish
     for refreshments at the University Center or the Greenleafe.  The
     debate is
     brief, and in past years students have appreciated the experience.
     Although the instructor requires the debate in his other two classes,
     he
     makes it voluntary in this course and awards extra points for
     attendance.
     The difference is that the other courses do not have a requirement
     for a
     four-hour drive on old roads.   To receive the three points, students
     simply need to write "I attended the James Madison debate--+ 3
     points" on
     the outside of their bluebooks at the second test.
    
                             READING REQUIREMENT FOR COURSE
     The following books are required.  Unless otherwise indicated, the
     entire
     work is assigned.  To hold down costs, the instructor urges students
     to
     share as many books as they feel comfortable not having for exclusive
     use.
     It is not necessary to own every book assigned in this course.  In
     previous
     years books marked with an asterisk (*) on the following list have
     been
     shared with little inconvenience by class members.
    
     The lectures presuppose a reading of Williams and Hatch.  Although
     Fithian
     and Jarratt are discussed thoroughly in class, well-organized
     students may
     also be able to share in their purchase and use.  Of the unasterisked
     books, only Kidder-Smith must be brought to class:
    
     TEXT:
           1.  Peter W. Williams, America's Religions: Traditions and
     Cultures
     (through page 225, as assigned).  Prior to tests the instructor will
     indicate what names and terms he wishes students to know from the
     text.
    
     COLONIAL VIRGINIA AND WILLIAMSBURG:
           2.  Philip Vickers Fithian, Journal and Letters of Philip
     Vickers
     Fithian , ed. Hunter Farish (all)
           3.  Devereux Jarratt, Devereux Jarratt:  An Autobiography. (Mr.
     Holmes receives no royalties on this book.)
          *4.  Michael Olmert, Official Guide to Colonial Williamsburg
          *5.  Parke Rouse, Cows on the Campus
    
     AMERICAN RELIGION IN THE EARLY NATIONAL PERIOD:
          *6.  Nathan O. Hatch, The Democratization of American
     Christianity
    
     GUIDES TO AMERICAN CHURCH AND DOMESTIC ARCHITECTURE:
          *7.  John J. Blumenson, Identifying American Architecture (pages
     2-25,
     plus any other styles that relate to America through 1840).  Lectures
     will
     refer to this book, but its principal purpose is to serve as an
     architectural guide for your project.
           8.  G. E. Kidder-Smith, Beacon Guide to New England Houses of
     Worship
     (do all styles that relate to America through 1840).
    
                        OUTLINE OF TOPICS TO BE COVERED IN COURSE
    
     The instructor will cover some of the topics listed below in more
     detail
     than others.  He will cover some segments via reading rather than by
     lecture.  Good class discussions (which he does not wish to break
     off) will
     sometimes cause him to shorten lectures to keep the class on
     schedule. The
     instructor will announce or asterisk all names or terms he wishes
     class
     members to know from lectures:
    
     1.  INTRODUCTION: THE EUROPEAN AND AMERICAN BACKGROUND TO AMERICAN
     REL
    
     IGI
    
     OUS
    
     HIS
    
     TOR
    
     Y;
    
     FOR
    
     MS
    
     OF
    
     REL
    
     IGI
    
     OUS
    
     POL
    
     ITY
    
          Williams, 2-12, 44-59 (end of 2d full paragraph), 65-92.
    
     2.  THE MATERIAL CULTURE OF EARLY AMERICA:  OLD ROADS AND CHURCH AND
          DOMESTIC ARCHITECTURE IN AMERICA THROUGH 1840
    
          Blumenson (note all styles followed in the United States through
          1840).
          See also the entries under "architecture" in the index to
     Williams.
          Complete and submit two-page summary of drive on the old roads
     of
          Tidewater Virginia.
    
     3.  ANGLICANISM AND ROMAN CATHOLICISM IN COLONIAL AMERICA
    
          Williams, 93-95, 145 (last paragraph) to 149 (omit Judaism)
          Fithian (all).
    
     4.  ENGLISH NONCONFORMITY IN COLONIAL AMERICA: THE PURITANS
     (CONGREGATIONALISTS), BAPTISTS, AND QUAKERS
    
          Williams, 95-106, 132 (last paragraph)-133 (omit last paragraph),
          115-120 (lst paragraph).
          Kidder-Smith (all).
    
                                         TEST 1
    
     5.  CONTINENTAL PROTESTANTISM IN COLONIAL AMERICA:  THE HUGUENOTS,
     LUTHERANS, AND "GERMAN SECTARIES"
    
          Williams, 111 (last paragraph)-122, 140-144, 192 through lst
     paragraph
          of 193.
    
     6.  THE SCOTS-IRISH AND THE TRANSPLANTATION OF PRESBYTERIANISM
    
          Williams, 107-111 (last full paragraph).
    
     7.  COLONIAL AMERICAN COLLEGES AND THE COLLEGE OF WILLIAM AND MARY IN
          VIRGINIA
    
          Rouse (all).  Although this book goes into the twentieth
     century,
          class members should read all of it.  In the areas of Colonial
          Williamsburg and William and Mary, this course includes
     contemporary
          material.
    
     8.  COLONIAL WILLIAMSBURG AND EARLY AMERICAN LIFE
    
          Olmert (all).  Two classes of tours of Colonial Williamsburg led
     by
          Mr. Wootton on dates to be announced.  The first class will meet
     at
          9:30 in front of Bruton Parish Church; the second class will
     meet at
          9:30 by the entrance gate to The Capitol.  Attendance is
     required.
          Please bring Olmert's guide (even if you are sharing it) each
     time.
    
     9.  THE GREAT AWAKENING AND THE RISE OF EVANGELICALISM
    
          Jarratt (all); Williams, 94-135.
    
                                         TEST 2
    
     10.  THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION, THE SEPARATION OF CHURCH AND STATE, AND
     THE
          REORDERING OF DENOMINATIONAL LIFE
    
          Williams, 135-139, 161-165, 195-196 (end of first paragraph)
          Hatch (begin).
    
     11. THE RISE OF "INFIDELITY" AND THE RELIGION OF THE FOUNDING FATHERS
    
          Williams, 137-139
          Hatch (continue).
    
     12. THE SECOND GREAT AWAKENINGS, METHODISM AND REVIVALISM, THE
     BENEVOLENT
          EMPIRE OF EVANGELICAL AMERICA, AND THE STATUS OF ROMAN
     CATHOLICISM
    
          Williams, 166-174, 174-175 (last full paragraph), 183-191 (omit
     post-
          1840 material), 196-197 (end  of first paragraph); Hatch
     (complete).
    
     13. THE RESTORATIONIST IMPULSE IN EARLY NATIONAL RELIGION: THE
     UNITARIANS,
          UNIVERSALISTS, "CHRISTIAN MOVEMENT," AND MORMONS
    
          Williams, 204-209 (omit Transcendentalism), 210-213 (end of
     first full
          paragraph), 219-225.
    
                        TEST 3 ON FRIDAY, MAY 2, 8:30-11:30 A.M.
    
                            APPENDIX TO RELIGION 345 SYLLABUS
    
                               A.  DATES OF TESTS 1 AND 2
     The precise dates of Tests 1 and 2 will depend upon the progress of
     lectures and discussions.  The class will know the precise date at
     least
     one week before any test, but students should watch the progress of
     lectures so as to avoid being caught unprepared.
    
                               B.  QUESTIONS FOR ALL TESTS
     Because questions from class members can assure a broader and fairer
     test,
     the instructor encourages students to submit suggested questions for
     all
     tests; please use e-mail [(dlholm@facstaff.wm.edu).](mailto:\(dlholm@facstaff.wm.edu\).)  A class member
     may send
     them at any time up to 5 p.m. of the evening before the test.
    
     Although the instructor lacks the time to acknowledge the questions
     or to
     explain why he did not use one or another, he will attempt to use
     every
     question that strikes him as pertinent and fair.   As students read
     lecture
     notes or assigned books, they would be exceedingly wise to jot down
     possible questions.
    
                                 C.  ABSENCE FROM TESTS
     Except in cases of documented hospitalization, of documented serious
     illness in the immediate family, or of documented travel on behalf of
     the
     College, the policy of the Department of Religion is to give tests and
     examinations only during class hours at the scheduled points in the
     course
     and not to administer make-up tests or exams. Since the instructor
     has no
     intention of breaching that policy, no student should expect him to
     give a
     make-up test or to accept papers submitted after the deadline.
    
                                D.  THE SEMESTER PROJECT
     The field trip will involve visits by teams of three or four students
     (formed by students or by the instructor) to the surviving colonial
     churches, colonial church sites, and Georgian, classical revival, and
     gothic revival churches in one county in Virginia, North Carolina,
     Maryland, or Delaware.
    
     Teams may select their own county. The trip will also involve driving
     colonial roads, visiting old homes, and visiting country stores.
     After
     completing its field trip, each team will submit in two copies a two-
     page
     paper with unlimited pages of narrative footnotes.
    
     The paper is due to the instructor at any time between March 27 and
     April
     15 (but not later).  It can be placed on the instructor's podium
     before
     class, given to him after class, or placed in his mailbox in the
     Department
     of Religion office on the third floor of the Wren Building.   No paper
     should be submitted after 5 p.m. on April 15.  The instructor will
     accept
     no late papers in this course.
    
     The instructor will place copies of sample papers from previous
     semesters
     on desk reserve in the Reserve Room of the Swem Library.  After
     enrollment
     stabilizes, he will distribute full instructions by e-mail or by disk
     (WP
     5.1).
    
     Class members should look forward to, rather than fear, this paper.
     For
     twenty years course evaluations have indicated that students have
     left Rel.
     345 enthusiastic about what this project has taught them.  They have
     been
     similarly enthusiastic about the semester project done on towns,
     cities,
     and Victorian America in Rel. 346.  Some years ago a senior woman in
     the
     course observed that her fiance--whom she met when she was a freshman
     and
     he a senior--would drive only back roads when he came down from the
     District of Columbia to visit her.
    
     In letters or in conversations, many alumni have stated that the
     project
     remains the most interesting paper they did in four years of college.
    
     It will give class members a hands-on experience of early American
     history
     and material culture.  It will also take students to old roads and to
     colonial churches and to historic homes and to uncommon places.
    
                                          ####

