**English 332: British Literature since 1750 (Internet)**

**Course Syllabus**

**Fall** ******2001**

**Instructor**

Dr. Ron Morrison

Office: CB 113C

Office Phone: 783-2608

E-Mail Address: [r-morrison@rocketmail.com](mailto:r-morrison@rocketmail.com)

Home Page Address: <http://www.morehead-st.edu/people/r.morris>

Office Hours: 10:20-11:20 TRF2 and by appointment

**Other Important Addresses**

MSU's Home Page: <http://www.morehead-st.edu>

MSU Distance Learning Page: <http://www.morehead-st.edu/units/distance>

MSU Distance Learning Student Guidelines Page: <http://www.morehead-
st.edu/units/distance/distance_learning_student_guid.html>

**Required Texts**

Austen, Jane. _Pride and Prejudice_. New York: Oxford UP, 1990.

Damrosch, David, gen. ed. _The Longman Anthology of British Literature_.
Volume 2. New

          York: Longman, 1999. 

Hardy, Thomas. _Tess of the d'Urbervilles_. New York: Oxford UP, 1988.

Harmon, William, and C. Hugh Holman. _A Handbook to Literature_. 8th ed.
Englewood Cliffs,

          NJ: Prentice Hall, 2000. 

Woolf, Virginia. _To the Lighthouse_. New York: Harcourt, 1989.

**Recommended Text**

Gibaldi, Joseph. _MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers_. 5th ed. New
York: MLA,

          1999\. 

**Technology Requirements and Competencies**

See the MSU Office of Distance Learning's Page for minimal technology
requirements for any on-line course: <http://www.morehead-
st.edu/units/distance/requirements_for_taking_online.html>.  All assignments
must be submitted in a rich text format. All students taking this class must
be proficient in sending and reading e-mail (including opening and sending
attachments), navigating the internet with a graphical browser (including
utilizing all features of the Blackboard software package), using word
processing software to create documents consistent with MLA format rules, and
managing files on a personal computer.

**Course Objectives**

**Catalog Description** : ENG 332 is "A Survey of English literature from
Wordsworth to the present." 3 Credit Hours. Prerequisites: ENG 100 (or
equivalent).

**Instructor's Description** : The primary aim of this course is to introduce
students to the major movements, the representative writers, and the primary
themes of English literature after 1750. A secondary objective is to acquaint
students with the various literary terms and techniques necessary for the
advanced study of nineteenth- and twentieth-century literature. A final aim is
to encourage students to explore the significance and value of nineteenth- and
twentieth-century British literature in the literary history of the Western
world.

**Course Content and Instructor's Expectations**

First and foremost, students will spend much of their time for this class
closely reading the assigned literary texts. Students will view brief
Powerpoint presentations on major authors and movements. Students will respond
to major works by submitting brief threads to the Blackboard Discussion Board
and will be required to take brief reading quizzes on most assigned readings.
Students will write three critical essays, a midterm examination, and a final
examination.

**Criteria for Final Grade**

                                                   3 essays at 15% each                           45% 

                                                   midterm examination                             15% 

                                                   final examination                                    15% 

                                                   reading quizzes                                      15% 

                                                   participation, including Blackboard         _10%_

                                                                                                               100% 

Note: In order to pass this course, students must complete every major
assignment.

Grading Scale for Quizzes and Exams:

100-90=A; 89-80=B; 79-70=C; 69-60=D; Below 60=E.

**Late Assignments**

All assignments must be completed and submitted by the final due dates listed
in the syllabus to receive full credit. Late assignments will be penalized one
letter grade for each day late. Students who experience extreme technical
difficulties are invited to contact the instructor by telephone to negotiate
for a brief extension.

**Class Participation**

The class participation grade is based on each student's ability to answer
questions on the Blackboard discussion board over the assigned readings. To
get an A or B for this part of the course, students must respond to all of the
Blackboard questions. Students who miss five or more Blackboard questions will
receive an E for this part of the course.

**Plagiarism Policy**

Plagiarism is the use of the words or the ideas of another as if they were
one's own. Plagiarism will not be tolerated in this course. All plagiarized
papers will receive a zero. Students should read the MSU Academic Policy
Statement at the following web page: <http://www.morehead-
st.edu/units/distance/academic_dishonesty.html>.  Students must print off and
sign a copy of the Student Academic Class Work Contract found on the page
listed above.

**Reading and Assignment Schedule**

Except for the required due dates listed below in bold, the dates for
completing the reading assignments and quizzes are suggested rather than
required. Reading quizzes may be completed by referencing the works under
discussion, but be aware that there is a ten-minute time limit for each quiz.

Note: The Longman anthology provides very useful background information on the
authors, works, and periods we will study. Students who hope to do well in
this course should read this background material faithfully in addition to the
specific readings described below. The introductions to the novels are not so
crucial, but they often do provide some helpful insights.

Week of   8/20-8/26  Austen: _Pride and Prejudice_ **** [two separate
quizzes].

Week of 8/27-9/2   Burke: from _Reflections on the Revolution in France_
(58-66);

                               Wollstonecraft: from _A Vindication of the Rights of Men_ (67-76); Paine: 

                               from _The Rights of Man_ (76-82); Blake: _The Marriage of Heaven and Hell_

                               (126-38) [quiz]. 

Week of 9/3-9/9  Wordsworth: selections from _Lyrical Ballads_ , including
Preface to Second

                            Edition (314-36) [quiz]; "Michael" (344-54) [quiz], "Ode: Intimations of 

                            Immortality from Recollections of Early Childhood" (435-39) [quiz]; 

                            Coleridge: "The Eolian Harp" (478-80), "The Rime of the Ancient 

                            Mariner" (484-99) [quiz]. 

Week of 9/10-9/16  Byron: Dedication and Canto I of _Don Juan_ (570-616)
[quiz]; Shelley:

                                "Mont Blanc" (653-57), "Hymn to Intellectual Beauty" (657-59), "Ode to 

                                the West Wind" (670-72), "To a Sky-Lark" (672-75). 

Week of 9/17-9/23  Keats: "The Eve of St. Agnes" (759-68), "La Belle Dame sans

                                Mercy" (768-69) [quiz], selections from the Odes of 1819 (771-80). 

Week of 9/24-9/30  Carlyle: from _Past and Present_ (1082-93); Mill: from _On
Liberty_ (1121-

                                32), from _The Subjection of Women_ (1132-41); Barrett Browning: 

                                selections from _Sonnets from the Portuguese_ (1155-58), from _Aurora_

                                _Leigh_ (1158-81). **Essay #1 and All Quizzes on Romantic Writers and**

**                                All Discussion Board Questions on Romantic
Writers Due by 8:00 a.m**

**                                on Monday, 1 October.**

Week of 10/1-10/7  Tennyson: "The Lady of Shalott" (1189-94), "Ulysses"
(1198-99), "The

                                Epic [Morte d'Arthur]" (1202-04); Tennyson: from _In Memoriam_ (1215- 

                                43) [quiz]. 

Week of 10/8-10/14  Browning: "Porphyria's Lover" (1348-49), "Soliloquy of the
Spanish

                                  Cloister" (1349-51), "My Last Duchess" (1351-52) [quiz], "The Bishop 

                                  Orders His Tomb at Saint Praxed's Church" (1355-57), "Fra Lippo Lippi" 

                                  (1367-75) [quiz]. **Midterm Examination Due by 8:00 a.m on Monday,**

**                                  15 October.**

Week of 10/15-10/21  Dickens: _A Christmas Carol_ (1396-1444) [quiz]; Arnold:
"Dover Beach"

                                    (1634-35), "The Buried Life" (1636-38), "Stanzas from the Grande 

                                    Chartreuse" (1638-43) [quiz]. 

Week of 10/22-10/28  C. Rossetti: "A Triad" (1709), "In an Artist's Studio"
(1709-10), "Winter:

                                    My Secret" (1711), "Up-Hill" (1712), "Goblin Market" (1712-24) [quiz]; 

                                    Swinburne: "Hymn to Proserpine" (1752-55); Hopkins: "God's Grandeur" 

                                    (1778-79), "The Windhover" (1780), "Pied Beauty" (1780), "Thou Art 

                                    Indeed Just, Lord" (1785). 

Week of 10/29-11/4  Hardy: _Tess of the d'Urbervilles_ [two separate quizzes];
Conrad: _Heart_

                                   _of Darkness_ (2018-72) [quiz]. **Essay #2 and All Quizzes on Victorian**

**                                  Writers and All Discussion Board Questions
on Victorian Writers**

**                                  Due By 8:00 a.m. on Monday, 5 November.**

Week of 11/5-11/11  Yeats: "The Lake Isle of Innisfree" (2308-09), "The Wild
Swans at Coole"

                                  (2310), "Easter 1916" (2310-12) [quiz], "The Second Coming" (2312-13), 

                                  "Among School Children" (2324-25), "Crazy Jane Talks with the Bishop" 

                                  (2326-27), "Lapis Lazuli" (2327-28) [quiz]. 

Week of 11/12-11/18  Woolf: _To the Lighthouse_ [two separate quizzes].

Week of 11/19-11/24    **Thanksgiving Week.  Use this week as a time to catch
up and get**

**                                    some rest.  The instructor will
generally be available during this**

**                                    week, although response time may be
slow.**

Week of 11/26-12/2   _The Waste Land_ (2430-42) [quiz]; Lawrence: "The Fox"
(2571-

                                  2614) [quiz]. 

Week of 12/3-12/9  Auden: selected poems (2658-68) [quiz]; Beckett: _Krapp's
Last Tape_

                                (2747-52), from _Texts for Nothing_ (2752-56). **Essay #3 and All Quizzes**

**                                on Twentieth-Century Writers and All
Discussion Board Questions on**

**                                Twentieth-Century Writers Due by 8:00 a.m.
on Monday, 10 December.**

Week of 12/10-12/14  Review for and write Final Examination. **Final Exam is
tentatively due**

**                                    by 8:00** **a.m. on Friday, 14
December**.

