**![](nosferatu.gif)**|

**8:171:002 Topics in Film and Popular Culture**

**The Vampire in Literature and Film**  
---|---  
  
**Instructor: Rob Latham**  
---  
  
**Course Times: Tuesdays and Thursdays 1:05-2:20 PM, in EPB 107 **
**Screenings: Tuesdays 7:00-10:00 PM, in EPB 107** **Office Hours: Tuesdays  &
Thursdays 3:45-5:00 PM and by app't, in EPB 455** **Phone: 335-0465 (office);
337-3364 (home)** **E-mail: robert-latham@uiowa.edu; roblath@zeus.ia.net**
** ** **Required Texts (all at Prairie Lights Bookstore):**     **John Richard
Stephens, ed., VAMPIRES, WINE, AND ROSES**     **Alan Ryan, ed., PENGUIN BOOK
OF VAMPIRE STORIES**

**Bram Stoker, DRACULA: NORTON CRITICAL EDITION**     **Richard Matheson, I AM
LEGEND**

**Theodore Sturgeon, SOME OF YOUR BLOOD**     **Anne Rice, INTERVIEW WITH THE
VAMPIRE**     **Jewelle Gomez, THE GILDA STORIES**     **Poppy Z. Brite, LOST
SOULS**     **Christopher Moore, BLOODSUCKING FIENDS: A LOVE STORY**

**Kim Newman, BAD DREAMS**     ** ** **Also Required (at University
Bookstore):**     **Reading Packet**  

  |

**![](Mark%20of%20Vampire.gif)**  
---|---  
  
**![](DRACPOST.jpg)**|

**Description: The figure of the vampire, originating in classic myth and
Medieval folklore, has become a staple of contemporary popular culture, due
largely to its literary appropriation, during the late 18th and early 19th
centuries, by the British Romantic poets. For these writers, the figure was a
complexly expressive emblem, combining themes of immortality, of bodily and
psychic metamorphosis, of exploitative sexual and social relationships, of
transfiguring desires and unquenchable hungers--themes that subsequent authors
of vampire texts have inherited and built upon. Indeed, thanks to Victorian
and modern treatments, the figure has become a rich and subtle icon,
condensing into a single resonant image all manner of personal and social
obsessions and anxieties. This class will survey representative vampire texts
of the past two centuries, attending both to the developing intertextual
complexity of the image and to its evolving capacity to address issues of
social moment, especially issues relating to race, class, gender and
sexuality. **

**Warning: Some of the materials presened in this class are of a graphic and
disturbing nature, dealing explicitly with themes of occult horror, sexuality
and/or violence. If such material is likely to offend or upset you, you should
consider taking a different class.**  
---|---  
  
**Requirements and Assignments: The first requirement is preparation and
attendance; you must be here for every class meeting with the day's reading
and/or viewing completed. Further, you must attend the weekly film screenings,
which are mandatory. Since the weekly quizzes and the exams will test
information presented in lectures as well as in the various texts (literary,
filmic) on the syllabus, missing classes will negatively impact your grades on
these assignments. Note: The weekly Double Feature screenings are optional,
but there will be extra credit questions on the quizzes and exams derived from
these movies.**

**The required writing consists of weekly quizzes, two short (5 page) papers,
an in-class mid-term examination, and a final. The quizzes, of which there
will be roughly twenty over the course of the semester, are designed to test
your reading/viewing of the texts and your diligence in attending to lecture
materials. The format will be 3-4 short-answer, fact-based questions. Quizzes
missed due to absences cannot be made up and will thus count as zeroes against
your final quiz grade. I will probably drop the three worst grades in
calculating your final score.**

**The two short papers are geared to allow you to develop your own ideas and
perspectives on the course materials. These papers may take any of a number of
forms: close readings of individual texts; comparative analyses of two or more
texts; contextual discussions that address specific texts as representative of
larger literary, philosophical, cultural or social concerns ; etc. I am also
open to creative projects. You may wish, in these papers, to bring in other
texts and/or issues not covered on the syallbus or in the lectures, so long as
some major part of your focus is on the latter; in other words, feel free to
synthesize the course materials with elements from your own reading, viewing,
listening, cogitating, etc.**

**Despite my willingness to entertain diverse sorts of papers in terms of
content, I am very picky about their form. They must be double-spaced on 8 1/2
x 11-inch unruled paper, with one-inch margins all around and no font size
larger than 12-point type. They must also be proofread for typos,
misspellings, and minor grammatical errors; 1/2 grade will be deducted for
those that are not. Do not penalize yourself by turning in a brilliantly
conceived and well-structured essay in a mistake-ridden and/or slovenly
format.**

**A note about late papers: because of the size of this class, it is
absolutely impossible for me to accept late papers for any reason short of
serious illness or other unavoidable catastrophe. The papers are due in class
on Tuesday of the week assigned and must be collected at that time, so make
your preparations for planning and writing them accordingly.**

**The mid-term and final will be in-class exams incorporating objective
(identification, short-answer) and essay sections. These exams will test the
material on the syllabus and in the lectures and will cover that material
roughly in halves (e.g. the mid-term through Week 8 and the final Weeks 8
through the end of the semester). Missed exams cannot be made up for any
reason short of, etc. (see late paper policy).**

**Grading: The breakdown in grading is as follows: Quizzes = 10%; Papers = 20%
each; mid-term and final exams = 25% each, towards your final grade. **  
---  
  
**Schedule of Readings: **  
---  
  
![](nosfer-2.gif) |

> ** **

>

> **Week 1. (January 18, 20)**

>

>     **Tuesday: Review of Syllabus; Preliminary Lecture**

>

> ** ** **Screening: BLACK SABBATH (Italian; 1964; dir. Bava): excerpt "The
Wurdalak"**     ** ** **Thursday:** **From Stephens, VAMPIRES, WINE, AND
ROSES:**

>

>>     **Voltaire, "Vampires" (pp. 182-86)**     **Alexandre Dumas, "The
Vampire of the Carpathian Mountains" (pp. 238-85)**  

       
---|---  
  
** **

**Week 2. (January 25, 27)**

> **Tuesday: From Stephens, VAMPIRES, WINE, AND ROSES:**

>

>     **Robert Southey, "Thalaba the Destroyer" (pp. 49-51)**     **Lord
Byron, excerpt from "The Giaour" (pp. 78-79)** **From Ryan, PENGUIN BOOK OF
VAMPIRE STORIES:**     **Lord Byron, "Fragment of a Novel" (pp. 1-6)**
**John Polidori, "The Vampyre" (pp. 7-24)** ** ** **Screening: GOTHIC
(English; 1987; Russell; 87m)** **Dbl Feature: None this week** ** **

>

> **Thursday: From Ryan, PENGUIN BOOK OF VAMPIRE STORIES:**

>

>     **James Malcolm Rymer, excerpt from VARNEY THE VAMPIRE, OR, THE FEAST OF
BLOOD (pp. 25-35)**     **Robert Aickman, "Pages from a Young Girl's
Journal"(pp. 382-414)**

** **

**Week 3. (February 1, 3)**

> **Tuesday: From Stephens, PENGUIN BOOK OF VAMPIRE STORIES: **

>

>     **Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, "The Bride of Corinth" (pp. 327-33)**
**John Keats, "Lamia" (pp. 187-206)** **From Reading Packet:**     **Samuel T.
Coleridge, "Christabel"** ** ** **Screening: DAUGHTERS OF DARKNESS (French;
1971; Kumel; 87m)** **Dbl Feature: THE VAMPIRE LOVERS (English; 1970; Baker;
91m)**     ** ** **Thursday: From Ryan, PENGUIN BOOK OF VAMPIRE STORIES:**

>

>     **Joseph Sheridan LeFanu, "Carmilla" (pp. 71-137)**  
  
---  
  
![](Dracula.gif) |

**Week 4. (February 8, 10)**

** **

**Tuesday: From Stephens, VAMPIRES, WINE, AND ROSES:**

    **Edgar Allan Poe, "Ligeia" (pp. 52-68)** **From Reading Packet:**     **Theophile Gautier, "The Beautiful Dead"**     ** ** **Screening: A FOOL THERE WAS (US; 1915; Powell; 70m) ** **Dbl Feature: THE TOMB OF LIGEIA (American; 1964; Corman; 82m) **     ** **

**Thursday: From Stephens, VAMPIRES, WINE, AND ROSES:**

    **Rudyard Kipling, "The Vampire" (pp. 69-70)** **From Reading Packet:**     **Algernon Swinburne, "Dolores"**



  
---|---  
  
> ** **

**Week 5. (February 15, 17)**

> **Tuesday: Bram Stoker, DRACULA, chs 1-7 (pp. 9-86)**     **Supplementary
Readings in Norton Edition:**

>

>     **Emily Gerard, From TRANSYLVANIAN SUPERSTITIONS (pp. 331-35)**

>

> **Stoker, "Dracula's Guest" (pp. 350-60)**     **Stephen D. Arrata, "The
Occidental Tourist: DRACULA and the Anxiety of Reverse Colonization" (pp.
462-70)** ** **

>

> **Screening: DRACULA (US; 1932; Browning; 75m)**

>

> **Dbl Feature: DRACULA (US; 1979; Badham; 109m)**     ** ** **Thursday:
Stoker, DRACULA, chs 8-16 (pp. 86-1`93)**     **Supplementary Readings in
Norton Edition:**

>

>     **Phyllis A. Roth, "Suddenly Sexual Women in Bram Stoker's DRACULA" (pp.
411-21)**

>

> **Christopher Craft, "'Kiss Me with Those Red Lips': Gender and Inversion in
Bram Stoker's DRACULA" (pp. 444-59)**     **Talia Schaffer, "'A Wilde Desire
Took Me': The Homerotic History of DRACULA" (pp. 470-82)** ** **

**Week 6. (February 22, 24)**

> **Tuesday: Stoker, DRACULA, chs. 17-27 (pp. 194-327)**     **Supplementary
Readings in Norton Edition:**

>

>> **Franco Moretti, "A Capital DRACULA" (pp. 431-44)**

>

>     ** ** **Screening: NOSFERATU (German; 1922; Murnau; 63m)** **Dbl
Feature: THE FEARLESS VAMPIRE KILLERS (US; 1967; Polanski; 98m)**

>

> **Thursday: Film Adaptations of DRACULA**

>

>     **Supplementary Readings in Norton Edition:**

>

>> **Gregory A. Waller, "Tod Browning's DRACULA" (pp. 382-89)**

>

>     **Nina Auerbach, "Vampires in the Light" (pp. 389-404)**     **[FIRST
PAPER DUE](vampess1.html)**

>

>  

|

**![](Drac.gif)**  
---|---  
** **

**![](martin.gif)**|

> ** **

**Week 7. (February 29, March 2)**

> **Tuesday: From Stephens, VAMPIRES, WINE, AND ROSES:**

>

>     **H.P. Lovecraft, "The Hound" (pp. 361-68)** **From Ryan, PENGUIN BOOK
OF VAMPIRE STORIES:**     **C.L. Moore, "Shambleau" (pp. 255-281)**     **Carl
Jacobi, "Revelations in Black" (pp. 282-300)**

** **

    **Screening: CRONOS (Mexican; 1994; del Toro; 92m) ** **Dbl Feature: LIFEFORCE (US; 1985; Hooper; 100m)** ** **

    **Thursday: From Ryan, PENGUIN BOOK OF VAMPIRE STORIES:**

    **Fritz Leiber, "The Girl with the Hungry Eyes" (pp. 334-48)**     **C.M. Kornbluth, "The Mindworm" (pp. 349-61)**

**Week 8. (March 7, 9)**

> **Tuesday: Richard Matheson, I AM LEGEND**     ** ** **Screening: INVASION
OF THE BODY SNATCHERS (US; 1956; Siegel; 80m)** **Dbl Feature: THE LAST MAN ON
EARTH (US-Italian; 1964; Ragona/Salkow; 86m)**     ** ** **Thursday: Matheson,
I AM LEGEND (cont'd)**

>

> **From Stephens, VAMPIRES, WINE, AND ROSES:**     **Ray Bradbury,
"Homecoming" (pp. 89-102)**  
  
---|---  


** **

** **

**Week 9. (March 14, 16) **

> **Spring Break \--No Classes**

>

> ** **

**Week 10. (March 21, 23) **

> **Tuesday: Preparing for the mid-term (no reading scheduled)**     ** **
**Screening: None This Week**     ** ** **Thursday: Mid-term Exam**

>

> ** **

**Week 11. (March 26, 30)**

> **Tuesday: Theodore Sturgeon, SOME OF YOUR BLOOD**     ** ** **Screening:
MARTIN (US; 1977; Romero; 96m)** **Dbl Feature: VAMPIRE'S KISS (US; 1988;
Czapsky; 103m)**

>

> **Thursday: From Ryan, PENGUIN BOOK OF VAMPIRE STORIES:**

>

>     **Richard Matheson, "Drink My Blood" (pp. 362-70)**     **Suzy McKee
Charnas, "The Unicorn Tapestry" (pp. 505-61)** ** **

**Week 12. (April 4, 6) **

> **Tuesday: Anne Rice, INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE**     ** ** **Screening:
THE HUNGER (US; 1983; Scott; 100m)** **Dbl Feature: DRACULA'S DAUGHTER (US;
1936; Hillyer; 71m)**

>

> **Thursday: Rice, INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE (cont'd)**

** **

**Week 13. (April 11, 13) **

> **Tuesday: Jewelle Gomez, THE GILDA STORIES (excerpts)**

>

> **Screening: BLACULA (US; 1972; Crain; 92m) **

    **Dbl Feature: BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER (US; 1992; Kazui; 98m) **

** **

**Thursday: Gomez, THE GILDA STORIES (cont'd) **

> **From Ryan, PENGUIN BOOK OF VAMPIRE STORIES:**     **Tanith Lee, "Bite-Me-
Not or, Fleur de Feu" (pp. 588-612)**

**[SECOND PAPER DUE](vampess2.html)**     ** **

**Week 14. (April 18, 20)**

> **Tuesday: Poppy Z. Brite, LOST SOULS**     ** ** **Screening: THE LOST BOYS
(US; 1986; Schumacher; 97m)** **Dbl Feature: NEAR DARK (US; 1987; Bigelow;
95m) **

>

> **Thursday: Brite, LOST SOULS, cont'd**

    ** **

**Week 15. (April 25, April 27)**

> **Tuesday: Christopher Moore, BLOODSUCKING FIENDS: A LOVE STORY**

>

> ** ** **Screening: NADJA (US; 1995; Almereyda; 92m) ** **Dbl Feature: None
this Week**

    ** **

**Thursday: Moore, BLOODSUCKING FIENDS (cont'd)**

** **

**Week 16. (May 2, 4) **

> **Tuesday: Kim Newman, BAD DREAMS**     ** ** **Screening: THE ADDICTION
(US; 1995; Ferrara; 82m) ** **Dbl Feature: None this Week **

** **

**Thursday: Newman, BAD DREAMS (cont'd)**     ** **

**Final Exam.[Topic Sheet](vamp-final.html)**  
---  
****

**LINKS:**  
---  
  
|

[![](../webct/bat01.gif)](http://promo.net/pg/_authors/i-_stoker_bram_abraham_.html)
|

> **[Bram Stoker's DRACULA (full
text)](http://promo.net/pg/_authors/i-_stoker_bram_abraham_.html)**  
  
---|---  
  
[![](crosbone.gif)](http://ebbs.english.vt.edu/LRA/) |

> **[Lord Ruthven Assembly (academic
association)](http://ebbs.english.vt.edu/LRA/)**  
  
[![](dragon01.gif)](http://www.geocities.com/WallStreet/Floor/7569/15.html) |

> **[The Historical
Dracula](http://www.geocities.com/WallStreet/Floor/7569/15.html)**  
  
[![](pentagra.gif)](http://users.aol.com/mishian/nosferatu/TdV.html) |

> **[Theatre de Vampires (fan
page)](http://users.aol.com/mishian/nosferatu/TdV.html)**  
  
![](annerice.gif)  
  
**[RETURN HOME](http://www.uiowa.edu/~c008171/robspage/roblath.html)** |

**ANNE RICE**  
  
>  









>  



