WST 2010 - Introduction to Women's Studies  
Tuesday-Thursday 5:30 - 6:45 PM, Fall Semester 1999

Cynthia Griffith, 404-651-2692 e mail: cgriffith@gsu.edu  
Office Hours: Tuesday and Thursdays 4:00 - 5:15, and by appointment  
1 Park Place  Room 607 (Enter through 650)

                Texts:          Feinberg, Leslie. Stone Butch Blues   
                                Coontz, Stephanie. The Way We Never Were   
                                Lorde, Audre.  Sister Outsider: Essays and   
Speeches by Audre Lorde  
                                Readings from the instructor and the web   
                                All textbooks are available at Charis   
Books and More, 1189 Euclid Avenue, NE.

Purpose and Objectives  
Introduction to Women's Studies provides all students (of any discipline)  
with a serious and  
scholarly way to become familiar with a vast body of knowledge that has  
historically been  
neglected: the conditions and circumstances affecting the lives of women.  
There are no  
prerequisites for this course.  As we examine the status of women's lives  
we will pay attention to how race, class, ethnicity, sexual orientation,  
age, cultural and social systems play significant roles in how women  
conduct themselves in the world.

Why are racism, heterosexism, ageism, homophobia, and class exploitation  
women's studies issues?  What are the dynamics of social and cultural  
systems that privilege and oppress women and men in various ways? What are  
significant events in the past that have helped to  
shape the women's movement: the first, second and third waves of feminism?  
How and why do feminism and women's studies interlink?  What do we mean by  
feminist contradictions?  What stereotypes exist about women and how can  
we dispell these myths?  What are some remarkable contributions made by  
women?

The course presents a number of selections from different cultures,  
genres, and political identification.  The syllabus is organized into  
clusters.

Course Guidelines  
Attendance: since discussion is such an important part of this class, more  
than three absences will affect your grade, as you will lose five points  
per missed class after three absences.  
        You need to come to class on time and stay until the end of class.   
        You need to be prepared for class by doing the readings before   
class.  
        Cell phones and pagers must be turned off. 

Requirements - 3 short papers, The Way We Never Were, the reading logs, 5  
to 7 pages in length, and the research paper 7 pages in length. - Total 4  
papers.  
        Reading logs                            30%   
        The Way We Never Were           20%   
        Research Paper                  20%   
        Participation in class                  30% 

NOTE: THERE ARE NO EXAMS IN THIS CLASS.  That is why your papers and  
attendance are critical.

Your reading logs are in lieu of tests so take them seriously.  You will  
hand in a log for two  
clusters of your choice. Your readings need to be analytical.  Describe  
the arguments that are  
being made in the cluster.  What are the authors saying and why? If you  
want you can read  
additional works and include them in your analysis.  What are the authors  
telling us about  
women; what are the authors telling us about feminism; what are the  
authors saying about race,  
class and gender?  How do the authors arguments interact with each other?  
You can address  
issues raised in class and explore them in your log as long as you utilize  
analytical theories  
we're learning in class or that you've read about on your own. What do you  
think are the  
strengths and weaknesses of the perspective?  Do you agree the author's  
argument, why and why  
not.  When using references or quotations from articles please use the  
publication style that  
your discipline suggests for the assignment (i.e. APA, Chicago style,  
MLA).  Due 9/14 and  
11/11

The Way We Never Were. Pick a couple of chapters of the book and write  
about them from your  
own perspective. Be sure and discuss the issues and myths the author  
writes about.  Due 10/7

For  your research paper, you will write a seven page research paper on a  
woman in history who  
has contributed to the advancement of women.  See instructor for  
suggestions and approval. You will then give an oral presentation to the  
class. We will pick dates for individual  
presentations during the second week of class.

Assignment dates  
        Log One                         9/14   
        The Way We Never Were           10/7   
        Log Two                         11/11   
Research Paper presented in class               12/7 (written paper due)

Papers will automatically be graded down one letter grade if turned in  
after the due date.

Facilitation Class Discussion  
For days in which we have reading discussions, a leadership group will be  
established.  The  
leadership group will summarize class readings and lead the class in a  
discussion of the  
readings.

Grades  
It is possible to receive a grade of A for this class: if you attend every  
class, are prepared  
for every class by doing the readings, participate in the group  
discussions, turn in papers on  
time, and the papers follow the established guidelines, and your research  
paper is well  
thought out and delivered in a coherent manner.

It is also possible to fail this course.  If you are habitually absent,  
are not prepared for  
class, and do not participate or turn in papers on time you will fail.  
Although a grade of D  
is passing in some disciplines, this instructor does not automatically  
give a passing grade.

CLUSTER ONE:   INTRODUCTION TO THE COURSE  
                8/24                    Introduction to the course and   
establishment of ground  
rules. Distribute syllabus.

                8/26                    Short lecture and discussion on   
women's studies as an  
academic discipline, an introduction to key concepts and definitions.  
Video: Dreams of  
Equality  
        Search the internet: NOW. Org, Feminism.Com, nnedv.org (national   
network to end  
domestic violence) and others.  Tell the class what you found of interest.

                                        Present issues in women's studies   
and feminism  
                8/31                 Readings: Marilyn Frye, Oppression   
(web)  
                        Adrienne Rich, Claiming an education: Taking   
women's studies seriously (web)  
                        Audre Lorde, Transformation of  silence into   
language and action.  
                        Lorde, Sexism: An American disease in blackface   
                        Reading discussion of 8/31 and 9/2 

                        Third wave: race, class and gender   
9/2                     Readings: Peggy McIntosh, Unpacking the invisible  
knapsack (web)  
        Ann Russo, We cannot live without our lives: white women,   
anti-racism and Feminism.  
(web)  
                        Audre Lorde, The master's tools will never   
dismantle the master's house  
                        Reading discussion 

CLUSTER TWO: WOMEN'S CONSTRUCTION OF SELF AND OTHERS'  
                         CONSTRUCTION OF WOMEN 

                                        Victorian women's construction of   
self and activism

9/7  
                Lecture: First wave feminism,introduction to the cult of   
domesticity and the relationship between abolition and feminism (the  
Grimke sisters)  
Readings: Selections from Mary Wolstencraft's Vindication of the Rights of  
Women (Handout)

9/9                     Washington, National Club movement: Black women's  
clubs in white                 America (web)  
                                        Reading Discussion   
                        TURN IN FIRST LOG 

                9/14                    Oral presentations from research   
papers

                        Early Images of Women   
                9/16                    Guest lecturer, Dr. Charlene Ball   
  Selections from Genesis; Hesiod; Sappho, (web)  
                        J. Berger, Ways of Seeing - Images of Women in   
European Art  
                        (handout)   
                        Discussion with Dr. Ball   


CLUSTER THREE: WOMANISM AND BLACK FEMINISM

                9/21                    Performance Artist - Wanda Woodall   
                        Reading: Walker, Saving the Life That Is Our Own   
                        Clenora Hudson-Weems, Africana Womanism:   
Reclaiming Ourselves  
                        Bell Hooks, feminism: a transformational politic   
(web)  
                         READ TWO 

                9/23                    Video: Audre Lorde   
                        Readings: Aptheker, Woman's Legacy:  Essays on   
Race, Sex and Class in American History.  (Handout)  
                        Lorde, An open letter to Mary Daly  (web)   
                        Lorde, Poetry is not a luxury   
                        READ TWO   
                        Reading discussion 9/21 and 9/23 

                9/28                    READING DAY-NO CLASS   
 The Way We Never Were

                CLUSTER FOUR:   WOMEN'S VOICES   
                9/30                    Readings: Perdue, Cherokee Women   
and the Trail of Tears (web)  
                        Weber, Raiz Fuerte: Oral History and Mexicana Farm   
workers (web)  
                        Garcia, The development of Chicana feminist   
discourse, 1970-1980 (web)  
                        READ TWO OF THE THREE   
                        Reading Discussion 

                10/5                    Susan Glaspell, A Jury of Her   
Peers (web )  
                        Video: A room of one's own   
                        Alice Walker, In search of our Mother's Gardens   
                        Reading discussion 

10/7                    Reading discussion: The Way We Never Were  
                        TURN IN THE WAY WE NEVER WERE PAPER   
    


                CLUSTER FIVE:   SOCIALIZATION OF GENDER AND IDENTITY 

Girls  
10/12               Munro, A. Boys and Girls (web)  
                Sittenfield,Your life as a girl(web)   
                        L. Gould, X (web) READ TWO   
                        Reading discussion 

10/14               Film: Orlando - class will be extended to allow for  
length of film  
                        Or oral presentations from research papers 

                        Identity and Gender   
10/19                   E. Neuborne, E. Imagine my surprise (web)  
                        Myhre, One bad hair day too many (web)   
                            E. Ensler, The Vagina Monologues  (handout)   
                            Galler, The Myth of the Perfect Body (web)   
                        Video:  Still Killing us softly   
                Reading Discussion   
CLUSTER SEVEN: SEX, GENDER AND SEXUALITY

                10/21           S. Pharr, Homophobia: A Weapon of Sexism   
(web)  
                A. Rich, Compulsory Heterosexuality and  lesbian existence   
(web)  
                K. Hagan, Orchids in the Arctic (web)  READ TWO   
                Reading Discussion 

                10/26           READING DAY: STONE BUTCH BLUES - NO CLASS 

                10/28           Speaker from Feminist Women's Health   
Center  
                HAND IN SECOND LOG   
 11/2            Video: When Night Is Falling or oral presentations from  
research paper

                11/4            Discussion: Stone Butch Blues 

CLUSTER EIGHT: VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN

                Economic Violence   
                11/9            Joel Handler, Hard labor, what can be done   
(handout)  
                Introduction: Putting a Face on Welfare  (web)   
                Guest lecturer, Dr. Elizabeth Beck, on welfare. 

11/11           Globalization/Environmentalism  
              Readings:  K. Warren, Taking empirical data seriously: An   
ecofeminist perspective (web)  
               Lori Heise, The global war against women   
                Reading Discussion 

CLUSTER NINE: WOMEN AND AGEISM

                11/18           Speaker from The Older Women's League   
(OWL) - Jeanne Scherr  
                Handouts from instructor   
                HAND IN LOG TWO 

                11/23           Video: Whisper the waves and the wind or   
Acting our Age  
  Discussion of 11/18 and 11/23

CLUSTER TEN: AUTOBIOGRAPHY  
                11/30           Lourdes Torres, The Construction of the   
self in U. S. Latina Autobiographies  
                Telling our own stories - how this class has impacted on   
our views and our career or personal goals  
                GROUP DISCUSSION 

CLUSTER 11: ACTIVISM

                11/30      Combahee River collective statement (web)   
                               When it rains I get scared (web)   
                                Lorde, the uses of anger, women responding   
to racism  
                                Ida B. Welles, student paper,   
                                Film: Step by step   
                           Hand out of getting involved in Atlanta and on   
campus

                12/7            Wrap up and party   
                                        Hand in research papers 

At some point during the semeseter we will have a guest speake from Men  
Stopping Violence.  
We'll have to move other assignments and reading around.  
Reading:  L. Lemoncheck. What's wrong with being a sex object?

[Back to Syllabi Page](../../syll.html) / [Back to Main
Page](../../index.html)

