# AMERICAN REALISM

## Fall 2000

#### EN 424.01 An Undergraduate Elective at Boston College

![](hopper13.jpg)

#### Prof. Christopher Wilson

English Department Carney Hall 435 ex. 2-3719  
http://www2.bc.edu/~wilsonc/424.html  
To see my home page click here: [CW HOME PAGE  

You can email me by clicking here:[wilsonc@bc.edu](mailto:wilsonc@bc.edu)  
Office Hours:  
Monday 1-2  
Wednesday 1-3  
Thursday 11-12 and by appointment  

This is an upper-division, interdisciplinary elective centering on the
development of realist conventions in literature, photography, and painting in
America from 1880 to 1940: middle class realism, impressionism, documentary
realism, the social or proletarian realism of the 1930s, and more. Our primary
focus will be on fiction; the intent of the course, however, is to sharpen our
sense of various realist philosophies and aesthetics during this period by
comparing the social practice of literary writing with experimentation of
other media in this era. Consequently, we will cover some theoretical issues
about representation, about realist literary conventions, and the political
ideologies which have often been at play in realistic art. Consequently, this
course may be of special interest to American Studies minors.

This course, however, is open to all majors. _ Generally, I do think it's a
good idea to have had a course like Studies in Poetry or Narrative and
Interpretation for preparation, or a similar "interpretive" course
(emphasizing, for instance, visual interpretation) from another discipline._
The reading load for this course is also, in my view, somewhat extensive, and
you will be asked to read criticism and writing on the visual arts. On the
other hand, the course assumes no specific prior knowledge on the part of
students - in particular, no special familiarity with interpreting painting or
photography. The first weeks of the course are devoted to acquiring the skills
in "reading" visual images.

* * *

#### Course Requirements

    1. Very Regular Class Attendance and Participation (20%), including some in-class presentations. **Three Cut Maximum**
    2. One initial 3-5 pp. paper (10%) 
    3. One 4-6 Page Paper (15%) 
    4. One additional 4-6 pp. paper (25%). 
    5. Final Examination (30%)  plus attendance at a couple of video showings (see calendar). 

* * *

#### _Books You Will Need_

You will need to buy the following course texts, all of which should be in the
BC Bookstore:

    * Nathanael West, _Day of the Locust_
    * Edith Wharton, _The House of Mirth_
    * John Dos Passos, _The Big Money_
    * Willa Cather, _My Antonia_ (please use the edition in BC bookstore) 
    * Tille Olsen, _Yonnondio: From the Thirties_
    * and a _Required Course Reader_ of assigned essays 

_**Note:** This Course Reader will also be on Reserve in O'Neill Library._

The following two books are _highly recommended_ , and will also be placed on
reserve in O'Neill Library.

  * Linda Nochlin, _Realism_
  * R.G. Renner, _Hopper: Transformations of the Real_

_Whatever books you choose to purchase, you should always bring your text to
class on the discussion days. If you choose to use a reserve reading, please
bring a xerox to class._

* * *

## Calendar

  
Dates denote days by which you should have done the reading. (R) denotes
material on reserve in O'Neill; (HO) means handouts; (CR) means material in
the class reader as well.

Sept

6 Opening Day Introduction and Syllabus

## I. Prologue: "How We Picture the World:" The Conventions of Realism

### 8 Lecture: Realisms, Representation, "Reality"

_Assignment_ : Nochlin, chapter entitled "The Nature of Realism" in _Realism_

11 Lecture/ Discussion: Reading Realist Prose

Assignment: W.J.T. Mitchell, "Representation" (CR), plus a short prose
selection (TBA)

![](homer_life_line.jpg)

##  II. Victorian Realism: Space, Time, and Neoclassical Form in Thomas Eakins
and Edith Wharton

### 13 Lecture/Discussion: Ways of Reading a Visual Text __Attendance
Mandatory__

Required Reading: Jules Prown, "Winslow Homer in His Art" (CR); Elizabeth
Johns, chapter on "William Rush Carving..." from her _Thomas Eakins: The
Heroism of Modern Life_ (CR)

15 Discussion of Thomas Eakins 2

Required Reading: Nochlin, chapter called "The Heroism of Modern Life"

Elizabeth Johns, "The Gross Clinic" (CR)

![](eakinsswimming_hole.jpg) Thomas Eakins WEB Sites

[Eakins Study Images](http://www2.bc.edu/~wilsonc/eakinsstudy.html)

[UNC Exhibit](http://metalab.unc.edu/wm/paint/auth/eakins/)

[Art Cyclopedia](http://www.artcyclopedia.com/artists/eakins_thomas.html)

[Sunsite Listings](http://sunsite.auc.dk/cgfa/eakins/index.html)

Also Recommended to View Video, "Thomas Eakins: A Motion Portrait," in
O'Neill's Media Center

18: Discussion of Thomas Eakins 3

20: Lecture: Edith Wharton/ "A Moment's Ornament"

[Click here if you want to see the images in the "Tableaux Vivants Scene in
_The House of
Mirth_](http://msnhomepages.talkcity.com/LibraryLawn/auguster/rohrbach/Russ

o/Russo.htm) 22: Discussion: Wharton, _House of Mirth_

25 Discussion: _House of Mirth_ 2

27 Discussion: _House of Mirth_ 3

##  III. Spectacles of Industrialism: Human Documents

### 29 Lecture: Time, Motion, Industrial Vision

Oct.

2 Discussion: Lewis Hine Photos (1)

Required Reading: Maren Stange, "The Pittsburg Survey" (CR), from her _Symbols
of Ideal Life_ ;

Recommended Reading: Patricia Hills, "John Sloan's Working- Class Women" (CR),
from Maryann Doezma, ed. _Reading American Art_

![](hinegirls.jpg)

John Sloan and Lewis Hine Web Sites:

  * [Hine Study Images](http://www2.bc.edu/~wilsonc/hinestudy.html)

  * [ART CYCLOPEDIA ON SLOAN](http://www.artcyclopedia.com/artists/sloan_john.html)

  * [An Exhibit of Lewis Hine's Child Labor Photographs](http://www.historyplace.com/unitedstates/childlabor/index.html)

4 Discussion: Lewis Hine (2)

6 No Class: _First Short Paper Due_

3-5 PAGE VISUAL ANALYSIS

9 NO CLASS: COLUMBUS DAY

11 Lecture: Willa Cather and Memory

Recommended Reading: Judith Fryer, "Novel of the Soil" from her _Felicitous
Space_ (R); and Jean Schwind, "The Benda Illustrations to _My Antonia_ " (R)

![](lark0.jpg) 13 Discussion: _My Antonia_

16 Discussion: _My Antonia_ (2)

18 Discussion: _My Antonia_ (3)

![](Chilimark.jpeg) 20 Discussion: Thomas Hart Benton (1)

Required Reading: Verlyn Klinkenborg, "Thomas Hart Benton Came from
Missouri..." (CR), and Elizabeth Broun,"Thomas Hart Benton: A Politician in
Art" (CR);

Sometime this week, please also view Ken Burns' Video Documentary on Benton,
in O'Neill Media Center (R)

23 Discussion: Benton (2)

  * [Thomas Hart Benton World](http://www.geocities.com/BourbonStreet/1875/)

  * [Diego Rivera Web Museum](http://www.diegorivera.com/)

  * [a Photo of a Benton Mural as Installed: Opening of the West](http://www.trumanlibrary.org/teacher/benton.htm)

  * [A Charcoal Version of "Homestead"](http://www.csulb.edu/library/arts/Benton.html_f/Benton.html)

  * [Scroll down to "B" and look at a Benton Murals in Sequence](http://www.nbmaa.org/HTML-Pages/Artists.html#/)

  * [A Benton and Hopper Page, with "City Activities" Panels](http://www.tigtail.org/TVM/B/benton.html)

##  IV. Remembering the 1920s: Class and the American Mosaic

### 25: Lecture: John Dos Passos, Murals and Montage

27: Discussion of Dos Passos, _The Big Money_ (1)

30 Dos Passos, ( 2)

![](saccovanshahn.jpg) NOV.

Sometime this week, please also view Charlie Chaplin's "Modern Times" in the
O'Neill Media Center (R)

1 Ben Shahn (1)

Required Reading: Susan Noyes Platt, "The Jersey Homestead Mural" (CR)
Recommended Reading: Laura Katzman, "The Politics of Media: Painting and
Photography in the Art of Ben Shahn" (CR)

Ben Shahn Sites

[Suggested Study Images of Ben
Shahn](http://www2.bc.edu/~wilsonc/shahnstudy.html)

[The Jersey Homesteads
Mural](http://scc01.rutgers.edu/njh/homesteads/mural.htm)

[ART CYLOPEDIA](http://www.artcyclopedia.com/artists/shahn_ben.html)

[HARVARD EXHIBIT](http://www.artmuseums.harvard.edu/Shahn/)

[JEWISH
MUSEUM](http://www.jewishmuseum.org/Pages/Special_Exhibits/shahn/shahn2.htm

l)

3 Ben Shahn (2)

6 Discussion: Dos Passos (3)

##  V. The Thirties and After: The Grotesque and the Speed-up

### 8 Lecture: Proletarian Literature/ Tillie Olsen

10 Discussion: Olsen, _Yonnondio: from the Thirties_ (1)

13 Discussion: Olsen (2)

15 Discussion: Olsen (3)

![](langebreadline.jpg) 17 Discussion: Dorothea Lange (1)

Required Reading: James C. Curtis, "Dorothea Lange, Migrant Mother, and the
Culture of the Great Depression" (CR)

Dorothea Lange Sites:

[Suggested Study Images of Dorothea
Lange](http://www2.bc.edu/~wilsonc/Langestudy.html)

[LINKS TO LANGE
SITES](http://www.artcyclopedia.com/artists/lange_dorothea.html)

[GLOBAL ART ON
LANGE](http://www.museumca.org/global/art/collections_dorothea_lange.html)

[OAKLAND EXHIBIT](http://www.masters-of-photography.com/L/lange/lange.html)

20 Discussion: Dorothea Lange

_THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY_

27 Lecture: Nathaniel West 29 Discussion: Nathanael West, _Day of the Locust_
(1)

1 Discussion: _Day of the Locust_ (2)

4 Discussion: _Day of the Locust_ (3)

Two Images by Monsu Desiderio, of Atlantis and the fall of Troy, cited in _Day
of the Locust:_

![](desidatlantis.jpg) ![](desidtroy.jpg)

Suggested Reading only: Karen Ann Marling, "Early Sunday Morning," (CR) and
R.G. Renner, _Hopper: Transformations of the Real_

6 NO CLASS: CONFERENCE TIMES 2

![](hopper18.jpg) Edward Hopper Sites: [ART
CYCLOPEDIA](http://www.artcyclopedia.com/artists/hopper_edward.html)

[ON LINE EXHIBIT](http://nmaa-ryder.si.edu/collections/exhibits/hopper/)

[GALLERIES WITH HOPPER](http://www.i-galleries.com/hopperidx.htm)

[SUNSITE](http://sunsite.auc.dk/cgfa//hopper/index.html)

8 Last Class Day / Course Evaluations / Exam Prep.

_FINAL PAPER DUE_

* * *

#### Some Links to Handouts from this Course:

####

  * [Six Conventions You Should Know For College Writing](tenc.html)
  * [The Correction Code Used on Your Papers](ccode.html)
  * [How to "Read Back" into Literary Passages](rback.html)

  * [The Simplified MLA Citation System We're Using](mylac.html)

  * [Ten Pet Peeves of Mine About Your Writing](tips.html) 

* * *

### Some General "Crossroads" WWW Links that Take You to Many Sources

####

  * [American Studies Web: The WWW Home of the American Studies Association](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/asw/)

  * [American Memory Project at the Smithsonian/ Library of Congress](http://lcweb2.loc.gov/ammem/ammemhome.html)

  * [Guide to American History WWW Sites called "History Matters"_

  * [Making of American WWW Site: Primary Documents in American Social History_

  * [Library of Congress Finding Aids](http://lcweb2.loc.gov/faid/)

  * [BC Online Data Bases](http://www.bc.edu/bc_org/avp/ulib/ref/Onlinenew.html)

  * [Voice of the Shuttle: Humanities Research](http://vos.ucsb.edu/)

  * [American Literature Resources on the Web](http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/Lit/american.html)

  * [Ethnicities, Multicultural Resources in American Literature_
  * [Cultural Theory on the Web](http://eserver.org/theory/)

  * [Hypertexts in American Literature/ University of Virginia](http://xroads.virginia.edu/~HYPER/hypertex.html)

  * [ON LINE TEXTS YOU CAN USE FOR YOUR PAPER ASSIGNMENTS
  * [Fine Arts on the Web (Courtesy of Jeff Howe, Fine Arts Department](http://www.bc.edu/bc_org/avp/cas/fnart/Artweb.html)

  * [Link to Boston College's AMICO WWW site for finding images in Art History (On Campus Only)](http://www.bc.edu/bc_org/avp/cas/fnart/amico/)

* * *

#### A Few Links to Winslow Homer sites:

    * [Winslow Homer site at Syracuse University](http://web.syr.edu/~ribond/homer.html)
    * [Links to Articles and Web Pages and Images](http://www.safran-arts.com/links/homer.html)
    * [Earlier Homer Exhibit at the MFA in Boston](http://www.boston.com/mfa/homer/mfahomer.htm)

* * *

#### A Few Links to sites related to Hine and Riis:

    * [Hypertext version of How the Other Half Lives](http://www.cis.yale.edu/amstud/inforev/riis/title.html)
    * [A Quite Helpful Link Page on American Immigration, Connecting to Visual Images, Material on Jacob Riis, Ellis and Angel Islands](http://www.davison.k12.mi.us/academic/immpage.htm)

* * *
    
        Course Policies:_
    
    
    
    
    1.    Class attendance is  required.  You are allowed three cuts 
    (hereby defined as an "unexcused absence") without penalty.  
    But absence beyond this three-cut maximum can lower 
    your overall course grade--and, in some cases, be grounds for failing 
    the course altogether.  If there is a good reason why you have had to
    miss a class, please don't hesitate to tell me.  
    Medical Excuses should be accompanied by a doctor's 
    note.   After the first week, we'll be using an attendance sheet 
    sign-in to save time.  
    	
    2. 	Class participation can account for about 20% of your grade. 
    Generally, I try to use your class participation (including your 
    work on panels or "kick-off" presentations) as a measure of how 
    well you have read and understood the assignments.  My main 
    goal is to encourage strong class participation--and to teach 
    each of you how to present yourself successfully in oral 
    presentations--but not to penalize unduly those who are 
    temperamentally quiet or feel uncomfortable speaking.  If your 
    participation reflects strong reading skills, consideration for 
    others' viewpoints, and frequent contributions to the flow of 
    discussion, the "average" based solely on your writing efforts 
    (including exams)  can be boosted considerably. 
    Conversely, infrequent or poor class participation can make your 
    overall grade more dependent on the hourly and final exam.  
    		
    3.  	When you submit a paper, it should be neatly typed or word-
    processed and double-spaced, preferably on both sides of the
    paper so that we can save a few trees. (The Computer center allows 
    you to do this by selecting OCF-2.)  In addition, you are required 
    to keep either a xerox or carbon copy.  That way, if your paper 
    is lost, you can simply re-submit your copy.  
    
    4.	_Hard Copy_ versions of your papers are due on the assigned 
    dates.  (In other words, I do not accept email submissions.  On 
    penalties, my rule is that I allow 24 hours leeway 
    without penalty; after that, you will be penalized about 
    1/3 grade for every part of 24 hours the paper is 
    late.   
    The idea of this "leeway" period is that you should never miss 
    a class in order to type a paper; come to class, and turn the 
    paper in later.  And since the leeway period is there, all other excuses 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    (e.g. "the computer center was closed," "my roomate didn't turn in 
    my paper," etc.) are irrelevant.  If you turn in any paper late, please 
    also attach a note identifying the exact time you turned it in (e.g. 
    under my office door).
    
    5.   In a large class like this, it isn't uncommon for students 
    to feel, alternately, "over their head," unprepared--or, 
    conversely, bored or unchallenged.  _The first remedy for 
    any of these situations is to come to my office for a 
    conference, and to come early in the semester._  If my office 
    hours don't fit your schedule, just talk to me in class about 
    setting up another time. Please note:  my "voice mailbox" 
    on my phone extension (552-3719) really operates more like a 
    mailbox than a "phone machine"--that is, I will try to respond 
    to calls when I come into my office hours.  _But email 
    conversations are very much encouraged, particularly as 
    "follow ups" to class discussions._
    
    
    6.    This course emphasizes improving your writing.  To that 
    end, I use a "correction guide" adapted from the handbook by 
    Diana Hacker, entitled _A Pocket Style Manual_. I will hand out
    a sheet explaining these symbols if you can't easily access the WWW
    link below.   If you're confused by some of the symbols I use 
    in the margins to correct your papers, you can also consult Hacker (which 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    can also be bought in the Bookstore).  It goes without saying I would 
    also be happy to discuss your writing with you in conference.

[Click Here to see the Correction Code Used on Your Papers](ccode.html)

[The Simplified MLA Citation System We're Using](mylac.html)

[Ten Pet Peeves of Mine About Your Writing](tips.html)

![](/cgi-bin/wwwcount2.3/Count.cgi?df=wilsonc1.dat)

* * *

If you have any comments on this page, please send them to:
[wilsonc@bc.edu](mailto:wilsonc@bc.edu) .

