**_SYLLABUS_** __

  
  

  * **AFRICAN-AMERICAN EXPERIENCE SINCE 1890**

Hist 4910 and 5910

  
  

**PREREQUISITES** : Eng. 1113 English Grammar and Composition LAR-220

  
  

**COURSE DESCRIPTION** : In this course students will study in some detail the
African American Experience from the nadir of the dreams of liberation, as the
Victorian Era came to an end and the so-called Progressive Era began, down to
current liberationist struggles and debates. Considerable time will then be
devoted to examining the historical record of this experience, through the
lynching and Ku Klux Klan craze of the Jim Crow, Progressive Era, through the
African-American sacrifices made during World War I, the Great Depression,
World War II, the Civil Rights and Black Power movements, into the continuing
debates about the meaning of Black Liberation and how to achieve it.

**COMPETENCIES** : (See Syllabus # 5 and 9)

  
  

2\. **Professor:**

**** Dr. Jere W. Roberson

Professor of American History, Director of Ethnic Studies, Professor of
African

American History since 1971, Professor of U.S. Constitutional History since
1969

3\. **Office Hours:** Summer 2002

12:40-2PM M-F

LA 202-J

974-5592

jeresoffice@netscape.net

  
  

4\. **Textbooks:**

a. _A Turbulent Voyage_ , 3rd Ed. By Floyd W. Hayes, III.

College Press, 2002

[to be found at the University Bookstore]

b. _The African American Experience Since 1890: A Study and Course Guide_

__ [to be found at Kopy Kat printers]

  
  

5\. **COURSE OBJECTIVES:**

    * Students will complete written assignments that will require them to compose critiques/summaries of professional works and demonstrate their cognitive skills. 
    * Students will make oral presentations to the class that demonstrate their verbal skills.
    * Students will engage in research projects for classroom presentation that demonstrate skills listed in (a) and (b) above and thereby display their discriminating analytical skills.
    * Students will compose responses to 2 essay examinations that will demonstrate how well they have mastered the material covered during the first two periods of the class. These examinations will require an acceptable presentation/reflection of cognitive skills.

6\. **Instructional Process**

Class Discussion of Assigned Material

Lecture when appropriate

Conducting and Presenting Research projects

7\. **Course Requirements:**

Imbedded

  
  

8\. **Resources, references, and supplies:**

Resources: Textbook and additional readings as prescribed by professor in
Bibliography (See Study Guide)

References: See suggested readings sections in Text

Supplies: Folder (as prescribed by professor) with Grade Sheet attached (as
described)

9\. **Grading and Evaluation:**

All grading of written material will be conducted on the rubric presented to
the students at the beginning of the semester and made available on the
professor's department website. Each category will be evaluated on a 100-point
scale

(A=90-100,

B=80-89,

C=70-79,

D=60-69,

F=below 60).

A final grade point earned in each category will be calculated by multiplying
the grade earned by the value of each category. At the end of the semester all
category points will be totaled, and a letter grade will be assigned according
to the A=90-100, B=80-90, C=70-79, D=60-69, and F=below 60 scale.

**The following are the categories and the value assigned to each category.**

A. **Undergraduates**

      * Two (2) comprehensive **essay examinations** = **50% of grade**

2\. Critiques and summaries of historical

articles (to total 60 pages of reading text)= **30% of grade**

3\. Classroom Discussion of Material= **20% of grade.**

B. **Graduates**

  * Two (2) comprehensive **essay examinations** = **45% of grade.**
  * Critiques/summaries of 
        * 5 historical articles (minimum article 

length=12 pages each) taken from the

readings list= **15% of grade.**

b. and 3 Book Reviews (to total 600

pages of reading text)= **25% of grade.**

  
  

3\. Oral Presentation of Reviews

(in abstract form, standing for questions

by professor and students)= **10% of grade.**

  
  
  
  

*Policy on late examinations/deadlines/discussions: There will be none unless the excuse is provided by a university official.

10\. **Attendance Requirement:**

Un-excused absences (that is accepted by the professor, prior to absences) are
unacceptable.

Final Grade will be reduced one point for each un-excused 50 minute absence.

(One day of summer classes equals 2 3/5 classes of regular semester)

11\. **Course Calendar** :

June 30

Orientation and Preparation

  
  

**PERIOD I**

[July 1-11]

  
  

July 1 Text Section I

July 2,3,7 Text Section II

July 8 Text Section IV

July 9,10 Text Section V

July 11 Examination #1

UG; First 1/3 of Critiques/Summaries Due

Grad. First 1/3 of Book Reviews and Critiques Due

  
  

**PERIOD II**

[July 14-23]

  
  

July 14,15 Text Section VI

July 16,17 Text Section VII

July 18,21,22 Text Section VIII

July 23 Examination #2

UG; Second 1/3 of Critiques/Summaries Due

Grad. Second 1/3 of Book Reviews and Critiques Due

**PERIOD III**

[July 24-31]

  
  

July 24-30 Complete all Book Reviews and/or Critiques

July 24 Professor available for advice and consultation

Any Revisions from past Work Due

  
  

July 30 Remaining 1/3 of all Book Reviews and Critiques Due

Social occasion and class evaluation.

  
  

12\. **Additional Information:**

The key to your success is to manage your time

  
  

13\. **ADA Statement regarding special accommodations:**

_The University of Central Oklahoma complies with Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
Students with disabilities who need special accommodations should make their
requests by contacting the coordinator of Disability Support Services._ On
September 14, 2001, the current coordinator is Ms. Lori Bright, 974-2549

