**ENGL 318N: American Women Writers** **of the Nineteenth Century**  
Professor Scherman  
Spring 98  
Section 31: T/Th 5:40-6:55

* * *

**Syllabus**

__Description__

The purpose of this course is to give you a comprehensive introduction to
women's writing in the United States during the nineteenth century. During the
term, you will read works in a variety of genres (poetry, short stories,
novels, essays, letters, a journal prospectus, a slave narrative and more)
written by women and about women living during a period of massive social,
economic and technological change. In what ways were women the agents of
change? How did women in different situations and of different backgrounds
respond to new social and legal practices they had little or no "official"
voice in bringing about? In what ways did they find their own positions
_unchanged_ after a century that witnessed both an industrial revolution and a
civil war? And most important for this course, how were such questions and
responses to such questions translated into _literary_ form during the
nineteenth century? What was it to be a woman "author" without "authority"?

Although our major focus will be to reconstruct the voice and voices of women
responding to these questions in the nineteenth century, we will also consider
the more recent critical debates over the "feminization of American culture"
and the literary value of the work produced by the so-called "scribbling
women" of the period that have finally made courses like this one possible.

__Texts__ :

Catherine Maria Sedgewick, _A New England Tale_  
Elizabeth Oakes Smith, _The Western Captive, Woman and Her Needs_ , letters
(in coursepack)  
Margaret Fuller, _Woman in the Nineteenth Century_  
Harriet Beecher Stowe, _Uncle Tom's Cabin_  
Rebecca Harding Davis, _Life in the Iron Mills_  
Harriet Jacobs, _Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl_  
Louisa May Alcott, _Work_  
Sarah Orne Jewett, _The Country of Pointed Firs_  
Charlotte Perkins Gilman, _Herland_

Coursepack (to be purchased at SOS Printing, 5240 North Pulaski)

__Requirements_ :_

1\. Papers. You will write four ONE-PAGE papers during the term, each a
response to a quotation you choose from one of our course-texts in the above
list. These are difficult exercises in close-reading and writing economy. On
one hand, you will be expected to share original insight into the particular
line or lines you have chosen to write on/out of, but on the other hand, the
same quotation must suggest important general themes crucial to our
understanding of the work or the writer's effort as a whole. Your challenge,
in a single page, is to make both the quotation's unique meaning and its more
general implications for the work clear.

Due dates (at class time!) for papers are as follows. YOU MUST WRITE AT LEAST
ONE PAPER BEFORE THE MIDTERM.

_A New England Tale:_ January 27 __  
_The Western Captive:_ February 3  
_Summer on the Lakes:_ February 10 __  
_Woman in the 19th C.:_ February 19 __  
_Woman and Her Needs:_ February 24 __ __  
_Uncle Tom's Cabin:_ __ March 24 __  
_Life in the Iron Mills:_ April 7 __  
_Work:_ April 14 __  
_Country of the Pointed Firs:_ April 21 __  
_Herland:_ April 28 __

2\. Exams. There will be a midterm and a final, March 5 and May 5
respectively.

__Grades_ :_

Midterm, Final, each 20%. Papers (4) each 15%.

"A" grades are for original work which reflects careful preparation,
insightful reading and impeccable form. For this grade your writing must be
excellent, free of grammatical lapses or stylistic awkwardness.

"B" grades are for good work. Brilliant students who do little work may get
this grade. "B" writing is correct, easy to read, often insightful, but may
miss the mark occasionally in its content.

C" grades are for average work. Most often this grade is given to students who
can correctly return to me (on an exam or in a paper) what has been said in
class, and no more. "C" writing may have some grammatical problems.

"D" grades are for students who are working at it, but most often not getting
it. "D" writing is often full of grammatical errors and stylistic lapses.

"F" grades are for plagiarists or for no-shows and non-readers. That is, if
you come to class only a few times before the midterm and read only one of the
books, you will most probably fail that exam.

_Academic Integrity_

Over the past few years I have witnessed an increase in "borderline" cases of
academic misconduct, mostly in the form of plagiarism. The University Student
Conduct Code, available in the Deans Office, the Office of Student Activities
and elsewhere on campus, defines plagiarism as

appropriation or imitation of the language, ideas, and[/or] thoughts of
another author and representation of them as one's original work. This
includes (1) paraphrasing another's ideas or conclusions without
acknowledgment; (2) lifting of entire [sentences,]

paragraphs, chapters, etc. from another's work; and (3) submission as one's
own work, any work prepared by another person or agency. Students found guilty
of plagiarism--in even a single instance--may fail the assignment AND the
course, and may be subject to disciplinary action after a Judicial Hearing at
the University including suspension or explusion, depending on the student's
current status.

IF YOU ARE NOT SURE WHAT PLAGIARISM IS, OR IF YOU ARE UNSURE IF WHAT YOU HAVE
WRITTEN MAY BE CONSIDERED PLAGIARISM, SEE ME AS SOON AS POSSIBLE. "IGNORANCE"
IS NOT AN EXCUSE IN THESE CASES.

__FYI__ : My office is 2001, Classroom Building. E-mail: t-scherman@neiu.edu
Office hours M 10-2 Tu/Th 2-4 or by appointment @x2724.

__Schedule_ :_

week of Jan 13: Introduction

week of Jan 20: _A New England Tale_

week of Jan 27: _The Western Captive_ (coursepack)

week of Feb 3: _Summer on the Lakes_

week of Feb 10 (no class Feb 12): _Woman in the Nineteenth Century_

week of Feb 17: finish _Woman/19th; Woman and Her Needs_ (coursepack)

week of Feb 24: Emily Dickinson (handouts)

week of March 3: Open, **MIDTERM** (in class) March 5

week of March 10: _Uncle Tom's Cabin_

week of March 17: _Uncle Tom's Cabin_

week of March 24: _Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl_

week of March 31: **SPRING BREAK**

week of April 7: _Life in the Iron Mills_

week of April 14: _Work_

week of April 21: _Country of the Pointed Firs_

week of April 28: _Herland_

Tuesday, May 5, 6:00-7:50pm: **FINAL EXAM**

* * *

__Bibliography__ __

An asterisk (*) indicates the book has been recently acquired by NEIU.

_I. _Selected Primary Sources__

Child, Lydia M. _An Appeal in Favor of that Class of Americans Called
Africans_. New York: Arno, 1968.

\---. _Hobomok and Other Writings on Indians_. Ed, Carol L. Karcher . New
Brunswick: Rutgers UP, 1986.

Chopin, Kate. _The Awakening_. New York, W.W. Norton, 1976.

Davis, Rebecca Harding. _Life in the Iron Mills and Other Stories_. Ed.,
Tillie Olsen. New York: Feminist Press, 1985.

\---. _Margaret Howth_. New York: Feminist Press, 1990.

Dickinson, Emily. _Selected Poems and Letters of Emily Dickinson_. Ed., Robert
N. Linscott. New York: Doubleday, 1959.

\---. _The Complete Poems of Emily Dickinson_. Ed., Thomas H. Johnson. Boston:
Little, Brown, 1960.

Foster, Hannah. _The Coquette_. New York: Oxford, 1986.

Fuller, Margaret. _Woman in the Nineteenth Century_. Ed., intro., Bernard
Rosenthall. New York: W.W. Norton, 1971.

Gilman, Charlotte Perkins. _Charlotte Perkins Gilman: A Reader_. Ed., Ann
Lane. New York: Pantheon, 1980.

*-- _Journey from Within: The Love Letters of Charlotte Perkins Gilman, 1897-1900_. Lewisburg: Bucknell UP, 1995.

Grimke, Angelina, and Sara Grimke. _The Public Years of Sara and Angelina
Grimke: Selected Writings, 1835-1839_. New York: Columbia UP, 1989.

*Griswold, Rufus. _The Female Poets of America_. Philadelphia: Carey and Hart, 1848.

Harper, Frances. _A Brighter Day Coming: A Frances Ellen Watkins Harper
Reader_. Ed., Frances Smith Foster. New York: Feminist Press,1990.

*Hopkins, Pauline. _The Magazine Novels of Pauline Hopkins._ New York: Oxford, 1988. 

*Jones, Vivian, Intro. _The Young Lady's Pocket Library, or Parental Monitor._ Bristol: Thoemmes P, 1995.

Phelps, Elizabeth Stuart. _The Silent Partner_. Eds., Mari Jo Buhleand
Florence Howe. New York: Feminist Press, 1983.

*-- _The Story of Avis_. New Brunswick: Rutgers UP, 1985.

\---. _Dr. Zay_. Ed., Michael Sartisky. New York: Feminist Press, 1987.

Smith, Elizabeth Oakes. _Woman and Her Needs_. New York: Fowler Wells, 1851.

Stanton, Elizabeth Cady. _Eighty Years and More: Reminiscences of Elizabeth
Cady Stanton_. New York: Source Book Press, 1970.

\--- and Susan B. Anthony. _Correspondence, Writing, Speeches_. New York:
Schocken, 1981.

Stowe, Harriet Beecher. _Uncle Tom's Cabin_. New York: PocketBooks, 1963.

\---. _Pink and White Tyranny: A Society Novel_. Intro. Judith Martin. New
York: Signet, 1988.

Warren, Mercy Otis. _The History of the Rise, Progress, and Termination of the
American Revolution, Interspersed with Biographical, Political, and Moral
Observations_. Ed. Lester H. Cohen. Indianapolis, 1989.

Wharton, Edith. _Ethan Frome and Other Short Fiction_. New York: Bantam, 1987.

Wilson, Harriet. _Our Nig: or, Sketches from the Life of a FreeBlack_. Ed.,
Henry Louis Gates Jr.. New York: Random House, 1983.

_II. _History and Criticism__

Bardes, Barbara and Suzanne Gossett. _Declarations of Independence: Woman and
Political Power in Nineteenth Century American Fiction_ (New Brunswick, NJ:
Rutgers UP, 1990).

Basch, Norma. "Invisible Women: The Legal Fiction of Marital Unity in
Nineteenth Century America." _Feminist Studies_ 5 (Fall 1979): 346-60.

*Baym, Nina. _American Women Writers and the Work of History_ , 1790-1860. New Brunswick: Rutgers UP, 1995. __

_\--Novels, Readers, and Reviewers: Responses to Fiction in Antebellum
America_. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1984.

\---. _Feminism and American Literary History: Essays by Nina Baym._ New
Brunswick: Rutgers UP, 1992.

\---. _Women's Fiction: A Guide to Novels By and About Women in America,
1820-1870_. 2nd ed. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1993.

\---. "Mercy Otis Warren's Gendered Melodrama of Revolution." _South Atlantic
Quarterly_ 90/3 (Summer 1991). 531-54.

Brodski, Bella and Celeste Schenk, eds. _Life/Lines: Theorizing Women's
Autobiography_. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1988.

*Coultrap-McQuin, Susan. _Doing Literary Business: American Women Writers in the Nineteenth Century_. Chapel Hill: NorthCarolina UP, 1990.

Davidson, Cathy. _Revolution and the Word: The Rise of the Novel in America_.
New York: Oxford UP, 1986.

De Jong, Mary. "Her Fair Fame: The Reputation of Frances Sargent Osgood, Woman
Poet." _Studies in the American Renaissance_ , (1987): 265-83.

Donovan, Josephine. _New England Local Color Literature: A Women's Tradition_.
New York: F. Ungar, 1983.

\---. _Sarah Orne Jewett_. New York: F. Ungar, 1980.

Douglas, Ann. _The Feminization of American Culture_. 1977. Rpt. New York:
Anchor Press, 1988.

*Farr, Judith. _The Passion of Emily Dickinson_. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 1992.

Flexner, Eleanor. _Century of Struggle: The Woman's Rights Movement in the
United States_. Cambridge, MA: Belknap,1975.

Foster, Charles H. _The Rungless Ladder: Harriet Beecher Stowe And New England
Puritanism_. New York: Cooper's Square,1970.

Geissler, Kathleen M. "Needles and Pens: The Social Meaning of Women's
Literacy in Nineteenth-Century America." Diss. U Southern California, 1987.

Gilbert, Sandra, and Susan Gubar. _The Madwoman in the Attic: The Woman Writer
and the Nineteenth-century Literary Imagination_. New Haven: Yale UP, 1979.

Gura, Philip. "Poe, Hawthorne, and One of Those Scribbling Women." _The
Gettysburg Review_ (Winter 1993).

Haight, Gordon. _Mrs. Sigourney: The Sweet Singer of Hartford_. New Haven:
Yale UP, 1930.

Jelinek, Estelle C., ed.. _Women's Autobiography: Essays in Criticism_. 1980.

Johnson, Gayle. "Women in Publishing." _Perspectives on Publishing_. Eds.
Philip G. Altbach and Sheila McVey. Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath, 1976. 259-72.

Kelley, Mary. "The Sentimentalists: Promise and Betrayal in the Home." _Signs_
4/3 (Spring 1979): 434-46.

\---. _Private Woman, Public Stage: Literary Domesticity in Nineteenth-century
America_. New York: Oxford, 1984.

*Koppelman, Susan. _Two Friends and Other Nineteenth-Century Lesbian Stories by American Women Writers_. New York: Meridian, 1994.

Laue, Judy Myers. "Rufus Wilmot Griswold's _The Female Poets_ _of America_ :
The Politics of Anthologizing."Diss. U Southern California, 1988.

Machor, James L. _Readers in History: Nineteenth-Century Literature and the
Contexts of Response_. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins UP, 1993.

Manning, Carol S., ed.. _The Female Tradition in Southern Literature_.
Chicago: U Illinois P, 1993.

Marchalonis, Shirley, ed.. _Patrons and Protegees: Gender, Friendship, and
Writing in Nineteenth-century America_. New Brunswick: Rutgers UP, 19??

Melder, Keith E. _The Beginnings of Sisterhood: The American Woman's Rights
Movement, 1800-1850_. New York: Schocken Books, 1977.

Miller, Nancy K. "Changing the Subject: Authorship, Writing and the Reader."
_Feminist Studies/Critical Studies_. Ed. Teresa de Lauretis. Bloomington:
Indiana UP, 1986. 102-20.

Papashvily, Helen Waite. _All the Happy Endings: A Study of the Domestic Novel
in America, the Women Who Wrote It, The Women Who Read It, in the Nineteenth
Century_. New York: Harper and Bros, 1956.

*Robinson, Victoria. _Introducing Women's Studies: Feminist Theory and Practice_. New York: NYUP, 1997.

*Rowold, Katharina, Ed. _Gender and Science: Late Nineteenth-Century Debates on the Female Mind and Body_. London: Thoemmes P, 1996.

Scherman, Timothy H. "Authorship." _The Oxford Companion to Women's Writing in
the United States_. New York: Oxford, 1995.

Scherman, Timothy H. and Cameron Nickels. "Elizabeth Oakes Smith: the Puritan
as Feminist," _Femmes de conscience._ Paris: Presses de la Sorbonne Nouvelle,
1994.

Smith, Henry Nash. "The Scribbling Women and the Cosmic Success Story."
_Critical Inquiry_ I (September 1974): 47-70.

Speth, Linda E. "The Married Women's Property Acts, 1839-1865: Reform,
Reaction, or Revolution?" _Women and the Law_. Ed. D. Kelly Weisberg. 2 vols.
Cambridge, MA: Schenkman, 1982\. I:69-91.

Sterling, Dorothy. _We Are Your Sisters_. New York: W.W. Norton, 1984.

Stern, Madeleine B. _We the Women: Career Firsts of Nineteenth-Century
America_. New York: Schulte, 1963.

Tompkins, Jane. _Sensational Designs: The Cultural Work of American Fiction
1790-1860_. New York: Oxford UP, 1985.

Tuchman, Gaye with Nina E. Fortin. _Edging Women Out: Victorian Novelists,
Publishers and Social Change_. New Haven: Yale UP, 1989.

\---. "When the Prevalent Don't Prevail: Male Hegemony and the Victorian
Novel." _Conflict and Consensus: A_ _Festshrift in Honor of Lewis A. Coser_.
Eds. Walter W. Powell and Richard Robbins. New York: Free Press, 1984. 139-58.

Walker, Cheryl. "Feminist Literary Criticism and the Author." _Critical
Inquiry_ 16 (Spring, 1990): 551-71.

\---. _The Nightingale's Burden: Women Poets and American Culture before
1900_. Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1982.

*Walker, Nancy. _The Disobedient Writer: Women and Narrative Tradition._ Austin: U Texas P, 1995.

Wallace, James D. "Hawthorne and the Scribbling Women Reconsidered." _American
Literature_ (June 1990).

*Warren, Joyce. _Fanny Fern: An Independent Woman_. New Brunswick: Rutgers UP, 1992.

Watts, Emily Stipes. _The Poetry of American Women from 1632 to 1945_. Austin:
U Texas P, 1977\.

*Wollstonecraft, Mary. _Thoughts on the Education of Daughters (1787)_. New York: Oxford, 1994.

Wood, Ann D. "The 'Scribbling Women' and Fanny Fern: Why Women Wrote."
_American Quarterly_ 23 (1971): 3-24.

