English 202N: Selected Works of British Literature, 1800 to the Present

Autumn Quarter, 2001

TR 5:30-7:30pm, Derby 80

Professor Marlene Longenecker

Office Hours TR 11:30-12:30 and by appointment on Wednesday afternoons or
after this class.

Denney 405

292-6114

Longenecker.2@osu.edu

Teaching Interns: Scott Banville: Denney 515 Banville.1@osu.edu

Jennifer Camden: Denney 513 Camden.4@osu.edu

Course Description

This course is designed as an introduction to four major literary and cultural
movements in British Literature since the end of the eighteenth century:
Romanticism, Victorianism, Modernism, and Postcolonialism (which is one part
of postmodernism). Like all "isms," these are complex and sometimes
contradictory, often difficult to define. The literary texts are selected as
representative of this complexity. The course should not be thought of as a
"survey" of all these movements (impossible in ten weeks) but as a series of
moments in the history of British literature of the past two hundred years.
The course is required of English majors and is in part designed to prepare
them for future work in English 398 and at the upper division. Students taking
the course as a GEC requirement or as an elective should emerge with a sense
of the "big picture" of our literary inheritance from Britain. You are all
encouraged to read more than I have assigned in the Norton Anthologythe more
you read, the better you will understand the ones I have assigned.

Required Text: The Norton Anthology of English Literature, Volume 2 (Seventh
Edition), ed. Abrams et. al. You will also be asked later in the quarter to
pay for copying one short story that is not in your textbook. If you buy
early, you should be able to find a used copy of the Norton.

Note: WW Norton maintains a very good website at
www.wwnorton.com/nael/welcome.htm

which I encourage you to explore. It has links to important web resources on
most of the topics for this course. Some assignments involve this website.

Course Requirements

1\. The most important requirement in this course is that you read the
assignments thoughtfully and on time. I cannot stress this enough. Students
unused to literature courses will need to plan time for the reading (which is
generally not heavy, but it is difficult). Because this course emphasizes
reading rather than writing, there will be no long formal papers, but there
will be a lot of informal writing in the form of responses to study questions,
quizzes, and the occasional in-class exercises. These assignments are designed
to help you think through what you have read and come to class prepared with
some ideas about it. They comprise a significant part of your grade (35%,
together with a class participation grade) and must be done carefully and
thoroughly. They are "informal," but that does not mean superficial. Those
done outside of class must be typed (double-spaced) and, because they are tied
to each day's discussion, they must be on time: no late work will be accepted.
If you miss a class, you should be certain to pick up the next day's
discussion questions, which will be in an envelope outside my office door. I
will drop the two lowest grades on these assignments at the end of the
quarter.

2\. There will be three take-home exams (consisting of short-answer essay
questions) due on October 11, October 30, and November 15\. Each will count
15% of the grade. The exams must be typed and double-spaced and will be due at
the beginning of (not the end of and not after) the class on the date
assigned. Late work will not be accepted except in cases of documented medical
emergencies. If you have an emergency and need an extension, please try to
contact me ahead of time.

3\. There will be a final exam on Tuesday, December 4 at 5:30pm in the same
room in which the class meets. This exam will count for 20% of your final
grade.

4\. Attendance and class participation are important. Two unexcused absences
are allowed (not encouraged!) with no questions asked. Beyond that, absences
are excused only for fully documented personal or family medical emergencies.
Students cannot be excused from class for conflicts with work schedulesyou
need to work those out with your employer so that you are not expected to work
when class meetsor family functions like weddings and birthdays (funerals are
excused). If you need to attend one of those, take it as one of your "free"
absences. After two unexcused absences, your grade for the course will be
lowered for each absence. Each week, I will record a class participation grade
for you, and these will be averaged in with your short assignment grades.
Students who observe Yom Kippur are excused on 9/27; I would appreciate it if
you would let me know that you intend to take the holiday.

Note: Plagiarism is defined as the representation of another's works or ideas
as one's own: it includes the unacknowledged word for word use and/or
paraphrasing of another person's work, and/or the inappropriate unacknowledged
use of another person's ideas. If you consult other critics or web sites,
please be sure to cite them appropriately. Due to lots of helpful software,
plagiarism from the internet is very easy to catch. All cases of suspected
plagiarism will be reported to the Committee on Academic Misconduct.

The Office of Disability Services, located in 150 Pomerene Hall, offers
services for students with documented disabilities. If you need their
services, call 292-3307.  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


Assignments

Thurs 9/20 Introduction to the Course

Tues 9/25 Romanticism: An Introduction

"The Romantic Period" (1-21)

"The French Revolution" (117-18)

"Apocalypse by Imagination" (161-63)

Blake, from America (146-47)

Dorothy Wordsworth, from the Grasmere Journals, entries for

April 15 (391) and "July" (395)

William Wordsworth, "I Wandered Lonely as a Cloud" (284) and

"Composed Upon Westminster Bridge" (296)

Shelley, "The World's Great Age" (771-72) and the last six

paragraphs of "Defence of Poetry" (801-802)

Thurs 9/27 The Poetics of "Democracy": Poetry of and for "The People"

Read the Norton headnotes on Blake (35-39) and Wordsworth (219-21)

Wordsworth, the section on "The Subject and Language of Poetry"

from "Preface" to Lyrical Ballads (239-46)

"Simon Lee" (222-24), "We Are Seven" (224-26), and "Michael" (270-80)

Blake, from Songs of Innocence: (45-48) "The Lamb," "The Little Black Boy,"
"The Chimney Sweeper," "Holy Thursday"; from Songs of

Experience (51-57) "Holy Thursday," "The Chimney Sweeper," "The Tyger,"
"London"

Tues 10/2 The Poetics of Self: Memory and Imagination

Go to the Norton Topics Online

(www.wwnorton.com.nael/nto/romantic/tourism/tourismfrm.htm)

and read as much as you can in this section. It is especially

important to read the excerpt from Burke's Inquiry on the Sublime and

the Beautiful (please print that excerpt and bring it to class).

Wordsworth, "Lines Composed A Few Miles Above Tintern Abbey. . . "

(35-38) and "Ode on Intimations of Immortality" (286-92);

also read the important headnote to the "Ode"

Keats, Letter to Reynolds May 3, 1818 (892-94)

Thurs 10/4 The Poetics of the Gothic: Encounters with the Sublime

Go to the Norton Topics Online
(www.wwnorton.com/nael/nto/romantic/litgoth/explore.htm)

and read as much as you can under the topics on literary Gothicism

Read the headnote on Coleridge (416-418)

Coleridge, "The Rime of the Ancient Mariner" (422-38) and

"Kubla Khan" (439-41)  
    
    
    


Tues 10/9 The Romantic Lyric: Keats

Read the headnote on Keats (823-26)

Keats, "Ode to a Nightingale" (849-51), "Ode on a Grecian Urn" (851-53)

"Ode on Melancholy" (853-54), "To Autumn" (872-73)

Thurs 10/11 FIRST MIDTERM DUE

The Victorians: An Introduction

"The Victorian Age" (1043-63)

Arnold, "Memorial Verses" (1482-84),"Dover Beach" (1492-3), "Stanzas

from the Grand Chartreuse" (1493-98) and read the headnote

on Matthew Arnold (1471-75)  
    


Tues 10/16 The Industrial Revolution

"Industrialism: Progress or Decline?" (1696-1719) Read the selections

by: Engels, Dickens, Anonymous (Poverty Knock), Mayhew,

Besant, Chew

Barrett Browning, "The Cry of the Children" (1174-78)

Go to Norton Topics Online at

www.wwnorton.com/nael/nto/Victorian/industrial/indusfrm.htm

and read as much as you can in these selections, especially Gaskell's

Preface to Mary Barton.

Thurs 10/18 The "Woman" Question

"The Woman Question" (1719-1739) Read the selections by:

Ellis, Patmore, Martineau, Anonymous.

Also go back to the Romantic period and read the headnote on

Mary Wollstonecraft (164-6)

Go to Norton Topics Online at

www.wwnorton.com/nael/nto/Victorian/womanq/womanfrm.htm

and read as much as you can in these selections, especially the excerpt

from Ruskin.

Christina Rossetti, "Goblin Market" (1589-1601) and the headnote on

Rosetti (1583-4)

Tues 10/23 Art and Life: The Role of the Poet

Read the headnotes on Tennyson (1198-1201) and Browning (1345-49)

Tennyson, "The Lady of Shalott" (1204-08), "Ulysses" (1213-14),

In Memoriam, stanzas 54-59 (1250-53) (read the headnote to this poem on p.
1230)

Browning, "My Last Duchess" (1352-53) and "Andrea del Sarto" (1385-

90)

Thurs 10/25 Critiquing the Victorians: The Nineties

"The Nineties" (1740-41) and the headnote on Oscar Wilde

Wilde, "Preface to The Picture of Dorian Gray" (1760-61)

The Importance of Being Earnest (1761-1805)

from De Profundis (1805-1808)

Tues 10/30 SECOND MIDTERM DUE

Modernism: An Introduction

"The Twentieth Century" (1897-1915)

Hardy, "The Darkling Thrush" (1937-38) and "Convergence of the Twain" (1945-6)

Owen, "Dulce Et Decorum Est" (2069)

Thurs 11/1 James Joyce: Autobiography as Fiction

Read the headnote on Joyce.

"Araby" (2236-2240) and "The Dead" (2240-2268)

Note: James Coetzee, who is on your syllabus for the last day of class, is
appearing this evening at Mershon auditorium. You should make every effort to
attend if you can.

Tues 11/6 Poetry in the Wasteland: Yeats, Eliot, and Auden

Read the headnotes on all three poets.

Yeats, "Wild Swans at Coole" (2101) and "Sailing to Byzantium" (2109)

Eliot, "The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock" (2364-67) and read the head-

notes and the first two stanzas of The Wasteland (2369-70)

Auden, "Musee des Beaux Arts" (2505) and "In Memory of W.B. Yeats" (2506-08)

Thurs 11/8 The "New" Woman Writer: Virginia Woolf

Read the headnote on Woolf

"Professions for Women" (2214-18)

"The Mark on the Wall" (2143-48)

Chapter Three from A Room of One's Own (2174-83)

Tues 11/13 The End of Empire

Read the headnote on Conrad.

Conrad, Heart of Darkness (1957-2017)

Note: this is the longest assignment you have in this course.

Give yourself time.

Thurs 11/15 THIRD MIDTERM DUE

The Empire Writes Back: Introduction to Postcolonial Literature

Read the section called "The Rise and Fall of Empire" (2017-2040)

Go to Norton Topics Online at

http://www.wwnorton.com/nael/nto/20thC/postcolonial/posttopfrm.htm

and read as much as you can in this section.

Tues 11/20 and Thurs 11/22: No Class: Thanksgiving Week  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


Tues 11/27 South Africa

Read the headnotes on Gordimer and Coetzee

Gordimer, "The Moment Before the Gun Went Off" (2573-76)

and "The Train from Rhodesia" (Xerox)

Coetzee, from Waiting for the Barbarians (2829-34)

Thurs 11/29 Ireland

Read the headnotes on Heaney and Boland

Yeats, "Easter, 1916" (2104)

Heaney, "Casualty" (2822)

Boland, "That the Science of Cartography. . . . , " "The Dolls Museum

in Dublin," and "The Lost Land" (2834)

