  [![Crossroads
logo](/crossroads/AmericanStudiesAssn/Templates/Images/logo_sm.gif)](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/index.html)
|   |

[![Curriculum](/crossroads/AmericanStudiesAssn/Templates/Images/cur_sm.gif)](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/curriculum.html)[![Technology
&
Learning](/crossroads/AmericanStudiesAssn/Templates/Images/tech_sm.gif)](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/innovation.html)[![Reference
&
Research](/crossroads/AmericanStudiesAssn/Templates/Images/ref_sm.gif)](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/reference.html)  
  
![horizontal red
rule](/crossroads/AmericanStudiesAssn/Templates/Images/redrule.gif)  
**[![Communities](/crossroads/AmericanStudiesAssn/Templates/Images/com.gif)](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/community.html)**

**[Americ](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/asainfo.html)[ an Studies
Association](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/asainfo.html)**  
---|---|---  
  
#### [Advertising in the
Newsletter](/crossroads/AmericanStudiesAssn/newsletter/advertise.htm)

|

#### [Submit Ads
Online](/crossroads/AmericanStudiesAssn/newsletter/onlineform.htm)  
  
---|---  
  
#### [Guidelines for Free Conference, Fellowship, Publication, and Other
Announcements](/crossroads/AmericanStudiesAssn/newsletter/opps&resource.htm)  
  
  

## September 1997 ASA Newsletter

[About the ASA](/crossroads/AmericanStudiesAssn/about/index.htm)

**[Annual Meeting
Information](/crossroads/AmericanStudiesAssn/annualmeeting/index.htm)**

**[Current Issue of
Newsletter](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/AmericanStudiesAssn/newsletter/index.htm)**  
[ Employment](/crossroads/AmericanStudiesAssn/newsletter/o&r/employment.htm)  
[Opportunities &
Resources](/crossroads/AmericanStudiesAssn/newsletter/o&r/announcements.htm)  
[Archive](/crossroads/AmericanStudiesAssn/newsletter/archive/articles.html)

[Publications](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/AmericanStudiesAssn/publications/index.htm)

[ASA
Resources](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/AmericanStudiesAssn/resources/index.htm)

* * *

**[Join the ASA](/crossroads/AmericanStudiesAssn/about/membership.htm)**

* * *

[ Home](/crossroads/asainfo.html)



|

**American Identities and American Studies:** **A View from the ESL
Classroom**

**_Howard Wach_**

[Howard M. Wach teaches in the History department, Herbert H. Lehman College,
City University of New York e-mail:
[hwach@westnet.com](mailto:hwach@westnet.com).]

**There is also a syllabus for Professor Wach's course,[American Studies:
Cultures, Values, and
Traditions](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/asanews/wach-syll.html).**

Last December I agreed to participate in creating an innovative curriculum
designed to speed the "mainstreaming" of English as a Second Language (ESL)
students at Lehman College in the City University of New York. Finding new and
effective ways to teach ESL students has become a CUNY imperative as
immigrants flood into New York City's educational institutions. Our program
linked American Studies, American Literature, and Composition classes in a
"block" structure in which students travel as a group from class to class. As
the American Studies teacher, I had chief responsibility for setting the
curricular direction. I followed a very rough blueprint laid out in the
funding proposal that created the program. Called "The Search for Self and
Community: Personal Identity and Community Values in a Multicultural Society,"
its premise was to build a curriculum around the literary, historical, and
cultural material originating in the Literature and American Studies classes.
The three linked courses would engage ESL students in an investigation of
"American Identity"\--an issue presumed to be of some natural interest to them
--while also providing the intensive language instruction ordinarily given in
ESL classes.

Fortunately, I had very little planning time and therefore little opportunity
to reflect on the academic and logistical complexities to which we had
committed ourselves. Engaging my historian's instincts, I decided to use
primary sources as the basic reading assignments for examining a series of
thematic topics that would address questions of identity: Native Americans,
immigration and ethnicity, African-Americans, labor, and women. The primary
sources would then be the building blocks for the basic writing assignment in
my classes: a series of short papers I called "analytical summaries" that
would, ideally, allow students to explain the meaning of a particular reading
within a cultural or historical context. I used a very good two-volume set,
edited by Robert D. Marcus and David Burner, entitled **America Firsthand**
(2nd ed., St. Martin's, 1995), that included selections from letters, diaries,
memoirs, speeches, and newspaper columns. Like all good anthologies, it
provided students an artfully arranged chorus of voices, in this instance
designed to reveal experiences, feelings, and observations about the American
past. My textbook choice paid extra dividends when our teaching team decided
to have students write a longer research paper that would ask them to
integrate assignments from all three classes. We defined two general themes
for this culminating exercise:  "community and assimilation" and "inclusion
and exclusion." All of us worked closely with students to help them design
manageable topics. The rich selection of documents in **America Firsthand** ,
many of which I had not formally assigned, came in quite handy as students
searched for sources to use. I also screened evocative films like "Little Big
Man" and "Mississippi Masala," each an exploration of peculiarly American
identity puzzles, and I showed the Jackie Robinson segment from Ken Burns's
documentary history of baseball, a nice complement to the public celebration
of Robinson's breakthrough season of fifty years ago and a topic of avid
interest to some of my baseball-mad Dominican students. Finally, I assigned
modest weekly readings from an abridged version of a good textbook in American
history, **Out of Many: A History of the American People** (3rd ed., St.
Martin's, 1996), whose social-historical focus suited our program's needs.

My classes met twice weekly in one-hour and two-hour sessions. During the
hour-long class I usually presented a short lecture designed to complement
reading and discussion of primary sources. I also distributed weekly study
questions--an especially helpful tool for ESL students--to help guide their
reading, to prompt class discussions during our two-hour session, and to serve
as blueprints for their analytical summaries.

Historical fact, a certain amount of narrative, and the introduction of
relevant conceptual frameworks were important and necessary components of the
class. These students needed to know a great deal of basic history--far more,
in fact, than I could teach in this American Studies class. So I picked my
spots. We learned about the great strike of 1877, the origins of the AFL, and
the vicissitudes of immigration legislation in 1924 and 1965. We looked
closely at the language of the fourteenth amendment and examined the logic of
state laws designed to evade it. As much as possible, I trained our collective
attention on historical material that illustrated issues of identity in
American life, while my lectures concentrated on actions, events, or concepts
that would help contextualize the primary sources. I introduced Andrew
Jackson's Indian Removal Act and the idea of a "frontier of exclusion" when
students read an 1837 petition to Congress written by Cherokee leader John
Ross. Similarly, I prefaced their reading of the Seneca Falls "Declaration of
Sentiments" (which we read aloud in class alongside appropriate passages of
the Declaration of Independence) with a discussion of early Victorian women's
legal status, concentrating especially on implications flowing from the
common-law definition of "coverture." Reading aloud--breaking a text down
sentence by sentence--became a fairly frequent exercise. It focussed our
concentration on language and often elicited questions--both substantive and
linguistic--that would not otherwise have been asked.

Predictably enough in a class taught for the first time, and taught in
collaboration with other instructors, syllabus design was a work in progress.
We had determined, for example, to begin with a unit on Native Americans.
After three weeks of material in all three classes, students were reeling.
Several told me, half facetiously, that they never again wanted to hear
anything about Indians. But in the end, subject choice and teaching
strategies, though obviously critical to the success of our program, were only
a part of the core experience that made the semester so memorable. That
experience came not from the "nuts and bolts" of teaching, but from an
unexpected twist on the whole notion of American identity.

A powerful mixture of American identities, not formally prepared material,
became the animating force of my classes. I came to the students as a third-
generation American in early middle age, a baby boomer, a son of the New York
suburbs with strong memories of immigrant grandparents in a cramped Bronx
apartment thirty years and a few subway stops away from my classroom at
Lehman. The students I encountered were living in similar neighborhoods,
struggling to master English, trying to get their Spanish and Creole and
Yoruba tongues (not to mention Filipino, Italian, Portuguese, and Vietnamese)
around English diphthongs and consonants, their minds accustomed to English
idioms, their memories adjusted to the vagaries of English spelling. They were
all immigrants with vivid memories of a homeland. They could all tell versions
of the immigrant's tale of journeys, hardships, adjustments, bewilderments,
puzzlements, elations, and disappointments. Some were young, just out of high
school, but many were older, men and women with families, jobs, experiences,
and burdens beyond tonight's homework assignment.

I soon appreciated just how deep was their stake in what they learned, how
anchored their faith in the education they wanted, how intimate its connection
to their idea of American life. The best of them had the immigrant's will, the
matter-of-fact perseverance and capacity for self-investment, eyes trained on
the future, that drives full-time workers to take on full-time study and read
the next day's assignment on the swaying subway car while coming home from
work. They insisted on rewriting papers, and made me explain in detail every
comment, every correction, every suggestion for improvement. Most classes
ended with a knot of students around my table at the head of the classroom. I
was constantly adding hours onto my schedule to talk to them individually
about their work.

Responding to their energy, feeding off it and finding ways to direct it,
seemed to propel me toward some central point, a kind of ground zero or
essence of American Studies. Talking about their work in my office, or
answering their questions in class, meant talking through the complexities of
all our American lives. This was a kind of teaching that drew only indirectly
upon professional training or expertise. As the semester progressed, I found
myself increasingly teaching from my own everyday habit of trying to stay
attentive to the rhythms and patterns of American society. My careful
preparation for each class became a kind of sculptor's armature, an underlying
structure for the material that mattered most. What I really knew, and what
the students really wanted to know, was an order of knowledge that turned less
on the teacher's preparation than it did on something like the "thick
description" an anthropologist builds while trying to penetrate the core of a
culture.

Certain moments in the classroom--unrehearsed and unpredictable--triggered
that "thick description" and brought us closer to a metaphorical space where
all our American identities seemed to merge. One day I came to class prepared
to talk about the turn-of-the-century black journalist Ida B. Wells and her
anti-lynching campaign. Meanwhile, the students had read a selection of
letters addressed to the black newspaper **The Chicago Defender**. Written
during the World War I era by prospective migrants from the Mississippi Delta,
these plaintive queries about jobs and opportunities spoke eloquently about
racial oppression and, as one writer put it, the desire to go where  "a man is
a man." That day the defining moment was my improvised lesson on Billie
Holiday (nobody knew who she was when I asked), and my recitation of the
lyrics to "Strange Fruit," her haunting song about lynching. (Next year I'll
have a recording ready.) When students read excerpts from "A Bintel Brief,"
the advice column for immigrants in the Yiddish-language **Jewish Daily
Forward** , I reminisced about sitting on my grandfather's knee as he helped
me to decipher words on the **Forward** 's front page and shared a few
examples of his fractured English. More to the point for students living in
immigrant neighborhoods where English is seldom heard on the street, I gave
them a quick microcosmic history of Yiddish in America in the example of my
family, a pattern of generational language change they all recognized
immediately. When they read Claude McKay's classic novel **Home To Harlem** in
their literature class, I found myself conducting an impromptu lesson on the
structure of pig Latin in order to explain what McKay's protagonist means when
he refers to whites as  "ofays." Another day, in the midst of a lesson on the
rise of white supremacy in the post-Reconstruction south, the so-called
"redemption" of the southern states, I was asked if I felt privileged as a
white man. I answered slowly, deliberately, as honestly as I could, trying to
do justice to the question, to my experience, to my students' reality as
people of color in contemporary New York, and to a commitment to come close,
at least, to a difficult truth of the utmost importance.

One way or another, nearly every class drew upon my cultural knowledge, my
very being as homo americanus. I free-associated into aspects of American life
that grow more significant for ESL students as their own American identities
deepen. Roused by the students' curiosity and determination, my classes
became, at their best, a twice-weekly ritual of open-ended and open-minded
mutual exploration.

Of course, not everything worked quite so smoothly. Determining the
comprehensibility of readings for ESL students is an inexact science. We spent
much classroom time on the literal meaning of assignments. I conducted many
more vocabulary lessons in standard English than in pig Latin. But there were
slipups nonetheless. An 1885 anti-immigration poem called "Unguarded Gates,"
written by a New York socialite named Thomas Bailey Aldrich, a piece of late
Victorian nativist doggerel notable mainly for its genteel articulation of
Social Darwinist views of "inferior races" crowding the American shore, was
utterly indecipherable to the students. They did not understand a single line
until we "translated" it in class. The dialect sections of McKay's novel were
equally opaque. Since enhancing English language acquisition was the
underlying rationale for the program, these were serious problems, though they
didn't really diminish the engagement most students felt with the content of
the classes.

Obviously, the example of one semester and roughly fifty students cannot
demonstrate anything conclusively. But our experience suggests both the
attractiveness and educational value of an American Studies curriculum for ESL
students. Though some of the younger students unfortunately rivaled their
native-born American contemporaries for sheer cussed laziness, the thematic
emphasis on "identity" thoroughly captivated everyone's interest. Its
historical and cultural resonances powerfully struck home. By the end of the
semester students were talking about their new understanding of the struggles
of previous immigrants, new perspectives on their own experience, a changed
understanding of everyday life in New York City, and how much more
knowledgeable they felt about the dynamics of race, nationality, and ethnicity
in American life.

The source of their new knowledge was a genuine hunger to learn about American
culture and society. In that sense, their culminating research papers became
the key component bridging the elements of our program. The linked processes
of reading, incorporating new knowledge, then drafting and redrafting
relatively lengthy essays under close faculty supervision, brought language
acquisition to the forefront of "content"-centered student work. Most of the
finished papers reflected tremendous improvement. Moreover, systematic
attention to the process of revising formal writing often results in
significant language development over time. But ESL students in the City
University must pass standardized reading and writing tests that don't allow
for tutorial help or revision. The tests themselves are currently at the
center of considerable institutional and political contention. Results of
tests taken at the end of the semester suggest an average passing rate, but a
truer measure of the program's effects may not be so quickly attainable. And
in the end, while some students demonstrated tangible linguistic progress, all
clearly benefitted from a structured exposure to knowledge about American
culture that none had ever had before.

Our program also endured growing pains. Linking three classes turned out to be
a logistical nightmare. Literary readings needed to be more carefully chosen
and more tightly aligned with the American Studies material, and the
Composition teachers felt uneasy, and overworked, negotiating their way
between "content"\--the American Studies component my classes and the
literature classes represented--and "skills"\--their conventional
responsibility. On the "content" side, I was unhappy with the relative
inattention I was able to give to issues of social class. Like American
society generally, our project's initial conception of identity pushed aside
and obscured class in favor of race, gender, and ethnicity. Along the same
lines, one student suggested that closer attention to politics--or at least to
the intersection of politics and identity issues--would be a welcome addition.

These problems acknowledged, the appeal of the program is clear and the
possibilities for expanding it are vast. A faculty workshop given toward the
end of the semester by the [American Social History
Project](http://www.ashp.cuny.edu/), a CUNY-based resource for innovative
teaching strategies based on solid scholarship, suggested interesting (and
field-tested) ways to enhance our instruction. For example, the ASHP video
entitled **Heaven Will Protect the Working Girl** effectively dramatizes the
experience of young Jewish and Italian women working in New York City garment
factories in the period leading up to the 1909 strike called the  "Uprising of
the 20,000." The classroom techniques ASHP teachers have developed include
framing the video with writing exercises, structured small-group discussions,
role-playing, and questions about perspective and point of view. The viewers'
guide that accompanies the video provides the written background ESL students
must have. Creative use of materials like these should heighten understanding
of a topic that combines several of our central themes while bringing students
closer to the American past. After all, many already know a great deal about
low-paid factory work, sweatshops, ethnic conflict, and the dilemmas of
immigrant labor.

New York City itself is an enormously rich resource. Two of my colleagues
arranged visits to the newly-housed Museum of the American Indian and the
Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture in Harlem. We can exploit
museums of every kind, from art, photography, film, and video collections, to
Ellis Island and the Lower East Side Tenement Museum, to current exhibitions
like the New-York Historical Society's examination of Seneca Village, the
vanished African-American and Irish community expunged by the construction of
Central Park. In the classroom, and with an eye on language acquisition, we
can build on knowledge of the reading that worked best. The literature of
assimilation, for example, from the passionate yearning of Russian Jewish
novelist Anzia Yezierska to the smoldering anger of early twentieth-century
Sioux activist Red Bird, also known as Gertrude Simmons Bonnin, to Richard
Rodriguez's melancholic reflections on language and loss, drew uniformly
strong responses. Adjusting and modifying the design of our program will be a
challenge well worth undertaking.

The last day of classes each of my two sections came prepared to celebrate.
They brought homemade food and a CD player, and cleared some dancing space in
the middle of the room. We warmly wished each other a good summer. I look
forward to working again in a program that combines two natural allies:
language acquisition and acculturation. As the new "golden age" of immigration
to America proceeds apace, educators would do well to consider the merits and
rewards of bringing "America" to immigrants.

**This syllabus is part of Professor Wach's essay, American Identities and
American Studies: A View from the ESL Classroom, both appearing in the
September 1997 _ASA Newsletter_.**

AMS 111--American Studies: Culture, Values, and Traditions

Spring 1997

Professor Howard Wach

Office: Carman Hall 297; Phone 960-8286 or messages at 960-8288

Office Hours: Monday and Wednesday, 10-11, or by appointment.

**Course Description**

The three classes you are taking as a "block" all address one central
question: what does it mean to be American? In this class, we will try to
answer the question by reading, writing, and talking about the historical
experiences of Native Americans, African-Americans, immigrants, women, and
working people. We will compare and contrast these experiences, measure them
against important historical changes in American life, and ask further
questions that will add to our understanding of who we are as Americans and
how "being American" has been defined in American history and culture. For
example, why have immigrants left their homelands for America? How have
native-born Americans reacted to the presence of immigrants in different
periods of American history? How well has the American promise of "liberty and
justice for all" been fulfilled? How have racial differences affected that
promise throughout American history? How do Americans balance their commitment
to "being American" against attachments to their cultures of origin? Is the
United States a "melting pot" or a "mosaic"?

**Course Requirements**

There are no exams in this class. Instead, each student is responsible for
turning in five 2-page papers ("Source Summaries") at times indicated in the
class schedule. Each 2-page paper will discuss one reading assignment.
Everyone is encouraged to revise these papers for a better grade. The more
times we write something, the better the writing will be. See the "Source
Summary" handout for more information. We will also write in class and there
will be occasional written homework assignments. All of this work will help
you develop material for the source summaries. In addition, I will hand out
study questions on a weekly basis. The questions will guide our class
discussions and suggest ways to write about the reading.

**Course Evaluations**

Course grades will be determined as follows:

Five source summaries: 75%

Attendance and class participation: 25%

I will take attendance during every class period. More than three unexcused
absences will negatively affect your grade.

**Books**

The following books are required for this class and have been ordered by the
bookstore:

John Mack Faragher, et al., **Out of Many: A History of the American People**
, vol. II (brief edition).

Robert Marcus and David Burner, **America Firsthand** , vols. I and II.

Note: Most of our reading in this class will be taken from the two volumes of
**America Firsthand**. Please bring the appropriate volume to class every day.

**Course Schedule**

**1\. INTRODUCTION:**

Feb. 3-5: What makes an American "american"?

**2\. EUROPEANS AND NATIVE AMERICANS** (Faragher, 351-356):

February 10, 19: READING: Marcus and Burner, vol. I, "The Destruction of the
Indies," (14-18) and "Encounter with the Indians" (31-37). (NOTE: No class
February 12 and 17.)

February 24-26: READING: Marcus and Burner, vol. I, "The Trail of Tears"
(140-147), and vol. II, "The School Days of an Indian Girl" (35-44).

March 3-5: Film and discussion ("Little Big Man")

**FIRST PAPER DUE MARCH 3**

**3\. IMMIGRATION AND AMERICAN HISTORY** (Faragher, 373-375, 413-415, 456-457,
496-498, 625-626):

March 10-12: READING: Marcus and Burner, vol. I, "A Young Irishman Comes to
America" (148-150); vol. II, "The Threat to the White Goddess" (102-103), "A
Bintel Brief" (104-114)

March 17-19: READING: Marcus and Burner, vol. II, "Memories of the Internment
Camp" (201-207), and "Crossing the Rio Grande" (330-339)

**4\. THE QUESTION OF RACE: AFRICAN-AMERICAN EXPERIENCE** (Faragher, 329-338,
418-419, 440-441, 497, 545-558)

March 24-26: READING: Marcus and Burner, vol. II, "African Americans'
Reactions to Reconstruction" (3-8), "Teacher of the Freedmen" (9-15), and
"Letters from the Great Migration" (168-171)

**SECOND PAPER DUE MARCH 24**

March 31-April 2: READING: Marcus and Burner, vol. II, "Letters from African-
American Soldiers" (220-238), "Launching the Montgomery Bus Boycott" (254-263)

**5\. WORKING MEN AND WOMEN: LABOR AND AMERICAN IDENTITY** (Faragher, 370-372,
390, 406-410, 416-417)

April 7-9: READING: Marcus and Burner, vol. I, "The Lowell Textile Workers"
(174-182); Marcus and Burner, vol. II, "Testimony on Child Labor" (79-90)

**THIRD PAPER DUE APRIL 7**

April 14-16: READING: Marcus and Burner, vol. II, "I Belong to the Working
Class" (63-78), "The Triangle Fire" (141-145)

**SPRING RECESS**

**6\. AMERICAN FEMINISM** (Faragher, 390, 417-418, 437-438, 458, 577)

April 28-30: READING: Marcus and Burner, vol. I, "Sojourner Truth: Two
Speeches" (242-244), "Declaration of Sentiments" (handout)

**FOURTH PAPER DUE APRIL 30**

May 5-7: READING: "Minority Women--Work and Politics" and "The Feminine
Mystique" (handouts)

**7\. CONCLUSIONS**

May 12-14: Film and discussion ("Mississippi Masala")

**FIFTH PAPER DUE MAY 14**



The work outlined above applied only to the American Studies class. In
addition, the following are some of the readings assigned to students in the
American Literature and Composition sections of the program. The excerpted
selections listed here, drawn from several commonly used readers designed for
freshman-level composition courses, all elicited strong responses from
students. Assignments from all three classes were incorporated into the
culminating paper (see below).

Full-length books:

Claude McKay, **Home to Harlem**

Leslie Silko, **Ceremony**

Tim O'Brien, **The Things They Carried**

Excerpted Readings:

Vine Deloria, "Custer Died for Your Sins"

Ishmael Reed, "What's American about America"

Joe Klein, "The Good Life and Long Hours of Nguyen Nguu"

Kevin Mullen, "The Irish Cop"

Richard Rodriguez, "Hunger of Memory"

Anzia Yezierska, "America and Me"

Brent Staples, "Black Men and Public Space"

Langston Hughes, "Theme for English B"

Benjamin Franklin, "Remarks Concerning the Savages of North America"

**AMS 111/ENG 227/ENG 096/099**

Spring 1997

Final Assignment

To complete the assigned work in AMS 111, ENG 227, and ENG

096/099, all students will write a final paper. The minimum length is five
typed pages.

All three classes are pursuing a common question: the puzzle of identity in a
multicultural society. Race, ethnicity, gender, and social class are all
important dimensions of our exploration of American culture, literature, and
history. Two central themes that have emerged in our work are:

> 1\. "inclusion and exclusion"\--Are all Americans included in the "American
dream" of liberty, equality, and opportunity? If not, what accounts for the
exclusion of some of us? How do Americans define themselves and determine who
"belongs" and who are "others"? How do definitions of "inclusion" change over
time? How have we seen "inclusion and exclusion" played out in American
culture, literature, and history?

>

> 2\. "community and assimilation"\--How do we "become" American? What do we
keep and what do we give up? What is desirable and what is not about the
process of becoming American? How have these processes been experienced in
American culture? How have they been expressed in American literature?

The final paper will explore one of these themes through the student's choice
of a topic covered in either ENG 227 or AMS 111.

To decide on a topic for your paper:

Look through the course outlines for ENG 227 and AMS 111. Think about the work
you've done until now, and look ahead to the subjects that will be covered for
the rest of the term. Is there one particular topic that interests you or that
relates to your own experience? Is there a question or theme you would like to
explore more thoroughly? Pick one topic that you'd like to write about in ENG
227 and/or AMS 111. If you have trouble picking a topic, ask any of your
teachers for help.

Once you have picked a topic, choose one source (a reading assignment from
either ENG 227 or AMS 111) that addresses the topic. Write out a thesis
statement (1 page) about your topic that expresses your interest, shows how
the source discusses it, and connects it to one of the themes discussed above.
For example, you might want to write about Native Americans and race, or
immigrants and assimilation, or women and inclusion. We have read (or will
read) material on all these topics. Everyone is also free to propose an
original topic, as long as it falls within the general themes of "inclusion
and exclusion" or "community and assimilation."

Your thesis statement is the starting point for your paper. At the end of the
thesis statement, make a list of all the sources (from all three classes) that
you will use in writing your paper. Be sure to look through all your class
books. If you aren't sure what to include, ask any of your teachers for help.
Be sure to make copies of the thesis statement for all three of your teachers.

Due dates for the stages of this assignment are:

Thesis statement: March 26

Paper workshop (in ENG 096/099): week of April 14

First draft: April 28

Final draft: May 14  
---|---  
  
The main office of the **American Studies Association** (Executive Director,
John Stephens) is located at 1120 19th Street, NW, Suite 301, Washington DC
20036; Phone (202) 467-4783; Fax (202) 467-4786; Email:
[asastaff@theasa.net](mailto:%20asastaff@theasa.net). **_  [American
Quarterly](http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/american_quarterly/)_**, the **_[Guide
to American Studies
Resources](http://www.press.jhu.edu/associations/asa/gasr/index.html)_** and
the Annual Meeting Program Book are published by the [Johns Hopkins University
Press](http://www.press.jhu.edu/press/index.html) and are archived at [Project
Muse](http://muse.jhu.edu/muse.html)  


* * *

|  [ ![American Studies
Association](/crossroads/AmericanStudiesAssn/Templates/Images/asatoolbar.gif)](http://www.press.jhu.edu/associations/asa/asatoolbar.gif)  
---|---  
  
[![](/crossroads/AmericanStudiesAssn/Templates/Images/logotiny.gif)](/Templates/Images/asatoolbar.gif)  
**[American Studies Electronic Crossroads
(ASEC)](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/crossroads.html)**

  
  
  
  

