History 1522

**East-Central Europe in the Twentieth Century**

** **

**Lecture Course**

**Fall 2001**

** **

**MW 11**

**Robinson Hall 105**

** **

** **

Dr. Patrice Dabrowski

Robinson Hall 102 (History Department Tutorial Office)

Office hours:  Mondays 1:30-3:30 pm and Thursdays 2-4 pm

[please call Laura Johnson, 5-2157, to schedule an appointment]

Office telephone: 495-9147

[pmdabrow@fas.harvard.edu](mailto:pmdabrow@fas.harvard.edu)

course website:  <http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~hist1522/>





Dan Epstein -- Course Assistant

Office Hours: Wednesdays, 2:30-4:00 pm (Loker Commons)

Telephone: (617) 547-4121

depstein@fas.harvard.edu



**Course description:**

** **

History 1522 is an introduction to the history of the lands between Germany
and Russia/USSR during a century of tremendous change--the twentieth century
we have just consigned to history.  Although the experiences of the peoples
one tends to associate with the region--Poles, Czechs, Hungarians, Slovaks,
and Jews--will receive more systematic treatment, those of Belarusians,
Ukrainians, Lithuanians, Latvians, Estonians, and others will figure as well.
Pertinent developments in the neighboring German and Russian lands will
likewise not be ignored.  As regards the chronology of our investigation, we
will explore life in the final years of the Habsburg, Hohenzollern, and
Romanov empires; the problematic "nation-states" of the interwar period; the
watershed of World War II; the post-war communist experience; the revolutions
of 1989; and post-communism.  Sources include literary works and film.





**Course requirements:**

** **

_Midterm_ (in-class written examination on Wednesday, October 24) --20%



_Book and/or film reports_ (3-5 pages each)  - a total of _two_ \--10%



Choose from the following: (books) Borowski, Drakulic, Garton Ash, Hasek,
Kovaly, Kundera, Milosz (either _Native Realm_ or _Captive Mind)_ , Rosenberg;
(films) _Ashes and Diamonds_ , _The Unbearable Lightness of Being_ , _Man of
Marble_.   Study questions will be posted on the website.  Deadlines for the
book reports are noted on the weekly schedule; film reports are due in class
the Wednesday of the week following the film screening (the screenings have
now been scheduled and these dates have been added to the syllabus that is
posted on the website).



_Source analysis_ (3-5 pages)   - 5%



Through a close reading of a document (of your choice) from the source
collection (the sources in Sugar, ed., _East European Nationalism_ or in
Stokes, ed., _From Stalinism to Pluralism_ ), explain some aspect of East-
Central European history.  (Further instructions to be posted on the website.)
Please note that the source analysis is due in class on the Wednesday of the
week in which the source you have selected is assigned.



_Term paper_ (10-12 pages), due Friday, January 11 --30%



Your choice of subject, pending approval of instructor. You are to prepare a
short (one-page) proposal consisting of a paragraph explaining your topic and
what kinds of questions you seek to answer as well as a short bibliography.
Please note that this is due before the winter break--on Wednesday, December
5.  The proposals will be handed back to you, with brief comments, the
following week.  Policy on rough drafts:  the instructor will read and comment
in detail on all paper drafts submitted by Friday, January 4, which will allow
students who avail themselves of this opportunity ample time for revisions and
adjustments.  (More general advice on conceptual matters, outlines, or
discrete sections of the paper will be dispensed up until January 11.)



_Final examination_ (traditional three-hour examination; date to be
announced)--35%





**Readings for the course:**



Please note that no book purchases are _mandatory_ , nor need you patronize
the COOP to acquire the ones that you wish to own.  (Sometimes better deals
are to be had via on-line services or other local bookstores.)  Most students
will probably find it useful and convenient to have, at a minimum, their own
copies of a textbook on twentieth-century East European history as well as the
sourcebook by Gale Stokes (listed below) as well as a collection of other
sources to be xeroxed.  I have selected Crampton's one-volume survey (listed
below) as the textbook for the course (and, as such, have provided weekly page
assignments); it is a relatively inexpensive and comprehensive treatment of
East European politics.  Should you not find his style congenial, or should
you prefer to read in greater depth, feel free to read the relevant parts of
other books that provide a good introduction to the subject.  There is no
other comparable one-volume work.  Both Ivan T. Berend ( _Decades of Crisis:
Central and Eastern Europe Before World War II_ and _Central and Eastern
Europe, 1944-1993:   Detour From the Periphery to the Periphery_) and Joseph
Rothschild ( _East Central Europe Between the Two Wars_ , and _Return to
Diversity_ , revised edition) have written excellent surveys of the interwar
period and postwar period.  Those interested in the deeper historical
perspective may wish to consult Robert Bideleux and Ian Jeffries, _A History
of Eastern Europe:   Crisis and Change_, the first half of which covers the
period from antiquity to World War I.



**How best to prepare for class meetings:**

** **

Students are advised to do the reading for the week _in advance of the
lectures_ , which will build upon the readings (or, on occasion, deal with
other subjects entirely).  We will occasionally discuss in class the relevant
source material for a given week; some of these discussions are noted on the
syllabus.



** **

** **

**Books available for purchase at the Coop (they will also be available on
reserve):**



R.J. Crampton, _Eastern Europe in the Twentieth Century --and After_ (course
textbook)



Gale Stokes, ed., _From Stalinism to Pluralism:   A Documentary History of
Eastern Europe Since 1945_, 2d. ed. (course sourcebook)



Ivan T. Berend, _Decades of Crisis:   Central and Eastern Europe Before World
War II_ (recommended)



Tadeusz Borowski, _This Way For the Gas, Ladies and Gentlemen_

_ _

Slavenka Drakulic, _How We Survived Communism and Even Laughed_



Timothy Garton Ash, _The Magic Lantern:   The Revolution of '89 Witnessed in
Warsaw, Budapest, Berlin, and Prague_



Jaroslav Hasek, _The Good Soldier Svejk_



Heda Margolius Kovaly, _Under a Cruel Star:   A Life in Prague 1941-1968_

_ _

Milan Kundera, _The Joke_

_ _

Czeslaw Milosz, _Native Realm:   A Search for Self-Definition_



Czeslaw Milosz, _The Captive Mind_

_ _

Tina Rosenberg, _The Haunted Land:   Facing Europe's Ghosts After Communism_

_ _



**Course sourcebook:**

** **

A number of the readings not available for purchase (that is, articles and
excerpts of books) have been posted on the course website as e-reserves.
These apparently can be accessed from the course website by giving your last
name as the user I.D. and your I.D. number (all nine digits) as the password.
If there are any problems with this, please let me know. There still are
selections from three books listed below (those marked with an asterisk*) that
will not be on e-reserves.  I will prepare a set of xeroxes--that is, a
typical sourcebook--which you will be able to purchase from a nearby copy
shop.  Feel free, of course, to read them on reserve if you do not wish to
purchase the sourcebook.





**Additional books on reserve:**



Ivo Banac and Katherine Verdery, eds., _National Character and National
Ideology in Interwar Eastern Europe_.   [on reserve*]



Daniel Chirot, ed., _The Origins of Backwardness in Eastern Europe:
Economics and Politics from the Middle Ages Until the Early Twentietch
Century_ [on reserve]



Stephen R. Graubard, ed., _Eastern Europe ... Central Europe ... Europe_ [on
reserve]



Roman Laba, _The Roots of Solidarity_ [on reserve *]



Joseph Roth, _The Bust of the Emperor_ [on reserve] ****



Peter F. Sugar, ed., _Eastern European Nationalism in the Twentieth Century_
[on reserve *]



Piotr Wandycz, _The Price of Freedom_ [on reserve]





**Weekly schedule of lectures and assignments:**



## PART ONE:  INTRODUCTION

** **

**Week 1.   **

            Lecture 1.  Wednesday, September 12

Introduction





**Week 2.**

Lecture 2.  Monday, September 17

Eastern Europe?  Central Europe?  East-Central Europe? -- Definitions



            Lecture 3.  Wednesday, September 19

            Backwardness:  Or, Everything is Relative



Readings for Week 2:  R.J. Crampton, _Eastern Europe in the Twentieth Century
--And Beyond_, 1-27; Tony Judt, "The Rediscovery of Central Europe," pp. 23-58
in Stephen R. Graubard, ed., _Eastern Europe ... Central Europe ... Europe_
[e-reserves]; Iver B. Neumann,  "Russia as Central Europe's Constituting
Other," _East European Politics and Societies_ 7 (Spring 1993): 349-69
[e-reserves]; P eter Gunst, "Agrarian Systems of Central and Eastern Europe,"
pp. 53-91 in Daniel Chirot, ed., _The Origins of Backwardness in Eastern
Europe_ [e-reserves].







## PART TWO:  EXPERIENCE OF EMPIRE

** **

**Week 3.**

            Lecture 4.  Monday, September 24

Under the Hohenzollerns and Romanovs

In-class Discussion: Mickiewicz, _Books of the Polish Nation_



            Lecture 5.  Wednesday, September 26

The Habsburg "Hothouse"



Readings for Week 3:  Piotr Wandycz, _The Price of Freedom_ , chs. 5-6
[e-reserves]; _Eastern European Nationalism in the Twentieth Century_ , edited
by Peter F. Sugar, pp. 103-4, 205-7, 222-7, 243-9, 264-6 [sourcebook]; Adam
Mickiewicz, _The Books of the Polish Nation and the Polish Pilgrims_
[e-reserves].





**Week 4.**

            Lecture 6.  Monday, October 1

The Intelligentsia and its "-isms"

           

            Lecture 7.  Wednesday, October 3 -- *book reports on Hasek due

War and Revolution

            In-class Discussion:  Hasek and the experience of the Great War



Readings:  Jaroslav Hasek, _The Good Soldier Svejk_







## PART THREE:  "INTERWAR" EAST-CENTRAL EUROPE



**Week 5.**

            NO CLASS.  Monday, October 8



            Lecture 8.  Wednesday, October 10 

Postwar settlements:  Creating "nation-states"?  \-- *book reports on Milosz
due

In-class Discussion:  Joseph Roth, _The Bust of the Emperor_ ; Wilson's
Fourteen Points



Readings:  Crampton, 31-8; _Eastern European Nationalism_ , 227-33, 249-52;
Joseph Roth, "The Bust of the Emperor" [e-reserves]; Wilson's Fourteen Points
[e-reserves]; Jerzy Jedlicki, "Polish Concepts of Native Culture," pp. 1-22 in
Banac and Verdery, eds., _National Character and National Ideology in Interwar
Eastern Europe_ [sourcebook]; Czeslaw Milosz, _Native Realm_ (through the
chapter entitled  "The Publican")





**Week 6.**

Lecture 9.  Monday, October 15

Populations and Politics



            Lecture 10.  Wednesday, October 17

Economic Balance Sheet



Readings:  Crampton, 39-51; 57-71; 78-89; 95-106; 152-159; George Schopflin,
"The Political Traditions of Eastern Europe," pp. 59-94 in Stephen R.
Graubard, ed., _Eastern Europe ... Central Europe ... Europe_ [e-reserves];
_Eastern European Nationalism_ , 249-52 [sourcebook]; Zsigmond Pal Pach,
"Business Mentality and the Hungarian National Character," pp. 83-101 in Banac
and Verdery, eds., _National Character and National Ideology in Interwar
Eastern Europe_ [sourcebook].





**Week 7.**

            Lecture 11\. Monday, October 22

Society and Culture



Reading for Week 7:  Milosz, _Native Realm_ (continue up to the chapter
entitled  "The Peace Boundary"); articles by Andrzej Chojnacki (pp. 23-38),
Andrew Lass (pp. 39-64), and Tamas Hofer (pp. 65-83) in Banac and Verdery,
eds., _National Character and National Ideology in Interwar Eastern Europe_
[sourcebook].





**MIDTERM** :  Wednesday, October 24 (students are responsible for material
covered through Lecture 10)





**Week 8.**

            Lecture 12.  Monday, October 29

Interwar East Central Europe and the Jewish Question



            Lecture 13.  Wednesday, October 31 -- * book reports on Borowski due

World War II:  Turning Point?



Readings:  Crampton, 51-56; 71-77; 84-94; 159-176; 179-209; _Eastern European
Nationalism_ , 105-6, 208-11 [sourcebook]; Heda Margolius Kovaly, _Under a
Cruel Star_ , 5-51; Tadeusz Borowski, _This Way for the Gas, Ladies and
Gentlemen_.







### PART FOUR:  THE "COMMUNIST" EXPERIMENT



**Week 9.**

            Lecture 14.  Monday, November 5

Communist Takeover and Ethnic Cleansing

FILM SHOWING (7 pm; Barker 211): Ashes and Diamonds



            Lecture 15\.  Wednesday, November 7

 Stalinism in Eastern Europe -- * book reports on Milosz due

In-class Discussion:  Ketman and Stalinism (read Milosz, _Captive Mind_ )



Readings:  Crampton, 211-274; Stokes, 12-56; Kovaly, _Under a Cruel Star_ ,
52-163; Milosz, _Captive Mind_ (especially chapters entitled  "Ketman" and
"Alpha") Film:  Ashes and Diamonds (if you can't attend the showing or view
the video on your own, please read the book under the same title by Jerzy
Andrzejewski).





**Week 10.**

            NO LECTURE:  Monday, November 12



Lecture 16.  Wednesday, November 14 --* film reports due (Ashes and Diamonds)

Destalinization Crises:  1956 and All That



Readings:  Crampton, 275-317; Stokes, 81-134; Kovaly, _Under a Cruel Star_ ,
164-177; _Eastern European Nationalism_ , 211-17, 234-9, 252-6 [sourcebook].





**Week 11.**

Lecture 17.  Monday, November 19

The Rise and Fall of "Reformed Communism":  1968 --*book reports on Kundera
due

In-class Discussion:  _The Joke_

FILM SHOWING (TUESDAY, November 20, 7 pm; Barker 211): The Unbearable
Lightness of Being



Lecture 18.  Wednesday, November 21

Antipolitics and Human Rights -- * book reports on Kovaly due



           

Readings:  Crampton, 318-59;  Stokes, 107-80; Kovaly, _Under a Cruel Star_ ,
178-92; Milan Kundera, _The Joke_. Film:   The Unbearable Lightness of Being.
(again, those who miss the showing should read the book by Milan Kundera on
which the film is based)



** **

**Week 12.**

            Lecture 19.  Monday, November 26 -- * book reports on Drakulic due

Daily Life Under Communism:  The Women's Burden

In-Class Discussion:  women's perspectives on communism

FILM SHOWING (eve.; Barker 211): Man of Marble



            Lecture 20.  Wednesday, November 28 --* film reports due (Unbearable Lightness of Being)

Polish Upheavals and the Emergence of Solidarity



Readings:  Crampton, 359-76; Stokes, 181-215; Slavenka Drakulic, _How We
Survived Communism and Even Laughed_ ; Roman Laba, _The Roots of Solidarity_ ,
3-12, 99-196 [sourcebook]; _Eastern European Nationalism_ , 106-8
[sourcebook].  Film showing:  Man of Marble.





 </

