Fall 1997 Dr. Bergen

[![](file:///C|/Program%20Files/Netscape/Navigator/mypage/Chrome02Forward.gif)](102outlines.html)[OUTLINES](102outlines.html)  
[![](file:///C|/Program%20Files/Netscape/Navigator/mypage/RedSquareBack.gif)](classes.html)[Back
to Fall 1997
Classes[![](file:///C|/Program%20Files/Netscape/Navigator/mypage/pulsar.gif)](index.html)](classes.html)[My
Home
Page[![](file:///C|/Program%20Files/Netscape/Navigator/mypage/ballmail.gif)](mailto:bhbergen@gallux.gallaudet.edu)](index.html)[Send
me e-mail](mailto:bhbergen@gallux.gallaudet.edu)

BOOKS REQUIREMENTS GRADES MAKE-UP POLICY CLASS SHEDULE

**HISTORY 102**

**WORLD CIVILIZATION **  
  

**Syllabus and Contract: By accepting this syllabus and remaining in this
course beyond add/drop period, you (the student) agree to abide by all the
rules and requirements set out in this syllabus.**  
  

**KEEP THIS SYLLABUS, YOU WILL NEED IT ALL SEMESTER**  
  

_**BOOKS** :_ **_Required_** Text, available in the Bookstore:

\- McKay, Hill, Buckler, _A History of World Societies,_ 4th edition, Volume
II, Since 1500

**_Optional_ , but strongly recommended:**

\- _Study Guide_ , Volume II, From 1100

***Make sure to buy the correct Volume - VOLUME II - of each book.** *

_**DESCRIPTION** :_

This course will cover some important aspects of the history of the world from
the Age of Exploration to the Present It will consist mostly of lectures, with
some discussion.  
  

**I. _REQUIREMENTS_ :**

**1.** A. **ATTENDANCE: REQUIRED**. _BE WARNED: if you miss a class, you are
responsible for all that you miss_ including all assignments. No exceptions.
For an excused absence, such as approved sporting events, etc., you must **let
me know in advance**. Absences for work, leaving early for holidays, etc.,
will not be excused. You are allowed 3 unexcused absences. After 3 absences, I
will take credit off your attendance grade.

B. **Lateness:** You are expected to arrive in class on time (even if the
instructor is late). Attendance will be taken first thing every class. If you
arrive after attendance has been taken, you will NOT BE COUNTED.  
  

**2.** A. **TESTS** : You will have **THREE ONE-HOUR TESTS**. The tests will
include **ESSAYS and Identification Questions**. There will be NO FINAL exam,
only three hourly tests of equal weight. Tests will check both your knowledge
AND your ability to think independently and write a sustained argument. They
are a much more important in determining your final grade than quizzes.  
  

B. **QUIZZES** : There will be at least **ONE QUIZ EACH WEEK** , covering ALL
reading for the week. **_No make-ups_**. Ever. For any reason. Even illness.
Your three lowest quiz grades will be dropped at the end of the semester. A
missed quiz will become one of your three dropped quizzes. Quizzes will be
short, generally one-word or one-sentence questions, intended to check your
understanding of the reading. *Be careful, quizzes are short and easy, but
worth much less toward your final grade than tests.*  
  

Quizzes will be given at the beginning of class. If you arrive more than five
minutes after class begins, YOU WILL NOT BE ABLE TO TAKE THE QUIZ.  

**3.** **_READING_** :

A. **TEXTBOOK** : Keeping up with the reading is essential. Lectures will be
hard to understand if you have not read the book BEFORE CLASS. You will
therefore be REQUIRED to come to class with the READING FINISHED. The basic
text is not always easy reading, so _use a dictionary_.  
  

B. **STUDY GUIDE** : The **optional** _Study Guide_ includes outlines, and
lists of important terms for each chapter to help you. Buy it and use it if
you feel you need additional help in understanding the textbook.  
  

C. **HANDOUTS** : I will distribute outlines for every chapter to help you
follow lectures and discussions. Each outline will be accompanied by a list of
important vocabulary. Identification questions on the test will be taken only
from those lists. Buy a folder or notebook to keep all these papers in. You
are responsible for saving them.  
  

**4.** **_HOMEWORK and PARTICIPATION_** :

A. **HOMEWORK:** You may occasionally be assigned short-answer questions or
identifications, or short essays. I will also hand out other short readings
from time to time. You will be responsible for all of these, when and if they
occur.  
  

B. **PARTICIPATION** : Active participation in classroom discussion is a
requirement of this course. You don't have to be right to participate, you
just have to try.  
  

**5.** **_WWW Project_ : **You will be required to choose a topic and to do
some research on that topic on the World Wide Web (WWW), and to write a report
on it. Details will be handed out later in the semester.  
  

**6.** **_ASK QUESTIONS_ :** It is your responsibility to ask questions if you
don't understand something. If you have questions that come up after class, or
that come up in your reading, you can ask them at the beginning of class, or
during my office hours.  
  

**II. _GRADES_** :

Your grade for the course will consist of  
  

Attendance 5%

Participation and Homework 5%

Quizzes 15%

WWW Project 15%

First Test 20%

Second Test 20%

_Third Test 20%_  
  
Total 100%  
  

**III. _MAKE-UP POLICY:_ **

A. MAKE-UPS: Make-ups on tests will be granted **only for emergency
situations** such as illness or family emergencies and only WITH WRITTEN PROOF
of that situation.

B. PERMISSION ONLY IN ADVANCE: Except in extreme situations, permission for an
extension FOR ANY ASSIGNMENT must be sought BEFORE the due date or date of the
test.

C. LATE PAPERS: Papers or homework turned in late without advance permission
will lose ONE FULL GRADE for each day late.

D. No make-ups on quizzes. No exceptions. Ever.  
  

**_CONTACTING ME_** : E-Mail: bhbergen; Office: HMB S235 651-5926 (V/TTY);

Office hours: Mon, Wed, Fri 12:00pm - 1:00pm and by appointment  
  

I encourage you to come see me with any questions about the course, the book,
the lectures, or to discuss any aspect of the course.  
  

_COURSE OBJECTIVES_ :

1\. To give some basic background in the main lines of world historical
development.

2\. To give an idea of what historical scholarship is: what kinds of questions
historians ask, and how they develop their answers.

3\. To give a sense of how history is relevant for our own society.

4\. To develop skills of critical thinking, and logical argument.  
  
  
  

**IV. SCHEDULE of topics and assignments:** This schedule lets you know what
reading you must do for each week, and when tests will occur. This schedule is
provisional, that is, it may be changed. It presumes that we progress rapidly
through the book. It may change according to how the class goes. If you are
not sure about where we are, check with the instructor. Tests dates ordinarily
will not be changed. Homework assignments other than reading will be made
separately from this list.  
  

**_WEEK OF:_** _**Topic:** _

Aug 25-29 (M-F) INTRODUCTION, THE AGE OF EXPANSION

Reading: Chapter 16, pp. 515-529, 540-546  
  

**No class Monday, September 1 (Labor Day)**

Sept 1-5 ABSOLUTISM AND CONSTITUTIONALISM

Reading: Chapter 17, pp. 557-567, 582-586, 589-590  
  

Sept 8-12 SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION AND THE ENLIGHTENMENT

Reading: Chapter 18, pp. 595-610, 616-618  
  

Sept 15-19 WESTERN SOCIETY, AFRICA

Reading: Chapters 19, 20  
  

Sept 22-26 CHINA, JAPAN

Reading: Chapter 22

****FIRST TEST Wednesday, September 24****

**NO CLASS FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 26**  
  

**WWW Project: Choice of Topic due Monday, September 29**

Sept 29-Oct 3 THE FRENCH REVOLUTION

Reading: Chapter 23, pp. 738-741 (pp. 741-744 optional), pp. 744-759

**NO CLASS FRIDAY, OCTOBER 3 (Rosh Hashana)**  
  

Oct 6-10 NAPOLEON, and INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION

Reading: Chapter 23, pp. 759-767, Chapter 24  
  

Oct 13-17 IDEOLOGY AND REVOLUTION

Reading: Chapter 25, pp. 804-819

**NO CLASS, WEDNESDAY-FRIDAY, OCTOBER 15-17**  
  

Oct 20-24 IDEOLOGY AND REVOLUTION continued

Reading: Chapter 25, pp. 819-841  
  

Oct 27-31 URBAN LIFE, EUROPEAN NATIONALISM, SOCIALISM

Reading: Chapter 26  
  

****SECOND TEST Monday, November 3****

Nov 3-7 NEW IMPERIALISM, FIRST WORLD WAR

Reading: Chapter 27, pp. 890-913, Chapter 29 pp. 960-975  
  

Nov 10-14 RUSSIAN REVOLUTION, POST-WAR NATIONALISM IN ASIA

Reading: Chapter 29, pp. 975-989, Chapter 30, pp. 992-1012, 1024-1025  
  

**WWW Project due Monday, November 17**

Nov 17-21 DEPRESSION AND DICTATORSHIP

Reading: Chapter 31, pp. 1040-1051, Chapter 32, pp. 1054-1065  
  

****Class will be held on Monday, Nov 24****

Nov 24-28 FASCISM & NAZISM

Reading: Chapter 32, 1065-1074

**NO CLASS, Wednesday-Friday, November 27-29** (Thanksgiving)  
  

Dec 2-5 THE SECOND WORLD WAR

Reading: Chapter 32, pp. 1074-1089

****THIRD TEST: Friday, December 6****  

TOP BOOKS REQUIREMENTS GRADES MAKE-UP POLICY CLASS SHEDULE

[![](file:///C|/Program%20Files/Netscape/Navigator/mypage/Chrome02Forward.gif)](102outlines.html)[OUTLINES](102outlines.html)  
[![](file:///C|/Program%20Files/Netscape/Navigator/mypage/RedSquareBack.gif)](classes.html)[Back
to Fall 1997
Classes[![](file:///C|/Program%20Files/Netscape/Navigator/mypage/pulsar.gif)](index.html)](classes.html)[My
Home
Page[![](file:///C|/Program%20Files/Netscape/Navigator/mypage/ballmail.gif)](mailto:bhbergen@gallux.gallaudet.edu)](index.html)[Send
me e-mail](mailto:bhbergen@gallux.gallaudet.edu)

