# Courses in ENGLISH LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE (DIVISION 361)

  
For all English classes, registered students must be present at each of the
first two meetings to claim their places. Any student who does not meet this
requirement may be dropped from the course. NOTE: If you must miss a class due
to religious observances, contact the instructor or leave a message for the
instructor with the department (764-6330).

#### WRITING COURSES:

After taking or placing out of Introductory Composition, students may elect
English 225 for further practice in the fundamentals of expository and
argumentative prose. English 325 offers the opportunity for work in
argumentative and expository prose at a more advanced level.

Several sections of English 223, the beginning course in creative writing, are
available each term; the work is multi-generic, and two of the following will
be covered in each section: fiction, poetry, and drama. More experienced
writers may apply for admission to specialized sections of English 227
(Playwriting), English 323 (Fiction or Poetry), English 423 (Fiction), English
427 (Playwriting), and English 429 (Poetry). Admission to these advanced
courses is by permission of the instructor, who will require writing samples.

#### INDEPENDENT STUDY:

Independent study in English must be elected under one of the following
numbers: 226 (Directed Writing, 1-3 hours), 299 (Directed Reading, 1-3 hours),
426 (Directed Writing, 1-4 hours), 499 (Directed Reading, 1-4 hours). There is
a limit to the total hours that may be taken under any one number (3 in 226; 6
in 299, 426, and 499). All elections require permission of the professor, on
an election authorization (override) form to be turned in at CRISP and also on
a departmental approval form. GSTA's are not normally authorized to supervise
independent study.

**124\. College Writing: Writing and Literature.** _ECB writing assessment.
(4). (Introductory Composition). ._  
By connecting the two terms of its title, Writing and Literature aims to help
prepare the student to produce the range and quality of expository prose
expected in college courses. Works of literature will be considered for their
effective use of language and argument. They will serve as reference points
for thinking and writing strategies. Characteristically, sections of English
124 will involve the writing of a minimum of six essays, with considerable
attention given to the preparation of drafts and to revision. The literary
works which will serve as points of reference will vary from section to
section and from term to term. Course descriptions for individual sections
will be available after November 19 in 224 Angell Hall.

**125\. College Writing.** _ECB writing assessment. (4). (Introductory
Composition). ._  
Like English 124 (Writing and Literature), English 125 (College Writing)
prepares students for the various kinds of academic writing required of them
as undergraduates at the University of Michigan. In addition to informal
exercises or impromptu essays, students can expect to write six or more formal
papers exemplifying the various modes of discourse which comprise our academic
community.

Individual course descriptions will be available for reference in 224 Angell
Hall after November 19. For all English classes, registered students must be
present at each of the first two class meetings to claim their places. Any
student who does not meet this requirement may be dropped from the course.

**217\. Sophomore Seminar.** _English 124 or 125, or permission of instructor.
(3). (HU)._  
This exciting range of courses will give the student the opportunity to focus
early in the College career on a sharply defined topic or body of literary
works, and to do so in a seminar format, with much emphasis on discussion and
writing. Whatever the topic of the seminar, students will be introduced to
large questions of how one interprets and values the works one investigates,
of the relation between those works and the cultural order of which they are a
part, and of the function(s) of criticism at the present time. Sophomore
Seminars will be limited to approximately 20 students, and will serve to
fulfill the College's Humanities Distribution requirement.

_Section 001. Imitation and Invention in Modern Literature_ : This seminar
will examine the ways modern writers establish their authority and identity by
appropriating and transforming old texts to create new narrative traditions.
We will discuss the ideological and artistic reasons which prompt literary
borrowings and how narrative imitations generate new forms of language and
representation. Above all, this course will introduce the concept of
intertextuality, the process by which old texts are rewritten as new ones and
real historical events are turned into narratives. We will examine these
literary relationships by reading a cross-section of international writers in
English. The course will begin by discussing Doctorow's rewriting of Von
Kleist's "Michael Kolhauss" in _Ragtime,_ and his use of historical episodes
in the novel. We will then proceed to examine the triangular relationship
between Charles Johnson's _Middle Passage_ and Melville's _Benito Cereno_
(itself a rewriting of the Armistead slave revolt) and Robert Hayden's poem,
"The Middle Passage." We will then examine the structural relationship between
a European novel (Conrad's _Under Western Eyes_ ) and an African text (Ngugi's
_A Grain of Wheat_ ). The seminar will conclude by discussing intertextuality
in novels by women, works which raise a different set of questions about
literary traditions, narrative conventions, and genre. After comparing
Charlotte Bronte's _Jane Eyre_ (England) to Jean Rhys' _Wide Sargasso Sea,_ we
will discuss the relationship between two novels by Nigerian writers, Flora
Nwapa's _Efuru_ and Buchi Emecheta's _The Joys of Motherhood._ Assignments
will include three short papers and a final examination. WL:1 Cost:3 (Gikandi)

_Section 002. Hamlet in Its Contexts_ : _Hamlet_ is probably Shakespeare's
most popular and familiar play. To get some idea of why this might be, we will
start the course by looking carefully at the play, both as something to read
and as something to see on a stage. Then we will consider some of the contexts
of the play, most obviously, other plays by Shakespeare and his
contemporaries, and also discussions of relevant bits of history and
psychoanalysis and various kinds of literary criticism. Throughout we will try
to keep the dramatic nature of the play in mind as a reference for the utility
of these contextual readings-what help would they be to a director or an actor
doing _Hamlet_? There will be a final exam, an in-term exam, and several short
(about three pages) papers. WL:1 (Lenaghan)

_Section 003. 20th Century Irish Literature_ : Yeats, Joyce, Shaw, O'Casey,
Beckett, Heaney-these are just a few of this century's outstanding Irish
literary figures. We will read a number of their works (and quite a few by
lesser-known, contemporary authors) with an eye toward gaining an
understanding of the historical, political and cultural contexts which
fostered them. Trends in Ireland's literary developments, social formations,
and popular culture will all be fair game for our explorations. (The issues
facing Irish women writers of this century will be of particular concern.) The
only prerequisites for this course are an interest in literature and a
curiousity about things Irish. (The latter includes anything from Celtic
legends to The Pogues.) Most of our work will be done through class
discussion, spurred by your frequent, energetic contributions and
presentations. Additional requirements (probably) will include two papers and
an exam. WL:1 Cost:3 (Martin)

_Section 004. Writing Alternatives to the Modern State: Literature Between
"The Wars." _ This class will examine the relationship of women to state and
literary empires in the wake of World War I. By focusing upon some influential
texts of the period we will consider the relationship between gender and
writing, as well as the significance of location (both geographical and
imaginary) on the major tenets of modernism. Readings for the course will
include: Woolf's _A Room of One's Own;_ Forster's A Passage to India;
Burdekin's _Swastika Night;_ Orwell's _1984;_ Hurston's _Their Eyes Were
Watching God;_ Larsen's _Quicksand;_ Baker's _Modernism and the Harlem
Renaissance;_ Kim (ed.) _The Gender of Modernism;_ Benstock's _Women Writers
of the Left Bank;_ and a course pack which will include short stories and
poetry by other writers of the era. There will be a midterm, final, two 2-page
response papers, and two longer papers. WL:1 (Snyder)

_Section 005. Novels of Initiation._ In novels of Initiation characters
encounter fundamental experiences in the process of moving toward adulthood.
The tentative selections-subject to change-include Thomas Berger, _Little Big
Man;_ H.D., _Hermione;_ Theodore Dreiser, _Sister Carrie;_ Ralph Ellison,
_Invisible Man;_ William Faulkner, _The Reivers;_ Jayne Anne Phillips,
_Machine Dreams;_ J.D. Salinger, _The Catcher in the Rye;_ and Alice Walker,
_The Color Purple._ Work will include two papers, a mid-term, and a final.
Most of the class work will be done through discussion. The grading will take
into account the norm (mechanics and style) as well as the contents of the
papers. Participation in discussion, like regular attendance, will also figure
in the grading. Short quizzes will be added if necessary to insure keeping up
with the reading. WL:1 Cost:2 (Blotner)

_Section 006. Literacy._ For Winter Term, 1992, this course is jointly offered
with [Linguistics 277.](ling.html#anchor220671)

_Section 007. Reading and Writing About Modern Poetry._ This is a seminar in
reading and writing about modern poetry written in English. One part of the
seminar's purpose is to develop skills of close reading particularly
applicable to poetry but also useful in any medium of written discourse.
Another is to read poems in their cultural context, and a third is to offer
practice in writing a research paper. The paper will be 10-12 pages written
and rewritten in two segments, the first segment establishing a cultural
context for the poetry that is examined in the second. Seminar meetings in the
latter half of the semester will be partly devoted to students' presentation
of their research. WL:1 Cost:1 (Fader)

**223\. Creative Writing.** _English 124 or 125 or equivalent. (3). (Excl).
May not be repeated for credit._  
All sections of 223 teach the writing of two of the following three genres:
fiction (including personal narrative), drama, and poetry. Different sections
will emphasize the individual genres to varying degrees. Classwork involves
the discussion of the process of writing and the work of a few published
authors. Students will do exercises meant to develop a sensitivity to language
and a facility with evocative detail, voice, form, and so forth. Most
classroom time, however, is devoted to reading and discussion of student
writing. A final portfolio of revised finished work of 35-50 manuscript pages
may be required.

All sections of English 223 will have course descriptions available for
reference in 224 Angell Hall after November 19.

**225\. Argumentative Writing.** _English 124 or 125 or equivalent. (4).
(Excl)._  
This course will develop ways of exploring and defending positions ideas, and
beliefs in writing. Attention will be paid to processes of reasoning, the
testing of assumptions and claims, the questioning of beliefs, and the
discovery of ideas and evidence through analysis and rigorous articulation in
written discourse. The course will also focus on considerations of style,
formal strategies or techniques, and revision as integral to precision in
making points and developing argumentative ideas both for purposes of
individual reflection as well as for the purpose of persuading an audience.
Classes are usually run on a discussion/workshop basis, with students sharing
drafts of papers and examining professional writing from periodicals or from a
text book of collected essays.

All sections of English 225 will have course descriptions available for
reference in 224 Angell Hall after November 19.

**227\. Introductory Playwriting.** _(3). (Excl).  
Section 001. _ A crash course immersion into the world of professional
playwriting. Original student work is read aloud each week by actors, then
critiqued in workshop fashion by the class. Modeled after the Playwrights
Units at such distinguished Off-Broadway Theaters as Circle Repertory Company
and Ensemble Studio Theater, student playwrights are expected to write two
revised one-act plays over the course of the semester, see one play a week,
read at least one play a week, meet weekly with an assigned partner, have
weekly conferences with the instructor, and keep a journal. Mid-term and end
of the year performances are open to the public. Instructor is a New York-
based playwright and screenwriter with Regional theater and Off-Broadway
credits (Arena Stage, GeVa, Victory Gardens, Circle Rep, Manhattan Theater
Club) and the expectations of the workshop are of a similarly professional
nature. To enroll, put name on waitlist at CRISP, come to the first day of
class with dramatic-writing sample and compelling idea for an original play
(class size limited to 15 writers). WL:1 Cost:2 (Roth)

**239\. What is Literature?** _English 124 or 125, or permission of
instructor. (3). (HU).  
Section 002. _ We will try to answer the question posed by our title by
reading-closely, at times even minutely-a number of works in a variety of
forms (poetry, prose, drama, and film) and genres (comedy, tragedy, dramatic
monlogue, the novel, autobiography, etc.) Some of the issues we will be facing
as we do so include: the construction/creation/mystification of a notion of
the self itself; the nature of dramatic action, and its reflections in fiction
and film; the literary canon, how it was constructed, dismantled, and
reconstructed; and why (or why not) we should think about these things. The
texts we will study include: Blake, _Songs of Innocence and Experience;_
Rosengarten, ed., _All God's Dangers: The Autobiography of Nate Shaw;_
Dickens, _Great Expectations;_ Shakespeare, _Twelfth Night;_ Kingston, _The
Woman Warrior;_ and a film or two. Requirements include: Four short papers and
a final exam and alert presence in class. WL:1 Cost:1 (Freedman)  
  
_Section 003._ In the course, we will read mainly poems, plays, short stories,
and one or two novels. In class meetings and assigned essays, our discussion
of assigned works will raise questions and topics like these: 1) How the
serious study of literature may relate to "just reading" poems and stories, 2)
What it can mean to just read a poem or a story (or a telephone directory or a
basketball program or a library graffito or a televised talking head)-and
whether just reading can be distinguished from one's interpretation or
evaluation of literature, 3) Whether one's own intuitions in response to poems
and stories are to be "trusted"-and how personal intuitions may relate to
scholarly disquisitions, 4) Whether the "serious study" of literature should
be taken seriously, 5) How the features of a poem or story figure in a
reader's making of its meaning, 6) How the pleasure derived from reading good
poems and stories may or may not be distinguished from pleasures derived from
such as these: drugs, aerobics, philately, yoga, gossip, horticulture,
baseball, 7) Whether one can confirm or validate for others the world that one
makes of the text of a story or a poem-and how readers have tried to do so
over the past century or so, 8) How the world of poems or stories may relate
to the times and places of their makers, as to those of readers. In this
section of the course, all written work will be entered in *Confer for all
members of the class to read. Regular participation in the (computer-) course
conference is an unwaivable requirement for credit in the course. Written
Work: SHORT weekly (journal-like) responses to assigned readings, short bi-
weekly essays, short critical responses to the responses and essays of others.
In meetings of the class, there will a handful of interruptible lectures, much
discussion, and-in the final weeks of the term-small-group presentations. WL:1
(Van't Hul)

_Section 004._ In asking the question "What is Literature?" we will be more
interested in exploring boundaries and characteristics of different types of
writing than in arriving at a specific answer. In that process of exploration
we will look back upon our experiences as readers as well as examining a
variety of texts. Texts will include long and short fiction, drama, film,
poetry, "new" journalism, and essays, drawn from a wide range of cultures and
historical periods. A more detailed list is available upon request from the
instructor. WL:1 Cost:3 (Howes)

_Section 005._ In this class we will think seriously about the kinds of things
we do and say about literature. Its goal is to help you become more self-
reflective and critical as you read and write about books. We will achieve
this goal by exploring together some fundamental and provocative questions.
How do we decide what "literature" is in the first place? What is at stake
when we decide whether a work of literature is good or bad? How can different
assumptions and theories about literature change the way we interpret a single
work? How do we talk about the "context" of a work of-literature? We will
explore these questions through coordinated readings of literary, non-
literary, and critical writings. The literature we read will be a diverse
selection of novels, stories, and poems, and will include Emily Bronte's
_Wuthering Heights,_ Zora Neale Hurston's _Their Eyes Were Watching God,_ and
William Faulkner's _As I Lay Dying._ There will be three short papers, a final
exam, and frequent informal writing exercises. Participation in class
discussion will be mandatory. WL:1 (Pinch)  
  
_Section 006._ We will use Fitgerald's _The Great Gatsby_ (USA); Chinua
Achebe's _Things Fall Apart_ (Nigeria); Kamala Makandaya's _Nectar in a Sieve_
(India) to organize our thoughts about how, when, and why definitions of and
approaches to texts and contexts, to universities and market-places, _etc._
shape or undermine what we mean when we talk about  "literature." It would be
interesting to also read, say, narratives from religious texts, narratives
with "plot," "god," "character," "climax," etc. and then check ourselves to
see how available for a range of interpretations such kinds of texts are.
Thus, in addition to our three "standard" and "recognizable" books, we will
test ourselves not only across cultures, as above, but also across class,
commercial, gender, _etc._ lines. This class will function by way of lectures-
as well as short, written reports around which class discussion will take
place. WL:1 (Johnson)

_Section 007. The Art of Interpretation: An Act of the Mind._ This course is
primarily designed to help you join a community of people who carry on a
continuing, informed conversation about literature. The literature studied
will reflect both the social issues of the times and each author's unique
shaping of that material. We want to read closely not only to see what an
author says but how she or he says it. Thus, our readings will often focus on
the dynamics of the imaginative process. Moreover, if we begin this term
finding ourselves reading, rhythmically, somewhat slow, understated works, we
will progressively find ourselves in the midst of the potentially explosive
energy of Beckett's _Rockaby,_ Fowles' _The French Lieutenant's Woman,_ and
Irvings' _A Prayer for Owen Meany._ The format of the course will be
discussion and more discussion; the focus will be on the exchange of ideas.
The requirements of the class will include: two thoughtful and analytical
essays (8pp./ea.); a short weekly response to a text; and a comprehensive
final exam. Although still tentative, the readings will be selected from the
works of the following authors: Browning, Dickens, Hardy, Hawthorne, James,
Joyce, Yeats, Eliot, H.D. Wang, Toni Morrison. Naylor, Atwood, A. Tyler,
Dorris, Allende, Erdrich, Hong Kingston, Julia Alvarez, and Marmon Silko. WL:1
Cost:3 (Back)

_Section 008._ This course explores some fundamental questions about the
meaning and significance of the study of written and oral "literature." In
addition to examining the historical development of literary studies itself,
we'll explore some of the varying conceptions of and attitudes toward
literature in different periods and cultures. We'll explore some basic
theories and methods that are used to think about and write about literature
both by reading accessible theoretical texts and by writing about a variety of
literary-critical forms from different periods and cultures. By examining how
literary and critical forms and practices shape and are shaped by changes in
technology (such as the invention of print and t.v.), in socio-political
institutions (such as the university), in economic structures, and in cultural
customs and beliefs, we'll analyze what our own current literary-critical
practices reveal about American cultural habits. Discussion format. Brief
weekly writing assignments, occasional oral presentations, a journal, and a
term essay-project. Cost:3 WL:1 (Ross)

_Section 009._ This course will introduce students to literature's formal
aspects-how it is put together, to what end, with what effect-with attention
to different literary works' relationship to the culture from which they arose
and which they in turn helped produce. We will be focusing on American
literature in particular, from the eighteenth to the twentieth century, and we
will examine both canonical and non-canonical works (i.e. "classics" and
"popular fiction"), works by both women and men, and will discuss the present
state of literary studies, a field itself now attempting to answer the
question of what is "literature." There will be three papers, a midterm and a
final. Attendance is mandatory. WL:1 Cost:2 (Barnes)

_Section 010._ Good question! Even if we don't quite or can't quite answer it,
it lets us ask a lot of subsidiary questions that ought to provoke our
thought-questions that may seem simple but, on reflection, aren't. What are
books for? Pleasure? Instruction? Sleep? Why does anyone treasure or admire a
book? Under what or whose influence? How does a book get to be thought a great
book or a good book? Then again, what is fiction? What is a poem? Why? Who
decided? When? How does a tradition get started; why does it stop? Is
"literature" concentrated in any particular medium? Print? TV? Speech?
Electronic communication? -In order to explore such questions, we'll read
Ong's _Orality and Literacy,_ Tutuola's _The Palm Wine Drinkard,_ Hurston's
_Their Eyes Were Watching God,_ Conrad's _Heart of Darkness,_ some short
stories, a few critical essays, and quite a number of poems. We'll also read
and analyze various kinds of  "non-literary" prose, part of a Harlequin
Romance, and part of the recent best-selling hoax _The Education of Little
Tree._ We may have a storyteller come to class, but if not we will experiment
with telling. The class may determine part of the syllabus. We shall write
three essays on increasingly challenging topics. Collaborative work will be
permitted but not required. Some writing will be directed primarily to the
class, not the professor. The final exam will test critical thinking about the
course readings and about a short new text. WL:1 (Smith)

**240\. Introduction to Poetry.** _Prerequisite for concentrators in the
Regular Program and in Honors. (3). (HU).  
Section 001. _ The aim of this course is to deepen the rewards of reading
poetry by understanding its nature and how it achieves its effects. Much of
our work in this term will therefore be devoted to cultivating a common
critical vocabulary which will enable us to resond intelligently to as many
different forms of poetry as possible. The emphasis will be upon close
readings of various British and American writers, with the last few weeks
reserved for a study of the works of an individual poet. To encourage an
appreciation of the oral nature of poetry, some memorization and recitals will
be required, together with a series of short papers and a final exam. Primary
text: _Norton Anthology._ WL:1 (Larson)

_Section 002._ In this course we read and study poems rather carefully so that
we can read poetry with more enjoyment and knowledge. This activity is
prerequisite to concentrating in English. The course can also be a good one
for students not intending an English concentration but who want to know more
about poetry. We go by as much reading of poems in class and as much
discussion as we can. We invite familiarity with the main manifestations of
English and American verse through the close reading of a given few. That way
we can hope to get some sense of the range of lyric poetry as well as some
skill at seeing how different kinds of poems are put together and how they
work; and this not for its own sake but so that we can know more clearly,
enjoy more deeply. Toward the close of the course we will study the work of
one major poet-perhaps Yeats or Frost or Dickinson. There will be a number of
written exercises, two relatively short papers, one hour exam and a final
exam. (Cost:2 WL:1) (McNamara)

_Section 003._ We shall study the traditional and modern forms of English and
American poetry, with special attention to the close reading of great examples
of the principal forms. We shall proceed chiefly by discussion, supported by
short papers, quizzes, a midterm, and a final exam. Participation in a
computer conference is a required part of the course. A major object is to
enable students to read and appreciate poems written from points of view and
with purposes not immediately obvious or even sympathetic to an unskilled
modern reader. English 240 is a prerequisite for English concentrators but it
is open to all University undergraduates. WL:1 (Cloyd)

_Section 004 and 005._ This course begins to answer the question of how to
read poetry with pleasure and skill. We will look carefully at poem after poem
with an emphasis on the poet's craft, or how the poem is put together.
Requirements will include some memorizing, several short "exercises," one or
two formal papers of analysis, a midterm, and a final. Class proceeds by
discussion. Text is the complete _Norton Anthology of Poetry._ WL:1 Cost:1
(Zwiep)

_Section 006. Honors_ : This course is for anyone interested in reading poetry
with increased pleasure and understanding. We will read a wide range of poems
of different kinds and periods, and try to develop skills useful in the
analysis and discussion of poetry. Close reading of specific poems will be
used to illustrate questions of form, rhyme and rhythm, imagery, tone and
content. There will be numerous short, ungraded (but required) writing
assignments, group presentations, one or two longer papers, a midterm and a
final exam. Other requirements for the course are regular attendance and
active participation in class; final grades will reflect all the requirements.
Required text: _Norton Anthology of Poetry._ WL:1 (McSparran)

_Section 007._ Our aims for this course will be to learn how to understand and
enjoy poetry better, and how to articulate both our understanding and our
enjoyment. Our method will involve our (1) reading a number of short poems at
the rate of one or two per class; (2) discussing them carefully together; and
(3) writing about them both in daily in-class "scribbles" and in short papers.
Our final exam will ask you to write about poems, and about poetry. One of the
nice things about studying poetry is that you can look at the whole poem at
once, usually: you don't have to turn the page. That doesn't mean, however,
that you don't have to work hard-it just means that the hard work is easier to
do! Our texts are the third edition of the _Norton Anthology of Poetry_ and
Seamus Heaney's _Selected Poems 1966-1987._ WL:1 Cost:1 (Hornback)

_Section 008._ This course does not attempt a history of poetry, but rather a
nonhistorical investigation into the choices poets make. If you've ever tried
to write poems, you may have felt the dizzying sense of possible rhythms,
sounds, tones of voice, and structures open to a poet. When he or she begins
to write (or rewrite), should the poem sound "like poetry" or like prose?
Should it rhyme? Should the poet use a traditional form? How should the poem
select its vocabulary? Should it imitate the speaking voice? Should it sound
like a song? Where and how should the poet break the lines? And how should all
these options be combined? This course aims to heighten your awareness of the
various decisions made at the poem's every turn, and to give you the tools
with which to discuss them. By the same token, it also aims to make poetry
more accessible and more fun. Readings include Shakespeare's "Sonnets," Keats'
"Odes," Eliot's "The Waste Land," and Bishop's "Geography III." Requirements:
3 papers, midterm, final, and brief, hopefully enjoyable in-class writing
exercises. WL:1 Cost:5 (Terada)

_Section 009._ This course aims to introduce students to kinds of poetry in
English, to some of the techniques poets use in the making of poems, and to
the pleasures and skills of reading poetry. We shall read and listen to many
poems written by American, Canadian, British, and Irish poets, and to some
poems translated from other languages. Texts will likely include an anthology,
as well as a few books of poems by individual authors. The course will proceed
by discussion and the occasional lecture, with major evaluative emphasis on
the student's participation in discussions, and the quality of the written
work. Students should plan to write on poems and their designs in several
short response papers, and in two longer essays of 5-7 pages each. There will
be a midterm hour exam and a final exam. In conjunction with Michigan's
Visiting Writing series, there will also be several opportunities to hear
poets read their work in Ann Arbor, in living color. WL:1 (Heininger)

_Section 010. Honors_ : A course in how to-or ways to-understand, feel, feel
out, feel about, appreciate, evaluate, and interpret poems. Poetry typically
differs from ordinary language and from prose in certain qualities, and we
shall try to understand how and why it does so. As we look at-and hear-poems,
we shall consider such things as sound, diction, rhythm, figures of speech,
the line, form, and genre, authorship, audience, and context. Our readings
will come from various cultures, old and now; most readings will be British
and American, most of these recent or contemporary. We'll pay some attention
to the histories of poetry. By the end of the term, everyone should be able to
read any linguistically available poem with confidence, to know what kind of
poem it is, how it works, when it might have been composed, what it might
mean, and whether it's any good. Main texts: a course pack (at Kolossos
Printing), and a computer-generated Intro to Poetry (free). In addition,
students will choose among several topics for independent reading, to include
the study of one contemporary poet. Some of our work will be collaborative,
some private. Everyone will write three essays on increasingly challenging
topics. There will be a test on "technical terms," another test on the course
readings, and a final exam asking for the interpretation and evaluation of
some new poetry. WL:1 (Smith)

_Section 011._ In this section I will take a fairly traditional approach to
poetry, emphasizing form, imagery, and meaning in an orderly progression. We
will read well-known poems from a broad range of English literary history as
well as some poems that are off the beaten track. Students should be prepared
to study poems in advance of class for discussion and to write a few lines of
their own poetry (not graded) now and again. There will be several videos of
contemporary poets. Requirements: class attendance (absolutely mandatory) and
participation based on careful reading; quite a few quizzes; short written
analyses every week; a final exam. Text(s) to be announced. WL:1 Cost:2
(Crawford)

_Section 012._ Many students believe that the more one knows about the
technical elements of poems-meter, rhyme scheme, etc-the harder and less
enjoyable poetry is to read. We will try to avoid or dispel that notion in
this class. By concentrating on a small number of poets, we will see that
poetry can be both carefully constructed and a natural form of expression.
Course requirements include three or four 5-7 page papers, a midterm, and a
final. WL:1 (Artis)

**245/Res. College Hums. 280/Theatre 211. Introduction to Drama and Theatre.**
_(4). (HU)._  
See [Theatre and Drama 211.](theatre.html#anchor197045) (Cardullo)

**270\. Introduction to American Literature.** _(3). (HU).  
Section 001. Race and Ethnicity in Literature of the United States. _ This is
a special section of English 270 designed to meet the LS&A "Race or Ethnicity"
requirement. Thus we will concentrate primarily on 20th century literature and
life experiences of several racial and ethnic groups in the United States.
Among the cultures receiving special attention will be African-American,
Latino, Asian-American, Native American Indian, and Jewish American. The
subject, of course, is vast, and we can hardly hope to do more than
familiarize ourselves with a small sample of texts and issues. Two aspects of
this culture and life experience that will receive special attention are
"oppression" and "resistance." In addition, we will also consider interactions
among gender, race and ethnicity, as well as various theories of the origins
and functions of racist ideology. The writers to be studied will probably
include Frederick Douglass, Jean Toomer, Richard Wright, Lorraine Hansberry,
Alice Childress, Rodoflo Corky Gonzales, Jose Antonio Villareal, Sandra
Cisneros, Lorna Dee Cervantes, Maxine Hong Kingston, Leslie Marmon Silko, and
Aaron Kramer. Requirements will include a short diagnostic writing assignment,
a substantial paper, and a final examination. WL:1 (Wald)

_Section 002._ This course will survey 19th and 20th century American
literature, mostly fiction. Writers to be studied include: Hawthorne,
_Scarlett Letter_ and stories; Melville (stories); Twain, _Huckleberry Finn;_
Kate Chopin, _The Awakening;_ James, _The American;_ Dreiser, _Sister Carrie;_
Wharton, _The House of Mirth,_ Fitzgerald, _The Great Gatsby;_ Hemingway, _The
Sun Also Rises;_ and Faulkner, _Go Down Moses._ Two short (5 page) or one long
(10 page) paper will be assigned. There will be a midterm and a final exam.
WL:1 Cost:2 (Beauchamp)

**280\. Thematic Approaches to Literature.** _(3). (HU).  
Section 001. Comic Responses to Catastrophe. This course is part of the Comedy
Semester. _ We will study a selection of modern literature which takes
thematic material traditionally treated with  "high seriousness" and casts it
in an essentially comic mode. The reading will be post-World War II fiction
and drama which keeps us laughing all the way to the grave. We will, by
reading these works closely, try to determine how and why they are comic and
to discover why, in our time, their mostly grisly subject matter elicits comic
responses. We will try to define and describe the nature of comedy, a slippery
and possibly hopeless-but useful-endeavor. Our reading will be about 8 books
(some fiction; some drama; some short pieces) by some of these (or maybe
several other) authors: Kurt Vonnegut, Peter DeVries, Tom Stoppard, Philip
Roth, Edward Albee, Edward Lewis Wallant, Francine Prose, Woody Allen. We may
also see and study a film or two _(e.g.,_ Kubrick's . _Dr. Strangelove,_
Richardson's _The Loved One,_ or Gilliam's _Brazil_ ). In addition, students
will read a 4-page anthology of comic theory from Plato and Artistotle to Al
Capp and Stephen Sondheim. The class will be mostly discussion if its size
encourages that. Should class size be large, we will have as much discussion
as possible, along with eminently interruptible informal lecture. Requirements
are two 5-7 page papers, one in-class essay exam, an essay final, and your
actively and intelligently participating presence. The course is suitable for
anyone who enjoys reading literature, analyzing it, talking and writing about
it-while discovering why we laugh at other people's pain. WL:1 Cost:$25-50
(Bauland)

**285\. Introduction to Twentieth-Century Literature.** _(3). (HU).  
Section 001. A Rage for Chaos. _ This introductory course in twentieth century
literature will focus on some of the most important novels, poems, plays,
films, and stories of the century, chiefly written in the United States,
England, or Ireland. It will examine what happened to people's views of the
world when everything they had come to value exploded. Love, marriage,
friendship, religion, sanity, patriotism-all bedrocks of Western Civilization-
were challenged in a century when war, madness, bigotry, sexual passion, and
alienation became the norms. What has emerged is not so much a new order as it
is a deeper understanding of the chaos that lives within us all. Works by T.S.
Eliot, James Joyce, D.H. Lawrence, Ernest Hemingway, William Faulkner, the
Marx Brothers, Toni Morrison, Marilyn Monroe, Eugene O'Neill, and Lawrence
Kasdan, among others. Course requirements include three papers (3-5 pp. each),
a midterm and a final. WL:1 Cost:5 (Harrison)

_Section 002._ An introduction to twentieth-century literature in English, our
course will attempt a broad exposure to that vast and diverse material. We
will study the literary traditions commonly associated with the period,
experimental Modernism and Post-Modernism. We will attend as well to older
traditions that have been of continuing importance in this century, Realism
and the Romance, for example, while trying to get a sense of what the majority
of readers have actually been reading over the last many decades: novels of
crime and suspense, westerns, self-help books, and so on. We will look,
further, to both that literature which has for political, historical, or other
reasons long existed at the borders of dominant cultural realms and that which
has, in translation, recently crossed national and linguistic borders
themselves. Thus our eclectic syllabus will be arranged with an eye more to
the historical representativeness of its texts than to their "coherence" as a
group. Expect to give serious (and imaginative) attention to both T. S. Eliot
and Micky Spillane, Charlotte Perkins Gilman and Tarzan, Jean Toomer and H. G.
Wells, Thomas Pynchon and Virginia Woolf, Gabriel Garcia Marquez and Joan
Didion, among others. This course requires no previous study in English
literature at the college level. Non-majors are welcome. There will be three
or four short papers, a mid-term, and a final exam. Readiness to participate
in class discussions and regular attendance are expected. WL:1 Cost:2 (Leon)

**Primarily for Juniors and Seniors  
  
302\. Writing About Good Books. **_(4). (Excl).  
Section 001. _ The goals of this course are a) to engage students in books
that are enjoyable and instructive, and b) to help them write more effectively
and with increased pleasure. The writing portion of the course lays great
emphasis on revision. Each paper is written in two drafts, and the main
criterion for grading is the thoroughness of revision of the first draft.
Participation in a course computer conference is mandatory. There are four
books and four papers, each written in two drafts. There are no exams. WL:1
(Meisler)

**308\. History of the English Language.** _(3). (HU).  
Section 001. _ The aim of this course is to introduce-and to get students to
understand for themselves-all the major aspects of the internal development of
English as a language. This will be achieved through a combination of lectures
and workshops, through the use of one of the subject's latest and most up-to-
date textbooks and its dynamic workbook; through what are promised to be
enthusiastic and vigorous lectures dealing only with the topics of the course
(i.e. all the topics covered by the textbook plus a few others); and through
lots of student homework and workshop participation. Although dealing with
traditional and conventional subject matter in an orthodox way, this will
nevertheless be a hands-on, high-energy course, requiring a smiling and a
I-really-do-want-to-do-it attitude-approach. The texts for the course: C. M.
Millward's _A Biography of the English Language_ (Holt, Rinehart and Winston,
1989) and C. M. Millard's _A Biography of the English Language: Workbook to
Accompany_ (Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1990) WL:1 (Kirk)

**315/Women's Studies 315. Women and Literature.** _(3). (HU). May be repeated
for a total of 6 credits with department permission.  
Section 001. Women Writing from the Periphery. _ This course focuses primarily
on the works of postcolonial and minority women writers who are concerned with
rewriting the "master narrative" of slavery, colonialism, race and nation. The
artistic processes of decolonialization emerge as a continuing dialectic
between hegemonic systems of representation and peripheral subversion of them.
Significant attention will be paid to the ways in which the women writers
create a space within and between these two worlds. Authors will include Jean
Rhys, Honor Ford Smith ed., Olive Senior, Paule Marshall, Toni Morrison, Grace
Nichols. Course requirements include three short papers and one longer one.
This course fulfills the New Traditions Requirement for English concentrators.
WL:1 Cost:3 (Gregg)

_Section 002. Feminist Postmodernism: Bodies and Texts_ : In this course, we
will attempt to sketch the contours of a feminist postmodernist politics and
poetics. Our way into this ambitious project will be to focus on one
particular obsession of both feminism and postmodernism: theorizing the body
in the text, and the text in the body. The novels we will read all work to
"rewrite" the female body by dismantling traditional patriarchal constructions
of that body. Reading fiction alongside theory, we will consider how a
feminist postmodernist practice untangles the politics of representation by
scrutinizing the codes which have governed representations of the female body
as an object to be contemplated and controlled by a male gaze. Some questions
that are likely to arise include: Where does feminism, as a politics,
intersect with, and diverge from, postmodernism as an aesthetics? How do new
"technologies of the body," and the debates around them, work to deconstruct
and reconstruct the female body? What is at stake in the feminist rethinking
of the female body, particularly in terms of such postmodernist thematics as
"gender-bending," de-naturalization of the "natural," the fragmentation of the
body and identity? The course will be structured so as to place fictional
texts and theoretical texts in dialogue with each other. Lecture and
discussion. Texts will include a course pack (available at Dollar Bill
Copying), and novels drawn from the following list (available at Shaman Drum):
Kathy Acker, _Don Quixote;_ Angela Carter, _The Passion of the New Eve;_ Lois
Gould, _A Sea-Change;_ Gayl Jones, _Corregidora;_ Toni Morrison, _Beloved;_
Audrey Thomas, _Mrs. Blood;_ Fay Weldon, _The Life and Loves of a She-Devil_
(or _The Cloning of Joanna May_ ); Monique Wittig, _The Lesbian Body._
Requirements: Several short writing assignments; two 5-page papers; a final
exam; participation in bi-weekly small discussion groups. The course fulfills
the New Traditions Requirement for English concentrators. WL:1 Cost:4
(S.Robinson)

_Section 003. Modernism/Postmodernism: Autobiographical Fictions._ This course
will examine writings by women in the 20th century from the literary periods
now recognized as modernism and postmodernism. By assuming that gender matters
in processes of writing and reading, the class hopes to introduce students to
categories of feminist criticism and to the strategies used by women writers.
It will focus, although not exclusively, on the uses of autobiographical
material in writings about women writing from various class and race
positions, in autobiographical writing about "americanness," in postmodern
novels about the 19th century, and in novels that structure their stories
around sex changes. Readings will range from Woolf's "A Room of One's Own" to
Stein's "Paris, France," from Cisneros' "House on Mango Street" to Morrison's
"Beloved," from a novel by a former East German writer to a lesbian mystery.
Class will consist of two lectures and one day of self-facilitated small group
discussions. Requirements include two short papers, a midterm and a final.
This course fulfills the New Traditions Requirement for English concentrators.
WL:1 (Herrmann)

_Section 004. Twentieth-Century American Women Writers._ Hemingway,
Fitzgerald, Salinger, Pynchon-these twentieth-century American men have
already become part of a "Great Tradition" of American literature that traces
its origins back to Emerson, Thoreau, and Whitman. What about twentieth-
century American women writers? Do Nella Larsen and Djuna Barnes explode our
vision of a canonical male tradition? How did these women help shape
modernity? How was their writing influenced by the Great Depression and the
World Wars? By the shopping sprees of the 50's and 80's? By Vietnam? What did
Gertrude Stein say to Edith Wharton? When Toni Morrison and Sharon Olds write
about children and sexuality, do they speak the same language? When we look at
the differences between women writers who are themselves divided by ethnicity,
race and class, can we define a Great Female Tradition? Do we want to? This
course fulfills both the New Traditions and American Literature Requirement
for English concentrators. WL:1 (Yaeger)

**317\. Literature and Culture.** _(3). (HU). May be repeated for credit with
department permission.  
Section 001. The Condition of English _ : In virtually every generation over
the twelve or thirteen centuries since English emerged in England, minor
prophets have voiced deep concerns for "the purity" of the language, have
deplored its on-going decadence. Scholars have known for nearly two centuries
that change is constant of all natural languages. What they sense in the
evolution of English is not the stench of decadence but the pungency of life
itself. But presidents and secretaries of education and governors and
commissioners and legislators and PTO members and journalists and talk-show
hosts do not take scholarly views. Concern for the purity of the English
language persists. What one scholar observed of Americans of several decades
ago remains true of us: We share in a "national mania for correctness." There
will be no grail of linguistics purity in this course or at the end of it: One
of our quests will be for an understanding of those (a) who think
nostalgically about a time when English was pure, and (b) who imagine when and
how and even why the purity has been defiled. Some topics: (1) the idea of the
"history" of a language, (2) idiolect and dialect: personal, regional, and
social varieties of English, (3) varieties of English in the dialogue of
fictions, (4) the idea of English as a "national language," (5) the
grammatical and metaphorical life of English, (6) the dreary ambition of real-
good grammarians of English, (7) semantics: how words in particular "change
their meanings," (8) the uses and abuses of dictionairies, (9) styles and
registers of English, and (10) pragmatics: racistic, sexistic, and other
popular uses of English. The work will include readings in an ample course
pack, weekly exercises and short essays, and a journal. Regular (weekly)
participation in a Computer (Course) Conference is an unwaivable requirement
for credit in the course. WL:1 (Van't Hul)

_Section 002. The Hollywood Cinema and the Construction of "America." _ In
this course, we will study the ways the Hollywood film industry created,
contested, and re-created models of American Identity. Itself a product of
immigrants, the Hollywood film industry both shaped and questioned models of
ethnicity and race during a period of tremendous social, political, economic,
and ideological transition, both establishing and contesting notions of a
distinctive American national identity and delineating deviations from that
normative model. We will focus largely on classic Hollywood films of the '30s
and '40s, and then on the efforts of filmmakers of the '70s and '80s to revise
their import and agenda; but we will also measure these films against
fictional and non-fictional treatments of the same issues and themes. The
films we will study include: _Meet Me In St. Louis; Stagecoach; The Man Who
Shot Liberty Valance_ and/or _The Searchers; Little Caesar; The Godfather (I_
and/or _II_ ); _Hester Street; Annie Hall; Chan is Missing; Do the Right
Thing._ Readings will include: Rober Sklar, _Movie Made America;_ Owen Wister,
_The Virginian;_ Abraham Cahan, _Yekl;_ Mario Puzo, _The Godfather;_ Maxine
Kingston, _The Woman Warrior;_ Jonathan Rieder, _Canarsie;_ essays and stories
by (among others) Henry James, William Dean Howells, Ernest Hemingway, Zane
Grey, Werner Sollors, Ronald Takaki. Students will be asked to take a midterm
and a final exam and to write one 10 page paper. This course fulfills the
American Literature Requirement for English concentrators. WL:1 Cost:2
(Freedman)  
  
_Section 003. Bigotry and Maturity in the Literature of Two Cultures._ The
purpose of this course is to invite its members to examine some assumptions of
their own culture by comparing them to related assumptions in another, distant
culture. Its method will be to compare the English Renaissance as it reveals
itself in four of Shakespeare's plays with the post-World War II cultures of
Europe and America reflected in eleven plays and novels by Kogawa, Sartre,
Hochhuth, Ellison, Jones, Albee, Walker, Morrison and Kennedy. Each class
except the first and last will begin with fifteen minutes of writing in
response to a question intended as preparation for discussion that follows. In
addition to these numerous in-class papers, two 2-3 page papers will be
required as preliminary versions of two 5-6 page papers that are the chief
written work of the course. No midterm or final examination given. This course
fulfills the Junior/Senior Writing requirement, and the LS &A requirement for
a course in race, racism, or ethnicity, and also fulfills the New Traditions
Requirement for English concentrators. WL:1 Cost:5 (Fader)

_Section 004. Colonialism and Nationalism in African Literature._ In this
class we will examine the spread of the English language throughout much of
Africa: we will look closely at how those who brought the language to the
continent with them adapted the land to its description and how those who
learned the language appropriated it for their own cultural purposes. This
course will cover a significant amount of historical, geographic, and literary
ground but will always be interesting to those seeking to understand the
sometimes contradictory, always problematic image of Africa in the West. There
will be three papers, a midterm, and a final exam. This course fulfills the
New Traditions Requirement for English concentrators. WL:1 (Artis)

**318\. Literary Types.** _(3). (HU). May be repeated for credit with
department permission.  
Section 001. Theatre, Ritual, Myth: A Study of Contemporary Performance Theory
_ : The course explores the nature of theater and its relationship to ritual
and myth in contemporary performance. By attending plays and ceremonies as
well as studying written and filmed accounts, we will explore a range of
performance activities that combine theater, ritual, and myth. Although some
background in theater will be helpful, the course will include an exploration
of the fundamentals of theater aesthetics. Reading will be drawn from
contemporary dramatic literature, theater theory such as Peter Brooks' _The
Empty Space_ and Artaud's _The Theater and Its Double,_ and works from
sociology and anthropology, such as Victor Turner's _From Ritual to Theatre._
We will use productions at the University and in the surrounding area as a
laboratory, attending plays by the San Francisco Mime Troupe, "El Teatro de la
Esperanza," among others, the Performance Network, and the U of M's Department
of Drama. The course method will be lecture, discussion, and demonstration.
Students will write two papers, take an exam, and make a group presentation.
WL:1 (Cohen)

_Section 002. Comedy and the Comic Muse. This course is part of the Comedy
Semester._ Comedy and the Comic Muse is a course designed for students who
want to take part in a wide-ranging and varied exploration of ideas about
comedy. Keyed to the Comedy Semester, a theme semester sponsored by LS &A, the
course will be self-contained but will also make extensive use of the special
programs and activities that will define the Comedy Semester-lectures,
exhibitions, theatre performances, and the like. Students will read widely in
comic theory and in comic literature-chiefly plays and novels; they will also
be expected to attend events related to the program of the Comedy Semester. In
most cases, these activities will overlap-e.g. two of the plays assigned for
the course will also be available in productions on campus, a major novel in
the course is written by one of the guest lecturers, films that receive
special attention in the course will be the subject of an illustrated lecture.
Thus the work of the course will be quite varied, and I will try to keep in
mind the special demands that such a course makes on students' time. Most of
our work in class will be discussion, though I will occasionally lecture.
Writing for the course will include short papers, reviews of performances and
exhibits, and-for interested students-opportunities for creative writing
designed to reflect our wide exposure to ideas about comedy. My hope is that
the course will be unusual both in its design and in the opportunities it
affords for students to become involved in a subject in a variety of ways.
Students who enroll in this class may wish to consider taking other courses in
the Comedy Semester as well. Grades will be based on written assignments,
class participation, and a final examination. WL:1 Cost:2 (Jensen)

**319\. Literature and Social Change.** _(3). (HU). May be repeated for credit
with department permission.  
Section 001. Theatre and Social Change _ : READING will involve some "non-
political" modern drama to put issues of social change in perspective; Boal,
Brecht, Kidd, and others for a background and ideas; and plays by progressive
groups of the last 25 years-guerrilla theater, Chicano theater, Baraka's
revolutionary plays, African and Nicaraguan theatre for development, AIDS
theatre, women's theatre, and contemporary community-based theatre.
PRODUCTION. Students will join one of several groups: 1) guerrilla theatre; 2)
forum theatre, to take a participatory play to local institutions of one kind
or another; 3) community-based theater, helping local people in a prison or
shelter, _etc.,_ create a play. This production will be the main thrust of the
course. Students with theatre experience are welcomed, but such experience is
not required. Required is an interest in arts and social change, a willingness
to try acting in nontraditional contexts, and the desire to shape a
performance around a cause. Grading will be based upon three short papers and
the production. See instructor for permission to enter course: 1631 Haven
Hall, Thursday 9-11 plus posted extra hours during preregistration. Cost:2 WL:
Enrollment is permission of instructor; no waitlist. (Alexander)

_Section 002. The Literature of National Identity_ : This course will examine
the complex and contradictory relation between literary texts and the question
of national identity. We will try to examine the ways in which creative
writers from a cross-section of "national" English literatures invent images
of their national identity or question existing doctrines on nationalism and
nationality. Several problems will be addressed in the course of the term:
Does the narrative of the nation demand a particular literary genre such as
the novel (often defined as the modern epic of the nation)? Do concepts of the
nation have the same meanings and implications for postcolonial writers in
Africa, India, the Caribbean, and the Pacific as they do in the Metropolitan
cultures of Europe and the United States? In what ways has the English
language been affected by its appropriation by previously colonized writers?
Above all, in what ways is the literature of national identity revised and
transformed by the affirmation (or negation) of gender, modernity, and
history? The course will try to address these questions by comparing
established texts (Dickens' _A Tale of Two Cities_ and Mrs. Gaskell's _North
and South;_ classical United States narratives on national identity (Walt
Whitman's _Leaves of Grass_ and W. E. B. Dubois' _The Souls of Black Folk_ );
modernists novels (Faulkner's _Absalom, Absalom),_ and more contemporary
"American" interventions into the discourse on national identity (Doctorow's
_Ragtime_ and Gloria Naylor's _Linden Hills_ ). These texts will be compared
and contrasted with literatures from the "new" traditions, including Wole
Soyinka's _Ake_ (Nigeria), George Lamming's _In the Castle of my Skin_ (
Barbados), Bharati Mukherjee's _The Middleman and Other Stories_ (India/USA),
and Albert Wendt's _Leaves of the Banyan Tree_ (Samoa). Our theoretical text
will be _Nation and Narration,_ edited by Homi K. Bhabha. The class will be a
combination of lectures and discussion. Assignments will include a midterm
exam, a research paper, and a final examination. This course fulfills the New
Traditions Requirement for English concentrators. WL:1 Cost:3 (Gikandi)

**320/CAAS 338. Literature in Afro-American Culture.** _(3). (HU). May be
repeated for a total of 6 credits with department permission.  
Section 001. _ This course will survey the oral and literary forms, themes and
traditions of Afro-American literature. Critical attention will be paid to the
Black oral tradition as manifest in folktales, sermons, devotional music,
blues, worksongs and contemporary forms. In addition, study of Black literate
forms such as the slave narrative and the application of the autobiography,
the autobiographical essay, the novel of confrontation and liberation, as
Afro-American authors use them to formulate Black identity and consciousness,
will also be considered. Particular attention will be paid to the special
problematic that a dual literary tradition, one based upon an oral medium, the
other upon the devices of literacy, poses for Black authors in registering the
Afro-American experience in literature. Two short papers and a research
project. This course fulfills the New Traditions requirement for English
concentrators. WL:1 Cost:3 (Chrisman)

**323\. Creative Writing.** _Junior standing and written permission of
instructor. (3). (Excl). May be repeated for credit.  
Section 001. Media and Other Arts _ : A course in mixed media composition,
especially combinations of poetry, drama, and fiction with graphic arts,
painting, music, dance, and photography. Prerequisite: experience with one or
more of these art forms and interest in exploring their relations with other
forms of art. Permission of instructor to be obtained before CRISP
registration by conference during office hours (posted on door of 2617 Haven
Hall). Requirements are explained in detail during the pre-election interview.
They include maintaining a journal of varied writing and other forms of
composition and completing a series of weekly composition projects, individual
and collaborative. Cost:1 WL:3 (Wright)

Section 002. _Fiction_ : Students are expected to maintain journals throughout
the term, to comment thoughtfully and intelligently on one another's work and
on short stories selected from the text, and, finally, to come up with
approximately fifty pages of reasonably polished fiction. Attendance at the
readings sponsored by the English Department is also encouraged. Students who
want to enroll in the course should get on the Waitlist at CRISP and bring a
manuscript to class the first evening. A list of those admitted will be posted
shortly thereafter. Cost:2 WL:1 (Ezekiel)

_Section 003. Fiction_ : This is a writing workshop designed for the graduates
of English 223 or those writers who are able to compose interesting ambitious
short stories without the benefit of a beginner's workshop. Students will be
required to attend class faithfully, to attend some of the University's
Visiting Writers Series, to read a handful of selected stories, and to produce
50 pages of typed, double-spaced, reasonably polished original fiction. The
instructor is an experienced short story writer, and as such, she will focus
almost exclusively on the craft of the story (as opposed to novel) writing.
Interested students should realize that while the required reading for this
course is light, the amount of time and energy necessary to produce 50 lively,
carefully revised pages of fiction is prodigious. Enrollment for this course
is limited. Thus, admission to the workshop will be determined by the quality
of manuscripts (no more than 10 pages) submitted to the instructor at the
first schedul

