  ![](images/ams.gif) |

##  USIA Summer Institute  
for International Professors and Scholars  
in American Studies  
  
---|---  
  
> ##  Rolling on the River: Waterways to Diversity in America

>

> **Background Information**

>

>   * [Vision and Purpose of the Summer Institute](usia.html#Vision and
Purpose of the Summer Institute)

>   * [About WMU](usia.html#About WMU)

>   * [The History of American Studies at WMU](usia.html#The History of
American Studies at Western Michigan University)

>   * [University Libraries](usia.html#University Libraries)

>   * [International Exchange at WMU](usia.html#Prior International Exchange
Experience)

>   * [Institute Directors](usia.html#Institute Directors)

>

|  **This Year's Schedule and Participants**

>

>   * Program Activities

>   * Academic Residency Component

>   * Study Tour Component

>   * Schedule

>   * Tentative Program

>   * Academic Program Session Schedule

>   * Required Reading

>   * International Colleagues

>

  
> ---|---  
>  
> ###

>

> ###  Program Activities

>

> During the academic residency component, each week will include lectures on
human movement along a major waterway and the social and cultural development
that followed and became important in American history. Lectures will move
over space from the East Coast to the West and over time from early migrations
and colonial unrest to current debates concerning gender, race, ethnicity, and
class. In addition, each week will include a special focus on an institution
that originated in a riverine or coastal area and that evolved to meet
national needs: the U.S. Constitution, Chicago politics and economy, the
University of Mississippi and the Center for the Study of Southern Culture,
and global culture and education in California.

>

> The Institute's first week, "The Atlantic Waterways to North America,"
treats, first, the development of a colonial population comprising Indians,
Europeans, and Africans in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries and,
second, the political, religious, and literary forms that arose within that
population. Europeans were not the world's first skilled maritime navigators,
but they were the first to possess both the ability to move settlers back and
forth across an ocean and the urge to resettle part of their population. The
Spanish, Dutch, French, and English all settled in North America, but each
with different intentions and results. Participants in the Summer Institute
will learn about the various motives and means of settlement as well as
settlers' various ways of relating to Indians and of procuring adequate labor
in lands that to Europeans seemed open and rich but devoid of sufficient
laborers. Indians suffered greatly from disease and abuse and Africans soon
came by sea to provide labor in many areas of North America, yet Europeans
themselves bore heavy burdens of labor indentures and disease-induced
mortality. Students should also learn that historical events have meaning not
only in themselves but in a larger system: European settlement affected
Indians everywhere, the slave trade affected African population for more than
200 years, and the American colonies were crucial to Europe. Waterways led to
a rural economy, later praised as "agrarian," in the Southern colonies, as
tobacco floated down rivers to the Atlantic for shipment to European ports.
Waterways led to urban sites in the Northern colonies as cities like Boston,
Philadelphia, and New York funneled goods between European ships and American
farms. Northern port cities also attracted the greatest variety of free men
and women of European or African background, since the ports offered both work
and the possibility of even a small community of people all of similar
background.

>

> Drawing from our first week of study, participants will be able to explain
to their students that from the rural, riverine Southern counties and the
urban, maritime North?in great measure out of a clash between these two forms
of American culture?arose some of the most conspicuous elements of American
culture. The American Revolution, in the Northern port cities, had an urban
face expressing the dissatisfaction of artisans and people who wanted a
greater say in politics, but it also had, in the Southern colonies, an
agrarian face expressing the sanctity of property (including slaves) and the
necessity of gentlemanly, orderly politics. The Constitution, with the Bill of
Rights, was in some ways a melding of these two faces of the Revolution and
proved to be an enduring means of balancing different interests in society and
politics. The failure of British colonies in the West Indies to join the
Revolution can be explained in part by their extreme dependence on maritime
trade and their lack of hinterlands to attract free, white men. Reform
movements like abolitionism were articulated on rivers and seas. Black
mariners carried information to slaves about the possibilities of freedom,
work, and dignity in different parts of the Atlantic world. Frederick Douglass
had a striking vision of freedom as he gazed at the Chesapeake Bay, he escaped
on a boat, and he sought work on docks in Massachusetts. Intent on making
waterways their own, slaves saw the path to freedom in rivers and seas.
Moreover, many white abolitionists lived in port cities, where a cosmopolitan
view of the Atlantic world at once made evident the evils of the slave trade
and suggested the value of freedom. Early American education was also
conditioned by waterways, as the scattered Southerners dismissed Jeffersonian
plans to provide public schooling, while urban Northerners fought the first
American battles over integrated public schools as children of the port
cities' black communities fostered in port cities first attended "charity"
schools and later were allowed, after great protest, to attend tax-supported
schools. Improvements in waterways and commercial uses of waterways were
contentious issues in early-national politics that were carried over into
courts and the voting booth.

>

> Participants will learn, too, the ways in which waterways came to figure in
the arts: James Fenimore Cooper saw the excesses of his society at work along
the Hudson River, yet painter Thomas Cole saw religious meaning revealed along
there; Henry David Thoreau saw water as symbolic of purity and knowledge, yet
Herman Melville saw the killing of whalers and sailors in American enterprises
at sea. Finally, in this week, participants will learn how to relate to the
great Atlantic migrations of the nineteenth century (Irish, German, Jewish) to
earlier ocean crossings and the growth of great port cities (Boston, New
Haven, New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Cincinnati, Chicago, St. Louis, New
Orleans). This first week will include orientations to the WMU campus,
library, and computer facilities.

>

> The Institute's second week, "The Great Lakes and Northern Passages into the
American Heartland," allows for the consideration of local environmental,
political, economic, social, and educational issues. Kalamazoo is a city built
along a river and, as such, grew economically through the lumber industry that
evolved into the manufacture of paper, an industry that, though lucrative, led
to the despoliation of the river (Western Michigan University's College of
Paper Technology is the major national training ground for the paper
industry). Teachers will look at the history of Kalamazoo, from its indigenous
Potawatomi Tribal culture (whose word for boiling pot was "kalamazoo,"
signifying the rising of mist from the river in the morning), through the
explorations of the French voyagers from Canada, and the arrival of Europeans
in the early nineteenth century. The city was "founded" in the 1830s as a
European settlement town and has defined itself over the last century and a
half as a blending of European (notably Dutch and later also Latvian),
African, and Indigenous American cultures. The seminar will include visits to
the city and travel on the river, allowing participants to come to know the
region, the history of the movement and merging of immigrant groups, the
efforts to adapt to the post-industrial economy of the late twentieth century,
and the local movement to restore the natural beauty and health of the river.
We will also read fiction and poetry of the region: Cooper's description of
Kalamazoo County in _Oak Openings_ , Caroline Kirkland's appeal to women in _A
New Home?Who'll Follow?_ , as well as Carl Sandburg's poem "The Sins of
Kalamazoo," and Ernest Hemingway's "Big Two-Hearted River" about fishing in
lower Michigan.

>

> Beyond the local riverine culture, the seminar will focus on the Great Lakes
Region, a maritime environment influenced and framed by an area containing
one-fifth of the world's fresh water supply. In recent years historians,
archaeologists, folklorists, and geographers have turned their attention to
the realms, communities, vessels, shipping, navigation, and resources of the
Great Lakes. Maritime environments, whether they are defined or examined
locally, regionally, or nationally, imply movement of many kinds. In this
regard, the maritime history of the Great Lakes is most poignantly revealed in
terms of inextricable interactions with natural environments, within and
between locales and regions, and, given the rise of a national economy, with
America's East and West Coasts. Institute participants will establish
reference points for understanding the history of midwestern maritime
consciousness, and, at the same time, acquire a rigorous methodology and
interpretive perspective for locally- and regionally based maritime history.
Midwestern consciousness was not solely informed by the large bodies of water
known as the "inland seas" or "sweet seas," but by rivers, lakes, and canals
that were proximate to them. Within this framework, teachers will explore the
elements of nature, intercultural contact, resource extraction, commodity
movement, technology, and material life that defined and expressed the social,
cultural, and environmental sensibility of the region and its specific
locales. We will look especially at Chicago and Detroit as representative
cities that developed industrial economies and societies and, in the late
twentieth century, became sites of conflict as those industries dried up.

>

> The Institute's third week, "Mississippi Passages between North and South,"
treats, first, the use of the Mississippi River in settlement, economic
development, and nation-building and, second, the ways typically American
forms of music, literature, politics, and race relations developed along the
river and traveled along its course. In some ways, these American forms
developed because of the river. Probably the first city on the Mississippi was
Cahokia, a settlement of native Americans who built great earthworks and
traded on the river but who dispersed before their mounds were found by the
French in the seventeenth century. Participants will learn about the
complexity of some native American societies as well as about the debate among
scholars over the numbers of indigenous people at the time of European
incursion. French and English settlers, farming along the river, made it into
an avenue of intercontinental commerce. Moreover, participants will also learn
about the evolution of the Mississippi from a colonists' river into a nation's
waterway. Beginning in the antebellum era, Americans learned how to control
the river's flow and used points along its banks like St. Louis as "gateways"
between the east and the west?passages for people and goods. The Mississippi
played a crucial role in the growth of Southern agriculture and the expansion
of slavery in the nineteenth century as steamboats carried cotton and other
staples from field to market. Moreover, native American land with access to
rivers like the Mississippi and the Tennessee became the object of white
speculators in the antebellum years as Indian removal policies led to the
forced migration of the Chocktaw, Chickasaw, Creek, and Cherokee. Both native
Americans and some white groups like the Mormons fled across the Mississippi
to escape disastrous circumstances in the east. The Mississippi, along with
the Missouri, became an instrument of nineteenth-century Manifest Destiny as
New Orleans and Fort Leavenworth became the sources for attacks on the
Mexicans in the 1840s.

>

> With a sense of the ecological and economic history of the Mississippi,
Institute participants will be able to present to their students the dynamics
of cultural flow along the river. A persistent problem in American society can
be seen in the different paths of St. Louis and East St. Louis, the former
became the vibrant "gateway to the West," while the latter, which could have
been its sister city across the river, became a poorer place
disproportionately inhabited by minorities. Yet the river has inspired
American visions: Abraham Lincoln saw in the river a symbol of both the
separation and the unity of the USA, Mark Twain immortalized the Mississippi
in travel narratives that seek to journey also into the American heart, and
runaway slaves followed the river north just as after the Reconstruction free
blacks followed it north to escape from poverty and racism in the South. As a
passage for popular music, the Mississippi has few peers, whether it appears
in Paul Robeson's "Ol' Man River," John Hurt's adopted name, or the delta
blues carried into the cities by musicians like Muddy Waters and Big Mama
Thornton. The great flood of the Mississippi in 1927 was remembered in many
blues songs, such as John Lee Hooker's elegy to a small town washed away by
the waters. New Orleans, St. Louis, and Chicago have all provided stages for
some of the greatest American music. Participants should then appreciate the
ways in which economic and cultural development led to civil rights efforts by
the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee and other groups working on the
Mississippi Delta and to agitation over the integration of the University of
Mississippi in the 1960s. We see a continuation of tumultuous relations
between different races along the Mississippi in the 1990s in the effort to
obliterate the names of slave-holders like George Washington from public
school-buildings. Yet we see also in the 1990s at the University of
Mississippi the nation's leading institution in understanding an American
region as the product of interracial interaction: the Center for the Study of
Southern Culture. Through discussion and through reading of _The Encyclopedia
of Southern Culture_ , participants will learn how this center has advanced
national self-understanding in the United States.

>

> The Institute's fourth week, "Pacific Shores or Pacific Rim?," focuses first
on the complex history of migration and settlement of the Pacific Coast, and
second, on the continuing cultural importance of the region for the nation at
large. Students should understand that from prehistory the Pacific Ocean has
been a busy highway, bringing people first from Asia and then from the rest of
the world to what is now the Pacific Coast of the United States. Many ancient
creation stories, for example, tell of how the native peoples of the Americas
arrived here from islands beyond the western ocean. Moreover, continued
intensive interaction with the Pacific led to the development of distinctive
maritime cultures all along the American Pacific Coast, ranging from the
Tlingit in Alaska to the Chumash of Southern California. Much later, the ocean
currents brought Spanish settlement from Mexico and Russian settlement from
Siberia, setting off European competition for this strategic region. As the
gateway to Asia and Asian markets, the Pacific Coast eventually attracted the
interest of England and the United States as well. Using the inland waterways
of the Far West, especially the Columbia River, the Lewis and Clark expedition
forged an overland link between the eastern United States and the Pacific
Northwest in the early nineteenth century. It was not until the middle of that
century, however, when the California Gold Rush inspired massive numbers of
U.S. citizens to travel "around the Horn," that the United States secured
political control over much of the region. The subsequent commercial
exploitation of the West stimulated yet another Pacific migration, that of the
Chinese and Japanese, who, among other things, brought a new religious
diversity to the American Far West. Ultimately, however, Asian immigration ran
into a backlash of political fears and cultural anxiety on the part of
European Americans. Free immigration was curtailed, and while America expanded
across the Pacific into Asia, Americans in the West have ever since tried to
hold the line against what they perceive as "foreign" expansionism into
America.

>

> In addition to this background, Institute participants should also be able
to introduce their students to the special, if contradictory, place the region
has had in the American imagination. For Richard Henry Dana, author of _Two
Years Before the Mast_ , the sea journey to California represented an escape
from the oppressive antebellum America East into the relative freedom of the
Hispanic West. For Mary Austin, the author of _The Land of Little Rain_ , a
similar journey represented a flight to a different kind of freedom---freedom
from the constraining gender roles of Victorian America. And yet for still
others, such as the poet Robinson Jeffers, the Pacific West was "continent's
end," and thus a metaphor for the exhaustion of humanity and the necessity for
a radical re-orientation towards the "transhuman magnificence" of nature. Most
Americans, however, saw the Pacific Coast simply as "the nation's other
shore," the culmination and capstone of America's Manifest Destiny. For this
reason, the American Pacific Coast has become symbolic of both the worst and
the best possibilities for America at large. This is especially true as the
region experiences a renewal of large-scale Hispanic and Asian migration.
Participants will therefore come to understand why issues related to education
in California---issues such as bilingualism and Affirmative Action---have
become so bitterly divisive, contributing to increased racial and ethnic
polarization not only in the West, but in the nation at large. Conversely,
participants will also investigate how some Pacific port cities such as Los
Angeles have taken globalization seriously and have sought to develop civic
models that will allow all Americans to meet the challenges of living and
working in a world where the distinctions "domestic" and "overseas" have
largely become meaningless.

>

> ###  Academic Residency Component

>

> The academic residency component will run from June 26 (when participants
arrive in Kalamazoo) to July 23, 1999 (when participants complete academic
residency component). The program begins with three orientation sessions on
June 27. First, the academic co-directors, Dr. John Saillant and Dr. Brian
Wilson, will be introduced. They will give a general overview of the
Institute, its goals and expectations for the participants, and discuss the
schedule and assignments for the course. Participants will be provided with a
copy of the syllabus in the pre-program mailing, facilitating a discussion of
the over-arching themes and sub-themes of the course. Drs. Saillant and Wilson
will also discuss the opportunities for individual study and research, and the
place of American Studies in the curriculum at Western Michigan University.
The first session will conclude with a brief discussion of American culture in
general and the American Midwest in particular, as well as a physical
orientation to the Western Michigan University Campus and Kalamazoo.

>

> Two sessions on June 28 and June 29 will be orientations to the computer
facilities and the libraries at Western Michigan University. The computer
orientation will be conducted at the Bernhard Center computing facility.
E-mail accounts and Internet access will be established at this time, and
participants will be instructed in their use. Throughout the Summer
Institute's academic component, participants will have access to the Bernhard
Computing facility, as well as to computers in Waldo library in order to
pursue their research and to communicate with family and colleagues at their
home institutions. The library orientation will be conducted at Waldo Library
and will introduce the participants to both the printed and on-line resources,
special collections and archives, as well as the inter-library loan system at
the University. Library cards will be issued at this time and the University's
borrowing policies explained.

>

> A typical day during the academic residency component consists of three
class meetings, two in the morning and one in the afternoon. Course meetings
will be held in a classroom dedicated to that purpose in the centrally-located
Bernhard Student Center. Class format maintains a balance between traditional
lecture style and more interactive learning approaches: historical problem
solving, computer-aided presentations, group analysis of documents and
artifacts, and small group discussion in order to develop critical thinking
skills. Participants will be provided at the beginning of each class period
with a brief abstract/outline of the following lecture, as well as suggestions
for further reading from the selected bibliography. Lectures will be
supplemented by additional handouts, usually reproductions of primary
documents both textual and graphic, as well as slides and short video clips.
Occasionally, an entire class period will be devoted to viewing and discussing
an entire video. Since videos will be used to highlight material already
discussed earlier in the day, discussion can focus on both content and the
possible pedagogical uses of such videos in the participants' own classes at
their home institutions.

>

> Generally, Tuesday and Thursday afternoons will be devoted to research time,
although optional tours will be offered. One such tour will be of the
Kalamazoo area. Directed by the local historian, Dr. Peter Schmitt, the
Kalamazoo tour will begin at Bronson Park, containing not only an Indian
burial mound, but also surrounded by some of the oldest and most significant
religious architecture in the city, most of which dates back to the second-
half of the nineteenth century. Another afternoon tour will include a canoe
trip down the Kalamazoo River with attention to the factory system that
developed here in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries and the
current attempts to revivify the river as part of the state superfund clean up
of industrial pollution (President Clinton delivered a speech on the
environment along the banks of the Kalamazoo River in the working-class
community of Comstock in 1996).

>

> Weekends will include optional bus tours to significant waterways of the
Midwest, bringing together the various ways of considering water in American
studies. We will literally travel to and on rivers and lakes, at the same time
that we discuss their utility as modes of transportation for indigenous and
immigrant groups, bringing raw materials for industry and laborers from around
the world, allowing European American populations to move westward and African
Americans to escape to the North. In our readings, lectures, and tours,
participants will also be asked to think about the ways that water serves as a
metaphor for the blending of ethnic, racial, economic, and religious groups in
the United States. We have in mind, not so much a "melting pot" as a flowing
river as our cultural symbol, a river that carries in its current many diverse
peoples and ideas.

>

> The first weekend trip, July 3 and 4, Katherine Joslin will conduct a tour
of Chicago, one that focuses attention on its ethnic neighborhoods and the
historic merging of immigrant groups. We will drive west to Chicago, where we
will visit the DuSable Museum of African American History, Jane Addams' Hull
House Museum, the Chicago Historical Society, and travel by boat up the
Chicago River. We will celebrate the Fourth of July in Chicago. The second
weekend trip will begin in Fennville, MI, with a visit to the pottery studio
of Native American artist Ed Gray (his tribal name is Miskwabik), a member of
the Ojibway Tribe; he is also an AIDS activist. Mr. Gray will show us his
studio, discuss his methods, and talk to the participants about his art and
the Ojibway view of the issues concerning the Great Lakes Region. From
Fennville, participants will then canoe down the Kalamazoo River to Saugatuck,
where they will spend the evening on the shores of Lake Michigan. On Sunday,
participants will then travel to South Haven, where Michael Chiarappa will
introduce them to the maritime history of Michigan by touring the Great Lakes
Maritime Museum.

>

> One of the strengths of the Western Michigan University Summer Institute is
the provision for intensive advising for the participants. The academic co-
directors will hold daily scheduled office hours and be available for general
advising, guidance to on- and off-campus archives and repositories,
facilitating contact with appropriate scholars at other institutions, and
aiding in the selection and acquisition of additional materials (books,
photocopied materials, slides, videos, computer software, etc.) for use in the
participant's home institution. In addition, the academic co-directors will
endeavor to lay the groundwork for continued scholarly contact, both between
the participants themselves, as well as the American academic community in the
creation and maintenance of an American Studies Web Site, one that will begin
with a posting of all project papers/curricula written during the Institute.
Most importantly, however, each participant will be assigned an individual
faculty colleague who will work intensively with the participant to develop
research projects and curriculum development. As can be seen in the appendix,
adequate time has been programmed into the schedule to allow participants to
present the results of their research and/or curriculum development projects.

>

> In addition, throughout the academic residency component of the Summer
Institute, the Project Director will be available for regular consultation,
both individually and jointly, by the participants. As the appendix indicates,
the Summer Institute provides for weekly breakfast meetings with the Project
Director at which administrative issues can be discussed and feedback
received. Participants will also have the opportunity to formally evaluate the
Summer Institute at the end of the academic residency component on August 1.
Moreover, the academic co-directors will sponsor two evening gatherings in
their homes, and the academic residency component will conclude with a
farewell dinner to be held the evening of August 1.

>

> ###  Study Tour Component

>

> The Summer Institute will culminate in a cross-country bus tour, following
the waterways of the Midwest back to their eastern source, the Atlantic Ocean,
providing Institute participants the opportunity to see rivers, lakes, canals,
and towns that have featured in the course materials during the initial four
weeks. Brian Wilson will travel with the group during the two weeks; Katherine
Joslin and John Saillant will also direct segments of the tour. Driving first
to Detroit, we will tour the Henry Ford Museum as a way of further
understanding movement in American culture, the necessity of waterways in
bringing industry to Detroit and the significance of Henry Ford's automobile
that allowed flexible overland travel. On the drive from Detroit to New York
City, we will stop at Cleveland's Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, at Niagara
Falls, and also Seneca Falls (with its museum of feminist history); since we
will travel from Buffalo to Albany, we will stop to see remnants of the Erie
Canal; and we will stay overnight in Cooperstown for a visit to James Fenimore
Cooper's house and the Baseball Hall of Fame. In New York City, Katherine
Joslin will conduct a tour that will include a visit to Ellis Island to search
its archive for groups and families that made their way through New York and
to the Tenement House Museum on the Lower East Side to see where immigrants
lived along the way; we will also go to Harlem to tour the neighborhoods and
to the Metropolitan Museum of Art. The group will drive to Philadelphia and
Independence Hall where Brian Wilson will review the city's significance as
the site of constitutional argument and compromise. Ending the tour in
Washington, DC, John Saillant will guide day-trips to Williamsburg, Jamestown,
and Mount Vernon. In Washington, Brian Wilson will take the group through the
Smithsonian Institution, the National Museum of American History, the
Holocaust Museum and to the Vietnam Veteran's Memorial. The tour will conclude
with a meeting at the office of the United States Information Agency, after
which participants will depart for home.

>

> ###  Schedule

>

> Prior to April 26, 1999 Pre-program Mailing to Participants  
> May 1, 1999 Initial Website Published  
> June 26, 1999 Participants Arrive in Kalamazoo---Welcome/Briefing  
> June 27, 1999 Academic Residency Begins  
> July 23, 1999 Summer Institute Evaluation---Study Tour Preparation  
> July 24, 1999 Study Tour Departs  
> August 2, 1999 Arrival in Washington, D.C.  
> August 6, 1999 Meet with USIA Representatives  
> August 7, 1999 Leave for Home  
> Until August 7, 2000 Continuing Contact with Participants

>

> ###  Tentative Program

>

>  
> Dr. Katherine Joslin, Department of English  
> Dr. Howard J. Dooley, Department of History and Executive Director of
International Affairs  
> Dr. John Saillant, Departments of English and History  
> Dr. Brian Wilson, Department of Comparative Religion  
> JoNina Abron, Department of English, Journalist  
> Dr. Tom Bailey, Department of English  
> Dr. Linda Borish, Department of History  
> Dr. Lewis H. Carlson, Department of History  
> Dr. Michael Chiarappa, Department of History  
> Dr. Janet Coryell, Department of History  
> Stuart Dybek, Department of English, Fiction Writer  
> Dr. James M. Ferreira, Department of History  
> Dr. Vyacheslav Karpov, Department of Sociology  
> Dr. Trent Kyniston, Department of Music, Saxophonist  
> Dr. Irma Lopez, Department of Foreign Languages and Literatures  
> Dean James Petersen, College of Arts and Sciences and Department of
Sociology  
> Dr. Gwen Raaberg, Director of Center for Women's Studies  
> Dr. Chester B. Rogers, Department of Political Science  
> Dr. Peter Schmitt, Department of History  
> Dr. Benjamin Wilson, Department of Black American Studies  
> Dr. Elena Lisovskaya, Departments of Education and Professional Development  
> David Issacson, Reference Librarian, Waldo Library, Western Michigan
University  
> Dr. Richard Wright, Director, Computing and Communication Services  
> Mark S. Liberacki, Computing Services, College of Arts and Sciences  
> Gladys Cardiff, ABD, Department of English, WMU, Native American Poet  
> Ed Gray, Native American Metalworker and Potter  
> Cybelle Shattuck, ABD., Department of Religious Studies, UC Santa Barbara,
Specialist in the Religions of South Asia.

>

> ###  Academic Program Session Schedule

>

> Arrival, Kalamazoo, MI, June 26, 1999

>

> Orientation, June 27, 1999

>

> 11:00-12:30 Welcome by Timothy Light, Provost, and Introduction of Project
Team, Katherine Joslin, John Saillant, and Brian Wilson

>

> I. The Atlantic Waterways to North America

>

> Day 1, June 28, 1999

>

> 11:00-12:30 Atlantic Migration to the Americas: John Saillant  
> Reading: "The First Americans," "Settlements in the Spanish Borderlands,"
"British Settlements," and "The Slave Trade," _Encyclopedia of the North
American Colonies,_ editor in chief, Jacob Ernest Cooke. New York: Charles
Scribner's Sons, 1993, pp. 15-66, 113-132, 155-200.  
> Web Resources: H-NET Gateway to [Migration and
Ethnicity](http://www.h-net.msu.edu/gateways/migration)

>

> 2:00-3:30 Campus Computer Facilities Orientation: Mark S. Liberacki,
Computing Services, and John Saillant

>

> Day 2, June 29, 1999

>

> 9:00-10:30 Religious Diversity on the Colonial American Shore: Brian Wilson  
> Reading: Selections from Catherine Albanese, _America: Religions and
Religion_ , 2nd Edition. Belmont: Wadsworth Publishing Co., 1992.

>

> 2:00-3:30 Library Tour: David Issacson  
> Web Resources: University Libraries _<http://www.wmich.edu/library/>_

>

> Day 3, June 30, 1999

>

> 9:00-10:30 Social and Economic Diversity in the Colonial, Coastal, and
Riverine  
> Settlements: John Saillant  
> Reading: "Interracial Societies," "Repeopling the Land," _Encyclopedia of
the North American Colonies,_ pp. 155-184. "Cities by the Sea," _Who Built
America?,_ pp. 97-109.

>

> 11:00-12:30 Religion and Education: Elena Lisovskaya  
> Reading: Peter Mitchel, "Protestantism and Educational Provision" in W.
Tulasiewicz and Cho-Yee To, _World Religions and Educational Practice_ (New
York: Cassell, 1993), pp. 125-135.

>

> 2:00-3:30 Looking Back across the Atlantic: American Notions of Literature:
K. Joslin  
> Readings: _Norton Anthology, Vol I_ , poems by Anne Bradstreet, 212, Edward
Taylor, 292, and Phyllis Wheatley, 821; Emerson, "Self-Reliance," 1045-61,
Cooper, from _Notions of the Americans_ , 937; Hawthorne, "The May-Pole of
Merry Mount," 1207-1214, Whitman, "Crossing Brooklyn Ferry," 2108 2112;
Dickinson, # 303, p. 2450

>

> Day 4, July 1, 1999

>

> 9:00-10:30 The Declaration of Independence and the Constitution: A New Way
of Thinking About People's Relationship to Government: Chester Rogers  
> Reading: Selections from Lawrence J. R. Herson, _The Politics of Ideas:
Political Theory and American Public Policy_ (Prospect Heights, Ill.: Waveland
Press, 1990).

>

> 2:00-4:00 Rare Book Room Visit: Thomas Amos; Regional Archive: Sharon
Carlson

>

> Day 5, July 2, 1999

>

> 9:00-10:30 The Changing Meanings of Equality and Inalienable Rights:
Nineteenth and Twentieth Century Developments: Neil Pinney  
> Reading: Selections from Lawrence J. R. Herson, _The Politics of Ideas:
Political Theory and American Public Policy_ (Prospect Heights, Ill.: Waveland
Press, 1990).

>

> 11:00-12:30 Ethnic Maritimes: John Saillant  
> Reading: "Industrial and Urban Growth," "Paths to Wage Labor," "Immigrants
and Social Structure," _Who Built America?,_ pp. 213-220, 238 256, 264-268.
"River Life," "Chesapeake Bay," "Creolization," "Maritime Tradition,"
_Encyclopedia of Southern Culture,_ pp. 147-149, 356, 379, 637-639.

>

> Web Resources: Ellis Island Foundation, Inc. _<http://www.ellisisland.com>_

>

> 2:00-3:30 Continuity and Change in Mass Political Culture in the United
States: Vyacheslav Karpov  
> Reading: Paul DiMaggio, John Evans and Bethany Bryson, "Have Americans'
Social Attitudes Become More Polarized?", _American Journal of Sociology_ ,
Vol. 102, No. 3, pp. 690-755.

>

> Day 6, July 3, 1999

>

> 8:00-9:00 Breakfast and Conversation with Project Team.

>

> 9:30 Optional Tour of Chicago, Departure  
> Afternoon DuSable Museum of African American History, Hull House, and Terra
Museum  
> Evening Fireworks; Overnight Chicago

>

> Day 7, July 4, 1999

>

> 10:00 Chicago Pops Concert, with Jesse Jackson, Jr.  
> 1:00 Chicago Historical Society, Fireworks, Return Home

>

> II. The Great Lakes and Northern Passages into the American Heartland

>

> Day 8, July 5, 1999

>

> 9:00-10:30 Great Lakes and the Cultural History of Movement: Kristin
Szylvian  
> Reading: Selections from Michael Ashworth, _The Late, Great Lakes: An
Environmental History_ (Detroit: Wayne State UP, 1987)

>

> 11:00-12:30 Autos and Steel: The Making of the Industrial Heartland: David
Lyon  
> Reading: "Changing Patterns of Social Life," "Railroads and the West,"
"Industry and Workers," "Workers' Struggles," _Who Built America?,_ pp.
269-299, 516-538.

>

> 2:00-3:30 Localism and Centralism in American Public Education: Elena
Lisovskaya  
> Reading: John Taylor Gato,"Some Thoughts on the National Socialization of
Children." _The Journal of Alternative Education_ , Vol. 12, No. 3, pp. 32-56;
Ronald Corwin and M. Dianda. "What Can We Really Expect from Large-scale
Voucher Programs?" _Phi Delta Kappan_ , Vol. 75, No. 1, pp. 68-74.

>

> Day 9, July 6, 1999

>

> 9:00-10:30 Kalamazoo: A City and Its River from Industrial Despoliation to
Superfund Cleanup: Peter Schmitt  
> Web Resources: Kalamazoo History _<http://www.rootsweb.com/~mikalama/>_

>

> 11:00-12:00 Coast of Chicago: Stu Dybek Reading

>

> 2:00-3:30 Sport History Movements: Linda Borish

>

> Day 10, July 7, 1999

>

> 9:00-10:30 Block by Block: Ethnic Neighborhoods in Chicago: Katherine Joslin  
> Reading: Selections from Jane Addams, _The Spirit of Youth and the City
Streets_ (handout)

>

> 11:00-12:30 Boss Tweed to Boss Daley: Machine Politics: Chester Rogers  
> Reading: "The Great Upheavals," "A New Urban World," _Who Built America?,_
pp. 109-158, 178-184.

>

> Web Resources: Chicago Historical Society _<http://www.chicagohs.org>_

>

> 2:00-3:30 "Hog Butcher" and Other Metaphors: Chicago Writers: Katherine
Joslin  
> Reading: _Norton Anthology, Vol II_ , Carl Sandburg, "Chicago," p.
1139,"Halstead Street Car," p. 1140; Richard Wright, from _Native Son_ Brooks,
"The Vacant Lot," p. 2506, "To the Diaspora,"p. 2512; Stuart Dybek, from _The
Coast of Chicago_ (handout)

>

> Day 11, July 8, 1999

>

> 9:00-10:30 One Fifth of the World's Fresh Water: Ecology of the Great Lakes:
Dave Dickason  
> Reading: Selections from William Ashworth, _The Late, Great Lakes._

>

> Afternoon Battle Creek Tour: Michael Nassaney and Brian Wilson

>

> 8:00 Theatrical Performance on Routes North in the Underground Railroad: Von
Washington

>

> Day 12, July 9 , 1999

>

> 9:00-10:30 Federalism and Localism in American Life: Neil Pinney  
> Reading: "The Great Depression and the First New Deal," "The Second New
Deal," _Who Built America?,_ pp. 317-372, 374-383.

>

> 11:00-12:30 Black Migration to Northern Cities: Ben Wilson  
> Reading: "Black Migration," "Blacks in Northern Cities," _Encyclopedia of
Southern Culture,_ pp. 181-183, 238-246. Selections from John Hope Franklin,
_From Slavery to Freedom: a History of African Americans_ (New York : McGraw-
Hill, 1994).

>

> 2:00-3:30 Social Inequality and Poverty in America: Vyacheslav Karpov  
> Reading: A. Currie and B. Skolnick, "Social Inequality I: Wealth and
Poverty," Chapter 4 (83-117) in _America's Social Problems_ (NY: Longman,
1997)  
>  Web Resources: U.S. Government Census _<http://www.census.gov/>_

>

> Day 13, July 10, 1999

>

> 7:00-8:00 Breakfast and conversation with Project Team.

>

> 8:00 Optional Tour to Lake Michigan  
> Morning Ed Gray's Studio, Fennville, Michigan

>

> Day 14, July 11, 1999

>

> 2:00-5:00 Canoe Trip on the Kalamazoo River

>

> III. Mississippi Passages Between North and South Day 15, July 12, 1999

>

> 9:00-10:30 Migrations along the Mississippi: John Saillant  
> Reading: "Migration Patterns," "Cherokee Settlement," "Trail of Tears,"
_Encyclopedia of Southern Culture,_ pp. 551-552, 567-568, 704-705. Timothy R.
Mahoney, "Urban History in a Regional Context: River Towns on the Upper
Mississippi, 1840-1860," _Journal of American History,_ Vol. 72, No. 2, pp.
318-339.

>

> 11:00-12:30 Mormons from the Mississippi to the Great Salt Lake: Brian
Wilson  
> Reading: Selections from Catherine Albanese, _America: Religions and
Religion_ , 2nd Edition. Belmont: Wadsworth Publishing Co., 1992.

>

> 2:00-3:30 Seneca Falls and the Movement of Women into the Public Sphere:
Gwen Raaberg  
> Reading: Elizabeth Cady Stanton on the Seneca Falls Convention (handout)

>

> Day 16, July 13, 1999

>

> 9:00-10:30 The Midwest and the Mississippi in the National Conflict: The
Civil War:  
> Janet CoryellReading: "Civil War," "Confederate States of America,"
"Reconstruction," _Encyclopedia of Southern Culture,_ pp. 603-609, 658-660.
"The Civil War: America's Second Revolution," _Who Built America?,_ pp.
417-465.

>

> Web Resources: Valley of the Shadow
_<http://jefferson.village.Virginia.EDU/vshadow2>_

>

> Afternoon Research Time.

>

> Day 17, July 14, 1999

>

> 9:00-10:30 Urban Life on the Mississippi: John Saillant  
> Reading: "Sharecropping and Tenancy," "Mardi Gras Indians," _Encyclopedia of
Southern Culture,_ pp. 29-31, 218-219. Dennis C. Rousey, "Aliens in the WASP
Nest: Ethnocultural Diversity in the Antebellum Urban South," _Journal of
American History,_ Vol. 79, No. 1, pp. 152-164. Selection on East St. Louis
from _Crusade for Justice: The Autobiography of Ida B. Wells,_ editor Alfreda
M. Duster. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970.

>

> 11:00-12:30 Music of the Mississippi: Trent Kyniston  
> Reading: "Blues," "Storytelling," "Jazz," "Blues-singing Women,"
_Encyclopedia of Southern Culture,_ pp. 488-492, 995-998, 1014-1018, 1531
1532. Selection from Timothy E. Schewier, _Born in the U.S.A.: The Myth of
America in Popular Music from Colonial Times to the Present._ Jackson:
University Press of Mississippi, 1991.

>

> 2:00-3:30 The Literary Portraits of the Mississippi and the South: Katherine
Joslin  
> Reading: Mark Twain, _Huckleberry Finn_ (read prior to Institute), Kate
Chopin, _The Awakening,_ Zora Neale Hurston, _Their Eyes Were Watching God_

>

> Day 18, July 15, 1999

>

> 9:00-10:30 Racial Conflict and Cooperation: Ben Wilson

>

> Reading: "Black Codes," "Slave Codes," "Black Landownership," "Lynching,"
_Encyclopedia of Southern Culture,_ pp. 819, 831, 168-170, 174 176. Selections
from John Hope Franklin, _From Slavery to Freedom: a History of African
Americans_ (New York : McGraw-Hill, 1994).

>

> 11:00-12:30 Freedom Riders: University of Mississippi and the Progress of
Civil Rights: James Petersen  
> Reading: "The Rights-Conscious 1960s," _Who Built America?,_ pp. 543-608.  
> Web Resources: _<http://www.mecca.org/~crights/cyber.html>_

>

> Day 19, July 16, 1999

>

> 9:00-10:30 Changing Attitudes toward Race: Vyacheslav Karpov  
> Reading: Sears, Van Laar, Carrillo, and Kosterman, "Is It Really Racism? The  
> Origins of White Americans' Opposition to Race-Targeted Policies,"  
> _Public Opinion Quarterly_ , 61, 1 (Spring, 1997), 16-53

>

> 11:00-12:30 Race, Ethnicity, and Education: Elena Lisovskaya  
> Reading: Joel Spring, "Equality of Educational Opportunity" in J. Strouse,
ed.) _Exploring Themes of Social Justice in Education_. Merrill, Prentice
Hall, 1997, pp. 224-256; James Anderson, "Power, Privilege, and Public
Education: Reflections on 'Savage Inequalities'." _Educational Theory_ , Vol.
43, No. 1 (Winter 1993), pp. 1-10.

>

> Day 20, July 17, 1999

>

> 8:00-9:00 Breakfast with Institute Director

>

> Research Time

>

> Day 21, July 18, 1999

>

> 11:00 Trip to Great Lakes Maritime Museum

>

> IV. Pacific Shores or Pacific Rim? Day 22, July 19, 1999

>

> 9:00-10:30 Native American Art: Glays Cardiff

>

> 11:00-12:30 Voyaging to the Island of Queen Califa: Hispanics in California:
Irma Lopez  
> Reading: Selections from Douglas Monroy, _Thrown Among Strangers: The Making
of Mexican Culture in Frontier California_ (Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1990).

>

> 2:00-3:30 Dharma in the Golden State: Asian Religions in California: Cybelle
Shattuck  
> Reading: Selections from Catherine Albanese, _America: Religions and
Religion_ , 2nd Edition. Belmont: Wadsworth Publishing Co., 1992.

>

> Day 23, July 20, 1999

>

> 9:00-10:30 American Music: Lew Carlson and James Ferreira

>

> 11:00-12:30 Multicultural education: Elana Lisovskaya

>

> Afternoon Research Time

>

> Day 24, July 21, 1999

>

> 9:00-10:30 The Black Panthers and the Schools: JoNina Abron  
> Reading: Selections from her book manuscript on her experiences in the Black
Panthers

>

> 11:00-12:30 Women, Migration, and Movement West: Katherine Joslin  
> Reading: Selections from Susan Roberson, ed., _Women, Migration, and
Movement: Women and Relocation_ (University of Missouri Press, 1998).

>

> 2:00-3:30 Contemporary Nature Writing in the West: Tom Bailey  
> Reading: Selections from Norman Maclean, _A River Runs through It_ (handout)

>

> Day 25, July 22, 1999

>

> 9:00-10:30 Participant Presentations of Research/Curriculum Development

>

> 11:00-12:30 Participant Presentations of Research/Curriculum Development
Projects.

>

> 2:00-3:30 Participant Presentations of Research/Curriculum Development
Projects.

>

> 7:00 Farewell Dinner

>

> Day 26, July 23, 1999

>

> 9:30-11:30 Summer Institute Evaluation

>

> Afternoon Study Tour Preparation

>

> Evening Farewell Dinner with Project Team and Staff

>

> Study Tour Schedule

>

> Day 1, July 24, 1999  
> Morning: Depart for Detroit, The Henry Ford Museum  
> Afternoon: Travel to Cleveland, Overnight  
> Day 2, July 25, 1999  
> Morning: The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame  
> Afternoon: Depart for Niagara Falls, Overnight

>

> Day 3, July 26, 1999  
> Morning: Depart for Seneca Falls, Visit to Women's Museum  
> Afternoon: Travel to Cooperstown, Stop at Site of Erie Canal, Overnight

>

> Day 4, July 27, 1999  
> Morning: James Fenimore Cooper's House  
> Afternoon: The Baseball Hall of Fame, Travel into New York City

>

> Day 5, July 28, 1999  
> Morning: Walk in Central Park, Visit the Metropolitan Museum of Art  
> Afternoon: Free Time

>

> Day 6, July 29, 1999  
> Morning: Tenement House Museum, 97 Orchard Street  
> Afternoon: Trip to Ellis Island  
> Day 7, July 30, 1999  
> Morning: Tour of Harlem, including neighborhoods and the Mt. Nebo Baptist
Church  
> Afternoon: Free Time

>

> Day 8, July 31, 1999  
> Morning: Depart for Philadelphia  
> Afternoon: Independence Hall

>

> Day 9, August 1, 1999  
> Morning: Tour of the Philadelphia  
> Afternoon: Guided Tour of Historic Homes

>

> Day 10, August 2, 1999  
> Morning: Depart for Washington, DC  
> Afternoon: Smithsonian Institution

>

> Day 11, August 3, 1999  
> Morning: Depart for Day Trip to Williamsburg  
> Afternoon: Tour of preserved Eighteenth-Century Village

>

> Day 12, August 4, 1999  
> Morning: Depart for Day Trip to Jamestown  
> Afternoon: Walking Tour

>

> Day 13, August 5, 1999  
> Morning: Depart for Day-Trip to Mount Vernon  
> Afternoon: Return to Washington, National Museum

>

> Day 14, August 6, 1999  
> Meeting with Representatives of the United States Information Agency

>

> Day 15, August 7, 1999  
> Depart for Home

>

> ###  Required Reading Provided by WMU to Participants

>

>  
> Catherine L. Albanese, _America: Religions and Religion_ , 2nd Edition.
Belmont: Wadsworth Publishing Co., 1992.

>

> Nina Baym, _et al,_ , eds, _The Norton Anthology of American Literature_ ,
Vols. I and II. New York: Norton, 1994.

>

> Steven Brier _et al, Who Built America?_ New York: Pantheon Books, 1989, 2
volumes.

>

> Kate Chopin, _The Awakening: Complete, Authoritative Text with Biographical_
and Historical Contexts, Critical History, and Essays from Five Contemporary
Critical Perspectives. Boston: Bedford Books of St. Martin's Press, 1993.

>

> _The Encyclopedia of Southern Culture,_ ed. Charles Reagan Wilson and
William Ferris. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1989.

>

> John Hope Franklin, _From Slavery to Freedom: a History of African
Americans_. New York : McGraw-Hill, 1994.

>

> Zora Neale Hurston, _Their Eyes Were Watching God._ 1937; Harper & Row,
1990.

>

> Mark Twain, _The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn: A Case Study in Critical
Controversy_ , Gerald Graff and James Phelan (eds.), New York: St. Martin's,
1995.

>

> In addition, participants will also be provided with a reader containing
articles and other daily readings not found in the required books above.  
>  
>  
>

>

> ![](images/usiascholars.jpeg)

>

> Participants.

>

> ###  International Colleagues

>

> **Lucia Helena de Azevedo, Vilela, Brazil:**  
>  I am from Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil. I teach North American
literature at the Federal University of Minas Gerais. My current research
project is in Native Studies, a comparative study of Brazilian and North
American writings, _Silent Nations: A Comparative Study of the Creation
Stories of the Native Peoples of Brazil, the United States, and Canada._ I
have just started to investigate notions of cultural purity, authenticity, and
cross-cultural imagination in two Native American works, Leslie Marmon Silko's
_Ceremony_ and N. Scott Momaday's _House Made of Dawn._ In a postmodern
perspective, differences brought into creative contact allow "contamination"
to be a literary strategy. My doctoral study was in Comparative Literature. My
dissertation, "Alchemical Treasures: Transtextuality in J. G. Rosa and W. B.
Yeats" (1996), illustrates translation and literary creation as processes of
rereading and rewriting the universal cultural legacy.

>

> **Phiri Bizeck, Zambia** , Shu Hua Chung, Taiwan:  
> Beginning in 1982, I studied English and American literature at the National
Chunghsing University and the Chinese Culture University. Then I went to Paris
for a comparative study of English, Chinese, and French literatures at the
Institute of Comparative Literature of Paris III Nouvelle-Sorbonne University.
At the Far East Institute of the National College of Oriental Languages and
Civilizations, I learned how to translate classical Chinese literature into
French. In 1994, I returned to Taiwan with the _Diplome d'etude approfondie._
Now I teach French at the National Chiaotung University and English at the
Kaohsiung Medical College. I hope to write on the theme of identity in St.
Jean de Crevecoeur's _Letters from an American Farmer._

>

> **Boonruang Chunsuvimol, Thailand:**  
>  My specialty is sociolinguistics and I received my degrees in Australia
(linguistics and French), Singapore (applied linguistics), and Thailand
(linguistics). My major studies in American writings have been of linguists
like Bloomfield, Chomsky, and Labov. I am now director of the Thammasat
University's British and North American Studies International Programme for
undergraduates and will come to the USA to learn how to add to our programme.

>

> **Larisa Codiacova, Moldova**

>

> **Simone Cinotto, Italy:**  
>  I graduated in 1996 with a thesis on the image of Italian Americans in
recent Hollywood films and kept focusing my research on Italian migration to
North America and the Italian American experience. My doctoral dissertation
(University of Genoa) treats the role of food in "building" Italian American
ethnicity in 1930s New York. I explore food in family, community, and economic
contexts. In the USA, I hope to examine the impact of ethnic enclaves in the
urban landscape and the importance of ethnic stores and institutions in
creating (or replicating) a familiar environment as well as in drawing
boundaries between groups. I am also interested in Italian American
"masculinity," in intergenerational cultural transmission and memories and
uses of the past in immigrant families, and in first-generation and second-
generation immigrants as consumers. Consumption can be an avenue to
assimilation, though resistance to consumption exists too.

>

> **Nandana Dutta, India**

>

> **Marina Victorovna Fedosik, Belarus:**  
>  I graduated from Minsk State Linguistics University in British Area Studies
and now I work there. My research interests are in American literature and
American Studies. I also work at the American Studies Centre of the European
Humanities University. Now I am studying the works of Ishmael Reed, so I would
like to return to Belarus with material about them along with material for a
new comprehensive course in American Studies to be taught at the European
Humanities University.

>

> **Dorra Kammon, Tunisia:** I have been teaching US history as an assistant
lecturer for a few years to students preparing a BA in Humanities. I have a
doctorate in American Studies from the University of Sorbonne Louvelle, Paris
III, with a thesis on American strategy in Africa. Now my scholarly interests
are in the effect of immigration on American society, religion, education,
politics, economics, and human rights. In 1998, we initiated a new curriculum
designed to integrate history, religion, culture, economy, and human rights in
a four-year track in American Studies. The first year involves a course on
race, gender, and human rights in America as

