HISTORY 543 (61) MASTER OF LIBERAL STUDIES 666 (61)     American Decorative
Arts Fall 2000







Dr. Michael Cahall

Office: 427 College Hall
Office Hours:  
Telephone: (412) 396-6474 (o)
Mon. 11:00-12:00  
                 (412) 344-1272 (h)                                                          Tues. 4:00-5:00   
E-Mail: Cahall@duq.edu
Wed. 11:00-12:00  
                                                                                                          Fri. 11:00-12:00   
                                                                                                          And by Appointment 



**_COURSE OVERVIEW:_**

        In this course, we will explore the objects, of various materials, with which Americans, from the arrival of English colonists up to the beginning of World War II, have surrounded themselves. Two characteristics that separate the decorative from the fine arts are the utilitarian nature of most of the pieces and the importance of the surrounding environment to the object itself; we will be looking at pieces that were made to be used in the home. In addition to style, which is always important, we will also look at the technology of producing these pieces and how they reflect other aspects of the society in which they were created and used.   
        The main vehicle for this look into the American past will be classroom lectures, illustrated with slides. Your main activity during these lectures should be looking and listening, not necessarily taking extensive notes. You should familiarize yourself first with the larger characteristics of shape and proportion which are important determinants of style, and then look for the details that might provide clues to differences in time and region of construction. The notes you take should simply remind you of these points or provide examples to support them.   
        The goal of this class is to give you an introductory knowledge of decorative arts styles within the context of nation's past. I believe this is another way in which to learn about the people whose lives constitute the flow of American History. 



**_REQUIRED READINGS:_**

        Two books are required for this course:   
    
            _Evaluating Your Collection,_ compiled by Dwight Lanmon   
            _Seeing Things Differently,_ by Philip D. Zimmerman 

These books are available for purchase at the Duquesne University Bookstore. I
expect you to buy your own copies.  
        In addition, the bookstore has copies of three other books as recommended reading for the course:   
            _The History of American Ceramics: From Pipkins and Bean Pots to_   
            _Contemporary Forms, 1607 to the Present,_ by Elaine Levin 

            _Glass in Early America,_ by Arlene Palmer 

            _American Silver at Winterthur,_ by Ian M.G. Quimby 

    
        You are not required to purchase these books and will not be responsible for the information contained in them. They are, however, standard sources for these subjects and good resource materials, especially for students in the Archives, Museum and Editing Program.   
        I may put additional readings on reserve in the University library. When I do this, I will inform you about them well in advance of the due date. 



**_ATTENDANCE/PARTICIPATION:_**

        This class will meet Tuesday evenings from 6:00 to 8:40 p.m. in Room 552 College Hall, unless I direct you otherwise. Attendance is a requirement of this course and will figure into your final grade. Attendance will be taken at each class session as a means by which I may learn your name and document your presence at class meetings. You are responsible for all material presented; if you miss a class, get notes from a classmate or see me.   
        I will also use class periods to elicit reactions to lectures and readings by posing questions, advancing theories of my own, or setting up case studies to which you will be expected to respond. Participation may also be student-originated. I encourage you to ask for additional explanations when lectures or readings are unclear, to ask questions of the instructor, and to agree or disagree with anything said in class. The only condition for class discussion is that we listen to each other respectfully. 



**_OUR ELECTRONIC CLASSROOM:_**

        In order to facilitate communication within the class, I have asked Computer and Technology Services (C.T.S.) to set up a WEBCT site for our class. This resource contains a copy of this syllabus, bibliographies, outlines, and other course materials. It also gives you the ability to send e-mail to class members and post items on a class bulletin board. We might also establish a weekly chat room session if you wish.   
        You can access WEBCT from any internet-linked computer. In order to reach our class site, first go to _http://webct.cc.duq.edu:8900_. Then click on "VIEW COURSE LISTING." This will bring you to a "Category" page where you click on "McAnulty College and Graduate School of Liberal Arts." You will then see a long list of web sites for various courses offered by the College; scroll down this list until you come to "HISTY 543: AMERICAN DECORATIVE ARTS", then click on this link to access our site. Before you are allowed into the site, you will need to enter your User Name (your last name in all lower case letters) and your Password (the last four digits of your Social Security number). The Password tool on the course homepage will allow you to change your password if you wish. 



**_FIELD TRIPS:_**

        Slides and lectures only go part of the way in teaching you about the decorative arts. In order to give you the opportunity to view actual pieces, there will be two Saturday field trips during the semester. At 1:00 p.m. on October 14, Ann Madarasz, chief curator of the Historical Society of Western Pennsylvania, will show us _Shattering Notions_ , an exhibit of glassmaking in Pittsburgh now on view at the Heinz Regional History Center. On November 11 at 11:30 a.m., we will tour Clayton, the home of Henry Clay Frick, to look at decorative arts in a restored Victorian setting. We will make travel arrangements the week before each trip.   
        I realize that this day may interfere with outside work schedules, but Saturdays were the only day on which I could schedule these tours and special presentations. If you have outside work commitments, I hope you will be able to make arrangements with your boss or a fellow worker to be free on these dates. I would like everyone in class to attend these sessions. 



**_EXAMINATIONS:_**

        There will be two formal examinations in this class. A midterm test will be given during the regular class period on October 17, and the final exam will take place December 19 from 6:00 to 8:00 p.m. The purpose of these tests is to give you the opportunity to demonstrate your grasp of general concepts as well as specific information. Each examination will include both objective and essay questions.   
        In addition, there will be two short quizzes given at the beginning of the class periods on October 3 and November 14. These will be purely objective.   
        A make-up exam or quiz will be given only if one of these two conditions is met: (1) students make arrangements at least 24 hours **prior** to the scheduled exam date to take a make-up 

(2) students present written evidence of illness or other cause as soon as
possible following the exam date.         In either case, make-up quizzes or
examinations are to be taken **within seven days** (not class days) of the
scheduled examination date. Only in extreme situations will this rule be
modified. Workload, university-related or outside, is not a sufficient reason
to warrant a make-up exam.



**_WRITING ASSIGNMENTS:_**

        As one requirement of this course each of you will prepare two written assignments on topics related to American Decorative Art.   
        The first paper will be a short description (3-4 typewritten pages) of a decorative arts object (any medium) using the fourteen criteria described by Dwight Lanmon in _Evaluating Your Collection_. You may choose to describe an object in your own possession or one found on display in a local museum. (In the latter case, you might not be able to use all of Lanmon's categories). This paper is due by the end of class on October 3.   
        The second assignment is to prepare a more formal research paper on any topic in the decorative arts that is of personal interest to you. This paper is to be of moderate length (8 to 10 typewritten pages) and conform to accepted standards of projects of this type. This paper is to be the student's own work. Borrowed material should be indicated with footnotes or endnotes presented in proper form. Students wishing advice on these standards should consult _A Manual for Writers of Term Papers, Theses, and Dissertations_ by Kate Turabian (available in the DU Bookstore) or see me. A statement of your term paper topic is due on September 5 and a preliminary bibliography is to be handed in on October 10. The final draft of your research paper is due by November 28\. You will also make a ten-minute presentation of your research at the December 5 class.   
        A separate handout will give further details of the writing assignments.  **YOUR OBJECT PAPER IS DUE ON OCTOBER 3, AND THE FINAL DRAFT OF YOUR TERM PAPER IS DUE ON NOVEMBER 28.** **LATE PAPERS WILL BE ASSESSED A ONE-GRADE PENALTY FOR EACH DAY THEY ARE LATE.** ****  ****  **_FINAL GRADE:_**

        The University's "+/-" grading system will be used, and your final grade will be computed according to the following formula: 

                                Attendance/participation                     10%   
                                Quizzes (average)                               10%   
                                Midterm examination                           20%   
                                Writing assignments   
                                        Object Paper                              10%   
                                        Term Paper                                 15%   
                                Final examination                                 35% 



**_ACADEMIC INTEGRITY:_**

        I expect all students to abide by the Expectations of Academic Integrity as outlined in _The Code of Student Rights, Responsibilities, and Conduct_. Cheating and plagiarism penalties can range from receiving a zero for the assignment to dismissal from the University. 



**_POSSIBLE CHANGES:_**

        This syllabus provides a clear idea of the requirements and structure of the course. The purpose of this course, however, is to study American decorative arts, and that purpose supersedes all others. When advisable, I reserve the right to alter the syllabus over the course of the semester in order to improve that study. Your comments (positive or negative) on how the course is going are truly welcomed, and any suggestions you might have on how our look at decorative arts might be improved will be seriously considered.   

* * *

HISTORY 543 (61) MASTER OF LIBERAL STUDIES 666 (61)   Schedule of Lectures,
Reading Assignments, and Examinations Fall 2000









August         29                                 Introduction/The American
Home

September     5                                 American Furniture, 1620-1780  
                                                                Reading: Lanmon   
**                                                                 Statement
of Term Paper Topic Due**

                     12                                 American Furniture, 1780-1876   
                                                                Reading: Zimmermann 

                     19                                 American Furniture, 1876-1915 

                     26                                 American Silver and Other Metals 

October           3                                 American Glass I  
**                                                                  Quiz #1**  
**_                                                                  Object
Paper Due_**

                      10                                 American Glass II   
**                                                                 Preliminary
Bibliography Due**

_                       14                                 Shattering Notions:
The Pittsburgh Glass Industry_  
_                                                            (tour of exhibit
at Sen. John Heinz Regional History_  
_                                                            Center and
discussion with chief curator Ann_  
_                                                            Madarasz)--1:00
p.m._

                      17                                 **Midterm Examination**

                      24                                 American Ceramics I 

                      31                                 American Ceramics II 

November        7                                 Graphics  
**                                                                     Last
Date to Submit Rough Drafts**

                       11                                 _Tour of Clayton--11:30 a.m. ($6.00 admission_   
_                                                             charge)_

                       14                                 Art Nouveau   
**                                                                     Quiz
#2**

                       21                                 _no class (Thanksgiving Holiday)_

                       28                                 Art Deco   
**                                                                     Final
Draft of Term Paper Due**

December         5                                 Presentation of Research
Papers

                       12                                 _no class (University Meets According to Friday_   
_                                                             Schedule)_

                       19                                 **Final Examination**

* * *

* * *

