### History 530.02  
The Second Commonwealth



This course will acquaint students with the history of the Jewish people since
the Cyrus declaration (538) BCE) and the Restoration of Zion until the
destruction of the Second Temple (70 CE). It will emphasize the political
history of the Jews in Judea, where "political" is to be perceived not as the
mere succession of governments and wars, but rather as an interaction between
politics and social, economic and religious affairs working together under
certain circumstances. Indeed. we shall be extremely mindful of the influence
of those factors on the development of Jewish ideals and beliefs during that
period. One important goal is to explore how Judaism of that era served as a
backdrop and background for the understanding of the rise of Christianity.



**Course schedule:**

Week I - _Jews under the Persian Rule (538-331 BCE)_ : Cyrus and the
Restoration of Zion: The erection of the Second Temple. Ezra and Nehemiah. The
Samaritan Schism. The Jewish Diaspora ( Babylonia and Egypt).

_Reading:_ Ben-Sasson (ed.), pp. 159-182.



Week II - _The Hellenistic Era (Part 1: 331-200 BCE)_ : Alexander the Great
and the Jews. The Successors of Alexander (Diadochi). Under the Ptolemaic
Rule. The Zenon Papyri. The rise of the Tobaids and the beginning of
Hellenization in the Jewish society.

_Reading:_ Schafer, pp. 1-25; Tcherikover pp. 39-49, 59-72.



Week III - _The Hellenistic Era (Part II: 200-167 BCE)_ : The reign of the
Seleucids. The Hellenizers' struggle for power. The religious persecutions of
Antiochus IV Epiphanes. Manifestations of Jewish martyrdom.

_Reading:_ Schafer, pp. 27-51; Tcherikover pp. 127-142, 152-174, also
recommended: 175-203



Week IV - _The Establishment of the Hasmonean state (167-104 BCE)_ : The
Maccabaean Revolt under Mattathias and Judas. The Hasmonean dynasty of the
first generation: Jonathan. Simon, John Hyrcanus I. The first Hasmonean
conquests. The Jewish sects (Pharisees. Sadducees, Essens).

_Reading:_ Schafer, pp. 51-73; Tcherikover, pp 204-246; recommended: Anchor
Bible Dictionary, entries: Pharisees. Sadducees, Essens.



Week V - _The Hasmonean Kingdom (104-63 BCE)_ : Judas Aristobulus 1. Alexander
Jannaeus, Salome-Alexandra. Opposition to the Hasmoneans and the civil war.
The collapse of the Hasmonean Kingdom and the Roman conquest.

_Reading:_ Schafer, pp. 73-80; Tcherikover, pp. 246-265; recommended: Efron,
pp. 147-175; 227-236



_Midterm examination_



Week VI - _The Roman Indirect Rule (63 BCE-6 CE)_ : The rise of the House of
Antipater. Mattathias Antigonus the last Hasmonean king. Herod King of Judea
and his achievements. The Herodian dynasty. The Sages and the Oral Law. Hillel
and Shamai.

_Reading:_ Schafer, pp. 81-105; Alon, pp. 18-47



Week VII - _The Direct Roman Rule (Part 1: 6-41 CE)_ : The establishment of
_Provincia Judea_ : the rise of Jewish zealotry. The First Roman governors;
Pontius Pilate and the crucifiction of Jesus. The religious persecutions under
Gaius Caligula. King Agrippa I (41-44 CE).

_Reading:_ Schafer, pp. 105-114; Smallwood, pp. 145-180



Week VIII - _The Direct Roman Rule (Part II: 44-74 CE)_ : The corruption of
the last Roman governors. The background and the outbreak of the Great War
with the Romans. The Roman suppression of the revolt. The destruction of
Jerusalem and the Second Temple. The sequel of the war (the fall of Masada).

_Reading:_ Schafer, pp. 114-130; Smallwood, pp. 293-330; recommended:
Josephus, _The Jewish War_ , books III-VII.



Week IX - _The Jewish Diaspora_ : Jewish community and Greek city ( _polis_ ).
Jewish Hellenistic Literature. Birth and growth of Anti-Semitism. Disturbances
against the Jews of Alexandria and their struggle for equal rights. Philo
Alexandreus.

_Reading:_ Tcherikover, pp. 196-332, 344-377; recommended: Smallwood, pp.
220-255.



Week X - _The last Jewish revolts against Rome_ : The consequences of the
Great Jewish War. The Rabbis of Jabneh and Johanan son of Zakkai. The Jewish
uprising Under Trajan (95-117 CE). The Bar-Kokhba Revolt (132-135 CE) -
background and consequences. Epilogue.

_Reading:_ Schafer, pp. 131-161.



On account of the great mass of material which this course must survey in a
short amount of time, lectures and discussions must only move at a rapid pace,
but they must also be selective - stressing and highlighting certain topics at
the expense of others. For this reason, it is imperative that one not fall-
behind in the assigned reading. An attempt has been made to assign as much of
the required reading as possible from the book to be purchased; nevertheless,
it is recommended to plan your schedule with an eye on the occasional but
important reserve reading to be done in the Undergraduate Library (205
Sullivant Hall).

Although this course will be structured primarily around lectures, you are
warmly encouraged to ask questions in class and to participate in discussion,
either during or at the end of each session, depending on the topic being
considered. If you wish to pursue a subject or question more extensively than
class time allow, you are urged to do so - after class, during office hours,
or at any other convenient time. Also, no one should hesitate to come to
office hours or to arrange appointment to raise any sort of problem he or she
might be having with the course; you are most welcome to discuss anything that
might be on your mind.



_Requirements_ :

  1. Regular attendance and preparation. When you come to class, it will be assumed that you are ready to be called upon to discuss the assigned reading (may influence final grade). 
  2. A midterm examination (approximately 40% of the final grade). 
  3. A final "take-home examination," to include questions on the course material and an essay concerning an additional pertinent articles or chapters in book of one's choice. A list of suggested titles will be distributed during the third week of class, but articles or books not on the list may be read with the approval of the instructor (approximately 60% of the final grade). 



_Suggestions for Success_ :

  1. If you have any question or problem, approach the instructor as soon as possible. Our goal is to help you, but we must learn about a problem from you, in order to be able to confront it. If office hours are inconvenient, ask for an appointment. 
  2. Prepare for every class. and take careful notes on your reading. As painful as this process might seem--especially when compared to the ease of coloring a textbook with a bright felt pen--the investment of time is worthwhile, for two reasons: 
    1. Taking notes demands that you understand and digest the reading material more thoroughly than does covering it with yellow, pink or turquoise. 
    2. Good notes will spare you from having, to reread the textbooks immediately before examinations, saving you at least as much as the "extra" investment time they required. when you need it most. 
  3. Since the goal of the course is to stimulate your thought and understanding--and not simply your memory--exams will consist of essay questions, both short (i.e. identification) and long. Keep the following in mind: 
    1. Always relate exam points to time: If the exam has three sections of equal value, apportion your time accordingly; _do not_ spend more time on one or two of the sections than the percentage of the grade mandate. 
    2. Outline your essay before beginning to write -- if you do not outline, the result often is an incoherent answer. So outline -- quickly. Then begin writing a properly structured essay: write an introduction; compose the main portion of the answer: conclude with two or three sentences that summarize your argument. If you follow this procedure, and do not simply write your answer as thoughts occur to you, you are far more apt to write an organized effective essay. 
    3. Remember that the prime concern of the historian is to analyze change or changes through a period of time. When, why, and how the changes occurred, as well as their significance, are issues underlying each question you will be asked. As you study throughout the quarter. try to keep this in mind when reading the assigned material and reviewing your notes. When exam time comes, you then should be thinking, along the right lines. 
    4. Feel free to seek feedback and advice (beyond the written comments appearing on your papers) concerning your performance on midterm examinations. If, having received such additional clarification. you are still convinced that the grade you received is incorrect and desire that it be redetermined, you must submit a written explanation of your request. You must also recognize that the reevaluation of your exam may result in a grade higher than. equivalent to, or lower than the grade you received originally. 
    5. If for any family or medical reason you find it absolutely necessary to miss an examination, you must contact the instructor _before_ the examination and have his consent to your absence if you wish to take a Make-up exam. No medical excuse will be honored without a corroborating note from a physician explaining your inability to take the examination. 



_Readings_ :

I. Required for purchase:

  1. P. Schafer. _The History of the Jews in Antiquity_ (English translation by D.Chowacat), 1995. Harwood Academic Publishers GmbH (softcover). 
  2. V. Tcherikover. _Hellenistic Civilization and the Jews_ , New York, 1977. Athenaeum (softcover). 



II. Additional books on reserve at the Undergraduate Library:

  1. E. Schurer, _The History of the Jewish People in the Age of Jesus Christ_ (eds. G. Vermes, F. Millar et al.), I-III, Edinburgh 1973-1987, T.  & T. Clark Ltd. 
  2. G. Alon, _Jews, Judaism and the Classical World_ , Jerusalem, 1977. The Magnes Press (The Hebrew University). 
  3. H.H. Ben-Sasson (ed.), _A History of the Jewish People_ , 1976, Harvard University Press. 
  4. E.M.Smallwood, _The Jews Under Roman Rule,_ Leiden 1981. E.J. Brill. 
  5. Flavius Josephus: 
    1. _The Second Jewish Commonwealth_ (= _Jewish Antiquities_ , XII.iv-XX), translated by W. Whiston. edited by N. Glatzer), New York 1971, Schocken Books. OR _Antiquities of the Jews_ , The Loeb Classical Library edition. 
    2. _The Jewish War_ (translated by G.A. Willamson, revised by E.M. Smallwood) 1981. Penguin Books. OR Josephus, _The Jewish War_ , The Loeb Classical Library edition. 

