LIT 3313: American Science-Fiction Literature and Film Professor Andrew Gordon
Fall 1998 MWF8 (3:00-3:50) TUR 1315 Office: 4323 TUR Phone: 392-6650 ext. 254
Office Hours: MWF 6, or by appointment Mailbox: 4012 TUR E-mail:
agordon@nervm.nerdc.ufl.edu Homepage: http://web.clas.ufl.edu/users/agordon

Objectives:

1\. To survey American science-fiction literature and film since 1945: the
"Golden Age," the New Wave, the New Women, Cyberpunk, and beyond 2000.

2\. To develop critical skills in thinking about the role of science fiction
within contemporary American culture. We will consider science fiction as the
literature of science, technolgy, and change, and as perhaps the most
characteristic American literature since 1945, a genre affecting all areas of
our popular culture.

3\. To develop analytical skills through writing about science-fiction stories
and films.

Texts (at Goering's, University and 13th):

Science Fiction: The SFRA Anthology ed. Warrick, Waugh, and Greenberg

Starship Troopers by Robert A. Heinlein

Dune by Frank Herbert

The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula Le Guin

The Forever War by Joe Haldeman

Neuromancer by William Gibson

Snowcrash by Neal Stephenson

Alien Zone: Cultural Theory and Contemporary Science-Fiction Cinema ed.
Annette Kuhn

Science Fiction After 1900 by Brooks Landon

Requirements:

1\. Twelve quizzes on the reading. Brief questions designed to keep you
current on the reading. NO MAKEUPS, but only ten quizzes are required. If you
take eleven or twelve, I drop the lowest quiz grades. Ten quizzes= 20% total.

2\. Two papers. Paper 1, due September 23, should be about four-five typed
pages (1000-1250 words) and concern a novel, story, or film covered in Weeks
I-IV. This need not be a research paper. Paper 2, due December 2, should be
six-seven typed pages (1500-1750 words) and compare any two works (novels,
stories, or films) from the course, except the one you wrote on in Paper 1\.
It should show evidence of research from at least three critics. You may also
deal with outside works, but clear this with me in advance. In both papers, I
encourage you to apply not only what you have learned in this class but also
what you have learned in other courses, whether history, sociology,
anthropology, psychology, philosophy, political science, economics, biology,
physics, or chemistry: science fiction is the meeting ground of the
humanities, social sciences, and hard sciences, and any or all of these
approaches may be valid for particular works.

Alternately, with my prior permission, Paper 2 may be a science-fiction story
or teleplay of about ten pages. See me to talk about the story first. You must
submit a first draft by November 4; I will make suggestions for revisions but
reserve the right at that point to ask you to do the paper instead of the
story. The grade is based on the final draft of the story submitted December
2\. Some students go through three drafts of the story. Contact me before the
due date if you need extra time. Unexcused late papers lose two points per
school day. Paper 1= 20%. Paper 2= 25%.

3\. One oral report to the class. You may report on an assigned author, novel,
or film, or on another author or work of science-fiction literature or film.
(These reports may also help you prepare for your papers.) Alternately, you
may discuss such topics as the Star Trek phenomenon, an SF (science fiction)
TV series, SF music, SF comics or magazines, SF in advertisements or
commercials, or SF videogames or computer games; science fiction saturates our
entire popular culture. You can use, if you wish, cassette tapes, slides, or
videotape (let me know so I can get the equipment). Two students may
collaborate on a project. Limit yourself to five minutes per person. Be
creative and have fun with your reports. They are required but ungraded. Oral
report= 5% 4. Class attendance and participation. Everyone is allowed three
unexcused absence; after that, contact me with a valid explanation. Each
subsequent unexcused absence means one point off your final grade. Attendance
and participation= 10%.

5\. Final exam. Essay topics, to be announced in the last class. Exam= 20%

Outline:

I   M, Aug 24 Introduction. Film: The Day the Earth Stood Still. W, Aug 26
Introduction. Continue film: The Day the Earth Stood Still. F, Aug 28 In SFRA
Anthology: stories by Hawthorne, Wells ("Star"). Conclude The Day the Earth
Stood Still

II  M, Aug 31 Precursors and "Golden Age" SF: In SFRA Anthology: Forster. In
packet: Campbell, Zoline. Landon, Preface , Chapter 1-2 (to p. 58). Q (Quiz)1
(readings Aug 28 and Aug 31). W, Sep 2 "Golden Age" SF: Anthology: Weinbaum,
Campbell. Kuhn, 1-18. Film: The Thing. F, Sep 4 Conclude The Thing.

III    M, Sep 7 LABOR DAY HOLIDAY W, Sep 9 SF of 40s and 50s: Asimov, Moore.
F, Sep 11 SF of 40s and 50s: Sturgeon, Bradbury. Q 2 (readings Sep 2-11).

IV  M, Sep 14 SF of 50s: Blish. Film: Invasion of the Body Snatchers W, Sep 16
SF of 50s: Smith. Body Snatchers. F, Sep 18 SF of 50s: Bester. Conclude Body
Snatchers. Q3 (readings Sep 14-18).

V   M, Sep 21 SF of 50s: Starship Troopers (to p. 87). Landon, 58-71. Film:
Starship Troopers. W, Sep 23 Starship Troopers (to 159). Film: Starship
Troopers. F, Sep 25 Conclude Starship Troopers. PAPER 1 DUE. Q4 (readings Sep
21-25).

VI  M, Sep 28 SF of 60s: Dune (to p 102). Film: Dune. W, Sep 30 Dune (to 199).
Film: Dune. F, Oct 2 Dune (to 309). Film: Dune. Q5 (Dune to 309).

VII   M, Oct 5 SF of 60s: Dune (to 401). Film: Dune. W, Oct 7 Conclude Dune.
Q6 (Dune to end). F, Oct 9 SF of 60s: Zelazny.

VIII   M, Oct 12 60s "New Wave": Dick. Landon, 107-22, W, Oct 14 60s "New
Wave": Delany. Landon, 145-58. F, Oct 16 60s "New Wave": Ellison. Q 7
(readings Oct 9-16).

IX   M, Oct 19 The New Women: Le Guin, "Nine Lives." W, Oct 21 Left Hand of
Darkness (to 148). Landon 123-28, 132-35. Kuhn, Chapter 18. F, Oct 23 Conclude
Left Hand of Darkness. Q8 (readings Oct 19-23).

X    M, Oct 26 The New Women: Russ. Landon 128-32. Film: Alien. W, Oct 28 The
New Women: Tiptree. Landon 136-41. Film: Alien F, Oct 30 The New Women:
Butler. Film: Alien. Kuhn: Chapters 6, 7, 9, 10, 11. Q 9 (readings Oct 26-30).

XI  M, Nov 2 SF of 70s: Vietnam in Space: The Forever War (to p. 63). W, Nov 4
Forever War (to 135). F, Nov 6 Conclude Forever War. FIRST DRAFT OF SHORT
STORY DUE. Q10 (Forever War).

XII  M, Nov 9 80s Cyberpunk: Neuromancer (to p. 53). W, Nov 11 VETERAN'S DAY
HOLIDAY F, Nov 13 HOMECOMING HOLIDAY.

XIII  M, Nov 16 Neuromancer (to 149). Film: Blade Runner. Landon, 159-66.
Kuhn: Chapter 3, 4, 12, 15. W, Nov 18 Conclude Neuromancer. Blade Runner. F,
Nov 20 Conclude Blade Runner. Q11 (Neuromancer).

XIV   M, Nov 23 1990s and Beyond 2000: Snowcrash (to p. 89). Nov 25
THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY Nov 27 THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY

XV   M, Nov 30 1990s and Beyond 2000: Snowcrash (to p. 258). PAPER 2 OR FINAL
DRAFT OF SHORT STORY DUE. Landon 167-79. Film: Contact. W, Dec 2 Snowcrash (to
p. 315). Film: Contact. F, Dec 4 Snowcrash (to p. 383). Film: Contact

XVI   M, Dec 7 Finish Snowcrash. Film: Contact W, Dec 9 Finish Contact. Q12
(Snowcrash).

GUIDELINES FOR PAPERS 1. Grading Criteria: A (90 and above)= distinguished
work, well written, free from all serious defects, shows originality and
insight. B (80)= good work, above average performance, no serious weaknesses
in form or content. C (70)= acceptable work, unobjectionable. A C paper
usually has more writing errors than the A or B paper and does not show as
much depth, originality, or insight. D (60)= below average work: serious or
many defects in form and/or content. E (55 or under)= unacceptable. 0= failure
to turn in an assignment may result in failure in the course. A grade such as
A-/B+ means that your paper was on the borderline between the two grades.

2\. Pick a carefully focused topic you can handle in five pages: not "The
Character of Holden Caulfield in Salinger's The Catcher in the Rye" but
"Holden and Phoebe" or "Holden and the Movies."

3\. State your thesis (an argument or point worth proving) at the end of the
first or second paragraph. For example: "The automobiles and the way they are
driven in F. Scott Fitzgerald's novel The Great Gatsby reflect the character
of the people who own or drive them."

4\. Be sure your argument is original and worthwhile. Don't waste your time
and mine restating the obvious, reciting critical commonplaces, or retelling
the plot.

5\. Your title should reflect your specific topic: not The Great Gatsby but
"Cars in Gatsby." 6. Do not underline or put in quotation marks your own
title.

7\. Support your argument with references to characters, incidents, and
relevant quotations.

8\. Recount narrative action in present tense: "At Myrtle's party, everyone
gets drunk and Tom breaks Myrtle's nose." Exception: action which is
antecedent to the "present tense" of the narrative: "Gatsby had always been
given to grandiose dreams, dreams which seem realized when he met Daisy in
1917."

9\. Use " " even when quoting only a few words from the text.

10\. Avoid long quotations, especially in five-page papers. If a quotation is
longer than 50 words, set it off by indenting and single-spacing it. You don't
need to use " " then since it is already set off from your text.

11\. When you are quoting two lines of poetry as if they were prose, put them
in " " and use a slash / to indicate line endings. When you are quoting three
or more lines of poetry, indent, single-space and write them out exactly as
they appear on the page in the original text. You don't need to put them in "
" then.

12\. Dialogue is already in " " in a story, so quote it using double quotation
marks: "` '" (13).

13\. Follow American punctuation: commas and periods go inside the quotation
marks, unless a parentheses follows. Thus: " ," or " ." But " " (13), or " "
(13).

14\. _Novel_ but "Short Story." In other words, underline the titles of long
works but use " " around the titles of short works. _The Great Gatsby_ by F.
Scott Fitzgerald but "The Swimmer" by John Cheever.

15\. Number all pages (except cover page and page one).

16\. Keep a copy of the paper for your protection.

17\. Never end a line with a hyphen.

18\. Avoid paragraphs that are too short (one or two sentences) or too long
(one page).

19\. A hyphen is indicated by a -. A dash is indicated by a --. Don't confuse
the two.

20\. A three-dot ellipsis indicates that something has been omitted from the
middle of quoted matter. You don't need the ellipsis at the beginning of a
quotation (it is obvious that something has been omitted if your quotation
does not begin with a capital letter). A four-dot ellipsis (. . . .) indicates
that the end of a sentence or a sentence or more has been omitted (the fourth
dot is the period ending the sentence).

21\. Use brackets [ ] not parentheses to indicate your own insertions within
quoted matter: "His [Jim's] notion was wrong." Parentheses within quoted
matter are taken as the original author's.

22\. I don't expect perfection in papers because I don't find it in my own
work. Everyone can use a good editor. Writing errors are evidence that you are
doing your own work and honestly trying. Use your mistakes: learn from them
and learn to be your own editor.

23\. I value papers that do some original thinking and teach me something new
about a novel or story. When you're writing, remember you're the teacher.

25\. Some abbreviations I use in correcting or commenting on papers:

W= wordy

O-U= omit unneeded words

R= needless repetition

(Note: as you can see from these first three items, a lot of what I do in
reading papers is simply crossing things out: unnecessary or repetitious
words, phrases, sentences, or occasionally entire paragraphs.)

CHOP= choppy writing. Too many short sentences in a row; this usually goes
along with W, O-U, and R.

AWK= awkward

SP= spelling

D= diction (word choice: check dictionary or thesarus)

V= vague

U= unclear

T= wrong tense

PSV= avoid passive tense (not "the ball is hit by me" but "I hit the ball").

RO= run-on sentence

RO/CS= run-on sentence, comma splice (using a comma where a period, semicolon,
or comma plus coordinating conjunction is called for). For example: He wanted
to go, however, he couldn't. That's RO/CS. Correct to: He wanted to go.
However, he couldn't. He wanted to go; however, he couldn't. He wanted to go,
but he couldn't.

FS= fragment sentence. For example: He wanted to run. Although he could barely
walk. The sentence sentence is FS (a subordinate clause belonging to the first
sentence).

= paragraph

= good point

