[![next](http://www.cs.buffalo.edu/icons/latex2html/next_motif.gif)](node10.html)
[![up](http://www.cs.buffalo.edu/icons/latex2html/up_motif.gif)](annual.report.html)
[![previous](http://www.cs.buffalo.edu/icons/latex2html/previous_motif.gif)](node8.html)
[![contents](http://www.cs.buffalo.edu/icons/latex2html/contents_motif.gif)](node1.html)  
**Next:** [ About this document ](node10.html) **Up:** [University at Buffalo
CENTER ](annual.report.html) **Previous:** [WORKSHOP: The History of
](node8.html)  

# CS/LIN 575 SYLLABUS

**CS 575/LIN 575 INTRODUCTION TO COGNITIVE SCIENCE Fall 1996** **SYLLABUS**

**INSTRUCTOR:**      Prof. William J. Rapaport, 214 Bell Hall, 645-3180 x 112,
` rapaport@cs.buffalo.edu`  
`http://www.cs.buffalo.edu/pub/WWW/faculty/rapaport/`  
Office Hours: Mondays, 1:00-2:00 P.M.; Thursdays, 11:00-11:50 A.M.;  
and by appointment.  
**CLASS MEETINGS:**  
![tabular525](img30.gif)  

**REQUIRED TEXT:**  

  * Gardner, Howard (1985/1987), _The Mind's New Science: A History of the Cognitive Revolution, with a New Epilogue by the Author: Cognitive Science After 1984_ (New York: Basic Books). 

**RECOMMENDED SUPPLEMENTARY READINGS:**  

  * Note: Most of these should be on reserve (at SEL?). 

  1. Collins, Allan,  & Smith, Edward E. (eds.) (1988), _Readings in Cognitive Science: A Perspective from Psychology and Artificial Intelligence_ (San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers). 
  2. Osherson, Daniel N. (general ed.)\ (1995), _An Invitation to Cognitive Science, Second Edition_ , 4 volumes, although only 3 have been published so far (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press). 
  3. Posner, Michael I. (ed.) (1989), _Foundations of Cognitive Science_ , (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press). 
  4. Stillings, Neil A.; Weisler, Steven E.; Chase, Christopher H.; Feinstein, Mark H.; Garfield, Jay L.; & Rissland, Edwina L. (1995), _Cognitive Science: An Introduction; Second Edition_ (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press). 

**TOPICS:**  
Cognitive science is the interdisciplinary study of cognition. Cognition
includes mental states and processes such as thinking, reasoning, remembering,
language understanding and generation, visual perception, learning,
consciousness, emotions, etc. Some cognitive scientists limit their study to
human cognition; others consider cognition independently of its implementation
in humans or computers. Some cognitive scientists study cognition
independently of the cognitive agent's environment; others study it within the
context of the agent, the society, the culture. Cognitive science can also be
defined as, roughly, the (hopefully non-empty) intersection of the disciplines
of computer science (especially artificial intelligence), linguistics,
philosophy (especially philosophy of mind and philosophy of language), and
psychology (especially cognitive psychology). Some writers on cognitive
science add cognitive anthropology to this list, and most would add the
cognitive neurosciences. The former deals in part with the societal and
cultural context mentioned above. The latter is concerned with the
``implementation'' of mind in human physiology.

We will review the history, nature, major findings, and philosophical
implications of cognitive science, as covered in the Gardner book,
supplemented by readings from anthologies and other sources. We will also
discuss an interdisciplinary cognitive-science research project in narrative
understanding conducted by members of the UB Center for Cognitive Science.

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS:**  

  * You will be expected to attend all lectures and to complete all readings and assignments on time. No programming will be required. 
    * Students enrolled for _undergraduate_ credit are expected to read all the material in Gardner. 
    * Students enrolled for _graduate_ credit are expected to read all the material in Gardner as well as all of the supplementary readings. 
  * From time to time, information will be posted to the newsgroup ` sunyab.cs.575`, which you should read on a regular basis. 
  * Students should make every effort to attend the colloquia sponsored by the Center for Cognitive Science. These meet Wednesdays, 2:00-4:00 P.M., 280 Park Hall. See the appended tentative schedule. 
  * You should also take a look at the Center's home page on the Web:  
`http://www.cs.buffalo.edu/pub/WWW/cogsci/`

  * The final course grade will be determined on the basis of a weighted function of (a) class attendance and participation and (b) a term project. (Graduate and undergraduate students will be graded separately.) 
  * The term project may be either a programming project or a research report. 
    * Possible _research report_ topics include: 
      * a discussion of some problem in cognition that at least 3 different cognitive sciences have investigated (possibly including suggestions for other routes of investigation) 
      * a ``grant proposal'' for a cognitive-science research project that would investigate some problem in cognition from the perspectives of at least 2 of the cognitive sciences 
      * a discussion of a cognitive-science issue or area that was _not_ covered in class 
      * a discussion of a philosophical or foundational isssue in the field of cognitive science 
      * an ``encyclopedia of cognitive science'' article on a major cognitive-science book or anthology, etc. 
    * Possible _programming projects_ include: 
      * an implementation of an existing cognitive-science computer program 
      * a computational implementation of a cognitive-science theory 
      * a computational implementation of a feature of human cognition  The final report for a programming project must include: 
      1. a technical report (in the style of a paper in a conference proceedings) describing the theory and its implementation, and 
      2. one or more appendices containing annotated sample runs and annotated code (as appropriate). 
    * The reports should be about 10-15 pages (typed or printed, double-spaced; i.e., approximately 2500-4000 words). All programming and research reports must follow writing guidelines to be handed out in class. 
  * A proposal for your term project, consisting of an extended abstract and bibliography, is due no later than Friday, October 11; no late proposals will be accepted, and no term projects will be accepted without an approved proposal. The final term project is due no later than Wednesday, December 11. 
  * Students should notify the instructor within the first two weeks of class if they have a disability which would make it difficult to carry out course work as outlined (requiring notetakers, readers, extended test time).   

**Incompletes:**  
It is University policy that a grade of Incomplete is to be given only when a
small amount of work or a single exam is missed due to circumstances beyond
the student's control, and that student is otherwise doing passing work. I
will follow this policy _strictly_! Thus, you should assume that I will _not_
give incompletes:-) Any incompletes that I might, in a lapse of judgment:-),
give will have to be made up by the end of the Spring 1997 semester.  

**IMPORTANT DATES**  
  
![tabular581](img31.gif)  

Note: If you follow this schedule for reading, you will be able to complete
all of the reading by the end of the semester. The topics covered in lectures
will differ slightly from this sequence, especially since I am planning on
having several guest speakers.  
![supertabular587](img32.gif)  

* * *

[![next](http://www.cs.buffalo.edu/icons/latex2html/next_motif.gif)](node10.html)
[![up](http://www.cs.buffalo.edu/icons/latex2html/up_motif.gif)](annual.report.html)
[![previous](http://www.cs.buffalo.edu/icons/latex2html/previous_motif.gif)](node8.html)
[![contents](http://www.cs.buffalo.edu/icons/latex2html/contents_motif.gif)](node1.html)  
**Next:** [ About this document ](node10.html) **Up:** [University at Buffalo
CENTER ](annual.report.html) **Previous:** [WORKSHOP: The History of
](node8.html)

_William J. Rapaport  
Fri Sep 12 14:43:47 EDT 1997_

