|

![btn_hist.bmp \(107670 bytes\)](../images/btn_hist.gif)

[Course Description](index.htm)

[FAQ's](faq_sht.htm)

[Office Hours](office.htm)

[Required Texts](txts_rqd.htm)

[Format and Basic Requirements](frmt_reqs.htm)

[Course Calendar](cal_tpc.htm)

[Grading](grading.htm)

[Spring 2002 Projects](../h453proj/spring_02/index.htm)

[Spring 2001 Projects](proj_mnu01.htm)

[Spring 2000 Projects](proj_mnu00.htm)

[Spring 1999 Projects](proj_mnu99.htm)

[Project Assignment](projassignmnt.htm)

[Project Topic Ideas](projtopics.htm)

[Links](galileo.htm)

[](proj_mnu00.htm)[Sample Midterm](smpl_mdtrm.htm)

[Download Syllabus (.htm) ](dwn_syl.htm)

[MS Word Download Syllabus ](dwn_syl.doc)  
  
---  
  




**__** | [![](images/atom1.gif)](index.htm) |

The History of Modern Science -- His 453  |  
---|---|---  
  
Spring 2002 \-- Project Assignment |  
  
**_Project Assignment :_**

> The project assignment is to participate in the collaborative development of
a Web-based publication. That publication should incorporate material that
develops and amplifies one of the major themes defined for this course (see
comments).

  * conceptual development of modern science
  * the cultural dimensions of Western science
  * the social role of the "scientist."

> The expectation (requirement) is that each student will participate fully in
the development of the collabortive project. My planning assumption (for 1/4
of the course grade) is that the level of effort required will range between
40 and 50 hrs. for each project team member.

>

> **DUE DATE is April 15 before class -- We'll browse loaded projects in class
on that day.**

_**Assignment Rules:**_

> **Rule 1:** Topics will be posted for all to see and choose. Anyone may sign
up to work on a posted topic.

>

> **Rule 2:** Teams must have at least 3 members, and no more than 5 members.

>

> **Rule 3:** No exceptions to Rules 1 & 2 -- No individual projects; if 6 or
more sign up, the topic has to be divided.

>

> **Rule 4:** Every project must have a section that lays out the team
organization and responsibilities \-- i.e., a separate Web page (section) to
explain who did what.    Example 1      Example 2      Example 3      Example
4     Example 5

>

> **Rule 5:** Grades are assigned individually -- not to the group (read more
in the comments below).

>

> **Rule 6:** Intellectual Property: The ASSIGNMENT RULE is the commercial
rule -- you have to have permission to use or display other people's
intellectual property. (Read the comment below carefully! If you don't
understand, ask about it!)

>

> **Rule 7:** Final team decisions have to be made by 7:00 p.m. on March 4.
Late sign ups get docked 5 pts. on the final grade -- no exceptions, no
excuses. It will cost you five points to sign up after 7:00 p.m. on March 4.

>

> **Rule 8:** Individual teams are responsible for loading the project onto a
development site on a Bryant Server (See comment below).

**_Procedures:_**

Anyone can suggest a topic, but all topics must have approval of the
instructor (me). The best way to suggest a topic is to send an e-mail. Use
this link if you have an idea right now:
[dlux@bryant.edu](mailto:dlux@bryant.edu?subject=His%20453%20Project%20Topic%20Suggestion)
This link is configured just for submitting topics.

All you need to do to get your name listed on a project team is let me know.
Again the best way is to use an e-mail. Here's one configured just for that
purpose:
[dlux@bryant.edu](mailto:dlux@bryant.edu?subject=His%20453%20Want%20to%20Sign%20Up%20For%20a%20Project%20Team)
As you get your name to me, I'll post it on the Topics page. Include your
e-mail address so that I can include it along with your name.

Individual teams are responsible for organizing themselves, appointing
leaders, assigning work, etc. (See comments below.)



























**_Comments:_**

* * *

  * **The Assignment:** The project assignment is to produce of Web publication that informs -- not a  "term paper." The target audience is other students. They may be K - 12, or they may be college-level students in non-science courses. The objective is to inform them about the topic, and to provide authoritative material such as bibliographies, glosseries, explanations for key concepts, etc. The project is aimed at an audience that presumably knows 'less' than you do, and a major part of grading will focus on how clearly and authoritatively the project addresses the needs of the target audience. back to the project assignment

* * *

  * **About Our Project Section:** In your section explaining "who did what," it's advisable to err on the side of detail. Don't be afraid of boring people. I'm probably the only person who will ever read this section really carefully, and I guarantee that I will read it carefully. It's a major factor in grading. Grades will be assigned individually based on what this section says. back to rules

* * *

  * **Intellectual Property Permissions** : In most class-related projects, the fair use doctrine allows students (sort of) to use graphics, sounds, etc., without the author's permission. That may be OK under the law, **BUT it's NOT** permitted in this assignment. You must seek and obtain appropriate permission to use other people's intellectual property. This applies most specifically to graphics and sound files -- downloaded or scanned. Just as in the 'real world' it's your responsibility to know who owns the copyright and to obtain the owner's permission to use it. The only exception to this rule appears with clip art and media files specifically created for hypermedia use (e.g., Microsoft clipart, backgrounds, buttons, etc.). Be careful, however, just because someone else is using it on the web doesn't mean that person is the copyright owner. If in doubt, you need to check. back to rules

* * *

  * **Team Organization:** This is your project \-- not mine. An important part of the assignment design involves turning over direction of the work to you and your team. In the past, some teams have had frequent meetings and integrated their work as they went along. Other teams have chosen to meet only once or twice and simply 'sliced up' the responsibilities for producing various sections or pages that were then 'stitched' together at the end. How you work is up to you. back to procedures

* * *

  * **Project Loading:** Loading means the project has to be sent by FTP to an account on a Bryant server. If no one on the team knows how to do this, ask me. I'll help. Once the project is up and running on the team's site, I'll use an http import utility to process the project for reloading on the /~history site. Someone from the team must be available for debugging if the site uses html 4. I'll take care of any html 3 problems, but fancy programs such as NetFusion (older versions), FrontPage (all versions), and ColdFusion are notoriously fickle about relocation when you use the html 4 standard and/or proprietary code. MSWord is also very touchy about running on UNIX platforms, but we now have utilities that will correct the idiosyncrasies that come with Microsoft proprietary code. back to rules If you want fancy explanations, try this site: [http://www.blooberry.com/indexdot/html/index.html ](http://www.blooberry.com/indexdot/html/index.html)  
  
If your team uses a non-Bryant server as a development site (e.g., geocities)
be very careful. It is the team's responsibility to get the site into shape
for transfer. We know what happens with Bryant servers. We've also seen
unhappiness with the results of transfers from other sites (geocities, for
example, laces your pages with java script to create pop-ads, etc.) back to
rules

















