##  History 461  
SENIOR SEMINAR  
SPRING l999

##  ![](Einstein.jpg)

Instructor: James W. Crowl Office: 234 M. Ruffner Office Telephone: 395-2217
Office hours: M 1:30-4:00; W 1:30-2:00; 3:00-4:00 TR ll:15-12:00, l:00-1:50,
3:15-4:00  

##  Contents

Course Description  
Required Texts  
Course Objectives  
Class Schedule  
Course Requirements  
Grading  
Attendance Policy  
Honor Code  
Research Paper  
Critiques  
Instructor Conferences  
Oral Presentations  
Standardized Achievement Test  
Additional Bibliography **[Click here to see an "A" paper from a previous
semester](semexamp.htm)**

###  Course Description:

Capstone course in history. Research, writing, and assessment of student
outcomes. NOTE: Satisfactory completion of this course and each of its
requirements (including departmental achievement test and questionnaire) is
required for graduation by all history majors.

Return to Table of Contents

###  Text:

  * Turabian, Kate L. _A Manual for Writers_. Sixth edition, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, l996.

Return to Table of Contents

###  Course Objectives:

Upon completion of the course, students will have gained an appropriate
increase in:

  * 1\. knowledge of historical study and methodology

  * 2\. critical and analytical thinking skills

  * 3\. understanding of the importance of ethical dilemmas in the shaping of history

  * 4\. the ability to do historical research

  * 5\. the skills necessary to use a word processor.

Return to Table of Contents

###  Class Schedule:

####  February 3

Topic for paper and preliminary bibliography submitted

####  March 3 (Wed.)

First final draft due (2nd class meeting) **_No papers accepted after that
date!_ (THIS IS NOT A ROUGH DRAFT!)**

####  March 24 (Wed.)

Three critiques due (3rd class meeting)

####  March  24 - 31

Student-Instructor conferences

####  April 7 - 23?

Oral presentations (4th class meeting) (Monday, Wednesday, Friday schedule)

####  April 14

Second Final Draft Due **_No papers will be accepted after that date!_**

Return to Table of Contents

###  Course Requirements:

Twelve page research paper  
Fifteen minute oral defense - presentation of your paper  
Three critical reviews

Return to Table of Contents

###  Grading:

The final grade in the course will consist of the first draft of the paper
(30%), the three critiques (25%), the oral presentation (l0%), and the second
final draft of the paper (35%).

Return to Table of Contents

###  Attendance Policy:

Students will be expected to attend all meetings of the class. The catalog
requirements for attendance will be enforced.

Return to Table of Contents

###  Honor Code:

Students are expected to comply with the honor code on all work for the
course.

Return to Table of Contents

###  Research Paper:

1\. Topic: Your topic must be one on which you have not written before, nor
may you use it for another course this semester. The topic should be selected
in consultation with the instructor. By February 3, students must submit a
one-page proposal for the paper, plus an additional preliminary bibliography.

2\. Length: The text of the paper must be at least twelve pages, but not more
than twenty pages.

3\. Papers must be typed on a word-processor or computer and printed on a
laser printer.

4\. Research: Papers should use at least twelve sources. Primary sources,
current periodicals, professional journals, newspapers, and other periodicals
should be painstakingly examined. The result of your research should be a
paper with meaningful, carefully crafted conclusions, based on your research
and the analysis of that work.

5\. Footnotes: Footnotes (not endnotes) must be used (30 to 40 or so would be
a reasonable expectation). Disregard Turabian's unfortunate section on
parenthetical notes, pp. 175-184. Never use parenthetical notes! Your
footnotes MUST comply with Turabian's requirements for footnotes on pages
117-174, and when using the examples in chapters 11 and 12, pp. 185-238, be
certain to Not use the "PR" model (Parenthetical Reference) and use only the
"N' for footnote or "B" for bibliographical citations. If you use a source
from a computer or a CD-Rom, check carefully Turabian's Section 8.141 on
"Electronic Documents."

6\. Subsequent Notes: Please heed Turabian's rules for repeat notes. Read her
sections 8.85 to 8.87 (pp. 138-139) on the use of Ibid.

Of even more importance, study sections 8.88 to 8.96 (pp. 139-141) for
"shortened references". Students must use Method A and not B, for such repeat
references! (Section 8.90 - 8.91, pp. 139-140)

7\. Format: Follow Turabian's requirements for Title Page, Preface, and
margins. You should rely on Turabian's Manual in the preparation of every
aspect of your manuscript.

8\. Papers must be carefully written and very carefully proofed for spelling,
punctuation and grammatical errors. Papers (including the first final draft)
which fail to meet a high standard will be returned with failing grades.
Students are urged to read their papers aloud in order to catch run-on and
muddled sentences.

9.First Final Draft: This draft of the paper is NOT a rough draft or any kind
of a preliminary draft! It is intended to be a FINAL draft of the paper. You
should give it the careful attention that you would to a final draft of a
paper for a graduate course. Anything less than that will result in a severe
reduction in grade!

10\. Works Cited: The final bibliography must be a "Works Cited," which means
that it may include only works cited in the footnotes! See Turabian, Chapter
9, pp. 165-174.

11\. Students must submit two (2) copies of the first final draft of the
paper. One will be placed on reserve in the library to be used by your
colleagues in preparing critiques of your work. Only one copy of the second
draft is required, but it will not be returned.

12\. Encyclopedias and textbooks are not acceptable sources for your paper.

13\. Plagiarism: Students should be aware that the use of an author's ideas
without giving proper credit to that author constitutes plagiarism. Students
should note that the use of an author's words without placing those words in
quotation marks and providing proper citation likewise constitutes plagiarism.
Students sometimes believe that by changing an occasional word or two in a
sentence or paragraph, they are avoiding plagiarism. That is NOT the case.
Students must take ideas and information from a source and re-form them into
their own words.

If your instructor suspects intentional or unintentional plagiarism, he will
return a paper ungraded and ask that the student bring his sources to the
office to verify the scholarship.

14\. Objectivity: Apart from scholarship and the quality of the writing,
objectivity may be the most important standard by which your paper will be
judged. Avoid any subject on which you can not attain complete objectivity!
Beware!

15\. Preface: Students should include a Preface for your paper. See Turabian's
section 1.25 for guidance. The Preface should include a clear statement of the
thesis of your paper.

Return to Table of Contents

###  Critiques:

Between March 3 and 24, each student will be required to write a two page
critique of three (3) other first final drafts. Each critique should carefully
analyze the strengths and weaknesses of the paper and should provide concrete
recommendations about how the paper may be strengthened.

Each critique should consist of four sections: The first should deal with the
format (title page, margins, footnote format, Works Cited page, etc.) and the
quality of the writing. A second section should be concerned with the research
and the content of the paper. A third section should address recommendations
for improvement; and in the fourth section, students must check at least eight
footnotes from at least three sources. Students should verify that the
information does come from that source, that the page number and other
footnote information is correct, and that no plagiarism has occurred.

Two (2) copies of each of the three critiques must be provided: one for the
instructor and one (unsigned) for the author of the paper being critiqued.

Return to Table of Contents

###  Conferences:

Students may wish to schedule individual appointments with the instructor
between March 24 - 31 at about the time you will begin your second final
draft.

Return to Table of Contents

###  Oral presentations:

One of the purposes of the course is to sharpen your oral presentation skills.
These presentations have an additional benefit in that they compel you to
consolidate and analyze your material at a time when you are preparing your
final draft of the paper. Each presentation will last approximately fifteen
minutes.  Students will be expected to use a POWERPOINT presentation, to best
illustrate their lecture.

Return to Table of Contents

###  Standardized Achievement Test:

Students will be required to take a departmental Achievement Test, to be
administered one evening (a Thursday) during the semester. No student will be
able to successfully complete the class or graduate without satisfying this
important requirement. Students will also be required to do one or more exit
questionnaires for the benefit of the department.

Return to Table of Contents

###  Additional Bibliography:

  * Barzun, Jacques. _On Writing, Editing, and Publishing_. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, l985.

Return to Table of Contents

* * *

[Return to Spring 1999 Course Syllabi Page](syllabi.htm#Spring 1999 Syllabi)  
[Return to Department of History and Political Science
Homepage](http://web.lwc.edu/academic/las/history/home.htm)  

* * *

