**Philosophy 0210: HISTORY OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY**

{Meets MW 11.00-11.50 in G-24 Cathedral of Learning}  


_Instructor_ : Gerald J. Massey, Ph.D., Distinguished Service Professor of
Philosophy

1009F Cathedral of Learning; Tel: 624-0392 e-mail: gmas+@pitt.edu  


_Office Hours_ : MW 4.00-5.30 & at other times by appointment  


_Teaching Assistants (Recitation Leaders) & Recitation Sections_:

Every student must be enrolled in a recitation section. Students who are
taking the course as a 4-credit writing course must be enrolled in a writing
section, i.e., a W-section.. (The sections that meet twice weekly are the
_writing sections_.)

Chrisoula Andreou andreou+@pitt.edu

Donald Bruckner dwbst15+@pitt.edu

Alexander Pruss pruss+@pitt.edu

_Textbooks_ :

Rene Descartes, _Discourse on Method_ & _The Meditations_ , Hackett paperback

David Hume, _An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding_ , Hackett paperback  


_Course Requirements for students enrolled in 3-credit (non-writing) course_ :

There will be three announced hourly (50-minutes) essay exams, one each on (1)
Descartes's _Discourse on Method_ and his _Meditations on First Philosophy_ ,
(2) Hume's _Enquiry concerning Human Understanding_ , and (3) Kant's
metaphysics & epistemology, and Hume's and Kant's systems of morality. There
will also be a two-hour final examination during the final examination period.

Each student will receive two numerical grades (a) and (b) as follows:

(a) An essay-exam-and-recitation grade determined as follows: Each of the
three essay exams will count 30%, and the quantity & quality of recitation
participation will count 10%;

(b) The final examination grade;

The numerical Course Grade will be the better of (a) and (b).  


_Course Requirements for students enrolled in 4-credit writing course_ :

There will be three announced hourly essay exams, exactly as in the
requirements for the 3-credit course above. There will also be a two-hour
final examination during the final examination period.

Each student will receive three grades (a), (b), and (c), as follows:

(a) An essay-exam-and-recitation grade determined as in (a) above;

(b) The final examination grade;

(c) A writing grade based on assigned papers and revisions (details will be
distributed in

the writing sections);

The Course Grade will be determined as follows: 75% of the better of (a) and
(b); 25% of the writing grade. For example: if the essay-exam grade were 92,
the final-exam grade 85, and the writing grade 88, the numerical Course Grade
would be 91, i.e., 69 (75% of 92) + 22 (25% of 88), which converts (see table
below) into a Course Letter Grade of A- (A minus)..  


_Table for converting Numerical Course Grades into Course Letter Grades_ :

[Fractions will be rounded to the nearest whole number]

97-100 = A+ 87-90 = B+ 77-80 = C+ 67-70 = D+ < 60 = F

93-97 = A 83-87 = B 73-77 = C 63-67 = D

90-93 = A- 80-83 = B- 70-73 = C- 60-63 = D+  


_Academic Integrity_ :

Absolute academic integrity is expected of all students. Anyone who cheats on
an examination will receive a failing Course Grade. Similarly, anyone who
plagiarizes a paper will receive a failing Course Grade. Any students who are
uncertain about what counts as cheating or plagiarism should ask their
recitation leader to explain these concepts to them. Ignorance of applicable
standards of academic integrity will not be accepted as a defense. (The
Instructor has a reputation for being sympathetic to students \-- _except when
they violate the canons of academic integrity_.)  


[_Examination Questions_ :](TOPICS.HUM.htm)

The questions that appear on the hourly essay exams and on the final
examination will be drawn from lists of questions distributed (electronically)
in advance of the given examination.  


_Electronic Distribution of Course Materials_ :

From time to time, such course materials as lists of possible essay-exam
questions, lists of possible final-exam questions, and installments of the
Study Guide will be distributed electronically. Students can download
materials by visiting the Instructor's webpage at: www.pitt.edu/~gmas

Transparencies  
[ONE](http://www.pitt.edu/~gmas/0210/TRANSPCY_1.htm)  
[TWO](http://www.pitt.edu/~gmas/0210/TRANSPCY_2.htm)  
[THREE](http://www.pitt.edu/~gmas/0210/TRANSPCY_3.htm)  
[FOUR](http://www.pitt.edu/~gmas/0210/TRANSPCY_4.htm)  
[FIVE](http://www.pitt.edu/~gmas/0210/TRANSPCY_5.htm)  
[SIX](http://www.pitt.edu/~gmas/0210/TRANSPCY_6.htm)

_Study Guide_ :  
[1 Discourse on Method](http://www.pitt.edu/~gmas/0210/guide1_mod.html)  
[2 Meditations on First
Philosophy](http://www.pitt.edu/~gmas/0210/studyguide2.htm)  
[3 Inquiry Concerning Human
Understanding](http://www.pitt.edu/~gmas/0210/HUME_SG.htm)

The Instructor will prepare a Study Guide, which is designed to help the
student understand the writings of Descartes and Hume, and to get the most out
of them. Installments of the Study Guide will be distributed electronically
from time to time. Students are urged to refer frequently to this Study Guide
when they are reading the texts of Descartes and Hume.  


_A Word or Two about Philosophy and Philosophical Texts_ :

Philosophical texts cannot be read and understood like novels or short
stories. They must be worked through slowly, carefully, and reflectively. In
many respects philosophical writings resemble sophisticated legal documents
such as Supreme Court opinions. It is, therefore, no accident that many
leading attorneys and judges (e.g., the late Louis Nizer and Judge Learned
Hand) have had substantial philosophical training, and that many leading
jurists recommend the study of philosophy as an ideal preparation for the law.  


One skill you should take away from this course is an enhanced ability to read
a text closely, to grasp the concepts employed or introduced, to recognize
presuppositions and assumptions, to identify and evaluate the reasoning, to
weigh the evidence for and against positions taken, and to ferret out
implications of claims or assertions. These quintessentially philosophical
skills are of incalculable value in virtually all walks of life, but
especially in such professions as law, medicine, science, and education.

