**THE WESTERN TRADITION OF POLITICAL THOUGHT: MODERN**

**Political Science 310A**

**Winter 1996**

MEB 238 Tues/Thurs 11:30-1:20

**Professor:** Christine Di Stefano

**Office hours:** Tues 2-4

**Gowen Hall 37**

**Phone:** 543-9254

Please read this syllabus carefully. If you have any questions, direct them
immediately to Professor Di Stefano. You are responsible for the information
in this syllabus. If you should lose this syllabus, ask for a replacement
copy.

_Course description:_ This course will provide a selective survey of modern
(not to be confused with contemporary) political theory, including primary
source works of Karl Marx, Alexandra Kollontai, John Stuart Mill, W.E.B. Du
Bois, Max Weber, Friedrich Nietzsche, and Richard Wright. Special attention
will be given to each theorist's unique and enduring attempt to analyze the
modern Western experience. Key themes include: diverse meanings and
assessments of modernity; narratives of modernity and its non-modern
"others;" the relationship between modernity and modern emancipatory
movements; the relationship between modernity and colonialism; the impact of
modernity on intimate relationships; the question of historical progress
(i.e., are modern people better off than their pre-modern predecessors and
non-Western contemporaries?); the declining role of religion, tradition, and
communities in modern societies; modernity as experienced by disenfranchised
populations; modernity as myth; intimations of postmodernity.

_Prerequisites:_ POL S 201 strongly recommended. For nonmajors, previous
coursework in early modern or modern Western history, history of ideas, or
philosophy is recommended. **Students** (including Political Science majors)
**with none of these prerequisites are strongly advised against taking this
course.**

_Bad reasons for taking this course:_ if you are taking this course only
because it fits into your time schedule or meets a requirement for your major,
you are very likely making a serious mistake. Get out now, before it's too
late!

_Good reasons for taking this course:_ If you enjoy reading (lots of it) and
sustained theoretical inquiry, then you have probably chosen the right class.
If you are motivated to develop skills of argumentation through writing,
you're in the right place. If you can follow ideas without benefit of moving
action pictures, sound tracks, and sound bites, then you will have no problem
keeping up with lectures. If your response to reading a difficult text is to
reread it, rather than give up, advance to Go and collect $200. If you suspect
that reality is very often a great deal more complicated than we first
imagine, then you are of the theoretical persuasion. If you are curious about
some of the core ideas that have shaped contemporary U.S. culture (for good
and for ill), the  "relevance" of this class will not remain a mystery to you.

_Class format:_ Lecture/discussion

_Requirements:_ This course is reading and writing intensive. You are expected
to complete reading assignments by the date on which lectures for the those
assignments have been scheduled. Students will be expected to complete **two
exams, two five-page papers, and one comprehensive final exam,** all based on
assigned class readings. You will notice below that five exams and five paper
assignments are scheduled for the quarter. It is up to students to decide
which two exams and which two paper assignments to complete. But you must
complete two of each, in addition to taking the final comprehensive exam on
June 3. Please note that, with the exception of the last paper on Nietzsche,
**papers must be turned** in **at the start of class on the due date.** (For
instructions on the Nietzsche paper assignment, consult p. 4 of this
syllabus.) **Late papers will not be accepted, except** in **documented cases
of medical emergency or personal/family crisis.** Students are responsible for
taking two of the scheduled in-class exams and for completing two paper
assignments on time. **No** substitutions are allowed. If you miss one or more
of the assigned paper/exam assignments, a grade of

> > 0.0 will be entered for each missed assignment.

_Grading:_ Class attendance and participation in discussions may help to raise
the final grade, which will be based on the exams and papers (80%) and
comprehensive final exam (20%). Please note that University policy on the
grade of  "incomplete" will be followed in this course. As stated on p. 33 of
the UW General Catalogue: "An incomplete is given only when the student has
been in attendance and has done satisfactory work until within two weeks of
the end of the quarter and has furnished proof satisfactory to the instructor
that the work cannot be completed because of illness or other circumstances
beyond the student's control.it

_Accessing the instructor:_ You will note that my office hours and office
phone number are posted on this syllabus. My office phone is also equipped
with an answering machine, so you can leave a message at any time. Your best
assurance of communicating with me outside of class is during office hours or
by telephone. Students are encouraged to drop by during my office hours for
informal discussion regarding the substance of the course or to discuss your
concerns about the course and your performance on exams and assignments. I am
also available to meet with small groups of students for coffee and discussion
at the initiative of students and with advance notice. Students may also
request an individual meeting time with me by appointment.

_Disability accomodations:_ If you would like to request academic
accomodations due to a disability, please contact Disabled Students Services,
448 Schmitz, 543-8924 (V/TDD). If you have a letter from Disabled Student
Services indicating you have a disability that requires academic
accomodations, please present the letter to me so we can discuss the
accomodations you might need for class.

**REQUIRED READINGS**

The following texts have been ordered at the University Bookstore and are on
reserve at the library:

Karl Marx, _Selected Writings_ (Hackett)

_J.S._ Mill, _On Liberty_ (Hackett)

J.S. Mill, _On the Sublection of Women_ (Hackett)

W.E.B. Du Bois, _The Souls of Black Folk_ (Penguin)

Max Weber, _The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism_ (Scribners)

Friedrich Nietzsche, _On the Genealogy of Morals_ (Vintage)

Richard Wright, _White Man, Listen!_ (Harper Collins)

**These reprints will be placed on reserve in the library:**

> Alexandra Kollontai, "The Social Basis of the Woman Question" "Working Woman
and Mother"

>

> "Theses on Communist Morality"

>

> "Sexual Relations and the Class Struggle"

>

> "Communism and the Family"

**READING ASSIGNED AND CLASS SCHEDULE**

> I. **Karl Marx: Modernity as Radical Freedom**

**January 7: Introduction to the course and preliminary lecture on Marx**

**January 9: Marx, "Excerpt-Notes of 1844,11 "Alienated Labor," "Private
Property and Communism," The ****_Communist Manifesto_**

**January 14: Marx,** ** _Capital_** **, vol. 1, selections (pp. 214-264)
January 16: Marx,** ** _Capital_** **, vol 1, selections (pp. 264-300)**

**January 21: Kollontai, "The Social Basis of the Woman Question,it "Working
Woman and Mother," "Theses on Communist Morality," "Sexual Relations and the
Class Struggle," "Communism and the Family" (reprints on reserve)**

**January 23: In class exam or paper due on January 28**

> **II. John Stuart Mill: Modernity as Rational Freedom**

**January 28: Mill,** ** _On Liberty_** **, chapters I-IV**

**January 30: Mill,** ** _On Liberty_** **, chapter V**

**Mill,** ** _On the Subiection of Women_** **, chapters I & II**

**February 4: Mill,** ** _On the Sublection of Women_** **, chapters III &
IV**

**February 6: In class exam or paper due on February 11**

> **III. W.E.B. Du Bois: Double-Consciousness at the Dawn of Freedom**

**February 11: Du Bois,** ** _The Souls of Black Folk_** **, chapters I-V**

**February 13: Du Bois,** ** _The Souls of Black Folk_** **, chapters VI-IX**

**February 18: In class exam or paper due February 20**

> **IV. Max Weber: The Limits of Modernity**

**February 20: Weber,** ** _The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of
Capitalism_** **, chapters I, II & III**

**February 25: Weber,** ** _The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of
Capitalism_** **, chapter IV (Part A only), chapter V**

**February 27: In class exam or paper due March 4**

> **V. Friedrich Nietzsche: Modernity as Nihilism**

**March 4: Nietzsche,** ** _The Genealogy of Morals_** **, Preface and First
Essay**

**March 6: Nietzsche,** ** _The Genealogy of Morals_** **, Second Essay**

> **VI. Richard Wright: Modernity Unbound**

**March 11: Wright, "The Psychological Reactions of Oppressed People," and
"Tradition and Industrialization,llin ****_White Man, Listen!_**

**March 13: In class exam on Nietzsche or Nietzsche paper due on Monday, March
17. This paper must be turned in to the Political Science main office, in
Gowen 101, by 4 p.m.**

**March 19 (Wednesday): Final exam, 4:30-6:30 p.m.**

[**Back to CHID Homepage**](http://depts.washington.edu/chid/)

