DRAFT SYLLABUS

DO NOT REPRODUCE WITHOUT SPECIFIC PERMISSION FROM THE AUTHORS



Mount Saint Mary College  
Newburgh, New York

**MST 101 - Math, Science, and Technology I**

Fall 2000



Dr. Lynn E. Maelia S. Pat Sullivan OP

Aquinas 205 Aquinas 12-F

569-3131 569-3267

maelia@msmc.edu sullivan@msmc.edu

Office hours: Office hours:

T,W,Th: 11-12 M: 11-12, T,Th: 1:30-2:30

and by appointment and by appointment

inclement weather phone: 569-3500



Course Description:

This course will introduce students to the scientific method, experimental
design, mathematical data analysis, information retrieval and assessment.
Integrated throughout the course will be the history and philosophy of
science, mathematical theory and problem-solving strategies. Students will
engage in inquiry based and collaborative learning and develop both written
and oral communication skills. This course will satisfy the college's computer
literacy requirement.



Outcomes:

Students will lessen their anxiety of math and science and be able to
appreciate the relevance of math and science in everyday situations. At the
end of MST 101, a student will be able to:



* ask questions that can be answered by an experiment

* design an experiment

* analyze data for trends

* use a spreadsheet

* present experimental findings orally and in writing

* use word processing

* make and interpret graphs

* use statistics to assess the validity of data

* use fractions, ratios, decimals, and irrational numbers

* understand and use scientific notation

* understand and use different methods of measurement

* understand the limitations of measuring devices

* understanding the differences between qualitative and quantitative data

* retrieve information by traditional and electronic means

* understand the development and use of the real number system



Attendance:

Attendance is mandatory. Three consecutive unexplained absences must be
reported to the registrar. Excessive absence can be cause for loss of a grade
or failure. Attendance will be a part of your grade.



Assessment:

In-class assignments and homework will be graded according to the following
scale:



Grade Criteria/Performance

A Consistently outstanding work that shows mastery of the material relevant to
the assignment. Work displays evidence of well-developed high-order thinking
and problem solving skills, including the ability to define a problem, the
ability to recognize, develop and evaluate different hypotheses or solutions,
the ability to find patterns and meaning in complex data, the ability to
evaluate the reliability of different sources of information, the ability to
generalize from specifics, where warranted, and the ability to make reasoned
judgments, even with incomplete information.

B Consistently very good work that shows mastery of material relevant to the
assignment. Work displays evidence of high-order thinking and problem solving
skills, as above, but with some difficulties.

C Good quality work showing mastery of the material, but with some weakness.
Work meets requirements for the assignment but shows little, if any, evidence
of high-order processes, such as those listed above.

D Assignment is completed, but is of poor quality with major weaknesses.
Mastery of the material is in doubt and high-order processes are not evident.

F Assignment is not completed on time, does not meet minimum criteria, or is
plagiarized or otherwise dishonest.



Numerical grading for assignments will be:



A = 95 B = 85 C = 75 D = 65

A- = 92 B- = 82 C- = 72 F = 50

B+ = 88 C+= 78 D+= 68



Final grades will be weighted as follows:

Attendance and participation 15%

Assignments (in-class and homework) 35%

Exams 30%

Final project 20%



FINAL LETTER GRADING:



92-100 A 75-77 C+

88-92 A- 72-74 C

85-87 B+ 68-71 C-

82-84 B 65-67 D+

78-82% B- 60-64 D

< 60 F

Tentative Schedule:

Date

|

Topic  
  
---|---  
  
Sep. 6

|

Introduction/ Data collection, tables and charts using Quattro Pro  
  
11

|

Graphing and sampling  
  
13

|

Analyzing Pie Charts using percentages & fractions  
  
18

|

Word processing using WordPerfect & importing graphs & tables from Quattro Pro  
  
20

|

Using the Scientific method as a means of investigation  
  
25

|

Information retrieval using computer & manual searching  
  
27

|

Questioning / hypothesis formation  
  
Oct. 2

|

Measurement systems: theory & practice  
  
4

|

Exam 1/ Experimental design  
  
11

|

Design & implementation of experiments  
  
16

|

Numerical analysis of student data  
  
18

|

Circles measurement and the concept of Pi (p)  
  
23

|

Statistical analysis of data  
  
25

|

Writing lab reports/ word processing  
  
30

|

Data modeling  
  
Nov. 1

|

Exam 2/ developing an oral presentation  
  
6

|

Student oral reports due/ introduction to technology  
  
8

|

Technology - design  
  
13

|

Technology - Application & testing - Experiment 1 Laboratory Report Due  
  
15

|

Density - concept and experiment  
  
20

|

Oral reports of design projects  
  
27

|

Statistical analysis of experimental data- Design project Laboratory Report
Due  
  
29

|

Geometric concepts  
  
Dec. 4

|

Geometric applications  
  
6

|

Exam 3/ Development of lesson plans  
  
11

|

Student Lesson Plans - final project  
  
13

|

Student Lesson Plans - final project  
  
18

|

Student Lesson Plans - final project  
  
|

Final Exam period Post- assessment  
  
Learning Strategies:

Cooperative learning will be utilized as the underlying motivation for group
assignments. Cooperative learning assumes that students learn from each other
as well as from the instructor. Students are responsible for not only their
own learning, but also for the learning of the other members of the group.
While some class time will be given for group work, groups are expected to
meet outside of class time if needed.

