![](../../../images/r.jpg)  
---  
|   | **Spring 2000**  
 **POL 3235  
Democracy and Citizenship**  
---|---  
![](../../../images/2-courses.jpg)  
|  Prof. Lisa Disch  
[LDISCH@POLISCI.UMN.EDU](mailto:ldisch@polisci.umn.edu)  
Social Science Tower 1472: 6-7825  
410 Ford Hall: 4-9809  
Hours: Tuesdays 2:15-3:30 (SST)  
Thursdays 2:15-3:30 (410 Ford)  
  
T. A. Matt Weidenfeld  
[MWEIDEN@POLISCI.UMN.EDU](mailto:mweiden@polisci.umn.edu)  
Social Science Tower 1368: 4-4029  
  

**COURSE DESCRIPTION**

  

What is the most important feature of democracy? That it protects your rights?
That it gives you an opportunity to participate in the process of government?
In this intermediate-level course, designed for undergraduate majors and non-
majors in political science, we examine a range of answers to this question
through primary texts from the history of political thought. We also link
those texts to problems and dilemmas of contemporary politics. This course is
designed to foster critical thinking about the limits of democracy and
citizenship under contemporary social conditions. It also seeks to realize a
modestly democratic ethos in the classroom. To that end, we will use
participatory learning strategies including peer work groups, critical
response papers, and group discussion days on which students are primarily
responsible for teaching the assigned material.

  

**LEARNING OBJECTIVES**

  

This is a liberal arts course whose principal objective is for students to
deepen their appreciation for the texts of John Locke, James Madison, Jean-
Jacques Rousseau, J. S. Mill and Karl Marx by putting those texts to work on
their worlds. We will realize this objective, in part, through close reading.
These are dense and difficult texts; your weekly reading load is calculated to
encourage you to read them more than once. We will also realize the objective
by banishing mid-term and final exams, which principally test for mastery of
content, in favor of two kinds of writing assignments that develop critical
thinking, together with its expression in clear, cogent writing. To build
comprehension skills, students will write five microthemes over the course of
the semester. To promote critical reasoning, students will write three
preparation papers.

  

**REQUIRED TEXTS**

(available at H. D. Smith Bookstore in Blegen Hall basement)

  

John Stuart Mill, _On Liberty_ , ed. Elizabeth Rappaport (Indianapolis:
Hackett).

Jean-Jacques Rousseau, _On the Social Contract_ , trans. Donald A. Cress
(Indianapolis: Hackett).

  

**Copies Packet available at Paradigm Course Resource (Dinkydale Dome; 1501
Washington Ave, SE).

  

**OFFICE HOURS**

  

Tu 2:15 - 3:30 1472 Social Science Tower; 6-7825

Th 2:15 - 3:30 410 Ford Hall (CAFS Office); 4-9809

  

If you have a question or problem between office-hour days, I encourage you to
communicate with me by e-mail, which I check every weekday. Please do not
submit your assignments by e-mail.

  

**ACCESSIBILITY**

  

If you have a condition that affects your ability to participate fully in
class or to meet all course requirements, please speak with me after the first
day of class so that we can work together to arrange appropriate
accommodations. This syllabus and other course materials can be made available
in alternate formats.

  

**COURSE EXPECTATIONS**

  

1\. Read the syllabus thoroughly.

  

2\. Read assigned texts and articles in time for their presentation in class.

  

3\. Attend class and participate actively, in ways that are constructive and
respectful of me as well as your classmates.

  

4\. Participate in a "participatory learning" group in class with two or three
other students on a regular basis. In addition to your own learning, you will
also be responsible for the learning of your group mates. It is up to you to
ensure that they get something interesting and useful from this course.

  

5\. Complete five microthemes on time.

  

6\. Complete three preparation papers on time.

  

**ASSIGNMENTS**

  

Microthemes

  

A microtheme is a short (approx 300 word), focused response to a single
question that trains students to summarize an argument or section of an
argument for an audience of imagined readers who are unfamiliar with it. It
can also be a response to a critical question that trains students in
persuasive writing. This task builds reading comprehension skills, gives
practice in following and formulating arguments, and prepares students to
write critical essays of their own.

  

We put few comments on microthemes. Instead, we score microthemes according to
precise criteria, specified in advance, so that your score gives you a clear
idea of what you did well and where you need improvement. In addition, we will
xerox and distribute high-scoring microthemes (with names removed) to serve as
an example for next time. In sum, microthemes are more like a running mid-
term/final examination than they are like an essay. In contrast to a mid-term
or final examination, however, we expect clear and precise writing, specific
page references, and creativity. NOTE: microthemes must be typed and submitted
on **one side of** a 5" x 8" index card.

  

Preparation Papers

  

A preparation paper is a short critical essay in response to a focused
discussion question. Although its focus is not comprehension, it presupposes
that you have mastered the key concepts of a reading or group of readings, and
can converse fluently about them. Preparation papers are due three times this
semester, on days when we break into peer work groups. The papers take the
place of my lecture and must be prepared on time; they provide the basis for
the in-class work of group discussion.

  

Participatory Learning Groups

  

Participatory learning is the classroom use of structured small group
interaction so that students work together to maximize their own and each
other's learning. Despite considerable research which demonstrates that
participatory learning is superior to traditional lecturing for developing
students' higher-level reasoning and fostering positive relationships among
students, it is infrequently practiced at the college level, particularly at
large public universities such as this one. In this class we will make use of
peer work groups of 3 or 4 students each.

  

A peer work group is not the same as a small discussion group. It has a
precisely organized structure which consists of five basic elements. 1)
_Positive interdependence_ which means organizing tasks so that members must
work together to succeed. We will achieve this by role differentiation within
the group. 2) _Face-to-face interaction_ which simply involves devoting some
part of class time to group work. 3) _Individual accountability_ which is
achieved through individualized measures of participation and achievement (the
preparation paper). 4) Teaching _social skills_ by clearly spelling out the
different group roles and monitoring performance. 5) _Group process_ involves
devoting a few minutes at the end of a group exercise for members to evaluate
how well the group is working.

  

At least three days this semester we will break into peer work groups for a
majority of the class session (about 1 hour of group work and 15 minutes of
wrap-up discussion). I will not lecture on group days. Instead, you will be
responsible for presenting the material to each other, and for engaging in a
critical discussion. To ensure that these days are productive, you will write
**preparation papers** for these days. Preparation papers are an individual
assignment, prepared prior to class. In class, each group will also do a group
assignment (a worksheet) that records your group discussion, and helps you put
your thoughts in order for the large-group wrap-up.

  

Informal in-class writing

  

Occasionally, as a stimulus to class discussion, we will do informal writing
(on a question you will have received in advance). These assignments will not
be graded. They will be collected, and we will record the fact that you did
(or did not do) them.

  

**GRADING**

  

I observe CLA standards for grading.

  

Determination of Final Grade

  

Your grade will be based on a straight scale. The microtheme and preparation
paper assignments are weighted as follows:

  

5 Microthemes @ 15 points

3 Preparation Papers @ 15 points

Total Points for Class = 120

  

Extensions and Absences

  

Microthemes are due at the end of class. Late Microthemes will lose **one**
point for every weekday they are late. Extensions for microthemes can be
arranged only in the case of a doctor-certified illness.

  

Because preparation papers are assignments to prepare you for an in-class
exercise, they must be finished by the beginning of class. They are of little
use to you and your classmates if you do not attend class the day they are
due, and submit them on time. Consequently, extensions for preparation papers
cannot be arranged, and a more serious late penalty is assessed. Your
preparation paper will lose **three** points if you missed class on the
assigned day, or did not come to class with finished paper in hand.
Preparation papers will lose **one** point for every additional weekday they
are late.

  

Incompletes

  

I do not grant incompletes except under the most extraordinary of
circumstances.

  

**DAILY SCHEDULE OF ASSIGNMENTS**

  

Jan 18 Introduction; no reading.

  

**What Kind of Democracy is This?**

  

Jan 20 **Joan Didion, "Slouching Towards Bethlehem."

_Reading Questions: Imagine that the first stanza of the Yeats poem describes
the Old World's reaction to the American Revolution (it doesn't-just imagine).
Why might the spectre of an experiment in self-government inspire such a
response? What did Haight-Ashbury stand for in the 1960s? What do_ _you
associate with it? Did Didion find political meaning in Haight-Ashbury? Did
she "sell anyone out" in writing this essay? What stands at the corner of
Haight and Ashbury today?_

  

Jan 25 **Declaration of Independence & U. S. Constitution

_Reading Questions: What is the most important feature of democracy_ _to you:
that it protects your rights? That it gives you an opportunity to participate
in government, or to express oppposition? Which of these was this government
designed to do best?_

  

Jan 27 **Federalist #9, #10

_Reading Questions: What are the federalists afraid of? What metaphors do they
use to describe it? What is the "first object" of government, according to
Madison (#10)? What is a "faction"? What does Madison mean by
"representation"?_

  

Feb 1 **Federalist #14, #39, #51

**First Microtheme Due**

  

Feb 3 **Essays of Brutus

  

Feb 8 **Lani Guinier, "The Tyranny of the Majority," & "Groups, Representation
and Race-Conscious Districting"

  

Feb 10 **First Preparation Paper Due**

  

**Citizenship as Civic Duty**

  

Feb 15 Jean-Jacques Rousseau, _On the Social Contract_ :

Book I: read all.

  

Feb 17 Rousseau, Book I: chapters 6-9 (read again); Book II: chapters 1, 3, 4,
6

**Second Microtheme Due**

  

Feb 22 Rousseau, Book II: chapters 8-11; Book III: chapters 12-15

**Carole Pateman, "Rousseau, John Stuart Mill, and G.D.H. Cole: A
Participatory Theory of Democracy."

  

Feb 23 Lobby Day at the Capitol (tentative): 1:00 - 3:00 pm.

  

Feb 24 No class (as compensation for Lobby Day).

  

Feb 29 **Michael Pollan, "Town-Building is no Mickey Mouse Operation"
(informal writing in-class).

  

**Where does the public good stop and individuality begin?**

  

Mar 2 J.S. Mill, _On Liberty_ , pp. 1-33.

  

Mar 7 J. S. Mill, pp. 33-71.

  

Mar 9 J.S. Mill, pp. 73-91.

**Third Microtheme Due**

  

**Citizenship vs. Dependency: Is it** ** _literally_** **the rights of Men?**

  

Mar 14 **Carole Pateman, "The Fraternal Social Contract"

  

Mar 16 **Nancy Fraser and Linda Gordon, "A Genealogy of _Dependency_ : Tracing
a Keyword of the U. S. Welfare State."

  

Mar 21 **Nancy Fraser, "Gender Equity and the Welfare State: A Postindustrial
Thought Experiment"

**Second Preparation Paper Due**

  

**Are individual liberty and market freedom compatible? (Or, Can "the
individual" survive in a commodified world?)**

  

Mar 23 **John Locke, "Selections" from _Second Treatise of Government,_ read
all.

  

Mar 27-31: SPRING BREAK

  

April 4 **Locke, re-read Chapter V

**Fourth Microtheme Due**

  

April 6 **Karl Marx, _Capital_ , pp. 125-40.

  

April 11 **Marx, pp. 163-77.

  

April 13 **Marx, pp. 270-280.

**Fifth Microtheme Due**

  

April 18 **Michael D. Smith, "The Empire Filters Back: Consumption,
Production, and the Politics of Starbuck's Coffee"

  

April 20 **Serra A. Tinic, "United Colors and Untied Meanings: Benetton and
the Commodification of Social Issues," and **Patricia J. Williams, "The Death
of the Profane"

**Third Preparation Paper Due**

  

April 25 Film: "Berkeley in the 60's" (Part I).

  

April 27 Film: "Berkeley in the 60's" (Part II).

  

May 2 Port Huron Statement (informal writing in class)

  

May 4 Last Day of Class: No reading. Return Microthemes and Preparation
Papers.

  

**Participatory Learning Groups: Roles and Tasks**

  

Participatory learning often works best when you think specifically about what
makes a group discussion go well, enumerate the tasks that successful
discussion entails, and assign those tasks to individual group members. Think
about beginning with these:

\-- _reader/tracker_ : initiates group discussion by reading task; keeps group
on track by periodically restating group's major conclusions as answer begins
to emerge, or restating question as discussion diverges

  

\-- _recorder_ : take notes as discussion proceeds. _Formulate_ your group's
answers to the worksheet tasks, and record them on the worksheet. Notice that
the work of the recorder and that of the reader/tracker are closely related;
if the discussion does not stay on track, it is difficult for the recorder to
formulate succinct answers to the worksheet questions. Try to find innovative
ways of working together.

  

\-- _checker/encourager_ : encourages each group member to participate by
periodically asking different members of the group to participate; it is your
responsibility to use humor, treats, threats , etc. to ensure a fair sharing
of labor in your small group, and to ensure that each member of the group
understands the rationale behind the arguments and answers you produce.

  

\-- _accuracy coach_ : call for point of information when it seems as if
another member makes a mis-statement about the text, the question, or an error
in restating the rationale and conclusions of the group

  

Group Processing: At the end of each group work session, it is important to
assess your group work. Pay attention to each of the roles AND to the dynamic
of their relationship to each other.

  
  
|  ** [S UMMER 2001](../../summer2001/index.html)  
  
[SPRING 2001](../spring2001/index.html)  
  
[FALL 2000](../fall2000/index.html)  
  
[SUMMER 2000](../../summer2000/index.html)  
  
[SPRING 2000](../index.html)  
  
[FALL 1999](../../fall1999/index.html)  
  
[SUMMER 1999](../../summer1999/index.html)  
  
[SPRING 1999](../index.html)  
  
[WINTER 1999](../../winter1999/index.html)  
  
[FALL 1998](../../fall1998/index.html)  
  
[SUMMER 1998](../../summer1998/index.html)  
  
**  
---|---  
![](../../../images/end.jpg)

