  HISTORY OF SCIENCE:  ORIGINS TO NEWTON  
Dr Robert A. Hatch - HIS 3463 (2507X) \- Summer B 2000  
MTWRF 6 (3.30-4.45) - 2305 Turlington Hall  
---  
In this course we survey changes and developments in Western science (natural
philosophy) from earliest times through the Scientific Revolution of the 17th
century. Lectures, discussions, and readings are concerned with the origin(s),
transmission, and development of scientific and philosophical ideas, and the
emergence of new intellectual, cultural, and linguistic communities and
practices. Particular emphasis is given to changing views and conceptions of
the traditional triad: 'Science, Nature, Man.' There will be a One Hour In-
Class Essay Exam in addition to a Take-Home Last Essay. Please note that
attendance is mandatory, participation expected. Students may chose to write
an extra-credit Optional Research Essay; please see the Study Guide and
elsewhere at this WebSite for details. Office hours for Professor Hatch are
Wednesday, 4.45-6.00pm and by appointment, 4123 Turlington Hall. Students are
strongly encouraged to take advantage of Office Hours. Telephone: 392.0271
(24h machine); E-Mail: ufhatch@ufl.edu. In addition, required materials are
also found at my WebSite: http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/rhatch

* * *

  
Required Reading is taken from the following books and from this WebSite:  
Gator Textbooks, Creekside Mall, 3501 SW 2nd Avenue, Suite D:  374.4500; for
further information see their WebSite: http://www.gatortextbooks.com

* * *

  
If you need a map to find Customcopies click the WebSite:
http://www.customcopies.com/map.html

* * *

  
Hatch, Robert A., Study Guide for the History of Science  
    {Custom Copies: 377.4221; Also at Gator Textbooks; Also on-line at this WebSite}    
Henry, John, The Scientific Revolution & the Origins of Modern Science  
Kuhn, Thomas S., The Copernican Revolution  
Kuhn, Thomas S., The Structure of Scientific Revolutions  
Lindberg, David C., The Beginnings of Western Science  
Toulmin, S. & J. Goodfield, The Fabric of the Heavens {Recommended}  
Westfall, Richard S., The Construction of Modern Science

* * *

  
Recommended Books at the Library:  
E. A. Burtt, The Metaphysical Foundations of Modern Physical Science.  
Herbert Butterfield, The Origins of Modern Science  
Alan Debus, Man and Nature in the Renaissance.  
Edward Grant, Physical Science in the Middle Ages.  
G.E.R. Lloyd, Aristotle: The Growth and Structure of His Thought.  
Carolyn Merchant, The Death of Nature: Women, Ecology, and the Scientific
Revolution.  
Londa Schiebinger, The Mind Has No Sex?: Women in the Origins of Modern
Science.  
Stephen Shapin, The Scientific Revolution

* * *

  
Other recommended volumes are found at Library East & the Science Library

* * *

  
Evaluation

All required work is announced on this syllabus. But please note. This is a
demanding course, particularly as a Summer Session offering.  As this syllabus
indicates, the course involves substantial reading and writing. Attendance is
mandatory and careful preparation and active involvement in discussion is
critical. Evaluation criteria and course requirements are straightforward.
Since a schedule is provided in advance, absences and arrangements for late
work must be approved in advance. Please plan your course schedule and study
commitments with care. When in doubt consult the syllabus, ask questions, and
read ahead. Finally, students are expected to read and understand a number of
items (concerning examinations, writing papers, secondary readings, etc.)
available at my posted WebSite.  This WebSite contains useful items for
students (bibliography, WebLinks, Search Engines, etc.) as well as practical
guides on writing Blue Book Exams and University level essays, as well as
suggestions about Reading Writing.  Students are responsible for reading this
material: http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/rhatch

* * *

  
Evaluation takes five forms:  
1\. Completion and comprehension of assigned readings and lectures.  
2\. Attendance and participation in class lectures and discussions is
mandatory. Please be certain to understand this basic course requirement. In
addition there may be unannounced quizzes {Approximately 20%}  
3\. Mid-Term Exam: Monday, 17 July 2000 (30%) Written in-class 'Blue-Book'
Essay Exam. Please see the WebSite for guidelines and suggestions in preparing
for this exam.  
4\. Take-home Essay: Nota Bene: Due 12.oo Noon Friday 11 August 2000 (c. 50%)
in 4131 Turlington Hall (Main History Office). Written take-home essay: This
Essay exam is limited to 1000 words, the equivalent of five {5} typed pages,
double spaced, typed {no binders please: Kindly staple securely}. Please see
the WebSite for suggestions in preparing and writing this essay. Students
should retain a photocopy of their work for backup purposes. If you wish to
have your essay returned, kindly supply a large manilla envelope (9x12) with
the appropriate postage and address. I will arrange for a Special Federal
Agent to return your essay and final course grade.  
5\. Optional Term Papers: 15-page research essay; due no later than 12.00
Noon, Friday, Week V. The optional paper provides extra credit and can add as
much as one letter to the final course grade. The paper is non compulsory; no
one is penalized for not choosing this option. The term paper allow interested
students to pursue a course topic in greater detail or to identify an area not
treated in this general survey course of readings and lectures. Consider
carefully whether you have sufficient time to do a proper job. The Optional
Paper should represent a solid and rewarding effort. It is possible that your
time would be better directed to the required readings. Required reading
increases in quantity, subtlety, and significance as the course aims at the
Last Take-home Essay. In all cases, the topic for the Optional Term Paper must
be approved by your instructor. Please consult the Study Guide and the WebSite
noted above for details regarding topic selection, approval, submission
timetables, general bibliography, and suggestions about research and writing.
As always, students should take advantage of Office Hours for discussion and
consultation.

* * *

  
PART I:    ANCIENT & MEDIEVAL NATURAL PHILOSOPHY

* * *

  
WEEK I: 3-7 July  
M - 6   Plotting Our Course

T - 6 - 4 July - Independence Day: No Class: Have Fun!  
W-F - 6 - Egyptian and Babylonian Science: A Sketch

Readings: Kuhn, Copernican, Foreword; Begin Toulmin, Introduction & Chap. 1;
Acquaint yourself with all required books. Lindberg, Chapters 1 & 2; Visit
WebSite. Begin with Teaching Resources; then read: Undergraduate Guide to the
History of Science.  
NB: The Study Guide is self-paced by topic: RRSR {Read, Review & Study
Regularly}: Hatch - History of Science Study Guide  
Discussion Topic: Science, Myth, Language  
Early Greek Cosmology: The Pre-Socratics  
Readings: Toulmin, Chapter 2; Lindberg, Chapter 2, continue;  
Continue WebSite Teaching Resources & Hatch - History of Science Study Guide  
Discussion Topic: Truth & Reality?

Aristotle: The Aristotelian Synthesis  
Readings: Lindberg, Chapter 3; Toulmin, Chapter 3; Kuhn, Copernican, Chapter
1-2.  
Continue WebSite Teaching Resources & Hatch - History of Science Study Guide  
Discussion Topic: Aristotle vs. Plato  

* * *

  
WEEK II: 10-14 July  
M-F-6   Ptolemy & the Almagest (Mathematical Synthesis) -- {slide show}  
Readings: Toulmin, Chap. 3 & 5; Kuhn, Copernican Chap. 2; Lindberg, Chapter 5  
Finish WebSite Teaching Resources & Continue: Hatch - History of Science Study
Guide  
Discussion Topic: Astronomy & Cosmology

From Ancient to Medieval Science: An Overview (film)  
Readings: Lindberg, Chapters 8 & 9; Toulmin, Chap. 6.  
Continue: Hatch - History of Science Study Guide  
Discussion Topic: Transmission Problems

Medieval and Renaissance Astronomy  
Readings: Kuhn, Copernican, Chapter 4; Lindberg, Chapters 11, 12, 14.  
Continue: Hatch - History of Science Study Guide  
Discussion Topic: Discussion REVIEW: Review All Required Texts; Review All
Notes.

* * *

  
PART II:    THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION

* * *

WEEK III: 17-21 July  
M-6:   MID-TERM EXAM: Monday 17 July: Bring Blue Exam Booklet(s)

T-6: NO CLASS Tuesday  
Readings: Review and study all readings and notes; Continue Toulmin; Begin
Henry.

The Scientific Revolution: A Portrait {slides}  
Readings: Toulmin, Chapter 7; Begin J. Henry.  
Continue: Hatch - History of Science Study Guide;  
Read: Hatch - The Scientific Revolution: Paradigm Lost?  
Begin: Hatch - The Scientific Revolution HomePage  
Discussion Topic: Continuity, Revolution; Internal, External

* * *

  
WEEK IV: 24-28 July

M-F-6   Copernicus & the Copernican Disturbance {Gee Nick! No Revolution?}  
Readings: Review Lindberg, Chapters 11 & 12; Kuhn, Copernican, Chapter 5
(again); begin Chapter 6; Continue J. Henry. Continue: Hatch - History of
Science Study Guide; then Read & Review: The Big Guys - The Scientific
Revolution  
Discussion Topic: Revolutionary Points of Detail

Tycho Brahe, Observer, Cosmologist & Bon Vivant  
Readings: Kuhn, Copernican, Chapter 6; Continue J. Henry;  
Continue: Hatch - History of Science Study Guide  
See: Hatch - The World Systems  
Discussion Topic: World Systems, Birds, Rabbits, etc.

Kepler & the New Astronomy {A Keplerian Revolution?}  
Readings: Westfall, Chapter 1; Continue J. Henry;  
Continue: Hatch - History of Science Study Guide  
Discussion Topic: Were These Guys Geniuses?

Galileo & the New Astronomy {A Galilean Revolution?}  
Readings: Reread: Kuhn, Copernican, pp. 117-118, 219-226;  
Toulmin, Chapter 8; Kuhn, Copernican, Chapter 7;  
Continue J. Henry; Continue: Hatch \- History of Science Study Guide  
Discussion Topic: Metaphysics, Method, and Experiment

* * *

WEEK V: 31 July - 4 August  
M-F-6   Ismael Boulliau {A Copernican Synthesis?}  
Readings: Begin Westfall, Chapters 1 & 2; Begin Kuhn, Structure.  
Web-Bio, Ismael Boulliau  
Continue: Hatch - History of Science Study Guide  
Discussion Topic: The Geometrical Spirit and Mechanical Worldviews

Descartes & the Mechanical Philosophy [The Cartesian Synthesis]  
Readings: Westfall, Chapter 2 & 3; Toulmin, Chapter 9; finish J. Henry.  Web-
Bio  
Finish Kuhn, Structure. Continue: Hatch - History of Science Study Guide  
Discussion Topic: The Mechanical Philosophy

Isaac Newton & the 'Newtonian Synthesis'  
Readings: Toulmin, Chapter 9-10; Westfall, Chapters 7 & 8;  
Web-Bio(s), Hatch - Sir Isaac Newton;  
Re-read Kuhn, Structure {then re-think Kuhn's Structure}.  
Continue: Hatch - History of Science Study Guide  
Discussion Topic: Mechanism, Materialism, Force--action-at-a-distance!

* * *

WEEK VI: 7-10 August

The Structure of Scientific Revolutions: Of Birds, Rabbits, & Other Living
Things...  
Readings: Review all Readings and Lecture Notes  
Review: Hatch - History of Science Study Guide

Discussion & Review: Toward Synthesis and or Revolution or and / - = . .

* * *

Nota Bene: Last Take-home Essay Due:  
12:00 Noon, Friday 11 August 2000,  
4131 Turlington Hall {History Department Main Office}

Please staple your typewritten exam (no binders please).  Include your name
and SSN on the cover page and (as standard procedure) the Course Title,
Number, and the Date. If you wish to have your essay returned, please attach a
large (9x12) brown clasp envelope with appropriate postage and your address. I
will arrange to have your essay and final course grade delivered by a Special
Federal Agent.  
---  
  
    
    
    


