

![Infofacts Course by Internet](/infofacts/Images/net3-lowres.gif)  
---  
**

FS 453: FOOD LAWS AND REGULATIONS

COURSE DESCRIPTION:** Federal and state laws and regulations, and case law
history affecting food production, processing, packaging, marketing, and
distribution of food and food products. History of food law, enactment of laws
and regulations, legal research, and regulatory agencies.

**

CREDIT:** Three semester credit hours

**

PREREQUISITE** : None

**

*Please note:** Credit will not be given for both FS 453 and FS 553.

**

TUITION AND FEES:** (in state) $222 / (out of state) $411

**

CLASS BEGINS:** May 23, 2001

**

MEDIUM:** Internet

**

**Students must have ready access to an adequate computer with the proper
browser and audio capabilities, and the ability to communicate with the
instructor by e-mail (see the list of minimum hardware and software
requirements on the Distance Education web site: distance.ncsu.edu). Students
should also have experience with the computing skills listed later in this
INFOFACT (see Computing Skills Required for Course Completion).

INSTRUCTOR:** Dr. Pat Curtis, Professor of Food Science is a graduate of Texas
A&M University. She has over 14 years teaching experience and over 5 years
experience teaching this course, two of these via the Internet. For more
information about Dr. Curtis, visit her home page at:
<http://www.cals.ncsu.edu/food_science/faculty/curtis>**. For course
information contact:** Dr. Pat Curtis, Department of Food Science, 129 Schaub
Hall, North Carolina State University, Campus Box 7624, Raleigh, NC 27695.
E-mail: [Pat_Curtis@ncsu.edu](mailto:Pat_Curtis@ncsu.edu) or phone:
(919)515-9514, FAX (919)515-7124.

**

WHEN AND WHERE:** All course information will be provided via the Internet
through e-mail and course websites. The syllabus can be found at:
<http://www.cals.ncsu.edu/course/food_law/index.html.new>**.** The course will
begin on May 23, 2001.

**

GOING TO CAMPUS:** All course materials can be accessed via the Internet.
Students are required to either come to campus for exams or arrange for an
approved office campus site (call ACP for details). Communication between the
instructor and students can occur using e-mail, telephone, fax, and surface
mail. Students are welcome to schedule individual and group conferences with
the instructor during the semester.

**

AUDIENCE:** Students, food and related industries, regulators, county
extension agents, high school teachers (food science).

**

COURSE REQUIREMENTS:

Course work:** Students are required to complete each lesson as it is
presented on the World Wide Web. Students must complete all modules to receive
credit for this course. Modules include instructions and all required
assignments, quizzes, and some optional activities. Final and midterm exams
will not be available on the computer. Therefore, the student must contact
instructor to arrange for midterm and final exams. Final exam will be
comprehensive.

**

Assignments:** Each module has at least one assignment that must be completed
and submitted to the instructor via e-mail. Many of these assignments require
you to find information.

**

Project:** Students will be required to research a given topic and present
their findings on the course web forum.

**

Quizzes:** There are pre- and post- module quizzes for each module. These quiz
results will be used to measure the effectiveness of the course. Only the
post-module quizzes will be used to determine your grade, but you must
complete all quizzes to receive full credit. Your score will appear at the
bottom of the quiz once you hit the "submit" button. A list of your answers
will appear in another window. The starred answers are correct.

**

If you take a post-quiz multiple times, only the first quiz you submit will
count towards your grade!

Midterm and Final Exams: **The midterm exam will be given around week 9 of the
semester and the final exam will be given during the final exam week.

**

SPECIAL NOTE:** NC State students have access to direct high-capacity Internet
connections in the computer labs. The majority of those will be equipped with
high level net-browser software such as Netscape and real audio and real
video.

**

COMPUTING SKILLS REQUIRED FOR COURSE COMPLETION:

**

  * You will need to perform the following basic Internet skills while taking an Internet course. You should test your capabilities for these functions prior to the start of the semester:

  * Access your Unity account

  * Find the NC State web site

  * Use e-mail through the Internet

  * Open an e-mail window

  * Send an e-mail message

  * Use a search engine

  * Make hotlink connections (mouse click on icons and blue underlined text)

  * Open, enter, and post to the discussion group

  * Cut and paste between word-processing software, e-mail, and the web

  * Save as a text, pdf, and/or postscript file (A word of caution: there may be problems doing this with PCs. You will want to try this before the beginning of the semester to work out any problems.

If you are experiencing difficulties with the above tasks, you may want to
contact a computer expert for suggestions in developing these skills or fixing
any computer problem. You may also contact:

North Carolina State University Computer Services Information Center

Room 208 in the Hillsborough Building (on Hillsborough St. across from D.H.
Hill Library)

Telephone: (919) 515-HELP (4357)

E-mail: [help@ncsu.edu](mailto:help@ncsu.edu)

World Wide Web: <http://www2.ncsu.edu/ncsu/cc/pub/unity.html>

**

TEXTBOOK(S):** None

**

REGISTRATION:** Contact the Office of Adult Credit Programs  & Summer Sessions
for registration forms and for questions about the program. You may write to:
Office of Adult Credit Programs & Summer Sessions, North Carolina State
University, Campus Box 7401, Raleigh, NC 27695-7401, U.S.A. We are located in
the McKimmon Center (the corner of Gorman St. and Western Blvd.). Toll free
number: (866) 294-9903; Local: (919) 515-2265, E-mail:
[distance_ed@ncsu.edu](mailto:distance_ed@ncsu.edu) or FAX: (919) 515-9550.
Office hours are 8:00am-8:00pm Monday through Thursday, 8:00am-5:00pm Friday.
Other INFOFACTS may be viewed on our Home Page of the INTERNET:
[http://distance.ncsu.edu](http://distance.ncsu.edu/)

i-fs453 03/15/2001  
  


