# HLS 100 Introduction to Health Science

## FALL 2001 Syllabus

### Instructor: Lily Dow Velarde, Ph.D.  
Assistant Professor,  
Dept. of Health Science

### Office Phone: 505-646-2183;  
Office fax #: 505-646-4343  
Office Location: Academic Research- Bldg. C  
(Corner Standley and Locust Avenues), Rm. 107

### Office Hours: Tu 10:00-11:00 and 1:30-2:30; Wed 1:30-2:30pm, or by
appointment

### Class Text: Information from the NMSU Health Science Dept. website
(www.nmsu.edu/~hlthdpt)

### Class meets in Hardman Hall Rm 216 (see tentative schedule for meeting
dates).

### _Course Description_ :

Presents an overview of the Bachelor of Community Health (BCH) degree, of
professional career opportunities in the realm of public health and community
health education, as well as the functional roles of practice, education, and
research.

  


|

_NOTES:_

(1) This is a WebCT (or hybrid) course. Class will meet for formal class
lectures on the specified dates throughout the semester. Students are not
required to have a personal computer with internet access, as both on- and
off-campus students can use the computers in the NMSU Library or in the
computer labs available across the main NMSU Campus. You are required to check
the HLS 100 Course Homepage at least twice weekly for discussions and e-mail
announcements.

(2)In order to access the HLS 100 homepage through the WebCT site, you should:
a) Connect to [http://salsa.nmsu.edu](http://salsa.nmsu.edu/); b) Click "WebCT
courses" c) Log in by entering your email user name and your student account
number as a password.

(3) As this is a mini-course, please note that the last day to apply for a
refund, to withdraw from the course, and to withdraw from the university (if
this is your only course) is less than half the normal time schedule. Please
check with the NMSU Registrar regarding the new deadlines for an 8-week mini-
course to confirm the actual dates!  
  
---  
  
### _Welcome to HLS 100!_

The BCH degree program, like all undergraduate degree programs offered through
the College of Health and Social Services (CHSS) main campus departments,
requires that you first declare yourself as a "Pre-" major until you are
formally admitted. Thus, when seeking advisement through Ms. Carol MacAlister
or to register  you must initially identify yourself as a "Pre-BCH" major!
Ms. MacAlister is located in the CHSS Dean's Office in the Educational
Services Building.

Upon completion of the admission requirements listed below, including
completion of the Health Science Departmental Application for the BCH and the
required "Conventions of Written English" writing assessment to be given in
this course, your application will be reviewed by the Health Science
Undergraduate Admissions Committee for a final admissions decision. Please
note that Dr. Lily Velarde is the BCH Program Coordinator who, along with Dr.
Steve Arnold the HLS Department Head, reviews applications for consideration
for admissions.

Note that the BCH degree program is one of the few to have been nationally
approved by the Society for Public Health Education (SOPHE) and the American
Association for Health Education (AAHE) Baccalaureate Program Approval
Committee (SABPAC).

### _Admission Requirements_

Students seeking admission to the BCH degree are required to keep the Pre-BCH
designation until they have met the following admission requirements:

A) A cumulative grade point average (GPA) at NMSU of at least 2.5 after
completion of 23 credits of general education course work (may include "CR"
grades for equivalent courses accepted as transfer credit by NMSU).   Read the
"General Education Requirements" section in the most recent NMSU Undergraduate
Catalog.

B) A grade of "S" in this course (HLS 100M) and a grade of "C" or better in
HLS 150.

C) Submission of an application that includes: (1) a brief personal statement
of interest in the profession and in the BCH degree program, (2) a copy of
your most recent NMSU transcript indicating your most recent cumulative GPA,
and (3) your percentile score on the department's writing assessment (College
Board Exam's "Conventions in Written English") which will be administered
through this HLS 100 course.

### _Overview of BCH degree requirements_ :

In addition to completing the department's required  General Education
requirements (41 Gen Ed credits minimum required) and the Health Science Core
Requirements, students must select and complete the required and elective
credits included as part of the BCH Option courses. See the latest copy of the
NMSU Undergraduate Catalog
(<http://www.nmsu.edu/Academic_Progs/Undergraduate_Catalog/>) for the most
recent BCH degree requirements or see
<http://www.nmsu.edu/~hlthdpt/forms/BCH_Advising_Sheet.htm>).  

### _Minors_

The NMSU Department of Health Science also offers three academic minors in:
(1) Community Health, (2) Health Administration, and (3) Gerontology and a
proposed minor in Environmental and Occupational Health. Required and elective
courses for each of these minors are described in the curriculum guides for
minors available through the NMSU Department of Health Science website or
through your advisor.



### \---------------------------------------------

### _Instructional Strategies Used in HLS 100_

This web-facilitated (web-based for the distance education students) course
will feature class lectures on selected dates (see tentative course schedule
attached to this syllabus), with other class meetings available for tutorials,
guest speakers and/or field trips. Most of the assignments for this course are
web-based and can be submitted via the HLS 100 WebCT Homepage as well!

## _HLS 100 Evaluation Criteria (Note: Graded S/U)_

Your final grade for this course will depend upon successfully completing four

assignments (worth 10 points each for 40 points total), a writing assessment
(or alternate writing activity), completion of a personal statement of
interest in pursuing the BCH degree (worth 10 points total) and, a
comprehensive final examination (50 points). Total points: 100 points

### _Assignments & Abstract_

A total of 4 assignments are required in this course. _For complete assignment
instructions, please click on the "Course content" icon on the HLS 100
homepage._

  
The first assignment will require you to conduct an online literature search
using certain national databases made available electronically through the
NMSU Library. You will hear more about how to do this during the second class
meeting (in the Branson Library--the Library Instruction Room). The second
assignment will have you visit and extract information from the homepage of
the National Commission for Health Education Credentialing (NCHEC). The third
assignment involves a visit to the web site of the NMSU Department of Health
Science for a "scavenger hunt" for information regarding the role of community
health educators. The last assignment requires that you prepare an abstract
from a professional publication source on the subject of border health issues.

In addition to the four assignments (due dates on tentative course schedule),
those wishing to make application to the BCH degree program are also required
to complete a 35 minute writing assessment and to write a personal interest
statement describing their reasons for wishing to pursue the BCH degree. Both
are required as admissions steps prior to being considered for entry into the
BCH degree program. Those not wishing to make formal application to the BCH
are given the opportunity to complete an alternative writing assignment in-
class instead of completing the writing assessment and personal interest
statement.

### _Final Examination_

A comprehensive final examination, based on the material provided for your
session readings will be given during the final class period.

### _Grading Scale:_ 70 - 100 = S for satisfactory; below 70 = unsatisfactory.

## _Reserve Readings_

Several readings will either be reserved for your use in this class at the
Circulation Desk of the Zuhl Library or linked to your web-based sessions.
Keeping up with the readings is YOUR responsibility!

## _Tentative Topic Agenda_

###  August 22, Introduction: Welcome and Overview, instructions for logging
on to course on the web

### August 29: Class will meet at the Branson Library (Electronic Instruction
Classroom).  
_Assignment # 1 due date (9/5)_

###   September 5: History of public health and health promotion/ health
education

### Session readings #1

###  

### September 12: Health education profession & certification

### Session readings #2 _Assignment#2: Exploration of the NCHEC, Inc. website
and responding to questions related to your visit to the NCHEC page. Due by
Sept. 19._

###  September 19: Health Science Department Visit. _Class will meet at the
Dept. of Health Science,_ Academic Research Building C (next to Genesis
Center), Room 110. Tour of HLS Dept.and mini-presentations by Dr. Stephen
Arnold, Dept. Head ; Tour or Border Epidemiology Center (Dr. Hugo Vilchis) and
US/MX Border Health Commissioner's office (Dr. Jeffrey Brandon).

### _Assignment #3: Visit to the Dept. of Health Science's website and
responding to designated questions. Due by Sept. 26.  _

### _September 26: Part I --Writing Assessment (Conventions of Written
English/BCH Appl./Personal Interest Statement OR Alternate Writing In-class
Assignment. Part II --APA Style Referencing. Assignment #4: APA-style Article
Abstract, Due by Oct. 3.  _

### _October 3: Review for Final Exam and Course Closure._

### _October 10: FINAL EXAMINATION -- class will meet in regular classroom at
regularly scheduled time._

#  
  
#  
  
#  

