![](sylll_files\\history.gif)

**History 102: World Civilization Since 1300**  
**Spring 2002**

**Instructor: Dr. Jon W. Stauff, Associate Professor of History**  
**230 Ambrose Hall, 333-6389**  
**MWF 10-11, TR 9:15-10:15, or by app't**  
[StauffJonW@ambrose.sau.edu](mailto:StauffJonW@ambrose.sau.edu),
[jstauff@sau.edu](mailto:jstauff@sau.edu), or
[jonstauff@home.com](mailto:jonstauff@home.com)

**Introduction:**

History 102 is a survey of world history from the European Renaissance to the
contemporary period.  In addition to our investigation of political, economic,
social, intellectual, and cultural topics, this semester we will explore the
history of astronomy and examine various "cosmologies" that evolved from
ancient times to the modern period.

History 102 fulfills general education requirements in History and Social
Science, and it is also a required class in the major concentration in
History.  There are no pre-requisites for the course.

**Active Learning and Class Participation:**

We seek to promote an active learning environment in History 102 this
semester.  Students will be expected not only to read course materials and
take appropriate notes during class meetings, but they will also be expected
to prepare short oral presentations on historical documents and present their
findings to their peers during class discussion.  Pertinent questions for the
instructor are welcome and expected during class, and students should feel
free to engage the instructor in conversation during office hours or at some
other mutually-agreed upon time.

**Class Attendance:**

Class attendance is mandatory.  Each student may take two unexcused absences.
For every subsequent unexcused absence, students will have their final grade
reduced by a factor of 1.5%.  If you have a work commitment that forces you to
miss class repeatedly, then you should consider dropping the course.  Varsity
athletics, theatre, music, campus ministry/PAX, forensics, and other SAU-
sanctioned activities involve lots of our students on campus, but if these
activities take you off campus, you must contact me in order to be formally
excused from class for these activities.  Please contact me if you find
yourself ill, with a death in the family, or unable to attend class for any
reason at all.  Leaving early for/Arriving late from spring or holiday break
is not a valid excuse for missing class.

**Electronic Communication:**

Students should have an e-mail account and access to the WWW in order to
prepare course assignments.  E-mail accounts on the SAU system may be obtained
in the Information Technology Office (Ambrose Hall 300) during business hours.
(My address is [jstauff@sau.edu](mailto:jstauff@sau.edu) and will become
[StauffJonW@ambrose.sau.edu](mailto:StauffJonW@ambrose.sau.edu) during the
course of the semester, and I check my e-mail religiously.)  Students should
feel free to send me e-mail at any time if they have any questions regarding
the course materials.  The homepage for the course is

" **http://www.sau.edu/history/102/102home.html** "

**Required texts:  **

Course texts are available in the SAU bookstore for purchase.

Bulliet, et al., _The Earth and Its Peoples_ , Volume 2

Reilly, _Worlds of History_ , Volume 2

**Evaluations:**

**A          90-100%  B+       87-90      B          80-87    C+       77-80**  
**C          70-77        D         65-70      F below 65%**  


**Six midterm tests              60%**  
**One final exam                   20%**  
**Document exercises        20%**

Midterm and final exams will be a mixture of multiple choice, identification,
and essay questions.  Identification items are listed on the course web site.
I will not give essay questions to students before the exam.

There are six midterm tests scheduled during the semester, and all six of
these tests will count toward the final grade.

The final exam will be a little longer than the midterm tests, and there will
be questions based upon the documents in Reilly, too.  Therefore it is worth
more than each of the six midterm tests.

There will be weekly document exercises based on readings in the Reilly book.
These are to be submitted every Thursday, starting on January 24.  These
exercises should be no longer than 2-3 pp., typed, single spaced.

**Student Success:**

There are trained tutors in the Student Success Center for student use during
the course of the semester.  Feel free to stop by the SSC in Ambrose 243 for
more information about these services.

Students with disabilities should see me privately or contact Ann Austin at
333-6161 and Ryan Saddler at 333-6275.  Ann and Ryan will be able to help all
students design appropriate accommodations that will make academic success in
HIST 102 possible.  Students should feel free to contact me at any time about
any aspect of the course.  If some of you are struggling with course
materials, we might be able to meet in small groups in my office to work on
things together.

Sometimes we experience problems in our lives that prevent us from achieving
our academic goals.  SAU has a Counseling Center at 2036 Gaines Street.  The
telephone number is 333-6423.  Professional counselors maintain
confidentiality while helping students cope with all types of challenging
situations in their lives.   Please don't hesitate to contact the Counseling
Center if you think you need help!

**Academic Dishonesty:**

Under no circumstances will academic dishonesty be tolerated in HIST 102.
Should I discover evidence that someone has cheated on an exam, committed
plagiarism, or engaged in some other type of dishonest activity in class, I
will not hesitate to refer that person to the Dean of Students according to
the policies set out in the University Catalog.  It is always better to do
your own work (rather than copy it from a WWW page...and we do know when you
do that).  Check the History Dept style manual at
<http://www.sau.edu/history/styleman.html> if you have concerns about correct
citation practices. And: you are always welcome in my office to discuss any
question related to the course materials.  Please let me help you.

Best wishes for a successful semester of world history study!

