![](../scarlet.grey.gif)  
**Ohio State University  
School of Music**  

## Music 950.01 Course Syllabus

Mark DeWitt, Instructor |

Office location: 101G Hughes  
---|---  
  
Class meetings: TR 9:00-10:18 AM |

Office hours: Mon 2:30 & Tue 11 or by appt  
  
Class location: 065 Sullivant  |

Office phone: 292-1585  
  
(Music/Dance library large seminar room) |

Email: dewitt.46@osu.edu  
  
Website: dactyl.som.ohio-state.edu/Music950/descript.html  
  
  

### Course Description

Music cognition has expanded greatly as a research area in the last fifteen
years, following the expansion of cognitive science as a whole. Cross-cultural
research has great significance for the investigation of the "musical mind,"
and suggests the need for a subfield of "cognitive ethnomusicology" that has
yet to take definite shape. In this seminar, we will survey the existing
literature of cross-cultural and non-Western monocultural studies by music
cognition researchers, as well as work by ethnomusicologists, folklorists, and
others that examines cognitive processes in music. We will address problems of
disciplinary histories and interdisciplinary communications that arise in the
study of music cognition, and explore future possibilities for a "cognitive
ethnomusicology." In the service of this exploration, we will work as a team
to compile an annotated bibliography of readings in cognitive ethnomusicology.

In his history of cognitive science, Gardner identified six component
disciplines: philosophy, psychology, linguistics, artificial intelligence,
neuroscience, and anthropology. Of these, anthropology has arguably had the
least influence on music cognition studies and on cognitive science overall,
yet it is fundamental to ethnomusicology as it exists today. Researchers who
study human cognition seem to have no quarrel over the importance of
comparative evidence from cultures other than their own, but methodological
difficulties have proven difficult to overcome and disciplinary priorities
(especially within anthropology, and with it ethnomusicology) have shifted.
How can ethnomusicology make good on the promise of comparative study for
cognitive science, and how can a fresh infusion of approaches from cognitive
science invigorate ethnomusicology and thereby contribute to music cognition
studies?

We will be tackling this interdisciplinary subject by way of its component
disciplines. Every week we will be covering:

  1. specific disciplinary approaches to cognitive studies (most of these will come from cognitive science and music cognition); 
  2. work in that topic that relates to ethnomusicology (e.g., has a cross-cultural focus); and 
  3. work in ethnomusicology that relates to the discipline(s) either through similar methods or by providing evidence for or against certain theories.

Readings in the first category will be of the background variety. The
instructor will assign some readings in the second and third categories, but
the bulk of these will come from your own explorations of the literature that
will result in an accumulated bibliography. In many cases, the degree to which
material in categories 2 and 3 "relates to" its counterpart will be the object
of critical evaluation.

This seminar welcomes an interdisciplinary mixture of those interested in the
combination of cognitive studies and music outside of the Western art
tradition, including students from musicology, music theory, anthropology,
psychology, folkloristics, and cognitive science. The content of the seminar
shall be shaped in part by the interests of those who participate.

  
  

### Assignments

Weekly assignments (auditors included) will consist of readings (on reserve in
the Music/Dance library) and literature searches in assigned areas. Some
readings will be shared, while the literature searches and other readings will
be assigned individually. You will lead a discussion of the week's readings at
least once.

You will present briefly and turn in the results of your literature search
each week in the form of an annotated bibliography, having at least two
entries. In some cases, you will be assigned to search some part of the
cognitive science literature. In your annotation you will indicate how it is
relevant to ethnomusicology, or, where you can find nothing closely related,
how it could (plausibly) be made relevant. In other cases, you will be asked
to comb the ethnomusicological literature for evidence of cognitive processes.
Thus we will accumulate the "team bibliography" as we go.

There will be two larger written assignments (optional for auditors): a book
review and a term project. For the requirements for the book review, see the
page titled, "Music 950.01 Book Review Assignment." There are no guidelines
for the term project, although you should meet with the instructor to agree on
a topic and format. Most welcome for the final project would be a research
proposal or an annotated bibliography over and above the weekly assignments.

  
  

### Grading

Participation and Discussion of Readings 10%

Weekly literature searches and annotations 20%

Book review 25%

Term project 35%

