**HIST 506 PHILOSOPHY OF HISTORY** Allan Megill

University of Virginia

Spring 1999

3:30-6:00 Mondays

c:\wpdocs\0syllabi\50699de2.yes

  
  
  
  

**COURSE DESCRIPTION AND REQUIREMENTS**

  
  

**Instructor Contact Information** : _Office Location_ : 221 Randall Hall.

  
  

_Office Hours_ : Tu Th 3:30-4:30, **and by arrangement**. You should not feel
confined to my scheduled office hours. An efficient means of arranging
appointment times is by e-mailing me, at _megill@virginia.edu_ ; it is best to
e-mail me a day or two in advance. Often, I can arrange meetings at other
times than the official hours (Friday afternoons are often a good time to see
me, and sometimes Wednesday afternoons). **Note:** On occasion I shall have to
cancel office hours because of other obligations. It is helpful, therefore, to
contact me ahead of time even if you plan to come during regularly scheduled
hours. I cannot _guarantee_ my presence at any particular scheduled office
hour, unless you have alerted me that you will be coming to see me then.

  
  

_Telephone Numbers_ : _Office_ : 924-6414 (voicemail after several rings if
there is no answer). _Home_ : 971-8744 (answering machine after several
rings). You shouldn't hesitate to phone me at home: I prefer by far working
there to working in Randall Hall. If we are otherwise occupied we generally
don't answer the phone; but avoid 5 pm-8 pm, and don't phone later than 10:30
pm.

_E-mail_ : megill@virginia.edu _Home page_ :
http://www.people.virginia.edu/~adm9e

  
  

**Course Subject and Rationale:** The class aims to provide a reflective
history of the core of Western historical thinking and writing, and also at
the same time to provide some theoretical devices for understanding
historiography generally. Thus it combines history and theory. The
accompanying syllabus, and the handout listing the contents of the class
packet, will give you a fairly good idea of the coverage of the course. It is
my contention that some knowledge of the history of historiography and of the
rudiments of historical theory is essential if one is to understand and "do"
history at the highest level. The risk in not having this knowledge is that
one is more likely to fall into banality or error.

  
  

The course is intended to be useful to students both in the discipline of
history and outside it. To the former it offers an _entr e_ to the far from
negligible field of historical theory. To the latter it offers a quick way of
gaining some sense of how historians (as distinguished from literary scholars,
political scientists, anthropologists, scholars in religious studies, and so
on) think about the past. To both groups, it perhaps offers some new
perspectives on some specific works or genres of history.

  
  

Each time that I teach this course I have in hand one or more writing projects
related to it (you will note from the "Class Packet Contents" that many of the
items listed are my own; most of them were worked up, at least in part, during
previous teachings of the course). This semester I have a number of
"philosophy of history" writing projects on hand (since I am mostly working on
Marx at the moment, it is hard to know how much progress I shall make on
them). One project is a paper on the tendency in certain quarters to over-
value, even to romanticize narrative. Another, far less well developed project
is a paper on "History, Science, and the Culture Wars." I am obliged to
produce _something_ for the latter project, since I am scheduled to give a
lecture on that topic at Duke at the end of March. Of the three papers that I
had underway in this class a year ago, two are now in print and the other, as
you will see in the class packet, is in a coherent form, although it has not
yet been published.

  
  

**Course Requirements:** Practically speaking, the most important requirement
of this, and other, 500-level courses that I teach is the writing of a fairly
substantial paper (of 20-25 page length). The topic of the paper needs in some
way to be related to the theme of the course: that is, the paper will need to
deal with issues of history-writing, or of historical thinking more generally,
and it will also need to connect with some of the specific literature that we
shall be dealing with in class.

  
  

Undergraduate students are well advised to look for a paper topic that they
already have some experience with, through other courses or through their own
reading. History graduate students who take this class generally try to write
a paper in which they apply what they learn in this class to their empirical
research field. _Mutatis mutandis_ , graduate students in other departments
either do the same thing, or they introduce me to relevant literature in their
field (on such issues as evidence, narrative, and the like). All paper topics
are to be discussed in advance with me. You are expected to have given me, in
writing, an overview of your proposed topic by the week of March 1-5, 1999 at
the latest. Note that if you are graduating, there are severe time constraints
in regard to the writing of the paper.

  
  

In addition, you will also be expected to participate effectively in the
collective work of the class. In particular, you will be asked, once or twice,
to be the "reporter" for part or all of a class session, producing an account
of the discussion that you will post on the class e-mail list by a day before
the next class. You will also be expected, once or twice, to produce some sort
of short written response, also to be posted on the class list, to the reading
that we will be doing. **So that I can keep this work in mind during final
grading, please hold onto copies of this writing, and submit these copies when
you submit the final paper.** (If you aren't easily able to print off e-mail
messages, let me know: I can usually supply a copy.)

  
  

Although I have never taken attendance in my classes, it has occurred to me
that I ought to have a record of class attendance, and so I expect to pass
around a notebook each class session for you to sign in on. I do not fixate on
attendance, but since my 500-level classes have tended to get larger than they
used to be, I have thought that out of fairness I should have a record of
attendance at the end of the semester.

  
  
  
  

The e-mail list is an important part of the course. **Enrolled students, and
others interested in the course, should _immediately_ put themselves on the
e-mail list.** Send a message to

  
  

majordomo@Virginia.edu

  
  

with the message text:

  
  

subscribe hist506-phil

end

  
  

The wording must be exactly as above, with no extra words, phrases or
spellings. The commands must appear on two lines as shown.

  
  

**Course Reading:** The following books are required for the course. Note that
they are all on reserve, except for one book that has just been published. I
have ordered copies of all books at the University of Virginia Bookstore:

  
  

Fritz Stern, ed., _The Varieties of History from Voltaire to the Present_ ,
revised ed.

  
  

R. G. Collingwood, _The Idea of History_ , revised edited by Jan Van der
Dussen

  
  

Michel de Certeau, _The Writing of History_

  
  

Brian Fay, Philip Pomper, and Richard T. Vann, eds., _Contemporary History and
Theory: The Linguistic Turn and Beyond_ (Malden, MA; Blackwell, 1999).

  
  

There is also a class packet for this course. It is available at The Copy
Shop, 5b Elliewood Avenue, phone 295-8337 and is priced at $22.95.

  
  

Students may need to photocopy some additional material from time to time, but
there will be very little such copying required. For a listing of the course
reading more or less as it will be considered in class, see the handout
entitled "Syllabus/Selected Bibliography."

