[ ![This page is in AAA Conformance with the Web Content Accessibility
Guidelines](../wcag1AAA.gif)](http://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG1AAA-Conformance
"Explanation of Level Triple-A Conformance")

OhioLINK History of Philosophy Website

# Philosophy 31010  
Twentieth-Century Philosophy

10:45 a.m.-12:00 p.m. TR  
220 Bowman Hall  
Spring 1999

Professor [Gayle Ormiston](../contrib/g_ormiston.html)  
320 E Bowman Hall  
Office Hours: 1:00-3:00 T &R, 11:00-12:00 W  
and by appointment.

* * *

## Contents

  * Course Design
  * Texts
  * Mechanics
    * Writing Requirements
    * Grading
  * Academic Complaints
  * Students with Disabilities
  * Work Schedule 

* * *

## Course Design

The guiding question for the course is: "What is philosophy?" This section of
PHIL 31010W is designed to provide an in-depth introduction and exposure to
various responses to this question in twentieth-century philosophies. To
achieve this end, five approaches to philosophy will be explored in some
detail through various "representative" writings: pragmatism, analytic
philosophy, phenomenology, hermeneutics, and deconstruction. Intensive writing
assignments will be used to support class readings and discussions in an
effort to understand the varieties of each approach developed and practiced in
the twentieth century.

[ Back to the Table of Contents ]

* * *

## Texts

  1. Required Books 
    1. _Reconstruction in Philosophy_ , John Dewey [RIP] 
    2. _Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus_ , Ludwig Wittgenstein [TLP] 
    3. _Introduction to Metaphysics_ , Martin Heidegger [IM] 
    4. _Reason in the Age of Science_ , Hans-Georg Gadamer [RAS] 
    5. _The Hermeneutics of African Philosophy_ , Tsenay Serequeberhan [HAF] 
    6. _Yielding Gender_ , Penelope Deutsche [YG] 
  2. Required Articles ( _On Reserve_ in Main Library) 
    1. "The Elimination of Metaphysics," A.J. Ayer 
    2. Selections from _Meaning and Necessity_ , Rudolph Carnap 
    3. "Two Dogmas of Empircism," from _From A Logical Point of View_ , W.V.O. Quine 
    4. "Letter to a Japanese Friend," _Derrida and Diff erance_, Jacques Derrida 
  3. One Required Writing Text 
    1. _Philosophical Writing_ , 2nd edition, A.P. Martinich 
    2. _Thinking and Writing About Philosophy_ , Hugo Bedau 
  4. Supplemental 
    1. _The Philosopher's Index_ (Print Copy and CD-ROM Version) 
    2. _Encyclopedia of Philosophy_
    3. _Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy_ (CD-Rom and Print Copy) 
    4. _Routledge History of Philosophy_
    5. Philosophy Wesbites 
      1. Kent State University, Department of Philosophy: <http://www.kent.edu/philo>
      2. OhioLINK History of Philosophy Instructional Website: <http://iws.ohiolink.edu/philosophy/>
      3. Episteme Links: <http://www.epistemelinks.com>
      4. American Philosophical Association: <http://www.udel.edu/apa> 

[ Back to the Table of Contents ]

* * *

## Mechanics

### Writing Requirements.

PHIL 31010W is a writing-intensive course (WIC). WICS are designed to instruct
a student in _writing in the discipline_ of his/her major. Emphasis is on the
_processes_ of writing--the various techniques, styles, methods, goals, and
kinds of writing in the discipline. Writing is viewed as a tool to aid in
learning the material content presented in a course; and course material is
viewed as a tool to learn about writing. Writing is integral to the routine
activities of the course.

Each course in the eight-course history of sequence offered by the Department
of Philosophy is a WIC. Philosophy WICs require at least **3 macro writing
projects.** For each macro project at least **2 micro writing exercises** are
required. Micro writing exercises are intended as exercises that instruct one
in various aspects of writing that will be encountered and employed in a macro
assignment. In this sense, micro exercises are comparable to  etudes in
musical or painting/drawing instruction. Micro exercises also support daily
reading assignments and discussion.

For the Spring 1999 semester, **micro and macro** assignments will be due on
the following dates. These dates may change in light of classroom needs such
as the pace and progress of reading and discussion.

DUE DATE | EXERCISE  
TYPE | EXERCISE  
NUMBER  
  
---|---|---  
January 21, 1999 | Micro | 1  
  
February 2, 1999 | Micro | 2  
  
February 18, 1999 | MACRO | 1  
  
March 2, 1999 | Micro | 3  
  
March 25, 1999* | Micro | 4  
  
April 13, 1999* | MACRO | 2  
  
April 23, 1999* | Micro | 5  
  
May 4, 1999* | Micro | 6  
  
May 13, 1999 | MACRO | 3  
  
  
*** Due dates have been changed as noted.**

### Grading

The final course grade will be determined on _all_ forms of class
participation. The following values will be used:

Micro #1| 5%  
  
---|---  
Micro #2| 5%  
  
MACRO #1| 10%  
  
Micro #3| 5%  
  
Micro #4| 10%  
  
MACRO #2| 20%  
  
Micro #5| 5%  
  
Micro #6| 5%  
  
MACRO #3| 25%  
  
Class Participation & Attendance| 10%  
  
  
[ Back to the Table of Contents ]

* * *

## Academic Complaints

The Provost has directed every university academic unit to recognize and to
follow a common procedure for handling student academic complaints. The
Department of Philosophy has established such procedure.

The Department of Philosophy's procedure for handling student academic
complaints is in conformity with the Student Academic Complaint Policy and
Procedures set down as University Policy 3342-4-16 in the _University Policy
Register_. For information concerning details of that procedure, please see
the Department Chairperson.

[ Back to the Table of Contents ]

* * *

## Students With Disabilities

In accordance with university policy, if you have a documented disability and
require accommodations to obtain equal access in this course, please contact
the instructor at the beginning of the semester or when given an assignment
for which an accommodation is required. Students with disabilities must verify
their eligibility through the office of Student Disability Services (SDS).

[ Back to the Table of Contents ]

* * *

## Work Schedule

(The following schedule is subject to change.)

Date| Assignment  
  
---|---  
January| 19| Introductions, Orientation, Expectations. Introduction to the
History of Philosophy.  
  
21|  **[Micro #1](go_s99_micro-1.cgi) due;** "Introduction," RIP (v-xli)  
  
26|  RIP, Introduction and Ch. 1, 1-27  
  
28|  RIP, Ch. 2, 28-52; Ch. 3 53-76  
  
February| 2|  RIP, Ch. 4, 77-102; Ch. 5, 103-31; **[Micro
#2](go_s99_micro-2.cgi) due**  
  
4|  RIP, Ch. 6, 132-60, Ch. 7 161-86  
  
9|  RIP, Ch. 8, 187-216.  
  
11|  TLP, propositions 1, 2, 3  
  
16|  **[MACRO #1](go_s99_macro-1.cgi) due;** TLP, propositions 4  & 5  
  
18|  TLP, propositions 5 & 6  
  
23|  TLP, propositions 5, 6, 7  
  
25|  "The Elimination of Metaphysics," Ayer  
  
March| 2|  **[Micro #3](go_s99_micro-3.cgi) due;** Ayer and _Meaning and
Necessity_ selection from R. Carnap  
  
4|  Carnap Selection and "Two Dogmas of Empiricism," Quine  
  
9|  "Two Dogmas of Empiricism," Quine  
  
11|  Introduction to Heidegger, IM Ch. 1, 1-51  
  
16|  IM Ch. 2, 52-74; Ch. 3, 75-92.  
  
18|  IM Ch. 4, 93-115.  
  
23|  IM Ch. 4, 115-96.  
  
25|  IM, Ch.4, 106-206; **[Micro #4](go_s99_micro-4.cgi) (Macro #2 draft)
due.**  
  
29| Spring Break  
  
April| 2  
  
6|  Introduction to Gadamer. RAS, Ch. 1, 1-21.  
  
8|  RAS, Ch. 2, 21-38; and Ch. 3, 39-68  
  
13|  RAS, Ch. 39-68; Ch. 4, 69-87 **[Macro #2](go_s99_macro-2.cgi) Due--Final
Draft**  
  
15| RAS, Ch. 5, 88-112; Ch. 6, 113-38  
  
20|  RAS, Ch. 7, 139-50; Ch. 8, 151-67.  
  
22|  **[Micro #5](go_s99_micro-5.cgi) Due.** HAF, "Introduction," 1-11; Ch. 1,
13-30; and "Conclusion," 117-21  
  
27|  HAF, Ch. 2, 31-53; CH. 3, 55-85  
  
29|  **[Micro #6](go_s99_micro-6.cgi) Due.** HAS, Ch. 4, 87-115. Derrida,
"Letter to a Japanese Friend"  
  
May| 4|  YG, 'Introduction," 1-10; Ch. 1, 11-33; Ch. 2, 34-58.  
  
6|  YG, Ch. 3, 59-89; Ch. 7, 169-84.  
  
13| Final Examination. **[Macro #3](go_s99_macro-3.cgi) Due, In Class**  
  
  
[ Back to the Table of Contents ]

* * *

This page is part of the OhioLINK History of Philosophy Instructional Website
designed and developed by the [Department of
Philosophy](http://www.kent.edu/philo/index.html) at Kent State University. We
are interested in any comments you may have concerning this syllabus. Send
e-mail to the [KSU Department of Philosophy Instructional Website
Team](mailto:philo@kent.edu) or directly to Professor [Gayle
Ormiston](mailto:gormisto@kent.edu), who designed this syllabus.

* * *

[ [ Return to the Spring 1999 (this class) Homepage](go_s99_home.html) ]

[ [ Return to the Twentieth-Century Philosophy Homepage](index.html) ]

[ [ Return to the OhioLINK History of Philosophy Homepage](../index.html) ]

[ ![Valid HTML 4.0
!](../w3c_40.gif)](http://validator.w3.org/check?uri=http://iws.ohiolink.edu/philosophy/31010/go_s99_syl.html
"Validate this page for yourself!") _Spring 1999.  
KSU Department of Philosophy  _

  *[RIP]: Reconstruction in Philosophy
  *[TLP]: 
  *[IM]: Introduction to Metaphysics
  *[RAS]: Reason in the Age of Science
  *[HAF]: The Hermeneutics of African Philosophy
  *[YG]: Yielding Gender

