[ ![This page is in AAA Conformance with the Web Content Accessibility
Guidelines](../wcag1AAA.gif)](http://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG1AAA-Conformance
"Explanation of Level Triple-A Conformance")

OhioLINK History of Philosophy Website

# Philosophy 31006  
Nineteenth-Century Philosophy

8:50-9:40 MWF  
315 Bowman Hall  
Spring 1997

Professor [Clarence Uher](../contrib/c_uher.html)  
320-K Bowman Hall  
Office Hours: 9:45-10:15, 2:05-2:35 MWF; 3:05-3:35, 6:50-7:20 TR  
and by appointment.

* * *

## Contents

  * Course Overview
  * Texts
  * Requirements
  * Grading
  * Grievance Procedure
  * Make-Ups
  * Problems 

* * *

## Course Overview

The objective of this course is to examine some of the major philosophical
developments during the nineteenth century. With the American, French and
Industrial Revolution as our backdrop, and the ever increasing presence of
science and technology in everyone's life during the nineteenth century, we
will explore the philosophical movements of: idealism, materialism,
utilitarianism, and existentialism. Our study will focus on the works of:
Hegel, Marx, Bentham, Mill, and Nietzsche looking for the influence of (or
lack of) these major historical and scientific events.

As a writing intensive course, students will be able to improve: their ability
to analyze text, their reading comprehension skills, and their ability to
effectively express themselves in writing. The macro and micro writing
projects, explained on the following page, will be designed to achieve these
objectives.

[ Back to the Table of Contents ]

* * *

## Required Texts

  1. _Introduction to the Philosophy of History_ , G.W.F Hegel, tr. by Leo Rauch   
  

  2. _The Marx-Engels Reader_ , Robert C. Tucker.   
  

  3. _Utilitarianism, On Liberty, Essays on Bentham_ , John Stuart Mill, ed. by M. Wornock.   
  

  4. _Twilight of the Idols / The Anti-Christ_ , Friedrich Nietzsche, tr. by R. J. Hollingdale. 

There will be additional material on reserve in the library.

[ Back to the Table of Contents ]

* * *

## Requirements

This is a writing intensive course which means that the bulk of your grade
(60%) will be based on three macro writing assignments during the semester.
Each of the macro writing assignments will be supported by various micro
assignments. Micro assignments may include, but are not limited to, outlines,
interpretation of passages in the text, generation of study questions,
construction of a bibliography, and the generation of abstracts.

### Macro Projects

  1. Interpretation of course text. 
  2. Comparison/contrast of selected topic. 
  3. Research paper. 

### Micro Projects

There will be at least two micro projects for each macro project. Each group
of micros will comprise (10%) of a student's total grade for the course.

### Final Exam

The final exam for this course will be on Tuesday, May 13, 1997. The final
exam will be comprehensive.

### Class participation

This simply means that the students are expected to contribute to the class in
an appropriate way; i.e., discussion, comments and questions about the
material. Some of the micro projects may involve class participation.

[ Back to the Table of Contents ]

* * *

## Grading

Your final grade for this course will be determined on a straight scale of:
90%=A, 80%=B, 70%=C, 60%=D, and less than 60%=F. Your final grade will be
comprised of the following components:

Three macro projects at 100 points each, for a total of 300 points.

A number of micro projects (to be determined), for a total of 150 points.

One final exam, worth 50 points.

The total number of points available is thus 500 points. By keeping track of
the number of points you earn, you can determine your final course grade as
follows:

Letter Grade| Points Required  
---|---  
A| 450 or more points  
  
B| 400 or more points  
  
C| 350 or more points  
  
D| 300 or more points  
  
F| fewer than 300 points  
  
  
[ Back to the Table of Contents ]

* * *

## Grievance Procedure

"The Philosophy Department Grievance Procedure for handling student grievances
is in conformity with the Student Academic Complaint Policy and Procedures set
down as University Policy 3342-4-16 in the University Policv Resister. For
information concerning the details of the grievance procedure please see the
Departmental Chairperson."

[ Back to the Table of Contents ]

* * *

## Make-Ups

Students will be permitted to make-up missed assignments do to an excused
absence (e.g., a doctor's excuse) during the scheduled date of the assignment.
If a student does not have the proper documentation they will not be permitted
to make-up the assignment. Papers that are late will loose ten points for each
day that the paper is late.

[ Back to the Table of Contents ]

* * *

## Problems

Should a problem arise which would impede your success in this course, please
contact me as soon as possible.

[ Back to the Table of Contents ]

* * *

This page is part of the OhioLINK History of Philosophy Instructional Website
designed and developed by the [Department of
Philosophy](http://www.kent.edu/philo/index.html) at Kent State University. We
are interested in any comments you may have concerning this syllabus. Send
e-mail to the [KSU Department of Philosophy Instructional Website
Team](mailto:philo@kent.edu) or directly to Professor [Clarence
Uher](mailto:cuher@kent.edu), who designed this syllabus.

* * *

[ [ Return to the Spring 1997 (this class) Homepage](cu_s97_home.html) ]

[ [ Return to the Nineteenth-Century Philosophy Homepage](index.html) ]

[ [ Return to the OhioLINK History of Philosophy Homepage](../index.html) ]

[ ![Valid HTML 4.0
!](../w3c_40.gif)](http://validator.w3.org/check?uri=http://iws.ohiolink.edu/philosophy/31006/cu_s97_syl.html
"Validate this page for yourself!") _Spring 1997.  
KSU Department of Philosophy  _

