**Thinking, Learning and Computers CCT670 Fall 1998**  
Instructor: [Peter Taylor](authoridentification.html), Critical and Creative
Thinking Program  
Email: peter.taylor@umb.edu; Phone: 617-287-7636  
Office: Wheatley 2nd flr 143-09 (near Counseling  & School Psychology)  
Class Time: Th 4-6.30; Office Hours: Tu, Th 2.30-3.30 & 6.45-7.45; by sign-up.  
Course Website: [http://omega.cc.umb.edu/~ptaylor/670-98.html](670-98.html)  
  
What are the consequences of using computers to aid our thinking, learning,
communication and action in classrooms, organizations, and social
interactions? Class activities acquaint you with a number of specific
computer-based tools, as well as themes for critical thinking about these
tools. You also examine interpretations of and debates about social and
educational transformations that involve computers.  
Assignments and projects are designed to help you, as a teacher or other
professional, overcome deficiencies in your prior education about computers
and develop skills for on-going learning. The course as a whole aims for you
to better fulfill the needs of your community/organization, address the
information explosion, adapt to social changes, and collaborate with others to
these ends.  
  
**Overview  
Assessment  
Requirements  
Expectations**  
**Texts and Materials**  
**Schedule of classes and assignments**  
**[Teacher-Student-Subject interactions** (a schema)  
[**Research Briefings** , by current and former students](briefings-TOC.html)  
[**Tasks in preparation for class**](670Tasks.html), elaborating on or in
addition to those printed in the syllabus  
[**Notes on writing and revising**](writing-TOC.html), including  
[**Freewriting suggestions**](IrsiosFW.html)  
Student presentations, schedule (TBA)  
[Chat room](http://www.umb.edu/class/CCT670), for internet dialogue between
classes (password needed)  
  
**Overview  
** ****The classes involve three overlapping angles:  
I. Tools and Critical Themes. We become acquainted with specific tools and
critically examine their effectiveness with respect to different tasks;  
II. Interpretations and Debates about computers and social discourse from WWII
onwards;  
III. "Heterogeneous re/construction" of educational, scientific and other
social activities, in which computers provide some of the technical and
discursive resources.  
Angle I is emphasized earlier in the course; II and III later.  
****  
**Requirements** ****1\. Project: Building on one or more tools, activities,
or themes from the course, design an activity for a class, organization, or
your own personal development. This project should concern the current or
future consequences of using computers to aid your thinking, learning,
communication and action in classrooms, organizations, and social
interactions. During the semester you develop and revise these projects in
relation to the three stages of the course, and the particular classes,
themes, debates, etc.  
2\. Weekly One Page(plus) Responses (6 times during weeks 2-10). Either a) in
preparation for class write a commentary on readings, or b) after class review
the readings and the class activities. In either case explore, when
appropriate, the relationship between your project/ interests and the
readings/activities.  
3\. Research Briefing(s): As one or perhaps two assignments, you (individually
or with another student) select a topic on which to prepare a research
briefing, i.e., a summary (2-4 pages) in written form that gives other
students in this and future classes a quick start when they face that research
issue. These briefings should provide or point to key resources, i.e., key
concepts, issues and debates, references, quotes or paraphrases from those
references, faculty on campus, relevant courses.  
  
**Expectations** ****1\. Work on your project outside class steadily, i.e.,
every week, throughout semester. Preferably, set aside clear block(s) of time
each week.  
2\. Be responsible about course involvement (pre-reading, attendance,
discussion, contact about non-attendance, and contact about late work).  
3\. Submit wordprocessed assignments (so you can revise and update them) on
due dates.  
4\. Resubmit assignments when requested, responding to comments from me and
sometimes from other students.  
5\. Bring workbooks to every class, because you will sometimes do in-class
assignments making a carbon copy for me to comment on. Bring a ball point pen
to make a clear copy.  
6\. Make suggestions about changes and additions to the course activities and
materials. Support me as I experiment in developing this course.

**Assessment** ****There is no P/F option for this course. The overall grade
is divided into two parts:  
Written assignments and presentations, 2/3; Participation and contribution to
the class process, 1/3.  
  
For each part, satisfactory completion of "basic work" gives you a B+. If you
do not complete the basic work, the grade is pro-rated downwards, so that a D
corresponds to half of the basic work requirement. Completing assignments
cannot compensate for below-basic-level participation, and in that situation
the overall grade is capped so that it is no higher than the participation
grade.  
To have a chance--but not a guarantee--of getting a higher grade, "additional
work" is taken into account. (On the third last class I will let you know
whether your basic work looks like being satisfactory, borderline, or less
than satisfactory.)  
  
Written assignments and presentations: Basic work = 80% of assignments
submitted _and_ revised and resubmitted until OK/RNR. (Final report counts for
two assignments and requires responding to comments on the draft, which may
entail more research.)  
Additional work = Final research report will be graded.  
  
Participation and contribution to the class process: Basic work = Attendance
(at least 10 sessions unless proper medical excuses are provided) and Prepared
participation.  
(Active participation can make up for some absences, but if you haven't picked
up the handouts you missed, you aren't likely to be well prepared to
participate actively when you do come to class.)  
Additional work = Active participation and End-of-semester Portfolio.  
  
**Texts and Materials**  
Required: Edwards, P. N. (1996). _The Closed World: Computers and the Politics
of Discourse in Cold War America_. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  
Xeroxed required readings will be available at an estimated total cost of $15.  
Xeroxes of additional articles will be placed on reserve in Healey library.  
A binder of clippings (additions welcome) and folders of additional materials
for many classes will also be placed on reserve in Healey library.  
  
****SCHEDULE OF CLASSES ****  
Additional information about classes, assignments, and other tasks will be
provided in regular handouts, and be posted on the course website.  
Subject to revision in light of student interests. Suggested changes welcome.  
  
Class 1 (9/10)  
**Introduction to course angles and process**  
****Activity: Analyzing rectangles  
Computers as calculating and informational retrieval tools, enforcing rules
and ignoring context, reinforcing rule-bound activity in society  
The course as a teaching/learning community  
Activities: Freewriting and sharing on possible individual projects;
Cardstorming on Computers in social and educational discourse and
transformations  
  
Class 2 (9/17)  
**Group Interactive Software** (for "teachers who love to teach")  
Reading: Snyder, T. (1994). "Blinded by science." _The Executive Educator_
(March): 1-5.  
Activity: Using a critical heuristic to elicit topics for Research Briefings  
Class 3 (9/24)  
**Virtual Communities, Identities, and Inequalities**  
****Turkle, S. (1988). "Computational Reticence: Why women fear the intimate
machine," in C. Kramarae (Ed.), _Technology and Women's Voices_. New York:
Routledge and Kegan Paul.  
Turkle, S. (1995). _Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age of the Internet_.
New York: Simon and Schuster, 9-26.  
Sclove, R. and J. Scheuer (1996). "On the road again? If information highways
are anything like interstate highways--watch out!," in R. Kling (Ed.),
_Computerization and Controversy_ , **** 606-612.  
Activity: Using and constructing Websites, or a guide to web use.  
***A*** Asmt due: Title and paragraph description of proposed project  
  
Class 4 (10/1)  
**System Dynamics**  
?? (1997). "Five learning processes: The role of systems thinking and the
STELLA software in building world citizens for tomorrow"  
Activity: Economic management game.  
  
Class 5(10/8)  
**From Artificial Intelligence (AI) to dynamical systems theory**  
****Hofstadter, D. R. (1979). _G odel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid_.
New York: Basic Books, 33-41, 559-584, 594-632.  
Hendriks-Jansen, H. (1997). "The epistemology of autism: Making a case for
embodied, dynamic and historical explanation." _Cybernetics and Systems_ 28:
359-415, excerpts.  
Activity: MIU game and discussion  
***A*** Asmt due: Research Briefing I (from class 2).  
  
Class 6 (10/15)  
**Problem-posing, problem-solving, and persuasion in biology** (guest: Prof.
B. White, Biology)  
Peterson, N. S. and J. R. Jungck (1988). "Problem-posing, problem-solving, and
persuasion in biology." _Academic Computing_ 2(6): 14-17, 48-50.  
Activity: TBA.  
  
Class 7 (10/22)  
**Interpreting the history of computing I**  
Reading: Edwards, chaps. 1, 9, 10 and epilogue (begin)  
Activity: Metaphor, discourse, and social agency  
***A*** Asmt due: Annotated bibliography of reading completed or planned for
your project.  
  
Class 8 (10/29)  
**Interpreting the history of computing II**  
Reading: Edwards, chaps. 1, 9, 10 and epilogue (complete)  
Activity: Interpreting SciFi films.  
  
Class 9 (11/5)  
**Computer models of Global Change**  
Reading: Taylor, P. J. (1997ms). "How do we know we have global environmental
problems? Undifferentiated science-politics and its potential reconstruction"  
On reserve: Meadows, D., D. L. Meadows, J. Randers and W. W. Behrens (1972).
"The State of Global Equilibrium," in _The Limits to Growth_. New York, NY:
Universe Books, **** 157-197.  
Glantz, M. H. (1989). "Societal Responses to Regional Climatic Change," in M.
H. Glantz (Ed.), _Societal Responses to Regional Climatic Change: Forecasting
by analogy_. Boulder and London: Westview Press, Inc., **** 1-7, 407-428.  
Activities: The two islands game. Identifying moral-technocratic language in
texts.Class 10 (11/12)  
**Heterogeneous Re/construction of Social Simulations**  
Reading: Taylor, P. J. (ms.) "Constructing Heterogeneous Webs in Socio-
Environmental Research"  
Activity: Mapping heterogeneous resources.  
  
Class 11 (11/19)  
**Presentations on student projects I**  
***A*** Asmt due: Narrative outline.  
  
\--Thanksgiving break--  
  
Class 12 (12/3)  
**Presentations on student projects II**  
  
Class 13 (12/10)  
**Taking Stock of Course: Where do we go from here?**  
***A*** Asmt due: First draft of research report (two copies; returned with
comments by PT and a student by 12/15)  
  
***A*** Portfolio, for those doing this: 12/15  
***A*** Final project reports: 12/21  
  
\----------------------------  
**Other possible classes**  
****Simple Tools--Significant Changes? (Spreadsheets, Bibliographic Data
Bases)  
Active analogizing to adapt computer games to teaching (the game of life)  
Virtual visit to the Math Forum  
Visit to the MIT media lab  
Robotics at MIT  
Multimedia education  
Complexity theory and Santa Fe Institute  
Fractals and ethnomathematics  
Systems ecology and metaphor after WW II  
Sociology of Scientific Knowledge meets AI  
\+ suggestions welcome  

