Georgia Perimeter College

A Two-Year Unit of the University System of Georgia

Syllabus for

ENVS 1401

Environmental Science TeleWeb Course

**

SPRING SEMESTER 2002

Instructor:** Dr. John R. Anderson, Jr.

Office: E-2220 **DUNWOODY CAMPUS

**

Phone Number: (770) 551-3121

Science Department phone number (770) 551-3124

FAX Number: (770) 551-7097

E-mail Address: janderso@gpc.peachnet.edu

Environmental homepage:
**http://www.gpc.peachnet.edu/~janderso/environs/telecourse/telecour.htm

**

Office Hours:

Time of day |

Monday |

Tuesday |

Wednesday |

Thursday |

Friday  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
Morning |

11:00 - noon |

9:30 - 10:30 |

11:00 - noon |

9:30 - 10:30 |

9:00 - noon  
  
Afternoon |

1:00 - 4:00 |

Not Available |

Not Available |

1:00 - 4:00 |

Not Available  
  
Evening |

e-mail me any evening and on weekends  
  
**

Section number:** ENVS-1401-290 (Teleweb Section)

**

PREREQUISITE:** Have exited or exemption from Developmental Studies and ESL
requirements.

**

CATALOG DESCRIPTION:

**

This is a non-lab science course designed to investigate the role of humans in
their environment. Students develop a knowledge base about their biological
and physical environment. This information leads to exploration of human
dependence on technological control over, and interactions with the
environment. Emphasis is placed on sustaining resources and making informed
choices concerning environmental issues.

**

EXPECTED EDUCATIONAL RESULTS:

**

As a result of completing this course the student will be able to:

  1. Define and explain the basic issues concerning the ability of the human community to interact in a sustainable way with the environment. 
  2. Evaluate scientific information and arrive at defendable conclusions as to its validity and applicability. 
  3. Describe and discuss the environmental implications of the cycles of biologically important materials through the ecosystem.
  4. Discuss the limitations placed on living systems by energy transfer efficiencies.
  5. Explain why the size of the human population presents an environmental problem. Define, interpret, and calculate the factors involved in the human population growth rates. Discuss the worldwide distribution of populations.
  6. Give examples of how organisms including humans interact in biological systems.
  7. Identify ways in which humans interact with their physical environment.
  8. Discuss costs and benefits of sustaining each of the following types of resources; food, health, habitats, energy, water, air, soil, and minerals.
  9. Give defendable opinions on improving or maintaining the urban environment, determining allocation of environmental costs, and dealing with waste disposal.

**

GENERAL EDUCATION OUTCOMES:

**

  1. This course addresses the general education outcome relating to communications as follows: 
    1. Students develop their reading comprehension skills by reading the textbook, handout materials and published articles. Students are required to critique articles on current environmental topics from periodical sources.
    2. Students develop their listening skills through lecture and small group problem solving. Videos will be included in the course.
    3. Students develop their reading and writing skills through the use of exercises developed specifically to enhance their understanding of certain environmental principles. Students provide written or oral analysis of these problems in both individual and group format. They must be able to answer discussion questions on course exams.
  2. This course addresses the general education outcomes of mathematical concept usage and applies the scientific method as follows: 
    1. Students must apply mathematical concepts in the analysis of graphically presented material. Their mathematical skills will also be used to collect, graph, and interpret data from class projects. 
    2. Students apply the scientific method as they learn to analyze studies and determine the validity of the data supporting the conclusions. 
  3. This course addresses the general education outcomes relating to identifying and evaluating global, economic, political, historical, and geographical forces, and analyzing how these forces help shape the past, present, and future as follows:
    1. Environmental Science is the most inclusive of all sciences. It crosses the lines among science disciplines as well as having applications in the economic, political, geographical, and sociological areas. It is global in scope. 

**

COURSE CONTENT

**

  1. Introduction - the environment as an idea 
    1. History
    2. Basic issues
    3. Critical thinking
  2. Connections 
    1. The earth as a system
    2. Biogeochemical cycles 
    3. Energy transfer
    4. Interactions within human populations - size is an environmental problem
    5. Interactions between humans and other organisms
      1. Ecosystems
      2. Biological diversity
      3. How ecosystems respond to disturbance - restoration and recovery
    6. Interactions between humans and the physical environment 
  3. Sustaining our resources 
    1. Human resources
      1. Food
      2. Environment and health 
    2. Biological resources
      1. Habitats
      2. Rare and endangered species 
    3. Energy resources 
    4. Physical resources
      1. Water
      2. Air
      3. Soil
      4. Minerals 
  4. Environment and society 
    1. Urban environment 
    2. Economics 
    3. Waste disposal 
    4. What can we do? Who decides?
      1. Impact and planning
      2. Integrating values and knowledge 

**

COURSE TEXTBOOK: REQUIRED

**

1. _Environmental Science_. By G. Tyler Miller, 8 th edition. 

2. _Race to Save the Planet Study Guide/ 2002 Edition_ , by Edward C. Wolf

**

REQUIRED MATERIALS:

**

1\. Green Scantron sheets, for exams, 4 for the entire term.

**

GRADING:

**

Summary of grading |

Total Points  
---|---  
  
Lecture Tests - 3 tests @ 100 points each |

300  
  
Discussion |

20  
  
Quizzes |

50  
  
Project |

30  
  
Final Exam - Comprehensive |

200  
  
TOTAL |

600 points  
**

TEST DATES:**

I will be administering tests on the Dunwoody Campus. Test may be taken at the
TESTING CENTERS on any campus. You will need arrange with your instructor at
least two weeks prior to the testing period to take your test at a testing
center. The test must be taken by the cut off date listed on the course
outline. There will be no make-up for tests missed after the date the test
must be taken. **MAKE SURE TO BE AWARE OF TEST DATES!

** **

RETURN OF EXAMS AND OTHER ASSIGNMENTS

**

It is the policy of the Science Department on the Dunwoody Campus of GPC and
your instructor to keep all tests and exams. The exams are available for
inspection in my office at any time during the semester. Material from the
first three tests that the majority of students miss will be summarized and
placed in WebCT for students to study for the final with. The student may keep
the project and other work other than tests after they have been returned. Any
papers not claimed at the end of the semester will be kept until the end of
the following term and then destroyed.

**

DUE DATES:

**

It is your responsibility to turn in all assignments on time. Assignments will
be turned in via e-mail in WebCT, to my GPC e-mail account, turned at my
office on the Dunwoody Campus, or mailed to me on the Dunwoody campus to
arrive on the date it is due. No assignments will be accepted late. See the
Assignment outline for the dates when assignments are due.

**



DISCUSSIONS

**

Discussions will take place in WebCT on the Bulletin Board. There will be
preparation for each class discussion. You will read various articles or visit
web sites to prepare for the class discussions. You will be required to
respond at least 3 times in the week of the discussion. That means you post a
response to the discussion **on three separate days** during the week of the
discussion. You must respond not just to your instructor's comments but to
comments made by your fellow students. This is Asynchronous (not real time)
but everyone participating has a voice. Etiquette of computer use needs to be
followed as well as decorum with your fellow students. Profanity or derogatory
comments will not be used and will be an automatic Failure for this
assignment. Each Discussion will be worth 10 points, thus two discussions for
a total of 20 points.

**

The Project:

**

The project will entail looking up air quality data on the Internet for a
locality in Georgia, weather data from the Internet for that same locality (or
one near the pollution collection site), and counting cars near the site of
the pollution reporting station. The data will be plotted on three separate
graphs to show correlation between the weather data, the air quality data and
the number of cars on the road. This project will be worth 30 points. See the
handout for the directions for the project later in this syllabus or the
directions can also be found on the telecourse web page.

The first and second graphs will be turned in prior to the due date for the
entire project so the instructor can make comments on theses graphs and help
you produce each of these graphs well before the final project is due. The
project can be turned in when you have it completed. The ultimate due date is
March 29, 2021 by noon. (Just a note, you will turn in graph 1and 2 twice once
for helpful comments and the second time with the final project.)

**

Quizzes

**

Quizzes are in WebCT for everyone to take. All quizzes you only have one
attempt to take them.. All quizzes are timed so you need to be prepared prior
to taking the quiz. Each unit has or will have at least one quiz. All of the
quizzes combined will amount to 50 point in your total course grade. (At
present there is a total of 316 points for quizzes so if you earned 237 points
of the total points that is 75% thus you would have 75% of 50 or 37.5 points)

**

COMMUNICATIONS WITH YOUR INSTRUCTOR:

**

  1. The best method is via e-mail. Each student has e-mail in WebCT and this is the account I want you to use to communicate with me. 
  2. My other e-mail address is **janderso@gpc.peachnet.edu

**

  * By being a GPC student you have an e-mail account. When you check your WebCT Id you will be given your e-mail id too.

  1. You can call me during my office hours as listed on the syllabus (770) 551-3121. After these hours either e-mail me or call my office and leave a voice mail.
  2. My mailing address if you need to mail assignments is: Dr. John Anderson, Science Department, Georgia Perimeter College, 2101 Womack Road, Dunwoody, GA 30338
  3. Another communication means, especially with your peers in the course is using the Bulletin Board or the Chat Rooms. WARNING: ANY VULGAR LANGUAGE USED IN THE CHAT ROOM WILL EARN AN AUTOMATIC FAILURE ON ONE OF YOUR TESTS. THE SECOND OFFENSE AND YOU WILL FAIL THE COURSE. ANY HARASHMENT (refer to pages 37-42 of the Student handbook for information as to harassment) USING THE CHAT ROOM WILL BE AN AUTOMATIC FAILURE OF THE COURSE. Logs of the chat room sessions are archived so you are liable for what you say in these rooms. I will monitor these for improper behavior.







**

VIDEO TAPES:

**

You will check out of the library the videotapes for the course. (You will be
issued two video tapes which have 10 hours of lectures on them.) It is your
responsibility to turn these tapes back into the library at the end of the
term. It is not expected that you will only watch these tapes once. Remember
you have control of the VCR so stop and rewind when you don't comprehend or
gather the information given in the video. THIS IS NOT MINDLESS TV WATCHING!
THIS IS SOME OF THE INFORMATION FOR THIS COURSE. A LARGE NUMBER OF QUESTIONS
ON TESTS (the first test only has 1 hour of video, but tests 2 and 3 each have
three hours of videos, there will be more questions from the videos on Test 2
and 3 than what will be on test 1) WILL COME FROM THESE VIDEOS. Read the
information in the study guide as to what you should have gotten out of the
video that you have watched. Each unit we study has a title, this same title
is the title for the hour of video you need to watch for that unit.

**

ACADEMIC HONESTY POLICY**

It is a part of your education to learn responsibility and self-discipline.
The College expects its students to obey all regulations, national, state,
local, and those of the college. Cheating includes any attempt to defraud,
deceive, or mislead the instructor in arriving at an honest grade assessment.
Plagiarism is a form of cheating that involves presenting as one's own work
the ideas or work of another.

All portions of any test, project, or final exam submitted by you for a grade
must be your own work, unless you are instructed to work collaboratively.
Specific requirements will be described for collaborative projects, but all
work presented must be the work of members of that group. Research materials
used must be properly cited.

Violation of the Academic Honesty Policy will result in a grade of "0" (zero)
for that test, project, or summary. The second offense will result in
assignment of a grade of "F" for the course and a formal charge of Academic
Dishonesty will be lodged with the Dean of Student Affairs and Dean of
Academic Affairs. If you are caught cheating on the final exam you will fail
the course (the grade of "F" will be assigned) and a formal charge of Academic
Dishonesty will be lodged with the Dean of Student Affairs and the Dean of
Academic Affairs.

Policies have been established by Georgia Perimeter College to insure due
process in charges of cheating or plagiarism. A copy of these procedures can
be found in the Student Handbook.

**

Americans with Disabilities Act Statement

**

If you are a student who is disabled as defined under the **Americans with
Disabilities Act** and require assistance or support services, please seek
assistance through the **Center for Disability Services** (CDS). A CDS
Counselor will coordinate those services.

**

Equal Opportunity Statement

**

No person shall, on the grounds of race, color, sex, religion, creed, national
origin, age, or disability, be excluded from employment or participation in,
be denied the benefits of, or otherwise be subjected to discrimination under
any program or activity conducted by Georgia Perimeter College.

**

Affirmative Action Statement

**

Georgia Perimeter College adheres to affirmative action policies designed to
promote diversity and equal opportunity for all faculty and students.

**

The Regents' Test

**

The University System of Georgia requires that all students enrolled in
undergraduate degree programs in University System institutions (including
Georgia Perimeter College) successfully complete all parts of a competency
examination in reading and English composition. This competency examination is
commonly called "the Regents' Test", and it is free of charge. A student has
two attempts to pass this test before accumulating 45 hours of collegiate
credit. Please sign up for the Regents' Test when you enroll in English 1102.
Do this in time to have two attempts before accumulating 45 credit hours!



**

Directions on how to get to the Environmental Science Telecourse Homepage

**

  1. These materials are found at: **http://www.gpc.peachnet.edu/~janderso/environs/envhp.htm**
  2. On this page click on the Environmental Science Telecourse Page 
  3. This will take you to the materials you will need this term. This page is actually: **http://www.gpc.peachnet.edu/~janderso/environs/telecourse/telecour.htm**
  4. On this page you will find links to: the Course Handouts (which is where the syllabus and course outline can be found) ; the directions for the Air Quality Project; the link To WebCT, where the materials for the course are found. WebCT is where the majority of the information for this course is found!

**

Directions for using WebCT

**

  1. From the Telecourse Homepage chose To WebCT link. The URL for this link is **http://webct.gpc.peachnet.edu**. 
  2. This will take you to a page where you will see Log on to myWebCT- click on these words 
  3. You will now be directed to give your user id and password. To get your login and password you will need to go to **http://www.gpc.peachnet.edu/studentid**. Once you login to WebCT you will be able to change your password. If you do this fill out the reminder section so in case you forget your password you will have a reminder of what you password is. Do not give your user id and password out. You are being graded for your use of this system as well as your grades will be posted here. 
  4. WebCT is where you get the outlines for the textbook, quizzes, and other important materials for this course.
**

  5. MAKE SURE IF YOU USE A COMPUTER OTHER THAN YOUR OWN TO CLOSE DOWN THE INTERNET BROWSER COMPLETELY BEFORE LEAVING THE COMPUTER.** If you don't someone else will be able to get into your WebCT account and take quizzes, etc. Make sure you protect your grade.

**

Directions for using GALILEO off campus

**

You can access various GALILEO function from home with a password. The
password for this semester for Off-campus access from 12/20/01 to 5/12/02 is
aloe.

* * *

[Return to the course handout page](handout.htm)

