  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  
|  |  |  | **Topics in Science Education-EDCI 6342** |  
|  | [University and Public School
Projects](http://unix.utb.edu/~rramirez/projects.html)  
---  
[](http://unix.utb.edu/%7Erramirez/)  
[Courses](http://unix.utb.edu/~rramirez/courses/index.html)  
[](http://unix.utb.edu/%7Eeduc/)  
[Personal](http://unix.utb.edu/~rramirez/Vita.htm)  
[](mailto:myanez@utb1.utb.edu)  
  
  
|  |  |  
|  |  |  **The University of Texas at Brownsville**

**Spring 2000**

**Education 6342.60 Topics in Science Education (Kit-Based Science Programs)**

**_Course Syllabus_**

**_General Course Information_**

Course: EDCI 6342.60 Topics in Science Education (Kit-Based Science Programs)

Time: 4:25 - 7:15 PM

Date: Monday

Location: N234 and specified field locations

Instructor: Reynaldo Ramirez, Jr., Ed.D.

Textbook(s): Provided by Instructor

Barba, R. H. (1999). _Science in the Multicultural Classroom: A Guide to
Teaching and Learning, Second Edition_. Allyn and Bacon, Boston.

Reference

Materials: Carin, A. A. (1997). _Teaching science through discovery, eighth
edition_. MacMillan Publishing Company, New York.

Mastropieri, M. A. and Scruggs, T. E. (1993). A Practical Guide for Teaching
Science to Students with Special Needs in Inclusive Settings. Purdue Research
Foundation, West Lafeyette, IN.

Office Phone: (956) 982-0201

e-mail: reyr @ utb1.utb.edu

URL: http://www.unix.utb.edu/~rramirez

Office Hours: Tuesday and Thursday, 2 - 4 pm

Friday, By Appointment

**_Course Description_**

Catalog Description:

Special topics in science education related to science pedagogy, inquiry
models of science instruction, integration of content areas, coordinated-
thematic science teaching, authentic assessment methods in science education,
fostering science process skills and critical thinking skills, and laboratory
methods. May require field activities. May be repeated for credit when the
topics vary. Lec 3, Cr 3

Funding Description:

The course under consideration is developed to meet the needs of grants
provided by the National Science Foundation - Urban Systemic Partnership,
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and The Texas Regional
Collaboratives for Excellence in Science Teaching. The Urban Systemic
Partnership grant provides support for teachers from the Brownsville
Independent School District. The other two grants provide support for all
teachers within the domain of The University of Texas at Brownsville and Texas
Southmost College. The grants provide support for local science teachers at
targeted grade levels by providing funds to cover tuition, fees, books,
materials, and related grant activity costs. The funds will also be available
to support additional coursework in science education and graduate level
biology coursework this summer.

Topic Description:

The purpose of these endeavors is to provide teachers with both a theoretical
and practical perspective of the history, development, implementation, and
evaluation of kit-based programs that meet the needs of a diverse student
population. The project will accomplish the following goals:

  1. To provide a theoretical perspective, including the history of kit-based programs.
  2. To enable teachers to develop adaptations and/or modifications for science kits that facilitates the inclusion of all students.
  3. To develop science modules in a kit-based format for use in pre-college school settings.
  4. 4) To familiarize and provide teachers with the expertise to implement currently available science kits.

**_Course Objectives_**

By the end of this course, students should be able to:

    * Describe the philosophical underpinnings of science education to diverse learners and learning environments.
    * Describe educational viewpoints and their role in inspiring student motivation and learning.
    * Describe group dynamics in the science classroom as part of a social process that impacts student learning 
    * Evaluate methods to assess knowledge of children in the science classroom in terms of student performance and understanding.
    * Develop and implement instructional strategies that are appropriate to meet the needs of culture and ability of diverse learners.
    * Construct a knowledge of science processes through the use of manipulatives and technology.
    * Develop science modules that integrate local themes of environmental concern and provide a means for students of all abilities access

    * Create a product which can be used in multicultural and inclusive classrooms.

**_Course Requirements_**

    * Attend class regularly and participate in class discussions and activities (irregular attendance hurts!) 
    * To be responsible for all assigned readings prior to scheduled class discussions and activities. 
    * Maintain a journal of reflections about experiences with skills and concepts addressed in class. Date the entry and focus on the relation of the discussion to multicultural and inclusion issues.
    * Develop and test an instructional module reflective of current practices with students in multicultural and inclusive classrooms. 
    * Students are expected to maintain a professional level of discussion and attitude.

**_Course Assignments and Evaluation_**

  1. Quizzes and alternate assessments/assignments (periodically) 10%
  2. Reflective Journal 20%
  3. Develop an Adapted Multicultural or Special Education Module
  




(Must be in a kit-based format) 40%

  4. Presentation (Individual - Scheduled) 10%
  5. Final Examination 20% 

**_Special Conditions_**

The student enrolled in EDCI 6342 - Topics in Science Education is required to
complete forty-five (45) contact hours to earn three hours of university
course credit. It is also imperative that students grasp an academic
understanding of their participation. Therefore, attendance is clearly a
fundamental component in the evaluation of students. Further, it is understood
that a student, especially a graduate student, enters in to academic endeavors
that go beyond regularly scheduled class time. Everyone must understand the
importance of "time on task" and "going beyond the call of duty." Under some
circumstances class time will be adjusted to meet the needs of ALL students,
however, the final outcome will be the same--the objectives of the course will
be met!

The lecture and discussion section refers to specific readings. The readings
must be completed prior to the date for discussion. The dates are provided as
an opportunity for students to explore the author's viewpoints and share their
experiences with others. Dialogue is expected, but avoid taking the stage.
Students have always commented that sometimes with discussions like these few
students have an opportunity to speak.

_Students are expected to obtain an e-mail address_. It is important to get
one as soon as possible. The grants pay for "computer-use fees". Establish a
schedule for reading your e-mail and taking advantage of the University's
Internet resources.

Course meeting places have been arranged for three sites. We will initially
meet at The University of Texas at Brownsville assigned classroom. Afterward,
we will be meeting at Titan Tires, Incorporated and Camp Lula Sams. Directions
to get to both sites will be provided elsewhere.

  * When parking at Titan Tires, check with the guard at the plant entrance. He will direct you to visitor parking. A classroom has been set aside for our use.

  * When parking at Camp Lula Sams, please back your car into the parking spaces. If you are available to help guide someone, please do so. On any excursion, do not collected any plants or animals without asking. The purpose of the planned workshops is to give you a greater appreciation for "leaving things as they are" by taking notes, making sketches, and photographing natural things for later study.

A field sketchbook and instructions will be given to participants during
second workshop. However, participants should secure a notebook. A spiral
notebook or record book will work quite well. The purpose of this notebook is
to maintain a reflective journal. Do not confuse the journal with the field
sketchbook. The journal provides a place for reflections, while the field
sketchbook is a means of documenting what will be observed. Selfishly, we also
hope the journals will provide a means of documenting anecdotal assessment
information for grant purposes.

Like most grants, a certain amount of paperwork is required. Especially,
surveys that must be completed to evaluate the program's effectiveness. Please
_bear_ with us. We have tried to cut the surveys to a minimum. However, we are
required to administer both pre and post assessments. ENOUGH!!!

**_Tentative Course Schedule_**

The course will consist of two distinct class formats. A final exam is
scheduled separately. The first, which is scheduled for regular class meetings
and a second, reserved for workshop activities. Students not enrolled in SPED
6306 will receive up to six hours of Texas Environmental Education Advisory
Committee credit. _Students are expected to attend all workshops as a
requirement for covering course costs_. The number of contact hours of EDCI
6342 and those of SPED 6306 do not overlap. Therefore, the requirements of
each course, in terms of contact hours, will be met during this semester.

Lecture and Discussion

_Class Time 4:25 - 7:05 PM_

_(39 contact hours)_ January 12-13, 2000 - Late arena registration

January 17, 2000 - Martin Luther King Holiday

January 24, 2000 - Science in the Multicultural Classroom: An Introduction,
pp. 1 - 23.

January 31, 2000 - Motivation in the Science Classroom, pp. 24 - 53; The
History of Science: A Culturally Affirming Perspective, pp. 54 - 73

February 7, 2000 - Ways of Knowing Science, pp. 74 - 101; Groups in the
Science Classroom, pp. 102 \- 125

February 14, 2000 - Assessing Knowledge in the Science Classroom, pp. 126 -
161; Instructional Strategies for Culturally Diverse Learners, pp. 162 - 189

February 21, 2000 - No class

February 28, 2000 - Constructing a Knowledge of Science and Language, pp. 190
- 223; Constructing a Knowledge of Science Processes, pp. 224 - 266

March 6, 2000 - No class

March 13 - 18, 2000 - Spring Break

March 20, 2000 - Math/Science Integration in the Multicultural Classroom, pp.
294 - 313; Constructing a Knowledge of Science from Text in the Multicultural
Science Classroom, pp. 314 - 339

March 27, 2000 - Science/Technology/Society in the Multicultural Classroom,
pp. 340 - 363; Guiding Learning in the Science Classroom, pp. 364 - 388

April 3, 2000 - No Class

April 10, 2000 - Module Presentations

April 17, 2000 - Module Presentations

April 24, 2000 - Module Presentations Workshops

_General Workshop Hours 8:30 AM - 12:00 AM; 1:00 PM - 3:30 PM_

_(6 hours)_

February 19, 2000 - Learning to Look (3 hours)

March 25, 2000 - Illustrating Nature (3 hours)

April 8, 2000 - Wild About Wetlands (3 hours)

**Informative Websites** [Lawrence Hall of
Science](http://www.lhs.berkeley.edu/)  
[Delta Education](http://www.delta-ed.com/)  
[Savi/Selph](http://www.lhs.berkeley.edu/FOSS/SAVI_SELPH.html)  
![](transparent.gif) | ![](transparent.gif) | ![](transparent.gif) |
![](transparent.gif) | ![](transparent.gif) | ![](transparent.gif) |
![](transparent.gif) | ![](transparent.gif)

