HIS 336:01 Syllabus

College of Arts and Science

3 credits

Prerequisite: HIS 140, or consent of instructor



**The Ancient World: Rome**

**Fall 2000; T/Th 8:00 &endash; 9:15**



Instructor: Dr. Cynthia K. Kosso

Office: LA 316

Office Hours: T and Th, 9:30-10:30 and by appointment

Phone: 523-9305

E-mail: cynthia.kosso@nau.edu

Web page: http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~ckk





Required texts:

Texts:

Ward, A., Heichelheim, F and Yeo, C. A History of the Roman People, Third
Edition, Prentice Hall. (abbreviated Ward et al.)

Wheeler, M. Roman Art and Architecture. Thames and Hudson. (abbreviated
Wheeler)



Primary sources:

Caesar, The Civil War, World Classics

Livy, The Early History of Rome, Penguin

Suetonius, The Twelve Caesars, Penguin.



Course intentions:

In this course we will consider the people and history of the Roman world up
to, roughly, the third century CE. We'll begin by discussing the nature of the
sources (historical, archaeological and anthropological), how they are used
and how they complement and enhance one another. Next we will consider the
political, social, cultural and religious history of Rome beginning with the
foundation of the Republic. I plan to get through the transformation of the
republican political system to the Roman Empire of the Emperors. In
particular, through-out the course of the semester, we will attempt to
identify the factors that made the Romans such a powerfully successful and
influential people.



Course requirements:

This course is writing and reading intensive. You will be expected to practice
and perfect your critical reading skills with respect to both the ancient
texts and

secondary material. We will be discussing the reading critically and often,
hence the class will be run partly as a seminar rather than pure lecture
course.

There will several short projects (including one geography assignment and
writing and/or presentation projects, assigned in class), two exams or take-
home papers, one research paper -- with short classroom presentation (about
ten minutes) of your material \--(approximately 15-20 pages of text for the
paper) on a topic about Rome of your choice. You will need to turn in a
written summary outline of your topic (typed and double spaced).





Late policy:

Please turn things in on time. I do not accept late papers or projects without
an official university excuse.







Project: Points: Due Date:

Participation and attendance 25

Geography assignment 25 Sept. 7

Projects 100 TBA

Exams or Take-home exams 200 Oct 6/ Dec. 11

Paper topic and outline 25 Sept. 28/ Oct 26

Paper presentation 25 TBA

Paper 100 Nov. 30

total points 500



A= 500 - 450

B= 449 - 400

C= 300 - 350

D= 349 - 300

F= 300 - 0





Academic Honesty: "The History Department takes academic integrity very
seriously and will not tolerate acts of academic dishonesty. It is the
student's responsibility to familiarize her/himself with these matters as
defined by the University. See the current NAU Student Handbook, for
definitions and procedures."



Topics, readings and assignment due dates



Week one (Aug. 29, 31): Introduction, sources, Italian prehistory

READ:

Ward et al., pages 1-10

Wheeler, pages 7-24

I recommend that you start reading Livy now!

Week two (Sept. 5, 7): Etruscan roots and origins of the Roman Republic, early
Roman Religion

READ:

Ward et al., pages 11 &endash; 49

Livy, pages 33 - 182

Geography assignment due



Week three (Sept. 12, 14): The Patricians and Plebeians; Wars and external
relations to 345 B.C.E

READ:

Ward et al., pages 50 - 68

Livy, pages 183 - 403

Week four (Sept. 19, 21): Conquest of Italy

READ:

Wheeler, pages 25-88

Project one due



Week five (Sept. 26, 28): Punic Wars and Imperialism

READ:

Ward et al., pages 69 - 123

Topic statement due



Week six (Oct. 3, 5): Social and economic life of Italy in the second century
B.C.E.

READ:

Ward et al., pages 124 - 145

Exam one



Week seven (Oct. 10, 12): Gracchi and socio-political turmoil

READ:

Ward et al., pages146 &endash; 174

Suetonius, pages 13 -53

I recommend that you start reading Caesar now!

Week eight (Oct. 17, 19): Public crises (Pompey and Caesar)

READ:

Ward et al., pages 175 &endash; 223

Caesar, The Civil War

Project two due



Week nine (Oct. 24, 26): Late Republican culture and society

READ:

Ward et al., pages 224 &endash; 245

Wheeler, pages 89 - 158

Paper outline due



Week ten (Oct. 31, Nov. 2): The Augustan and Julio-Claudian Age

READ:

Ward et al., pages 246 &endash; 317

Wheeler, pages 159 &endash; 206

Suetonius, pages 54 - 246

Project three due



Week eleven (Nov. 7, 9): The Principate to the Second Century

READ:

Ward et al., pages 318 &endash; 372

Suetonius, pages 247 - 314



Week twelve (Nov. 14, 16): Third Century Crisis and beyond

READ:

Ward et al., pages 373 - 488

Project four due



Week thirteen (Nov. 21, Thanksgiving on Thursday): Summary and review

Recommended reading:

Ward et al., pages 489 &endash; 546

Wheeler, pages 207 - 231



Week fourteen (November 28, 30): PRESENTATIONS

Paper due



Week fifteen (December 5, 7): PRESENTATIONS



