**Philosophy and the Sciences**

**(Phil 1400)**

**Syllabus**

[**Home**](Home.html) **-[News](News.html) \- [Notes](Notes.html) \-
****Syllabus** **-[Links](Links.html) \- [Recommended](Recommended.html) \-
[Contact](../Shared/Contact.html)**

**  
  
  
  
Phil 1400: Philosophy and the Sciences  
Instructor: Devon Belcher, Ma.  
Phone: 666-4032  
Email: Belcher@ucsu.colorado.edu  
Webpage:  
  
  
Philosophy and the Sciences - Phil 1400  
  
Course Overview:  
The aim of this course is to provide an introduction to some of the central
questions in the philosophy of science. Beginning with the classic 'Problem of
Induction' (how can we justify any claims to know that the future will behave
as the past has done?), we will use several more specific, original articles
to explore several themes. First, what is science (is it something special?).
What justifies a scientific theory? What is Evidence and Confirmation? What is
the difference is between 'real' science and 'pseudo science'( for example,
how come astrology doesn't count as a science, but psychology does?). What is
the status of theoretical entities like atoms and magnetic fields? What is the
nature and role of the rational virtues (simplicity, parsimony, richness,
etc.) in scientific theorizing?  
While this course has been designed to focus on general philsophical issues
involved in systematic theorizing of any sort (not just science), a certain
level of scientific literacy is an asset. Students will find it to their
benefit to pay close attention to science in the news; to aid this, I'll try
to compile a 'recommended reading' list and set of web links.  
  
A Caveat:  
Everything interesting and worthwhile is difficult. Science is difficult;
Philosophy is not always immediately obvious, and the intersection of the two
is often very hard work. We will be adressing some of the most difficult
problems in philosophy (albeit, in a simplified way) and you should not expect
to 'get it' all at once or from a cursory reading. On the other hand, even if
the material sometimes seems 'over your head', remember that you aren't
expected to get it 100%. Every problem listed below represents merely a
starting point for serious thinking, and my grading policies definitely take
this into account.  
  
Ethics:  
You are expected to know and abide by CU's standards of intellectual
integrity. Failure to abide by these will result in at least course failure
and perhaps expulsion from the college. While the internet has provided
students with many opportunities to plagiarize, it has also provided
professors with many tools to catch plagiarists.  
  
Course Requirements:  
  
Readings:  
It is expected that you will have completed the reading before coming to
class. It is recommended that you reread the material after coming to class.
This will improve your understanding immensely. You are also encouraged to
come to office hours to discuss the problems and issues that arise in the
readings and in class discussion. Required reading materials for the course
are:  
  
Bryan Skryms, Choice and Chance  
  
Curd and Cover, Philosophy of Science: The Central Issues (Henceforth PS)  
  
Reserve Materials at Norlin  
  
Tests:  
There will be 4 in-class tests, which will be of the short answer/essay
format. These are required.  
  
Section I: Hume's Problem of Induction  
  
Wk1  
  
Tues: Introduction to course. Discussion: Inductive vs. Deductive. Read
Skyrms, Ch 2, Ch3  
  
Thurs: The Problem of Induction. Read Carnap,  "The Problem of Induction", in
PS.  
  
  
Wk2  
  
Tues: Discussion: Wrap up Hume's problem. Read: Skyrms, Ch 5. Recommended
reading: Salmon, "Rational Prediction" in PS.  
  
Thurs: Discussion: Mill's Methods. Read: Skyrms, Ch 4  
  
  
Wk3  
**

**Tues: Discussion: Goodman's New Riddle  
  
Thurs: Catch up, Review  
  
**

**Section II: Confirmation and Explanation  
**

**Wk 4  
  
Tues: In-Class Exam. Read Hempel,  "Two Basic Types of Scientific
Explanation", in PS; David-Hillel Ruben, "Arguments, Laws and explanations",
in PS**

**Thurs: Discuss Hempel, Ruben. Read Carnap, "The Value of Laws", Hempel,
"Inductive Statistical Explanations", both in PS  
****  
  
Wk5  
  
****Tues: Discuss Carnap, Hempel. Read Popper, "Conjectures and Refutations"
(handout). **

**  
Thurs: Discuss Popper. Read Kuhn, "Logic of Discovery or Psychology of
Research?", Kuhn, "Objectivity, Value Judgement, Theory Choice", both in PS  
. Read Feyerabend, TBA  
  
Wk6  
  
Tues: Discuss Kuhn. Read Feyerabend, TBA.Review  
  
Thurs: Discuss Feyerabend. Review. **

**  
Section III: Underdetermination and the Quine-Duhem Thesis  
Wk7  
Tues: In-Class Exam. Read Gillies,  "The Duhem Thesis and the Quine Thesis",
in PS  
  
Thurs: Discuss Gillies, Read Laudan, "Demystifying Underdetermination", in PS.
Recommended reading: Duhem, "Physical Theory and Experiment", in PS  
  
  
Section IV: Realism and Anti-Realism  
Wk8  
**

**Tues: Discuss: Gillies, Laudan. Read: Maxwell, "The Ontological Status of
Theoretical Entities"  
**

**Thurs: Discuss: Maxwell. Read: Van Fraasen, "Arguments concerning Scientific
Realism", in PS  
**

**Wk 9  
**

**Tues: Discuss: Van Fraasen. Read: Matthews, "Spoiling a Universal Fudge
Factor"  
  
Thurs: Discuss: Van Fraasen, Matthews. Read: Fine, "The Natural Ontological
Attitude", in PS.  
Wk10:  
  
Mon: Discuss Fine, Harman.  
  
Thurs: Review  
  
Section V: The Theoretical Virtues  
Wk11  
  
Tues: In-class Exam, read Quine, "Hypothesis"(Handout)  
  
Thurs: Discuss Quine, Read Harman, "Inference to the Best Explanation"
(Handout)  
  
  
Section VI: Science and Pseudo-Science  
**

**Revised to this point**

**Wk12  
  
Mon: Movie. Read: Lakatos,  "Science and Pseudo-Science", recommended, re-read
Popper, "Conjectures and Refutations"  
  
Wed: Discuss Lakatos, Popper; Read Thagard, "Why Astrology is a Pseudoscience"  
  
Fri: Discuss Thagard, Read Ruse, "Creation-Science is not a Science" in PS  
  
  
Wk13  
  
Mon: Discuss Ruse, Read Laudan, "Science at the Bar- Causes for Concern",
Ruse, "Response to the Comentary - Pro Judice"  
  
Wed: Discuss the Michael Ruse Affair  
  
Fri: In-Class Exam  
  
Section VI: What is a Science? A Case Sudy  
All TBA, but presumably from "Rape: A Natural History", Kitcher, "Vaulting
Ambition", Kitcher, "Abusing Science",  
  
(Finish semester)  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
**

