**

  
NOTICE:  
***********SAMPLE ONLY**********  
CONSULT CURRENT COURSE SCHEDULE OR DEPARTMENT FOR CURRENT INSTRUCTOR'S VERSION



Communication Science and Disorders 381

Psycholinguistics

Fall Sememster, 1999

**

Professor Judith Goodman

Office Hours: Tues. and Fri., 2 - 3, or by appointment.

Class Times: MW, 2 - 3:15

Room: Lewis 331

**_

Required Readings:

_** _______****_

Gleason, J. B. & Ratner, N. B. (1993) _Psycholinguistics_. Fort Worth, TX:
Harcourt Brace College Publishers. (Referred to below as G &R)

Articles and chapters as indicated.

**

I. Course Overview

**

What makes human beings special? Throughout history, people have often
answered that question with "language." Indeed, language stands at the center
of human affairs, because it is the chief instrument of communication. The
goal of this course is to study the knowledge and processes that underlie a
person's ability to produce and understand language. We will address such
questions as "How do people perceive speech?"; "How do people identify words
they see or hear?"; "How do people understand the meaning of a sentence?";
""How do people produce and comprehend entire conversations?"; "By what mental
processes do people come to say what they say?"; "What are the biological
bases for language?"; "What course do children follow in learning to
understand and speak their first language, and why?"; "Do people who speak two
languages process language the same way monolinguals do?"; and "What theories
best account for language processing?"

Although I will prepare lectures, I hope these lectures will be interrupted
with questions and a lively discussion of ideas. You should feel free to raise
relevant issues at any point during a class. In addition, there will be
student presentations on specific topics throughout the course.

**

II. Course Requirements

**

1\. Class attendance and readings are mandatory. Material from both will be
included in exams.

2\. We will jointly decide on the nature of assignments. Since the class is so
small, we have several possibilities. There will be 3 exams, so you have a
chance to think more deeply about the basic course material. In addition, I'd
like the class to have a lot of student participation. One way to do this is
through student presentations. Either we could have you pick selected topics
and lecture/lead discussion on them or we could assign one or two papers in
which you explore a topic of your choosing in depth and present that to the
class. In addition, to make this class more of a seminar and less lecture, we
could either agree to have me lecture for half of each class and have
discussion for half of the class, or I could provide an overview for each
topic and then we could have discussion for articles that further address some
aspect of the topic. We'll discuss these options during the first class. In
addition, I am flexible about this syllabus. If there are topics that are not
covered or ones you'd like to cover in more depth, we can change it. This is a
small class -- I will provide guidance, but I psycholinguistics is a big,
broad topic and we don't have to follow the outline below if there are other
areas in the field you want to cover.

**

III. Schedule of Lectures and Readings

**

Aug 23 _Overview_ **G &R ch 1**

__

Aug 25/30 _Speech Perception_ **G &R ch 3**

Sept 1/8 _Speech Perception_

Nygaard, L. C., Sommers, M. S., & Pisoni, D. B. (1994). Speech perception as a
talker-contingent process. _Psychological Science_ , **5** , 42-46.

Tallal, Miller, Bedi, Byma, Wang, Nagarajan, Schreiner, Jenkins, Merzenich
(1996). Language comprehension in language-learning impaired children improved
with acoustically modified speech. _Science_ , **271(5245)** , 81-84.

Sept 13/15 _Word Recognition, Semantic Memory and the Lexicon_ **G &R ch 4**

 **

Sept. 20 NO CLASS

**

Sept 22/27 _Word Recognition, Semantic Memory and the Lexicon_

Grosjean, F. and Gee, J.P. (1987). Prosodic structure and spoken word
recognition. In U.H. Frauenfelder & L.K. Tyler (Eds.) _Spoken Word
Recognition_. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. pp. 135-156.

Reading TBA

****

Sept 29/Oct 4/6 _Syntax and Sentence Processing_ **G &R ch 5**

Ferreira, F. & Clifton, C. (1986). The independence of syntactic processing.
_Journal of Memory and Language_ , 25, 348-368.

Carpenter, P.A, Miyake, A., & Just, M.A. (1995). Language comprehension:
Sentence and discourse processing. _Annual Review of Psychology_ , **46** ,
91-100.

**

Exam #1: Oct 11

**

Oct 13 _Conversational Discourse and Sociolinguistics_ **G &R, ch 6**

Oct 18 _Speech Production_ **G &R ch 7**

Oct 20/25 _Biological Basis of Language_ **G &R ch 2 **

Oct 27/Nov 1 _Biological Basis of Language_

Zaidel, D.W. (1992). Adult commissurotomy: separating the left from the right
side of the brain. In R. Campbell (Ed.) _Mental Lives: Case Studies in
Cognition_. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.

Damasio, A.R. & Damasio, H. (1993) Brain and language. In _Mind and brain:
Readings from Scientific American magazine_. W. H. Freeman  & Co, Publishers,
New York, NY. 54-65.

__

Nov 3/9 _Language Acquisition_ **G &R, ch 8**

Saffran, E., Aslin, R., & Newport, E. (1996). Statistical learning in 8-month-
olds. _Science_ , **274** , 1926-1928.

Nov 10/15 _Language Acquisition _

Smith, L.B., Jones, S.S., & Landau, B. (1996). Naming in young children: A
dumb attentional mechanism? _Cognition_ , **60** , 143-171.

Reading TBA

**

Nov 17: Exam #2

**

Nov 29/Dec 1 _Bilingualism and 2nd language acquisition_ **G &R ch. 10**

Dec 6/8 _Theoretical Perspectives_

Pinker, S. (1991). The rules of language. _Science_ , **253** , 530-535.

Bates, E. & MacWhinney, B. (1989). Functionalism and the competition model. In
B. MacWhinney & E. Bates (eds.) _The crosslinguistic study of sentence
processing_ (pp. 3-76). New York: Cambridge University Press.

**

Dec 13: 10:30 am, Exam #3

**

_University Statement on Academic Dishonesty_ :

Academic honesty is fundamental to the activities and principles of a
university. All members of the academic community must be confident that each
person's work has been responsibly and honorably acquired, developed, and
presented. Any effort to gain an advantage not given to all students is
dishonest whether or not the effort is successful. The academic community
regards academic dishonesty as an extremely serious matter, with serious
consequences that range from probation to expulsion. When in doubt about
plagiarism, paraphrasing, quoting, or collaboration, consult the course
instructor.

_Instructor's Additional Statement on Academic Dishonesty_ :

Any cases of cheating or plagiarism will result in a failing grade and will be
reported to the Provost for possible further action.

If you have special needs as addressed by the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA) and need assistance, please notify the Access Office or course
instructor immediately. Reasonable effort will be made to accommodate your
special needs.

