**CD143RL (CD40): SPECIAL TOPIC SEMINARS IN APPLIED DEVELOPMENTAL SCIENCE**

**Spring 2002 Seminar Topic: Family-Centered Community Building for Youth  
**

Class Time: MWF, 10:30am-11:20am

Instructor: **[Richard M. Lerner](http://ase.tufts.edu/epcd/lerner.htm)**  
Office: 105 Eliot-Pearson  
Office Hours: By appointment (7-5558)  
email: [richard.lerner@tufts.edu](mailto:richard.lerner@tufts.edu)

Course Description || Rationale || The Role of Applied Developmental Science
|| Course Goals || The Spring, 2002 Seminar Topic: Family-Centered Community
Building for Youth || Course Topics/Required Readings || Course Requirements
|| Class/Recitation Schedules

* * *

**Course Description**

Theory and practice of applying child development scholarship to programs and
policies pertinent to topics of societal and community importance. Students
integrate readings and class discussions with observations of and interactions
in community-based programs. Focal topic of seminar varies each semester, for
example, building civil society through community-based child development
programs, promoting the positive development of teenage mothers and their
infants, or promoting healthy alternatives to interpersonal, family and
community violence. Prerequisites: Undergraduate class standing and CD1 (or
instructor permission).

Back to top

**Rationale**

One billion children will be born worldwide in the next 10 years. Most of
these young people will be children of color and will live in developing
nations. No one alive on the planet today knows how these children will be
fed, how their waste products will be eliminated safely, or how energy will be
created to power their lives. The world's economies are projected to produce
new jobs numbering only in the tens of millions to gainfully employ these
youth. The most optimistic projections are that the world will fall _several
hundred million jobs_ _short_ in attempting to occupy these youth
productively. Moreover, the educational systems of the world are ill-prepared
to provide the knowledge and skills needed by these youth to compete for the
relatively few jobs that will be available to them.  
  
The negative global economic and geopolitical implications for people of all
ages in all nations are difficult to overestimate. The United States will not
be immune to the enormous global problems facing children and adolescents. Job
opportunities for America's young people will be limited by cheaper labor
costs existing abroad. In turn, America's own young people are themselves
faced with historically unique social and personal problems.  
  
One fifth of America's children and adolescents live in poverty. The rates of
poverty are about four times higher for American children of color. Estimates
are that half of America's young people engage in two or more high risk
behaviors, such as unsafe sex, teenage pregnancy, and parenting; drug and
alcohol use and abuse; delinquency, crime, and violence; and school
underachievement, failure, and dropout.

Back to top

**The Role of Applied Developmental Science**  

A generational time bomb is ticking with increasing rapidity. Its explosion,
less than a decade away, threatens the very fabric of national and
international civil society. The times we live in necessitate, then, not
modest programs that work on one or even several facets of the problems of
children and adolescents. Instead, a bold set of actions must be taken. These
actions must be aimed at no less than global systems change for children and
adolescents. Such change will require innovative actions within, and new,
integrative connections among, all sectors of society-(1) government; (2)
business; and (3) the not-for-profit, community-based world, including, quite
critically in our view, youth and families and, as well, institutions of
higher education.

Predicated on its history of national and international leadership in applied
child development scholarship, Eliot-Pearson has forged and sustained the tri-
sector collaborations reflecting the larger-scale actions critically needed at
this point in time. Eliot-Pearson is engaged in bringing to scale, nationally
and internationally, an integrated model of the scholarship and community-
collaboration needed to address the domestic and international issues facing
children and adolescents.

The approach of the Eliot-Pearson Department of Child Development is
associated with a dynamic, developmental systems theory of human development
and stresses the strengths of children and adolescents and the individual and
community assets that may be marshaled to enable all young people to develop
their potentials for positive contributions to self and society. Accordingly,
the model pursued within Eliot-Pearson emphasizes that it is certainly not
humane, or economically or politically prudent, to wait for youth problems to
fully emerge and to then seek means to ameliorate their severity or further
growth. In addition, the model emphasizes that problem prevention is not
sufficient to address these problems. There are at least three reasons for
this view.

First, prevention is not provision. Preventing a problem from occurring does
not, in turn, provide children and adolescents with the knowledge and skills
needed to contribute productively to self, family, and community. This is
because, second, problem-free is not fully prepared. A child free of problems
associated with substance use, violence, crime, unsafe sex, etc. is not
necessarily a child who has the knowledge and skills to compete successfully
in the global marketplace. Educators and employers will want to know that
young people are not participating in harmful behaviors; however, they also
will want to know that young people are prepared to fully participate in
school and career.

Third, and perhaps most critically, community members will want to know that
the young person is not just prepared to participate but, as well, is actively
involved in community participation. In other words, then, being prepared is
not equivalent to being engaged. That is, even if a young person is prepared
to make a productive contribution to self and community, he or she must be
actively engaged in doing so. He or she must be an active citizen and
contribute, therefore, to self, family, community, and civil society.
Accordingly, the promotion of positive youth development and of active
citizenship among young people are very much the same enterprise.

For this reason then, colleagues within Eliot-Pearson collaborate extensively
with faculty associated with the Tufts University College for Citizenship and
Public Service (UCCPS), a component of the university that seeks to further
education for active citizenship among all students and in all departments
across the university. Accordingly, the Eliot-Pearson model of development and
the UCCPS conception of promoting civic engagement and active citizenship
among young people converge in stressing the promotion of positive
development, not the prevention of negative outcomes. This emphasis is
predicated on the vision that in order to enable children and adolescents to
make positive contributions to self, family, and the economic and civic
components of their communities--that is, for youth to develop Competence,
Confidence, Character, Caring/Compassion, and Connection to the institutions
of civil society-young people must be provided with the individual strengths
and social supports they will need to be prepared and to become engaged.

The promotion of such positive development is the mission of applied
developmental science (ADS). ADS generates and uses theory and research about
human development to improve the lives of children, adolescents, and families
around the world. ADS draws upon knowledge from fields such as child
development, education, psychology, sociology, political science, and the
health sciences to help children, families and communities grow to reach their
full potential by addressing needs as varied as: Improving infant healthcare;
Strengthening child-parent relations; enhancing risk prevention programs for
children and adolescents; improving education and literacy; providing safe
environments for children, adolescents, and families; and building civil
society, through collaborating with schools, communities, businesses, policy
makers, and other international groups and institutions involved in the
promotion of positive child and adolescent development. The mission of ADS is
to promote education, health, competence, character, confidence, social
connection, and caring among children, adolescents, and families globally.

Back to top

**Course Goals**

The goal of this course is to enhance students understanding of the
philosophical, historical, theoretical, and methodological features of ADS,
both in general and in regard to the specific topic of a given semester's
seminar. The pertinent literatures from both science and practice will be
discussed, and students will therefore gain an integrated appreciation of the
reciprocal relations between basic and applied research and among research,
policies, and programs. Each semester a different "sample case" of ADS will be
focused on in order to afford students the opportunity to appreciate the
general and specific features of a given ADS area and, as well, to give
students an appreciation of the range of intellectual issues and professional
practices associated with any area.

Drawing from ongoing ADS activities of Eliot-Pearson and UCCPS faculty,
students visit, observe, or even volunteer at community-based organizations
working on the seminar's focal topic. Students have an opportunity to observe
and reflect on the connections between academic scholarship and community-
based practice, and have assignments that include writing papers representing
their understanding of the connection between the "academic" information
learned in the course and the actions of community-based organizations.

Back to top

**The Spring, 2002 Seminar Topic: Family-Centered Community Building for
Youth**

As envisioned by former Vice President Al Gore, family-centered community
building (FCCB) differs from traditional community development approaches.
Traditional community development approaches have placed a relatively greater
emphasis on building community infrastructure: buildings, businesses, and
other determinants of economic productivity. These are critically important
but not sufficient components of a comprehensive community building effort.
They do not directly address the important and integrated family and human
development issues.

FCCB is broader and more integrated. It considers strategies that invest in
the human and social capital of a community as well as its productive
capacity. These strategies include a range of different actions that enhance
services that support families, child and adolescent development, family
education, and parenting and skill building activities. FCCB also considers
how communities create the environmental, social, and educational conditions
to enhance individual relationships within families and family relationships
within the community.

FCCB starts with the basic premise that individuals, families, and communities
are complex systems. To understand the relationships of individuals, families,
and communities, one needs to understand how family relationships develop and
change as families develop and change, as well as understanding how
relationships within a community develop and change over time. Accordingly,
FCCB utilizes a systems building approach. System change and system
transformation demands a comprehensive and strategic approach. It also means
that we consider how strategic partnerships are formed, how we communicate our
messages, how new leadership is developed, how our resources are deployed, and
a range of other system building techniques that have shown to be important
when real, scalable, and sustainable change is to take place.

FCCB for youth extends this framework by focusing on how young people-the
human and social capital on which the future of civil society rests-may be
integrated within the developmental system to become active, engaged citizens
who enhance the ability of communities to support the efforts of families to
enact what may be their most important function: The rearing of healthy and
productive children and adolescents. By involving youth in the effort to build
family-centered communities, young people are both producers and products of
the developmental system that fosters their civic engagement and positive
development. They become community resources helping facilitate the ability of
families to rear healthy young people and they become, as a consequence of
their actions, the beneficiaries of such family functions. They will develop
into adults actively engaged in community and family activities; they will
raise other generations of healthy young people and, through such efforts,
bringing to scale and sustain civil society.

Accordingly, by discussing FCCB for youth in the context of this applied
developmental science seminar, students will learn:

  * The philosophical, historical, and theoretical bases of applied developmental science and the association between this approach to developmental scholarship and the promotion of positive development across the life span.
  * The challenges to and the opportunities for healthy, positive development among contemporary American youth.
  * The differences between prevention versus promotion as intervention strategies for capitalizing on opportunities for positive youth development.
  * The attributes of positive development among young people (the "Five Cs" of positive youth development: Competence; Confidence; Connection; Character; and Caring/Compassion).
  * The assets for positive development that are present among young people and within their families and communities.
  * That communities and families are complex systems, and that there are multiple determinants of family and community well being.
  * The history of community development and the emergence of the new field of family-centered community building.
  * A systems approach to community building that creates a new vision for community change and a set of strategies designed to communicate that new vision, governance, and leadership.
  * How integrated youth development and civic engagement programs create valuable activities for young people, and make a strong connection between young people and the roles they will assume as members of their community.
  * The importance of programs and approaches that emphasize the strengths possessed by young people, and the role of "community youth development," that is, youth civic engagement with communities, in furthering positive, healthy development.

Back to top

  
**COURSE TOPICS:**

Required Readings **(In Bold)** and Suggested Readings

**1\. THE HISTORICAL CONTEXT OF APPLIED DEVELOPMENTAL SCIENCE**

**Bronfenbrenner, U. (1974). Developmental research, public policy, and the
ecology of childhood. Child Development, 45, 1-5.**

**Lerner, R. M. (1995). America's youth in crisis: Challenges and options for
programs and policies. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. [Forewords and
Chapters 1-3]**

Lerner, R. M., & Galambos, N. L. (1998). Adolescent development: Challenges
and opportunities for research, programs, and policies. In J. T. Spence (Ed.),
Annual Review of Psychology (Vol. 49, pp. 413-446). Palo Alto, CA: Annual
Reviews.

**Lerner, R. M., Fisher, C. B., & Weinberg, R. A. (2000). Applying
developmental science in the twenty-first century: International scholarship
for our times. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 24, 24-29.**

Zigler, E. (1999). A place of value for applied and policy studies. Child
Development, 69, 532-542.



**2\. PHILOSOPHICAL AND THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONS OF APPLIED DEVELOPMENTAL
SCIENCE**

**Birkel, R., Lerner, R.M., & Smyer, M.A. (1989). Applied developmental
psychology as an implementation of a life-span view of human development.
Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 10, 425-445.**

**Fisher, C. B., & Lerner, R. M. (1994b). Foundations of applied developmental
psychology. In C. B. Fisher & R. M. Lerner (Eds.), Applied developmental
psychology (pp. 3-20). New York: McGraw-Hill. **

**Horowitz, D.F. (2000). Child Development And The Pits: Simple Questions,
Complex Answers And Developmental Theory. Child Development, 71, 1-10.**

Lerner, R. M. (1998). Theories of human development: Contemporary
perspectives.  
In R. M. Lerner (Ed.), Theoretical models of human development. Volume 1 of
the  
Handbook of child psychology (5th ed., pp. 1-24), Editor-in-chief: W. Damon.
New York:  
Wiley.



**3\. ACADEMIC AND COMMUNITY CONTEXTS OF APPLIED DEVELOPMENTAL SCIENCE:
OUTREACH, OUTREACH SCHOLARSHIP, ENGAGEMENT, AND CO-LEARNING**

**Thompson, L. S., & Lerner, R. M. (2000). Pursuing policies promoting healthy
youth development: The role of university-community collaboration. Policy and
Politics for Nursing, 1, 68-75.**

**Jensen, P., Hoagwood, K. & Trickett, E. (1999). Ivory towers or earthen
trenches? Community collaborations to foster "real world" research. Applied
Developmental Science, 3, 206-212.**

Kellogg Commission on the Future of State and Land-Grant Colleges. (1999).
Returning to our roots: The engaged institution. Washington, D.C.: National
Association of the State Universities and Land-Grant Colleges.

**Lerner, R.M., & Fisher, C.B. (1994). From applied developmental psychology
to applied developmental science: Community coalitions and collaborative
careers. In C. B. Fisher & R. M. Lerner (Eds.), Applied developmental
psychology (pp. 505-522). New York: McGraw-Hill.**

Lerner, R. M., & Simon, L. A. K. (Eds.). (1998). University-community  
collaborations for the twenty-first century: Outreach scholarship for youth
and families.  
New York: Garland.

Ralston, P., Lerner, R. M., Mullis, A. K., Simerly, C., & Murray, J. (Eds.).
(1999). Social change, public policy, and community collaboration: Training
human development professionals for the twenty-first century. Norwell, MA:
Kluwer.



**4\. APPLYING DEVELOPMENTAL SCIENCE TO CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS: PREVENTION
VERSUS PROMOTING POSITIVE YOUTH DEVELOPMENT**

Benson, P. (1997). All kids are our kids: What communities must do to raise
caring and responsible children and adolescents. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

**Lerner, R. M., De Stefanis, I., & Ladd, G. T. (1998). Promoting positive
youth development: Collaborative opportunities for psychology. Children's
Services: Social Policy, research, & Practice, 1, 83-109.**

**Pittman, K. J., & Zeldin, S. (1994). From deterrence to development:
Shifting the focus of youth programs for African-American males. In R. B.
Mincy (Ed.), Nurturing young Black males (pp. 45-55). Washington: The Urban
Institute Press.**

**Scales, P. C., & Leffert, N. (1999). Developmental assets: A synthesis of
scientific research on adolescent development. Minneapolis, MN: Search
Institute. [Chapter 1]**



**5\. COMMUNITY-BASED APPROACHES TO PROMOTING POSITIVE YOUTH DEVELOPMENT:
INTEGRATION SCIENCE AND PRACTICE**

**Benson, P. L., Leffert, N., Scales, P. C., & Blyth, D. A. (1998). Beyond the
"village" rhetoric: Creating healthy communities for children and adolescents.
Applied Developmental Science, 2(3), 138-159.**

Damon, W. (1997). The youth charter: How communities can work together to
raise standards for all our children. New York: The Free Press.

**Leffert, N., Benson, P., Scales, P., Sharma, A., Drake, D., & Blyth, D.
(1998). Developmental assets: Measurement and prediction of risk behaviors
among adolescents. Applied Developmental Science, 2, 209-230.**

Zeldin, S., Camino, L., & Wheeler, W. (2000). (Eds.). Promoting adolescent
development in community context: Challenges to scholars, nonprofit managers,
and higher education. Applied Developmental Science, 4, Supplement 1.



**6\. POSITIVE YOUTH DEVELOPMENT AND CIVIC ENGAGEMENT**

Benson, P. L., & Pittman, K. J. (Eds.) Trends in youth development: Vision,
realities and challenges. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Lerner, R. M. (2000). Developing civil society through the promotion of
positive  
youth development. Journal of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, 21,
48-49.

**Lerner, R. M., Fisher, C. B., & Weinberg, R. A. (2000). Toward a science for
and of the people: Promoting civil society through the application of
developmental science. Child Development, 71, 11-20.**

O'Connell, B. (1999). Civil Society: The underpinnings of American democracy.
Hanover, NH: University Press of New England.

**Pittman, K., Irby, M., & Ferber, T. (2001). Unfinished business: Further
reflections on a decade of promoting youth development. In P. L. Benson & K.
J. Pittman (Eds.), Trends in youth development: Vision, realities and
challenges (pp. 3-50). Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers. **

**Yates, M., & Youniss, J. (1996). Community service and political-moral
identity in adolescents. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 6, 271-284.**

  

**7\. FAMILY-CENTERED COMMUNITY BUILDING FOR YOUTH  
Shirk, M., Bennett, N.,  & Aber, J. L. (1999). Lives on the Line: American
Families and the Struggle to Make Ends Meet. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
[Chapter 5]  
Gore, A. (in press) Foreword. In R. M. Lerner & P. L. Benson (Eds.).
Developmental assets and asset-building communities: Implications for
research, policy, and programs. Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers. **

**Damon, W., & Gregory, A. (in press). Bringing in a new era in the field of
youth development. In R. M. Lerner & P. L. Benson (Eds.). Developmental assets
and asset-building communities: Implications for research, policy, and
programs. Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.**

**Halfon, N., Gonzalez, R., & Hochstein, M. (1999). Building Bridges for
California's Young Children: A 12-Point Agenda to Enhance Proposition 10. Los
Angeles, CA: UCLA California Policy Research Center.**

**Lerner, R. M., & Benson, P. L. (Eds.). (in press). Developmental assets and
asset-building communities: Implications for research, policy, and programs.
Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers. [Chapters 1 and 2] **

Kretzmann, J. P., & McKnight, J. L. (1993). Building Communities from the
Inside Out: A Path Toward Finding and Mobilizing a Community's Assets.
Chicago, IL: ACTA Publications.

Sampson, R. J. (2000). The Neighborhood Context of Investing in Children:
Facilitating Mechanisms and Undermining Risks. In S. Danziger & J. Waldfogel
(Eds.) Securing the Future: Investing in Children from Birth to College (pp.
205-230). New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

**Scales, P., Benson, P., Leffert, N., & Blyth, D. A. (2000). The contribution
of developmental assets to the prediction of thriving among adolescents.
Applied Developmental Science, 4, 27-46.**

Back to top

**Course Requirements**

Over the course of the semester, students will meet with leaders of community-
based organizations seeking to enhance positive youth development and civic
engagement through involving young people in family-centered community
building activities. Class presentations from leaders of at least three
organizations will occur across the semester. The purpose of these
presentations will be to provide students with an opportunity to gain a basis
for reflections on the connections between academic scholarship and community-
based practice, in general, and the specific approach taken in the programs
furthering family-centered community building for youth.

The students' reflection will be presented in three reaction papers
representing their general and program-specific understanding and critique of
the connection between the "academic" information learned in the course and
the actions of each of the community-based organization. Recommendations for
conceptual and/or methodological changes and/or program development should be
part of the discussion in the paper. Each paper should be between three to
five pages in length (not including references) and must be presented in
accordance with the style requirements detailed in the _Publication Manual of
the American Psychological Association_ (5th ed.). Each paper will contribute
15% to the final course grade.

In addition, three "take-home," essay exams will be given over the course of
the semester, the first for Sections 1 and 2 of the syllabus, the second for
Sections 3, 4, and 5, and the third for Sections 6 and 7. Each exam will offer
students choices of topics on which to focus their writing for the exam.
Responses will be limited to three pages (not including references). Each exam
will contribute 15% to the final course grade. The content of these exams will
be based on readings and class discussions.

Finally, during the last class meetings of the semester, each student will be
asked to organize and lead a relatively brief (e.g., 20 minute) class
discussion about how to apply developmental science to policies and programs
in order to enhance family-centered community building for youth. This
presentation will contribute 10% to the final course grade.

Back to top

* * *

**Class schedule for CD143-RL Spring 2002**

**_Weekday_** | **_Date_** | **_Projects_**  
---|---|---  
  
W

|

January 23

|

 n/a  
  
F

|

January 25

|

_No class_ / lecture w. Mr. Gore  
  
M

|

January 28

|

 n/a  
  
W

|

January 30

|

n/a  
  
F

|

February 1

|

n/a  
  
M

|

February 4

| n/a  
  
W

|

February 6

| n/a  
  
F

|

February 8

| n/a  
  
M

|

February 11

| n/a  
  
W

|

February 13

|

Exam no 1 handed out  
  
F

|

February 15

|

n/a  
  
M

|

February 18

|

_No class_  
  
W

|

February 20

|

_Exam no 1 due_  
  
F

|

February 22

| n/a  
  
M

|

February 25

| n/a  
  
W

|

February 27

|

Guest speaker 1: Margaret Beale Spencer  
  
F

|

March 1

| n/a  
  
M

|

March 4

| n/a  
  
W

|

March 6

|

Guest speaker 2: Rob Hollister / _Reaction paper no 1 due_  
  
F

|

March 8

| n/a  
  
M

|

March 11

| n/a  
  
W

|

March 13

|

Guest speaker 3: Linda Thompson  
  
F

|

March 15

| _Reaction paper no 2 due_  
  
M

|

March 18

|

No class (spring break)  
  
W

|

March 20

|

No class (spring break)  
  
F

|

March 22

