Political Science 3325

J.L.Nogee, instructor

spring 2002





_Scope of Course_

_ _

The Russian political system we will examine is relatively new on the world
scene. It is barely a decade old. Though an ancient country, Russia emerged
out of the collapse of communism and the Soviet Union in 1991. Russia's
government---indeed its social structure and economy---is in a transitional
state. The outstanding issue to be decided is whether Russia will move into
the camp of democratic states with market economies or become an authoritarian
regime as it has been throughout its history. The constitution adopted in 1993
remains controversial. Reflecting the wishes of President Yeltsin it
established a strong presidential system. It also created institutions of
government which were designed to operate in a democratic fashion, but have
done so in only a limited way. Yeltsin's successor, Vladimir Putin, has
already brought about a number of important changes, particularly in
strengthening the power of the central government over the regions that
comprise the Russian federation.



This course will review the Soviet antecedents of present-day Russia and the
collapse of the Soviet system. It will examine the various political forces
and interests involved in political struggle of the Yeltsin administrations.
We will study the constitutional changes made by Yeltsin and look at the
political parties, elections and institutions of government. Our primary focus
will be on the issue of democratic change: what are the obstacles and
prospects for Russian democracy?

The class lectures will be organized around the following subjects:



A. Theories of Russians politics.



B. The Soviet system

1\. Leninist system

2\. Stalinist totalitarianism

3\. Khrushchev reformism

4\. Brezhnev stagnation

5\. Gorbachev and Perestroika

6\. Collapse of Soviet system



C Post-Soviet Russia

1\. Yeltsin's first administration

a. Struggle with parliament

b.parliamentary elections 1993, 1995

c. Presidential elections 1996



2\. Yeltsin's second administration

a. Regionalism and central government

b. Parliamentary elections 1999

c. Presidential elections 2000



3\. Vladimir Putin as president



4\. Political institutions:

a. presidency

b. parliament

c. political parties



5\. Russian federalism

6\. Prospects for democracy and reform

_Course Requirements_



There are three required books: _Russian Politics, The Struggle_ _for a New
Order_ by Joseph Nogee and Judson Mitchell; _Gorbachev,Yeltsin and Putin,
Political Leadership in Russia's_ _Transition_ edited by Archie Brown and
Lilia Shevtsova; and _Contemporary Russian Politics_ , edited by Archie
Brown.There will be two quizes and a final examination. The first quiz will be
on February 15th and will cover the lectures and chapters 1-4 of the Nogee-
Mitchell book. The second quiz will be on March 15 and will cover chapters 5-6
of the Nogee-Mitchell book and chapters 1-3 of _Gorbachev,Yeltsin and Putin_
as well as the lectures. The final examination will be on May 3 and will cover
all the material since the second quiz. Each quiz will count %20 of the final
grade and the final examination %50. In addition there is a course paper of
ten pages which will count toward 10% of the grade. You must choose from the
list of topics in this syllabus for your paper. The paper is due on the last
day of class.



This is primarily a lecture course though you are encouraged to raise
questions and issues for discussion relevant to the course. Regular class
attendance is expected. Absences in excess of 12 will result in a grade
penalty. You are responsible for being informed of any announcements that may
be made in class. For purposes of withdrawing you will be considered passing
so long as you have not failed an exam. Make-up exams are possible but
discouraged. There are three conditions for a make-up exam: you must give
notice before the exam is given (you can leave a message on my telephone
"voice mail" (743-3914); you must have a satisfactory reason; and you must be
prepared to take the exam immediately upon returning to class.

There are a few "rules of the class" which you are asked to observe:

1\. Please be in class on time.

2\. No food or drinks in class.

3\. No pagers or cellular telephones in class.

4\. No cassette recorders (exceptions for handicapped).

Please feel free to discuss any problems connected with the course with the
instructor. Office is 432 PGH; Office hours MWF 10-11:30.E-mail is
jnogee@uh.edu

paper topics



Boris Yeltsin as president.

Vladimir Putin as president

Russia's "shock therapy"

Economic reform 1994-1999

The economic collapse in 1998

Political parties in Russia

"Unity"

"Yobloko"

Women in Russian politics

The parliamentary election of 1993

The parliamentary election of 1995

The parliamentary election of 1999

Yeltsin's re-election in 1996

Putin's election in 2000

Liberal Democratic Party

Communist Party

"Russia--Our Home"

The Agrarian Party

"Union of Right Forces"

"Fatherland Party"

The 1993 constitution

The Federal Assembly

The Duma

Putin's reform of Russia's regions

Russian presidency

Council of the Federation

The constitutional position of the republics

Elections in Russia

Comparison of 1991 and 1993 constitutions.

Politcs of Ruslan Khasbulatov

Politics of Vladimir Zirinovsky

Politics of Gennadi Zyuganov

Politics of Aleksandr Lebed

Politics of Anatoly Chubais

Politics of Gregory Yavlinsky

Politics of Yuri Luzhkov

Politics of Egor Gaidar

Politics of Gennadi Burbulis

Politics of Boris Nemtsov

Yevgenni Primakov as Prime Minister

Victor Chernomyrdin as Prime Minister

Sergei Stepashin as Prime Minister

Sergei Kirienko as Prime Minister

Russia's "oligarchs"

Boris Berezovsky

Tatanya Dyachenko

Aleksandr Korzhakov

Anti-semitism in Russia

The parliament crisis Sept-Oct 1993

April 1993 referendum

Yeltsin and parliament 1992-1993

Russian nationalists

The Civic Union

The Chechen war 1994-1996

The Chechen war 1999-present

Commonwealth of Independent States

Russian military

Party factions in Duma

Private ownership of land

Human rights in Russia

Religion in Russian politics

The banks and the media

Russia's press

Union between Russia and Belarus

Russian budget

Environmental problems

Politics in Ukraine

Politics in Belarus

Politics in Moldova

Politics in Georgia

Politics in Azerbaijan

Politics in Armenia

Politics in Kazakstan

Politics in Kyrgystan

Politics in Turkmanistan

Politics in Tajikstan

Politics in Uzbekistan

Putin and the media

Federal Security Service

Kursk disaster and Russian politics

