[Back to library page for POL
429](HTTP://www.library.arizona.edu/users/arawan/pol429/pol429.html)  
[Back to POLIS course
homesite](http://www.u.arizona.edu/ic/polis/spring00/Course-
Homesite.cgi?POL_429)  
  **Political Science 429** | **Spring, 2000**  
---|---  
**The U.S.-Mexican Borderlands in Comparative Perspective** | **Professor Ed
Williams**  
  


**Syllabus**

_The Course Described_

The course counts two major foci. The first describes and analyzes the
Mexican-United States Borderlands, emphasizing several elements of the
Borderlands culture/society, economy, ecology, and polity. The second focus
analyzes the evolution of borderlands in comparative perspective. As the
components of __ the local Borderlands are treated, the purpose is to cast
those characteristics in a broader analytical framework designed to understand
borderlands in other contexts and generally conceived.

The informal lecture defines the method of instruction. Questions, challenges
and discussion are encouraged and evaluated in the student's favor in the
calculation of the final grade.

Regular attendance is encouraged and will be evaluated in the student's favor
in the calculation of the final grade.  


_Requirements_

Two examinations and two essays are required for undergraduates. Graduate
students will do a major research paper in place of the second essay. The mid-
term is an essay exam; scheduled for Wednesday, March 8. It will cover
lectures till that juncture of the course and the reading for Parts I and II
of the course. The mid-term is worth 50 points of a total of 200 for the
semester, or 25 percent of the final grade for undergrads; for graduates, 40
points or 20 percent of the final grade.

The final exam is set for Monday, May 8. 11am to ipm. it will cover lectures
for the second half of the course and reading for Parts III, IV, and V. The
final will present both essay and objective questions. The final counts 50
points or 25 percent of the final grade for undergraduates; 40 points or 20
percent for graduates.

The first essay will a description of the organization and subject matter of
the course. It will be drawn from the introductory lecture, the syllabus, and
an examination of __ the reading material. It is six pages, typed, 250-275
words to the page, one inch margins, with page numbers and references to the
sources as appropriate. The essay is due on Wednesday, February 2 at the
beginning of class; late papers are penalized one grade for every class. It is
worth 50 points or 25 percent of the final grade for undergrads; 40 points or
20% for graduate students.

The second six page essay for undergraduate students will focus on an
historical, comparative, or conceptual theme. It will contain 250-275 words to
the page; it will be typed, with notes, a bibliography, and numbered pages.
The paper is due on Wednesday, April 12, at the beginning of class. Late
papers are penalized at the rate of one grade per class. The research paper is
worth 70 points or 35 percent of the final grade for undergraduates.

Students may choose to research any topic that is germane to the course, but
the topic must be approved by the instructor. Some examples of logical topics
include:

  * A Description of the Chinese/Russian Borderlands
  * Issues in the Venezuelan-Colombian Borderlands (or other countries)
  * A Comparison of the US-Mexican/Chinese-Hong Kong Borderlands (or others)
  * The Kashmiri Dispute
  * Kurds in the Turkish Borderlands
  * Anglo Borderlanders in 19th Century Mexican Texas
  * The Issue of Language in Borderlands Culture

Graduate students are required to submit a 22 page research paper. The topic
will be cleared with the instructor. Graduate students will participate in two
specially convened sessions. In early February each student will present a
prospectus of five pages, double-spaced. One of the student's peers will
submit a one page critique of the prospectus. In mid-April the graduate
students will present the penultimate drafts of their papers. One of the
student's peers will submit a double-spaced, four page critique of the paper.
The final papers are due on Thursday, May 4. Undergrad students are invited to
the sessions, but not required to attend. The paper and concomitants are worth
80 points, or 40 percent of the grade for graduate students.  
    


_Assignments, Dates and Weights Reiterated_ :  
  First essay due on Wed, Feb 2 ......................... |

  * undergrads, 50 points or 25% 
  * grads, 40 points or 20%

  
---|---  
  |  
Mid-term exam on Wed, March 8 ......................... |

  * undergrads, 50 points or 25% 
  * grads, 40 points or 20%

  
  |  
Second essay due Wed, April 12 ........................ |

  * undergrads, 50 points or 25%

  
  


_Graduate student research papers_ :

Prospectus in early Feb, penultimate draft in mid-April, final papers due May
4. 80 points or 40% of final grade  
  _Final exam on Mon, May 8_............................... |

  * undergrads, 50 points or 25%
  * grads, 40 points or 20%

  
---|---  
  
  Grading Scale | 182 thru 200.......A | 121 thru 159.......C  
---|---|---  
  | 160 thru 181.......B | 100 thru 120.......D  
  |   | below 100..........E  
  


_Reguired Readings_

Several readings are required for the course. To wit:

  * Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, _Texas Colonias: A Thumbnail Sketch_.... n.d. 1998?, 25pp. In packet
  * Government Accounting Office (GAO), _U.S.-Mexico Border: Issues and Challenges_ .... 1999, 50pp. In packet
  * _Journal of Borderlands Studies_ (JBS) Vol XIV, No. 1, Spring, 1999. 80pp.
  * Rachael Kamel and Anya Hoffman, editors, _The Maquiladora Reader: Cross Border Organizing_.... 1999, 120pp.
  * David E Lorey, _The U.S.-Mexican Border in the Twentieth Century,_ 1999, 179pp.
  * Oscar J Martinez, _The U.S.-Mexico Borderlands: Historical and Contemporary Perspectives_ , 1996, 255pp.
  * _Transborder Community Relations at the U.S.-Mexico Border: The Cases of Laredo/Nuevo Laredo and El Paso/Ciudad_ Juarez, n.d., 1998?, 34pp. In packet

NOTE: The _Journal of Borderlands Studies_ (JBS) must be purchased from the
teaching assistant for the course. The class packet may be purchased at
Arizona Print and Copy, 1033 N. Park The other reading material may be
purchased at the bookstore, or wherever.  
    


_Schedule of Specific Sublects and Reading Assignments_

Students should read ahead and be prepared to discuss the readings in class
during their appropriate time period.  
    


I. Weeks 1 & 2, Jan 12 thru 26... Introduction to Course and Introduction to
the U.S.- Mexican Borderlands, comparative borderlands, boundary lines and
borderlands, demography, history, geography, et al. Readings:

    * Lorey, chapters 1-5
    * GAO, _Issues and Challenges_

II. Weeks 3,4,5, Jan 26 thru Feb 16 ... Borderlands Culture and Society:
Norteflos and Fronterizos, Mexican-Americans, Anglo-Americans, Native
Americans; religious and linguistic differences and similarities, the Third
Culture?, border health. Readings:

    * "Transborder Community Relations..." in packet
    * "Homeless Adults..." in _JB_ S
    * "Environmental Deterioration..." in JBS
    * Federal Reserve, _Texas Colonias...._

III. Weeks 6,7,8. Feb 16 thru March 8 ... Borderlands Economy: relative
poverty, drugs, maquiladoras, smuggling, vice, the North American Free Trade
Agreement.

Reading:

    * Kamel and Hoffman, _The Maquiladora Reader_

IV. Weeks 9,10,11. March 8 thru April 5 ... Borderlands Ecology: surface and
groundwater issues, air pollution, hazardous and toxic wastes. The Colorado
River, the Rio Grande, the Grey Triangle, et al. Reading:

    * Martinez, _U.S.-Mexico Borderlands..._

V. Weeks 12,13,14,15. April 5 thru May 3 ... The Borderlands Polity: Norteno
politics, Mexican-American politics; human rights issues, borderlands
refugees. et al.

Readings:

    * Lorey, chapters 6 and 7
    * "Emissions from Heavy Trucks..." in JBS
    * "Public Participation..." in JBS

_Office Hours_

Students should see me to clear their research paper topic. Students are
invited to see me to discuss lecture and reading material, examination
preparation, whatever. My office is 343 Social Sciences Bldg. Office hours for
the Spring, 2000 semester: Tuesday: 2:30 to 4pm Wednesday: 3 to 4:30pm ... and
by appointment I can also be called at home on Thurs mornings, 9 to 11am.
Email hours: whenever

If it be impossible to make those hours, please see me or call me for another
time. Political Science Office: 621-7600; Direct Line at U: 621-9906; Home:
881-6413 email: edwardw@u.arizona.edu  

* * *

[Back to library page for POL
429](HTTP://www.library.arizona.edu/users/arawan/pol429/pol429.html)  
[Back to POLIS course
homesite](http://www.u.arizona.edu/ic/polis/spring00/Course-
Homesite.cgi?POL_429)

