**History 346: Introduction to Asian American History**

     Professor J. Wu
    Spring Quarter 1998
    Tuesdays & Thursdays 1:30-3:18
    Journalism Building, Room 300
    Office: 152 Dulles
    Office Hours: Tuesdays 3:30-5:00 and by appointment

**Course Description and Objective:**

This course introduces the field of Asian American history, which focuses on
the experiences of people of Chinese, Japanese, Korean, South Asian, Pilipino,
and Southeast Asian ancestry in the United States. Lectures, readings, films,
and discussions will examine the continuities as well as changes in Asian
American experience through three chronological periods: the first wave of
immigration (mid-19th to 1934), the years of exclusion and international
conflict (the middle decades of the 20th century), and the second wave of
immigration (post-1965). The course will explore two overarching themes: 1)
how the experiences of Asian Americans complicate the existing understanding
of American race, class, gender, and international relations; and 2) the
similarities as well as differences between various Asian American groups,
i.e. the historical validity of a pan-Asian American identity.

Course materials represent a variety of disciplines (Anthropology, Sociology,
Literature) and sources (oral history, newspaper articles, film) that
contribute to the field of Asian American History. I encourage you to engage
each assignment critically. What does the source tell us about the experiences
of Asian Americans? What is the purpose of the author or filmmaker in creating
this work? What types of evidence are used to support an argument or
perspective? You will be asked to share your insights through discussions,
paper assignments, and exams. In other words, this course encourages you to
develop critical reading, thinking, and writing skills.

**Course Materials:**

Ronald Takaki, _Strangers from a Different Shore: A History of Asian
Americans_ (1989).

Chris Friday, _Organizing Asian American Labor: The Pacific Coast Canned-
Salmon Industry, 1870-1942_ (1994).

Yen Le Espiritu, _Asian American Panethnicity: Bridging Institutions and
Identities_ (1992).

The books are available for sale at SBX. They are also on reserve at the EHS
Library, 110 Sullivant Hall.

In addition to the books, a course packet will be available through COP-EZ in
the basement of Bricker Hall.

**Course Requirements:**

Discussion participation. (25%)

Midterm that covers materials from weeks 1-5 (25%)

Final that covers materials from weeks 6-10 (25%)

One of the following writing assignments. You need to select one option by
April 23 and submit a 1-2 pg. description of your project by May 21. The final
paper is due on May 28 for graduating seniors and June 4 for everyone else.
(25%)

1) A 5-8 page review of a documentary that has been assigned for the course.
The review should treat the documentary as a secondary source, analyzing the
perspective of the film-maker and discussing the video's portrayal of
particular issues in relation to readings and lectures. You may choose to
compare and contrast two videos. 2) Conduct an oral history with a person of
Asian American background. Design a series of questions for the interview and
discuss your findings in a 5-8 page essay. The essay should include a short
summary of the person's life but mostly focus on how that individual's
experiences illuminate certain issues from the course.

3) Write a 5-8 page analysis of an Asian American novel. You can take various
approaches to this paper. You could examine how the author depicts historical
events or portrays Asian American identity. You could also analyze how to use
the novel as a historical document.

**Class Schedule**

_Week 1: Introduction_

March 31 Introduction to Course - [lecture outline](http://www.history.ohio-
state.edu/people/wu.287/Lecture1.outline.html)

April 2 International Context for Migration - [lecture outline
](Lecture2.outline.html)

Takaki, pp. 3-75.

[Reading Questions](rq1.html)

_Week 2: First Wave Immigration and Exclusion_

April 7 "Aliens Ineligible for Citizenship" \- [lecture
outline](lecture3.outline.html)

April 9 Strategies of Resistance

Takaki, pp. 77-176.

[Reading Questions](rq2.html)

_Week 3: Labor and Class Politics_

April 14 Gender and Racial Stratification of Labor - [lecture
outline](lecture4.outline.html)

April 16 A Dollar a Day, Ten Cents A Dance (video)

Chris Friday, Organizing Asian American Labor.

Evelyn Nakano Glenn, "The Dialectics of Wage Work: Japanese American Women and
Domestic Service, 1905-1940," in Unequal Sisters, ed. by Ellen Carol DuBois &
Vicki L. Ruiz (Routledge, 1990), pp. 345-372.

[Reading Questions](rq3.html)

_Week 4: Family and Community Formation_

April 21 Transnationalism and Asian American Gender Roles - [lecture
outline](lecture5.outline.html)

April 23 The Second Generation (Select Paper Topic Option)

Takaki, pp. 177-354.

[Reading Questions](rq4.html)

_Week 5: International and Domestic Politics - World War II_

April 28 Asian American Nationalism and Japanese American Interment \-
[lecture outline](lecture6.outline.html)

April 30 Days of Waiting (video) Takaki, pp. 355-405

Valerie Matsumoto, "Japanese American Women During World War II," Unequal
Sisters, pp. 373-386.

"Testimonies to the Commission on Wartime Relocation and Internment of
Civilians," Amerasia Journal 8, no. 2 (1981):55-105.

Don T. Nakanishi, "Surviving Democracy's `Mistake': Japanese Americans & the
Enduring Legacy of Executive Order 9066," Amerasia Journal 19:1 (1993): 7-35.

Optional:

Gordon H. Chang, "`Superman is about to visit the relocation centers' & the
Limits of Wartime Liberalism," Amerasia Journal 19:1 (1993): 37-60.

[Reading Questions](rq5.html)

_Week 6: Cold War Asian America_

May 5 Midterm

May 7 The Communist Threat in Asia and McCarthyism in the U.S.

Takaki, pp. 406-420

Arleen de Vera, "Without Parallel: The Local 7 Deportation Cases, 1949-1955,"
Amerasia Journal 20:2 (1994): 1-25.

Victor G. and Brett de Bay Nee, Longtime Californ': A Documentary Study of an
American Chinatown (1972), "The Victory," pp. 200-227.

Optional:

Judy Tzu-Chun Wu, "`Loveliest Daughter of our Ancient Cathay!':
Representations of Ethnic and Gender Identity in the Miss Chinatown U.S.. A.
Beauty Pageant," Journal of Social History 31, no. 1: 5-31.

_Week 7: Second Wave Immigration_

May 12 New Ethnic Communities [lecture outline](lecture7.outline.html)

May 14 The Model Minority?

Takaki, pp. 420-491

"Success Story of One Minority Group in U.S.," reprinted from U.S. News &
World Report, 26 December 1966, in Roots, pp. 6-9.

[Reading Questions & Syllabus Changes](rq7.html)

_Week 8: Social Activism_

May 19 The Asian American Movement [lecture outline](lecture8.outline.html)

May 21 Who Killed Vincent Chin? (Video) (Description of Paper Assignment Due)

Espiritu, Asian American Panethnicity.

[Reading Questions](rq8.html)

_Week 9: Contemporary Issues Part I_

May 26 Gender, Sexuality, and Cultural Identity [lecture
outline](lecture9.outline.html)

May 28 Slaying the Dragon (Video) (Paper Due for Graduating Seniors)

Chitra Banerjee Divakaruni, "Silver Pavements, Golden Roofs," in Arranged
Marriage (New York: Doubleday Dell, 1995), pp. 35-56.

Nazli Kibria, "Power, Patriarchy, and Gender Conflict in the Vietnamese
Immigrant Community," Gender and Society 4:4 (March 1990): 9-24.

Miriam Ching Louie, "Immigrant Asian Women in Bay Area Garment Sweatshops:
`After Sewing, Laundry, Cleaning and Cooking, I have no Breath Left to Sing,"
Amerasia 18:1 (1992): 1-26.

"Yellowdykecore: Queer, Punk `n' Asian: A Roundtable Discussion," in Dragon
Ladies, pp. 216-232.

Joan Walsh, "Asian Women, Caucasian Men," San Francisco Chronicle: Image, 2
December 1990: 11-16.

[reading questions & announcements](rq9.html)

_Week 10: Contemporary Issues Part II_

June 2 Inter-racial Conflict and Cooperation (Final for Graduating Seniors)
[lecture outline](lecture10.outline.html)

June 4 Asian American Arts and Media Maya Lin: A Strong Clear Vision (Video)
(Papers Due)

Edward T. Chang, "Jewish and Korean Merchants in African American
Neighborhoods: A Comparative Perspective, Amerasia 19:2 (1993): 5-21.

Leland T. Saito, "Asian Americans and Latinos in San Gabriel Valley,
California: Interethnic Political Cooperation and Redistricting 1990-1992,"
Amerasia 19:2 (1993): 55-68.

Ronald Takaki, "Prospects" and "At the End of the Century: The `Culture Wars'
in the U.S.," in From Different Shores, pp. 277-280 & 296-299.

Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., "The Return to the Melting Pot," in From Different
Shores, pp. 293-295

[reading questions](rq10.html)

_Final June 8 (Monday) 1:30-3:18_

Back to [Asian American Studies Course Page](http://www.cohums.ohio-
state.edu/AsianAm/Courses.htm)

Back to [Courses](http://www.history.ohio-
state.edu/people/wu.287/courses.html) page

Back to [Homepage](http://www.history.ohio-
state.edu/people/wu.287/default.htm)

