AQUINAS COLLEGE  
POLITICAL SCIENCE DEPARTMENT  
  
**THE WORLD IN CRISIS  
  
PS 150 Fall 2001**

**Syllabus**

**  
** The world in crisis: Bosnia, Cuba, Columbine High School, Nicaragua,
Northern Ireland, Chiapas, East Los Angeles, PRC troops in Hong Kong, Haiti,
Somalia, Beijing, American Embassies, Tokyo subways, Olympic Parks, North and
South Korea, Saudi Arabia, Florida Voting Booths, Iraq, Kuwait, Arab-Israeli
relations, Mozambique, Moscow, Washington, DC, human rights violations, armed
conflict, poverty, environmental degradation, economic activity, international
law, religious confrontation, diplomacy, nationalism versus transnational
integration - all will be discussed in this course!!!

"My life depends on yours. Our actions have almost immediate global
consequences."  
                                                                   Professor Tom Hovet

"Few will have the greatness to bend history itself, but each of us can work
to change a small portion of events; And in the total of all those acts will
be written the history of this generation."  
                                                                   Robert F. Kennedy  

**_

I. COURSE GOALS_:

**

    A. To understand that our individual actions have global consequences;  
    B. To understand multinational and multicultural interconnectedness;  

**_

II. COURSE DESCRIPTION_:

**

This course is designed as an introduction to the dynamics of global
interaction and international relations. As such, it is concerned with
developing a basic understanding of the international system and modes of
_conflict_ and _cooperation_. We will examine various approaches to the study
of international relations, and look extensively into the interdependence of
numerous international actors. Additionally, we will look at the structure of
the international system as seen from the individual, national and systems
level of analysis. We will also examine issues such as gender concerns,
international political economy, the management of a nuclear world, the
limitations and capacities of the environment, the disparity of development
among nation-states (from absolute hunger to opulent waste), and efforts to
organize, control and resolve the many issues and conflicts in the
international community.

This course is introductory in nature, therefore, "we will begin at the
beginning," with the assumption that very little is known about international
relations and the "world in crisis." Our goal is that by the end of the course
you the student should have the necessary background and analytic tools to
actively think critically about the world in crisis. In order to do so, you
need to think critically about the following course objectives.

**_

III. COURSE OBJECTIVES AND OUTCOMES_:**

        A. Identify and analyze international crisis areas and sources of conflict;  
        B. Identify and analyze major approaches to the study of international politics;  
        C. Identify and analyze modes of cooperation and crisis management in the international  
                system;  
        D. Identify and analyze major international actors at the individual, national and transnational  
                level of decision-making in international affairs;  
        E. Identify and analyze power elements in the modern international system;  
        F. Identify and analyze the relationships between the above international and multicultural  
                phenomenon and the individual. Emphasis is placed on how we, as individuals, interact in  
                the global community.

**_

IV. COURSE STRUCTURE_:

**

Because of the volatile nature of the world in crisis and political phenomena,
we will engage in lively discussions. Students are expected to participate in
these discussions, as they are usually quite fun!! During these discussions I
will often play the "devil's advocate" to insure that all sides of a given
issue are presented. Do not hesitate to speak your mind, but remember, in
order to successfully and artfully defend your position, you must substantiate
that position. This is especially applicable to examination answers.

Lack of attendance will result in a) less knowledge gained on your part; b)
less ability for you to demonstrate understanding of the material; and thus c)
a **LOWER GRADE**. Attendance is absolutely necessary.

**_

V. COURSE REQUIREMENTS_:

**

There will be one geographic examination, two news quizzes, various in-class
writing exercises, one "Controversial Issues Paper," one midterm and a final
exam. The value of each is as follows:

Geographic exam:                                                         5%  
Two news quizzes:                                                       10%
(5% each)  
Various "Other" Assignments:                                       10%  
Controversial Issues Paper:                                           25%  
Midterm:
25%  
Final:
25%

**_

VI. ADMINISTRATIVE INFO_:

**

Office: Holmdene 219  
Office Telephone: x-4461 (almost all day during the week)  
Home Telephone: 957-2675 (after 8:30 am and before 10:00 pm)  
E-mail address: [durharog@aquinas.edu](mailto:durharog@aquinas.edu)  
Office Hours:  
        Monday:          9:00 - 10:55  
        Wednesday:     9:00 - 9:25, 11:00 - 12:00  
        Thursday         9:00 - 10:55, 1:00 - 4:30  
        Friday             11:00 - 12:00

_

AND BY APPOINTMENT!!!_ I expect students to take advantage of office hours.
Those who do almost always improve!! Please feel free to call me at home or
arrange an appointment or meeting. Please try the office first and respect the
listed phone hours.

**_

VII. REQUIRED READINGS_:

**

1\. Rourke, John T. _International Politics on the World Stage_. Dushkin,
2000, 8th Edition.  
  
2\. Smith, Dan. _The State of War and Peace_. International Peace Research
Institute, Penguin  
    Press, 1997, 3rd Edition.  
  
3\. Congressional Quarterly, _Global Issues: Selections from the CQ
Researcher_. Congressional  
    Quarterly Press, 2001.

4\. Jackson, Robert M. _Annual Editions: Global Issues 01/02_ , Dushkin, 2001.
Seventeen Edition.

5\. Daily Newspaper / current events / news readings:  
    At least: GR Press  
    Others might include:  
        NY Times,   
        Washington Post,   
        Christian Science Monitor,   
        LA Times

    Other good news sources are:  
        National Public Radio (NPR), CNN, MTV??

**_

RECOMMENDED READINGS_:**  
  
1\. Allen, John L. _Student Atlas of World Politics_ , Dushkin, Fourth
Edition, 2000.  
  
2\. Purkitt, Helen E. _Annual Editions: World Politics 00/01_. Dushkin, 21st
Edition, 2000.  
  
3\. Sivard, Ruth. _World Military and Social Expenditures 1996_. World
Priorities, Inc., 1996,  
    16th Edition or latest issue.  
  
4\. Smith, Dan and Michael Kidron. _The State of the World Atlas_. Penguin
USA, 6 th Edition.  
    October 1999.

