#  Spelman College, Spring 1999  
CIS 102 Research Using the Internet

  
  
  

#  Course Information:

This course will be team taught. For questions about the overall course,
contact the coordinator, Dr. Jeanette Allen, (404) 223-7623, ACC 215, office
hours MWF at 11:00 a.m. to noon or 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.

#  Course Overview:

Dr. Peterson | Jan 11: | history  
---|---|---  
Holiday | Jan 18: | Martin Luther King Jr. Holiday  
Dr. Peterson | Jan 25: | TCP/IP (addresses/domains, whitepages, finding
people)  
Dr. Peterson | Feb 1: | mail/news (attachments, netiquette, mailing lists)  
Dr. Anderson | Feb 8: | www  
Dr. Anderson | Feb 15: | browser (bookmarks/mail/graphics off and on)  
Dr. Anderson | Feb 22: | search engines  
Dr. Anderson | Mar 1: | refining search  
Dr. Allen | Mar 8: | Galileo (other libraries and databases)  
Holiday | Mar 15: | Spring Break  
Dr. Allen | Mar 22: | file formats (on line journals)  
Dr. Lawrence | Mar 29: | web authoring  
Dr. Lawrence | Apr 5: | web authoring  
Dr. Hardnett | Apr 12: | lynx, opera  
Dr. Hardnett | Apr 19: | ftp, java applets  
Dr. Hardnett | Apr 26: | legal and social issues (intellectual property,
privacy)  
  
##  Rationale:

The purpose of this course is to give students from diverse science
disciplines an understanding of how the Internet works, what the World Wide
Web is, and the ways that people can communicate via the Internet and the Web.
In particular, this course focuses on tools which can be used to find and
disseminate information for scholarly research.

This is a 1 credit hour course. It meets once a week. It is being offered
pass/fail only.

##  Objectives:

The objectives of the course are to:

  * Learn the history of the Internet. 
  * Learn to use basic communication tools such as electronic mail and news. 
  * Learn to find information using archie, gopher, and wais. 
  * Learn to transfer information using ftp. 
  * Learn the history of the World Wide Web. 
  * Learn about hypertext and the Hypertext Markup Language. 
  * Learn to use browsers for information foraging. 
  * Learn how to search on a topics using various web search engines 
  * Learn to use on-line catalogues such as GALILEO and the online Library of Congress 
  * Learn about accessing and using non-text materials, such as graphics, video, and audio. 
  * Learn about creating interactive pages using Java. 

##  Expected Outcomes:

Upon completion of this course, the student should

  * know some of the history of the Internet and the World Wide Web. 
  * be able to communicate using electronic mail and news. 
  * be able to find information using web tools wais. 
  * be able to transfer information using ftp. 
  * understand what hypertext and HTML are. 
  * be able to use browsers for information foraging. 
  * be able to search on a topics using various web search engines 
  * be able to use on-line catalogues such as GALILEO and the online Library of Congress 
  * be able to access and use non-text materials, such as graphics, video, and audio. 
  * understand the usefulness of Java. 
  * write a research paper based on Internet sources, correctly citing materials obtained over the web. 

##  Course Information:

  * Supplementary Materials: Some materials will be handed out in class, but each student will need some 3.5 inch disks. 
  * Late Policy: No makeups will be given except by PRIOR agreement with the instructor who assigned it. Any assignments turned in late will be be counted off 10% per day, with the exception of the web document which is the last deliverable of the course project. The web document must be turned in by the due date or receive a zero. 
  * Snow Policy: If for any reason a class is not held at the assigned time, anything scheduled for that day is automatically rescheduled for the next scheduled class period. Any projects, assignments, or homeworks due on a missed day become due at the next scheduled class period. Similarly, any tests scheduled for a class period which is not held at the assigned time will be given at the next scheduled class period. 
  * Accommodation: If you have a learning disability or any other special need, please contact the coordinator and we can discuss it. 

##  Method of Instruction:

Instruction will consist of classroom lectures, demonstrations, activities,
and assignments.

#  Course Requirements:

##  Text Book:

Internet Research Companion: Making the right connections and discoveries by
Geoffrey McKim. QUE Educational Training, 1996.

##  References:

Netscape Navigator: Surfing the Web and Exploring the Internet, by Bryan
Pfaffenberger

Exploring the Internet, by Clive Sanford, Irwin, 1995

##  Attendance:

Students are required to be present and on time for each class and are
responsible for all material covered in class whether they are present or
absent. The coordinator may withdraw students with excessive unexcused
absences.

##  Academic Honesty:

At Spelman College, academic dishonesty includes but is not limited to
submitting work that is not one's own, cheating on quizzes, tests, mid-term
and final examinations, and plagiarism. Academic dishonesty will not be
tolerated and will be dealt with in accordance with the policy on academic
honesty in the Spelman College catalog. For the first offense of academic
dishonesty, the student will receive a grade of **F** for the course.

##  Grade Policy:

The project is worth 40%. This includes choosing a topic (5%), finding
resources (5%), creating an annotated bibliography (10%), and authoring a web
document (20%),

The remaining 60% of the course is divided into 5 units, each worth 12%. For
each unit, instructors will assign homework or quizzes as appropriate.

Spelman College discourages extra credit assignments. All returned graded work
must be retained by the student in case there is any question about grading.
In addition to the rules explicitly stated in this syllabus, students shall be
governed by the rules of Spelman College; therefore it is the student's
responsibility to become familiar with the rules and regulations of the
College.

  

* * *

_Scott D. Anderson_  
_12/29/1998_

