#  PLS 202

* * *

**STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT**  


  

**Political Science 202**

  
  
  
  
  

**Section 01 Dr. William K. Hall**

**Spring 1998/1999 432 Bradley**  
    
    


**OBJECTIVES OF THE COURSE**  


This course is designed to provide students with a basic understanding of how
political decisions are made by the state and local governments, in practice
as well as in theory. State and local governments affect our lives in more
ways than any other level of government. And yet, these two levels are the
least understood, least appreciated and least respected levels of government.  


This course has as its main objective to help you understand the activities
and business of these governments. You should: (1) gain a more thorough
understanding of some of the basic elements, principles, and processes of the
myriad state and local political systems; (2) be able to use that information
to better describe, explain, analyze, evaluate; and (3) be better prepared to
participate in state and local politics.  
    
    
    
    


**READINGS FOR THE COURSE**  


Straayer, John, Wrinkle, Robert, and J.L. Polinard, _State and Local Politics_
,

2nd edition, 1998.  


Thad L. Beyle (ed.), St _ate Government: CQ's Guide to Current Issues and_

_Activities, 1998-1999_ , 1998.  


Edwin O'Connor, _The Last Hurrah_ , 1985 (reprint).  
    
    


**CLASSROOM METHODS AND TECHNIQUES**  


This class will be conducted through a combination of lecture, class
discussion and student participation and involvement. Current political events
will be frequent topics of discussion, in part, to illustrate key concepts and
themes.  
    
    


**CLASS ATTENDANCE**  


You are expected to attend ALL class sessions.  
    
    


**GRADES**

Your overall grade will be weighted as follows:  


Examination I 100 points

Examination II 125 points

Class Projects/Activities 150 points

The Mayors of Peoria 75 points

_The Last Hurrah_ 50 points

Class participation 50 points  


Course grades will be determined as follows:  


A -- 495 - 550 points

B -- 440 - 494 points

C -- 385 - 439 points

D -- 330 - 384 points

F -- Fewer than 330 points  


For those students who end up on the "borderline" (e.g., a student who has
earned 435 points--a high C grade), class attendance, class participation, as
well as a pattern of improvement in grades from the first examination to the
second will be taken into account. If you have faithfully attended class and
have contributed to class discussions, you are more likely to receive the
benefit of the doubt.  
    
    


**EXAMINATIONS**  


There will be two scheduled examinations. Each exam will include a combination
of short-answer questions and essay questions.  


The two examinations will be given on these dates:  


The first exam (over Sections I - III) will be given on

Thursday, March 11.  


The second exam (over Sections IV and V) will be given for this course at

the time assigned in the Academic Handbook for final week--that being:

Tuesday, May 11, 12:00-2:00 p.m.  
    
    


Letter grades for each of the two exams will be assigned on the basis of total
points scored on each exam as follows:  


A -- 90% - 100%

B -- 80% - 89%

C -- 70% - 79%

D -- 60% - 69%

F -- 0% - 59%  
    
    


**MAKE-UP EXAMINATIONS**  


A make-up examination will be given only under the most extraordinary
circumstances, and then only for a legitimate, excused absence. Students who
must unavoidably be absent on an examination day because of participation in
official intercollegiate events (e.g., a member of the BU varsity equestrian
dressage team) should see the instructor before the regularly scheduled exam
is given in order to discuss a make-up.  


In case of illness on an examination day, documented proof of the alleged
affliction will likely be required before I will consider allowing you to take
a make-up examination. A make-up examination is given solely at the
instructor's discretion.  
    
    
    
    


**CLASS PROJECTS/ACTIVITIES**  


Each student will be responsible for a variety of projects/activities. For
example, students might be asked to locate a copy of the constitution of
another state and make comparisons of specific provisions of that constitution
to the present Illinois Constitution. Or, students might be asked to watch a
portion of a governor's state of the state address and write a news analysis
of that speech.  


Some of the projects/activities will be written. Some will not. Some
projects/activities will be done in class. Some will be done out of class. As
of the writing of this syllabus, the exact number of these projects/activities
had not been finalized. Details on these projects/activities will be provided
with as much advanced warning as feasible. With almost no exceptions possible,
if a project/activity is done during class, students missing class will not be
allowed to make up the project/activity.  
    
    
    
    
    
    


**THE MAYORS OF PEORIA**  


The major out-of-class project for the semester will be to compile an oral
history of each of the six (or more?) living mayors of Peoria, whose terms of
office date as far back as the early 1950s. Students will work in teams
(probably three students per team) to assemble a knowledge base of the history
and politics of Peoria during each Mayor's term in office. Following a serious
effort to research the life, times, and especially the politics of Peoria for
each of the mayors, students will interview each of the mayors. These
interviews will be recorded (either video and/or audio taped). Later, after
the semester is over and when the interviews are typed up and the mayors have
scanned the transcripts of their interviews, these interviews and the
histories compiled by each student team will become a part of the larger
"Legacy of Peoria Project." Details will be provided early in the semester.  
    
    
    
    


**_THE LAST HURRAH_**  


Since we are reading _The Last Hurrah_ , we (that is an editorial "we") will
be doing a variety of things with the book. You may be asked to write an in-
class analysis of part of the book. You may be asked to write a short out-of-
class piece on a part of the book. There may be other activities which
accompany our reading of this true classic of American urban politics.  
    


**CLASS PARTICIPATION**  


I have three expectations for class participation:  


(1) That you read the assigned readings (Straayer, et al.; Beyle; O'Connor;

and/or class handouts) before coming to class each day. I expect you to come
to class prepared to discuss the day's topic(s), raise questions and make
comments about the readings, etc.; and  


(2) That you will be aware of and informed about current political events and

activities, especially the goings-on in Illinois and Peoria-area politics; and  


(3) That you will be prepared to make a meaningful contribution to class

discussion.  


Students are urged to do extra reading about state and local government and
politics in newspapers, news magazines, and books. As always, your instructor
will be happy to provide reading suggestions on various topics.  
    
    
    
    


**EXTRA-CREDIT WORK**  


There is no such thing as extra-credit work in this course.  
    
    


**INSTRUCTOR'S OFFICE HOURS**  


Although you will see me twice a week in the classroom, it is possible you
will want to see me in my office. I am available to meet with you every day of
the academic week, especially at the scheduled office hours listed below:  


Monday 9:30-10:45, 1:00-3:30

Tuesday 9:30-10:15, 2:45-3:30

Wednesday 9:30-10:45

Thursday 9:30-10:15, 2:45-3:30

Friday 9:30-10:45, 1:00-2:00  


Should you need to reach me by phone, my office phone is: 677-2495. If I am
not available when you call, you may leave a message for me on my AUDIX or you
can reach my secretary at 677-2502 and leave a message with her. I can also be
reached by email: hall@bradley.edu  
    
    
  

**TOPIC AND ASSIGNMENT OUTLINE**

  
  
  

**I. INTRODUCTION TO STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT**  


A. January 21-What State and Local Government is All About

[A portion of this first meeting will be used to discuss

organizational matters, course structure and requirements.]  


B. January 26--A Nation of State and Local Governments

Readings:

Straayer, Wrinkle, Polinard (SWP), Chapter #1 (pp. 1-25)  


**II. THE ENVIRONMENT OF STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT**

A. January 28 and February 2--The Environment of Intergovernmental Relations--
A

Preliminary Look

Readings:

SWP, Chapter #2 (pp. 26-65)  


B. February 4, 9 and 11--The Constitutional Framework: State Constitutions

Readings:

SWP, Chapter #3 (pp. 66-93)  
    
    
    
    


**III. THE PEOPLE AND POPULAR PARTICIPATION IN STATE AND LOCAL**

**POLITICS**

A. February 16 and 18-Political Parties

Readings:

SWP, Chapter #7 (pp. 227-251)

Beyle:

Introduction, (pp. 35-39)

Politics and Marketing, (pp. 40-41)

Strong Parties, (pp. 42-43)

The New Look in Parties, (pp. 44-45)  
    
    


B. February 23 and 25-Special Interest Groups

Readings:

SWP, Chapter #8 (pp. 252-283)

Beyle:

Influence Peddlers, (pp. 46-48)  


C. March 2, 4 and March 9-Campaigns and Elections

Readings:

SWP, Chapter #9 (pp. 284-311)

Beyle:

Price, Direct Democracy (pp. 24-26)

Hovey, Voter Initiatives (pp. 27-29)

Semiatin, A Tale of Two Taxes (pp. 7-10)

Rosenthal, Campaign Finance (pp. 11-15)  
    
    


******* EXAM I on Thursday, March 11 *******

**(over Sections I-III)**  
    
    


******* SPRING BREAK--No Class on March 16 and 18 *******  
    
    


**IV. THE INSTITUTIONS AND DYNAMICS OF STATE GOVERNMENT**  


A. March 23 and 25-The Legislature and the Legislative Process

Readings:

SWP, Chapter #4 (pp. 94-143)

Beyle:

Introduction, (pp. 69-73)

Legislators and Salaries, (pp. 74-77)

Conservatives in the Legislatures, (pp. 78-85)

The Public and the Legislatures, (pp. 86-87)

Legislative Issues, (pp. 185-188)  
    
    


B. March 30 and April 1-The Governor and the Executive Branch

Readings:

SWP, Chapter #5 (pp. 144-183)

Beyle:

Introduction, (pp. 91-95)

Gov. Tucker, (pp. 96-103)

Veto Politics, (pp. 104-107)

National Governors Association, (pp. 108-111)

Introduction, (pp. 115-119)

Civil Service, (pp. 120-126)

Size of State Bureaucracies, (pp. 127-132)

State Innovations, (pp. 133-134)  
    
    


C. April 6 and 8-The Judiciary

Readings:

SWP, Chapter #6 (pp. 184-225)

Beyle:

Introduction, (pp. 137-141)

Judicial Impeachment, (pp. 144-145)

Redistricting Judicial Districts, (pp. 146-150)  


D. April 13-State and Local Fiscal Policy

Readings:

SWP, Chapter #13 (pp. 405-445)

Beyle:

Lottery $$$, (pp. 192-194)

School Funding, (pp. 203-207)  
    
    


**V. THE INSTITUTIONS AND DYNAMICS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT**  


A. April 15 and 20-Counties, Townships, School Districts and Special Districts

Readings:

SWP, Chapter #11 (pp. 341-375)  


B. April 22 and 27-Municipalities and Metropolitan Government

Readings:

SWP, Chapters #10 and #12 (pp. 313-339; 377-403)

Beyle:

Introduction, (pp. 153-157)

KC City Manager's Troubles, (pp. 158-164)

TV and City Council Meetings, (pp. 165-170)

Zoning, (pp. 171-177)  
    
    


C. April 29- _The Last Hurrah_

Readings:

O'Connor, All chapters  


D. May 4-Politics in Peoria  


******* EXAM II on Tuesday, May 11, 12:00-2:00 p.m. *******  


* * *

  * [Back of Course List](Clist.htm) ![](Bullet.gif)  [Back to Political Science](plsdept.html) ![-](Bullet.gif)

* * *

  * _Page Manager: Larry Aspin_
  
_Last update: 1/19/99_

