



|

**LS Syllabus:** **LS504**

* * *

Clicking on any of the following links allow you to directly access that
particular area of this syllabus:

  * Course: 
  * Instructor Information
  * Office Hours
  * Special Services
  * Teaching Philosophy
  * Course Overview 
  * Course Description 
  * Course Goals 
  * Course Prerequisites 
  * Course Schedule
  * Required Texts/Materials 
  * Assignment Schedule 
  * Submitting Assignments
  * Evaluation/Grading/Requirements 
  * Class Participation 
  * Attendance 
  * Guidelines
  * Course Policies 

(Note: You can print the entire syllabus by printing this page.)

|

  
---|---|---  
  
Top

|

**Course:**

* * *

LS 504: Introduction to the Information Professions ****

|

  
  
Top

|

**Instructor Information:**

* * *

Instructor:  Professor Marilyn Kay Harhai



Contact Information:



Office: 208 Carlson Library

Office Phone: 814-393-2377

Department Secretary (Barbara Reed): 814-393-2271

Department Toll-Free (Barbara Reed): 866-272-5612

Department Fax: 814-393-2150



Email: [mharhai@clarion.edu](mailto:mharhai@clarion.edu)



Mailing Address:

Clarion University of Pennsylvania

840 Wood Street

Department of Library Science

208 Carlson Library

Clarion, PA 16214

|

  ****  
  
Top

|

**Office Hours:**

* * *

Office hours will be posted on the Blackboard site. I am happy to schedule
individual meetings or phone conferences by arrangement. Please feel free to
email me at any time to ask a question or to arrange a meeting.
[mharhai@clarion.edu](mailto:mharhai@clarion.edu) If you email me, I will get
back to you within a reasonable period of time. ****

|

  
  
Top

|

**Special Services:**

* * *

Any student requiring accommodations for taking notes or tests should make
arrangements, as early in the semester as is possible, to discuss his or her
needs with me. ****

|

  
  
Top

|

**Teaching Philosophy:**

* * *

I subscribe to the constructivist educational model in which learning is
student-centered and the learner is actively involved in constructing meaning
from exposure to new ideas and experiences. In a constructivist classroom, the
role of the teacher is to organize information around problems, questions and
learning situations. Constructivism makes the student integral to, and
responsible for, his or her own learning. I also subscribe to brain-based
learning theory, which is closely aligned with constructivism. Like the
constructivist-learning model, the brain-based learning model calls for active
learning in a practical, interactive context. Other characteristics of both
theories include using hands-on projects, learning by doing, involving
students in classroom presentations, and the teach assuming a facilitating,
rather than starring and lecturing, role. ****

|

  
  
Top

|

**Course Overview:**

* * *

LS 504 is designed to be the first, or at least an early, class in a student's
coursework. The purpose of the class is to provide a foundation from which to
pursue a course of study. Core elements of librarianship, professional ethics
and expectations, and knowledge competencies are introduced.

|

  
  
Top

|

**Course Description** **:**

* * *

This course introduces students to the nature of information and its role in
society, the philosophical, ethical, and historical foundations of the
information professions, major professional organizations, and the legal,
political, and social issues confronting today's information professionals.
The identification and use of print and electronic information resources
pertinent to library and information science are also covered. Note: This
course assumes a basic knowledge of computers and related functions, including
electronic mail, accessing web-based materials, creating home pages, utilizing
word processing programs, etc. If you are deficient in any of these areas, you
should arrange to correct the deficiency.

|

  
  
Top

|

**Course Goals** **:**

* * *

At the end of the course the student will be able to:

  * Understand the nature of information and the forces that shape it 
  * Understand the roles of librarians and related professionals in mediating between sources of information and consumers of information 
  * Become acquainted with the body of professional literature that informs the information professions, including the various formats in which it is typically found 
  * Become proficient in using the various information retrieval tools appropriate to the librarianship and other information disciplines 
  * Understand the role of professional organizations in relationship to the information professions and have a basic knowledge of the history, function, and purpose of the major professional organizations and selected specialty organizations 
  * Understand the distinguishing aspects of the major types of libraries and career paths available in each 
  * Understand the history of libraries in society, particularly the role of libraries in American culture 
  * Have a basic grasp of the nomenclature and vocabulary associated with librarianship

|

  
  
Top

|

**Course Prerequisites** **:**

* * *

  * None 

|

  
  
Top

|

**Course Schedule** **/Class Meeting Times:**

* * *

This is a Blackboard course taught entirely on the Web. As this is an online
class, students will be participating from a number of locations. Please note
that all dates and times mentioned in this syllabus refer to the date and time
in Clarion, PA and you should make adjustments accordingly. The class will be
divided into groups for chapter discussions.



|

## Chapter Discussion Schedule: Rubin  
  
---  
  
**Date**

|

#####  Chapters  
  
Week 1: July 8 to July 13

|

One: Information Infrastructure

Two: Information Science  
  
Week 2: June 14 to July 20

|

Three: Redefining the Library

Four: Information Policy  
  
Week 3: July 21 to July 27

|

Five: Information Policy as Library Policy

Six: Information Organization  
  
Week 4: July 28 to August 3

|

Seven: From Past to Present

Eight: Ethics and Standards  
  
Week 5: August 4 to August 9

|

Nine: Library as Institution

Ten: Librarianship  
  
  
  
Top

|

**Required** **Texts/Materials:**

* * *

Required:



Rubin, R. (2000). Foundations of library and information science. New York:
Neal-Schuman.



Harris, R.A. (2002). Using sources effectively. Los Angles: Pyrczak.



Used for Assignments (You will need access to these manuals but you are not
required to purchase them.):



American Psychological Association. (2001). Publication manual of the American
Psychological Association (5th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.



_The Chicago Manual of Style_ , 14th ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1993)



Gibaldi, Joseph. _MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers_. 5th ed. New
York: MLA, 1999.

|

  
  
Top

|

**Assignment Schedule** **:**

* * *

It is very easy to fall behind (and procrastinate) in an online course. In
order to spread the work out over the entire semester, assignments will be due
at regular intervals. The assignments will be turned in using the Digital Drop
Box at the Blackboard site. The Blackboard site can be found at
[http://online.clarion.edu/](http://online.clarion.edu/).



To enroll: You will automatically be enrolled in the Blackboard course site.



Blackboard or Technology Issues: If this is your first Blackboard course,
please be sure to have enrolled in and completed the online Blackboard
orientation course prepared by the Department. Completing the orientation
course helps ensure that you will be able to submit materials to the
instructor. To enroll in the Library Science Orientation course, go to the
Blackboard site ([http://online.clarion.edu/](http://online.clarion.edu/)).
Select Course Catalog button. Select Library Science. Find the listing for
Library Science Orientation Course, and select the enroll button next to it.
Follow the instructions from there.



If you have any technical problems, please contact university's help desk
[http://www.clarion.edu/admin/computing/hdindex.shtml](http://www.clarion.edu/admin/computing/hdindex.shtml).
Technology is unreliable. Be sure to keep a copy of all work that you submit.
The plan to submit work at the last moment can be defeated with a computer
problem or other technology glitch. Plan ahead.  As a specific suggestion,
remember to include your name and identifying information in any attachments.
If your instructor prints out an attachment, there is no way to know it is
yours unless you include your identifying information within the attached
document.



Assignments:

1.       Post Biography to "Water Cooler" Discussion Area - By July 8

2.       _Using Sources Effectively_ Assignment  - 15%

3.       Clarion University Resources Assignment - 15%

4.       Style Manuals Assignment - 15%

5.       Exam - 15%

6.       Moderate assigned chapters and create Web page based on those chapters. 40%

a.       Moderate assigned chapters during specified week.

b.       Week One: Post outline for Web page based on assigned chapters.

c.       Week Two: Post annotated bibliography for Web page.

d.       Week Three: Post draft Web page.

e.       Week Four: Post completed Web page.

f.         Week Five: Review Web pages of other group members.

|

## Assignment Schedule  
  
---  
  
**Due Date**

<td width=490 valign=top style='width:367.6

