## History and Systems of Psychology 320

#### Gordon M. Redding, Dept. of Psychology, Illinois State University

####
[http://www.cas.ilstu.edu/psychology](http://www.cas.ilstu.edu/psychology)

## Spring 2002 Syllabus

Study the following syllabus carefully and keep it for later reference. All
course requirements and procedures are given here. Students are responsible
for all information contained in this syllabus.

### Tentative Schedule

The following is a tentative schedule of lecture topics, reading assignments,
exams, and other assignments for the semester. Adjustments in the schedule may
be made contingent upon the progress of the class, but advance notice will be
given of changes.

[**SCIENCE, PHILOSOPHY, AND SPIRITUALISM**](pppindex.html)

14 January to 30 January: Textbook Chapters 1, 2, 3 and 4

1 February: EXAMINATION 1

[**FOUNDING OF SCIENTIFIC PSYCHOLOGY**](pppindex.html)

4 February to 20 February: Textbook Chapters 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, and 15

11 February: DEADLINE FOR SELECTION OF TERM PAPER TOPIC

22 February: EXAMINATION 2

[**EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY, PSYCHOANALYSIS, ADAPTATION
PSYCHOLOGY**](pppindex.html)

25 February to 20 March: Textbook Chapters 9, 10, 11, 14, and 16

22 March: EXAMINATION 3

[**BEHAVIORALISM AND APPLIED PSYCHOLOGY**](pppindex.html)

25 March to 8 April: Textbook Chapters 10, 11, 12, 13, and 20

10 April: EXAMINATION 4

[**COGNITIVE SCIENCE AND PROFESSIONAL PSYCHOLOGY**](pppindex.html)

12 April to 29 April: Textbook Chapters 13, 15, 17, 18, 19, and 20

15 April: TERM PAPER DUE

1 May: EXAMINATION 5, Extra Credit Due

9 May, 7:50 AM: FINAL EXAMINATION (All Chapters)



### Required Textbook

Hergenhahn, B. R. (2001). _An introduction to the history of psychology_ , 4th
ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Thomson Learning.

### Communications

Professor: Gordon M. Redding Office: 429 DeGarmo Hall

Phone: 309-438-8387 E-Mail: gredding@ilstu.edu

Office Hours: 2:00-2:50 PM Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays

**Materials essential to performance in the course are located on this course
web page**

###  Course Policies

Conformity with official University withdrawal policies will be followed for
this course. Cheating or plagiarism will result in a grade of "F" in the class
and referral to the student judicial office for disciplinary action. Consult
with the professor if you have any doubt about what constitutes plagiarism.

_Any student in need of a special accommodation should contact 438-5853
(voice) or 438-8620 (TDD)_

###  Psychology Undergraduate Listserve

Important information for psychology majors is regularly posted on the
listserve. All psychology majors are automatically subscribed to this
listserve through their _@ilstu.edu email address. You should regularly check
your mail for important announcements. If you have a mail account with another
provider, you can easily have the mail from your _@isu.edu account forwarded
at the following URL:

[https://secure.ilstu.edu/ulid/forward/](https://secure.ilstu.edu/ulid/forward/)

### Course Organization

This course reviews historical changes in the concept and study of mind,
particularly as it pertains to psychology. Lecture periods will elaborate upon
material covered in the textbook and should not be taken as a substitute for
textbook study; far more important material is covered in the textbook than
can be covered in lecture periods. Moreover, textbook reading assignments must
be studied before the relevant lecture periods to facilitate in-class
question-and-answer discussions. (See [Study Tips](studytips.html) posted on
the course web page).

### Attendance

Roll will not be taken after the first few meetings. Attendance is the
student's responsibility. However, each student is responsible for the
information conveyed in each class meeting. Absence is not an excuse for
failure to meet course requirements.

### Examinations

There will be five equally weighted regular examinations distributed
approximately evenly over the semester (see Schedule for dates). None of these
regular examinations will be comprehensive, but each will cover only the
immediately preceding material. In addition, there will be a comprehensive
final examination (see Schedule for dates). Each examination will consist of
30 multiple choice questions (3 points each) and one short-answer essay
question (10 points).Some practice questions are available on line at textbook
[publisher's web
site](http://psychology.wadsworth.com/book/hergenhahn4e/quizzes/hergenhahnquiz.html).
The essay question will be selected from the discussion questions at the end
of each textbook chapter and from a [list of questions](studyquestions.html)
posted on the course web page prior to the examination. Students should be
prepared to answer all of the posted questions, but only one will be selected
for the examination. Makeup examinations will not be routinely given. If a
student finds it necessary to miss an examination, he/she should make
arrangements with the professor beforehand.

### Term Paper

A term paper is _required_. The topic must be selected from a [ list of
topics](papertopics.html) posted on the course web page. Each student must
select a topic and report it to the professor early in the semester (see
Schedule for date). Topics cannot be selected by more than one student and
allocation of topics will be done on a first-come basis. [Some starting
resources](resources.html) are to be found on the course web page, as well as
in the textbook. Papers are due before the end of the semester to allow time
for grading (see Schedule for date). Paper length will be determined by the
student's judgment of when he/she has adequately covered the topic, but
ordinarily length should be between 20 and 30 pages. Format must conform to
the _Publication Manual of the American Psychology Association_ (2001). Papers
will be [ evaluated](paperevaluation.html) (100 points) on completeness of
coverage, clarity of organization, citation of original sources, conformity to
format requirements, and grammar. Late penalty: one letter grade for each
class day late.

### Grading

Grades will be based on the cumulative points acquired on the examinations and
paper. The maximum number of points possible is 700. Each exam will count 100
points (total of 600). An additional 100 points will come from the term paper.
The cutoffs are 90, 80, 70, and 60 percent (630, 560, 490, and 420 points) for
letter grades of A, B, C, and D, respectively. Grading will conform to
departmental standards. All work must be turned in on time and late work will
be penalized by one letter grade for each class day delay.

### Extra Credit from Participation in Psychological Research

Twenty extra-credit points can be acquired by participation as subject in
psychological research approved by the Dept. of Psych. Two (2) grade points
will be given for each whole participation unit up to a maximum of ten (10)
units or twenty (20) grade points. Instructions for research participation are
to be found on the [Dept. of Psych.'s web
page](http://main.psy.ilstu.edu/committees/humanresearch/base.html).
Alternatively, the student may identify up to 10 web sites which are scholarly
relevant to the history of psychology (excluding those [sites already
identified](resources.html) on the course web page). Each web site will be
counted like one participation unit. The URL of each site must be reported,
together with a brief description of the resource (including author, kind of
information provided, and relevance to the history of psychology).

