**American Government and Politics**  
**Political Science 110H**  
**Brigham Young University** _Fall 2001_  
_Professor Richard Davis_  
_754 SWKT_  
_Ext 8-7503_  
_richard_davis@byu.edu_  
_Office Hours: Office Hours: Monday and Thursday 2- 3 p.m._  
_Teaching Assistants: Lisa Underdown and Audrey Perry_

**Course Description **

**Course Requirements **

**Course Objectives**

**Teaching Assistants/Discussion Sections**

|

**Texts **

**Reading and Discussion Schedule **

**Plagiarism/Other Work**

**[ Extra Credit Essay](../../DAVISR/110/extracredit.html)**  
---|---  
|

**<http://www.mhhe.com/socscience/polisci/patterson/links.mhtml>**

**[Candidate list
](http://fhss.byu.edu/POLSCI/DAVISR/Religion211/CandidateList01.htm)**

**[Short Essay](../../DAVISR/110/shortessayf01.htm)**

|

  Review Session:

    Wednesday: Nov 28th, 7PM 3716 HBLL  
---|---  
  


**Course Description**

 This course is designed as an introductory survey to American Politics and
Government. During this semester we explore the roots of American democracy,
including the U.S. Constitution and the early years of the Republic. We
discuss how the Constitution is applied today in areas such as freedom of
religion, freedom of speech, and other elements of the Bill of Rights.

Then we turn our attention to the political culture, i.e. our shared political
values, and how we acquire our political ideology. Next we discuss
organizations affecting American politics - interest groups, political
parties, and the news media.

We then move onto an analysis of the electoral process, particularly as it
relates to presidential elections. Since we have just been through an election
year, we will draw into our discussion examples from that campaign.

The institutions of government come next \- Congress, the presidency, the
Supreme Court, and the bureaucracy. We examine how Congress is organized and
the process of legislation. We see how the president seeks to assert a
leadership role over the Congress and the nation and how that role has changed
during our history. The place of the judicial branch is the next subject with
emphasis on the Supreme Court's policy making role today. Finally, the
bureaucracy is addressed. The last section handles public policy issues -
domestic, defense, and foreign.  


**Course Objectives**  


As instructor, my intent is to do more than impart knowledge to you. I want
you to develop your critical analysis skills, as well as your oral and written
abilities. I want you to desire to learn more about Political Science than you
know now, so that much of what you learn about this subject will not be what
you take notes on in class or read in the texts; rather it will be the product
of your own thirst for knowledge.

Learning is inherently a two-way street: it requires effort on the part of
both the teacher and the student. The teacher must be willing to show the way,
but the student has to want to walk down the path. I will do my part to
enlighten your mind about this subject and offer opportunities for you to
learn independently. But you must walk down that path.

Also, it is my objective not only to equip you with knowledge for good
citizenship, but to encourage your participation in the political process as
well. It is my expectation that you will become involved in following and
participating in American politics at the national, state, or local level.

**Teaching Assistants/Discussion Sections**  


The teaching assistants are here to assist you in learning. Use them as a
means to help you understand the course material and get the most out of this
course. They are experienced in the study of American politics and can answer
most of your questions about the course.

The discussion sections are not required. However, I strongly suggest you
attend. Even if you will not attend, please sign up for one of them because
that act assigns you to a teaching assistant who grades most of your work.

During the section period, each TA will review the material of the preceding
week, answer questions, and offer the opportunity for further discussion.
These sections are particularly useful for those of you who speak up less in
the large class, but feel more comfortable being vocal in a small group
setting.

Whether you sign up for a discussion section, you will be assigned to a
section and a TA. That person will be responsible for grading much of your
work and tracking your progress through the semester. On occasion, you can go
to another section. However, please alert Lisa Underdown early in the semester
if you wish to change sections.

There are certain things the teaching assistants will not do. They will not
provide lecture notes. They are not expected to schedule times to see you
outside their normal office hours. They are not expected to set course policy.
If you have a question about class policy/procedure, come to me.  


* * *

**Course Requirements**

1\. Three Midterm Exams - 20 percent each 60%

2\. Short Essay 10

3\. Campaign/Political Interest Group Participation Report 5

4\. Final Examination 20

5\. Class and section attendance/participation 5  


1\. **In-class midterm examinations** (See below for dates) The exams will
include multiple choice and essay questions from the texts and the lecture.

2\. **Short Essay** \- One short essay of no less than two pages and no more
than three will be assigned during the semester. Essays must be double-spaced
with one-inch margins

using 10 or 12 point font. Essays can be submitted via e-mail, but must fit
the same requirements as hard copy if printed. Essays will be graded down one
letter grade for each day submitted late. Check the syllabus for due dates.

3. **Campaign Participation** \- You will be expected to spend at least 10 hours working on

an electoral campaign or in a political interest group (off campus). The
particular type of participation (type of work, campaign, group) must be
submitted to me by September 20 and will be subject to my approval.

4\. **Final examination** \- The final examination will be held in-class
during the final exam

period. It will be comprehensive. Travel arrangements at the end of the Winter
semester will not be considered an acceptable excuse for missing the final.

5\. **Class attendance/participation** \- You will be graded on your
attendance at and participation in class as well as the lab section you sign
up for. Sign up will occur the first week of class. Also, if you come in
during my office hours with a question about American politics before the
first midterm exam, you will receive an extra 5 points on the exam.

* * *

**Required Texts**  


To start you on your study of American Government, I am assigning the
following required texts, which are available for purchase in the BYU
Bookstore:

Patterson, _The American Democracy,_ 5th ed., _2001_

Shafritz and Weinberg, _Classics in American Government_ , 2nd ed.,2000  


You are also required to subscribe to one of the following publications for
the period of this semester:

_The New York Times_

_The Washington Post National Weekly Edition_  


Subscription forms will be circulated in class the first day or two of class
or can be picked up at the _New York Times_ subscription desk.  


_It is also expected that you have an active e-mail account and be familiar
with the Internet and e-mail._ This syllabus and other material relevant to
the course will be available on the Web at an address that will be given to
you shortly. Please visit it frequently to view news of the class and complete
assignments.

* * *

**Reading and Discussion Schedule**

September 4 - Introduction, Patterson, ch1

September 6, 11 - The Framing of the Constitution, Patterson, ch.2; Shafritz
and Weinberg, ch.I

September 13 - Federalism, Patterson, ch.3; Shafritz and Weinberg, ch.II

September 18 - Civil Liberties, Patterson, ch.4; Shafritz and Weinberg, ch.
III

September 20 - Civil Rights, Patterson, ch.5; Shafritz and Weinberg, ch. IV

September 25 - _First Midterm Exam_

September 27 - Public Opinion/Socialization, Patterson, ch.6; Shafritz and
Weinberg, ch. V

October 2 - Participation and Voting, Patterson, ch.7; Shafritz and Weinberg,
ch. VII

October 4, 9 - Political Parties, Patterson, ch.9; Shafritz and Weinberg, ch.
VI

October 11, 16- Elections, Patterson, ch.8; Shafritz and Weinberg, ch. VII

**October 12 - First Essay Due**

October 18 - Interest Groups, Patterson, ch.10; Shafritz and Weinberg, ch.
VIII

October 23 - _Second Midterm Exam_

October 25, 30 - The News Media, Patterson, ch.11; Shafritz and Weinberg, ch.
IX

November 1, 6- Congress, Patterson, ch.12 and 13; Shafritz and Weinberg, ch. X

November 8 - NO CLASS

November 13, 15 - Presidency, Patterson, ch.14 and 15; Shafritz and Weinberg,
ch. XI

_November 15 - Movie Night 6:30 p.m._

November 20 - FRIDAY CLASSES

November 22 - NO CLASS

November 27 - Bureaucracy, Patterson, ch.16; Shafritz and Weinberg, ch. XIII

November 29 - _Third Midterm Exam_

**November 30 - Campaign Participation Report Due**

December 4- Judiciary, Patterson, ch.17; Shafritz and Weinberg, ch. XII

December 6 - Public Policy, Patterson, ch. 18 and 19

December 11 - Foreign and Defense Policy, Patterson, ch. 20.

December 13 - Conclusion

December 18 - FINAL EXAM - 11-2 p.m.  

* * *

  
**Plagiarism/Other Work**  


While all students sign the honor code, there are still specific skills most
students need to master over time in order to correctly cite sources,
especially in this new age of the internet; as well as deal with the stress
and strain of college life without resorting to cheating. Please know that as
your professor I will notice instances of cheating on exams or plagiarizing on
papers. See <http://www.byu.edu/honorcode> for specific examples of
intentional, inadvertent plagiarism, and fabrication, falsification. Work for
other courses will not be accepted for assignments in this course.

**Sexual Harassment**  


Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 prohibits sex discrimination
against any participant in an educational program or activity that receives
federal funds. The act is intended to eliminate sex discrimination in
education. Title IX covers discrimination in programs, admissions, activities,
and student-to-student sexual harassment. BYU's policy against sexual
harassment extends not only to employees of the university but to students as
well. If you encounter unlawful sexual harassment or gender based
discrimination, please talk to your professor; contact the Equal Employment
Office at 378-5895 or 367-5689 (24-hours); or contact the Honor Code Office at
378-2847.

**People with Disabilities**  


Brigham Young University is committed to providing a working and learning
atmosphere which reasonably accommodates qualified persons with disabilities.
If you have any disability which may impair your ability to complete this
course successfully, please contact the Services for Students with
Disabilities Office (378-2767). Reasonable academic accommodations are
reviewed for all students who have qualified documented disabilities. Services
are coordinated with the student and instructor by the SSD office. If you need
assistance or if you feel you have been unlawfully discriminated against on
the basis of disability, you may seek resolution through established grievance
policy and procedures. You should contact the Equal Employment Office at
378-5895, D-282 ASB.  

* * *

Return to Top

[BACK to Course Syllabi
List](http://fhss.byu.edu/POLSCI/courses/SYLLABI/fall2001.html)

[Professor Davis' Home
Page](http://fhss.byu.edu/POLSCI/courses/Fall01/index.html)

