**

PSYC 1300 - General Psychology

COURSE INFORMATION SHEET - Summer, 2002

INSTRUCTOR:**

  * Dr. Bill Lammers  
  * Office: MAS 257 
  * Phone: 450-5415 (office); 329-7494 (home) 
  * E-mail: billl@mail.uca.edu 
  * Office Hours: MTWThF 11:15-1:00 and by appointment.

**

TEXTBOOK:  **_Psychology:   In Search of the Human Mind, 3rd Ed. (2001) _by
Robert J. Sternberg

**

RESOURCES:**

  * An internet study guide, along with other resources, is available at the textbook web site: 
  * [http://www.wadsworth.com/cgi-wadsworth/course_products_wp.pl?fid=M18&sort=author&discipline_number=24](http://www.wadsworth.com/cgi-wadsworth/course_products_wp.pl?fid=M18&sort=author&discipline_number=24)
  * At the website, click on the icon that represents your textbook.

**

ATTENDANCE:** Attendance and active participation is expected at every class
meeting.

**

COURSE DESCRIPTION:** The purpose of the course is to introduce you to a
fascinating area of science that investigates human behavior and thought. We
will discuss a variety of topics, most of which will relate to normal,
everyday behavior and thought. However, we will also explore some of the
psychological disorders that afflict so many people in our society. This is
the course that caused me to change my major from Electrical Engineering to
Psychology. I hope that you will find the material as interesting as I did.

Students will survey all topics in five major areas of study. These include
history and dimensions of psychology, scientific foundations, psychobiological
processes, learning, and psychopathology. In addition, we will explore the
topics of consciousness, memory, and social influences.

**PLACE IN THE GENERAL EDUCATION PROGRAM:**  

This survey and introductory course in psychology is a general education
elective that fulfills the Behavioral and Social Sciences area requirement. As
a Behavioral and Social Science course it strives to fulfill certain general
objectives. These objectives are:

，         To be familiar with traditional and contemporary theories used to
explain human behavior;

，         To understand the empirical bases of the behavioral and social
sciences;

，         To be able to hypothesize causes and consequences of individual and
social behavior;

，         To recognize the effect of the environment on individual and social
behavior through social institutions and processes;

，         To appreciate the interactions of individuals, institutions, events,
space, and ideas in human society. **  **

**

GRADING:**

Nine chapter tests (20 points each)

|

180 pts  
  
---|---  
  
Comprehensive Final Exam

|

50 pts  
  
Ten writing assignments (5 points each)

|

50 pts  
  
Internet assignment |

10 pts  
  
Class participation

|

10 pts  
  


|

  
  
**

TOTAL**

| **

300 pts**  
  
 Course Grade: A = 90% - 100% B = 80% - 89% C = 70% - 79% D = 60% - 69% F = 0%
- 59%

**

WRITING ASSIGNMENTS:** At the beginning of each class, each student will turn
in a one-page, typed, single-spaced summary (in his/her own words) of one
topic from the assigned reading for that class. Half of the page should be a
summary of the reading and half of the page should be the student's own
thoughts on the topic. Five of these summaries will be graded.

**

INTERNET ASSIGNMENT** **:**   Sometime prior to the last week of the course,
each student will make a 5-minute presentation (in Dr. Lammers' office) of
information related to a topic in psychology that they found on the Internet.
Each student will also submit a 1/2-page summary of the information and a
completed [Internet Site Evaluation
Form](http://www.coe.uca.edu/psych/lammers/4325site.html) to Dr. Lammers.

**ENRICHMENT ACTIVITIES:** Students may earn up to 9 extra points by
participating in experiments (3 points per 1/2 hour) and/or doing extra
internet assignments (3 points per assignment).

**

ACADEMIC HONESTY:** While student cooperation in studying the material is
greatly encouraged, any cheating on tests or writing assignments will not be
tolerated and will be dealt with severely according to University policy.

**

SPECIAL ACCOMMODATIONS**: The University of Central Arkansas adheres to the
requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act.  If you need an
accommodation under this Act due to a disability, contact the Office of
Disability Support Services at 450-3135.

**SCHEDULE OF READINGS:** Specific reading assignments will be posted at the
beginning of each class. We will discuss ten of the chapters in the textbook.
The chapters are outlined below.

**Chapter**

| **

Chapter Title**  
  
---|---  
  
1

|

What is Psychology?  
  
2

|

Research Methods in Psychology  
  
3 | Biological Bases of Behavior  
  
4

|

Sensation & Perception  
  
5 | Consciousness  
  
6

|

Learning  
  
7

|

Memory  
  
16

|

Psychological Disorders  
  
13-14

|

Social Psychology  
  
[_Return to My Teaching Homepage_](http://faculty.uca.edu/~billl/teaching.htm)

