[**Home Page**](http://www.uccs.edu/~energy/courses/160home.html)

|

[**Lecture Notes**](http://www.uccs.edu/~energy/courses/160lectures)

|

[**Class
Grades**](http://webct.uccs.edu:8900/SCRIPT/ENSC260/scripts/student/serve_marks?DISPLAY+_homepage)

|

[**Solar Energy Links**](http://www.uccs.edu/~energy/courses/solarlinks.htm)

|

[WebCT pages](http://webct.uccs.edu:8900/SCRIPT/ENSC260/scripts/serve_home)  
  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
|

[Class
Calendar](http://webct.uccs.edu:8900/SCRIPT/ENSC260/scripts/student/serve_calendar?START+_homepage)

|

[Threaded
discussion](http://webct.uccs.edu:8900/SCRIPT/ENSC260/scripts/student/serve_bulletin?ENTER+All)

|

|  
  
## _ENSC 160 Introduction to Solar Energy ---- Fall 1999_

### _\- Course Information_

  * Instructor / office hours
  * course syllabus and information
  * textbook
  * grading standards



  * **Mondays** : course meets in traditional classroom for lecture
  * **Wednesdays** : course meets in computer lab for interactive exercises

###  

* * *

_Instructor_

### Daryl Prigmore

  * office: Engr 245
  * phone: 262-3560
  * [email: dprigmor@mail.uccs.edu](mailto:dprigmor@mail.uccs.edu,%20dprigmor@mgram.com)
  * office hours: 
    *  M 3:00 - 4:00
    *  W 12:00 - 1:00
    * or by appointment

###

* * *

![](http://www.uccs.edu/~energy/images/Sun_is_out.gif)_Course Syllabus and
Information_

This introductory science course deals with many aspects of the sun, including
its fundamental operation and the many ways it has been used historically and
continues to be utilized terrestrially as a benign, renewable energy source.
Active, passive, and high tech approaches will be examined in detail. A major
portion of the course will be devoted to the use of sophisticated simulation
software to design high efficiency, energy conservative buildings using the
sun to satisfy their energy requirements. The course employs technology (CD-
ROM's, DVD's, and Web-based resources) to enhance student understanding and
achievement by the very interactive nature of the technology.

**Tentative outline (subject to revision)**

  * The history of solar energy utilization by humans
  * Basic concepts of energy in general 
    * fundamental dimensions (length, area, volume, time, energy, power)
    * buzz words (BTU's, kWh, joule, cal) 
      * [Here is an interactive lesson to review and learn about energy and power](http://www.uccs.edu/~energy/courses/energy_units.html)
  * Fundamentals of solar operation 
    * fusion of hydrogen into helium 
      * [Here is a lesson on the structure and operation of the sun](http://www.uccs.edu/~energy/courses/sun.htm)
    * transport via photons to earth (basic electromagnetic theory) 
      * [Here is a quick review lesson on light](http://www.uccs.edu/~energy/courses/sunlight.html)
  * Fundamentals of thermal energy transfer and storage 
    * conduction, convection, and radiation heat transfer
    * thermal conductivity (R-values), specific heat and heat capacity
  * Passive design approaches for heating and cooling
  * Active design approaches for heating and cooling
  * Energy conservation and the design of "smart" buildings 
    * orientation, high performance glazing, vegetation, infiltration, daylighting
    * direct gain, shading devices, energy storage (thermal mass)
  * High tech solar energy 
    * photovoltaics, air conditioning, Stirling cycles, Rankine cycles, power tower

[Class lecture notes ](http://www.uccs.edu/~energy/courses/160lectures)

**Study hints:** Read the assigned text pages before coming to class. This
will help familiarize you with the basic ideas and terms to be discussed in
the lecture. If you do not understand something after reading and the lecture,
ask questions. Questions are welcome during the lecture or during my office
hours.

#### Return to Class Menu

###

* * *

## _Books_

**Text:** The Sun's Joules CD \- [limited Web demo version:
http://solstice.crest.org/renewables/SJ/index.html](http://solstice.crest.org/renewables/SJ/index.html)
[![](http://www.uccs.edu/~energy/images/SunsJoules.gif)](http://solstice.crest.org/renewables/SJ/index.html)

**optional text:** Energy-10 CD

#### Return to Class Menu

###

* * *

## _Grading_

#### The course grade will be determined approximately as follows:

Test #1

|

100 pts  
  
---|---  
  
Test #2

|

100 pts  
  
quizzes

|

up to 50 pts  
  
homework

|

up to 100 pts  
  
project

|

100 pts  
  
participation

|

50 pts  
  
Test # 3

|

100 pts  
  
note: Quizzes may be unannounced !!

**Make-up exams:** Make-up exams will be given only under extremely
extenuating circumstances and only if prior arrangements have been made. If
you must miss an exam, please inform me prior to the exam day.

[Class Grades to date](http://www.uccs.edu/~tchriste/courses/grades.html)

#### Return to Class Menu

* * *

[to Energy Science program Home Page](http://www.uccs.edu/~energy)

[to Physics Department Home Page](http://www.uccs.edu/~physics)

* * *

Students are also accountable for the "General Information" section of the
current "Schedule of Courses" which discusses the Honor Code, student rights
and responsibilities, and other issues.

* * *

**Reasonable accommodation:** Students with a disability who require
accommodations must provide a letter of accommodation from Student Support
Services (CH 104, x3354) within the first two weeks of the semester.

* * *

All information on this page is subject to change. Changes will be announced
in class.

last updated: January 11, 2000

