#  EEOB 105-01

#  [Global Environmental Change](EEOB105_flyer_2001.html)

#  Coming Spring 2001

###  This site is under continuous construction.  
Check back weekly for new material.

#

* * *

##  Where do you want to go?

> > * **Course Description**

>> * **About the Professor**

>> * **About the Course Web Site**

>> * **Textbook and Other Reference Materials**

>> * **Use of Electronic Media**

>> * **Grading Policies**

>> * **Lecture Schedule and Lecture Notes**

#

* * *

Syllabus

**Course Description**  
**EEOB 105 is an introduction to the natural processes that regulate the
function of the Earth system, emphasizing the role of biological processes and
human activities in global environmental change. The composition, formation,
and stabilization of Earth's ecosystems and atmosphere will be explored. With
a basic understanding of the history and mechanisms of natural global change
processes, the means by which human activities alter Earth system function at
local to global scales will be examined, along with potential consequences of
and solutions to human-induced global change.**

**This 3 credit course can be used to fulfill a core requirement in the the
EEOB major and the Environmental Studies coordinate major. See the
Environmental Studies Program Coordinator (Christine Murphey, 201B Alcee
Fortier Hall) for more information about the ENST major and the course
requirements. This course also qualifies for non-laboratory science
distribution requirement for non-science majors.**  


**Professor**  
**[Jay Gulledge](http://www.tulane.edu/~gulledge/), Department of [Ecology &
Evolutionary Biology](http://www.tulane.edu/~eeob/)** **Mailbox:  ** | **
room 310 [Dinwiddie Hall](http://www.tulane.edu/%7Emap/dinwiddie_hall.html)
(put written messages here if necessary)**  
---|---  
**Email:  ** | **[  gulledge@tulane.edu](mailto:gulledge@tulane.edu) (often
the easiest way to get ahold of me)**  
  
**Phone:**

| **  862-8291**  
**Office:  ** | **  room 364 Israel (Environmental Sciences) Building**  
**Office hours:  ** | **  by appoinment**  
  
**Course Web Site**  
**<http://www.tulane.edu/~gulledge/EEOB105/>**  
**I will post the syllabus, the course schedule, the lecture notes, and other
relevant links and information on this web site. The content will be modified
on an ongoing basis. Therefore, the web site should be your primary reference,
not an old copy of the syllabus. I will contact you by email whenever changes
are made to the web site.**  


**Textbook and Other References**  
**1\. The textbook for this course is a custom book from Wiley press that
combines chapters from two of their regular textbooks:**

> **_Environmental Science: Earth as a Living Planet_ , 3rd Edition by Botkin
& Keller (2000)**  
> **_The Blue Planet: An Introduction to Earth System Science_ , 2nd Edition
by Skinner, Porter & Botkin (2000)**

**The custom textbook is available only from the Tulane Bookstore and is
titled _Global Environmental Change_.**

**2. _[Global Warming: Early Warning Signs](http://www.climatehotmap.org/)._
An interactive version of this informative map is available online at
<http://www.climatehotmap.org/>.**

**3\. Additional readings will be assigned and made available eletronically or
on reserve in the library.**  


**Electronic Media**  
**This course _requires_ the use of the Internet both for frequent Email usage
and for World Wide Web access. I will make broadcast announcements to all
class members and will communicate one-on-one with students via Email. Your
written assignment will be turned in via Email and the best way to contact me
to ask questions or setup appointments will be via Email. Detailed lecture
notes will be accessible on the course web page and I will assign required
reading to be accessed via the World Wide Web.**

**Internet use will be a required academic resource in the same way that the
textbook is. Lack of access to the Internet from home will not excuse a
student from this requirement. On-campus computing resources are freely
available and can be accessed on a daily basis from several different
locations on campus.**  


**Grading**  
**This course will be graded on a standard 100 point scale as follows:**  
**`    97-100 A+     87-89 B+     77-79 C+     60-69 D`**  
**`    93-96  A      83-86 B      73-76 C       < 60 F`**  
**`    90-92  A-     80-82 B-     70-72 C-`**

**Grade distribution:**  
**`3 Midterm Exams + 1 Final Exam (best 3 out of 4):   85%`**  
**`                   two-minute oral/written report:   5%`**  
**`                                       Attendance:  10%`**

**The bulk of your grade will be determined by 3 midterm exams and a
comprehensive final exam. The average of the 3 highest scores on these 4 exams
will constitute 90% of the final grade. This means that if you are happy with
your average grade on the three midterm exams, you may skip the final exam and
accept the grade you already have earned. Assuming that you have taken all 3
midterm exams, THE FINAL EXAM CANNOT LOWER YOUR GRADE. So, unless your midterm
average is an A+, you should take the final exam because it can increase your
grade but cannot lower it. Because MAKEUP EXAMS WILL NOT BE OFFERED, if you
miss a midterm exam, you must take the final in order to have 3 exams to
determine your score.**

**5% of your grade will be based on a very short (2 minutes) written
report.[Click here to download the assignement (3.5 MB PDF
file).](TimeAssignment.pdf)**

**Attendance is mandatory and will be monitored daily. An attendance score
will constitute 10% of the final grade. Because everyone occasionally has good
cause to miss class, up to 3 absences will be tolerated without penalty, and
no excuse or notification will be required. USE THESE FREEBIES WISELY, as
there will be no other excused absences. The fourth absence will result in a
loss of 5 points on your final grade and the fifth absence will result in a
loss of an additional 5 points. Hence, it would be very difficult to earn an A
in this course with 4 absences, and essentially impossible with 5 or more
absences.**

* * *

#  Lecture Schedule  
(with links to lecture notes)

**Note that some reading assigments must be downloaded from the web. Some of
these are in PDF (portable document format). To access these documents you
need Adobe Acrobat Reader. This program has become very common and is
installed on most web-accessible computers. If you do not have Acrobat Reader
on your internet computer, it is freely available for download from the Adobe
web site at   <http://www.adobe.com/products/acrobat/readstep2.html>.**  


##  **Date**

|

##  Topic

|

##  Reading  
  
---|---|---  
**Thur Jan 11** | [Ten essential concepts to learn in this course](lecture-
notes/01_10-essentials/01_10-essentials.html) |  **[{link}](lecture-
notes/01_10-essentials/01_10-essentials.html)**  
**Tue Jan 16** | [What is global change?](lecture-
notes/02_GlobalChange/02_what-is-global-change.html) | **Southwick Ch. 9**  
**(library reserve)**  
**Thu Jan 18-**  
**Tue Jan 23** | [Thinking critically about science and the
environment](lecture-notes/03_CriticalThinking/03_Critical-thinking.html) |
**Botkin Ch. 2**  
**Thu Jan 25** |  "Louisiana-Polluter's Paradise" (Guest lecturer: Dr. Bruce
Fleury) | **Bullard  **  
**(library reserve)**  
**Tue Jan 30-**  
**Thu Feb 1** | [Structure of the Earth system and Earth system
science](lecture-notes/04_ESS/04_EarthSystemScience.html) | **Skinner Ch. 1**  
**Botkin Ch. 3**  
**Tue Feb 6-**  
**Thu Feb 8** | [The biosphere: biological influence on Earth history;
homeostasis and the Gaia Hypothesis](lecture-
notes/05_Biosphere/05_Biosphere.html) | **Skinner Ch. 17**  
**Botkin Ch. 3  **  
**(pp. 46-47)**  
**Tue Feb 13** | **Exam I** |  
**Thu Feb 15** | [Climate History](lecture-
notes/06_ClimateHistory/06_ClimateHistory.html) | **Skinner Ch, 14**  
**Tue Feb 20-**  
**Thu Feb 22** | [Human Impacts on Climate](lecture-
notes/07_HumanClimateImpacts/07_HumanClimateImpacts.html) | **Botkin Ch. 21**  
**Southwick Ch. 18**  
**(library reserve)**  
**Tue Feb 27-**  
**Thu Mar 1** | **Enjoy Mardi Gras Break!** |  
**Tue Mar 6** | [Introduction to the chemistry of life](lecture-
notes/RedoxChemistry/RedoxLecture.html) ******(Guest lecturer: Gantt
Boswell)** |  
**Thu Mar 8** | [Ecosystems: How life is organized in the Earth
system](lecture-notes/08_Ecosystems/08_Ecosystems.html) | **Botkin Ch. 6**  
**Skinner Ch. 15**  
**Tue Mar 13** |  Finish lecture/review for exam |  
**Thu Mar 15** | **Exam II** |  
**Tue Mar 20**  
**Thu Mar 22** | [Material and energy flow in ecosystems: C and nutrient
cycles](lecture-notes/09_BiogeochemicalCycles/09_BiogeochemCyc.html) |
**Botkin Ch. 8**  
**Skinner Ch. 16**  
**Tue Mar 27-**  
**Thu Mar 29** | [Soil and Soil Organic Matter](lecture-notes/Soil-
SOM/Soil.html) | **Tan Ch. 3**  
**(library reserve)**  
**Tue Apr 3-**  
**Tue Apr 10** | [Species diversity and Ecosystem Function](lecture-
notes/11_Ecosystems&Diversity/11_Ecosystems&Diversity.html)  
Read the following reports:  
[    1\. ](http://ens.lycos.com/ens/aug2000/2000L-08-30-10.html)[Biodiversity
and Ecosystem Functioning: Maintaining Natual Life Support Processes](agency-
reports/ESA-Issue4_Biodiversity&ecosystemFunction.pdf)  
[    2\. Biotic Invasions: Causes, Epidemiology, Global Consequences and
Control](agency-reports/ESA-Issue5_BioticInvasions.pdf) | **Botkin Ch. 12**  
**[{report 1 link}](agency-reports/ESA-
Issue4_Biodiversity&ecosystemFunction.pdf)**  
**[{report 2 link}](agency-reports/ESA-Issue5_BioticInvasions.pdf)**  
  
**NOTE:**

| **Exam III (scheduled for April 17) will cover up to this point** |  
**Writing**  
**Assignment** | [For those who did not get the handout in class, follow this
link to download the writing assignment.](TimeAssignment.pdf) Note that the
file is quite large (3.5 MB) and will require a lot of download time if you
are using a modem. Also, the file is in PDF format and requires Adobe Acrobat
Reader for viewing ([see information above](index.html#schedule)). **The
assignment will be due at the beginning of class on April 24.** | **[{link to
assignment}](TimeAssignment.pdf)**  
3.5 MB PDF file  
**Thu Apr 12** | [Population biology, human population growth, and ecosystem
carrying capacity](lecture-
notes/12_PopulationBiology/12_PopulationBiology.html) | **Botkin Ch. 5**  
**Skinner Ch. 20**  
**Tue Apr 17** | **Exam III** |  
**Thu Apr 19** |

##  ***IGNORE THIS ROW***

Fossil fuels and alternative fuels  
Read the following reports:  
[    1\. Global Warming Threatens One Third of All
Habitat](http://ens.lycos.com/ens/aug2000/2000L-08-30-10.html)  
[    2\. Subsidizing Big Oil](http://www.ucsusa.org/vehicles/pipeline.html)

##  ***IGNORE THIS ROW***

| **Botkin Ch. 16**  
**Botkin Ch. 17**  
**[{report 1 link}](http://ens.lycos.com/ens/aug2000/2000L-08-30-10.html)**  
**[{report 2 link}](http://www.ucsusa.org/vehicles/pipeline.html)**  
**Thu Apr 19** | [Effects of agriculture on the environment](lecture-
notes/EffectsOfAgriculture/EffectsOfAgriculture.html)  
Read this report:  [Human Alteration of the Global N Cycle: Causes and
Consequences](agency-reports/ESA-Issue1_HumanAltered-Ncycle.pdf) | **Botkin
Ch. 11**  
**[{report link}](agency-reports/ESA-Issue1_HumanAltered-Ncycle.pdf)**  
**Tue Apr 24** |  Written assignments due at the beginnig of class  
[Ecosystem services and management](lecture-
notes/EcosystemServices/EcosystemServices.html)  
Read this report:  [Ecosystem Services: Benefits Supplied to Human
Societies...](agency-reports/ESA-Issue2_EcosystemServices.pdf) | **Botkin Ch.
13**  
**[{report link}](agency-reports/ESA-Issue2_EcosystemServices.pdf)**  
**Thu Apr 26** | [Ecological Economics](lecture-
notes/13_EcologicalEconomics/13_EcologicalEconomics.html) (Guest lecturer:
Gantt Boswell)  
Read this report: [A Small Price to Pay: US Action to Curb Global
Warming...](agency-reports/UCS_SmallPriceToPay_1998.pdf)  
LAST REGULAR MEETING BEFORE FINAL EXAM | **Botkin Ch. 25**  
**[{report link}](agency-reports/UCS_SmallPriceToPay_1998.pdf)**  
  
**NOTE:**

| **Exam IV (final exam) will cover all material covered from Apr 12 to this
point.**  
**Contrary to my previous statements, the final exam will NOT be
comprehensive.  **  
**The format will be similar to previous exams.** |  
**Sat April 28-**  
**Tue May 1** | **Final exam study period** | **As a study aid, read**  
**Skinner Ch. 20**  
**Fri May 11** | **Exam IV (final exam) 8 AM - Noon, 124 Dinwiddie** |

