Return to the [Intro. Soc. Home Page](introsoc.htm)

Return to the [Sociology Courses](http://www2.una.edu/sociology/courses.htm)
Page

**COURSE SYLLABUS  
Introduction to Sociology (SO 221)  
The Department of Sociology  
Summer, 2001**

**Instructor** :  Craig T. Robertson, Ph.D.                         **    **
**Office** :  558 Stevens Hall  
**Office Phone** : 765-4530                                              **
**             **Office Hours** : M-F 1:00-2:00pm.  
**E-mail:**[ctrobert@unanov.una.edu](mailto:ctrobert@unanov.una.edu)
**Website** : **** www2.una.edu/crobertson

**COURSE OVERVIEW**  

As part of the Sociology major and general studies curriculum, this course
serves as an introduction to sociology.  Sociologists study human behavior and
the organization of society.  Their work assumes that social forces external
to individuals shape behavior.  The science aims to identify, understand, and
explain what these specific forces are and how they shape human behavior in
social groups.  This course will introduce you to this scientific discipline
by examining its history, the work of its early and contemporary contributors,
essential concepts, research methods, theory, and applications.  I hope you
will come to see that sociology can assist you in improving your understanding
and quality of social life.

**REQUIRED TEXT**

 Tischler, H. L.  (1999).  _Introduction to sociology_.   Fort Worth: Harcourt
Brace Publishers.

  **SPECIFIC COURSE OBJECTIVES**

1\. Understand essential terminology and assumptions central to this science.  
2\. Understand how culture, socialization and social structure impact human
behavior.  
3\. Apply the sociological perspective to a study of social class, deviance,
race, and gender.  
4\. Understand how sociologists examine the primary institutions of any
society including religion, economy, political structures, family, and the
workforce.  
5\. Encourage students to apply the sociological perspective to their own
areas of study.

**STUDENT RESPONSIBILITIES**

_Class preparation_ :  Students will receive advanced notice of reading
assignments and are expected to completely read all assigned work prior to
attending class.  Students may find the PowerPoint presentations on the course
website useful.  I encourage you to review them and provide me with some
feedback.

_Attendance_ :  UNA's attendance policy is adopted in this class.  Course
credit cannot be earned if a student's cumulative excused or unexcused
absences exceed one week of scheduled class time. Please review the UNA
Student Directory and Handbook for this policy.  Since I call roll each day,
late arriving students should see me after class to ensure an accurate class
roll was taken.  Students who leave class after our customary break will be
marked absent for one-half class.

_Assignments_ :  During the semester you will have the opportunity to complete
4-5 written extra-credit assignments.  These five point assignments will allow
you to apply course material to real world settings.  The assignments will be
posted on the course website.

Although these assignments are extra-credit, failure to submit assignments on
time will result in an automatic 80% grade before I begin grading the work.
All late assignments must be submitted before class begins no later than two
business days after the designated due date.  No work will be accepted after
this late/grace period.

All assignments are to be submitted with a cover sheet indicating your name, a
title for your work, the due date, my name, and the name of this course.  All
work must be typed (unless otherwise stated), grammatically sound, paginated,
and stapled on the left upper corner.  Your work will be graded on the basis
of content, grammar, and adherence to the previously mentioned guidelines.
Work may be returned immediately for resubmission if you fail to meet these
criteria.  I expect students to write ethically.  Any information drawn from
works published by others must be appropriately cited within the body of your
work and then referenced in bibliography page.

_Quizzes_ :  I will give "open notebook" 10 point quizzes during the first 10
minutes of class at my discretion.  You may expect at least five quizzes
during this summer term.  All make-up quizzes are essay and are given at my
discretion.  To do well on these quizzes you should take good notes as you
completely read your assigned work.

_Examinations_ :  Students will take three examinations.  Examinations are
scheduled below but if we deviate from that schedule I will aim to give you
fair notice of rescheduling.  All make-up examinations are essay and are given
at my discretion.  The first examination will count 40 points, the second will
count 50 points and the third will count 60 points.  Examination study guides
will be posted on the course website.

_Learning Disabilities Policy_ :  It is UNA's policy to provide equal
opportunity in education.  If you have a disability that may prevent you from
meeting course requirements you should contact me within the first three class
meetings to file a Student Disability Statement.  Students must work with the
Office of Student Life (GUC, 202) and me to develop an alternative academic
plan.

**GRADING**

I employ the following grade point scale:  A=90-100%, B=80-89%, C=70-79%,
D=60-69%, and below 60%=F.  Your final grade represents a percentage
calculated by dividing the total number of points earned by the total number
of earned points possible.  For example, if you made 8/10 on a quiz, 7/10 on a
process assignment, and 45/50 on an exam, your grade would be 60/70 or 85.7%.
I will happily discuss grades in my office.  If you wish me to mail your final
grade for this course, submit a stamped, self-addressed envelope the day of
the third examination or e-mail me with your request.

**TENTATIVE COURSE OUTLINE AND ITINERARY **

(Make sure you have read chapter contents entirely before coming to class.
For example, you should have read all of Ch. 1 and Ch. 2 before coming to
class on July 3)

  _Date_                                          _Event/Subject_

July 2                                       Welcome, review of course
syllabus, preliminary  
discussion of Ch. 1.

July 3                                       Ch. 1 and begin Ch. 2

July 4                                       Independence Day - University is
closed

July 5                                       Ch.3

July 6                                       Ch.3 and begin Ch. 4

July 9                                       Ch. 4

July 10                                     Exam 1

July 11                                     Ch. 5

July 12                                     Ch. 5 and begin Ch. 6

July 13                                     Ch. 6 and begin Ch. 7

July 16                                     Ch. 7 and begin Ch. 8

July 17                                     Ch. 8

July 18                                     Exam 2

July 19                                     Ch. 9

July 20                                     Ch. 9 and begin Ch. 10

July 23                                     Ch. 10 and begin Ch. 11

July 24                                     Ch. 11 and begin Ch. 13

July 25                                     Ch. 13 and begin Ch. 15

July 26                                     Ch. 15

July 27                                     Final non-cumulative examination

**FINAL COMMENTS**  

You are encouraged to consult with me concerning any problems you may
encounter with lectures, readings, assignments, or examinations.

Return to the [Intro. Soc. Home Page](introsoc.htm)

