# CIS 492/PHIL492. Computers & Society.

## Spring 2001 Syllabus

**Location:**

     122 Nichols Hall, MWF 10:30-11:20

**Instructor:**

    [Michael Huth](http://www.cis.ksu.edu/~huth/home.html) ([` huth@cis.ksu.edu`](http://www.cis.ksu.edu/htbin/finger?huth@cis.ksu.edu))
    **Office:** 324B Nichols Hall, ph. 532-6350
    **Office Hours:** W 3:45-4:35 PM, T 10:30-11:20 AM, or by appointment

**Required Readings:**

     Readings will be assigned from 

  * "A Social History of American Technology", by Ruth Schwartz Cowan; Oxford University Press; and 
  * "Human Values and the Design of Computer Technology", edited by Batya Friedman; CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press. 
Other readings may also be assigned. Reading assignment and paper due dates
will be announced in class. Students are responsible for knowing which
readings have been assigned, when papers are due, and when tests will be
given.

**Course Objectives:**

     To aid students in the development of critical-thinking skills that can be successfully applied in ethical reasoning and in assessing and analyzing societal issues pertaining to technologies. We study the past, present, and future of (information) technologies and their connection to constitutional law (including property rights), policies, and ideologies. 

**Course Description:**

     In this course, we will investigate the impact of technologies, in particular information technologies, on societies and consider the philosophical, political, and moral issues such technologies and their supporting policies raise. Specifically, we plan to address: 

  * Ethical Reasoning; 
  * Human Values and the Design of Computer Technology; 
    * Conceptualizing Human Values in Design, 
    * Computers as Persons? -- Implications for Design, 
    * Practicing Value-Sensitive Design; 
  * Privacy; 
  * Predicting Technology: a Look into the Past; 
  * Intellectual Property Rights; 
  * Social History of American Technology; 
    * Colonialization, 
    * Industrialization, 
    * Twentieth-century technologies; 
  * Technologies and Weltanschauungen. 

**Requirements:**

     Students are required to attend all classes and read assigned texts prior to class. Class participation is expected. The formal requirements that will determine your total grade are: 

  * A written take-home mid-term exam on Ethical Reasoning  & Human Values and the Design of Computer Technology (30% of your total grade); 
  * a case study conducted in a team of three to four members, resulting in a presentation of your research findings in class; each team member is required to participate in that presentation and a hardcopy of the presentation has to be submitted beforehand; topics will be announced and assigned in the fourth week of this course; (30% of your total grade); 
  * a substantial final paper (minimum of ten pages) on a topic other than that of your group presentation; you need to get your topic approved by the instructor and are expected to hand in a prospectus/outline about two weeks before classes end; we will then talk about general guidelines for writing good papers (40% of your total grade). 

**Grading and Final Exam:** There will be no final exam, but the final paper
is due on the day the final exam would have been scheduled. Relation of
percentages to letter grades:

> 85%  <= A <= 100%, 75% <= B < 85%, 65% <= C < 75%, 55% <= D < 65%, 0% <= F <
55%.

**Policy statements:**

    

**Dropping this course:** If you decide not to complete this course, it is
your responsibility to drop---there are no ``automatic'' drops due to non-
attendance.

**Rights, responsibilities and resources --- Sexual and Racial Harassment**

"I believe that engineers must not only be the people who know how to do
things right, but also those who know the right things to do."

> > Dr. Joseph Bordogna  
>  Acting Deputy Director  
>  National Science Foundation

One purpose of your education is to help you develop skills, approaches, and
abilities that are necessary for effective teamwork, and for your success in
your profession and as a citizen. It is important that you understand your
rights and responsibilities regarding the University's Sexual and Racial
Harassment policies. (full text of the policies can be found on KSU's web site
at <http://www.ksu.edu/uauc/fhbook/fhxj.html>) If you experience any
situations, in or out of class, that seem inappropriate or that make you
uncomfortable, a list of resources and courses of action to assist you can be
found on the College of Engineering web site at [
http://www.engg.ksu.edu/students/statement-
harassment.htm](http://www.engg.ksu.edu/students/statement-harassment.htm).



**University Honor System:** Kansas State University has an Undergraduate
Honor System based on personal integrity which is presumed to be sufficient
assurance that in academic matters one's work is performed honestly and
without unauthorized assistance. Undergraduate students, by registration,
acknowledge the jurisdiction of the Undergraduate Honor System. The policies
and procedures of the Undergraduate Honor System apply to all full and part-
time students enrolled in undergraduate courses on-campus, off- campus, and
via distance learning. A prominent part of the Honor System is the inclusion
of the Honor Pledge which applies to all assignments, examinations, or other
course work undertaken by undergraduate students. The Honor Pledge is implied,
whether or not it is stated: "On my honor, as a student, I have neither given
nor received unauthorized aid on this academic work." A grade of XF can result
from a breach of academic honesty. An XF would be failure of the course with
the X on the transcript indicating failure as a result of a breach of academic
honesty. For more information, please visit the Honor System web page at:
<http://www.ksu.edu/honor>.

**Academic Accommodations for Students with Disabilities:** If you have any
condition, such as a physical or learning disability, which will make it
difficult for you to carry out the work as the instructor has outlined it or
which will require academic accommodations, please notify the instructor in
the first two weeks of the course.

**Notice of copyright for course syllabus and lectures:** Copyright 2001
(Michael Huth) as to this syllabus, all lectures and online course material.
During this course students are prohibited from selling notes to or being paid
for taking notes by any person or commercial firm without the express written
permission of the professor teaching this course.

* * *

Copyright 2001 [Michael Huth](http:home.html)
([huth@cis.ksu.edu]("http://www.cis.ksu.edu/htbin/finger?huth@cis.ksu.edu"))

