COURSE TITLE: GEO 120A: GEOLOGY OF CINCINNATI

Week-end Term III, Spring, 1998

2 or 3 credit-hours

**SYLLABUS**

GEO 120A (Geology of Cincinnati I) is basically one half of GEO 120 (Geology
of Cincinnati), which is a four-hour course that generally is offered in the
week-end format only every other year. Here, for your information, is the
course description of GEO 120 from the undergraduate catalogue: An overview of
introductory topics in geology with emphasis on the glacial history of
southwest Ohio, and on the landforms, geological structures, rocks, minerals,
and fossils found within the Greater Cincinnati area; an analysis of the
geological processes acting in the past and present and their effect on
cultural development of Cincinnati. Course is designed to accommodate students
with no college-level science background. Course satisfies general education
science requirement for non-science majors. Field trips will be scheduled.
Lecture, lab.

**COURSE OBJECTIVES OF GEO 120A:**

To give students an introduction to geology, with emphasis on the Cincinnati
Area, especially on the bedrock and fossils of the region. The course is
designed to accommodate students with no college-level science background. The
course satisfies the general education science requirement for non-science
majors. The course includes both field-trip and laboratory activities. The
class will visit fossil localities of the Tri-State area, and you will have
the opportunity to amass a good collection of local fossils (and get to keep
what you collect!).

**PREREQUISITES:** (none, except a lust for knowledge and a desire to learn)

**INSTRUCTOR:**

R. A. Davis (Ph.D., Professor)

  
office: SC 103C 'phone: ext. 4699 (full number: 244-4699)  
electronic-mail: r_a_davis@mail.msj.edu  
office hours: Monday afternoons, 1400-1600  
(If that is inconvenient, please, make an appointment for some other time
that's better for you.)

**COURSE MEETS:**

Unless otherwise announced, class meets from 1:00 until 4:50 p.m. on Saturday
afternoons, 18 April, 2 May, 16 May, 6 June, and 27 June. Plus, there is an
all-day field-trip on Saturday, 23 May.

For the 3-credit-hour option, there is a second all-day field-trip on
Saturday, 13 June 1997.

**BOOKS, _etc_.: REQUIRED:**

Davis, R. A. 1992. Cincinnati fossils. An elementary guide to the Ordovician
rocks and fossils in the Cincinnati, Ohio, region. Cincinnati Museum of
Natural History. 61 p. (ISBN 1-882151-00-3; paper-back)

United States Geological Survey. Burlington, Ky--Ohio, 7.5-minute quadrangle
map.

**BOOKS, _etc._ : RECOMMENDED, BUT NOT REQUIRED**:

Feldmann, Rodney M., and Merrianne Hackathorn, eds. 1997. Fossils of Ohio.
Ohio Division of Geological Survey, Bulletin 70. xx + 577 p. (ISBN
0-931079-05-5; paper-back).

[Fenneman, Nevin M. 1916. Geology of Cincinnati and
vicinity](http://ucaswww.mcm.uc.edu/geology/crest/fenneman/index.html).
Geological Survey of Ohio Bulletin, ser. 4, no. 19, 207 p. This work recently
went out-of-print, but copies commonly are available in used-book shops.
Moreover, the entire work is available on-line (just click on Fenneman's
name).

Ford, John P. 1972. Bedrock geology of the Addyston quadrangle and part of the
Burlington quadrangle, Hamilton County, Ohio. Ohio Division of Geological
Survey, Report of Investigations 83, 1 sheet.

Haneberg, William C., Mary M. Riestenberg, Richard E. Pohana, and Sharon C.
Diekmeyer. 1992. Cincinnati's geologic environment: A trip for secondary-
school teachers. Ohio Division of Geological Survey, Guidebook No. 9, iii + 23
p.

Hannibal, Joseph T., and Richard Arnold Davis. 1992. Guide to the building
stones of downtown Cincinnati: A Walking tour. Ohio Division of Geological
Survey, Guidebook No. 7, 44 p.

Potter, Paul Edwin. 1996. Exploring the geology of the Cincinnati/Northern
Kentucky Region. Kentucky Geological Survey Special Publication 22, Series XI,
(vii) + 115 p.

Because of the high cost of books, I deliberately have not asked you to buy
any general geology books or historical geology books, even though one or more
might be handy to help you learn about the topics that we will cover. I have
asked, however, that some such books be put on [reserve](reserve.htm) in the
College Library for your use. In addition, I have asked the Book-store to have
on hand some copies of the book I used in GEO115 (Earth Science) this year:

Plummer, Charles C., and David McGeary. 1996. Physical geology (seventh
edition). Wm. C. Brown, Dubuque, Iowa. xix + 539 p. (ISBN 0-697-28734-3;
paper-back). (study-guide: Tuttle, Esther, Sherwood D. Tuttle, and Steven D.
Carey. 1996. Student Study Guide to accompany "Physical Geology" Seventh
Edition. Plummer/McGeary. Wm. C. Brown, Dubuque, Iowa. ix + 193 p. [ISBN
0-697-26678-8, spiral].)

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS, _etc._ :**

"Lecture" 40%; Other 60%.

Class-sessions will cover the main points of assigned readings and laboratory
work. Students will be expected to turn in assignments at the start of each
class-session. The assignments may involve any or all of the following:
reading, some writing of short answers, short essays, and so on. There will be
one or more interpretative reports relating to field-trip or field-trips.
There will be a final-report/term-paper due at the end of the course.

**METHOD OF EVALUATION/TESTING CRITERIA AND VALUE:**

Pre-assignment.......................10%

Tests......................................30%

Home-work assignments.........30%

Final-report/term-paper...........30%

**ATTENDANCE, _etc._ :**

College policy with respect to week-end classes requires attendance. This is,
of course, because each session is one-fifth of the course. Requirements
aside, folks who attend class almost always do better in a course than do
those who do not attend class.

There will be material presented in class that will not be in the texts. It
may well be that some material presented in class will differ from that in the
texts. In those cases, what is presented in class has precedence over that in
the texts.

If you miss a class due to illness or genuine emergency, bring suitable
documentation (for example, a letter from a medical doctor) and consult with
me.

**OTHER IMPORTANT DATES AND TIMES:**

As you know, Sunday, 3 May, is the last day you may drop a class without
record; after that, at least a "W" must be assigned. The absolute last day on
which a class may be dropped is Sunday, 7 June; after that, a letter-grade
must be assigned.

**OTHER INFORMATION:**

**Reading assignments:**

Because you are mature adults, I will not make specific reading assignments to
all the material in all the texts. After all, authors and editors go to
considerable time and trouble to compile tables-of-contents and indices for
their books. You should come to class familiar with everything available in
the texts on the announced subject or subjects of the class.

There may be specific reading assignments in sources other than (and in
addition to) the course texts.

**Field-trips:**

Depending on whether you are taking the course for two or three credit-hours,
one or both field-trips are required.

On field-trip days, you should report to the specified location suitably
attired and equipped for the announced subject and nature of the field-trip.
Radios, telephones, other communication devices, and such like are not
permitted on field-trips without the prior, specific permission of the
instructor.

Here is a list of items you should bring:

      * hand-lens
      * a copy of the "fossil book" (Davis, R. A. 1992. Cincinnati fossils. An elementary guide to the Ordovician rocks and fossils in the Cincinnati, Ohio, region)
      * supplies for marking and wrapping specimens collected a. paper-bags, plastic-bags, or both, newspaper, paper-napkins, tissue-paper, _etc._ , fine-point, water-proof marker 
      * a bag or pack in which to carry everything
      * of course, whatever you need to take notes

You also may want to bring:

      * a compass (the directional kind)
      * a water-bottle or canteen
      * binoculars, _etc._
      * work-gloves
      * maps of Ohio, Kentucky, and Indiana
      * sun-screen lotion
      * insect repellent
      * sun-glasses

As far as attire goes, you should consider the following:

      * long sleeves--to protect you from the sun (Skin-cancer is no joke!)
      * long legs--to protect you from sun and abrasion
      * sturdy shoes, preferably over the ankle, with a sole that provides good traction; field-boots are best
      * hat, with a broad brim all the way around--again, to protect you from the sun 
      * rain gear, if weather bad or uncertain

If you have the metabolism of a shrew, you might want to bring snack items.

In general, there are no toilet-facilities at field-trip localities.

**Grading:**

Because information on any given subject is cumulative, thus also will be any
test we have; however, unless otherwise announced, each will emphasize
material covered since the previous test.

Dictionaries and other such reference works are not allowed to be used during
tests, except by prior arrangements with the instructor.

If an assignment is not turned in on time, whatever score is tallied will be
halved, because of lateness.

This is not a course in the English language. Hence, errors in grammar,
spelling, etc. will not cause a deduction of points otherwise due. An
exception to this is names and technical terms in the subject-matter of the
course: You will be expected to spell these correctly.

It is only fair to point out that well-written, grammatically correct material
is much more likely to put the instructor in a pleasant mood for assigning
points to work being graded.

**Academic honesty:**

The goal of this course is to add to your individual knowledge, perceptions,
skills, etc. in the area of the earth sciences. Thus, in order to evaluate
your, individual progress, I need to be certain that what I see of your work
really is yours.

The College has adopted the policy on academic honesty printed in the College
Catalogue. Please, familiarize yourself with it.

With respect to this course, cheating is not allowed. A student caught
cheating will be assigned a failing grade for the course, and I will recommend
to the College that suitable other disciplinary action be taken.

**Tape-recording class-sessions:**

Tape-recording of class-sessions without prior, specific permission of the
instructor is not allowed. Even when such permission is given, the student
must agree that the recordings are for the personal use of the student and
will not be shared with anyone else either by means of the original tapes,
copies of the tapes, or any kind of transcription of the tapes. Moreover, the
student must agree to erase or otherwise destroy the tape-recorded matter upon
the completion of the course or upon withdrawal from the course.

**Materials needed:**

In addition to the books, etc., listed previously, you will need to have or
obtain certain other supplies and equipment. Some of them are listed here, and
we will discuss others during the first class-session.

      * pocket-knife (the blade of which you won't mind getting scratched)
      * two sharp pencils ("lead" not too hard)
      * good eraser for same
      * protractor (circular and transparent [clear] preferred))
      * straight edge with metric and English units (30-cm length)
      * graph paper (English units, 10 divisions to the inch)
      * In addition, you will need to have a special kind of magnifying device called a hand-lens. (Hand-lenses come in a wide variety of prices and, hence, quality; I suggest that you not buy a hand-lens until we have talked about them on the first day of class. If you do want to acquire one before that, personally, the one I like best is called a Hastings Triplet and is made by Bausch & Lomb, but they cost in the vicinity of $30 to $40. Another one you will see available is the Coddington; personally, I don't think it is worth the $20-$25 you would have to pay for it. It is possible to get an acceptable hand-lens for well less than that, but you have to know how to test it before you buy it.)
      * If you have a compass (the kind that points north), bring it, but you don't need to go out and buy one, unless you really want to do so.
      * Please, do NOT go out and buy a geology hammer, chisels, and so on, before we talk about these in class. (If you already own such equipment, you also should use suitable safety-goggles.)

[To GEO 120 Home-Page](index.htm)

_l ast modified: 14 May 1998_

