 St.  Lawrence University  
 Department of Government

**_Government 290A:   Theoretical Perspectives on 20th Century U.S. Foreign
Relations_**

Professor Karl K. Schonberg  
 Spring 2002

Office Hours: 208 Hepburn.  Monday and Thursday, 10:30-12:00 and by
appointment.  
Phone: office: 229-5434  
E-mail: [kschonberg@mail.stlawu.edu](mailto:kschonberg@mail.stlawu.edu)

**Course Objectives:** This course will enhance students' grounding in the
various methodologies of political science, especially as they apply to
international relations.   It will do so by examining historical and
contemporary American Foreign policy through the lens of International
Relations theory.  Each week, one historical period or contemporary problem in
U.S. foreign relations will be considered with reference to a particular body
of relevant I.R. theory.  The application of social science theory and methods
to historical evidence will refine both students' knowledge of foreign policy
issues, and their ability to use the tools of political science to understand
these subjects.

**Requirements:** Grading will be based on: four written **reactions to
assigned readings (35%)** of roughly 3-4 pages each; a **research paper
(35%)** of roughly 18-20 pages; an initial **outline of that paper with thesis
statement and list of sources (10%)** ; and a 10-15 minute oral **presentation
of research (5%)** at the end of the semester.   Finally, **class
participation (15%)** , is expected to be informed, thoughtful, and frequent.
At a minimum, I expect you to be in class, having completed and carefully
considered the assigned reading, and prepared to engage in discussion.

**Texts:** The following required texts are available for purchase at the
bookstore:

  *  Wesley M. Bagby, _America's Foreign Relations Since World War I_.   Oxford, 1999.
  *   G. John Ikenberry, _American Foreign Policy: Theoretical Essays_ , Fourth Edition.  Longman, 2002.
  *   Larry Madaras, ed., _Clashing Views on Controversial Issues in American History Since 1945_.   Dushkin, 2001.
  *   Diane E. Schmidt, _Writing in Political Science: A Practical Guide_ , Second Edition.  Longman, 2000.

 Students will also be expected to read a major newspaper daily; the _[New
York Times](http://www.nytimes.com)_ is available at the bookstore, though you
are encouraged to read the leading national newspaper of your choice, in print
or online.

    Note that additional resources on the internet for each of the topics discussed in class can be found by clicking on the weekly subject headings below.

* * *

January 21-24: _[Realism and the Background of U.S. Foreign
Relations](http://it.stlawu.edu/~ksch/290links1.html)_  
 Bagby, 1-17.  
 Ikenberry, 14-58.

January 29-31: _[World War I and the Versailles
Settlement](http://it.stlawu.edu/~ksch/290links2.html)_  
 Bagby, 18-49.  
 Ikenberry, 238-296.

February 5-7: _[Neutrality and Intervention in the Second World
War](http://it.stlawu.edu/~ksch/290links3.html)_  
 Bagby, 50-136.  
 Ikenberry, 138-167.  
 Madaras, 2-25.

**Short Paper #1 must be submitted on or before February 5.**

February 12-14: _[Origins of the Cold
War](http://it.stlawu.edu/~govt/290links5.html)_  
 Bagby, 137-179.  
 Ikenberry, 84-136; 168-187.  
 Madaras, 26-47; 74-97.

February 19-21: _[Eisenhower and
Dulles](http://it.stlawu.edu/~ksch/290links6.html)_  
 Bagby, 180-217.  
 Ikenberry, 187-202.  
 Madaras, 48-73; 122-143.  
 Schmidt, 1-10; 19-51.

February 26-28: _[Kennedy's Cold
War](http://it.stlawu.edu/~ksch/290links7.html)_  
 Bagby, 218-238.  
 Carol Cohn, "Sex and Death in the Rational World of the Defense
Intellectual."  To be provided..  
 Ikenberry, 396-441.  
 Madaras, 146-161.  
 Robert Dean, "Masculinity as Ideology:  John F. Kennedy and the Domestic
Politics of Foreign  
    Policy."  _Diplomatic History_ ,  Winter 1998.  On reserve, and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html).   
Film: _Dr. Strangelove_.   Monday, February 25 on campus cable.

**Short paper #2 must be submitted on or before February 26.**

March 5-7: _[Johnson and Vietnam](http://it.stlawu.edu/~ksch/290links8.html)_  
 Bagby, 239-260.  
 Ikenberry, 506-516; 544-572  
 Madaras, 203-223.  
 Lawrence R. Jacobs and Robert Y. Shapiro, "Lyndon Johnson, Vietnam, and
Public Opinion."  
    _Presidential Studies Quarterly_ , September 1999.  On reserve, and available online   
    through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html). 

March 12-14: _[Nixon, Ford, and
Detente](http://it.stlawu.edu/~ksch/290links9.html)_  
 Bagby, 261-296.  
 Ikenberry, 320-344.  
 Madaras, 248-270.  
 Henry Kissinger, "Between the Old Left and the New Right." _Foreign Affairs_
, May/June 1999.  
    On reserve, and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html). 

    **March 16-24: Spring Break**

March 26-28: _[Carter and Human
Rights](http://it.stlawu.edu/~ksch/290links10.html)_  
 Bagby, 297-319.  
 Ikenberry, 298-320.  
 Schmidt, 52-94.  
 Patrick Tyler, "The (Ab)normalization of U.S. Chinese Relations."  Foreign
Affairs, Sept./Oct. 1999.  
    On reserve, and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html).   
 Andrew Deroche, "Standing Firm for Principles:  Jimmy Carter and Zimbabwe."
_Diplomatic History_ ,  
    Fall 1999.  On reserve, and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html). 

**Short paper #3 must be submitted on or before March 26.**

April 2-4: _[Reagan and the Evil
Empire](http://it.stlawu.edu/~ksch/290links11.html)_  
 Bagby, 320-355.  
 Madaras, 272-295..  
 William D. Jackson, "Soviet Reassessment of Ronald Reagan, 1985-1988."
_Political Science Quarterly_ ,  
    Winter 1998-1999.  On reserve, and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html).   
Film:  _The Day After_.   Monday, April 1 on campus cable.

**April 2:   Research paper outline with thesis statement and list of sources
due**

April 9-11: _[Bush I and Clinton](http://it.stlawu.edu/~ksch/290links12.html)_  
 Bagby, 356-403.  
 Ikenberry, 516-544.  
 Madaras, 332-359.  
 Stephen Walt, "Two Cheers for Clinton's Foreign Policy." _Foreign Affairs_ ,
March/April 2000.  
    On reserve, and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html). 

April 16-18: __Bush II and the Future of U.S. Foreign Policy__  
 Madaras, 360-383.  
 Ikenberry, 573-614.  
 Additional Readings TBA.  
 Schmidt, 94-142; 199-226.

**Short paper #4 must be submitted on or before April 16.**

April 23-25:  Research Presentations

April 30-May 2: Research Presentations

**Final Paper Due:   Saturday May 6, 4:30 p.m. in Hepburn 208**

* * *

**Class Paper Guidelines**

 For your paper due May 6 you will be expected to relate an issue of your
choice in contemporary or historical US foreign policy to one of the
theoretical perspectives examined in this class, or one of your own choosing.
This format is suggested as a guide; beyond this the topic of the paper is
your choice, and I encourage you to examine an issue that interests you in a
creative way.  I suggest strongly that you follow at least one issue (two or
three would be better) in the newspaper, and as you read the class texts,
consider which of the theoretical perspectives offered seems best able to
explain the course of world events in the cases you follow.

 Consult with me early and often as you consider possible topics and begin to
write.  I can't tell you what to write about, but I will give you my opinion
of ideas you may have, and possibly suggest other approaches to the topic you
want to discuss.  I'll be happy to meet with you during my office hours or by
appointment for this purpose, but please feel free to call me at home as well
if you have a question or idea you'd like to discuss.  This assignment
requires you to assert your thoughts and opinions about a particular topic in
the news in a knowledgeable way, and to support your argument with substantial
research.  In many cases, you will find it useful to begin your research by
consulting periodicals like the _[Economist](http://www.economist.com)_ ,
_[Foreign Affairs](http://www.foreignaffairs.org)_ or _[Foreign
Policy](http://www.foreignpolicy.com)_.   Significant evidence from a variety
of scholarly sources (journals and texts) is expected.

 As you begin to write, your first and foremost concern should be, "what is my
argument?"  Do not start to type until you know what your paper is about and
you have a clearly formulated thesis statement.  This should be one sentence,
stating clearly and concisely the point your paper will be trying to prove.
This statement should appear early in your paper--ideally in the first
paragraph--and every sentence that follows should be intended to prove it.
Outline your argument carefully and in detail before you begin writing, and
after letting the reader know what you intend to prove, let them know how you
intend to prove it in a few sentences.  Do not spend time on general
introductory or concluding paragraphs which are only loosely related to your
thesis.

 Proofread your essay carefully before you submit it, or better still, have
someone else read it and critique it.  No matter how well you write, any paper
will benefit from a trip to the writing center.  Note that proofreading and
spell-checking are not the same thing, and both are required.  You are not
being graded primarily on style, but a disjointed, muddled presentation can
very definitely make your argument unclear and ineffective, for which you will
lose points.

 Provide citations if you directly quote a source, paraphrase an argument
found elsewhere, or refer to factual information which is not common
knowledge.  Citations may be parenthetical in the paper's text, footnotes, or
endnotes.  A recommended form for citations will be provided, though form is
your choice as long as it is consistent throughout the paper.  Citations
should include (or refer to a bibliographical reference which includes) the
author's full name, title of the work, publisher and date of publication, and
page number.  Citations from the Internet should provide, in a footnote or
endnote, the long site name listed in the location box of your browser.

 Your paper will be graded on the coherence of your argument and the
effectiveness with which it is asserted and proven.  It will not be graded on
the amount of material you include.  These papers are expected to be 18 to 20
pages in length, but this is only a guideline, not a requirement.  If you feel
you have made your case concisely and effectively, do not feel compelled to
write more, make the fonts or margins bigger, or otherwise change your paper
to get onto the next page.  Use 12 point type, and one inch margins on the
top, bottom, and both sides of the page.  Number your pages, and start
counting with the first page of text.

 Papers must be submitted by Monday May 6 at 4:30 p.m.; papers submitted after
that time will be considered late.  Extensions will be given only in cases of
very serious illness or family emergency.  Computer problems are not an
acceptable excuse.  No extensions will be given on May 6 under any
circumstances.  Late papers will be penalized one half grade (.5 on the four-
point scale ) per day late.  
    
    
  

_Guidelines for 3-4 Page Reactions to Course Readings_

 You will be expected to hand in four short papers reacting to assigned course
readings over the course of the semester.  Only one paper may be submitted for
credit on or before February 5; one more between then and February 26; one
more between February 26 and March 26; and a fourth on or before April 16.
The first of these papers must be submitted no later than Tuesday February 5;
the second by Tuesday February 26; the third by Tuesday March 26; and the
fourth by Tuesday, April 16.

 These papers should be roughly 3-4 pages (double-spaced) in length.  You are
not required to refer to any additional research beyond the assigned class
readings for that week, but you may find it useful to use outside sources, and
you are encouraged to do so.  As with the longer paper described above, they
should begin with a focused, coherent thesis and be organized throughout to
prove that point.

 In these papers, students may (but are not required to) 1. examine and
critique the perspective of one or more of the authors being considered; 2\.
examine and critique one or more aspect of U. S. foreign policy in the era
being considered--even if that policy is not a major focus of the assigned
reading; 3. examine and critique the relevance and utility of the body of I.
R. theory presented in the reading.  In any case, these papers should reflect
a careful examination of the _entire_ reading assignment for that week, and
should argue a point which reflects the student's agreement, disagreement, or
expansion upon some aspect of that material.   Think of this assignment as an
invitation to ask what you consider to be a useful discussion question about a
given week's topic, and to compose your own answer to that question.  You are
also strongly encouraged to use this assignment to criticize points made in
the texts with which you disagree.

 The structure and composition of these essays is very much your choice, and
you should make every effort to think and write creatively about the topics
raised in the readings.  You should also feel free to contact me at any point
before these essays are submitted with questions or ideas you'd like to
discuss.

 These papers must be handed in at the beginning of class on the _Tuesday_ of
the week in which the reading assignment you are critiquing is to be discussed
(if you wish to write a paper on the subject to be discussed in the week April
2-4, for example, you must submit that paper on Tuesday, April 2).   Late
papers will be penalized .5 per day late, as described above.  The standards
for editing and style described above also apply.

