**HIST388-001-01C  
Hunger and Poverty in Market Economies  
**001 LEC TR 3-4:30 COLL 314  
David Ludden  
215B College Hall  
Office Hours: T Th 1-3  
 [homepage](http://www.sas.upenn.edu/~dludden/)  
email: [instructor](mailto:dludden@sas.upenn.edu), [course
listserv](mailto:HIST388-001-01C@lists.upenn.edu) **  

* * *

** This course fulfills requirements for [Quantitative Data
Analysis](http://www.college.upenn.edu/curriculum/requirements/quantitative.html),
Distribution I: Society, [Economic History
Concentration](http://www.history.upenn.edu/undergrad/econ-hist.html),
[Nutrition Minor](http://www.nursing.upenn.edu/nutrition/) and 1CU
[WATU](http://www.sas.upenn.edu/writing/) (optional)  

* * *

[Data Links](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist188/course/h188link.html) |
[Data Sets](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/h388datasets.htm) |
[Library Course
Guide](http://www.library.upenn.edu/vanpelt/guides/courses/hist/hist388-001.ludden.html)
|
[Bibliographies](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist188/course/h188bibliographies.html)
|  [Online
Reading](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist188/course/h188reading.html) |
[Online
tutorials](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist188/tutorial/h188tutorframeset.htm)  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
[Complete Collection of Tables and
Charts](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/Hist388imageframeset.html)

* * *

[old notes and
syllabi](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist188/course/h188frameset.html)
**jump to weeks/course outline** |  
---  
** **wk1 Getting Started.  
 wk2 History and the Big Picture  
 wk3 Global Conditions and Trends  
 wk4 Inequality in the World Economy  
 wk5 Inequality in Food Systems.  
 wk6 Gender and Entitlement  
 wk7 War and Disaster  
 wk8 Health Environments  
 wk9 1943-4 Famine in Bengal.  
 wk10 1974 Famine in Bangladesh  
 wk11 Famines in Africa  
 wk12 Spatial Analysis in Asia, Africa, and US  
 wk13 Searching for Solutions: Policy and Activism  
 wk14 Student Projects.  
  
This course examines the historical operation of markets economies in social
environments characterized by chronic poverty, malnutrition, and sickness; by
deep structural inequality; and by periodic outbreaks of famine. It
concentrates on empirical evidence, on case studies, and on quantitative
analysis. Case studies come from Asia, Africa, and the US. Our goal is to
develop basic, practical research skills in data analysis, information
science, and social and economic history.

There are no exams. Instead, small assignments are due every week. They total
eighteen and they vary in content. They include 150 word essays on the weekly
reading, two five-page essays on assigned questions, data analysis exercises,
and a final project whose content and format can vary according to student
skills and interests.

Students seeking WATU credit must revise and resubmit the first and second
five-page papers after consultation with the instructor.

**Students are encouraged to put all assignments** on an individual course web
page. Making this page is optional but highly recommended to enhance the value
of the class. Students who elect to make a web page _must do it in the first
three weeks of class_. They will then put all their assignments on their web
page. This will constitute their online course dossier. They will get extra
credit for their effort.

**Students who do not make web pages must prepare a dossier** in the form of a
file-folder with their name at the top, which will include all their
assignments.

**The course officially ends on the last day of classes, Monday, Dec. 10. Our
last day of class is the previous Thursday, Dec. 6, when we will have final
discussion of student projects.** All assignments must be completed and either
mounted on a student web site or handed in to the instructor in the dossier by
5PM Dec. 10 in History Dept mailbox.

**The online syllabus is the official syllabus. Check it regularly** for
updates and revisions. Please note that class attendance and student
preparedness for class discussions will count in the calculation of final
grades. Assignments will be posted on the course web page but all discussions
of assignments occur only in class, ONLY IN CLASS, _not on email, after class,
or during office hours_. Questions about assignments must be raised in class.

**Things to Acquire**

**1\. Books** at House of Our Own, 3920 Spruce Street.

> Liz Young, _World Hunger_ , Routledge, 1997, $17.00

>

> Amartya Sen, _Poverty and Famines: An Essay on Entitlement and Deprivation_
, Oxford, 1984, $21.00

**2\. Bulkpack** at Campus Copy, 3900 block Walnut Street.
([Contents](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist188/course/bulkpack.htm))

**3\. Software** available either free or at low cost personal acquistion, and
also available at computer labs. Freeware:
[Eudora](http://www.upenn.edu/computing/product/net/eudora.html), [Acrobat
Reader](http://www.upenn.edu/computing/product/net/acrobat.html), [Netscape
Communicator](http://www.upenn.edu/computing/product/net/communicator.html)
and [Navigator](http://www.upenn.edu/computing/product/net/netscape.html),
[File Transfer Program
(FTP)](http://www.upenn.edu/computing/product/net/wsftp.html). Word 2000 and
Excel 2000 are at the Computer Connection. All these programs plus SYSTAT are
also installed in [computer
labs](http://www.upenn.edu/computing/view/labs/lablist.html). A free trial
download of SYSTAT may be available on the [SYSTAT
homepage](http://www.spss.com/software/science/SYSTAT/).

> **NOTE:** Penn's Computing Resource Center is a walk-in service facility
located in Suite 202 Sansom West (Grad Tower B), 3650 Chestnut Street.
Entrance is located off Steve Murray's Way (mid-block between 36th and 37th on
Chestnut). Please be sure to bring your PennCard for access to the building.
The CRC is open Monday through Friday, from 1:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m.

>

> * * *

>

>> student web pages (should open in this same frame):

>>

>> Mary Braun  
>  <http://www.sas.upenn.edu/~mbraun/hist388/>  
>  Sue Casey  
>  <http://www.sas.upenn.edu/~sucasey/h388.html>  
>  Leslie Dubek  
>  <http://www.sas.upenn.edu/~ldubeck/hist388.html>  
>  Phillip J.F. Geheb  
>  <http://www.sas.upenn.edu/~geheb/History%20388/home/main.htm>  
>  Andrew Kirkpatrick  
>  <http://members.aol.com/skaoscar/Index.html>  
>  Lindsey Matthews  
>  <http://www.seas.upenn.edu/~lmathews/>  
>  Jessica Naylor  
>  <http://www.sas.upenn.edu/~jnaylor>  
>  Ryan O'Grady <http://futures.wharton.upenn.edu/~ryanwo/hunger.html>  
>  Jolene Sloat  
>  <http://www.sas.upenn.edu/~jolene>  
>  Ren Shankaran  
>  <http://www.sas.upenn.edu/~ranjani/hist388ren.html>  
>  Justin Waluch  
>  <http://futures.wharton.upenn.edu/~jwaluch/history388.html>  
>  Margaret Watt <http://www.sas.upenn.edu/~mwatt/HIST388/index.htm>  
>  
> ---  
>  
>  
>

week 1.

**Getting Started**

Sept 6

Introduction to the course. **Buy** Young and Sen books **.** Don't by
anything else yet. Gather information for making your own homepage. **Friends
are** **your most valuable resource**. Find one to help you. For help on
terminology, see [basic glossary](h188message1.htm), course tutorial [glossary
page,](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist188/tutorial/tutorial-2.html) and
[internet glossary](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/internetglossary.htm)
[(source)](http://www.matisse.net/files/glossary.html). [Penn homepage
tutorial](http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/help/homepage.html) is a good place to
begin. Also check out the [Course
Tutorials.](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist188/tutorial/h188tutorframeset.htm)
See [technology resources](http://www.sas.upenn.edu/computing/students/) for
information on services available to students, and if you have any questions,
call 573-HELP or email [help@sas.upenn.edu](mailto:help@sas.upenn.edu).

* * *

**top**

week 2.  
**History and the Big Picture**

Sept 11:  
**Hunger, Poverty, and Wealth**

**Read** Young, _World Hunger_ , pp. 1-37 and [World hunger is a
paradox](http://db.uia.org/cgi-shl/oicgi/inet_uiaf?DD=PR&DR=B0262&) [enter as
guest] in [Encyclopedia of World Problems and
Potential](http://www.uia.org/uiapubs/pubency.htm) a service provided by the
[Union of International Associations](http://www.uia.org/). Browse these web
sites. Basic [FAO Data](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/faohunger.htm).

**Lecture:** Hunger, poverty, and the politics of knowledge in the US. The
importance and difficulty of learning about deprivation and inequality, and of
asking questions about why and how they are being reproduced locally and
worldwide amidst economic prosperity and development. History as a [way of
seeing](http://www.sas.upenn.edu/~dludden/h11motto.htm) the present through
the past. Major approaches to the problem of hunger: modernization theory,
ecology, and class analysis. A tour of the course website and related
resources.

Sept 13:  
**The History of Hunger as a Social and Political Problem**

**Assignment #1. Write** a short paragraph explaining why you took this course
and what you most want to learn in it. This will help us to begin designing
your final assignment. **Write** 150 words on the paradoxical character of
world hunger today and what this paradox suggests for the study of history.

**Extra Credit Assignment.** Make your own H388 **** web page. [See tutorial
lesson 3](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist188/tutorial/tutorial-3.html).
[Send me](mailto:dludden@sas.upenn.edu) email with a link to your web page.
Post all assignments on your web page. **** List assignments by their due date
on your website. you can either put all assignments on one page with internal
links for each assignment or make separate pages for each assignment with
links from your main page. _Students can meet with instructor to discuss web-
page issues during ffice hours: T Th 1-3_.

**Lecture:** The history of hunger as a problem. Premodern approaches. The
emergence of modern approaches during the early development of capitalism. The
context of the British Empire and the shock of nineteenth century famines in
Ireland and India. Adam Smith
([website](http://www.utdallas.edu/~harpham/adam.htm)) Thomas Malthus
([onmalthus.htm](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist188/course/onmalthus.htm)),
and "natural law" approaches. National wealth production as the solution to
poverty among individuals and groups afflicted with poverty who pose political
problem for modern state elites. The end of feudalism and emergence of modern
poverty in market economies. Urban and rural dimensions. Hunger and poverty as
problems _among others_ whose solution needs to fit into the broader
priorities and interests of modern states. The bourgeois and middle class
search for solutions to the poverty of others. Market economies as social
environments for thinking about the problems of hunger and poverty.

* * *

**top**

week 3.  
**Global Conditions and Trends**

Sept 18:  
**Current Conditions**

**Read** Young, _World Hunger,_ pp. 36-63, and online Peter Uvin, "[The State
of World Hunger](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/hunger00.pdf)" (PDF
file, can be downloaded or printed){Source: Brown University [World Hunger
Program.](http://www.brown.edu/Departments/World_Hunger_Program/hungerweb/data.html))
Note concepts and measures: food shortage, food poverty, food deprivation.

**Assignment #2.** **Write** 250 words on key ideas in the readings. Pay
attention to _but do not reproduce_ Young's  "key ideas."

**In class assignment:** Hist388 is part of a larger effort to develop new
empirical knowledge about hunger to inform public discussion. Locally, we work
with the Greater Philadelphia Coalition Against Hunger to study what is
technically now called "food security" in this region. A Working Group on Food
Security Research meets periodically to consider research currently underway.
The Working Group meets today. I will attend. Anyone interesting in working
with the Coalition on this and other projects should let me know.

I may be a few minutes late arriving to class. Before I arrive, I would like
you focus your attention on the Peter Uvin essay "State of World Hunger."
Appoint someone to write on the board the class collective answers to the
following question \-- it will take the form of a list: What measures does
Uvin use to describe the state of world hunger? Think about units of analysis.
Time frame. Comparison. This is the first of a series of efforts that we will
engage to address the problem of measuring hunger. Record the list of answers.
Put it in your dossier/webpage. This is **Assignment #3**. **  
  
Lecture:** Measurement in the evolution of economic systems. Development as a
solution to hunger and poverty. Instituting development regimes. Political
conflict over the process of development. Charles Darwin, social evolution,
cultures of poverty, backwardness and enlightenment. Missionaries and
imperialists. The American South, Africa, and uplift. Teleology, delayed
development, obstacles, and inequalities. Food systems in the progression of
economic systems: subsistence, technology, and measures of productivity.

Sept 20:  
**Long-term Trends**

**Read:** Louis Uchitelle, "[World Economy Is as Interconnected Today as in
1913](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/uchitelle.htm),"
([source](http://www.mtholyoke.edu/acad/intrel/intercon.htm)) and Pritchett,
"[Divergence, Big Time](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/pritchett.htm)"
([source](http://wbln0018.worldbank.org/Research/workpapers.nsf/5ade973899c8608685256731006834d5/3448458aa513e024852567e00055e6b9?OpenDocument))
and "[Patterns of Economic
Growth](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/pritchett2.htm)."
([source](http://wbln0018.worldbank.org/Research/workpapers.nsf/5ade973899c8608685256731006834d5/c25cb08bb270504e85256855004fbbb4?OpenDocument)).
"[The Effect of Growth on
Distribution](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/kuznets1.htm)" ([source
with links](http://www.worldbank.org/poverty/inequal/econ/distrib.htm)).
BULKPACK: Manuel Castells, "The Rise of the Fourth World: Informational
Capitalism, Poverty, and Social Exclusion," from _End of Millennium_ ,
Blackwell Publishers, 1998, pp. 70-165. Mark Weisbrot, et al, ["The Scorecard
on Globalization 1980-2000: Twenty Years of Diminished
Progress."](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/Scorecard.pdf)
([Source](http://www.cepr.net/globalization/Scorecard.pdf)) Ref: check out
[World Bank research online](http://econ.worldbank.org/). Note: reinforcing
the growth imperative is a continuous project. See [World Bank on Sept 11,
2001](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/growth_imperative.htm)
([source](http://www.worldbank.org/developmentnews/stories/html/100101a.htm))

Additional reading for anyone interested in histories of national wealth and
poverty in the modern world ecoonomy, David Landes, _The Wealth and Poverty of
Nations_ explains the big-picture global economic disparities with ideas
pitched directly into contemporary development debates. Here is a [long
review](http://www.j-bradford-delong.net/Econ_Articles/Reviews/landes.html)
(source URL) and stuff on [Gunder Frank and David Landes
debate](http://csf.colorado.edu/mail/wsn/98.III/0106.html)

**Assignment #4**. Make a simple table in Excel using UNICEF data in our
course [data file](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist188/course/h188data.html).
[Click here](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/unicef2.txt) to open basic
UNICEF data file. Save it in ASCII .txt format; open it in Excel. **Make** a
chart from this table. Use the Excel [online
tutorial](http://isds.bus.lsu.edu/cvoc/learn/introit/excel/index.htm) and use
it as needed. Examples of the simplicity that I have in mind for this
assignment are these two [on income
inequality](http://www.sas.upenn.edu/~dludden/inequality3.htm) and these
[onmalthus.htm](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist188/course/onmalthus.htm).
Here is [great chart](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/GNPlifeExp.gif) by
Leslie Dubek, H388 Fall 2001

* * *

**top**

week 4.  
**Inequality in the World Economy**

Sept 25:  
**Global Inequality as a Structural Relationship**

Read: Read Young, _World Hunger_ , pp. 64-88; Cheryl Christensen, "World
Hunger: A Structural Approach," from _The Global Political Economy of Food_ ,
edited by Raymond F. Hopkins and Donald J. Puchala, The University of
Wisconsin Press, 1978, pp. 171-200.

Sept 27:  
**Measuring Hunger and Poverty Globally**  

**Read:** Adam Wagstaff and Naoko Watanabe **"**[Socioeconomic Inequalities in
Child Malnutrition in the Developing
World](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/WagstaffWatanabe.pdf) **" **
([Source](http://econ.worldbank.org/docs/1189.pdf)) . Angus Deaton, "Counting
the world's poor: problems and possible solutions." [PDF file on SAS
server](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/worldpov3b.pdf).
[Source](http://www.wws.princeton.edu/~rpds/worldpov3b.pdf). **Study:**[Human
Development Indicators](http://www.undp.org/hdro/indicators.html)

**Assignment #5. Bring to class** FIVE talking points with which to discuss
the measurements that are used to calculate the state of world hunger today.
IMAGINE that a student has come up to you on the street and asked you, "What
is the state of world hunger?" Then imagine yourself trying to explain the
various measures that are used to answer the question. Select and categorize
kinds of measurements. Think about the implications of their respective "bias"
or "specialized myopia." Consider specifically the kind of bias that emerges
from the GLOBAL FORM of statistical description in the context of severe
global inequalities. Where does it come from? Do ways of measuras a feature of
their institutional production. Are global data biased against poor countries?
Is the contradiction between the "imperial" and "global" principles in the
formation of the UN evident in the nature of UN world data? Is wealth being
re-humanized via HDI? [Check out this
chart](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/HDIpcgdp.gif).

* * *

  **top**

week 5  
**Inside Food Systems:  
Power, Production, and Inequality**

Oct 2

**Assignment #6**. Do **[Excel Exercise
#1](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist188/course/h188excel1frames.html)**. See
[GRAPH and Chart
Samples](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/h388chartframe.htm).

**Read** (1) **** Young, _World Hunger_ pp.88-133, (2) Anna Rose Bord on,
"[Philippines: Unequal
Access.](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist188/course/philippines.htm)" (3)
[ACORN report on housing discrimination in the
US](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/ACORN.htm). (4) **[Additional
thoughts for research](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/ACORN2.html)**.

Also have a look at [Quantitative Skills for
Historians.](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist188/course/h188qsbasics.html#top)

Lecture/discussion: understanding inequalities _within_ societies, economies,
and political systems. Example of data from South India circa 1800.

Oct 4

Discussion of **Paper Assignment #1, due** next Tuesday, October 9. In no more
than five double-spaced pages, use arguments and data from the readings to
summarize your own understanding of recent trends in the world economy as they
pertain to the production of global inequality and big regions of poverty. Be
specific. Use information provided by the authors of books and articles you
have read. (I will ask you to post a revised version of this paper on your web
site.)

[Some views of
inequality](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/inequalityframeset.htm)

* * *

  **top**

week 6.  
**Gender and Entitlement**

Oct 9  
**PAPER #1 Due at the start of class today (This is Assignment #7)**

**The Entitlement Approach: A Formal Framework of Analysis**

**Read** Amartya Sen, _Poverty and Famines_ , pp. 1-51.

Oct 11

**Read** from bulkpack. Agarwal,  "Social Security and the Family: Coping with
Seasonality and Calamity in Rural India" and Peter Svedberg, "Undernutrition
in Sub-Saharan Africa: Is There a Gender Bias." **Reference:**["Women and
sustainable food security,"](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/women1a.htm)
([source](http://www.fao.org/sd/fsdirect/fbdirect/FSP001.htm)) "[Women: The
key to food security](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/women2.htm),"
([source](http://www.fao.org/DOCREP/x0171e/x0171e00.htm)) "[Environment, women
and population: interrelated issues in rural development in Southeast
Asia,](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/women3.htm)"
([source](http://www.fao.org/DOCREP/x0178e/x0178e00.htm)) and FAO site [Gender
and Food Security](http://www.fao.org/Gender/)

**Assignment #8** : Using these articles, write 150 words on the problem of
social "coping" with seasonal crises and major calamities as a problem of
gendered entitlement. Post this prose on your web page and bring it to class.
Consider how regions and societies differ in their _everyday_ patterns of
gender inequality? Seasonal, cyclical, and periodic crises occur unevenly in
space, time, and societies. But there are patterns. We are looking for
patterns using quantitative data that can also inidicate how people cope with
crisis.

* * *

  **top**

week 7  
**War, Markets, Hunger, and Disease**

Oct 16 **Read** Young, _World Hunger_ , pp.133-146 and Dreze and Gazdar,
"Hunger and Poverty in Iraq, 1991." Bring five talking points to class (out
them in your dossier or on your web page) concerning the role of military
conflict in causing mass death and health crises. This is **Assignment #9.**

Oct 18.  **CLASS MEETING IN LIBRARY** electronic classroom. Focus on the
search for data with which to assess the extent of poverty and inequality. In
preparation, explore [Human Development Reports](http://www.undp.org/hdro/)
and [US CENSUS ](http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/saipe.html)site. Explore links
on the messy but chock full [H188 Resources
page](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist188/course/h188resources.html). **FIND
some data on the web** and save it to disk in ASCII, HTML, or XLS format.
**Tips:** When you look around the web for useful information, keep track of
your routes of searching -- you may need to find some site again long after
you have forgotten how to find it. Links to data sites on your web page make
them easy to find. Downloading files means you do not need to go to the
original site each time you want to use the data. Put the record of your use
of data in/for the library meeting in your dossier or on web page. This is
**Assignment #10**

* * *

  **top**

week 8.  
**Health Environments**

Oct 23  
**Disease, Malnutrition, and Poverty**

> Read in blukpack Philip Payne, "Not Enough Food: Malnutrition and Famine,"
and online David Pimentel, et al. "[Ecology of Increasing Disease: Population
growth and environmental
degradation](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/ecologydisease.htm), "
_Bioscience_ Vol. 48 No. 10 October, 1998
([source](http://dieoff.com/page165.htm))

>

> **Assignment #11** : post on course page and bring to class **250 words** to
integrate your understanding of the interactions between disease and
malnutrition. In class discussion.

>

> **Come to class ready** to discuss connections between entitlement and
health.

Oct 25 I have to miss class today and need a student assistant to show this
film. Any volunteers?

> **IN CLASS: Film, "Distant Thunder."** This film will consume the whole of
the class time and a few minutes more. We will start the film rolling at 3PM
sharp. Please try to stay till the end. Come prepared to take notes. Put brief
indication of your conclusions from this film on (1) the experience of famine,
and (2) methods of coping, on your web page or in your dossier. This is
**Assignment #12**

>

> **

>

> * * *

>

> **

  **top**

week 9.  
**1943-4 Famine in Bengal**

Oct 30  
**Bengal in 1943-44. Bangladesh in 1974.**  

**Read** Amartya Sen, _Poverty and Famines_ , pp.52-85 and [Bowbrick critique
of Sen and alternative approach to the
data](http://www.prima.net/bowbrick/Refuting.html) (URL sourcepage). Also have
a look at [Quantitative Skills for
Historians](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist188/course/h188qsbasics.html#top)

I have to miss class today.

**ASSIGNMENT # 13. Come to class with FIVE talking points** for class
discussion. _This discussion will be run by the class in my absence_. Combine
your talking points into a class list of major issues. Focus on the questions
of what caused the famine as a general phenomemon and what caused specific
groups to suffer most. Keep the film,  "Distant Thunder," in mind. Look ahead
to organize discussion around paper #2 topic.

Here is [SEN FRAMESET with charts and
tables.](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist086/FrameSetSenCharts.html) I will
also send you Sen workbooks this week. Store them for future use. Also Please
note that you can acquire [SYSTAT
9](http://www.spss.com/software/science/systat/) free of charge for a 30 trial
use. Wait until after break to download it; that will give you enough time to
use it on your own hard disk for class assignments. It is also available in
the computer labs.

  

* * *

  **top**

week 10

**1974 Famine in Bangladesh**

Nov 1 **Read** Sen, _Poverty and Famines_ , pp.131-154

**Write a first draft** of **Paper #2 (Assignment #14)** for discussion in
class today. Final version is **due next Tuesday in class.** In no more than
five pages, explain the major similarities and differences between famines in
Bengal and Bangladesh. Keep in mind Bowbrick's counter-arguments to Sen when
considering this comparison. To begin this paper, write out a list of key
points in Sen chapters: why did famines occur when they did? where did they
occur, really? who suffered most and why? **More detailed questions:** how do
local conditions effect the geographical and social distribution of hunger?
Why do hungry people die? What specific occupational groups die most often and
why? What is the role of government policy in the changing terms of
entitlement? how does the concept of  "entitlement" differ from "effective
demand"?  In these cases, can it be said that markets working _caused_ famine?
or that markets _alleviated_ starvation? Be very specific in thinking about
answers to these questions -- think about _diversity in time and space_ and
across the range of _groups in the population._

Class discussion of paper topic.  

* * *

  **top**

week 11  
  
**SAHEL AND ETHIOPIA FAMINES**

Nov 6. **Paper #2 (Assignment #14) DUE AT THE START OF CLASS**

**Reading:** Sen, _Poverty and Famines_ , pp.113-130; on desertification in
[Sahel](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/Sahel1.htm)[
(source)](http://www.eden-foundation.org/project/desertif.html) and more
general view of
[desertification](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/desert.htm)
[(source).](http://ag.arizona.edu/~lmilich/desrtif.html)

Nov. 8. **Ethiopia.** Read Sen, _Poverty and Famines_ , pp.86-112.

* * *

**top**

week 12

**Spatial Analysis in Asia, Africa, and US.**

Nov 13. **Assignment #15.** Bring to class for discussion a list of the
spatial dimensions of famines in the Sen book. Consider this to be the guiding
question: WHERE did famine occur and WHY there?

Nov 15. **ASSIGNMENT #16** Do [Data
Exercise.](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/dataexercise1.htm) The
question for today is, "How Poor is Philadelphia?" We can then discuss
implications for politics and social policy. Some [notes on measuring
poverty](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/notespovertymeasures.htm). In
class discussion on spatial analysis of poverty in the US. **Reading:**[Thomas
W. Lester, "Changes in U.S. Income Inequality since 1979 and Their Effects on
Metropolitan
Areas"](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist188/course/twlester.htm)/...Isaac
Shapiro and Robert Greenstein, "[The Widening Income
Gulf](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/ShapiroGreenstein.htm)."
([source](http://www.cbpp.org/9-4-99tax-rep.htm)) Read through [Dartmouth
College Sociology 7 Syllabus on Poverty in
America](http://www.dartmouth.edu/~socy7/links.html). Check out Hist 388 past
student projects on census data by [Mark
Kahn](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist188/course/kahnme-finalproject.htm) and
[Peter Bachman](http://www.sas.upenn.edu/~peterbac/phillyindex.html)

* * *

> > **top**

>>

>> week 13

>>

>> **Searching for Solutions**

Nov 20. Read among the following and come to class ready to discuss.

[A short history of development in South Asia  
](http://www.sas.upenn.edu/~dludden/development.htm)"Natural" disasters
continue to happen: [Orissa
1999](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/orissa1999.htm).[(source)](http://www.disasterrelief.org/Disasters/991109indiacyclone5/).  
Policy solutions may also be disasters:
[India2001](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/akhbar2001.htm).
[(source).](http://www.ercwilcom.net/~indowindow/akhbar/2001-01/special.htm)  
Amartya Sen lecture "[Hunger and Public
Action](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/sen890.htm)."
[(source)](http://www.thp.org/reports/sen/sen890.htm)  
Activism and the World Bank/IMF <http://www.brettonwoodsproject.org/>:
<http://www.september30.org/s30/>
:...<http://www.50years.org/s28/call.html>:...  
Using research for policy: Eldis, ["From Research to
Policy."](http://nt1.ids.ac.uk/eldis/polres.htm)  
"Targeting" and [sustainable
development](http://www.fao.org/WAICENT/FAOINFO/SUSTDEV/index_en.htm). ..  
[Action Research](http://www.scu.edu.au/schools/gcm/ar/arhome.html).  
Ethnicity and inequality in the US. Online chapter in [America
Becoming](http://books.nap.edu/books/030906838X/html/21.html#pagetop).  
Limits of volunteerism. [on "compassion
fatigue"](http://books.philly.com/chapter/nonfict/moeller_susan.asp)  
[The global digital
divide](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist388/global_digital_divide.htm).
[(source)](http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2001/09/ishaq.htm#author)

**Assignment #17: Submit a description of your final project.**

11/22 No Class. Thanksgiving.

* * *



week 14

**ASSIGNMENT #18: final project presentations**

12/4 discussion of final projects

12/6 discussion of final projects

12/10 last day of class. all work must be on website by 5PM today. I will do
grading in the next few days and send you email with your final evaluation and
grade by end of week.

**top**

