**POLITICAL SCIENCE (POLS) 250**

**Politics and Political Inquiry I**

**Dr. Sam Hines Spring 2000**  
**Dean, School of Humanities M 5:30-8:15 pm**  
**& Social Sciences Maybank Hall 107**  
**58 George St. / 953-5770 Office Hours: By Appointment**  
**hiness@cofc.edu**

**I. Course Description and Objectives** :

Political Science 250 is designed to provide the political science major with
an introduction to a set of key concepts in political theory and to the
historical development of Western political thought. The student will work
with primary and secondary literature in political theory and will gain an
understanding of how political theorists from ancient Greece to this century
have attempted to create theories of politics and visions of political order
in response to the crises and problems of their time and in light of the work
of the political theorists that preceded them. Primary source materials
written by the great political philosophers (Plato, Aristotle, Machiavelli,
Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, Mill, Marx) will be read and discussed along with the
contributions of other political theorists.

This course is required of all Political Science majors and should be taken
within the first fifteen hours of the major. This course introduces the
student, by way of an analysis of concepts and issues, to the historical
tradition of inquiry into the "good society," the "nature and origins of the
state," the sources of "authority," and the "quest for order and justice."
Concepts to be discussed include: justice, liberty, equality, natural law, ,
freedom, democracy, obligation, authority, and power. The historical
relationships of politics and political theory to ethics, economics, and
religion will be discussed.

Our primary objective is to gain familiarity with the Western political
tradition and to gain specific knowledge about the key concepts, theories, and
political theorists within that tradition. This course and (POLS 251) Politics
and Political Inquiry II, provide the political science major with a strong
conceptual and theoretical foundation for subsequent work in political
science.

**II. Course Requirements** :

A. Attendance.

Attendance will be taken regularly at first and then sporadically. I do this
primarily to help me get to know you by name. You will find that much is
discussed in class. It is your choice whether you attend or not. My experience
has been that poor attendance usually results in poor performance, but the
choice is yours. Regular attendance and participation may make a difference in
your favor if your grade point average is borderline.

B. Mid-term Examination- An identification (key concepts) and essay exam
covering the first half of the course. This exam will be given in late
February. Value: 30% of final grade.

C. Essay Assignment- A special essay assignment is to be given out at the
beginning of the semester. You will turn in a first version of the essay at
the beginning of the third week of class . This initial essay will be read and
critiqued but will be ungraded. Your final essay will be due the next to last
week of class. You must turn in 2 copies of the first and second versions of
the essay. Value: 30% of final grade.

D. Final Examination- Given during the regularly scheduled exam period, this
essay exam will emphasize the material covered after the Mid-Term, but will
also be comprehensive. Value: 40% of final grade.

Grading Scale - A= 90-100; B+= 87-89; B=80-86; C+= 77-79; C=70-76; D= 60-69;
F= below 60. When a letter grade is given (e.g., on the essay assignment), the
value will be as follows: A= 95; B+= 88; B=85; C+= 78; C=75; D=65; F= 55.

**III. Texts: These are available at the College Bookstore**.

Glenn Tinder, Political Thinking, 6th edition. New York: Harper Collins,
1995\. (paperback)

Robert Booth Fowler & Jeffrey R. Orenstein, An Introduction to Politcal
Theory: Toward the Next Century. New York: Harper Collins, 1993. (paperback)

Jene Porter, ed., Classics in Political Philosophy, 2nd edition. Scarborough,
Ontario: Prentice Hall. 1997. (paperback)

Donald G. Tannenbaum & David Schultz, Inventors of ideas: An Introduction to
Western Political Philosophy. New York: St. Martins Press, 1998. (paperback)

**IV. Topical Outline with Assignments** : We will stick to this schedule as
closely as possible, however, it may be necessary to shift times and topics as
the semester progresses. I will try to give you as much advance notice of
changes as is possible.

January 17     Syllabus and Handouts will be distributed. Course objectives,
assignments, and policies will be discussed.  
                      Initial essay assignment given. 

January 24     Discussion of Handouts on Political Theory  
                     Glenn Tinder, Political Thinking, Chapters1 

                     Fowler & Orenstein,chapter 1 

                     Tannenbaum & Schultz, chapter 1 

January 31     Human Nature, the Individual & the Community  
                      Fowler & Orenstein, chapter 2 

                      Tinder, chapter 2   


February 7     AUTHORITY: Fowler & Orenstein, chapters 3, 4, 9, & 10

                      POWER: Tinder, chapters 4-6 

February 14    JUSTICE: Fowler & Orenstein, chapter 5

                       FREEDOM: Fowler & Orenstein, chapter 6   


February 21     EQUALITY: Tinder, chapter 3; Fowler & Orenstein, chapter 7

                        POLITICAL OBLIGATION: Fowler & Orenstein, chapter 8   


February 28     MID-TERM EXAM- covering all previous topics & readings  


March 6           SPRING BREAK (NO CLASS)  


March 13         Ancient Political Thought

                        Tannenbaum & Schultz, Chapters 2-3 

                        PLATO: Porter, Platos Apology, pp. 1-19; and Republic, pp. 20-118   


March 20         Ancient Political Thought continued

                        ARISTOTLE & CICERO: Porter, Aristotles Ethics & Politics, pp. 119-192; Tannenbaum & Schultz,   
                        chapter 4-5 

March 27         Medieval Political Thought

                        Tannenbaum & Schultz, chapters 6-8 

                        AUGUSTINE & AQUINAS: Porter, Augustines City of God, pp. 193-206 and Aquinas On Kingship   
                        & Summa Theologica, pp. 193-222 

April 3             Modern Political Thought: The Rise of Democracies

                        MACHIAVELLI: Porter, Machiavellis The Prince, pp. 223-292 

                        Tannenbaum & Schultz, chapters 9-11 

                        Fowler & Orenstein, Chapters 10 & 11   


April 10            The Social Contract Theorists

                        HOBBES: Porter, Hobbes Leviathan, pp. 293-350 

                        LOCKE: Porter, Lockes Second Treatise, pp. 351-402 

                        ROUSSEAU: Porter, Rousseaus Second Discourse and Social Contract, pp. 403-458 

                        Tannenbaum & Schultz, chapters 12-14   


April 17            Liberalism, Marxism and Historical Change

                         Tannenbaum & Schultz, chapters 15-18 

                         Tinder, chapter 7 

                         MILL: Porter, Mills On Liberty, pp. 513-552 

                         HEGEL & MARX: Tinder, chapter 7; 

                         Porter, Hegels Philosophy of History & Philosophy of Right, pp. 459-512 

                         MARX: Porter, Marxs works, pp. 553-608 

                        Essays are due   


April 24            Last day of class / Postmodernism and the Future of
Political Theory

                        NIETZSCHE: Porter, pp. 609-650 

                        Tannenbaum & Schultz, chapter 19 

                        Orenstein & Fowler, chapters 12& 13 

                        Review Session 

**FINAL EXAMS-**

Your final exam will be given during normal class time on the officially
scheduled day. Exceptions will require approval by the Dean of Undergraduate
Studies.

**ESSAY ASSIGNMENT INSTRUCTIONS**

Your assignment is to write an essay of approximately 5 to 10 pages in length
that presents your Political Philosophy. Minimally, your Political Philosophy
must include your position on each of the following subjects:

1\. Human Nature- What is the nature of "man"?

2\. Authority- What is the basis (are the bases) of political authority? On
what basis would you give consent and accept  
    obligations to the state? 

3\. Source of the Law- From whence do the principles of law come?

4\. Equality- What are the limits, if any, to the application of the principle
of equality?

5\. Liberty- What is the extent of individual liberty and what are the limits,
if any, to individual liberty?

6\. Justice- What constitutes a just political order?

7\. Purpose of Politics- Why do people engage in politics? Is there an
"ultimate" purpose? How inclusive is the political  
    enterprise? 

8\. Relation of politics to economics- Does one determine the other? Are they
of equal value or is one more important  
    (takes precedence over) the other? 

9\. Relation of politics to religion or any other belief systems- Does
politics serve religion or the reverse?

10\. The principle problems or sources of disorder for your political system-
If your political philosophy could be put into  
      practice, what would be the greatest challenges to it? 

In preparing your essay you will realize that there is overlap among these
questions and that they are most certainly inter-related. This assignment will
be evaluated in terms of the clarity, logic, consistency and cogency of your
point of view and of the correctness and quality of your writing. Where you
stand on these issues is a personal matter--there is no one correct answer to
be provided.

A first draft of your essay is due in approximately two weeks. Your final
draft of the essay is due the last class period of the semester. Two copies of
your final draft and one copy of your original critiqued draft should be
turned in. The final draft must be typed. There will be a penalty of one
letter grade for late papers. I would be more than happy to read a draft of
your essay at any time prior to the class period it is due and give you
feedback.

