#  **PLS 311**

* * *

**POLITICAL PARTIES**   **Political Science 311**  


Section 01 11:00-11:50 MWF Dr. William K. Hall

Fall 1997/1998 432 Bradley Hall  
    


**OBJECTIVES OF THE COURSE**  


This course seeks to provide you with an understanding of the development,
operation, and prospects of the political party in America. In particular, we
will consider the historic origins and electoral politics of political
parties, how parties reinforce and/or reduce political inequality, and the
recent organizational decline and attempts at renewal of parties. We will make
every effort to carefully analyze, understand, and put into some sort of
historical context the Republican congressional election victories in the 1994
and 1996 elections and the election and re-election of a Democratic President
of the United States.  
    
    
    


**READINGS FOR THE COURSE**  


Two paperback books are required for the course. Both are available at the
Bradley Bookstore.  


Paul Allen Beck, _Party Politics in America_ , 8th edition,

1997\.  


John C. Green and Daniel M. Shea (editors), _The State of_

_the Parties_ , 2nd edition, 1996.  
    
    
    


**CLASSROOM METHODS AND TECHNIQUES**  


This class will be conducted through a combination of lecture, class
discussion and student involvement. This means that while I will lecture some,
the course will depend more on the active participation and discussion efforts
of you and everyone else in the class. It is imperative that you keep up with
events and happenings of the contemporary national, state and local political
scenes.  
    
    
    


**CLASS ATTENDANCE**  


You are expected to attend ALL class sessions.  
    
    
    


**GRADES**  


Your overall grade will be weighted as follows:  


Mid-Term Examination 20%

Second (final) Examination 20%

Analytical/Research Project I 20%

Analytical/Research Project II 20%

Class Participation 20%  
    
    
    


**EXAMINATIONS**  


There will be two scheduled examinations:  


On the first exam you will be asked to answer two essay

questions (chosen from pairs of questions).  


On the second (final) exam you will be asked to answer three

essay questions (chosen from pairs of questions).  


The two scheduled examinations will be given on these dates:  


The mid-term exam (over Sections I, II and III) will

be given on _Friday, October 24_.  


The second (final) exam (over Sections IV, V and VI)

will be given for this course only at the time

assigned in the Academic Handbook for final

week--that is: _Tuesday, December 16, 12:00-1:15 p.m._

(a 75-minute exam).  
    
    
    


**MAKE-UP EXAMINATIONS**  


A make-up examination will be given only under the most extraordinary
circumstances, and then only for a legitimate, excused absence. Students who
must unavoidably be absent on an examination day because of participation in
official intercollegiate events (e.g., a member of the BU coed varsity skeet
shooting team) should see the instructor _before_ the regularly scheduled exam
is given in order to discuss a make-up.  
    


In cases of illness on an examination day, documented proof of the alleged
affliction will likely be required before I will consider allowing you to take
a make-up examination. In such asses as these, a make-up examination is given
solely at the instructor's discretion.  
    
    
    


**ANALYTICAL/RESEARCH PROJECTS**  


Each student will write two analytical/research papers:  


**_Analytical/Research Project I:_**  


The first analytical/research project (10-12 pages) will involve your
exploring--in some depth--a topic related to the parties as political
institutions, party organization, or parties and voters. A detailed
description of this project will be handed out in class within a few days of
the start of the semester. This first analytical/research paper _is due by
class time on Friday, October 10_.  
    


**_Analytical/Research Project II:_**  


In this 10-12 page paper, you will be responsible for analyzing any one of the
multitude of contemporary problems facing America in the 1990s, explaining the
differences (as well as the similarities) in the positions of the two major
political parties and the problem you have selected. A detailed description of
this project will be handed out in class later in the semester. This
analytical/research paper _is due by class time on Monday, December 8._  
    
    
    


**CLASS PARTICIPATION**  


I have four expectations for class participation:  


(1) That you will be in attendance at each of our

class sessions.  


(2) That you read the assigned readings--whether from

Beck or Green and Shea--before coming to class each day.  
    


I expect a critical reading of the material.

Unless you are truly weird, you certainly will not agree with everything you
are presented with in this class. Argue, disagree, throw the equivalent of an
intellectual temper tantrum.  


(3) That you will be aware of and informed about

current political events and activities affecting and relating to political
parties.  


(4) That you come to class prepared to make a

meaningful contribution to class discussion.  


**Students who miss more than five (5) class sessions will**

**receive 0 points for Class Participation.**  
    


**EXTRA-CREDIT WORK**  


There is no such thing as extra-credit work in this course.  
    
    
    


**AVAILABILITY OF THE INSTRUCTOR**  


Although you will see me three times a week in the classroom, it is possible
you will want to see me in my office. I am available to meet with you every
day of the academic week, especially at the scheduled office hours listed
below:  


Monday 9:15-10:45, 1:00-3:30

Tuesday 9:15-10:15, 2:45-3:30

Wednesday 9:15-10:45

Thursday 9:15-10:15, 2:45-3:30

Friday 9:15-10:45, 1:00-2:00  


Should you need to reach me by phone, my office phone is: 677-2495. If I am
not available when you call, you can leave a message for me on my AUDIX or you
can reach my secretary at 677-2502 and leave a message with her. I can also be
reached by email: hall@bradley.edu  
    
    
    
  **TOPIC AND ASSIGNMENT OUTLINE**  


**COURSE INTRODUCTION**  


August 27--A portion of the first meeting will be used

to discuss organizational matters, course structure and requirements.  
    


**I. POLITICAL PARTIES AND PARTY SYSTEMS**  


A. August 29, September 1 and 3--In Search of Parties

Readings:

Beck: Introduction, Chapter #1 (pp. 1-5, 7-29)

Green/Shea, Reading #1 (pp. 1-8)  


B. September 5, 8, 10 and 12--The History of the Major

American Party Systems

Readings:

Beck: Chapter #2 (pp. 30-57)

Green/Shea, Reading #3 (pp. 25-41)  


C. September 15 and 17--The History of "Third" Parties

Readings:

Beck: Chapter #2 (pp. 30-57)

Green/Shea, Readings #4 and #15 (pp. 42-60, 239-255)  
    


**II. POLITICAL PARTY ORGANIZATION**  


A. September 19 and 22--State and Local Party

Organization

Readings:

Beck: Introduction, Chapter #3 (pp. 59-63, 65-84)

Green/Shea, Readings #8 - #13 (pp. 125-213)  


B. September 24 and 26--National Party Organization

Readings:

Beck: Chapter #4 (pp. 85-105)

Green/Shea, Readings #5 and #6 (pp. 63-107)  


C. September 29 and October 1--The Party of the Activists

Readings:

Beck: Chapter #5 (pp. 106-125)

Green/Shea, Readings #14 and #16 (pp. 217-238,

256-269)  
    
    
    
    
    


**III. THE PARTY IN THE ELECTORATE**  


A. October 3 and 6--The Loyal Electorates

Readings:

Beck: Introduction, Chapter #6 (pp. 127-130, 131-150)  
    


******* FOUNDER'S DAY--No Class on Wednesday, October 8 ******  
    


******* ANALYTICAL/RESEARCH PROJECT I DUE *******

**Friday, October 10, at class time**  
    


B. October 10 and 15--The Party Within the Voter

Readings:

Beck: Chapter #7 (pp. 151-167)  
    


******* FALL BREAK--No Class on October 13 *******  
    


C. October 17, 20 and 22--The Active Electorate

Readings:

Beck: Chapter #8 (pp. 168-195)  
    


******* EXAM I on Friday, October 24 *******  
    
    
    


**IV. PARTIES AND THE ELECTORAL PROCESS**  


A. October 27 and 29--Naming Party Candidates

Readings:

Beck: Chapter #9 (pp. 196-217)  


B. October 31 and November 3--Naming Presidential

Nominees

Readings:

Beck: Chapter 10 (pp. 218-245)  


C. November 5 and 7--Parties and the Campaign for

Election

Readings:

Beck: Chapter #11 (pp. 246-269)

Green/Shea, Readings #17, #18 and #20 (pp. 273-288,

289-313, 328-351)  


D. November 10 and 12--Picking Up the Tab

Readings:

Beck: Chapter #12 (pp. 270-300)

Green/Shea, Reading #7 (pp. 108-124)  
    


**V. POLITICAL PARTIES AND THE ART AND SCIENCE OF GOVERNING**  


A. November 14 and 17--The Legislature

Readings:

Beck: Introduction, Chapter #13 (pp. 301-304,

305-330)

Green/Shea, Reading #19 (pp. 314-327)  


B. November 19 and 21--The Executive and Judiciary

Readings:

Beck: Chapter #14 (pp. 331-352)  


C. November 24 and December 1--Party Government: The

Quest for the Holy Grail

Readings:

Beck, Chapter #15 (pp. 353-376)  
    


***** THANKSGIVING BREAK--No Class on November 26 and 28 *****  
    


**VI. PARTIES IN THE AMERICAN SETTING**  


December 3, 5 and 8--Whither Parties?

Readings:

Beck: Introduction, Chapter #16 (pp. 377-378,

379-397)

Green/Shea, Readings #22 and #23 (pp. 367-396)  
    


******* ANALYTICAL/RESEARCH PROJECT II DUE *******

**Monday, December 8, at class time**  


******* SECOND EXAMINATION on Tuesday, December 16 *******

**12:00-1:15 p.m.**

**(A 75-minute examination.)**

* * *

  * [Back of Course List](Clist.htm) ![](Bullet.gif)    [Back to Political Science](plsdept.html) ![-](Bullet.gif)

* * *

  * _Page Manager: Larry Aspin_
  
_Last update: 2/20/97_

