**

Approved by University Studies Sub-Committee.  A2C2 action pending.



University Studies Course Approval

**

Department or Program: **_Engineering

_**

Course Number: **_ENGR 102

_**

Course Title: **_Introduction to Engineering

_**

Number of Credits **: _2

_**

Catalog Description: **_History of engineering, engineering disciplines,
professional and ethical aspects of engineering, introduction to problem-
solving, creativity and teamwork, use of personal computers in engineering
applications, safety and environmental issues, current engineering challenges.
This course is one of three engineering courses that collectively satisfy 3
credits of the Science and Social Policy requirement in the University Studies
Program.

_**





This is an existing course that has previously been approved by A2C2 **_Yes

_**

OR

This is a new course proposal **_No_**. (If this is a new course proposal, the
WSU Curriculum Approval Form must also be completed as in the process
prescribed by WSU Regulation 3-4.)

Department Contact Person for this course:

Email:



The proposed course is designed to satisfy the requirements in (select one
area only):

**

Course Requirements

**

**A. Basic Skills: B. Arts & Sciences Core:

**

______ 1. College Reading and Writing ______ 1. Humanities

______ 2. Oral Communication ______ 2. Natural Science

______ 3. Mathematics ___ __ _ __ 3\. Social Science

______ 4. Physical Development and Wellness ______ 4. Fine & Performing Arts



**

C. Unity and Diversity: D. Flagged Courses:

**_

_ 1\. Critical Analysis ______ 1. Writing

___ ** _X_** _ 2. Science and Social Policy ______ 2. Oral

______ 3. a. Global Perspectives ______ 3. a. Mathematics/ Statistics

______ b. Multicultural Perspectives ______ b. Critical Analysis

______ 4. a. Contemporary Citizenship

______ b. Democratic Institutions











**

Course Syllabus

WINONA STATE UNIVERSITY  
DEPARTMENT OF ENGINEERING

**_

ENGR 102: INTRODUCTION TO ENGINEERING

_**

SPRING 2001-2002



ENGR 102- Introduction to Engineering- 2 S.H.

**

History of Engineering, engineering disciplines, professional and ethical
aspects of engineering, introduction to problem-solving, creativity and team-
work, use of personal computers in engineering applications, safety and
environmental issues, current engineering challenges. _This course is one of
three engineering courses that collectively satisfy 3 credits of the Science
and Social Policy requirement in the University Studies Program. Grade only.

_**

CLASS TIME:** W 3:00-4:50 **ROOM:** ST 205

**

INSTRUCTOR:** Fariborz Parsi

**

OFFICE:** 203B ST **TEL:** (507) 457-5282 **FAX:** (507) 457-5681

**

E-MAIL** fparsi@winona.edu

**

WEB:** http://course1.winona.edu/fparsi

**

OFFICE HOURS:** is posted by the office or see the web page

**

TUTOR: **Derek Hoffman **Hours: e-mail:

TEXT:** _Engineers and their Profession_ Kemper and Sanders, 5 th edition,
Oxford

**_

CORSE EXPECTATIONS AND EVALUATION:

_

1\. TESTS** (midterm and final)

> **

>

> 2\. Homework **will be assigned weekly. Each HW problem must have three
sections of GIVEN, REQUIRED, and SOLUTION and each problem is to start on a
separate page. It is strongly encouraged that you use engineering pads for
your HW. Your HW is due every WEDNESDAY at the beginning of the class.

>

> **

>

> 3.** There will be a policy of **NO MAKE UP WORK**. If you have to miss an
exam or turn in a late HW, you should consult with the instructor prior to
being absent or immediately after you return to class. Otherwise, it is
understood that you will get a grade of zero for that assignment or exam.

**

4\. PROJECTS **will be discussed in class

> > **

>>

>> 5\. PORTFOLIO **You are required to turn in a portfolio of your work on the
day of the final exam. More detail about the content and format of the
portfolio will be discussed in class.

**

  6. COURSE EVALUATION

**

> Exam 1 25% Exam 2 25% Projects 20% (10% each)

>

> HW 15% Portfolio 5% Pop Quizzes 10%

>

> **

>

> GRADE SCALE:** A 90-100, B 80-89, C 70-79, D 60-69, F 0-59

>

> **

>

> COURSE CONTENT: ENGR 102

>

> **

>

>  

Week 1

|

> > > > W (1/9) Introduction  
  
---|---  
  
Week 2

|

W (1/16) Engineering Profession (Chapter 1)  
  
Week 3

|

W (1/23) Branches of Engineering (Chapter 2)

Reverse Engineering project will be assigned  
  
Week 4

|

W (1/30) Composite Materials Engineering (Notes)  
  
Week 5

|

> > > > W (2/6) Creativity (Chapter 6)  
  
Week 6

|

> > > > W (2/13) Technical communication (Notes)  
  
Week 7

|

W (2/20) **TEST 1,** Design project will be assigned  
  
Week 8

|

W (2/27) Design Process (Chapter 7)  
  
Week 9

|

> > > > W (3/6) Spring Break  
  
Week 10

|

W (3/13) Engineering Education (Chapter 5)  
  
Week 11

|

W (3/20) Ethics and responsibilities (Chapter 11)  
  
Week 12 |

W (3/27) Legal Aspects (Chapters 13 and 14)  
  
Week 13 |

> > > > W (4/3) Engineering Societies (Chapter 12) and Professional
Registration (Chapter 9)  
  
Week 14

|

W (4/10) Engineering Employment (Chapter 4)  
  
Week 15

|

W (4/17) Open (possible plant tours, speakers, etc.)  
  
Week 16 |

W (4/25) **FINAL TEST

**

Portfolios are due  
  
I reserve the right to change the schedule when necessary.

**

Contribution of Course to Meeting the Science and Social Policy Requirements:

** **

Topic** | **

Outcome**  
---|---  
**

Course 1/3. Introduction to Engineering** | **

Scientific foundation of topic** | **

Social, ethical, historical and/or political implication** | **

Integrating science with social policy** | **

Evaluate policy options and social dilemmas** | **

Articulate, choose, and defend policy or scientific options**  
  
Role of Engineering |   |

X |   |   |  
  
Engineering History |   |

X |

X |   |  
  
Engineering Design Methods |

X |   |   |

X |  
  
Creative Thought and Learning |

X |   |   |   |

X  
  
Engineering and management, project management |

X |   |   |

X |  
  
Patents, trademarks, and copyrights |   |   |   |   |  
  
Communication |   |   |   |   |

X  
  
Engineering Quality |   |   |   |   |

X  
  
Ethics |   |

X |   |   |  
  
Safety and the environment |   |

X |

X |   |  
  
Categories of Engineering |   |   |   |   |  
  
Composite Materials |   |   |

X |   |  
  
Contemporary Topics |   |   |   |

X |  
  


  1. Requirements and learning activities that promote students' abilities to understand the scientific foundation of the topic.
**

Introduction to Engineering 102 delves into scientific methodologies. It
explores separate methods and the application of each method. It also
addresses the importance of scientific foundation as it applies to engineering
principles.

**



  2. Requirements and learning activities that promote students' abilities to understand the social, ethical, historical, and/or political implications.
**

Several topics in the course cover these aspects. The topic of Ethics is
covered in one unit. In this lesson, the students are exposed to an
engineering decision that was made under pressure. This decision caused an
aerospace catastrophe. In this unit, students are exposed to the political
pressures that can be put on the engineering profession.

Another unit in this course is titled "History of Engineering". This unit
covers the development and application of engineering principles and how they
have impacted society. Example: Students study an overview of Egyptian
irrigation systems and how this engineering achievement transformed society
from nomadic tribes into collective communities.**

  3. Requirements and learning activities that promote students' abilities to understand and articulate the need to integrate issues of science with social policy.  

**

Within the "History of Engineering" lesson plan, students study the societal
changes that stem from engineering advancement. For example: students are
given an engineering topic / advancement for discussion in small groups.
(Topic example: Nuclear energy). Within the discussion, one question that
students must answer is whether the engineering topic is a benefit or a
detriment to society.

**

  4. Requirements and learning activities that promote students' abilities to evaluate the various policy options relevant to the social dilemmas posed by the science.  

**

Students are exposed to concurrent policy issues through open topic discussion
and assignments. Students are assigned a minimum of two reports during the
term that depict engineering roles in the governing process. Students must
research articles and report their findings, as well as their opinions on the
subject.

**

  5. Requirements and learning activities that promote students' abilities to articulate, choose among, and defend various policy and/or scientific options to cope with the challenges created.  

> **

>

> Students discover the process of decision making during the unit of
"Creativity & Learning". In this unit, students are broken into small groups
and provided with an engineering problem. (Problem example: Air pollution)
Students must brainstorm to solve the problem and provide a reasonable
solution that will have a minimum impact to society.

>

> **

>

>  
>

>  

**Approval/Disapproval Recommendations

**



Department Recommendation: Approved_____ Disapproved____ Date:______

Chairperson Signature_______________________ Date______



Dean's Recommendation: Approved_____ Disapproved ____* Date:______

Dean's Signature_______________________ Date______

*In the case of a Dean's recommendation to disapprove a proposal a written rationale for the recommendation to disapprove shall be provided to USS



USS Recommendation: Approved_____ Disapproved____ Date:______

University Studies Director's Signature_______________________ Date______



A2C2 Recommendation: Approved_____ Disapproved_____ Date:______

A2C2 Chairperson Signature_______________________ Date______



Faculty Senate Recommendation: Approved_____ Disapproved____ Date:______

FA President's Signature_______________________ Date______

Academic Vice President's Recommendation: Approved_____ Disapproved____
Date:______

VP's Signature_______________________ Date______



President's Decision: Approved_____ Disapproved____ Date:______

President's Signature_______________________ Date______





