**

The Portrait 2000

Literature and Arts B-31

Professor Henri Zerner

Tuesday, Thursday - 12:00 - Sackler Auditorium

**

Office Hours: Tuesday, 3-5

Fogg Art Museum, 3rd Floor

Ph. 495-4770

Head Teaching Fellow:

Alexis Sornin

<sornin@fas.harvard.edu>



**

COURSE DESCRIPTION:

**



The most famous of all works of art is a portrait. Sculptors and painters have
made likenesses of individuals since the ancient Kingdoms of Egypt. The
portrait gives visual form to changing conceptions of individual existence,
and its history can make us more conscious of how time bound, how culturally
determined is our sense of self. The course examines how artistic conventions
are established to give visual and tangible form to institutions, feelings,
and thoughts. Examples from a variety of periods with greater emphasis on the
Western tradition from the Renaissance to the present.



**

REQUIREMENTS:

**



There will be three writing assignments:

\- a response paper (2 pages) on reading E. H. Gombrich's _The Story of Art_
due on October 17,

\- a short looking assignment (2-3 pages) due on November 21,

\- and a longer paper (7-10 pages) due on December 14, 2000.

No late papers will be accepted without Professor Zerner's previous approval.

There will be a midterm test on October 31, 2000 and a final exam tentatively
on January 13, 2001.

The midterm test is intended only to assess your progress and will not be
counted for the final grade unless it raises it.

There will be two lectures a week.

Sections will begin the first week of October.

Weekly attendance and participation is required and will count for the final
grade.

Although this course does not demand a heavy load of reading, an important
part of the work consists in studying the visual material presented in
lectures, and works of art on exhibition in the Harvard University Art
Museums.

Slides will be available for study on the course webpage:
<http://www.fas.harvard.edu/portrait>





**































READINGS:

**



Since there is no prerequisite for this course, E. H. Gombrich's _The Story of
Art_ is assigned as a primer. This book is available at the Coop and Harvard
Book Store. Although specific chapters have been assigned in the weekly
syllabus of readings, it is strongly recommended that you read the book as
soon as possible (Introduction, Chapters 1 to 5, 11 to 16, 18 to 20, 23 to
Conclusion) especially if you have no previous familiarity with the general
history of Western art. This reading will give you the necessary chronological
structure to situate the works of art and to follow the course.



There is a sourcebook available from Harvard Printing and Publications
Services (HPPS), Science Center, Room B-10.



All required readings in the weekly syllabus are on reserve in Lamont, Hilles,
and Fine Arts Libraries. In addition, the following publications have been
placed on reserve at the Fine Arts Libraries as recommended general reading
and as a potential source for paper topics.



\- R. Barthes, _Camera Lucida: Reflections on Photography_ , Flamingo, 1984

\- H. Belting, _Likeness and Presence_ , Chicago, 1994

\- J. Breckenridge, _Likeness: A Conceptual History of Ancient Portraiture_ ,
Evanston, 1969

\- R. Brilliant, _Portraiture_ , Reaktion, 1991

\- Th. Heller (ed.), _Reconstructing Individualism in Western Thought_ ,
Stanford, 1986

\- J. Pope Hennessey, _The portrait in the Renaissance_ , Pantheon Books, 1966

\- J. Koerner, _The Moment of Self-Portraiture in German Renaissance Art_ ,
Chicago, 1993

\- F. Licht, _Goya: The origins of the Modern Temper in Art_ , Harper & Row,
1979

\- E. Panofsky, _Tomb Sculpture_ , Phaidon, 1992

\- M. Pointon, _Hanging the Head: Portraiture in 18th-c. England_ , Yale, 1993

\- Exhibition Catalogue, _The Romantics to Rodin_ , Braziller, 1980

\- J.-J. Rousseau, _Confessions_ , Penguin, 1954

\- L. Trilling, _Sincerity and Authenticity_ , Harvard, 1972

\- J. Walker, _Portraits: 5000 Years_ , Abrams, 1983

\- J. Woodall, _Portraiture Facing the Subject_ , Manchester, 1997



**

LECTURES** :

**

September

**

Tu. 19 Introduction: What is a Portrait ? The Role of Likeness

\- Henri Zerner, "The Portrait: Likeness and the Problem of Recognition",

_Il Ritratto e la Memoria_ , 1993: 111-121

Th. 21 Functions and Uses of the Portrait Today

\- Ernst Gombrich, _The Story of Art_ , Introduction, Chap. 1 and 2

Tu. 26 The Portrait as Substitute Body: Ancient Egypt

Th. 28 The Portrait as Moral Example: Ancient Greece

\- Ernst Gombrich, _The Story of Art_ , Chap. 3, 4, and 5

**

October

**

Tu. 03 The Portrait as Memorial: Ancient Rome

\- George Hanfmann, _Observations on Roman Portraiture_ , 1953: 33-50

\- Sheldon Nodelman, "How to read a Roman Portrait", _Art in America_ , 1975:
27-33

Th. 05 The Loss and Recovery of Likeness in the Middle Ages

\- Hans Belting, "Roman Funerary Portraits and Portraits of the Saints",

_Likeness and Presence_ , (1990), 1994: 78-101

Tu. 10 North and South in the Renaissance

\- John Shearman, "Portraits and Poets", _Only Connect_ , 1992: 108-148

\- Aby Warburg, "Bildniskunst und florentinisches Burgertum", (1902),

_Ausgew ahlte Schriften und Wurdigungen_, 1979: 69-87

Th. 12 Formats and Conventions of Western Portraiture: I - The Bust

\- Ernst Gombrich, _The Story of Art_ , Chap. 11 to 16

Tu. 17 Formats and Conventions of Western Portraiture: II - The State Portrait

\- Ernst Gombrich, _The Story of Art_ , Chap. 18-20, 23 to Conclusion

**

Hand in first writing assignment on Gombrich

**

Th. 19 Formats and Conventions of Western Portraiture: III - The Group
Portrait

\- Jonathan Sawday, "Self and Selfhood in the Seventeenth Century",

_Rewriting the Self,_ R. Porter (ed.), 1997: 29-48

\- Alois Riegl, "Group Portraiture of Holland", (1939),

_Holl andische Grouppenportrat_, (selection), 1971: 125-138, 209-217

Tu. 24 Theories of Physiognomy

\- Johann Caspar Lavater, "Essays on Physiognomy",

_Physiognomische Fragmente_ (selection), 1775: 13-19, 23-31, 113-122, 170-76

Th. 26 Reading Interiority

Tu. 31 **Midterm Test

**



**

November

**

Th. 02  _Mona Lisa

_

Tu. 07 Allegorical Portraiture

\- Andrew and Catherine Belsey, "Icons of Divinity: Portraits of Elizabeth I",
_Renaissance Bodies_ , 1990: 11-35

\- Marcia Pointon, "Graces, Bacchantes and 'Plain Folks':

Order and Excess in Reynolds's Female Portraits",

_British Journal for Eighteenth-Century Studies_ , 1994: 1-26

Th. 09 Excess

Tu. 14 The Portrait of Christ

Th. 16 _Las Meninas_ and its Legacy

\- Michel Foucault, " _Las Meninas_ ", _The Order of Things_ , (1966), 1971:
3-16

\- Leo Steinberg, "Velazquez's _Las Meninas_ ", _October_ _19_ , 1981: 345-354

Tu. 21 The Photographic Revolution

\- Abigail Solomon-Godeau, "The Legs of the Countess", _October_ _39_ , 1986:
65-108

**

Hand in the Second Writing Assignment

**

Th. 23 **Thanksgiving

**

Tu. 28 The Portrait Identity and the Law

\- Alan Sekula, "The Body and the Archive", _October_ _39_ , 1986: 3-64

Th. 30 The Mask and the Face

**

December**

Tu. 05 Designing Oneself: The Body as Image

\- Norman Bryson, "Morimura: Readings", _Art + Text,_ 1995: 74-79

Th. 07 Modern Art and the Abstract Portrait

Tu. 12 Contemporary Art and Photographic Portraiture

\- Harold Rosenberg, "A Meditation on Likeness", _Avedon: Portraits_ , 1976:
177-186

\- Benjamin Buchloh, "Residual Resemblance: Three Notes on the Ends of
Portraiture",  _Face-Off_ , 1994: 53-68

Th. 14 Self-Portraiture

**

Hand in third writing assignment

**

Tu. 19 The Portrait Reconsidered: The Self as Subject

Th. 21 **Winter recess

**

**

January

**

Sat. 13 **Final Exam** (Tentative Date)

