[![](../images/rel_dept.gif)](../index.html)[![Return to RU Main
Menu](../images/rulogo-white.gif)](http://www.rutgers.edu)





840:101  ![](../images/redbullet3.gif) Introduction to Religion  
![](../images/redrule.gif)  
_**open to 1** **st** **Year students and Sophomores only**_

**Winter 1999-2000

****

Time and Place: **Th 12/23, M-S 1/3-1/8, M-F 1/10-1/14 (8:30-1:00), SC 205/CAC

**

[Dr. James Pavlin](../j_pavlin.html)**

**

Office: **Rm. 130 Loree Bldg. DC  
**Phone & Voice Mail: ** (732) 932-2107  
**Office Hours:** after class or by appointment **  
e-mail:** jpavlin@hotmail.com

![](../images/redrule.gif)

**SYLLABUS**

**Course Description:** The course is designed to introduce the student to the
critical analysis of the role of religion in human societies. Starting with a
discussion of the definition of religion and the various methods for studying
religion, the student will gain a broad perspective on the scope of the
problems related to the discipline. The student will then approach the major
motifs identified as religious, with the aim of examining, from a mainly
anthropological point of view, the various phenomena related to the spiritual
experience.

> * * *

**

Required Texts:

**

Baird, Robert D. _Category Formation and the History of Religions.

_

de Waal Malefijt, Annemarie. _Religion and Culture: an Introduction to
Anthropology of Religion.

_

Lessa, William A. and Evon Z. Vogt. _Reader in Comparative Religion: an
Anthropological_ _Approach.

_**

Recommended books on reserve at Library: TBA

> * * *

Course Requirements:

1) **Class Attendance and Participation (20% of final grade): Besides their
physical presence in the class, students are expected to contribute to general
class discussions. Additionally, each student will give one or more brief
presentations (depending on class size) based on assigned readings. Also,
material covered in class lectures and discussions will be included on the
exams.

2) Four Topical Papers (40% of final grade based on the average of the four
papers): Each paper should have a cover page and be 2 pages in length. These
papers will be coordinated with the students' classroom presentations.
Students will be assigned readings from the selections in Lessa and Vogt as
indicated in the syllabus. The papers should show that the student has grasped
specific issues and can discuss them within the context of broader
perspectives. Papers should be in standard format: typed or printed on white
paper with 1 in. margins and double-spaced, a plain font at 10 or 12 point,
black ink.

3) Final Exam (40% of final grade): In class, closed book and notes exam
consisting of short answer identifications and essay questions.

> > * * *

**

Policies: **Students are expected to attend each class and be prepared for
class by reading all required assignments. Excused absences will be given to
students who present some form of official documentation (doctor's note,
etc.). Students are responsible for information presented in the lectures as
well as what is contained in the required readings, all of which may appear on
the exams. Recommended readings are optional and meant for those who wish to
explore certain topics in depth.

Assignments must be handed in on time. Unexcused late assignments handed in
within one week of due date will have a half grade deducted. After one week,
they will not be accepted. An unexcused missed final exam will receive a
failure, no make-ups are permitted. (Emergency situations, as in all cases,
will be taken into consideration.) Incompletes for this course ordinarily will
not be given.

> > * * *

**

Grading system: **A=100-90, B+=89-87, B=86-80, C+=79-77, C=76-70, D=69-65,
F=64 and below.

> > * * *

**

Course Outline and Reading Assignments

**

(Caution! chapters and page numbers may not correspond to students' editions):

> > * * *

**The Science of Religion**

> > 12/23 Baird, chs. 1-3, pp. 1-53

>>

>>> > de Waal Malefijt, chs. 1-3, pp. 1-80

>>>>

>>>> Lessa and Vogt, Forward, Preface and Intro., pp. v-6

>>>>

>>>> The Science of Religion (continued)

>>

>> 1/3 Baird, chs. 4-5, pp. 54-154

>>

>> de Waal Malefijt, ch. 4, pp. 81-103

>>

>>> > Prehistoric Religions and Functions of Religion

>>>>

>>>> 1/4 de Waal Malefijt, chs. 5, pp. 104-144, & 12, pp. 290-328

>>>>

>>>> Lessa and Vogt, chs. 1-2, pp. 7-89; presentations (1-9); first paper due

>>>

>>> Religious Beliefs

>>

>> _

>>

>> _ 1/5 de Waal Malefijt, ch. 6, pp. 145-171

>>

>> Lessa and Vogt, ch. 3, pp. 90-166; presentations (10-18)

>>

>>> > > Myth and Ritual

>>

>> 1/6 de Waal Malefijt, ch. 7, pp. 172-195

>>

>> Lessa and Vogt, ch. 4, pp. 167-219; presentations (19-23)

>>

>>> > Religious Communication

>>>>

>>>> 1/7 de Waal Malefijt, ch. 8, pp. 196-227

>>

>> Lessa and Vogt, ch. 5, pp. 220-300; presentations (24-32); second paper due

>>

>>> Religious Specialists

>>>

>>>> 1/8 de Waal Malefljt, ch. 9, pp. 228-245

>>>>

>>>> Lessa and Vogt, ch. 6, pp. 301-33 1; presentations (33-37)

>>>>

>>>> Religious Healing

>>

>> 1/10 de Waal Malefljt, ch. 10, pp. 246-270

>>

>>> > Lessa and Vogt, ch. 7, pp. 332-379; presentations (38-44); third paper
due

>>

>> * * *

**Witchcraft and Sorcery**

> > 1/11 de Waal Malefljt, ch. 1 1, pp. 271-289

>>

>>> > Lessa and Vogt, ch. 8, pp. 380-412; presentations (45-48)

>>

>> * * *

**Religious Change**

> > 1/12 de Waal Malefljt, ch. 13, pp. 329-359

>>

>>> > Lessa and Vogt, ch, 9, pp. 413-454; presentations (49-54); fourth paper
due

>>>>

>>>> 1/13 Reading Period (or snow emergency make-up day)

>>>>

>>>> 1/14 Final Exam

  ![](../images/redrule.gif)  
[Home](../index.html) | [Requirements](http://) | [Fall Courses](fall_99.html)
| [Winter Session](winter_00.html) | [Spring Courses](spring_00.html) |
[Summer Session](summer_00.html)

Last updated: 12/15/99 [![Return to RU Main Menu](../images/rulogo-
white.gif)](http://www.rutgers.edu)  
---

