# **COGNITIVE SCIENCE**

# **PSYCHOLOGY 455**

###  Syllabus-Spring 2002

### Gordon M. Redding

Study the following syllabus carefully and keep it for later reference. All
course requirements and procedures are given here. Students are responsible
for all information contained in this syllabus.

# **Tentative Schedule**

The following is a tentative schedule of lecture topics, reading assignments,
and exams for the semester. Adjustments in the schedule may be made contingent
upon the progress of the course, but advance notice will be given for any such
changes.



[INTRODUCTION](1CognitiveScience/CogSci.html): Cognitive Science (A
Disciplinary Inter-Disciplinary Study of Mind)

  * A. What is Cognitive Science? (Basic Issues and History)
  * B. The Cognitive Sciences (Subject Matters and Methods)

**Reading Assignment: Stillings, et al., Chap. 1**

**TOC: I. Basics**

[I.ARCHITECTURE OF MIND](2CognitivePsychology/CogPsy.html): Cognitive
Psychology (Manipulating Mind through Behavior)

  * A. Cognitive Architecture (Representation and Process)
  * B. Topics in Cognitive Psychology (Concepts, Memory, Reasoning, Problem Solving)

**Reading Assignment: Stillings, et al., Chaps. 2, 3**

**TOC: I. Basics**

**TOC: II. Introduction to Computers**

**TOC: IV. Connectionism**

[II.CREATION OF MIND](3ArtificialIntelligence/AI.html): Artificial
Intelligence (Simulation of Mind by Computer)

  * A. Knowledge Representation (Lexicon, Structure, Access Procedures, Semantics)
  * B. Program Architecture (Nets and Search, Program Control, Learning)

**Reading Assignment: Stillings, et al., Chaps. 4, 5**

**TOC: II. Introduction to Computers**

**TOC: III. Illustrative Robots**

**EXAMINATION ONE: 13 FEBRUARY**

[III.LANGUAGE AND MIND](4Linguistics/Linguistics.html): Linguistics (Observing
Mind in Language)

  * A. Linguistic Competence (Grammars: Representation of Linguistic Knowledge)
  * B. Linguistic Performance (Natural Language Processing, Psycholinguistics)

**Reading Assignment: Stillings, et al., Chaps. 6, 9, 11**

**TOC: III.B. Robots Using Symbols**

[IV.NATURE OF MIND](5Philosophy/Philosophy.html): Philosophy (Arguing Mind
from Logic)

  * A. The Foundational Role of Philosophy (Ontology and Epistemology)
  * B. The Contributory Role of Philosophy (Semantics: Approaches to Meaning)

**Reading Assignment: Stillings, et al., Chaps. 8, 10**

**TOC: I. Basics**

**TOC: II. Introduction to Computers**

**EXAMINATION TWO: 27 MARCH**

[V.PHYSICAL BASIS OF MIND](6Neuroscience/Neuroscience.html): Neuroscience
(Correlating Mind and Brain)

  * A. Nervous System Structure (Organization, Brain Facts, Computation)
  * B. Topics in Cognitive Neuroscience (Two Visual Systems, Lateralization)

**Reading Assignment: Stillings, et al., Chap. 7**

**TOC: V.A. Introduction to Neurons in the Brain**

[VI.COMPUTATIONS & CONNECTIONS](7Connections/Connections.html): Case Study in
Vision

  * A. Symbol Manipulation Models (Constrained Computation, Modularity)
  * B. Neural Network Models (Parallel, Distributed Processing, Hidden Units, Learning)

**Reading Assignment: Stillings, et al., Chap.12**

**TOC: IV. Connectionism**

**TOC: V. Artificial Neural Networks**

**EXAMINATION THREE: 1 MAY**

**REVIEW PAPER DUE: 8 MAY, 1:00 PM**

**Office** : 429 Degarmo Hall

**Office Hours** : 2:00-2:50 PM Monday, Wednesday, Friday

**Voice Mail** : 309-438-8387

**Email** : gredding@ilstu.edu

**Textbook**

Stillings, N.A., Weisler, S.E., Chase, C.H., Feinstein, M.H, Garfield, J.L,
Rissland, E.L. (1995). _Cognitive science: An introduction_ , 2nd Ed.
Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press.

**Mind Project Table of Contents (TOC)**

[http://www.mind.ilstu.edu/webapps/toc/toc.php?class=isupsy455&list=1](http://www.mind.ilstu.edu/webapps/toc/toc.php?class=isupsy455&list=1)

**Supplemental Sources**

Anderson, J.R. (1990). _Cognitive psychology and its implications_ , 3rd Ed.
San Francisco: Freeman.

Bechtel, W. (1988). _Philosophy of mind: An overview for cognitive science_.
Hillsdale, NJ.: Erlbaum.

Churchland, P.S., & Sejnowski, T.J. (1992). _The computational brain_.
Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press.

Copeland, J. (1993). _Artificial intelligence: A philosophical introduction_.
Cambridge, MA.: Blackwell.

Dawson, M. R. W. (1998). _Understanding cognitive science_. Oxford, UK:
Blackwell.

Estes, W.K. (1988). Toward a framework for combining connectionist and
symnbol-processing models. _Journal of Memory and Language, 27_ , 196-212.

Gardner, H. (1985). _The mind's new science: A history of the cognitive
revolution_. New York: Basic Books.

Gardner, M. (1996). _The night is large: Collected essays, 1938-1995_. New
York: St. Martin's Press. (Chap. 35: The Mystery of Free Will; Chap. 36:
Computers near the Threshold?).

Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1983). _Mental models_. Cambridge, MA.: University Press.

Komatsu, L. K., Ed. (1994). _Experimenting with the mind: Readings in
cognitive psychology_. Pacific Grove, CA.: Brooks/Cole.

Kosslyn, S.M., & Koenig, O. (1992). _Wet mind: The new cognitive
neuroscience_. New York: Free Press.

Langacker, R.W. (1986). _An introduction to cognitive grammar_. Cognitive
Science, 10, 1-40.

Leiber, J. (1991). _An inviation to cognitive science_. Cambridge, MA.:
Blackwell.

Luger, G.F. (1994). _Cognitive science: The science of intelligent systems_.
New York: Academic Press.

Marr, D. (1982). _Vision: A computational investigation into the human
representation and processing of visual information_. San Francisco: Freeman

Norman, D. (1980). Twelve issues for cognitive science. _Cognitive Science, 4_
, 1-32.

Quinland, P. T. (1991). Connectionism and psychology. Chicago, IL.: University
of Chicago Press.

Solso, R. L., & Massaro, D. W., Eds. (1995). _The science of the mind: 2001
and beyond_. New York: Oxford University Press.

Sperry, R. W. (1993). The impact and promise of the cognitive revolution.
American Psychologist, 48, 878-885. In R. L. Solso and D. W. Massaro (Eds.),
_The science of the mind: 2001 and beyond_ (pp. 35-). New York: Oxford
University Press.

von Eckardt, B. (1993). _What is cognitive science?_ Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Winston, P.H. (1992). _Artificial intelligence_ , 3rd. Ed. New York: Addison-
Wesley.

**Course Orientation**

The course will provide a broad survey of related efforts in the disciplines
of Cognitive Science. A lecture format will be employed with assigned readings
from a primary textbook. In depth coverage of any particular discipline/topic
will be necessarily limited, however, the supplemental sources for lectures
provide more extended introductions to each area. Also, when the opportunity
arises, guest lecturers will provide special expertise.

**Evaluation**

Three 100-point, essay-format examinations will be given. In place of a final
examination will be a 100-point review-type paper (APA format), focusing on a
subtopic of Cognitive Science selected by the student in consultation with the
Professor. This final paper must go beyond the level of treatment in lectures
and text, and must span at least two subdisciplines of cognitive science.
Students are urged to settle on their paper topics early in the semester. The
course grade will be based on percentage of the total possible 400 points
(three exams and one paper): 90, 80, 70, and 60 percent for A, B, C, and D,
respectively.



  **Any student in need of a special accommodation**

**should contact 438-5853 (voice) or 438-8620 (TDD)**

