**

AMERICAN HISTORY I** (H105, section C882) -- Fall1999

Lecture Hall [LE] 102

Mondays and Wednesdays, 10-10:50 am

DISCUSSION SECTIONS:

H105, **C883** : Mondays, 11-11:50 am, Science/Engineering II [SL] 110  
H105, **C884** : Mondays, 12 noon-12:50 pm, Cavanaugh Hall [CA] 226  
H105, **C885** : Wednesday, 11-11:50 am, Science/Engineering II [SL] 110  
H105, **C886** : Wednesdays, 12 noon-12:50 pm, Cavanaugh Hall [CA] 226  
H105, **C887** : Wednesdays, 1-1:50 pm, Science/Engineering III [LD] 018

Dr. Marianne S. Wokeck | Ms. Ginny Gottman  
---|---  
Cavanaugh Hall [CA] 503N | Cavanaugh Hall [CA] 001-D  
phone: 274-5820 [= voice mail] | phone: 274-2571 [= voice mail]  
e-mail: MWOKECK@IUPUI.EDU | e-mail: VGGOTTMA@IUPUI.EDU  
office hours: Mondays, 1-2 pm; Tuesdays, 4-5 pm; Wednesdays, 8:30-9:30 am; and
by appointment | office hours: Mondays, 1-2 pm; Wednesdays, 9-10 am; and by
appointment  
  
_**Please note:**_ This syllabus and other course materials can be found
linked to **oncourse** (http://oncourse.iupui.edu/) and on the **home page of
the Department of History** (http://www.iupui.edu/it/history/History.html).
You can get to the site from the IUPUI home page (http://www.iupui; from
there, click on ACADEMICS; then SCHOOLS; then IU SCHOOL OF LIBERAL ARTS; then
RELATED PAGES; then DEPARTMENT OF HISTORY; then COURSE DESCRIPTIONS and
SYLLABI/COURSE HANDOUTS; then H105-H106).

BOOKS (available at University bookstore [not shelved very systematically];
Follet=s; and online):

**

All students should own and must read:

**

John M. Murrin et al, _Liberty, Equality, Power: A History of the American
People_. Volume 1: To 1877 (Fort Worth: Harcourt Brace, 2d edition, 1999).
This textbook is shrink-wrapped with the accompanying U.S. History Documents
Package (2d edition, 1999).

Kathryn Zabelle Derounian-Stodola, ed., _Women =s Indian Captivity Narratives_
(New York: Penguin Books, 1998).

Louis H. Gates, Jr., ed., _Classic Slave Narratives_ (New York: Penguin Books,
1987) {The Life of Olaudah Equiano [pp. 3-145]; Narrative of the Life of
Frederick Douglass [pp. 245-331] **or** Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl
[pp. 335-515]}.

COURSE OBJECTIVES AND REQUIREMENTS:

This course introduces students to a variety of basic topics and perspectives
in American History. In particular, the course explores the nation=s history
through different kinds of readings and by addressing questions about the
texts and the reconstruction and interpretation of the past. The reading and
writing assignments constitute the core of the course, which follows a format
of lectures with class discussion. Students need to calculate on average at
least four hours each week of reading and writing (in addition to the
scheduled class time) in order to be properly prepared to take part in class
discussion and to complete the course successfully. Regular class attendance
and participation in discussion sections is mandatory.

Grading will be based on **several tests and assignments** : two _mid-terms_
(the better of the two counts 20%) and a _final_ (30%). These tests are a
combination of identifications, true-false questions, multiple-choice
questions, short-answer, and essay questions. The selection, summary, and
analysis of one primary source from the U.S. History Documents Package counts
for 30 percent of the semester grade. The remaining 20 percent of the semester
grade is based on the students = practice of professional behavior and
civility that normally count among the prerequisites for college courses.
Students who observe the rules and instructions concerning punctuality,
attendance, class participation, and assignments will receive a satisfactory
grade (C) for this portion of the course; those who do not follow the rules of
professional and civil conduct will fail this part. Students whose
participation in class discussion is exemplary and those who submit an
extensive class journal that includes notes about lectures and discussions as
well as notes about the reading assignments can thereby raise an average grade
for this segment of the course. Content will count most heavily in all written
work, but grammar, spelling, and style will affect grade.

Students who do **satisfactory** work can expect the average grade of  "C" (72
points on a scale of 100 points maximum) in accordance with the academic
regulations stated in the _Bulletin_ , p. 17; students whose work is **above
average** will receive grades of  "C+" to "B+" (76 to 88 points on a scale of
100); for demonstrable **excellence** in their work students can achieve an
"A-" (92-95 points) or "A" (96-99 points); AA+@ is for a perfect score of 100
points. Less than 50 points represent **unacceptable** work and hence carry
the failing grade of  "F"; "C-" to "D-" (68 to 50 points on a scale of 100)
constitute **below average** work. For calculation of the semester grade,
improvement over the course of the semester is an important consideration and
can raise the final grade above the mathematical average. All assignment have
to be handed in on time. Tardiness carries a penalty: for every day an
assignment is late, one-third of a letter grade is subtracted from the earned
grade. For example, a B+ assignment will be lowered to a B-, if it was two
days late.

Directions for class attendance and assignments (particular instructions will
be available on net: Department of History home-page):

Each student can miss four classes--no questions asked--without failing the
class (counting all lectures and discussions together; not four lectures and
four discussion sections separately).

Each student will also be responsible for selecting one primary source from
the U.S. History Documents Package in order to summarize and analyze it. All
selections need the instructors= approval, who--together with the student--
will also determine when the assignment is due. As with the other assignments
of that kind, the summary and analysis of the selected primary source needs to
be typed (double-spaced, standard one-inch margins; with the name of the
student and date of the assignment clearly marked in the right-hand, top
corner), and they are due in duplicate (be sure to save all of your course
work on disk until the end of the semester).

Each student is encouraged to create and maintain a journal of notes about the
lectures; discussions; and readings.

Students are expected to take tests and exams at the appointed time and hand
in written assignments in class the day they are due (assignments will not be
accepted after class on the designated date). Students who for extraordinary
reasons cannot meet a deadline should discuss their situation with the
instructors **before the due date.

**

Polite as well as professional conduct requires that students are punctual and
keep any scheduled appointment (that includes lectures and discussion
sections). If unforeseen and unavoidable circumstances prevent students from
meeting at the appointed time, they should inform the instructors of the
situation as soon as possible.

University policy is that the grade of "Incomplete" should be assigned only to
students who have successfully completed most of the course work and who have
been prevented by significant and unanticipated circumstances from finishing
all requirements. Removal of "Incomplete" grades is often troublesome for both
student and instructor, I will be reluctant to assign them.

Cheating on exams and other forms of intellectual dishonesty, notably
plagiarism, will not be tolerated, will result in a failing grade on the work
in question, may mean a failing semester grade, and may lead to disciplinary
action by the university. Consult the _Indiana University Bulletin, 1998-2000:
School of Liberal Arts_ , p. 20-21, or the relevant parts about academic
misconduct published in the _Code of Student Ethics_ for the university's
rules on academic misconduct.

COURSE OUTLINE and READING ASSIGNMENTS (assignments are due at the beginning
of the week unless noted or announced otherwise):

week 1 **Organization and Introduction

**

> Aug 25

week 2 **When Old Worlds Collide: Contact, Conquest, Catastrophe**

> Sept 1, 3 _Liberty, Equality, Power_ , chapter 1

week 3 **The Challenge to Spain and the Settlement of North America

**

> Sept 8 _Liberty, Equality, Power_ , chapter 2; document: chapter 2, #10

week 4 **England Discovers Its Colonies: Empire, Liberty, and Expansion

**

> **

>

> **Sept 13, 15 _Liberty, Equality, Power_ , chapter 3; document: chapter 3,
#20 **

>

> **

> > > > 1st MID-TERM: September 15

week 5 **Provincial America and the Struggle for a Continent

**

> **

>

> **Sept 20, 22 _Liberty, Equality, Power_ , __ chapter 4; document: chapter
4, #27; _Women =s Indian Captivity Narratives_, pp. 3-79 [@Mary Rowlandson;
Hannah Dustan; Elizabeth Hanson@] **

>

> **

week 6 **Reform, Resistance, Revolution

**

> **

>

> **Sept 27, 29 _Liberty, Equality, Power_ , chapter 5; document: chapter 5,
#38 **

>

> **

week 7 **The Revolutionary Republic

> ** Oct 4, 6 _Liberty, Equality, Power_ , chapter 6; document: chapter 6, #43
**

**

> > > DISCUSSION: AOlaudah Equiano,@ in: _Slave Narratives_ , pp. 3-145

week 8 **The Democratic Republic, 1790-1820

**

> Oct 11, 13 _Liberty, Equality, Power_ , chapter 7; document: chapter 7, #48

> > > > 2nd MID-TERM: Oct 13

week 9 **Completing the Revolution, 1789-1815

**

> **

>

> Oct 18, 20 _Liberty, Equality, Power_ , chapter 8; document: chapter 8, #52;
_Women =s Indian Captivity Narratives_, pp.81-210 [@=Panther Captivity=;
Jemima Howe; Mary Kinnan; Mary Jamison@]

>

> **

week 10 **The Market Revolution, 1815-1860

**

> Oct 25, 27 _Liberty, Equality, Power_ , chapter 9; document: chapter 9, #59

week 11 **Toward an American Culture

**

> Nov 1, 3 _Liberty, Equality, Power_ , chapter 10; document: chapter 10, #61

week 12 **Society, Culture, Politics, 1820s-1840s

**

> Nov 8, 10 _Liberty, Equality, Power_ , chapter 11; document: chapter 11, #72

week 13 **Jacksonian Democracy

> ** Nov 15, 17 _Liberty, Equality, Power_ , chapter 12; document: chapter 12,
#76; _Women =s Indian Captivity Narratives_, pp. 213-40 [@Mary Godfrey@] **

**

week 14 **Manifest Destiny: An Empire for Liberty Bor Slavery?

**

> **

>

> **Nov 22 _Liberty, Equality, Power_ , chapter 13 **

>

> **

_**

THANKSGIVING** (24-28 Nov [= no classes])

_

week 15 **Manifest Destiny: An Empire for Liberty Bor Slavery?

**

> **

>

> **Nov 29, Dec 1 _Liberty, Equality, Power_ , chapter 13; document: chapter
13, #80; _Women =s Indian Captivity Narratives_, pp. 237-337 [@Sarah
Wakefield; Emeline Fuller@] **

>

> ** DISCUSSION: AFrederick Douglass@ or AHarriet Jacobs,@ in: _Slave
Narratives_ , pp. 245-331 or pp. 335-515 **

>

> ** SUBMISSION OF COURSE JOURNAL [= optional] **

>

> ** (due: Dec 1); also: Dec 1 is the absolute deadline for formal, written
assignment(s) **

>

> **

week 16 **The Gathering Tempest, 1853-1860

**

> **

>

> **Dec 6, 8 _Liberty, Equality, Power_ , chapter 14; document: chapter 14,
#90 **

>

> **

week 16 **Secession and Civil War, 1860-1862** and **A New Birth of Freedom,
1863-1865

**

> **

>

> **Dec 13 _Liberty, Equality, Power_ , chapters 15 and 16; documents: chapter
15, #96; and chapter 16, #102

> **FINAL** : Monday, December 20, 10:30 am-12:30 pm (cf. _Schedule_ , p. 161)

