HSS2: Texts and Contexts, 1500-1800

Course Requirements     Course Materials     Schedule

Spring 2001 T, 9-llam; Th 12-l pm

Kirsten Schultz  
Office: 114E A7  
Office Hours: T, 12-lpm; Th, 1-2pm & appointment phone: (212) 353-4278

email: [schultz@cooper.edu](mailto:schultz@cooper.edu)

In "Texts and Contexts, 1500-1800" students will read a range of texts from
the Renaissance through the Enlightenment. In each case we will discuss the
nature of literary expression and its relationship to the historical contexts
in which texts were written, read and performed. In doing so we will trace a
number of themes: the European encounter with the New World, the nature of
politics and governance, the relationship between religion and politics, the
origins of modern science, and the rise of political and economic
individualism. In general, the course will provide a forum in which students
may gain an understanding of political and cultural criticism through careful
reading, discussion and writing.

COURSE REQUIREMENTS:

Attendance, participation and presentations: Students are required to attend
class and purposefully participate in discussions of the readings. Failure to
attend class and prepare for discussions will significantly lower a student's
grade. Students will also be required to make at least two formal
presentations of assigned readings. The specific goals and length of these
presentations will be discussed in class.

Papers: Students must complete three writing assignments, each approximately 7
pages in length. The topics, to be distributed and discussed in class, will be
based on assigned readings only. Early in the semester we will be visited by a
representative from the Center for Writing and Speaking who will discuss
writing and the resources available to students writing papers.

Exam: We will have a final exam on the last day of class. The exam will be
cumulative. The format for the exam will be discussed in class.

Plagiarism: As defined by the Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences,
plagiarism is the intentional and unintentional "presentation of another
person's words, phrases, ideas or conclusions as your own." It may take the
form of "repeating another person's sentences or phrases as your own,
presenting another person's argument as your own, letting another person write
your paper, or purchasing a paper for submission under your name." Students
should be advised that I consider plagiarism to be an offense against me and
your classmates and that in the past I have enforced punitive measures. At The
Cooper Union these include a grade of F for the assignment, informing the Dean
of the infraction, and instruction on plagiarism at The Center for Writing and
Speaking. If you have any questions about how to avoid plagiarizing you should
discuss this with me or with a tutor from the Center for Writing and Speaking.

Course grades will be determined as follows:

Attendance/Preparedness/Participation: 15  
Oral Presentations: 10%  
Papers: 60% (20% each paper)  
Exam: 15%

COURSE MATERIALS:

The following required texts are available for purchase at Shakespeare and Co.
(Broadway):

More, Thomas, Utopia. Edited by Robert Adams, 2"d ed. (New York: Norton, 1992)

Portilla, Miguel Leon, ed. The Broken Spears: The Aztec Account of the
Conquest of Mexico (Boston: Beacon Press, 1992)

Shakespeare, William, The Tempest. Edited by Stephen Orgel (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1987)

Kuhn, Thomas, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 3`d ed. (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1996)

Rousseau, Jean Jacques. Political Writings. Edited by Alan Ritter. (New York:
Norton, 1987)

Franklin, Benjamin. The Autobiography and Other Writings. Edited by Jesse
Lermisch. (ICY. Signet, 1961)

Additional required readings, indicated in the schedule below, are either 1)
on reserve at The Cooper Union library or 2) available on-line at the address
indicated in the schedule.

SCHEDULE OF CLASSES:

1/18 (l h): Introduction: review of syllabus and requirements

\- Old Worlds -

1/23 (2h): Reading: Christopher Columbus, "Narrative of the Third Voyage..."
(1498-1500) (handout)

1/25 (lh): Writing Center visit.

1/30 (2h): Reading: More, Utopia, Book One, 3-30

-New Worlds -

2/1 (1h): Reading: More, Utopia, Book Two, 30-48

2/6 (2h): Reading: More, Utopia, Book Two, 48-85

2/8 (1h): Assignment: Visit the New York Public Library on-line exhibition
"Utopia: The Search for the  
Ideal Society in the Western World" at:  
<http://www.nypl.org/admin/pro/exhibit/chssex.html#utopia>

In class we will discuss the exhibit as a whole, but you should be prepared to
comment on at least one of the sections ("Sources," "Other Worlds," "Utopian
History," "Dreams and Nightmares" or "Metaworlds") and the understandings of
utopia that it provides. Identify one image, and print a copy of the image to
bring to class, which you think provides an insightful, provocative or
misunderstood rendering of utopia.

2/13 (2h): Reading: The Broken Spears, "Forward" and "Introduction," xi-xxiv
and xxv-xlix

2/15 (1h): Reading: The Broken Spears, 3-90

2/16-2/19: Founder's Day Break

2/20 (2h): Reading: The Broken Spears, 91-158

2/22 (lh): Reading: documents on the African slave trade in Robert Conrad,
Children of God's Fire: A Documentary History of Black Slavery in Brazil,
51-15 (On reserve)

2/27 (2h): Reading: "De Las Casas- Sepulveda Debate," 24-45 (On Reserve) and
Montaigne, "Of Cannibals" in The Tempest, 227-238. First Paper Due

3/1 (Ih): Reading: Shakespeare, The Tempest: "Introduction," 30-39 and Act 1

3/6 - 3/13: Reading: Tempest, Acts 2-5

\- Revolutions: Politics and Science -

3/15 (lh): Reading: Galileo, "Letter to the Grand Duchess of Tuscany" (1615)
at <http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/galileo-tuscany.html>; and Thomas Kuhn,
The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 1-51

3/17-3/25: Spring Break

3/27 (2h): Reading: Francis Bacon, "Idols of the Tribe" (1620) in Galileo's
Commandment, 88-91 (On Reserve); and Kuhn, 52-91

3/29 (1h): Reading: Descartes, "Discourse on Method" (1637) at
[http://www.wsu.edu:8080/~wldciv/world_civ_reader/world_civ_reader_2/descartes.html](http://www.wsu.edu:8080/%7Ewldciv/world_civ_reader/world_civ_reader_2/descartes.html);
and Kuhn, 92-143

4/3 (2h): Reading: Issac Newton and Robert Hooke, "Dispute on the Nature of
Light" (1672) in Galileo's Commandment, 184-192; and Kuhn, 144-210 Second
Paper Due

4/5 (1h): Reading: Rousseau, "Discourse on the Origins and Foundations of
Inequality Among Men," in Political Writings, 3-57

4/10 (2h): Reading: Olympe de Gouges, "Declaration of the Rights of Women"
(1791) at
[http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1791degougel.html](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1791degouge1.html);
and Judith N. Shklar, "Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Equality" in Political
Writings, 260-273.

4/12 (lh): Reading: Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations, Book 4, ch. l-3 and ch.
8, available at: <http://art-bin.com/art/oweala.html>

4/17 (2h): Reading: Franklin, "Introduction" vii-xiii; and The Autobiography,
15-82

4/19 (lh): Reading: Franklin, 82-146

4/24 (2h): Reading: Franklin, 146-180

4/26 (lh): Reading: Thomas Jefferson, Notes on the State of Virginia (1780s)
at
[http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/P/tj3/writings/slavery.htm](http://odur.let.rug.nl/%7Eusa/P/tj3/writings/slavery.htm)

5/1(2h): Simon Bolivar, "Message to the Congress of Angostura" (1819) at
<http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1819bolivar.html>

Third Paper Due

5/3 (lh): Review for Exam

5/8 (2h): Exam



