![](../../../images/r.jpg)  
---  
|   | **Fall 2000**  
 **POL 1201  
Political Ideas and Ideologies**  
---|---  
![](../../../images/2-courses.jpg)  
|

POL 1201 Fall 2000

Professor Lisa Disch Tu/Thur 11:15-12:30

1472 Social Science Tower Blegen 235

626-7825; LDISCH@POLISCI.UMN.EDU

**COURSE DESCRIPTION**

What is the secret to a well-ordered and lasting political community? At one
time, political order was understood to follow from the order of nature.
Rulership, in turn, was believed to be reserved to those few who could master
some form of knowledge-from the timeless truths of philosophy to the time-
bound lessons of political strategy and political honor. Today, we no longer
appeal to nature to justify our political institutions, and we have thoroughly
rejected the notion that political rule should be the prerogative of an
educated elite. Instead, we understand political legitimacy to be based on the
consent of the people. But the principle of popular consent opens up another
question in its own turn: who is qualified to speak for the people? The first
theorists of consent put property in the place of knowledge as the foundation
of a stable political order. Compared to what had gone before, this was
certainly a more democratic basis for political rule. But it ignited various
debates, many of which continue even today, regarding the meaning of ownership
and self-ownership, the debts (e.g. taxation, military service) that citizens
owe to the state, and the interrelationship of property and slavery.

These are the questions we will explore in this introductory-level political
theory class. The class is designed for political science majors and non-
majors. It assumes no prior knowledge of political theory.

**LEARNING OBJECTIVES**

This is a liberal arts course whose principal objective is for students to
deepen their appreciation for the political ideas of Plato, Machiavelli, John
Locke, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Karl Marx, Malcolm X, Martin Luther King and
others, by putting their writings to work on our world. We will realize this
objective, in part, through close reading. These are dense and difficult
texts; your weekly reading load is calculated to encourage you to read them
more than once. We will also realize the objective by banishing mid-term and
final exams, which principally test for mastery of content, in favor of
writing assignments that develop critical thinking, together with its
expression in clear, cogent writing. This class uses writing to learn (in-
class exercises, not graded), as well as writing to produce graded
assignments. I have designed the writing assignments of the course to build
comprehension skills, promote critical reasoning, and structured them to
progress from simple to more complex forms of critical reasoning. We begin
with short "microtheme" assignments, move from there to short papers, and
finish with a persuasive essay that gives students the opportunity to write as
political theorists.

**REQUIRED BOOKS** (Available at Smith Bookstore)

Michael L. Morgan, ed. Classics of Moral and Political Theory. New York:
Hackett, second edition.

William Shakespeare. Julius Caesar. Washington Square Press.

**COPIES PACKET at Paradigm Course Resource (Dinkydale Dome; 1501 Washington
Ave, SE). Phone: 379-4590.

**OFFICE HOURS**

Tuesdays 1:00 - 2:30 and by appointment.

Location: 1472 Social Science Tower

Phone#: 626-7825

E-mail: [LDISCH@POLISCI.UMN.EDU](mailto:LDISCH@POLISCI.UMN.EDU)

If you have a question or problem between class and office-hour days, I
encourage you to communicate with me by e-mail. I am available for
appointments outside of my regular office hours; if you need to schedule such
an appointment, I encourage you to do so by e-mail.

**Note: Please do not submit written assignments by e-mail, under any
circumstances.

**ACCESSIBILITY**

If you have a condition that affects your ability to participate fully in
class or to meet all course requirements, please speak with me after the first
day of class so that we can work together to arrange appropriate
accommodations. This syllabus and other course materials can be made available
in alternate formats.

**COURSE EXPECTATIONS**

  * Be sure to attend class regularly and to always complete the assigned reading before the day we discuss it. You will learn more from this class and it will be more interesting to you if you are prepared. 
  * It may help your comprehension of assigned readings to read them more than once: before class and after it. 
  * Take responsibility for your own learning by participating actively in class. 
  * Participate in small-group discussion and exercises periodically throughout the quarter. 
  * Complete 3 microthemes; in-class writing exercises; one short paper; one final persuasive essay. ****

  * ABSENCES are your prerogative as adult college students, and your responsibility. You will see that in addition to due dates for microthemes and other assignments, I have noted on the syllabus: a) days when in-class writing is scheduled; b) days when assignments will be handed out. Because it is a stimulus to discussion, in-class writing cannot be made up; miss the discussion and you miss the point of the writing as well. If you miss class on a day when I distribute an assignment, you may pick up the assignment either at the next class meeting, or from an envelope outside the office of our teaching assistant. I do not send assignments out by e-mail unless you have an extended illness, or some other event that warrants special accommodations. ****

**Grading**

I observe the CLA standards for grading.

Your grade will be based on your performance on various written assignments.

3 Microthemes (15 pts each) 45 points

1 Short Paper 20 points

In-class writings 5 points

1 Take-Home Final: Persuasive Essay 30 points

TOTAL 100 points

Participatory Learning

Participatory learning is the classroom use of structured small group
interaction so that students work together to maximize their own and each
other's learning. Despite considerable research that demonstrates that
participatory learning is superior to traditional lecturing for developing
students' higher-level reasoning and fostering positive relationships among
students, it is infrequently practiced at the college level, particularly at
large public universities such as this one. In this class we will make use of
10-15 minute small-group discussions periodically throughout the quarter,
using the microthemes or the nightly reading questions as the basis for
discussion.

Microthemes

A microtheme is a short (200-300 word), focused response to a single question
that trains students to interpret part of the reading, or to "abstract" the
main points of an argument. It can also be a response to a critical question
that trains students in persuasive writing. This task builds reading
comprehension skills, gives practice in following and formulating arguments,
and prepares students to write critical essays of their own.

We score microthemes according to precise criteria, specified in advance, so
that your score gives you a clear idea of what you did well and where you need
improvement. You will receive fewer comments on your microthemes than you will
on your short paper and your take-home final; however, they will be returned
to you promptly so that you can learn from the labors of your peers. The day
we return microthemes, we will xerox and distribute high-scoring examples
(with names removed), and go over their strong points in class. The best
microthemes are written clearly and precisely in your own words. You should
cite the assigned reading (with specific page references) but not quote it
extensively. The very best also show creativity. NOTE: microthemes must be
typed and submitted on **one side of** a 5" x 8" index card.

Short Paper

The short paper assignment is an opportunity for you to put You can think of
the short paper (2-3pp max) as a long microtheme that treats two authors in
relation to each other rather than only one. In this short paper, you will use
Machiavelli's arguments about political knowledge to refute Plato's contention
that the well-ordered city would be ruled by the philosopher-king.

In-class Writings

These are short exercises that we will do at the beginning of class to help
focus your thoughts and stimulate discussion. We will collect but not grade
them. Try not to be late or absent on in-class writing days; your grade may be
affected if you miss more than one.

Final Exam

The final exam for this class is a take-home essay. It is not a research paper
but a persuasive essay in which you take a position on an assigned question
and execute an argument with specific references to assigned texts. This is
not a book report or summary of the reading. The position you take, while
expressed in your own words and organized by the points you want to make,
should be inspired by the theorists we have read in the course. Writing a
persuasive argument involves anticipating the probable counter-arguments that
an opponent would make from the other side and giving reasons to support your
position that implicitly refutes those likely responses. A persuasive essay is
like: 1) a letter to a friend with whom you strongly agree or disagree about a
particular topic; 2) an editorial or letter to the editor for the opinion page
of the newspaper.

**DAILY SCHEDULE OF ASSIGNMENTS**

CMPT = Classics in Moral and Political Theory

**Denotes Copies Packet

******I.** **Introduction**

Sept 5 Introduction; No Reading

Sept 7 How to read political theory:

**Plato, "Euthyphro"

**II.** **Knowledge and Rulership**

Sept 12 Plato, "The Apology," in CMPT, pp. 6-20.

**Distribute First Microtheme Assignment**

Sept 14 Plato, "The Apology," re-read.

Sept 19 Plato, _The Republic_ , Book I, in CMPT, pp. 32-54.

Sept 21 Plato, _The Republic_ , Book I, re-read.

****MICROTHEME #1 DUE**

Sept 26 Plato, _The Republic_ , Bk III 412c-419; Bk IV 427d-435, pp. 96-100;
106-112.

Sept 28 Plato, _The Republic_ , Bk VII 514- 521c, pp. 167-172.

****IN CLASS WRITING: "Does Our Society Have a Noble Fiction?"**

Oct 3 **Herbert Croly, _The Promise of American Life_ , chapter 1.

**Distribute Second Microtheme Assignment**

****

Oct 5 Machiavelli, _The Prince_ , in CMPT, read "Dedication to Lorenzo de
Medici" and chapter 1; skim chapters 2-5; read 6-11.

Oct 10 Machiavelli, _The Prince_ , read chapters 12-18.

****

Oct 12 Machiavelli, _The Prince_ , read chapter 21; skim 22-23; read 24-26.

****MICROTHEME #2 DUE**

Oct 17 William Shakespeare, _Julius Caesar_ , acts I-II.

**Distribute Short Paper Assignment**

Oct 19 William Shakespeare, _Julius Caesar_ , act III.

Oct 24 William Shakespeare, _Julius Caesar_ , acts IV-V.

Oct 26 Short Papers due: No Additional Reading; election exercise.

**III.** **Self-Ownership and Self-Government**

Oct 31 Locke, _Second Treatise_ , in CMPT, pp. 739-748.

Nov 2 Locke, _Second Treatise_ , re-read pp. 739-748; read 748-755.

Nov 7 Rousseau, _The Second Discourse_ , in CMPT, pp. 847-862 & corresponding
footnotes.

**Distribute third microtheme assignment.**

Nov 9 Rousseau, _The Second Discourse_ , pp. 862-874 & corresponding
footnotes.

Nov 14 Rousseau, _The Second Discourse_ , pp. 874-83 (thru end of top
paragraph); 890-91& footnotes.

****

****IN CLASS WRITING: "Tell Rousseau whether history proved him right or
wrong: The more humanity exercises the faculty of 'perfectibility,' the more
we corrupt ourselves as a species."**

Nov 16 **Julius Nyerere, "Ujamaa - The Basis of African Socialism."

****MICROTHEME #3 DUE**

**IV.** **How does a Democracy Based on Self-Ownership Throw Off the Legacy of
Slavery?**

Nov 21 **Derrick Bell, "The Real Status of Blacks Today," from _And We Are Not
Saved_.

**Frederick Douglass, "The Meaning of July 4 th for the Negro," from _Selected
Speeches._

Nov 28 **Derrick Bell, "The Real Status of Blacks Today," from _And We Are Not
Saved_. ****

**Frederick Douglass, "The Meaning of July 4 th for the Negro," from _Selected
Speeches._

**Distribute Take-Home Final**

Nov 30 **Malcolm X, "The Old Negro and the New Negro," from _The End of White
World Supremacy_

**Martin Luther King, "I Have A Dream," "Letter from Birmingham City Jail,"
"Black Power Defined," from _A Testament of Hope_

Dec 5 **Martin Luther King, "A Testament of Hope," from _A Testament of Hope_

**Malcolm X, "The Young Socialist Interview," from _By Any Means Necessary_

**Malcolm X, "At the Audobon," from _Malcolm X Speaks_

Dec 7 **"Shared Prayers, Mixed Blessings," _New York Times_ , June 4, 2000

**"The Minority Quarterback," _New York Times_ , July 2, 2000

****

Dec 12 **TAKE-HOME FINAL DUE; class evaluations**

Dec 15 **TAKE-HOME FINAL SECOND DUE DATE (AUTOMATIC EXTENSION)**

  
  
|  ** [S UMMER 2001](../../summer2001/index.html)  
  
[SPRING 2001](../spring2001/index.html)  
  
[FALL 2000](../fall2000/index.html)  
  
[FALL 2000](../index.html)  
  
[SUMMER 2000](../../summer2000/index.html)  
  
[SPRING 2000](../../spring2000/index.html)  
  
[FALL 1999](../../fall1999/index.html)  
  
[SUMMER 1999](../../summer1999/index.html)  
  
[SPRING 1999](../index.html)  
  
[WINTER 1999](../../winter1999/index.html)  
  
[FALL 1998](../../fall1998/index.html)  
  
[SUMMER 1998](../../summer1998/index.html)  
  
**  
---|---  
![](../../../images/end.jpg)

