



|

**LS582 Serials Syllabus:**

* * *

Clicking on any of the following links allow you to directly access that
particular area of this syllabus:

  * Course: LS 582
  * Instructor Information
  * Office Hours
  * Special Services
  * Course Overview 
  * Course Description 
  * Course Goals 
  * Course Prerequisites 
  * Course Schedule
  * Required Texts/Materials 
  * Assignment Schedule 
  * Submitting Assignments
  * Evaluation/Grading/Requirements 
  * Class Participation 
  * Attendance 
  * Guidelines
  * Course Policies 

(Note: You can print the entire syllabus by printing this page.)

|

  
---|---|---  
  
Top

|

**Course:**

* * *

LS582 Serials ****

|

  
  
Top

|

**Instructor Information:**

* * *

Instructor:  Professor Marilyn Kay Harhai



Contact Information:



Office: 208 Carlson Library

Office Phone: 814-393-2377

Department Secretary (Barbara Reed): 814-393-2271

Department Toll-Free (Barbara Reed): 866-272-5612

Department Fax: 814-393-2150



Email: [mharhai@clarion.edu](mailto:mharhai@clarion.edu)



Mailing Address:

Clarion University of Pennsylvania

840 Wood Street

Department of Library Science

208 Carlson Library

Clarion, PA 16214

|

**Course:**

* * *

LS 501: Developing Library Collections

Term:  Spring 2002 ****  
  
Top

|

**Office Hours:**

* * *

Online office hours will be scheduled and posted on the Blackboard site. I am
happy to schedule individual meetings by arrangement. Please feel free to
email me at any time to ask a question or to arrange a meeting.
[mharhai@clarion.edu](mailto:mharhai@clarion.edu) If you email me, I will get
back to you within a reasonable period of time. ****

|

  
  
Top

|

**Special Services:**

* * *

Any student requiring accommodations for taking notes or tests should make
arrangements, as early in the semester as is possible, to discuss his or her
needs with me. ****

|

  
  
Top

|

**Course Overview** **:**

* * *

Serials management is a major issue for librarians. The spiraling cost and
proliferation of serial titles exerts a financial pressure felt by public,
academic, special, and governmental libraries. Evolving access technologies
also present opportunities and challenges. As Gorman noted in "The Education
of Serials Librarians in Australia," serials impact all areas of library
practice: collection development, acquisitions, cataloging, collection
maintenance and preservation, public service, circulation, and general
management.

|

  
  
Top

|

**Course Description** **:**

* * *

Organization and management of serial publications; includes the format,
selection, bibliographic control (manual and mechanized), and preservation
techniques; the selection of jobbers and the services they offer.

|

  
  
Top

|

**Course Goals** **:**

* * *

At the end of the course the student will be able to:

  * Discuss the serials format and its history.
  * Demonstrate basic competency in serial selection, ordering, and cataloging.
  * Use serials as reference sources.
  * Organize, maintain, and control a serials collection and necessary records.
  * Understand the basic principles of serials automation and the ability to evaluate serials control systems.
  * Consider the alternative formats for serials and the interaction of format and serials management. 

|

  
  
Top

|

**Course Prerequisites** **:**

* * *

Prerequisites: LS 501, 502.

|

  
  
Top

|

**Course Schedule** **/Class Meeting Times:**

* * *

This is a Blackboard course taught entirely on the Web. As this is an online
class, students will be participating from a number of locations. Please note
that all dates and times mentioned in this syllabus refer to the date and time
in Clarion, PA and you should make adjustments accordingly. The class will be
divided into groups for chapter discussions.



|

## Chapter Discussion Schedule  
  
---  
  
**Date**

|

#####  Chapters  
  
Week 1: June 3 to June 9

|

One: Serials Format

Two: History and Statistics  
  
Week 2: June 10 to June 16

|

Three: Collection Management of Serials: Part I

Four: Collection Management of Serials: Part II  
  
Week 3: June 17 to June 23

|

Five: Application of Citation Analysis

Six: Study of Periodical Use  

Seven: Journal Ranking Studies  
  
Week 4: June 24 to June 30

|

Eight: Serials Processing  
  
Week 5: July 1 to July 5

|

Nine: Electronic Journal

Ten: Serials Automation  
  
  
  
Top

|

**Required** **Texts/Materials:**

* * *

Required:



Nisonger, T.E. (1998). Management of serials in libraries. Englewood, CO:
Libraries Unlimited.



Used for Assignments:



American Psychological Association. (2001). Publication manual of the American
Psychological Association (5th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.



American Library Association. (1998). Anglo-American cataloguing rules (2nd
ed.) Chicago: Author.



|

  
  
Top

|

**Assignment Schedule** **:**

* * *

It is very easy to fall behind in a summer course. In order to spread the work
out over the term, assignments will be due at regular intervals. The
assignments will be posted to your Clarion student Web page. Exams will be
taken via Blackboard. The Blackboard site can be found at
[http://online.clarion.edu/](http://online.clarion.edu/).



To enroll: You will automatically be enrolled in the Blackboard course site.



Blackboard or Technology Issues: If this is your first Blackboard course,
please be sure to have enrolled in and completed the online Blackboard
orientation course prepared by the Department. Completing the orientation
course helps ensure that you will be able to submit materials to the
instructor. To enroll in the Library Science Orientation course, go to the
Blackboard site ([http://online.clarion.edu/](http://online.clarion.edu/)).
Select Course Catalog button. Select Library Science. Find the listing for
Library Science Orientation Course, and select the enroll button next to it.
Follow the instructions from there.



If you have any technical problems, please contact university's help desk
[http://www.clarion.edu/admin/computing/hdindex.shtml](http://www.clarion.edu/admin/computing/hdindex.shtml).
Technology is unreliable. Be sure to keep a copy of all work that you submit.
The plan to submit work at the last moment can be defeated with a computer
problem or other technology glitch. Plan ahead.  As a specific suggestion,
remember to include your name and identifying information in any attachments.
If your instructor prints out an attachment, there is no way to know it is
yours unless you include your identifying information within the attached
document.



Assignments:

1.       Post Biography to "Water Cooler" Discussion Area - By June 3

2.       Exam 1: Terminology from Chapter One - First week of class. 10%

3.       Midterm - Third week of class. 15%

4.       Final - Fifth week of class. 15%

5.       Cataloging Exercise. Fourth Week of class. 20%

6.       Moderate assigned chapters and create chapter Web page. 40%

a.       Moderate assigned chapters during specified week.

b.       Week One: Post outline for Web page based on assigned chapters.

c.       Week Two: Post annotated bibliography for Web page.

d.       Week Three: Post draft Web page.

e.       Week Four: Post completed Web page.

f.         Week Five: Review Web pages of other group members.

|

## Assignment Schedule  
  
---  
  
**Due Date**

|

**Assignment**  
  
By Monday, June 3

|

Post Biography to "Water Cooler" Discussion Area in Blackboard (see assignment
1 under assignments on Blackboard site)  
  
By Monday, June 10, 8 a.m.

|

Complete Exam 1: Terminology from Chapter One

Post outline for Web based on assigned chapter.  
  
By Monday, June 17, 8 a.m.

|

Post annotated bibliography for Web page  
  
By Monday, June 24, 8 a.m.

|

Complete Midterm

Post draft Web page.  
  
By Monday, July 1, 8 a.m.

|

Post completed Web page.

Submit completed cataloging exercise  
  
By Friday, July 5, midnight

|

Complete Final  
  
Week of July 1 - 5

|

Review Web pages of other group members.  
  
  
  
Top

|

**Submitting Assignments:**

* * *

Written assignments will be submitted by posting material to the student's Web
page. Cataloging assignment will be submitted per instructions in the
assignment. ****

|

  
  
Top

|

**Evaluation/Grading/Requirements** **:**

* * *

Online Discussion-Participation:

The expectation of the instructor is that students will log on a minimum of
five times every seven days. It is critical that you read all public
discussion postings. You are required to post a minimum of four substantive
posting per seven-day period. Remember, this is the minimum participation. You
are encouraged and invited to participate to a greater extent. These posting
must have substance, "I agree" or "Absolutely" do not count. Your postings
must demonstrate both a grasp of the required reading, reflect your
consideration of other's postings, and demonstrate the synthesis of the text,
your colleagues' postings, and your research. Demonstrating respect for your
classmates in your postings is also a significant component of class
participation. Your participation in class is not separately graded, i.e. you
will not receive an A or a B. As noted above, class participation is a
requirement of taking the course. I reserve the right to adjust each student's
grade by one full letter grade for not meeting any of the above course
participation requirements. Please also remember, as mentioned above, part of
your grade will reflect your moderating of the course discussion. Participate
in the discussions others are moderating, as you want them to participate when
you are moderating. See the separate page on tips for posting to the
discussion.
[[posting]](http://eagle.clarion.edu/~faculty/mharhai/LS533WEB/POSTING.HTML).



Online Discussion-Moderating:

Each student will have at least one opportunity to moderate the online course
discussion. This will allow each student to begin to develop this important
skill. The moderator should open the discussion with either discussion
questions regarding the chapters or with a problem based on the reading. It is
the moderator's responsibility to keep the discussion on track and to
synthesize the contributions. It is also the moderator's responsibility to
keep track of each student's participation. The moderator must send an email
report to the instructor at the end of the discussion noting if all students
have met their minimum participation requirements for that period. See the
separate page on tips for moderators
[[moderators]](http://eagle.clarion.edu/~faculty/mharhai/LS533WEB/MODERATORS.HTM).



<span style='fo

