Course Syllabus  
---  
![](../images/bluline.gif)  
  
\-- a university of arizona course on methods and approaches for studying the
future  
  
  

##### Roger L. Caldwell

##### Department of Soil, Water and Environmental Science  
University of Arizona. SWES 499 (formerly SWES 450 and SWES 550)  
Structured for Spring 2002.

You can go directly to the [Course Objectives](objectives.html) or[ Course
Modules.](coursemodules.html)

* * *

## _Course Overview_

####  Course Description

Techniques and approaches to understand broad issues about the future (with a
focus on environmental topics as examples). Uses computer conferencing and
Internet with significant student discussion and opportunities for team
approaches and reporting. There are no prerequisites other than upper division
or graduate standing.

**Location and Times**

The course meets one hour/week in small group settings of students. The
specific times will be developed by coordinating with student schedules. The
bulk of the course work will be via the web, using the course web pages,
Internet overall, and a discussion forum named Caucus. The times you interact
are up to you.

**Instructor's Information**

Instructor is [Dr. Roger L. Caldwell](http://ag.arizona.edu/~caldwell),
Professor of Soil, Water and Environmental Science. I am also Professor of
Communications and Director of the Educational Communications and Technology
office in the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences. I am available anytime
via electronic mail -- caldwell@ag.arizona.edu (the preferred method for rapid
response). Specific office hours are arranged by appointment, (520)-621-2010,
Forbes 306. My personal web page is at
[http://ag.arizona.edu/~caldwell](http://ag.arizona.edu/%7Ecaldwell)

#### Course Objectives

The objective of this course is to develop abilities to understand the issues
and to critically interpret the diverse viewpoints regarding possible futures
for the United States and world, by:

  * Developing an understanding of futures techniques and approaches, including their limitations and applications.  

  * Exploring a range of perspectives and styles of how various people and organizations approach futures studies and to become acquainted with the futures literature.  

  * Gaining experiences with techniques and technologies that should be useful in your own future.  

  * Providing opportunities to work as individuals and as teams. 

The full course title is _Anticipating the Future: Focus on Environment._
Accordingly, several themes, case histories, and discussions will come from
the environmental   area. We will use the time period of about 20-25 years
(year 2025) as our futures reference point; it is far enough into the future
that much is uncertain but it is not so far that we cannot relate to it
(within our lifetimes)

**Texts**

There are no required texts. One text is suggested: Barker, Joel. 1993.
Paradigms: The Business of Discovering the Future. Harper, NY. 240 p. You can
review books used in past years at [the course history](../home/coursehistory-
books.html) page. There are a number of book reviews on line and references
are made to major readings in the futures field as well as a range of on-line
references.

**Special Materials Required**

There are no special requirements. It is expected you will have a computer for
accessing internet or can arrange to use one in the several campus access
labs. The only program you need is a browser (version 4.0 or higher of
Internet Explorer or Netscape).

* * *

## _General Content and Approach_

####  Course Approach and Focus

In addition to classroom and out-of-class individual and team activities, the
course makes extensive use of Internet and group discussion by computer
conferencing. Interaction among the students and between the students and the
instructor is expected and encouraged. In addition to the textbooks, selected
course readings will be provided as background issues (some on Internet and
some in paper copy).

The class depends on a lot of interaction among the class members and with the
instructor. I will serve more as a guide/mentor than a lecturer. **You will
have to do a lot on your own, and I will give you assignments, deadlines, and
feedback so you don't get lost. However, you should plan on doing things on
your own that allow you to discover new views, facts, or approaches and you
need to be "self motivated" since you will be much more on your own in doing
assignments and following your own interests than in typical courses.**

The classroom portion will stress developing a basic understanding of futures
studies approaches and how to make choices among various techniques,
understand the nuances of different approaches, and build on the discussion
developed through Internet materials. At various times during the semester,
there will be a short video on profiles of a significant futurist or a futures
topic.

We will start with five important paradigm shifts already underway (in my
view) as examples:

  * Personalization with Group Perspective 
  * Science and Technology
  * Values and Lifestyles
  * Learning and Skills
  * Population and Demographic Shifts 

The Internet portion will use the range of information available via the world
wide web and a computer conferencing system. It will also include tours,
seminars, expeditions, and other "guides" to finding relevant information for
the course. The computer conferencing uses a new web based system called
"caucus"; we will learn this and other web based features of the class during
laboratory sessions the second week of class. Some conferencing will be
anonymous, some role playing, and most will have your name associated with
comments.

**Grading and Exams**

This course is an independent study and will be graded different from most
courses. The objective is to get you to learn and explore, but I also need
some means of assessing your progress. There will be no formal exams but there
are study questions on the class web (you can study these questions and learn
that way rather than by exam). You will have to prepare several documents (a
term paper that addresses the future of your chosen career, images of the
future, and literature reports. You will be expected to contribute to team
efforts and to Caucus discussions. I will get a weekly progress report from
you (email) and if you lag behind I will give you some gentle reminders and
offer suggestions for getting back on track. The grade is P or S (or failing)
in an independent course, and I will grade based on the overall effort and
contribution you make to the course.

* * *

**_Expectations_**

####  What I Expect From You

Since the course is focused on learning through student initiative, it is
important for the student to become involved in the non-classroom assignments
and even do activities on your own that are not specific class assignments.
The course framework provides a range of opportunities for exploring and
testing differing perspectives.

There is a large amount of discussion required for this course. It is expected
each student will be on Internet/conferencing for about 2 hours per week. It
is imperative that you not get behind on computer conferencing discussions. It
will be difficult to carry on discussions in class alone, since the Internet
and conferencing discussions will be _integrated_ with class discussion. It is
important for you to ask questions and participate in classroom and in
Internet activities. There is a great deal of relevant information on Internet
that is relevant to this class. A representative collection of relevant
information is organized through the course home page (
_http://ag.arizona.edu/futures_ ). Take advantage of this opportunity to
explore new things!

Use this syllabus as a road map so you don't get lost or behind. Copies are
available on the class home page. The essential rules from the student
perspective is to realize the course is different by

  * The degree of learning is heavily dependent on student initiative 
  * The course is an integrated mixture of Internet and classroom, team and individual efforts. 

#### What You Should Expect From Me

I will follow the outline posted on the [Course Modules](coursemodules.html)
page unless unexpected events cause minor scheduling changes. I will be
available for electronic communication with responses in less than 24 hours,
and I can meet you in my office at any time we can arrange (by phone or
email). There will be opportunities for feedback from me via written and
electronic form.

This syllabus covers the basic aspects of the course. The focus will be on
understanding and extending your knowledge and experience with particular
reference to futures studies material. To do this, I will:

  * Each student will develop a half to one page proposal for the [final report](careerpaper.html) -  this will be in lieu of a final exam for the course. Submit this for instructor approval by mid April). The project is the development of a report on the subject of the student's probable career. Include in this report the assumptions, primary trends, and several scenarios. Conclude by summarizing differing perspectives on the future the field as well as your own conclusions. The length should be in the range of 3-5 pages. 
     
  * I will give you feedback following each weekly on-line progress report. 

* * *

## _Course Policies and Logistics_

##  Evaluation

I will use an electronic evaluation form that provides anonymous responses.

#### Additional Work for 599 Level Course

Students taking it at the 500 level are required some additional work
assignment. This will be a second report, in the same format as the 'future of
your career" paper mentioned above, but on any topic you want to choose (check
with me in advance for approval of the topic).

## Policies

There is no formal attendance taken, but the course is heavily dependent on
discussion, both in class and by Internet.

The University of Arizona Code of Academic Integrity (http://info-
center.ccit.arizona.edu/~uhap/appendg.html)

The University of Arizona Student Code of Conduct
(http://w3.arizona.edu/~studpubs/handbook/policyframe.html)

* * *

## _Special Activities_

Assignments will be made weekly (on Friday for following week) by class list
serve and by posting on "assignments" portion of class home page. In addition
to a few big things (like the final team exercise or and exam) there will be
MANY small things and continuous involvement throughout the semester in
discussions and quick assignments. Do not let these small things accumulate
without doing them on a timely basis.

Progress reports will be made (via email) to instructor weekly (on Monday for
previous week). These reports are short (a line to a paragraph or so)
indicating what you are doing relevant to the class, what problems or
questions you have, and what you plan to do for the next week. The report
should include reference to specific items in the weekly assignment as well as
activities on your own. I will respond to your progress reports with
suggestions or acknowledgment.

#### Individual and Group Images for 2025

These are brief entries (about 1/2-1 pages or 1-2 computer screens) on
Internet and will consist of a vision of a day in your life in the year 2025.
Your "image" of the future in part causes you to act the way you do today.
This sharing of views will be fun and initially help form the basis of group
discussion on various visions of the future that will be developed by group
effort.

#### Literature Critiques and URL Posting

The critiques are written submissions by each student on a specific futures
related article (two are required as individuals and one jointly with another
student. ). The entire class will have group discussion of the reports (via
Internet). This report will be no longer than one page (typed equivalent) and
entered into caucus for comment (this is about 1-2 screens). Sources can be
journal articles, book , or other sources. News magazines and newspapers
should not be used. Use URL's where possible so readers can see original
material (if it exists on Internet). For the joint critique you find your own
team member and be sure to note both names when posting on caucus.

#### Peer Reviews

Students will prepare a brief paper (format will be provided) of roughly a
page on an assessment of future situation. This is a critical review approach
and not a general description of the situation. This will be posted in Caucus,
and two other students will review and comment (in Caucus). Other students may
review and comment as well.

#### Guest Speakers

There will be a electronic guest speakers (via Caucus). The class will be able
to ask questions/comment with speaker. This discussion will be for focused for
a two week period.

* * *

## _Information Resources_

####  Specific to Your Functioning in this Course

Information relating to futures is quite varied. There are a few sources that
are purely futures oriented, but most are within other disciplines. Finding
these sources, evaluating the information, and integrating it into a cohesive
result is part of what we will learn. To do this, you will need to learn a
variety of ways of collecting information. Our primary information sources
will be:

  * Internet sources as collected by the instructor (primarily available on-line) 
  * Handout material by the instructor 
  * Sources identified by the class 

#### Important Internet Addresses

Class home page -- <http://ag.arizona.edu/futures>  
Class listserv -- [futures@ag.arizona.edu](mailto:swes450@ag.arizona.edu) (I
will send you notes on this but don't respond to list)  
Caucus Conferencing <http://caucus.arizona.edu>

* * *

## _About the Instructor_

####  Instructor's Perspective on Future

You can read more about me by selecting "instructor" on the class home page.
Briefly, here is my view about the future. The future cannot be predicted, but
there are a number of early warning signals for major changes that can be used
to "anticipate" the future. If we make two assumptions: 1) the future will not
be a simple extrapolation of past experience, and 2) major paradigm shifts (or
discontinuities in trends) are (well) underway but generally unrecognized.
Some of these shifts are due to electronic (communications) technology,
biological system understanding, world economic and political order, and
recognition of the human impact on the long term environment. Each of these
(and others) have further impacts on multiple areas. By understanding this
"big picture" you are more alert to the more specific changes that may (or may
not) occur. I believe we are in a major transformation period (not a simple
transition). Change in the next 25 years will be greater than in the last 25.
Some of this can be anticipated and some cannot; recognizing this fact is
important. Just as important is understanding we are in a major "transition"
period that does not allow use to simply extrapolate past trends to forecast
the future.

By approaching the future with an attitude that one can develop an ability to
perceive (some but not all) possible changes, and be ready in advance to react
to them, is what this course is all about. You can learn to be alert and
develop your own radar system to continually scan the world. This should allow
you to better anticipate likely changes (but, not predict specific events!).
My basic approach is to understand a concept(s) of the future through images
or visions, look at paradigm shifts or new eras that cause major
discontinuities in current trends, review the resulting driving forces of
change and their individual trends, and develop a small number of scenarios to
test out the reality and imagination of the conclusions. This information is
then mixed with your own experiences and your accumulated "wisdom or insight"
to allow you better navigation of the future.

I have listed all my views about the future in one place -- [My
viewpoints](../rlc/rlcmain.html) (including hints and suggestions on how you
might develop your own techniques for studying the future..

* * *

Return to "Anticipating the Future" [course home
page](http://ag.arizona.edu/futures)  
Prepared by [Roger L. Caldwell](mailto:caldwell@ag.arizona.edu)

