##  **_Sociology SYG2010:_**

##  **_Social Problems_**

**THIS ONLINE SYLLABUS IS AN EXAMPLE OF COURSE CONTENT AND REQUIREMENTS AND IS
SUBJECT TO REVISION.   AN "OFFICIAL" SYLLABUS CAN BE OBTAINED IN CLASS.**  

**Instructor -[Dr. Terry L.
Mills](http://web.clas.ufl.edu/users/tlmills/index.htm)**

**Office: 3356 Turlington Hall.**

**Office phone 392-0265 ext 252.[E-mail:
tlmills@soc.ufl.edu](mailto:tlmills@soc.ufl.edu)**

**Office Hours : 10:30-11:30am \- M,W,F, or by appointment.**

No office hours on Tues-Thur, except by prior appointment.  
    
  **Required Materials for this class :**

1\. Neubeck, Kenneth J., & Neubeck, Mary Alice (1997). _Social Problems: A
critical approach_.

2\. New York Times - bring at least two articles related to social problems
each day to class (get free subscription on Internet...www.nytimes.com).

3\. OPTIONAL TEXT - Finsterbusch & McKenna  _Taking Sides: Clashing Views on
Controversial Social issues_ \- can be used in conjunction with class
forum/debates. ******Also Useful as resources for this class :**

Time or Newsweek magazine (get subscription or go to library and read).

Nightly Evening News, such as CNN, News Hour with Jim Lehrer, National Public
Radio (NPR).  
  **Course Overview :**

The Oklahoma City bombing, or the recent debate over women's right to late
term abortions, and abortion in general have focused attention on the rights
of individuals, groups, and government. The civil unrest that took place in
Los Angeles in 1992, as well as various instances of unrest in Florida has
focused attention on those cities, and on the inter-group conflicts underlying
the social forces in America. These out-breaks of violence and anarchy have
been characterized as either "riot," "revolution," or "rebellion." Does it
really matter how you typify these events? How can we explain these conflicts?
. What are the sources of inter-group conflict? What causes it? How can you
explain what occurs? What might happen in the future?

The sociological analysis of social problems can provide many answers to what
is happening in the abortion-rights debate . The sociology of social problems
can provide many answers to what happened in the civil uprisings. The
sociology of social problems involves the scientific analysis of inter-group
problems in contemporary societies.

This course is based on one very important principle: _that social, political,
economic, and military struggles emerge out of social conflicts about values,
norms, inequalities, and social change._

Social problems like those of the Los Angeles "riots," or the conflict over
abortion rights don't just happen, like natural catastrophes such as
earthquakes or hurricanes. Rather, they are created by social forces. These
involve conflicts between groups striving to achieve the social values they
feel are important. And, in response to problems that are perceived, public
policy solutions are proposed reflecting collective norms, values, and
politics in the broader society.

In this course you will learn about the nature, extent, causes, and policy
solutions proposed with regard to a number of contemporary social problems. We
will focus on three major categories of social problems: (1) those involving
deviant behavior; (2) problems of social inequality; and (3) problems of
social change and population dynamics, with their political and group conflict
implications. You will learn about social problems in the context of : (1)
contemporary sociological theory; 92) social research; (3) mass media reports;
and (4) your own experiences.

**Course requirements and distribution of grades:**

This is a demanding course. You will have to read a lot, think a lot, examine
your previously-held conceptions, and come to new conclusions about the issues
we explore.

This may be in fact the most personally demanding GE course you will ever take
at UF. But we guarantee that you will learn a great deal, and that you will
acquire important insights about how you and your family might survive the
coming conflicts of the early 21th. Century.

**Here's how your grade will be calculated :**

100 points: Exam #1 - 30 questions (10 point curve)

100 points: Exam #2 - 45 questions (10 point curve)

100 points: Final Exam - 50 questions (no curve)

20 points: in-class debates. Five students each time - 5 minutes each.
Students argue pro-side, or argue con-side of issues selected during week
one).

_0-50 points: Class attendance._

**Total points = 0 - 370 points.**

**Total grade for course (90%+ = A; 80% = B; 70% = C; 60% = D, below 60% =
unthinkable!).**  


**All Reading Assignments are in the Neubeck textbook; and The New York
Times.** **WEEKLY READING ASSIGNMENTS:** **Section One: THE SOCIOLOGY OF
SOCIAL PROBLEMS**

**_Week #1 :_ How "private troubles" become "public issues": Why, in 1997, are
Americans facing so many social problems? What are some of the causes of these
social problems? How can contemporary social science help us to understand
these issues? What are the social science perspectives on current social
problems? -- Example, the Abortion dilemma: Should abortion be readily
available in American society? How has this "private problem" become a "social
problem" in the past few decades?**      **Read Neubeck text: Preface pp. xv-
xvii; and Introduction pp. 1-25; and chapter 2 - Concentration of
Political/Economic Power, pp 61-74.**

**_Week #2 and 3_** : **How sociologist interpret and explain (e.g. social
pathology or individual deviant behavior; or social disorganization theory),
the causes of social problems. How are social problems created; how does
policy (government) attempt to solve these problems through legislation and
implementation; and what happens when solutions don't work? What is the
natural history of social problems? And what are the major theories in
sociology that can explain this process: (1) symbolic interactionism; (2)
functionalism; (3)conflict theory.-- Example: the dilemmas of aging: how much
are you willing to contribute in your higher taxes to assist today's older
Americans in retirement? How will you help your parents? How much will your
children be willing to help you out in your old age?** **       Read chapter 1
- The Global Context pp. 27-59. And chapter 2 Concentration of Political
Power, pp 75-87.**  
  **Section Two: NORM VIOLATIONS AND DEVIANT BEHAVIOR IN SOCIAL CONTEXT**

**_Week #4_ : EXAM #1**

**_Week #5_ : Sexual "deviance" and sexual "deviants": How and why does an
individual's private sex life become a "public issue" and therefore a "social
problem"? Is prostitution a social problem? Is pornography? Should impotence
be considered a "social problem," since it affects 100% of the male population
during their life?    Read chapter 3 - Militarism & War pp. 89-120, and
chapter 10 - Heterosexism, pp 337-367.**

**Class Debate #1   "Should abortion be available to any woman who wants it in
America today?"**

**_Week #6_ : Problems of alcohol and other substance abuse: What is chemical
dependency, and what are its consequences to society? (Are you a dependent?)
Why are some drugs legal and others not? Why is this personal deviance
relative to society?    Read chapter 17 - Substance Abuse, and chapter 4 -
Environmental Abuse.**

**_Week #7_ : Problems of violence in today's society: Why has violence become
a particularly American social problem? What is the difference between
violence, aggression, and assertiveness? Do we define these differently in
public and private settings? Can the government implement policies to reduce
violence? Is there a relationship between violence in sports and violence in
American society today?    Read chapter 5 - Work, and chapter 16 \- Suicide.**

**_Week #8_ : Problems of crime and criminal justice in American society: Why
does the USA have the highest crime rate of any industrialized society -- and
why are our current attempts to deal with the high crime rate not working?
What is crime? What is justice? How do definitions of these affect "criminal
activity" Read chapter 14 - Criminal Behavior.**

**_Week #9_ : Class debate #2 Should the use of currently outlawed substances
(such as marijuana or other drugs) be decriminalized and treated like alcohol
use is now, in order to reduce criminal activity and to protect the rights of
individual freedom?**

**Exam #2 - BRING SCANTRON AND PENCILS.**  
  **Section Three: PROBLEMS OF SOCIAL INEQUALITY**

**_Week #10_ : Problems of wealth and poverty: Why is there so much poverty
evident in the world's "most wealthy nation"? Is it possible that economic
inequality can lead to revolution in 21th Century America? Who are the poor?
Who are the homeless? Is there an urban under-class? How did this contribute
to the recent and past civil uprisings in America?**   **READ chapter 6 -
Economic Inequality and Poverty; and chapter 15 - Mental Illness.**

*** **Class debate #3 Is locking up criminals longer the most effective means
to reduce crime in our society?**

**_Week #11_ : Problems of race and ethnic inequalities: Will inter-group
problems reflecting racial inequality lead to a revolution in America within
the next ten years? How is race/ethnic inequality related to class inequality?
Read chapter 7 - Schooling and Unequal Educational Opportunity, and chapter 8
- Racism.**  


**_Week #12_ : Problems of gender inequality: How much gender discrimination
still exists in American society? Is this a social problem? If so, why don't
educated women protest it more vigorously? How is gender inequality related to
racial/ethnic and class inequality?**  
**Read chapter 9 - Sexism, and chapter 10 - Heterosexism.**  
  **Section Four: SOCIAL CHANGE & THE MEGA-PROBLEMS** **OF THE 20 TH CENTURY**

**_Week #13_ : Problems of changing families: When do "family problems" become
"social problems," and why? In industrialized societies, is the family an
obsolete social institution? What is a family? Why has "family values" become
a political debate in America since 1988? What rights should children have in
the "contract across generations"? What rights should elders have? What
obligations?    Read chapter 11 - Ageism, and chapter 12 - Health care.**

**_Week #14_ : Problems of population growth: What is the "population crisis"
and why don't most Americans feel alarmed by its potential consequences? What
is "population metabolism" for humans, and how is the USA involved in three of
its four dynamics? If we crack down on illegal immigrants, will this help to
solve our problems? Read chapter 13 - Family-related problems.**

**_Week #15_ : *** Final class debates**

**FINAL EXAM - Bring SCANTRON & PENCILS**  
  **ATTENDANCE POLICY:** **Your class attendance and participation are
important. You will be allowed no more than 2 _ _unexcused absences__. You
will need written documentation for medical absence. You will earn 50 points
for having no more than 2 unexcused absences.**

