# PSCI 3041

## Advanced American Government: The U.S. Congress

### Spring 2002

Instructor| Teaching Assistant  
---|---  
Scott Adler| Scott Allan Zakon  
131B Ketchum| 5 Ketchum  
492-6659| 492-0850  
[esadler@colorado.edu](mailto:esadler@colorado.edu)|
[zakon@colorado.edu](mailto:zakon@colorado.edu)  
Office hours: Tues 10:45-11:45  
Weds. 2-4, or by appt.| Office hours: Weds. 10-12  
Fri. 10:30-11:30  
  
This course examines the structure and performance of the policy making
process in the U.S. Congress. We concentrate on several different aspects of
congressional organization, ranging from the history and evolution of the
rules of procedure and the structure of the committee system to the role of
purposive actors, like party leadership and the president, in influencing
outcomes in the policy process. We will frequently examine not only the
details of congressional procedure, but also address questions as to why the
rules are the way they are and why certain actors act the way they do.
Additionally, this course is an introduction to the topics and methods
employed in the study of political science, specifically geared toward
Congress.

This is not like your normal advanced social science course. The textbook to
be used employs a rational choice view of political actors and explains
congressional politics in a game theoretic fashion. Thus, the readings will be
complicated and are likely to take longer than normal to complete and
thoroughly comprehend.

In addition, a significant part of the course will be consumed by a
congressional simulation that will be conducted toward the end of the
semester. Since this class emphasizes student participation, both in regular
class sessions and as part of the simulation, it is critical that you keep
current on the reading, attend class and contribute daily.

  
**Course Requirements**  
Background Knowledge: It is expected that all students have some background in
American government, with a small amount of knowledge of Congress (about the
equivalent one would receive in an Introduction to American Politics course).

Readings: All of the readings listed in the syllabus are required and should
be completed before the class (or week) for which they are assigned. (There
are occasional reading that are available on the Web, as well as one that must
be downloaded from the JSTOR website.)

Lecture and Participation: I expect all students to participate in class
discussion, which will not be possible without having done the reading.
Lectures are an opportunity for me to explain and elaborate on the readings
and for you to ask questions on items that are unclear or matters you would
like to discuss further. On Thursdays we will begin class with a brief (15
minutes or so) discussion of the events in Congress the prior week. All
students are required to come to class with a newspaper or web clipping
concerning the developments in Congress that week and be prepared to discuss
it (this will be part of your participation grade).

Problem Sets: There will be two problem sets due one in the first half of the
semester and the other in the second. The problems will be drawn from the
material covered in the textbook and in lecture.

District Profiles and Political Strategy: As part of the simulation, each
student will represent a different congressional district. Before we begin the
simulation you will write-up a detailed description of your district and your
political strategy for the simulation.

Exams: There will be a midterm and final exam covering the material in the
readings and in lecture (including the weekly discussions of congressional
events). The final exam will additionally cover the activities of the
simulation, including details about congressional procedure.

  
**Grading**  
(Assignments not handed in on time will be reduced one grade for each day they
are late.)  Participation and discussion| 15%  
---|---  
[District Profile and Political Strategy](district.html)  | 10%  
Problem Sets| 20% (10% each)  
Midterm Exam| 25%  
Final Exam| 30%  
If you foresee that you will be unable to attend the scheduled final exam,
please drop this course.

**Required Books:**  
Stewart = Stewart, Charles. _Analyzing Congress_. W.W. Norton.  
Dodd = Dodd, Lawrence and Oppenheimer, Bruce. _Congress Reconsidered_.
Congressional Quarterly Press. Seventh Edition.  
**(Strongly) Recommended Books:**  
Oleszek, Walter. _Congressional Procedures and the Policy Process_.
Congressional Quarterly Press. Fifth Edition.  
Davidson, Roger and Oleszek, Walter. _Congress and Its Members_. Congressional
Quarterly Press. Seventh Edition.

Congressional Simulation pages are [here](congress.html)  
Links are [here](links.html)

DATE| Lecture Title and Reading Assignments  
---|---  
Jan. 15  | Introduction to class.  
Jan. 17  | Unidimensional Spatial Models  
Stewart, Preface and Chapter 1 (pp. 3-32)  
Jan. 22  | Congress and the Constitution  
Stewart, Chapter 2 and Appendix B (The Constitution)  
Jan. 24 & 29  | The Origins and Development of Congress  
Stewart, Chapter 3  
Nelson Polsby, [The Institutionalization of the House of
Representatives](http://www.jstor.org/view/00030554/di960948/96p0127u/0?currentResult=00030554%2bdi960948%2b96p0127u%2b0%2c01%2b19680300%2b9995%2b80319699&psearchExp=&searchID=8dd55318.10111235470&nextHit=01&sortOrder=SCORE&viewContent=Article&config=jstor&frame=noframe&userID=808aa2cc@colorado.edu/018dd553180050780351&dpi=3&displayChunk=10)
on JSTOR  
Jan 29: [Problem Set 1](ps1.html) handed out  
Jan. 31 & Feb. 5  | The Choices Candidates Make  
Stewart, Chapter 4  
Dodd, Chapters 4 & 6  
Feb. 7 & 12  | The Choices Voters Make  
Stewart, Chapter 5  
Dodd, Chapter 7 (Review for Midterm Feb. 12)  
**Feb. 7: Problem set 1 due**  
Feb. 14  |  **Midterm**  
Feb. 19  | Regulation of Congressional Elections  
Stewart, Chapter 6  
Dodd, Chapter 5  
Feb. 21  | Redrawing District Lines  
Selections from Congressional Redistricting (Butler and Cain)  
Additional Web-readings  
Feb. 26 & 28  | Multidimensional Spatial Models  
Stewart, Chapter 1 (pp. 22-46)  
Feb. 26: Problem set 2 handed out  
Mar. 5 & 7  | Parties and Leaders in Congress  
Stewart, Chapter 7  
Dodd, Chapters 2, 11 & 12  
Mar. 12 & 14  | Committees in Congress  
Stewart, Chapter 8  
Dodd, Chapters 9 & 10  
**Mar 12: Problem set 2 due**  
Mar. 19 & 21  | Floor Procedures and Congressional Deliberation  
Stewart, Chapter 9  
Congressional [District Profile and Political Strategy](district.html) Due  
Mar. 26 & 28  |  **Spring Break**  
Apr. 2 & 4  | Begin Congressional Simulation  
Select party and committee leaders  
choose committee assignments  
write party platforms  
and complete bill proposals.  
Additional readings on parliamentary procedure  
Apr. 9 & 11  | Conduct Committee Hearings  
Apr. 16 & 18  | Committee Markup Sessions  
Apr. 23, 25 & 30  | Floor Deliberation  
May 2  | Wrap-up Simulation and Review for Final  
**May 6**  |  ****Final Exam, 10:30 am-12:30 pm** (this is a Monday)**

