January 29, 2002

**

Phil 456, Philosophy of Biology II

**

Lindley Darden

University of Maryland, College Park

Spring 2002

**

Aims of the course** : This course will discuss topics about the philosophy of
the biological sciences, including evolutionary biology, ecology,
neuroscience, developmental biology, and molecular biology. It will deal with
such as topics as whether biology can be reduced to chemistry/physics, the
issue of reasoning in the discovery of mechanisms, the nature of biological
theories, whether there are laws in biology, and the relations between
theories and experiments. The readings will be articles by philosophers and
scientists that use detailed cases from the sciences to address philosophical
issues.

**

Useful details:** Instructor: Lindley Darden, Professor of Philosophy. Office:
1107C Skinner; Mailbox: Philosophy Department, 1125A Skinner; Phone:
301-405-5699. Office hours: 2-3 Tuesday and by appointment. Email:
darden@carnap.umd.edu Web page: www.inform.umd.edu/PHIL/faculty/LDarden/

**

Requirements.** Two take-home examinations, a final examination, and short
writing assignments. The take-home exams will be handed out in class, as
indicated on the syllabus. They must be turned in on the due dates. A late
exam receives a lower grade; the grade decreases by a portion of a letter
grade for each day (24 hour period) that the exam is late; for example,
turning in an exam due at 12:30 at 12:40 will decrease an A to an A-. Thus it
is possible to receive an F because of lateness. However, an F is not a 0,
which is given for failure to turn in an exam and will result in failure of
the course.

Short writing assignments: For each class, each student should write one page.
On this page, there should be a one paragraph summary of the main point(s) of
the article, followed by at least two questions for discussion. Sufficient
copies for everyone in the class should be brought to class. There will be 22
articles read in the course; 20 short writing assignments will be counted in
the final grade. If you are sick or for some other excused reason unable to
attend class, use that as one of the short assignments that you do not turn
in. Late short assignments will usually not be accepted.

Regular class attendance for the entire class period is expected.

**

Grading:** The take-home exams and final exam must all be completed to receive
a passing grade in the course; in other words, completing them is a necessary,
but not a sufficient, requirement to pass the course. Each take-home exam and
the final exam count 30 points ; the average of 20 short writing assignments
count 10 points in the final grade.

**

Listserv List:** There is an email discussion forum for the class. All
students should have email accounts and will be expected to receive the
material on the list throughout the semester. If you do not have an email
account, go to the Computer Science Center and sign up for a wam account. Once
you have an email account, from your regular email account, subscribe to the
listserv: send a message to listserv@listserv.umd.edu Put no subject in the
subject line. As the only line of the text of the message type: subscribe
phil456 your first and last names, e.g., subscribe phil456 Charles Darwin
Reply to confirmation message with ok within 24 hours. When you want to send
messages to the class, send the message to phil456@listserv.umd.edu Note the
difference between the address for subscribing and the address for sending
messages.

**

Honesty:** Honesty on the part of students is presumed. The student is
expected to be familiar with the University of Maryland Code of Academic
Integrity available at

http://www.inform.umd.edu/jpo/ Students may get help with the grammar and
structure of their writing, such as at the Writing Center (Room 0125,
Taliaferro Hall), but they may not get unacknowledged help with the content of
their work. Please contact the instructor with any questions about what is
acceptable or unacceptable outside help. Learn exactly what plagiarism is and
avoid it. The Code is administered by the Student Honor Council, which strives
to promote a community of trust on the College Park campus. Allegations of
academic dishonesty can be reported directly to the Honor Council (314-8206)
by any member of the campus community.

**

Required text:** Packet of articles for Phil 456 available at the Maryland
Book Exchange

**

Recommended for reference, no need to buy:

**

Schaffner, Kenneth (1993), _Discovery and Explanation in Biology and
Medicine._ Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-73592-3 paperback

Sober, Elliott (ed.) (1994), _Conceptual Issues in Evolutionary Biology: An
Anthology_. 2nd Ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-69162-0 (pbk)

Sterelny, Kim and Paul E. Griffiths (1999), _Sex and Death: An Introduction to
Philosophy of Biology._ Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. ISBN
0-226-77304-3 (pbk)

**

Assignments:**

**

Tues. Jan 29, Introduction

Thur. Jan 31, Evolutionary Theory

**

Darden, Lindley and Joseph A. Cain (1989), "Selection Type Theories,"
_Philosophy of Science_ 56: 106-129. Available at

http://www.inform.umd.edu/EdRes/Colleges/ARHU/Depts/Philosophy/homepage/faculty/LDarden/Research/pubs/dardencain.html

**

Tues. Feb. 5, Evolutionary Theory

**

Lennox, J. and Wilson, B. (1994),"Natural Selection and the Struggle for
Existence," _Studies in History and Philosophy of Science_ 25: 65-80.

**

Thur. Feb. 7, Evolutionary Theory

**

Reeve, H. K., and Sherman, P. W. (1993),"Adaptation and the Goals of
Evolutionary Research," _The Quarterly Review of Biology_ 68: 1-32.

**

Tues. Feb. 12, Evolutionary Theory

**

Wimsatt, W. (1980),"Reductionist Research Strategies and their Biases in the
Units of Selection Controversy," in T. Nickles (ed.), _Scientific Discovery:
Case Studies_. Dordrecht: Reidel: 213-259.

**

Thur. Feb. 14, Evolutionary Theory

**

Lloyd, E. (1987),"Confirmation of Ecological and Evolutionary Models,"
_Biology and Philosophy_ 2: 277-293.

**

Tues. Feb. 19, Evolutionary Theory

**

Beatty, J. (1995),"The Evolutionary Contingency Thesis," in G. Wolters and J.
Lennox (ed.) _Concepts, Theories, and Rationality in the Biological Sciences._
Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press: 45-81.

**

Thur. Feb. 21, Developmental Biology

first take home midterm exam handed out

**

Gilbert. S. F. (1991),"Induction and the Origins of Developmental Genetics,"
in S. F. Gilbert (ed.), _A Conceptual History of Modern Embryology._
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press: 181-206.

**

Tues. Feb. 26,** study day, work on take home midterm

**

Thur. Feb. 28** , study day, work on take home midterm

**

Tues. Mar. 5, Developmental Biology

first take home midterm exam due

** **

Thur. Mar. 7, Developmental Biology

**

Amundson, R. (1994),"Two Concepts of Constraint: Adaptationism and the
Challenge from Developmental Biology," _Philosophy of Science_ 61: 556-78.

**

Tues. Mar. 12, Developmental Biology

**

Kauffman, S. A. (1991),"The Sciences of Complexity and the Origins of Order,"
in A. Fine, M. Forbes, and L. Wessels (ed.), _PSA 1990_ , vol. 2. East
Lansing, MI: Philosophy of Science Association: 299-322.

**

Thur. Mar. 14, Ecology

**

Cooper, G.(1993), "The Competition Controversy in Ecology," _Biology and
Philosophy_ 8: 359-384.

**

Tues. Mar. 19, Ecology

**

Diamond, J. M.(1986), "Overview: Laboratory Experiments, Field Experiments,
and Natural Experiments," in Diamond, J. and T. J. Case (ed.), _Community
Ecology._ New York: Harper and Row: 3-22.

**

Thur. Mar. 21, Ecology

**

Levins, R. and R. Lewontin( 1980), "Dialectics and Reductionism in Ecology,"
_Synthese_ 43:47-78.

**

Tues. Mar. 26, Spring Break, no class

Thur. Mar. 28, Spring Break, no class

** **

Tues. Apr. 2, Molecular Biology

**

Darden, L., (manuscript), "Introduction to Philosophy of Molecular Biology"
(handout)

** **

Kitcher, Philip (1984), "1953 and All That: A Tale of Two Sciences," _The
Philosophical Review_ 93: 335-373.

**

Thurs. Apr. 4, Molecular Biology

second take home exam handed out

**

Waters, C. Kenneth (1990), "Why the Anti-reductionist Consensus Won't Survive
the Case of Classical Mendelian Genetics," in Arthur Fine, Micky Forbes and
Linda Wessels (eds.), _PSA 1990_ , v. 1, East Lansing, MI: Philosophy of
Science Association: 125-139.

**

Tues. Apr. 9** study day, work on take-home exam

**

Thurs. Apr. 11, Molecular Biology

**

Darden, Lindley (manuscript), "Relations Among Fields: Mendelian, Cytological,
and Molecular Mechanisms" (handout)

**

Tues. Apr. 16, Molecular Biology

second take home exam due

**

Culp, Sylvia (1995), "Objectivity in Experimental Inquiry: Breaking Data-
Technique Circles," _Philosophy of Science_ 62:438-458.

Schaffner, Kenneth (1995), "Interactions Among Theory, Experiment, and
Technology in Molecular Biology," in David Hull, Micky Forbes, and Richard
Burian (eds.), _PSA 1994_ , v. 2. East Lansing, MI: 192-205.

**

Thurs. Apr. 18, Neuroscience

**

Trumpler, Maria (1997)"Converging Images: Techniques of Intervention and Forms
of Representation of Sodium-Channel Proteins in Nerve Cell Membranes,"
_Journal of the History of Biology_ 30: 55-89.

**

Tues. Apr. 23, Neuroscience

**

Craver, Carl and Lindley Darden (2001), "Discovering Mechanisms in
Neurobiology: The Case of Spatial Memory," in Peter Machamer, R. Grush, and P.
McLaughlin (eds.), _Theory and Method in the Neurosciences._ Pittsburgh, PA:
University of Pittsburgh Press: 112-137.

**

Thurs. Apr. 25, Neuroscience

**

Bechtel, William and Stufflebeam, R. S. (2001), "Epistemic Issues in Procuring
Evidence about the Brain: The Importance of Research Instruments and
Techniques," in W. Bechtel, P. Mandik, J. Mundale, and R. Stufflebeam (eds.),
_Philosophy and the Neurosciences: A Reader._ Malden, MA: Blackwell: 55-81.

**

Tues. Apr. 30, Neuroscience

**

Clark Glymour (1994), "On the Methods of Cognitive Neuropsychology," _British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science_ 45: 815-835.

**

Thur. May 2, Neuroscience

**

Grush, Rick (2001), "The Semantic Challenge to Computational Neuroscience," in
Peter Machamer, R. Grush, and P. McLaughlin (eds.), _Theory and Method in the
Neurosciences._ Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press: 155-172.

**

Tues. May 7, Function and Mechanism in Medicine

**

Toulmin, S. (1975),"Concepts of Function and Mechanism in Medicine and Medical
Science," in H.T. Engelhardt, Jr. and S. F. Spicker (ed.), _Evaluation and
Explanation in the Biomedical Sciences._ Dordrecht: Reidel: 51-66.

**

Thur. May 9,** Overview and review

**

Tues. May 14,** Overview and review

**

Monday, May 20, 10:30am-12:30pm, Final Exam

**

Have a nice summer

