#  LIT 245-100

##  **_LITERATURE OF THE AMERICAN WEST_**

##  Boulder Campus - Spring 2001

##  Meg Gallagher

| Course Requirements  | Syllabus  | Literature Links | [Daily
Assignments](dailyspring01west.html)

![](ArchesIII.jpg)

> > > > **OFFICE HOURS:**

                 _Office_ : Longmont, Room 203.2, 303-516-8920   
                 _Office Hours_ : Times and locations to be announced   
                           E-Mail Address: [meg.gallagher@lc.frcc.cccoes.edu](mailto:meg.gallagher@lc.frcc.cccoes.edu)

**_TEXTS_ :**

  * **_Prose & Poetry of the American West_** edited by James C. Work
  * **_The Virginian_** by Owen Wister

**_REQUIRED MATERIALS_ :**

  * one 2-pocket folder for notes, handouts, etc.
  * pen/pencil for some type of writing implement (no crayons, please!)
  * paper (preferably lined)
| Click here for syllabus |

**_SYLLABUS & EXPECTATIONS_:**

**Literature of the American West** examines works in various genres by
contemporary and classic western writers. We will investigate the dominant
themes as well as social and historical backgrounds. The movie **_Red River_**
, directed by Howard Hawks, will also be viewed.

**_Quizzes and Tests_ :**  Periodically, unannounced quizzes will be given to
make sure you are keeping up with the reading.  They will be given usually at
the beginning of class, so if you are late, you will not be given extra time
to take or finish a quiz. Also, tests will be given over required readings.
Each test will be worth 100 points.  You CANNOT make up a quiz or a test.

**_Microthemes_ : ** You will write at least two microthemes during the
semester. One of them will be on some aspect of western writers ranging from a
biography of one of the authors to the ethnic diversity of the West. You will
present your findings in a five-minute oral presentation.  The other
microtheme will focus on one of the readings. You are expected to use accurate
grammar, mechanics, and spelling.  Each essay is worth 100 points.  | Click
here to continue syllabus |

**_Attendance_ : ** Being here every class period ON TIME and being prepared
are very important since discussions depend upon YOU!  Three absences will be
allowed, but beginning with your fourth absence, your grade for the course
will be lowered one letter grade for each subsequent day you are absent.

**_Arriving Late/Leaving Early_ : ** Three tardies (late 10 minutes or
more)=one absence.  
If you leave class early (over 5 minutes), the same policy applies: three=one
absence.

**_Extra Credit_ ** does not exist in this class.  Keep up with the required
assignments and be prepared for discussions, quizzes, and tests.

**_Plagiarism_ : ** Plagiarism will not be tolerated!  Using someone else's
words, ideas, etc. without acknowledging your outside sources will result in
an "F" for the assignment.

**_Students with disabilities_ : **If you require accommodations because of a
physical, learning, psychiatric, vision, or hearing disability, you must
contact the Special Services Office at 303-404-5302 at the beginning of the
semester in order to document your disability. After you have documented your
disability, please see me during my office hours or make an appointment so we
can discuss your accommodations. | Click here for Literature Links |

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Click below for Literature Links:

    * [Chicano literature links](http://www.accd.edu/sac/english/bailey/mexamlit.htm)
    * [Latina/o Literature and Cultural Studies: THE QUARRY](http://home.uchicago.edu/~weorchar/homepage.htm)
    * [Latina/o Literature and Literature of the Americas at UNC](http://asweb.unco.edu/latina/default.htm)
    * [Sandra Cisneros](http://voices.cla.umn.edu/authors/SandraCisneros.html)
    * [Pat Mora](http://voices.cla.umn.edu/authors/patmora.html)
    * [Rudolfo Anaya](http://www.accd.edu/sac/english/portales/anaya.htm)
    * [Native American Literature Bibliography](http://www.ipl.org/ref/native/biblio2.html)
    * [Native American Authors, Titles, Tribes](http://www.ipl.org/ref/native/)
    * [Native American History](http://jupiter.lang.osaka-u.ac.jp/~krkvls/history.html)
    * [Jemez Pueblo](http://www.jemezpueblo.org/index.html)
    * [Kiowa Tribe](http://home.swbell.net/starwolf/main.html)
    * [N. Scott Momaday](http://www.ipl.org/cgi/ref/native/browse.pl/A50)
    * [Literary Criticism Pathfinders](http://www.ipl.org/ref/QUE/PF/litcrit.html)
    * [Online Literary Criticism Collections](http://www.ipl.org/ref/litcrit)
    * [Midnight at the Internet Cafe Reference Collection](http://www.aclin.org/~maic/)
    * [Western Literature Association (with links)](http://www.usu.edu/~westlit/index.html)
    * [High Country News (environmental issues of West)](http://www.hcn.org/)
    * [American Authors](http://www.frostburg.edu/dept/engl/gartner/amerauth.htm)
    * [Center of the American West at CU-Boulder](http://www.centerwest.org/academics/index.html)
    * [Photography Collection-Western](http://gowest.coalliance.org)
    * [History of the American West](http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/award97/codhtml)

  Back to top of page   | Go to FRCC
[homepage](http://frcc.cc.co.us/lg/index.html)

  
  
  
  

