**Geography 5984: Human Impact on the Environment**

****[(SEE 2002 CLASS PHOTO)](class.htm)****  

**Spring 2002**

**  
CRN: 15415,**

**7:00-9:50,** **McBryde 136**

_**Instructor:**_ **Lisa M. Kennedy**  
_Office:_ 127 Major Williams  
_Phone:_ 231-1422  
_e-mail:_[ **kennedy1@vt.edu**](mailto:likenne1@vt.edu)

_Office hours:  
_ M-T 4:00-5:00, and by appointment

|

![](flyercows3.jpeg)  
  
---|---  
  
_**Course description:**_

Humans have been extraordinary agents in transforming the physial nature of
the Earth. A long-standing interest among geographers, human impact on the
environment has come to the forefront of issues facing scientists in all
disciplines, policy-makers, and the general public. This course will examine
both past and present human modification of earth's major systems. We will
take a systematic approach by looking in turn at human impacts on hydrology,
soil and landforms, climate and atmosphere, and biotic patterns. The course
will focus on the effects of human activity on environmental patterns and
processes, but we will also consider the social and cultural causes of human
action. Geographic variation in impacts, such as between developed and
underdeveloped nations, arid and humid environments, islands and continents,
and will be an overarching theme.

| ![](terraces.jpe)  
---|---  
  
_**Required reading:**_

> **Goudie, A. 2000. _The Human Impact on the Natural Environment, 5th Ed._
586 pp. The MIT Press, Cambridge, ****MA.**

We will use this text to provide the framework, background, and ideas for our
discussions. Participants will also seek out reading material from relevant
scientific literature.

_**Background preparation needed:**_

This course assumes a basic knowledge of earth processes including
climatology, geomorphology, and ecology, such as from introductory physical
geography or other environmental science courses. Advanced courses in physical
geography or other physical sciences will be helpful but are not required. See
me if you have any concerns about your preparation.

_**Requirements:**_

**Reading and preparation for class:** The reading for each meeting will
include relevant sections of the text, and other selected material, usually
peer-reviewed articles or book chapters. Participants will be expected to
synthesize reading material, generate ideas, and contribute them in our weekly
discussions. You will also be called upon occasionally to prepare a one-page
handout summarizing a reading and present your summary in class.

**Leading discussion and associated tasks:** A team of two students will lead
a substantial part of each of our class meetings. The discussion leaders will
also select some or all of the reading material for that session. They will
read the relevant text chapter well in advance, do a literature search on the
topic, and with my approval choose several interesting papers (or book
chapters or other material) as class reading material. The papers selected by
discussion leaders will be submitted for my review by 9:00 am on the Monday 1
week and 1 day before your topic is addressed in a class meeting. Each
participant will be responsible for co-leading 1 or 2 discussions depending on
class size and other factors.

**Special assignment and field trip:** The field trip for this course will
focus on mining in Virginia. Students will research some aspect of Virginia
mining, give a report of their findings in class, and prepare handouts (2-4
pages including bibliography) for the rest of the class. **[SEE FIELD TRIP
PHOTOS](fieldtrip.htm)**

**Term paper:** Students will explore individual topics of their choosing
resulting in a term paper of moderate length (12-15 pp.) and give short
informal presentations of their findings near the end of the term. The term
paper could be related to the student's own research, and may be a literature
review, or could be based on secondary or original data collection subject to
my approval.

_**Assessment:**_

Preparation for and contributions to weekly discussions

|

25%  
  
---|---  
Discussion leading assignment(s) and associated tasks |

25%  
  
Field trip participation and associated special assignments |

25%  
  
Term paper and presentation |

25%  
  
At the end of the semester, students will submit anonymous reviews of their
peers for their contributions to the seminar. I will consider these
evaluations in assigning the proportion of the grade related to "contributions
to weekly meetings" (25%).

This course emphasizes weekly discussions of reading material, so attendance
is required. If you must miss class, I expect a phone call or e-mail
explanation in advance if at all possible. _  
_

**General Course Outline**

**_Dates and the order of topics may change. Please be flexible._**

_DATE_

|

_TOPIC_

|

_TEXT CHAPTER_  
  
---|---|---  
  
15 Jan

| Introductions, Organizational meeting |  
  
22 Jan

| Environmental history and cultural development |

1  
  
29 Jan

| Environmental history and cultural development continued |

1  
  
5 Feb

| Soils, Coastal impacts; GUEST LEADER |

4, 6  
  
12 Feb

| Waters: stream impoundment, channelization, groundwater issues, pollution  |

5, 6  
  
19 Feb

| Climate and the atmosphere, global warming; GUEST SPEAKER  |

7  
  
26 Feb

| Vegetation I: Logging, old-growth forests; GUEST SPEAKER |

2  
  
5 Mar

| **NO CLASS - Spring Break; TERM PAPER TOPICS DUE** |  
  
12 Mar

| Vegetation II: Fire and forest |

2  
  
19 Mar

| TBA; field trip planning meeting? |  
  
26 Mar

| Mining in VA; student presentations |  
Sat 30 Mar | FIELD TRIP to Powell River Project: coal mining in southwest VA |  
  
2 April

| Vegetation III: Genetically-altered crops; GUEST SPEAKER |

2  
  
9 April

| Animals: Large predators, extinction and conservation; Cattle & tropical
deforestation |

3  
  
16 April

| The future, conclusions: "free-for-all" discussion; GUEST SPEAKER |

8, 9  
  
23 April

| Paper presentations I |  
  
30 April

| Paper presentations II, **TERM PAPERS DUE TODAY** |  
  
**GUEST PRESENTATIONS SPRING 2002 (all are faculty of Virginia Tech):**

**Dr. James Campbell** , Department of Geography: Discussion leader __ on
human impacts on soil, Feb. 5, _**" Land Reclamation: Examples from the
Netherlands, southwestern France, and Nova Scotia" April 16 **_

**Dr. Madeline Schreiber** , Department of Geological Sciences: Feb. 19, _**"
Arsenic Contamination of Groundwater"**_

**Dr. James Burger** , Department of Forestry: Feb. 26, _**" Reforestation of
Surface-Mined Lands"**_

**Dr. Tom Hammett** , Department of Wood Science and Forest Products: April 2,
_**" Non-Timber Forest Products and Forest Conservation" **_





