**

GSCI** **351 (3 credit hours)

STRATIGRAPHY - SPRING 2001

9:30-10:20 Mon, Wed; Laboratory 9:30-11:30 Friday



Instructor:

**

Jeff Over

Office: 213 Greene Science Building

Office Hours: MTF 8:30-9:30; or by appointment

**

Course Objective:

**

This course is designed to provide an introduction to stratigraphic concepts,
principles, processes, and techniques. Stress will be placed on recognition of
sedimentary rocks, facies, and sequences to interpret stratigraphic
relationships and sedimentary basin history.

**

Course Prerequisites:

**

GSci. 112: GSci 220 recommended.

**

Course Text (required):

**

Boggs, S., Jr., 1995, Principles of Sedimentology and Stratigraphy: Simon and
Schuster, New Jersey, 774 p.

**

Supplementary Texts and Major References:

> **

>

> Walker, R.G. and James, N.P. (eds.), 1992, Facies Models: Response to Sea
Level Change: Geological Association of Canada, St. John's, Newfoundland, 409
p.

>

> North American Commission on Stratigraphic Nomenclature, 1983, North
American Stratigraphic Code, American Association of Petroleum Geologists
Bulletin, 67:841-875.

>

> Hedberg, H.D. (ed.), 1976, International Stratigraphic Guide: John Wiley and
Sons, New York, 200 p.

>

> Miall, A.D., 1989, Principles of Sedimentary Basin Analysis, 2nd Edition:
Springer-Verlag, New York, 668 p.

>

> Reineck, H.-E., and Singh, I.B., 1980, Depositional Sedimentary
Environments: Springer-Verlag, New York, 549 p.

Scholle, P.A., and Spearing, D. (eds.), 1982, Sandstone Depositional
Environments, AAPG Memoir 31, 410 p.

Scholle, P., Bebout, D., and Moore, C., 1983, Carbonate Depositional
Environments, AAPG Memoir 33, 708 p.

**

Course Requirements:

**

2 Hour Examinations 30 %

Final Examination 25 %

Laboratory Assignments 25 %

Project 20 %

**

Field Trips:

> **

>

> Field trip plans are tentative. Several trips are planned to study, measure,
and describe classical stratigraphic sequences in the northern Appalachian
Basin of New York and Pennsylvania. GSA in Vermont will also incorporate
several stops.

**

Term Project:

> **

>

> A report based on field trip data and published articles is required. The
paper will use the format of the journal "Geology" and be no less than 5
typed, double-spaced pages (300 words/page) and no more than 10 pages in
length. See guidelines to authors in "Geology" or "Geological Society of
America Bulletin" for further information. Reports are due 04 May (Friday),
before 5:00; late projects will not be accepted.

**

Grading Policy:

**

1) Examinations will cover lecture and laboratory material, text assignments,
and outside readings.

2) Final examination will be comprehensive.

3) Final grades will be calculated based on a percentage of the point system
outlined above: 100-93 = A, 92.9-89.5 = A-, 89.4-86.5 = B+, 86.4-83.0 = B,
82.9-79.5 = B-, 79.4-76.6 = C+, 76.5-73 = C, 72.9-69.5 = C-, 69.4-59.5 = D,
<59.5 = E. There will be no additional assignments; late reports or
assignments will not be accepted without written prior arrangement.

**

Materials:

**

Engineers scale, protractor, colored pencils, hard or stiff covered field
notebook, hand lens, geologic hammer.



22 Jan Introduction, Scope of Stratigraphy Ch. 1, skim entire text

24 Jan Clastic Environments and Classification Ch. 6, p. 157-193

26 Jan **Field Studies, Information Gathering, Introduction to Classification

**

29 Jan Stratigraphic Sequences, Controls Ch. 9, p. 289-298

31 Jan Clastic Environments (continental facies) Ch. 10, p. 299-354

02 Feb **Clastic Rock Classification

**



05 Feb Clastic environments

07 Feb Clastic Environments

09 Feb **Clastic Rock Environments, Correlation Problem 1** Ch. 14, p. 520-526

12 Feb Clastic Environments (marginal marine facies) Ch. 11, p. 355-417

14 Feb Clastic Environments

16 Feb **Clastic Environments

**

19 Feb Clastic Environments (marine facies) Ch. 12, p. 418-460

21 Feb Clastic Environments

23 Feb **Exam I

**

26 Feb Exam Review, Unconformities p. 493-497

28 Feb Carbonate Environments and Classification Ch. 7, p. 194-235

02 March **Carbonate Rock Classification and Environments

**

05 March Carbonate Environments and Sequences Ch. 13, p. 461-488

07 March Carbonate Environments and Sequences, **tape** Ch. 14, p. 520-526

09 March **Carbonate Rock Environments, Correlation Problem 2

**

12 March **GSA

**

14 March **GSA -** Evaporate Environments Ch. 8, p. 236-286

16 March **Strata in sequence - Oklahoma Aulacogen

**



26 March Diagenetic Environments, Cementation p. 227-235, Appx. A

28 March Diagenetic Structures, Geopetal Structures Ch 5 p.108-154

30 March **Exam II

**



02 April Stratigraphic Nomenclature Ch. 14, p. 491-493, Appx. B

04 April Lithostratigraphy Ch. 14, p. 497-511

06 April **Core Description (Field Trip - Saturday)

**

09 April Biostratigraphy Ch. 17, p. 587-625

11 April Chronostratigraphy Ch. 18, p. 626-666

13 April **Core Description

**

16 April Sequence Stratigraphy Ch. 14, p. 511-519

18 April Sequence Stratigraphy, **tape

**

20 April **Well Logs (Field Trip - Sunday)

**

23 April Well Logs Ch. 14, 526-530

25 April Well Logs

27 April **Well Logs; Correlation Problem 3

**

30 April Seismic Stratigraphy Ch. 15, p. 531-563

02 May Basin Architecture and History Ch. 19, p. 667-691

04 May **Seismic Profiles

**



**

07 May Monday, Final Exam - 8:00

**

