# **Assembly Language and Computer Architecture**

##  Bob Matthews

## Department of Mathematics and Computer Science

## January, 2002

* * *

## Administrivia

  * **Meeting times:** 9 - 9:50 MTThF Thompson 322
  * **Final Exam:** Wednesday, May 15, 12:00  **required**
  * **Instructor:**
    * Bob Matthews (email matthews@ups.edu)
    * Thompson 501
    * Extension 3561
  * **Office hours (tentative):**
    * 2:00 MTThF
    * Or by appointment.

If you catch me free at any time, please feel free to drop in. Messages sent
via email are welcome, and can be used to ask a question or to set up an
appointment.  Please refer to [My Office Hours](../OfficeHours.html) for
details of my schedule

  * **Textbook**
    * **Required:** **Required:** Paul, Richard P.:   **SPARC Architecture, Assembly Language Programming, and C** , Second edition, Prentice Hall, 2000. We will cover chapters 1 - 11
    * **Strongly Recommended:**   Tanenbaum, Andrew S.:  Structured Computer Organization, Fourth Edition, Prentice Hall, 1999.  We will cover chapters 1 - 7 and appendices A and B.





* * *

### Document Change History (excluding assignments and exam reviews)

  * 1/28/01:  Changed exam dates to avoid conflicts with CSci 361 and CSci 455

* * *

## Weekly reading and lecture schedule

  * [This Week](ThisWeek.html)
  * [Next Week](NextWeek.html)
  * [Previous Weeks](PreviousWeeks.html)

* * *

## Assignments

  * [Exercise set #1](Exercise01.htm) (due in class Monday, Feb. 4)
  * [Exercise set #2](Exercise02.htm) (due Friday, Feb. 8)
  * [Exercise set #3](Exercise03.htm) (due various)
  * [Exercise set #4](Exercise04.htm) (due Monday, March 4)
  * [Exercise set #5](Exercise05.htm) (due Friday, March 15)
  * [Exercise set #6](Exercise06.htm) (due Friday, April 5)
  * [Exercise set #7](Exercise07.htm) (due various)
  * [Exercise set #8](Exercise08.htm) (due Thursday, May 2)

* * *

## Exam reviews

  * [Exam 1 Review](exam_1_review.htm)
  * [Exam 2 Review](exam_2_review.htm)
  * [Exam 3 Review](exam_3_review.htm)
  * [Final Exam Review](FinalReview.html)

* * *

## Evaluation

  * Three hour exams + a comprehensive final: 60% (The final exam will have the weight of two hour exams)
  * Written and programming exercises: 40%

* * *

## Notes:

### Grading Policies

Programming exercises will be graded on style and documentation as well as
correctness. Programs and control scripts must include header documentation as
well as adequate internal documentation unless otherwise specified. Late
assignments will generally not be accepted, will incur an increasing penalty
when accepted, and will certainly not be accepted after the graded exercise is
returned to the class unless I have asked you to correct and resubmit the
exercise. Late exercises must be submitted in hard-copy form with listings of
the assignment source and of test runs. Programs marked for correction and re
submission must be turned in within a week of the day that the assignment was
returned to the class. If a program or control script meets requirements,
works OK, is readable, and at least minimally documented (header documentation
and some internal documentation at important points, it earns between 70% and
80% of the points possible. If a program or control script is well structured,
meets all tests (tests are driven from the statement of the assignment, and
the specific tests I will use on your program will be taken from the problem
description in the assignment write-up, but the specific tests will not
generally be provided in advance), and is well documented, it will earn
between 80% and 95% of the total possible points. To earn 100% of the total
possible points, the program or control script must meet all of the above and
do something exceptional beyond the statement of the program.

A minimum grade of 50% on exams and 50% on homework assignments is a necessary
(but not necessarily sufficient) condition for a passing grade. All
assignments turned in must represent individual effort: work done by a
committee cannot be accepted except where a group effort is a clearly stated
part of the assignment. All students in Computer Science classes at the
University of Puget Sound are responsible for the material contained in the
document on academic honesty published by the Department of Mathematics and
Computer Science and included in the Academic Handbook.

Unless exceptional circumstances arise, I generally try to return exams and
homework to the class within a week.

* * *

The final exam for this class will be Wednesday, May 15, at 12:00 noon. It
will be a comprehensive, two hour in-class examination.

* * *

Should you find yourself in difficulty at any point in the semester, please
make arrangements to meet with me as quickly as possible.

* * *

[Lecture Schedule](schedule.htm)

* * *

[Course Syllabus](CSci_281_Syllabus.htm)

* * *

### Some links of interest

  * [Local Documentation](http://orion.ups.edu:8888/ab2/coll.45.13/@Ab2CollView?)
  * [SPARC Assembly Language Reference Manual (local)](http://orion.ups.edu:8888/ab2/coll.45.13/SPARC/@Ab2TocView?)
  * [System calls](http://orion.ups.edu:8888/ab2/coll.40.6/REFMAN2/@Ab2TocView)
  * [SPARC International Standard Documents Depository](http://www.sparc.org/standards.html) (many thanks to Patrick Karjala)

* * *

Return to [my home page](http://www.math.ups.edu/~matthews)

