**School of Information Sciences  
** University of Tennessee, Knoxville  
  
SIS 560: Development and Management of Collections  
Monday: 9.40 - 12.25  
Room 205 Temple Court  
William C. Robinson  

### Office:

  * 102 Temple Court [865-974-7918]
  * wrobins1@utk.edu
  * http://web.utk.edu/~wrobinso

### Office hours:

  * 1.00 - 3.00 Monday
  * 2.00 - 4.00 Tuesday
  * Before class (for quick queries)
  * Other times by appointment

These are my official office hours, but I will be pleased to see you at other
times. I am usually available before and after class. Often, I work at home on
Fridays. If I am not in my office, please leave a note in my mail box next
door or send me an email post and I will get back to you.

Email is the best way for students who are not often on campus to meet with
me. I normally check my email several times per day during the work week and
once a day on weekends and holidays. Normally, I can answer your queries
within a few hours.

### Disabilities

If you need course adaptations or accommodations because of a documented
disability or if you have emergency information to share, please contact the
Office of Disability Services at 191 Hoskins Library at 865-974-6087. This
will ensure that you are properly registered for services. You will also need
to contact me and give me a brief explanation so I can make appropriate
arrangements.

### Catalog description:

Selecting and preserving a variety of items (tangible and intangible) to meet
needs of particular users; community analysis; policies and procedures;
evaluation; purchasing.

### Online Dictionary of Library and Information Science definitions

_Collection development_ is "the process of planning and building a useful and
coherent collection of library materials over a period of years, based on
assessment of the information needs of the library's clientele and analysis of
previous usage, and normally constrained by budget allocations for new
materials. Collection development includes formulation of selection criteria
and planning for resource sharing, as well as selection, deselection, and
replacement of lost and damaged items."

_Selection_ is "the process of deciding which materials should be added to the
library's collection. Such decisions are usually made on the basis of reviews
and standard collection development tools."

Substituting "information agency" for library will make these definitions more
generic.

:

### Scope:

This course will introduce notable principles, philosophy, and practice of
collection development and management to meet particular needs. The course--
text (when used), lectures, and assignments--attempts to cover the most
important aspects of collection development and management. The course deals
with collections in general rather than collections limited to a particular
subject, format or agency. Examples will be taken from a variety of settings,
but many will come from libraries where collection development and management
tends to be more established and where the teacher has more experience. Please
note that collections may contain items in almost any format.

While classroom activities will be somewhat general, assignments will involve
the student with a specific community, agency, collection, subject and format.

### Schedule:

Since there will be about 45 hours of classroom time, some important topics
will not be covered extensively in the class. The following is a tentative
schedule of topics to be covered in the course. The nature of the topic, the
amount of class discussion, and the discovery of new material may result in
changes. We may not cover all of the topics listed below.

Lecture notes for the topics covered in this class are available at the
teacher's WWW site. Please read the appropriate lecture notes before that
topic is presented in class. Class room presentations will assume that you are
familiar with the lecture content.

* * *

Meeting One  
27 August  
Introduction

* * *

Meeting Two  
3 September  
Labor Day holiday  

* * *

Meeting Three  
10 September  
Concepts and Definitions  
  
**Assignment One due**

* * *

Meeting Four  
17 September  
Reviews and reviewing

* * *

Meeting Five  
24 September  
Importance  
Selector  
Art - Science  
**Assignment Two due**

* * *

Meeting Six  
1 October  
Current Awareness

* * *

Meeting Seven  
8 October  
Community analysis  
**Project parts 1/2 due**

* * *

Meeting Eight  
15 October  
Policy statements  
Acceptable use

* * *

Meeting Nine  
22 October  
Evaluation  
**Project parts 3/4 due**

* * *

Meeting Ten  
29 October  
Weeding

* * *

Meeting Eleven  
5 November  
Resource allocation

* * *

Meeting Twelve  
12 November  
Purchasing

* * *

Meeting Thirteen  
19 November  
Preservation  
**Project parts 5/6 due**

* * *

Meeting Fourteen  
26 November  
Resource sharing  
Preservation

* * *

Meeting Fifteen  
3 December  
Complaint handling  
**Project parts 7/8 due**

* * *

Meeting Sixteen  
10 December  
Final Examination (2 hours)from 12.30 until 2.30 p.m.  

* * *

### Outcomes:

When you complete this course, you should be able to:

  * Discuss review utility
  * Be able to select the best item
  * Identify and characterize agency attributes likely to impact on selection;
  * Identify and interpret information about community characteristics, needs and wants, indicating how this information affects collection development;
  * Develop a priority-oriented selection policy for a chosen subject area;
  * Evaluate the adequacy of a collection in a chosen area, indicating strengths and weaknesses;
  * Revise an existing collection according to established criteria; and
  * Build a community responsive collection using a variety of appropriate selection aids.

  

### Teaching Methods:

This is primarily a lecture course. However, lectures are interruptible and
appropriate questions likely to interest the class are encouraged. Prepare
yourself for the subjects which will be discussed in class by doing the
appropriate reading. Review the lecture notes. Think about issues raised and
relate them to your own experience.

Only a few topics can be covered in class. Much of what you learn will come
from the time, effort, and thought given to the assignments. Class time is
used to introduce the student to general concerns, problems, and trends. Since
class time will _not_ provide the student with specific how to do it
information relating to assignments, students should discuss particular
concerns, questions or problems with the teacher outside of class.

### Class Attendance:

Class attendance is not required. However, failure to attend class and
participate in class discussions will be considered in the student's final
grade _if_ performance on assignments is marginal.

### Weather:

The University, because of its residential nature, rarely closes even when the
weather is awful. The School does not have a dangerous weather policy but
leaves these decisions to individual faculty members. If the University is
open, but road conditions are dangerous where you live or if you are anxious
about future road conditions, **stay at home.** The teacher will **not** come
to the University to meet with the class if roads are dangerous where he
lives. If the Maryville City Schools are closed because of bad weather, the
class will not meet. Makeups will be arranged according to the needs of the
class.

The teacher will post a note on UTKSIS-L if he is unable to meet with the
class.

### Assignments:

All written work must be word processed or typed using double spaced content.
Please use at least a 11 point font. Written work should be neatly stapled in
the upper left corner and submitted without hard covers. Your name, email
address and TC mail box number must be on the title page. **Turabian** is the
official SIS style manual. Except in extraordinary circumstances, hard copy is
expected.

Each assignment may be done by an individual **or** a team of two students.
Teams are self-selected. Each team assignment should close with a brief
statement indicating what each student contributed to the assignment.

* * *

1\. The first evaluation exercise (100 points) requires you to identify an
item that has received at least three reviews [more are better]. Please answer
these questions:

  * How many reviews did you discover?
  * How difficult were they to find [use appropriate indexes to insure a good pool of reviews]?
  * How would you characterize the descriptive AND evaluative information found in the reviews?
  * Which review was best for what and why?
  * Traditionally, collections have been based on reviews. If your experience is a typical one, how do you feel about that?

I am looking for:

  * a variety of reviews and some thoughtful discussion of how easy it was to find them and use them;
  * a thoughtful characterization of the kinds of descriptive and evaluative information found in these reviews and the degree to which they meet the needs of the collection developer (what do you need from a review?);
  * a clear indication of which review was most useful for what; and
  * some thoughtful generalizations on the assets and liabilities of review-based collection development.

  
  

* * *

2\. The second evaluation (100 points) requires you to answer **ONE** of the
following questions. The purpose of this assignment is to demonstrate your
ability to evaluate and select the best from a pool of items. Best for  what
and best for whom will be important in a thoughtful response. You will also
need to briefly characterize the pool of available items and discuss your
evaluation and selection process.

  1. Which web site provides the best coverage of new developments in information technology {you may select a platform or OS of choice)?
  2. Which personal information management software {platform of choice} is the best?
  3. Which travel guidebook to Canada is the best?
  4. Which recording of the "Planets" by Holst is the best?
  5. Which in-print edition of **Shakespeare's Sonnets** is the best?
  6. Which inexpensive laptop computer {platform of choice} is the best?

  
  

I am looking for:

  * a thoughtful discussion of how you identified and selected an appropriate audience and purpose for the collection;
  * a thoughtful characterization of your selection criteria based on audience and purpose;
  * some description and evaluation of the process you used to create a pool of possible best items;
  * a thoughtful characterization of the pool of available items;
  * identification of the best item(s) and a rationale for that decision; and
  * some thoughtful concluding remarks about the process of selecting the best item.

  

* * *

3\. You will develop a collection on a reasonably sized subject using
appropriate formats. **Items selected may be tangible or intangible. Any
format is suitable. Server-based collections are fine.** Select a local
organization or agency with a need for a professionally developed collection.
Please be reasonable in any demands which you make on local contacts. Make an
appointment and organize yourself so as to make minimal demands on their time.
Develop a collection in your subject or topic following the collection
development process described on the separate process handout {this handout is
available via my WWW site}. Your chosen organization and subject must be
approved by the teacher. This assignment is worth 650 points.

Please note that part of this assignment requires use of the WWW. Please see
the teacher if you have difficulty with this aspect of the assignment.

* * *

4\. There will be a final examination. Questions will be selected from the
comprehensive examination question set available via the School's WWW site.
You will answer  one question. This is designed to help prepare you for the
School's comprehensive examination. This examination is worth 25 points.

### Warning:

Late work may not be accepted. If accepted, late work without a convincing
rationale will be given a letter grade penalty which will reduce the optimum
grade to B. Discussion before the due date may provide an extension without
penalty.

Incomplete grades are given only in extraordinary circumstances. If you are
aware of a problem likely to make it difficult to meet a course deadline,
please contact the teacher as soon as possible. Rationale statements are less
likely to be accepted after the deadline has passed.

Academic honesty is an integral part of graduate study. Cheating, plagiarism,
and other acts of academic dishonesty will be dealt with severely as set forth
in **Hill topics** , the UTK student handbook. It is also important to note it
is normal for graduate students to help each other in a variety of ways while
still being responsible for creating their own intellectual property and
clearly indicating where they are in debt to others.

As an introductory course which should give you basic information about
selection, evaluation, and acquisitions, the course is not comprehensive.
Important aspects of collection development and management will be mentioned
only in passing. The course cannot tell you all that you need to know. Rather,
you should leave the course with the feeling that you know enough to continue
your education on your own. One short course cannot give you the collection
development and management competencies necessary for a professional lifetime.

Class time will emphasize basic concerns. Students will be responsible for
becoming familiar with a variety of bibliographic and other sources on their
own time. Note that use of a **variety** of **appropriate** sources is
required for success with the project. The teacher may discuss appropriate
sources with the student at a mutually convenient time.

Since there is much to do and time is limited, establish your own schedule and
stick with it. Plan on completing the first assignments soon so that you have
adequate time for the major selection project.

Besides the specific assignment specifications mentioned above or on other
course handouts, **ALL** written work will be evaluated according to the
following criteria:

     (1) the presentation of the paper;
    (2) the quality of the writing [ **Work that is not acceptably presented and/or written may be returned without evaluation**.];
     (3) the quality of the organization of the paper;
    (4)the quality and amount of reflection, analysis, and interpretation; and
    (5)the use of appropriate literature and source material.

### Grades:

The following convention is used in evaluating student work:

A = Excellent......................(93 - 100 percent)  
B+ = Good (visible extra effort)..(86 - 92 percent)  
B = Satisfactory...................(80 - 85 percent)  
C+ = Some requirements met.........(75 - 79 percent)  
C = Few requirements met...........(70 - 74 percent)  
  

### Text:

When a text is used it is **Developing Library and Information Center
Collections** by G. Edward Evans (Libraries Unlimited, 2000).

### Other Resources

#### Print

Other older texts for those interested in library collections are widely
available {call numbers below are for the UTK Libraries but similar ones
should be found in other LC classed collections} and include: **Collection
Management: Background and Principles** by Wortman [Z689 .W787 1989]; Carter,
Bonk and Magrill, **Building Library Collections** ; Katz, **Collection
Development** ; Ranganathan, **The Five Laws of Library Science** [Z670 .R22
1963]; and Broadus, **Selecting Materials for Libraries** [Z689.B86].
**Collection Development in Libraries** [Z687 .C64] was a state of the art
review which is dated but has many of the useful characteristics of a text.

**Collection Management** [Z687 .D42] is the most useful of those periodicals
which regularly treat library collection development. **Collection Building**
[Z687 .C] is another important title. **The Unabashed Librarian** [Z671 .U45]
contains many useful tips and suggestions about collection development and
management for smaller public libraries. **Library Resources and Technical
Services** [Z671 .L717] publishes research articles on library collection
development and acquisition work. **Library Acquisition: Practice and Theory**
[Z689 .L515] also contains worthwhile articles.

#### Web Sites

The best collection of links and documents for collection development and
management librarians is at [ the University of
Buffalo](http://ublib.buffalo.edu/libraries/units/lml/colldev/cdinternet.html).
You should become familiar with it. Another most useful and comprehensive WWW
site for acquisitions and collection development is [is at Vanderbilt
University](http://www.library.vanderbilt.edu/law/acqs/acqs.html). The
Vanderbilt site now includes a directory of selected collection development
policies on the WWW. Policies dealing with digital resources may be found at
[the University of Indiana WWW
site](http://www.indiana.edu/~libsalc/policies/e-policies/e-policies.html)

The national on-line book stores, Amazon.com, being the best known, are often
useful for current awareness, reviews, and bibliographic verification. The
Librarians' Index to the Internet is often useful in locating information on
professional topics. [Collections and Acquisitions Research Online
](http://128.253.121.98/carol/start.htm) is an information clearinghouse for
library research in this area. It is relatively new but is worth a look.

Many of the several library and information science discussion groups on the
Internet deal with CDM on an irregular basis, usually by subject or type of
library. You may also want to check with your favorite discussion list index
to check for lists that deal with highly focused collection development on a
topic such as printing history or a format such as maps.

The American Library Association has two units devoted to collection
development and management. The Resources Section of the Association for
Library Collections and Technical Services [ALCTS], with its Collection
Management and Development Committee, has traditionally been the association
home for collection developers. Recently, the Reference and User Services
Association has created a Collection Development and Evaluation Section. The
degree to which these two sections cover the same scope is presently unclear.
Ideally, the prospective library collection developer should belong to both.

* * *

***Please see the teacher if you have special needs, objectives, or problems
[Return to Collection Development and Management Page](560.html)  
![Train picture](trainmaster.gif)

