* * *

**[[Home](/radtext/)] [[Resources](/radtext/resources.html)]
[[Tools](/radtext/tools.html)] [[Lecture Outlines](/radtext/lectures/)]
[[Assignments](/radtext/assignments.html)] [[Discussion](/radtext/radtext-
password/discussion/)] [[Announcements](/radtext/radtext-
password/announcements/)] [[Readings](/radtext/radtext-password/readings/)] **

* * *  
  
---  
  
![](images/title.gif)

Colloquium for History Majors

16A:051:03

## Fall, 2001



# TEXTS OF REFORM AND REBELLION



Instructor:

Professor Shelton Stromquist

162 Schaeffer Hall

[shelton-stromquist@uiowa.edu](mailto:shelton-stromquist@uiowa.edu)

335-2301

Office Hours: T, Th 12:30 -1:30 pm; W 1:30-2:30 pm.



This course is a seminar for students who have declared their major as
history. It is designed to accomplish several objectives.



#### Course Objectives

1) To introduce students to critical reading and writing skills that will be
needed for their course work in the major;



2) To promote discussion and understanding of the peculiarities of history as
an intellectual discipline;



3) To foster the improvement of students' writing and the interpretive skills
that are crucial to analyzing the past;



4) To develop students' abilities to express themselves clearly and
insightfully.



5) Through research for and writing of a major paper, to help students gain a
sophisticated understanding of a particular historical problem or area of
historical experience.





This colloquium focuses on the history of American radicalism and reform. We
begin with the era of the American Revolution, and we end with the social
movements of the1960s. We are interested in examining the conditions that
promote reform and the ways to assess the impact of reform ideas and movements
in their own times. Our method will be one that focuses on a number of
influential reform texts. We will read them closely and ask ourselves a
variety of questions: How and why did these works acquire the influence they
did? To what audiences were they addressed? On what traditions of American
thought did they draw? What rhetorical strategies did they employ? And how,
ultimately, do we assess their historical significance and impact?



**We will all read all of the primary texts.** (This is an absolute
requirement.) But, for each text a small group will also prepare an oral and
written report that discusses the impact and significance of the text.
Finally, each student will prepare an individual research paper on some aspect
of the history of one of the social movements we are considering. It may grow
out of a small group project or it may be entirely independent of the small
group work.



**_The Required Texts:_**

(All of these texts are available in very inexpensive editions from **Prairie
Lights Bookstore**.)



Thomas Paine, _Common Sense_

Frederick Douglass, _Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, An_

_American Slave_

Harriet Beecher Stowe, _Uncle Tom's Cabin_

Edward Bellamy, _Looking Backward_

W.E.B. Du Bois, _The Souls of Black Folk_

Upton Sinclair, _The Jungle_

Clifford Odets, "Waiting for Lefty" (a play)

Michael Harrington, _The Other America_

Students for a Democratic Society, "The Port Huron Statement"



A few additional short readings may be placed on reserve in the Main Library
(RBR).





**_Course Requirements:_**

1) Class attendance and participation are required. I will take attendance,
and I will evaluate participation on a regular basis. Only **prior excused**
absences will be accepted as a basis for missing class. Points will deducted
for unexcused absences. (25% of grade.)



2) For each required book each student in the Colloquium must submit a one to
two page analytical summary of the book, due the day each text is first
discussed. Late summaries will not be accepted. (15%) [I will provide a
handout and a model for what I am expecting.]



3) Group projects and reports: Each student will be assigned to participate in
_two_ groups over the course of the semester. Each group has responsibility
for preparing a report presenting its findings and leading a class discussion
on the impact and significance of one of the texts we are all reading. The
report will be at least 15 pages in length, with each group member writing a
clearly demarcated section of the report. The written report is due the day of
the group's presentation. [I will give you a separate handout on this
assignment.] (30% of student's total grade; 15% for each group report.)



4) Final Paper: Each student will write a final research paper on some aspect
of one of the social movements represented in the texts. The topic may grow
out of the research you've done for a group project or it may be entirely
independent of your group work. You must develop a topic (narrowing it
appropriately where necessary), submit a proposal and working bibliography
(DUE: October 19), and write a final paper (DUE: December 12.) We will hold a
final class meeting during exam week at my house where individuals will
briefly present the results of their research. (30%)



Students with disabilities that may require accommodations should see me
individually after class or in my office hours.



Students should feel free to discuss any concerns they may have about the
class with me or with the chair of the History Department: Professor Kenneth
Cmiel ([kenneth-cmiel@uiowa.edu)](mailto:kenneth-cmiel@uiowa.edu\)), 335-2303



## **_Organizational Matters_**

Regular class attendance and close attention to the required readings will
have a direct bearing on how well students do in this course. I assume that
all students will have complete and detailed notes for all class sessions. For
each writing assignment you will be given a letter and a percentage grade: A
92-100%, A- 90-91%, B+ 88-89%, B 82-87%, B- 80-81%, C+ 78-79%, C 72-77%, C-
70-71%, D+ 68-69%, D 62-67%, D- 60-61%, F below 60%.



Students with disabilities should make an appointment to see me at the
beginning of the semester to discuss whatever accommodations may be needed.



Be certain to keep copies of all work submitted and all graded work received,
at least until final grades have been awarded. THIS IS YOUR RESPONSIBILITY.



You should feel free to raise any concerns about the conduct of this class
with me or with the chair of the History Department: Kenneth Cmiel, 335-2303
([kenneth-cmiel@uiowa.edu)](mailto:kenneth-cmiel@uiowa.edu\))..



Plagiarism will be severely punished. If you have questions about how to use
and appropriately cite material from other sources, see me. You may also
consult the "Tools" page of the course web site for references to proper
citation methods.







**_Course Web Site:_**

This course has a **web site** : <http://twist.lib.uiowa.edu/radtext>
consisting of several features, some of which will require a password (to be
distributed only to class members.) If you require instruction about how to
access the web site or require assistance, please contact me. The web site
consists of:

\-- _Syllabus page_. This provides a readily available copy of the syllabus
and other handouts regarding assignments, exams, etc.

\-- _Readings page_. This page is _password protected_.

\-- _Tools page_. Here you will find a guide with links to a variety of
bibliographical and web-based library tools.

\-- _Resources page_. On this page you will find links to a wide variety of
web sites and other information sources about labor history. This page may
expand significantly as the semester unfolds.

\-- _Announcements page_. This is a _password protected_ place for
announcements pertaining to the course, assignments, deadlines, or other
events that may be relevant to the subject matter of the course.

\-- _Discussion page_. This _password protected_ page offers us the
opportunity to carry on discussion of questions or issues raised in class.
THIS IS NOT AN ALTERNATIVE TO IN-CLASS PARTICIPATION but simply a way of
expanding those discussions.



**IMPORTANT** : I will expect each class member to visit the **discussion page
and the announcements page** sometime before **every** class session and be
familiar with any questions raised and responses offered. From time to time I
will post questions on the discussion page pertaining to in-class discussion
of the assigned reading or a forthcoming assignment. Use of the discussion
page (but not overuse) will figure into a student's class participation grade.
I expect all communications to be constructive and thoughtful.



**_  
_**

####  Class Meetings and Reading Assignments



August 29: Overview and Organization of Course

Assignment: Bibliographical exercise





September 5: American traditions of reform--overviews

_Assignment_ : Harvey J. Kaye, "Radicals and the Making of American

Democracy: Toward a New Narrative of American History,"

_History Teacher_ 1995, 28:2, 217-225.

Discuss meaning of "historiography"

Presentation on bibliographical searches:

John Schacht, UI Library, Reference Department





September 12: Library calisthenics: finding and evaluating sources

Meet at Library: 4057 Lib

Exercises in finding and evaluating sources



Read and discuss _Common Sense_

Brief small group meetings





September 19: Tom Paine and the American republican tradition

##  Read & Discuss: Eric Foner chapter





September 26: Slavery and Abolitionism

Read and discuss: _Narrative of the Life of Frederick_

_Douglass_





October 3: Significance and context of _Narrative of the Life of Frederick_

###  Douglass

GROUP REPORT & DISCUSSION





October 10: Significance and context of _Uncle Tom's Cabin_

GROUP REPORT & DISCUSSION





October 17: **NO CLASS**

DUE: research paper prospectus and working bibliography **10/19/01**





  

October 24: Edward Bellamy and "the Great Upheaval"

Read and discuss Bellamy, _Looking Backward_





October 31: Looking Forward/Looking Backward

GROUP REPORT & DISCUSSION OF BELLAMY





November 7: W.E.B. Du Bois and _The souls of black folks_

GROUP REPORT & DISCUSSION





## November 14: Upton Sinclair's "Jungle"

GROUP REPORT & DISCUSSION



Rosalyn Baxandall, "Pioneer and Aunt Tom: Elizabeth Gurley Flynn's

Feminism," _Rethinking Marxism_ , 1988 1:1, 74-85



Annette T. Rubinstein, "Fire, Grace, and Sisterhood: Two Women

Activists of the early 20th Century," _Science and Society_ , 1991-2

55:4, 473-481



November 21: THANKSGIVING BREAK



November 28: "Waiting for Lefty" and the Popular Front in the 1930s

GROUP REPORT & DISCUSSION



Barbara Foley, "Women and the Left in the 1930s," _American Literary_

_History_ , 1990 2:1, 150-169



Reading aloud of the play.



December 5: The War on Poverty and other wars: _The Other America_

GROUP REPORT & DISCUSSION





December 12: SDS and the 1960s: "The Port Huron Statement"

GROUP REPORT & DISCUSSION



For the full text of the Port Huron Statement, see:

<http://www.nv.cc.va.us/home/nvsageh/Hist122/Part4/PortHuron.htm>



RESEARCH PAPERS DUE





Exam week: session to be scheduled

Brief individual reports on research papers.

  
  
* * *

**[Top]** **[[Home](/radtext/)] [[Resources](/radtext/resources.html)]
[[Tools](/radtext/tools.html)] [[Lecture Outlines](/radtext/lectures/)]
[[Assignments](/radtext/assignments.html)] [[Discussion](/radtext/radtext-
password/discussion/)] [[Announcements](/radtext/radtext-
password/announcements/)] [[Readings](/radtext/radtext-password/readings/)] **

* * *

Instructor: Shelton Stromquist [[shelton-stromquist@uiowa.edu](mailto:shelton-
stromquist@uiowa.edu)]  
Research Librarian: John Schacht [[john-schacht@uiowa.edu](mailto:john-
schacht@uiowa.edu)]  
For technical help with this web site, click [here](/forms/TWIST-
feedback.html).

[TWIST](http://twist.lib.uiowa.edu/), University Libraries, The University of
Iowa.  
Copyright (C) 2001 The University of Iowa. All rights reserved.  
URL: http://twist.lib.uiowa.edu/radtext/syllabus.html  
Page Updated: Thursday, September 6, 2001 / Size: 33764 bytes

