# ![](./QuantLitSyl01F_files/image002.gif)

## Syllabus



**GE1412 QUANTITATIVE LITERACY** ****  
  
---  
  
Fall 2001





**_ _**

**_No knowledge can be certain,_**

**_if it is not based upon mathematics._**

**_ _**

**_Leonardo da Vinci_**

**_ _**



The Quantitative Literacy Course introduces you to the intriguing mathematical
sciences called Probability and Statistics. Statistics is the fascinating
study of how you can describe an unknown world by opening only a few windows
on it. You will discover the excitement of thinking in a way you have never
thought before. You will explore the most important ideas of probability and
statistics, and how they are applied to solve scientific, industrial,
economic, political, and other problems.

** **

** **

**Course Goals**





  1. Appreciate Probability and Statistics as sciences.
  2. Learn to use Descriptive Statistics to organize data. Understand the basic ideas of Probability Theory and Inferential Statistics and learn how they are used to solve applied problems.
  3. Develop analytical and problem-solving skills.
  4. Fulfill your degree requirements. 





** **

#### Course information



**Meeting Times and Location:**

|

Sec. 1 Monday, Thursday 5:00-6:50 pm Room 318  
  
---|---  
  
  ****

|

Sec. 2 Tuesday, Thursday 11:00-12:50 pm Room 340  
  
**Instructor Name:**

|

Elena Khalitov  
  
  ****

|

  
  
**Office hours:**

|

By appointment  
  
**Home Phone:**

|

763-559-4041  
  
**E-mail address:**

|

ekhalitov@mn.mediaone.net  
  
  ****

|

  
  
**Course Description:**

|

This course develops conceptual understanding of problem solving, decision
making, and analytical skills dealing with quantities and their magnitudes and
interrelationships. The course includes representing and analyzing data
through such statistical measures as central tendency, dispersion, elementary
probability theory, the binomial distribution, the normal curve and normal
distributions, central limit theorem, and sampling distributions. Students
create logical statements and arguments in a real-world context using real-
world examples and data sets. Students will estimate, approximate, and judge
the reasonableness of answers. Graphing and using polynomial functions and
systems of equations and inequalities in the interpretation and solution of
problems will be covered. Students will select and use appropriate approaches
and tools in formulating and solving real-world problems.  
  
  ****

|

  
  
**Course Length:**

|

11 Weeks  
  
  ****

|

  
  
**Contact Hours:**

|

44  
  
  ****

|

  
  
**Credit Value:**

|

4 Credits  
  


**Course Competencies:**

** **

，         Describe the relationship between statistical evaluation and real
world problem-solving

，         Describe and demonstrate sampling techniques and levels of
measurement

，         Explain and demonstrate random sampling and presentation of data
from the process

，         Demonstrate uses for measures of central tendency and variation,
standard deviation, and variance

，         Explain multiple approaches to averaging, including percentile
groupings and box-and-whisker plots

，         Demonstrate probability theory and apply it to predict outcomes

，         Define the normal curve and distribution and apply it in estimating
problems involving human characteristics and performance

，         Convert raw scores to z-scores

，         Explain the use of statistics to infer results to a larger group and
demonstrate the ability to use inferential statistical treatments to predict
outcomes



**Course Prerequisites:**

|

Satisfactory outcome of the Mathematics Skills Evaluation test.

|

  
---|---|---  
  
  ****

|



|

  
  
**Textbooks:**

|

Understanding Basic Statistics by Brase and Brase

|

  
  
  ****

|



|

  
  
  ****

|



|

  
  
  ****

|



|

  
  
**Technology Needed:**

|

Simple calculator with square root capability

|

  
  
  ****

|



|

  
  
**Evaluation:**

|

，         Weekly quizzes

，         Creative project

，         Mid-quarter Exam Week 5

，         Final Exam Week 11



|

30 % of your final grade

10% of your final grade

30% of your final grade

30% of your final grade  
  
  ****

|



|

  
  
**Grades:**

|

The percentage of total points you earn will be given the following grades:
A=90%, B=80%, C=70%, D=60%.





|  
  
|  |  |  
  
**Materials**

You need to have materials with you for each class. This includes textbooks,
notebooks, and calculators.

**Homework **

Homework problems are assigned each week but not collected or graded. However,
working on these problems on your own is crucial to succeed in this course.
Weekly quizzes and exams will consist of problems similar to the homework
problems.

Also, practice is essential for a mathematics class. In this regard,
mathematics is like swimming. No matter how much and how well a couch will
explain you how to swim, you will not learn to swim until you plunge into
water and swim. Unless you work on problems by yourself, you will not learn
mathematics.

**Weekly quizzes**

Quizzes will consist of problems similar to those done in class and assigned
as homework.

**Exams**

Exams are closed books and closed notes. You are allowed to bring one sheet of
paper with your notes.

**Problem solving**

To get a full credit for solving a problem, you will need to show your work
and explain how you solved the problem. Generally, you should use the
following plan:

(1) write down the conditions of the problem (what is given);

(2) formulate the question being asked in the problem (what you need to find
out);

(3) explain how you solve the problem, how you reach the solution;

(4) find the answer;

(5) verify the answer and write down your conclusion.

** **

**Creative Project:** You have an opportunity to explore some interesting
facts about statistics and mathematics! Possible topics include anything you
are interested in history of statistics, game theory, mathematics and arts,
Golden Section, biographies of great mathematicians, etc.

2-3 pages, could include illustrations, due before the final exam.



**Tentative Schedule**

** **

**Week 1 ** (Oct 1-7) **Math Skills Test** , Math Skills review.

** **

**Week 2 ** (Oct 8-14) Chapter 1. Organizing data. Levels of measurement.

Population, sample. Graphs.

**Week 3 ** (Oct 15-21) Chapter 2. Averages and Variation. Percentiles. Box-
and-Whisker Plots.

** **

**Week 4 ** (Oct 22-28) Chapter 4. Counting Techniques. Probability.
Probability rules.

** **

**Week 5 ** (Oct 29-Nov 4) Midterm Preview. **Midterm exam.**

** **

**Week 6 <span style="mso-spac

