##  Operations Research Applications 45-935: Course Syllabus

  * [John Hooker](http://www.gsia.cmu.edu/afs/andrew.cmu.edu/gsia/jh38/jnh2.html), instructor, 216 GSIA, 268-7589, fax 268-6837, email john.hooker@andrew.cmu.edu. Office hours 1:30-3:30 pm Wednesdays and by appointment. Feel free to email questions, etc.

  * The course meets in Mini 3, 1997, Mondays and Fridays, 10:30-12:20, Mellon Aud.

  * The url of the [course page](http://www.gsia.cmu.edu/afs/andrew/gsia/jh38/45-935.html) is http://www.gsia.cmu.edu/afs/andrew/gsia/jh38/45-935.html. This page is at http://www.gsia.cmu.edu/afs/andrew/gsia/jh38/45-935.syllabus.html. 

Last Update: 12 February 7

* * *

###  Course Summary

The aim of this course is to investigate how mathematical modeling can
contribute to management practice. This is done by examining as many case
studies as possible. Cases have been selected from the operations research
literature on the basis of two criteria: a) they describe a nontrivial model
in detail, and b) they report how the model was applied in a specific
organization. The course maintains focus on _both_ the mathematical details
_and_ the broader managerial context. The former is necessary to understand
the model's assumptions. The latter is necessary to judge whether they are
realistic, and whether the model can play a useful role.

* * *

###  Course Packet

The course packet contains 32 selected articles from two series of
publications in the operations research literature:

  * Finalist papers in the Franz Edelman competition, which recognizes outstanding contributions to management science practice. The journal _Interfaces_ publishes them in a special issue each year. 
  * Papers published in the "OR Practice" section of the journal _Operations Research_. 
Aside from these, it is hard to find articles in the literature that describe
practical modeling experience in specific firms. (There is usually little
incentive for practitioners to publish their work, and firms often restrict
release of information.) Standard business school case studies rarely describe
nontrivial models and tend to pose a problem rather than report on efforts to
solve it.

* * *

###  Course Requirements

  * You will be assigned to two-person teams, and each team is expected to **present three case studies in class.** Each presentation, and discussion following, will occupy one-half of a class period. The assignment of cases will match your preferences as closely as possible. More details on the presentation are given below.

  * You will be asked to **critique approximately four of the case studies in class**. Immediately before each presentation, two students will be called upon to serve as critics. They will make their comments after the presentation. The presentations you criticize will be chosen at random and will not be announced in advance. Critiques you miss will not be rescheduled, but you may miss one of them without penalty. More details below.

  * There are **no exams** and **no written assignments**. 

  * The course **will not involve any use of software or computers.**

* * *

###  Grades

2/3 of the course grade is based on the presentations and 1/3 on the
critiques.

* * *

###  Class Presentations

  * The presentations should last about 30 minutes. 

  * You should describe 
    * the problem to be addressed by the model; 
    * previous attempts to address the problem and any other relevant firm history; 
    * the persons and/or teams that were responsible for addressing the problem, with particular attention to the role played by modeling experts and how they established credibility; 
    * any other organizational factors that gave rise to the situation or that influenced how it was addressed; 
    * a detailed description of the model, using mathematical notation, with clear definition of mathematical symbols and identification of all modeling assumptions; 
    * a brief mention of the solution algorithm, whether it is reliable, and how hard the problem is to solve; beyond this the algorithmic details are not important; 
    * an assessment of the model's contribution, including the extent to which it was accepted and implemented by the organization, its effect on the bottom line, and the reasons for its success or failure;  to the extent that the article provides this information.

  * There is no need to use slick graphics, PowerPoint, etc. Better to spend time on the conceptual side. It may be convenient to make transparencies of enlarged tables, graphs, etc., from the article.

  * In particular, **the mathematical model should be written by hand on the chalkboard.** It should be explained slowly to show exactly how it is supposed to model the problem.

  * You can consult with anyone you wish to get help with reading the article and preparing your presentation, including me. My office hours are as listed above or by email appointment. But if you wait until the last minute, I can't guarantee I will be available. 

###  Critiques

  * The critiques provide both the critics and the presenters an opportunity to think on their feet. About 15 minutes will be available for the critiques and ensuing discussion.

  * The articles in the packet are success stories, because otherwise they would not have been published. The onus is on the critics to identify weaknesses in the model or its application. 

  * Any aspect of the model is fair game, including the way the problem is conceived, the realism of the model, the way it is implemented, the believability of the claims made for it, etc. I will be particularly impressed by critiques that show an understanding of the mathematics. We are trying to do justice to both the mathematics and managerial reality. 

### Schedule

  * Two presentations will be made in each class. I will present cases that are not chosen by students, to the extent necessary to fill the slots. The cases I present will be criticized, as well as those you present.

  * You can indicate your preference for cases during the first class. Students who join the course late will get leftovers. The cases will be scheduled in the order they are listed in the packet. 

  * The precise schedule will depend on which cases are presented, but the cases will be scheduled in the order listed in the packet. The schedule and the team assignments will be linked to the course page when they are ready. 

  * You can negotiate with another team to switch the dates of your presentations. Please keep me informed of any changes, and I will update the schedule given here accordingly.

