**H217 (The Nature of History)  
**

**Fall Semester 1998  
Violette  
Office CM205  
Office Hours MWF 11AM-12Noon  
  
** Telephone: **481-6693** (Office), **486-0088** (Home)  
E-mail: **[violette@fwa.cioe.com](mailto:violette@fwa.cioe.com)**  
FAX **: 486-6743**  
Course List:
**[violhist@listserv.ipfw.edu](mailto:violhist@listserv.ipfw.edu)**  
**[History Department Homepage](http://www.ipfw.edu/hist/)**  
  

**Texts**

Anthony Brundage, _Going to the Sources: A Guide to Historical Research and
Writing_ , Harlan Davidson, 1997.

  
**Course Objectives**

This course, which fulfills the second course writing requirement for Arts and
Sciences students, is designed to improve students' academic writing, with an
emphasis on those skills which are of particular use to the student of
history. Students will also learn to utilize effectively the electronic
resources available for historical research at IPFW. Since all faculty in the
Department of History are invited to participate in this course, students will
also have the opportunity to interact with the faculty and learn more about
their areas of expertise.



**Attendance Policy**

Because success in this course is dependent upon the exchange of information
which occurs only in the classroom, regular attendance is absolutely
necessary. A penalty will be assessed for excessive absences. Ten percent of
the course grade will be determined, as indicated below, on the basis of
attendance: 0 absences--A+; 1-2 absences--A; 3-4 absences--B; 5-6 absences--C;
7-8 absences--D; 9 or more absences--F.

  
**Class Participation**

While no specific grade is awarded for in-class participation, such
participation can be a factor in the determination of the course grade. Extra
credit can be earned for contributions to class discussions.

  
**Recording Devices**

Department of History policy prohibits the use of recording devices in the
classroom unless there is a special need. Students with such needs should
consult the instructor.

If you have or acquire a disability and would like to find out what special
services and accommodations may be available to you, contact Services for
Students with Disabilities in WU 118 & 218 (481-6657).

  
**The Writing Center**

Students are encouraged to take advantage of the assistance provided by the
Writing Center and to visit the center regularly. Experienced writers at the
center will help students clarify and organize their ideas. The Writing Center
is located in Kettler G35. Appointments should be made several days in
advance.

  
**E-mail Information**

Students must have activated their e-mail accounts to participate fully in
this course. A list of all student e-mail addresses will be made available.

All students must also subscribe to the class mailing list which will be used
for all communications which affect the class as a whole. To subscribe to the
list go to the following Web page and follow the instructions:[
http://listserv.ipfw.edu/guest/RemoteAvailableLists.](http://listserv.ipfw.edu/guest/RemoteAvailableLists)
To post messages to the list use the following address:
[violhist@listserv.ipfw.edu.](file:///D:/violhist@listserv.ipfw.edu)

Help Desk:The Computing and Data Processing Services' Help Desk is located in
Kettler 208A. The telephone number is 481-6030.

  
**Assignments**

_Exercises and Essays_ (20%). Exercises and essays based on classroom work
will be posted on the class mailing list and are due on the date determined by
the instructor.

> * Exercises and essays will be submitted by e-mail.

>

> * You should place the following information at the top of the first page:
your name, exercise/essay number and date of submission. Repeat your surname
and exercise/essay number on the subject line of the e-mail message.



_First Research Paper_ (20%). A 4-6 page research paper assignment emphasizing
the major components of a research paper will focus on the collection of data,
the organization of the essay, footnotes, and the compilation of a
bibliography. Students should become thoroughly familiar with the items listed
under [Useful Hints for Research
Papers](http://www.ipfw.edu/ipfwhist/home/hints.htm) on the department's
homepage. Before the final paper is turned in students will be required to
submit a preliminary bibliography, an outline, and the first two pages of the
draft.

  
_Quizzes_ (10%). There will be several in-class quizzes based on in-class work
and assigned readings.



_Second Research Paper_ (20%). This paper will be 6-8 pages in length and will
emphasize the use of resources available for historical research on the World
Wide Web.

> * Students have until January 31st to discuss possible topics for this paper
with the instructor. If no topic is approved by that date, a topic will be
assigned by the instructor.

>

> * Specific requirements for this paper include electronic sources, direct
quotations, graphics, primary documents, and an annotated bibliography.

>

> * Before the final paper is submitted students will be required to submit a
preliminary bibliography, sample annotations, an outline and the first two
pages of the draft.

  
_Third Research Paper_ (20%). This paper will be 6-8 pages in length and will
emphasize the use of primary source documents in historical research. All the
requirements of the previous papers pertain to this paper, with the exception
that students must submit a draft of the completed essay one week before the
end of the semester. Both the draft and the completed paper will be evaluated
on the basis of historical quality and technical quality. The grade for
technical quality received on the draft will be averaged with the technical
quality component of the final version for a composite technical quality
grade.

  
**Style Manual**

The style manual recommended by most faculty in the Department of History is
Kate L. Turabian, _A Manual for Writers of Term Papers, Theses, and
Dissertations_. 6th ed. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1996.



