## General Information  
![](../Gif/Standard/m74_small.gif)

**Required Text: _The Cosmic Perspective (Second Edition)_ , Bennett, Donahue,
Schneider and Voit, Addison Wesley Longman, 2002** **Lectures: Monday,
Wednesday and Friday, 2:30 - 3:30 pm in Edwards 106 (Red Room)**

Please read the following [Disability Statement.](disable.html)

The lecture sessions serve a number of important purposes in this course.
Lecture time will be used in the following ways:

  * Answering questions 
  * Discussion and explanation of course content as presented in the assigned reading 
  * Taking quizzes and exams 
  * Viewing videos, slides and computer simulations 

[Attendance](attend.html) at all lectures is assumed. Students are responsible
for all material presented in lecture, whether or not it is mentioned in the
text. Generally, lecture time will be devoted to exploring several of the more
difficult topics in the reading assignment. However, because astronomy is
changing rapidly, discussion may also include material that was unknown when
the text was printed.

What is expected of each student:

  * Read assignments _before_ the class in which the material is to be discussed. Be prepared to ask questions and to participate in any discussions in class. 
  * Attend all classes (and labs if registered for AST 201). Arrive on time. Present documented excuses for missed sessions within 48 hours of returning to class. 
  * Seek assistance from the instructor as soon as you find yourself unable to fully understand the material on your own. 
  * Check the course Web site at least several times each week to catch up on late-breaking news, grade postings and announcements. 

* * *

## About Mathematics  
![](../Gif/Standard/math.gif)

Galileo asserted that mathematics is the "language" of science. That statement
is as true today as it was in the 17th century. Mathematics provides the tools
necessary to fully understand relationships among variable quantities; without
it we would not be able to state "laws" of nature precisely.

Because this course uses basic mathematical skills throughout, it is strongly
recommended that students who enroll have completed QNT 111 or its equivalent.
Specific skills expected in this course are:

  * arithmetical skills including handling of powers and roots and the ability to compute in terms of both fractions and decimals 
  * graphical skills including drawing and interpreting linear graphs 
  * algebraic skills including understanding of proportion and the ability to do simple algebraic manipulations of equations. 

**These skills are essential for successful completion of the course.** They
are especially important in the laboratory. To facilitate lab assignments,
students are encouraged to have a calculator that can handle powers and roots.
Quizzes and exams will not require calculators, but may include questions
related to the interpretation of graphs, as well as the use of proportion and
simple calculations involving powers and roots.

* * *

## Unit I - Developing Perspective  
![](../Gif/Standard/comet_small.gif)

In this first unit of the course, including Chapters 1, 2, and S1, we will
begin our study of astronomy by developing a broad overview of the universe in
which we live. This will include a general introduction to the structural
hierarchy and history of the universe, the scale of space and time and the
various ways in which the Earth moves in that universe.

* * *

## Unit II - Key Concepts for Astronomy  
![](../Gif/Standard/telescope.gif)

In the second unit, comprising Chapters 3 - 7, we will lay the groundwork for
understanding astronomy by studying some basics of physics. We shall see that
a few principles governing matter, energy, light and motion can explain both
the phenomena of our daily lives and the mysteries of the cosmos.

* * *

## Unit III - Learning from Other Worlds  
![](../Gif/Standard/Io.gif)

The third unit, Chapters 8 - 13, will explore the growing field pf planetary
science. In particular, we shall look for unifying principles that have been
discovered through planetary exploration. Why are some planets rocky and dense
while others are gaseous and fluid? How are atmospheres formed, and how do
they affect the evolution of planetary surfaces. How does the exploration of
distant worlds change the way in which we think of our home planet?

* * *

## Unit IV - Stellar Alchemy  
![](../Gif/Standard/Betelgeuse.jpg)

Chapters 14 - 17, will be devoted to stars, beginning with our own star - the
sun. We will examine the similarities and differences among stars, and trace
their "life-cycles" from birth to death. One main focus of this portion of the
course will be on how we can obtain accurate and detailed information about
objects which are billions of miles away.

* * *

## Unit V - Galaxies and Beyond  
![](../Gif/Standard/m31_small.gif)

Finally, in Chapters 18 - 22, we will look at the massive collections of stars
which we call galaxies. This unit will include discussion of such bizarre
objects as quasars and super-massive black holes, and will introduce current
speculation about the early stages of development of the universe and whether
there is likely to be life on other worlds.



##

* * *

Using the World Wide Web  
![](../Gif/Standard/Deepspace.gif)

Current astronomy is an exciting discipline in which it is easy to see
scientists at work - discovering new phenomena, discussing and debating the
meaning and importance of newly collected data, working out how new
information can fit into existing understanding of the universe, and sometimes
questioning whether or not the existing theoretical paradigm is correct or
needs revision.

Because it is updated constantly and is readily available, the Web represents
a new and powerful learning resource, especially for astronomy. A word of
caution, however: There is so much material available on the Web, that it can
be overwhelming. Also, it is very seductive - once you get plugged into it, it
is hard to break away for other important study demands. Therefore, consider
the web an important _supplement_ to class discussion and text reading, not a
replacement for them.

[Our text has its own Web
site](http://occ.awlonline.com/bookbind/pubbooks/bennett2_awl/chapter1/deluxe.html).
Please check it out as soon as possible. You will find practice quizzes and
other summary and supplementary material there, coordinated with each chapter
of the text.

[The Hubble Space Telescope (HST)](http://www.stsci.edu/pubinfo/Pictures.html)
provides unparalleled views of the universe,and these are frequently made
available rapidly on the World Wide Web. Indeed,there is a wealth of
fascinating and up-to-the-minute information appearing daily on the Web, and
you are encouraged to explore this information regularly, using it to expand
upon and inform your understanding of the material presented in class or in
the text.

The [Astronomical Picture of the Day
(APOD)](http://antwrp.gsfc.nasa.gov/apod/astropix.html) presents a new picture
every day, together with a paragraph of explanatory text (including hyper-
links to other related material). This is an incredible resource for browsing
through many remarkable images. An archive and index are available so you can
search for specific objects which have been featured in the past.

For a list of interesting Web sites click the ["Links"](LinkFrame.html) button
in the General Astronomy title bar at the top of this screen.

**Please Note: use of the World Wide Web is a _course requirement_ , not an
option!** The course Web page is the official means of communication between
the instructor and students about grades, announcements of upcoming events,
astronomy news, course requirements and assignments, and extra credit
opportunities. All students are expected to check the course home page several
times a week for new material.

##

* * *

Quizzes, Exams and Grading Criteria

Grades for this course will be based on the following weights:

  |

**AST 211**   |

  **AST 201**  
---|---|---  
  **Quizzes** |

  **14.3%** |

**10.7%  **  
  **Unit I Exam** |

  **14.3%** |

**10.7%**  
  **Unit II Exam** |

  **14.3%** |

**10.7%**  
  **Unit III Exam** |

  **14.3%** |

**10.7%**  
  **Unit IV Exam** |

  **14.3%** |

**10.7%**  
  **Cumulative final exam** |

  **28.5%** |

**21.5%**  
  **Lab** |    |

**25%**  
  
**Please note:** Each component of the grade will be "curved" to an average of
50 and a standard deviation of 20 before combining with the above weights.
This includes the lab average (for AST 201) as well as the quiz average. Exam
grades will be curved before being recorded on the Web, but be aware that
individual quiz grades and lab grades will be reported as "raw" data which
will be adjusted before being combined with the exam grades at the end of the
semester. [Click here](adjusted.html) for more information about the use of
adjusted scores.

About 15 unannounced quizzes will be given, and will include current material
either from recent lectures, assigned readings and/or the Web. There will be
no make-up quizzes; if you present a [valid, documented
excuse](attend.html#leg) for missing a quiz, that quiz will be waived.

Make-up exams will be given **only** if you present a valid, documented excuse
or make arrangements with the instructor in advance. Material from Unit V will
be included on the comprehensive final exam.

Quizzes and exams will include multiple-choice and essay questions. A list of
scores will be maintained on this Web site and will be accessible at all times
by clicking the ["Grades"](GradeFrame.html) button in the General Astronomy
title bar. Each student will have a secret alias number assigned to him/her by
the instructor; all grades will be posted on the course Web site using these
aliases. To learn your alias number, send an e-mail request to the course
instructor, or stop by during office hours. Be sure to include your name in
the request; email addresses don't always provide enough information to
identify the source. Please do **_not_** include your social security number.

All quizzes and exams (except the final exam) will be available to be picked
up at the instructor's office as soon as the grades appear on the Web. All
students are encouraged to pick up their graded materials for study purposes.
**Please note: quizzes that are not picked up within two weeks after grades
are posted may be discarded and will no longer be available to students.** The
final exam will not be returned, but will be retained on file for a year. All
other exams and quizzes will be discarded after the final exam is
administered.

* * *

## Laboratory (AST 201 only)  

All students registered for AST 201 are required to attend all scheduled
laboratory sessions. Attendance will be taken and cuts will be reflected in
your lab grade. **Since AST 201 carries the General Education L Code, students
who fail to complete the laboratory portion of the course satisfactorily _will
automatically fail the entire course_ , regardless of performance in the other
portions of the course.** Students who cannot meet the laboratory requirements
should be registered for AST 211 which does not require any laboratory work.

Laboratory sessions may be held in any of three places: Room G29 Smith, Room
134 Lennon (the Planetarium) or at the observatory on Redman Road, depending
on the nature of the planned exercise and weather conditions. Check the [Lab
Home Page](http://galileo.physics.brockport.edu/~matt/frames.html) for any
special instructions about the evening's lab.

The location of the lab on any given night may be weather-dependent; you
should always dress appropriately for going out of doors.

* * *

## Drops, Withdrawals and Incompletes

Please note that the "free drop period" for this semester ends at 5:00 pm on
February 25, 2002. Prior to that time, you may drop the course without the
instructor's permission if you choose. **Students who wish to leave the course
after that date must have the permission of the course instructor and the
department chairperson.**

You will not be able to get the required signatures unless you have a well-
documented explanation which shows that you will not be able to complete the
course as scheduled _for reasons beyond your control_. Such reasons are
generally medical - an illness that extends over many weeks, for example. The
following are reasonable grounds for seeking a withdrawal:

  * "I was in a car accident and was hospitalized for three weeks." 
  * "I have had to increase my work hours from 20 to 30 to support my family." 
  * "The stress of taking 19 credits is overwhelming and my doctor told me to cut back." 
Note that appropriate documentation of the claimed circumstances will be
_required_.

**The fact that you are not doing well in the course is NOT a valid reason for
withdrawal.** Discuss your case with the instructor before you spend money on
the withdrawal form - you will be wasting your money if you do not have a
strong case.

Incomplete grades are intended for those who have serious extenuating
circumstances which have interfered with their academic performance for a
significant portion of the semester, but who do not wish to withdraw. Please
note that the basic criteria are the same for a withdrawal and for an
incomplete. Documentation is required. **Incompletes will not be considered by
the instructor unless the amount of work to be made up represents less than
1/3 of the course material. Students who have missed more than 1/3 of the
material for legitimate reasons should withdraw.**

The absolute deadline for submitting completed course withdrawal forms to the
Registrar's Office for the Spring 2002 semester is 5:00 pm, May 3, 2002.

