Syllabus for Calculus III

# HISTORY OF MATHEMATICS

##  Math 311. Spring 1998. Prof. Rickey

**Textbook:** _A History of Mathematics. An Introduction,_ by Victor J. Katz,
HarperCollins, 1993. Read it carefully before class so you are prepared to ask
questions and to participate in discussions. Of course you should read it
again later very carefully. We will cover most of the book, including some
topics from the twentieth century.

**Office Hours:** I will be in my office, Room 406 MSC, Monday and Wednesday
from 1:30 to 3:00. If my office hours change unexpectedly due to events beyond
my control I will do my best to notify you by email. You can also talk to me
after class. Other times are available by appointment. You are encouraged to
stop in -- it is part of your education.

**Aims of the Course:**

  1. To give life to your knowledge of mathematics. 
  2. To provide an overview of mathematics -- so you can see how your various courses fit together and to see where they come from. 
  3. To teach you how to use the library and internet (important tools for life). 
  4. To show you that mathematics is part of our culture. 
  5. To indicate how you might use the history of mathematics in your future teaching. 
  6. To improve your reading and analytic skills, especially in a technical situation. 
  7. To improve your oral and written communication skills in a technical setting. 

Remark: You should think about why you signed up for this course and what you
hope to get out of it. If your goals are different than mine, let me know and
perhaps I can accommodate you.

**Stress of the Course:** This course is designed as a survey of the history
of mathematics. But far too much mathematics has been done in the past 4000
years to treat its entire history carefully, so we will concentrate on one
theme: The development of calculus. To do this we will have to discuss the
development of algebra, geometry, and trigonometry. Consequently we will
discuss the history of most of the mathematics that is discussed in the high
schools; this is intended to benefit the prospective teacher. We will not
discuss many topics in modern mathematics.

**Automathography via email:** Each of you is required to get an email account
so that I can communicate with you outside of class, and so that you can
communicate with each other via a mail list called mathchat2. The first
assignment involving email is to send me an automathography. You are to
introduce your mathematical self to me. Tell me about the courses you have
taken, what your favorites were, what you find hardest. Explain what your
mathematical interests are, and what you plan to do after graduation. Reveal
why you signed up for this course and what you expect to get out of it. If
your aims for taking this course are different than those stated above, please
let me know. If you have any anxieties about this course, or any special
problems or needs, let me know. You are encouraged to be creative in your
response; don't be pedantic and just answer the questions asked above; include
whatever you wish. There are three purposes for this assignment: to make sure
that you can use email, to introduce yourself to me, and for me to get some
idea about your writing skills. Send your response by email by Friday January
16 (Yes, I realize this is not a class day).

* * *

Woops, forgot to include my email address. Here it is:
[rickey@math.bgsu.edu](mailto:rickey@math.bgsu.edu)

* * *

**First Library Assignment:** The purpose of these two assignments is to help
you to learn your way around the library and the computer library catalogues.
At first they may seem like busywork, but you will appreciate them when you
are working on your paper.

For the first assignment you will be given the name of a mathematician and be
asked to find out what you can about him or her. The questions asked on the
sheet giving the name of your mathematician are designed to acquaint you with
a few of the most useful reference works in the library dealing with the
history of mathematics. Please answer the questions on this sheet and return
it.

Some of the questions ask you to look up works by and about the mathematician.
Your records on these can be turned in on 4 by 6 index slips (cards are too
bulky; other sizes are unacceptable), but I would strongly encourage you to
send them to me via email. Each should contain the author's name, title, date
of publication (the publisher and place of publication are usually not of much
interest), the library call number and any other information that is of
interest to you. You should use the following format (for a book):

> Klein, Felix (1849--1925)  
>  **The Evanston Colloquium. Lectures on Mathematics** ,  
>  New York: Macmillan, 1894  
> Call Number: BGSU: SL 510.8 K63e

>

> English translation of twelve expository lectures given at Northwestern
University in conjunction with the Chicago World's Fair in 1893. One contains
a new proof of the transcendence of pi, a result needed to show that one
cannot square the circle with straightedge and compass.

You should also write a short two page biography of the individual. Include
information about early education and background, contributions to mathematics
as well as other fields, and whatever other information you have found that is
of interest (e.g., anecdotes). You must supply references on your sources, as
part of the intent of this exercise is for you to learn to deal with
footnotes.

This biography should be posted on our class email list so that everyone in
the class can read them. I encourage all students to read them carefully and
make suggestions for improvement (this can be done off list, but do send me a
copy). The purpose for posting all of these biographies is so that everyone
can learn from them. After they have been posted for a week and people have
had an opportunity to ask for clarification and to make suggestions, I will
give you the opportunity to submit a revised copy for a grade.  It is expected
that many students will be asked to revise their paper.

You will be our class expert on this individual so be prepared to say
something when the name comes up in class later. This assignment is due
January 30. It is worth 50 points.

If there is sufficient interest we can convert these biographies into web
pages. Yes, this would be for extra credit. Say up to 25 points, depending on
the value added. Of course your name would go on the page.

Note: You are strongly encouraged to start a permanent file of library slips.
This is a lifelong habit that is well worth developing. This is especially
true of those of you who intend to become teachers, as you will have many
occasions to want to have more information about a topic that you once read
about. There are also several software packages available for keeping track of
references (I use EndNote Plus), but I know of no freeware.

**Second Library Assignment:** The second library assignment is designed to
acquaint you with the periodical literature. You are to turn in short synopses
of ten papers on the **history** of **mathematics** (both words are crucial)
that you have looked up and read. You should post this information to our
class email list. The primary purpose of doing this is that it will provide
everyone with lots of ideas for their major paper.  Each is to contain
complete bibliographic details: author, title (in quotes), periodical, volume,
date (in parentheses following the volume number), and pages. The slip must
also contain a short summary of the paper. The most interesting of these will
be edited and posted on the web, so write your synopses with an eye towards
encouraging your peers to read the paper. But be honest, if the paper is
uninteresting, boring or not well written, say so.

A typical slip (for a journal article) is as follows:

> Hogan, Edward  
>  1971 "Robert Adrain: American mathematician,"  
>  **Historia Mathematica** , vol. 4 (1971), pp. 157-172.

>

> A very good, interesting biographical sketch concentrating on Adrain's
publication of two journals, his teaching, and his mathematics. Very easy to
read.

There are three ways to do this assignment and I encourage you to try them
all:

  1. Pick up one of the journals listed in the bibliography (to be distributed) and browse until you find a historical paper that interests you. 
  2. Pick a topic that interests you, look it up in Kenneth O. May's **Bibliography and Research Manual of the History of Mathematics** and then go find the paper. 
  3. Use one of the databases available through the library computer. I will bring a computer to class one day and discuss how you can do this. 
The last two techniques will be the one you will have to use when writing your
research paper, so I encourage you to do some of this. Another possibility is
to follow up references that you encounter in your reading. Be sure to look in
some old journals as they can be lots of fun.

The ten articles are to come from at least four different periodicals (books
are not permitted), and deal with at least four different mathematical topics.
Once an article has been posted it should not be duplicated; to prevent
problems in this regard, you should post your work shortly after you have done
it; don't wait till you get your synopses of all 10 articles completed.

This assignment is due February 6. It is worth 50 points.

You may find it easier to work on these two library assignments
simultaneously. At the same time you should begin thinking about a topic for
your research paper.

While doing these assignments you are strongly encouraged to browse in the
library. Whenever you pick up a volume of a journal to look up one thing see
what else it has of interest. Be sure to make slips on anything you find that
interests you. Don't rely on your memory; I guarantee it will fail you.

**Internet Exercise:** The quality of the information on the internet is
highly variable and judging its validity is a highly valuable skill. You will
be given a sequence of web sights to look up and to comment upon. Some of
these have been selected because they are very poorly done. Others have been
chosen because they are well done. You will be asked to decide which and to
explain the reasons for your decisions.

These exercise will be posted on the web and I will notify you of the URL when
that happens. Your comments on the sights should be posted on our email list
so that all can benefit from what you learn.

This exercise is due February 13. It is worth 50 points.

**Exams:** The midterm exam will be given March 27; the final exam on Friday
May 8 from 3:30 to 5:30 P.M. A sample exam will be distributed prior to each
exam. There will be true-false questions, matching, fill-in-the-blanks,
multiple choice questions, short answer questions, and essay questions. Some
questions will be closely related to the exercises at the ends of the
chapters. The exams will include all of the material in the book, as well as
that discussed in class.

**Research Paper:** You are to write a paper on a topic of your choice. This
is meant to be an interesting and enjoyable assignment, not a chore. So choose
a topic with care. The only restriction that I impose is that it cannot be on
the mathematician that your first library assignment dealt with.

You should think about the choice of a topic for your paper while you are
doing the two library assignments. The exercises at the ends of the chapters
in Katz suggest many possible topics. Some students prefer to write about a
mathematician, others prefer the history of some mathematical topic. You are
encouraged to talk to me (during office hours or via email) about possible
topics. As soon as you have an idea, please let me know so that I can suggest
possible references or make comments about the reasonableness of your choice
of topic. On February 25 I would like each of you to give me your topic via
email; only rarely will I veto a topic as unreasonable.

Each paper must meet the following requirements:

  1. The papers are to be on the history of mathematics. They can be neither all history nor all mathematics. Each should contain a reasonably non-trivial piece of mathematics as well as the history and background of that mathematics. 
  2. Enough expository material should be included so as to make the paper self-contained. If you have doubts, ask a friend to read it. Having someone else read your paper critically is the best way to improve the exposition. 
  3. You should use a variety of research materials and must give careful references to your sources. You will want to use books and encyclopedias, but I especially encourage you to use the journals (a necessity for B work). Your paper should include a bibliography listing your sources and they should be cited in the body of your paper when appropriate. The best sources to use are original sources, but, admittedly, that is hard to do. Their use is, however, required for A work. 
  4. The paper must be prepared using a wordprocessor (you may write in symbols if the wordprocessor you are using does not handle them); if you don't know how to use one, now is the time to learn. Other issues such as the length, format, etc., are up to you. Since you will be startled by this last comment, let me point out that papers have a natural length. You are telling a story which needs certain background, exposition, and detail. When that is successfully done, stop; you have finished. You should turn in two copies of your paper as I intend to keep one copy. 
The **grading of your paper** will be based on a number of factors, including:
the historical and mathematical content; the significance, interest, accuracy,
and completeness of the material; the accuracy, scope and significance of your
references, and the sensitivity with which they are used and cited; and
finally, the style in which it is written (poorly written papers will not be
accepted). As in Olympic figure skating, your score will be a combination of
technical performance and artistic merit. The grade of A will be given only
for truly excellent work which uses original sources; B for good solid work
that makes use of high quality journal articles; C for average work; D and F
for unsatisfactory work. All grades are possible.

To guarantee that you devote sufficient thought to your paper a topic is due
February 25 and a preliminary report and outline is due March 18. The latter
should include (a) your topic, (b) a few words about what you intend to do,
(c) an outline, (d) your preliminary bibliography, and (e) any questions you
have about your paper. This is best done via email as it makes it easier for
me to incorporate comments. The more details you include, the more feedback
you will get from me. Some students choose to turn in a first draft a little
later. Feel free to ask questions and to indicate the problems you are having.
The intent of this preliminary report is twofold: It should aid you in writing
your paper and it allows me to make suggestions. Remember, the secret of good
writing is rewriting.

The final version of your paper is due April 22.

**Problems:** There are many problems in the textbook and they contain a great
deal of information about the history of mathematics. You should read all of
them (as well as the references and footnotes for they give you some idea of
the wealth of information available). Pick one problem from each chapter and
do it (I encourage you not to pick the most routine ones). I will also suggest
problems that you should pick from. You should do these problems in groups of
cardinality three (this is called cooperative learning). Get together and work
the problem, then write up a full solution with explanations. Have others in
your group check and amend the write up before it is turned in. Put all three
names on the paper. When the problem is turned in, it will be given to another
group of three for grading. The second group will check if the problem has
been done correctly, and will make comments on how good the explanation was,
and will make suggestions for improvement. I will then look at the paper and
make comments to both groups. Each problem is worth 15 points for doing it,
and 5 for correcting it. Groups doing especially challenging problems or
turning in exceptional solutions will receive bonus points. Groups can do
additional problems for extra credit. You can turn in these problems when you
finish with them, but must do so within 3 class days of the discussion of the
chapter in class (this is to prevent everything from being turned in at the
end of the semester when all of us will be too busy to deal with them
effectively).

Each week I will call for volunteers (or, if needed, designate people) to put
problems on the board.

**Class Attendance and Participation :** Your are expected to attend class.
Roll will be taken at the beginning of the semester so that I can learn your
names. If you miss class you are expected to find out what happened in class
from a classmate and to learn the material on your own. You are also required
to present a written note (on nice paper) to me explaining your absence and
apologizing. I will randomly call on poeple to discuss what they learned in
the readings, and to suggest those topics that they are having trouble with.

**Plagiarism:** According to the Random House College Dictionary plagiarism is
"the appropriation or imitation of the language, ideas, and thoughts of
another author, and representation of them as one's original work." Scrupulous
care must be taken to avoid this in your writing. Naturally the source of a
direct quotation must be cited. But also when you take the ideas of another
and rephrase them you must cite your source. In historical work everything
except the common and readily available facts needs a reference to the work
where you learned this information. **Mutilation of library materials is a
crime, both literally and figuratively.** Xerox is cheap and readily
available, so there is no excuse for defacing library holdings in any way.

Cheating of any form will not be tolerated and will be treated with the utmost
severity. See your student handbook for details.

**SUMMARY OF DATES:**

**Date** | **Assignment** | | **Points ** |  January 16 | Automathography | |
25  | January 30 | First library assignment | |  50  | February 6 | Second
library assignment | |  50  | February 13 | Internet assignment | |  50  |
February 25 | Topic for paper | |  | March 27 | Midterm Exam | |  100  | March
18 | Outline of paper | | 25  |  | Problems | | 200  | April 22 | Paper | |
150  |  | Classroom performance | | 50  | May 8, 3:30--5:30 | Final exam | |
150

You are expected to turn in the assignments on the dates indicated above.
There will be a 10% penalty for each class that your assignment is late.

* * *

This document has been posted on the World Wide Web. The URL is:

> http://www.bgsu.edu/~vrickey/math311/syllabus-311-98.html

* * *

[Return to Fred Rickey's Home Page.](http://www.bgsu.edu/~vrickey/)

* * *

If you have comments, send email to V. Frederick Rickey at
[rickey@math.bgsu.edu](mailto:rickey@math.bgsu.edu)

