### SYLLABUS, GEOLOGY 537, Fall 2001

_Meeting Time and Place:_ The class meets at 1830 on Thursdays in PH-3, 106,
unless informed otherwise.  
  
_Instructor:_ R. B. Grannell  
  
_Office and Telephone:_ PH3-130 or 132  
1-562-985-4927 (office)  
1-562-596-7182 (home); but please, don't call before 0900 or after 2330 unless
it is an emergency!  
  
_E-mail:_ grannell@csulb.edu (office) or fritts@inreach.com (Mendocino at some
vacation time; I don't have an e-mail capable computer at home that I am
conscientious about reading).  
E-mail addresses and telephone numbers for class partcipants are on an
attached list, handed out in class.  
  
_Office Hours:_ MWTh 1700-1800  
Other times by appointment, call during normal office hours to schedule, or
ask in class. I will always be here by late afternoon on Monday, Wednesday,
and Thursday, and usually all day. I will also be here some Tuesday mornings
and some Fridays, depending on my field trip schedule, etc.  
  
_About this course:_ This course consists of a comprehensive survey of the
geology of California, province by province. The list of topics is
approximately that of the topics shown on the presentation schedule, which is
located at the end of this syllabus. There are two required weekend field
trips in the course, one to the Mojave Deseart and San Bernardino Mountains
(with possibly a few stops in the Colorado Desert), and; the second will be to
the southern Coast Ranges and western Transverse Ranges.  
  
_Textbook and Reading Assignments:_ There is no assigned text for the class;
each province covered in the course will be accompanied by a reading list,
consisting of articles from the literature and web site information. The lists
are extensive, but contain partially-redundant material, so some articles need
not be read as thoroughly as those they partially overlap. Reading lists are
provided separately from the syllabus. The most important articles will be
denoted by an asterisk I have copies of most of the articles included in the
reading assignments. These may be borrowed for a day or two. Also, if you are
interested in saving some money, I can pay for xeroxing costs of articles from
the library (ones that I don't have), provided that you give them to me once
you are finished with them.  
  
_Grading:_ Grading will be conventional, A through F. Grading is usually on a
curve, and in the past grades above 85% have been required for an A, 75% for a
B, 55% for a C, and 45% for a D; this may vary slightly, however, dependent
upon class performance and the difficulty of the material. Examination will be
entirely by essay question. Samples of possible essay questions will be
provided as study guides, but there is no guarantee that any of the study
questions will appear on a particular exam. There is only one examination, a
comprehensive final, but it may be divided up into a take home portion and an
in-class final.  
  
The final exam, regardless of its format, is worth 27% of the grade. Two
presentations will be made by each student; the topics and date for each
presentation are shown on the attached presentation schedule. The first
presentations, for a half hour, is worth 20%, and will occur at the end of
September. The second presentation, for an hour, will occur at the end of
November and early December; this presentation will be worth 33% of the grade.
Another paper, worth 20% of the grade (and equivalent in length to the first
presentation), will consist of a writeup of background information for a
segment of the Mojave Desert field trip. This last assignment will be due in
mid October (see schedule for exact dates). Each presentation and/or paper
needs to be submitted in electronic form, either as a text file or as a WORD97
document, both of which I can read on my computer and convert to HTML for
inclusion on the web with other course materials. I will do the programming
myself. Figures and graphs and photos (whatever you plan to submit) can be
submitted in paper form to be scanned (use legible copies), or as digital
files (please see me for details). More information about these requirements
will be provided as the course progresses.  
  
. No makeups will be given for the final exam unless there is a serious,
compelling, and documented excuse. The first presentation will serve as the
basis for an evaluation of your grade to date, in the event you are
considering withdrawing. Withdrawal with the expectation of a poor grade is
only possible through the end of the 8th week.. All presentations must be made
on time, or a drop in one grade will result. The oral presentation is not
graded in terms of style, and grading will be based on the electronic file.
However, a presentation that lacks content (and thus penalizes the other
students) will cause a 10% loss on the final grade for the paper, no matter
how illustrious the electronic file is. If something serious arises, and you
cannot make your presentation on time, discuss the problem with me as soon as
possible, so that I can fill in with alternate material. Similarly, if you
decide to drop the course just before your presentation is to be made, let me
know, so that students are not penalized with l ack of a lecture. 24 hours
notice would be greatly appreciated, and is necessary to avoid harming other
students.  
  
Field trips are not graded per se, but attendance is mandatory. You will need
to make up a missed field trip before a grade can be assigned. Again, serious
and compelling reasons are needed to miss a field trip and to instigate a
makeup. The field trips will be leaving early afternoon on Fridays, so they
constitute two and a half days each. If your work prevents you from going on
the Friday parts, we can arrange to have you catch up with us on Friday night
at the campground; the missed work can be made up by attending the one day
SEPM field trip to the Ventura - Oxnard area on October 20th.  
  
The final exam will be comprehensive, and at least part of it will take place
on the Thursday during finals week (December 13th) at the time scheduled in
the schedule of classes.  
  
_Withdrawal policy:_ The withdrawal policy follows that for the College of
Natural Sciences and Mathematics, which is more stringent than that for the
university as a whole. The last day to withdraw with the expectation of a D or
F grade is at the end of the 8th week (actually, on October 19th). After that,
withdrawal can only be for a serious and compelling (documented) reason which
does not include expectation of a poor grade. A copy of the college policy is
provided separately  
  
. _Schedule of important dates and presentations._  

  * August 30 -- Introduction and Overview of the course 
  * September 6 -- Overview of the Geological Provinces (see http://seis.natsci.csulb.edu/deptweb/Deptwebpage.html; click on field sites in the link list, then calif. field sites, then province map, and choose the overview at the top) 
  * September 13 -- Continued Overview, Colorado Desert 
  * September 20 -- Peninsular Ranges, Los Angeles Basin 
  * September 27 -- Fault Presentations, as follows in order of presentation (initials of presenter in parentheses; needs to be submitted in electronic form, plus paper or electronic graphics, at 1830): 
    1. San Gabriel fault (ET) 
    2. San Jacinto fault (PH) 
    3. San Andreas fault in Southern California (NM) 
    4. Newport-Inglewood fault (CZ) 
    5. Whittier-Elsinore fault (TO) 
    6. Santa Monica - San Gabriel Mountains frontal fault system (TL) 
    7. Palos Verdes, Cabrillo faults (AF) 
  * October 4th -- Continental Borderland, Transverse Ranges 
  * October 11th -- Transverse Ranges, San Joaquin Valley 
  * October 18th -- Cascade Range, Modoc Plateau  
Mojave Desert writeup for field trip due in electronic form (plus graphics) at
1830.  

    1. Independence Dike Swarm (TO) 
    2. Rainbow Basin and Tertiary sedimentation in general (TL) 
    3. Miocene volcanism in the Mojave (ET) 
    4. Precambrian basement (gneisses, plutonics) (CZ) 
    5. Late Precambrian to Paleozoic sedimentary rocks (albeit now metamorphosed) (PH) 
    6. Mesozoic plutonism (NM) 
    7. Eastern Belt Structural Geology (metamorphic core complexes, fold and thrust belt, Colorado Extensional Corridor (AF) 
  * October 19th, Last day to withdraw from the class with the ecpectation of a poor grade. 
  * October 20th, SEPM field trip (makeup for those who cannot attend Friday afternoons on field trips. 
  * October 25th -- Basin and Range province, prep for field trip 
  * October 26th (afternoon), 27th, and 28th, Mojave Desert field trip 
  * November 1 -- Mojave wrapup, Klamath Mountains 
  * November 8 -- Klamath Mountains 
  * November 15 -- Coast Ranges, field trip prep 
  * November 16th (afternoon), 17th, 18th -- Second field trip, southern Coast Ranges, western Transverse Ranges, maybe some San Joaquin Valley 
  * November 22 -- Thanksgiving, no class 
  * November 29 and December 6th -- Sierra Nevada presentations, all papers due in electronic form on November 29th at 1830 (even though your presentation isn't due until December 6th); presenters and topics are in order of presentation 
    * November 29th presentations 
      1. Metamorphic basement rocks and their relationships (TO and ET) 
      2. Mesozoic plutonic rocks (CZ) 
    * December 6th presentations 
      1. Tertiary processes -- volcanism, seismicity, uplift, fragmentation, rotation and translation, and glaciation (NM, AF) 
      2. History and Plate Tectonics Setting (PH) 
      3. Relationship to Klamath Mountains (TL) 
  * December 13th -- Final examination 
.

