**Common Goals: Cooperative Strategies**  
**FYPR 014-02**

MWF 11-11:50, 333 Swords Hall  
Prof. David Damiano, 341 Swords Hall, 793-2476  
e-mail: dbd@math.holycross.edu _or_ damiano@holycross.edu  
**Office Hours:** MWF 10-11 AM and T 1-2 PM and by appt.  
January 19, 2000

**_When self encounters other, how then shall we live?_**

In a multi-candidate election, should you vote for you preferred candidate or
is it better to vote against an undesirable candidate? In reallocating seats
in the House of Representatives after the 2000 census, how can we insure that
all citizens have equal representation? In deciding the fate of a National
Forest, how can environmentalists, hikers, hunters, loggers, and miners form
coalitions to obtain common goals? We will begin this semester by further
developing the mathematics introduced in the first semester to create a
mathematical model which will allow us to analyze encounters in which there
are more than two positions on every issue. In contrast to our work in the
first semester, this will require us to think about the give and take that is
necessary to move beyond conflict between self and other to cooperation . Is
it necessary for all parties to agree, or even for a majority to agree in
order to achieve a particular outcome? Can we use the model to decide which
groups have the power to determine the outcome? Under what conditions will the
``rational solutions'' suggested by our mathematical model be effective
strategies for achieving resolution of the more complex realities which we are
modeling? In what ways do they suggest a response to the question, ``How then
shall we live?''  

**Course Structure**  

This semester we'll proceed much as we did last semester, considering the
common readings, game theory and applications of game theory. In class, we
will continue to combine lecture and discussion, but there will be a new
feature this semester. Working in teams of two or three, you will get to lead
one of the class discussions either on a common reading or in the portion of
the course dedicated to ``Social Choice in Context''. The student-led
discussions will begin after the March break.

The entire program will be traveling to Washington, D.C., leaving Friday,
April 7 and returning Sunday, April 9. The primary purpose of the trip is to
attend the Holocaust Memorial Museum. The cost of the trip will be shared
between the program and you, the participants. Shortly after the beginning of
the semester, we'll discuss the details. When the time comes, please let me
know if it will impose a financial hardship on you.  

**FYP Journals**  

We will continue with journals following the same format as last semester. As
a reminder, the following is repeated from the fall syllabus:

As part of the course requirements, you will have to keep an academic journal.
This is not a personal diary or log of classroom activities, but rather a
place for you to reflect on discussions and activities related to the program
or current events on and off campus in light of the program. You might use it
to continue a discussion we began in class, to react to a lecture or film you
saw, in connection with the program or in another context, or to make
connections between the class material and material from other classes. You
should think of this as a public document, which I will be reading and which
you should be willing to show to members of the class. I will often suggest
topics for journal entries. In addition, you will be required to write entries
on a number of the common events, which will be determined as the semester
progresses. As a general rule, you must make at least two journal entries each
week. I will collect the journals once a week, usually on Fridays, and will
make written comments and pose questions for further thought. I will be
reading your journals for content and not style. Nonetheless, you should take
care with your writing as others will be reading it on occasion. An overall
evaluation of your journal will be part of your final grade, but I will not
grade individual entries.  

**Assignments and Grading**  

The assignments this semester will consist of the FYP journals (described
above), an 8-10 page research paper due Wednesday, April 19, a 5 page
reflection paper due Wednesday, May 3, individual and collaborative game
theory assignments, and the leading of a class discussion.

Note that the Class Participation component includes attendance at co-
curricular events. There will be an average of one event per week. It is
strongly recommended that you attend as many of the events as possible.
Attendance is mandatory at the events that are central to the program or to
this class. The co-curricular events will be discussed in class. A list of
events that have been scheduled is given at the end of the syllabus.  

> Grading Scheme:  
>

>

> Class Participation and Journal | 15 %  
> ---|---  
> Leading Class Discussion | 5 %  
> Individual and Group | 20 %  
> Game Theory Assignments |  
> Take Home Midterm Exam | 20 %  
> March 17-21 |  
> Research Paper | 25 %  
> Reflection Paper | 15 %  
> Total | 100 %  
>   |  
  
**Texts:**  
The following texts are required texts for the first semester. These are
available in the College Bookstore in the Hogan Campus Center. Additional
material will placed on reserve in the Science Library on the first floor of
Swords Hall.

> Common Readings:

>

>   * _The Tempest_ , William Shakespeare, Signet Classic Edition, 1998.

>   * _The Pleasures of Exile_ , George Lamming, University of Michigan Press,
1960.

>   * _We wish to inform you that tomorrow we will be killed with our
families_ , Philip Gourevitch, Farrar Strauss and Giroux, 1998.

>   * _Between Vengeance and Forgiveness: Facing History After Genocide and
Mass Violence_ , Martha Minow, Beacon Press, 1999.

Texts for _Common Goals: Cooperative Strategies_ :

>

>   * _Game Theory and Strategy._ Philip D. Straffin. The Mathematical
Association of America, 1993.

>   * _Rwanda and Genocide in the Twentieth Century_ by Alain Destexhe, New
York University Press, 1996.

>   * Course Pack, available in the College Bookstore after February 15.

**Schedule of Readings**  

The common texts should be read by the first day they are discussed in class.
Particular readings in Straffin will be assigned weekly.

  * January 19-January 28. _The Tempest_ and _The Pleasures of Exile._
  * January 31-March 3. Part III, N-Person Games, _Game Theory and Strategy._
  * March 6-March 10. No classes. Spring Break. 
  * March 13-March 17. _We wish to inform you..._ and Chapters 1-3 , ``The Unlearned Lesson of History'', ``Three Genocides in the 20th Century'', and ``The Hutu and the Tutsi'' of _Rwanda and Genocide in the Twentieth Century_ by Alain Destexhe. 
  * March 20-March 24. Introduction to Social Choice Theory. Chapters 3-5 of _Mathematics and Politics_ , Alan D. Taylor. Course Pack reading. 
  * March 27-April 5. Social Choice in Context. Course Pack readings on representation, the Voter's Rights Act, and alternatives to plurality voting. 
  * April 7. No class. Trip to Washington. 
  * April 10-April 14. Lawrence Langer, Course Pack reading. Chapters 4 and 5, ``From Indifference to Compassion'' and ``Justice Must be Done'' of _Rwanda and Genocide in the Twentieth Century_. 
  * April 17-April 19. _Between Vengeance and Forgiveness: Facing History After Genocide and Mass Violence_ , Martha Minow. 
  * April 21-April 24. No classes. Easter Break. 
  * April 26- _Between Vengeance and Forgiveness: Facing History After Genocide and Mass Violence_ , Martha Minow. 
  * April 28-April 30. _Not Only for Myself: Identity, Politics, and Law_ , Martha Minow, Course Pack reading. 
  * Study Week begins Tuesday, May 2. 

**Schedule of Events and Activities as of January 19:**  

  * January 18, Tuesday, 7:30 PM, _The Forbidden Planet_. **Mandatory Event**. 
  * January 31, Monday, 7:30 PM. George Lamming, ``The Pleasures of Exile'', Haberlin 103. **Mandatory Event.**
  * February 22, Tuesday, 8 PM, ``Of Ebony Embers: Vignettes of the Harlem Renaissance'', presented by the Core Ensemble, Brooks Concert Hall. 
  * February 29, Tuesday, 7:30 PM, FYP Academic Information Night. 
  * March 16, Thursday, Martha Nussbaum, Religion and Modernity Lecture titled ``Feminist Internationalism: In Defense of Universal Values''. 
  * March 23, Thursday, 7 PM, ``The Tyranny of Evil'' and Peter Rosenblum of the Human Rights Center at Harvard Law School. **Mandatory Event.**
  * March 30-April 3, FYP Film Series on the Holocaust. 
  * April 7-9, Friday-Sunday, FYP trip to Washington, D.C. **Mandatory Event.**
  * April 12, Wednesday, 4 PM. Lawrence Langer. Haberlin 103, FYP only. ``Confronting the Holocaust: Oral and Literary Witnessing''. **Mandatory Event**. 
  * April 12, Wednesday, 7:30 PM Lawrence Langer, Hogan Ballroom, Religion and Modernity Lecture titled ``The Chosen People and the People Chosen: Jewish Promise and Jewish Loss in the Paintings of Samuel Bak.'' 
  * April 27, Thursday, 3:30-5:30 PM, Martha Minow, ``Between Vengeance and Forgiveness'' Hogan Ballroom. **Mandatory Event**. 
  * May 2, Tuesday, FYP Year-end banquet, Hogan Ballroom. 

  

* * *

__  
_2000-01-26_

