    [Return to Education Home Page](../homepage.htm)
    COURSE SYLLABUS
    SPRING 1998

# ED 370 - CHARACTERISTICS OF THE LEARNING DISABLED

      _CLASS DAY AND TIME:_
     Wednesday - 6:00 - 8:45 p.m. 
    Room L214
    _TEXT:_
     Lerner, J., _Learning Disabilities_. Boston, Mass. Houghlin Mifflin Company, 1997.
     Buzzell, J., Piazza, R., _Case Studies for Teaching Special Needs and At-Risk Students._ Albany, New York: Delmar Publishers, Inc. 1994.
    INSTRUCTOR:
    Alice Wirt
    Education Office - S313
    Telephone: (815) 740-3376
    Office Hours:
    Monday 10:00 - 12:00 P.M.
    Wednesday 10:00 - 12:00 P.M.
    I am at the college five days a week and I welcome any visitors!

**If you believe that you may be in need of special services or accommodations
in your coursework, please contact Alice Wirt in the Education Department at
(815) 740-3376, or stop in S313 for an appointment.**

**_COURSE DESCRIPTION_**

**The purpose of this course is to introduce students to the field of learning
disabilities. The course covers characteristics of learning disabilities,
definitions, history, assessment, medical aspects, teaching preschoolers and
adolescents, and teaching strategies for pre-academic learning, oral language,
reading, writing, mathematics, and social-emotional development.**

**Course Objectives:**

**The student will:**

    1. **Demonstrate knowledge of the definitions and characteristics of learning disabilities.**
    2. **Demonstrate knowledge of state and federal legislation relating to individuals with learning disabilities.**
    3. **Demonstrate understanding of the educational foundations of teaching children and youth with learning disabilities.**
    4. **Demonstrate familiarity with the full range of placements for individuals with learning disabilities.**
    5. **Demonstrate understanding of the effects of learning disabilities upon academic, social, and vocational performance across the life span.**
    6. **Demonstrate knowledge of informal and formal assessment methods, of making decisions based on assessment information, and of writing IEP's.**
    7. **Demonstrate an appreciation for cultural diversity and its effects on all aspects of teaching children and youth with learning disabilities.**
    8. **Demonstrate knowledge of teaching strategies and methods for instructing children and youth.**
    9. **Demonstrate an understanding of precursors of learning disabilities and methods for intervention.**
    10. **Demonstrate an understanding of academic learning disabilities and teaching strategies of oral language, reading, writing, and mathematics.**
    11. **Demonstrate an understanding of the social and emotional problems of individuals with learning disabilities and strategies for meeting social and emotional needs.**

**Methods of Instruction**

**The methods for instruction will include lecture, discussion, student work
groups, reading assignments, student presentations, audiovisual materials, and
computer multimedia presentations.**

**Course Outline and Calendar**

  |   |  
---|---|---  
  
Week

| Activities | Assignment  
  |   |  
  
1

| Overview of the class, calendar assignments and C.E.C. common core.

Learning Disabilities: A Field in Transition

Inclusion Practices

Collaboration

Multiple Intelligences

Newest L.D. on-line - PBS channel 126 - Web-site \-
[idonline@weta.com](mailto:idonline@weta.com)

Cooperative Learning Materials

Multiple intelligencies videos

| Read Chapters 1 & 2  
  |   |  
  
2

| Historical Perspectives and Emerging Directions

Linguistic Diversity

Attention Deficit Disorder

Education Reform Movement

Computer Technology

Surplus Federal Computers: Web-site -
[http://www.slcfund.org](http://www.slcfund.org/)

| Read Chapter 3

Read an article (on line) about A.D.D. (be prepared to discuss this article in
class  
  
  |   |  
  
3

| Assessment

Attention: Deficit Disorder

Computer Technology

Case History

Cooperative Learning

| Read Chapter 4

Begin Case History  
  
  |   |  
  
4

| Clinical Teaching

Lesson Plans

Clinical Teaching in an Inclusive Classroom

Promotion of Active Learning

Reciprocal Teaching

Learning Strategic Instruction

| Read Chapter 5

Study for test on chapters 1, 2, 3, 4

(T. - F. - multiple choice - essay)  
  
  |   |  
  
5

| **Test on Chapters 1 - 2 - 3 - 4**

**Systems for Delivering Educational Services**

**Alternative Placements**

**Family System - conferences - counseling - parent education groups**

|  Read Chapter 6

Read an article on co-teaching collaboration in special education. Or make a
list that describes activities that can be used by the learning disabilities
teacher to promote the partnership between regular and special educators.  
  
  |   |  
  
6

| Theories of Learning: Implications for Learning Disabilities

Theory Building

Developmental Theories

Behavioral Theories

Cognitive Psychology

| Read Chapter 7  
  |   |  
  
7

| Presentation of Group Activities

a. In a book, article, or other source on learning disabilities or special
education, find a theory or model of learning disorders, of assessment, of
teaching, of a service delivery system, or of a related area. Explain the
theory or model.

b. Give examples of analyzing a task using behavioral analysis for direct
instruction. Select an academic task (spelling, arithmetic, handwriting) or a
nonacademic task (cleaning your desk, meeting new friends).

c. demonstrate how to teach a learning strategy

d. Explain how a maturational lag can lead to learning disabilities.

Styles of Learning

| Study for Midterm examination  
  |   |  
  
8

| **Midterm Examination**

**Medical aspects of Learning Disabilities**

**Characteristics of Children with ADD or ADHD**

|  
  |   |  
  
9

| Young Children. Importance of preschool years. Precursors of learning
disabilities. Young children. Legislation for you children. Assessment.
Programs for young children. Placement options. Transition. Curriculum.
Computers. | Read Chapter 8  
  |   |  
  
10

| Adolescents & adults. Characteristics. Problems at secondary level.
Transition. Approaches for teaching. Learning strategies instruction. Adults
with learning disabilities. College programs. Web-site
[www.education.org/spkz.wrt](http://www.education.org/spkz.wrt) | Read Chapter
9

Design an activity to teach auditory perception or visual perception.  
  
  |   |  
  
11

| Pre-academic learning. Motor development. Perceptual systems. Teaching
strategies for motor and perceptual learning. Phonological awareness. Oral
language. The integrated language system. How children acquire language.
Linguistic systems. Emergent literacy. Assessment of oral language. Teaching
strategies for listening and speaking. | Read Chapter10 & 11  
  |   |  
  
12

| Reading. Consequences of reading disability. Dyslexia. The reading process.
Whole language philosophy. Explicit code-emphasis instruction. Word
recognition skills.  | Read Chapter 12  
  |   |  
  
13

| Writing. Written expression. The writing process. Strategies for writing.
Word-processing. Assessment of written expression. Spelling. Developmental
stages. Spelling problems. Invented spelling. Approaches to teaching spelling.
Assessment of spelling. Handwriting, manuscript, cursive, keyboarding.
Strategies for teaching written expression, spelling, and handwriting. | Read
Chapter 13

Each group will design a plan for writing with a graphic organizer. Select a
topic and make a graphic organizer on the topic.  
  
  |   |  
  
14

| Mathematics. Disabilities in mathematics. Indicators of math problems.
Changing views about mathematics instruction.

Theories about mathematics learning. Assessment of mathematics

| Read Chapter 14  
  |   |  
  
15

| Social-emotional problems. Strategies for building social competencies,
self-esteem. Behavior management strategies. Accommodations for inclusive
classrooms.

Review

| Read Chapter 15  
  |   |  
  
16

| Case Theory presentations.

**Final**

|  
  |   |  
  
17

| **Final Examination** |  
  
**_GRADES:_**

**Four tests each worth 100 points.**

**Five assignments each worth 20 points.**

**500 total points**

**A = 463 - 500 (100-93) - 37 points**

**B = 433 - 462 (92 - 86) - 67 points**

**C = 393 - 432 (85 -78) - 107 points**

**D = 348 - 392 (77 - 70) - 152 points**

**F = 347 and below**

**_COURSE REQUIREMENTS:_**

    1. **The student is expected to attend every class session. Two late arrivals and/or two early departures count as one absence. Please note that if you miss 4 classes you will not be allowed to take the final. (25 points off for each missed class. 15 points off each late arrival or early departure). All gentlemen will take off their hats when we have guest speakers and/or visit clinical sites.**
    2. **All assignments are due on the required dates. _No late assignments will be accepted._**

**_TESTS:_**

**Week 5 test on chapters 1, 2, 3, 4, 5**

**Week 8 Mid-term exam**

**Week 16 Final - Case History Presentation**

**Week 17 Final**

**_ASSIGNMENTS:_**

**_WEEK_**

  1. **Cooperative Learning Strategy**
  2. **Article about ADD.**

  5. **List that describes activities that can be used by the L. D. teacher.**

  10. **Design an activity to teach auditory perception or visual perception.**

**13\. Graphic Organizer.**

[Return to Education Home Page](../homepage.htm)

