![AUCTEbluebanner](../../AUCTEbluebanner.gif)  
---  
![](../../clearpixel.gif) | ![](../../clearpixel.gif)  
---|---  
|

**_Designing a syllabus

_**        The University requires a syllabus for each course, as specified in
the extract from the Academic Regulations below. On the following pages is a
composite syllabus for a fictitious course which was prepared based on various
syllabi. It should be seen as a guide only, but feel free to use any portions
of it which might be useful.

Academic Regulations 25.00.04 Course Syllabuses

A. An approved syllabus or outline describing the general nature and scope of
each course must be prepared and on file in the office of the dean of the
college or school where the course is offered. Additionally, a copy of each
syllabus is to be placed on file in the  university library. The syllabus
should be changed or brought up to date whenever the content or approach of
the course is substantially changed.

B. Syllabuses are not intended to inhibit flexibility on the part of the
faculty member or to place limits on the prerogative of adapting a course in
the way that seems most suitable. The university is well aware that each
faculty member will place emphasis in a course according to the person's
concept of the subject matter covered. The purpose of the syllabus is to
provide a clear summary of what the course is intended to achieve, the content
which it covers (with an indication of the breadth and depth of coverage), and
the basic reading and other assignments which it requires of students. Each
faculty member assigned to a course should be familiar with its syllabus and
ensure that, regardless of personal points of view about coverage and format
of presentation, adequate attention is given to the aspects of the course
which the sponsoring college, school, or department has indicated should be
included.

C. The university requests that each faculty member, at the opening of each
session, distribute to those students enrolled a copy of the syllabus, a list
of assigned and suggested readings, and the schedule of examinations which
will be in effect for the course. Arrangements for the typing and duplication
of these guides, which are most helpful to students, may be made through the
office of the college, school, or department concerned.  


American University

DEPARTMENT OF STUDIES

FALL 99 39.210.02  M&Th 2:10-3:25 Room TBA

History of Syllabus Art/A 3:2

(Add a graphic or a cartoon here to jazz up your syllabus)

I. Instructor: Dr. Jane Taylor, Associate Professor of Syllabus Studies,
Department of Studies. Office: 342 Ward; telephone: 885-1111. Call at home if
urgent (202-363-2222).

Office hours: Mon, 3:30-6:30. Email: jtale@american.edu.Teaching assistant:
Celia Mudd x2354

II. Course statement: (INSERT HERE THE COURSE DESCRIPTION TAKEN FROM THE
UNIVERSITY CATALOG PLUS ANY OTHER GENERAL COMMENTS YOU AS THE INSTRUCTOR WOULD
LIKE TO ADD)

III. Relationship to the General Education Program:

Course SYL-210, "History of Syllabus Art" is a second level course in
Curricular Area III (the International and Intercultural Experience), in the
University's General Education Program. This dimension of the curriculum is
designed to develop an informed understanding of the diversity of the world's
cultures and the critical issues which challenge policy makers in our
increasingly interdependent world. Each second level course builds on and
extends concepts and skills introduced in a designated foundation course in
the same or a related discipline. In order to complete the International and
Intercultural Experience with course SYL-210, " History of Syllabus Art ", you
must have previously completed one of the following foundation courses in Area
III: LIT-150: Third World Lit   OR   SIS-140: Cross-cultural Comm   OR
ANTH-110: Culture- Human Mirror.  The rationale for the linkages to each
foundation course is as follows:  LIT-150: Third World Lit: the course uses
literature as a key element.  SIS-140: Cross-cultural Comm: the course
emphasizes the unique features of various cultures.  ANTH-110: Culture- Human
Mirror: the course examines the cultural contribution of various syllabi

IV. Course requirements and evaluation:

a. Mid-term exam (worth 20%), on Thursday 22 Octobe00r.

b. Final exam (worth 25%), on Thursday 14 December, 2:10-4:40 PM (from the
mid-term on).

c. Report on a painter (worth 10%, due 19 Nov). You will prepare a  written
report on a painter which you will select from the 14 painters presented in
class and on the computer program (if you prefer a painter other than one of
these 14, please see with me first). The emphasis will be to place the
individual in the historical, social, and political context of her/his period.
Your report should be about 15 pages, including sources, which must be
properly identified.

d. Short reaction paper (approximately 8-9 pages) on your individual visit to
the Museum of Modern Art, 19th St. and Constitution, tel 458-6016 (call first
to confirm that they are open). Worth 10% and due Monday 12 October. Other
museums are available (please consult first).

e. Unannounced quizzes on the assigned daily readings (10%).

f. Computer exercises (10%). This course uses Lotus Learning Space software,
and involves responding electronically to discussion questions posed for each
class sessions. We will have a computer orientation session in the Anderson
Computer Lab on Thursday 10 September. Contact the course teaching assistant
(Celia Mudd 885-2354) if you have any problems.

g. Participation grade (15%). This grade will be based on how much and how
well you participate in class by making comments, asking and answering
questions, and joining in the class dialogue. Attendance will affect this
grade, since if you are not present you obviously cannot participate. The
participation grade includes brief written exercises in connection with class
simulations.

h. The writing assignments: as I am sure you know, the General Education
Program stresses writing skills. You will have several opportunities to use
these writing skills in the written assignments described above, which will be
graded on the basis of content as well as style, organization, grammar, etc. I
expect these assignments to be typed, and in compliance with the standards set
out in the College Writing courses you have taken. There will be one grade for
content and one for form. You may resubmit your paper if your "form" grade is
low. The course's teaching assistant will provide you with guidance and
comments on your paper, but does not grade your paper (that is my
responsibility).

i. Attendance policy: I expect regular attendance, but I understand that you
may be absent from time to time for various reasons (please keep me informed).
You are responsible for making up all the work you miss. An unreasonable
number of absences (especially if unexplained) will inevitably affect your
participation grade (see "g").

j. Late work will be penalized unless you obtain my permission in advance. I
will approve Incomplete contracts only in exceptional cases.

k. Academic integrity. As scholars, we are all held to the University's
Academic Code of Ethics. Academic dishonesty in exams and quizzes, and
plagiarism (presenting the words or ideas of others as your own) will not be
tolerated. All exams and quizzes are "closed book". All papers are individual
work, although I encourage you to discuss and share sources prior to writing.

l. Videos. In the "Study assignments" which follow, you will find a series of
video tapes listed. These are optional, and they serve to add a rich visual
dimension to the course. You can see these video tapes at your convenience in
the Library's Media Services (basement).

m. "Community Service Learning Project". You have the optional opportunity of
doing a Project (39.294) in connection with this course. This would earn you
one credit, Pass/Fail, for doing a total of 40 hours of approved field work
over the semester in the local community. A written journal is due the last
week of class (Mon 7 Dec).

n. Extra credit project (15-20 page reaction paper, or completion of
additional computer projects, including your own web page): ask me about this
possibility after the Mid-term exam, especially if you are weak in other
graded portions of the course, such as participation.

o. The course web site. This course uses Blackboard CourseInfo.  On the
Blackboard web page you will be given questions very similar to those which
might be encountered on the quizzes and exams. We will go over Blackboard in
our lab session on Thursday 10 September.

p.  Student Services. If you experience difficulty in this course for any
reason, please don't hesitate to consult with me.  In addition to the
resources of the department, a wide range of services is available to support
you in your efforts to meet the course requirements.

Learning Services (x3360, MGC 201) offers study skills workshops, individual
instruction, tutor referrals, and services for students with learning
disabilities.

Psychological Services (x3360, MGC 201) offers counseling and consultations
regarding personal concerns, self-help information, and connections to off-
campus mental health resources.

Disability Support Services (x3315, MGC 120) offers technical and practical
support and assistance with accommodations for students with physical or
psychological disabilities.

If you have a disability and might require accommodations in this course,
please notify me with a letter from DSS or LS early in the semester so that we
can make arrangements to address your needs.

V. Required texts (available through the Campus Store):

Jack Tale, A History of the Contemporary Syllabus, 1998; $45 new/ $39 used

Pat McNices, ed., Contemporary Short Syllabus Stories. (Second edition); $27
new/ $23 used.

VI. Recommended Texts (available in the Bookstore):

E. Bradford Quema, Syllabi: A Concise Interpretive History (6th edition,
1994).

Marta Traba, Art of the Syllabus, 1900-1980.

VII. Other books and bibliographic sources on Library Reserve:

Ades, Dusk, Art in Syllabi: The Modern Era.

Hunt, Gilbert, Contemporary Art in U.S. Syllabi.

  
![](../../clearpixel.gif) |  
---|---  
| ![auline](../../auline.jpg)  
| ![](../../clearpixel.gif) |  
---|---  
| [![email](../../email.gif)](mailto:landion@american.edu)  
| ![](../../clearpixel.gif) | ![](../../clearpixel.gif) |
![](../../clearpixel.gif) | ![](../../clearpixel.gif) |
![](../../clearpixel.gif)  
---|---|---|---|---  
|

Maintained by:  [Lisa Andion](mailto:landion@american.edu) |  
|

Created by:  Alison Marcoff  
|

Last update:  November 2, 2000 |  
|

Questions?  Contact us by [e-mail](mailto:landion@american.edu) or call x2305  
| ![](../../clearpixel.gif) |  
---|---  
| [![eaglehome](../../eaglehome.gif)](http://www.american.edu)  
![](../../clearpixel.gif) |  
---|---  
|  |

[[Home](../../index.html)] |

[[Intro](../../cteintro/cteintro.html)] |

[[Teaching Resources](../../trm/trm.html)] |

[[Teaching Centers](../../othertcs/othertcs.html)] |

[[Calendar](../../calendar/calendar.html)] |

[[Greenberg Seminar](../../gbgintro/gbgintro.html)]  
---|---|---|---|---|---

