My Teaching Experience

* * *

Throughout the last several years I have had the wonderful opportunity to
instruct or assist in the instruction of a number of fantastic courses,
working alongside many excellent teachers at two very fine institutions. On
this page I hope to summarize my experiences with these courses, indicating
the nature of my pedagogical work in the last several years while giving
credit to the intelligent people with whom I've worked.



_Courses taught at the University of Denver_

Note: the quarters at the University of Denver were 10 weeks in length, three
to a year. The graduate students were not responsible for the full teaching
duties in any of the classes except for the laboratory sessions for the CORE
course on math and computer science, MATC 0100.



**MATH 1950 (1,2,3): [First-year] Calculus** (September 1996 \-- June 1997,
primary instructor: Dr. Joel Cohen)

This course used the text _Calculus_ written primarily by Deborah Hughes-
Hallett and Andrew M. Gleason, and was the DU Department of Math and Computer
Science's first and only attempt at using that "reform" text as a basis for
the primary calculus sequence. This course was the first with which I
assisted. My duties throughout the three quarters consisted primarily of
holding office hours and help sessions, grading homework, quizzes and exams,
creating the occasional test question or quiz, directing several computer
laboratory sessions using Maple software, and writing and giving perhaps three
or four class lectures per quarter. The class had roughly 30 students, all
undergraduates.



**COMP 2370: Introduction to Algorithms and Data Structures** (September 1996
-- November 1996, and September 1997 -- November 1997, primary instructor: Dr.
Mario Lopez)

This course was the department's "make or break" course for the computer
science majors, serving as the first major theoretical course that was
required of that major. Because of its theoretical nature, the students taking
the course also included a small number of "returning" students who had found
jobs in "industry," creating an interesting demographic!

The course used the text _Data Structures and Algorithm Analysis in C++_ , by
Mark Allen Weiss. The material consisted of the basics of the representation
of data in computer programming, and of the manipulation of that data by an
assortment of algorithms. Also, the students were led through the rudimentary
analysis of time and space considerations involved in designing data
structures and algorithms. My duties included holding office hours, grading
homework and exams, and giving two or three class lectures during the course
of the semester. The class had perhaps 20-25 students, most undergraduates,
but there were a few "non-traditional" students as well.



**MATH 2080: Multivariate [second-year] Calculus** (January 1997 -- March
1997, primary instructor: Dr. James Hagler)

This class was based upon the relevant material contained in the 2 nd edition
of James Stewart's _Calculus_ , covering chapters 11, 12, and 13 of that text.
Therefore the material led from the basics of analytic geometry to the very
beginnings of vector calculus. There were about 25-30 students in the class,
primarily physics and engineering majors. My duties for the class consisted of
holding office hours, conducting review sessions, grading quizzes, and
designing and delivering two or three lectures throughout the course of the
quarter.



**COMP 3371: Advanced Data Structures and Algorithms** (March 1997 -- June
1997, primary instructor: Dr. Mario Lopez)

This class is the continuation of the class for which I assisted in the Fall
of 1996. The material becomes more complex and theoretical, discussing more
powerful data structures and algorithms, including more advanced programming
methodologies. The overwhelming majority of the students were graduate
students or "non-traditional" interlopers from industry. I'm pretty sure I was
the youngest one in the room most of the time!

The text used for the course was _Introduction to Algorithms_ by Thomas H.
Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson, and Ronald L. Rivest. My duties included grading
homework and exams, and writing and providing two or three lectures throughout
the quarter.



**MATC 0100: Introduction to Mathematics and Computing, Computer Lab** (July
1997 -- August 1997 and July 1998 -- August 1998, primary instructor: Patrick
Bahls)

During the summers I led the computer laboratory portion of the mathematics
and computer science course designed for those who merely needed to fulfill
CORE course requirement. Because the course was so designed, all of the 10-12
students in this class (enrollment was roughly equal both summers) were
upperclassmen in Arts and Humanities, and were as a consequence quite timorous
when it came to numerical computation of almost any sort.

This class was my first opporuntity to design my own syllabus to a large
extent, merely having to follow along (more or less) with the classroom
portion of the course. I designed and implemented numerous laboratory
exercises leading the students through the use of word processors,
spreadsheets, and databases (all on the Microsoft platform), training them to
work with these applications in order to solve basic yet practical
mathematical problems. I even got in a lecture or two on basic web design!

In addition to delivering the laboratory lectures explicating the exercises
described above, I created all of the homework, quizzes, and exams which were
used for the laboratory portion of the course, and was fully responsible for
all grading.



**MATH 1955 (1,2,3): [First-year] Honors Calculus** (September 1997 -- June
1998, primary instructor: Dr. James Hagler)

This was without a doubt my favorite among the classes with which I assisted
during my time at DU.

These students were eager, bright, and highly motivated. Most of them were
enrolled in the University's Honors Program, and were more than willing to
meet the greater-than-usual demands that the course put upon them.

The text used in this course was _Calculus with Analytic Geometry_ by George
F. Simmons, and Simmons' companion book _Calculus Gems: Brief Lives and
Memorable Mathematics_ served to provide the humanistic counterpoint that I
have always found essential in the teaching of an above-average mathematics
course.

My duties for this class included grading quizzes and exams, holding office
hours and review sessions, designing and delivering occasional lectures, and
directing students in their group projects.

One of my favorite moments in this class: during last review session of the
year, not long before the final exam, two of the students mobbed me from
behind and got me in a bearhug while a third snapped our picture. Classic.



**MATH 2070: Introduction to Differential Equations** (September 1997 --
November 1997, primary instructor: Dr. Joel Cohen)

This course utilized Stephen L. Campbell's _An Introduction to Differential
Equations and Their Applications_ , and considered several basic methods of
solving ordinary differential equations. Beginning with the basic theory
(existence and uniqueness of solutions) and methods for solution of separable
equations, the students were led through various techniques, culminating in
the exploration of the Laplace transform.  
My duties for the class consisted of holding office hours, grading quizzes and
exams, and designing and delivering two or three lectures throughout the
course of the quarter. There were roughly 30-35 students in the class, most of
whom were majors in either math, physics, or engineering.



**MATH 3160 (1,2) Introduction to Real and Abstract Analysis** (January 1998
-- June 1998, primary instructor: Dr. James Hagler)

The first quarter of this class provided the first taste of analysis that
undergraduates at DU would receive. There were about 8-10 students in the
class, all of whom were majors in mathematics. The text that was used was
Richard R. Goldberg's _Methods of Real Analysis_ , and the first quarter of
the course dealt primarily with the first five or six chapters of this text,
beginning with sequences and series in the real numbers (and the question of
their convergence), continuing to examine topics like general metric spaces,
continuous functions on these spaces, and the notions of connectedness,
compactness, and completeness.

My duties in this class for this first quarter consisted of holding office
hours and grading homework.

The second quarter's class continued where the first had left off, working
still from Goldberg's text, though this material was supplmented by various
topical lectures based upon other sources. The ranks of the class had dwindled
and now only four or five students remained, so there was little for me to do
to assist Dr. Hagler. My duties consisted mostly of grading homework and
holding office hours.



_Courses taught at Vanderbilt University_

Note: the semesters at Vanderbilt University are 15 weeks in length. The
graduate teaching assistants are fully responsible for the teaching of a large
number of the courses comprising the various calculus sequences, though do not
teach any classes above this level.

Unless otherwise noted, all courses utilized the 4 th edition of James
Stewart's _Calculus_ , covering the chapters indicated below for a given
course. As was done above, I shall list the courses in the chronological order
in which they were taught, aside from the Undergraduate Seminar, which is
listed following all of the courses.



**MATH 150A: First-year Calculus [first semester]** (August 1999 -- December
1999, August 2000 -- Decemeber 2000, and August 2001 -- December 2001)

This is the first semester of the "standard" sequence of calculus, designed
primarily for those students in the non-engineering sciences who require
calculus for their majors (pre-med, mathematics, physics, biological sciences,
etc.).

In each of the semesters given above, the course began with a two-to-three
week review of algebra and trigonometry that was designed with the intention
of getting the calculus students up to speed with the topics that they would
require in investigating the calculus. A different supplementary text was used
in each of the three semesters given above, most recently [_From Here to
Infinity: A Foundation for Calculus_](book.html), co-written by several
graduate students at Vanderbilt University, including myself.

Once this review was completed, the course covers the first four chapters of
the Stewart text, taking the students from the basic notions of functions and
their limits, through continuity and the definition of the derivative,
ultimately to applications of the derivative in numerous fields.

This course is truly a thrill to teach; I must say that I very much enjoyed
this first oportunity to take full "creative control" of a mathematics course.
I especially relish the opportunity to provide a holistic view on mathematics
as a human endeavor, accessible to all students who are willing to put forth
the effort to master the concepts involved. For more details concerning this
philosophy of teaching, please see the page which contains the [statement of
my teaching philosophy](pot.html), or the page which contains several
[essays](phil/essays.html) on mathematics and its instruction.

My duties for this class included design and implementation of a syllabus,
creation and delivery of all class lectures, creation and grading of all quiz
and test material, oversight of students' individual projects (usually short
survey papers, but including occasional forays into basic mathematical
concepts outside of the calculus), holding office hours and review sessions,
and mentoring students in their choice of mathematics courses.

In addition, during each of the two more recent semesters listed above, I have
had the opportunity to mentor a first-year graduate student in methods of
instruction. The duties involved herein include direction in the delivery of
lectures and in the logistics of class management (office hours, review
sessions, preparation, etc.), guidance in the design and evaluation of testing
materials (including comparative grading), and oversight and criticism of
actual lectures delivered by the mentee to the class.

There were roughly 30 students in each semester of this class.



**MATH 155B: First-year Accelerated Calculus [second semester]** (January 2000
-- May 2000)

This course is designed for the students in the various engineering programs
at Vanderbilt, and because of the needs placed upon the students by those
programs, the material is covered a bit more quickly than it is in the
standard sequence.

This second semester of the course covers chapters 7-12 of the Stewart text,
beginning with the algebra and calculus of exponential and logarithmic
functions, leading all the way though an introduction to sequences and series.
On the way, the students are taken through advanced techniques of integration,
applications of the integral, a brief introduction to differential equations,
and calculus in other coordinate systems.

This course was a challenge to teach, simply because of the speed at which the
material is covered! My duties in this course were the same as those listed
above in my teaching of MATH 150A.

Approximately 35 students were enrolled in this course.



**MATH 140: Survey of Calculus** (July 2000 -- August 2000)

This is the course designed for those students who plan no further study in
calculus, requiring the course only to fulfill basic core mathematics
requirements. As a consequence, the material was presented without nearly as
much rigor, and emphasis was placed upon application rather than theory. The
text used for this course was the 4 th edition of S. T. Tan's _Calculus for
the Managerial, Life, and Social Sciences_ , and the material from the first
five chapters of this text was presented, detailing the computational
rudiments of differential and integral calculus without much abstract,
theoretical clutter.

I taught this course during the summer, so the enrollment was small, offering
a very different classroom dynamic than is present during the regular school
year; in all, there were 6 students.



**MATH 150B: First-year Calculus [second semester]** (January 2001 -- May
2001)

This course continues where the first semester left off, covering chapters 5-8
of the Stewart text, as well as Sections 9.1 and 9.2. The students are now
taught about the integral calculus, including the basic notion and theory of
the integral, its computation, some applications of the integral, the algebra
and calculus of exponential and logarithmic functions, and further techniques
of integration.

My duties in this course were almost identical to those listed above during my
teaching of MATH 150A. The only difference was that in this semester, I
directed the students through various challenging group projects rather than
assigning individual projects. These group projects covered topics such as a
highly simplified introduction to the Lebesgue integral, the rudiments of the
application of calculus to population dynamics, and an introduction to Fourier
analysis. I'm sure these projects were as challenging for the students to
complete as they were for me to design, but it was important to me that the
students be treated as intellectually mature individuals, fully capable of
investigating these extra-calculus concepts. My goal was to expose them to
mathematical thought that they would not normally experience unless they
elected to major in mathematics.

As when I've most recently taught the first semester of MATH 150, I was also
given in this semester the chance to mentor a first-year graduate student. My
duties in this vein were nearly identical to those described above.

There were roughly 30 students in this course.



**MATH 155A: First-year Accelerated Calculus [first semester]** (July 2001 --
August 2001)

This is the first semester of the engineering sequence of the calculus,
covering the first six chapters of the Stewart text. Teaching this course was
especially challenging: not only is there a great deal of material that is
covered, but I taught this course during the summer, so the lectures were two
and a half hours long, five days a week, for about five weeks. Quite draining!

But very fulfilling. In addition to the material described above under the
teaching of MATH 150A, the students are exposed to the basics of integration
and applications of the integral. My duties for this class were nearly
identical to those described above, though I assigned no projects, due to the
condensed, intensive nature of the course.

There were 6 students enrolled in this course.



**The Vanderbilt University Undergraduate Seminar in Mathematics**

When I first arrived at Vanderbilt four years ago, a couple of my colleagues
and I, excited about the opportunities that we would soon have to reach out to
an undergraduate audience in order to share our love of mathematics, had the
idea of beginning a lecture series on mathematics tailor-made for
undergraduates students.

At the time, we were bogged down with core course work, and soon after that,
preliminary exams and qualifying papers would take their tolls, so we weren't
able to put our plan into action as soon as we would have hoped.

However, in the spring semester of 2001, we finally got our act together and
organized the seminar about which we had dreamed. Lining up several of our
fellow graduate students and setting down a schedule of talks, we proceeded to
send forth the message of mathematics to the undergraduate community.

We gave five talks during the course of that semester, the topics running the
gamut of pure and applied mathematics. For instance, I spoke on the
mathematical notion of symmetry, and introduced undergraduates to the very
basics of group theory in order to describe this idea of symmetry. With many
cardboard models and saltine crackers, I explained rotations and reflections
and how it is that elements of symmetry groups are multiplied. Other speakers
talked about mathematical modelling in population biology and medical
research, graph coloring, and the notion of cardinalities of infinity in term
of one-to-one correspondences. Our final talk was a fun one at which one
graduate student presented the audience with a number of mathematical puzzles
and riddles.

All talks were aimed at undergraduate students (not necessarily math majors),
although attendance by other graduate students and faculty was strong. All in
all, an average of 35 undergraduates attended each talk that semester.

The seminar continues this semester. Three talks have been given so far,
beginning with my lecture on a brief history of problems in geometry,
introducing the students to non-Euclidean spaces. Attendance has been better
than ever, with more than 40 students attending every talk.

For more information about this seminar series, please visit the [website of
the VU Undergraduate Seminar in
Mathematics](http://www.math.vanderbilt.edu/~ugsem).

* * *

Back to [My Papers and Publications](res.html)

Back to [Patrick's Calculus Corner](index.html)

