**GLOSSARY**

**Add/Drop

**

1\. The process of adding and/or dropping a course from one's schedule. 2\.
The period of time allowable to add and/or drop (see deadlines section for
specific information).

**Advisor

**

UMA faculty or staff member assigned to assist degree candidates with course
scheduling and other academic decisions.

**Advising Centers

**

The Academic and Career Advising Center on the Augusta campus, and the
Advising Centers at the Bangor and Lewiston-Auburn campuses provide support
and information services to UMA students. The centers are staffed by other
students called peer advisors.

**Associate Degree

**

Associate of Arts (A.A.), Associate of Applied Arts (A.A.A.), or Associate of
Science (A.S.); also known as a "two-year" degree; however, actually means a
program that requires approximately 60-73 credits for completion, regardless
of the timeframe.

**Audit

**

Attending a course for no credit and no grade. Tuition is the same as for a
credit course.

**Baccalaureate Degree

**

A degree granted to students who have completed at least a "four-year" course
of study. The degree can be granted as either a Bachelor of Arts (minimum of
120 credits) or of Science (normally 126 credits).

**Catalogue

**

A publication containing information on pro-grams, policies, and personnel.
Typically referred to as a "bulletin," it serves as a student's contract with
the University.

**Challenge Exams**

Locally produced tests and procedures which allow students to earn credits for
particular UMA courses.

**CLEP

**

College Level Examination Program. National testing which provides academic
credit for UMA degree candidates.

**Core Curriculum

**

A required group of courses common to all UMA degree programs including course
work in English, communications, mathematics, science, computer science,
social science, and arts and humanities. Core courses ensure breadth of study
for all students and help to build critical thinking, decision making,
communication, and learning skills.

**Counselor or Coordinator of Student Support Services  

**

Titles applied to staff professionally trained to assist students with
personal and career counseling, educational planning, personal skills
development, job search skills, and coping with crisis.

**Course Designation/Number

**

The number following the subject-matter desig-nation in the course listings.
Ex: CRJ 231.

**Credit Hour

**

The amount of credit assigned to each course. Does not necessarily correspond
with the amount of time spent in class. An "academic hour" is usually 50
minutes. One "academic hour" of lecture = 1 credit hour; normally, 2 hours of
lab/studio = 1 credit hour.

**CRN (Course Reference Number)

**

Unique five digit course designation indicating location you plan to attend.
Ex: PSY 100, E5146 Saco.

**DSIS (Distributed Student Information System)

**

A computerized information system which provides students access to grades,
schedules, academic program information, academic history, registration,
transfer information, course, and open class section searches.

**Early Registration

**

This is a period during which students may register for courses without
payment. Check the current course guide for payment deadlines.

**Equal Opportunity

**

In complying with the letter and spirit of the applicable laws and in pursuing
its own goals of diversity, The University of Maine at Augusta shall not
discriminate on the grounds of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation,
national origin or citizenship status, age, disability or veterans status in
employment, education, and all other areas of the University. The University
provides reasonable accommodations to qualified individuals with disabilities
upon request. The University will regard freedom from discrimination and
discriminatory harassment as an individual employee and student right which
will be safeguarded as a matter of policy. Retaliation against anyone who
makes a complaint of discrimination or harassment or who is involved in a
complaint process will not be tolerated. (See [Non-Discrimination
Notice)](AccreditState.html#Non-Discrimination Notice "Non-Discrimination
Statement")

**Full-Time

**

In study-terms, generally at least 12 credit hours per semester. In financial
aid terms, 12 credit hours.

**Grade Point Average (GPA)

**

Average grade of courses taken in any semester. Formula: Grade point
multiplied by credit hour = quality points. Quality points divided by number
of credits carried = GPA. See catalogue for grade representation and to figure
cumulative GPA or the "How to Computer Your GPA" on page 13.

**Honors Course

**

One of the courses currently offered in the Honors Program designed for the
highly motivated student. (See current course guide.)

**Incomplete

**

Grade designation "I" indicating that a course has not been completed.

**Matriculate

**

To be admitted into a college as a degree student.

**Office Hours (Faculty)

**

Designated time that the faculty have committed to being available in their
offices to meet with students either by appointment or on a drop-in basis.

**Part-Time

**

Credit hour load of less than 12 credits.

**Peer Advisor

**

A student specially trained to provide basic academic and career information
and referral services through the Academic and Career Advising Center or
Advising Centers.

**PIN (Personal Identification Number)

**

Initially your date of birth (example: October 6, 1973, would be 100673), your
PIN is used to access Tell-Us and DSIS.

**Portfolio (Assessment of Prior Learning)

**

A comprehensive documentation of knowledge and/or skills acquired through
prior work or volunteer experience that, under specific circumstances, may
qualify a student for advanced standing credit.

**Prerequisite

**

A course requirement or a condition to be fulfilled prior to registration for
certain classes.

**Probation

**

1\. Academic: Official warning that student is not making satisfactory
progress toward a degree and that continued probation and/or suspension will
result if improvements are not made. 2\. Disciplinary: Sanction imposed for
violation(s) of the Student Conduct Code.

**RAN (Registration Authorization Number)

**

Students majoring in veterinary technology, architecture, art, dental hygiene,
English, graphic arts, interdisciplinary studies, liberal arts, liberal
studies, medical laboratory science, music, nursing, or photography, must
obtain a RAN from their academic advisor in order to register for classes.

**Sexual Harassment or Discrimination Issues  

**

(See [Equal Opportunity](EqualOpportPol.html#EQUAL "Equal Opportunity"))

**Site

**

A facility designated to receive courses and other educational offerings
broadcast by UNET. A site is usually in a high school but also may be in a
place of employment.

**Site Coordinator

**

Person who is responsible for managing and overseeing the operation of a site.

**Student Activity Fee

**

Compulsory fee paid by all students that serves as revenue to support
educational, athletic, cultural, and social activities for students. Decisions
regarding use of the funds are made by the local student government
association.

**Suspension

**

Separation from the University due to academic or disciplinary problems. A
sanction imposed for violation(s) of the Student Conduct Code. Separation from
the University for a stated period of time or until stated conditions are met.

**Syllabus

**

Developed by your instructor, the syllabus acts as your contract for a course.
This written document will typically include faculty contact information and
hours, assignment information, attendance requirements, and grading policy.
Some faculty may use an extended syllabus which includes course materials and
handouts. When ordering books, be sure to ask if a syllabus is available.
Faculty may choose to distribute the syllabus at the first class meeting.

**Tell-Us

**

An interactive voice response system accessed by touch tone phone, which
allows students to register for classes and provides information on grades,
class schedule, and financial aid status.

**Transcript

**

The official academic record of a student prepared by the Office of Admissions
and Records which shows courses taken, grades, degrees award, etc.

**Transfer

**

Movement from one academic program to another within UMA (change of program)
or, more commonly, change to another educational institution.

**Withdrawal

**

Dropping all courses for any reason.

