{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1
\deff0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\\*\panose
02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f3\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\\*\panose
05050102010706020507}Symbol;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright
\fs20\cgrid \snext0 Normal;}{\\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph
Font;}{\\*\cs15 \additive \v\cf6 HTML
Markup;}{\s16\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\adjustright
\fs20\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext16
header;}{\s17\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\adjustright
\fs20\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext17 footer;}{\\*\cs18 \additive \sbasedon10 page
number;}{\s19\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\cgrid \sbasedon0
\snext19 footnote text;}{\\*\cs20 \additive \super \sbasedon10 footnote
reference;}}{\\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid-1\listsimple{\listlevel\levelnfc0\leveljc0\levelfollow0\levelstartat0\levelspace0\levelindent0{\leveltext\'01*;}{\levelnumbers;}}{\listname
;}\listid-2}}{\\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid-2\listoverridecount1{\lfolevel\listoverrideformat{\listlevel\levelnfc23\leveljc0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelold\levelspace0\levelindent360{\leveltext\'01\u-3928
?;}{\levelnumbers;}\f3\fbias0 \fi-360\li360 }}\ls1}}{\info{\title Finance 325
Syllabus - Summer 2001}{\author Dr. Kenneth R. Beller}{\operator Kenneth R.
Beller}{\creatim\yr2001\mo5\dy14\hr16\min39}{\revtim\yr2001\mo5\dy14\hr16\min39}{\printim\yr2001\mo5\dy14\hr16\min25}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1152}{\nofchars6570}{\\*\company
Washington State
University}{\nofcharsws8068}{\vern71}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\lytprtmet\hyphcaps0\formshade\viewkind4\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot
\fet0\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl {\footer \pard\plain
\s17\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\adjustright \fs20\cgrid {\tab
Page }{\field{\\*\fldinst {\cs18 PAGE }}{\fldrslt {\cs18\lang1024 3}}}{ \par
}}{\\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta
.}}{\\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta
.}}{\\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta
.}}{\\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta
)}}{\\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta
)}}{\\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta
)}}{\\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta
)}}{\\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta
)}}{\\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta
)}}\pard\plain \qc\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\cgrid {\fs28
Finance 325 \par Principles of Business Finance \par \par Summer - 2001 \par
}{ \par }\trowd \trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw15
\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw15 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw15 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw15
\trbrdrh\brdrs\brdrw15 \trbrdrv\brdrs\brdrw15 \clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw15
\clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw15 \cltxlrtb
\cellx4320\clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw15
\clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw15 \cltxlrtb \cellx8748\pard
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {\fs24 Washington State University -
TriCities \par Programs in Business \par 2710 University Drive \par Richland,
WA 99352-7603 \par \par \cell Dr. Kenneth R. Beller \par Assistant Professor
of Finance \par 125D CIC Building \par Phone: (509)-372-7386 \par Fax:
(509)-372-7100 \par \cell }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright
{\fs24 \row }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs24 \par }\pard
\qc\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\fs24 Course Specific Email:
f325_2000@yahoo.com \par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\fs24
\par Objectives: \par \par }{\fs24 This course will introduce students to the
fundamentals of finance. We will consider theories and tools to address modern
corporate finance problems and issues in realistic settings. Specific topics
covered include: \par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs24
i) \tab }{\fs24 financial markets}{\fs24 , \par ii)\tab financial statement
analysis, \par iii)\tab forecasting and planning, \par iv)\tab }{\fs24 the
time value of money}{\fs24 , \par v)\tab the relationship between risk and
return, \par vi)\tab capital budgeting, \par vii)\tab principles of leverage,
\par viii)\tab current asset management, \par ix)\tab derivative securities,
\par x)\tab ethical issues in finance, and \par xi)\tab international finance.
\par \par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs24 In addition,
current events as they pertain to Finance will be discussed. \par }\pard
\fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs24 \par }\pard
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\fs24 Prerequisites: \par \par }{\fs24
Accounting 231 (or concurrent), Economics 101 or 201, and Decision Science 215
(or concurrent). \\{The C.B.C. equivalent is also valid.\\} \par \par
}{\b\fs24 A financial calculator is required}{\fs24 . The Texas Instrument
BAII Plus and the Hewlett-Packard HP-10B are both good and relatively
inexpensive choices. I will only provide support for the TI BAII Plus in
class. The class lecture notes are built around the HP-10B. If you choose some
other calculator, please ensure that the calculator is capable of performing
internal rate of return (IRR) calculations. \par \par }{\b\fs24 \page Required
Textbook: \par \par }{\fs24 Keown, Arthur J., David. F. Scott, Jr., John D.
Martin, J. William Petty, Basic Financial Management, Eighth edition, Prentice
Hall, 1999. \par \par }{\b\fs24 Recommended Reading: \par \par }{\fs24 In
addition to the assigned readings from the textbook, it is suggested that you
begin developing your interest and knowledge by reading about current business
practices and issues in other accessible publications. One excellent source of
information is the Wall Street Journal. Alternatives are Barron's and Business
Week. \par \par }{\b\fs24 \par Class Equipment Requirements: \par }{\fs24 \par
}{\i\fs24 INTERNET ACCESS \par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright
{\fs24 In addition to the textbook, students are required to have internet
access. This means both email, and the ability to use a web-browser such as
Netscape or MS Internet Explorer. There will be a class website. It will be
accessible from the instructors personal home page which is located at:
"http://www.tricity.wsu.edu/~kbeller" \par }\pard
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\fs24 \par FINANCIAL CALCULATOR \par
}\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs24 A financial calculator
is required for this course. Please bring your financial calculator with you
to all classes and examinations. All time value of money problems are to be
solved using a calculator or "advanced mathematics". We will }{\fs24\ul
not}{\fs24 be using the tables in the back of the book. ALL calculations for
examinations will be done using calculators. \par The Texas Instrument BAII
Plus and the Hewlett-Packard HP-10B are both good and relatively inexpensive
choices. I will only provide support for the TI BAII Plus in class. The
textbook and instructors powerpoint files give help for the HP-10B. If you
choose another calculator, please ensure that the calculator is capable of
performing internal rate of return (IRR) calculations. \par }\pard
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs24 \par }{\i\fs24 POWERPOINT \par
}\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs24 The instructor will
make his lecture slides available via the class website. These electronic
"overheads" are written in Microsoft Powerpoint 4.0. Students must have access
to a personal computer which can read these files. This does }{\fs24\ul
not}{\fs24 mean you need to buy a copy of the Powerpoint program. Microsoft
makes a viewer freely available for IBM PC computers running Windows 3.1,
Windows 95 & 98, and Windows NT. Other presentation graphics programs may be
able to convert these files. The WSU-TC computing labs are furnished with
Powerpoint 97 which can easily read these files. \par }\pard
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs24 \par \par }{\b\fs24 Office Hours:
\par }{\fs24 by appointment. \par }{\b\fs24 \page Evaluation: \par \par
}{\fs24 The students grade for this course will be based primarily on exam
performance. There will be one written assignment. There will be three mini-
exams / quizzes[25 minutes long] and three exams [ 50 minutes long]. The
students grade will be based on the best two of three mini-exams and the best
two of three exams. Both the mini-exam and the exam may be cumulative. Exam
coverage will be roughly outlined in the course schedule, though the
instructor reserves the right to change exam coverage with notice, the class
immediately before the exam. The evaluation weights for each component of the
course are given below: \par \par }\trowd
\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw15 \trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw15
\trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw15 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw15 \trbrdrh\brdrs\brdrw15
\trbrdrv\brdrs\brdrw15 \clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw15
\clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw15 \cltxlrtb
\cellx2844\clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw15
\clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw15 \cltxlrtb
\cellx5796\clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw15
\clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw15 \cltxlrtb \cellx8748\pard
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {\fs24 Item\cell Date\cell
Points\cell }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {\fs24 \row
}\trowd \trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw15 \trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw15
\trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw15 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw15 \trbrdrh\brdrs\brdrw15
\trbrdrv\brdrs\brdrw15 \clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw15
\clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw15 \cltxlrtb
\cellx2844\clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw15
\clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw15 \cltxlrtb
\cellx5796\clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw15
\clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw15 \cltxlrtb \cellx8748\pard
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {\fs24 Mini-Exams\cell See
schedule\cell 100\cell }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {\fs24
\row }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {\fs24 Exams\cell See
schedule\cell 200\cell }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {\fs24
\row }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {\fs24 Book Review\cell
June 22\cell 50\cell }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {\fs24
\row }\trowd \trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw15
\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw15 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw15 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw15
\trbrdrh\brdrs\brdrw15 \trbrdrv\brdrs\brdrw15 \clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw15
\clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw15 \cltxlrtb
\cellx2844\clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw15
\clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw15 \cltxlrtb
\cellx5796\clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw15
\clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw15 \cltxlrtb \cellx8748\pard
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {\fs24 Total\cell \cell }{\fs24\uldb
350\cell }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {\fs24 \row }\pard
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs24 \par Early or late examinations will
not be granted except as permitted by the University. Examinations will stress
materials covered in the course notes, in class discussions, and in the
assigned review questions. \par \par One 3.0 inch by 5.0 inch formula sheet
(both sides) will be allowed to all examinations. \par The instructor reserves
the right to confiscate without recourse any formula sheet which does not
comply with the 3.0 inch by 5.0 inch specification. \par \par Remedial work
will not be allowed to improve your grade. You are encouraged to seek help at
any time if you seek additional practice problems. \par \par }{\b\fs24
Homeworks: \par }{\fs24 \par There will be no graded homework problems or
assignments. Practice problems with solutions will be posted directly on the
class web site. To be successful in a first finance course requires practice.
You are strongly encouraged to attempt all practice problems as we work
through the course. Most students that have trouble with this class do not do
the homework until it is too late. You are encouraged to try all problems at
the end of the textbook, both Set A and Set B. If you have attempted a
question which was not part of the standard web listed questions, just email
the instructor and he will reply to your email with the 'basic' answer. Worked
solutions take much longer to provide. \par \par \page }{\b\fs24 Book Review:
\par }{\fs24 \par I require a [200 to 350 word] book review turned in to my
office by 8:00 p.m., June 22. The book, which is to be reviewed, must have as
its central theme a topic of interest in the field of finance. Possible topics
of such books could include: biographies of famous investors, investment
strategy books, small business financing, raising venture capital, and the
history of famous financial institutions. You are recommended to discuss the
book of choice with the instructor as soon as possible to get instructor
confirmation that the book is acceptable. \par }{\b\fs24 \par \par Academic
Integrity: \par \par }{\fs24 The policy of the Business Program at WSU Tri-
Cities is as follows: \par \par "Any breach of academic integrity, as defined
in the Student Handbook, will be dealt with as follows: The first offense will
result in a grade of zero on the graded work in question. A second violation
will result in an "F" for the course. Subsequent violations, or one blatant
violation (e.g. stealing an exam), may also result in expulsion from the
university. The instructor will report all violations to Student Services.
Note that the above penalties are the MINIMUM as agreed by the business
faculty. Individual instructors have the right to impose more strict sanctions
if they wish." \par \par It is critical to the reputation of our degrees and
to the College of Business and Economics that we behave with the highest
possible degree of academic integrity. As future business leaders, students
have a special obligation to ensure their ethical standards are beyond
reproach. Please be advised that all cases of cheating will be pursued and
treated consistently (without exception). Academic dishonesty includes, but is
not limited to: \par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\cgrid \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3
\'a8\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li360\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx360{\\*\pn
\pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnhang{\pntxtb
\'a8}}\ls1\adjustright {\fs24 copying the work of another student in an
examination, or on an assignment \par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\cgrid
\loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'a8\tab}}\pard
\fi-360\li360\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx360{\\*\pn
\pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnhang{\pntxtb
\'a8}}\ls1\adjustright {\fs24 providing answers to another student in an
examination, or on an assignment \par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\cgrid
\loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'a8\tab}}\pard
\fi-360\li360\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx360{\\*\pn
\pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnhang{\pntxtb
\'a8}}\ls1\adjustright {\fs24 using any unauthorized materials in an
examination \par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\cgrid \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3
\'a8\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li360\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx360{\\*\pn
\pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnhang{\pntxtb
\'a8}}\ls1\adjustright {\fs24 impersonating another student, or allowing
yourself to be impersonated by another student in an examination \par
{\pntext\pard\plain\f3\cgrid \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'a8\tab}}\pard
\fi-360\li360\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx360{\\*\pn
\pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnhang{\pntxtb
\'a8}}\ls1\adjustright {\fs24 changing the name or answers on an examination
after the work has been graded and returned \par }\pard
\qc\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright { \par \par }}

