**

_COURSE SECTION INFORMATION

_

Department:** Curriculum and Instruction

**

Course Number:** CUAI-5402-270

**

Course Title:** Elementary Methods in Mathematics (K-8)

**

Semester Hours:** 3

**

Semester:** Fall, 2000

**

Instructor:** Dr. Katie Driskell

**

Office:** 406 Warf-Pickel

**

Office Phone:** 439-7604

**

Office Hours:** Tuesday 4:00p.m. - 7:00 p.m.: 9:45 p.m. - 10:30 p.m. Thursday
3:00 - 4:00 p.m, 9:45 - 10:30 p.m., and by  appointment

**

Course Management and Evaluation Policies:

**

Grading

Grading will be _both_ subjective and objective. High quality work is expected
at all times. The quality must be **exceptional** in order to receive an "A".
Final grades will consist of evaluations made on class participation,
attendance, assignments, field experience, and professional attitude. The
objective part of the evaluation will be translated into numerical
equivalents.

95-100 A 80-84 C

93-94 A- 78-79 C-

91-92 B+ 76-77 D+

89-90 B 70-75 D

87-88 B- 65-69 D-

85-86 C+ Below 65 F





**

Activities:** Each of 7 activities count as the equivalent of 1 test grade

**

Major project and presentation** Counts as the equivalent of 2 test grades

**

Class participation, attendance, professional attitude, etc.:** Counts as the
equivalent of 1 test grade

**

Attendance:

**

Attendance is very important! Often, it is not possible to gain the essence of
the class from class notes since much of the class involves hands-on
activities. Attendance is a necessary but not sufficient condition and by
itself, does not insure a high grade. The instructor will not be responsible
for reteaching class content or for providing handouts if you do miss a class.
Make arrangements with someone in your class to take notes and pick up
handouts .

**

Class participation:

**

You must actively participate in class activities. You are expected to
contribute to class discussions with thoughtful, reflective remarks.

**

Class Meeting Schedule: Thursdays 7 - 9:45 p.m.



_COURSE SYLLABUS

_

Department: ** Curriculum and Instruction

**

Course Number:** CUAI-5402-270

**

Course Title:** Elementary Methods in Mathematics (K-8)

**

Semester Hours:** 3

**

Date of this Revision of Syllabus:** September, 2000

**

Text and Materials:** Manipulative Kit from ETA includes the text:Thornton,
C.,  & Parrino, G. _Hands-On Teaching H.O.T.: Strategies for Using Math
Manipulatives_. Vernon Hills, IL: ETA



**

Catalog Description:** Designed to explore current methodology for teaching
children and youth with a variety of learning and lifestyles. Modern
techniques of classroom management are included.

**

Additional Course Information:** This course will provide a hands-on approach.
Research on the teaching and learning of mathematics will be translated into
pragmatic classroom applications.

**

Relationship of Course to College and Program Philosophy and Goals:

**

This course is designed to prepare pre-service students to teach mathematics
at the elementary level who are knowledgeable of current methodologies and
mathematical content. One foci of this course will be to prepare pre-service
students to teach mathematics in such a way as to empower students with the
higher order problem solving and application skills, enabling them to adapt to
the ever-changing demands which are our technological and diverse reality. A
variety of methodologies will be modeled throughout the class. Problem solving
strategies will be explored, and the appropriate use of calculators and
computers will be included throughout the course.

Mathematics will be presented as a way of thinking, as an essential problem
solving tool, and as a device for understanding our ever-shrinking world. As
such, applications of mathematics to other subject areas will be inculcated
throughout the course. The history of mathematics will be interwoven
throughout the course in order to develop among students an appreciation of
the contributions of various cultures to the field of mathematics.  Because
communication skills are critical to our leaders of the 21st century, students
will develop communications skills about mathematics. This class will include
writing, reflection, and talking about mathematics.

A variety of algorithms will be presented to be used with children with
learning disabilities such as a low stress algorithm for multiplication or
addition. Students will be taught how to do an error analysis of mistakes
children often make. A wide assortment of activities will be provided which
may be modified such that they would be appropriate for talented students of
mathematics or for those with learning difficulties. Students will be
encouraged to describe how they could modify such activities so that they
would be appropriate for a variety of learning styles. A variety of evaluation
procedures will be used to evaluate and assess learning including interviews,
classroom presentations, mathematical communication. One theme will be to
develop among the students an appreciation for individual differences, and in
particular, to learn to value creativity and divergent thinking.

A theoretical framework, including the most recent work of educational
psychology and mathematics education will be an underpinning of the course.
The teaching and learning of mathematics will be presented from a
constructivist position of learning in which students must interpret,
reinterpret and construct their own mathematical meaning. .





**

Course Objectives:

**

\- to increase knowledge of mathematical content

\- to learn and practice a variety of strategies for the teaching of
mathematical concepts, appropriate to different learning  styles

\- to develop appropriate materials and to make discriminating use of
commercially produced materials for the teaching  and learning of mathematics

\- to develop a knowledge of the current issues in mathematics education

\- to become familiar with the uses of technology in the elementary classroom

\- to develop an awareness of the contributions of various cultures to the
field of mathematics

\- to become familiar with resources available including professional journals
and professionals in the field

_ to increase awareness of the real-world applications of mathematics

**

Course Topics:** Sorting and classifying; patterns; counting and numeration
problem solving; arithmetic operations on whole numbers; rational numbers;
ratio and proportion; geometry; data collection, representation, and
interpretation; the nature of mathematics learning; technology; place value;
measurement; estimation; relationships among mathematics and other subjects;
evaluation and remediation; and National Council of Teachers of Mathematics
_Standards.

_**

Class Activities (including instructional strategies) and Requirements
(Projects, Papers, Tests, etc.):





Activities:

**

You will be required to find or create activities for teaching elementary
mathematics. For ideas, use: Journals, such as _Teaching Children Arithmetic_
, _Instructor_ , and _School Science and Mathematics_ ; elementary mathematics
textbooks; and professionals in the field. Follow the format described on a
handout distributed by the instructor. All activities must be typed. All must
include complete source, and A.P.A. style must be used. Activities _must focus
on developing the meaning of the concept_. Drill and practice activities are
not appropriate. _At least one of your activities must involve the use of
calculators.

_ **

Major Project and Presentation

**

A major project and presentation will be required.

**

Supplementary Readings and Materials:

**

National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (2000). _Principles and Standards
for School Mathematics_. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of
Mathematics. (May be found at _http://www.nctm.org_.)

Post, T.R. (Ed.) (1992). _Teaching mathematics in grades K-8: research based
methods_. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, Inc.

Journal:

_

Teaching Children Arithmetic_

Calculator

Texas Instruments Math Explorer calculator

**

Bibliography**

Ameis, J. A. (2000). _Mathematics on the Internet: A Resource for K - 12
Teachers_. Upper Saddler-River, NJ: Merrill.

Addison-Wesley Publishing Co. (1993). _Multiculturalism in mathematics,
science, and technology: Readings and activities_. Menlo Park, CA: Addison-
Wesley Publishing Co.

Atwater, M. M., Radzik-Marsh, K., & Strutchens, M. (Eds.). (1994).
_Multicultural education: Inclusion of all_. Athens, GA: University of
Georgia.

Bitter, G. G., & Mikesell, J. L. (1993). _Using the Math explorer calculator:
A sourcebook for teachers_. Menlo Park, CA: Addison-Wesley.

Burns, M. (1999 reprint). _About teaching mathematics: A K-8 resource_.
Sausalito, CA: Mathe Solutions Publications.

Burns, M. (1992). _Math and literature (K-3)_. White Plains, NY Math Solutions
Publications.

Burton, G., et al. (1991). _Fifth-grade book: Addenda series, grades K-6_.
Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

Burton, G., et al. (1991). _First-grade book: Addenda series, grades K-6_.
Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

Burton, G., et al. (1992). _Fourth-grade book: Addenda series, grades K-6_.
Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

Burton, G., et al. (1991). _Kindergarten book: Addenda series, grades K-6_.
Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

Burton, G., et al. (1993). _Number sense and operations: Addenda Series,
grades K-6_. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

Burton, G., et al. (1992). _Second-grade book: Addenda series, grades k-6_.
Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

Burton, G., et al. (1990). _Third-grade book: Addenda series, Grades K-6_.
Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

Carpenter, T.p., et al. (1999). _Children=s mathematics: Cognitively guided
instruction_. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.

Cathcart, W. G., et al. (2000). _Learning mathematics in elementary and middle
schools_. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill.

Coburn, T. G. (1992). _Patterns: Addenda series, grades K-6_. Reston, VA:
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

Duevas, G., & Driscoll, M. (Eds.). _Reaching all students with mathematics_.
Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

Davis, R. B., Maber, C. A., & Noddings, N. (Eds.) (1990). Constructivist views
on the teaching and learning of mathematics. _Journal for Research in
Mathematics Education Monograph No. 4_. Reston, VA: National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics.

Davydov, V. V. (Ed.). (1991). _Psychological abilities of primary school
children in learning mathematics_. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of
Mathematics.

Del Grande, J., et al. (1993). _Geometry and spatial sense: Addenda series,
grades k-6_. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

Fey, J. T., & Hirsch, C. R. (1992). _Calculators in mathematics education_.
Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

Harlan, J. D., & Rivkin, M. S. (2000). _Science experiences for the early
childhood years: An integrated approach._ (7th ed.) Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Merrill.

Hatfield, M. M., et al. (2000). _Mathematics methods for elementary and middle
school teachers_. (4th ed). New York: John Wiley  & Sons, Inc.

Jensen, R. J. (Ed.). (1993). _Research ideas for the classroom: Early
childhood mathematics_. New York: Macmillan Publishing Co.

Kennedy, L. M. , & Tipps, S. (1994). _Guiding children's learning of
mathematics_ (7th ed.).Belmont, CA: Wasdworth Publishing Company.

Kenney, M. J., & Hirsch, C. R. (Eds.). (1991). Discrete mathematics across the
curriculum, k-12. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

Krause, M. C. (1983). _Multicultural mathematics materials_. Reston, VA:
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

Lindquist, M. M. (1992). _Making sense of data: Addenda series, grades K-6_.
Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

McKillip, W. D., & Davis, E. J. (1980). _Mathematics instruction: Early
childhood_. Morriston, NJ: Silver Burdett Company.

Metlina, L. S. (Ed.). _Mathematics in preschool: An aid for the preschool
educator_. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

Morrison, G., et al. (1999). _Integrating computer technology into the
classroom._ Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill.

National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (1993). _Assessment standards for
school mathematics: Working draft_. Reston, VA: The Council.

Payne, J. (Ed.). (1990). _Mathematics for the young child_. Reston, VA:
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

Polya, G. (1973). _How to solve it_ (2nd ed.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.

Post, T. (Ed.). (1992). _Teaching mathematics in grades k - 8: Research-based
methods_ (2nd ed.). Needham Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon.

Reys, B., et al. (1991). _Developing number sense in the middle grades:
Addenda series, grades 5-8_. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of
Mathematics.

Sheffield, L. J., & Cruikshank, d. E. (2000). _Teaching and learning
elementary and middle school mathematics_. New York: John Wiley  & Sons.

Stenmark, J. K. (1991). _Mathematics assessment: Myths, models, good
questions, and practical suggestions_. Reston, VA: National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics.

Stockard, J. W., Jr., * Snyder, V. (1997). _Activities for elementary school
mathematics_. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press, Inc.

Stutt, A. (1997). _Education on the internet: A student=s guide_. Upper Saddle
River, JJ: Merrill.

Thiessen, D., & Matthias, M. (1992). _The wonderful world of mathematics: A
critically annotated list of children's books in mathematics_. Reston, VA:
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

Trafton, P. R., & Thiessen, D. (1999). _Learning through problems: Number
sense and computational strategies_. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.

Webb, N. L., & Coxfore, A. F. (Eds.). (1993). _Assessment in the mathematics
classroom_. National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

Welchman-Tischier, R. (1992). _How to use children's literature to teach
mathematics_. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

Zawojeuski, J. S., et al. (1991). _Dealing with data and chance: Addenda
series, grades 5-8_. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.







