###

**Spring 2002** HSTS 412 and [HSTS 512](512S2002.htm) |  Professor [Ronald E.
Doel](http://www.orst.edu/dept/history/F-DOEL.htm), Department of
[History](http://osu.orst.edu/dept/history)  
---|---  
T Th 11:00 AM - 12:20 PM, Withycombe 217 | Telephone: 737-3469  
[Email: doelr@ucs.orst.edu](mailto:doelr@ucs.orst.edu) | Office hours: 11 AM-
noon Fridays or by appointment [[302 C Milam](http://www.orst.edu/cgi-
bin/campus_map?357,151&Milam+Hall+-+Mlm)]  
Logon to Blackboard: <http://my.oregonstate.edu> | [Return to main page
[Helpful Resources]](http://osu.orst.edu/instruct/hsts412/doel)  
Midterm Examination [on-line at 11 AM Thurs. 05/09/02] | Extra-credit
assignment [created May 23: **due by 5 June** ]  
Final Examination [on-line at 9:20 PM on Mon. 06/03/02] _**due: 12 June
noon**_ |  
  
**The Scientific Revolution:**

**The Origins of Modern Science in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries**

**_Course description_** : An introduction to the formative period of modern
science. We discuss major ideas and events in the physical and life sciences
from Copernicus to Newton. This course also examines significant intersections
between science, culture, technology, art, and religion during this period,
and also addresses major controversies over proper methods and practices to
obtain knowledge about the natural world. We look at the questions raised by
those who sought to understand the earth and the heavens, the answers they
gained, and the conflicts they generated. We shall also ask additional
questions: What was the 'practice' of science five hundred years ago? How did
people in times and places different from our own interpret the physical,
biological, and social environment surrounding them? Approaching these issues
will help us better understand science in our own time - including
relationships that are still contested today, such as that between science and
religion.

HSTS 412 is a baccalaureate-core course that satisfies the Synthesis
requirement in Science, Technology, and Society. This course aims to
incorporate elements of critical thinking; it provides a perspective on the
scientific approach to understanding and manipulating the world by relating
that perspective to its social context. It is suitable for students from
diverse fields, and humanities students interested in understanding the role
of science in the modern world ere especially welcome. A separate graduate
seminar will be arranged for those enrolled in HSTS 512.

**_Required texts_** (all paperback, and available at the Memorial Union
Bookstore):

Peter Dear, _Revolutionizing the Sciences: European Knowledge and its
Ambitions, 1500-1700_.

Allen G. Debus, _Man and Nature in the Renaissance_.

Arthur Koestler, _The Sleepwalkers: A History of Man's Changing Vision of the
Cosmos_.

**_Course requirements_** :

_For students enrolled in _HSTS 412__ : A mid-term examination and a take-home
final examination (to be completed during finals week) are required. The
midterm exam (35% of grade) and a final examination (45%) each will consist of
short-answer and essay questions that will address the major themes raised in
readings, lecture, and discussions. Several short research and writing
assignments (3 to 5 pp. in length) are also undertaken during the term. The
remainder of course grade consists of class participation, demonstrated by
regular attendance, familiarity with course readings, and contributions to in-
class discussions and Blackboard discussion forums.

_For students enrolled in _[HSTS 512](512S2002.htm)__ : In place of the mid-
term and final examination, graduate students will prepare a 20-25 page
research paper on a topic of your choice, chosen in consultation with the
instructor. A five to seven page research paper proposal, articulating your
guiding research questions and sources, will be due before the start of class
on Thursday, May 2nd.

Students are expected to be honest and ethical in their academic work.
Academic dishonesty is defined as an intentional act of deception in one of
the following areas: cheating-- use or attempted use of unauthorized
materials, information or study aids; fabrication-- falsification or invention
of any information; assisting-- helping another commit an act of academic
dishonesty; tampering-- altering or interfering with evaluation instruments
and documents; and plagiarism--representing the words or ideas of another
person as one's own.

Students with documented disabilities who may need accommodations, who have
any emergency medical information the instructor should be aware of, or who
need special arrangements in the event of evacuation, should make an
appointment with the instructor as early as possible, and no later than the
first week of the term. All class materials will be made available in
accessible format upon request.

All seminar members are to sign up for the web-based links to this class
(which also allow for on-line discussion and debate among students, access to
course documents, and participation in group projects). Log on via
[http://my.oregonstate.edu](http://my.oregonstate.edu) ; please see handout
for further help on setting up your free account. Students are expected to
have an active email account as well (any account is fine, though be certain
that mail to your ONID account is forwarded correctly). Email is often the
best way to reach me.

Students are encouraged to take advantage of the university's [Writing
Center](http://oregonstate.edu/dept/writing-center/twc.html) in preparing
research papers for this course. The Writing Center phone is 737-5640; you can
also stop by the Writing Desk at The Valley Library, second floor, phone:
737-8385.

**_Course Outline_**

**1\. Week of April 1: What Was Worth Knowing in 1500?**

Meeting 1 ( **4/2** ): Introduction to the History of Science

Meeting 2 ( **4/4** ): What is a Scientific Revolution?

**_Reading_** : [ _please complete by Thursday, April 4_ ]:

Dear, Introduction and Chap. 1 (pp. 1-29)

Debus, 1-15

* * *

**2\. Week of April 8: What A Renaissance Student Knew: Natural Philosophy and
the Transmission of Knowledge**

Meeting 3: **_Meet Tues. April 9 th in Autzen Room, Valley Library_**

Meeting 4 ( **4/11** ): How to Learn Things in the Sixteenth Century

**_Reading_** :

Dear, Chapters 2 and 3 (pp. 30-64)

Debus, Chap. 2 (pp. 16-32)

Koestler, pp. 9-12, 15-16, 19-52

* * *

**3\. Week of April 15: The World on its Head**

Meeting 5 ( **4/16** ): Copernicus and _De revolutionibus_

Meeting 6 ( **4/18** ): A New World System

\--[assignment sheet for class meeting on April 18](assignmt2.htm)\--

**_Reading_** _:_

Debus, Chap. 4 (pp. 74-100) Koestler, pp. 121-224

* * *

**4\. Week of April 22: Mathematics Challenges Philosophy**

Meeting 7 ( **4/23** ): The Lure and Power of Observation

Meeting 8 ( **4/25** ): Kepler, Galileo, and the New Astronomy

**_Reading:_**

Dear, Chap. 4 (pp. 65-79)

Koestler, pp. 227-368

Galileo, _Sidereus Nuncius_ [ _Starry Messenger,_ 1610] (please read the
[Introduction](http://www.stcloud.msus.edu/~physcrse/astr106/siderius.html)
and then the
[Conclusion](http://www.stcloud.msus.edu/~physcrse/astr106/siderius2.html))

* * *

  
**5\. Week of April 29: The Study of Man and Nature**

Meeting 9 ( **4/30** ): Medicine from Galen to Vesalius

Meeting 10 ( **5/2** ): Nature in a Changing World

**_Reading_ :**

Debus, Chapters 3 and 4 (Pp. 34-73)

J.D. deC. Saunders and C.D. O'Malley, _The Illustrations from the Works of
Andreas Vesalius of Brussels_ ([ on
reserve](http://oasis.orst.edu/search/r?SEARCH=HSTS412) at Valley Library,
QM25.V4 - spend some time looking at Vesalius' illustrations)

**HSTS 512** : Research paper proposal due May 2nd

* * *

**6\. Week of May 6: Constructing a Mechanical World**

Meeting 11 ( **5/7** ): Descartes Builds a Mechanical Universe

Meeting 12 ( **5/9** ): _HSTS 412: Mid-term examination[](midterm2002.htm)_

**_Reading_ :**

Dear, Chap. 5 (pp. 80-100)

* * *

**7\. Week of May 13: The Organization of Science**

Meeting 13 ( **5/14** ): Experimental Natural Philosophy in the Royal Society

Meeting 14 ( **5/16** ): The Rise of Scientific Institutions

**_Reading_** :

Dear, Chap. 6 (pp. 101-130)

Debus, Chap. 7 (pp. 116-130)

* * *

**8\. Week of May 20: Experiment: How to Learn Things About Nature in the
Seventeenth Century**

Meeting 15 ( **5/21** ) _:_ The Physics of Galileo

Meeting 16 ( **5/23** ): Harvey and the Circulation of Blood [ _New : [extra-
credit assignment](ec.htm)]_

**_Reading_** :

Dear, Chap. 7 (pp. 131-148)

Debus, Chap. 6 (pp. 101-116)

Galileo, _Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems_ [1632] (excerpts; [
read **'To the Discerning Reader'** and the first third of **'The First Day**
'](http://www.dartmouth.edu/~matc/readers/renaissance.astro/7.0.0.html))

* * *

**9\. Week of May 27: Cartesians and Newtonians**

Meeting 17 ( **5/28** ): Isaac Newton and the _Principia_

Meeting 18 ( **5/30** ): Newton's Alchemy

**_Reading_** :

Dear, Chap. 8 (pp. 149-167)

[A Biography of
Newton](http://es.rice.edu/ES/humsoc/Galileo/Catalog/Files/newton.html) [On-
line. _Short--read in its entirety_.]

* * *

**10\. Week of June 3: Newton's World View and its Legacies**

Meeting 19 ( **6/4** ): What was Worth Knowing by the Eighteenth Century?

Meeting 20 ( **6/6** ): Conclusions

**_Reading_** :

Dear, Conclusion (pp. 168-170)

Debus, Chap. 8, pp. 131-141

Koestler, 504-517

**HSTS412: Final Examinations due Wednesday, June 12, 12 PM, Department of
History [306 Milam Hall]**

****HSTS 512: Research Paper due Wednesday, June 12, 12 PM, Dept. Of History
[306 Milam Hall]****

****Extra-credit assignment : _due June 5th_****

_Final examination will be distributed on last week of our course._

  

* * *

__[Items at Circulation /
Reserve](http://oasis.orst.edu/search/r?SEARCH=HSTS412)__[
s](http://oasis.orst.edu/search/r?SEARCH=HSTS412) at Valley Library:

In addition to copies of the course texts (available for two-day loan), the
following items are reserved for this course:

Ronald Brashear and Daniel Lewis. _One Thousand Years of the Art and Science
of Astronomy_ San Marino [Calif.] : Huntington Library ; Seattle : University
of Washington Press, 2001. QB15.B67.2001

I. Bernard Cohen, ed., _An Essay on Newton's Principia_. With an Introduction
to the Reprint Edition by Ball, W. W. Rouse (Walter William Rouse), 1850-1925.
New York, Johnson Reprint Corp., 1972. [QA803.B34.1972]

Robert Hooke, _Micrographia: or, Some physiological descriptions of minute
bodies made by magnifying glasses. With observations and inquiries thereupon_.
London, Printed by J. Martyn and J. Allestry, 1665. QH271.H62.1665a

  
J. B. de C. M. Saunders and Charles D. O'Malley, _The Illustrations from the
Works of Andreas Vesalius of Brussels; With Annotations and Translations, A
Discussion of the Plates and their Background, Authorship and Influence, and a
Biographical Sketch of Vesalius_. Cleveland: World Publishing Co., 1950.
[QM25.V4]

[ Return to main page](http://osu.orst.edu/instruct/hsts412/doel)

last update: 3 July 2002

