**G ENESIS and TRANSFORMATION: National Identity in the Circum-Gulf Caribbean
Area, 1808-1955**

  Puerto Rico Case Study Site

**![](Garita.jpg)**   **Dr. Diana Velez** Department of History University of
Central Florida Colbourn Hall 547 Office Hours: Direct Line and Phone Mail:
(407) 823-6617 E-Mail:
[velez@pegasus.cc.ucf.edu](mailto:%2Fvelez@pegasus.cc.ucf.edu)

Web Site: [pegasus.cc.ucf.edu/~velez](http://pegasus.cc.ucf.edu/~velez)

**_Sounds of the Puerto Rican Coqui............._**
[![](speaker1.gif)](coqui.wav)

**

* * *

** **Site Contents**

> > Course Description..... A Word from Dr. Velez..... Core Syllabus... PR
Syllabus...... Required PR Case Studies Readings...... PR Lecture/Reading
Assignments...... PR Overheads and Documents...... [Workshops and Research
Aids](guidefra.html)...... [Select Bibliography on Puerto
Rico](prbiblio.htm)......

>>

>>  
>>

>> Web Authoring Workshop..... PR Reference Sites Links...... Research Team
Sites..... Puerto Rican Journey...... [Ask the Prof](askprof.html).....

**

* * *

**

> > **_C_ _ourse Description_**: This is a specialized research course for
history majors and selected graduate students that examines the origins,
formation, and development of national identity in the Circum Gulf-Caribbean
Region. The course focuses on the entire region but utilizes two countries,
Mexico and Puerto Rico, as case studies that concentrate on the institutional,
cultural, social, economic and international factors that helped shape the
concept of national identity in these nations. Dr. Rodney Alvarez, developer
of the Mexican case study, and Dr. Diana Velez, developer of the Puerto Rican
case study as well as technical designer and web developer of the project, are
co-instructors of this course.

>>

>> There are 3 web sites associated with this course: (1) _WebCT Course Portal
Site_ (password protected) which contains course requirements, common core
syllabus, schedule of activities, electronically reserved readings, links to
the Mexican and Puerto Rican Case Study Sites, chat/discussion board access,
whiteboard access, links to the Interactive _[Dictionary of Historical Terms
for Latin America/Spanish Caribbean and Iberian Peninsula](dictiona.html)_ ,
_Research Workshop_ , and _Web Authoring Workshop_ ; this site will also house
the six research teams's Web Sites; (2) _Mexico Case Study Site_ contents
prepared by Dr. Alvarez contains case syllabus with readings, overhead
materials, and documents, as well as electronic resources for lectures and
research, and (3) _Puerto Rico Case Study Site_ designed and authored by Dr.
Velez which contains the same types of materials as the Mexico Site. The Case
Study Sites are accessible through the WebCT Portal or directly, without
password protection, through the UCF server.

Students admitted into this course must have access to a computer that is
linked to the internet. If students do not have a personal computer they can
access the course at one of several UCF on-campus computer labs and stations,
including those conveniently located at the UCF Library. Students will be
trained in the use of this technology as well as in traditional and web
research/communication techniques, including web authoring. Utilizing the
internet is central to this project since teams are required to work both in
person as well as on line during and after course hours. Both instructors will
also be available on line to work with and assist students and teams, as well
as monitor student activity on line.![](upred.gif)  

![](hi%20rick.JPG)  | _G reetings! As a student in this course you are
participating in an educational experience that is designed to challenge your
imagination and stretch your research and communication skills, as well as
enhance your knowledge and facility with international/regional issues. This
course combines the very best in traditional and modern electronic research
and presentation techniques under the direct, individual supervision of an
instructor. Here you will be trained in archival-documentary as well as
electronic database and internet research, and presentation formats that
include on line, video, and computer based collaborative projects in both an
individual and group setting. You will gain experience as a project designer
and developer, as well as team participant and leader as you explore one of
the key concepts in modern history, the nature and development of national
identity. Please note that you will be periodically cued to this section of
this site for information regarding the Puerto Rican case study portion of the
course. Thank you in advance for your participation ,and I look forward to
seeing you this semester. **Dr. Diana Velez**_  
---|---  
  
* * *

**_Syllabus_**  

Core Syllabus...... Required PR Readings...... PR Lecture/Reading
Assignments...... Overheads/Documents...... Workshops/Research Aids......
**![](upred.gif)**

    

* * *



    

****

      * **Required PR Case Studies Readings:**

> >      1\. Arturo Morales Carrion. _Puerto Rico: A Political and Cultural
History_. New York: W.W. Norton  & Company, 1983.

>>

>>  
>>

>> 2\. [_Interactive Dictionary of Iberian, Latin American, and Spanish
Caribbean Historical Terms and Concepts_](dictiona.html)

>>

>>  
>>

>> 3\. Refereed journal articles and articles appearing in select anthologies
and professional publications, as well as chapters from select studies such as
Christina Duffy Burnett and Burke Marshall, eds. _Foreign in a Domestic Sense:
Puerto Rico, American Expansion, and the Constitution_ (Durham: Duke
University Press, 2001) and Frances Negron-Muntaner and Ramon Grosfoguel,
eds., _Puerto Rican Jam: Essays on Culture and Politics_ (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 1998).

>>

>>  
>>

>> 4\. Legislative materials such as U.S. Supreme Court Decisions and
Congressional debates; statistical databases; political papers and economic
briefs; cultural and institutional primary documents

>>

>>  
>>

>> 5\. Kate Turabian. _A Manual for Writers of Term Papers, Theses, and
Dissertations_. Chicago: The University Press of Chicago, 1996.

>>

>>  
>>

>> 6\. Andrew Harnack and Eugene Kleppinger, _Online!: A Reference Guide to
Using Internet Sources_ ![](upred.gif)

>>

>>

>>> Course Requirements: Students will be organized into 6 research teams,
each of which will be designated with a color and name. Each team will be
responsible for conducting collaborative research on an historical issue
relating to the course's theme of national identity. To this end, each student
will be producing an individual research paper that answers a question related
to their group's general subject area (e.g., national identity and
international/regional relations may be the group's subject and one student
may selected to research the question: Can it be argued that European
revolutionary nationalist ideals of the mid to late 19th century had more of
an impact on the formation of nationalism in --two countries selected by
student-- than similar ideas in the United States?). At the end of the
research period the team members read and critique each others papers and then
formulate an executive summary of how, taken together, these papers offer a
perspective on the team's general theme. To this end individual students and
their teams are responsible for the following activities and projects for
which they will be evaluated:

>>>

>>> 1\. Individual Presentations: includes research design and actual paper
(minimum of 10 pages), individual's project web page design and execution, and
oral presentation on the paper, as well as submission of an individual team
member portfolio (see #2 below)= 100% of grade

>>>

>>> 2\. Team Presentations: includes a team written executive summary (5-7
pages) and oral report, as well as a team designed web page with links to the
individual pages= individual student participation will be monitored by
instructors which entails class participation and documentation of individual
team member's collaboration and completion of team assignments through the
submission of a portfolio by each student. A grade will be assigned to the
portfolio and points will be deducted for failed completion of assignments,
non attendance of classes or team sessions (in the lab or internet sessions),
missed deadlines, or any other act of omission or commission which undermined
the ability of the team to complete its projects in a timely and professional
manner.

>>>

>>>  
>>>  
>>>

>>

>>   * **PR Lecture/Reading Assignments:**![](upred.gif)

>>   * **PR Overheads and Documents:**![](upred.gif)

>>   * **Workshops and Research Aids:**![](upred.gif) ****

>>

>

>> **

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> **

> > **_PR Reference Sites_**![](upred.gif)

> > * * *

>>

>> ****

>>

>> **_Research Team Sites_![](upred.gif) ** Please note that because these
sites are part of the research team projects they sites will not be operative
until later in the semester. A notification will be posted on this site
announcing their accessibility.

**BLUE TEAM** ![](wh_ball.gif)...... **YELLOW TEAM** .![](wh_ball.gif)......
**RED TEAM** .![](wh_ball.gif)....... **PURPLE TEAM**
..![](wh_ball.gif).......... **ORANGE TEAM** ![](wh_ball.gif)...... **GREEN
TEAM** ![](wh_ball.gif)  
  
---  
  
> >  
>

> **_Puerto Rican Journey_![](upred.gif)**

> * * *

>

>>  
>>

>> ****

>

> **_Page Last Updated: December 26, 2001_**

> **_Page Designed and Written by Dr. Diana Velez using Dreamweaver 4.0 and
Adobe PageMill 3.0_**

