16-480/680 Direct Instruction Strategies in Special Education

Fall Semester 2001

Tentative Syllabus Information

Fall 2001

    
    
     
    
    
    William Kitz, Associate Professor
    Office: Nursing Education 26 (Project Success office area)
    Phone: (920) 424-1033 (office)
           (920) 233-2166 (home)
    Office hours: by appointment

**Required Texts and Manuals**

    
    
              Carnine, D., Silbert, J., & Kameenui, E. J.(1997).  Direct instruction reading (3rd).  
                     New York:  Merrill.
              Stein, M., Silbert, J.  Carnine, D. (1997). Designing effective mathematics instruction:  
                     A direct instruction approach (3rd). New York:  Merrill.
              Tutoring Tactics (Tom Fischer)
              Making Modifications (Tom Fischer)

**Recommended Texts**

> >

>>     Hall, S. & Moats, L. (1999) Straight talk about reading: How parents
can make a difference.

>>           Chicago:

>>     Contemporary Books.

>>       (ISBN 0-8092-2857-2 ) Available through Amazon or Barnes and Nobel

>>       online for approximately $10 plus shipping and handling.

**Course Objectives**

    
    
    1.  Philosophical, Historical and Legal Foundations of Special Education

>

>     1.1  Describe models, theories and philosophies that provide the basis
for special education

>          practice and within specific licensure area.

    
    
    2.  Characteristics of Learners

>

>     2.1  Describe differential and similar characteristics (cognitive,
physical, social/emotional)

>          and their effect (educational/instructional) on individuals with
exceptionalities,

>          including level of severity and multiple exceptionalities.

    
    
         2.4  Describe the various etiologies of conditions affecting individuals within specific
              areas of licensure.
     
    3.  Assessment, Diagnosis, and Evaluation
         3.7  Implement norm, curriculum-based assessment and measurement, and criterion referenced
              procedures appropriately.
     
    4.  Instructional Content and Practice
         4.2  Describe and implement research supported instructional and remedial methods
              (e.g., direct instruction)techniques, and curriculum materials and classroom
              management techniques.
         4.3  Implement techniques for modifying o material including assistive technology.
         4.6  Describe the impact of language development on the academic and social skills
              of individuals with learning disabilities.
         4.10 Choose and use appropriate technologies to accomplish instructional objectives
              and to integrate them appropriately into the instructional process.
         4.11 Prepare appropriate level (acquisition, fluency, maintenance, etc) lesson 
              plans based on a task analysis and including a clear objective appropriate 
              instructional and progress monitoring strategies.
         4.12 Describe and implement ways to involve the individual and family in setting
              instructional goals and charting progress.
     
    5. Planning and Managing the Teaching and Learning Environment
         5.2  Use strategies and techniques for facilitating appropriate inclusion of students
              with exceptional needs in various settings.
         5.5  Design a learning environment that encourages active participation by learners
              in a variety of individual and group learning activities.
         5.6  Design, structure and manage daily classroom routines including transition time
              effectively for students, other staff, and general classrooms.
         5.9  Incorporate efficient use of instructional time.

**Note to Graduate Students**

    
    
    Graduate students:  Make an appointment with me to negotiate a project/presentation. 
    Please present several ideas when you meet with me.  For specific instructions on the
    graduate presentation, see me the final 15 minutes of the second class period.



**Course Outline**

Week 1

    
    
    Course overview  
    
    
    Lab Overview&emdash;Tom Fischer
    ObjectivesWhat is Direct Instruction (Myths and Truths/Basic Overview)
    Chapter 3, DI Reading background
    Battle of City Springs (Part 1)
    Grad paper overview (end of class)
    For next week: 
    Read Direct Instruction Reading, Chapters 6-8
    Application Items: Chapter 6, p. 69, 1;  Chapter 7, p. 81, 3 & 4; Chapter 8, p. 95, 4 & 6. 

Week 2

    
    
    Fads in Education
    Discussion of Chapters 6-8 DI Reading
    DI Basics (Part 1)
    Battle of City Springs, (Part 2)
    Grad paper (grad students only)
    1. Topic selection
    2. APA format
    For next week:  
    Read DI Reading, chapters 9-12 
    Application Exercises:  Chapter 9, p. 107, 2c, p. 113, 1a, p. 128, 3, p145, 2b, c, d. 

Week 3

    
    
    Discuss Chapters 9-12, DI Reading
    Project Follow-through (FT)&emdash; educational research on DI and other programs
    DI Basics&emdash;part 2
    Battle of City Springs&emdash;part 2
    For Next Week:
    Read "Tutoring Tactics"
    Read DI Math, chapters 4-5 
    Application Exercises:  Chapter 4, p. 46, 1;  Chapter 5, p. 64, 6 & 8. 

Week 4

    
    
    Discuss Chapters 4-5, DI Mathematics and "Tutoring Tactics."
    Reading educational research&emdash;Part 1
    Discuss Chapters  4 and 5, DI Mathematics
    DI Basics&emdash;Part 3
    Battle of City Springs&emdash;Part 3
    For Next Week:
    DI Math, Chapters 6 and 7
    Application Exercise:  Chapter 9, p. 167, 3. 

Week 5

    
    
    Discuss DI Mathematics Chapters 6 and 7
    Reading Educational Research&emdash;part 2
    DI Basics&emdash;part 4
    Battle of City Spring-Part 4 (conclusion)
    For next week: 
    DI Math, Chapters 8 and 9.
    Application Exercise:  Chapter 9,  p. 167, 3. 

Week 6

    
    
    Discuss DI Mathematics, Chapters 8 and 9
    20/20 tape with Zig Engelman 1995
    Preparation for DI Demo
    Preparation for Mid term examination
    For next week: 
    DI Reading, Chapters 15, 16, 17.
    Application Exercise:  Chapter 15, p. 169, 1 & 5;  Chapter 16, p. 180, 1; Chapter 17, p. 189, 4 & 5.

Week 7

    
    
    Discussion of Chapters 15-17, DI  Reading
    Examination I  (Covers all DI Reading and DI Mathematics chapters covered to date)
    	GRAD PAPER OUTLINES DUE
    For Next Class 
    DI Reading, Chapters 18 and 19.
    Application Exercise:  Chapter 18, p. 203, 1a, c, and e;  Chapter 19, p. 218, 1b & 2. 

Week 8

    
    
    Examination return and discussion
    Discuss Chapters 18 and 19. 
    DI Demos (3 students)
    Videodisc demonstrations
    For Next Class
    DI Mathematics, Chapters 10 and 11
    Application Exercise:  Chapter 10, p. 196,  6.

Week 9

    
    
    Discussion of Chapters 10 and 11 led by  				
    DI Demo 3 students
    Chemistry and Energy Videodiscs 
    Error Analysis with basic mathematics operations
    For next week:
    DI Mathematics, Chapters 12 and 13.
    Application exercises:  Chapter 12, p. 287, #7

Week 10

    
    
    Discussion of Chapters 12 and 13 led by 				
    DI Demo 3 students
    Reviewing a textbook for user friendliness

>

>     1. How can texts become more user friendly?

>     2. What kinds of modifications would have to be done to a text you
reviewed to make it more friendly?

    
    
    Example of a user friendly  US History text based on "Big Ideas"
    Modifying text materials
    For Next week:
    DI Reading, Chapters 22, 23 and 24
    Application exercises:  Chapter 22, p. 241, 1;  Chapter 23, p. 250, 1, Chapter 24, p. 269, 1
     

Week 11

    
    
    Discuss Chapters 22-24 led by 				
    Other Reading Programs&emdash;Lindamood Bell Auditory Discrimination In Depth or ADD also called LIPS.
    Task Analysis and Teaching:  Reading a clock to the half hour 
    	You are teaching a group of first grade students to read an analog clock.  

>

>     They already know how to read the clock to the hour (e.g. 8:00).  
>     Your objective today is to teach them to read the clock to the nearest
half-hour.  
>     List some prerequisite skills that are essential for success at reading
a clock to the half hour?  
>     What would be your teaching procedure&emdash;be concise and go step by
step (this need not be lengthy).  
>     Keep knowledge forms in mind.  We will discuss in class.

Mathematics:

    
    
    1. NCTM and the current state of mathematics (Standards???)
    2. Analyzing a mathematics text book for teacher and student learner friendliness.
    3. Next week:  spreadsheets, and higher level use of manipulatives (e.g. prealgebra and beyond)
    DI demonstrations&emdash;3 students
    For next week:
    DI reading Chapters 22, 23, and 24.
    Application exercises: Chapter 22, p. 241, 1 & 4; Chapter 23, p. 250, 1; Chapter 24,  p. 269, 1

Week 12

    
    
    Discussion of DI reading, Chapters 22, 23, 24 led by 					
    Effective Teaching&emdash;Classroom management
    Written Expression/Spelling emphasis
    Orton Gillingham multisensory approaches
    di demonstrations&emdash;3 students
    GRAD PAPER DUE
    For Next week:
    DI Mathematics, Chapters 14, 15, and 16
    No application exercises  

Week 13

    
    
    Discussion DI Mathematics chapters 14, 15 and 16 led by 				
    First year of teaching
    Planning for instructional improvement
    Cooperative review
    DI demonstrations&emdash;3 students
    For next week:
    Chapters 17, 18 and 19
    No application exercises

Week 14

    
    
    Discussion of Chapters 17, 18 and 19 led by 				
    Final Examination&emdash;all chapters and class discussion items since midterm.



**Assignments**

    
    
    The explanation of assignments below is intended to be cursory at best.  A more thorough 
    explanation of each assignment along with examples and/or study guides and review
    sessions will be provided in class.
     
    Application exercises

>

>     Using the principle of instructional design outlined in class and in the
course textbooks,

>     the student will develop

>     a direct instruction acquisition lesson plan which will include the
following elements:  
>     appropriate objective, analysis of preskills, materials, scripted
teaching format,

>     appropriate evaluation instrument,

>     and monitoring chart.  Due on dates provided in course outline

    
    
     
    DI demonstration

>

>     Each student will present a 10-15 minute lesson including at least two
tasks of to

>     the class using the principles of Direct Instruction design and
delivery.  The lesson

>     may come from any DI material including Connecting Math Concepts,
DISTAR,

>     Reading Mastery, Spelling Mastery, etc.  Students will be graded on
proper

>     delivery of instruction using the principles discussed and practiced in
class.  
>     Given on date determined in class.

    
    
     
    Examinations
     

>

>     The first examination will cover material from DI  Reading and DI
Mathematics texts

>     materials presented in class lectures to that point in the semester.

    
    
     

>

>     The second examination will cover materials from after the midterm from

>     DI  Reading and DI Mathematics chapters discussed in class and materials

>     presented in class.  In general, the final is not cumulative.

    
    
     

>

>     We will discuss material from the text and lecture weekly and we will

>     review examination material one week before each examination.  The
format

>     of the examinations will be multiple choice, short answer and essay.

    
    
     
    Class response sheets

>

>     Each week you will be required to hand in class reactions sheets.  A
copy of one

>     of the sheets is at the back of the syllabus.  You may make additional
copies

>     of this sheet or just write the questions on a plain piece of paper and

>     provide your answers.

    
    
    **Assignment Percentage Values**
    
    
     
    Assignment	               Undergraduate	Graduate
    Application Exercises	        30%	         25%
    DI demonstration	             15%	         10%
    Instructional Presentation	   10%	         10%
    Examinations	                 40%	         40%
    	Exam I 20%
    	Exam II 20%
    Class Resp Sheets/attendance*	 5%	          5%
    Grad Paper/presentation	       NA	         10%
     
    *see copy of class response sheet at the end of the syllabus



**Attendance and Grading**

    
    
    A	  96-100 points
    A/B	90-95 points	
    B	  85-89 points
    B/C	80-84 points
    C	  75-79 points	
    C/D	70-74 points *
    D	  65-69 points *
    F	< 65 points
    * Not an option for graduate students. Graduate students Grades Less than 75 points = F 



**Graduate Assignment**

    
    
    Part 1: Research on a current issue about dyslexia and or its effective remediation. The topic 
    will be approved by the instructor by the 4th week of class. Final paper is due by the 12th week
    of classes. It is expected that at least 8 references will be used.
     
    The paper should include these sections

> >

>>     Introduction  
>>     >

>>  
>>     Review of literature  
>>     >

>>  
>>     Discussion  
>>     >

>>  
>>     Conclusion  
>>     >

>>  
>>     References

    
    
    Length of paper: 6-8 pages of narrative&endash;no longer&endash;this is not a comprehensive research paper.
    Double space APA style (4th edition) is required. APA books are in library and on sale at the
    bookstore. APA is the format used in most journals and books.
     
    Part 2: The student will make a five to ten minute oral presentation to the class on his or her 
    paper during the 11th 12th, or 13th period of the class.
    
    
    **Attendance and Class Participation**
    
    
    Attendance is critical to the success of each student in this course. Therefore a "baseball" 
    policy is used. The first unexcused miss results in no penalty. The second unexcused miss
    results in a one-half grade deduction. The third unexcused miss results in failure of the 
    course. Class participation is also important to each student's success in class. 
    Approximately 8-10 times during the semester, the instructor will provide students
    with an article about reading or spelling instruction or dyslexia or some other
    related topic. Students will be expected to read the article before the next class period 
    and participate in large and small group discussions.
     
    
    
    **Accommodations for Students with Documented Disabilities**
    
    
    "The University of Wisconsin Oshkosh is committed to providing reasonable 
    accommodations for students with disabilities. Please contact Disability 
    Services [Dean of Students Office 125 Dempsey Hall 424-3100 (voice) 
    424-1319 (TTY) for the University's accommodation request form and 
    documentation requirements. Information related to an individual's 
    accommodation request and/or arrangements will be confidential and will be 
    shared with relevant University personnel or offices on a 'need to know' 
    basis."
    
    
    **Class Response Sheet**
    
    
    Name 
    Date
    1. Preparation for class: What are your reactions to the text and or article
       assigned from last week?
     
     
     
     
     
    2. What are your reactions to tonight's class?
     
     
     
     
     
    3. What questions do you have about the readings or topics covered in class?
     
     
     
     
     



* * *

[Go to Bill Kitz home page](http://www.uwosh.edu/faculty_staff/kitz/)  
[Go to Special Education home
page](http://www.coehs.uwosh.edu/specialed/home.html)  
[Go to UW Oshkosh home page](http://www.uwosh.edu/)



