[C & I](/ed/programs/ci/index.html) | [CPE](/ed/programs/cpe/index.html) |
[EDAD](/ed/programs/edad/index.html) | [HPER](/ed/programs/hper/index.html) |
[TTD](/ttd/index.html)  
[Graduate Programs](/ed/programs/index.html) | [School of Education](/ed/) |
[SOE NCATE Page](/ed/ncate/) | [USD](/)

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
|  |  |  |

# Division of Curriculum and Instruction

#  ELED 773 - Elementary School Curriculum |  |  |  
|  |

# I.Course Description

ELED 773-Elementary School Curriculum: An examination of the  
elementary school curriculum as it relates to the learning needs of  
the elementary school students, patterns of curricular  
organizations, and current curricular content.

#  II.Rationale

The USD Reflective Decision Making model for preparing educators  
provides the framework supporting the School of Education  
programs. This course is intended primarily for those educators  
who have, or expect to have, supervisory or administrative  
responsibilities for elementary school curricula, but who have not  
had extensive background working in the elementary school.  
Although some time will be spent on methods and materials relevant  
to the elementary school, this course will be presented as a  
survey of curriculum, and methods, and not as detailed methodology.

This course will examine foundations for the determination of  
curricula, although the course is not intended as an in-depth course  
on the theory of curriculum development. The course will also  
examine the curriculum as it relates to the learning needs of the  
elementary school student, patterns of curricular organization, and  
current curricular content.

#  III.Textbook

The textbook adopted for this course is: |  
|  |  |

Morrison (1993).  
and Bacon. |  |

Contemporary Curriculum K-8.  |  |

Boston: Allyn |  |  
|  |

# IV.Course Objectives and Outcomes

As a result of this elementary school curriculum course, the students will  
be able to:  
1.Define and differentiate between the words curriculum and  
instruction. (SoE C; NCATE 1.A.1)  
2\. Identify and explain the differences among aims, goals, and  
objectives for the elementary school curriculum. (SoE C;  
NCATE 1.A.1, NCATE 1.F.2)  
3\. Describe the differences among the types of curriculum  
designs for the elementary school curriculum. (SoE C; NCATE  
1.A.1, NCATE 1.F.2) |  
|  |  |  |  |  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
|  |  |

  4.   
Identify and describe the various philosophies of education.  
(SoE C; NCATE 1.A.1, NCATE 1.F.1)

  5.   
Explain significant historical events in the area of school and  
curriculum. (SoE A; NCATE 1.A.1, NCATE 1.F.1)

  6.   
Identify and describe the major psychological foundations of  
education. (SoE A; NCATE 1.A.1, NCATE 1.F.1)

  7.   
Describe how the sociological foundations are essential during  
the curriculum development process. (SoE A; NCATE 1.A.1,  
NCATE 1.F.1)

  8.   
Describe a developmentally appropriate kindergarten  
curriculum. (SoE C; NCATE 1.F.2)

  9.   
Describe an appropriate language arts curriculum that  
includes reading, writing, speaking, and listening. (SoE C;  
NCATE 1.F.2)

  10. Identify essential components of a social studies curriculum  
appropriate for a changing global/multicultural community.  
(SoE C; SoE B; NCATE 1.F.2, NCATE 1.G.3)

  11. Describe the principles of effective science and mathematics  
programs. (SoE C; NCATE 1.F.2)

  12. Describe what constitutes an effective health and physical  
education curriculum which includes topics necessary for a  
society undergoing major changes. (SoE C; NCATE 1.F.2)

  13. Write a rationale for the inclusion of art and music in the  
elementary school curriculum. (SoE C; NCATE 1.F.2)

  14. Describe characteristics of effective elementary schools and  
teachers. (SoE C; NCATE 1.F.3)

  15. Outline a plan of curriculum evaluation. (SoE C; NCATE 1.F.2)
  16. Describe major curriculum issues to be addressed immediately  
and in the future. (SoE C; NCATE 1.F.2)

  17. Identify curriculum trends that will affect the elementary  
school curriculum. (SoE C; NCATE 1.F.2; NCATE 1.F.3)

|  
|  |

# V. Course Topics

The major topics to be considered in this course are:  
*Curriculum foundations  
*Philosophy of education  
*History of education  
*Psychological theories of education  
*Sociological considerations of education  
*Language arts curriculum  
*Social studies curriculum  
*Mathematics curriculum  
*Science curriculum  
*Health and physical education curriculum  
*Art curriculum  
*Music curriculum  
*Curriculum evaluation models  
*Effective schools and teachers |  |   
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
|  |

*Curriculum trends and issues

#  VI. Instructional Methods and Activities

Methods and activities for instruction include:

**Traditional Experiences  
** 1.Large group instruction/discussion - approximately 50% of  
the time will be spent in discussion  
2.Guest speakers - on selected topics, guest lecturers will make  
presentations

**Clinical Experiences  
** 1.Student presentations - approximately 25% of the time will be  
spent on student presentations dealing with curricular issues  
and trends  
2.Case studies or situations - approximately 25% of the time  
will be spent on case studies or unique curricular situations  
that involve decision making.

**Course Requirements  
** 1\. Read and critique 8 periodical articles from appropriate  
journals which deal with elementary school curricular, issues,  
and trends.  
2\. Read the textbook and all handouts presented in class.  
3\. Write a position paper on an elementary school curriculum  
issue. Procedures and position paper style will be  
demonstrated in class.  
4\. Present an oral report on a current trend/issue that is now  
occurring in the elementary school curriculum.  
5\. Actively participate in discussion by contributing ideas,  
information, and sharing.  
6\. Use the Internet (WWW, Listservs, and Search Engines) to  
gather information on standards, scope and sequence of the  
various content areas, and curricular issues.  
7\. Write a letter to an administrator outlining personal thoughts  
on how to improve the elementary school curriculum.  
8\. Each class member will contribute cartoons and/or other  
educational humor during the class.  
9\. Other assignments as determined in class.

#  VII. Evaluation and Grade Assignment

The methods of evaluation and the criteria for grade assignment of  
this course are: |  
|  |  |

**Methods  
** *Final test  
*Periodical critiques |  |  |  |   
|  |  |  |

100 points  
80 points |  |  
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
|  |  |  |

*Position paper  
*Oral presentation  
*Administrator Letter  
*Participation/attendance  |  |  | 

50 points  
50 points  
20 points  
40 points |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  
|  |  |  |

**Grading Scale  
** A=92-100%  
B=84-91%  
C=76-83%  
D=68-75%  
F=Below 68%  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  
|  |  |  |  |

of total points  
of total points  
of total points  
of total points  
of total points |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  
|  |

# VIII.Course Schedules and Policies

#  A.Tentative Course Schedule |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  
|  |  |  |  |  |  |

**ELED 773-Elementary School Curriculum  
****Summer, 1998** |  |  |  |  
|  |

Instructor: Robert W. Wood, Ed.D  
Office: Delzell Education Center, Rm 218C  
Telephone: (605) 677-5832  
Home Phone: (605) 624-4320  
E-mail Address: woodr@usd.edu  |  |  |  |

Class Days: MTWTH  
Class Hrs: 7:25 am-9:50 am  
Meeting Room: ED 216  
Office Hours: Appointment |  
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

# Tentative Schedule |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  
|  |

# Meeting

1

  2. 

  3. 

  4. 

  5. 
|  |  |  |  |  |

# Unit |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

# Readings |  |  |  
|  |  |

INTRODUCTIONS: SYLLABUS  
An overview of the course  
and course requirements  
CURRICULUM FOUNDATIONS  
Field of curriculum  
Curriculum Development  
Curriculum Design  
FOUNDATIONS OF EDUCATION  
Philosophy of Education  
History of Education  
FOUNDATIONS OF EDUCATION  
Psychological Theories  
Sociological Considerations  
EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION  
Jean Piaget's Influence  
Developmentally Appropriate  
Kindergarten  
Standards  
THE LANGUAGE ARTS  
Reading |  |

Ch 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7  
Handouts

Ch 1,2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7  
Handouts

Ch 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,

Ch 1, 2 , 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,

Ch 1  
Handouts

Ch 9  
Handouts |  |  
|  |

  6. 
|  |  |  |  |  |  
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
|  |  |  |  |

Listening  
THE LANGUAGE ARTS  
Oral Expression  
Written Expression  
THE LANGUAGE ARTS  
Spelling  
Grammar/usage  
Integration  
Standards  
SOCIAL STUDIES  
Scope and Sequence Models  
Standards  
MATHEMATICS  
Effective Programs  
Standards  
SCIENCE  
Curriculum Models  
Standards  
HEALTH AND PHYSICAL  
EDUCATION  
Standards  
Current Trends/Issues  
ART EDUCATION  
Standards  
Current Curricular Trends  
MUSIC EDUCATION  
Standards  
Curricular Issues  
EFFECTIVE SCHOOL/TEACHERS  
CURRICULUM EVALUATION  
MODELS  
CURRICULUM ISSUES AND  
TRENDS  
Written Assignments Due  
FINAL EXAMINATION |  |  |  |  
|  |

  7. 

  8. 
|  |  |  |

Ch 9  
Handouts

Ch 9  
Handouts

Ch 11  
Handouts

Ch 12  
Handouts

Ch 12  
Handouts

Ch 13  
Handouts

Ch 10  
Handouts

Ch 10  
Handouts

Ch 8, 14, 15, 16, 17 |  |  
|  |

  9. 

  10. 

  11. 

  12. 

  13. 

  14. 

  15. 
|  |  |  |  
|  |

  16. 
|  |  |  |  |  
|  |

  2.   
**Class Policies**

  3. Class attendance is required. Points will be taken off for  
each day missed. This policy will be discussed during the  
first day of class.

  4. Assignments turned in after the due date will be given only  
partial credit, 20% per day will be taken off for each day late  
for all assignments.

#  IX.Bibliography

The knowledge base that supports course content and procedures  
includes: |  
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
|  |

# A. Contemporary References (1990-1998)

ASCD. (1991). ASCD curriculum handbook. Alexandria, VA:  
Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.

Champlin, K. (n.d.). Assessing curriculum guides for art education.  
Reston, VA: National Art Education Association.

ASCD. (1993). Challenges and achievements in american education.  
Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.

Flood, J., Jensen, D., Lapp, D. & Squire, J., eds. (19991). Handbook of  
research on teaching the english language arts. New York: Macmillan  
Publishing Company.

Hunter, D. & Hunter, L. (1990). The comprehensive school health  
sourcebook. Menlo Park, CA: Health and Education Communication  
Consultants.

Lemlech, J.K. (1998). Curriculum and instructional methods for the  
elementary and middle school. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill.

NCSS. (1990). Social studies curriculum planning resources.  
Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt Publishing Company. |  
|  |

NCTM. (1995). Curriculum and evaluation standards.  
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. |  |

Reston, VA: |  |  |  |  |  |  
|  |

National Research Council. (1996). National science education  
standards. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

Norton, D. (1997). The effective teaching of language arts (5th ed.)  
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill/Prentice Hall. |  |  
|  |

Passe, J. (1995). Elementary school curriculum.  
Brown & Benchmark Publishers. |  |

Madison, WI: WCB |  |  |  
|  |

Pratt, D. (1993). Curriculum planning: A handbook for foundations,  
principles and issues (2nd ed.) Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon.

Shaver, J.P. Eds. (1991). Handbook on research on social studies  
teaching and learning. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company. |  |  |  |  
|  |

Walker, D. (1990). Fundamentals of curriculum.  
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. |  |

Orlando, FL: |  |  |  |  |  |  |  
|  |

Winters, M. & Betts, F. (1991). Curriculum materials directory.  
Alexander, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. |  |  |
|  |  
|  |  |  
---|---|---|---  
|  |

**Key Journals  
** Phi Delta Kappan  
Educational Leadership

Note: Every major elementary school curricular area has a  
professional organization publishing a journal. Check in the  
I.D. Weeks Library for available issues.

**Internet Resources  
** The professor of this class will distribute appropriate Internet  
World Wide Web (WWW) addresses dealing with unit topics.  |

