![](forestli.gif)  


##  Principles of Biology:  Evolution and Diversity  
Bi 212, 2002

    
    
  **Lecture Instructor:  **  
Dr. John Sollinger (2 pm section, CRN:  4571), Science 358, 552-6342,
[sollingj@sou.edu](mailto:sollingj@sou.edu)

**Office hours:**  
M, T, Th, F @ 10-11, or by appt or chance  
---  
**Textbook:**  
Campbell et al, 1999. _Biology_.

**Lab manual** :  
_Laboratory Manual for Bi 212 Principles of Biology_ , 2001

**Writing manual:**  
McMillan, 1997. _Writing Papers in the Biological Sciences_

**Laboratory notebook:**  
Quadrille ruled, bound notebook required. Spiral-bound notebook or 3-ring
binder not acceptable for lab work.  
  
[Population Genetics
Problems](/BIOLOGY/Courses/PrinBi/BI212/Bi212W02popgenQs.htm)

 [E. coli data set](E-coli.htm)  
     [E. coli instructions](E.coli-instructions.doc)

**_Welcome back to Principles of Biology,_** where we study that most
fascinating of subjects \- LIFE.  We will continue working toward our overall
goals for this course sequence:

  * Gain sufficient proficiency in the various sub-disciplines of biology to succeed in advanced courses in specialized areas of biology.
  * Become sufficiently knowledgeable about biology to make informed decisions about important issues concerning biology that face society today.
  * Develop an understanding of the enterprise of science, its scope and its limitations.
  * Have fun!

**_Biology 212 is the second course_** in this sequence.   Our specific goals
in this course are to help you:

  * Understand the unifying theory of biology: evolution by natural selection, and the evidence for it from experiments, observation, fossils, biochemistry, geology, genetics, and molecular biology.
  * Understand the processes of speciation and genetic change in populations.
  * Gain an appreciation of the diversity of life forms and become knowledgeable about their characteristics and phylogenetic relationships.
  * Become familiar with the current state of knowledge on the origin of life and its history on Earth.
  * Develop an understanding of biodiversity as a biological concept and become familiar with conservation issues.
  * Gain direct experience in the methods of science including developing questions, gathering data, analyzing data to derive conclusions, and communicating results in the form of a scientific paper.
  * Develop skills of quantitative reasoning by applying mathematics to scientific questions and by using computers to analyze and graph data.

**_Who should be taking this course?_** Any student intending to major in
biology or other natural science, and students in any major who need to meet
course requirements for medical, dental, or veterinary school should be
enrolled in Bi 211.   The topics and depth of coverage in Bi 211-213 are
geared toward students with a strong interest in biology and who need a solid
foundation for more advanced courses in the sciences.  **Bi 211-213 DO fulfill
the general education requirement for science.**

**_Who should not be taking this course?   _**We advise students majoring in
arts, humanities, business, or social sciences to take Bi 101 and 102, or Bi
101 and 103 to fulfill natural science requirements.  These courses assume
less prior knowledge of biology.  If you are unsure which sequence best suits
your situation, see your advisor as soon as possible.

**_Lectures, assignments, exams, etc.   _**Lecture material will overlap
substantially with that in the textbook, but sometimes we will discuss
material in lecture that is not in the text, and vice-versa.  Be prepared to
answer exam questions on any material from lecture or assigned reading in the
textbook.

There will be two midterm exams, and one cumulative final exam.  The exams
will be predominantly multiple choice questions, but they will also include
non-multiple choice questions such as drawing graphs, labeling diagrams, short
written responses, or solving problems.  The questions on the exams will come
mostly from material covered in lecture and the assigned textbook reading, but
occassionally they will come from the lab.

The midterms and final will be given ONLY at the time listed in the schedule.
Students may not take the exam given in the other lecture section of Bi 212.

[Click here for lecture and lab
schedule](/BIOLOGY/Courses/PrinBi/BI212/sched02.html) , including chapters in
textbook.

We will occasionally have assignments in lecture.  Many of these assignments
will be done right in class, and count for 5 points.  Sometimes students will
work collaboratively in a group on the assignment.  These assignments will NOT
be announced in advance and can NOT be made up if missed, so try not to miss
any lectures.  Occassionally, instructors may give assignments to be completed
outside of class time and that count for more points.

**_The laboratory supplements the lecture.   _**In lab, you will have the
opportunity to study some topics in more detail and to gain hands-on
experience in data collection, quantitative analysis, and other aspects of
scientific method.  The topics covered in the lab generally parallel those in
lecture.  Students will usually work collaboratively in groups during lab, but
each student will maintain his or her own laboratory notebook.

**Lab grades** will include evaluations of your individual  lab notebooks,
separate laboratory reports, and one lab practical exam.  Details can be found
in the lab manual and will be discussed further by your lab instructor.  In
addition to weekly laboratory exercises, the entire Bi 212 class will conduct
an experiment on the evolution of antibiotic resistance in bacteria.  Students
will work in groups to prepare a report on this experiment in the format of a
scientific paper.  Details on this assignment will be provided in lab.  Refer
to the required book, _Writing Papers in the Biological Sciences,_ for
explicit instructions on how this paper should be written.

**_The campus computer network_** is accessible to all students and we will
make significant use of it this term.   We will post lab data, reading
assignments, or other information pertinent to Bi 212.  Excel, the spreadsheet
program we will use to analyze our data, is available on the network. **Email
is a very efficient way to contact your instructors**.   If you have not
already logged in, explored the campus web pages, and sent and received email,
please go to the Computer Center very soon and do so.

**_Grading and grades._** The total possible points in this course is
approximately 550 (see below).  Your grade depends on the total number of
points you earn in lecture and lab combined, relative to the highest total
number of points.  For example, suppose the total of the highest scores
achieved on all the exams and assignments is 509.  Suppose you earned 448
points.  Based on the total possible points, your percentage would have been
85.33%, for a grade of B.  However, based on the highest point total, your
percentage is 88.0%, for a grade of B+.  Note that your grade will not be hurt
by others scoring very high on exams.  Your percent and the corresponding
grade can not be lower than what you actually achieved on the exam.  However,
your grade can get a "boost" if the highest score is less than a perfect
score.  There is no "curve" in the strict sense, since there is no
predetermined distribution of letter grades.  It is possible (and greatly
hoped for by your instructors!) that everyone could earn As and Bs.  
  **Point Values**

  Midterm exam 1            100  
  Midterm exam 2            100  
  Final exam                     150  
  Lecture assigns       up to 50

  Lab notebook                  20  
  Lab reports                      60  
  Lab practicum                  20  
  Evolution lab writeup        60

  TOTAL                      ~560 | **Grade Ranges**  
      93.00 -   100           A   
      90.00 - 92.99          A-   
      87.00 - 89.99          B+   
      83.00 - 86.99          B   
      80.00 - 82.99          B-   
      77.00 - 79.99          C+   
      73.00 - 76.99          C   
      70.00 - 72.99          C-   
      67.00 - 69.99          D+   
      63.00 - 66.99          D   
      60.00 - 62.99          D-   
      00.00 - 59.99          F  
---|---  
  
**_Some suggestions for getting the most from this course._**   Students often
ask for suggestions that will help them do well in this course.  Although each
person has to find the right combination of study techniques that work best
for her or him, the suggestions listed at the link below have proven helpful
to many students.  If it sounds like doing well requires a lot of effort, that
is because **it does**.   Biology, and science in general, is an immense,
complicated subject.  It is the nature of the natural world.  However, it is
also endlessly fascinating, making learning about it fun and rewarding.

 [Study Ideas](http://www.sou.edu/biology/Courses/PrinBi/BI212/studyideas.htm)

**_What if I miss a lab?_** The short answer is, DO NOT miss a lab.   You may
attend another lab section later in the week, but only with permission of that
lab instructor and only if there is room.  Make sure the lab instructor signs
your notebook so you receive credit for the work in your notebook.  If you can
not attend another lab section, you may be able to come into the lab and work
on your own, but generally it is not possible to have available all of the
materials needed to complete the lab.  All the needed materials are removed on
Friday to make room for the next week's items.

**_What if I miss lecture?_** Once again, the best advice is, DO NOT miss
lecture -- EVER.   If you do miss lecture, be sure to get notes from another
student and find out about any announcements made in class.  You are still
responsible for any and all information given out in class whether you were
there or not.  If an assignment was given in class, you can not make it up.

**_What if I miss an exam?_** Only students who can document that they missed
an exam due to serious extenuating circumstances beyond their control will be
allowed to take a make-up exam.   This policy is in fairness to the majority
of students who take the exams at the scheduled times, and to many students
who do so in spite of difficult circumstances.  **Check the schedule now to
avoid making plans that will conflict with exams.**   Contact your lecture
instructor within 48 hours of the exam to determine if s/he will excuse your
absence and allow you to take a make-up exam.  Examples of excused absences
include: hospitalization, death in the family, or court subpoena.  Examples of
non-excused absences include: having other exams the same day, over-sleeping,
leaving campus early during finals week, being tired, or having a cold.
**There will be ONE make-up exam given at ONE time (Tuesday, 20 Mar,
12:30-1:30).**   If you need to take a make-up exam, be sure to keep this time
slot open.  The make-up will cover all material on the first and second
midterms and may be short essay questions and/or multiple choice and/or other
format.

**_Where can I get extra help if I want it?_**   The Student ACCESS Center (SU
134) provides a number of services designed to help students succeed.  In
particular, Academic Resource Services offers tutoring and programs in study
skills.  These services are for any student who wants to maintain or improve
performance in school, regardless of whether s/he is earning an A or an F in a
class.

**_There is NO extra credit. _** A few students generally ask if they can do
"extra credit" to make up for poor performance on exams or other aspect of the
course.  Although this is often done in highschool, we do not give extra
credit in this course.  Out of fairness to all, a student's grade is based
solely on performance on the required elements of Bi 211, not on what s/he
might do outside of Bi 211.  Any "extra" effort a student may wish to invest
would be better spent on studying lecture material and completing high-quality
assignments in lab.

**_Miscellaneous University policies_**.   A grade of incomplete (I) will be
assigned only if the quality of a student's work is satisfactory but the
course is not completed for reasons acceptable to the instructor.  Students
wishing to arrange an I should contact the instructor at the earliest possible
date.  An I automatically changes to an F after 12 months unless incomplete
course work is made up to the satisfaction of the instructor.

A grade of E will be assigned if a student misses the final exam.  The grade
of E is converted to an F at the end of the next term unless the student makes
up the final exam to the satisfaction of the instructor (see missed exam
policy for examples of circumstances under which a student would be allowed to
take a make-up exam).

It is assumed that all students exhibit the highest levels of academic
integrity. Refer to the SOU Student Handbook for the University Policy on
academic integrity.  
    


