**Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology** (Geological Sciences 303B; # _U12884_ )

Prerequisites: GEOL 303A, 380; CHEM 120A

Meetings: MW 6:00 to 9:45 P.M. in MH-208

Instructor: **Dr. Diane Clemens-Knott**

e-mail: [dclemensknott@fullerton.edu](mailto:dclemensknott@fullerton.edu)

Office Hours: Tues 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.

Phone: (714)278- **2369**

Office: MH-264B

_Welcome to Geology 303B!_

_I love studying crystalline rocks and look forward to introducing this
fascinating subject to you._



In this class we will study the geologic processes and some of the physical
and chemical principles that petrologists appeal to when trying to decipher
the history of formation (or petrogenesis) of an igneous or metamorphic rock.
We will focus on the more common or particularly significant igneous and
metamorphic rock associations in order for you to develop a strong familiarity
with them as well as to develop your personal strategy for identifying unknown
rocks.



You will leave this class with the ability to describe, identify and interpret
hand samples of igneous and metamorphic rocks. Furthermore, you will learn how
to integrate the knowledge gained from the hand samples with field,
geochemical and experimental data in order to form plausible petrogenetic
models (i.e. how did this rock form?). In order to master the concepts and
skills, you will need to learn the vocabulary of petrology - this will require
a substantial memorization effort early on, but you will see your efforts pay
off soon enough.



As the geosciences involve the application of the "pure" sciences (physics,
chemistry, biology and mathematics) to solving the puzzles of the earth, we
will use a significant amount of "basic" science - particularly chemistry and
mathematics - in this course. If this frightens you, take heart, because there
is a _very_ good chance that these subjects will seem easier and more
interesting to you once you see how useful they are in a geologic context. You
may, however, find the need to review college algebra, CHEM120A and GEOL303A.



**Required Texts and Materials**

**Raymond** , L.A., 1995, Petrology: The Study of Igneous, Sedimentary, and
Metamorphic Rocks: Volume 1: Igneous Petrology

**Yardley** , B.W.D., 1989, An Introduction to Metamorphic Petrology

any **geological dictionary** , such as the AGI Dictionary of Geological Terms

**your mineralogy textbook** (see Tom Handzus to check out a locker)

**hand lens**

**Supplemental Texts: ** none of these will be assigned, but, in case you are
interested in examining the subjects further, these are the books on which I
rely. Some of these are located in **SLC-203** for use in that room. Of these,
the 2 atlases are beautiful picture-books.

Bowen, 1928, _The Evolution of Igneous Rocks_ (this book is a classic and,
amazingly, remains appropriate despite the subsequent explosive growth in
igneous petrology)

Charmichael, Turner and Verhoogen, 1974, _Igneous Petrology_

Deer, Howie and Zussman, 1980, _An Introduction to the Rock Forming Minerals_

Hess, 1989, _Origins of Igneous Rocks_

Hyndman, 1972, _Petrology of Igneous and Metamorphic Rocks_

MacKenzie, Donaldson and Guilford, 1982, _Atlas of Igneous Rocks and their
Textures_

McBirney, 1993, _Igneous Petrology_ , 2nd ed.

Williams, Turner and Gilbert, 1982, _Petrography_ , 2nd ed.

Yardley, MacKenzie and Guilford, 1990, _Atlas of Metamorphic Rocks and their
Textures_

**  
**

**Requirements**

** **

**(1)** **Lab exercises**

Labs are designed to be completed within the 5-6 hours of lab. I do not take
attendance, but I can confidently say that the labs will take less effort and
be more meaningful if completed during the scheduled lab period when you'll
have myself and your classmates to assist you.

Lab assignments are due **at the beginning of the lab period** that the
subsequent lab is to begin. For example, Lab #1 is due at the beginning of the
lab period in which Lab #2 is begun. _Late assignments will be docked **50%**_
if turned in within one week of the due date. Later assignments will receive
no credit; however, if you advise me **before** a crisis, we can make
alternate arrangements. Adherence to this policy is necessary so that we all
don't fall behind.

_I will only grade selected problems on each lab. It is your responsibility to
consult the posted keys for correct answers to ungraded problems as you will
be held responsible for all material._



**(2) Write-Your-Own-Exam Questions**

Recent research in teaching methods indicates that students benefit greatly
when asked to write about and respond to assigned reading material. Every
Monday at the beginning of lecture you will hand in two questions you have
written and answered based on the previous week's reading assignment (i.e. on
Monday of week 3 you will turn in questions based on the reading from week 2).

Please consult the attached handout for the format to be used. These
assignments will prove to be useful study guides as I will compile your best
questions as a class study guide and will use many of the questions on the
written exams.

In addition, we will use this assignment as a forum for you to let me know
what concepts you're not understanding or which topics you would like to learn
more about, so that I can respond to your needs and interests _before_
examination time.

There are 14 possible journals (including week 1): you need only turn in **12
of the 14**.



**(3) Pop-quizzes**

A way to identify and focus on basic material which you should have learned
and committed to memory prior to the exams.



**(4)** **Lab exams**

Three, 1-hour, closed-book, practical examinations taken during the laboratory
session. The first will involve identification of igneous structures (ex:
different volcano types) primarily from projected slides. The second and third
exams will emphasize hand samples.



**(5)** **Field trips/note-taking exercises**

Attendance is **required** on the 3 scheduled one-day trips, and written
assignments concerning the trips will be required. If there is a conflict with
other scheduled geology field trips, please tell me so **immediately**. There
is very little flexibility in our schedule.



**(6)** **Lecture examinations:** Written exams, lasting approximately 2
hours, given in class.

** **

**(7) Final examination**

The exam is scheduled for Monday, December 13, 1999 from 5 to 6:50 P.M. The
exam will predominantly cover metamorphic petrology, but I reserve the right
to ask questions integrating both igneous and metamorphic petrology.



**  
**

**Exceptions to 1-7:** Usually exceptions will be granted only for serious,
documented (i.e. a doctor) illness. Please consult me _in advance_ if you are
having trouble with the pace of the class, or if you anticipate any scheduling
difficulties.



We will follow the **honor code** explained on the last page of this syllabus.
One of the pleasures of teaching upper division geology courses is that
violations are virtually nonexistent. Be forewarned, however, that I take this
subject very seriously, and if there are any instances of the honor code being
violated I will recommend the most serious penalties allowed by the
University.

** **

**Grading**

Your grade will be determined _solely on the points earned_ in the following
categories. There is _no extra credit_ available. Please see the attached
schedule for additional details. The point distribution listed below many vary
slightly, but I will attempt to keep the weight of exams relative to exercises
at approximately 55:45.



Journals: 12 (out of 14) @ 5 points each 60

Pop-Quizzes: 3 @ 10 points each 30

Igneous lab exercises: 10 @ 10-20 points each 165

Metamorphic lab exercises: 4 @ 10-20 points each 60

Lab exams: 3 @ 30 points each 90

Field trip logs: 3 @ 15 points each 45 ****

Lecture exams: 3 @ 100 points each _300_

750 points



I will determine the breakdown into A, B, C, etc. after grading the final
exam. My guess is that the ranges will be close to A = 90-100%, B = 80-89%, C
= 70-79%, D = 60-69%, and F = 0-59%, but I may adjust this according to both
the difficulty of my assignments and the seriousness of your performance. I
will give you a letter grade on all exams, so that you will be able to gauge
your progress and, of course, will consult with you individually upon request.

**Some Closing Words**

**** There is no way that I (or probably anyone) could teach this course and
make it _easy_ without it being completely useless to you as a geoscientist.
Given that this will probably be a difficult course, **_it is imperative that
you keep pace with the reading assignments_** _, completing them **before**
the lecture_ and raising any questions you might have in lecture or in your
journals. In return, I promise not to waste your valuable time by repeating in
lecture what you've just read, but instead I will highlight the important
points and build upon them with additional examples/insight.

You will soon discover that I strongly encourage **class participation**. If
you're uncomfortable with this, please realize that this classroom is one of
the safest environments you will ever experience in which to voice your ideas.
I'm looking forward to hearing your fresh perspective on my chosen field of
study, so please don't be shy.

In the end you may learn as much from your fellow classmates as from me. I
encourage you to consult each other on laboratory assignments and to study
together whenever possible. Do not rely too much on your lab partner's
assistance, however, or you will have difficulty with the examinations. In
other words, **learn from each other, but resist becoming dependent upon on
another**. This caution applies particularly to the hand sample laboratory
exams. These two lab exams will involve the same types of exercises as the
weekly assignments, but will allow both you and me to have confidence in your
individual ability to work with hand samples.



