The University of AkronFall, 1998  
Department of Physical and Application of Outdoor Education  
Health Education to the School Curriculum  
5560:450/550  
Dr. Gayle Workman  
MH 116, 972-7476  
Th 4:20-7:45 p.m., 4 cr.  
Workman@uakron.edu  
_  
Students whose names do not appear on the university's official clas list by
September 14, 1998 will not be permitted to participate (attend class, take
exams, or receive credit)._

COURSE SYLLABUS  
  
_Rationale_

The restrictions of the classroom and school building often restrict the
learning/teaching environment. The more students are involved with the
learning process, and the more each student is involved with learning, the
greater the learning outcome. Because of the rapid growth of technology, it is
important for the student to be sensitive to the environment and to become
actively involved with the learning process. This is a Phase V ("Learning to
Study Teaching") course that is designed around the foregoing information. It
is a requirement in the Master's level option in Outdoor Education.

In addition to the Program Studies Competencies cited below, the following
Beginning Teacher Competencies are extended into the next level: A
(Communication), C (Planning and Instruction), E (Lifelong Learning), G
(Decision-Making), N (Resources), P (Structure Subject Matter), and Q
(Specialty Area Knowledge).  
_  
Course Objectives_

1\. The student or prospective teacher will:  
  
A. Experience a multi-sensory approach to learning and teaching.  
B. Design curricular-enrichment activities based upon one's specific
curriculum.  
C. Utilize the extended environment beyond the school classroom in curricular
design and the teaching/learning process.  
D. Develop an appreciation of natural and human-made environment as an
integral part of the teaching/learning process.  
E. Analyze the teaching/learning process to determine the decision one must
make to enhance learning.

2\. Other objectives specific to this course are that students will:  
A. Investigate several models for applying outdoor education to the school
curriculum.  
B. Analyze procedures for applying outdoor education to their own curriculum.  
C. Analyze processes for using the environment as a process for curriculum
development.  
D. Investigate environmental awareness activities which may be used as a means
of curriculum development.  
_  
Course Outline_

I. Outdoor Education; Meaning, Application and Implications  
A. Education as process.  
B. Awareness, sensitivity, re-action, action.  
C. Models for Outdoor Education (McHarg, Samples, Dewey, Hammerman).  
D. Curriculum extension and enrichment.  
E. The school yard as a learning resource.

II. The Application of Outdoor Education to the Teaching of Mathematics  
A. Using standard measuring instruments with natural objects and application
to the natural environment.  
B. Developing capacities to estimate distance, time, quantity, space. etc.  
C. Applying mathematical skills to practical experiences in the outdoors.  
D. Perceiving mathematical concepts in nature, such as geometric shapes and
patterns, environmental relationships, topography, and astronomy.

III. The Application of Outdoor Education to the Teaching of Science  
A. Natural sciences  
1\. Common plant and animal study in the natural environment  
2\. Understanding interrelationships of plants and animal life in various
environments  
3\. Understanding conservation needs  
4\. Uses of plants and animals  
  
B. Earth science  
1\. Land characteristics as they relate to plants, animals, and water  
2\. Soil formation and characteristics  
3\. Natural phenomenon  
  
C. Scientific techniques  
1\. Observation  
2\. Predicting  
3\. Hypothesizing  
4\. Collecting and recording data  
5\. Measuring and evaluating  
6\. Recording techniques  
7\. Theorizing  
IV. Application of Outdoor Education to the Teaching of Social Studies  
A. Understanding the social sciences through personal involvement.  
B. Investigation skills for studying institutions in the community.  
C. Group interaction in a natural setting.  
D. Projects and concepts for the study of history and geography.

V. Application of Outdoor Education to the Teaching of Health and Physical
Education  
A. Healthful living in the natural environment.  
1\. The development of positive personal health habits through experience  
2\. Safety habits in the out-of-doors  
3\. Involvement with experiences for wholesome mental health habits  
4\. Community and environmental health concerns  
  
B. Physical activity indigenous to a natural setting  
1\. Aquatic activities  
2\. Fundamental survival skills  
3\. Physical fitness in the natural environment  
4\. Worthy use of leisure time activities  
5\. Survival skills  
  
VI. Application of Outdoor Education to the Teaching of Language Arts  
A. Using native materials for creative expression  
B. Developing utilitarian and decorative crafts employing natural objects  
C. Developing awareness and sensitivity to the natural environment through
manipulative skills in an outdoor setting  
D. Preserving or duplicating nature for classroom study  
E. Natural dyes in the environment

VII. Application of Outdoor Education to the Teaching of Language Arts  
A. Developing self-expression in the natural environment  
B. Multi-sensory involvement through nature  
C. Appreciation of nature's expression through personal involvement  
D. The use of the outdoor settings in teaching the creative use of language
through written and oral expression  
E. Appreciation of the natural environment through reading and the study of
prose and poetry.

  
  

_Student Activities/Instructional Strategies_

1\. Lecture  
2\. Discussion  
3\. Active Participation  
4\. Project Design  
5\. Curriculum Application  
6\. Readings  
  
_Course Requirements_

1\. The required text is: _Experience and the Curriculum_ , edited by Horwood.  
The recommended Text is: _The Theory of Experiential Education_ , edited by
Warren, Sakofs, and Hunt.

2\. Active participation by students in curricular activities and discussion.  
  
3\. Writing assignments ( **three** ) related 1.) Pioneers in the field, 2.)
The work of cutting edge professionals, or 3.) Curricular lessons and units
which apply outdoor education to the current curriculum.  
  
4\. Design of a curriculum application model.  
  
5\. Project ( **research paper and presentation** ) related to the application
of outdoor education to the school curriculum.  
  
Read at least one book of choice regarding outdoor education. Can be
coonsidered part of writing assignment, curriculum model, or class project.  
  
Small group history project.  
  
8\. The grading scheme is:  
  
A. _Undergraduates_ :  
1\. Active Participation 200  
2\. Writing assignments 300  
3\. Curriculum application model 100  
4\. Final exam 100  
5\. Small group history project 50  
**Possible points** **750**

B. _Graduates_ :  
1\. Active participation 100  
2\. Writing assignments 150  
3\. Curriculum application model 150  
4\. Presentation of project 200  
5\. Small group history project 50  
6\. Final exam 100  
**Possible points** **750**

_Grading scale_

A = 690-750 C+ = 575-599  
A- = 675-689 C = 541-574  
B+ = 650-674 C- = 525-540  
B = 616-649 D+ = 500-524  
B- = 600-615 D = 466-499  
D- = 450-465

9\. The course has 20 CBE hours as an experience component.

10\. The above information is subject to change.

11\. Office hours are by appointment.

_Bibliography_

_Books  
_  
Adolph, J.,  & McKnight, R. (1987). _Outdoor education: Nature_.  
Stevensville, MI: Educational Service, Inc.  
Brainherd, J. (1986). _The natural observer's handbook: Learning_  
_to appreciate our natural world_. Connecticut: The Globe Pequot Press.  
  
Branford, J.,  & Stein, B. (1984). _The IDEAL problem solver_. New  
York, NY: Freeman.

Briceno, S.,  & Pitt, D. (Eds.). (1988). _New ideas in environmental_  
_education_. Dover, NH: Croom Helm.  
  
Cantor, Jeffrey A. (1995). _Cooperative education and experiential learning:
forming community-technical college and business partnerships/Jeffrey A.
Cantor._ Toronto: Wall  & Emerson, c1995

Cantor, Jeffrey A. (1997). _Experiential learning in higher education :
linking classroom and community._ Washington, DC : ERIC Clearinghouse on
Higher Education, 1997.

Cornell, J. (1979). _Sharing nature with children_. CA: Ananda  
Publications.  
  
Debruin, J. (1989). _Schoolyard-backyard cycles of science_.  
Carthage, IL: Good Apple, Inc.  
  
Earth Works Groups, The. (1989). _50 simple things you can do to save_ _the
earth_. Berkeley, CA: Earthworks Press.  
  
Evans, Norman (1994). _Experiential learning for all._ London; New York:
Cassell, 1994.

Gutloff, Karen, ED, (1995). _Beyond textbooks: hands-on learning._ West Haven,
Conn. : NEA Professional Library, c1995

Hopkins, Richard L., (1994). _Narrative schooling : experiential learning and
the transformation of American education._ New York : Teachers College Press,
c1994.

Humphrey, James Harry, (1990). _Mathematics can be child's play._ Springfield,
Ill. : Charles C. Thomas, c1990

Jackson, Lewis, Caffarella, Rosemary S. ED (1994). _Experiential learning: a
new approach_. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, c1994  
  
Johnson, J. (1988). _Sidewalk field trips_. Grand Rapids, MI:  
Instructional Fair, Inc.  
  
Johns, F., Liske, K.,  & Evans, A. (1986). _Education goes outdoors._  
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.  
  
Markle, S. (1988). _Science mini-mysteries_. New York: MacMillan.

Miller, G., Jr. (1985). _Living in the environment_ (4th ed.).  
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing Company.

O'Connor, M.,  & McGlauflin, K. (1987). _Living lightly in the city_.  
Milwaukee: Schlitz Audubon Center.  
  
Reed, Edward, (1996). _The necessity of experience._ New Haven : Yale
University Press, c 1996.

Varela, Francisco J. (1991). _The embodied mind : cognitive science and human
experience._ Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press, c1991

Vivian, V. (1986). _Focus on environmental education: A guide to_  
_help educators relate the environment to the elementary and middle school
curriculum_. Glassboro, NJ: Curriculum Development Council.  
  
Weitzman, D. (1975). _My backyard history book_. Toronto: Little,  
Brown and Company.  
  
_Articles_

Albers, D. (1988). Create a Sense-ation. _Science and Children_.  
26(3).  
  
Chenery, M.,  & Hammerman, W. (1984). Current practice in the  
evaluation of resident outdoor education programs; Report of a national
survey. _Journal of Environmental Education_ , _16_ (2), 35-42.  
Crompton, J., & Sellar, C. (1981). Do outdoor education experiences  
contribute to positive development in the affective domain? _Journal of
Environmental Education_ , _12_ (4), 21-29.  
  
Disinger, J. (1988). Environmental education research news.  
_Environmentalist_ , 8(2), 83-86.  
  
Foster, S. (1989). Streetwide science. _School Science Review._  
70(254), 15-17.  
  
Lucas, A. (1980/81). The role of science education in education for  
the environment. _Journal of Environmental Education_. _12_ (2), 33-36.  
  
Ham, S., Rellergert-Taylor, M., & Krumpe E. (1987). Reducing  
barriers to environmental education. _Journal of Environmental Education,_
_19_ (2), 25-33.  
  
Ham, S., & Sewing, D. (1987). Barriers to environmental Education.  
_Journal of Environmental Education_ , _19_ (2), 17-24.  
  
Harvey, W. (1988/90). The relationship between children's  
experiences with vegetation on school grounds and their environmental
attitudes. _Journal of Environmental Education._ _12_ (2), 9-15.  
  
Hawes, D. (1978). Satisfactions derived from leisure-time pursuits: An
exploratory nationwide survey. _Journal of Leisure Research_ , _10_ (4),
247-264.  
  
Hungerford, H., & Volk, T. (1990). Changing learner behavior through
environmental education. _Journal of Environmental Education._ _21_ (3), 8-21.  
  
Iozzi, L. (1989). What research says to the educator--Part one:  
Environmental education and the affective domain. _Journal of Environmental
Education_ , _20_ (3), 3-9.  
  
Iozzi, L. (1989). What research says to the educator--Part two:  
Environmental education and the affective domain. _Journal of Environmental
Education_ , _20_ (4), 6-13.  
  
Knapp, C. (1989). Humanizing outdoor education--Exploring the  
affective domain. _Journal of Physical Education, Recreation, and Dance_ ,
_60_ (2), 40-43.  
  
Lambert, M., Segger, J., Staley, J., Spencer, B., & Nelson, D.  
(1978). Reported self-concept and self-actualizing value changes as a function
of academic classes with wilderness experience. _Perceptual and Motor Skills_
, _46_ , 1035-1040.  
Simpson, K. (1989). A survey concerning teachers' perceptions of  
of the importance of science related social issues (SRSI). _Journal of
Environmental Education_. _21_ (1), 31-37.  
  
Vanden, H., & Bessel, J. (1987/88). Teachers as interpreters.  
_Outdoor Communicator_ , 22, 23-26.  
  
Vincent, R., & Wray, J. (1988). Safety VIII: Safety in  
out-of-school science. _School Science Review_ , _69_ (250), 55-59.

