**PHILOSOPHY 303                   SYLLABUS
Eiichi Shimomisse**

Spr, 2000
Office: 243-3959

Class Meetings: TTh 5:30~6:45 p.m.
Dept.:  243-3328-9

Office: H&FA B-322
Home: 519-0321

Office Hours:
Fax:     519-0671

TTh 9:30-10:00 a.m., 11:30a.m.-1:00, 2:30- 4:00p.m. & 7:00~7:30
& by appointment  

eshimomisse@home.com
www.csudh.edu/phenom_studies/  

** **

**FROM DESCARTES TO KANT**

**HISTORY OF CONTEMPORARY WESTERN** **PHILOSOPHY**



This course may fulfill one of the three history course-requirements of
Western Philosophy (PHI 301, 303, and 304) for Philosophy Majors and serving
as fulfilling an elective upper division course requirement for Philosophy
Minors. They are designed to give the student a solid knowledge as the
background necessary to further his/her own philosophical inquiry as well as
to comprehensively understand the _nature_ of the Western Philosophy with
respect to its _problems_ and _methods_ through its _historical development_..

           

It is highly advisable that the student has taken PHI 250: Introduction to
Philosophy. It is also highly advisable to have taken PHI 301 before
attempting to take this course, although none of these courses is pre-
requisite to PHI 303.

           

The course PHI 301 covers the birth and historical development of Greek
Philosophy in the cultural perspective from the Ionian Philosophies (in
distinction from the mythological thoughts-- _mythos kai logos_ --) through
the Pre-Socratic Philosophies to the Athenian Philosophies, Sophists,
Socrates, Plato and Aristotle. In the Ancient Philosophy, as well known to the
student of philosophy, basic philosophical questions were asked primarily
about the "way of being" in order to provide valid foundation for pursuing
knowledge and knowledge itself. **** It was considered that the way of being
determines the way of knowing. The questions in epistemology was asked by
Plato in confrontation with the Sophist's contention that there be no
knowledge universally valid, but that it is merely relative. Aristotle
discussed the questions about knowledge only in relation to his discussion
bout the Mind.

            T

he Medieval philosophy was for 1,000 year in the Dark Ages to philosophy, as
such a characterization as _Ancilla Theologiae_ needlessly indicates. The
intellectuals were rather sick and tired of the Medieval Latin and the
scholastic philosophy in the 13th and the 14th centuries. The intellectual
curiosity which had long been suppressed by the authority of church started to
looking for a new, totally different ground for and a new method in the
pursuit of knowledge. Knowledge was subjugated to theology and was kept only
among the clergies.



In the _two_ fronts, Renaissance was brought out.

On the one hand, the intellectuals of the time (instead of the pursuit of
education by the Bibles for training clergies) were awakened to the new,
alternative urge to discover the educational ideal of being human. they
started to discover the Latin texts of the Ancient Romans which was different
from and free from corruption from the Medieval Latin. It became the
educational "must" among the intellectual youth to be able to not only read
the Ancient texts, but also freely  cite a great many phrases from Cicero,
Epictetus, Seneca, Marcus Aurelius Antonius, etc. The enormous intellectual
movement to return the educational ideal of the Ancient Greece and Rome.

           

On the other, the wonder for and the pursuit of the knowledge for its own sake
could no longer be repressed by the church against the unsatiable desire and
curiosity of what really is. This demanded a new methodology or the
methodological revolution in understanding what knowledge is all about.



This return to the Ancient educational ideal ("paideia") and the new urge for
the pursuit of knowledge brought the focus of our intellectual attention from
God and Church to the human-being itself.



The Revolution in the understanding of the nature of reality and that of
knowledge, in arts, music, literature and almost all the aspects of the human
activities started right here during this period. This is called the
Renaissance.

           

As knowledge was keenly perceived as a strong power not only for its own sake,
but also for its instrumentality and usefulness, philosophical reflection on
knowledge and its object was stirred up in the intellectual's minds and
further, the theory of knowledge became the central concern of the pursuit of
knowledge. Thus, _Contemporary Western Philosophy_ began to inquire into the
"way of knowing" as the central theme of its philosophical inquiry in order to
determine the way of being in reality, i.e., the basis of all possible
knowledge (epistemology) is the basis for the ontology or metaphysics, what
reality is.



"How do we know reality?" ("What is the nature of knowledge?" "What kinds of
knowledge does provide the actual picture of reality?") "What is the ultimate
foundation of truth and knowledge?" "What are the criteria of truth (thus
knowledge)?" These questions were asked by philosophers and scientists alike.
Therefore, the History of the Contemporary Western philosophy began with the
Renaissance and is supposed to have ended with Immanuel Kant and his Critical
Philosophy.

           

This course aims at having students understand the new beginning of
Contemporary Philosophy (the Renaissance after in its new problems, new
methods and new paradigms, and how various approaches to the theory of
knowledge and ontologies which derive from respective epistemologies have
historically developed through many critical appraisals of the predecessors
and ourselves. Humanism (Petrarca and Valla for example) represents the so-
called reproductive Renaissance in philosophy. There were also new revival of
Plato's philosophy centered around Florence and its Academy (Ficino was the
founder). Around Padva and Venice (centering the university of Padva),
Aristotelianism was revived both in the tradition of the Arabic philosophy and
separately in the discussions of the nature of the soul. Their endeavors were
to revive the philosophy of Aristotle without the preconception about
Aristotle's Scholastic interpretation.

           

The genius of the productive Renaissance may be found (long before Bacon,
Galileo and Machiavelli, etc.) in the philosophy of Nicolaus of Cues (from
Berkastel Kues on Mosel, later very close to the then Pope as a Cardinal.) or
Nicolaus Cusanus. He found the ultimate truth in _docta ignorantia_ (learned
ignorance -- long reference back to Socrates) through the _concordantia
oppositorum_ (the identity or concordance of the opposites).Nicolaus Cusanus
was aware of the earth being a sphere and did possess a model of the globe.
Reviving and newly-introducing the positive no of knowing (by intellect) than
the way of rational knowledge (by understanding), the former of which appears
ignorance to the reason and yet is capable of grasping the absolute God as the
Infinite of the opposites in the finite world according to reason, while the
latter (reason) is discursive, is concerned about the distinctions and is not
capable of comprehending the infinite God.

           

For the 16th Century Philosophy, we shall study mainly Bacon, Montaigne,
Galileo and Hobbes. They and their contemporary philosophers and scientists
prepared for the basic characteristics of Contemporary Philosophy, i.e., to
return to experience to know nature (=induction), and to model valid knowledge
after mathematical truth (=deduction and mathematization of knowledge of
nature), the latter of which will have more deciding impact on the further
development of Western Philosophy, Natural Sciences and Technologies.

           

Rene Descartes distinguishes himself as considered the founder and father of
Contemporary Philosophy 1) in his method of universal doubt, 2) in his search
for the ultimate foundation of knowledge and sciences ( _mathesis universalis_
) and 3) in a mathematical manner in the thinking (As Hegel properly stated in
his _Philosophy of History --_Descartes is the Father is the European
contemporary philosophy, as long as he made our consciousness _(das
Denken=cogitare)_ as the principle of philosophy --), his specification of the
criteria of truth ( _idea clara et distincta_ ), the dualistic understanding
of being of the world, mind ( _mens_ , including God) and matter ( _res_ ).
Although epistemologically consciousness (res cogitans) is prior to and is the
ultimately basis of matter or thing (res extensa), consciousness and matter
cannot reduce themselves to each other ontologically. While matter's act of
being is to extend, consciousness' or spirit's act of being is to think
(=cogitare, being conscious of...). Thus, the self as the agent of acts of
thinking was viewed as the best, most clearly and distinctly, known, on the
foundation of which everything else is to be demonstrated for its truth and
reality. Descartes was an excellent mathematician (invented the analytic
geometry) and not only understood Galileo premiss (nature is described by
_mathematical_ language), but also the then most advanced theory of astronomy,
although Descartes destroyed his _magnum opus on Nature_ and never published
it.

           

Also as a great mathematician (the founder of the theory of probability) and
religious philosopher (the author of P _ens ees_) Braise Pascal, having died
too young, revealed himself as the best student of Descartes in many ways and
yet at the same time showed a greatest sensitivity to the nature of human
nature of its faculties and saw the limits of reason (=understanding) and
advocated the _truth and knowledge by the heart_ (la verite et la connaissance
du ceour) alternative and superior to the knowledge of reason or
understanding. Pascal may be considered the first great thinker and advocate
of the anti-rational philosophy in the Contemporary Western philosophy.

           

So-called Continental Rationalists Malebranche, Spinoza, and Leibniz followed
Descartes in order to (in their respective mind) correct the faults and
shortcoming of the Cartesian philosophy. They all maintained the position that
they held reason as the priority and principle of philosophy.



Among them, Leibniz distinguished himself far above the others in two basic
aspects. Leibniz was the founder of the differential calculus and possessed
enormous foresights in mathematics and philosophy. Leibniz possesses the honor
of being the first Western philosopher who read and was influenced by the
Chinese philosophy by Chu-shi.

           

British Empiricism, also influenced by Descartes, developed its thoughts
through Locke, Berkeley, and Hume, from their own tradition of Occam, Bacon
and Hobbes. Although the immediacy and indubitability of consciousness and its
objects (idea), they held that all the ideas originate from our sensory
experience. For they genetically assumed as self evident that our mind at our
birth is a blank tablet (tabula rasa). In order to find a more and more
logical consistent position, Locke's philosophy was lead to Berkeley's
idealism and further to Hume' s skepticism.

           

Immanuel Kant, a son of a saddle-maker at Konigsberg (East Prussia) with
enormous will for self determination and unlimited confidence in the ability
of Reason, as the most sophisticated, articulate, and demanding philosopher of
all the above, to synthesize both Continental Rationalism and British
empiricism by recognizing the two mutually independent sources of knowledge,
Reason and Sense experience. By _critically_ reflecting on the _conditions of
the possibility of knowledge_ , Kant adopted the _sources_ and _limits_ of
knowledge from British Empiricism on the one hand and on the other he kept the
rigorous _requirement of the validity_ of knowledge of Continental
Rationalism. However, his ultimate desire as a philosopher was to make sure
that natural sciences, Newtonian physics in particular, are valid systems of
knowledge, while ethics is to have the objective and necessary basis of its
moral command.

           

The triumph of Western Reason does not come to an end until the beginning of
the 19th Century. The course PHI 404 deals with the process in which the
Western philosophy started searching the principle of philosophy other than
the reason from Fichte through Schelling to Hegel (and the Hegelians including
Marx) and at the same time began questioning itself in the Late Schelling,
Schopenhauer, Feuerbach and European Nihilism of the late 19th Century to the
point where the Western Philosophy critically confronted itself in
Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Dostoyevsky. This process of Western Philosophy
prepared itself for the rise of Western Modernism, which was followed by
Postmodern Philosophy.



The outcome of students' learning from this course may be evaluated how
articulately and appropriately they understand the development of the Western
Contemporary philosophy by the end of the Semester. Particularly they are
explicitly aware of the methods, the problems and the solutions of the major
philosophical thoughts at the turning points, Renaissance, Descartes, Leibniz,
Locke, Rousseau and Kant.



**_ _**

**_REQUIREMENTS_** :



1\. _Full attendance_ , i.e., with three officially excused absences allowed.
An unexcused absence may result in the Final Grade "F." Call me at my office
and leave your message in voice mail, when you ought to miss the class.

2. _Preparation for the assigned reading for every class meeting_ as well as some outside readings.

3\. One must make it a habit to restudy at the weekend the previous week's
contents of the two class meetings.

4\. To take the _Mid Term_ and the _Final Examination_. They consist of two
portion, 25 multiple questions (25%) and an essay (75%).

5\. To write and make at least one class report. For the subject and time,
consult with the instructor.



**6\. Please do note the University Catalog 's statements on academic
Integrity and _Plagiarism_ (cheating by copying someone else 's test or other
materials than your own). **

  __

**_METHOD OF EVALUATION_** :



l. Midterm Exam weighs _30%_.Both Essay and Multiple Choices together

2\. Final Exam weighs _40%_. Both Essay and Multiple Choices together

3. _Preparation for the assigned readings_ weighs _30%_. 



**OUTCOME ASSESSMENTS**

** **

1\. The knowledge of the historical facts retained at the end of the semester,
which is ascertained as  at least  70% or higher points of the average of the
multiple-choice Mid Term and Final Examinations.

2\. A well understanding of the major currents of the philosophical methods
and questions, which will be tested at the final examination.

3\. The Final Paper should reveal the student's explicit awareness of the
method and the basic problem of a certain philosopher of the given period.



**_ _**

**_ _**

**_SCHEDULE_**



1st W  Introduction: Western Philosophy and its Place in Renaissance

Philosophies/Galileo & Machiavelli

2rd       Bacon & Montaigne  

3th       Hobbes & Descartes  

4th       Descartes  

5th       Descartes  

6th       Pascal & Malebranche  

7th       Spinoza  

**Mid Term Examination**  

8th       Leibniz  

9th       Leibniz

10th     Locke  

11th     Berkeley  

12th     Hume

13th     Kant  

14th     Kant

15th     Kant  

16th     Kant  

**Final Examination***

* See the Final Time in your Schedule.       

  Final Examination is not accumulative.                            ****

** **

**_TEXTBOOKS_**



1. _The Rationalists_ : Rene Descartes, Benedict de Spinoza and Gottfried Wilhelm Freiherr von Leibniz, Doubleday Anchor Books, N.Y.

2\. _The Empiricists_ : John Locke, George Berkeley and David Hume, Doubleday
Anchor Books, N. Y.

3\. Kant, _Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics_ , ed.by L. W. Beck, Bobbs-
Merrill

4\. My lecture notes shall be available at my Website or the Library's
Reserved Shelves.

**_ _**

**_A SHORT BIBLIOGRAPHY_**



1\. Bacon, F., _Novum Organum_

2\. Descartes, R., _Meditationes de prima philosophia_

3\. Descartes, R., _Discours de la m ethode_

3\. Descartes, R., _Regulae_

4\. Spinoza, B., _Ethica_

5\. Leibniz, G. W., _Monadologie_

6\. Leibniz, G. W., _Discours de la metaphysique_

7\. Pascal, B., _Pens ees_

8\. Hobbes, T., _Leviathan_

9\. Locke, J., _An Essay concerning the Human Understanding_

10\. Locke, J., _Two Treatises on Government_

11\. Berkeley, G., _A Treatise concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge_

12\. Berkeley, G., _Three Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous_

13\. Hume, D., _An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding_

14\. Hume, D., _Dialogues concerning Natural Religion_

15\. Kant, I., _Kritik der reinen Vernunft_

16\. Kant, I., _Kritik der praktischen Vernunft_

17\. Kant, I., _Grundlegung der Metaphysik der Sitten_

18\. Kant, I., _Kritik der Urteilskraft_

19\. Copleston, F., _History of Western Philosophy_ vol. 3, 4, 5  & 6, Image
Books, N. Y.

