12.22.99

COURSE OUTLINE

History, Theory, Methodology of Architectural History

Arch558/AH591: Seminar in 20th c. Architecture  
Winter Quarter 2000  
Wed. 9-11:50am  
Rm 317, Gould Hall  
Office hours: Wed. 1:30-3:30, rm 222, Art Bldg, or by appt.  
tel: 543-0935  
home page:
[http://faculty.washington.edu/mlc](http://faculty.washington.edu/mlc)  
email: [mlc@u.washington.edu](mailto:mlc@u.washington.edu)



_Aim of course:_ to familiarize advanced students in architecture and
architectural history with the basic figures and texts in the history and
historiography of modern architecture.

_Approach:_ weekly meetings, with discussion based on student analyses of
required readings.

_Requirements_ : weekly 5-7 pg. critical summaries and analyses of the weekly
reading; for graduate students and those taking the course for 5 rather than 3
credits, a final 10-15 pg research paper.

_Text:_

Tournikiotis, Panayotis. _The Historiography of Modern Architecture_ , MIT
Press, 1999.



_Reserve book list:_

Allsopp, Bruce. _The Study of Architectural History_ , 1970.

Banham, Reyner. _Theory and Design in the First Machine Age_ , 1960.

Benevolo, Leonardo. _History of Modern Architecture_ , 1971 (orig. published
in Italian, 1960)

Collins, Peter. _Changing Ideals of Modern Architecture, 1750-1950_ , London,
1965.

Giedion, Sigfried. _Space, Time and Architecture_ , 1941. 5th ed. rev & exp,
1967.

Hitchcock, Henry-Russell. _Architecture: Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries_ ,
1958, rev. 1977.

Hitchcock and Johnson, _The International Style: Architecture Since 1922_ ,
1932, reprinted 1966.

Kaufman, Emile. _Architecture in the Age of Reason: Baroque and Post-Baroque _
, 1955.

Kostof, Spiro. _A History of Architecture_ , 2nd ed., 1995

Pevsner, Nikolas. _Pioneers of the Modern Movement_ , 1936, 3rd ed rev & exp,
1960.

Tafuri, Manfredo. _Theories and History of Architecture_ , 1979 (orig.
published in Italian, 1968).

Tournikiotis, Panayotis. _The Historiography of Modern Architecture_ , MIT
Press, 1999

Trachenberg and Hyman. _History of Architecture_

Upton, Dell. _Architecture in the United States_ , 1998

Watkins, David. _The Rise of Architectural History_ , 1980

Whiffen, Marcus. _The History Theory and Criticism of Architecture_ , MIT
Press, 1965.

Zevi, Bruno. _The Modern Language of Architecture_ , 1978.



_Articles_ (to be selected)

Frampton, Kenneth. "Towards a Critical Regionalism," in Foster, Hal (ed), _The
Anti-Aesthetic. Essays on_

_PostModern Culture_ , 1983

Giedion, "History and the Architect," in _Architecture. You and Me_.

Huxtable, Ada Louise. "The Gospel According to Giedion and Gropius is Under
Attack," _NYT_ , 27june76, II, p.1.

Jacobus, John. [on Peter Collins as an architectural historian],
_Architectural Record_ , March 1967.

Kostof, Spiro. "Architecture, You and Him: The Mark of Sigfried Giedion,"
_Daedalus_ , v. 105, #1, 1976, 189-204.

Kostof, Spiro. "Macmillan Encyclopedia of Architects" [bk review], _Design
Book Review_ , summer 1983.

Kostof, Spiro. [on arch.history methodology], _JSAH_ , 1967

Kostof, "Introduction," _A History of Architecture_ [his methodological
approach]

Ksiazek, Sarah Williams. "Mark Wigley, _White Walls, Designer Dresses: The
Fashioning of Modern Architeture,_ "

[book review], _Design Book Review_ , Summer 1983 [on theory & its problems.
EXCELLENT]

Scott Brown, Denise. "The Teaching of Architectural History," _Arts +
Architecture_ , 1967, p. 30.

Trachenberg, M.. "On Recent Architectural History," _Art Bulletin_ , December
1988, 208-241.

Upton, Dell. "Architectural History or Landscape History, _JAE_ , Aug. 1991.

Zevi, Bruno. "History as a Method of Teaching Architecture," in _The History,
Theory and Criticism of Architecture_ ,

Papers frm the 1964 AIA-ACSA Teaching Seminar, Cranbrook, Marcus Whiffen (ed),
1965.





_General Bibliography_ (open to supplementation):

Arato, Andrew and Gebhardt, Eike. _The Essential Frankfurt School_ ,1998
(collected essays by Adorno, Walter

Benjamin, Herbert Marcuse, etc.; basically, literary theory)

Attoe, Wayne and Moore, Charles W. (guest editors), "How Not to Teach
Architectural History," _JAE (Journal of Architectural Education)_ , v. XXXIV,
#1, fall 1980 (includes essays by Claus Seligmann, Walter Creese, Tzonis &
Lefaivre, etc.)

Burke, Peter (ed). _New Perspectives on Historical Writing_ , 1991
(revisionist hstory)

Colquhoun, Alan. _Essays in Architectural Criticism. Modern Architecture &
Historical Change_, 1981

Colquhoun, Alan. _Modernity and the Classical Tradition_ , 1989 (essays on
classicism)

Davies, Norman. _Europe. A History_ , Introduction, pp. 1-46, 1996
(methodology)

Hall, Edward T. _The Hidden Dimension_ , 1966

Hall, Edward T. _The Silent Language_ , 1959

Jenkins, Keith. _Rethinking History_ , 1991 (revisionist history)

Leach, Neil. _Rethinking Architecture_ , 1997 (theory)

LeCorbusier, _Towards a New Architecture_ , 1927 (reprinted 1960)

Norberg-Schultz, Christian. _Genius Loci. Towards a Phenomenology of
Architecture_ , 1979

_Oppositions_ , Winter 1976:7 (on typology, and other theoretical issues)

Pommer, Richard (ed). "Revising Modernist History," _Art Journal_ , Summer
1983 (on the architecture of the '20s)

Porphyrios, Demetri (ed), _On the Methodology of Architectural History_ ,
Architectural Design Profile, London, 1981

(includes essays by Gombrich, Rykwert, Kostof, Colquhoun, Frampton, Forster,
Tafuri and others. _Meaty_ ).

Rowe, Colin. _The Mathematics of the Ideal Villa and Other Essays_ , 1976.

Rowe, _The Architecture of Good Intentions_ , 1994

Rowe, _As I Was Saying_ , 1996

Rykwert, Joseph. _The Dancing Column. On Order in Architecture_ , 1996 (legacy
of classicism)

Said, Edward. _Orientalism_ , 1978

Scott, Geoffrey. _The Architecture of Humanism. A Study in the History of
Taste_ , 1914 (reprinted 1969)

Summerson, John. _The Classical Language of Architecture_ , 1963 (later
reprinted)

Tafuri, M. _Theories and History of Architecture_ , 1976

Tafuri, M. _Architecture and Utopia. Design and Capitalist Development_ , 1976

Venturi, Robert. _Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture_ , MoMA, NY,
1966

Venturi, Scott Brown, Izenour, _Learning from Las Vegas_ , 1977

Watkin, David. _Morality & Architecture. The Development of a Theme in
Architectural History and Theory from_

_the Gothic Revival to the Modern Movement_ , 1977.

Watkin, David. _The Rise of Architectural History_ , 1980.

Williams, Patrick & Chrisman, Laura. _Colonial Discourse & Post-Colonial
Theory_,1994 (collected essays in post-colonial theory)

Zevi, Bruno. _Architecture as Space_ , 1957



_Guest discussants:_

Alex Anderson (classicism and its legacy)

Vikram Prakash (colonial discourse, and post-colonial theory)

Claus Seligman (Giedion, Upton, and arch.history methodology)

_ _

_Participants_ (tentative)

Marvin Anderson (arch.hist)

Douglas Paul Coover (arch.)

Paul Davis (arch., audit)

Jennifer Dee ( arch/arch.hist)

Christa Lynn Fairbrother (arch.)

Victoria Halligan (arch.)

Eun-Boo Kim (arch.hist)

Patrick Nopp (arch/landscape arch., audit)

Shuishan Yu (arch.hist.)









**Syllabus** (rough outline, with subjects subject to change)



Jan. 5 - Introduction: aims of course, syllabus, readings; papers; guest
lecturers.

12 - The Pioneers: Pevsner, Kaufmann, Giedion; Zevi

_Required reading:_ Tournikiotis, Preface, chapts 1 & 2

_ _

_Suggested background:_

Pevsner, _Pioneers of Modern Architecture_

Kaufmann, _Architecture in the Age of Reason_

Giedion, _Space Time and Architecture_

Zevi, _History of Modern Architecture_ ,

_Architecture as Space_

_The Modern_ _Language of Architecture_

_Towards an Organic Architecture_

19 - Benevolo; Hitchcock

_Required:_ Tournikiotis, chapts 3 & 4

_Suggested background:_

Hitchcock, _Modern Architecture. Romanticism & Reintegration_, 1929

Hitchcock and Johnson (Philip), _The International Style: Architecture Since
1922_ , MoMA, NY, 1932

Hitchcock, _Architecture: Nineteenth & Twentieth Centuriess_, 1958

Geoffrey Scott, _The Architecture of Humanism_ , 1914; revised ed. 1924



26 - Historiography in the '60s: Reyner Banham; Peter Collins

_Required:_ Tournikiotis, chapts 5 & 6

_Suggested background:_

Banham, _Theory and Design in the First Machine Age_ , 1960

Peter Collins, _Changing Ideals in Modern Architecture, 1750-1950_ , 1965





Feb. 2 - Manfredo Tafuri; Wittkower, Colin Rowe and others

_Required:_ Tournikiotis, chapts 7 & 8

_Suggested background:_

Tafuri, Manfri. _Theories and History of Architecture_ , 1979

Wittkower, Rudolf. _Architectural Principles in the Age of Humanism_ , 1948





9 - Revisionist views, and What's Wrong With Architectural History: Claus
Seligmann

_Required:_

Upton, Dell. "Architectural History or Landscape History," _JAE_ , August 1991

Kostof, Spiro. _A History of Architecture_ , 2nd ed., 1995 (intro)

Trachenberg & Hyman, _Architecture from Prehistory to Post-Modernism_ (intro)

_Suggested:_

Zevi, Bruno. "History as a Method of Teaching Architecture," _in The History,
Theory & Criticism of Architecture, _Papers from the 1964 AIA-ACSA Teaching
Seminar, Cranbrook, Marcus Whiffen (ed), 1965.

Giedion, "History and the Architect," in Giedion, _Architecture You and Me_ ,
1958.

Kostof, "Architecture You and Him: The Mark of Sigfried Giedion," _Daedalus_ ,
v. 105, #1, 1976, 189-204.



16 - The Legacy of Classicism: Alex Anderson

_Required:_

Summerson, John. _The Classical Language of Architecture_ , 1963 (reprinted
for 17th time in 1993)

Colquehoun, Alan. _Modernity & The Classical Tradition_, 1989, pp. vi- 31

_Suggested:_

Rykwert, _The Dancing Column. On Order in Architecture_ , 1996



23 - The Impact of the Frankfurt School, Post-Colonial discourse: Vikram
Prakash

_Required:_

_Suggested:_

Williams, Patrick & Chrisman, Laura. _Colonial Discourse & Post-Colonial
Theory_, 1994 (collected essays in literary theory)

Arato, Andrew & Gebhardt, Eike. _The Essential Frankfurt School_ , 1998
(collected essays)

 Mar. 1 - Student reports on individual research

 Mar. 8 - Student reports (con't)



**Mar. 10 - Final reseach papers due for graduates & others taking the course
for 5 credits**

