**International Students**

**city / state / climate / housing / insurance / employment / financial aid**

**GENERAL INFORMATION**

**THE UNIVERSITY**

The University of Houston-Victoria, founded as an upper-level institution in
1973, is one of four institutions in the University of Houston System. The
primary role of UH-Victoria is to provide upper-level and graduate instruction
in the Coastal Bend region. UHV serves students who have completed two or more
years of college by providing bachelor's degrees, master's degrees and
professional certification programs. Degrees are offered in education,
business administration and specified areas of the arts and sciences. These
programs produce business, education and human service professionals who can
communicate effectively, who have marketable skills and who demonstrate the
appropriate level of mastery in their fields.

UHV is a small university with an enrollment of approximately 1600 students.
It is fully accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools.
Small faculty/student ratios allow for personalized individual attention and
open class interaction. Our faculty work closely with students outside the
classroom through regular office hours and sponsorship of student
organizations and events.

**THE CITY **

Victoria, center of the South Texas Crossroads in the heart of the Golden Gulf
Coast, is an expanding historic city on the banks of the Guadalupe River. More
than 150 years old, it was one of the first three towns chartered by the new
republic when Texas won its independence from Mexico in 1836.

Pioneer charm and high-tech industry mingle in the city of 60,000 inhabitants,
near the Gulf of Mexico. It is a short distance by car to Houston (124 miles),
San Antonio (114 miles) and Austin (122 miles). Victoria is surrounded by vast
expanses of ranch lands held by descendants of early Texas settlers, offering
economic strength as well as cultural interests. Victoria enjoys easy
accessibility to popular entertainment, recreational and cultural sites in
Texas including the beaches of Corpus Christi and South Padre Island.

**THE STATE **

The name "Texas" originated from the native Indians who first settled Texas.
The conquering Spaniards found them so friendly they called them "Tejas," the
Spanish word meaning "friends." Texas was granted statehood in 1845. It's rich
history includes a brief period in which Texas was its own Republic. Six flags
have flown over Texas in its rich history: The Confederate flag, The flag of
the Republic, the Spanish flag, the Mexican flag, the French Flag, the United
States flag.

Texas is the result of the unique convergence of many cultures including
Hispanic, German Czech and Irish. These cultures are celebrated by annual
festivities such as Wurstfest and Fiesta.

State industries include farming, petrochemical processing and plastics
industries.

**CLIMATE **

The weather in Victoria generally is hot and humid in the summer months of
June through August, consistently reaching 90 degrees Fahrenheit (32 degree
centigrade) or higher. Winters are generally mild with temperatures seldom
falling below freezing. Rain is well distributed throughout the year. Light
clothing is recommended for the summer months, and a coat is needed for the
winter months.

**HOUSING **

UH-Victoria does not operate any student housing facilities. Monthly rates for
apartments in Victoria vary from $300-$600 per month. Smaller houses are also
available to rent at similar costs. Information and assistance with housing
needs can be obtained by contacting the Office of Student Relations at UHV.

**INSURANCE **

All international students should be covered by hospitalization insurance. If
the student is not already covered by hospital insurance, a student may join a
plan offered by UHV at student rates. Information on health insurance is
available in the Office of Student Relations.

**EMPLOYMENT **

A non-immigrant student is not permitted to work off campus for a wage or
salary or engage in business while in the United States unless permission to
do so has first been granted by the Immigration and Naturalization Service. A
student who requires employment (1) because of economic necessity due to
unforeseen circumstances arising after admissions, or (2) to obtain practical
training, should contact the Office of Admissions and Records for the proper
procedure to follow. Permission to work off campus may be requested only after
a student has been in the United States for 12 months. The alien spouse or
child accompanying or following to join a non-immigrant student is not
permitted to work in the United States. College Work Study is available on a
very limited basis.

**FINANCIAL AID **

There is limited financial assistance for international students at the
University of Houston-Victoria; however, international students may compete
for university scholarships. Financial assistance is limited and the
university discourages applicants whose financial needs are not met prior to
enrollment.

The granting of financial assistance does not constitute admission. The
applicant must file for admission only through the Office of Admissions and
Records.

General information about awards and scholarships available for study in the
United States may be obtained from the U.S. Embassy or the U.S. Information
Agency (USIA) in the student's country. More specific information may be
obtained by requesting the booklet entitled "A Guide on Admission and
Financial Planning for Students from Other Countries" from:

College Board Publications

Box 886

New York, New York 10101 USA



**THE ACADEMIC YEAR **

The academic year is composed of the fall semester, spring semester and summer
session. The fall semester begins in late August and ends in mid-December. The
spring semester begins in mid-January and ends in May. The summer session
(June through August) is composed of two five week terms with a concurrent
ten-week session. Although some international students attend one or both
summer terms, attendance during the summer terms is not required. During the
year, classes are suspended for several special holidays. There is a break
between the fall and spring semesters beginning in mid-December and ending in
mid-January and there is a one week vacation in the spring.

Credit for courses at the University is measured in semester hours. Most
courses meet three hours a week in the fall and spring semesters and have a
credit value of three hours. These same courses meet for nine hours a week
during the five-week term and yield three semester hours of credit. Most
graduate courses are taught in the evening only.

International students on F-1 visas must maintain a full course of study
during the fall and spring semesters (at least 9 semester hours for graduate
students and 12 semester hours for undergraduate students) to comply with
immigration requirements.

**THE FACULTY **

The faculty of the University of Houston-Victoria are very well grounded in
their respective fields of study. Many of them have authored books and have
been awarded fellowships for further study. Many of our faculty have also
published numerous articles in journals of their field. Our business students
have also prepared marketing projects used by local nonprofit organizations.
The faculty to student ratio at the University of Houston-Victoria is
approximately 18:1. You will be sure to receive the individual attention you
deserve with a ratio this low.

**TRANSPORTATION **

An apartment within walking distance of the University campus is ideal
considering that public transportation is not available. Cab service exists
but is not recommended for daily use as it may become quite expensive. The
city does have one airport that is served by Continental Airlines. Continental
Airlines flies directly to Houston and has no other destinations.

**LETTER OF FINANCIAL BACKING **

The Letter of Financial Backing is evidence that the student will have
sufficient money to cover all expenses (a minimum of $16,969 US available each
year) during enrollment at the University of Houston-Victoria. This letter may
be signed by a parent, relative or sponsor. The form letter is included in
this bulletin. This is not required of permanent residents or immigrants.

**STATEMENT OF UNDERSTANDING **

The Statement of Understanding indicates that the applicant comprehends and
will comply with the statements it contains. The student should read the
statement carefully and also note that any student may be required to take
further English proficiency tests on arrival, even if that student is
transferring from a U.S. institution. The form containing this statement is
included in this bulletin.

**STUDENT EXPENSES **

The cost of living in the United States may be comparatively high. The
University cannot predict what individual expenses will be. Estimated expenses
in the United States may average $1300.00 a month, but students should have at
least $4000.00 upon arrival in Victoria to cover registration fees and initial
living expenses. Annual expenses that may be expected are listed below in U.S.
dollars:

| **Undergraduate** | **Graduate**  
---|---|---  
Room and Board  | $6000.00 | $6000.00  
Tuition and Fees* | $6912.00 | $5760.00  
Books and Supplies  | $457.00 | $457.00  
Miscellaneous Expenses | $3600.00 | $3600.00  
**TOTAL** |  $16,969.00 | $15,817.00  
  
*(Based on 24 semester hours per year for undergraduates and 18 semester hours per year for graduates) 

(Total includes cost for 12 months of living and 2 semesters of study. Summer
school, add $3372.00)

*Private ownership of an automobile is not recommended because of the high cost of purchase, operation and insurance, as well as the additional risk of driving in a foreign country. **Includes recreation, clothing, transportation and personal expenses. 

**TRANSFER OF FUNDS**

Before the student leaves the home country, it is very important to inquire
about the regulations regarding the transfer of funds. In addition to the
expenditures for travel, the student should have at least $4,000.00 (US) upon
arrival in Victoria to meet initial expenses. American Express Traveler's
Cheques are recommended in place of currency. Exchange rates may be obtained
by contacting any banking institution.

**APPLICATIONS **

Admission application forms and catalogs may be obtained by writing the Office
of Admissions and Records, University of Houston-Victoria, 3007 N. Ben Wilson,
Victoria, Texas 77901-4450, USA. **There is no application fee at the
University of Houston-Victoria.**

Applications for admission should be submitted at least six (6) weeks prior to
the first day of classes to ensure time for processing.

An applicant should always write directly to the Office of Admissions and
Records and not try to work through friends or relatives. Each letter and
envelope should bear the name and address of the person writing the letter.
The same names in the same order should be used, and the family name clearly
indicated by underlining it.

The completed application, with supporting documents, constitutes the basis
upon which eligibility for admission is determined. All questions on the
application must be answered fully. Admission is invalid if granted on the
basis of incorrect information or omitted facts which, if known, would have
caused the applicant to be ineligible.

A student must file a new application for a future semester if the student
does not enroll for the semester indicated on the original application.

All graduate education majors must complete a special application, in addition
to the graduate application, to which the deadlines and information for the
graduate application are applicable.

Only the Office of Admissions and Records is authorized to notify the
applicant of acceptance by the University as a student. An applicant should
not interpret any statement made in casual correspondence with any University
faculty member to mean that the applicant has been admitted. No conditional or
temporary admission is ever granted to students from abroad.

**TRANSCRIPTS **

It is the responsibility of the applicant to have complete and official
transcripts and mark sheets mailed from EACH former institution directly to
the Office of Admissions and Records of the University of Houston-Victoria.
Records from one institution carried on a transcript from a second institution
cannot be used for admission purposes.

Transcripts from foreign institutions must be in English and an official
English translation and evaluation by a recognized credential evaluation
service of the transcripts must be included. International transcripts must
include confirmation of the degree/diploma or the credential evaluation
service must include confirmation of the degree/diploma. It is recommended
that a syllabus, catalog or similar bulletin which describes the courses
sufficiently for proper evaluation also be submitted with foreign transcripts.

Any work attempted at another college subsequent to admission to the
University of Houston-Victoria must be submitted whether or not credit was
earned. The student cannot disregard any part of the college record.



**REQUIREMENTS FOR ADMISSION**

**UNDERGRADUATE **

To be eligible for admission to the University of Houston-Victoria, a student
must have earned a minimum of 54 semester hours of college credit from an
accredited institution with a 2.0 (A=4.0) grade point average and must have
passed all parts (reading, writing and mathematics) of the Texas Academic
Skills Program (TASP).

A student also has the option of attending the University with a minimum of 30
semester hours. However, the student must be enrolled at another institution
while they are attending UHV until they have successfully completed 54
semester hours.

In computing grade point averages, only the semester hours and grades earned
on the last enrollment in a repeated course will be used for computation of
the required grade point average for admission.

A student will not be considered for admission if ineligible to return
immediately to any former institution(s).

**GRADUATE **

Admission to a graduate program depends on (1) the applicant's grade point
average on all work attempted, undergraduate and/or graduate, beginning with
the semester during which the first of the 60 most recently earned semester
hours was taken and (2) the score on the General Aptitude Test (verbal and
quantitative sections only) of the GRE (Graduate Record Exam). GMAT (Graduate
Management Aptitude Test) may be substituted for Business majors or MAT
(Miller's Analogy Test) may be substituted for Counseling majors.

In general, the higher an applicant's grade point average, the lower the test
score need be for approval for graduate admission.

To determine an applicant's eligibility for graduate admission, an Admission
Index is computed which combines the grade point average on the last 60
semester hours with the GRE score. The Admission Index is obtained by
computing the formula: (GPA x 200) + the sum of the verbal and quantitative
sections only of the GRE or GMAT x 200 or MAT x18.

To be admitted, applicants must meet at least one of the following standards:

1\. A grade point average of 2.5 or above over the last 60 credit hours
completed and a GRE score of 800 or above (verbal and quantitative sections).
Or GMAT of 400 or MAT of 50.

2\. An admissions index of 1400 or above.  
  
Transcripts become the property of the university and cannot be returned. They
will be kept on file in the Office of Admissions and Records for two years if
the applicant does not enroll.

**SUMMARY OF ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS FOR  **

**INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS**

**Requirements for Undergraduate admission**

1\. A completed application for undergraduate admission, obtainable from the
Office of Admissions and Records.

2\. An official transcript, including mark sheets for each year, from EACH
college attended. Transcripts must be mailed directly from each institution to
the University of Houston-Victoria Office of Admissions and Records, 2506 E.
Red River, Victoria, TX 77901-4450.

Transcripts from foreign institutions must be in English. If the transcripts
are in a foreign language, an official English translation of the transcripts
must be included. Also, a syllabus, catalog or similar bulletin which
describes the courses sufficiently for proper evaluation must be submitted
with foreign transcripts.

3\. TASP scores (reading, writing and mathematics) are to be mailed directly
from the National Evaluation Systems, Inc. to UH-Victoria; or the scores must
appear on an official transcript being sent from a college formerly attended.

4\. An official report of the [ TOEFL](http://www.toefl.org) scores must be
sent directly to the University of Houston-Victoria Office of Admissions and
Records from the Educational Testing Service. Exemptions to [
TOEFL](http://www.toefl.org) are listed under English requirements in this
brochure (page 6).

5\. Letter of Financial Backing (enclosed in this bulletin)

6\. Statement of Understanding (enclosed in this bulletin)

**Deadline: To assure processing, the student's completed application and all
supporting documents should be submitted at least eight weeks prior to the
first class day.**

No final approval or I-20 will be issued unless all of the admission
procedures and requirements are met.

The University of Houston-Victoria is fully accredited by the Southern
Association of Colleges and Schools.  

**REQUIREMENTS FOR GRADUATE ADMISSION**

1\. A completed application for graduate admission.

2\. An official transcript, mark sheets for each year of attendance, and
confirmation of degree or diploma, from EACH college attended. Transcripts
must be mailed directly from each institution or translator to the University
of Houston-Victoria Office of

Admissions and Records at 3007 N. Ben Wilson, Victoria, TX 77901.

3\. Appropriate exam scores must be mailed directly form the Educational
Testing Service to the University of Houston-Victoria. (GRE aptitude scores
[verbal and quantitative sections only] for all majors or GMAT for business
majors and MAT for Counseling

majors may be substituted.)

4\. A divisional application for majors in education. This application may be
obtained by contacting the Office of Admissions and Records at UH-Victoria

5\. An official report of the [ TOEFL](http://www.toefl.org) score sent
directly to the University of Houston-Victoria Office of Admissions and
Records from the Educational Testing Service. Exceptions to TOEFL are listed
under English requirements on page 6 in this brochure.

6\. Letter of Financial Backing (enclosed in this bulletin)

7\. Statement of Understanding (enclosed in this bulletin)

**Deadline: To assure processing, the student's completed application and all
supporting documents should be submitted at least six weeks prior to the first
class day.**

No final approval or I-20 will be issued unless all of the admission
procedures and requirements are met.

The University of Houston-Victoria is fully accredited by the Southern
Association of Colleges and Schools.  

**ENGLISH REQUIREMENT **

**English proficiency:** A valid, official [ TOEFL](http://www.toefl.org)
(Test of English as a Foreign Language) exam score of a minimum of 500 is
required and must be on file before admission will be approved. Photocopies
are not acceptable. You will need to request an official score report be sent
directly to the University of Houston-Victoria. Our school code is 6917.

**Institutional TOEFL:** The [ TOEFL](http://www.toefl.org) exam is
administered on selected dates every year at locations around the world. In
addition to these international TOEFL exams, individual institutions such as
the University of Houston are also authorized to administer the TOEFL exam.
This TOEFL is referred to as an institutional or Satellite TOEFL. It is
essentially the same in content as the international TOEFL exam but may only
be recognized by the institutions that administer them. UHV will recognize
institutional TOEFL exams taken at one of the University of Houston campuses
or other campuses approved by the International Student Admissions and
Policies Committee. Interested applicants should contact the UHV Office of
Admissions and Records.

**500 TOEFL Score Exceptions:** The 500 [ TOEFL](http://www.toefl.org) exam
score may be waived for students if they:

1\. Have completed nine semester hours of lower division English in an
accredited US college or university, three of which must be in composition and
three in literature or

2\. Have earned a bachelor's degree or higher in an accredited U.S. college or
university or

3\. Have completed the equivalent of at least three years of full-time study
at a recognized secondary school, college or university whose primary language
of instruction is English or

4\. Are recommended for academic study by an English Language Institute
recognized by the University of Houston-Victoria, after completing the highest
level of intensive English study.

Under certain conditions applicants who are required to submit TOEFL scores
may be tested again.

**Passports and Visas**

Before leaving the home country, the applicant must obtain a passport from
that government and a visa from the nearest U.S. Embassy or Consulate. If
accepted by the University, the student will be sent a letter of admission and
the appropriate form (I-20) by which a student visa for entry into the United
States may be obtained.

To meet U.S. government regulations, an undergraduate student on the F-1
(student) visa must take at least 12 semester hours of university work for
credit each fall and spring semester. While a graduate student must be
enrolled for at least nine semester hours of credit each fall and spring
semester.

[Letter of Financial Backing For all Nonimmigrant Student
Classifications](backing.htm)

[Statement of Understanding](statement.htm)

[Checklist for International Credentials](list.htm)

[Recommended Translation Evaluation Services](evaluators.htm)

