**University of North Texas,**

**School of Library and Information Sciences**

**SLIS 5630.001**

**_Information & Access Services in Science and Technology_**

**Fall, 1997**

* * *

[[Back to Course Inventory](hastings1.html)] [[Course Syllabus--Part
1](5630-2-1.html)] [[Course Syllabus--Part 2](5630-2-2.html)]  
[[Online Query Database](scitechqueries.html)] [[Science and Technology Query
Feedback Form](5630-7.html)]  
[[Science and Technology WWW Resources](5630-5.html)] [[Student
Projects](5630-6.html)]

* * *

**SYLLABUS: PART II**

* * *

**University of North Texas, School of Library and Information Sciences**

**SLIS 5630.001 / Information & Access Services in Science and Technology**

**Fall, 1997**

**SYLLABUS: PART II**

**MEETING TIME**

Tuesdays

6:30 p.m. - 9:30 p.m.



**INSTRUCTOR**

**Samantha Kelly Hastings**

> > ISB 205 F -- Fall Office Hours: Tu 1-6; W 1-6; Th 1-6

>>

>> 940-565-2445 (office) 940-591-7944 (home, 10 a.m.- 10 p.m.)

>>

>> hastings@lis.unt.edu

>>

>>  

* * *

**[continued from SCI/TECH Syllabus Part I]**

**VI. Dictionaries**

> > **A. Description**

>

> Dictionaries are used to obtain definitions of words. This is their primary
function but they can also be used for answering other types of queries. The
_Webster's Collegiate Dictionary_ , for example, can be used for identifying
proofreader's marks, for identifying Zodiac signs, and for learning about
elements of grammar. There are different types of dictionaries used in science
and technology reference work. A listing and brief description follows:

>

>  
>

> **Monolingual dictionaries.** As with guides to the literature, such
dictionaries may deal with all areas of science and technology of specific
area. Monolingual dictionaries may also be intended for different levels of
users. To illustrate this point, her are definitions of "Femur" from two
science and technology dictionaries:

>

>> > > The long bone in the higher part of the leg in man the like bone in
back leg of animals; in insects COXA. (Graham, E.C. _Basic Dictionary of
Science_. MacMillan, 1966)

>>>>

>>>>  
>>>>

>>>> In vertebrates, the proximal bone of the leg skeleton (or thigh bone) and
in arthropods that joint of the leg which is third from the articulation of
the body and which therefore in insects articulates with the trochanter at its
proximal end and with the tibia at its distal end. (Gray, P. _Dictionary of
the Biological Sciences_. Reinhold, 1967).

>

> As with general dictionaries, science and technology dictionaries also
contain definitions of words, abbreviations and trademarks as well as special
tables, for example, the table of chemical elements.

>

> **Polyglot dictionaries.** Here again a similarity exists between general
and science and technology polyglot dictionaries. Such dictionaries may
contain words in two or more languages. Dictionaries may treat a language as
both source language and target language, i.e., German-English, English-
German. In addition to word equivalent in two or more languages, polyglot
dictionaries may also include elements of grammar, listings of prefixes, word
roots and suffixes. Science and technology dictionaries may be restricted to
scientific and technical terms (in which case both general as well as
technical dictionaries have to be used in translation) or they may contain
both technical and non-technical terms. A step may have to precede the
selection of a polylingual dictionary, the identification of the foreign
language in which the word or larger grammatical unit is used. There are two
references in the bibliography that can be used for this purpose, the Piette
and the Clouser and Skolnik references. Both of these tools list clues with
which to identify a particular foreign language. These clues include the
alphabet used, common single letter words, diacritical marks, diphthongs, and
grammatical peculiarities such as the capitalization of all nouns in the
German language.

>

>  
>

> **Special Dictionaries.** These are dictionaries whose defined units are
other than words. Two such types are acronyms dictionaries and dictionaries of
signs and symbols. Dictionaries of signs and symbols have defined units
arrange by area of application, e.g., civil engineering, plumbing. For that
reason you need to know the area of application for a given symbol, otherwise
a page by page search needs to be made.

>

>  
>

> Problems in using dictionaries include the already mentioned language
identification. Also, the same word or acronym or symbol may have different
meanings in different fields. Unless the field is known, a unique answer can
often not be given. For example, if nothing else is known about an acronym, it
may stand for several organizations, publications, or products. Dictionaries
are sometimes not sufficiently up-to-date to include the latest terminology in
a field. The search for such new terms may have to be continued in journal
indexes and perhaps even in journal articles.

>

>  
>

>> **B. Sample Annotation**

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Title:** _McGraw-Hill Dictionary of Biology_. Sybil P. Parker, ed.,
McGraw-Hill, 1984. ( QH 302.5 M38 1984. SCI TECH REFERENCE)

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Intended user and use:** High school through college applications.
Definitions are short, illustrated and written for those with some previous
science background.

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Content:** Covers a wide variety of biological subjects, including
anatomy, biochemistry, virology, genetics etc. Each entry is associated with
one of 23 biological subfields by an abbreviation.

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Organization:** Entries are alphabetical and span some 384 pages. Entries
are formatted term [field]; definition; definition 2, definition see [cross
reference if applicable].

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Features:** Short, concise, desk or field volume.

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Limitations:** Definitions are seldom longer than a phrase or sentence.
No illustrations. Book is printed on poor-visibility gray stock.

>>

>>  
>>

>> **C. Select List of Titles**

>>

>>  
>>

>>> **1\. Examples of types of dictionaries**

>>>

>>>  
>>>

>>>> **A. Monolingual**

>>>>

>>>>  
>>>>

>>>> CALL NUMBER: R121 D73

>>>>

>>>> TITLE: **Dorland's illustrated medical dictionary.**

>>>>

>>>> VOLUME/DATE: Began publication with 23rd ed.

>>>>

>>>> PUBLICATION: Philadelphia : W.B. Saunders Co.,

>>>>

>>>> SCI/TECH REFERENCE

>>>>

>>>>  
>>>>

>>>> CALL NO: QA5 J32 1976

>>>>

>>>> AUTHOR: James, Glenn, 1882-

>>>>

>>>> TITLE: **Mathematics dictionary**

>>>>

>>>> EDITION: 4th ed.

>>>>

>>>> PUBLISHER: New York : Van Nostrand Reinhold, c1976.

>>>>

>>>> SCI/TECH REFERENCE

>>>>

>>>>  
>>>>

>>>> **B. Polylingual**

>>>>

>>>>  
>>>>

>>>> CALL NO: T10 B75 1969

>>>>

>>>> AUTHOR: Bray, A. (Alexander)

>>>>

>>>> TITLE: **Russian-English scientific-technical dictionary**.

>>>>

>>>> EDITION: 1st IUP paperback edition

>>>>

>>>> PUBLISHER: New York, N.Y., International Universities Press, 1969

>>>>

>>>> SCI/TECH LIBRARY Available

>>>>

>>>>  
>>>>

>>>> CALL NO: T9 D48 1966

>>>>

>>>> AUTHOR: De Vries, Louis, 1885-

>>>>

>>>> TITLE: **German-English technical and engineering dictionary**

>>>>

>>>> EDITION: 2d ed., completely rev. and enl.

>>>>

>>>> PUBLISHER: New York, McGraw-Hill [1965, c1966]

>>>>

>>>> SCI/TECH REFERENCE Non-Circ.

>>>>

>>>>  
>>>>

>>>> CALL NO: Q123 D37 1962

>>>>

>>>> AUTHOR: De Vries, Louis, 1885-

>>>>

>>>> TITLE: **French-English science dictionary for students in agricultural,
biological, and physical sciences, with a revised supplement of terms in
aeronautics, electronics, radar, radio, tel**

>>>>

>>>> EDITION: 3d ed.

>>>>

>>>> PUBLISHER: New York, McGraw-Hill [1962]

>>>>

>>>> SCI/TECH REFERENCE

>>>>

>>>>  
>>>>

>>>> CALL NO: QD5 P3 1950

>>>>

>>>> TITLE: **A German-English dictionary for chemists.**

>>>>

>>>> PUBLISHER: Wiley, 3rd edition, 1950.

>>>>

>>>> SCI/TECH LIBRARY Available

>>>>

>>>>  
>>>>

>>>> CALL NO: TL788 H8

>>>>

>>>> AUTHOR: Hyman, Charles J.

>>>>

>>>> TITLE: **German-English, English-German astronautics dictionary**

>>>>

>>>> PUBLISHER: New York, Consultants Bureau, 1968.

>>>>

>>>> SCI/TECH LIBRARY Available

>>>>

>>>>  
>>>

>>> **C. Abbreviations**

>>>

>>>  
>>>

>>>> CALL NO: P365 A28

>>>>

>>>> TITLE: **Acronyms, initialisms & abbreviations dictionary**.

>>>>

>>>> PUBLICATION: Detroit, Mich. : Gale Research Co., 1976-

>>>>

>>>> VOLUME/DATE: 5th ed. (1976)-

>>>>

>>>> 1976 v. 1, 1980 v. 3, 1987-1994 v. 1 pt. 1-3

>>>>

>>>> LOCATION: LATEST IN WILLIS LIBRARY GENERAL REFERENCE --

>>>>

>>>> NEXT LATEST IN GOVERNMENT DOCUMENTS

>>>>

>>>>  
>>>>

>>>> CALL NO: PE1693 D4 1986

>>>>

>>>> AUTHOR: De Sola, Ralph, 1908-

>>>>

>>>> TITLE: **Abbreviations dictionary**

>>>>

>>>> EDITION: Augm. international 7th ed.

>>>>

>>>> PUBLISHER: New York : Elsevier, c1986.

>>>>

>>>> SCI/TECH REFERENCE

>>>>

>>>>  
>>>>

>>>> **D. Thesauri**

>>>>

>>>>  
>>>>

>>>> CALL NO: HE 20.3612/3-5:

>>>>

>>>> TITLE: **Medical subject headings. Tree structures.**

>>>>

>>>> LOCATION: SCI/TECH REFERENCE

>>>>

>>>> 1995 -- Library retains latest edition only.

>>>>

>>>>  
>>>

>>> **2\. Bibliography**

>>>

>>>  
>>>

>>> CALL NO: Z7004 D5 U45 1969

>>>

>>> AUTHOR: Unesco

>>>

>>> TITLE: **Bibliography of interlingual scientific and technical
dictionaries.**

>>>

>>> EDITION: 5th ed.

>>>

>>> PUBLISHER: [Paris] : the Organization, [1969]

>>>

>>> REMOTE STORAGE Non-Circ.

>>>

>>>  
>>

>> **References for Language Identification**

>>

>>> CALL NO: P201 P5

>>>

>>> AUTHOR: Piette, J. R. F.

>>>

>>> TITLE: **A guide to foreign languages for science librarians and
bibliographers**

>>>

>>> EDITION: [New ed.] revised and enlarged by E. Horzelska.

>>>

>>> PUBLISHER: London, Published on behalf of the Welsh Plant Breeding
Station,

>>>

>>> WILLIS LIBRARY Available

>>>

>>>  
>>>

>>> CALL NO: Z7004 G7 W25 1967

>>>

>>> AUTHOR: Walford, Albert John

>>>

>>> TITLE: **A guide to foreign language grammars and dictionaries**

>>>

>>> EDITION: 2nd ed., revised and enlarged.

>>>

>>> PUBLISHER: London, Library Association, 1967.

>>>

>>> SCI/TECH LIBRARY Available

>>>

>>>  
>>>

>>> * * *

>>>

>>> **VII. Directories**

>>>

>>>  
>

> **A. Description**

>

>  
>

>> **1\. Biographic Directories**

>>

>>  
>>

>> Queries about scientists as well as non-scientists are one of the most
frequently asked types of queries in libraries. The two key variables for such
queries are biographic variables (who is or was the individual) and amount of
information wanted about the individual. These two variables will be listed
before dealing with biographic tools. The person about whom information is
wanted can be characterized in terms of time period (present versus past),
nationality, subject field, and fame or lack thereof. Amount of information
wanted about the individual can range from complete name with address,
publications by individual, personal and/or professional information about the
individual, to everything there is known about the individual. Let us look at
the types of biographic tools available to us before suggesting the different
types of tools for different types of biographic queries.

>>

>>  
>>

>> **_Types of Tools *********** Amount of Information About Individual_**

>>

>>  
>>

>> 1\. Abstract and Index Journals *****Address, Publications by

>>

>> 2\. News Journals *****New Job, Grant, Obituary, Other News Event

>>

>> 3\. Membership Directory *****Address, Sometimes Subject Interests

>>

>> 4\. Who's Who type of Directory *****Biographic Sketch

>>

>> e.g., _American Men and Women of Science_

>>

>> 5\. Encyclopedia, Dictionary *****Biographic Sketch

>>

>> 6\. Bio-Bibliography *****Biographic Sketch, Publications by and about
individual

>>

>> 7\. Biography *****Biography, Publications by and/or about the

>>

>> individual in book length form

>>

>>  
>>

>> For answering biographic queries, try to determine whether or not the
individual is alive, his nationality, subject field, and where or not he is
well-known. Then determine how much information is required about the
individual. Lead-in tools for biographic queries, in addition to the card
catalog and guides to the literature, are bibliographies of membership
directories. Develop your search strategy based on the types of answer
providing tools listed above. Keep in mind that the name of the individual may
be misspelled or that other incorrect information may be given, e.g., the last
and first names may be reversed. Also, use the latest tool for current address
queries; scientists move.

>>

>>  
>>

>> **2\. Directories Other Than Biographic**

>>

>>  
>>

>> Directories, other than biographic directories, are typically used to
identify and/or find information about a product or an organization. The
product may be a chemical, a piece of equipment, a service, e.g., microfilming
documents, or a computer program. The organization may be a library, a
research laboratory, a government agency, a business or industrial
organization. The arrangement of directories is typically by product and/or
organization. If the arrangement is by product there is likely to be an index
by organization, and vice versa.

>>

>>  
>>

>> Directories may also contain lists of trademarks. Amount of information
given per product or organization varies. Sometimes advertisements about a
company's products are included and information about the product's properties
and uses is given. Checking for chemicals may present problems for librarians
without chemistry training. If you do no find the chemical under the name as
given, check a chemical dictionary for synonyms. Also look under the name
without its prefixes. Directories may be special, annual issues of journals.
Check the latest volume first but go back several years since not every
product may be listed every year.

>>

>>  
>

> **B. Sample Annotation**

>

>  
>

>> **Title:** _Research Centers Directory_. Watkins, M.M. and Ruffner, J.A.,
eds. 19th ed. Gale, 1994. Also supplemented by _New Research Centers_ , 1965-.
Quarterly supplement to _Research Centers Directory_. ( AS 25 D5. WILLIS
REFERENCE)

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Intended user and use:** Intended to provide addresses, background
information, and heads of the various non-profit research centers in the
United States and Canada.

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Content:** In addition to the physical and biological sciences, it also
includes the social sciences and even the humanities. For each organization it
includes the phone number, date of establishment, complete mailing address,
head, number of staff, library holdings, and the name of the librarian. Where
permitted, the annual dollar volume of research is included.

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Organization:** Entries are arranged alphabetically within seventeen
broad subject headings. At the back of the book there is an institutional
index and also a separate research center index.

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Features:** Although it can be used to identify research centers in a
particular discipline, it is used primarily to find information about an
individual, known organization. Supplements are furnished between editions and
Gale maintains a free reference service which attempts to answer questions
about non-profit research centers not included in the directory.

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Limitations:** Since it covers only the non-profit research centers, it
omits listing industrial research centers which perform the bulk of research
in the United States. The index refers to assigned organization numbers, not
page numbers.

>>

>>  
>

> **C. Select List of Titles**

>

>  
>

>> **1\. Biographical**

>>

>>  
>>

>>> CALL NO: R712 A1 A6

>>>

>>> TITLE: **American medical directory.**

>>>

>>> PUBLICATION: Chicago, American Medical Association [etc.] 1906-1990.

>>>

>>> VOLUME/DATE: 1st-32d ed.

>>>

>>> LOCATION: SCI/TECH LIBRARY

>>>

>>> NOTES: LATEST IN SCI/TECH REFERENCE

>>>

>>>  
>>>

>>> CALL NO: Q141 A471

>>>

>>> TITLE: **American men and women of science.**

>>>

>>> VOLUME/DATE: 12th- ed.; 1971-

>>>

>>> PUBLICATION: New York, Bowker.

>>>

>>> LOCATION: SCI/TECH LIBRARY

>>>

>>> NOTES: LATEST IN SCI/TECH REFERENCE

>>>

>>>  
>>>

>>> CALL NO: Q141 A74 1982

>>>

>>> AUTHOR: Asimov, Isaac, 1920-

>>>

>>> TITLE: **Asimov's biographical encyclopedia of science and technology.**

>>>

>>> EDITION: 2nd rev. ed.

>>>

>>> PUBLISHER: Garden City, N.Y. : Doubleday, 1982.

>>>

>>> SCI/TECH REFERENCE Non-Circ.

>>>

>>>  
>>>

>>> CALL NO: RC335 D48

>>>

>>> TITLE: **Directory of certified psychiatrists and neurologists**.

>>>

>>> EDITION: 1st ed.

>>>

>>> PUBLISHER: Chicago : Marquis Academic Media, c1979.

>>>

>>> SCI/TECH LIBRARY Available

>>>

>>>  
>>>

>>> CALL NO: Q141 D5

>>>

>>> TITLE: **Dictionary of scientific biography** /Gillispie, editor-in-chief.

>>>

>>> PUBLISHER: New York, Scribner [1970-1980]

>>>

>>> SCI/TECH REFERENCE Non-Cir V.1 - 5

>>>

>>>  
>>>

>>> CALL NO: Q141 N2

>>>

>>> AUTHOR: National Academy of Sciences (U.S.)

>>>

>>> TITLE: **Biographical memoirs**

>>>

>>> PUBLICATION: Washington, National Academy of Sciences.

>>>

>>> SCI/TECH LIBRARY STATUS: Currently received: v. 7 1913, v. 18 1938, v.
25-57 1949-1987

>>>

>>>  
>>>

>>> CALL NO: Q141 M15

>>>

>>> TITLE: **McGraw-Hill modern men of science**.

>>>

>>> SCI/TECH LIBRARY v. 1-2

>>>

>>> **Also check news-journals in the sciences, e.g.,** ** _Chemical and
Engineering News_** **and general sources of biographic information, e.g.,**
** _Biography Index_**

>>>

>>>  
>>

>> **2\. Research Organizations, Societies**

>>

>>> CALL NO: T176 I651

>>>

>>> TITLE: **Directory of American research and technology** / edited by
Jaques Cattell Press.

>>>

>>> LOCATION: SCI/TECH REFERENCE-- STATUS: Currently received

>>>

>>>  
>>>

>>> CALL NO: T176 I65

>>>

>>> TITLE: **Industrial research laboratories of the United States** ,

>>>

>>> **including consulting research laboratories.**

>>>

>>> LOCATION: SCI/TECH LIBRARY--STATUS: Not currently received

>>>

>>>  
>>>

>>> CALL NO: HS17 E5

>>>

>>> TITLE: **Encyclopedia of associations.**

>>>

>>> PUBLICATION: Detroit, Gale Research Co., 1961-

>>>

>>> LOCATION: WILLIS LIBRARY-- FREQ: annual-- STATUS: Currently received

>>>

>>> LATEST IN GENERAL REFERENCE -- LIBRARY DOES NOT RECEIVE VOLUME 3.

>>>

>>>  
>>>

>>> CALL NO: AS25 D5

>>>

>>> TITLE: **Research centers directory.**

>>>

>>> PUBLICATION: Detroit, Mich. : Gale Research Co.,

>>>

>>> WILLIS LIBRARY --Currently received

>>>

>>> SCI/TECH REFERENCE

>>>

>>>  
>>>

>>> CALL NO: JX1904 A42

>>>

>>> TITLE: **Yearbook of international organizations.**

>>>

>>> PUBLICATION: Brussels, Union of International Associations.

>>>

>>> LOCATION: WILLIS LIBRARY-- NOTES: LATEST IN GENERAL REFERENCE

>>>

>>> FREQ: annual STATUS: Currently received

>>>

>>>  
>>

>> **3\. Manufacturers, Products, Chemicals**

>>

>>  
>>

>>> CALL NUMBER: TP12 C47

>>>

>>> MAIN TITLE: **Chemical buyers guide.**

>>>

>>> VOLUME/DATE: 1956-

>>>

>>> PUBLICATION: Don Mills, Ont., Southam Business Publication.

>>>

>>> SCI/TECH REFERENCE

>>>

>>>  
>>>

>>> CALL NUMBER: Q184 G8

>>>

>>> MAIN TITLE: **Guide to scientific instruments.**

>>>

>>> PUBLICATION: Washington, American Association for the Advancement of
Science.

>>>

>>> SCI/TECH REFERENCE

>>>

>>>  
>>>

>>> CALL NO: TP1103 M613

>>>

>>> TITLE: **Modern plastics encyclopedia.**

>>>

>>> PUBLICATION: New York, N.Y. : McGraw-Hill, 1965-

>>>

>>> SCI/TECH LIBRARY Copy 1 -Currently received

>>>

>>>  
>>

>> **4\. Libraries and Information Centers**

>>

>>  
>>

>>> CALL NO: Z674.3 E53

>>>

>>> TITLE: **Encyclopedia of information systems and services.**

>>>

>>> SCI/TECH LIBRARY-- STATUS: Not currently received

>>>

>>> CALL NO: Z674.3 K781

>>>

>>> TITLE: **New information systems and services.**

>>>

>>> PUBLICATION: Detroit, Mich., Gale Research.

>>>

>>> SCI/TECH LIBRARY--STATUS: Not currently received

>>>

>>>  
>>>

>>> CALL NO: QA76.55 O55

>>>

>>> TITLE: **Online database search services directory.**

>>>

>>> PUBLICATION: Detroit, Mich. : Gale Research Co., c1984-

>>>

>>> SCI/TECH LIBRARY--STATUS: Currently received

>>>

>>>  
>>

>> **5\. Bibliography**

>>

>>  
>>

>>> **Cumulative Book Index.** 1898-.

>>>

>>>  
>>>

>>> CALL NO: Z7405 D55 H37

>>>

>>> TITLE: **Directory of scientific directories** / compiled by Anthony P.
Harvey.

>>>

>>> VOLUME/DATE: 1st ed. (Mar. 1969)-4th ed. (1986).

>>>

>>> PUBLICATION: Guernsey, Channel Islands : F. Hodgson, 1969-1986.

>>>

>>> SCI/TECH REFERENCE--STATUS: Not currently received

>>>

>>>  
>>>

>>> CALL NUMBER: RA7.5 N37

>>>

>>> TITLE: **National health directory.**

>>>

>>> VOLUME/DATE: 1st- ed.; 1977-

>>>

>>> PUBLICATION: [Washington, Science and Health Publications]

>>>

>>> SCI/TECH LIBRARY--STATUS: Currently received

>>>

>>>  
>>>

>>> CALL NO: Z7163 P91

>>>

>>> TITLE: **PAIS bulletin**.

>>>

>>> VOLUME/DATE: 54th annual cumulation (1968)-62nd annual cumulation (1976);
v. 63 (1977)-v. 71

>>>

>>> PUBLICATION: New York : Public Affairs Information Service, 1969-1985.

>>>

>>> GENERAL ABSTRACTS/IN Copy 1 -Not currently received

>>>

>>>  
>>>

>>> CALL NUMBER: CD-ROM 42

>>>

>>> TITLE: **PAIS international [computer file].**

>>>

>>> PUBLICATION: Boston : SilverPlatter,

>>>

>>> NOTE: SERIAL: System requirements: IBM PC or compatible; 640K RAM minimum;

>>>

>>>  
>>>

>>> **Also check special issues of** ** _Special Libraries_** **, e.g.,
"Membership Directories **

>>>

>>> **of American Scientific and Engineering Societies. "**

>>>

>>>  
>

> **D. Questions for Discussion**

>

>  
>

> 1\. How would you go about finding everything there is to know about a well-
known contemporary scientist?

>

>  
>

> 2\. How would you go about finding everything there is to know about a
little-known contemporary scientist?

>

>  
>

> 3\. What misinformation can be given to you by a patron who wants to have a
biographic query answered. Consider each type of misinformation in terms of
your ability to answer the query.

>

>  

**VIII. Handbooks**



> **A. Description**

>

>  
>

> Handbooks are the scientist's and engineer's ready reference tools designed
to meet his most frequently occurring everyday information needs. Librarians
use handbooks primarily for two purposes: to answer queries calling for
numeric information, e.g., the boiling point of a chemical, the composition of
a particular grade of steel, the rate of breathing of the hamster. Handbooks
are also used as back-up tools for dictionaries, directories, and guides to
the literature. Queries for scientific facts are often difficult to answer for
librarians without a science background. One thing to remember is that the
answer is typically not a number but a number with qualifications. For
example, the solubility of a chemical is not 50 but 50 grams per 100 grams of
solvent at specified temperatures and perhaps with other qualifications. When
answering such a query, select as much information as possible from the tables
and perhaps from explanatory footnotes. Here it is better to give too much
rather than too little information. Handbooks are typically divided into
separately paginated sections. A reference to such a handbook should include
both the section number (typically given in Roman numerals) as well as the
page number. The page number could be in one of 20 sections. New editions of
handbooks are sometimes published yearly. It may not be necessary to check the
latest edition for some queries, e.g., properties of chemical, since these
properties (or more precisely our measurement thereof) remain fairly constant.
The indexes to handbooks are typically not complete. Specific access points
may not be provided for the thousands of substances mentioned in the text.
When you cannot locate a chemical, animal, product, or plant under its
specific name, attempt to look under a synonym or more generic name. An
alternative approach is to look under the property or other information
wanted.

>

>  
>

>> **B. Sample Annotation**

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Title:** _The Merck Manual._ Hovey, D.N., 8th ed.-. Merck, Sharpe and
Donna Research Laboratories, 199-. ( RC 55 M4. SCI TECH REFERENCE)

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Intended user and use:** Intended for the physician to aid him in
diagnosing and treating various human ailments, but it is highly informative
for the general reader as well. The widespread use of medical terms does not
make the writing unduly difficult, but a small medical dictionary would
complement the use of this tool.

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Content:** Includes almost all of the common ailments of human beings.
For each ailment it gives the etiology or nature of the disease, the symptoms
and diagnosis, and the treatment.

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Organization:** The almost 2,000 pages are broken down into 24 chapters,
each covering a specific type of disease, e.g., respiratory disorders. The
excellent index, 120 pages, makes it simple to locate any particular ailment.

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Features:** At the beginning of each chapter there is a detailed table of
contents which is much more comprehensive than the one found at the beginning
of the book. In the index the most important pages are printed in bold type.

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Limitations:** As with any medical book the librarian has to careful just
locating the patron's answer in the book, and not recommending any particular
treatment or making any diagnosis. Sometimes the answer will be found on a
page after that mentioned in the index since the index only mentions the first
page of a particular entry.

>>

>>  
>

> **C. Select List of Titles**

>

>  
>

>> CALL NO: QC61 A5 1972

>>

>> AUTHOR: American Institute of Physics.

>>

>> TITLE: **American Institute of Physics handbook.**

>>

>> EDITION: 3d ed.

>>

>> PUBLISHER: New York, McGraw-Hill [1972]

>>

>> SCI/TECH REFERENCE Non-Circ.

>>

>>  
>>

>> CALL NO: QH310 A392

>>

>> AUTHOR: Altman, Philip L.

>>

>> TITLE: **Biology data book.**

>>

>> PUBLICATION: Bethesda, Md., Federation of American Societies for
Experimental Biology

>>

>> SCI/TECH REFERENCE Non-Circ. V.1-3

>>

>>  
>>

>> CALL NO: QP516 D3 1969

>>

>> TITLE: **Data for biochemical research;** edited by R. M. C. Dawson

>>

>> EDITION: 2nd ed.

>>

>> PUBLISHER: Oxford, Clarendon P., 1969.

>>

>> SCI/TECH LIBRARY Available

>>

>> **[Note: There is a newer edition of this book, UNT doesn't have it]**

>>

>>  
>>

>> CALL NO: TD145 C2

>>

>> TITLE: **CRC handbook of environmental control.** Editors: Richard G. Bond
[and] Conrad P. Straub. Coordinating editor: Richard Prober.

>>

>> EDITION: [1st ed.]

>>

>> PUBLISHER: Cleveland, CRC Press [1972-73]

>>

>> SCI/TECH REFERENCE Non-Circ. V.1-4

>>

>>  
>>

>> CALL NO: RM300 A553

>>

>> AUTHOR: American Medical Association. Dept. of Drugs.

>>

>> TITLE: **AMA drug evaluations.**

>>

>> VOLUME/DATE: 2nd- ed.; 1973-

>>

>> PUBLICATION: Littleton, Mass., Pub. Sciences Group.

>>

>> SCI/TECH LIBRARY--STATUS: Not currently received

>>

>>  
>>

>> CALL NO: TK151 E4 1976

>>

>> TITLE: **Electrical engineer's reference book** / edited by M. G. Say

>>

>> EDITION: 13th ed., rev. reprint.

>>

>> PUBLISHER: London ; Boston : Newnes-Butterworths, 1976, c1973.

>>

>> SCI/TECH LIBRARY Available

>>

>>  
>>

>> CALL NO: QD65 H31

>>

>> TITLE: **CRC handbook of chemistry and physics.**

>>

>> VOLUME/DATE: 58th ed. (1977-1978)- [75th ed. 1994-1995]

>>

>> PUBLICATION: Cleveland, Ohio : CRC Press, c1977-

>>

>> SCI/TECH LIBRARY--LATEST IN SCI/TECH REFERENCE

>>

>> CALL NO: T55.3 H3 S3 1968

>>

>> AUTHOR: Sax, N. Irving (Newton Irving)

>>

>> TITLE: **Dangerous properties of industrial materials.**

>>

>> EDITION: 3d ed.

>>

>> PUBLISHER: New York, Van Nostrand Reinhold [1968]

>>

>> SCI/TECH LIBRARY Available **[there is a more current edition. . .]**

>>

>>  
>>

>> CALL NO: QC983 R83

>>

>> AUTHOR: Ruffner, James A.

>>

>> TITLE: **The weather almanac : a reference guide to weather, climate, and
air quality**

>>

>> **in the United States and its key cities, comprising statistics,
principles,**

>>

>> EDITION: 2d ed.-

>>

>> PUBLISHER: Detroit : Gale Research Co., [1977-

>>

>> SCI/TECH LIBRARY Available

>>

>>  
>

> **Bibliography**

>

>  
>

> CALL NO: Z675 U5 M68

>

> AUTHOR: Mount, Ellis.

>

> TITLE: **University science and engineering libraries : their operation,
collections, and facilities.**

>

> PUBLICATION: Westport, Conn. : Greenwood Press, 1975.

>

> SCI/TECH LIBRARY* Available

>

>  
>

> CALL NO: Z7405 T3 P68 1983

>

> AUTHOR: Powell, Russell H., 1943-

>

> TITLE: **Handbooks and tables in science and technology**

>

> EDITION: 2nd ed.

>

> PUBLISHER: [Phoenix, Ariz.] : Oryx Press, 1983.

>

> SCI/TECH REFERENCE Non-Circ.

>

>  
>

>  
>

> **Also see, Publisher's Catalogs, e.g. McGraw-Hill, Elsevier, etc.**

>

>  
>

> **D. Questions for Discussion**

>

>  
>

>> > > 1\. Can librarians without a science background answer queries from
handbooks?

>>>>

>>>>  
>>>>

>>>> 2\. What ethical and legal points should be considered in answering (or
not answering) medical queries?

>>>>

>>>>  
>>>>

>>>> 3\. What information would you include in a handbook for librarians?

>>>>

>>>>  
>>>>

>>>>  

**IX. Texts and Monographs**



> **A. Description**

>

> Texts and monographs are book length reviews of the literature written at
different levels and for different purposes. A text is typically intended to
be used with formal instruction at different levels. A monograph is typically
an advanced treatise on a subject. Texts may be in conventional (essay) form
or in programmed form. Programmed texts divide subject matter into a number of
small steps. At the end of each step, the reader can demonstrate to himself
his understanding of the subject matter covered up to this point by answering
one or more questions. Depending on his answers, he can go back and review
previously given material or he can go ahead and read on.

>

>  
>

> Texts and monographs will be used to answer two types of queries: queries
for background information on a subject and queries about a specific text or
monograph (a recommendation). For background information on a subject, use the
lead-in tools already discussed, the card or online catalog, guides to the
literature and bibliographies such as abstracting and index journals. In
addition to the local catalog, consider catalogs of other libraries. G.K. Hall
publishes a number of catalogs of science and technology collections. Some of
these are listed in the bibliography. These catalogs frequently provide access
to journal titles, reports, and other non-book publications. For
recommendations of specific titles look at the _Book Review Digest_ and/or
equivalent publications in Science and technology as given in the
bibliography. A recommendation should be based either on your own reading of
the book or reading a book review.

>

>  
>

>> **B. Sample Annotation**

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Title:** National Agricultural Library Catalog, NJ: Roman and
Littlefield, 1967-.

>>

>> ( Z 5076 U632. SCI TECH REFERENCE)

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Intended user and use:** Can be used by anyone who needs supplementary
bibliographic information. It can also be used in compiling bibliographies and
for interlibrary loan purposes.

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Content:** The complete catalog entry for all the catalogued holdings in
the National Agricultural Library.

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Organization:** The catalog is composed of two parts. The first part is
from 1862 to 1965\. It is in 73 volumes and all the author, title, and subject
cards are in one alphabet. The second part, holdings acquired during 1966
through ____, is in twelve volumes. The author and title cards are in one
alphabet while the subject cards are in another.

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Features:** This is naturally a very comprehensive list of agriculture
books. The last volume of each set is devoted to a list of translated articles
from foreign publications held by the library.

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Limitations:** For most recent acquisitions of the library, need to use
online database AGRICOLA.

>>

>>  
>

> **C. Select List of Titles**

>

>  
>

> **1\. Selection Aids**

>

>  
>

> **a. Journals**

>

>> > > 1. **** Primary science journals, e.g., _Science, American Scientist,
Quarterly Review of Biology_.

>>>

>>> 2\. _Books for College Libraries._ 1964-.

>>>

>>> 3\. _Library Journal_. 1876-.

>>>

>>> 4\. _Science Books and Films. A Quarterly Review._ 1965-.

>>>

>>> 5\. _Technical Book Review Index._ 1945-. SCI/TECH A  & I

>>>

>>>  
>

> **b. Bibliographies**

>

>  
>

>> > 1\. G.K. Hall printed catalogs of libraries.

>>>

>>>> _Example:_

>>>>

>>>>  
>>>>

>>>> CALL NO: Z7401 J58 1967

>>>>

>>>> TITLE: **The John Crerar Library Author-Title Catalog.**

>>>>

>>>> REMOTE STORAGE Non-Circ. V.1-9

>>>>

>>>>  
>>>

>>> 2\. CALL NUMBER: Z5076 N32

>>>

>>>> AUTHOR: National Agricultural Library (U.S.)

>>>>

>>>> TITLE: **National Agricultural Library catalog.**

>>>>

>>>> VOLUME/DATE: v. 1- Jan. 1966-

>>>>

>>>> PUBLICATION: Totowa, N.J., Rowman and Littlefield.

>>>>

>>>>  
>

> **2\. Reading**

>

>  
>

> Slavens, Thomas P. Writing for publications. _Journal of Education for
Library and Information Science_ 26 (1) 133-134, Fall 1985.

>

>  
>

>  
>

>  

**X. Encyclopedia and Compendia**



> **A. Description**

>

> A general encyclopedia summarizes knowledge in all fields. Science and
technology encyclopedias resemble general encyclopedias in arrangement and
features. Typically science and technology encyclopedias have articles
arranged alphabetically. Access to the text is facilitated with a subject
index. Information is update with yearbooks. Individual articles are typically
signed, illustrated and supplemented with references to the literature. There
are a number of one volume encyclopedias such as one described in the
annotation. These one-volume encyclopedias are actually a hybrid between a
dictionary and an encyclopedia. Encyclopedias are useful for providing
background information a subject or an individual, for pictures, and other
illustrations, and for bibliographies on a given subject.

>

>  
>

> Compendia are critical data complications. Here we are dealing with a tool
in which numeric information is emphasized. This is the back-up tool for
handbooks. In fact, numeric information in handbooks is usually taken from
compendia. Typically, information in compendia is not arranged alphabetically
but systematically. The system may be based on chemical structure, as in the
case of Gmelin. The index to the system must first be consulted to find the
volume containing wanted information. Compendia are comprehensive in coverage
but are typically not up-to-date.

>

>  
>

>> **B. Sample Annotation**

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Title:** _Van Nostrand's Scientific Encyclopedia_. 6th ed., 1982. ( Q 121
V3. SCI TECH REFERENCE)

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Intended user and use:** Although it can be used by anyone, the
definitions are replete with technical terms and equations that might be
difficult for one without scientific background. It is a prime source for a
cogent summary of almost any scientific term or concept.

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Content:** Covers all areas of the biological and physical sciences, both
pure and applied.

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Organization:** All terms are arranged in alphabetical sequence. There
are over 7,300 entries contained in the 3,000 + oversized pages. No index is
provided, but there are numerous cross references.

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Features:** Many detailed diagrams are included.

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Limitations:** Since there is no index, imagination must be used to
select proper subject headings. The following access points are not included:
people, places, organizations, publications, abbreviations, or events. The
entries will not include the following information: addresses, bibliographies,
maps, individual instruction, or recommendations. New editions come out
irregularly.

>>

>>  
>>

>>  
>>

>>  
>

> **C. Select List of Titles**

>

>  
>

>> CALL NO: QD246 D5 1982

>>

>> TITLE: **Dictionary of organic compounds.**

>>

>> PUBLISHER: New York : Chapman and Hall, 1982.

>>

>> SCI/TECH REFERENCE Non-Circ. V.1-7 + annual supplement

>>

>>  
>>

>> CALL NO: QA76.76 E95 E34 1988

>>

>> AUTHOR: Edmunds, Robert A.

>>

>> TITLE: **The Prentice Hall guide to expert systems**

>>

>> PUBLISHER: Englewood Cliffs, N.J. : Prentice Hall, c1988.

>>

>> SCI/TECH LIBRARY Available

>>

>>  
>>

>> CALL NO: QC854 E525 1987

>>

>> TITLE: **The Encyclopedia of climatology** / edited by John E. Oliver,

>>

>> Rhodes W. Fairbridge.

>>

>> PUBLISHER: New York : Van Nostrand Reinhold, c1987.

>>

>> SCI/TECH REFERENCE Non-Circ.

>>

>>  
>>

>> CALL NO: QA5 N513

>>

>> AUTHOR: Nihon Sugakkai.

>>

>> TITLE: **Encyclopedic dictionary of mathematics**

>>

>> PUBLISHER: Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press, c1977.

>>

>> SCI/TECH LIBRARY Non-Circ. V.1-2 **[there is a 2nd ed., 1987. . .]**

>>

>>  
>>

>> CALL NO: TP9 K54 1985

>>

>> TITLE: **Kirk-Othmer Concise encyclopedia of chemical technology**.

>>

>> PUBLISHER: New York : Wiley, c1985.

>>

>> SCI/TECH REFERENCE Non-Circ.

>>

>>  
>>

>> CALL NO: TA418.9 C6 E5 1983

>>

>> TITLE: **Encyclopedia of composite materials and components** / editor,
Martin Grayson.

>>

>> PUBLICATION: New York : J. Wiley, c1983.

>>

>> SCI/TECH REFERENCE Non-Circ.

>>

>>  
>>

>> CALL NO: QE5 F33

>>

>> AUTHOR: Fairbridge, Rhodes Whitmore, 1914-

>>

>> MAIN TITLE: **The encyclopedia of world regional geology**

>>

>> PUBLICATION: Stroudsburg, Pa. : Dowden, Hutchinson & Ross ; [New York] :

>>

>> distributed by Halsted Press, [1975-

>>

>> SCI/TECH REFERENCE Non-Circ. V.1

>>

>> CALL NO: Q199 N32

>>

>> MAIN TITLE: **International critical tables.**

>>

>> SCI/TECH REFERENCE Non-Circ. INDEX 1930 V.1-7

>>

>>  
>>

>> CALL NO: T47 M18 1988

>>

>> AUTHOR: Macaulay, David.

>>

>> MAIN TITLE: **The way things work.**

>>

>> PUBLISHER: Boston : Houghton Mifflin, 1988.

>>

>> SCI/TECH LIBRARY Available

>>

>>  
>>

>>  
>

> **Readings**

>

>  
>

>> Meschel, S.V. "Numeric Databases in the Sciences." _Online Review_ 8:
77-103, February, 1984.

>>

>>  
>

> **D. Questions for Discussion**

>

>  
>

>> > >

