**The Ohio State University  
Department of History  
Autumn Quarter 2000  
M-F 1:30-2:18  
  
HISTORY 152 AMERICAN CIVILIZATION SINCE 1877  
  
**

Instructor: Yuji Tosaka  
E-mail: tosaka.1@osu.edu  
Office: 009 Dulles Hall  
Phone: 292-2955 (History Dept.: 292-2674)  
Office Hours: WF 2:30-3:30  
Course Homepage: http://go.to/history152



**COURSE DESCRIPTION**

This course will offer an interpretive overview of U.S. history from the
Reconstruction period to the recent past. Historical knowledge provides an
indispensable background for all other forms of knowledge and enables us to
understand the choices before us and to think independently and wisely about
them as informed citizens. As we survey this period, we will focus on three
broad themes and developments: (1) the changes in the U.S. economic,
political, and social structures (e.g., industrialization, business-labor
relations, the federal government's role in the economy, and
urbanization/suburbanization); (2) the rise of the United States as a world
power and its foreign relations with other parts of the world; and (3) the
struggles of various groups-workers, minorities, and women-for equality and
justice in American society. The course will fulfill the GEC requirement in
history.

**REQUIRED TEXTS**

Gary B. Nash, et al., _The American People: Creating a Nation and a Society_ ,
vol. 2, _From 1865_ , brief 3d ed. (2000).  
Anne Moody, _Coming of Age in Mississippi_ (1968).  
_Retrieving the American Past_ , Autumn Quarter 2000 (available at SBX only).  
Reading Packet, History 152 (available at Grade A Notes, 22 E. 17th Avenue).

*The reading packet will also be available on closed reserve at the Main Library. _

_**COURSE REQUIREMENTS**

Attendance is expected and will be taken regularly. There will be material
covered in the lectures that cannot be found or is not stressed in the texts,
and not all material covered in the readings will be discussed in the
lectures. This means that reading will not take the place of class attendance,
nor will attending lectures substitute for reading in this course. We will
cover broad topic areas each week, and students who let the coursework slide
even for a week will usually have great difficulty catching up.

A midterm exam and a final exam will assess students' mastery of the course
material. These exams will require students to synthesize material from the
lectures and readings. Each exam will consist of multiple-choice questions and
one essay question. Essay questions may be comprehensive and cumulative in the
final exam. In addition, your grade will be based on two short papers on turn-
of-the-century urban politics and on _Coming of Age in Mississippi_. Also,
there will be a number of minor assignments during the quarter.

**All exams and papers must be completed in order to pass the course.** No
"extra credit" will be given in this course. Graduating seniors are
responsible for contacting the instructor and scheduling their final exams in
a timely manner.

**COURSE GRADE**

Your final grade in this course will be calculated as follows:

Short paper #1 10%  
Midterm exam 30%  
Short paper #2 20%  
Final exam 30%  
Participation 10% _  
_  
The class will be graded on a traditional absolute scale: A (93% and above),
A- (90-92%), B+ (87-89%), B (83-86%), B- (80-82%), C+ (77-79%), C (73-76%), C-
(70-72%), D+ (67-69%), D (60-66%), E (below 60%).  
  
**MAKE-UP EXAMS AND LATE PAPERS _**

_ Make-up exams and late papers will be permitted only in cases of compelling
necessity and on presentation of an official written excuse. Requests for them
should be made no later than the scheduled exam or due dates. You are
responsible for contacting the instructor or (if that is not possible) for
leaving a message at the History Department office.

Unexcused late papers will be penalized a half letter grade (5% points) per
day (weekends included). **Papers that are more than a week late will not be
accepted (i.e., you will automatically fail this course).**

**CLASS POLICIES**

According to the Code of Student Conduct, all suspected cases of academic
misconduct will be dealt with through the Committee on Academic Misconduct.
Each student is responsible for becoming familiar with the university rules
and policies about academic misconduct as outlined in the student handbook.
Also, your colleagues depend on your cooperation in maintaining a classroom
environment conducive to learning. Early departures, reading newspapers,
private conversations, eating, failure to turn off cell phones or pagers, or
any other disruptive behaviors are strongly discouraged. Any student acting in
such a disruptive manner may be asked to leave the room and will be penalized
accordingly.

Please talk to me immediately if you have questions or concerns about the
course material or requirements. If you are unsure about any part of the
assignments, please ask about it in advance! Also, there are many programs on
campus, such as the Learning Skills Program and the Writing Center, that are
designed to assist students in note taking, exam preparation, essay skills,
and with any personal concerns. Be sure to take advantage of these resources
that are available and open to all students at no cost. Please visit
www.uvc.ohio-state.edu for more general information.

Students with disability need to consult with the Office for Disability
Service to discuss and arrange specific accommodations and services needed in
this course. They are responsible for documenting their needs and seeking
necessary assistance from the instructor in a timely manner.

**GRADE APPEAL**

The request for a review of your grade should be made no later than one week
after the day on which the exams and papers are first returned in class. For
administrative reasons, please write a short paragraph (or more if necessary)
and be as concrete and specific as you can in explaining why you feel you
should have received a higher grade and what may have been missed or
misunderstood in your work. Your grade appeal will be answered with a detailed
written comment within a few days.  
_  
_**COURSE HOMEPAGE  
**  
The course homepage is designed to assist in administrative and organizational
matters. Such material as the syllabus, lecture outlines, major announcements,
and handouts will be made available as much as possible at this web site. The
homepage also features links to on-line resources related to the study of U.S.
history.



**COURSE SCHEDULE  
**

  
Lectures and assignments are tentatively scheduled below. Students are
responsible for finding out about any announcements made in class or about any
changes made in the syllabus.

_The American People_ = AP  
_Retrieving the American Past_ = RTAP

  
WEEK 1 (9/20-22)

Reconstruction: An Unfinished Revolution  
Reading: AP, chap. 16

The Triumph of Industrial Capitalism  
Reading: AP, chaps. 18 (pp. 466-79), 19 (pp.495-501); "The Rise of Big
Business" (RTAP), pp. 2-17

WEEK 2 (9/25-29)

The Workers' Revolt  
Reading: AP, chaps. 18 (pp. 479-92), 21 (pp. 551-57); "The Age of Industrial
Violence" (RTAP)  
  
The Farmers' Revolt  
Reading: AP, chaps. 17, 19 (pp. 507-14)  
  
Progressivism I: Social Reform  
Reading: AP, chaps. 19 (pp. 501-4), 21 (pp. 543-51); Arthur S. Link and
Richard L. McCormick, _Progressivism_ (packet)

WEEK 3 (10/2-6)

Progressivism II: Political Reform  
Reading: AP, chaps. 19 (pp. 504-7), 21 (pp. 557-60, 565-66); William L.
Riordon, _Plunkitt of Tammany Hall_ (packet)  
  
Progressivism III: Economic Reform  
Reading: AP, chap. 21 (pp. 560-64, 566-72); Gabriel Kolko,  "Big Business and
Progressivism" (packet)

American Imperialism  
Reading: AP, chap. 20; William A. Williams, "The Open Door and China" (packet)

******* Short Paper #1 Due: October 6 (Friday) *******

WEEK 4 **** (10/9-13)

America at War: World War I  
Reading: AP, chaps. 22, 23 (pp. 600-3); Walter LaFeber, "The Decisions for
War" (packet)

The New Era: The 1920s  
Reading: AP, chap. 23 (pp. 603-20, 622-24); "Hoover, the 'Associative' State
and the Great Depression" (RTAP), pp. 54-64; "Advertising and Marketing in
American Society During the 1920s and 1930s" (RTAP), pp. 73-97, 102-3, 112-17  

WEEK 5 **** (10/16-20)

The Great Depression  
Reading: AP, chaps. 23 (pp. 624-26), 24 (pp. 627-33); "Hoover, the
'Associative' State and the Great Depression" (RTAP), pp. 64-70

******* Midterm Exam: October 20 (Friday) *******

WEEK 6 (10/23-27)

The "First" New Deal  
Reading: AP, chap. 24 (pp. 633-40); Ellis W. Hawley, "The NRA and Industrial
Self-Government" (packet)  
  
The New Deal From Below  
Reading: AP, chap. 24 (pp. 640-55); "Industrial Unionism: A Chapter in
American Democracy" (RTAP)  
  
WEEK 7 (10/30-11/3)

The Crisis of the New World Order  
Reading: AP, chaps. 23 (pp. 620-22), 25 (pp. 657-75); "United States Entry
into World War II" (RTAP)

The Origins of the Cold War  
Reading: AP, chaps. 25 (pp. 675-85), 27 (pp. 711-20): "Truman's Decision to
Drop the Atomic Bomb" (RTAP)  

The New Cold War Order  
Reading: AP, chap. 27 (pp. 720-34); "The Korean War and the Rise of the
National Security State" (RTAP), pp.

WEEK 8 (11/6-9)

The Fifties: The Age of Consensus  
Reading: AP, chaps. 26 (pp. 686-99), 28 (pp. 745-53)

Civil Rights: Rising Wind  
Reading: AP, chaps. 26 (pp. 705-9), 29 (pp. 772-76); Moody, _Coming of Age in
Mississippi_ , parts 1, 2

WEEK 9 **** (11/13-17)

Civil Rights: Non-Violence and Mass Action  
Reading: AP, chaps. 28 (pp. 753-55), 29 (pp. 776-81); Moody, part 3

Civil Rights: Many Roads to Freedom  
Reading: AP, chaps. 28 (pp. 755-59), 29 (pp. 781-84); Moody, part 4

The End of the Sixties: Coming Apart  
Reading: AP, chaps. 26 (pp. 699-705), 28 (pp. 759-61), 29 (pp. 784 803); Bruce
J. Schulman, _Lyndon B. Johnson and American Liberalism_ (packet)

WEEK 10 (11/20-22)

******* Short Paper # 2 Due: November 20 (Monday) *****  
**

The Vietnam War I: Intervention  
Reading: AP, chap. 27 (pp. 734-35); George C. Herring, _America's Longest War_
, pp. 3-17, 61-79 (packet)

The Vietnam War II: Escalation  
Reading: AP, chap. 27 (pp. 735-36); Herring, pp. 121-26, 130-37 (packet)

WEEK 11 (11/27-12/1)

The Vietnam War III: War on Two Fronts  
Reading: AP, chaps. 27 (pp. 736-43), 28 (pp. 762-66); Herring, pp. 186-201
(packet)

America in a Changed World  
Reading: AP, chaps. 28 (pp. 762-70), 30

******* Final Exam: December 5 (Tuesday), 11:30 a.m.-1:18 p.m. *******

