**COURSE SYLLABUS**

**ESI 5531 DISCRETE SYSTEMS SIMULATION**

_**1\. COURSE PREFIX AND COURSE NAME**_

ESI 5531: DISCRETE SYSTEMS SIMULATION

_**2\. PREREQUISITE(S)**_

STA 3032 (Probability and Statistics for Engineers)

_**3\. INSTRUCTOR NAME, OFFICE, PHONE, NUMBER, AND OFFICE HOURS**_

_**4\. TIME/.DAY COURSE TAUGHT**_

_**5\. UNIVERSITY CATALOG DESCRIPTON**_

Methods for performing discrete systems simulation using an advanced
simulation language will be presented.

_**6\. COURSE OBJECTIVES**_

To show students how to analyze problems by use of a simulation model. The
course will cover the generation of random numbers and random variables to
simulate stochastic behavior; when to stop a simulation and what confidence to
place in the resulting estimators; building and animating a SIMAN model;
analyzing the results and comparing alternatives.

_**7\. COURSE TEXTS**_

C. Pedgen, R. Shannon, R. Sadowski, _**Introduction to Simulation Using
SIMAN**_ , McGraw-Hill, Inc., 1990

Kinko's notes

_**REFERENCE:**_

Law, A. M. and Kelton, W. D., _**Simulation Modeling and Analysis**_ , McGraw-
Hill Book Co., 2nd ed., 1990

_**8\. STATEMENT CONCERNING STUDENT LEARNING EXPERIENCES, INCLUDING COURSE
&QUOT;DESIGN&QUOT; CONTENTS.**_

_**9\. ACADEMIC DISHONESTY POLICY.**_

_**10\. EXAMINATION POLICY**_

_**11\. ATTENDANCE POLICY**_

_**12\. COURSE GRADING POLICY**_

_**13\. COURSE CALENDER**_

1\. Introduction to modeling

2\. Beginning the study

3\. Basic modeling concepts

4\. Model verification and validation

5\. Design of experiments

6\. Interpreting simulation output

7\. Animating the simulation

8\. Advanced modeling concepts

_**14\. OVERVIEW OF TERM PROJECT, CASE, OR WRITING ASSIGNMENT**_

Access to a microcomputer (IBM compatible running DOS 5.0). Students are
authorized by manufacturer to make copies of SIMAN.

_**15\. WRITTEN ASSIGNMENT INSTRUCTIONS**_

_**16\. TEACHING FORMAT**_

**COURSE SYLLABUS**

**EIN 5255 - TRAINING SIMULATOR ENGINEERING**

_**1\. COURSE PREFIX AND COURSE NAME**_

EIN 5255 - TRAINING SIMULATOR ENGINEERING

_**2\. PREREQUISITES**_

_**3\. INSTRUCTOR NAME, OFFICE, PHONE NUMBER, AND OFFICE HOURS**_

_**4\. TIME/DAY COURSE TAUGHT**_

_**5\. UNIVERSITY CATALOG DESCRIPTION**_

Introduction to significant topics relative to the development and use of
simulators for knowledge transfer in the technical environment.

_**6\. COURSE OBJECTIVES**_

To familiarize students with real-time simulation, focusing on the design and
development of simulators used in training. This course will provide the
necessary foundation for students pursuing advanced studies in simulation
systems or those interested in getting an overview of training devices /
systems.

_**7\. COURSE TEXTS**_

Textbooks (References):

**** _**" Military Contributions to Instructional Technology"**_, Ellis, J.
A., Praeger Publications

_**" Flight Simulation"**_, Rolfe, J. M. and Staples, K. J., Cambridge
University Press

_**8\. STATEMENT CONCERNING STUDENT LEARNING EXPERIENCES, INCLUDING COURSE
&QUOT;DESIGN&QUOT; CONTENTS.**_

The course is designed to stimulate the student's interest in Training
Simulation Systems through the use of formal lectures, real-world examples,
current literature coverage and technological demonstrations when available.

_**9\. ACADEMIC DISHONESTY POLICY.**_

In accordance with currently stated University of Central Florida Policies.

_**10\. EXAMINATION POLICY.**_

Two examinations will be required to complete the stated course objectives.

Each examination (Midterm and Final) will be take home examinations wherein
the student may use course notes, literature articles, handouts or any other
printed source material for their response. The student shall not use other
individuals work must be

_**11\. ATTENDANCE POLICY**_

The students are expected to attend class regularly and to participate in
class discussions. Class participation grades are based on the student's
active contribution to the topics under discussion.

_**12\. COURSE GRADING POLICY.**_

**Grading Criteria: Weighted Grading Criteria:**

A = 89.5 - 100 Quizzes = 25%

B = 79.5 - 89.49 Research Paper = 30%

C = 69.5 - 79.49 Final Examination = 30%

D = 59.5 - 69.49 Class Participation = 15%

F =  < 59.5 _________________

Total = 100%

_**13\. COURSE CALENDAR**_

**TOPICS**

1\. History of Training Simulation, Definitions, Stare-of-the-Art

2\. The Training Simulator

3\. Determining Simulator Requirements

4\. Mathematics of Simulation Engineering

5\. Computational Systems / Architectures

6\. Software Design

7\. Interface Design

8\. Visual Displays / Graphics

9\. Motion Simulation / Control Loading

10\. Instructional Delivery System

11\. Trainee Station Design

12\. Sensor Simulation

13\. Simulator Testing

14\. Logistic Support

15\. Future Technologies

_**14\. OVERVIEW OF TERM PROJECT, CASE, OR WRITING ASSIGNMENT**_

_**15\. WRITTEN ASSIGNMENT INSTRUCTIONS**_

_**16\. TEACHING FORMAT**_

**COURSE SYLLABUS**

**ESI 6127 STATISTICAL ASPECTS OF DIGITAL SIMULATION**

_**1\. COURSE PREFIX AND COURSE NAME**_

ESI 6127 STATISTICAL ASPECTS OF DIGITAL SIMULATION

_**2\. PREREQUISITE(S)**_

STA 5156 or equivalent

_**3\. INSTRUCTOR NAME, OFFICE, PHONE, NUMBER, AND OFFICE HOURS**_

_**4\. TIME/.DAY COURSE TAUGHT**_

_**5\. UNIVERSITY CATALOG DESCRIPTON**_

Statistical issues in digital simulation including input data analysis,
pseudorandom number generation, experimental design, and simulation output
analysis.

_**6\. COURSE OBJECTIVES**_

The purpose of this course is to provide students a solid theoretical basis
for statistical modeling as it pertains to simulation studies. Particular
emphasis will be placed on modeling input data, generation of random numbers
and random variates, output analysis, and experimental design and
optimization.

_**7\. COURSE TEXTS**_

_**Simulation Modeling and Analysis**_ by A.M. Law and W.D. Kelton, McGraw-
Hill, latest edition.

_**8\. STATEMENT CONCERNING STUDENT LEARNING EXPERIENCES, INCLUDING COURSE
&QUOT;DESIGN&QUOT; CONTENTS.**_

_**9\. ACADEMIC DISHONESTY POLICY.**_

_**10\. EXAMINATION POLICY**_

_**11\. ATTENDANCE POLICY**_

_**12\. COURSE GRADING POLICY**_

_**13\. COURSE CALENDER**_

**TOPICS:**

Review of Probability and Statistics

Random variables

Estimation of means, variances, and correlations

Confidence intervals and hypothesis tests for the mean

Time persistent statistics

Covariance-stationary processes

Monte Carlo simulations

Modeling input data

Useful distributions

Hypothesizing families of distributions

Estimation of parameters

Goodness-of-fit tests

Shifted and truncated distributions

Models of arrival processes

Random numbers

Generation

Testing

When to use more than one string

Random variates

Generation methods

Modeling families of distributions

Generating correlated variates

Generating arrival processes

Output analysis

Transient and steady state behavior

Analysis of terminating simulations

Analysis for steady-state situations

Multiple measures of performance

Comparing alternative scenarios

Two scenarios

More than two scenarios

Experimental design

Factorial designs

Factor screening strategies

Response surfaces

Variance reduction techniques

_**14\. OVERVIEW OF TERM PROJECT, CASE, OR WRITING ASSIGNMENT**_

_**15\. WRITTEN ASSIGNMENT INSTRUCTIONS**_

_**16\. TEACHING FORMAT**_

**COURSE SYLLABUS**

**EIN 6317 - TRAINING SYSTEMS ENGINEERING**

_**1\. COURSE PREFIX AND COURSE NAME**_

EIN 6317 - TRAINING SYSTEMS ENGINEERING

**2\. PREREQUISITES**

_**3\. INSTRUCTOR NAME, OFFICE, PHONE NUMBER, AND OFFICE HOURS**_

_**4\. TIME/DAY COURSE TAUGHT**_

_**5\. UNIVERSITY CATALOG DESCRIPTION**_

How human performance deficiencies should be addressed from a systems
engineering point of view. Manpower, personnel and training considerations
will be examined.

_**6\. COURSE OBJECTIVES**_

To introduce the student to training development issues, including complex
technological solutions to training deficiencies as well as managerial
solutions, using existing or low cost alternatives. Structured training
development methodologies will also be covered. The student will develop an
understanding of the training system development process and the associated
issues related to developing a modern training system.

_**7\. COURSE TEXTS**_

**Textbook:**

None, however outside reading assignments will be required to augment the
classroom lectures.

_**8\. STATEMENT CONCERNING STUDENT LEARNING EXPERIENCES, INCLUDING COURSE
&QUOT;DESIGN&QUOT; CONTENTS.**_

The course is designed to stimulate the student's interest in Training Systems
Design and application through the use of real-world examples, current
literature coverage and technological demonstrations when available.

_**9\. ACADEMIC DISHONESTY POLICY.**_

In accordance with currently stated University of Central Florida Policies.

_**10\. EXAMINATION POLICY.**_

Two examinations will be required to complete the stated course objectives.

Each examination (Midterm and Final) will be take home examinations wherein
the student may use course notes, literature articles, handouts or any other
printed source material for their response. The student shall not use other
individuals work must be

_**11\. ATTENDANCE POLICY**_

The students are expected to attend class regularly and to participate in
class discussions. Class participation grades are based on the student's
active contribution to the topics under disucssion.

_**12\. COURSE GRADING POLICY.**_

**Grading Criteria: Weighted Grading Criteria:**

A = 89.5 - 100 Midterm Examination = 25%

B = 79.5 - 89.49 Project / Presentation = 30%

C = 69.5 - 79.49 Final Examination = 25%

D = 59.5 - 69.49 Reading Assignments (10) = 10%

F =  < 59.5 Class Participation = 10%

_________________

Total = 100%

_**13\. COURSE CALENDAR**_

**TOPICS**

1\. Introduction to Course, Course Requirements Training Systems Defined

2\. Systems Approach to Training and Training Planning

3\. Conceptual Basis for Acquisition of Hardware and Training Equipment

4\. Life Cycle Systems Management, Assessment Procedure, Analysis Procedure

5\. Task Analysis, Selecting Tasks for Training, Selecting Training Sites

6\. Determination of Tasks for Simulator Application, Target
PopulationAnalysis, Human Cognition and its Impact on Training Development and
design

7\. Institute for Simulation and Training (IST) Visit (as Available)

8\. Job Aids, Job Aid analysis, Intelligent Systems and Embedded Training

9\. Objectives, Tasks, Measures of Performance, Task Specifications,
Simulation-Performance Validity, Repeated Performance Measure and Competency

10\. Training Device Requirements, Training Strategies, Documentation

11\. Cost and Training Effectiveness Analysis, Cost  & Operational
Effectiveness Analysis, Models, Evaluation

12\. Best Training, Verification and Validation

13\. Introduction to MIL-STD 1379D and Instructional System Design

14\. Project Presentations

_**14\. OVERVIEW OF TERM PROJECT, CASE, OR WRITING ASSIGNMENT**_

_**15\. WRITTEN ASSIGNMENT INSTRUCTIONS**_

_**16\. TEACHING FORMAT**_

**COURSE SYLLABUS**

**EIN 6532 - OBJECT ORIENTED SIMULATION**

_**1\. COURSE PREFIX AND COURSE NAME**_

EIN 6532 - OBJECT ORIENTED SIMULATION

_**2\. PREREQUISITE(S)**_

ESI 5531 or equivalent.

_**3\. INSTRUCTOR NAME, OFFICE, PHONE, NUMBER, AND OFFICE HOURS**_

_**4\. TIME/.DAY COURSE TAUGHT**_

_**5\. UNIVERSITY CATALOG DESCRIPTON**_

Object-Oriented modeling and development techniques to build large process-
based discrete event simulation models: concurrency in discrete event
simulation; object oriented simulation language support; development
environments; and future directions.

_**6\. COURSE OBJECTIVES**_

To introduce the methodology and strengths of object-oriented simulation to
students; to give the student experience in working with the object-oriented
modeling paradigm; to introduce to the student the issues surrounding
concurrency in compute simulation; and to identify future trends and areas of
investigation in object-oriented simulation.

_**7\. COURSE TEXTS**_

Rumbaugh, J., Blaha, M., Permerlani, W., Eddy, F., and Lorensen, W.,  "
_Object Oriented Modeling and Design_ ," Prentice Hall, 1991

CACI Products Company. _MODSIM: A Language for Object Oriented Simulation--
MODSIM Reference Manual_ , CACI Products Company, La Jolla, CA

**References** Assorted articles - list to be distributed

_**8\. STATEMENT CONCERNING STUDENT LEARNING EXPERIENCES, INCLUDING COURSE
&QUOT;DESIGN&QUOT; CONTENTS.**_

_**9\. ACADEMIC DISHONESTY POLICY.**_

_**10\. EXAMINATION POLICY**_

_**11\. ATTENDANCE POLICY**_

_**12\. COURSE GRADING POLICY**_

_**13\. COURSE CALENDER**_

TOPICS

1\. The object-oriented paradigm and object-oriented programming.

2\. Encapsulation, reusability and extensibility in Object-Oriented
Programming Languages.

3\. Identify, classification, polymorphism

4\. The Object Oriented Modeling Paradigm

4.1 Analysis

4.2 System Design

4.3 Object Design

4.4 Implementation

5\. MODSIM--an object-oriented simulation language.

5.1 Syntax and Structure of MODSIM programs.

5.2 Object Oriented Programming

5.3 Object Oriented Simulation

6\. Object Oriented simulation development environments.

7\. Areas of investigation in object-oriented simulation.

_**14\. OVERVIEW OF TERM PROJECT, CASE, OR WRITING ASSIGNMENT**_

Students will be required to model and perform computer simulations using an
object oriented simulation language (MODSIM). The work will be performed on
SUN work stations in the COE Computer Laboratory.

_**15\. WRITTEN ASSIGNMENT INSTRUCTIONS**_

_**16\. TEACHING FORMAT**_

**COURSE SYLLABUS**

**EIN 6645 MODELING AND SIMULATION OF REAL-TIME PROCESSES**

_**1\. COURSE PREFIX AND COURSE NAME**_

EIN 6645 Modeling and Simulation of Real-time Processes

_**2\. PREREQUISITE(S)**_

The course will emphasize hardware and software special issues and concerns of
real-time simulation, e.g. of simulations where asynchronous inputs are
received from outside which interrupt the work and which must be attended
before resuming the on-going activity. Although the course will not feature
programming assignments (homework), students are expected to be famliar with
programming in general. A course in a HOL, such as ADA, C, Modula, or
structured FORTRAN is acceptable. A course in human factors is highly
recommended.

_**3\. INSTRUCTOR NAME, OFFICE, PHONE, NUMBER, AND OFFICE HOURS**_

_**4\. TIME/.DAY COURSE TAUGHT**_

_**5\. UNIVERSITY CATALOG DESCRIPTON**_

Mathematical modeling and computer simulation of engineering and scientific
systems. Examination of hardware, software, and solution methods for real-time
systems

_**6\. COURSE OBJECTIVES**_

To introduce real-time simulation concepts with emphasis on proactical real-
world applications from the human factor, programming, and engineering
perspectives. Part of the course will survey methods used in the industry with
definitions, concepts, usage, and cost of real-time simulator elements. The
human training goals, performance measures, and sensory abilities as critical
design factors in the simulator development will be emphasized through a term
project. The project will deal with issues associated to working in a defense-
related environment.

Specific course objective include to introduce the student to:

Simulation life-cycle, from concept and specification, through development, to
finished product, life time support and product disposal.

Real-time concepts, with emphasis on identifying necessary real-time elements
from elements that can be handled  "else when".

Survey examples of existing simulator technologie, with performance vs cost
tradeoffs illustrations.

Some industry methods for a successful response to an RFP.

Real-time software/hardware engineering techniques.

Case study of the evolution of the VIGS (Video Interactive Gunnery Simmulator)

Human factors case study.

_**7\. COURSE TEXTS**_

_**a. required texts**_

David L. Ripps, _**An Implementation Guide to Real-time Programming**_ **,**
Yourdon Press, a division of Prentice-Hall, 1989.

_**b. references:**_

W.H. Roetzheim, _**Developing Software to Government Standards**_ , Prentice-
Hall, 1991.

Don Morgan, _**Numerical Methods: Real-time and Embedded Systems
Programming**_ , M&T Books, 1992.

D.J. Hatley and I.A. Pirbhai, _**Strategies for Real-time Systems
Specifications**_ , Dorset House, 1988.

_**8\. STATEMENT CONCERNING STUDENT LEARNING EXPERIENCES, INCLUDING COURSE
&QUOT;DESIGN&QUOT; CONTENTS.**_

_**9\. ACADEMIC DISHONESTY POLICY.**_

_**10\. EXAMINATION POLICY**_

_**11\. ATTENDANCE POLICY**_

_**12\. COURSE GRADING POLICY**_

_**13\. COURSE CALENDER**_

**Topics**

Applications of R/T simulaiton

Outline of a typical simulation company

Definitions of real-time and simulation

-case study examples 

-human factors engineering studies 

-mission levels 

-part-task trainers 

procedural/freeplay

Critical issues of term project

Advertising-related issues

manufactures and sales reps

specs manual

documentation

tech support

Future directions of research

Visual Systems

visual systems design

polygon, bitmap, combination bias

pipeline vs distributed data algorithms

video disk and other techniques

update rates as a function of task rate

update rate and resolutions as expense factor

Case studies, Evans and Sutherland, Links, ECC, VIGS.

Software Issues\

Clock-based/polled/interrupt-driven/human driven (transport delays)

analysis and design considerations

functional decomposition

moduarity and reusability

safety-mission critical components

3d interface--A/Ds

Operating Systems

real-time vs non-real-time--

advantages and disadvantages

DOS, V, Unix, and VRTX

polled vs. interrupt driven vs human interrupt driven

interrupt layer effects

privilege levels

hardware and software interrupts

non-predictability of operation

Databases

language considerations

VIGS/ECC case study

shared database-- tied in memory

distributed database performance

RAM architecture

dual port

DMA-truth and fallacies

compression algorithms

pkzip

DVI

fractal compression

Software Issues

OOP

CASE tools

libraries (build vs buy)

language considerations

model vs embedded

docs/standards.

multi-processing vs multi-tasking

freeplay vs procedural

levels of simulation detail

(how real does it need to be)

human factors

fidelity issues

software interface design

timing considerations related to humans

Hardware Survey: concepts and definitions

micor=mainframe/ other interfaces

shared memory, networking

bandwidth, bus arbitration and considerations

peripherals

performance and bottlenecks

A/D cards

system survey examples

sizes

cost

language specificity

software support

maturity level

connectivity and compatibility issues

forwards and backwards compatibility

expendability

commonality with standards COTS hardware/software

embedded system considerations

firmware

support hardware

ICE

passive analyzers

human factors

hardware interface design

F15/F16/LANTIRN/VIGS case studies

_**14\. OVERVIEW OF TERM PROJECT, CASE, OR WRITING ASSIGNMENT**_

**Term Paper.** The term paper must somehow deal with the material covered inn
this class. Some references will be provided to get an intial idea and develop
it. The paper may be a research paper, a survey, a tutorial, or a proposal.
Please read the "Instructions to Authors" in _**SIMULATION**_ and follow the
journal's instructions and suggestions. Students are expected to find new
references (at least 3) and enclose photocopies of them with the paper.

**Group Project.** Students will form teams and develop a real-time simulation
that meets the requirements specifiec in the first week of class. Each team
member will serve as a different department (human factors, hardware, or
software engineering). This project will:

a. allow the students to acquire a high level of understanding of the actual
team environment in which real-time simulators are specified, designed, and
developed; and

b. encourage creative thinking and the exchange of ideas in the design process
from human training, human sensory abilities, hardware tradeoffs, and software
techniques.

The final report must include a requirements documents (what the system is
supposed to do to meet the contract, including testable, contract binding,
requirements); a hardware list,; a software requirement specification; and a
design document with a schematic layout, variable naming conventions, etc.

_**15\. WRITTEN ASSIGNMENT INSTRUCTIONS**_

_**16\. TEACHING FORMAT**_

**COURSE SYLLABUS**

**EIN 6647 INTELLIGENT SIMULATION**

_**1\. COURSE PREFIX AND COURSE NAME**_

EIN 6647 Intelligent Simulation

_**2\. PREREQUISITE(S)**_

Course(s) in discrete-event simulation and/or expert systems

_**3\. INSTRUCTOR NAME, OFFICE, PHONE, NUMBER, AND OFFICE HOURS**_

_**4\. TIME/.DAY COURSE TAUGHT**_

_**5\. UNIVERSITY CATALOG DESCRIPTON**_

The application of knowledge-based methods within artificial intelligence to
the field of computer simulation. Included are the use qualitative models and
the use of heuristic and fuzzy knowledge in traditional discrete-event
simulation modeling.

_**6\. COURSE OBJECTIVES**_

1\. Provide a definition for and identify domain of intelligent simulation..

2\. Review the major branches of intelligent simulation research and
applications.

3\. Develop understanding of principle issues and technologies associated with
intelligent simulation

4\. Develop and implement an intelligent simulation model.

_**7\. COURSE TEXTS**_

_**a. required texts**_

_**Knowlege Based Simulation**_. Paul A. Fishwich and Richard B. Modjeski
(editiors). Springer-Verlag, New York, 1991.

**or**

_**Artifical Intelligence, Simulation and Modeling**_ , Lawrence Widman,
Kenneth Loparo, Norman Nielsen (editiors) . Wiley and Sons , 1989.

8\. Statement concerning student learning experiences, including course
"design" contents.

_**9\. ACADEMIC DISHONESTY POLICY.**_

_**10\. EXAMINATION POLICY**_

_**11\. ATTENDANCE POLICY**_

_**12\. COURSE GRADING POLICY**_

_**13\. COURSE CALENDER**_

**TOPICS**

1\. Review: simulation, expert systems, and AI

2\. Knowledge Representation in a simulation model

3\. Intelligent Simulation Methodologies

simulation advisor

model development

output analysis/decision making

rule-based models

qualitative models

decision making within a procedural simulation model

4\. Factual verses Behavioral Entity Knowledge

5\. Intelligent Autonomous Entities

6\. Implementing Intelligent Simulation Models

7\. Future Directions

8\. Literature Reviews

_**14\. OVERVIEW OF TERM PROJECT, CASE, OR WRITING ASSIGNMENT**_

Students are required to develop and exercise an intelligent simulation model.
Task may either be individual or group. **fulfils ABET requirements.**

Students are required to find and provide written review of three journal
articles relating to intelligent simulation. Student will provide presentation
of articles identifying their relevance and relationship to the topics
introduced in the course.

_**15\. WRITTEN ASSIGNMENT INSTRUCTIONS**_

_**16\. TEACHING FORMAT**_

