**The Citadel  
EDUC 531Principles of Elementary Curriculum Development **  
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION  
Spring 2002

**IN _STRUCTOR_** : Kathy Laboard Brown, Ed. D.  
**OFFICE:** 304 Capers Hall  
**OFFICE HOURS** : Posted on door Monday - 3:00 PM - 4:00 PM; 6:45 PM - 7:30
PM  
Tuesday -10:00 AM - 11:00 AM; 3:00 PM - 4:00 PM; 6:45 PM - 7:30 PM  
Wednesday - 5:30 PM - 6:45 PM  
Others by appointment  
**OFFICE PHONE** : (843) 953-2064  
**HOME PHONE:** (843) 577-5997  
**E-MAIL:** kathy.brown@citadel.edu or klaboard@aol.com  
**MEETING** : Tuesday - 4:00 PM - 6:45 PM  
**ROOM** : Capers 305

**COURSE DESCRIPTION:** Three Credit Hours The study of underlying principles
of curriculum development and organization including curriculum evaluations
and current issues and trends in the subject fields will be the focus of the
course. Attention is given to the professional decisions teachers,
administrators, and counselors must make about curriculum.  
Course Prerequisite: None

**REQUIRED TEXTS/MATERIALS** Passe, J. (1999). _Elementary school curriculum._
(2nd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. Computer with Internet and word processing
capability.

> **CONCEPTUAL BASE**  
>  The Citadel's Department of Education has adopted Learner-Centered
Education as its conceptual base. Learner-Centered Education provides several
advantages over others that might be considered. These include:  
>  1\. A conceptual base that can be embraced equally by all programs within
the department.  
>  2\. The reason schools exist: helping all students to learn more
effectively.  
>  3\. The learner as the most important and pivotal person in the teaching-
learning equation.  
>  4\. A framework within which curricular deve1opments, instructional
strategies and tactics, and assessment procedures can be measured.  
>  
>  _Definition of Learner-Centered Education:_  
>  Learner-centered education is defined by McCombs and Whisler (1997. p.9)
as: the perspective that couples a focus on individual learners (their
heredity, experiences, perspectives, backgrounds, talents, interests,
capacities, and needs) with a focus on learning (the best available knowledge
about learning and how it occurs and about teaching practices that is most
effective in promoting the highest levels of motivation, learning, and
achievement for all learners). This dual focus, then, informs and drives
educational decision-making.  
>  
>  Learner-centered education in this view embodies the learner and learning
in the programs, policies and teaching that support effective learning for all
students. Administrators are responsible for developing, maintaining and
enhancing a school environment that continually improves effective learning.
They are responsible also for assuring teachers are knowledgeable about their
students and how learning best occurs. Teachers are responsible both for
having classrooms that promote effective learning and for being familiar with
the instructional techniques that promote effective learning for all. School
counselors are concerned with improving both the conditions for learning
(parent education, classroom environment, teacher attitude) as well as
assisting each learner in developing his/her fullest potential. The following
five premises support these assertions.  
>  1\. Learners have distinctive perspectives or frames of reference,
contributed to by their history, the environment, their interests and goals,
their beliefs, their ways of thinking and the like. These must be attended to
and respected if learners are to become more actively involved in the learning
process and ultimately are to become independent thinkers.  
>  2\. Learners have individual differences, including emotional states of
minds, learning rates, learning styles, stages of development, abilities,
talents, and feelings of efficacy. These must be taken into account if all
learners are to learn more effectively and efficiently.  
>  3\. Learning is a process that occurs best when what is being learned is
relevant and meaningful to the learner and when the learner is actively
engaged in creating his or her own knowledge and understanding by connecting
what is being learned with prior knowledge and experience.  
>  4\. Learning occurs best in an environment that contains positive
interpersonal relationships and interactions and in which the learner feels
appreciated, acknowledged, respected, and validated.  
>  5\. Learning is seen as a fundamentally natural process; learners are
viewed as naturally curious and basically interested in learning about their
world and mastering it.  
>  
>  A learner-centered conceptual base, as described above, serves as an
integrative framework for scholarly activity, curriculum development and
revision, teaching, and professional endeavors. Obviously there is much more
supporting a learner-centered emphasis than provided above. Cognitive theory,
including meta-cognition, motivational and affective factors, development and
social attributes, and individual differences to name just a few of the
critical variables, are all involved. The central emphasis, and understanding,
that emerge from an integrated and holistic examination of a learner-centered
approach is simple: that for educational systems to serve the needs of every
learner, it is essential that every instructional decision be based on an
understanding of the learning process and be focused on the individual
learner.  
>  
>  _This course is related to Learner-Centered Education in the following
manner:_ Candidates will have the opportunity to collaborate with
practitioners, colleagues, and instructors and consult current research to
construct their understanding of the school function of supervisory practice.
Not only will students analyze case studies but also they will research the
data on effective supervision practices. The multiple skill and tasks of
supervision and techniques will be incorporated into class assignments.  
>  
>  **_COURSE OBJECTIVES:_  
>  ELCC, Educational Leadership Constituent Council Guidelines  
>  (ISLLC), Interstate School Leaders Licensure Consortium standards **  
>  
>  **_Area I, Strategic Leadership:_** The knowledge, skills and attributes to
identify contexts, develop with others vision and purpose, utilize
information, frame problems, exercise leadership processes to achieve common
goals, and act ethically for educational communities.  
>  **1.1(1)** Facilitate the development and implementation of a shared vision
and strategic plan for the school or district that focuses on teaching and
learning.  
>  
>  Examples of activities and performance assessments:  
>  ， Develop a school profile that incorporates multiple information sources,
data collection, and data analysis strategies. Based on that analysis, outline
curriculum changes that would improve student achievement.  
>  ， Compare vision/mission statements of three schools. Write a critique
showing the link to the educational/supervisory philosophy  
>  ， Plan appropriate staff development based on strategies or tactics listed
in school or district's strategic plan  
>  
>  **_AREA II, INSTRUCTIONAL LEADERSHIP:_** The knowledge, skills and
attributes to design with others appropriate curricula and instructional
programs, to develop learner centered school cultures, to assess outcomes, to
provide student personnel services, and to plan with faculty professional
development activities aimed at improving instruction. **3.2(1)** Develop,
collaboratively, a learning organization that supports instructional
improvement, builds an appropriate curriculum, and incorporates best practice  
>

>

> Examples of activities and performance assessments:  
>  ， Using common planning times and representatives from different
departments or content areas discuss strengths and weaknesses of current
curricular programs. Collectively analyze results, plan steps, and a timeline
for aligning the curriculum standards to match student needs. Reference the
textbook, materials and resources, methods and strategies, lesson plans that
were consulted to ensure student achievement and accountability.  
>  ， Develop an electronic presentation for first-year administrators on how
to facilitate the processes of curriculum development, design, implementation,
and evaluation at the building level to promote academic achievement and best
practices.  
>

>

> _**3.3(2)**_ **** Base curricular decisions on research, applied theory,
informed practice, the recommendations of learned societies, and state and
federal policies and mandates. Examples of activities and performance
assessments:  
>  ， Compare/contrast the characteristics of the various educational
philosophies. In a double-entry journal, cite examples of
teacher/administrative behavior that support or refute curricular decisions
based on the philosophy(s) implemented at your school.  
>  ， Analyze a Case Study #56. Explain the supervisory model(s) used; discuss
the theory and reasons for your choice.  
>  ， Choose one benchmark school and relate how the principal used one or more
of the five curriculum leadership behaviors.

>

> **_3.4 (2)_** Design curricula with consideration for philosophical,
sociological, and historical foundations, democratic values, and the
community's values, goals, social needs and changing conditions. Examples of
activities and performance assessments:  
>  ， Analyze the curriculum that you teach; interpret and explain the impact
of philosophical, sociological, historical foundations on the development of
that curriculum.  
>  ， Choose five newspaper articles that address current issues and trends
that will influence curriculum. Develop processes for engaging teachers in
interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary curriculum development.

>

> **_3.5(2)_** Align curricular goals and objectives with instructional goals
and objectives and desired outcomes when developing scope, sequence, balance,
etc. Examples of activities and performance assessments:  
>  ， Review South Carolina curriculum standards in your curriculum/grade area
of concentration; show correlation of standards to content area curriculum.  
>  ， Develop sample activities and assessments that align with your curricular
goals and objectives; show correlation to PACT and norm-referenced testing.  
>  ， Develop an annual report that shows the horizontal and vertical
dimensions of your area of curriculum concentration.

>

> **_3.6(2)_** Develop with others curriculum and instruction appropriate for
varied teaching and learning styles and specific student needs based on
gender, ethnicity, culture, social class and exceptionalities Examples of
activities and performance assessments:  
>  ， Develop a presentation for induction teachers that shows the correlation
between development and implementation of curriculum; illustrate how
instructional accommodations are made for learning styles and special needs of
students based on gender, ethnicity, culture, social class and
exceptionalities  
>  ， Review the philosophy of learner-centered education. Identify varied
teaching/learning styles relative to that philosophy.  
>  ， Develop with your grade-level team a curriculum for students who have
been retained in a grade or course.  
>  **  
> COURSE REQUIREMENTS - See rubrics for round table discussions, critiques,
and electronic presentation**

>

> **1\. Readings and Round Table Discussions** \- Read textbook; select a
chapter from the text, find a research article that extends the research
presented in the chapter. Be prepared to facilitate the round table
discussions by: (a) summarizing the chapter, (b) emphasizing the knowledge,
disposition, and performance tasks required for facilitating elementary
curriculum, (c) and specifying the theoretical and practical approaches that
can be implemented at the building level. These activities are worth 25
points.  
>  **2\. Research** \- Review current research that addresses curriculum
design, planning, development, and evaluation. Prepare two, 3-5 - page
critiques that: (a) adhere to APA style; (b) include a minimum of five entries
on the reference list; (c) state clearly the primary researcher's position
relative to knowledge, disposition, and performance tasks required by
administrators for transformative curriculum leadership; (d) compare and
contrast supportive and contradictory perspectives of the issue stated; (e)
interpret the research by explaining administrative candidate's position prior
to reading the research, explaining how the research will influenced the
administrative candidate's approach to facilitating curriculum leadership, and
specifying how the research relates to design, planning, development,
implementation, or evaluation; (f) describe the procedures/steps that the
administrative candidate might use to implement curriculum theory and practice
and how the candidate will implement federal, state, and local mandates at the
building level. Submit critiques via email attachment. 30 points.  
>  **3\. Individual presentation** \- Select an ISLLC performance assessment
recorded on the syllabus, pp. 3-5; prepare an electronic presentation that
identifies the knowledge, disposition, and performance tasks required to
facilitate curriculum planning, design, development, implementation, and
evaluation. 25 points.  
>  **4\. Field Experience** - **Interview** representatives from different
grade levels or content areas. Create a school profile that outlines the
strengths and weaknesses of current curricular programs based on instructional
strategies, instructional accommodations made for diverse learning styles,
gender, ethnicity, culture, social class, exceptionalities, and the number of
low-performing students that require Academic Plans (APS). Analyze and
interpret results in a narrative to parents that specify the steps, the
predicted timeline for aligning curriculum to meet student needs. Reference
the textbook, materials and resources, methods and strategies, technological
resources that are employed to ensure student achievement and education
accountability. Specify the procedures that are in place and that will be
established to develop, design, implement, and evaluate curriculum. Share your
findings in a practical handout to be disseminated to the community. 20 Points

>

> _**ABSENCES**_ Regular attendance is required under The Citadel's policy.
Students will be given a zero (0) for missing quizzes, examinations, and other
assignments. Only under extraordinary circumstances will exceptions to this
rule be made. For any student, absences, whether authorized or unauthorized in
excess of 20%, or three sessions, or a total of nine hours out of 45 hours of
scheduled class time can, at the discretion of the professor, result in a
failing grade.

>

> **_LATE ASSIGNMENTS_** Assignments are due as indicated in the syllabus.
Assignments that are turned in late will lose credit at the rate of 1/10 the
point value of each day past the due date. Assignments that are not submitted
will earn a grade of zero.  
>

>

> **EVALUATION PROCEDURES AND WEIGHTS FOR ASSIGNMENTS:**  
>  Grades in this course will be based on points earned in various activities:

>

>  
>

> **Activity** | **Points** | **Course Final Grade**  
> ---|---|---  
> Readings/Participation  | 25  | A = 90 or more points  
> Research  | 30  | B = 80 to 89 points  
> Individual Presentation  | 25 | C = 70 to 79 points  
> Field Experience | 25  | F = Failure  
> TOTAL  | 100 |  
>  
>  
>  **_PROCEDURES FOR COURSE AND INSTRUCTOR EVALUATION_** : An instrument
(Classroom Performance Evaluation) is provided to each student to secure an
anonymous evaluation of the overall course. The result obtained is for the
professor and department head to improve the quality of the course and to
improve teaching effectiveness. The evaluations are also on file as one aspect
of data from students for the department head and dean to make decisions
related to promotion, tenure, and merit salary increases.

>

> Methodology: a variety of teaching methods will be used in this class. They
include, but are not necessarily limited to lecture, discussion, research
projects, critiques, group work, demonstrations, and student speeches.

>

> _**STATEMENT ON PLAGIARISM**_ **(Honor Manual)  
>  ** Plagiarism is a violation of the Honor Code. Plagiarism is the act of
using someone else's words as your own without giving proper credit to the
source:  
>  1\. When you quote another's words exactly you must use quotation marks and
a footnote (or an indication in your paragraph) to tell exactly where the
words came from, down to the page number(s).  
>  2\. When you mix another's words and ideas with your own in one or more
sentences, partially quoting the source exactly and partially substituting
your own words, you must put quotation marks around the words, you must put
quotation marks around the words you quote and not around your own. Then you
cite the source, down to the page number(s). [See (1) above]  
>  3\. When you paraphrase another's words or ideas, that is, when you
substitute your words for another's words but keep his idea(s), you do not use
quotation marks, but you must cite the source, down to the page number(s).
[See (1) above].  
>  4\. When you use only another's idea(s), knowing that they are his ideas,
you must cite the source of that idea or those ideas, down to the page
number(s). [See (1) above]  
>  5\. Citing the source means giving, as a minimum, the author, the title of
the book, and the page number.

>

> _**DISABILITY DISCLOSURE STATEMENT**_  
>  If you need accommodations because of a disability, please inform me
immediately. Please see me privately after class, or at my office.

>

> Office location:___Capers 304____________ Office hours See page #1______

>

> To request academic accommodations (for example, a note-taker), students
must also register with Academic Support, 101 Thompson Hall, 953-1821. It is
the campus office's responsibility to review documentation, provided by
students, requesting academic accommodations and to engage students and
instructors, as needed and consistent with course requirements, in
accommodation planning.

>

> **_COURSE OUTLINE/SCHEDULE_**

>

>   | **TOPIC & ASSIGNMENT** | ELCC  
>  Guidelines  
> ---|---|---  
> **01/08/02** |  ， Introductions, expectations, explanation and discussion of
the syllabus, conceptual framework of the department of education, and the
field of curriculum.  
>  ， Leadership style  
>  ， Overview of APA Style and electronic presentations  | 1.1(1)  
> **Assignment **next class** |  Read Chapter 1 |  
> **01/15/02** | **Part I - Introduction  
>  ** Chapter 1- Introduction  
>  ， Definition of curriculum, why study curriculum, curriculum vs instruction  
>  ， Aims of the curriculum  
>  ， The dynamic curriculum **  
> ** |  **3.3(1)**  
> **Assignment** |  Read Chapter 2 |  
> **01/22/02** | **Part II - Curriculum goals**  
>  Chapter 2 - Meeting the changing needs of individuals in our society  
>  ， Societal changes  
>  ， Solving societal problems  
>  ， Evaluating your own education | **3.4(2)**  
> **Assignment** |  Complete Chapter 3, Round table discussions  
>  ***Critique #1 - due 02/05/02  
>  ** |  
> **01/29/02** |  Chapter 3 - How can the curriculum meet the developmental
needs of elementary children?  
>  ， Types of development  
>  ， Development and the curriculum  
>  ， Problems of variation in development， Identifying developmental
capabilities  
>  | **1.1(1)**  
> **Assignment** |  Read Chapter 4, Individual presentations, round table
discussion, |  
> **02/05/02** |  Chapter 4 - The impact of history and philosophy on the
elementary curriculum  
>  ， Curriculum in colonial times  
>  ， Curriculum in the 1800s  
>  ， Curriculum in the 1900s  
>  | **3.4(2))**  
> **Assignment** |  Read Chapter, 5 - Individual presentations, round table
discussions. |  
> **02/12/02** | **Part III - Elementary curriculum issues  
>  ** Chapter 5 - Social Studies  
>  ， What is social studies?  
>  ， What are the goals of social studies?  
>  ， The role of the textbook  
>  | **3.2(1)**  
> **Assignment** |  Read Chapter 6, individual presentations, round table
discussions  |  
> **02/19/02** |  Chapter 6 - Science and health  
>  ， What is science?  
>  ， Goals of science education  
>  ， Health  
>  ， Science standards/special interest groups that influence the curriculum |
**3.2(1)**  
> **Assignment** |  Read Chapter 7, individual presentations, round table
discussions  |  
> **02/26/02** |  Chapter 7 - Language Arts  
>  ， Reading/oral language/listening/writing  
>  ， How technology is changing the language arts  
>  ， Standardized tests  
>  ， Bilingual education  
>  | **3.2(1)**  
> **Assignment** |  Read Chapter 8, individual presentations, round table
discussions, ***field experience - due 03/05/02- Sharing** |  
> **03/05/02** |  Chapter 8 - Mathematics  
>  ， What should be emphasized in mathematics  
>  ， What do the experts recommend?  
>  ， The gap between the intended curriculum and the actual curriculum  
>  ， Reform of mathematics education  | **3.2(1)**  
> **Assignment** |  Read Chapter 9, individual presentations, round table
discussions |  
> **03/12/02** |  Chapter 9 - The arts  
>  ， The new arts curriculum/national standards  
>  ， The gap between the intended curriculum and the actual curriculum  
>  ， Evaluation difficulties/need for specialists  
>  ， The relationship between funding and other curriculum areas  | **3.3(1)**  
> **Assignment** |  Read Chapter 10, individual presentations, round table
discussions  |  
> **03/19/02** |  Chapter 10 - Physical Education  
>  ， Physical education curriculum models  
>  ， Benefits of physical education/gaps/ goals  | **3.2(1)**  
> **Assignment** |  Read Chapter 11, individual presentations, round table
discussions ****Critique #2 - due 04/09/02** |  
> **03/26/01** |  Chapter 11 - Organizing classrooms and schools  
>  ， Graded and nongraded schools  
>  ， Horizontal organization  
>  ， Class size  
>  ， Classroom management | **3.5(2)**  
> **Assignment** |  Read Chapter 12, individual presentations, round table
discussions  |  
> **04/09/02** |

>

> Chapter 12 - The integrated elementary curriculum  
>  ， Benefits of the integrated curriculum  
>  ， Two approaches to curriculum integration  
>  Teaching in high poverty classrooms

>

> |  
> **Assignment** |  Read Chapter 13, individual presentations, round table
discussions |  
> **04/16/02** | **Part IV - Politics of elementary school curriculum  
>  ** Chapter 13 - How the curriculum is determined  
>  ， Federal role in determining the curriculum  
>  ， State role in determining the curriculum  
>  ， Role of school districts in determining the curriculum  | **3.5(2)**  
> **Assignment** |  Read Chapter 13 |  
> **04/23/02** | **-** How the curriculum is determined  
>  ， School's role/curriculum decision making  
>  ， How teachers influence the curriculum  
>  ， The power of teacher associations  
>  ， Politics at the school leve  
>  l， Managing curriculum reform  | **3.3(2)**  
>  
>  
>

>  

