**Information for the Music School Faculty  
  
**General Information  
All Instruction  
Applied Music Instruction  
Advising  
Important dates in academic year, 2000-2001  
  
Instrument Security Policy  
Ensemble Music Security Policy  
  
Faculty Procedure for Assigning Voice Students  
Procedure for Making Teacher Assignments for Voice Students  
  
Studio Requirements for Recital/Concert Attendance  
Studio Generic Course Outline  
Stetson University Ensemble Generic  
MC455 FLUTE Pedagogy and Repertoire  
Classroom Generic Course Outline MC100  
  
School of Music Area Coordinators - 2000-2001  
School of Music Faculty/Staff Responsibilities - 2000-2001  
  
Ways In Which Arts & Science and Business Students Can Get Involved In Music  
  
Promotion Guidelines

**  
**General Information

_Syllabus_ : Please pass out a syllabus in each class and submit a copy for
the Music Office files. Be as specific as possible in explaining your
expectations and grading policies. For example, your syllabus should include
the objectives of your course, your grading and attendance policies, your
expectations, your office hours, an academic honesty policy, etc. Studio
teachers should see the _Syllabus_ section of this brochure under Applied
Music Instruction.. On your computer disk there are generic syllabi for
studio, classroom, ensemble, and pedagogy/repertoire classes which you can
adapt to your specific needs.

_Student Attendance and Grading_ :  If a student is frequently absent from
class or lessons, please notify Campus Life, ext. 7200, and Mrs. Brunning.
Grades for music courses are ABCDF (with +/- options) with the exception of
aural training courses which are ABC/F (with +/- options).

_Office Hours_ :  Please provide ample opportunity for your students to get
the help they need to succeed in your class or lesson. Include your office
hours in your syllabus, and post your schedule on your office door.

_Grade Inventories_ :  Grade Inventories are due once each term (see schedule
on last page of this brochure). These are important evaluations which help the
students know how they are progressing in their college work. These reports
also protect you and the Music School from student complaints at the end of
the semester. You will receive grade reports from the Registrar on which you
should indicate grades for all students receiving C-, D, or F in your courses
or applied lessons. You do not report any grades above a C-.

_Incompletes_ :  This grade (I) should be given sparingly and only when a
student cannot complete the coursework because of illness or other
circumstances beyond the control of the student. All work for the course must
be completed two weeks prior to the last day of classes in the next academic
session of enrollment (excluding summer term). For applied lessons, the
student must complete the course within the first three weeks of the next
semester to be able to continue in the next applied course that semester.
Students request an Incomplete grade by filling out the Incomplete form which
must be signed by you and by the Dean or the Associate Dean.

_Music Office Work_ :  Anne Ross and her student assistants will be happy to
help with your class work. However, the Music Office is very busy, serving 40
faculty and almost 200 students; and the office workers are often too busy to
satisfy everyone's needs immediately. If you have work (e.g., Xeroxing syllabi
and handouts, picking up supplies at the Book Store), you may leave it in the
Music Office Work Box (Middle Office) 24 hours before your deadline. There are
forms on the wall by the Work Box that you should fill out with your
instructions and attach to your work project. _ _

_Audio Visual Equipment_ :  In addition to the AV equipment provided by Audio-
Visual Services (ext. 7182), the Music School has an overhead projector, tv-
vcr cart, video camera, chromatic tuner, and music-computer unit. Please
reserve AV equipment in the Check-Out Book in the bookcase in the Middle
Office. Mrs. Brunning will tell you where each of these pieces of equipment is
kept. Please return it to its home after your class.

_Room Reservations_ :  To reserve a room other than your assigned classroom,
check the rooms availability in the Room Reservation Book (Middle Office
bookcase). If the room is free, sign your name for the time that you need it.
_Elizabeth Hall Auditorium is reserved through Mrs. Brunning_.

_Music Library Deadlines_ : Due dates for circulating materials checked out by
faculty are January 1 for materials checked out May through November and June
1 for materials checked out December through April.

_Program copy Deadlines_ :  The Music School presents approximately 200
recitals a year, thatss 200 programs that must be typed, copied, folded, and
distributed by the Music Office, i.e., Anne Ross. It is essential that we
observe the following deadlines for submitting program copy:

Ensembles: at least 2 weeks before the concert;

Faculty Recitals: at least 6 working days before the recital;

Senior Recitals: within 24 hours of successful completion of the Hearing;

Student Recitals: by Tuesday noon of the week of the student recital.

Because of the many chores for which the Music Office is responsible, it will
be necessary for you to provide your own programs if you do not meet the
deadline.

_Outside Employment of Your Students_ :  Music students often have
opportunities to perform off campus. While these opportunities are valuable
educational experiences, it is also important to insure that students fulfill
their primary responsibilities at Stetson. Applied study, ensemble
performances and rehearsals, and classroom responsibilities should be the
first concern of music students.

_Adjunct Contracts_ : Adjuncts should meet with the Dean within the first two
weeks of each semester to finalize your contract. Payments will be made in
four monthly checks per semester.

_Adjunct Faculty Evaluation:_

_Teaching Loads_ :  Teaching loads in the School of Music are calculated as
follows:

     Twelve load hours constitute a full load.

     Load hours for classes and ensembles are computed in clock hours.

     One clock hour of applied teaching or chamber music coaching is equivalent to 3/5 of a load hour.

     Responsibility for a major ensemble constitutes 4 load hours.

     Credit toward 12 load hours may be given for faculty recitals and for other responsibilities assigned by the Dean 

     (e.g. recruitment).  

_Faculty Evaluation Process_ :  The School of Music faculty evaluation process
involves input from the faculty member, students, associate dean, and dean.
The basic document is the _Faculty Self-Evaluation_ form which is completed in
January for the preceding year. In this document the faculty member is asked
to evaluate the years work and to respond to the results of the student
evaluations. Responses to this self-evaluation are received from the associate
dean and the dean, and a separate evaluation session is scheduled with the
dean.

Student Evaluations forms can be administered during any semester by a faculty
member or administrator. The forms must be administered a minimum of once a
year in continuing or repeated courses and every semester in one-semester-only
courses. Evaluation forms will be kept on file in the Music office for five
years. Summaries will be kept in the faculty members permanent files.  

Evaluation forms and results are confidential and will be seen only by the
faculty member, the associate dean, and the dean. They can be seen by others
only with the individual faculty members written permission. Self-Evaluation
and Student Evaluation forms will be used for faculty development and
promotion, tenure, and merit pay recommendations only after the dean has
discussed the forms with the faculty member and he/she has been given an
opportunity to respond in writing.  
  

_Faculty Evaluation Criteria_ :  Evaluation of faculty for tenure, promotion,
and other types of recognition will be based primarily on evidence of
effective teaching. In addition, the Stetson School of Music expects all
faculty to be actively involved in service to the University and in research
and/or creative and professional activities appropriate to their field.

_Administrative Evaluation:_   Each year the faculty of the School of Music is
asked to evaluate the work of the Dean  and Associate Dean.  The following
procedures are in effect.

      a)  Evaluation forms for the Dean are turned in to the Associate Dean, who summarizes them and discusses the 

            results with the Dean.

      b)  Evaluation forms for the Associate Dean are turned in to the Dean, who summarizes them and discusses the results with the Associate Dean.

      c)  Summaries are kept on file in the individuals permanent file.

      d)  All information is kept on file in the Music Office for five years.

_Teaching Effectiveness_ :  The University Faculty Handbook lists ways in
which teaching effectiveness may be evaluated. (See Articles 4.10.0010.3.2
_Criteria for Tenure_ and 4.10.0010.4.3 _Evidence for Promotion_.)

_Research and/or Creative and Professional Activities_ :  Research and
creative and professional activities may include performances on and off
campus, recordings of performances or original works, compositions,
performances of original works, attendance at professional meetings,
presentations at professional meetings, positions held in professional
organizations, publications of research and classroom materials, preparation
of computer instructional materials, WEB publication of research and classroom
materials, and other activities which may be appropriate to the faculty
members field.

_Service_ :  Service to the University must include recruiting, productive
committee work within the Music School and at the University level, and
academic advising. In addition, such items as are listed in the University
Faculty Handbook (Article 4.10.0010.3.3 _Evidence for Tenure_ , C. Service
within the University and within the larger community) may be used as evidence
of service.

Given the unique nature of a Music School, it is essential that faculty within
the School work together and support one another as they strive to accomplish
the goals of the School.

_Copyright Issues_ :  Please do not break the copyright law or encourage your
students to break the law. Explain the following general guidelines to your
students, and refer to your copy of _Copyright Law: A Guide for Music
Educators_ for additional information.  

Without having secured permission of the copyright holder, music educators may
-

     Make a copy of a lost part in an emergency if it is replaced with a purchased part;

     Make one copy per student of up to 10% of a musical work for class study as long as that 10% does not

      constitute a performable unit;

     Make a single recording of a student performance for study and for the archives;

     Make a single recording of aural exercises or tests using copyrighted material;

     Preserve or replace library copies when not available for purchase;

     Make one copy of a short verbal or a graphic work for teachers use.



Without having secured permission of the copyright holder, music educators may
not -

     Copy to avoid purchase;

     Copy music for any kind of performance (note emergency exception above);

     Copy without including copyright notice;

     Copy to create anthologies or compilations;

     Reproduce material designed to be consumable; e.g., workbooks, standardized tests, and answer sheets;

     Charge students beyond the actual cost involved in making copies as permitted above.  
  
  
**_back to top_** ** _ >>_**

* * *

# All Instruction

_Faculty Attendance Responsibilities_ :  Faculty are expected to meet all
assigned classes (classroom, ensemble rehearsals, applied lessons, and
coaching sessions). If a faculty member must miss a scheduled class meeting,
rehearsal, or lesson, he/she must notify the Music Office and make
arrangements for covering the class or making up the applied lesson or
coaching session. Classes and rehearsals should not be canceled except in
extreme circumstances. Applied students will receive a minimum of 14 lessons
per semester.  
  
  
**_back to top_** ** _ >>_**

* * *

# Applied Music Instruction

_Course Numbers_ :     The course numbers for applied study are MCA plus three
numbers:

**First number:    **  
1 for lower division; 3 for upper division (Music majors will not receive
upper-division credit in their _principal_ instrument
until they have passed the Sophomore Decision; for all others, upper-division
study begins after 4 semesters of  
                                   lower-division.)

**Second number:   **  
1 for music majors and minor; 0 for all others

**Third number:  **  
the number of hours of credit the student is receiving (Music majors receive 2
or 3 hrs. credits for their principal instrument  
                                  and 1 hr. credit for secondary instrument. Non-majors or electives receive 1 hr. of credit.)

                       

For example, **MCA313** means that the student is a music major, is in the 3rd
or 4th year of applied study, has passed the Sophomore Decision, and is
receiving three hours of applied credit in the principal instrument. All
applied course numbers may be repeated for credit. Please check to see that
each number is correct, and report any mistakes to Mrs. Brunning.

_Scheduling Lessons_ :  Students schedule weekly lessons at the beginning of
each term by submitting a printed class schedule to the applied teacher. The
teacher then assigns and posts the weekly lesson schedule on the studio door.
This should be done as promptly as possible in order to meet the requisite
number of lessons for the term (minimum of 14 each term).  Each music major is
entitled to one hour of instruction per week on the major instrument. All
other lessons are 1/2 hour per week.

_Student Recital Performances_ :  Except for the first semester of the
freshman year, each music major must appear at least once each semester as a
soloist in the major applied music area in a Student Recital or an on-campus
performance approved by the students instructor. Student Recitals will be held
on Thursdays at 2:30 p.m. Students should pick up a form for requesting a
recital appearance from the Music Office. The student should fill out the form
properly, including opus numbers, catalog numbers, key designations, tempo
markings for movements, designations of arrangements or transcriptions,
duration of performance, dates, and name of the collaborating artist where
appropriate. The form can also be found on the computers in the Music-Computer
Lab. The student then submits the form to the applied music instructor for
approval and signature and returns the form to the Music Office _no later than
Tuesday at 12:00 noon prior to the Thursday recital_. Rehearsal time for these
recitals is scheduled from 12:00 until 3:00 p.m. on Wednesdays; the sign-up
sheet is located in the Music Office.

_Junior Recitals_ :  Refer to page 8 of the _Student Handbook_ for information
concerning Junior Recitals.

_Senior Recitals_ :  Refer to your _Senior Recital Booklet_ and pages 9 and 10
of the _Student Handbook_ for information concerning Senior Recitals. All
students presenting a senior recital should pick up a _Senior Recital Booklet_
from Mrs. Ross in the Music Office.   ** **

_Accompanists_ :  It is the responsibility of the student to arrange for an
accompanist. The faculty accompanying coordinator, Ms. Kayla Paulk, can assist
in locating an accompanist. Dr. Rickman performs many solo and chamber
recitals during the year and should not be asked to play for student recitals.

_Senior Recital Hearings_ :  The jury for the Senior Recital Hearing is chosen
by the dean or the associate dean. Please do not change the jury make-up
without checking with the dean or associate dean. The studio teacher is
responsible for arranging the time and place for the hearing, for notifying
the jury, and for picking up the students jury card and the jury comment
sheets from the Music Office. Within 24 hours of the hearing, the applied
teacher should turn in to the Music Office the jury card and a disk and hard
copy of the students program and program notes.

_Syllabus_ :  Please pass out a syllabus to your students by the end of the
first week of classes, and submit a copy for the Music Office files. You may
wish to begin with the generic studio syllabus found on your computer disk.
Your Studio Syllabus should explain your expectations and your grading and
attendance policies for private lessons and performance classes. For example,
you may include expectations of practice time, amount of literature learned
and technique acquired, jury expectations, and how the students work in these
areas will be evaluated and graded.

The Syllabus will also include the list of up to seven recitals/concerts
required by the Studio with an indication of how the student will be penalized
for non compliance; e.g., reduction in quality points or lowered applied
grade. The studio teacher is responsible for keeping track of the students
compliance with the studio recital requirement. It is essential that the
studio teacher provide the Office, by the first day of exams, with the list of
students who did not meet the Studio requirement and the preferred method of
evaluation. The studio teacher is responsible for lowering the applied grade,
if that method is chosen. See p. 4 of the Student Handbook for additional
information.

_Recruiting_ :  An important responsibility of all faculty teaching applied
lessons is assisting in the recruitment of students. Recruitment coordinators
are Duncan Couch (vocal), Bobby Adams (winds & percussion), ?(strings), and
Michael Rickman (keyboard). Wendy Gabler is the Music Admissions Counselor for
the School of Music. Please take the initiative to ask your coordinator and
Wendy Gabler about ways in which you can assist. As a rule, weekday auditions
will be held on Monday at 1:30 p.m.. Please keep this time open whenever
possible.

J _uries_ :  Examinations in applied music are given before a jury consisting
of three music faculty members, one of whom is the students applied teacher.
All students enrolled in applied lessons will appear before a jury at least
once during each term of registration, except that during the first semester
of study, students enrolled in one-hour elective or secondary courses and
students giving a senior recital that semester may appear at the discretion of
the teacher. Jury appointments are normally for a 12- to 20-minute period. The
Sophomore Decision jury determines the students eligibility for junior
standing. This jury is longer and more comprehensive and includes a test of
oral competency. (See _Student Handbook_ , p. 6)

  
**_back to top_** ** _ >>_**

* * *

# Advising

_General Procedures: _

When you receive your advising packet, post your advising sign-up schedule on
your door. Allow at least 20 minutes for each student. Also post on
your door the following information for your advisees: _ _

_School of Music Advising Program brochure Pick_ up from the Music Office and
read before your advising session.

_Student Self-Evaluation form Pick_ up from the Music Office , fill out, and
turn in during your advising session.

_Course Card Fill_ out in pencil and bring to your advising session. _ _

Before advising, please become familiar with the information in the School of
Music Advising Program brochure found in _The Faculty Book_.  _ _

Allow a few minutes between students to fill out the Student Progress Report.
This report, along with the Student Self-Evaluation form should be turned in
to the Music Office at the end of the advising period. You may wish to keep
copies for your files. _ _

At the end of the advising period, turn in to the Music Office the sign-up
schedule you posted and the computer cards for those students who did not come
to be advised. _ _

_Things to Remember_ : _ _

Students may not be enrolled in more than 18 hours without permission from the
dean or associate dean.

Students must enroll in English until they have completed the requirement.
Students may not drop English until this requirement has been satisfied.

The only courses that satisfy the Music School requirement for A&S history are
HY101, 102, 103, & 104\. **All other history substitutions require permission
of the dean or associate dean. **

All students must enroll in Functional Piano until they have passed the Piano
Proficiency. Students may not drop Functional Piano unless they have passed
the proficiency.

Students may not enroll in a 300- or 400-level applied lesson until the
Sophomore Decision is passed.

A student may not be enrolled in another applied music course until a previous
incomplete grade in applied music is removed.

Students must enroll junior recital and senior recital in the appropriate
semester.

_All_ students must audition for ensembles. The director of choral ensembles
or the directors of instrumental ensembles will assign each student to the
appropriate ensembles.

Freshmen and sophomores enroll in 100-level ensembles; juniors and seniors
enroll in 300-level ensembles.

Refer to the Student Ensemble Participation list in the Ensemble & Studio
section of _The Faculty Book_ to help you in determining the number of
ensembles required by degree and by scholarship for each of your advisees.

Music Education students should apply for admission to the Teacher Education
program in the first semester of the sophomore year. _ _

Music Education students should meet with Dr. Dershimer in Teacher Education
every semester after the freshman year.

_Courses Which Fill the General Education Requirements_ : _ _

_English_ (all degrees)two courses from the following:  
  
           EH111 -           College Writing   
           EH121 -           Research and Argumentation   
           EH131 -           Analytical Reading and Writing

The English Department places entering students in the sequence on the basis
of standardized test scores. The student must be enrolled in a Freshman
English course each    semester until the requirement is completed. _ _

_Oral Communication_  (all degrees)may be met by having a Certification of
Competency in Oral Communication issued by the department of the students
major (in our case in the

     Sophomore Decision) or by passing one of the following courses:c

           CN201 -     Public Speaking   

