**EDT 326** **Science in the Elementary School** August through December -
1997

Diana M. Hunn, Ph.D.  
Chaminade 114
Class Hours: 8:45-10:10 MW or 10:20-11:45 MW  
Office 229-3316  
Home 687-3063
Office Hours: 1:30-4:30 M & W (exceptions  
Tuesdays - Sinclair 449-6004, secretary 449-6000                 during field
experience) and by appointment  
**Please do not hesitate to call me at home or to confirm that I will be in
the office.**

Course Description:  
        Planning, diagnosis, instructional methods, materials, and evaluation techniques for teaching science to   
        students with varied needs and abilities.  The Fall 1997 course will include emphasis on three major themes:  **_science education theory and literature_** **_resources_** **_Ohio's State Science Model and National Standards_**

Note: This syllabus is designed as a complement to the Elementary Block
syllabus.

**I. COURSE GOALS**  
                                            The elementary science methods course is designed to..... 

        1\. familiarize the preservice teachers with a variety of techniques, resources, and evaluation strategies   
         used to teach science in safe and effective ways in grades K-8. 

        2\. involve preservice students in the processes of science as discovery through participatory hands-on   
        experiences and by reflections about science courses. 

        3\. familiarize preservice teachers with history, present status, and trends in science education and science. 

        4\. demonstrate ways to integrate science with other curricular areas. 

**II. COURSE OBJECTIVES**

                                            The preservice teacher education student will be able to............. 

**         A. KNOWLEDGE:**

            1\. define the psychological and developmental readiness needed by children when   
            teaching early science concepts. 

            2\. describe the resources that can be used for professional development in the areas of   
            elementary science. 

            3\. reflect upon the concepts and methods used in integrating the computer and other technologies in   
            science instruction. 

            4\. discuss connections between previous science courses and the methods class. 

**         B. SKILLS**

            1\. select student prerequisite skills for specific science concepts. 

            2\. integrate science concepts into other teaching areas such as mathematics,   
            English, social studies, reading, language arts, music, art, etc. 

            3\. use the State Science Model, National Science Education Standards, and other   
            references/resources to make effective curricular decisions. 

            4\. design lessons and develop classroom / program practices that reflect safe practices   
            and promote ongoing monitoring for safety. 

**         C. ATTITUDES/VALUES**

            1\. demonstrate a positive attitude toward teaching students science skills & concepts. 

            2\. demonstrate an awareness of the academic and professional sources of information to   
            improve personal competency. 

            3\. demonstrate an awareness of student cultural diversity as it relates to the development   
            and application of science concepts. 

            4\. demonstrate an awareness of the "value laden" aspects of science as applied to "every   
            day life." 

            5\. demonstrate an awareness of the calculator, computer, and other new and old technologies   
            as essential tools for the classroom teacher. 

**III. COURSE TOPICS**

**         A. CONCEPTUAL PROCESS**

            1\. Nature of Science and Historical Development of Science Curricular Approaches 

            2\. National, State, and Local Standards 

            3\. Developmental Levels of Thinking as Related to Science Instruction 

            4\. Teaching Through Discovery/Inquiry 

            5\. Safety Issues and Connections with Society 

            6\. Questioning Skills Related to Learning/Instructional Models 

            7\. Integrating Science Throughout the Curriculum 

            8\. Science Instruction for the Exceptional Student 

**         B. CONTENT**

            1\. Learning and Teaching Science: a Developmental View 

            2\. Technology and Elementary School Science 

            3\. Resources for Elementary and Middle School Science Programs 

            4\. The Ohio Model for Science 

            5\. National Science Education Standards 

            6\. Planning for Instruction 

            7\. Assessment in the Classroom 

            8\. Project WET 

**IV. INSTRUCTIONAL PROCEDURES**

**         A. LARGE GROUP:** Lecture, discussion/participation, evaluation,
peer teaching

**         B. SMALL GROUP:** Planned discovery activities, discussion of
curricular materials,  
                                            student designed activities, cooperative learning activities 

**         C. INDIVIDUAL:** Read text and other professional literature,
prepare instruction and  
                                        materials for class and field experiences 

**V. STUDENT EVALUATION**

        The student will be evaluated on the following: 

        A. Class attendance:       This is a hands-on course and the activities completed in class   
                                              are critical to student knowledge,     skill development, and preparation   
                                              for teaching. After one absence the student's grade will be dropped   
                                              one-half letter grade per absence. Excused absences must be made up   
                                              by attending make-up sessions conducted about three times each   
                                              semester. Each make-up session will last 3 hours, will be announced in advance,   
                                              and probably be held in the late afternoon or evening. Students must attend   
                                              the entire session to receive credit for the missed class. 

B. Participation in large and small group assignments  
C. Individual assignments and tests  
D. Conferences (those scheduled by instructor are REQUIRED)  
E. Interdisciplinary unit  
F. Determinants of grades:  
        attendance/participation     required   
        activities/quizzes                10%   
        lesson plans                       10%   
        toolkit                                40%   
        tests/exams                        10%   
        interdisciplinary unit            20%   
        portfolio                             10% 

                the Block grading scale will be used 

**VI. CLINICAL EXPERIENCES (20 hours +)**

These activities allow students enrolled in this course to integrate classroom  
learning and presentation with the needs and experiences of children. Numerous  
activities will be planned, performed, and evaluated by the students and
instructor in the  
campus classroom.

Field trips to local museums and events are being planned. These classes might
be held off-campus and might require some admission charges.

**VII.    FIELD EXPERIENCES**

**_         Field Experience #1_**  
        1\. Teach at least one science lesson that includes:   
                ~introduction (set induction, modeling, discrepant event, etc.)   
                ~use of hands-on activity   
                ~cooperative learning strategy   
                ~relate the lesson to at least one other discipline   
                ~include formal or informal evaluation 

        2\. Assist cooperating teacher in every way possible   
        3\. Observe the classroom arrangement & the availability and use of   
        of supplies, materials, manipulatives   
        4\. Tutor individual student(s) with remedial or special needs 

**_Field Experience #2_**  
        repeat the above PLUS   
        1\. Survey computer usage and other technology in science 

**VIII.   TEXTS**

Lowery, L.F. (Ed.) (1997). _NSTA Pathways to the Science Standards_.
(Elementary School Edition).  
Arlington, VA: National Science Teachers Association.

_Science: Ohio's Model Competency-Based Program._ (1997). Columbus, OH:  
State Board of Education.

selected readings and handouts

**IX. Toolkit Items and Class Requirements** (select from following \- max of
40)

            handouts, articles, other references                                                 req. 

            WISH / resource list                                                                       req. 

            readings/critiques \- 1 pg. short review of two articles                         5 

            reflection paper on a science ed or current topic - 1 to 2 pages   
            must be completed on a word-processing program                            5 

            mind capture/discrepant event shared in class                                     5 

            film/video/ or CD critique - 1 to 2 pages                                            5 

            science bulletin board (with letters)                                                    5 

            set of manipulatives of materials for hands-on                                     5   
                activities _with instruction_ for students   
    
           file folders (15 or more) some filled with materials                                5 

            book report                                                                                     15 

            ideas: _ZAPP!, My Posse Don't Do Homework, The First Year of Teaching,_   
_             Reviving Ophelia, The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People,
Silent Spring._  
            books must be approved by Dr. Hunn 

            Girl Scouts Young Astronauts Program 10   
            Saturdays at Bergamo or other approved volunteer programs 

Note: items and other ideas are negotiable  
        students are encouraged to develop materials which can be used in their interdisciplinary   
        units and with students during field experiences 

