# PSY/SOC/POLS/BADM 309B Statistics

## Fall Semester, 2001 at Houghton College

### Paul Young, Department of Psychology

#### Office: Academic Building B- 324

#### Phone: 567-9308 or Ext. 3080

#### e-mail:[ paul.young@houghton.edu](mailto:%20paul.young@houghton.edu)

#### Office hours: 9- 9:50 a.m. MWF; 2:40-3:30 p.m. TR; or by appointment

To load a printable copy of the syllabus, [click
here](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat01syl.htm).

Catalog Description

|

General Objectives

|

Learning Outcomes  
  
---|---|---  
  
Course Arrangement

|

Textbook

|

Explanation of Assignments  
  
Assignment Calendar

|

Class Topic Schedule

|

Computer Usage: Excel and SPSS  
  
PowerPoint Slides

|

Attendance Policy

|

[Phramous Widget
Data](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/phramous.xls)  
  
Links to Statistics Sites

|

E-discussion ** __**

|

[Newsletter and
Reminders](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/statnews98.htm)  
  
|  |  
  
**_Catalog description:_**

Study of descriptive and inferential statistics, including analysis of
variance and measures of correlation. Focus on applications to social and
psychological data.

Meets requirements in Business Administration, Political Science, Psychology,
and Sociology majors.

Back to top

**_General objectives:_**

  * To understand and employ a logical approach to statistical analysis
  * To apply appropriate statistical analysis to the solution of research problems

Back to top

**_Learning outcomes:_**

By the end of this course, you ought to be able to

  * Convert a research problem to numerical form
  * Describe numerical data with statistics
  * Represent data with graphs
  * Compare variables with correlation
  * Predict changes with regression
  * Test differences between groups
  * Use spreadsheet statistical functions for data analysis
  * Use SPSS for research applications

Back to top

**_General Course Arrangement:_**

  * 1\. Thinking statistically in history. Statistics as a tool for logic.
  * 2\. Descriptive statistics: Scales of measurement, averages or measures of central tendency, measures of dispersion.
  * 3\. Correlation and regression.
  * 4\. Probability and decision-making. Sampling and re-sampling.
  * 5\. Inferential statistics, confidence intervals, and hypothesis testing.
  * 6\. Frequency analysis: Non-parametric methods.

Back to top

**_Required Textbook:_**

Pagano, R.R. (2001). _Understanding statistics in the behavioral sciences_ ,
6th edition. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.

Back to top

**_Explanation of Assignments:_**

  * **1.** Homework assignments require either or both of hand computation and computer analysis. There is a homework assignment for each major topic in the course, a total of 17 assignments. The assignments correspond to each of the 17 chapters to be covered in the textbook (chapter 11 is omitted and chapter 19 is review). Specific questions to be answered for each assignment are listed in the assignment calendar. (25%)

  * **2.** You will write three examinations on the content of the course. You will be asked to demonstrate what you have learned both in writing and by computation. On examinations, you may use a calculator, **_provided all class members have one with them._** However, you may use _only_ the arithmetic functions _add, subtract, multiply, divide, and square root._
  * Examinations are scheduled 
    * September 26(15%)
    * November 2(15%)
    * December 18, 1p.m. (15%). 
    * Material to be covered on each examination appears under the Class Topic Schedule. 

Back to top

  * **3.** A semester-long research project will culminate in a 5 - 7 page paper (not counting cover sheets, references, or data analysis appendices) in which you demonstrate your ability to select and apply appropriate statistical analyses to a research problem of your choice. The paper, in APA format, is due Wednesday, 5 December, 2001\. (15%)

Follow these steps:

**A.** Choose a research problem in your area of interest by reviewing course
notes, reading books and journals, or consulting the popular media. For
example, you might be interested in the _[water level
problem](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/waterlevel/index.htm)_ ,
that is, the apparent difficulty which intelligent people have figuring out
the direction which the surface of water will take when its container is
tilted. Or you might be interested in the news reports of the poor performance
of U.S. students on mathematics tests, compared to their peers in several
other countries.

**B.** Once you have chosen a problem, find five scholarly sources which have
considered the problem in the past. Scholarly sources include most journal
articles, many books, and some Web sites. You must exercise discernment in
your choice of sources, and at least three of your sources must be from
academic journals.

**C.** Using what you will learn about research design in this course, set up
a research study to gather data to help you answer the research problem. You
will get good ideas about designing your study from the scholarly sources you
have read on your topic.

**D.** Then, you have one of four options.

i. Conduct the study you have designed, gathering new data. If you choose this
option, consult with me about meeting the ethical obligations of research.

ii. Find appropriate data in a published database. Several databases are
linked to the course website, and you will be able to find others
electronically.

iii. Make up some data by generating the numbers randomly

iv. Make up data in such a way that the results will support your research
hypothesis.

**E.** Analyze the data from step D, choosing the appropriate descriptive and
inferential statistics, including graphs.

**F.** Explain the meaning of your results in a discussion section. Tell what
the results indicate in words. Connect your results with the results of the
studies you considered in section B. Draw a conclusion or a set of
conclusions.

**G.** Identify your sources in a reference list.

**H.** Include your statistical computations, either by hand or computer, in
an appendix.

Back to top

  * **4.** Computer assignments (10%)

We will be studying the meaning of statistical analysis with formulas and
calculations, in order to develop a deeper understanding of what we are doing.
However, most statistical analysis in research settings and in business is
done - often badly - by computer programs. Consequently, we will also learn
the statistical capabilities of two applications - _Microsoft Excel_ and
_SPSS_.

Lab assignments will be given requiring you to learn and use _Excel_ and
_SPSS_. I will be available to help you, but you are responsible to learn
these applications outside class time.

Back to top

  * **5.** Attendance and participation are mandatory. You must not fall behind in this class. For each absence after the first, you will lose one-half of one point from your grade, up to a maximum of five points. (5%)

Back to top

**_Assignment Calendar:_**

**Date**

|

**Assignment**

|

**Value**

|  |

**Date**

|

**Assignment**

|

**Value**  
  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
9/7 | Homework Chapter 1 | 1/17 of 25% |  | 11/2 | Second Examination |

15%  
  
9/10 | Homework Chapter 2 | 1/17 of 25% |  | 11/7 | Homework Chapter 12 |

1/17 of 25%  
  
9/14 | Homework Chapter 3 | 1/17 of 25% |  | 11/12 | Homework Chapter 13 |

1/17 of 25%  
  
9/21 | Homework Chapter 4 | 1/17 of 25% |  | 11/16 | Homework Chapter 14 |
1/17 of 25%  
9/26 | First Examination |

15%

|  | 11/26 | Homework Chapter 15 | 1/17 of 25%  
9/28 | Homework Chapter 5 |

1/17 of 25%

|  | 11/30 | Homework Chapter 16 | 1/17 of 25%  
10/5 | Homework Chapter 6 | 1/17 of 25% |  | 12/5 | Research Paper Due | 15%  
10/12 | Homework Chapter 7 | 1/17 of 25% |  | 12/10 | Homework Chapter 17  |

1/17 of 25%  
  
10/22 | Homework Chapter 8 | 1/17 of 25% |  | 12/14 | Homework Chapter 18 |
1/17 of 25%  
10/26 | Homework Chapter 9 | 1/17 of 25% |  |  |  |  
10/31 | Homework Chapter 10 | 1/17 of 25% |  | 12/18 | Final Examination: 1
p.m. |

15%  
  
Back to top

**_Class Topic Schedule:_**

**_Includes specific homework assignments_**

**Chapter**

|

**Learning objectives**

|

**Homework**  
  
---|---|---  
  
**1**

|  Understand how statistics relates to scientific method and epistemology

Realize the usefulness of statistics in the search for truth

Define and identify these terms:

_population, sample, variable, independent variable, dependent
variable,extraneous variable, data, statistic, parameter, observational study,
true experiment, descriptive, inferential, correlational, parameter
estimation, random sampling_

Load and edit data in _Microsoft Excel_

|  Due: 9/7: 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9a,b,c,&d

Computer lab: Enter the data from 9 a, b, c, and d in four labelled columns in
_Excel._ Save it.

Read the Overview chapter of the SPSS tutorial. Copy the _Excel_ data to SPSS
and save it. Print and submit.

Complete the _Web Connection,_ p.16  
  
**2**

Back to top

|  Understand and apply the rules of mathematical notation, summation, real
limits, significant figures, and rounding

Distinguish among scales of measurement

Differentiate discrete variables from continuous variables

| Due 9/10: 2, 3, 4, 7, 9, 10

Computer lab: Enter the data from 5 (a - d) and 9 in _Excel_. Find the sum of
each variable. Copy to SPSS and find the count of each set of scores.

Complete the _Web Connection,_ p. 33  
  
**3**

|  Construct simple frequency distributions and grouped frequency
distributions

Add relative frequency, cumulative frequency, and cumulative percentage
distributions

Compute percentile points and percentile ranks

Select the appropriate use of these frequency graphs:  _bar graph, histogram,
frequency polygon, cumulative percentage curve, stem-and-leaf diagram_

Identify _symmetrical_ and _skewed_ distributions

Prepare graphs with honest impact, and detect graphic deception

| Due 9/14: 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19



Computer lab: Use _Excel_ to form a frequency distribution of the Age data in
the [Phramous dataset](Phramous.xls). Then, graph homework problems 4b and 15.

Complete the _Web Connection,_ p.61  
  
**4**

Back to top

|  Compute the arithmetic mean and identify its properties

Define and compute the median and the mode

Explain how mean and median relate to skew

Understand and compute range, standard deviation, SS, MS, and variance

|

Due 9/21: 3, 4, 6, 9, 13 - 16, 21,30-32

Computer lab: Graph #18, handout

Complete the _Web Connection,_ p.81  
  
**5**

|  Mathematically describe the normal curve

Compute standard scores (Z - scores) and find their percentiles, areas, and
probabilities (PAP)

Use Z - scores to reverse from PAP to raw scores

| Due: 9/28: 3 - 19, 22

Computer lab: Do question 20a using _Excel_ , writing your own Z-score
function. Then check your work with _SPSS_. No Web Connection required.  
  
**6**

Back to top

|  Define these terms:  _scatter plot, Y intercept, slope,
positive/negative/inverse relationships, perfect/imperfect relationship_

Compute and interpret Pearson _r_ , COD, and Spearman _rho_.

Distinguish between correlation and causation.

| Due: 10/5: 3, 8, 11, 14, 17, 20(Careful!)

Computer lab: Graph #16. SPSS handout.  
  
**7**

|  Define these terms:  _least-squares regression line, standard error of
estimate, homoscedasticity, multiple regression, multiple correlation_

Compute the Y intercept and slope of a line and use them as regression
coefficients to predict values of Y'

Understand the application of SEE

Apply and interpret multiple correlationand multiple regression

Know when _not_ to use linear regression for prediction

|  Due: 10/12: 4, 5, 10, 13, 15

Computer lab: SPSS handout. Do question 14a-c using Excel.  
  
**8**

Back to top

|  Understand the purpose of sampling, and use a table of random digits and a
computer to sample both with replacement and without replacement.

Use resampling to compare sample results.

Distinguish between _a priori_ and _a posteriori_ probabilities. Compute each
of them.

Apply the addition and multiplication rules of probability.

Connect probabilities to Z - scores.

| Due: 10/22: 2, 3, 4, 9 - 5, 17, 20 - 23

Computer lab: Handout  
  
**9**

|  Use the binomial table to simplify the binomial expansion.

Use Pascal's triangle to simplify the binomial expansion.

Compute the mean and standard deviation of a binomial distribution.

| Due 10/26: 2, 4, 5, 9, 11, 13, 15, 16

Computerlab: Handout  
  
**10**

Back to top

|  Identify the features of a repeated measures design.

Define these terms: _alternative hypothesis, null hypothesis, decision rule,
alpha, Type I error, Type II error, one-tailed probability, two-tailed
probability_

Conduct and interpret the Sign test

Understand the concept of statistical power, and know how to compute it and
maximize it.

| Due 10/31: 9, 10, 12, 13

Computer lab: Handout  
  
**12**

Back to top

|  Know the general characteristics of sampling distributions.

Use resampling to generate sampling distributions of the mean.

Apply the sampling distribution of the mean in the Normal Deviate Test using Z
- scores.

Know the Central Limit Theorem

Apply the Critical Region approach to statistical decisions, using
resamplling.

| Due 11/7: 5, 8, 17 - 23

Computer lab: Handout  
  
**13**

|  Understand the concept of degrees of freedom.

Apply the _t_ -test for single samples, and compare it to the Normal Deviate
Test with Z.

Use _t_ to establish confidence intervals and critical regions.

Use _t_ to evaluate Pearson _r_.

|  Due 11/12: 4, 5, 12, 13, 17, 18

Computer lab: Handout  
  
**14**

Back to top

|  Distinguish correlated groups from independent groups.

Understand and apply the relevant _t_ test for correlated groups and for
independent groups.

Know the assumptions underlying the _t_ test.

|  Due 11/16: 9, 11, 16, 23

Computer lab: Handout  
  
**15**

|  Understand and apply the one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA).

Know the relationship between ANOVA and _t_ tests.

Understand the concepts of factorial designs and interactions.

| Due 11/26: 4, 7, 12, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19

Computer lab: Handout  
  
**16**

Back to top

|  Understand and apply the _t_ test for independent groups to planned
comparisons

Understand and apply Tukey's HSD test for _post hoc_ comparisons

|  Due 11/30 : 1, 5, 6, 9

Computer lab: Handout  
  
**17**

|  Compute, evaluate, and interpret the two-way or factorial analysis of
variance | Due 12/10: 8, 9, 10 Lab: Handout  
  
**18**

|  Understand and apply the chi-squared tests for goodness of fit and for
independence

Know when to apply the Wilcoxon and Kruskal-Wallis tests

| Due 12/14 : 5, 17, 18, 19, 21

Computer lab: Handout  
  
Back to top

**_Computer Usage:  Excel and SPSS_**

2\. Drawing [column
charts](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/excel2.htm) with Excel.

3\. Setting [spacing between
columns](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/excel2.htm) in Excel
charts.

5\. Z-scores in [Excel and
SPSS](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/excelSPSS.htm#z5)

6\. Pearson correlation in [Excel and
SPSS](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/excelSPSS.htm#pearson)

Spearman correlation in
[SPSS](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/excelSPSS.htm#Spear)

12\. The normal deviate test in Excel: [Z-test for
samples](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/excelSPSS.htm#zsamples)

**_Links to Statistics Sites_**

Several statistical databases maintained by [federal government
](http://www.fedstats.gov/)agencies are available on this site.

**_E-Discussion_**

Back to top

A discussion group folder should be available to you in Outlook.

Remember that items you post to the discussion group may be read by any member
of the class, including the teacher. However, nobody else has access to your
musings.

**_PowerPoint Slides_**

Click on the date of the presentation you wish to review. You will reach an
index of the day's (or week's) slides. Click on the first of the list if you
wish to see the entire presentation, or on any slide in the list where you
wish to start.

Please tell me of any improvements you can suggest.

[9/3](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat1/index.htm) |
[9/5](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat1/index.htm) |
[9/7](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat2/index.htm) |
[9/10](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat3/index.htm) | 9/12 |
9/14 | 9/17  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
9/19 | 9/21 | 9/24 | 9/26 | 9/28 | 10/1 | 10/3  
[10/5](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat6/index.htm) |
[10/8](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat6/index.htm) |
[10/10](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat7/index.htm) |
[10/12](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat7/index.htm) |
[10/15](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat7a/index.htm) |
[10/17](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat8/index.htm) |
[10/22](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat8/index.htm)  
[10/24](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat8/index.htm) |
[10/26](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat8/index.htm) |
[10/29](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat9/index.htm) |
[10/31](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat10/index.htm) |
[11/2](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat11/index.htm) |
[11/5](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat13/index.htm) |
[11/7](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat13/index.htm)  
[11/9](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat13/index.htm) |
[11/12](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat14/index.htm) |
[11/14](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat14/index.htm) |
[11/16](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat15/index.htm) |
[11/19](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat15/index.htm) |
[11/26](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat16/index.htm) |
[11/28](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat16/index.htm)  
[11/30](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat17/index.htm) |
[12/3](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat18/index.htm) |
[12/5](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat18/index.htm) |
[12/7](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat18/index.htm) |
[12/10](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat19/index.htm) |
[12/12](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat19/index.htm) |
[12/14](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/stat19/index.htm)  
  
_Last updated30 August, 2001_

_Copyright Paul Young_

