**COURSE SYLLABUS

Department:** Human Development and Learning

**

Course Number:** SPED 5002

**

Course Title:** Development of Instructional and Behavioral Interventions

**

Semester Hours:** Three (3)

**

Date of this Revision of Syllabus:** Spring 2000

**

Text(s) and\or Requird Readings:**

Lovitt, T.C. (1995). _Tactics for Teaching._ Columbus, OH: Merrill

Additional selected readings from the bibliography will be assigned throughout
the semester.

**

Catalog Description:** Examines and classifies special education interventions
and curriculums in schools and agencies, including a review of their validity.
Curriculum research techniques will be reviewed. Students will develop an
intervention and pilot test it based on a set of goals, objectives, specific
enabling steps, and evaluation criteria and techniques.

**

Relationship of Course to College Program Philosophy and Goals:** This course
supports the goals of the College of Education and the Special Education
Program by preparing educators to become leaders in the 21st century. This
course assists students in acquiring: the knowledge and skills needed to
function well as an educator in a changing and diverse society; an
understanding of learners and learning processes; the knowledge of effective
instructional technology necessary for professional practice; and a knowledge
of professional, ethical, and legal issues affecting educators.

**

Course Objectives** :

Demonstrate advanced ability to conduct continuous evaluation of student's
achievement and ability to base decisions about instructional changes on data
collected. (DLD IV.76).

Demonstrate advanced ability to design and implement instruction using a
variety of teaching strategies in a variety of stimulating environments,
including the multi-sensory approach and applied behavior analysis principles
of learning. (DOE II.B.)

Demonstrate advanced ability to use and adapt knowledge of social
studies/history, science, health/safety, and the arts in teaching. (DOE II.F.)

Develop knowledge of current research and ability to engage in research in
social skill development, alternative curriculum development, and instruction
for students with mild disabilities in reading, written language, spelling,
handwriting, learning strategies, and mathematics. (DLD VII.)

Demonstrate advanced skill in identifying causes of behavior and leaning
problems and employing appropriate correction and intervention techniques and
the ability to sue this skill effectively in a cooperative working
relationship with colleagues, teachers in other disciplines, related agencies,
and parents. (DLD X.207.)

Develop an understanding of the effect a mild disability can have on an
individual's entire life. (DLD I.13.)

Demonstrate advanced leadership ability to describe and implement "best
practices" for teaching individuals with multiple, moderate, and/or severe
disabilities.

Demonstrate ability to articulate the rationale for integrated
transdisciplinary therapy and its implementation. (DOE III.A.)

Demonstrate advanced knowledge of concepts and terminology used in assessment.
(CEC III.16.)

Demonstrate advanced ability to use formative assessment procedures such as
curriculum-based assessment to evaluate the results of instruction. (CEC
III.34.)

Demonstrate advanced ability to interpret and incorporate information from
assessments into Individualized Education Program (IEP) objectives; advanced
ability to write and sequence annual goals and short-term goals that are
ambitious and realistic, emphasizing parent involvement, values, and choice
(DOE III.D.; CEC IV. 43.)

Demonstrate an advanced ability to synthesize assessment/consultative
information from related service personnel into instructional programming
strategies. (DOE III.E.)

Demonstrate advanced ability to define and present appropriate learning tasks
for students with disabilities. (DOE IV.A.; CEC IV.39., IV.47., IV.51.)

Demonstrate advanced ability to select and adapt strategies and materials
appropriate to the learning styles of student with disabilities. (DOE IV.B.;
CEC IV.39.)

Demonstrate advanced ability to employ task and concept analysis in
individualizing instruction. (DOE IV.G.)

Demonstrate an advanced ability to employ behavioral principles to support
acquisition learning such as modeling, shaping, chaining, prompting, and
fading, and to support maintenance and generalization of learning. (DOE IV.H.)

Demonstrate an advanced ability to maximize students' independence by using
strategies to assist them in decision making. (DOE IV.K.)

Demonstrate advanced knowledge of basic classroom management theories,
concepts, methods, and techniques for students with exceptional learning
needs. (CEC V.60.)

Demonstrate advanced knowledge of research-based best practices for effective
management of teaching and learning environments. (CEC V.61.)

Demonstrate advanced knowledge of social skills needed for educational and
functional living environments and effective instruction in the development of
social skills. (CEC VI.74.)

Demonstrate an advanced knowledge of teacher attitudes and behaviors that
positively or negatively influence student behavior. (CEC V.73.)

Demonstrate advanced skill in designing, structuring, and managing daily
classroom routines effectively, including transition time for student, other
staff and the general classroom. (CEC V.68)

Demonstrate advanced skill in using such techniques as functional analysis to
analyze and address inappropriate behaviors that interfere with learning and
to employ the least intrusive and appropriate behavior management. (DOE IV.I,
IV.J)

Demonstrate advanced skill in applying a variety of procedures (e.g., peer
comparison, criteria of the next environment, functional and ecological
assessment) to select appropriate and realistic goals and objectives for
personal and social behavior in various classroom or community settings. (CEC
VI.80)

Demonstrate advanced skill in using a variety of basic behavioral procedures
including environmental arrangement, prompting, modeling, corrective feedback,
differential reinforcement, token reinforcement, behavior contracts, social
skills training, and self-management procedures to teach more adaptive or
functional behaviors that will replace maladaptive behaviors. (CEC VI.82,
VI.83)

Demonstrate advanced skill in using a variety of basic intervention procedures
including extinction, time out, response cost, overcorrection, and punishment
to effectively and humanely eliminate inappropriate behaviors that interfere
with a student's learning and development.

Demonstrate advanced knowledge of how to develop and/or select assessment
measures, instructional programs, and behavior management practices that
respond to cultural, linguistic, and gender differences. (CEC IV.44.)

Demonstrate advanced ability to employ adaptive equipment, materials, and
technology to support instruction in the endorsement area. (DOE IV.B.)

Demonstrate advanced knowledge of ways in which technology can assist with
planning and managing the teaching and learning environment. (CEC V.62.)

Demonstrate advanced knowledge of applicable laws, rules, regulations,
procedural safeguards, and ethical issues in the use of behavior management
and behavior modification programs (DOE VI.B.; CEC VI.71, 72)

Demonstrate advanced skill in incorporating integrating technology into
instruction of students with mild disabilities. (DLD III.57)

**

Course Topics:

**

Effective Teaching

Curriculum Based Measurement

Self Management of Behavior

Peer Mediated Learning

Classwide Peer Tutoring

Cooperative Learning

Modifying Curriculum

Graphic Organizers

Study Guides

Reading Strategies

Collaborative Problem Solving

Social Skills

Learning Strategies

Curriculum Review

**

Class Activities (including instructional strategies) and Requirements
(Projects, Papers, Tests, etc.):

**_

Class Participation_. Students are required to complete the readings and
participate in class discussions and activities. During the semester students
will be asked to lead discussions on research articles and curriculum
subjects. Class participation will count as a portion of your grade for a
total of 110 points.

_

Curriculum Critique_. Students are required to analyze and critique a specific
curriculum or teaching strategy. Each student will choose a curriculum to
analyze and critique, research the basis of the curriculum and the effects of
the curriculum or strategy intervention in the educational setting, and
present the information to the class. Students will earn up to 60 points on
the curriculum critique.

_

Midterm Exam_. The midterm exam will be a combination of true/false, multiple
choice, and short answer, and essay questions. The midterm will be completed
during regularly scheduled class time. This exam is worth 65 points.

_

Final Exam_. The final exam will be given in a "take-home" essay format.
Students are required to complete the exam and return it by the due date as
indicated in the class schedule. The final exam will require students to
design and plan for implementation two instructional programs for a specific
student or group of students with disabilities. One program will be in the
area of social/behavioral skills, and the other program will be
academically/functional-skill oriented. Students will be given a several of
classroom scenarios depicting students with behavior and academic problems
from which to choose, or students may design their own problems (e.g.,
students who are currently teaching, consulting, or doing field placements may
choose to plan interventions for problems they are having in their own
classrooms). The final exam is worth 65 points.

_

Grading

_

Class Participation (11@ 10 points each) 110 points (37%)

Curriculum Critique 60 points (20%)

Midterm Exam 65 points (21.5%)

Final Exam _65 points_ (21.5%)

TOTAL 300 points

93 - 100 A

90 - 92 A-

87 - 89 B+

83 - 86 B

80 - 82 B-

77 - 79 C+

73 - 77 C

70 - 72 C-

Below 70 F

**

Field Experience Requirements:** n\a

**

Supplementary Readings and Materials:** n\a

**

Bibliography:

**

Anderson - Inman, L. (1986). Bridging the gap: Student-centered strategies for
promoting the transfer of learning. _Exceptional Children_ , _52_ (6),
562-572.

Becker, W. C., & Carnine, D. W. (1981). Direct instruction: A behavior theory
model for comprehensive educational intervention with the disadvantaged. In S.
W. Bijow & R. Ruiz (Eds.) _Behavior modification: Contributions to education._
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Berliner, D. C. (1988). The half-full glass: A review of research on teaching.
In E. L. Meyen, G. A. Vergason, & R. J. Whelan (Eds.) _Effective instructional
strategies for exceptional children_. Denver, CO: Love.

Council for Exceptional Children (1987). _Research to practice: Critical
presentation skills_. (ERIC Digest #E448). Reston, VA: Author.

Council for Exceptional Children (1987). _Research to practice: Lesson
structure_. (ERIC Digest #E448). Reston, VA: Author.

Deno, S. L., & Fuchs, L. S. (1988). Developing curriculum-based measurement
systems for data-based special education problem solving. In E. L. Meyen, G.
A. Vergason, & R. J. Whelan (Eds.) _Effective instructional strategies for
exceptional children_. Denver, CO: Love.

Grossen, B. & Carnine, D. (1993). Phonics instruction: Comparing research and
practice. _Teaching Exceptional Children_ , _25_ (2), 22-25.

Kameenui, E. J., & Simmons, D. C. (1990). _Designing instructional strategies:
The prevention of academic learning problems_. Columbus, OH: Merrill.

Knackendoffel, E. A., Robinson, S. M., Deshler, D. D., & Schumaker, J. B.
(1992). _Collaborative problem solving_. Lawrence, KS: Edge Enterprises.

Lovitt, T. (1992). _Translating research into practice: Learning strategies_.
Longmont, CO: Sopris West.

Lovitt, T. (1992). _Translating research into practice: Teaching strategies_.
Longmont, CO: Sopris West.

Nowacek, E. J., McKinney, J. D., & Hallahan, D. P. (1990). Instructional
behaviors of more and less effective beginning regular and special educators.
_Exceptional Children_ , _57_ , 140-149.

Sprick, R., Sprick, M., & Garrison, M. (1993). Interventions: _Collaborative
planning for students at risk_. Longmont, CO: Sopris West.

**COURSE SECTION INFORMATION

Course Number:** SPED 5002

**

Course Title:** Development of Instructional and Behavioral Interventions

**

Credit Hours:** Three (3)

**

Semester:**

**

Instructor:**

**

Office Number:**

**

Telephone:**

**

Office Hours:**

**

Course Management and Evaluation Policies:**

**

Class Meeting Schedule:**



