[Back to Mark Kaplowitz course
homepage](http://www.nyu.edu/classes/kaplowitz/index.htm)

* * *

New York University, Spring 2000

Judaism: From Medieval to Modern Times



Department of Hebrew and Jewish Studies, V78.0111

(Also, History V57.0098, Middle Eastern Studies V77.0683, and Religious
Studies V90.0683)

Location: Tisch Hall UG54, Tuesday and Thursday 2:00pm - 3:15pm



Instructor: Mark A. Kaplowitz

[email: mqk4399@is4.nyu.edu ](mailto:mqk4399@is4.nyu.edu)

voice mail: 212-998-8973



Office Hours: Thu 4:00-5:00 pm, or by appointment

Office Hours Location: Room 206, Department of Hebrew and Jewish Studies in
the King Juan Carlos Center. 51 Washington Square South. (Directions: take the
elevator to 2W and the office is across the hall)

* * *

Description of Course: The purpose of this course is to examine certain
continuities and discontinuities in medieval and modern times in the
conception of Judaism as reflected in selected texts of the last 1000 years
which express the full range of Jewish religious and national creativity.
Among the topics to be discussed are the complex relations of Jewish thinkers
to the surrounding non-Jewish cultures, and how these interactions affected
the Jews' understanding of Judaism. The approach to this material will be
intellectual-historical.

* * *

Textbooks:

B = Bayme, Steven. _Understanding Jewish History: Texts and Commentaries._
(N.p.: Ktav Publishing House in association with The American Jewish
Committee, 1997)

G = Glatzer, Nahum N. _The Judaic Tradition: Jewish Writings from Antiquity to
the Modern Age._ (Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson, 1987)

S = Seltzer, Robert M. _Jewish People, Jewish Thought: The Jewish Experience
in History._ (New York: Macmillan, 1980)

* * *

Requirements and Grading:

Note: Due to the cumulative nature of the assignments in this course and their
important role in the student-teacher dialogue, late work will be penalized.

  * 15% Class Participation and Quizzes 

> > Although attendance will not be taken on a regular basis, students are
expected to participate in class discussions and the instructor may give
occasional "pop-quizzes" on the readings.

  * 15% Midterm Exam 
  * 20% 5 250-word reactions

> > Students are expected to submit to the instructor one page reactions to
the next session's readings five times during the course of the semester.
(i.e. on Tuesday February 1, a student may submit a reaction to the readings
assigned for Thursday, February 3.) There is no fixed schedule for this
assignment, but students may not submit more than one reaction a week, nor may
they respond to the readings or authors that they will be writing their papers
about. Students may be called upon to read or summarize their papers to the
class.

  * 15% First 2000 word paper (due on March 7)
  * 15% Second 2000 word paper (due on April 11)
  * 20% Integration of papers -- 5000 word paper (due on May 2)

> > The research and writing of these three papers constitute a major focus of
this course. Students will be expected to use their textbooks as a starting
point to find additional primary and secondary material on their topic. All
three papers will cover the same topic from a list of topics to be distributed
in class. The first paper will examine the views of a medieval thinker on the
selected topic. The second paper will examine the views of a modern thinker on
the same, or a closely related, subject. Finally, on the basis of the first
two papers, the third essay will be a comparison of the medieval and the
modern approaches to the selected issue. More detailed information about the
assignment will be distributed in the coming weeks.

In conjunction with the session on German Jewish Culture (4/11/2000), students
are advised to see the exhibit at the Jewish Museum (Fifth Ave and 92nd St.)
If there is interest, I will arrange for us to see the exhibit as a group.

* * *

Breakdown by Session:



Week 1

1/18 Introduction to Intellectual History

  * B xiii-xvi
  * G xvii-xviii
  * S ix-xiii

1/20 Introduction to Judaism

  * B 115-139
  * G 269-278, 318-321
  * S 323-342, 350-353, 373-381



Week 2 11th Century

1/25 Rashi and First Crusade

  * B 164-175
  * G 316-317, 332-336, 337-342, 411, 416-418, 465-469, 470-473
  * S 354-356

1/27 Golden Age of Spain

  * B 176-179, 186-187
  * G 286-289, 295-296, 298-299, 305-308, 372-377
  * S 342-348, 382-392



Week 3 12th Century

2/1 Arab Sciences and Maimonides

  * B 152-158, 160-161
  * G 279-286, 289-292, 293-295, 308-313, 388-391, 459-463
  * S 348-349, 393-408

2/3 Maimonides Continued

  * B 140-151, 179-182, 184-185
  * G 313-316, 321-327, 343-353, 391-396, 488-491



Week 4 12th, 13th and 14th Centuries

2/8 Pre-Zoharic Jewish Mysticism

  * G 353, 377-380, 396-397, 484-488, 492
  * S 356-370, 419-427

2/10 Maimonidian Controversies

  * B 182-184
  * G 327-329, 336-337, 405, 469-470, 475-484
  * S 408-418



Week 5 14th and 15th Centuries

2/15 Zohar

  * B 158-160, 161-163
  * G 296-297, 411-415, 419-428, 463-465
  * S 428-450

2/17 Expulsions

  * B 188-197
  * G 397-403
  * S 370-372, 474-475



Week 6 16th Century

2/22 Early Modern Judaism

  * B 198-212, 223-232
  * G 299-303, 329-332, 353-357, 403-405, 405-410, 415-416, 434-440, 473-475
  * S 454-467, 476-480, 496-501, 501

2/24 Midterm



Week 7 17th Century

2/29 Sabbatai Zvi

  * B 233-244
  * G 357-365, 428-434
  * S 467-474, 480-482, 501-502

3/2 Spinoza

  * B 212-222
  * S 502-505, 547-557
  * Additional Reading T.B.A.



Week 8 18th Century

3/7 Mendelssohn and Enlightenment --- First Paper Due

  * B 258-268
  * G 509-512
  * S 513-527

3/9 More Enlightenment

  * B 269-278
  * G 297-298, 303-304, 365-371, 380-382, 512-514
  * S 566-570



Spring Break



Week 9 18th into 19th Centuries

3/21 (Purim) Hasidim and Mitnagdim

  * B 245-257
  * G 382-384, 441-458
  * S 485-496, 482-485

3/23 Reform

  * B 279-294 
  * G 554-556, 584-592
  * S 527-533, 541-546, 580-584, 597-598



Week 10 19th Century

3/28 Wissenschaft

  * B 307-320
  * G 514-526, 535-538, 543-547, 758-763
  * S 570-579, 590-597, 598-613

3/30 Neo-orthodoxy

  * B 295-306
  * G 384-387, 538-543
  * S 584-590, 613-618



Week 11 19th Century

4/4 Zionism

  * B 332-345
  * G 526-535, 659-682, 799-800
  * S 626-642, 684-709

4/6 Russia, and others

  * B 321-332, 370-383
  * G 552-553, 780-783, 797-798
  * S 533-541, 569-570, 653-655, 658-661, 680-682, 709-719 



Week 12 20th Century

4/11 German Jewish Culture --- Second Paper Due

  * G 547-551, 559-579, 682-686, 763-780, 784-786, 790-797, 800-801
  * S 647-655, 720-748

4/13 America

  * B 346-369
  * G 580-584, 592-607, 706-757, 783-784, 786-790
  * S 642-647, 748-757



Week 13 20th Century

4/18 Holocaust and Israel

  * B 383-403, 403-421
  * G 556-559, 608-658, 686-705
  * S 655-658, 661-678

4/20 No Class -- Passover



Week 14 20th Century

4/25 (Fourth Intermediate Day of Passover) Post-modernity

  * B 422-430
  * S 678-683, 757-766
  * Additional Reading T.B.A.

4/27 No Class -- Passover



5/2 Final Paper Due

* * *

[Back to Mark Kaplowitz course
homepage](http://www.nyu.edu/classes/kaplowitz/index.htm)

Last Modified: Monday, March 6, 2000 3:30pm

Address comments or questions to:
[mqk4399@is4.nyu.edu](mailto:mqk4399@is4.nyu.edu)

