History of Science 112:

Medicine and Society in Medieval and Renaissance Europe



Fall 1998: Monday, Wednesday, 12-1 pm; Thursday 6-7 pm

Professor Katharine Park

Office hours: Tuesday 2-4, Science Center 235 G

Telephone: 495-9922; email: park28@fas.harvard.edu



TF: Kristen Haring

Office hours: Thursday 4-6, Science Center 224 E

Telephone: 495-8758; email: haring@fas.harvard.edu



_________________________________________________________



This course explores the history of medical theory and practice in Europe from
the twelfth to the early seventeenth century, using methods from social,
intellectual, and cultural history. The principal themes of the course
include: 1) the place of naturalistic medicine and medical practitioners
within a larger world of healing that included a wide range of religious and
magical techniques; 2) changing views of the body and its functions; 3) the
cultural and social significance of disease; 4) and the gradual emergence of
"modern" medical institutions and structures such as the hospital, the medical
profession, and highly developed regimes of public health. Teaching through a
combination of lecture and discussion, the latter focused on the analysis of
primary sources.



READINGS:

The following books have been ordered from the Coop:

Nancy G. Siraisi, _Medieval and Early Renaissance Medicine: An Introduction to
Knowledge and Practice_ (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990).

Paracelsus, _Four Treatises_ , ed. Henry E. Sigerist, trans. C. Lilian Temkin
et al. (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996).

Erik Midelfort, _Mad Princes of Renaissance Germany_ (Charlottesville VA:
University Press of Virginia, 1996).

Andreas Vesalius, _Illustrations from the Works of Andreas Vesalius of
Brussels_ (Dover, 1950).

Carlo M. Cipolla, _Fighting the Plague in Seventeenth-Century Italy_ (Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press, 1981).



Available through Harvard Printing and Publication Services (basement of
Science Center):

Readings for History of Science 112.



All required readings, except those in Readings for History of Science 112,
are on reserve in Lamont and Hilles; in the case of articles in an edited
collection, you should check under both the name of the author of the article
and the name of the editor(s) of the collection, since the article may appear
under either.



COURSE REQUIREMENTS:

1\. Two papers (ca. 7 pages = 1750 words): due 10/14 and 12/2. Please keep
backup copy of papers submitted.

2\. Midterm (in class): Friday 10/30.

3\. Final examination.

4\. Participation in class discussions.





SYLLABUS:

Unless otherwise specified in the syllabus, reading should be completed for
class discussion on Friday of each week. Please bring the assigned primary
sources to class.

Use these buttons to navigate the syllabus more quickly:

|

Week 1 (9/16-9/18)

|

Week 2 (9/21-9/25)

|

Week 3 (9/28-10/2)  
  
---|---|---  
  
Week 4 (10/5-10/9)

|

Week 5 (10/12-10/16)

|

Week 6 (10/19-10/23)  
  
Week 7 (10/26-10/30)

|

Week 8 (11/2-11/6)

|

Week 9 (11/9-11/13)  
  
Week 10 (11/16-11/20)

|

Week 11 (11/23-11/25)

|

Week 12 (11/30-12/4)  
  
Week 13 (12/7-12/11)

|

Week 14 (12/14-12/16)

|  
  
Week 1 (9/16-9/18) Introduction: the Greek and Arabic heritage

Reading:

Nancy G. Siraisi, _Medieval and Early Renaissance Medicine: An Introduction to
Knowledge and Practice_ (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990), ch. 1.

Edward Grant, _A Source Book in Medieval Science_ (Cambridge MA: Harvard
University Press, 1974), no. 90/pp. 705-15 (Hunain ibn Ishaq/Johannitius,
_Isagoge_ ). In Readings for History of Science 112.

As you read Iohannitius, try to master the basic system of the "naturals,"
"non-naturals," and "contra naturals." How would you define each of these
categories? It may help to make yourself a diagram or outline of them as you
read.



Part 1: MEDICINE IN THE MEDIEVAL WORLD, 500-1500

Week 2 (9/21-9/25) Medicine in the Islamic world

Emilie Savage Smith, "Islamic Culture and the Medical Arts" [online: web],
updated 15 April 1998. Visit in entirety. URL:
<http://www.nlm.nih.gov/exhibition/islamic_medical/islamic_00.html>

Grant, _Source Book in Medieval Science_ (Cambridge MA: Harvard University
Press, 1974), no. 91/pp. 715-20 (Ibn Sina/Avicenna, _Canon_ ). In Readings.

What is the relationship between Avicenna's discussion, written in the
eleventh century, and Johannitius', written in the ninth, which you read for
last week? (Note that the extract from Avicenna is a very small part of the
first book of a much longer work. To which portion of Johannitius' work does
the Avicenna extract correspond?) How would you describe the evolution of
Arabic medical theory over the intervening period, as reflected in these two
works?

Max Meyerhof, "Thirty-Three Clinical Observations by Rhazes (circa AD 900),"
_Isis_ 23 (1935): 321-56. In Readings.

To what extent does the theory of illness and the functioning of the body in
Rhazes' clinical notes reflect the theoretical system laid out by Iohannitius?
Are there ways in which it departs from it? Make a list of the various
discrete types of healing available to sick people in Baghdad around 900. What
do Rhazes' notes tell you about the relationships between the different types
of healers (or between healers of the same type)? What do they show you about
the patients' relationship to these healers?



Week 3 (9/28-10/2) From the Islamic world to the medieval West: systems of the
body

Siraisi, _Medieval and Early Renaissance Medicine_ , ch. 4.

Katharine Park, "The Life of the Corpse: Division and Dissection in Late
Medieval Europe," _Journal of the History of Medicine_ 50 (1995): 111-32. On
reserve.

Grant, _Source Book_ no. 93/pp. 722-24 (Isidore of Seville, _Etymologies_ );
no. 94/pp.724-26 ( _Anatomy of the Pig_ ); no. 95/pp. 727-29 (Master Nicholas,
_Anatomy_ ); no. 96 (Mondino de' Liuzzi, _Anatomy_ ); and no. 97/pp. 740-42
(Bernardus Tornius, _Consilium_ ). In Readings.

What kinds of changes do you see in the four anatomy texts, which range from
the seventh to the fourteenth centuries? How would you explain those changes?
Characterize the evolution of Christian Europe cultural attitudes toward human
dissection as they are evidenced in all five texts.



Week 4 (10/5-10/9) Education and practice

NO CLASS MONDAY 10/5.

Siraisi, _Medieval and Early Renaissance Medicine_ , chs. 2-3, 5-6.

Grant, _Source Book_ , no. 98/pp. 742-45 (Archimatthaeus, _On the Instruction
of a Doctor_ ); and no. 100.2/pp. 751-52 (Arnald of Villanova?, _De cautelis
medicorum_ ). In Readings.

What kinds of differences do you see between the first text, written in the
first half of the twelfth century, and the second, written ca. 1300? To what
changes would you attribute those differences?

Grant, _Source Book_ , no. 102/pp. 760-61 (Ugo Benzi, _Consilium_ ).



Week 5 (10/12-10/16) Treating the gendered body

NO CLASS MONDAY 10/12 (COLUMBUS DAY).

PAPER 1 DUE IN CLASS WEDNESDAY 10/14.

Claude Thomasset, "The Nature of Woman," in Christiane Klapisch-Zuber, ed., _A
History of Women in the West,_ vol. 2: _Silences of the Middle Ages_
(Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 1992), 43-69. On reserve.

Grant, _Source Book_ , no. 103/pp. 761-67 (Trotula, _Diseases of Women_ ); no.
104/pp. 767-69 (Constantine the African, _Pantegni_ ). In Readings.



Week 6 (10/19-10/23) Plague: a case study

Michael Dols, "The Comparative Communal Responses to the Black Death in Muslim
and Christian Societies," _Viator_ 5 (1974): 269-87. On reserve.

Richard Palmer, "The Church, Leprosy and Plague in Medieval and Early Modern
Europe," _Studies in Church History_ 19 (1982): 79-99. On reserve.

Grant, _Source Book_ , no. 107/pp. 773-74 (Guy de Chauliac). In Readings.

Rosemary Horrox, ed. and trans., _The Black Death_ (Manchester: Manchester
University Press, 1994), no. 56/158-63 (Paris Medical Faculty); no. 61/pp.
182-84 (physician of Montpellier); no. 62/pp. 184-93 (John of Burgundy); no.
64/194-203 (Pistoia city ordinances of 1348). In Readings.

Read the plague tractates of Guy de Chauliac, the Paris Medical Faculty, the
physician of Montpellier, and John of Burgundy in chronological order. What
differences and similarities do you see between the texts, and how would you
account for them?

How does the model of plague, its causes, and its prevention implicit in the
Pistoia ordinances of 1348 relate to that in the medical treatises?



Part 2: THE WORLD OF HEALING, CA. 1500

Week 7 (10/26-10/30) The world of medical practice

MIDTERM WEDNESDAY 10/28.

Prepare for Monday 10/26:

Siraisi, _Medieval and Early Renaissance Medicine_ , Epilogue.

Antonio Benivieni, _De abditis nonnullis ac mirandis morborum causis (On the
Hidden and Marvelous Causes of Disease and Healing)_ , trans. Charles Singer
(Springfield IL: Charles C. Thomas, 1954). In Readings.

Benivieni was a university-educated physician who practiced in Florence (an
important city in northern Italy) in the second half of the fifteenth century.
He jotted down these entries over the course of his career, so that they
resemble in some respects Rhazes' clinical observations. His brother selected
the longest and best developed entries from Benivieni's notes and published
them in 1507, after Benivieni's death.

Make a list of the various types or categories of healers referred to by
Benivieni, with examples of each. What kind of healing does each type offer?
What kinds of conditions does each specialize in (if any)? What healing
techniques does each use? Can you see any pattern in the kinds of patients
(male, female, occupation, social class) each treats? What is Benivieni's
attitude toward these different kinds of healers, and what is his relationship
to them?

Make a list of the various types of illnesses or conditions encountered or
described by Benivieni--for example, disability, chronic illness, acute
illness, trauma, etc.--with examples for each type. This will give you a sense
of the world of illness encountered by urban healers in the pre-modern period.
What are Benivieni's sources? Has he seen all these conditions personally?

What can you tell about Benivieni's view of the body? How does he think the
body functions? What are the principles that govern it? How does he conceive
of the differences between the male and the female bodies? How does he
conceive of internal illness and how do the kinds of healing techniques he
applies, as a physician, reflect that model of illness?



Week 8 (11/2-11/6) Varieties of religious healing

Katharine Park and John Henderson, "'The First Hospital among Christians': The
Ospedale di Santa Maria Nuova in Early Sixteenth-Century Florence," _Medical
History_ 35 (1991): 164-88. In Readings.

_The Miracles of King Henry VI_ , ed. and trans. Ronald Knox and Shane Leslie
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1923), nos. 1-59/pp. 34-120 and nos.
121-65/pp. 171-213. In Readings.

What are the various types of miracles contained in this source? Roughly what
proportion involve healing? What general kinds of illnesses are represented?
Which kinds are represented most frequently? What other types of healing had
been tried first, if any? In what order? Does the pattern vary according to
different kinds of illness? What is the attitude of the compiler toward other
kinds of healing?

Where and when did the cures take place? How did they happen, i.e., what
actions triggered the cure? What was the nature of the cure (gradual or
sudden, full or partial), and how was it documented?

What types of people are represented in this document? Male vs. female? Age?
Class? Are any groups disproportionately represented?



Week 9 (11/9-11/13) Varieties of magical healing

NO CLASS WEDNESDAY 11/11 (VETERANS DAY)

Ruth Martin, _Witchcraft and the Inquisition in Venice, 1550-1650_ (Oxford:
Basil Blackwell, 1989), 124-47. In Readings.  

Marsilio Ficino, _The Book of Life_ , trans. Charles Boer (Irving TX: Spring
Publications, 1980), pp. 1-2, 38-91, 177-83. In Readings.





Part 3: MEDICINE IN RENAISSANCE EUROPE

Week 10 (11/16-11/20) New diseases/new treatments I: the "French disease"

Anna Foa, "The New and the Old: The Spread of Syphilis (1494-1530)," trans.
Carole C. Gallucci, in _Sex and Gender in Historical Perspective_ , ed. Edward
Muir and Guido Ruggiero (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1990),
26-45. On reserve.

Review Benivieni, _De abditis_ , 9-21. In Readings.

Ulrich von Hutten, _Of the Wood called Guaiacum_ , trans. Thomas Paynel
(London: Berthelet, 1539 (transcribed with modernized spelling). Class
handout.



Week 11 (11/23-11/25) New diseases/new treatments II: Paracelsus

NO CLASS WEDNESDAY 11/25, FRIDAY 11/27 (THANKSGIVING)

Prepare for Monday 11/30:

Allen G. Debus, "Paracelsus and the Medical Revolution of the Renaissance."
Read in entirety. URL:
<http://www.nlm.nih.gov/exhibition/paracelsus/paracelsus_2.html>

Paracelsus, _On the Miners' Sickness and Other Miners' Diseases_ , Books I and
III, trans. George Rosen, in Paracelsus, _Four Treatises_ , ed. Henry E.
Sigerist (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996), 55-80, 103-23.



Week 12 (11/30-12/4) Madness

SECOND PAPER DUE WEDNESDAY 12/2.

Paracelsus, _On Diseases that Deprive Man of his Reason_ , trans. Gregory
Zilboorg, in _Four Treatises_ , 135-212.

Erik Midelfort, _Mad Princes of Renaissance Germany_ (Charlottesville VA:
University Press of Virginia, 1996).



Week 13 (12/7-12/11) The new anatomy

Andreas Vesalius, _Illustrations from the Works of Andreas Vesalius of
Brussels_ (Dover, 1950), Introduction and passim.

Vesalius, Preface to _On the Fabric of the Human Body_ , in Charles D.
O'Malley, _Andreas Vesalius of Brussels, 1514-64_ (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1964), 316-24. In Readings.



Week 14 (12/14-12/16) Public health

Carlo M. Cipolla, _Fighting the Plague in Seventeenth-Century Italy_ (Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press, 1981).



  
  
|  
  
Copyright (C) The President and Fellows of Harvard College

