**Trinity College          **

**Spring 2002**

** **

**Educational Studies 350: Curriculum: Theory, Policy and Practice**

** **

**Asst. Prof. Barbara Henriques                    **

Office McCook 304  

**TR 2:40-3:55 McCook 305**  

Phone: 297-2278  

Office Hours:  T/Th 11-12; W 2-4;

and by appointment  

Email: barbara.henriques@trincoll.edu
**http://www.trincoll.edu/depts/educ**  
  
---  
  
** **

**Introduction:** What is "the Curriculum"? How has it become what it is and
how has its development reflected the social and political realities of our
history? Who decides what composes "the Curriculum"? What constitutes
knowledge and does "the Curriculum" reflect that knowledge? Does knowledge
change and how is that reflected in "the Curriculum"? Do all members of our
society have equal opportunities for success with "the Curriculum"? How might
the trend toward national curriculum standards influence classroom instruction
and assessment? What role do interest groups play in shaping curriculum at the
local, state and national level? These are some of the questions we will
consider as we explore topics related to curriculum development policies,
theories and practice.

            A community learning component has been built into this course. Last year a joint collaborative project with the Educational Studies Program, the Trinity College Child Care Center, the Montessori Inter-district Magnet School entitled **Connecting our Children with the World** was funded through the 1634 Venture Capital Fund. As part of this project students developed a curriculum unit in the arts and/or sciences and presented their completed curriculum units to students in after school programs at partner schools. The units also included related  "learning at home" materials and community resources. 

This year we will continue this as a component of the course which allows you
to put into practice what you have learned about key components of curriculum
design. The curriculum unit you develop must have a clearly stated rationale,
methodology, and evaluation that is grounded in theories and policies of
curriculum development discussed in class. Students will present their
completed units to students in after school programs. Each student
presentation will be videotaped as part of the self-evaluation of the unit.
Units and the teaching of the unit will also be peer evaluated.

A final version of your curriculum unit must be submitted to me on disk and as
hardcopy for inclusion in the Educational Studies Resource Library.



  

**Text:**

Cornbleth, Catherine; Editor, _Curriculum Politics, Policy, Practice_ (New
York, SUNY Press, 2000). ISBN 0-7914-4568-2, $17.95



**Note:** Additional readings will be provided during the semester.

You are responsible for any revisions made to the syllabus, which will be
announced in class and posted on the course web site (see Ed Studies home page
above).

** **

**Evaluation:**

            Four 2-3 page analysis papers (10 points each)                                 40 points

                                                                                              

                        #1 Historical Perspectives on Curriculum

                        #2 Theories of Curriculum

                        #3 Curriculum Design, Development and Evaluation

#4 Improving the Curriculum





            Curriculum Project:                                                    

Proposal (comments only)  

Teaching of Curriculum Unit
15 points

Oral Presentation
10 points

Outreach Materials
10 points

Final Copy of Curriculum Unit                                              15
points



Peer Evaluation Report
10 points



**Total 100 points  
****Unit One: Historical Perspectives on Curriculum**

#  January

Tu       15        Introduction to the course, overview and requirements.



Th       17        The History of Curriculum In American

**Reading:** "Storm over the Schoolhouse: Exploring Popular Influences upon
the American Curriculum, 1890-1941" by Jonathan Zimmerman. Teachers College
Record, Volume 100, Number 3, Spring 1999, pp. 602-626.
<http://www.tcrecord.org/PDF/10324.pdf>

** **

Tu       22        The Early 20th Century

**Reading:** Chapter 3:  "Contestation and Curriculum: The Efforts of American
Socialists, 1900-1920" by Kenneth Teitelbaum in Beyer & Apple.

           

Th       24        The Present

**Reading:** Chapter 4:  "What Goes on in Classrooms? Is This the Way We Want
It? by Kenneth Sirotnik in Beyer & Apple.

#### Handout: Paper Topic #1



**NOTE: You need to begin thinking about your curriculum unit at this point.
Schedule a time to meet with me to discuss your ideas.**

**The Internet is a good source of ideas for units.**

**Also, check web sites and curriculum projects on the Ed Studies web page.**



### Tu       29      The Curriculum Project--Initial Steps

**Assignment:** Research Information for your topic. Come to class prepared to
provide some sites you have identified and ideas you are thinking about for
your curriculum unit.

            **Due:** **Topic Paper #1**

** **

###  Unit Two: Theories of Curriculum

Th       31        What Constitutes Curriculum?

**Reading:** Handout:  "Changing Conceptions of Curriculum" and "Curriculum as
a Field for Systemic Study" in _Curriculum Development_ by Tanner and Tanner.



# February  

Tu       05        Why Curriculum?

**Reading:** Handout:  "An American Curriculum?" by Cornbleth in Teachers
College Record, Vol. 90, No. 4, pp. 622-646.
<http://www.tcrecord.org/PDF/10284.pdf>

** **

Th       07        The Changing Curriculum

**Reading:** Handout:  "A Perspective on Cognitive Research and Its
Implications for Instruction" by Bransford and Vye in _Toward the Thinking
Curriculum_ ; ASCD.



  

Tu       12        Evaluating Theories of Curriculum

**Reading:** Chapter 5:  "Models of Curriculum Planning" by George Posner and
Chapter 10: "Democracy and the Curriculum" by George Wood in Beyer & Apple.



Th       14        Education for All?

**Reading:** Chapter 6:  "Multicultural Curricula: 'Whose Knowledge?' and
Beyond by Susan Noffke in Beyer & Apple. Chapter 6: "'They Don't What to Hear
it': Ways of Talking and Habits of the Heart in Multicultural Literature
Classrooms" by Susan Miller and Gina DeBlase Trzyna in Cornbleth.



Tu       19 **Trinity Day --No Scheduled Class**

Use this time to work on your Curriculum Project. It would be a good time to
schedule an appointment to meet with me to discuss your project.



Th       21        The Basic Skills Question

**Reading:** Handout:  "Curriculum Alternatives in a Survivalist Culture:
Basic Skills and the Minimal Self" by H. Svi Shapiro in _Critical Social
Issues in American Education_ , Shapiro and Purpel Eds.

_ _

Tu       26        Moving Forward?

**Reading:** "Schooling, Culture, and Literacy in the Age of Broken Dreams: A
Review of Bloom and Hirsh" by Aronowitz and H. Giroux in _Critical Social
Issues in American Education_ , Shapiro and Purpel Eds.



Th       28        Personal Theories of Curriculum

**Assignment:** Based on the material that we have considered in this section
of the course, prepare a preliminary personal statement that identifies what
you see as some of the key considerations that curriculum developers need to
be aware of as they write curriculum. Include citations from the readings and
our discussions whenever possible. Be prepared to present your statement in
class for further discussion.

**Handout Paper Topic #2**

** **

###  Unit Three: Curriculum Design, Development and Evaluation

# March

Tu       05        Objectives and Goals

**Review** Bloom's Taxonomy
[http://caribou.cc.trincoll.edu/depts_educ/Resources/Bloom.htm](http://caribou.cc.trincoll.edu/depts_educ/Resources/Bloom.htm)
and
[http://www.edwebproject.org/edref.mi.intro.html](http://www.edwebproject.org/edref.mi.intro.html)
for information on Howard Gardner's Theory of Multiple Intelligences. What
similarities and/or differences do you see in these approaches to learning?

## Due: Topic Paper #2



  

Th       07*      Curriculum Design in Science

            **Reading:** Project 2061 of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. Check out this website and become familiar with what and how the AAAS is trying to change curriculum. **[ http://www.project2061.org/tools/designs/default.htm](http://www.project2061.org/tools/designs/default.htm) **

** **

Tu        12*      California and Mathematics Reform

            **Reading:** "Instructional Policy and Classroom Performance: The Mathematics Reform in California" by David Cohen and Heather Hill. Teachers College Record, Volume 102, Number 2, February 2000, pp. 294-343. <http://www.tcrecord.org/PDF/10377.pdf>



Th       14*      State and National Curricula

            **Reading:** TBA

#### Handout Paper Topic #3



## Tu/Th 19/21   Spring Break



Unit Four: Improving the Curriculum



Tu       26 *****      Students with Different Abilities

**Reading:** Chapter 5:  "The Segregation of Stephen" by Diana Lawrence-Brown
in Cornbleth.

**             Due: Topic Paper #3**

** **

Th       28 *****      Gender and the Curriculum

**             Reading:** Chapter 12: "Teaching, Gender, and Curriculum" by
Sara Freedman in Beyer & Apple.

# April

Tu       02 *****      The Curriculum and Technology

**Reading:** Selections from _Oversold and Underused: Computers in the
Classroom_ by Larry Cuban. Harvard University Press, 2000.

** **

***Note: During this time most of you will be teaching your curriculum lessons
at the pre-arranged site. You will also be involved in a peer evaluation
experience. It is your responsibility to be up to date with the assignments
for class during this period.**

****

*      **Be sure that you have made the arrangements with the site and have everything that you will need to conduct your lessons successfully for you and your students. (You might want to check to see if they have video equipment you could use. This would mean that you wouldn 't have to borrow the equipment from the Trinity AV Department. **

*      **AV equipment _must_ be reserved in advance (well in advance, if possible) and can be picked up at AV, McCook 123. You need to familiarize yourself with the operation of the equipment before you use it.**

*      **I will be available via email or phone if you want to discuss your plans prior to your visit.**

** **

Th       04        Education and Business

**Reading:** Chapter 2:  "A Tale of Two Cultures and a Technology: A/musical
Politics of Curriculum in Four Acts" by Vivian Forssman and John Willinsky in
Cornbleth.



Tu       09        Textbooks and the Curriculum

**Reading:** Chapter 9: "The Culture and Commerce of the Textbook by Michael
Apple in Beyer & Apple.



Th       11        Evaluation

**Reading:** "Rethinking "High Stakes": Lessons from the United States and
England and Wales" by Firestone and Mayrowetz in Teachers College Record,
Volume 102, Number 4, August 2000, pp. 724-749.

**             Handout: Paper Topic #4**

** **

Tu       16        Evaluation: Another Perspective

**Reading:** Chapter 18:  "Developing Curriculum through School Self-
Evaluation" by Helen Simons in Beyer & Apple.

**Oral Presentations**



Th       18        Democracy and the Curriculum

**Reading:** Chapter 13;  "Schooling for Democracy: What Kind? by Landon Beyer
and Chapter 19: "Democratic Evaluation: Aesthetic, Ethical Stories in Schools"
by Landon Beyer and Jo Anne Pagano in Beyer & Apple.

**Oral Presentations**



Tu       23        **Final Oral Presentations**

**             Due: Topic Paper #4**

** **

**FINAL EXAM May 6 th 9am**

