[ ![](http://www.ga.unc.edu/images/toptool.gif)](http://www.ga.unc.edu/cgi-
bin/imagemap/Admin/imagemaps/toptool.map)

* * *

**Instructions and Key Definitions for Completing the  
1999-2000 Annual Report on Faculty Teaching Loads (same as 1998-99)**

* * *

(Changes and additions from last year are indicated by underlining, excluding
any hyperlinks.)

**_Special Notes for Completing the 1999-2000 Report (same as 1998-99)_**

_From the two videoconferences held on this topic this month (March 1999), the
instructions for 1998-99 reporting are carried over substantively unchanged
from 1997-98 reporting. In particular:_

  1. _Please do not count funded degree-credit extension courses that are taught "off-load."_
  2. _In order to ensure compatibility of data between 1997-98 and 1998-99, you are asked to use the same method of calculating Credit Hour Equivalents (CHEs) as you used last year._ 

_Please note that the "Form to Describe the Department's Method for
Calculating Credit Hour Equivalents" is part of the departmental report and is
not to be submitted to General Administration._

**Introduction**

This report is used for three purposes: 1) to monitor annual teaching
workloads by defining the standard load and exceptions to it; 2) to describe
who is actually teaching students enrolled in courses delivered by the
department; and 3) to measure the student credit hours of instruction
delivered by the department. The report should be completed using course data
that are tallied on each semester's census date and should cover all
coursework delivered in the fall and spring semesters of the academic year.

The report should be prepared by the **academic department or division** to
which courses and instructors are assigned. The name of the institution, the
department or division, and the department or division head should all be
entered on the top of the report. Courses that cannot be assigned to a
department even on a prorated basis, such as freshman orientation courses,
leadership courses or other inter- or multi-disciplinary courses may be
assigned to a catch-all department entitled " **Other**."

Please read carefully the definitions and instructions for completing this
form. **Note:** Not all instruction-related activities are expected to be
captured by this report. Course preparation, normal levels of academic
advising, writing and grading Ph.D. qualifying exams, holding office hours,
communicating with students via email, etc. are all examples of instruction-
related activities that are only indirectly measured by the credit hours and
credit hour equivalents to be reported on the attached form. Thus, what is
captured is based on the one _standardized measure_ of teaching activity
available within the University-the semester credit hour. For a better
understanding of the legislation, the Board of Governors' response to the
legislation, and the intended use of the data to come from this report, see
the [ _Board of Governors Plan for Rewarding Faculty
Teaching_](http://www.ga.unc.edu/UNCGA/assessment/reward_teaching.html).

* * *

**Definitions**

**Faculty** to be included in the report are those who actually meet the class
or deliver graded degree-credit instruction. _Other than volunteer faculty
(who should also be included), only faculty who are on the fall or spring
semester payrolls should be included._ Department heads, even if they are not
teaching during the academic year, should also be included. See [Fall 1998
Roster of Heads of Academic Departments](roster.html). In addition,
instructional faculty who are paid from the teaching line and have a
temporary, partial reassignment from their instructional duties for all or
part of the academic year should also be included. Teaching assistants,
temporary and part-time faculty, and volunteer faculty who deliver graded
degree-credit instruction should be included for the semesters _in which they
are assigned to teach_.

Faculty who are _not_ paid from the teaching line (purpose code=1310) and are
not teaching in the fall or spring semester should not be included even though
they may be considered a member of the department's faculty. In addition,
full-time academic advisors and other academic administrators who do not
deliver graded degree-credit instruction during the academic year should not
be included even though they may receive some of their salary from the
teaching line. Faculty employed by the medical schools at East Carolina
University or UNC-Chapel Hill, _by the School of Pharmacy at UNC-Chapel Hill,_
by the School of Dentistry at UNC Chapel-Hill, or by the School of Veterinary
Medicine at North Carolina State University should also be excluded.

**Graded degree-credit coursework** includes all courses in which students
receive a formal grade even though it may be something other than the standard
letter grade of "A," "B," "C" etc., for example, a grade of " **P** ass" or "
**U** nsatisfactory." Courses that are taught "off-load," e.g. extension
classes or summer school courses, even though they are graded and count for
degree credit, should not be counted. _Funded degree-credit courses, and the
faculty who teach them, may be included only if the courses are taught in-load
by your department._

**FTE** is a measure of instructional faculty input. One FTE is defined in
reference to the traditional nine-month appointment for tenure-track teaching
faculty paid wholly from the teaching line. Thus, a full-time appointment for
one semester or a half-time appointment for two semesters would each count as
0.5 FTE. Full-time, nine-month faculty who are paid partly from a state-funded
teaching position and partly from a state-funded non-teaching position should
have an FTE that is prorated accordingly. Similarly, FTE for all off-track
faculty and teaching assistants who are paid from the teaching line is defined
in reference to the **standard teaching load** for full-time off-track
faculty. Thus, a part-time faculty member hired to teach six hours in the fall
and six in the spring would be reported as 0.5 FTE in a department in which
full-time off-track faculty are expected to teach 12 hours per semester.

**Credit hour equivalent** (CHE) is the calculation of the equivalent teaching
load for courses not taught in a standard lecture format. _Use the same method
of calculating as was used for 1997-98 reporting. CHE_ is defined for thesis
and dissertation supervision or service, independent study, directed readings,
senior or honor's thesis supervision, laboratories and laboratory supervision,
clinics, internships, student teaching, practica, studio and other courses.
Equivalents are assigned in cases where the credit hours generated by a course
are different from the credit hours assignable for satisfying load
requirements. In some departments, equivalents are given for large classes and
graduate level courses and for activities such as supervising students'
experiential learning experiences. Please complete "Form to Describe the
Department's Method for Calculating Credit Hour Equivalents" (CHEs) for each
department that used CHEs to determine teaching loads in 199 _8_ -9 _9\. (This
form is part of the departmental report and is not to be submitted to General
Administration.)_

* * *

**Special Note about Courses That Are Team-Taught or Cross-Listed**

Since the teaching workload report is completed at the departmental level, it
will be necessary to prorate FTE, course credit hours and student credit hours
when courses are team-taught by departmental faculty, and by others outside
the department. Cross-listed courses should be assigned to the department
staffing the course and prorating should not be used unless the cross-listed
course is also team taught.

* * *

**Note of Clarification Regarding Instructors and FTEs to Be Included**

There are four issues that require clarification. The **first issue** is
whether faculty who were regular teaching faculty based on their permanent
position, but who were able to buy release time from externally funded
research, should have their reported FTE based on their permanent position or
based on their reduced teaching load. The answer is that it should be based on
their permanent position and that their release time from teaching should be
reported as credit hours of course reduction in line **13J**.

The **second issue** is whether instructors in zero-credit hour labs should be
reported at all on the departmental report. The answer is that they should be
reported and their FTE should be calculated as the percent of the standard
load that their credit hour equivalents represent. For example, if a TA or
off-track faculty member taught two two-hour labs and received four hours of
CHEs toward the department's teaching load, s/he should be reported as 1/3 FTE
if the standard load is 12 hours. The four CHEs for this person would be
reported on line **6**.

The **third issue** is whether instructors of remedial courses, freshman
seminars, and similar courses that count toward a student's courseload but not
toward graduation requirements should be included in the report. The answer is
yes.

The **fourth and final issue** is whether the report should include
instruction in military science courses taught by federally paid military
officers participating in an ROTC program. The answer is no. However, this
does not mean that courses, say in military history, taught by regular faculty
in the history department should be excluded just because they are typically
taken by students enrolled in ROTC.

* * *

**Column Instructions**

**Tenured and tenure-track faculty** include all such faculty whose duties are
fully or partially assigned by the department. A full-time administrator whose
duties are assigned outside the department should not be reported in this
column even if s/he holds tenure in the department. If the administrator
teaches a course on a "volunteer" basis, s/he should be reported under the
column entitled "Other faculty."

The **department or division head** should be reported even if s/he did not
teach during the academic year.

**Full-time off-track faculty** include all visiting, clinical and other
temporary faculty and lecturers who are hired to teach full-time in either the
fall or spring semester or both.

**Other faculty** include "volunteer" faculty, librarians, academic support
staff, post- _doctoral_ fellows, teachers paid out of Title III funds,
adjuncts, and other part-time faculty.

**Teaching assistants** include graduate students whose teaching
responsibilities include classroom, laboratory, studio, or other instructional
assignments that bring them into direct and substantive pedagogical contact
with students. An example of such an assignment is having to meet all classes
and deliver instruction even though the teaching assistant lacks full
responsibility for choosing the text or drawing up the syllabus. Another
example is having to set up, operate, and teach science lab courses. Teaching
assistants who only staff computer labs, grade papers, proctor exams, conduct
discussion or recitation sessions or hold similar responsibilities should not
be included in this report.

* * *

**Line Instructions**

**Line 1. Headcount** includes all instructional faculty (including joint
appointments) delivering instruction even though they may be double-counted on
another department's report. **Editing note:** Headcounts must be integer
values only and should be greater than or equal to the number reported on line
**2**.

**Line 2. FTE** as defined in the general instructions should be reported
here. Faculty whose appointments are in more than one department should have
their FTEs apportioned accordingly.

**Line 3. State-supported FTE** is the FTE reported on line **2** paid out of
the state-funded teaching line.

**Line 4. Standard Teaching Load** is the sum of credit hours and credit hour
equivalents that a full-time instructional faculty member in the department is
ordinarily expected to teach during the academic year. It should not be
reported for "other faculty" and teaching assistants. It may be different for
regular tenured and tenure-track faculty than it is for off-track faculty
because the latter may have workloads that limit responsibilities for research
and service.

**Line 5. Number of Course Credit Hours Taught** is the sum of fall and spring
semester course credit hours taught by the faculty included in each designated
column.

**Line 6. Number of Credit Hour Equivalents (CHE)** should be reported as they
were actually assigned by the department in 1997-98 _, even though the method
may have changed in 1998-99_. If CHEs are reported, please complete the "Form
to Describe the Department's Method for Calculating Credit Hour Equivalents"
_(which is part of the departmental report and is not to be submitted to
General Administration)_. **Note** : Do not double-report credit hours and
credit hour equivalents. For example, if CHEs are assigned for dissertation
supervision on this line, do not count the credit hours of the dissertation
courses on line **5** unless the sum of both _lines_ equaled the contribution
to load. SCHs from courses generating credit hour equivalents should be
included as the product of the course credit hours and the number of students
in the course, not as the product of credit hours plus equivalents and the
number of students in the course.

**Line 7. Number of Credit Hours Plus Equivalents** is the sum of entries on
lines **5** and **6**.

**Line 8. Number of Student Credit Hours (SCHs) Taught** is the product of
course credit hours and the number of students in the course summed over all
courses in the categories **a-f**. In category **a** , a remedial course is
one in which credit hours assigned to it do not count in satisfying degree
requirements. In category **b** , basic skills courses refer to freshman
composition in English, the first year of courses in foreign language, and
freshman level courses in mathematics. It does not include the credit hour
equivalents reported on line **6**. Credit hour counts should be taken on the
fall and spring semester census dates.

**Line 9. Number of Credit Hours Taught on an Overload Basis** is the number
of course credit hours plus equivalents taught on an overload basis. The
overload is based on the expected annual load. A faculty member who teaches a
heavier than standard load in the fall or spring with a compensatory reduction
in the other semester should not have his or her courses included on this
line. Courses taught on an overload for a stipend should be reported on line
**9a** ; all others should be reported on line **9b**.

**Line 10. Number of Faculty Who Taught Standard Load** is the headcount of
faculty who taught the standard load (indicated on line **4** ) during the
academic year.

**Line 11. Number of Faculty Who Taught More Than Standard Load** is the
headcount of faculty who taught one or more courses on an overload basis
during the academic year.

**Line 12. Number of Faculty with Reduced Load** is the headcount of faculty
who taught less than the standard load during the academic year _and_ the
total number of credit hours reduced. **Editing note** : The headcounts
reported on lines **10** , **11** , and **12** should equal the number
reported on line **1**.

**Line 13. Reason for Course Reduction** : For each reason listed, indicate
the headcount of faculty with course reductions and the number of credit hours
of course reduction that were attributable to that reason. **Note** : Faculty
who have reduced teaching loads during the academic year because they are
being compensated for overload teaching in a prior academic year should have
their course reductions reported on line **g**. Faculty on 12 month teaching
contracts who fulfill their load obligations by teaching in the summer should
have their load reductions reported on line **h**. The sum of headcounts in
items 13a-13p need not equal the total reported on line **12** because faculty
may have more than one reason for having received a reduction in load;
however, the sum of credit hours of course reductions in items **13a-13p**
should equal the total number reported on line **12**.

* * *

**Fundamental Relationship**

In each departmental report there should be a logical relationship between the
standard teaching load reported on line **4** and the actual course load data
reported on lines **7** , **9** , and **12** , which persons completing the
departmental report are asked to observe. Put simply, the actual courseloads
reported in these lines _, when adjusted for course reductions and overloads,_
should _equal_ the expected load, which may be calculated as the product of
the faculty FTEs reported on line **2** and the standard teaching load
reported on line **4**. _That is, the_ expected load will be met by faculty
who either teach the standard load or an overload and by faculty who have a
reduced load for any of the reasons listed in item 13 of the departmental
report. Because the course credit hours and CHEs reported on line **7**
include the overload hours reported on line **9** , this means that **the
actual load (line 7 plus line 12 _minus line 9_ ) should _equal_ the expected
load (line 2 times line 4) for each department**. Because the institutional
summary of these reports is an aggregation of departmental reports, this
relationship should be observed on the [institutional summary
report](instsumrpt.pdf) also.

  

* * *

Questions about _reporting to General Administration_ should be referred to:

Dr. Troy Barksdale  
Associate Vice President for Program Assessment & Public Service  
UNC General Administration  
P.O. Box 2688  
Chapel Hill, NC 27515-2688  
Phone: (919) 962-4554  
Fax: (919) 962-4316  
email: [tbarks@ga.unc.edu](mailto:tbarks@ga.unc.edu)

or

Dr. Gary Barnes  
Vice President for Program Assessment & Public Service  
UNC General Administration  
P.O. Box 2688  
Chapel Hill, NC 27515-2688  
Phone: (919) 962-4591  
Fax: (919) 962-3591  
email: [barnes@ga.unc.edu](mailto:barnes@ga.unc.edu)

* * *

Back to the [general information](general_instruct.html) for Teaching Workload
Reporting

* * *

[ ![](/images/bottombar.gif)](/cgi-bin/imagemap/Admin/imagemaps/bottombar.map)
Last Modified 3/29/99

