**College of Arts and Sciences Department of History**

**Northern Arizona University Spring 2001**

  

**_Sanjam Ahluwalia_**

**_Office: LA 232 Class Meetings: MWF 11.30-12.20_**

**_Phone # : 3-8709 Teaching Assistant: Matthew Thomas_**

**_Office Hours: MWF 12.30-1.30 Course Prerequisites: None_**

**_E-mail:[Sanjam.Ahluwalia@nau.edu](mailto:Sanjam.Ahluwalia@NAU.EDU)_**

  

**HIS 102: The Making of the Modern World**  


**_IMPORTANT : Please look at the "Northern Arizona University Policy
Statements" and the "Classroom Management Statement" at the back of this
documentbefore reading the syllabus._**  


**COURSE DESCRIPTION** : This course traces the evolution of the world from a
constellation of relatively isolated regions in 1500 to global interdependence
of the present-day. The emphasis in the course will be on tracing the
emergence of the interdependence between world regions--an interaction that
was stimulated by the European invasions and colonizations and sustained by
the contributions of the non-western regions. Together these forces shaped the
modern world. In analyzing and understanding global histories as inter-
connected, we will pay close attention to the social, cultural, political,
economic, demographic, and ecological implications of this history. Class
lectures and readings will stress upon issues of diversity, power imbalances,
and the interactive workings of race, ethnicity, class, gender, and national
variables. Though primarily a course in global history, it will draw upon
materials and pedagogical approaches from other disciplines, such as feminist
studies, anthropology, literature, political science, and art.  


**THEMATIC FOCI** : The readings and class lectures will emphasize the
importance of valuing diversity of human experiences. Students will be urged
to pay close attention to how variables of gender, race, ethnicity, class,
religion, community, and nation shaped historical understandings in different
parts of the globe. We will pay close attention to technological developments
and their varied impact in history, and again our focus will be to map how
technology impacted different social groups and societies in the past. Looking
at global interactions across time and space, this course will also examine
how environmental consciousness shaped human interactions with their natural
world.  


**DISTRIBUTION BLOCK** : Cultural Understanding.  


**ESSENTIAL SKILLS** : Critical Reading and Thinking, Ethical Reasoning,
Effective Writing, and Oral Communication.

**COURSE OBJECTIVES** : The course will promote understanding of different
cultures as they have developed in global, political, social, cultural,
economic, and environmental contexts. It will provide the opportunity for
students to study historical development of local and regional societies, and
to cross disciplinary and geographical boundaries to appreciate an
increasingly interdependent and multi-cultural world. This pedagogical
approach will emphasize the interconnectedness and uniqueness of all peoples.
It will elucidate the contributions of culturally diverse groups to the
formation of the modern world, while highlighting their achievements. The
course's potential is exemplary for instilling the skills and values of world
citizenship and for relating to people different from oneself.  


**COURSE STRUCTURE** : This is the second course in a two semester sequence on
World History at NAU. These courses are intended to be large surveys that
break down into smaller discussion sections through the strategic use of
teaching assistants. Both courses also build upon common themes of (1) the
globalization process; and (2) cultural change . The general format of the
course will be: interactive lectures, audio-visual materials, intensive
reading and writing, and small group discussions.  


**COURSE REQUIREMENTS**

You are expected to engage with weekly readings carefully and critically and
participate actively in class discussions, 15% of your course grade will
depend upon class discussion of various films and readings. This class will
also require use of internet resources.

Informal Writing: You will be expected to write short critical responses to
works of fiction, primary documents, and films.

Map Quiz: There will be 2 map quizzes in class, you will be asked to identify
specific places on an outline map from a list of places handed out in class
ahead of time.

Mid-Term Exam: There will be an in-class mid-term exam. The format of which
will be discussed in class.

Final Exam: In-class final exam will consist of essay questions drawn from a
list handed out in class two weeks prior to the exam.  


**COURSE GRADES**

Grades for the course will be calculated in the following way:

Class Discussion 15%; Informal writing 25%; Map Quiz 15%; Mid-term Exam 20%;
Final Exam 25%.  


TOTAL FOR COURSE 100%

The grading scale for the course will be as follows:

90%+ =  **A** ; 80 - 89%=  **B** ; 70-79%=  **C** ; 60-69%=  **D** ; below
60%=  **F**.  


**ASSIGNED TEXTS** :

Howard Spodek, The World's History: Volume II-Since 1100. **(REQUIRED)**  


Raymond Hylton, Documents Set: The World History: Volume II. **(REQUIRED)**  


Olaudah Equiano, The Interesting Narrative and other Writings. **(REQUIRED)**  


Gerald A. Danzer, World History: An Atlas and Study Guide. **(RECOMMENDED)**

A set of REQUIRED readings available on the World Wide Web (WWW).  


If necessary I may put REQUIRED or other RECOMMENDED readings on reserve at
the Cline

library.  


**COURSE POLICIES**

ALL WRITTEN ASSIGNMENTS ARE DUE IN CLASS.  


**PLEASE NOTE** : I do not give extensions, incompletes, or make-up exams,
except in cases allowed for by University Policy.  


Plagiarism or other forms of academic dishonesty will not be tolerated in any
of the assignments, and will result in failing the course. Please consult the
section on "Academic Integrity" in the  _NAU Policy Statements_ appended to
this syllabus for further details. IT IS THE STUDENTS' RESPONSIBILITY TO
FAMILIARIZE HERSELF/HIMSELF WITH THESE MATTERS AS DEFINED BY THE UNIVERSITY.  


**ATTENDANCE AND PUNCTUALITY**

While I will not take regular roll, frequent and repeated absence and/or lack
of punctuality could effect your grade. As pointed out above 15% of your class
grade will depend on participation in the various class discussions assigned
in the syllabus. Whatever your reasons for arriving late or missing a class,
it is  **YOUR RESPONSIBILITY** to arrange to meet or call a classmate and find
out what happened in that class.  


**COURSE SCHEDULE: SUBJECT TO MODIFICATION  **  


January 17: **_Introduction._**  


January 19: **_Why World History? Dominant themes to be covered in the course.
Start reading The Interesting Narrative_**.

Reading: Spodek, "Introduction," PP: 1-16.  


**_FORGING A GLOBAL WORLD_**

January 22-24: **_Changing World in 1500: Trade, Politics, and Society_**.  

January 22: Class Lecture.

January 24: Class Discussion of primary documents.

Readings: Spodek, "Chapter 12: Channels of Communication," PP: 372-408.

Documents Set, "Chapter 12," PP: 205-218.  


January 29: **_Trade Routes and World Trade-1500-1776._**

Readings: Spodek, "Chapter 13: The Unification of World Trade," PP: 409-443.  


January 31 & February 2: **_Demography and Migration-1500-1770s._**

January 31: Class Lecture.

February 2: Class Discussion of Primary documents and Chapter. **_First In
class Map Quiz.  _**

Readings: Spodek, "Chapter 14: Demography and Migration," PP: 444-474.

Documents Set, PP 244-246; 250-254.  


February 5: **_Class Discussion of  The Interesting Narrative._**  


**_REVOLUTIONS: POLITICS & SOCIETY, INDUSTRY AND EMPIRE_**

February 7-14: **_Political Revolutions in Europe and the Americas:
1688-1850_**.

February 7: English Revolution \--1688.

February 9:American Revolution \-- 1775-1783.

February 12: French Revolution \-- 1789-1799.

February 14: Revolt in Haiti \-- 1791.

Readings: Spodek, "Chapter 15: Western Revolutions and their Export," PP:
478-507.

Documents Set, PP 255-264.  


**_FEBRUARY 12: PAPER DUE ON  INTERESTING NARRATIVE._**  


**_February 16: MID-TERM EXAM!! PLEASE REMEMBER TO BRING BLUE BOOKS!!_**  


February: 19-21 **_End of Colonialism in Latin America_**

Readings: Spodek, "Chapter 15," PP: 509-516.

Documents Set, PP. 264-268  


February: 23 **_Comparative analysis and importance of the revolutions - Class
Discussion._**  


February 26-28: **_Industrial Revolution-1740-1914._**

February 26: Britain and Europe.

February 28: Impact on the world outside Europe: India, China and Africa.

Readings: Spodek, "Chapter 16: The Industrial Revolution," PP: 517-556.

Documents Set, PP: 278-286.

Marx, Communist Manifesto. **Available on line.**

**Please make a print out from the following site:**
_http://csf.colorado.edu/psn/marx/Archive/1848-CM/_  


March 2- **_Class discussion of  Communist Manifesto._**  


**_March 5-9: SPRING BREAK!!_**  


**_March 12: PAPER DUE ON Communist Manifesto._**  


March 12-16: **_Social Revolutions - 1830-1914_**

March 12: Gender Politics.

March 14-16: Film Doll House.

Readings: Spodek, "Chapter 17: Social Revolutions," PP: 557-575.

Documents Set, Chapter 17, PP 288-291, 306-311.  


**_March 16-19: Class discussion of  Doll House , Second Map Quiz._**  


**_NATIONALISMS AND IMPERIALISM: TOWARDS A POST-COLONIAL WORLD_**

March 21: ** _Politics of Nationalisms - 1830-1914._**

Readings: Spodek, "Chapter 17: Social Revolutions," PP: 575-593.  


March 23-30: **_Technologies of Destruction: 1914-2000_**.

March 23: World War I.

March 26: World War II.

March 28-30: Film and discussion.

Readings: Spodek, "Chapter 18: Technologies of Mass Production and
Destruction," PP: 594-639; Documents Set, PP: 312-325.  


April 2-9 ** _Russia and Japan 1914-2000_**.

April 2-4: Russia.

April 4-9: Japan.  

Readings: Spodek, "Chapter 19: Soviet Union and Japan," PP 640-676.

Documents Set, PP: 339-349; 354-362.  


April 11-18: **_India and China 1914-2000._**

April 11: India.

April 13 & 16: China.

April 18: Class Discussion-Gandhi and Mao.

Readings: Spodek "Chapter 20: China and India," PP 677-712.

Documents Set, PP: 363-386.

M. K. Gandhi, Hind Swaraj. **Available on Line.**

**Please make a print out from the following site:**

_http://www.swaraj.org/mkgandhiswaraj.htm_  


April 20-23: **_Latin America 1870s-2000._**

April 20& 23: Latin America.

Readings: Spodek, "Chapter 23: Latin America," PP: 774-804.

Documents Set, 432-435; 437-458.  


April 25-27: ** _Arab World and Africa 1870s-2000._**

Readings: Spodek, "Chapter 21: The Middle East and North Africa," PP: 713-15;
720-721; 727-740; Spodek," Chapter 22: Sub-Saharan Africa," PP: 741-773.

Documents Set, PP: 387-392; 401-410; 423-431.  


April 30: **_Global Environment.  _**

Readings to be announced.

May 2: **_Global People's Movements._**

Readings to be announced.  


**_May 4: FINAL EXAM REVIEW!_**  


**_May 9: 10.00- 12.00 PM. FINAL EXAM - PLEASE REMEMBER TO BRING BLUE
BOOKS!!!_**

