Note: This is rough text file. A word document may be downloaded from this
site. Syllabus ECON 11 sections 10 and 11 Principles of Macroeconomics Prof.
Miles Cahill Fall 1999 CONTACTING ME Office: STEIN 541 Office phone: 793-2682
e-mail address: mcahill@holycross.edu P. O. Box: 99A Office Hours: Mondays:
9:30-10:30 Wednesdays: 9:30-10:30 Thursdays 9:30-10:30, 1:00-3:00 And by
appointment and drop-in Principles of Macroeconomics section meeting times
Section 10: MWF 2:00-2:50 in Stein 319 Section 11: MWF 3:00-3:50 in Stein 319
OVERVIEW What is this course about? This class will provide you with an
introduction to the economics discipline, as well as an overview of
macroeconomics. Simply put, economics is a way of examining and evaluating the
world. Economics has been used to study nearly everything in the realm of the
social sciences, and economic techniques have been widely used in natural and
physical sciences. Macroeconomics is the study of economies as a whole. Among
other topics, it looks at issues concerning unemployment, inflation, interest
rates, and economic growth. Thus, this course will develop theories to analyze
the economy, and apply these theories using real-world data. By the time the
course is done, you should be able to use these skills to understand the news
and recognize faulty analysis. In addition, these skills will help you make
choices in life. The structure of this class divides the material into four
units: 1\. Introduction to economics Introduces the basic tools and concepts
of economics, including the notions of opportunity cost, supply and demand,
competition, and trade. 2\. Introduction to macroeconomics Introduces the
basic issues in macroeconomics, and details some of the ways the economy and
economic performance are measured. 3\. The long run economy Discusses the
behavior of the economy in the long run, introduces a model to study the long
run economy, and discusses sources of economic growth 4\. The short run
economy Discusses the behavior of the economy in the short run, builds a
mathematical and graphical model of the short run economy, and uses the model
to make predictions and analyze policy. 5\. Conclusion Brings together
material in the first four units by applying them to policy issues,
disagreements among macroeconomists, and the deficit (or surplus). A more
complete list of topics and the expected number of classes we will spend on
each unit can be found on pages 5-7 of this syllabus. Prerequisite High School
Mathematics This class will make extensive use of algebra and graphing
techniques. Make sure you are able to: ? manipulate and solve equations, and
systems of equations (e. g. two equations with two variables) ? make
percentage calculations, and use percentages in problems ? construct graphs
from data ? construct graphs that represent ideas and equations ? read and
interpret graphs If you have difficulties with any of these skills, please see
me immediately, and throughout the semester for help. The Appendix to Chapter
1 in the text (and study guide) provides some help in working with graphs. The
first homework assignment will help you refresh these skills as well. COURSE
MATERIALS Required materials Text: Stiglitz, Joseph E., Principles of
Macroeconomics, 2nd edition (Norton). (Available for purchase at the bookstore
- new and used copies are acceptable.) Recommended materials Study guide:
Martin, Lawrence W., Study Guide (for Stiglitz, Principles of Macroeconomics),
2nd edition. This study guide summarizes the main points of each chapter in
addition to highlighting key terms and concepts. It also provides several
practice questions with very detailed answers. While you may find it of great
help to you while studying, be warned that the practice questions are
significantly easier than many of the homework and exam problems you will
face. This feature may actually be helpful to you getting stated with the
material. Newspaper: The Wall Street Journal The Wall Street Journal is a
daily newspaper which publishes regular news stories. It has a particular
focus on politics, the economy and financial markets. Thus, it is a good way
to keep up on current events, and a good source of material for the short
paper (see below). Several WSJ articles will be distributed during the
semester. Newspaper: The New York Times (web version). The New York Times is
free on the web, though you have to pay a fee to access most articles from
previous issues. Non-textbook readings You will be required to read and
understand several outside readings. Some of the readings will be placed on
reserve, made available in the reserve room of the Dinand Library. Others will
be distributed in class. You will be assigned these readings during the course
of the semester. Microsoft Excel You will be required to use Excel to
generate, display, manipulate and graph data for assignments. On these
assignments, you will be given detailed instructions; I will make myself
available to help you as well. Excel is available in the computer labs. The
ECON 11 Home Page on the Internet I have set up a world wide web (www) home
page for these sections of ECON 11. On this web page, you will find the
syllabus, Internet links to use for assignments, data to use for assignments,
and some answers to assignments. In particular, Excel spreadsheets containing
answers to problems will be posted. The address for the class web page is:
http://sterling.holycross.edu/departments/economics/mcahill/econ1 1.html You
can also access the web page from the main Holy Cross page (www.holycross.edu)
through my faculty profile page on the Economics Department web site. You will
be given more instruction on the web page during class and on assignments.
GRADES Your grade will be mainly based on exam and quiz scores. Exams There
will be two in-class midterms and one cumulative final exam (during finals
week). The exams will be a combination of problems, short answer, and essay
questions. Even if you study hard, you can expect to need the entire 50 minute
period to complete the midterms, while you will not need the entire 3 hour
period to complete the final. Be warned: many questions will require you to
apply your knowledge in a way that you previously have not considered. The
exam dates are scheduled as follows: Midterm 1: Friday, October 1 Midterm 2:
Wednesday, November 3 Final exam: 2:00 (10) section: Tuesday, December 14,
8:30 3:00 (11) section: Thursday, December 16, 2:30 Quizzes There will be six
quizzes during the semester, announced one class ahead of time. They will be
short, taking approximately 10- 15 minutes. It is possible that one or more of
them will be take- home. Problem sets Throughout the semester, you will be
assigned individual problems and problem sets. Although problem sets will not
be collected or graded, completing them on time is essential to doing well in
the class. From time to time, individual problems will be discussed in class.
Attendance Attendance at every class is mandatory. Active participation is
strongly encouraged, and will be required from time to time. If you must miss
a class, call ahead if at all possible. Be on time and prepared for class. 3
bonus points will be added to the grades of all students who do not miss any
quizzes or classes without an acceptable excuse. In general, I will require a
note from your class dean for an absence to be excused. If you do miss a quiz
or test for an acceptable reason, I will re-weight your other tests or quizzes
to compensate, except in extreme cases. Grading Total points in semester: 300
Midterms (2): 75 points each, 150 points total Final exam: 90 points Quizzes:
(6): 10 points each, 60 points total Attendance: 3 bonus points Academic
dishonesty Cheating of any form will be prosecuted to the fullest extent
possible. Grade distribution Final grades will be based on the sum total of
final points, not on an average of letter grades on each assignment. Expect
the average GPA for the class to be approximately 2.8 (between a B and a B-).
You will be informed of your class standing throughout the semester. In
particular, you will be given a letter grade for each exam, and will be told
after each exam what your letter grade is for all your course work up to, and
including the exam. For example, after the second exam, you will be told your
letter (and number) grade based on the two midterms and the first four
quizzes. In addition, you will be told your letter grade going into the final
exam. As an insurance policy for you, the guaranteed minimum number of points
needed to achieve each score is given below: Grade Points Grade Points A: 285
C+: 230 A-: 270 C: 220 B+: 260 C-: 210 B: 250 D+: 200 B-: 240 D: 195 OTHER
NOTES Office hours You are very strongly encouraged to meet with me during my
office hours throughout the semester. Visit office hours for assistance in
understanding material covered in class or the readings; if you would like to
go over exams, quizzes or other questions; for assistance and suggestions with
the short paper; if you have any questions about the economics major or
economics courses; or if you would like to ask about and/or discuss any
economic issue. The most unfortunate mistake many students make is not
utilizing office hours, especially early in the semester. Suggestions for
study habits Unfortunately, it is a fact of life that there is nothing you can
do to guarantee that you will receive the grade of your choice. However, there
are a few simple things you can do to help you do well in class, and maximize
your chances of getting a high grade: ? Do not miss any classes. ? Spend a few
minutes before class reading the previous class's notes. ? Read the assigned
material in the text book and reserve readings before class. ? Be an active
participant in class - ask questions, make comments or at least actively think
about the material being presented. ? Complete all homework assignments soon
after the material is presented and before you look at the answers. ? Use the
study guide. ? Take an active approach to studying: do not just read over your
notes and make sure the material makes sense to you - make sure you can use
the material. Constantly ask yourself questions as you go over your notes: how
does this material relate to previous material? how can this material be
applied to real world questions? ? Come to office hours if you are having
difficulty with material, starting early in the semester. Information on the
Economics major Economics majors are required to take 9 classes, plus two
semesters of calculus. Five of these classes, covering basic and intermediate
macro and micro and basic statistics, are required. If you are considering a
major, you should take Principles of Microeconomics next semester (if you
haven't already), and start on your calculus sequence this year (if you
haven't already). For more information on the economics major, including
requirements, a summary of classes, and career opportunities for economics
major graduates, see the economics department home page on the Holy Cross web
site (www.holycross.edu), or come speak with me. CLASS OUTLINE On this and the
next two pages, you will find a list of topics and associated textbook
readings we will cover this semester. The topics are broken into five "Units."
The approximate number of classes spent on each unit is given in parentheses
after the unit title. The textbook readings refer to chapter sections and page
numbers in the text. Note we are not following the book in order, so make sure
to read the right pages for each class. One suggestion: you may find it
convenient to keep track of homework assignments, outside readings, etc. on
this outline. TOPIC TEXTBOOK READING Unit 1: Introduction to economics (8
classes) What is Economics? Ch. 1 Four questions: What, how, and for whom are
goods produced? Who decides? pp 9-15 Macro vs. Micro pp 17-8 Normative vs.
positive pp 21-3 Tools used by economists: Models, data analysis pp 18-21
Important concepts in economics Ch 2 Opportunity costs pp 39-40 Marginal
analysis p 41 Constraints (opportunity sets) pp 33-39 Budget and time
constraints pp 33-6 The Production Possibility Frontier (PPF) pp 36-9 Gains
from trade pp 43-52 Comparative advantage pp 48-52 Competitive markets pp
28-33, 134 Introduction to markets Ch 3, 5 The supply/demand model Ch. 3
Definition of a good * The demand curve pp 62-8 Substitution and income
effects pp 119-212 The supply curve pp 69-74 Equilibrium pp 74-7, 83-4
Applications to other markets * Labor, product, capital, international
currency markets * Failings of competitive markets pp 135-147 TOPIC TEXTBOOK
READING Unit 2: Introduction to macroeconomics (5 classes) Overview of
macroeconomics Ch 4 Long run vs. short run * Macroeconomic policy goals pp
92-3 The U. S. economy today * National production and income Ch 4 Potential
GDP vs. actual GDP pp 95-7 Measurement: National income and product accounts
pp 97-101 Alternatives to NIPA p 102 Keeping track of international trade p
182-5, * Balance of payments accounts * Unemployment Ch 4 Overview pp 103-4
Measurement pp 104-6 Forms pp 107-8 Inflation Ch 4, 14 Overview: Definitions,
effects and history pp 108-113, 352-6 Measurement p 108, * Unit 3: The long
run economy (4 classes) Long run equilibrium model Ch. 6, 7 Labor, product,
and capital markets in the long run pp 150-64 The international sector and the
trade deficit pp 168-72, 188-9 Fiscal deficits and the national debt pp 164-5,
178-82 Money pp 166-8 Economic growth Ch. 7, 17 Causes of growth pp 190-5, Ch
17 Policies to encourage growth pp 190-5, Ch 17 Unit 4: The short run economy
(13 classes) Markets in the short run Ch. 8, 15 Labor market pp 201-5, 382-95
Product and capital markets pp 205-13 Short run macroeconomic model: the
aggregate expen. model Ch. 9 Consumption and Saving pp 230-3 Investment pp
233-4 Aggregate Expenditure equilibrium pp 223-9 Spending multiplier pp 234-7
Government sector and fiscal policy pp 237-9 Fiscal Policy pp 237-9, 240,
333-6, 342-5 Effect of taxes on the multiplier p 240, 335-6 Net exports pp
239-44 Determinants, Exchange rates pp 240-1, 185-6 Open economy spending
multiplier p 244 TOPIC TEXTBOOK READING Unit 4 (continued) Money Ch 11
Overview: definitions and measurement pp 277-87 O'view of fin. sys., banks and
the Fed. Rsve pp 286-90, 301-3 Money Market Ch. 11 Money supply pp 290-301
Money creation and multiplier pp 294-7 Monetary policy pp 298-301 Money demand
pp 308-10, 320-2 Equilibrium pp 311 Monetary policy pp 311-6, 337-42 The AD
curve * Short run aggregate supply Ch. 14 Determinants pp 365-6, 374-7 Short
run macroeconomic equilibrium Ch. 14 Static short run equilibrium p 366 Shifts
in AD pp 367-370 Short run Phillips Curve pp 357 Shifts in AS pp 370-1 Long
run (inertial) inflation pp 371-3 Returning to the long run pp 358-64 Unit 5:
Conclusion (6 classes) Macroeconomic policy issues Ch. 16 Goals of policy pp
403-7 Causes of business cycles pp 407-11 Interventionists vs. non-
interventionists pp 411-20 Reducing long run unemployment pp 421-2 History of
policy pp 423-5 Summary of disagreements among macroeconomists * "Schools" of
macroeconomics * The fed. deficit (or surplus) and nat. debt in detail Ch. 18
Measurement issues pp 466-7, * Hist. causes of the deficit (or surplus) and
debt pp 464-7 Issues for the future pp 476-80 Costs and benefits pp 467-70 8

