# [ ![](images/newfl.gif)](http://www.as.wvu.edu/forlang) Majoring in Foreign
Languages [ ![](images/newfl.gif)](http://www.as.wvu.edu/forlang)

Table of Contents

[Introduction](MAJORHAN.htm#intro)

[Graduation Requirements](MAJORHAN.htm#req)

  * [Deparmental Requirements for the Major in Foreign Languages](MAJORHAN.htm#depreq)
  * [University Liberal Studies Program Requirements](MAJORHAN.htm#lsp)
  * [Eberly College of Arts and Sciences Requirements](MAJORHAN.htm#collreq)

**[

Interdepartmental Majors and Dual-Degrees](MAJORHAN.htm#majors)**

**[Minors](MAJORHAN.htm#minors)**

**[Study Abroad](MAJORHAN.htm#abroad)**

**[Advising](MAJORHAN.htm#advising)**

**[Clubs and Honoraries](MAJORHAN.htm#clubs)**

**[Departmental Scholarships and Awards](MAJORHAN.htm#awards)**

**[Placement Test](MAJORHAN.htm#place)**

**[Credit by Exam](MAJORHAN.htm#credit)**

**Departmental Policies**

**[Study Tips](MAJORHAN.htm#tips)**  

* * *

**

INTRODUCTION**

Welcome to the Department of Foreign Languages! Undergraduate course work is
offered in foreign literatures and cultures, linguistics, Teaching English as
a Second Language, language teaching methods, and foreign languages, including
Chinese, French, German, Italian, Japanese, Latin, Portuguese, Russian, and
Spanish. The Department also oversees the Intensive English Program in
Eiesland Hall, where international students may seek instruction in English as
a Second Language before matriculating into the university.

As a foreign language major or minor, you are greatly enhancing your ability
to deal with a complex world in which a global economy and international
relations are playing an increasingly important role. This area of study fits
well with almost all types of career options: international studies, political
science, history, English, business, economics, journalism, law, etc.. In
addition to job opportunities dealing with other countries, there are also
significant populations of non-English-speaking people in almost all corners
of the United States, allowing an individual knowledgeable in a second or
third language to have an edge in the job market in this country. Teaching in
the public schools, teaching English as a Second Language, government work,
social work, working for multi-national companies--all become viable options
for people with language skills. We strongly urge our students to combine this
degree with another major or minor. This can usually be accomplished without
having to go beyond the 128 credit hours needed for graduation, if one plans
early and carefully.

The Department of Foreign Languages encourages you to take advantage of all of
its resources. Advisors are available to help you prepare your plan of study
in order to make optimum use of your time and resources. Instructors and
coordinators are available to help you do your best in classes. Education
largely relies on communication--two-way communication. You must become an
active participant in this education process by telling us as soon as you
perceive a need or a problem. Contact your advisor, your teacher, or the
language coordinator as soon as you begin to see a problem or have a question.
In this manner, you can be assured that all efforts will be taken to help you
succeed.

This booklet contains information that can help you navigate through your
years as a major or minor in the Department of Foreign Languages. The
information is accurate as of fall, l996, but future curriculum revision or
resource allocation may necessitate changes at any time. Always check with the
departmental office, 205 Chitwood: phone: 304 293 5121 or e-mail:
[mbendena@wvu.edu](mailto:mbendena@wvu.edu) for updates.  


* * *

  **GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS** **A. DEPARTMENTAL REQUIREMENTS FOR THE MAJOR IN
FOREIGN LANGUAGES**

The Bachelor of Arts degree in foreign languages offers six areas of emphasis:
French, German, Russian, Spanish, Linguistics/TESL, and Foreign Literature in
Translation. Depending upon the area of emphasis selected, majors are expected
to communicate through reading, writing, speaking, and listening in one or
more foreign languages. They should also have knowledge of the culture and
literatures related to those languages and have a general understanding of how
human languages operate.

To major in foreign languages, students must have completed the equivalent of
four semesters of elementary and intermediate courses in one language. They
also must have completed 58 credit hours with an overall 2.0 grade point
average. They must continue to maintain an overall 2.0 grade point average for
graduation.

Foreign language majors must complete a minimum of 27 credit hours of upper-
division work offered in the Department of Foreign Languages. (Upper-division
is defined as courses numbered 100 or above.) All majors must take Linguistics
111. Only Linguistics/TESL majors may count Language 221 as part of their
major. Studetn electing French, German, Linguistics/TESOL, Russian, or Spanish
may **_NOT_** use FLIT courses to fulfill the major requirements but may use
them for the secondary area of concentration.   No undergraduate ESL course
may count in the major.

Students obtainin a major in Foreign Languages at WVU must complete a minimum
residency requirement of 12 upper-division hours on campus in their major
language of study, excluding courses numbered 191 and courses obtained by
credit by exam.

The foreign language major must select one of the following major areas of
emphasis and complete the courses listed:

**FRENCH:**

Linguistics 111  
French l03, l04, l09, and l10  
At least 9 hours of upper-division French courses  
3 hours of upper-division electives in the department

**

GERMAN:**

Linguistics 111  
German l03, l04, l09, and 110  
At least 9 hours of upper-division German courses  
3 hours of upper-division electives in the department

**

RUSSIAN:**

Linguistics 111  
Russian l03, l04, l09, and 110  
At least 9 hours of upper-division Russian courses  
3 hours of upper-division electives in the department

**

SPANISH:**

Linguistics 111  
Spanish l03, l04, l09, and 110  
At least 9 hours of upper-division Spanish courses  
3 hours of upper-division electives in the department

**

FLIT** (Foreign Literature in Translation):

Linguistics 111  
18 hours of upper-division FLIT courses, approved by the advisor  
6 hours of upper-division language courses, approved by the advisor

**

LING/TESL:**

Linguistics 111  
Linguistics 202 and 283  
Language 221 and 292 (Readings in Language)  
9 upper-division hours in Linguistics or TESL, approved by the advisor  
3 hours of upper-division electives in the department.

All students majoring in foreign languages must complete either a minor or an
approved concentration of course work that complements their major.  The
requirement for this "secondary concentration" may be met in one of four ways:

  1. Completion of twelve hours of upper-division credit, from within or outside the Department of Foreign Languages, with the same division prefix  (e.g. GER, HIST, BUS, PSYCH, FLIT).  The courses that constitute the 12-hour secondary concentration are subject to the availability of courses, must be approved by the student's advisor, and may not include courses required for the student's major.
  2. Completion of twelve hours of upper-division credit in the major area or from a combination of division prefixes that together focus on a common topic or subject area that complements the major area of study (e.g. French history, French art, French music).  The courses that constitute the 12 hours in this option are subject to availability, must be approved by the student's advisor, and may not include courses required for the major.
  3. Completion of an approved minor.  Requirements for minors are set by the academic unit offering them and include minimum of 15 hours of course work, with a minimu of 9 hours at the upper-division level.
  4. Completion of a second major.

In order to provide students with a balanced liberal arts education, the
Eberly College of Arts and Sciences requires that students do not take more
than 60 hours of the 128 hours needed for graduation in their major
department. Foreign language majors may exclude from the 60-hour limit
Linguistics 111, Language 221, and language 1-4 taken to fulfill the Eberly
College of Arts and Sciences language requirement.  
    


**B. UNIVERSITY LIBERAL STUDIES PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS**

In addition to the requirements established by the Department, all foreign
language majors must satisfy the prescribed general education requirements set
forth by the university. This is called the Liberal Studies Program. The most
updated list of courses fulfilling these requirements can be found at the
beginning of the _Schedule of Courses_.

Here is a summary of the LSP requirements:

1\. Skills Requirements

  * English l
  * English 2
  * One "W" course
  * Three hours of math or statistics (from Math 3, 4, 11, 14, 15, 16, 23, 28, 128, 131, 160, Econ. 125, Stat. 101)

2\. Program Clusters

  * Cluster A: Humanities and Fine Arts (12 hours)
    * 3 disciplines included
    * 2 courses from the same discipline
    * 2 foreign language courses may be used if they cover the same same language. Foreign language courses in a student's native language may not be used in Cluster A.
    * no more than one MDS course

  * Cluster B: Social and Behavioral Sciences (12 hours)
    * 3 disciplines included
    * 2 courses from the same discipline
    * no more than one MDS course

  * Cluster C: Natural Sciences and Mathematics (12 hours)
    * 2 disciplines
    * l laboratory
    * no more than one MDS course

  * Foreign/Minority Culture or Women/Gender Requirement (3 hours)



**C. EBERLY COLLEGE OF ARTS AND SCIENCES REQUIREMENTS**

Students must also satisfy the following requirements set forth by the Eberly
College of Arts and Sciences:

  * Foreign Language: Two years of study in one language. Courses used to fulfill this requirement are in addition to those used to fulfill the University Liberal Studies Program Cluster A requirement.
  * Fine Arts: Three hours of courses focused on the fine arts, in addition to those used to fulfill the Cluster A requirement. Courses satisfying this requirement are: Art 30; Classics 102; Communication Studies 187; English 21, 22, 24, 25 35, 36, 80, 85, 125, 130, 131, 132, 133, 135, 143, 145, 150, 170, 171, 172, 175; Foreign Literature in Translation 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 111, 112, 121, 122, 131, 132, 141, 142, 151, 152, 155, 161, 162, 166, 181, 182, 188, 189; Humanities 1, 2, 5, 10, 11, 20; Music 30, 130, 135, 137, 138; Philosophy 15; Religious Studies 142; Sociology and Anthropology 157; Theatre 30, 74, 220, 221, 295,296, 297, 298.
  * International Studies: Three hours of study of foreign countries or cultures, other than those of Modern Western Europe or Canada, and/or their role and interactions within the contemporary international system. This requirement may be used simultaneously to satisfy LSP requirements, but no course used to satisfy the foreign language requirement may be used to fulfill this requirement. Courses satisfying this requirement are the following: Communication Studies 135; English 85; Foreign Literature in Translation 16, 17, 152, 166, 171, 189; Geography 2, 143, 144, 210; History 4, 5, 6, 118, 42, 209, 225, 226, 228, 230; Humanities 5, 20; Philosophy 113, 122, Political Science 3, 150, 160, 250, 251, 254, 255, 256, 258, 266, 267, 269; Religious Studies 130, 131, 132; Sociology and Anthropology 5, 51, 155, 156, 222; Technology Education 245.

    
Students must complete a total of 128 credit hours for graduation. A Pass/Fail
grade is not acceptable for any course satisfying university, college, or
departmental requirements. Students may petition for a D/F Repeat if the
original course was taken within the first 60 hours of course work at the
university.  


* * *

**

INTERDEPARTMENTAL MAJORS AND DUAL-DEGREES**

The Department of Foreign Languages cooperates with several departments to
provide courses for interdepartmental majors and dual-degree programs:

  * International Studies: Many of the options in this interdepartmental degree program involve courses from the Department of Foreign Languages. Contact Rodger Yeager in the Department of Political Science, 316B Woodburn Hall (phone: 293 3811) for more information.
  * Slavic Studies Program: This interdepartmental major includes courses in Russian, Russian and East European history, political science, and economics. Contact Marilyn Bendena in the Department of Foreign Languages, 205 Chitwood Hall (phone 293 5121) for more information.
  * Dual Degree in Business and Foreign Languages: This coordinated five-year program in business and foreign languages provides global opportunities for students seeking both a Bachelor of Arts with a major in foreign languages and a Bachelor of Science in business. Contact Axel Claesges in the Department of Foreign Languages, 116 Chitwood Hall (phone: 293 5121) for more information.

* * *

**

MINOR IN FOREIGN LANGUAGES**

All students, except those majoring in foreign languages, may complete an
official Eberly College of Arts and Sciences minor in foreign languages.
Contact Rose Eavenson , in 202 Student Services Center (phone: 293 7476) to
apply for the minor. It consists of 15 credit hours of course work and is
available in six areas of concentration: French, German, Russian, Spanish,
Linguistics, and Foreign Literature in Translation. The requirements are the
following:

**

FRENCH, GERMAN, RUSSIAN, SPANISH:**



    * 103 and 104 **OR** 109 and 110 and 9 upper-division hours*
    *   
All courses must be in the same language

    * Linguistics 111 may be counted among the 9 hours.

**

FOREIGN LITERATURE IN TRANSLATION:**

    * 15 upper-division hours in FLIT courses, including courses in at least two different national literatures.*

**

LINGUISTICS:**

    * Linguistics 111, 202, 283, and six additional approved upper-division hours in foreign languages.

*Do not count these courses toward the minor: any 191-level teaching practicum, ESL 191, Languge 221. FLIT 191 courses count only toward the minor in FLIT.   


* * *

**

STUDY ABROAD**

Foreign Study is recognized by the Department of Foreign Languages as an
important component of the cultural and linguistic preparation of its
students. We encourage students to consider both international programs on
campus and study abroad. At present, the Department offers summer programs in
[France](http://www.as.wvu.edu/~mlasting/vendee.htm),
[Germany](http://www.as.wvu.edu/~german/abroad.htm),
[Mexico](mailto:fmedley@wvu.edu), and [Spain](mailto:pgonzale@wvu.edu).

The Department receives many advertisements throughout the year, describing
various study-abroad opportunities. It posts these on bulletin boards in
Chitwood and Eiesland Halls, but does not endorse any programs outside of West
Virginia University. Students planning to do study abroad should work closely
with [Dr. Frank W. Medley, Jr](mailto:fmedley@wvu.edu)., Chair of the
Department (205 Chitwood Hall) before they leave in order to fill out the
Transient Student Form and receive credit for the work they do abroad.

The University prohibits students from receiving credit twice for the same
work. If students assume they will be placed at a certain level in a study-
abroad program and then find that they are placed at a level which they have
already passed, they may not receive credit.

* * *

**

ADVISING**

When students enter the university as freshmen, they are designated as _pre-
majors_ and are advised in the Advising Center. If pre-majors prefer to be
advised in the Department, they may request that their files be sent to the
Department of Foreign Languages by contacting [Marilyn
Bendena](mailto:mbendena@wvu.edu) in 205 Chitwood. When students earn 58
credit hours, they officially may declare their major. Their files are sent to
their major department, where they will be advised. In order to declare a
major, students should see Rose Eavenson in 202 Student Services Center (phone
293 7476).

[Michael Lastinger](mailto:mlasting@wvu.edu) (220 Chitwood) advises all French
majors. [Marilyn Bendena](mailto:mbendena@wvu.edu) advises all other majors
and minors in the Department. It is important to keep in touch with your
advisor. Give updates of your address and phone number so that important
information can be sent to you.

Pre-registration usually begins right after mid-terms. In order to get the
classes you need, register as early as possible. Also, if you are having
academic problems, talk with your advisor: help may be available early so that
you won't have to drop a course or receive a poor grade. Remember, two-way
communication can often prevent many problems from becoming disasters!

At least one semester before graduation all majors should visit Rose Eavenson
in order to do a _Graduation Check_. If there are still requirements
outstanding, there will be time to register for them, and graduation will not
have to be delayed. All graduating seniors in _all_ foreign language areas of
emphasis should also see Marilyn Bendena to have their final _Graduation
Check_ for departmental requirements. Students may have their _Exit
Interviews_ done at the same time. This interview allows students to let us
know how they feel about their experiences in the Department.

* * *

  **CLUBS AND HONORARIES**

The Department of Foreign Languages sponsors the following clubs and practice
language tables:

  * Hispanic Association (Advisor: Jeffrey Bruner)
  * Russian Club (Advisor: Marilyn Bendena)
  * Japanese Activities (Advisor: Tachan Minami)
  * French Table
  * German Table

All students are invited to participate.

The Department maintains the following Honoraries:

  * Pi Delta Phi (French, Advisor: Twyla Meding)
  * Dobro Slovo (Russian, Advisor: Marilyn Bendena)
  * Sigma Delta Pi (Spanish, Advisor: Joseph Renahan).
  *   


* * *

**

DEPARTMENTAL SCHOLARSHIPS AND AWARDS**

    * **BROUZAS AWARD.**

Up to $1500 cand be given each year to departmental under graduate students
(sophomore and above) who wish to study in our Department or abroad. Students
must be West Virginia residents.  


    * **CAROL A. FALTIS AWARD.**

A grant of $500 for tuition is given to an undergraduate major in our
Department.  


    * **ELSIE MABEL AND ETHEL MAUDE JONES AWARD.**

The award is available to any undergraduate major in the Department,
preferably one who plans to teach. Applicants should demonstrate financial
need and strong grade point average. The money is for tuition.  


    * **OUTSTANDING GRADUATING SENIOR.**

The outstanding graduating senior of the Department is honored at the Eberly
College of Arts and Sciences' Awards Reception. Students should have a strong
grade point average.  


    * **DANK AWARD** (German-American National Congress).

One undergraduate or graduate student receives a grant of $200 for writing an
essay on German-American relations.

    * **ANNO NOBUKO AWARD.**

The outstanding student in Japanese 4 is awarde a Japanese dictionary at the
end of the semester.



Applications and nominations for these awards are solicited in January and
awards are announced at the annual Reception held in April.

* * *

**

PLACEMENT TEST**

As of August, l995, all students who have studied French, German, or Spanish
within five years before entry into West Virginia University must take a
computerized placement test before registering for a course in one of these
languages. The exams are free and are given during freshman orientation, at
the beginning of each semester, and during pre-registration.

If you successfully pass the course in which you placed with a B or better,
you will automatically receive credit for all the courses you placed out of
without additional charge for tuition on those courses. You may take the exam
only once for each language you have studied. The back credit applies only to
courses l-4. For further information, please contact the Chair's Office.  


* * *

**

CREDIT BY EXAM**

Students may take credit by exam for language course 1-4 and 103, 104, 109,
110.  If you wish to challenge a course, you may pay $50 and take a written
credit by exam. If you score at least 70%, you will receive credit for the
course. If you score 80% or better, you need only pay the additional $50 for
each course below the one which you passed in order to receive the credit.
This last option applies only to language l-4 courses.   Courses beyond 110
may not be challenged by exam.  With the permission of the chair, individuals
pursuing certification may challenge courses required for certification.  
    


* * *

**

DEPARTMENTAL POLICIES**   **Tutoring**

The Departmtent of Foreign Languages recognizes that tutoring can be very
beneficial when used responsibly.  Tutors can help students identify
difficulties, errors, problems, etc. and can provide valuable direction in
correcting the above.

The purpose of written and oral assignments in any foreign language is
essentially two-fold.  Such assignments provide students with the opportunity
to utilize and practice, with the goal of improving, the languge of study.  At
the same time, these assignments provide the instructor the opportunity to
evaluate students' abilities and progress in the language.

For this reason, tutors (whether university-affiliated or private individuals)
are prohibited from completing, correcting, or providing any answers on any
work for which students will receive a grade.  This practice not only hinders
the learning process, it is a major breach of academic integrity and honesty
(see _The Mountie_ , section 3.1.1.3.2), bot on the part of the tutors and the
students, and will prosectuted accordingly.  
  **Academic Honesty and Integrity**

The Department of Foreign Languages expects all students to perform with
honesty and integrity in all areas of their academic development.  Violations
such as, but not limited to, those described below will not be tolerated.  


  1. Plagiarism (see _The Mountie_ , section 3.1.1.3.1)
  2. Cheating and dishonest practices in connection with examinations, papers, and projects (see _The Mountie_ , section 3.1.1.3.2).
  3.   
NOTE: This includes, but is not limited to, all written and oral assignments.
Unless otherwise indicated by the instructor, all such work must be prepared
by each student independently; for example, students may not copy one
another's homework, and students with tutors (whether university-affiliated or
private individuals) may not receive assistance on any work that is to be
graded.  In short any work done in collaboration \-- unless expressly
permitted by the instructor -- constitutes academic dishonesty.

  4. Forgery, misrepresentation, or fraud (see _The Mountie_ , section 3.1.2.3.3).

All known incidences of academic dishonesty will be procecuted to the fullest
extent.  


* * *

**

STUDY TIPS**

To successfully master a foreign language, one needs to practice, just as one
must routinely practice any skill, be it playing the piano or hitting a tennis
ball. This means that language study should not occur in a last-minute cram
session the night before an exam. Rather, one should work at it each day. As
you walk home from class, wash the dishes, or take a shower, **talk out loud**
in the target language. Find friends or create study groups to help you
converse. Keep a journal in the target language. Get tapes or listen to songs
in the language. The more active exposure you have to the use of the language,
the quicker you will perfect your abilities.

One of the worst enemies of language learning is one's own timidity and fear
of making a mistake in front of others. Only by **actively** trying to speak
and write, however, will you conquer this obstacle. You are, after all,
putting considerable time and resources into this task--why not take full
advantage and learn in the optimum manner?

Here are some other useful tips that do work:

l. Attend class regularly and do your homework. Almost every instructor in the
Department of Foreign Languages has an attendance policy stated in the
Syllabus. It is there, not to plague students, but to accent the importance of
daily language drills. The Department backs all required attendance policies
and _underscores that final grades will be lowered for unexcused absences as
stated in the departmental syllabuses._

2\. Make every effort to actively participate in class discussions. Create
study groups with classmates in order to practice outside of class.

3\. Make use of the tapes and computer programs offered in the Computer-
Assisted Language Learning (CALL) Laboratory, located in Eiesland Hall.

All of our majors are also offered an e-mail computer account. See the office
manager, Marianne Roberts (205 Chitwood), to apply. Some clubs cruise the
Internet to correspond with individuals from other countries. This provides
valuable and interesting practice.

4\. The Department does not offer official tutoring services, nor does it set
fees. However, instructors and coordinators often have names of majors and
graduate students or native speakers who are willing to tutor, either for free
or for a fee. A tutor is an excellent tool for reviewing difficult grammar
points or for practicing the language. Caution must be taken, however, so that
the tutor does not wind up correcting assignments or compositions to the point
that cheating becomes an issue. Remember, compositions in a foreign language
infer the creation of language as well as the creation of a logical thesis. It
is unwise to allow a tutor to "work on"or "perfect" a composition: the
composition is no longer _your_ work, and you can be accused of cheating.

5\. Do not wait if you think you don't understand something or have a problem.
Inform the instructor, the coordinator, or your advisor. We are eager to do
all we can to help you succeed. All of us have flexible office hours for
precisely such situations.

* * *

### For further information, please contact:

Marilyn Bendena, Associate Chair  
[(mbendena@wvu.edu)](mailto:mbendena@wvu.edu)

Chitwood Hall  
P.O. Box 6298  
West Virginia University  
Morgantown, WV 26506

Telephone: 304-293-5121  
fax: 304-293-7655

**05/01/02**  
**These pages have been consulted  ![Hit
Counter](_vti_bin/fpcount.exe/forlang/?Page=MAJORHAN.htm|Image=4|Digits=6)
times since November 11, 1997.**  

* * *

[![](images/newfl.gif)Back to the Department of Foreign Languages Menu
](index.html)

