**SYLLABUS**  
**GEOG 3300 - International Travel and Tourism**  
**Spring Semester, 2001/2002**  
**Instructor: Dr. Tom L. Martinson, Professor of Geography**  
**Office: 104B Tichenor Hall**  
**Office Hours: M-W-F 12:00 - 1:00 p.m.**  
**Electronic Mail Address: martitl@auburn.edu**  
**Telephone: 334/844-3414**  
**Fax: 334/844-3409**

**Lecture Topics** **(For more complete information, see the digital schedule
on our homepage):**

Course Introduction  
Introduction to Geography  
Introduction to Travel and Tourism  
Latin America: Origins  
Introduction to Latin America  
-First Exam--   
The Travel Agent  
The Caribbean  
The Dominican Republic  
Jamaica  
-Second Exam--   
The Motivation for Travel  
Mexico  
Oaxaca  
Yucatan  
-Third Exam--   
Tourism in Global Perspective  
Central America  
Honduras  
Costa Rica  
-Fourth Exam-   
Tourism Through the Ages  
South America  
The Pacific Andean Countries  
Colombia (Cali)  
Colombia (Monteria and Barranquilla)  
-Fifth Exam-   
The Economics of Tourism  
The Southern Cone Countries  
Chile  
The Giant Countries  
-Sixth Exam-- 

International Travel and Tourism (GEOG 3300) meets Monday, Wednesday, and
Friday from January 9 through April 29 (except for designated holidays) at
2:00 to 2:50 p.m. in room 114 of Tichenor Hall. Students are expected to
attend all classes and participate in all class activities, including both
lecture and project work.

The textbook for this course is Gini Graham Scott, _The Creative Traveler_
(San Jose, CA: toExel, 2000). In addition, a number of class readings,
lectures for review, and grade summaries are available on our course homepage:

http://www.auburn.edu/academic/classes/geog/3300/index.html

You may want to bookmark this site because it contains many items of interest,
and we will add to the homepage as the semester goes on. See our digital
course schedule for more information and a daily listing of events in class.

You will need to use the Internet to complete assignments for this course, and
so you need access to the Auburn University computer system. If you are an
Auburn student you already have a Global ID and Password, and you must
activate it for this course. To activate it, call the Auburn Voice Automated
Information System (VAIS) by dialing 844-5800 and selecting option 6, "to
activate e-mail and computer userid." Carefully follow the instructions. Be
sure to write down your personal userid and password. You have only one
opportunity to activate your account using VAIS. If you have any problems
using your e-mail account you must go to the Division of University Computing
in Room 26 of the L Building, and be sure to bring your Auburn University
picture id card with you. Currently there is a charge of $4 for re-setting
your password.

We will make extensive use of computer multimedia in class to develop a visual
sense of the themes and places studied. Students are expected to be familiar
with computers, or at least willing to learn how to use e-mail, Internet
searching, saving files, computer graphics packages, and HTML coding, as part
of this course. If you are not willing to learn these techniques you should
consider dropping the course. This is not a "computer course," but we do use
the computer extensively to teach Geography.

Any student needing special accommodations should contact Dr. Kelly Haynes,
Director of the Program for Students with Disabilities, located in 1232 Haley
Center. We will make every effort to make your learning experience as full as
possible.

**Class Attendance**

In this course it is particularly essential that you attend each class and
each project session. Extenuating circumstances are acknowledged (serious
illness, no more than one funeral per person per quarter, and natural
catastrophe) but hangovers, early departures for weekend or end of semester
trips, breakups of "relationships," outside work, and birthdays are not valid
causes for missing class. Consider this as a job where you will not be paid if
you do not show up for work. If you think you will have conflicts that will
prevent you from attending class regularly it would be smart to drop the
course as soon as possible. Even if you miss class with a valid excuse, this
does not mean you are not responsible for the information presented in class
the days you are gone. The instructor will take attendance several times
during the semester and that information will enter into final grade
calculations at the end of the semester. In addition, if you come to class it
is expected that you will arrive on time and stay in your seat for the entire
class period. If you come late or get up and leave in the middle of a lecture,
you will be penalized at least ten points on the next exam. Experience proves
that people who attend class make higher grades than those who don't, so if
your goal is a good grade you must come to class, come on time, and stay in
your seat for the whole hour. And turn off those cell phones!

**Grades**

Grades are based on thee evaluations, which are the examinations, the travel
project, and pop quizzes. There are six multiple choice exams, which include
map location, and together they are valued at 25 points each, for a total of
150 points. Students are encouraged to write potential questions for a test
bank for the examinations. Some examination questions will be drawn from the
project materials and readings. The percentage distribution for grades on
examinations and the project is: A = 90 percent correct answers or better; B =
80-89 percent correct answers; C = 70-79 percent correct answers; D = 60-69
percent correct answers; and F = below 60 percent correct answers. I keep
records on points earned, percentages, and letter grades for each examination
and project. Makeup exams are available to students with valid excuses. I do
not offer extra credit and I do not "scale" exams.

The travel project is worth 175 points, with as much as 25 points given for
each section of your project as it is submitted on the dates required (usually
the exam days). You will be asked to choose a country in Europe for your
project, which will be a series of Webpages that portray selected aspects of
your country. There is an on-line _Study Guide_ that will direct you in this
project. Of course the project is to be your own work. Grades may be reduced
for late or incomplete sections of the project. There is no makeup for the
entire project; people not participating will receive an F for the course.

There will be as many as 15 pop quizzes for as much as five points each given
during the semester, for a total of 75 points. Pop quizzes will be given
during the class period. Makeup pop quizzes will be available for students
with university approved excuses. Students must take part in all evaluations
(including the exams and the project) or receive a grade of F for the course.

**The grand total points available is 400 (150 points from exams, 175 points
total from the project, and 75 points from pop quizzes).**

Anyone cheating on exams or projects will be subject to university
disciplinary action, probably leading to failing the course and perhaps
expulsion from school. For heaven's sake, don't plagiarize, or use the work of
others without attribution, in your work. Academic dishonesty is an offense
that will be reported to the Academic Dishonesty Committee; see page 86 of the
_Tiger Cub_ for further information.

The instructor's subjective evaluation of your contribution to the class will
occur during final grading, when deciding factors such as attendance and
participation will help determine your grade if it is near a breakpoint. It
may be that your final grade will be reduced by as much as one letter if you
did not participate actively in one or more projects, missed many classes,
disrupted class, or otherwise did not follow class policies explained here.
The time to think about grades is at the beginning of the course, not the end,
and good grades generally flow from an understanding and appreciation of the
course.

Remember, this is not a "computer course," but we use computers extensively to
teach Geography.

**The Travel Project**

The travel project for this course counts for 175 points on your final grade.
This is an exercise in which you prepare a travel itinerary and background
information about the travel destination of an international traveler,
yourself, on a trip to Europe. The assignment is built around the types of
issues likely to be encountered in a travel agency, and so you will be making
realistic decisions about important travel matters as well as learning about a
travel destination. In addition, you will be learning about how to search the
Internet and to develop your own Webpages to disseminate travel information.
Students are expected to complete their sections of their projects as the
topics are presented in class and be ready to discuss them at that time and to
submit their projects for evaluation at the times specified. See our course
homepage for the sequence of topics in the project.

**Important** : **Keep backup copies of all your work on computers and have
them ready at any time. Making backup copies is very important in all computer
projects.**

******What is Geography?**

Geography has been defined many ways, but for our class, the best definition
is that offered by Maurice Yeates, a Canadian economic geographer:

> Geography is "a science concerned with the rational development and testing
of theories that explain and predict the spatial distribution and location of
various characteristics on the surface of the earth." (Maurice H. Yeates, _An
Introduction to Quantitative Analysis in Economic Geography_ (New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1968), p. 1).

According to one knowledgeable non-geographer,

> "Geography is the science of place. Its vision is grand, its view panoramic.
It sweeps the surface of the Earth, charting the physical, organic and
cultural terrains, their areal differentiation, and their ecological dynamics
with humankind. Its foremost tool is the map." (As quoted in Terry G. Jordan,
Mona Domosh, and Lester Rowntree, _The Human Mosaic; A Thematic Introduction
to Cultural Geography_ , 6th ed. (New York: HarperCollins, 1994), p. 2).

Geography is a technical subject, particularly demanding of your abilities to
introduce, evaluate, and analyze spatial distributions. We will integrate and
synthesize a great deal of information in our attempt to understand the nature
of the places we discuss in class. Do not expect to receive high grades unless
you expend a great deal of time and energy on class activities: reading,
writing, and speaking.

**Course Objectives**

The objectives of this course are to introduce the environmental and cultural
patterns that make places attractive for travel and tourism, to provide you
with realistic situations in which you can develop your skills as you engage
in problem-solving and decision-making, and to acquaint you with electronic
information sources on the Internet, electronic mail (e-mail), and other
digital media. This is a Geography class, so lecture emphasis will be on the
special qualities of the natural and cultural environment that make places
attractive as tourist destinations and the spatial qualities of the travel
industry. We will not spend class time memorizing place locations; you should
know those already, or you should plan to spend extra time on your own to find
where the travel destinations discussed in class are located. Our emphasis in
lecture will be on travel and tourism in Latin America.

There are many travel-related readings and materials available for your use in
Geography, the RBD Library, and at travel agencies in Auburn and Opelika. Some
guest lecturers may be invited to class as resource persons. Use this class as
an opportunity to develop further expertise in travel and tourism by reading
the Travel section of the Sunday _Atlanta Journal and Constitution_ , watching
the Travel Channel on local cable television, looking for travel books (on
sale at such places as Books a Million on Opelika Road, reading the latest
issues of such magazines as the _Cond e Nast Traveler, Travel and Leisure_,
_Travel Holiday_ , _Travel & Leisure_, and the _National Geographic Traveler_
, and "surfing" the Internet for travel information.

I'm glad you enrolled for this course and want to make it a rewarding
experience for you. I will be happy to talk with you about any aspect of this
course, about Geography, or about opportunities in travel and tourism at any
mutually agreeable time. If you have always liked to travel and like maps, you
may be interested in a Geography major. See the following course listings.

* * *

**The Geography Major**

_Major courses (Required)_

GEOG 2010 Cultural Geography (3 semester Hours)  
GEOG 2020 Physical Geography (3 semester Hours)  
GEOG 2800 Geographic Methods and Techniques (4 semester hours)  
GEOG 3810 Cartography and Graphics (4 semester hours)  
GEOG 3820 Aerial Photography and Remote Sensing (4 semester hours)  
GEOG 3830 Geographic Information Systems (4 semester hours)  
GEOG 4800 Geographic Thought (4 semester hours)

_Major Courses (Elective; 12 hours required)_

Twelve additional hours in Geography to include at least one regional course.

_Supporting Courses (Required): Two semesters of a foreign language._

_Supporting Courses (Technical Electives; 12 hours required)_

The B.A. curriculum in geography requires a total of 12 hours of technical
electives. These technical electives are designed to add breadth to the
curriculum in keeping with the increasingly multi-disciplinary nature of
employment opportunities. These represent non-geography courses chosen in
concert with the faculty advisor from a very large number of acceptable
200-level and higher courses offered in the following departments, schools or
colleges: Agri-Economics, Agronomy and Soils, Anthropology, Architecture,
Botany, Civil Engineering, Computer Science and Engineering, Community
Planning, Economics, Geology, History, Landscape Architecture, Mathematics,
Marketing and Transportation, Political Science, Psychology, Rural Sociology,
Sociology, and Zoology-Wildlife Science. Courses offered in other departments
may be approved on a case-by-case basis.

_Supporting courses (Free Electives; 17 hours required)_

The B.A. curriculum in Geography requires a total of 17 hours of free
electives. These may be any course offered by the University including
additional Geography courses. They may include ROTC course credit.

_Courses fulfilling SACS oral communication requirements:_  
COMM 1000 Professional Communication (3 semester hours)  
COMP 1000 Computer Proficiency (3 semester hours), or successful completion of
University competency exam.

* * *

**Course Prospectus**  
**GEOG 3300 - International Travel and Tourism**

The general educational goals for the lecture portion of this course are to:  
1) develop a spirit of inquiry through spatial problem-solving lectures,
discussions, and projects;  
2) introduce spatial economic models of explanation for contemporary world
patterns of travel and tourism; and  
3) provide a conceptual framework for understanding the nature of tourism,
including the tourist, the destination, and the interactions between them.

In order to accomplish these goals we will explore some characteristics of the
contemporary world of tourism. The investigation will take the form of a
description of one of the six major world regions, Latin America, and an
introduction to its tourist attractions. Each destination in Latin America
offers a chance to discover how a sense of place, interactions between people
and environment, physical and cultural differentiation, the "clash of
cultures," eco-tourism, and the lure of tradition result in destinations that
are attractive to tourists.

By the end of this course, you will know and understand the meaning and
significance of travel destinations, the changing natural and human
characteristics of these destinations, and how the relationships between
people and places lead to the creation of attractive travel destinations. More
specifically, you will be able to explain how social and economic processes
shape places into travel destinations, and how these places have been altered
by the social and economic changes that accompany tourism, in every way from
improvements in transportation systems to the creation of artificial park
boundaries. You will be able to analyze how the character of a place relates
to its human interpretation and use. In addition, you will be able to evaluate
how natural environments and special physical features also give character to
places, and how these locational attributes, such as seashores or mountains,
make distinctive and attractive travel destinations.

In addition, by the end of this course you will know and understand how
multiple criteria can define and give structure to a tourism region, the ways
environmental and cultural regional systems are interconnected, and how
regions can be used to interpret and understand travel destinations. You will
know how to identify the differences among types of tourism regions, how they
are interconnected, and how change occurs in these regions.

Finally, our course objectives will lead you to know and understand how
tourism destinations and regions serve as symbols for individuals and society,
why different groups of people view places and regions differently, and how
changing perceptions of places and regions reflect cultural change. You will
be able to interpret how people express attachment to tourism places and
regions, and analyze how peoples' changing views of tourism places and regions
reflect individual points of view as well as cultural change.

Latin America is a realm comprising both modern-European-commercial and
traditional - Indian - subsistence components. This is a rapidly developing
world region where very different cultures exist side by side. This, together
with its great natural beauty, makes Latin America one of the world's great
tourist attractions.

In this course we will accentuate four educational objectives of Geography: 1)
useful knowledge, in knowing where places are and background information to
understand current issues in the travel and tourism industry; 2) problem-
solving, in explaining how geographers and travel agents solve problems
related to tourism; 3) promotion of world citizenship through engendering an
understanding of and appreciation for other peoples and places; and 4)
introduction to the useful skills of computing and computer-mediated
communication.

