**CSE 115 A Introduction to Computer Science I Spring 2000**

**University at Buffalo**  
_Department of Computer Science & Engineering_  
  
General Information

_Read this sheet carefully, and save it for future reference._

# Instructor

  
  

**Name:**      Phil Ventura **Office:**      236 Bell **Phone:**
645-3180x117 **Email:**      pventura @cse.buffalo.edu **WWW:**
`http://www.cse.buffalo.edu/~pventura`

# Course description

Designed to provide the fundamentals of the field to computer science majors,
this course introduces students to algorithm design and implementation in a
modern high-level programming language (Java). It emphasizes problem-solving
by abstraction. There will also be a brief coverage of the social and ethical
aspects of computing. Topics include data types, variables, expressions, basic
imperative programming techniques including assignment, input/output,
subprograms, parameters, selection, iteration, boolean type and expressions,
and the use of aggregate data structures. Students will also have an
introduction to the basics of abstract data types and object-oriented design,
as well as the mathematics of computer science such as Boolean algebra, basic
number theory, etc.

# Prerequisites

You must have four years of high school mathematics including algebra and
trigonometry, and a working knowledge of at least one high-level programming
language, or receive permission from the instructor.

# Textbook and Materials

The required textbooks for this course are:

  * Duane A. Bailey and Duane W. Bailey. 2000. _Java Elements_ , McGraw Hill. (ISBN: 0-07-228357-2) 
  * Cay S. Horstmann and Gary Cornell. 1999. _Core Java 2 (Volume 1)_ , Prentice Hall. (ISBN: 0-13-081933-6) 
  * Brown lecture notes, available at _Makin' Copies_ , located in the UB Commons. 

The recommended textbook for this course is:

  * Gregory J. E. Rawlins. 1998. _Slaves of the machine_ , MIT Press. (ISBN: 0-262-68102-1) 

Additional reading material may be assigned during the course, and will be
announced in lecture.

# Computing Resources

You will be given a computer account on `denali`, one of the CSE department
undergraduate servers. Labs will be taught in Norton 19 where you will connect
directly to your `denali` accounts. There are open hours in Norton 19 in
addition to formally scheduled lab time. You can connect to
`denali.cse.buffalo.edu` remotely from other sites on or off campus. You are
expected to become proficient at using the machines in the lab, the Unix
system, and the Java compiler. You should ensure that any programs you write
for this course compile using Sun's Java2 compiler (JDK version 1.2.1). Note
that some versions of Java developed for PCs include nonstandard features that
may not compile using this version of JDK.

# Course organization

The course has both a lecture and a laboratory component. Each component plays
a role in helping students achieve the objectives of the course. Students who
do not participate fully in both should not expect to do well in the course.

## Lectures

The conceptual and theoretical course content will be delivered primarily in
the lectures, complemented by readings from the text books. You should review
readings prior to attending a lecture, and review the readings again, along
with any notes you took, after the lecture.

Some of the topics will be difficult. It is therefore absolutely essential
that you ask questions whenever something is said which you do not understand.

You are expected to attend all lectures. If you are unable to attend a lecture
because of sickness or similar reasons, make sure you get the notes from a
classmate. If you are out of class for an extended period of time because of
sickness, notify your instructor as soon as possible, and see your instructor
immediately upon your return in order to determine how to catch up. If you
have missed a significant portion of the semester due to illness, it is
recommended that you resign from the course.

## Labs

The labs provide an opportunity for hands-on practice applying the concepts
and theoretical constructs discussed in class. There is also time for review
of lecture material and for asking more individual questions about the course
material than can typically be addressed in lecture. Some material needed to
do the assignments may be covered only in the labs. **Attendance will be taken
in labs**.

# Course requirements and evaluation

The following table indicates the grade breakdown which I will use in
assigning grades in the course. I reserve the right to make adjustments to the
breakdown if I feel it is necessary.

**10%**      Quizzes and homeworks **40%**      Lab assignments **50%**
Exams **5% (extra credit)**      Paper (optional)

## Quizzes and homeworks

There will be regular in-class quizzes and homework assignments. The purpose
of these is to give you feedback on your understanding of the material, and to
give you reinforce concepts discussed in class. Your lowest quiz grade will be
dropped.

## Labs

The objectives of this course cannot be met unless the student has a firm
grasp of the fundamental tools required to write a program to solve a problem.
To be successful, the student must acquire a certain set of skills, which can
only be done by doing. The labs in the course are designed to give students
the requisite hands-on experience required for analysing problems, developing
solutions to them, and implementing these solutions as Java programs.

A lab submitted after the due date is considered late, and will have a 20%
penalty (of the maximum score obtainable) imposed per day (24 hours), or
portion thereof, late. A lab _more than_ four days late (i.e. five or more
days late) will be awarded no points.

## Examinations

There will be two in-class preliminary examinations, together with a final
examination at the end of the term. The in-class exams will be held on dates
to be announced in lecture. The final examination will be given on a date to
be specified by the University. **Do not make travel plans for times during
the examination period until the final examination schedule has been posted**.

If you miss an examination because of sickness or similar reasons, visit a
physician and obtain a note detailing the period during which you were
medically incapable of taking the exam. Notify your instructor immediately via
email or telephone (voice mail) if you are going to miss an exam _before_ the
exam takes place, unless medically impossible. See your instructor as soon as
you return to class.

### Examination grading

There are two options for calculating your score for the exam component of the
course. Under the first option each in-class exam counts for 10% of your
grade, while the final exam counts for 30%. Under the second option the final
exam counts for 50% of your grade. The option which gives you the highest
score in the course will be used automatically.

You must attempt both in-class exams in order for the final-exam only option
to be available to you. If you do not write the in-class exams, you cannot
make use of the final-exam only option.

The motivation for having two grading options available is to ensure that you
are not penalized if you had a rough start in the course, but managed to do
really well on the final exam. If you do poorly on the in-class exams, you can
still do well in the course by demonstrating that you have learned the
material on the final exam. Of course, if you do poorly on the in-class exams,
this means you are playing without a safety net.

### Examination-pass requirement

**In order to receive a passing grade in the course, you must have a passing
exam grade. In other words, whichever option gives you the highest exam score
must correspond to a grade of at least 50% (or 25/50) in order for you to
receive a passing grade in the course.**

# Academic Integrity

We will follow the University Policy on Academic Integrity, found on pages
12-14 of the 1999-2000 Undergraduate Catalog. For more information, see
Article 5A of the _Student Conduct Rules_ , and the UB Teaching and Learning
Resources Student Conduct Rules web page:
`http://ublib.buffalo.edu/libraries/projects/tlr/conduct.html`

All academic work must be your own. Collaboration, usually evidenced by
unjustifiable similarity in assignments, is never allowed. After an
appropriate informal review, if any students are found in violation of
maintaining academic integrity, sanctions will be imposed, which can be as
severe as failing the course for reasons of academic dishonesty. Especially
flagrant violations will be considered under formal review proceedings, which
can call for harsher sanctions including expulsion from the University. If you
ever have any questions or concerns regarding the policy, particularly as it
relates to this course, please talk to your instructor.

# Incomplete (I) grades

We will follow the UB Undergraduate Catalog Statement on Incomplete Grades,
found on page 17 of the 1999-2000 Undergraduate Catalog. Take the time to
familiarize yourself with the contents of this page.

Generally, incomplete (``I'') grades are not given. However, very rarely,
circumstances truly beyond the student's control prevents him or her from
completing work in the course. In such cases the instructor can give a grade
of ``I''. The student will be given instructions and a deadline for completing
the work, usually no more than 30 days past the end of the semester.
University and department policy dictate that ``I'' grades can be given only
if the following conditions are met:

  * An Incomplete will only be given for missing a small part of the course. 
  * An Incomplete will only be given when the student misses work due to circumstances beyond his/her control. 
  * An Incomplete will only be given when the student is passing the course except for the missed material. 
  * An Incomplete is to be made up with the original course instructor within the time specified by the appropriate University regulation (see appropriate document above), and usually within the following semester. 
  * An Incomplete will not be given to allow the student to informally retake the entire course, and have that grade count as the grade of the original course. 

Incompletes can not be given as a shelter from poor grades. **It is the
student's responsibility to make a timely resignation from the course if he or
she is doing poorly for any reason.** The last day to resign the course is
Friday, March 17, 2000.

# Disabilities

If you have a diagnosed disability (physical, learning, or psychological) that
will make it difficult for you to carry out the course work as outlined, or
that requires accommodations such as recruiting note-takers, readers, or
extended time on exams or assignments, please advise the instructor during the
first two weeks of the course so that we may review possible arrangements for
reasonable accommodations.

# Course Outline

The following is a rough outline of the topics we will cover in the course:

  
  

  * Objects and classes 
  * Methods and procedural abstraction 
  * Inheritance 
  * Polymorphism 
  * Interfaces 
  * Object oriented design 
  * Expressions and evaluation 
  * Flow of control 
  * Recursion 
  * Arrays 
  * Social and ethical issues 
  * History of computing 

# Newsgroup

There is a newsgroup, `sunyab.cse.115 `, for this course. Students must learn
how to read news and subscribe to this newsgroup. Students are expected to
read the newsgroup on a daily basis. There will often be important material
posted there, such as supplementary course notes, homework and exam questions
and answers from previous years, and occasionally late breaking news. Students
may post general course related articles to the newsgroup. Use discretion in
posting articles related to homework assignments: when in doubt, e-mail the
T.A. or instructor first.

# WWW homepage

There is a web site for the course. Students are expected to visit the web
site on a regular basis. The URL is:

`http://www.cse.buffalo.edu/~pventura/Courses/SP2000/115/`

Another web site useful to students is the on-line CSE Undergraduate Brochure,
available at:

`http://www.cse.buffalo.edu/pub/WWW/undergrad/`

# General Notes

If you don't understand something covered in class, **ask about it** right
away. The only silly question is the one which is not asked. If you get a poor
mark on an assignment, quiz, or exam, find out why right away. Don't wait a
month before asking. The instructor and teaching assistants are available to
answer your questions. Don't be afraid to ask questions, or to approach the
instructor or T.A. in class, during office hours, in the hallways, or through
e-mail.

Your attention is called to the Counseling Center (645-2720), 120 Richmond
Quad. The Counseling Center staff are trained to help you deal with a wide
range of issues, including how to study effectively and how to deal with exam-
related stress. Services are free and confidential.

This course is intended to be hard work, but it's also intended to be fun.
Play with the computer, and have fun with the neat and elegant programming
ideas covered in this course. We think computer science is interesting and
exciting, and we want to convince you of this. Work hard, but have fun!

#  About this document ...

****

This document was generated using the[ **LaTeX** 2`HTML`](http://www-
dsed.llnl.gov/files/programs/unix/latex2html/manual/) translator Version
96.1-h (September 30, 1996) Copyright (C) 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, [Nikos
Drakos](http://cbl.leeds.ac.uk/nikos/personal.html), Computer Based Learning
Unit, University of Leeds.

The command line arguments were:  
**latex2html** ` -split 0 -no_subdir -no_navigation -t CSE115 Syllabus
115syllabus.tex`.

The translation was initiated by Philip R Ventura on Thu Jan 20 23:30:19 EST
2000  

* * *

_Philip R Ventura  
Thu Jan 20 23:30:19 EST 2000_

