Senior Seminar: Women in Southern History

HIS 4935 sect 1

Fall 2001 Mondays 2:30-5:15

Dr. Elna Green  
Johnston Bldg 259A  
Office hours: M & W 10-11  
office phone: 644-9531

email: [egreen@mailer.fsu.edu](mailto:egreen@mailer.fsu.edu)

  
  
  
  
  

_Course Description:_ This seminar will explore the world(s) of women in the
South during the 19th and 20th centuries. We'll look at the full range of
women's lives and activities, from work to childbirth, paying careful
attention to the ways in which race and class shaped women's experiences.

We will begin by reading several standard works in the field as a group; then
for the remainder of the course students will pursue their own individual
research projects independently. I expect that for most students this will be
a challenging endeavor-but I also expect to supervise your research and
writing closely. So, although this project is "independent," you should not
feel that you are doing it alone.

_Goals:_ Students in this course 1) will be introduced to the historiography
on women and southern history; 2) will gain experience in "doing history"
through research in primary source materials; 3) will have the opportunity to
improve their writing skills, by producing a term paper based on their
archival research. In the process, I hope that you will come to understand
something more of the nature of the historian's craft, while learning to think
more critically about sources.

_Requirements:_ 1) Attendance at all class meetings is mandatory. Any
excusable absence, such as documented illnesses, must be made up by additional
written work. Any inexcusable absence, such as oversleeping, will result in a
reduction of your final grade. 2)You must read the week's assignment before
the class meeting; you must be ready to participate in the class discussions
that will be based on those readings. 3) For each of the two optional
readings, students will prepare a 2 page [doubled spaced, typed] summary of
the book. Those summaries are due at the beginning of class the day we discuss
that book. 4) Students must complete a 12-to-15 page research paper.

_Paper:_ The term paper, on a topic of your own choosing, will be based on
your reading of both the secondary literature and the primary sources. You
must come up with an argument of your own, sustain it with primary
documentation, and ground it in the secondary literature. The paper will be
between 12  & 15 pages, double spaced, typed, properly footnoted. A
bibliography should be attached. Footnotes/endnotes should conform to the
style associated with the Chicago Manual (in-text citations are not
acceptable). I will go over this more fully in class.

_Grading:_  
term paper 50%  
participation 30%  
book summaries 20%

_Students with disabilities_ : Students with disabilities covered by the
Americans with Disabilities Act should follow these steps: (1) provide
documentation of your disability to the Student Disability Resource Center (2)
during the first week of class, bring a statement to me from the Resource
Center indicating that you have registered with them. That statement should
indicate the nature of the accommodations you require.

_Academic honesty:_ This University operates under an Honor Code, the terms of
which you are expected to know. Violations of the Honor Code result in prompt,
clear, swift punishment--a grade of zero on the assignment in question. In
some circumstances, even further punishment may be attached--a grade of F for
the entire course.

Academic violations usually take one of two forms: active, purposeful cheating
or inadvertent plagiarism. To avoid a charge of inadvertent plagiarism, take
care to use proper citations when utilizing the works of others. **As a
precaution, all students should retain copies of all notes, rough drafts, and
other such materials used in the preparation of papers. Keep these papers
until after you have received your final grade for this course--such materials
can substantiate the originality of one's work.**

_A Note on "the Civil Classroom":  _  I expect to maintain a classroom
environment that respects all members of the class and facilitates the free
exchange of ideas. Please refrain from eating, reading the newspaper,
sleeping, and other activities that disrupt learning and distract from our
daily business. Turn off all phones, beepers, and other potentially disruptive
electronic devices. Please show respect to both your instructor and your
classmates by not entering the room late, by allowing everyone to speak
freely, and by offering opposing opinions in a respectful manner. You gain no
participation points by out-shouting your fellow students, nor by verbally
intimidating them into silence. I, too, am bound by the same code of civility.
Part of my responsibility includes starting and ending class on time,
returning graded work promptly, and meeting my announced office hours
regularly.

**_Schedule:_**

  
  

August 27. Introduction day. Assignment of future readings. Background lecture
on women's history and historiography

Sept 3. No classes-Labor Day

**Sept 10. Core reading: Anne Firor Scott, The Southern Lady: From Pedestal to
Politics**

**Sept 17. Optional reading I: Literature on the 19th century**  


Suzanne Lebsock. The Free Women of Petersburg : Status and Culture in a
Southern Town, 1784-1860 (1984)

Deborah Gray White. Aren't I a Woman? Slave Women in the Plantation South
(1985)

Jean E. Friedman. The Enclosed Garden : Women and Community in the Evangelical
South, 1830-1900 (1985)

George C. Rable. Civil Wars : Women and the Crisis of Southern Nationalism
(1989)

Joan E. Cashin. A Family Venture : Men and Women on the Southern Frontier
(1991)

Elizabeth Moss. Domestic Novelists in the Old South : Defenders of Southern
Culture (1992)

Victoria Bynum. Unruly Women: the Politics of Social & Sexual Control in the
Old South (1992)

Christie Anne Farnham. The Education of the Southern Belle : Higher Education
and Student Socialization in the Antebellum South (1994)

Drew Gilpin Faust. Mothers of Invention : Women of the Slaveholding South in
the American Civil War (1996)

Martha Hodes. White Women, Black Men: Illicit Sex in the Nineteenth-century
South (1997)

Leslie A. Schwalm. A Hard Fight for We : Women's Transition from Slavery to
Freedom in South Carolina (1997)

Cynthia A. Kierner. Beyond the Household: Women's Place in the Early South,
1700-1835 (1998)

Elizabeth Varon. We Mean to Be Counted: White Women & Politics in Antebellum
Virginia (1998)

Marli F. Weiner. Mistresses and Slaves: Plantation Women in South Carolina,
1830-80 (1998)

Laura Edwards. Scarlett Doesn't Live Here Anymore: Southern Women in the Civil
War Era (2000)

Lorri Glover. All Our Relations : Blood Ties and Emotional Bonds among the
Early South Carolina Gentry (2000)  


**Sept 24. Optional reading II: Literature on the 20th century**  


Jacquelyn Hall, Revolt Against Chivalry: Jessie Daniel Ames and the Women's
Campaign Against Lynching (1974)

Julia Kirk Blackwelder, Women of the Depression: caste and culture in San
Antonio (1984)

Cynthia Neverdon-Morton, Afro-American women of the South and the advancement
of the race, 1895-1925 (1989)

Mary Martha Thomas, Riveting and rationing in Dixie : Alabama women and the
Second World War (1987)

Susan Tucker, Telling memories among southern women: domestic workers and
their employers in the segregated South (1988)

Marjorie Wheeler, New Women of the New South: the Leaders of the Woman
Suffrage Movement in the Southern States (1993)

Evelyn Higginbotham, Righteous Discontent: the Women's Movement in the Black
Baptist Church, 1880-1920 (1993)

Glenda Gilmore, Gender & Jim Crow: Women and the Politics of White Supremacy
in North Carolina, 1896-1920 (1996)

Pamela Tyler, Silk stockings & ballot boxes: women & politics in New
Orleans,1920-1963 (1996)

Tera Hunter. To 'Joy My Freedom: Southern Black Women's Lives & Labors after
the Civil War (1997)

Elizabeth Hayes Turner, Women, Culture, and Community: Religion and Reform in
Galveston, 1880-1920 (1997)

Amy Thompson McCandless The Past in the Present: Women's Higher Education in
the Twentieth-century American South (1999)

Kibibi Voloria C. Mack, Parlor ladies and ebony drudges: African American
women, class, and work in a South Carolina community (1999)

Rebecca Sharpless, Fertile ground, narrow choices : women on Texas cotton
farms,1900-1940 (1999)

Chana Kai Lee, For freedom's sake: the life of Fannie Lou Hamer (1999)

Constance Curry, et al. Deep in our hearts: nine white women in the Freedom
Movement (2000)  
    
    


Oct 1. Individual meetings, to pick paper topics.

Oct 8. Bibliography due. By 5:00 pm. [no meeting as a class]

Oct 15. Individual meetings, to discuss bibliographies.

Oct 29. Outline & thesis statement due [no meeting as a class]

Nov 5. Individual meetings, to discuss outline & thesis.

Nov 19. Draft paper due. By 5:00 pm. [no meeting as a class]

Dec 3. Final paper due. By 5:00 pm. This is a firm deadline.

