# PSY 309 Statistics

## Fall Semester, 1998 at Houghton College

### Paul Young, Department of Psychology

#### Office: Academic Building N \- 324

#### Phone: 567-9308

#### e-mail:[ pyoung@houghton.edu](mailto: pyoung@houghton.edu)

#### Office hours: 9 - 9:50 a.m. daily or by appointment

**_Catalog description:_**

Study of descriptive and inferential statistics, including analysis of
variance and measures of correlation. Focus on applications to social and
psychological data.

Meets requirements in Business Administration, Political Science, Psychology,
and Sociology majors.

**_General objectives:_**

  * To understand and employ a logical approach to statistical analysis
  * To apply appropriate statistical analysis to the solution of research problems

**_Learning outcomes:_**

By the end of this course, you ought to be able to

  * Convert a research problem to numerical form
  * Describe the numerical data with statistics
  * Represent data with graphs
  * Compare variables with correlation
  * Predict changes with regression
  * Test differences between groups
  * Use spreadsheet statistical functions for data analysis
  * Use SPSS for research applications

**_General Course Arrangement:_**

  * 1\. Thinking statistically in history. Statistics as a tool for logic.
  * 2\. Descriptive statistics: Scales of measurement, averages or measures of central tendency, measures of dispersion.
  * 3\. Correlation and regression.
  * 4\. Probability and decision-making. Sampling and re-sampling.
  * 5\. Inferential statistics, confidence intervals, and hypothesis testing.
  * 6\. Frequency analysis: Non-parametric methods.

**_Required Textbook:_**

Pagano, R.R. (1998). _Understanding statistics in the behavioral sciences_ ,
5th edition. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.

**_Explanation of Assignments:_**

  * **1.** Homework assignments require either or both of hand computation and computer analysis. There is a homework assignment for each major topic in the course, a total of 17 assignments. The assignments correspond to each of the 17 chapters to be covered in the textbook (chapter 11 is omitted and chapter 19 is review). Specific questions to be answered for each assignment are listed in the assignment calendar. (25%)

  * **2.** You will write three examinations on the content of the course. You will be asked to demonstrate what you have learned both in writing and by computation. On examinations, you may use a calculator, **_provided all class members have one with them._** However, you may use _only_ the arithmetic functions _add, subtract, multiply, divide, and square root._
  * .
  * .
  * .
  * .
  * Examinations are scheduled 
    * September 25(15%)
    * November 6 (15%)
    * December 17, 10:30 a.m. (15%). 
    * Material to be covered on each examination appears under the Class Topic Schedule. 

Back to top

  * **3.** A semester-long research project will culminate in a 5 - 7 page paper (not counting cover sheets, references, or data analysis appendices) in which you demonstrate your ability to select and apply appropriate statistical analyses to a research problem of your choice. The paper, in APA format, is due 7 December, 1997. (15%)

Follow these steps:

**A.** Choose a research problem in your area of interest by reviewing course
notes, reading books and journals, or consulting the popular media. For
example, you might be interested in the _[water level
problem](http://campus.houghton.edu/depts/psychology/waterlevelproblem/index.htm)_
, that is, the apparent difficulty which intelligent people have figuring out
the direction which the surface of water will take when its container is
tilted. Or you might be interested in the news reports of the poor performance
of U.S. students on mathematics tests, compared to their peers in several
other countries.

**B.** Once you have chosen a problem, find five scholarly sources which have
considered the problem in the past. Scholarly sources include most journal
articles, many books, and some Web sites. You must exercise discernment in
your choice of sources, and at least three of your sources must be from
academic journals.

**C.** Using what you will learn about research design in this course, set up
a research study to gather data to help you answer the research problem. You
will get good ideas about designing your study from the scholarly sources you
have read on your topic.

**D.** Then, you have one of three options.

i. You may choose to conduct the study you have designed, gathering new data.
If you choose this option, consult with me about meeting the ethical
obligations of research.

ii. You may find appropriate data in a published database. Several databases
are linked to this syllabus, and you will be able to find others
electronically.

iii. You may make up some data. If you choose this option, you must either
generate the numbers randomly, or in such a way that the results will support
your research hypothesis.

**E.** Analyze the data from step D, choosing the appropriate descriptive and
inferential statistics, including graphs.

**F.** Explain the meaning of your results in a discussion section. Tell what
the results indicate in words. Connect your results with the results of the
studies you considered in section B. Draw a conclusion or a set of
conclusions.

**G.** Identify your sources in a reference list.

**H.** Include your statistical computations, either by hand or computer, in
an appendix.

  * **4.** Computer assignments (10%)

We will be studying the meaning of statistical analysis with formulas and
calculations, in order to develop a deeper understanding of what we are doing.
However, most statistical analysis in research settings and in business is
done - often badly - by computer programs. Consequently, we will also learn
the statistical capabilities of two applications - _Microsoft Excel_ and
_SPSS_.

Laboratory sessions will be held in the PC laboratory in the Paine Science
Building.

You are responsible to learn these applications during the laboratory
sessions.

In the lab sessions, you will do two things. First, you will check your
homework calculations to verify your work. Second, you will be given extra
problems to work on in lab sessions, as listed in the assignment calendar.
Please print the results of the extra problem assignments and submit them with
your homework. **You must attend and participate in one lab session per week.
Computer assignments will be collected at the end of each lab session.** You
may not replace missed computer lab assignments.

  * **5.** Attendance and participation are mandatory. You must not fall behind in this class. For each absence after the first, you will lose one-half of one point from your grade, up to a maximum of five points. (5%)

**_Assignment Calendar:_**

**Date**

|

**Assignment**

|

**Value**

|  |

**Date**

|

**Assignment**

|

**Value**  
  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
9/7 | Homework Chapter 1 | 1/17 of 25% |  | 11/2 | Homework Chapter 12 | 1/17
of 25%  
9/9 | Homework Chapter 2 | 1/17 of 25% |  | 11/6 | Second Examination |

15%  
  
9/16 | Homework Chapter 3 | 1/17 of 25% |  | 11/11 | Homework Chapter 13 |

1/17 of 25%  
  
9/23 | Homework Chapter 4 | 1/17 of 25% |  | 11/16 | Homework Chapter 14 |
1/17 of 25%  
9/25 | First Examination |

15%

|  | 11/20 | Homework Chapter 15 | 1/17 of 25%  
9/30 | Homework Chapter 5 |

1/17 of 25%

|  | 11/23 | Homework Chapter 16 | 1/17 of 25%  
10/7 | Homework Chapter 6 | 1/17 of 25% |  | 12/4 | Homework Chapter 17 | 1/17
of 25%  
10/14 | Homework Chapter 7 | 1/17 of 25% |  | 12/7 | Research Paper Due  |

15%  
  
10/21 | Homework Chapter 8 | 1/17 of 25% |  | 12/11 | Homework Chapter 18 |
1/17 of 25%  
10/26 | Homework Chapter 9 | 1/17 of 25% |  |  |  |  
10/30 | Homework Chapter 10 | 1/17 of 25% |  | 12/17 | Final Examination:
10:30 a.m. |

15%  
  
**_Class Topic Schedule:_**

**_Includes specific homework assignments_**

**Chapter**

|

**Learning objectives**

|

**Homework**  
  
---|---|---  
  
**1**

|  Understand how statistics relates to scientific method and epistemology

Realize the usefulness of statistics in the search for truth

Define and identify these terms:

_population, sample, variable, independent variable, dependent
variable,extraneous variable, data, statistic, parameter, observational study,
true experiment, descriptive, inferential, correlational, parameter
estimation, random sampling_

Load and edit data in _Microsoft Excel_

|  1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9

Due: 9/7

Lab: Enter the data from 9 a, b, and c in _Excel._ Save it. Copy it to SPSS
and save it.  
  
**2**

|  Understand and apply the rules of mathematical notation, summation, real
limits, significant figures, and rounding

Distinguish among scales of measurement

Differentiate discrete variables from continuous variables

| 2, 3, 4, 7, 9, 10

Due 9/9

Lab: Enter the data from 5 (a - d) and 9 in _Excel_. Find the sums. Copy to
SPSS and find the count of scores.  
  
**3**

|  Construct simple frequency distributions and grouped frequency
distributions

Add relative frequency, cumulative frequency, and cumulative percentage
distributions

Compute percentile points and percentile ranks

Select the appropriate use of these frequency graphs:  _bar graph, histogram,
frequency polygon, cumulative percentage curve, stem-and-leaf diagram_

Identify _symmetrical_ and _skewed_ distributions

Prepare graphs with honest impact, and detect graphic deception

| 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18

Due 9/16

Lab: Use _Excel_ to form a frequency distribution of the Age data in the
Phramous dataset. Then, graph homework problems 4b and 18.  
  
**4**

|  Compute the arithmetic mean and identify its properties

Define and compute the median and the mode

Explain how mean and median relate to skew

Understand and compute range, standard deviation, SS, MS, and variance

| 3, 4, 6, 9, 13 - 16, 20, 29, 30, 32, 33

Due 9/23

Lab: Graph #16, handout  
  
**5**

|  Mathematically describe the normal curve

Compute standard scores (Z - scores) and find their percentiles, areas, and
probabilities (PAP)

Use Z - scores to reverse from PAP to raw scores

| 3, 5, 6, 8 - 19

Due: 9/30

Lab: Graph # 18  
  
**6**

|  Define these terms:  _scatter plot, Y intercept, slope,
positive/negative/inverse relationships, perfect/imperfect relationship_

Compute and interpret Pearson _r_ , COD, and Spearman _rho_.

Distinguish between correlation and causation.

| 3, 8, 11, 14, 17, 18 (Careful!)

Due: 10/7

Lab: Graph #18. SPSS handout.  
  
**7**

|  Define these terms:  _least-squares regression line, standard error of
estimate, homoscedasticity_

Compute the Y intercept and slope of a line and use them as regression
coefficients to predict values of Y'

Understand the application of SEE

Apply and interpret multiple correlationand multiple regression

Know when _not_ to use linear regression for prediction

|  5, 7, 10 - 13

Due: 10/14

Lab: SPSS handout. Graph the data in # 13.  
  
**8**

|  Understand the purpose of sampling, and use a table of random digits and a
computer to sample both with replacement and without replacement.

Use resampling to compare sample results.

Distinguish between _a priori_ and _a posteriori_ probabilities. Compute each
of them.

Apply the addition and multiplication rules of probability.

Connect probabilities to Z - scores.

| 2, 3, 4, 8 - 13, 15, 18, 21 - 23

Due: 10/21

Lab: Handout  
  
**9**

|  Use the binomial table to simplify the binomial expansion.

Use Pascal's triangle to simplify the binomial expansion.

Compute the mean and standard deviation of a binomial distribution.

| 2, 4, 5, 9, 10, 13, 15, 16

Due 10/26

Lab: Handout  
  
**10**

|  Identify the features of a repeated measures design.

Define these terms: _alternative hypothesis, null hypothesis, decision rule,
alpha, Type I error, Type II error, one-tailed probability, two-tailed
probability_

Conduct and interpret the Sign test

Understand the concept of statistical power, and know how to compute it and
maximize it.

| 7, 8, 9, 12, 13, 14

Due 10/30

Lab: Handout  
  
**12**

|  Know the general characteristics of sampling distributions.

Use resampling to generate sampling distributions of the mean.

Apply the sampling distribution of the mean in the Normal Deviate Test using Z
- scores.

Know the Central Limit Theorem

Apply the Critical Region approach to statistical decisions, using
resamplling.

| 5, 8, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19

Due 11/2

Lab: Handout  
  
**13**

|  Understand the concept of degrees of freedom.

Apply the _t_ -test for single samples, and compare it to the Normal Deviate
Test with Z.

Use _t_ to establish confidence intervals and critical regions.

Use _t_ to evaluate Pearson _r_.

|  3, 4, 9, 12, 13, 17, 18

Due 11/11

Lab: Handout  
  
**14**

|  Distinguish correlated groups from independent groups.

Understand and apply the relevant _t_ test for correlated groups and for
independent groups.

Know the assumptions underlying the _t_ test.

|  9, 11 - 13, 16, 19

Due 11/16

Lab: Handout  
  
**15**

|  Understand and apply the one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA).

Know the relationship between ANOVA and _t_ tests.

Understand the concepts of factorial designs and interactions.

| 4, 7, 12, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19

Due 11/20

Lab: Handout  
  
**16**

|  Understand and apply the _t_ test for independent groups to planned
comparisons

Understand and apply Tukey's HSD test for _post hoc_ comparisons

|  1, 3, 6, 9 Due 11/23

Lab: Handout  
  
**17**

|  Compute, evaluate, and interpret the two-way or factorial analysis of
variance | 8, 9, 10 Due 12/4 Lab: Handout  
  
**18**

|  Understand and apply the chi-squared tests for goodness of fit and for
independence

Know when to apply the Wilcoxon and Kruskal-Wallis tests

| 5, 12-15, 17 Due 12/11

Lab: Handout  
  
**_E-Discussion_**

A discussion group folder has been added to your Groupwise account. It should
show up in the left panel of your Groupwise screen as a folder labeled
Statistics Discussion under your Cabinet files. If there is a plus sign (+) in
the box to the left of your Cabinet files icon, click it to show the folders
available: one of them should be Statistics Discussion.

When you get to the Statistics Discussion group icon, it chould have a
receiving hand over a folder icon. If it doesn't, please let me know.

To post a message to the Discussion group, click on the icon, then click
File...New...Discussion. That will open a dialog box, and you can send an
e-mail as usual.

Remember that items you post to the discussion group may be read by any member
of the class, including the teacher. However, nobody else has access to your
musings.

