![](images/facultyheader.gif)  
  
---  
[![FIU Home](images/smallfiuhomeon.gif)](http://www.fiu.edu/) | [![Handbook
Home](images/tealtree.png)](index.htm) | [![AA
Home](images/smalltorchon.gif)](http://www.fiu.edu/provost)  
|

**[![Previous section](images/arrowback.gif)](humanresources.htm)
![Bottom of page](images/arrowdown.gif)        [![Next
section](images/arrow.gif)](servicesresources.htm)  
  
TEACHING  
![](images/tealbar.gif) **  
  
---  
**_Costello: I'm asking you a simple question. Who's on first?  
Abbott: Yes.  
Costello: So go ahead and tell me.  
Abbott: That's it.  
Costello: That's who?  
Abbott: That's it.  
Costello: I'm asking you. What's the guy's name on first base.  
Abbott: Oh no. What's on second._**  
  |  
![](images/tealbar.gif)  
  
**The relationship of teaching faculty to students is extremely important. Our
reputation as an institution depends on effective teaching and advising as
well as quality research. Students are, on the whole, informed consumers. They
want to receive their "money's worth" and they are not inclined to tolerate
irresponsible or unprofessional behavior on the part of an instructor. They
object to cancelled classes, chronic tardiness, lack of preparation, and
unequal treatment of students. The following sections (some of which are
strictly informative, some of which are recommended procedure, and some of
which are University policy) should help you be a more informed and effective
teacher.**

  
**SYLLABUS**

**You are required to provide your students with a syllabus very early in the
term. Students want to have some idea of what is expected of them in a course;
a syllabus provides that information. MOST STUDENT GRIEVANCES AGAINST FACULTY
MEMBERS ARE A RESULT OF MISUNDERSTANDINGS OVER FACULTY EXPECTATIONS.**

**Some of the issues a syllabus should address are:**

**1\. What reading material is required and where it is available (e.g., book
store or on reserve in the library)  
**

**2\. What the course requires in the way of exams, papers, experiments, group
projects, etc.  
**

**3\. There are no University-wide attendance policies, so be sure to include
your attendance policy on the syllabus. This is especially crucial if
attendance counts toward the student's final grade.  
**

**4\. What is your policy on make-up exams? on late work? It's a good idea to
accommodate legitimate, verifiable cases of illness and emergencies and you
must accommodate religious holy days. See Policies section of the _Faculty
Handbook._  
**

**5\. How will final grades be determined? It's inadvisable to change your
grading policies after the syllabus is distributed, but if for some reason you
need to do so, inform your students of the change.  
**

**6\. Make sure you define cheating and plagiarism for your classes. Do it on
the syllabus if possible. Plagiarism is a special problem, since it sometimes
occurs through an unintentional misuse of outside sources. The widespread
availability of material on the Internet has added a new dimension to the
problem of plagiarism. Make sure that your students understand that plagiarism
and cheating are serious offenses punishable by expulsion from the University.
The English Department can provide you with a one-page sheet on what
constitutes plagiarism and how to document sources. The section on "Academic
Misconduct" in the annual _Student Handbook_ also defines plagiarism and
cheating. It is imperative that you read this section of the _Student
Handbook_ since it explains in detail the procedures for disciplining a
student who is caught cheating. The handbook is available in the Student
Affairs Office (305-348-2797). Academic misconduct is discussed in more detail
in the Policies section. **  
  

![Top of page](images/arrowup.gif)                    [![Previous
section](images/arrowback.gif)](humanresources.htm)
[![Next section](images/arrow.gif)](servicesresources.htm)
![Bottom of page](images/arrowdown.gif)  
**  
  
DROP DATE**

**FIU has a late drop date which is usually 8 weeks into the semester
(adjusted for the 6- week Summer term). It's useful to have students complete
a major assignment (an exam, a project, a paper) before mid-term, so that you
can have it graded and returned before the drop date, thus letting your
students assess their progress. This isn't merely a kindness; it can also have
a salutary effect on a class. Students who are hopelessly lost can make a
class very difficult to teach.**

  
**CLASS ROLLS**

**You will receive updated class rolls at various times during the semester.
Each time you receive an updated class roll, read it to your class at the next
2-3 class meetings. This is the only way that students can find out their
enrollment status; sometimes they have been deleted from class rolls and don't
realize it. Students need to know their status, so they can remedy any
problems. If the course has optional grading (i.e. pass/fail or letter grade),
verify the grade option for which each student is registered. Except under
extraordinary circumstances, the grade option cannot be changed after the
first week of class.**

  
**EQUITABLE TREATMENT OF STUDENTS**

**It is imperative that all your students receive equitable treatment. You may
be tempted to allow certain students to retake exams, turn work in late, or do
extra work, but such practices can result in student grievances and even
litigation. You should present a comprehensive syllabus at the beginning of
the term and apply it consistently.**

**Reasonable accommodation of disabled students is not considered inequitable
treatment. See Policies section.**

  
**TEACHING FAMILY MEMBERS**

**Try to avoid situations in which family members become students in your
classes. Whenever possible, direct family members to equivalent courses taught
by others. If no other course is available, be sure to follow these guidelines
to ensure objectivity in teaching and grading and to protect yourself from
accusations of favoritism.**

**1\. Have another faculty member grade written assignments, tests, projects,
etc. whenever possible.**

**2\. Do not serve as an advisor to a family member; do not serve on or chair
his/her thesis or dissertation committee.**

**3\. Be sure that class assignments are the same for all students in the
class.**  
  

![Top of page](images/arrowup.gif)                    [![Previous
section](images/arrowback.gif)](humanresources.htm)
[![Next section](images/arrow.gif)](servicesresources.htm)
![Bottom of page](images/arrowdown.gif)  
**  
  
MEETING CLASSES**

**It should go without saying that a teacher must meet every scheduled class
and should meet it for the entire scheduled time. On those rare occasions when
professional obligations, an emergency, or illness require that you miss a
class, notify your chair and make provisions for covering your class in
advance if at all possible. If there is no one available to cover your class,
make sure that someone notifies your students. Never hire anyone else to teach
a course to which you have been assigned.**

  
**STUDENT ATTENDANCE**

**If attendance is required in your course, indicate that fact on the
syllabus. Students who participate in University sanctioned events (athletes,
debaters, musicians, etc.) must inform you in advance of any event which will
conflict with class time and they must make up any work that is missed.**

  
**FINAL EXAMINATIONS**

**To avoid exam conflicts for students, final examinations must be given
during the week following the last day of classes during Fall and Spring
semesters. Do not give final exams during the last week of class. Schedule
your exams according to the official final exam schedule, which can be found
in each semester's Schedule of Classes. Summer semesters do not have final
examination periods and course examinations may be given at the discretion of
the faculty member teaching the course.**

**OFFICE HOURS**

**Faculty office hours are often a sore point with students. Although many of
us have heavy research and service assignments in addition to teaching, we
must set aside a reasonable amount of time to see students. It is the Board of
Regents' policy that all teaching faculty must be available to meet with
students outside of class time. If you have an assigned office, be sure to
post your office hours outside your door and give them to your secretary so
that they can be posted in the department. If you teach on a campus other than
your primary campus, be sure to post and hold office hours there as well.
Students should be able to see you by appointment as well; those who work
might not be able to come during your posted office hours. It's a good idea to
put your office hours, your office room number, and your office telephone
number on your syllabus.**

**It is important that students have your office telephone number. If you
neglect to give it out, students will call the departmental secretaries, which
will increase their workload. Voice mail is available on the University Park
and Biscayne Bay Campuses. Your secretary can tell you how to connect to the
system. Some faculty members use their own answering machines instead.**

**If you are an adjunct without an office (all regular faculty are guaranteed
office space by the _Collective Bargaining Agreement_ ), your department chair
will find a suitable place in which you can meet students and receive messages
and mail. If you do not have your own individual mailbox, ask your department
chair for one. This makes receiving materials from students and leaving things
for them easier and assures a modicum of privacy.**  
  

![Top of page](images/arrowup.gif)                    [![Previous
section](images/arrowback.gif)](humanresources.htm)
[![Next section](images/arrow.gif)](servicesresources.htm)
![Bottom of page](images/arrowdown.gif)  
**  
  
GRADES**

**Be sure that you understand the University grading system. The definition of
each grade and the number of points it earns is explained in the University
_Catalog_. Most courses use a conventional letter grading system (A, A-, B+,
B, B-, C+, C, C-, D+, D, D-, F), but some courses are taught on a pass/fail
basis. In some cases, students can elect to take a course for letter grade or
pass/fail. You should review the grading options of students on your grade
roll and ask students to verify the option selected the first week of
classes.**

**There are some grades that cause special problems. The Incomplete (I) grade
is given at the instructor's discretion to a student who has been unable to
complete the course due to a serious interruption not caused by the student's
own negligence. When the instructor assigns an INcomplete grade, he/she also
assigns a default grade \- the grade the student will receive if the
prescribed work is not completed by the end of the next two academic
semesters. Summer C term is considered a semester. An INcomplete must be
completed within two semesters or it will automatically be changed into the
default grade. (See the following paragraph for the rules on students who have
applied for graduation.) You can require a student to finish an INcomplete in
a shorter period of time. It is useful to draw up a contract containing a firm
deadline with the student. Specify as short a period as is reasonable, since
experience shows that the longer an INcomplete drags on, the less likely it is
that the student will ever complete the work. A student should not re-register
for a course in order to make up an INcomplete.**

**Students who are graduating are under special time constraints. Any student
who applies to graduate at end of a given semester and who has received an
"INcomplete" grade in that term or a previous term must complete the required
course work by the end of the fourth week following graduation. In fact, the
change-of-grade form must be submitted to the Office of the Registrar by the
end of the fourth week of the following semester. If the student fails to
complete the course or the department fails to submit the change-of-grade form
in a timely fashion, the graduation application will be canceled. **

**An INcomplete should be given only to a student who has completed the bulk
of the work in the course. A student can drop a class through the eighth week
of the semester; a student with medical, personal, or other problems may
withdraw from the University altogether through the eighth week of the
semester. Check the academic calendar in the current _Catalog_ or the _Student
Handbook_ for the actual deadlines for drops and withdrawals. It is possible
for a student to drop or withdraw after the eighth week when circumstances
beyond his/her control make it impossible to continue. Under such
circumstances the student must submit an Appeal for Late Drop or an Appeal for
Late Withdrawal form to the Office of Registration and Records. If the
student's appeal is approved, Registration and Records will request that you
indicate on a special form whether the student was passing or failing at the
time of the drop/withdrawal. The grades WI (withdrew), DR (drop), and AU
(audit) are administratively assigned. You will never give these grades.**

**If a student's name does not appear on your grade roll, notify the student,
so that he/she can contact the Office of Registration and Records to obtain a
Course Registration Correction form. If the name of a student who has not been
in your class appears on your grade roll, the Registrar recommends assigning
that student an F. If there is a registration error, the F will prompt the
student to contact the Registrar; if the student enrolled but never attended,
the student has (unfortunately) earned the F. Non-attendance and non-payment
do not constitute a drop. Sometimes students fail to pay for a course thinking
this will automatically delete them from the course roll. This works only if
the student is taking just that one course.**

**MAKE SURE THAT YOUR STUDENTS UNDERSTAND THAT a C- IS NOT a C. Students are
usually required to earn a C or better in major courses and must earn a C or
better in Gordon Rule courses; a C- will not do. (See the explanation of the
Gordon Rule in the Academic Advising section). Students need only to pass
other general education Requirements and Core courses, but they must have a C
average at FIU to graduate. The Gordon Rule and general education requirements
are discussed under**  
  
**Advising. Make sure that your students know which courses can and cannot be
taken with a pass/fail option.**

**If you are an adjunct or if you are leaving the University, photocopy your
grade book and your syllabi and leave the copies with your department chair at
the end of the semester.**  
  

![Top of page](images/arrowup.gif)                    [![Previous
section](images/arrowback.gif)](humanresources.htm)
[![Next section](images/arrow.gif)](servicesresources.htm)
![Bottom of page](images/arrowdown.gif)  
**  
  
CHANGING GRADES**

**Once submitted, end-of-semester grades (apart from INcompletes) are final
and can be changed only to correct an error or in cases where some part of the
student's work was unintentionally overlooked. A change-of-grade form must be
submitted within one calendar year of the term in which the grade was earned.
You must indicate the reason for the change of grade on the front of the
form.**

**If a student files a grievance against an adjunct (or former regular faculty
member) who cannot be reached by the University, the department chair has the
right to change a disputed grade.**

  
**MAKING GRADES AVAILABLE**

**Students often want to know what grade they have earned before grades are
available via the web, phone or kiosk. At the same time Federal law (i.e. the
Buckley Amendment) makes it illegal to violate a student's right to privacy;
this means that you can't post grades using a student's name or social
security number and that you shouldn't leave graded exams and papers outside
your office door. In addition, grades cannot be posted on the class web site
in a manner that students can be identified. Furthermore, grades should not be
given out over the phone by or to anyone. Instruct your students NOT to ask
secretaries or other staff members about grades. If students are going to need
their grades before they receive the official reports, have them leave you
stamped, self-addressed envelopes. Students can, of course, come to your
office and ask you about grades or request them by e-mail.**

  
**FORGIVENESS POLICY**

**A student is allowed to retake a course in an attempt to raise his/her grade
point average. Both grades will appear on the transcript but only the last
grade will be calculated into the GPA. Undergraduates may use the forgiveness
policy a maximum of three times. They can retake the same course three times
or retake different courses for a total of three "retakes". Graduate students
are allowed to repeat no more than two courses under the forgiveness policy
with no single course being repeated more than once. Only the last grade
earned in a repeated course will count in calculating the GPA. There is then
some risk in a student retaking a course for the purpose of turning a passing
grade into a better grade.**

**In order for a repeated course to lead to the adjustment of the grade point
average, the course must be the same as the earlier course; the grading option
must be the same, and the course must be repeated at the same university. If a
course number has changed since the student's previous enrollment, a memo to
Registration and Records will enable the student to repeat the course.**

**The forgiveness policy is not automatic. Within twelve months of completing
a repeated course, the student must submit a Repeated Course form to the
Office of Registration and Records. The transcript will then be adjusted so
that all courses taken by the student (with the grades earned) will be
reflected, but only the last grade earned in a repeated course will be
calculated into the GPA. Credit hours for a repeated course can count only
once.**  
  

![Top of page](images/arrowup.gif)                    [![Previous
section](images/arrowback.gif)](humanresources.htm)                    [![Next
section](images/arrow.gif)](servicesresources.htm)                    ![Bottom
of page](images/arrowdown.gif)  
**  
  
STUDENT EVALUATION OF COURSES**

**The Board of Regents and the University require that students be given an
opportunity to evaluate classroom teaching. Every section of every course must
be evaluated each semester it is taught, including courses taught by adjunct
faculty. Such evaluations are useful in reviewing course design, in choosing
textbooks, and in evaluating teaching performance.**

**Currently each faculty member is required to administer a standard Board of
Regents questionnaire in each class. (This questionnaire is called the SUS
Student Assessment of Instruction.) Some units also administer a separate
departmental questionnaire or ask students for evaluatory comments. Ask your
department chair or supervisor about the specific procedures in your
department or school.**

**In some units, staff or other faculty members administer student
evaluations; in other units, faculty members take the evaluation forms to
their own classes. If this is the case in your unit, you must leave classroom
while students fill out student evaluation forms. Ask a student volunteer to
collect the forms, to put them in an envelope, to seal the envelope and return
it to the departmental secretary or the chair. You should have no access to
the completed evaluations until you have submitted the final grades you have
assessed for your students.**

  
**ACADEMIC ADVISING**

**Some units have specially designated faculty advisors, while in other units
all faculty members advise students. If you are going to be advising students,
it is imperative that you be familiar with the requirements of your major, the
University General Education Requirements, and the University Core
requirements.**

**Students who transfer to FIU with 37 or more semester credit hours must
fulfill the University's general education requirements, as well as the
requirements for a major. The Student Academic Support System (SASS) degree
audit will indicate which general education requirements have not been met.
The SASS is available to students via the kiosk system located through out the
University. Students are required to bring current SASS reports when they come
for advisement. Be sure to read the SASS report carefully. Be familiar with
the general education requirements listed in the University _Catalog_. **

**A student who attends FIU as a freshman or transfers with 36 hours or fewer
must fulfill the University's Core requirements. These requirements differ
from general education requirements. Core requirements are also listed in the
University _Catalog_. **

**All students entering a post-secondary institution after October 1982 must
meet the "Gordon Rule" in Math and English. (The Gordon Rule is officially the
State Board of Education Rule 6A-10.30.) This rule requires that a student
must take at least two mathematics courses - which courses will depend on the
student's math background and intended major - and at least four courses in
which the student writes over 6000 words. At FIU all composition courses
(those with an ENC prefix) fulfill the Gordon Rule; certain designated courses
in the Departments of English, History, Humanities, Philosophy, and Religion
also fulfill the Gordon Rule requirement. See the University _Catalog_.
Students with AA degrees from other Florida public institutions have met these
requirements unless they entered school before October 1982. **

**If you have any questions about general education requirements or Core
requirements, call the Advising Center in the Office of Undergraduate Studies
(University Park 305-348-2892, Biscayne Bay Campus 305-919-5754). If you have
any questions about the requirements of your major program, talk to your
department chair or program director. Read the _Catalog_ ; there is a great
deal of information there. When program requirements change, students should
be notified before the new requirements are implemented. Generally, the
_Catalog_ for the year that the student is admitted is held to be that
student's legal contract with the University. A student who leaves the
University and is re-admitted later must fulfill the requirements in effect at
the time of re-admission.**

**All students in the Florida State University System (SUS) and the community
colleges must either pass or be exempted from the College Level Academic
Skills Test (CLAST), a standardized exam which measures reading, English and
math skills. Students who receive high enough scores on the SAT or ACT exams,
combined with an adequate GPA in certain post-secondary courses can be
exempted from one or all sections of CLAST. However, anyone who plans to apply
for teacher certification in Florida must take and pass the CLAST.**

**Students who have neither passed nor been exempted from CLAST will not be
allowed to earn more than 96 hours of academic credit. When you are advising
students, check their transcripts and SASS audits to be sure that they have
met the CLAST requirement. Any student beyond the freshman level who has not
met the requirement should make arrangements with the Learning Center to take
the exam as soon as possible. A student who transfers to FIU with an AA degree
from another public Florida institution usually has completed the CLAST exam.
However, a transfer who does not hold the AA degree or a transfer student from
out of state may not have taken the exam.**

**Students seeking admission to FIU are required to have two years of high
school credit in one foreign language. If for some reason a student is
admitted without these credits, he/she must complete one year of beginning-
level credits in one foreign language before being admitted to the Upper
Division. (Students who have been continuously enrolled in a degree program in
the SUS or a Florida Community College since Fall 1989 can be exempted from
this requirement.)**

**When you are advising students, it is important that you keep careful
records. For example, if you agree to accept a course from another institution
or if you agree to let a student substitute one course for another, fill out a
SASS Audit Course Waiver form, send the white copy to the SASS office (PC
138), and put the yellow copy in the student's file. Make absolutely sure that
you understand what is required of the student. Make sure that you have
counted the student's credit hours correctly. Incorrect advising can cause
major problems for students, including delays in graduations.**

**As an advisor, you must ensure that students in the same program are treated
equitably. Don't waive certain requirements for some students and other
requirements for other students. Students can, however, be asked to take
remedial work, but the request must be based on specified deficiencies. If,
for example, you have a student whose writing is poor, you can forward a
sample of the student's writing to the Writing Lab or the English Department
with a request for review and evaluation. This evaluation can then form the
basis for a request that the student attend the Writing Lab on a regular
basis.  
If you find yourself advising students and are unclear about the requirements,
ask your chair or dean to arrange an advising workshop. **  
  

![Top of page](images/arrowup.gif)                    [![Previous
section](images/arrowback.gif)](humanresources.htm)
[![Next section](images/arrow.gif)](servicesresources.htm)
![Bottom of page](images/arrowdown.gif)  
**  
  
SAVING INSTRUCTIONAL RECORDS**

**It is a good idea to keep instructional records like grade books and syllabi
for at least five years. It is also advisable to keep any student work (exams,
papers, projects, etc.) that was not returned to or picked up by the student
for at least a year. Sometimes students complain about grades; occasionally
they file grievances. Without syllabi, copies of exams and assignments, and
grade records, evaluating the merits of a student complaint is very
difficult.**

**If you are an adjunct or if you are leaving the University, you should leave
a photocopy of your grade book and a copy of your syllabus with your Chair at
the end of the semester. Adjuncts should provide this material at the end of
each semester they teach.**

  
**INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS**

**There are a number of immigration and University regulations regarding
international students. If you advise international students contact the
Office of International Student Scholar Services for information on
immigration requirements and procedures. You should encourage your
international students to maintain photocopies of all documentation submitted
to the University.**

**To contact the Office of International Student Scholar Services call
305-348-2421 in University Park and 305-919-5813 on Biscayne Bay Campus. This
office also has information on special programs and activities for
international students.**

**For more information on the services this office provides see the Student
Services section of this handbook.**

  
**FACULTY AUTHORED BOOKS**

**If you require students to purchase a book that you have written or edited,
you are required by Board of Regents policy to notify the Provost. The Provost
will review your request and notify you. The Office of Academic Affairs
maintains a file of these requests for the Board of Regents.**

**Some faculty members donate the royalties from such sales to the FIU
scholarship fund. It's a nice thing to do.**

**For further clarification on this policy, see the Important Policies section
of this handbook.**

  
**BOOK ORDERS**

**The Bookstore requests that book orders be made no later than six weeks
before the course begins. In most units the departmental secretaries handle
book orders. Find out what the procedures are in your unit. The Bookstore can
also put together special course packets. However, packets require a great
deal of lead-time because the Bookstore must get permission from the
publishers to reprint each article. If you wish to assemble a course packet,
call the bookstore for instructions.**  
  

![Top of page](images/arrowup.gif)                    [![Previous
section](images/arrowback.gif)](humanresources.htm)                    [![Next
section](images/arrow.gif)](servicesresources.htm)                    ![Bottom
of page](images/arrowdown.gif)  
**  
  
FIELD TRIPS**

**If you take your students off-campus to art shows, lectures, displays,
geological or environmental expeditions, etc., you should obtain a release
from each student indicating that he/she is participating on a voluntary basis
and that he/she agrees to accept any risks involved. Call the University
Attorney's Office (305-348-2103) to obtain waiver forms.**

  
**CLASSROOM MAINTENANCE**

**As a courtesy to your colleagues, be sure that your classroom is in order
before you leave. If you have rearranged tables and/or chairs, return them to
their normal positions. Clean the board and ask students to dispose of their
trash in trash bins.**

  
**STUDENT HANDBOOK**

**You should be sure to obtain a copy of the _Student Handbook_ , which is
available from the Division of Student Affairs (305-348-2797). The handbook
contains the full texts of policies pertaining to students, including the
University's academic misconduct procedure and the University's student
grievance procedure. The handbook also includes a calendar which notes
important University deadlines, e.g. the last day to register, the last day to
drop a course, the last day to apply for graduation, etc. **

  
**CHART OF SERVICES AND RESOURCES FOR TEACHING**

**There are a number of useful services and resources for teaching faculty.
Those listed below are described in the next section of this handbook.**

**  
Resources for students and faculty**

**Academic Advising Center  
Academy for the Art of Teaching  
Art Museum  
Bookstore  
Centers and Institutes  
Computers and Telecommunications  
Development Office  
International Student Scholar Services  
International Programs and Activities  
Instructional Media Services  
Library  
Office of International Studies  
Statistical Consulting Service  
University Web Page  
Wolfsonian Art Museum **  
  
**Referral services for students**

**Career Planning and Placement  
Counseling Services  
Disability Services for Students  
English Language Institute  
Learning Center  
Minority Student Services  
Victim Advocacy Center  
Wellness Center  
Women's Center**  
  
  
[![Previous section](images/arrowback.gif)](humanresources.htm)        ![Top
of page](images/arrowup.gif)        [![Next
section](images/arrow.gif)](servicesresources.htm)  
  


  | __[![Handbook Home](images/tealtree.png)](index.htm)|  
---|---|---  
                 [![FIU Home](images/smallfiuhomeon.gif)](http://www.fiu.edu) | 

**Dr.[ Rosa Jones](mailto:jonesr@fiu.edu)  
Vice Provost for Academic Affairs  
Dean of Undergraduate Studies  
  
[jonesr@fiu.edu](mailto:jonesr@fiu.edu)** **  
PC 245,  Phone (305) 348-2800**

**For more information visit the[Academic Policy
Manuals](http://www.fiu.edu/provost/polman/keywords.htm)  
  
Web page maintained by [Michelle Soto](mailto:sotomich@fiu.edu) and [Dennis
Wiedman](mailto:wiedmand@fiu.edu) **

| [![AA Home](images/smalltorchon.gif)](http://www.fiu.edu/provost)  
  
|  
  


