

[Back to PSY510 Homepage](PSY510.html)

McDaniel College

Graduate Affairs

PSY:510:01 Psychology of Exceptionality

Fall 1999

Tuesdays 4:50-7:20 Hill 015



Dr. [**Henry
Reiff**](http://wwwfac.mcdaniel.edu/HTMLpages/Graduate/graduate/drafts/gf-
reiff.htm) , Office of Academic Affairs, 105 Elderdice

410-857-2750; email: [**hreiff**](mailto:hreiff@mcdaniel.edu) @mcdaniel.edu

Office Hours by appointment; I will try to meet with you before class when
requested.



Purpose

The purposes of this course are to: (1) present an overview of the causes,
characteristics and educational programming of specific exceptionalities, and
(2) identify the social and emotional needs of persons with disabling
conditions as well as the effect of disabling conditions on interpersonal and
intrapersonal relationships, and vocational, educational, and independent
living experiences.



This course addresses the following Council of Exceptional Children (CEC)
Common Core of Knowledge and Skills Essential for All Beginning Special
Education Teachers:

1\. Philosophical, Historical, and Legal Foundations of Special Education

2\. Characteristics of Learners

3\. Assessment, Diagnosis, and Evaluation

4\. Instructional Content and Practice

5\. Planning and Managing the Teaching and Learning Environment

6\. Managing Student Behavior and Social Interaction Skills

7\. Communication and Collaborative Partnerships

8\. Professionalism and Ethical Practices



Objectives

Students will:

1\. Gain an understanding of the historical events that have affected the
treatment of individuals with disabling conditions.

2\. Acquire knowledge of legislation and litigation pertaining to exceptional
persons.

3\. Delineate the causes of specific exceptionalities.

4\. Describe the characteristics of specific exceptionalities.

5\. Describe types of educational programming for individuals with
exceptionalities.

6\. Describe the potential for independent community living of individuals
with disabling conditions.

7\. Delineate community attitudes toward persons with disabling conditions.

8\. Identify the effects of disabling conditions on the family system.

9\. Identify the effects of disabling conditions on peer interactions.

10\. Delineate the effects of disabling conditions on emotional factors such
as motivation, self-concept, and locus of control.

11\. Examine the effect of disabling conditions on one's interpersonal
relationships and experiences.

12\. Through readings, social interactions with individuals with disabling
conditions, lectures, simulations, etc. examine self attitudes concerning
exceptionality.

13\. Examine the impact of disabling conditions on individuals from multi-
cultural/diverse backgrounds.



Assigned Text

Shea, T.M., & Bauer, A.M. (1997). _An introduction to special education: A
social systems perspective_ (2nd ed.). Madison, WI: Brown  & Benchmark.



Course Requirements

1\. Attend and participate in all classes.

2\. Complete all reading assignments.

3\. Complete two examinations.

4\. [Read, summarize and react to two (2) journal articles](abstracts.htm),
using A.P.A. style. Reports are due when disabilities are discussed. See
Schedule. One report is due before the midterm; the other is due after.

5\. For each class, find and [review an internet
site](http://www2.widener.edu/Wolfgram-Memorial-Library/inform.htm) related to
the topic on the syllabus and email the review and site address to the class
list.

6\. Make one presentationto the class and submit a 2-3 page paper about an
internet site related to the topic of that night. [Presentations will be
assigned in advance](psy510sched.htm).

7\. Option to #5: If positions are available, you may participate in the
McDaniel College Peer Mentor Program and submit a short paper describing your
experience. You will be required to meet weekly for about an hour with a
[McDaniel College student with learning
disabilities](http://wwwfac.mcdaniel.edu/HTMLpages/StuSer/ASC/ASC_Home_Page.html)
to act as a mentor/support. I will explain this program in more detail during
class.

8\. Develop a journal representing personal and professional growth and
development. Each entry will be your reaction to the week's class, with a
focus on how you have changed as a result.



Grading

Assignment Points

Abstracts (2) 50 (25 pts. ea.)

Weekly internet reviews 50 (5 pts. ea.)

Internet presentation and paper 75

Journal 25

Examination #1 100

Examination #2 100



A = 360-400

B = 320-359

C = 280-319



All assignments are due ON TIME. If this is not possible, for some personal
reason, make arrangements with the instructor. If special arrangements are not
made, points will be deducted for each day the assignment is over-due.

Type and proof all assignments.





 SCHEDULE OF TOPICS



8/31 Course Introduction

[What is exceptionality](http://www.altavista.com/cgi-
bin/query?pg=q&kl=XX&stype=stext&q=disability+definition&search.x=16&search.y=6)?

[What is inclusion](merger.htm)?



9/7 History and [Legislation](510laws.htm)

Reading: Chapters 1 - 3

[Links and reviews](510history.htm)



9/14 [The Family](510ecinfo.htm)

Reading: Chapters 4 and 6

[Links and reviews](510family.htm)



9/21 Deaf Issues and Hearing Loss

Reading: Chapter 12

[Deaf Awareness Week](510deaware.htm)

[Links and reviews](510deaf.htm)



9/28 Blindness and Visual Impairment

Reading: Chapter 11

[Deaf - Blind Comparison](510d%2Fb.htm)

[Links and reviews](510blind.htm)



10/5 Physically and Health Impaired

Readings: Chapter 10

[Links and reviews ](510physical.htm)



10/12 Mid-Term Break



10/19 [Mid-Term Exam](510midt.htm)



10/26 Communication Disorders

Reading: Chapter 9

[Links and reviews](510com.htm)



11/2 Multicultural Perspectives

Reading: Chapter 8

[Links and reviews](510multi.htm)



11/9 Learning Disabilities and Mild Disabilities

Reading: Chapters 13 and 15

[Links and reviews](510LD.htm)



11/16 Gifted

Reading: Chapter 17

[Links and reviews](510gifted.htm)



11/23 Behavioral Maladjustment, Emotional Disturbances, and Autism

Reading: Chapters 7 and 16

[Links and reviews](510BD.htm)

Thanksgiving Break does not begin until after evening classes on 11/23 :-(



11/30 Mental Retardation

Reading: Chapter 14

[Links and reviews](510MR.htm)



12/7 Exam

























Suggested Readings



Bak, J. J., Cooper, E. M., Dobroth, K. M. & Siperstein, G. N. (1987). Special
class placements as labels: Effects on children's attitudes toward learning
handicapped peers. Exceptional Children, 54(2), 151-55.



Barraga, N. C. (1983). Visual handicaps and learning. Austin, Tex.:
Exceptional Resources.



Blackorby, J., & Wagner, M. (1996). Longitudinal postschool outcomes of youth
with disabilities: Findings from the Mational Longitudinal Tranistion Study.
Exceptional Children, 62, 399-414.



Bodner-Johnson, B. (1991). Family conversation style: Its effect on the deaf
child's participation. Exceptional Children, 57, 502-511.



Bower, E. M. (1982). Defining emotional disturbance: Public policy and
research. Psychology in the Schools, 19, 55-60.



Bursuck, W., et al. (1996). Report grading and adaptations: A national survey
of classroom practices. Exceptional Children, 62, 301-318.



Connor, F. (1990). Combating stimulus overslectivity: Physical education for
children with autism. Teaching Exceptional Children,23 (1), 30-34.



Crocker, A.D., & Orr, R.R. (1996). Social behaviors of children with visual
impairments enrolled in preschool programs. Exceptional Children, 62, 451-462.



Dunn, L. M. (1968). Special Education for the mildly retarded - Is much of it
justifiable? Exceptional Children, 35, 5-22.



Favazza, P.C., & Odom, S.L. (1997). Promoting positive attitudes of
kindergarten-age children toward people with disabilities. Exceptional
Children, 63, 405-418.



Featherstone, H. (1980). A difference in the family: Living with a disabled
child. New York: Penguin Books.



Goleman, D. (1998). Working with emotional intelligence. New York: Bantam
Books.



Grigal, M. (1998). The time-space continuum: Using natural supports in
inclusive classrooms. Teaching Exceptional Students, 30 (6), 44-51.



Halpern, A.S. (1993). Quality of life as a conceptual framework for evaluating
transition outcomes. Exceptional Children, 59, (6), 486-498.



Halgren, D.W., & Clarizio, H.F.. (1993). Categorical and programming changes
in special education services. Exceptional Children, 59, (6), 547-555.



Harris, C.R. (1991). Identifying and serving the gifted new immigrant
-Problems and strategies. Teaching Exceptional Children, 23 (4), 26-31.



Hobbs, N., Perrin, J. M., & Ireys, H. T. (1985). Chronically ill children and
their families. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.



Howell, K.W., Evans, D., & Harris, J. (1997). Medication in the classroom: A
hard pill to swallow? Teaching Exceptional Children, 29 (6), 58-61.



Hudson, P., & Glomg, N. (1997). If it takes two to tango, then why not teach
both partners to dance? Collaboration instruction for all educators. Journal
of Learning Disabilities, 30, 442-448.



Katsiyannis, A., & Maag, J.W. (1997). Ensuring appropriate education: Emerging
remedies, litigation, and other legal considerations. Exceptional Children,
63, 451-462.



Landerholm, E. (1990). The transdisciplinary team approach in infant
intervention programs. Teaching Exceptional Children, 22 (2), 66-69.



Lichtenstein, S. (1993). Transition from school to adulthood: Case studies of
adults with learning disabilities. Exceptional Children, 59(4), 336-347.



MacMillan, D.L., Siperstein, G.N., & Gresham, F.M.. (1996). A challenge to the
viability of mild mental retardation as a diagnostic category. Exceptional
Children, 62, 356-371.



Meisels, S. J. (1985). The efficacy of early intervention: Why are we still
asking this question? Topics in Early Childhood Special Education, 5(2), 1-11.



Moon, M.S., Diambra, T., & Hill, M.L. (1990). An outcome-oriented vocational
process for students with severe handicaps. Teaching Exceptional Children, 23
(1), 47-50.



Nelson, C.M., Rutherford, R.B., Center, D.B., & Walker, H.M. (1991). Do public
schools have an obligation to serve troubled children and youth? Exceptional
Children, 57, 406-416.



Nelson, R.B., Cummings, J.A., & Boltman, H. (1991). Teaching basic concepts to
students who are educable mentally handicapped. Teaching Exceptional Children,
23 (2), 12-15.



Patton, J.M. (1992). Assessment and identification of African-American
learners with gifts and talents. Exceptional Children, 59 (2), 150-159.



Patton, J.M., Cronin, M.E., Bassett, D.S., & Kopppel, A. E. (1997). A life
skills approach to mathematics instruction: Preparing students with learning
disabilities for the real-life math demands of adulthood. Journal of Learning
Disabilities, 30, 178-187.



Patton, J.M., & Polloway, E.A. (Eds.)(1996). Learning disabilities: The
challenges of adulthood. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.



Reiff, H.B. (1998). Off the beaten path: A model of success for adults with
learning disabilities. In S.A. Vogel and S. Reder (Eds.), Learning
disabilities, literacy, and adult education (pp. 313-329). Baltimore, MD: Paul
H Brookes Publishing Company.



Reiff, H.B., Evans, E.D., & Cass, M. (1991). Special education requirements
for general education certification. A national survey of current practices.
Remedial and Special Education (RASE), 12 (5), 56-60.



Reiff, H.B., Gerber, P.J., & Ginsberg, R. (1996). What successful adults can
tell us about teaching children with learning disabilities. Teaching
Exceptional Children, 29 (2), 10-17.



Renzulli, J. S. (1978). What makes giftedness? Reexamining a definition. Phi
Delta Kappan, 60 (3), 180-84, 261.



Repetto, J.B., & Correa, V.I.. (1996). Expanding views on transition.
Exceptional Children, 62, 551-513.



Reynolds, M. C., Wang, M. C. & Walberg, H. J. (1987). The necessary
restructuring of special and regular education. Exceptional Children, 53(5),
391-98.

Reynolds, M. C., Zetlin, A.G., & Wang, M. C. (1993). 20/20 analysis: Taking a
close look at the margins. Exceptional Children, 59(4), 294-300.



Rosenberg, M.S. (1997). Learning disabilities occuring concomitantly with
other disability and exceptional conditions: Introduction to the special
series. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 30, 242-244.



Sacks, S.Z., Wolffe, K.E., & Tierney, D. (1998). Lifestyles of students with
visual impairments: Preliminary studies of social networks. Exceptional
Children, 64, 463-478.



Safran, S.P. (1998). Disability portrayal in film: Reflecting the past,
directing the future. Exceptional Children, 64, 4227-238.



Salend, S.J. (1990). A migrant education guide for special educators. Teaching
Exceptional Children, 22 (2), 18-21.



Salisbury, C.L., et al. (1996). Strategies that promote social relations among
elementary students with and without severe disabilities in inclusive schools.
Exceptional Children, 61, 125-138.



Schlichter, C.L., et al. (1997). Partners in enrichment: Preparing teachers
for multiple ability classrooms. Teaching Exceptional Children, 29 (4), 4-9.



Seidel, J.F., & Vaughn, S. (1991). Social alienation and the learning disabled
dropout. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 6, 152-157.



Sexton, D., et al. (1996). Early intervention inservice training strategies:
Perceptions and suggestions from the field. Exceptional Children, 62, 485-496.



Sexton, D., et al. (1997). Early interventionists' perspectives of
multicultural practices with African-American families. Exceptional Children,
63, 329-342.



Silver, L.B. (1991). The regular education initiative: A deja-vu remembered
with sadness and concern. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 24, 389-390.



Skiba, R.J., & Deno, S.L. (1991) Terminology and behavior reduction: The case
against "punishment". Exceptional Children, 57, 298-313.



Vergason, G.A., & Anderegg, M.L. (1997). The ins and outs of special education
terminology. Teaching Exceptional Children, 29 (5), 35-39.



Wang, M.C., Reynolds, M.C., & Walberg, H.J. (1986). Rethinking special
education. Educational Leadership, 44, 26-31.



Wehman, P., Kregal, J., & Barcus, J. M. (1985). From school to work: A
vocationaltransition model for handicapped students. Exceptional Children,
52(1), 25-37.



Yacobacci-Tam, P. (1987). Interacting with the culturally different family.

Volta Review, 89(5), 46-58.



Yehle, A.K., & Wambold, C. (1998). An ADHD success story: Strategies for
teachers and students. Teaching Exceptional Students, 30 (6), 8-13.



Yell, M.L. (1988). Honig v. Doe: The suspension and expulsion of handicapped
students. Exceptional Children, 56, 60-69.





[Back to PSY510 Homepage](PSY510.html)



Ysseldyke, J.E., Thurlow, M.L., & Shriner, J.G. (1992). Outcomes are for
special educators too. Teaching Exceptional Children, 25 (1), 36-50.

