#  MATH 101

Syllabus Homework and Lectures Links of Possible Interest

**Note** : I will have office hours on Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday from
10a-3p, and on Thursday 1p-3p (or so) during Finals Week. You may also make an
appointment with me by email, if you need to meet at some other time.

A review sheet for the final exam may be found [here](review3.pdf) in .pdf
format.

* * *

####  Syllabus

Class times:  |  MWF 9a-9.50a  
---|---  
Class room:  |  HB427  
Textbook:  |  Single-Variable Calculus, by Edwards and Penney  
Instructor:  |  Christopher Earles  
Office:  |  HB447  
Office Phone:  |  x2868  
Email:  |  `cearles@rice.edu`  
Office Hours:  |  Tuesday 12.30p-2p, Friday 1p-2.30p  
  
#### What is Calculus?

> The overall structure of the calculus is simple. The subject is defined by a
fantastic leading idea, one basic axiom, a calm and profound intellectual
invention, a deep property, two crucial definitions, one ancillary definition,
one major theorem, and the fundamental theorem of the calculus.

>

> The **fantastic leading idea** : the real world may be understood in terms
of the real numbers.

>

> The **basic axiom** : brings the real numbers into existence.

>

> The **calm and profound invention** : the mathematical function.

>

> The **deep property** : continuity.

>

> The **crucial definitions** : instantaneous speed and the area underneath a
curve.

>

> The **ancillary definition** : a limit.

>

> The **major theorem** : the mean value theorem.

>

> The **fundamental theorem of the calculus** is the fundamental theorem of
the calculus.

>

> These are the massive load-bearing walls and buttresses of the subject.

>

> \--David Berlinski, A Tour of the Calculus

#### Course Outline

We will in this course study the basic elements of the calculus, as outlined
above by Berlinski. Further, we will study various problems which can be
solved by methods of the calculus. These include the problems of finding
maxima and minima of functions, finding zeroes of functions (by means of
Newton's Method), and calculating some kinds of areas and volumes. Finally, we
will consider the history and philosophy of the calculus as it pertains to the
ideas at hand.

#### Class Schedule

(Note that the exam dates are tentative and may change.)  14 Jan  |  First Day
of Classes  
---|---  
21 Jan  |  Martin Luther King, Jr. Day (no class)  
27 Feb (Changed from 1 Mar) |  First Exam  
4-8 Mar  |  Midterm Recess (no class)  
28-29 Mar  |  Spring Recess (no class)  
5 Apr  |  Second Exam  
26 Apr  |  Last Day of Classes  
  
#### Student Requirements

Homework will be required every class and accounts for 25% of your grade.
These assignments may include two or three calculuations, a story problem, a
summary of the lecture, or a written explanation of some idea. There will also
be two 50-minute in-class exams and the final. Each exam will be worth 25% of
your grade.

* * *

####  Schedule of Assignments and Lectures

14 Jan      Introductory Lecture. The three ideas of the Greeks: the method of
exhaustion, the tangent problem, and the area problem. The real numbers.
**Assignment** : Write one- or two-sentence summary of the lecture.
**Reading** : Sections 1.1, 1.2; read sections 1.3, 1.4 if time permits.  16
Jan      Functions and Graphs. **Assignment** : Write one- or two-sentence
summary of the lecture; S1.1 #13 or #14; S1.2 one of #27-50 and one of #73-76;
S1.4 one of #11-20. **Reading** : S1.3 and 1.4 if you haven't already; S2.2
and 2.3; think about compositions (p.36); try to read carefully appendix D.
18 Jan      Limits: Definition and Limit Laws. **Assignment** : Write one- or
two-sentence summary of the lecture; S2.2 two of #1-18; try S2.2 #29.
**Reading** : S2.2, 2.3 if you haven't already; Appendix D, again, and try to
understand _why_ the statements are true.  23 Jan      More on Limits. The
Squeeze Law, the Basic Trigonometric Limit, the Law of Composition.
**Assignment** : Write summary of the lecture; S2.3 one of #1-24; one of
#25-28 (explain in sentences). **Reading** : S2.4  25 Jan      Continuity. The
Laws of Combination for Continuity. **Assignment** : S2.4 one of #1-8; one of
#9-14; summary. **Reading** : S2.1, S3.1.; Appendix E (if you would like).  28
Jan      More on Continuity. The Law of Compositions. The Two Deep Theorems of
Continuity: The Intermediate Value Theorem, and the Maximum (or Extreme) Value
Theorem. The Bisection Method for solving f(x) = 0. The three main ideas up to
this point: functions, limits, and continuity. **Assignment** : summary of
lecture; summary of all lectures to this point (use the three main ideas as an
outline, then fill it out by discussing their intuitive meaning); S2.4 one of
#53-58; S2.4 one of #63-67 (use complete sentences and coherent paragraphs).
**Reading** : S2.1, S3.1; Appendix E (if you would like).  30 Jan      Extreme
Value Theorem and Tangent Lines. Definition of the Derivative. Started to
solve an optimization problem. **Assignment** : summary of lecture; S3.1 one
of #11-20. **Reading** : S3.2, S3.3.  1 Feb      Finish the "rectangle with
largest area" problem. Instantaneous Speed. Rules for Calculating Derivatives:
Sums, Differences, Products, and Constants. **Assignment** : None. **Reading**
: S3.1, S3.2, S3.3 (if you haven't).  4 Feb      Review the previous lecture.
A quick note on showing that a function is continuous. The Quotient Rule.
**Assignment** : summary; S3.2 one of #1-50; one of #51-71. **Reading** :
S3.3, S3.4, S3.7.  6 Feb      The Coffeepot Problem. The Chain Rule.
**Assignment** : summary; S3.3 one of #1-36; one of #57-64. **Reading** :
S3.4, 3.7.  8 Feb      Inverse Functions. Algebraic Functions. **Assignment**
: summary; S3.4 one of #1-50. **Reading** : S3.7 (Appendix C is a review of
trig, if you need it.); S3.5, 3.6; S3.9, S3.10 (these two if you have time).
11 Feb      Trig Functions. **Assignment** : summary; S3.7 one of #1-68; one
of #69-88. **Reading** : S3.5, 3.6; 3.9, 3.10.  13 Feb      Optimization: the
Four-Step Method. The Cannonball Problem. **Assignment** : summary; S3.5 any
one; S3.6 any two. **Reading** : S3.9, S3.10.  15 Feb      Implicit
Differentiation. Related Rates. **Assignment** : summary; S3.9 one of #1-28;
one of #29-68. **Reading** : S3.10, S4.1, S4.2, S4.3.  18 Feb      Fixed Point
Theorems. Successive Approximation. Newton's Method. **Assignment** : summary;
S3.10 one of #1-20; one of #21-42. **Reading** : S4.1, S4.2, S4.3.  20 Feb
Linear Approximation. Increments and Differentials. **Assignment** : summary;
S4.2 one of #17-32; one of #40-47. **Reading** : S4.3.  22 Feb      Rolle's
Theorem and the Mean Value Theorem. **Assignment** : summary. **Reading** :
none.  25 Feb      Review of main concepts of chapters one, two, and three, in
prepartion for the exam. **Assignment** : none. **Reading** : none.  27 Feb
First Exam. **Reading** : S4.4  1 Mar      Fractals, Sierpinski's Triangle,
the relationship between math and science, and the fallacy of the converse.
**Reading** : S4.4, 4.5, 4.6.  11 Mar      Maxima, Minima, and the First
Derivative Test. **Assignment** : summary; S4.4 one of #1-26; one of #27-50.
**Reading** : S4.4-S4.7.  13 Mar      Curve Sketching. **Assignment** :
summary; S4.5 one of #5-14; one of #15-48; one of #49-54. **Reading** :
S4.5-4.7.  15 Mar      Concavity and the Second Derivative. **Assignment** :
summary; S4.6 one of #23-50; one of #51-90. **Reading** : S4.7.  18 Mar
Happy (late) St. Patrick's Day. Vertical and Horizontal Asymptotes and Curve
Sketching. Mentioned the colloquium with Persi Diaconis, "On Randomness".
Information [here](http://math.rice.edu/Calendar/randomness.html).
**Assignment** : summary; S4.7 one of #1-16; one of #17-28; one of #29-54.
**Reading** : S5.1, S5.3.  20 Mar      Axioms of Area; Axioms for Integrals;
The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. **Assignment** : summary. **Reading** :
S5.2, S5.3.  22 Mar      Antiderivatives; Some Formulas; Initial Value
Problems; Constant Acceleration. **Assignment** : summary; S5.2 one of #1-30;
one of #35-46; one of #57-79. **Reading** : S5.3, S5.4.  25 Mar      Mean
Value Theorem, Comparison Theorem, Initial Value Problems. **Assignment** :
summary; S5.6 one of #1-12; one of #14-28; one of #33-44; one of #61-64.
**Reading** : S5.7, S5.8, S5.9.  27 Mar      Integration by Substitution.
**Assignment** : summary; S5.7 one of #1-10, one of #11-40, one of #41-54.
**Reading** : S5.8, S5.4, S5.9.  29 Mar      No Class -- Spring Recess  1 Apr
Area of Plane Regions; Techniques for Finding Area. **Assignment** : summary;
S5.8 one of #1-10, one of #11-20, one of #21-40. **Reading** : S5.4, S5.9.  3
Apr      Review and Questions. **Assignment** : none. **Reading** : S5.4,
S5.9.  5 Apr      Second Exam.  8 Apr      Riemann Sums; Endpoint and Midpoint
Approximation Methods. **Assignment** : summary; S5.4 two of #11-42.
**Reading** : S5.9.  10 Apr      Error Estimate for Midpoint Method; Trapezoid
Method and Error Estimate; Simpson's Rule and Error Estimate. **Assignment** :
summary; S5.9 one of #1-6; one of #7-12; one of #13-18; one of #21-32.
**Reading** : S6.1, S6.2.  12 Apr      Start Chapter Six. Integration
Represents Accumulation. Finding Volumes by Integrating Cross-Sectional Area.
Volumes of Revolution. The Washer Method. **Assignment** : summary; S6.2 one
of #1-24; one of #25-30; one of #35-56. **Reading** : S6.3, S6.4.  15 Apr
Answered Questions on Previous Lecture; Began the Shell Method. **Assignment**
: none. **Reading** : S6.3, S6.4, S6.5.  17 Apr      The Shell Method; Compare
to Washer Method. **Assignment** : summary; S6.3 one of #1-28; one of #35-46.
**Reading** : S6.4, 6.5, 6.6.  19 Apr      Arc-Length; Surface Area of
Surfaces of Revolution. **Assignment** : summary; S6.4 one of #1-10; one of
#11-20; one of #21-44. **Reading** : S6.5, S7.1, S7.2, S7.3.  22 Apr
Separable First-Order Differential Equations; Slope Fields; Torricelli's Law.
**Assignment** : S6.5 #1-10; #11-20; #21-35 (Turn in only if you want
comments; not required.) **Reading** : S7.1, 7.2, 7.3.  24 Apr      The
Natural Logarithm. **Assignment** : S7.2 #1-18; #19-28; #33-50; #57-81. (Turn
in only if you want comments; not required.) **Reading** : S7.3.  26 Apr
The Exponential Function. Closing Thoughts. Evaluations.  4 May, 2p-5p
Final Exam is on this date. Located in Sewall Hall 309. If you are graduating,
you need to schedule your exam with me before Thursday the 2nd (when
graduating seniors grades are due).

* * *

####  Mathematical Links and Other Diversions

  * [Rice Mathematics Department](http://math.rice.edu/)
  * [The Mathematical Association of America](http://www.maa.org/) Recommended reading from the MAA site: 
    * [MAA Online Columns](http://www.maa.org/news/columns.html) \-- interesting reading on topics accessible to most undergraduates. 
    * [Calculus Articles for Students](http://www.maa.org/pubs/calc_articles.html) \-- this is a collection of fifty articles on calculus and its history. 
  * [The American Mathematical Society](http://www.ams.org/) Recommended reading from the AMS site: 
    * [What's New in Mathematics](http://www.ams.org/new-in-math/) \-- a collection of pages, many readable by the educated layman. 
    * [What's Happening in the Mathematical Sciences](http://www.ams.org/new-in-math/happening.html)
    * [Alberti's Perspective Construction](http://www.ams.org/new-in-math/cover/alberti1.html) \-- art and geometry. 
    * [The Mathematics of Piano Tuning](http://www.ams.org/new-in-math/cover/piano1.html) \-- a bit of hard reading, but interesting even if you just jump over all the equations. 
  * [World of Mathematics](http://mathworld.wolfram.com/) \-- from the authors of Mathematica
  * [The Glossary of Math Mistakes](http://www.mathmistakes.com/) \-- interesting reading 
  * [Triangle and Robert](http://turn.to/tr) \-- A diversion. Not quite math, but funny in a quirky way. 

* * *

Email: [cearles@rice.edu](mailto:cearles@rice.edu)

