**Policy Analysis in Education  
TE 919**

Brian DeLany  
118C Erickson Hall  
353-7765 [(BDeLany@msu.edu](mailto:\(BDeLany@msu.edu)) |  Class particulars:  
Monday 4-7  
Wells Hall C211  
---|---  
  
**_Office Hours:_** Monday 1:00-2:00 and by arrangement.

**_Course Description_**

We focus on two interrelated topics that attempt to help you to understand
policy analysis as something more than just a technical exercise:

  * What are the various intellectual lenses adopted by policy analysts and what are the implications for both policies and classrooms and communities?
  * How is policy generated, where does it come from, and how is it related (or not) to educational problems? 

The first query is concerned with both the technical frames of reference used
by analysts as well as their orientations to knowledge. What are the tradeoffs
economists, political scientists, sociologists, ethnographers or school
teachers bring to their analyses of policy? We will be considering recent
research as well as policy analysis in process to get a sense of both the
substance of policy and how people in our community are currently conceiving
their own work. Local analysts can provide insights into their work on the
math reforms in California, issues of gender and policy, choice and charters,
literacy reforms, truancy policies, teacher education as a tool of
international development, and policy and classroom practice (to name a few
possibilities) .

Discussions around the second question lead us to consider the links between
analysis and policy generation. There is a distinct clash between normative
and behavioral models of policy making--the way we talk and the way we act in
the formulation of policy problems, their alternative remedies and
implementation. Why do some claim that metaphors of gardening or sailing apply
more appropriately to the construction and implementation of social and
educational policy than do metaphors of strategic intervention?

We will explore the answers that policy analysts and their critics have
offered to these questions. The course materials will consist of two sorts of
readings: analytic pieces that exhibit or express answers to one or more of
the queries above, and several cases that permit you to try out various
answers in your own analyses. You will spend time in the library becoming
familiar with a broad range of literature as you develop a case of your own
from multiple policy perspectives.

The course satisfies one of the three "selective" courses required of all
students in the Department of Curriculum, Teaching, and Educational Policy.
Students from departments and colleges outside of education are most certainly
welcomed.

**_Course Requirements_**

The course will be conducted as a seminar. This means you will need to have
read and cogitated on the readings or issues at hand. Occasionally this means
speaking up in class but always it means listening and considering what others
say. Helping someone reformulate their ideas, questioning whether they meant
what they said, and extending ideas is preferable to verbal combat.

**_Reading:_** I will be passing out copies of the readings in class though if
class prefers I can make available the set of readings which can be purchased
at Ned's Bookstore. I am assuming you'd prefer the readings at no cost.
Student Book Store (SBS on Grand River) will have copies of Kingdon's Agendas,
Alternates, and Public Policy, Majone's _Evidence, Argument, & Persuasion in
the Policy Process_, Tyack & Cuban's _Tinkering Toward Utopia_ , Chubb & Moe's
_Politics, Markets and America's Schools_ , Gewirtz, Ball & Bowe's _Markets,
Choice and Equity in Education_ , and Bobrow and Dryzek's _Policy Analysis by
Design_ (I noticed last week that the Bobrow  & Dryzek book is on back order,
so I've run off copies of the pages in the book we will be using and will pass
them out during the first class meeting). Additional readings will be handed
out as the need arises.

**_Evaluation:_** You will be evaluated on their participation in class and
discussion of course readings. In addition there are the following
requirements:

> A **_weekly 1-2 page response_** to class and readings must be turned in
every Monday by 12:00 to my office mailbox. Make 2 copies. Email is also
acceptable (and preferred). These responses provide opportunity for you to
raise questions, offer interpretation about readings or class discussion, and
ask for treatment of specific issues in class. In effect they provide an
opportunity to check in and let me see how you are progressing. I will be
copying your work for the rest of the class to read so be sure to make your
thoughts readable and assume they are public. If someone could show me how to
make this accessible on eweb that might be the route we would all prefer

>

> **_Individual policy analysis._** Write on a policy problem of your own
choosing or some aspect of it. In addition to your own take on the problem you
will be expected to use at least one other model of analysis. So, if you see
yourself as a sociologist trying to make sense of teacher induction policy you
might also consider how an economist or Public Choice person might analyze the
issue. If literacy reform is your passion, what are the competing
arguments/ideologies that make for a "radical middle" in that policy war? If
math education reform is your interest, plot out what the competing arguments
are? In all these contested terrains to what extent is politics and turf more
important than teaching and learning?  
>

> **_Analysis of partner's draft._** Both the instructor and another student
will be reading and responding to the draft of your individual policy paper.

>

> **_Process paper._** This represents your cumulative thoughts on a
hypothetical policy dilemma. You will provide wisdom for some policy maker on
how they might best navigate the policy process.

The course grade will be determined as follows:

  * Class participation 
  * Journal on readings 
  * Analysis of partner's draft 
  * Individual analysis paper 
  * Process paper 

|

  * 20%
  * 20% (weekly)
  * 10% (due April 3)
  * 30% (due April 10)
  * 20% (due April 24)

  
---|---  
  
**Course Outline  **

**_Week 1 (Jan. 10): Introduction and a Road Map_**

> What is public policy and what makes a policy public? What is policy
analysis and how does it differ from other forms of inquiry, analysis or
research?

>

>> Stone, D. (1994). Helter Shelter, a review of The Homeless by Christopher  
>  Jencks and Tell Them Who I Am: The Lives of Homeless Women by Elliott
Liebow, in June 27, 1994, The New Republic, pp. 29-34.

**_I.) What is policy and policymaking?_**

**_Week 2 & 3 (Jan. 24): A. Policy Analysis from Multiple Perspectives_**

Choices about how to analyze public policies and issues, about the "best"
design, are not so obvious as some might claim. As James Coleman noted more
than 20 years ago, "There is no body of method; no comprehensive methodology
for the study of the impact of public policy as an aid to future policy."

While there is no "right" way to generate good policy analysis, there are
certainly better or worse choices. Often analysts draw on their own
disciplinary background. Whatever the choice of design, line of questioning,
choice of analysis, or method of presentation or dissemination, there are
tradeoffs and satisficing, better and worse uses of argument and evidence to
support analytic choices or conclusions.

The choice of analytic methods presents a key issue for policy analysis
because the lens and the method the analysts uses determines to a large degree
what they see, understand and might suggest as implications and solutions.
There are a variety of lenses to use: disciplinary models,
qualitative/quantitative distinctions, prior epistomoligic assumptions, and
assumptions about the purpose of policy analysis. For the first few weeks we
will be reading about the multiple lenses available to analysts and their
implications. Several questions should guide your reading.

  * What are the strengths and weaknesses of each general approach against the realities of policy making and the policy process as you currently understand it?
  * In what ways does the character of the policy process raise issues for analysis and the shape of choices for design?
  * What skills are needed for the policy analysts? What perspectives?

> Woodhall, Maureen, (1987). Human Capital Concepts. In Economics of
Education: Research and Studies, G. Psacharopoulos, ed., Oxford: Pergamon, pp.
21-24.

>

> Levin, Henry, and Carolyn Kelly (1994). Can Education Do It Alone? In
Economics of Education Review, 13(2), pp. 97-108.

>

> Lewis, Theodore (1997). America's Choice: Literacy or Productivity?
Curriculum Inquiry, 27(4), pp. 391-421.

>

> Chubb, John and Terry Moe, (1990). Politics, Markets and America's Schools,
Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, pp. 1-68.

>

> Ball, Stephen, Richard Bowe, and Sharon, Gewirtz(1995). Circuits of
Schooling: A Sociological Exploration of Parental Choice of School in Social-
Class Contexts. In Sociological Review, 43, pp. 52-78.

>

> Wells, Amy Stuart (1996). African-American Students' Views of Choice. In Who
Chooses? Who Loses? Culture, Institutions, and Unequal Effects of School
Choice. New York: Teachers College Press, pp. 25-49.

>

> **Recommended** as help in understanding the underlying frames in economics
and public choice arguments:

>

> Bobrow, Davis and John Dryzek, (1987). Policy Analysis by Design,
Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press, pp. 1-116.

>

> {please realize this is two weeks of readings since class will not meet
during the holiday}

**_Week 4 (Jan. 31) B. Policy Analysis from Multiple Perspectives: Policy,
Politics, and Social Capital_**

> Vinovskis, Maris, (1999). "Do Federal Compensatory Education Programs Really
Work? A Brief Historical Analysis of Title I and Head Start," American Journal
of Education, 107(3), pp. 187-209.

>

> Putnam, R., (1995). "Bowling Alone: America's Declining Social Capital,"
Journal of Democracy, 6(1), January, pp. 65-78.

>

> Berliner, D. and B. Biddle, (1995). The Manufactured Crisis, Reading:
Addison-Wesley, pp. 13-35.

>

> In addition, I will bringing readings on the politics of policy depending on
your substantive issues. For example for literacy folks I'd suggest you head
off to an Arizona lobby group's website. For math curriculum policy arguments
there's the "mathematically correct" website.

**_Week 5 (Feb. 7): "Ways of Seeing" Again_**

> Tyack, David and Larry Cuban (1995). Tinkering Toward Utopia: A Century of
Public School Reform, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, pp. 1-59.

>

> Tyack, David (1976). "Ways of Seeing: An Essay on the History of Compulsory
Schooling," Harvard Ed. Review, 46(5), pp. 355-389.

**_Week 6 (Feb. 14): Policy as Argument_**

Evidence offered in support of a policy position, or "proof" of a proposition,
reflects a number of choices about such things as: instrument to measure, lens
to view, or the logic of the analysis. Evidence, as a result, is socially
constructed in much the same way as are problems and solutions. While reading
this week's assignment consider the following questions and make a list of
questions you would want examined, in order to assess the validity of evidence
provided.

  * How can analysts and others view the same "facts" and reach different and conflicting conclusions?
  * How is evidence constructed? 
  * What are threats to internal or external validity?

> Majone, G., (1989). Evidence, Argument, & Persuasion in the Policy Process,
New Haven: Yale Press, pp. 1-68.

>

> Taylor, Barbara, Richard Anderson, Kathy Au, and Taffy Raphael (1999).
Discretion in The Translation of Reading Research to Policy. CIERA Report
#3-006.

>

> House, E. and C. Haug, (1995). "Riding the Bell Curve: A review,"
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 17(2), pp. 263-272.

**_Week 7 (Feb. 21): The Politics of Numbers and Words_**

Policy problems, policy targets and the categories used to devise and carry
out policy are socially constructed and not necessarily "givens" or "objective
facts." They typically denote important social needs, relevant definitions or
markers, and strategic or politically or bureaucratically defined boundaries.
As has been said before, what you see depends on where you sit. At the same
time, what you take as the critical definitions can form the directions of
analysis and shape the political implications of its proposed "solutions."

  * Take any current reform with which you are familiar and chart the implications of changes in the definitions of who the stakeholders are. What if the definitions of minorities were altered?
  * How do individuals construct "multiple definitions of self" ?
  * How might political pressures affect the value of data gathering? 

> Hodgkinson, H., (1995). "What Should We Call People?", Phi Delta Kappan,
October, pp. 173-179.

>

> Wright L., (1994). "Annals of Politics: One Drop of Blood", The New Yorker,
pp. 46-55.

>

> Plank, David, (1997). "Dreams of community," Expertise versus Responsiveness
in Children's Worlds: Politics in School, Home and Community Relationships,
Maureen McClure and Jane Lindle, eds., Washington, D.C.: Falmer Press, pp.
13-20.

>

> Goldring, Ellen and Claire Smrekar, (1997). "Community or Anonymity?
Patterns of Parent Involvement and Family-School Interactions in Magnet
Schools," presented at AERA meeting in Chicago.

**_Week 8 (Feb. 28): The Players in the Policy Process_**

Over the next few weeks we will be reading an analysis of the policy process.
It provides an interesting effort to account for the unexpected route our
efforts in public policy often take. While the discussion is at the national
level, be sure to translate it down to other levels of the policy process.
Consider the following questions as you read.

  * How do these arguments translate to the district, school or classroom level?
  * What are the implications for action in the policy arena? How might you position yourself to make the most of such a view of how policies are constructed, how "windows" are opened" or the value of position and presence in the process?
  * Can you get beyond some readers' sense that Kingdon is "cynical" or "negative" about the policy process? (As you might guess, some folks have not.) 

> Kingdon, J., (1984). Agendas, Alternatives, and Public Policies, Boston:
Little, Brown, and Co., pp. 1-70.

**_Week 9 (Mar 13): Models of the Policymaking Process_**

> Kingdon, J., (1984). Agendas, Alternatives, and Public Policies, Boston:  
>  Little, Brown, and Co., pp. 71-164.

>

> Come prepared to discuss your policy case in terms of its policymaking
process. Talk to policy analysts, interview people involved in the policy
process and collect a genealogy of the policy you are focusing on (i.e. do
some detective work).

**_Week 10 (Mar 20): Processes: Origins, Rationality, Incrementalism and
Garbage Cans_**

> Kingdon, J. (1984). Agendas, Alternatives, and Public Policies, Boston:
Little, Brown and Co., pp. 165-230.

>

> Pearson, David (199xxx)

**_Week 11 (Mar 27): The Implementation Perspective_**

For some, "implementation" is a misplaced metaphor. It assumes that "there is
a there." The perspective taken here is that policy is neither immutable nor
certain in its nature or consequences. It is generated and altered through out
the policy system--the federal, state, and local levels. Interesting to note
is that the notion of policy differs at each level. As you read through this
week's readings, take some policy reform you are familiar with and consider
the following questions.

  * Who are the major stakeholders/actors?
  * What are their concerns?
  * What resources and authority are available to policy makers and those responsible for carrying out policy?
  * What are the effective incentives at each level of the system and how do they differ?

Further, consider the broader questions around the readings:

  * What are some common processes and categories of implementation problems that emerge as policy is put into different institutional settings.
  * Of what value is an "implementation perspective" to the policy maker?
  * What are some dilemmas inherent in the implementation process?
  * Do certain kinds of policies, or certain kinds of policy instruments, present particular kinds of implementation problems?

> McLaughlin, M., (1987). "Learning from Experience: Lessons from Policy
Implementation," Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, Summer, 9(2), pp.
171-178.

>

> Baier, V., J.G. March, and H. Saertren, (1988). "Implementation and
Ambiguity", Decisions and Organizations, London: Basil Blackwell, pp. 150-
164.

>

> Majone, Chapter 4.

**_Week 12 (Apr. 3): Implementation and Organization_**

Leaders, whether the President of the United States, the manager of Red Sox,
or the principal of your local elementary school, enter their organizations
with affirmations of the faith that things will be changed for the better and
they will be able to change things. As we know, though, presidents can be
stymied, principals overwhelmed with events, and managers dumped in mid-
season. Some questions to ponder during this week's readings:

  * What are the motivations for leaders declaring the need for change?
  * What accounts for their inability, disinterest or forgetfulness in carrying through with their prior declarations for change?
  * What are ways change can be viewed by those who are expected to participate in the changes?

> March, J. G. and J. Olsen, (1983). "Organizing Political Life: What  
>  Administrative Reorganization Tells Us About Government", American
Political Science Review, (77), pp. 281-296.

>

> Cohen, David (1990). "The Case of Ms. Oublier," Education Evaluation and
Policy Analysis, 12(3), pp. 327-345.

[Analysis of partner's draft--10%]

**_Week 13 (Apr. 10): Implementation, Politics & Work_**

At times organizations might appear impervious to efforts to change them. We
might wonder:

  * To what degree are some policy efforts contrary to the basic history, legal and cultural contexts?
  * To what degree will the policy affect "us" rather than "them"?
  * To what extent would you be willing to carry on with a policy change whether it has any observable effect or not?

> Cohen, D., (1984). "Policy and Organization: The Impact of State and Federal  
>  Education Policy on School Governance", Harvard Educational Review, 52 (4),
pp. 474-499.

>

> or an implementation article addressing your own area of interest. For
example:

>

> Grant, S. G., Penelope Peterson, and Angela Shojgreen-Downer (1996).
"Learning to Teach Mathematics in the Context of Systemic Reform," American
Educational Research Journal, 33(2), pp. 509-541.

>

> Ball, Deborah, (1990). "Reflections and Deflections of Policy: The Case of
Carol Turner," Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 12(5), pp. 263-276.

[individual policy paper due--20%]

Week 14 (Apr. 17): Change and its Perception

Changes occur, both in individuals and organizations, we can be sure. At times
their called "reforms" and at other times "failures." But just when and how
they occur is often difficult to predict, much less manage. In addition to the
usual statistics of the changing distribution of resources and human capital,
subtle alterations in social capital are also observable. What it all means is
another question.

  * Consider as many outcome measures as you can think that might register change for the "better."
  * Are there any new avenues for change that have not been tried related to education?
  * Does change occur or not? What is your evidence?

> Fullan, M. (1991). "The Future of Educational Change," in The New Meaning of
Educational Change, New York: Teachers College Press, 345-354.

>

> March, J.G., (1981). "Footnotes to Organizational Change," Administrative
Science Quarterly, December, pp. 563-577.

>

> Tyack, David and Larry Cuban (1995). Tinkering Toward Utopia: A Century of
Public School Reform, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, pp. xxxxx.

**_Week 15 (Apr. 24): What Reforms Last: The Effects of Policy_**

Considering all the messiness of public policy and its likelihood for
generating change for the better, we look now at suggestions of how to guess
what policies might stick and which are "like leaves in the fall" and headed
for the mulch pile. A simple question remains for the day:

  * What is your source of optimism that educational policy can generate change for the better?

> Kirst, M. and G. Meister, (1985). "Turbulence in American Secondary  
>  Schools: What Reforms Last ?" in Curriculum Inquiry, 15 (2), pp. 169-186.

>

> Boyd, William, (1999). Paradoxes of Educational Policy and Productivity.
Educational Policy, 13(2), pp. 227-250.

Two other papers will be made available on request. It has been said, in the
past, that students wished they had read these two pieces first.

> Weick, K. (1984). "Small Wins: Redefining the Scale of Social Problems",
American Psychologist, 39(1), pp. 40-49.

>

> March, J. G. (1975). "Education and the Pursuit of Optimism", Texas Tech
Journal of Education, 2(1), pp. 5-17.

[Individual policy paper is Due (30%)]  
**on or before Monday April 10**

[Process paper Due (20%)]  
**on or before April 24**

