[**American Mathematical Monthly**](http://www.maa.org/), Vol. 103, No. 2,
February 1996, pp. 134-142.

** A Fable of Reform

[John J. Schommer](http://www.utm.edu/~jschomme/index.shtml) **

For years the math department at Rolling Hills State University (RHSU) had
been taking heat from nearly every liberal arts department on campus for being
too tough on liberal arts students. Having refused on many occasions to adopt
the "Math for Poets" class that many universities offer to fulfill university
math requirements, the math department at RHSU had been adamant in its support
of College Algebra as the _least_ course a student could take to fulfill this
requirement. But reform was in the air...

**1\. The Decision**

Maybe it was the fact that a lot of new folks had just been hired by the math
department. Maybe a lot of folks in the math department just really had a good
breakfast that morning. For whatever reason, someone suggested at the faculty
meeting one afternoon that perhaps the department should offer a course in
chess. At first the surprisingly enthusiastic reception was aimed at adopting
the course as an elective. The department soon found itself considering
seriously, however, whether in fact chess should be adopted as a way of
fulfilling the university math requirement. Enthusiasm for the idea, though
far from unanimous, was in the majority that afternoon, and a committee was
soon formed with many eager volunteers to draw up a syllabus for the course,
as well as to lay out the best arguments for a chess course before the
university curriculum committee.

The newly formed chess committee had barely met for an hour when they realized
that, from a professional standpoint, most of what they wanted to accomplish
in a chess class would resonate strongly with the
_[NCTM](http://www.nctm.org/) Professional Standards for Teaching Mathematics_
[ **1** , pp.19-67]. Within a week of their first committee meeting, a very
eager chess committee had completed the first draft of its report to the
curriculum committee. It emphasized the following:

* **Critical Thinking / Problem Solving.** If ever there was a game that involved critical thinking it was chess. Every time the board changed new problems were created, problems with many valid game-winning solutions, problems completely unlike the pre-fabricated exercises of the typical algebra book with their stock unique solutions. With the right teacher at the helm of this class, each lesson might very well involve almost 50 minutes of careful, critical analysis. 

* **Collaborative Learning.** A well-run chess class could very well serve as the model for a collaborative learning environment. Again, with the right teacher at the helm, a class could easily be conducted in small groups, all members tossing out ideas, discussing the critical pros and cons of every move on the board, moving only after achieving some democratic consensus for a course of action. No sleepy lecture sessions, classrooms would be noisy and bubbling with intellectual ferment. Quiet shy students with little self esteem would find their views solicited and even adopted on occasion. Students, even shy students, would learn to make their best arguments before a group of their peers. Highly disciplined and yet fun, chess promised to be an almost perfect venue for collaborative learning. 

* **No "mindless" symbol manipulation.** College algebra's harshest critics were almost incapable of saying "symbol manipulation" without saying "mindless" at the same time. If chess were adopted as a course, the math department could begin to demolish that ugly characterization of their discipline. Aside from the fairly easy-to-learn notation system for recording games (a skill that would be required only rarely in this class), 99% of the time nothing vaguely resembling abstract symbols would be used! Abstract symbol manipulation would be dead, the demand for critical analysis would be maintained. The best of both worlds! 

* **Physical Manipulatives.** Here was something that you rarely saw in a college math class -- physical manipulatives! And beautiful, artistic manipulatives at that. Though some students would be content with their generic plastic chess sets, some would no doubt fall in love with the artistry of more beautiful sets, a love which would surely make them want to play often. The more artistic students might even be motivated to sculpt their own sets. With chess sets becoming valued artistic possessions, could the desire for the beauty of the game itself (that reservoir of critical thinking) be far away? 

* **Negligible costs, even for a technology-friendly class.** Though a few students would indeed want fancy chess sets, and some would want to buy chess software for their computers, none of these would be required. The simplest of boards is all that would be needed; a college student could effectively walk into any local toy store and come away with the only materials needed for the course. Furthermore any chess program, a site-license for which would be cheaper than the heavily promoted math software found in most professional math journals, would instantly convert any computer lab into a chess lab. 

**2\. The Plan**

To say that the university curriculum committee was stunned to hear the math
department's proposal would be an understatement. It all sounded so
_progressive_. Liberal arts members of the curriculum committee began to
imagine life in harmony with the math department, their students no longer
complaining of the drudgery associated with completing their math
requirements. So caught up in the idea of this major reform in the math
department (and perhaps just a little fearful that this opportunity might not
ever come again), the committee quickly approved the course. Strange as this
might seem now in retrospect, no one ever bothered to ask, where was the
mathematics?

Every member of the chess committee was eager to be one of the first to teach
the new class. Since only few would be able to, the committee decided that
each member should draw up a detailed proposal for the course, and that the
members with the best proposals would then become the first teachers of the
course. Wonderful proposals were made, and when the teachers for the first run
of "Math 130: Chess" were finally picked, they all had a certain similarity in
their approach.

* Most of the traditional "lectures" would occur in the first week of the course, consisting primarily of the basic moves of each piece and ways to avoid being checkmated early. Chess aphorisms like "play to the center of the board" and "try to control a middle square" would be discussed. 

* Any lectures in subsequent weeks would be enthusiastic and quite short, focusing on problems associated with various opening, middle, and end games. Most of the time though, students would be actually trying to solve various chess problems in small groups. The emphasis in class would be "problem of the day and play, play, play". 

* Students would not be required to memorize games or even openings. 

* Chess grandmasters would be invited to talk about life in the world of chess and their favorite matches. 

With an enthusiastic group of teachers chosen, there was one last piece of
business that had to be decided: how would grades be assigned? Here, the
teachers thought, was where they could really exploit the beauty of living in
the computer age. With chess programs available that provide competition on
several levels of difficulty, putting together an objective grading system
would be easy: grades would be determined by students' ability to defeat a
given chess program a certain fixed percentage of times. A student could earn
an "A", for example, by defeating the program at "level five" 7 out of 10
times. The beauty of this system is that there would be clear objective
standards that would mean the same each and every year. Gradewise, the course
would be essentially teacher independent!

The teachers worked as a group to find good chess problems with interesting
solutions. Great software was found (with dazzling visuals that projected
nicely on overhead screens) that would play out the day's problem so that
everyone could compare their solutions to the computer approach. Four speakers
were lined up for the fall, all of whom traveled extensively because of chess
and had marvelous stories to tell of games bravely fought and often won. Two
speakers even offered to stay after class and play all takers on the quad in
simultaneous games.

By summer's end, it appeared that a dynamic, exciting class had been prepared
that would really get first-year students deeply involved in problem solving,
developing critical thinking skills that would serve them throughout their
lives. Well, at least that was the plan...

**3\. The Implementation**

There was a lot of excitement that first week. Students and teachers alike
felt that they were somehow part of a revolution. When teachers described how
the class would be run -- very short lectures, lots of game playing --
students were pleased and eager to get started. Though teachers tried to
stress that in fact this "game playing" was going to be serious business, some
students (especially those who had failed college algebra before) couldn't
help but think that this was going to be an easy way to complete that old math
requirement.

By the second week, it was already becoming quite clear who was probably going
to be earning "A"'s at semester's end. Knowing that these students would more
than likely find each other after class for some challenging play, teachers
made sure that this wealth of natural ability was spread around when assigning
folks to their small groups. And these natural players were actually quite
happy to be the big fish in those small ponds. As the semester progressed
teachers noted some minor problems with certain of these "prodigies" lording
over the others in their groups, but this indeed only proved to be a minor
problem. All in all, group work turned out pretty well in the first two
months.

The semester's guest lecturers were, by and large, quite interesting. Though
one presenter's "inside" stories about the chess world proved way too obscure,
the presentation by one grandmaster was particularly entertaining and
enlightening -- the image of chess nerd was thoroughly dispelled. The first
"chess on the quad" was surprisingly popular, and an alert university
relations officer made sure that local media would be around for the second
event. The second event was equally popular, and did indeed find its way into
local news stories. In fact, one reporter's story evolved into an examination
of mathematics reform on the national level and was picked up later by various
news services, much to the delight of a university president wanting very much
to be perceived as being on the cutting edge of reform.

It's actually not too hard to pin down when things began to deteriorate -- it
was right around midsemester, two weeks before grades were due. For fear that
the more prodigious players might go for their "A" early in the semester and
then start sleeping in, it was decided that you could not leave a level of
computer play until after you won at that level the required percentage of
times. To get a midsemester "A" you had to graduate to level four by
midsemester, to get a "B", level three etc. The network in the computer lab
was set up so that one could essentially play at any time of day for official
scoring purposes, and was furthermore designed so that a teacher could be
certain that the person who claimed to be playing was actually the person on
the machine. The computer also kept a good log of how long a person was on the
machine.

It was this simple log that shouted warning signs long before midsemester.
After the initial spurt of logging on at the beginning of the year, only the
naturally talented students seemed to be logging on regularly, and only they
seemed to be staying on for periods of time vaguely resembling the fabled
ratio of two hours homework to one hour of classtime. Despite these early
warning signs, the teachers assumed that students preferred playing each
other, and would eventually begin logging on regularly once midsemester
approached.

And so they did. With two weeks to go before midsemester grades were due, a
trickle and then a torrent of folks began to log on. The only problem was that
in the course of all their group work, students had managed to develop a
completely unrealistic idea of their own particular chess skills. Beating the
computer even at the lowest level proved far harder than they imagined. Office
hours were well attended the week before midterm with students absolutely
panicked about their grades. The teachers discussed the crisis and decided
that they were partially responsible for the mess -- they were going to have
to be quite generous with midsemester grades. An anonymous survey also
revealed that students were in fact _not_ playing chess all that often outside
of class -- the computer logs had been a pretty accurate reflection of who was
putting in time with "homework". The teachers made clear, though, that the
ultimate grading criteria remained the same -- by the end of the semester, a 7
out of 10 success rate at level two would be necessary to receive a minimal
passing grade. An understanding dean was notified officially by the teachers
about what had been going on (he had heard quite a bit already thank you very
much), and it was decided that students would be allowed to drop if they
wished (even this late in the semester) with a "WP". A discouraging number
chose this option.

The computer log that developed in the two weeks prior to midterm made
something else abundantly clear -- a large number of students were having
difficulty just getting past level one. The computer could replay students'
games for the instructors, and many students seemed to be roaming the board
aimlessly. Opening play appeared to be especially bad, leaving students with
barely defensible positions. Students also seemed to have no sense of when
resignation would be preferable to playing out their weak positions. Of course
one quick way to get students into more competitive openings with the computer
was to have them memorize famous openings like the Queen's Gambit and the
Sicilian Defense. It was precisely this kind of rote memorization which
everyone wanted to avoid when the course was being planned. Yet it was clear
that something like rote memorization was going to have to happen if many
students were going to get past level one. The teachers put together a booklet
of about ten famous openings and suggested that students might begin enjoying
more success against the computer if they memorized a few of them \-- not that
this was required, mind you. A day was put aside for a more traditional
lecture, and the pros and cons of the ten openings were discussed.

A few of the talented kids had discovered books on chess weeks earlier and had
in fact learned some of the classic openings already. Their impressive names
had been dropped by the "prodigies" in small groups, but it wasn't until the
big grade scare that the average student felt particularly motivated to
memorize them. In any case, soon after students started memorizing openings,
the level one barrier fell for many. The computer did not always respond
according to the book, but students found that if they persisted with a
prepared opening, more often than not they began to enjoy some success. At
this point they had, of course, little appreciation for why such openings were
yielding success, but they were at least content to be finally winning and
relieved to be "passing" the course. Appreciation for those openings could
always develop with time. Some students did want to drop the course a few
weeks after midsemester when it became clear that they would have to spend
quite a bit of time memorizing a chess "vocabulary". They were not altogether
happy when a very tired dean did not allow them to withdraw.

With little more than a third of the semester still to go, a "C" was looking
more and more possible to many and the assault on level three had begun in
earnest. But the grade scare had had a profound effect on classroom
temperament. Memorization had not only brought success to those who were
having trouble, it had also brought drudgery. Chess class was no longer the
"consequence free" class that it was just a month earlier. Success, it seems,
had been a double-edged sword. Though in-class time was itself still
considered fun, there was nothing particularly fun about the personal
discipline required to study chess outside of class. One of the messages
students had received implicitly before the grade crisis was that there were
no "right" and "wrong" solutions to chess problems, only "different" ones. The
success of memorization seemed to destroy that vision of chess -- there
apparently were "right" and "wrong" approaches to chess problems (depending on
level of play) and the discovery/small group method of learning how to make
those distinctions came with the risk that the desired grade might not be
earned by semester's end. Students no longer entertained false notions of
their own abilities. Teachers began to regularly hear the question, "...but
what is the _right_ move?" The chess books held in reserve at the library were
being used more often as students wanted to know more about the "correct" way
to play chess. Ironically, the more tiresome Math 130 had become for many, the
more success students seemed to be having according to the computer logs.

Now as uncomfortable as the class had become for those who had a reasonable
shot at earning a "C" by finals, it had become _very_ uncomfortable for those
for whom a "D" was becoming their best hope. The odd thing though, was that
the people who so desperately needed to spend more time with chess were not
really logging onto the computer as often as might be thought. After initially
becoming very involved in the memorization craze, the participation of the
struggling students fell off markedly when it became clear that memorization
was not going to be a quick fix to their grade predicaments. It turned out
there was still plenty of chess to play after those prepared opening moves.
Occasionally a student would find a teacher during an office hour and express
the frustration that no doubt many were feeling -- they "understood"
everything in groups, and they "followed" everything said in lectures, but as
soon as they tried to play on their own, they met with failure. Challenged by
the records of the computer log that claimed that they were not "studying"
anywhere near as often as they needed to, their response was to confess that
they indeed had not practiced as much as they should, but that their jobs and
extracurriculars took up an important chunk of their time.

Perhaps surprisingly, the biggest threat to the future of the chess class did
not come from a student, an "arts" faculty member, or an administrator. The
teacher who pushed hardest and worked most enthusiastically for the chess
class began to wonder openly whether any of this was an improvement over the
old college algebra class. The chess grade distribution looked strikingly
similar to the one for college algebra, about the same number of people had
dropped, and the same old excuses for poor performance were being heard. Most
profoundly discouraging though was the fact that the kind of students who
struggled in College Algebra primarily because they didn't do their algebra
homework, weren't doing their chess homework either. It was almost precisely
for this particular group of students that the chess class was put together.
Group work, manipulatives, all the things that were really supposed to get
this group involved did not seem to have anywhere near the effect on personal
study habits as was hoped. Embraced precisely to bring students formerly
alienated from math into a deeper involvement with problem-solving, the chess
version of "math reform" had yet to evidence the kind of involvement that
instructors were looking for.

The semester ended the way many do. Some students hardly lifted a finger and
got an "A". Some students, overconfident from their midsemester "A"'s and
"B"'s, lost a letter grade. Some students who struggled with a "C" all
semester long and who logged many an hour on the computer finally crossed the
"B" threshold with a tremendous sense of accomplishment. Yet other "C"
students who worked just as long and hard could not quite cross that "B"
threshold, finishing the course quite frustrated and vowing never to play
again.

**4\. Back to the drawing board**

With grades assigned and the campus virtually deserted, the chess committee
got together to debrief the teachers and assess the semester. The course
evaluations that students had completed in the last week of classes were
opened and read aloud. A consensus quickly emerged that students were quite
happy with the conduct of daily classes, and in particular the group work.
They were disappointed however that group work didn't seem to factor
explicitly in their final grade. One student's comment brought considerable
laughter -- "There was too much chess". But when the laughter died down
everybody had a sense that they knew what the student meant. Almost 90% of
class time had been spent solving chess problems, an almost maddeningly
efficient use of class time. A small but enthusiastic minority claimed that
this was the best college course they had ever taken. An equally small but
adamant minority claimed that it had been the worst. Most of the criticism
seemed directed at the grading. Though none could take the grading to task for
being subjective, students as a whole did not feel that the final grade they
were given adequately captured what they "knew". Any restructuring of the
course then, would have to focus on grading.

It seemed that the committee would first have to agree about what precisely
they were trying to measure. "Chess ability" rolled easily off the tongue, but
was perhaps too vague. Unfortunately, further discussion didn't clear this up
much. The committee felt itself going in circles, replacing the vague "chess
ability" with equally vague-sounding things like "successful contingency
planning" and "successful problem resolution". The word "success" seemed to be
the only commonality to all this vagueness, and this suggested to the
committee that they were on the right track keeping to a grading system based
on numbers of wins.

Perhaps a balance could be struck by setting the hurdles lower and then adding
a lot more of them: a "D" could be earned by beating level two 20 out of 40
times playing white; a "C" could be earned by winning at the same level 20 out
of 40 times playing black; and so forth through level three (a full two levels
below what was needed to get an "A" last semester). This would also solve the
problem of those few "A" students who had the course pretty much rapped up
after midterm -- they would have to log at least 52 games more than last
semester to get their "A"'s. Students at lower levels would be rewarded to a
greater extent for their quantity of play, if less so for their quality.

But maybe the problem with the grading system went deeper. Despite their
quaint but honest attempt to establish what they were trying to measure,
perhaps emphasizing each student's individual ability to win was somehow
fundamentally wrong-headed. Perhaps the clear equation between students'
ability to win at a certain level and their actual problem-solving abilities
was just an illusion. To be sure, playing to win seemed to be an integral part
of chess. But didn't the current grading system engender a hurtful and
oppressive hierarchy among the students? A distasteful elitism? Committee
discussion naturally turned to "alternative assessment".

Perhaps portfolios could be required of students. Students could be asked to
submit a certain number of their "best" games. The computer program that the
department had been using in fact was capable of keeping a record of all games
using standard chess notation, so it would not be too hard to submit games to
an instructor for evaluation. If wins at any level were the only games that
qualified for submission, then there would be little for the instructor to do
but make sure that the correct number of predetermined wins was achieved. If
the "quality" of each win were to be judged, then perhaps the board position
of each of the student's prized games could be entered into the chess program,
say after the first 10 moves, and the number of moves it took the student to
win the game from that point could be compared to the number of moves the
computer would take to win the same game. Of course, the very notion of
"quality" threatened to bring back the aura of elitism that the committee was
trying to eliminate. Furthermore, given that this grading system was more
difficult for the instructor to manage than the original "elitist" grading
scheme, it was not clear that this alternative system was really worth the
extra trouble. If the department was serious about ending elitism, the notion
of quality wins in a portfolio would have to be abandoned.

The committee did come to a quick agreement that some kind of writing could be
an important component of the portfolio. Students capable of explaining
"Kasparov's 23rd move against Karpov in the third game at Sarajevo" were
certainly demonstrating some advanced knowledge of the game -- provided of
course their analysis was correct. The committee would have to seriously
consider portfolios which included term papers purporting to analyze some of
the most famous (and perhaps not so famous) chess matches of all time.
Unfortunately, if part of the purpose of changing the grading scheme was to
make students happier with the course, it was not at all clear that adding an
analytical term paper to their responsibilities was going to accomplish this.

Still other candidates for portfolio submissions were discussed. Back when the
chess committee was trying to sell the curriculum committee on the value of
having physical manipulatives, their enthusiastic rhetoric suggested that some
of the more artistic students would be inspired to sculpt their own chess
sets. Perhaps sculpture of this sort would constitute a valid entry in a chess
portfolio. In the same vein, perhaps history majors would want to contribute
papers detailing chess history, perhaps sociology majors would want to write
on the contributions of different ethnic groups to chess, etc.

But just when everybody was feeling wonderfully inclusive about what would
comprise a portfolio, someone on the committee, to everyone's horror, realized
that the point of this course originally was to satisfy a university _math_
requirement. The committee had been on the verge of accepting sculptures of
chess pieces as reasonable demonstrations of university-level competence in
mathematics! How far they had come! They had not even begun to discuss one of
their students' most common complaints -- that their group work never factored
explicitly in their grades. Reawakened to the original purpose of the course,
the committee now realized that allowing group work to count for a significant
portion of the final grade would confront them with yet another problem. The
math department would effectively be saying "because you are good at _group_
work in _chess_ , you have sufficiently demonstrated _individual_ competence
in _mathematics_." That was quite a stretch. A good Outward Bound experience
or membership on one of the school's sports teams might as well contribute to
satisfying the math requirement -- any of those experiences usually involved
group problem solving.

As long as the grading in the chess course focused on each individual's
ability to win games, there seemed to be a mathematical character to the whole
enterprise. Once the individual's ability to win games was removed from its
preeminence in the grading scheme, the validity of chess as a substitute for
math seemed questionable. Questions indeed appeared to be in no short supply.
Why did chess ever seem like a valid way to fulfill the math requirement in
the first place? Why precisely did the possibility of alternative assessment
seem to negate the value of what the committee was trying to accomplish? Were
members of the committee simply closed-minded? Did everyone on the committee
have some subconscious elitist agenda? And finally what, if anything, did all
this say about the validity of alternative assessment strategies in the
typical _math_ course?

Everyone was now feeling quite frustrated. When this experiment had been but a
twinkle in the committee's eye, the campus support for this particular reform
was wide. Unless the department diluted its current grading criteria though,
setting lower "hurdles", allowing group work to count significantly in the
grading, and perhaps adopting certain alternative assessment strategies,
support for this kind of reform would wane and the math department would once
again become the whipping boy of the campus. In sum, the math department
appeared to have accomplished what few could have thought possible: they had
taught far less traditional math than ever before, and yet managed to make the
same numbers of people every bit as resentful. Was all this "reform" worth the
effort? The committee adjourned, undecided as to whether Math 130 would be
offered the following year.

**Reference**

[1] [NCTM](http://www.nctm.org/), _Professional Standards for Teaching
Mathematics_ , Reston: [NCTM](http://www.nctm.org/), 1991

