# _III. THE SYLLABUS AS A LEARNING TOOL_

## STUDENTS' WAYS OF KNOWING

In addition to the demographic portrait of the MSU undergraduate population,
you need to be aware of how students are likely to differ in the ways in which
they learn. The most widely known work on the cognitive development of college
students is _Forms of Intellectual and Ethical Development in the college
Years_ by William Perry (1970). Although Perry's study appears somewhat dated
and was based on a small sample of students from Harvard and Radcliffe, it
remains the dominant theory on cognitive development. The scheme of
development he describes has proven helpful in understanding students in many
different settings. Perry concludes that students move through stages of
cognitive development, each of which is qualitatively different and more
complex than the previous stage. As students move through these stages, the
ways in which they perceive, organize, and evaluate experiences and events in
their lives change. In this study, Perry suggests that new or intellectually
insecure students are often committed to a sense that information is either
right or wrong, factual or subjective. Uncertainty leads to discomfort and is
often assumed to be the result of an error. In order to get students to move
out of either/or dilemmas, instructors can:

  1. Provide students with opportunities to choose positions and defend their choices.

  2. Ask them to narrow choices and weigh pros and cons of alternative arguments or choices. 

  3. Draw upon course material that stimulates thinking about personal philosophy and life choices. 

  4. Set learning tasks that call for students to analyze, synthesize, and evaluate from personal perspectives and then progressively from more abstract or experiential perspectives, and call for students to apply learning from one context to problems in a different context. 

  5. Pose activities that ask students to generate new questions or evaluate assumptions inherent in how points of view are constructed. 

David Finster, in an article in the Chronicle of Higher Education (July 13,
1988), states that as he listens to students talk about life and learning he
hears Perry's positions and stages reveal themselves. The essence of Finster's
essay is that to be a good teacher one needs not only to build students'
knowledge base but also to teach them to think critically as they learn. To do
this you need to be aware of their developmental stages and learning styles.

### Learning Styles

In the Executive Summary of their book Learning Styles: Implications for
Improving Educational Practices, Claxton and Murrell (1987) state that
information about style can help instructors become more sensitive to the
differences students bring to the classroom. As teachers it is important to
keep in mind that the concept of style is one variable that may help you look
at the complex issues involved in teaching and learning (Claxton and Murrell
1).

Erickson and Strommer in their book Teaching College Freshmen (1991) suggest
that one very easy technique to get an overview of your students' style is to
ask them to write a paragraph on "How I Learn Best" (62). Another relatively
uncomplex way to look at style is to focus on learning modalities. Several
researchers have focused on the extent to which sensory receptors influence
learning. As you will find, some students respond better to hands-on learning
as opposed to reading or listening to a lecture. In general, researchers have
distinguished the following types of learners:

  * **Auditory learners** prefer to learn by listening. Lecturing is the teaching approach that works best for them.

  * **Visual learners** prefer print material. They learn best by reading or responding to visual cues, such as the chalkboard or overhead projector.

  * **Tactile learners** like to manipulate objects. Laboratory or hands-on methods of learning are most appropriate for them.

  * **Kinesthetic** , or whole body learners, like to learn through experiental activities. They prefer simulations, exploratory ativities and problem-solving.

If you are interested in furthering your understanding of style and how to use
the construct in your teaching, the Claxton and Murrell book gives an
excellent overview.

## THE SYLLABUS

Learning is a highly intricate process. It is easily hindered, especially when
the teacher fails to make clear what it is that one is expected to learn and
how it will be determined that the learning goal has been achieved. The more
complicated the material to be learned, the more important it is to organize
it and present it in a way that both enhances the process of learning and
clarifies the teacher's expectations. The syllabus is the tool used to achieve
this.

You might want to consider the syllabus as a contract between you and your
students. It is the syllabus that will make it clear to your students which
textbooks and other reading materials they must acquire, what your teaching
objectives will be and how you will go about finding out whether they have
been met, what kind of testing you will use, what the grading scale will look
like, whether you will assign homework and at what intervals, whether class
participation and/or attendance will influence grades, and even what material
you intend to cover during each of the class meetings or weeks. In many
departments, new teaching assistants and young instructors are asked to use
the already existing syllabi (approved by the department) for the courses they
are assigned to teach. However, once you become more experienced in teaching,
you will be expected to prepare your own syllabi. This is why it is important
to learn what characteristics a good syllabus should have.

This section will point out some important aspects of a well-written syllabus
and present several good syllabi that, at one time or another, were used in
actual MSU courses. However, this alone might not prepare you adequately for
the job of creating your own sylabus. Prior to attempting the job, you should
read sections IV and V as well.

### The Importance of the Syllabus

Having a well-developed syllabus will require the instructor to organize his
or her teaching early. It will help students know what is expected from the
start of the course and will allow them to plan their semester efficiently.
The opportunity for capricious grading changes will be diminished, and a
positive image will be presented to the students (a well-prepared syllabus is
evidence that the instructor takes teaching seriously). A syllabus also
provides the departmental office, supervisor, and/or colleagues with pertinent
information about the course.

The Ombudsman's Office has noted that a large number of complaints it deals
with have at their root a lack of understanding of the requirements and
expectations for performance in a course. A syllabus can consolidate into a
single document all of the routine matters that surround teaching a course:
reading schedules, grading, due dates, class topics, etc.

Simply put, the syllabus is a formal statement of what the course is about,
what students will be asked to do, and how student performance will be
evaluated. Unlike the comments an instructor makes in class, it is a lasting
statement to which students can refer again and again throughout the course.
Careful construction of the syllabus reduces ambiguity and is the first step
toward producing an environment in which student can flourish.

The syllabus is an agreement that you should follow as much as possible. If
you make any changes to it during the semester, be certain that all your
students are aware of them. You do not want to have to deal with an irate
student at the end of the semester who would say to you something like, "Hey,
I didn't know that you changed the course grading system, and l'm going to the
departmental chair to get this straightened out!"

Hallmarks of an acceptable syllabus include the following:

  * Name of Instructor 

  * Where Instructor can be reached/office hours 

  * Course Number; Section Number; Days, times, and classroom the class meets in 

  * Required Text(s) and other class materials 

  * Course Objectives 

  * Grading Procedure, including Attendance Policy, Class Participation, and the like 

  * Course Outline, by weeks at least 

### Preparing an Effective Course Syllabus

You can begin by studying syllabi from other instructors or those that have
been used previously in the course being taught. You might also check with
your department for specific guidelines about a syllabus format. However, the
following should be included in every syllabus:

  1. **Relevant information about the course and instructor**. The information should include the current year and semester, the name and number of the course and the meeting time (with days of the week and meeting times), and location. It should also include the instructor's name, phone number, the location of the instructor's office, and the times of his or her office hours. These facts are normally placed at the beginning of the syllabus.

  2. **A list of the resources to be obtained by the students**. Most important here are the required text(s) and reading assignments. Their role in the class and where they are available for purchase or loan should be included. (It is important to check that the bookstore or library will have the materials on the shelves before students are sent to find them!) It might also explain what, if any, materials other than text(s) are required of students. Any supplemental materials (such as lecture tapes, sample projects, or past tests) that are available can appropriately be mentioned.

  3. **A clear statement of course objectives**. The course objectives should be as clear as possible and should describe what the students will be expected to know-and at what level of competency-at the end of the semester, rather than what the instructor plans to do. Note that the use of vague terminology (such as "students will develop a clear understanding") can result in arguments over degrees of understanding. It is generally better to use specific, measurable behaviors as objectives.

  4. **A description of the means (or activities) by which the course objectives will be met**. Possible items include field trips, guest lecturers, discussions with active participation, problem-solving groups, assignments, use of audiovisual materials, etc. The amount of student time required for each activity may be estimated.

  5. **A statement of grading criteria**. This will explain the grading criteria, the components of the final grade, the weighing of various components, the impact of class participation and attendance to the final grade, and other relevant information. The number of tests each semester should be included, along with a brief description of what each test will cover. The numerical equivalent of letter grades or the "range" for each grade can be provided. 

  6. **A statement of course policies**. This is best expressed in a clear, nonthreatening form. Policies should be set for such events as missing an exam, turning in a late assignment, missing class, requesting an extension for an assignment, and reporting illness. It is a good idea to go on record with a fairly stringent policy that can be informally softened at a later date, if and where circumstances so warrant. The Ombudsman's Office recommends avoiding absolutes on the grounds that they are always more trouble than they are worth.

A schedule**. If each class hour is mapped out in detail, this will become the
longest and most time-consuming segment of the syllabus to prepare, although
it will be a good investment in a well-organized class. The syllabus should,
at a minimum, contain dates and corresponding lecture or lab topics, the
preparations that are required or suggested, and due dates for projects,
papers, and major assignments.

## Examples of Well-Written Syllabi

Below, you will find four syllabi that, at one time or another, were used by
MSU faculty. Notice that, although they do not follow the same format, each
provides all relevant information concerning the course in question. Upon
reading a specific syllabus, try to think of a question concerning the course
that the syllabus does not address; if you can come up with such a question,
find a place in the syllabus where it could be easily incorporated. Also,
analyze whether, as the semester would progress, the existing syllabus would
answer all questions you might come up with. While doing this, keep in mind
that it is only by planning your teaching well in advance that you will be
able to anticipate everything your students will need and to put it all
together in a syllabus.

* * *
    
    
    ISS 310, Section #2				Professor Whitsell
    Spring Semester, 1995			Office:  310 Natural Science (353-7197)
    Mon., Tues., Wed, & Fri., 11:30-12:20	Office Hours:  2-3 Mon., Tues. & Wed.
    Room 116 Natural Science Bldg.			or by appointment
    
    PEOPLE AND THE ENVIRONMENT
    SYLLABUS
    
    I.  Course Objectives and Content
    
    As described in the catalogue of courses, ISS 310 deals with "contemporary issues related 
    to the interation of socio-cultural and ecological systems.  Global, regional, national and 
    local environmental problems and responses."  Different ISS sections of the same course 
    are taught from the various perspectives of the instructors.  This section is premised on 
    the assumption that, if students are to understand the interaction of socio-cultural and 
    ecological systems, they must be familiar with some of the basic principles of both the 
    social sciences (to understand the "socio-cultural" side of the equation) and the natural 
    sciences (to understand the "ecological" side).  This course is designed to do that, 
    drawing from biology, geography, sociology, philosophy, political science, economics 
    and related disciplines, to provide a holistic perspective on people and the environment.  
    
    Upon completion of the course, students are expected to be sufficiently familiar with 
    important contemporary environmental problems to be able to understand how the 
    environment is being affected, why these environmental impacts are deemed problematic, 
    and what can be done to solve these problems.  Solutions will be approached from the 
    perspective that conservation is politics and that, even through inaction, we all inevitably 
    end up taking sides on questions about how much the environment is degraded and how 
    that degradation is distributed between different social groups, generations and 
    geographical regions.  It is hoped that this course will serve as a guide for students to 
    make responsible choices on such matters.  
    
    II.  Readings
    
    There are two required text books:
    1.  	Understanding Our Environment:  an introduction, by William P. 
    Cunningham (Wm. C. Brown, 1994).
    2.	People, Penguins and Plastic Trees:  basic issues in environmental 
    ethics>/cite>, edited by Christine Pierce and Donald VanDeVeer (Wadsworth, 1995, 
    second edition).
    
    There is a student study guide that accopmanies Understanding Our Environment, which 
    is available in the bookstores as an optional purchase.
    
    A few additional readings may occasionally be assigned from handouts or items placed 
    on reserve in the main library, at the assigned readings desk.  (Reserved library books and 
    articles may be checked out for two hours, if during the day, or overnight, if checked out 
    after 9:00 PM.)
    
    III.  Discussion Sections
    
    One of the distinctive features of this section of ISS 310 is its emphasis on active learning 
    in weekly discussion sections.  Instead of being limited to four lectures per week in a 
    large lecture hall with 150 students, the professor (with the financial support of the 
    College of Social Science and the Geography Department) has modified the printed 
    schedule as follows:  There will be only three lectures (Monday, Tuesday and 
    Wednesday) plus one discussion section, to be held in place of the Friday lecture (i.e. 
    from 11:30 to 12:20).  All students will participate in one of four discussion sections, 
    which will be conducted simultaneously each Friday by four teaching assistants, in four 
    different rooms (116, 140 & 304 Natural Science Building plus 100 Berkey Hall).  
    Activities within the discussion sections will inclue clarification of materials in assigned 
    readings and lectures, reviews in preparation for the midterm and final examinations, 
    small group porjects and presentations, debates and quezzes.  During the first week of 
    class, students will be divided into discussion sections in which they will remain for the 
    duration of the semester.  The teaching assistants responsible for discussion sections, the 
    locations of their offices, and their office phone numbers are as follows (office hours to 
    be announced):
    
    Steve Cameron					Linda Erickson
    124 Natural Science					144 Natural Science
    355-7718						353-9940
    
    Beth Myers						Jennifer Maxwell Stefanacci
    144 Natural Science					144 Natural Science
    353-9940						353-9940
    
    Participation in discussions is a very important dimension of this course. It is well known 
    that learning is significantly enhanced when the student takes an active part in her or his 
    own education.  (This is not to mention the sad fact that large lecture courses are 
    notoriously impersonal and often quite tiresome.)  When a professor stands on a platform 
    in front of hundreds of students, the implicit assumption is that she or he is the giver of 
    all knowledge while the students are the passive recipients.  The professor and TAs for 
    this course don't buy that.  We start from the assumption that every one of you has strong 
    feelings about some current environmental problems and that each one of you has 
    important knowledge and perspectives on these problems.  One of the prinicpal purposes 
    of the discussion sections is to allow us to share that knowledge with each other to a far 
    greater extent than would be possible in a large lecture format.  Other important 
    objectives are to challenge students to think critically, to develop the cooperative 
    problem-solving skills needed in the "real world" beyond undergraduate school, and to 
    maximize interest in and enthusiasm for solving the critical enviornmental problems we 
    all must face.  
    
    
    IV.  Requirements and Grades
    
    The total course score will be based on a curve and weighed as follows:  discussion 
    section grade 40%, midterm exam 20%, final exam 40%.
    
    The discussion section grade will be based upon attendance and participation, 
    performance in quizzes and grades in assigned projects.  (Your TA will provide detailed 
    information on the activities and requirements for your discussion section.)  The midterm 
    exam will be given during the lecture period on Wednesday, March 1.  The final exam is 
    scheduled for Wednesday, May 3, from 12:45 to 2:45 PM.  It will be cumulative, drawing 
    from the required readings and from all information presented and discussed in class.  
    The midterm and final exams will consist of true-false, multiple choice, short answer and 
    essay questions.  More details on the content and design of the exams will be provided in 
    time to assist with student preparations.  
    
    IV.  Lecture and Reading Schedule
    
    Lecture topics and required readings will be covered in the following order (as noted 
    above, a few additional readings may occasionally be assigned):
    
    SCHEDULE OF TOPICS					 Pages in	Pages in 
    							Pierce & Cunningham	VandeVeer
    I.	Introduction:  examining our own preconceptions 	 1 - 20		1 - 23
    	and expectations	
    	oEnvironmental science and environmental ethics:  how 
    		we understand our place in nature
    	oWhat do we perceive to be the most serious environmental
    		problems of our time?
    	oWhat can we already identify as the causes and solutions
    		for these problems?
    	oWhat do we hope to get out of this course?
    
    II.  The nature of nature:  how natural systems function  	21 - 63		280 - 
    288
    	oWhat are ecosystems and how to they work?
    	oIs there a balance of nature?  If so, how does it work?
    
    III.  Ecology and economy					90 - 100	367-380
    	Are natural and economic systems conpatible?	412-441
    	Can technology overcome environmental limits?
    	How are environmental goods and environmental
    		degradation distributed between social groups and 
    		generations?
    
    IV.  Environmental degradation:  causes, consequences 	 
    		and solutions
    	Human population growth:				64 - 89
    		o  Is it the number one problem?
    		o  What can and is being done to limit 
    			population growth?			330 - 338
    		o  Is starvation primarily the result of over
    			 population?				134 - 159
    	Soils:  How and why are we "losing ground?"
    	"Pests":  How are we and how should we do battle with our
    		natural competitors?
    	oResource management				160 - 204
    								24-39, 139-142
    	oPreservation of natural systems & biological 
    		diversity					339-358
    	oAir & Water systems and what we are doing to 
    		them						205 - 247
    	oEnergy						248-274
    	oFossil fuels
    	oNuclear  power
    	oRenewable energy					112-132,
    	oSolid, toxic and hazardous waste			276-297	39-44
    	oSustainable living in our cities and towns		298 - 318
    									
    V.  Action for the environment:  political and personal 
    		options							319 - 344
    								106-125
    	The philosophical underpinnings for action:  shallow, 
    	deep,							142 - 233
    		social and feminist ecology			358 - 366
    	o	Green lifestyles				442 - 469
    	o	Green politics
    
    
    
    * * *
    
    
    Math 110									Spring 1993
    COURSE OUTLINE
    
    
    * * *
    
    
    **Text**		 Applied Finite Mathematics, by Chester Piascik
    **Lecturer**	Lanette Poteete; office:  A-531 Wells Hall; phone 353-0844
    **Lectures**	Mo., We., Fr. 9:10-10:00 a.m., B-108 Wells Hall.
    **Office Hours**	Mo., We., Fr. 10:30-11:30 a.m. and by appointment.
    	Office hours are intended to help you clarify any procedural and other questions 
    you may have; they are NOT to be used to go over the material covered while you were 
    absent or to provide extensive help with homework problems.  As office hours are often 
    crowded, make sure to prepare your questions in advance.
    
    **Recitations**	Tu. and Th., according to the Schedule of Classes.
    	At recitations, your TA will be solving problems not assigned for homework but 
    similar to those assigned; if you have questions concerning the homework problems, you 
    must see one of the TAs during his/her help hours.
    
    **Help Hours**	Each TA will have help hours.  These hours will be announced 
    during the first recitation as well as during lectures; you may use help hours of ANY TA.  
    Help hours cannot be used as a substitute for lectures of recitations.  When asking 
    questions, be prepared to demonstrate your own attempts to answer them.
    
    **Attendance**	You are expected to attend ALL lectures and ALL recitations.  As 
    this is a five credit-hour course; in order to succeed, you are expected to spend at least ten 
    hours per week studying (not counting lectures and recitations).
    
    **Calculator**	You need a graphing calculator.  On lectures we shall cover the 
    basics of Sharp EL 9200; if you get a different calculator, you will be responsible for 
    learning how to use it.  YOU ARE FULLY RESPONSIBLE FOR HAVING A 
    CALCULATOR FOR ALL EXAMS AND ALL QUIZZES, AND FOR KNOWING 
    HOW TO USE IT.  If you forget to bring your calculator to an exam or if your calculator 
    does not function properly, you will have to work without it.
    
    **Homework**	On the sheet attached, you will find a day-by-day schedule of the 
    course as well as a list of problems from the text that you are expected to solve on your 
    own (solutions to most of them are at the end of the text).  Solutions of those problems 
    are not expected to be turned in.  It is considered that you cannot complete the course 
    successfully unless you fully understand and can solve AT LEAST the assigned 
    homework problems.  
    
    **Exams**	You will have nine ten-minute quizzes, four fifty-minute exams 
    and the final three-hour exam (for dates see the day-by-day schedule).  There will be no 
    make-ups for either quizzes or fifty-minute exams; only extreme situations will allow a 
    student to be excused from a quiz or a fifty-minute exam.  Having three finals on the day 
    of the final exam will excuse you from that exam; if such is the case, arrangements for the 
    (common) make-up final exam must be made in A-212 Wells Hall.  
    
    **Grading**	Every quiz counts 10 points, every fifty-minute exam counts 50 
    points; the final exam counts 300 points.  Grading scale for each of the quizzes and fifty-
    minute exams is:
    
    90% to 100% - 4.0			73% to 78% - 2.5		55% to 59% - 1.0
    85% to 89% - 3.5			65% to 72% - 2.0		0% to 54% - 0.0
    79% to 84% - 3.0			60% to 64% - 1.5
    
    	Grading scale for the final exam will be made AFTER the results of that exam are 
    turned in.
    
    **General Info**	
    	1.  Section R in the textbook is an algebra review.  You MUST be fully familiar 
    with the first 30 pages of this review; if you are not, you should consider dropping this 
    course and taking a more appropriate course instead.
    
    	2.  Before  being returned to you, a random selection of graded exams will be 
    copied.
    
    	3.  If you are caught cheating, the minimal penalty will be a zero for the course.
    
    Important Dates	1.  Quizzes:	Jan. 21;	Jan. 28;	Feb. 11;
    					Feb. 18;	Mar. 11;	Mar. 18;
    					Apr. 1;		Apr. 8;		Apr. 22
    
    			2.  Fifty-minute exams:	Feb. 4;		Feb. 25
    							Mar. 25;	Apr. 15
    
    			3.  Final Exam:	May 4, 7:45-10:45 a.m. (locations will be 
    announced.
    
    	NOTE.  To ALL quizzes and ALL exams you must bring your student ID and one 
    pictured ID (or only your student ID, if it is pictured); otherwise, your exam will be 
    invalid.
    
    
    MATH 110									Spring 1993
    DAY-BY-DAY SCHEDULE
    
    	The following is a tentative day-by-day schedule of the course.  Although no 
    sections will be added to the course, if it turns to be necessary a section or two might be 
    omitted; if that happens, an announcement will be made.  
    
    
    Jan. 13	1.1							Mar. 10	5.7
    Jan.15	1.2							Mar. 12	6.1
    Jan 18	1.3							Mar. 15	6.2
    Jan. 20	1.4							Mar. 17	6.3
    Jan. 22	2.1							Mar. 19	7.1
    Jan. 25	2.2							Mar. 22	7.2
    Jan. 27	2.3							Mar. 24	7.3
    Jan. 28	2.4							Mar. 26	8.1
    Feb. 1	3.1							Mar. 29	8.2
    Feb. 3	3.2							Mar. 31	8.2
    Feb. 5	3.2							Apr. 2		8.3
    Feb. 8	3.3							Apr. 5		8.3, 8.4
    Feb. 10:	4.2						Apr. 7		8.4
    Feb. 12	4.2						Apr. 9		8.5
    Feb. 15	4.2						Apr. 12	9.1
    Feb. 17	5.1						Apr. 14	9.2
    Feb. 19	5.2						Apr. 16	9.3
    Feb. 22	5.3						Apr. 19	9.4
    Feb. 24	5.4						Apr. 21	9.5
    Feb. 26	5.5						Apr. 23	9.6
    Mar. 8	5.6							Apr. 26	Review
    								Apr. 28	Review
    
    	If you miss a lecture, you are responsible for getting notes from one of the other 
    students.  Under no circumstances can you expect a lecture to be repeated for you.
    
    	Each quiz will cover the material from the proevious two or three lectures.
    
    	Unless it is announced differently at the lectures, the one-hour exams will cover 
    the following:
    
    Exam 1:	Ch. 1; Ch. 2
    Exam 2:	Ch. 3; Ch. 4
    Exam 3:	Ch. 5; Ch. 6
    Exam 4:	Ch. 7; Ch. 8
    
    	Final exam will cover the entire course (including chap. 9).
    
    	Keep in mind that March 9 is the last day to drop the course with no grade.
    MATH 110								SPRING 1993
    
    HOMEWORK ASSIGNMENTS
    
    	The following list includes a MINIMAL set of problems you must solve on your 
    own and fully understand in order to get a reasonably good grade.  To get the top grade, 
    you might have to solve some or all of the problems that are on this list.  
    
    
    1.1		1,3,5,6,7,9,11-17 all,19,21,23,27,29,30,31
    1.2		1-9 odd, 13-23 odd, 29-47 odd, 58-61 all, 63,65,67
    1.3		1-21 odd
    1.4		1-17 odd, 21,25,29-45 odd, 46,47
    2.1		1-39 odd, 40-43 all
    2.2		1-51 odd
    2.3		1-17 odd, 23-31 odd
    2.4		1,3,5,7,811-21 odd
    3.1		1-71 odd
    3.2		1-9 all, 11-99 odd, 101-109 odd
    3.3		1-9 odd
    4.1		1-49 odd
    4.2		1-43 odd, 47,49,53-75 odd
    5.1		1-21 odd,25,31,33,34
    5.2		1-23 odd, 27-35 odd, 39,43,45
    5.3		1-21 odd
    5.4		1-77 odd
    5.5		1,3,7-47 odd, 55-67 odd
    5.6		1-23 odd, 24,25,26
    5.7		1-29 odd
    6.1		1-25 odd,26-32 all
    6.2		1-17 odd,25,26,27,29,33
    6.3		1-19 odd
    7.1		1-9 odd
    7.2		1,2,3-31 odd
    7.3		1-19 odd
    8.1		1-83 odd
    8.2		1-23 odd, 27,29,31,43,49,53,57,59,61,62,63,65,67,69,77,80,81,83
    8.3		1,2,5-11 all, 13-19 all, 31,33,37,39,43,45,49,51,52,55,56,59,61,63,67,71-
    			81 odd
    8.4		105 all, 9,14,17-36 odd, 37,41,43-50 all
    8.5		1-11 odd, 12-24 all
    9.1		1-15 odd
    9.2		1-25 odd, 29,31
    9.3		1-19 odd,12
    9.4		1-23 all, 35,37,39
    9.5		1-45 odd
    9.6		1-21 odd
    
    
    
    
    PHL 200
    (Sections 1, 2)
    INTRODUCTION TO PHILOSOPHY
    
    Spring 1994
    
    Instructor							Teaching Assistant
    Martin Benjamin						Vanessa Tanaka
    514 South Kedzie Hall					540 South Kedzie Hall
    353-4617 (messages:  355-4490)				353-8860
    Office Hours:  T Th  2:30-4:00				Office Hours:  W 3:00-
    	and by appointment						4:00, Th. 12:30-1:30, 
    									and by appointment
    
    TEXTS:
    		Required
    		Joel Feinberg, ed.,  Reason and Responsibility (RR)
    
    		Recommended
    		Thomas Nagel, What Does It All Mean (WM)
    		Zachary Seech, Writing Philosophy Papers
    
    TENTATIVE SCHEDULE:
    Jan. 12		Introduction
    Jan. 14		Philosophical Argument ( (I)  
    			Handout
    ----------
    Jan. 17		Philosophical Argument II and th eDilemma of Determinism
    			Handout
    			Feinberg, RR, pp. 354-56
    			Nagel, WM, pp. 3-7, 47-58
    Jan. 19		Determinism (I)
    			Feinberg, RR, pp. 357-58
    			Paul Holbach, "The Illusions of Free Will," RR, pp. 363-67
    Jan. 21		Determinism (II)1 
    			Arthur Schopenhauer, "Every Existence Presupposes an Essence," 
    				RR, pp. 368-70
    ----------
    Jan. 24		Compatibilism (I)
    			A. J. Ayer, "Freedom and Necessity," RR, 370-75
    Jan. 26		Compatibilism (II)
    			Walter T. Stace, "The Problem of Free Will," RR, pp. 375-80
    Jan. 28		(Metaphysical) Libertarianism (I)
    			Richard Taylor, "Freedom and Determinism," RR, pp. 380-86
    ----------
    Jan. 31		(Metaphysical) Libertarianism (II)
    			C. A. Campbell, "Has the Self 'Free Will'?" RR, pp. 386-96
    Feb. 2		Praise, Blame, and Determinism (I)
    			Elizabeth L. Beardsley, "Determinism and Moral Perspectives,"
    				 RR, pp. 397-405
    Feb. 4		Praise, Blame, and Determinism (II)
    			Elizabeth L. Beardsley, "Determinism and Moral Perspectives,"
    			 RR, pp. 407-407
    ----------
    Feb. 7		The Mind-body Problem:  Origins
    			Feinberg, RR, pp. 262, 118-19
    			Rene Descartes, Meditations on First Philosophy, RR, pp. 125-133, 
    				151-55
    			Nagel, WM, pp. 8-26
    Feb. 9		The Mind-Body Problem: an Overview
    			Nagel, WM, pp. 27-37
    			Feinberg, RR, pp. 263-64
    Feb. 11	Dualism and Materialism
    			Jerome Shaffer, "The Subject of Consciousness," RR, pp. 268-77, 
    				280-81
    ----------
    Feb. 14	Philosophical Behaviorism
    			Paul M. Churchland, "Behaviorism, Materialism, and 
    				Functionalism," RR, pp. 290-91
    Feb. 16	Reductive Materialism (The Identity Theory)
    			Paul M. Churchland, "Behaviorism, . . . ," RR, pp. 291-96
    Feb. 18	Eliminative Materialism
    			Paul M. Churchland, "Behaviorism, . . . ," RR, pp. 296-300
    ----------
    Feb. 21	Functionalism
    			Paul M. Churchland, "Behaviorism, . . . ," RR, pp. 300-304
    Feb. 23	Is the Mind a computer Program? (I)2 
    			John R. Searle, "Minds, Brains, and Programs," RR, pp. 304-307
    Feb. 25	Is the Mind a Computer Program? (II)
    			John R. Searle, "Minds, Brains, and Programs," RR, pp. 307-315
    ----------
    Feb. 28	Reason and Religious Belief:  an Introduction
    			Feinberg, RR, pp. 2-4
    Mar. 2		The Ontological Argument
    			Saint Anselm, "The Ontological Argument," RR, pp. 6-7
    			William L. Rowe, "The Ontological Argument," RR, pp. 8-17
    Mar. 4		The Cosmological Argument
    			Saint Thomas Aquinas, "The Five Ways," RR, pp. 17-18
    			Samuel Clarke, "A Modern Formulation of the Cosmological 
    				Argument," RR, p. 19
    			William L. Rowe, "The Cosmological Argument," RR, pp. 20-27
    ----------
    Mar. 7-11	SPRING BREAK--NO CLASSES
    ----------
    Mar. 14	The Argument from Design
    			William Paley, "the Argument from Design," RR, pp. 28-32
    			David Hume, Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, RR, pp. 38-
    				40, 48-50
    			Stephen Jay Gould, "The Panda's Thumb" and "Senseless Signs of 
    				History," RR, pp. 33-38
    Mar. 16	The Problem of Evil (I)
    			David Hume, Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, RR, pp. 59-
    				69
    			Fyodor Dostoevsky, "Rebellion," RR, pp. 70-75
    Mar. 18	The Problem of Evil (II)
    			J. . Mackie, "Evil and Omnipotence," URRU, pp. 75-82
    ----------
    Mar. 21	The Problem of Evil (III)
    			Richard Swinburne, "The Problem of Evil," RR, pp. 83-92
    Mar. 23	Reason and Faith (I)
    			W. K. Clifford, "The Ethics of Belief," RR, pp. 93-96
    			Blaise Pascal, "the Wager," RR, pp. 97-100
    Mar. 25	Reason and Faith (II)
    			William James, "The Will to Believe," RR, pp. 109-116
    ----------
    Mar. 28	Ethics:  The Challenge of Relativism
    			Feinberg, RR, pp. 440-442
    			Richard B. Brandt, "Relativism and Ultimate Disagreements about 
    				Ethical Principles," RR, pp. 449-51
    			James Rachels, "The Challenge of Cultural Relativism," RR, pp. 
    				452-58
    			Bernard Williams, "Relativism," RR, pp. 459-61
    Mar. 30	Moral Motivation and Human Nature (I)
    			Feinberg, RR, pp. 442-43
    			Joel Feinberg, "Psychological Egoism," RR, pp. 461-72
    Apr. 1		Moral Motivation and Human Nature (II)
    			Howard Kahane, "Making the World Safe for Reciprocity," RR, 
    				pp. 479-87
    ----------
    Apr. 4		Proposed Standards of Right Conduct:  Utilitarianism (I)
    			Feinberg, RR, pp. 443-445
    			John Stuart Mill, Utilitarianism, RR, pp. 487-92
    			Nagel, WM, pp. 59-75
    Apr. 6		Proposed Standards of Right Conduct:  Utilitarianism (II)
    			John Stuart Mill, Utilitarianism, RR, pp. 492-99
    Apr. 8		Proposed Standards of Right Conduct:  Utilitarianism (III)
    			Peter Singer, "Famine, Affluence, and Morality," RR, pp. 499-506
    ----------
    Apr. 11	Proposed Standards of Right Conduct:  Ethical Egoism
    			Ayn Rand, "The Ethics of Emergencies," RR, pp. 506-510
    			James Rachels, "Ethical Egoism," RR, pp. 510-17
    Apr. 13	Proposed Standards of Right Conduct:  Kantianism (I)
    			Immanuel Kant, "The Categorical Imperative," RR, pp. 524-28
    Apr. 15	Proposed Standards of Right Conduct:  Kantianism (II)
    			Immanuel Kant, "The Categorical Imperative," RR, pp. 528-31
    ----------
    Apr. 18	Social and Political Philosophy:  Just and Unjust Laws
    			Martin Luther King, "Letter from Birmingham City Jail," RR, pp. 
    				536-44
    Apr. 20	Social and Political Philosophy:  Justice as Fairness (I)
    			John Rawls, A Theory of Justice, RR, pp. 531-33
    			Nagel, WM, pp. 76-86
    Apr. 22	Social and Political Philosophy:  Justice as Fairness (II)
    			John Rawls, A Theory of Justice, RR, pp. 534-536
    ----------
    Apr. 25	Social and Political Philosophy:  Justice, Gender, and the Family
    			Susan Moller Okin, Justice, Gender, and the Family, RR, pp. 545-
    				557
    Apr. 27	Making Connections:  The Fields and Interrelatedness of Philosophy
    Apr. 29	Making Connections:  The Nature and Value of Philosophy
    ----------
    
    WRITTEN REQUREMENTS
    
    1	 Short Papers
    	Short (3-5 page) papers will be assigned for Feb. 7, March 4, March 28, and April 
    22.  Students must write the first paper and any two of the remaining three-for a total of 
    three short papers.  Specific topics will be distributed in class one week in advance of 
    each due date.
    
    	Papers are due at the beginning of class.  Late papers will be accepted without 
    penalty only in very unusual circumstances and only if cleared with the instructor in 
    advance.  Late papers not authorize din advance will have their overall grade lowered by 
    0.5 for each 12-hour period for which the paper is late.  The clock starts ticking at the 
    beginning of class on the date the paper is due.
    
    2.	Final Examination
    	The final examination is scheduled for Wednesday, May 4, 7:45-9:45 a.m.  
    Students will be asked to answer three essay questions to be chosen on the day of the 
    exam from a set of 10-12 essay questions distributed in class on April 20.
    
    3.	Reflections on Readings and Class Meetings
    	Five (5) very short (no more than one double-spaced page) papers will be due in 
    class on alternate weeks beginning Jan. 24.  A specific schedule will be distributed in 
    class on Jan 19.  In these papers students will respond to two questions:
    
    	(1)	What, to your mind, is the most interesting or important unanswered 
    question raised in or by the previous class meeting--and why?
    
    	(2)	What, to your mind, is the most interesting or important point raised in or 
    by the assigned reading for today's class--and why?
    
    	These papers are due at the beginning of class.  They will be read, evaluated, and 
    returned at the following class meeting.  Late papers will be accepted only in very 
    unusual circumstances and only if cleared with the instructor in advance.
    
    4.	Quiz
    	There will be a brief quiz on the nature and assessment of elementary 
    philosophical arguments in class on January 21.
    
    **Grading**
    Each of the three short (3-5 page) papers will count 20 percent of the final grade, for a 
    total of 60 percent.  The final examination will count 30 percent.  Each of the five (1 
    page) Reflections papers will count 2 percent, for a total of 10 percent.  The usual 
    adjustments will be made in borderline cases for steady and unmistakable improvement 
    in written work and informed, thoughtful, and fairly regular participation in class 
    discussion.  The student's grade on the brief quiz on philosophical arguments will also be 
    sued to resolve borderline cases.
    
    Criteria employed in evaluating written work include the following:
    
    1.	How well does the author understand and appreciate the complexity of the 
    problem(s) and issue(s) he or she is addressing?  To what extent has the author made 
    judicious use of the clearly relevant concepts, categories, distinctions, positions, 
    arguments, etc. that have been included in course readings and that have been brought out 
    in class and come up in discussion?
    
    2.	Is the paper or essay clearly written?  Are its claims precise?  Does it have an 
    explicit overall direction?  Would it be intelligible to another student at this level who is 
    interested in teh topic, but not enrolled in the course?
    
    3.	To what extent has the author identified the assumptions or presuppositions 
    underlying his or her position?  And to what extent is he or she aware of the possible 
    difficulties with them?
    
    4	Are the author's claims and positions accompanied by cogent arguments?  Are 
    claims and agruments provided in different parts of the paper or essay  consistent with 
    each other?
    
    5	Has the author been fairly thorough?  Can the reader think of some fairly obvious 
    objection to the author's position, raised in class or in the readings, that he or she has not 
    anticipated and addressed?
    
    
    
    
    LBS 492
    Senior Seminar
    Fall, 1993
    ("The Revised Story")
    
    Gender, Race, and Science
    
    
    General Information
    **Instructor:**	Gail Richmond
     		Office: 330 Erickson Hall			Lab:  114/115 N. Kedzie
    		355-1725					353-2958
    
    **Meeting Place** : 322 North Kedzie Labs
    
    **Meeting Times:** TuTh 3:00-4:30 pm (1 additional hr to be arranged)
    
    **Required Texts:**
    
    Gornick, Vivian.  Women in Science. 100 Journeys into the Territory. Simon 
    and Schuster, 1990. (Note: This is the revised edition)
    
    Harding, Sandra. Whose Science? Whose Knowledge? Thinking from Women's 
    Lives. Cornell University Press, 1991.
    
    Keller, Evelyn Fox. Secrets of Life, Secrets of Death.  Routledge Press, 
    1992.
    
    Schiebinger, Londa. The Mind Has No Sex? Harvard University Press, 
    1989.
    
    The following articles/chapters also will be assigned:
    
    Benderly, B.  Different Brains? From Benderly, B.  The Myth of Two Minds:  
    What Gender Means and Doesn't Mean.
    
    Benderly, B. Different Intellects? Ibid.
    
    Easlea, B. The masculine image of science with special reference to physics: How much 
    does gender really matter?
    
    Fausto-Sterling, A. Gender, Race, and Nation: the Comparative Anatomy of "Hottentot" 
    Women in Europe, I. 1815-1817. Chapter to be published in Terry, J. and Urla, J. (Eds.) 
    Deviant Bodies, 1994.
    
    Keller, E.F. The anomaly of the woman in physics.
    
    Keller, E. F. Chapters 1-3 from Reflections on Gender and Science.
    
    Martin, J. R. Science in a different style.
    
    Namenwirth, M. Science seen through a feminist prism. From Bleier, R. (Ed.) 
    Feminist Approaches to Science.
    
    Sands, A.  Never meant to survive: A Black woman's journey.
    
    Weisstein, N. Adventures of a woman scientist. From Hubbard, R., Henifin, M., Fried, B. 
    (Eds.) Women Look at Biology Looking at Women.
    
    
    Below I have provided a small selected bibliography of books which might be of interest.  
    This is by no means an exhaustive list; rather, the texts represent what in my mind are 
    some of the more recent and significant efforts in assessing issues of feminism, gender, 
    race, and science.  Some are more accessible than others; most are quite useful resources 
    for exploring in more depth some of the topics we will be discussing this semester. I have 
    a much more exhaustive list of references on a variety of related topics which I will make 
    available as you begin the process of selecting a topic for your research paper.
    
    Bateson, M.C.  Composing A Life. Plume Press, 1989.
    
    Clatterbaugh, K.  Contemporary Perspectives on Masculinity. Westview 
    Press,
    1990.
    
    Haraway, D.  Primate Visions. Routledge Press, 1989.
    
    Harding, S.  The Science Question in Feminism. Cornell University Press, 
    1986.
    
    Harth, E. Cartesian Women:   Versions and subversions of rational discourse in the 
    Old Regime.  Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1992.
    
    Hirsch, M. and Keller, E.F. (Eds.) Conflicts in Feminism. Routledge Press, 
    1990.
    
    James, J. and Farmer, R. (Eds.) Spirit, Space, and Survival. African American 
    Women in (White) Academe. Routledge Press, 1993.
    
    Keller, E.F.  Reflections on Gender and Science. Yale University Press 
    1983.
    
    Kirkup, G. and Keller, L.S. (Eds.)  Inventing Women. Science, Technology, and 
    Gender. Polity Press (The Open University), 1992.
    
    McGrayne, S.B.  Nobel Prize Women in Science. Birch Lane Press, 1993.
    
    Rosser, S.V.  Female-Friendly Science. Pergamon Press, 1990.
    
    Rosser, S.V. Teaching Science and Health from a Feminist Perspective.  
    Pergamon Press, 1986.
    
    Rossiter, M.W.  Women Scientists in America: Struggles and Strategies to 
    1940.  Johns Hopkins University Press, 1982.
    
    Overview of Course
    	Any course which professes to be focused on issues as  substantial and varied as 
    gender, race, and science, must of necessity be select in its coverage of topics.  In light of 
    the fact that you all come to this course with varying degrees of familiarity with the 
    material we will be covering and diverse interests in the topic, I have structured the 
    course in such a way as to provide you with a selected look--historical, philosophical, 
    political--at the gender issues associated with pursuit of different scientific disciplines.  
    We will also look at particular issues women of color face when they choose to pursue 
    such careers.
    
    There are three additional objectives which I hope to achieve in this course, using gender, 
    race and science themes as vehicles.  One is to assist you in becoming more critical 
    readers and thinkers, to be able to digest and analyze written themes and to make 
    judgements about the role(s) these pieces play in the development of a particular school 
    of thought.  Another objective is to help you become better writers.   Certainly, becoming 
    a good writer depends to a large extent on your ability to read and analyze others' 
    writings, but it is the result of cumulative experiences, and thus requires guided written 
    practice in developing an idea which is simultaneously clear and compelling (and, of 
    course, obeys the standard rules of grammatical convention!).  While all of you have had 
    writing experiences in your previous STS courses, you may feel more or less at ease with 
    the task of communicating via the written word.
    
    Lastly, you will be provided with formal as well as less structured opportunities to share 
    your thoughts and ideas verbally with your colleagues in the class.  I hope that these 
    occasions will help you hone your communication skills; these will be valuable no matter 
    what career you ultimately choose.
    
    **Assignments and Grading**
    
    Your grade in this course will be based on the following assignments:  
    
    1. two short (i.e., 3-5 page) papers on assigned topics (10% each)
    	a) The first paper will consist of a critical analysis of an article by Brian Easlea 
    you will be given.  The specific issues to be addressed will be discussed at least one week 
    before the due date.
    
    	b) The second paper will be the result of your interviewing at least two female 
    scientists (on- or off-campus) concerning their perceptions about gender and career 
    issues.  As a class we will generate a list of questions which can form the basis for your 
    interviews.  You should try to compare/contrast each of these individual's responses, if 
    possible, and to make connections to the issues we have been discussing in class.
    
    2.  major research paper (30%). This paper, which is to be approximately 20 pages in 
    length, is due the last day of class.  Its focus should be on gender and science or gender, 
    race and science issues, but you are free to choose the specific thesis you wish to 
    investigate.  Some of your readings and our discussions may help you in this regard.  You 
    should plan on meeting with me to discuss your topic once you have made your choice or 
    earlier if you are having difficulty selecting a topic.  As you can see in the course 
    schedule, you should have your topic chosen by the fifth week of class.
    
    3. journal (20%).  One of the regular features of the course will consist of brief, written 
    assessments and reflections on articles and chapters you will be reading.  You may be 
    asked, for example, to read a chapter  or an article for an upcoming class and write about 
    what you think the author is trying to say and what significance the piece has for our 
    group discussions or for you personally.  Alternatively, I may ask you to spend several 
    minutes in class writing about these same sorts of ideas or reflecting on issues which are 
    troubling to you or about which you would like clarification. It would be best if you kept 
    these journal entries on loose-leaf paper (three-hole punched) so that you can hand these 
    assignments in individually and I can respond to your comments each time.  Your 
    journal, in the end, will be a reflection of the growth in your thinking about the complex 
    issues we will be discussing during the course of the semester, as well as a conversation 
    between you and me about such thoughts.  As it is often difficult to assign a grade to such 
    efforts, my position is that if you carry out these assignments in a reasonably thoughtful 
    manner, you will receive full credit for your work. 
    
    4. class participation (20%).  This part of your grade is the result of
    	a) the leading of one class discussion
    	b) your preparation for and extent of participation in discussions throughout the 
    semester
    
    5. oral presentation of research project (10%).  You should anticipate that the presentation 
    and discussion of you research project will last 30-40 minutes.  Each presentation will be 
    scheduled during the last two weeks of class. (I expect that we will schedule an additional 
    meeting time in order to accommodate all students' presentations.  One week in advance 
    of your session, you must select and assign readings for your seminar colleagues in 
    preparation for the discussion you will lead.  These will be copied and kept on reserve in 
    the Holmes Hall Computer Lab.
    
    
    
    A VERY TENTATIVE COURSE SCHEDULE
    
    DATE	TOPIC	ASSIGNMENT
    2 Sept		Course overview	----
    			Administrivia
    
    7 Sept		The nature of sex  & gender
    		 Gender & early science	Keller (Reflections, ch. 1--
    						hand out)
    
    9 Sept		Women in 17th Cent. W. European Science	Schiebinger, Intro, 
    								chs. 1-4
    
    14 Sept	Women & the Birth of "ModernScience"	Schiebinger, ch 5
    								Keller (Reflections, 
    								ch 2--hand out)
    
    16 Sept	Birth of Modern Sci. (cont'd)	 Keller (Reflections,
    						ch 3--hand out)
    
    21 Sept	Biology as Destiny--scientific search
    		for sex differences				Schiebinger, ch 6
    								(Benderly chapters 
    								assigned for first short 
    								paper)
    
    23 Sept		Biology as Destiny--The genderization
    			of sex differences			Schiebinger, ch 7-8
    								Benderly chs.
    
    28 Sept		In their own voices--Professional
    			women speak				Gornick, Intro &
    								Part 1
    
    	FIRST SHORT PAPER DUE
    
    30 Sept		In their own voices (contd)		 Gornick, Part 2
    
    
    5 Oct		In their own voices (contd)			Gornick, Part 3
    
    7 Oct		Their own voices (contd)			Keller article
    								Weisstein article
    
    DEADLINE FOR SELECTION OF RESEARCH TOPIC
    	 (Jennifer & Tom will facilitate discussion)
    
    12 Oct		No class (Dr. R. out of town)
    
    14 Oct	 	Challenging a Value-Neutral Science--
    		Issues of subjectivity/objectivity and the
    		 Social context of knowledge			Keller, Intro
    
    	 (Michelle & Sarah will facilitate discussion)
    
    DRAW UP LIST OF INTERVIEW QUESTIONS
    
    19 Oct		Feminism and science				Harding, ch 3
    								Namenwirth article
    	 (Kristin & Denese will facilitate discussion)
    
    21 Oct		Is there a feminist epistemology
    		of science?					Martin article
    								Harding, ch 5
    	(Ken & Elise will facilitate discussion)
    
    26 Oct		Feminist epistemology (cont'd)
    
     SECOND SHORT PAPER DUE
    
    28 Oct		The language of science			Keller, ch 1
    
    2 Nov		Science and the
    		secrets of nature &power;			Keller, ch 3,4
    
    4 Nov		Nature and Power				Keller, ch 5
     	 (Joanne & Tony will facilitate discussion)
    
    9 Nov		Feminist epistemology, revisited
    
    
    11 Nov		Toward a more global perspective:
    		Race and gender				 Sands article
    								Harding, ch 8
    								Fausto-Sterling
    	(Sue will facilitate discussion)
    
    16 Nov		Toward a more global perspective:
    		Non-Western science				Harding, ch 9
    
    18 Nov		Toward a more global perspective:
    		Perspectives from lesbian lives
    								Harding, ch 10
    
    23 Nov	"	Gendering knowledge"--Expanding
    		 feminist approaches to science		Harding, ch 11,12
    	(Valerie & Ricarla will facilitate discussion)
    
    25 Nov		Thanksgiving (No class)
    
    
    (With the exception of Dec. 14, the following class meetings will be 3:00 -
    4:45 pm in Rm 322 NKL)
    
    30 Nov	 	Student Presentations: Sue, Jennifer, and Tony
    
    2 Dec		Student Presentations: Ricarla, Valerie, and Sarah
    
    7 Dec		Student Presentations: Denese, Catina, and Elise
    
     9 Dec		Student Presentations: Amy, Tom, and Michelle
    
    
    14 Dec		Student Presentations: Kristin, Ken, and Joanne
    12:45-2:45 pm		Course wrap-up and evaluations
    
    RESEARCH PAPERS DUE
    
    
    

* * *

Permission to reprint the syllabus section in this handbook, with
modifications, has been granted by the Ohio State University.  Citation:
Teaching at The Ohio State University: A Handbook. Center for Teaching
Excellence/Faculty and TA Development, The Ohio State University, 1992 revised
edition, pp. 28-30.

![](images/grenline.gif)

### ![](images/arrow.gif)[ Go to Chapter Four](ch4.htm)

### ![](images/contents.gif)[ Return to Handbook Contents Page](contents.htm)

### ![](images/web.gif)[Return to the MSU TA Program Homepage. ](index.htm)

* * *

![](images/emailed.gif) [Comments](mailto:  georgem1@pilot.msu.edu)

