Introduction to Addressing Learning Difference

**EDS 333**

**Winter, 2002**

Fridays            9:00-11:30                                           410
Allyn Hall

Instructor:         Dr. Patricia Renick                 Secretary: Ms. Terry
Hines

Office:             325 Allyn                                Phone:
937-775-4472

Office Hours: 1:00 7:00 Tuesdays

                        Other times by appointment or before or after class.

E-mail:  [prenick@aol.com](mailto:prenick@aol.com) or
[patricia.renick@wright.edu](mailto:patricia.renick@wright.edu) (Please
includes course in subject)

*Texts:  Salend, S. J. : _Effective Mainstreaming: Creating Inclusive Classrooms_.   New York: Macmillan Publishing Company and Hunter, M.: _Discipline that Creates Self-discipline_ in WSU Bookstore Other readings may be distributed in class. 

**_Purpose of this Course_** _:_  

This course is designed as an overview of learning differences

resulting from handicapping conditions and at-risk factors.  It is intended to
provide

a pre-professional orientation of the history, laws, and discourse peculiar to
special

education, as well as the nature of learners with exceptional needs.

**_Course Objectives:_** The student will demonstrate: __

__

_Knowledge:_

1.   Knowledge of the historical aspects of educational services to learners with exceptional needs and their relationship to current practices.

2.   Knowledge of legal aspects of educational services to learners with exceptional needs.

3.   Knowledge of inclusion and the continuum of services delivery models for effecting the least restrictive environment appropriate to learning differences.

4.   Knowledge of the Ohio State standards and rules governing the delivery of educational services to all learners.

5.   Knowledge of the nature and needs of the wide range of learning differences, from students with multiple handicaps to those with gifted/talented characteristics.

6.   Knowledge of the nature and needs of learners with exceptionalities across the life-span.

7.   Knowledge of the discourse and terminology peculiar to the practice of inclusion and adaptive (special) education.

__

_Dispositions:_

__

1.   Accept, appreciate, and accommodate diversity as found in a multicultural/pluralistic society, especially the diversity of learner differences.

2.   Affirm the right of all learners, with their numerous inherent differences, to participate and be served as fully as possible in an inclusive environment (i.e., the least restrictive environment).

3.   Promote and support adaptive educational and instructional practices designed to most appropriately address the differences in learner needs and learning styles.

_Performances:_

1.   Use technology to access library and other research resources.

2.   Use technology in the preparation of papers and other course assignments.

3.   Prepare and present materials enhanced by multimedia.

**Success**

****

            To laugh often and much; to win the respect of intelligent people and affection of children; to earn the appreciation of honest critics and endure the betrayal of false friends; to appreciate beauty, to find the best in others; to leave the world a bit better, whether by a healthy child, a garden patch or a redeemed social condition; to know even one life has breathed easier because you have lived.  This is to have succeeded.  -Ralph Waldo Emerson

# Schedule of Classes

# Fridays 9:00-11:30

Jan 4                   Overview of Class and Introduction to Special Ed.

Salend: Chap. 1 Teaching & Learning

Jan. 11                         Alphabet and Due process

                                    Salend: Chap. 2 & 3

                                    Hunter: Chapter 1 & 2

Jan. 18                         Approaches to teaching and learning

                                    Salend:  Chap. 4 & 5

                                    Hunter: 3 & 4

**Journal check, Bring the reading assignments assigned thus far to class.**

Quiz on alphabet

Jan. 25                         Reading & Writing

                                    Salend: 6 

                                    Hunter: 7 & 8

                                    **One lesson plan due**

Feb. 1                          Content Instruction

                                    Salend: Chap. 7

Hunter: 9 & 10

**Journal check, Bring the reading assignments assigned thus far to class.**

Feb. 8                          Mathematics

                                    Salend:  Chap. 8

                                    Hunter:  Chap. 11 & 12

Feb. 15                        Socialization/ classroom Management

                                    Salend: Chap. 9

**Journal check, One lesson Plan due**

Feb. 22                        Education Technology

                                    Salend: Chap. 11

           

March 1                       Evaluating Progress/ communication

                                    Salend: Chap. 12

March 9                       Inclusive Practice & Wrap up **Portfolio due**

March 15                     **_Final Exam,_**   we will have to figure out
where and when, remind me.

**Course Requirements:**

Get **a non-slicky folder** with butterfly clips and some dividers. These are
available in the WSU Bookstore.   This is to be a Mini Portfolio of your
learning for this class.  **It must have:** dividers, a table of contents,
projects, and a summary of learning in it. It must be typewritten and double-
spaced with a 12-point font.   It must have appropriate spelling, punctuation
and grammar.

****

**1.   1st Section: (30 points)** Read the weekly assignments and write a
journal response using the enclosed guidelines for each book.  Reflective
Journal Guide:

A.  Write a brief summary of the information you have read the content of the
chapter what was to be learned form it.

B.  Reflect on what this learning means to you.  Is it new information, old
information, is it Greek and you don't understand any of it?  Does that
chapter overwhelm you or make you think differently about an issue?  Do you
wonder about something from the chapter?

C.  Where do I see evidence of what is in this chapter in my life, my current
school experience, and previous school experience.  Maybe you never
experienced this or even thought of this.  Can you think it to previous
learning?

D.  What action does this reading call you to? **This is a very important
question for you to answer.   Many people last quarter did not translate this
learning into action ideas or plans and lost points in their journals for
this.**

****

E.  Leave a space at the bottom of each page and label it Readers Comments.

**2.   2nd Section Lesson Plan:  (30 points)** it is important to read about
new strategies and approaches and it is vitally important to practice them.
As you read the Salend book, choose three simple, but adapted strategies.
I'll provide you with some strategies in class, too.  Write a lesson plan and
then ask your cooperating teacher if you can use the plan to teach the whole
class, a small group of students, or tutor one or two students.  Try it out,
and then write up what happened when you used the strategy.  Create three (3)
such lesson plans for several areas of the curriculum like reading, math, and
science.  If you teach only one area try to develop lesson plans that deal
with several strands or areas within your field.  Let me know about this.  The
form for the plans is as follows:

**Goal** -a general long-term projection, (usually covering an academic year)
for achievement in any of the academic skill/subject areas and/or
affective/behavioral domains.

**Objectives:**   These are specific and sequential steps you plan to employ
in pursuit of each goal.  A complete instructional objective includes the
following four elements:

                       

a.  Who:  the learner or student or class;

b.  Given what:  the behavior or performance expected spelled out in clear,
specific, observable and operational terms.

c.  Does what?  the behavior or performance expected spelled out in clear,
specific, observable and operational terms; and

d.  How well?  the minimally acceptable performance or success criterions,
state in appropriately measurable terms (i.e., state sometimes in percentages,
always thoughtfully in terms well suited to the task, the learner, the
setting).

EXAMPLE:  The student, given appropriate instruction, will visually and
auditory recognize the express the six initial consonant clusters:  wh, tr,
dr, br, wr, and yu, with at least 70% accuracy.  Jaime given an assigned
academic task, will reduce the number of times she goes off the subject no
more that twice per one-hour instructional period.  David, given appropriate
instruction, drill, and practice will calculate multi-digit addition and
subtraction problems (with and without regrouping), at least 60% accuracy.

**Materials and Resources:** These are the means-to-your-ends, the actual
"stuff" you need to implement and successfully carry out the lesson, which
might include anything from chalk to a computer or scissors to software.

****

**Methods/Procedures/Strategies:** Your means of  "transportation or the steps
followed in the implementation of the lesson, which might include any of the
following:

****

a.  Key instructional questions;

b.  sequencing of what happens first, second, third;

c.  instruction formatting (e.g., direct instruction, discovery learning,
cooperative learning, group size, etc.);

d.  Modality of teacher presentation and student performance,

**e.   Adaptations** for students with special needs.  **This is very
important, be specific and identify the category of student the adaptations
will be necessary for.**

****

**f.   Technology**, how will you incorporate it and use it in the lesson/

**g.** **Evaluation** :  what happened as a result of the lesson or during the
lesson.  Did the student or students' reach the criteria, what went well, what
went wrong, what did you do differently. How did it go was the lesson
successful would you change it, if so how?

  3. **_3 rd Section (30 Points)_ IEP or TAT meeting observation.  You need to request permission to attend an IEP meeting or a TAT meeting. Take notes, use pseudonyms, and tell me what happened as a result of the meeting. What did you learn from the meeting and what action does this call you too.  Be aware of the interaction that occurs between parents if present and/or between professionals. 3 pages in length. See permission slip.**

4.  **_4 th Section (30 points)_**.  I want you to pick a day and spend it shadowing the special educator in this building.  Talk with this educator, observe the interactions and teaching with the students. Write your interview and the day you shadowed as one report, 5 pages in length.  Ask the Special Educator these questions:

    1. What is the buildings approach to inclusive practice.
    2. What are kinds of disabilities to the students have who attend school in this building.
    3. What disabilities does this teacher's students have.
    4. How does she/he approach discipline?
    5. How many times a year does she/he talk with parents?
    6. How does special educator evaluate progress?
    7. What does she/he "do" inclusive practice.
    8. How are proficiency tests handled (who is exempted and how)
    9. Ask for a blank copy of an IEP form and have the special educator go over it with you, include it as the last pages of your report.

****

**5.   Final exam. (30 points)**  Will be discussed in class.

6.  **Attendance and Participation. (10 points) Very important !** Your presence in class is a gift to us.   Your presence, perspective, sharing, sharing and reflection helps to create a learning community in which we all learn from each other and benefit from each other's perspective and communication. Be with Us. ****

The mini-portfolio with everything in it must be given to me on or before the
final exam date.

Total number of points possible 160 (double check my math).  Final quarter
grades will be assigned based on the following scale of point earned:

95-100% = A

89-94% = B

83-88% = C

82-70% = D

Below 70% = F

All projects should be grammatically correct with proper spelling,
punctuation, and organization.  They should be neat and creative.  Graphics
are fine, but please  **NO** , Lion King, Muppets, Pocahontas, or Jedi
Journals.

Please be aware of possible field trips to be scheduled for the class.

Also I made add some things, change some things.  It is up to you to be
apprised of what is going on in class.  We will have at least one quiz over
the alphabet.  **Read this syllabus carefully and highlight things, you need
to remember what is in here.**



**[Back to Homepage](prtry.htm)**

