{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1
\deff0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\\*\panose
02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\\*\panose
020b0604020202020204}Arial;} {\f16\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2{\\*\panose
02000500000000000000}Palatino{\\*\falt Book
Antiqua};}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar\adjustright
\f16\fs20\cgrid \snext0 Normal;}{\\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph
Font;}{\s15\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\adjustright \f16\fs20\cgrid
\sbasedon0 \snext15 footer;}{\s16\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\adjustright
\f16\fs20\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext16 header;}}{\info{\title TE901 Syllabus
F94}{\author Michael W. Sedlak}{\operator Timothy
Hopkins}{\creatim\yr1998\mo9\dy8\hr19\min41}{\revtim\yr1998\mo9\dy8\hr19\min41}{\printim\yr1998\mo8\dy31\hr13\min56}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages11}{\nofwords4238}
{\nofchars24158}{\\*\company Michigan State
University}{\nofcharsws29667}{\vern89}}\margl1440\margr1440
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphhotz0\sprstsp\otblrul\brkfrm\sprstsm\truncex\nolead\msmcap\lytprtmet\hyphcaps0\viewkind1\viewscale100
\fet0\sectd \sbknone\linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl {\footer \pard\plain
\s15\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\adjustright \f16\fs20\cgrid {\fs18 TE 901
\tab Fall 1998\tab }{\field{\\*\fldinst {\fs18 PAGE }}{\fldrslt
{\fs18\lang1024 1}}}{\fs18 \par
}}{\\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta
.}}{\\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta
.}}{\\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta
.}}{\\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}
{\\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta
)}}{\\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta
)}}{\\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta
)}}{\\*\pnseclvl8 \pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta
)}}{\\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta
)}}\pard\plain \qc\widctlpar\adjustright \f16\fs20\cgrid {\f1 TE 901 \par \par
}{\b\f1 Proseminar in Curriculum, Teaching, and Educational
Policy}{\b\scaps\f1 \par \par }{\f1\fs18 Fall 1998 \par }{\f1 \par }\pard
\qj\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 Instructors}{\f1 : \par }\trowd
\trgaph80\trleft-80\trkeep \clvertalt\cltxlrtb \cellx5670\clvertalt\cltxlrtb
\cellx9280\pard \qj\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {\f1 Michael W. Sedlak \par
213 Erickson Hall \par 432.1260 (office) \par e-mail: msedlak@msu.edu\cell
Suzanne Wilson \par 116N Erickson Hall \par 353.9150(office) \par e-mail:
swilson@msu.edu\cell }\pard \widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {\f1 \row }\pard
\qj\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \par }{\b\f1 Seminar}{\f1 : \tab Tuesdays, 4 -
7 p.m., Rooms 109 and 111, Erickson Hall \par }{\b\f1 Office hours:}{\f1 \tab
By appointment \par \par }\pard \widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 Purposes of the
course \par }{\f1 \par This course is the first of two proseminar courses
required of all entering students in the doctoral program in Curriculum,
Teaching, and Educat ional Policy. The course is intended to provide a
foundation for an array of questions, ways of framing and pursuing issues, and
tools that you will draw on in the rest of your work. Focusing on several key
dimensions of schools and schooling, our aim i s to help you develop new
understandings of the role and nature of schools and teaching, as well as to
construct alternative perspectives on and approaches to examining educational
issues. While material draws heavily from the U.S. educational experience and
provides one context for our work, we will also pursue particular themes and
questions in the educational systems of other nations, and contrast the past
with the current wave of critique and reform. \par \par The course is about
learning about particular them es and struggles common to public education, in
the past and the present, in the U.S. and in other countries. But it is also a
course in learning to think, analyze, argue, and write -- about teaching and
learning, about schools and society, about teacher s , students, and the
public -- with both imagination and discipline. Because we think of doctoral
study as learning to participate in new communities of discourse, we focus
explicitly on methods and forms of thought and expression -- particularly
methods of interpretation, analysis, and argument, as well as approaches to
reading and forms of writing -- that are part of what you will be learning
throughout the program. \par \par The course also serves as an opportunity for
you to begin to build and participate in an intellectual community with others
entering the doctoral program. The nature of the work in this course will
involve interpreting and analyzing texts and other materials, framing and
revising questions, making conjectures, and testing alternative asserti ons.
All this involves taking new intellectual risks; developing a culture in which
taking such risks is valued, encouraged, and supported is part of our
collective task. \par \par }{\b\f1 Course themes}{\f1 \par \par In this
course, we will explore three inter-related areas of educational thought and
practice that shaped the drive to provide mass public schooling, and the
consequent struggles faced in educating a diverse population: the }{\i\f1
purposes}{\f1 of education, the consequent }{\i\f1 manifestations or internal
effects}{\f1 of competing purposes on knowledge, learning, teaching, and
structure, and finally the relationship between }{\i\f1 society and
education}{\f1 . To begin with, we will pretend that the areas are independent
and that we might be able to talk about them with little reference to one
another, but wi ll begin gradually to investigate their interdependencies and
connections. Our investigations will involve us in examining teaching and
learning, focusing on issues such as the nature of modal teaching practice,
the curriculum; the experience of differe n t groups in schools and what
students learn; criticisms of school, efforts to improve schools, and the
consequences of such efforts. The following themes are central to our
investigations. We hope that you will leave this semester with new insights
and questions related to each of these themes. \par \par }{\i\f1 Outsider and
insider perspectives \par }{\f1 \par One orienting theme will draw competing
portraits of the educational setting. We will attempt to differentiate between
two complex and to some degree unsatisfactory but revealin g perspectives: one
represented by many outsiders (members of the larger public who have tended to
view the schools through the lens of rational policymaking, who have expressed
themselves through laws, campaigns, speeches, scholarship, and research); the
other perspective represented by participants and keen observers, insiders, in
the educational enterprise (teachers, scholars, and of course the students
themselves). Our intent is that we will alternate these perspectives each
week. One week we will exam ine outsider perspectives on an issue, the next
week we will look at the same issue from an insider's perspective. \par \par
}{\i\f1 Conflicting visions of schools and their purpose \par }{\b\f1 \par
}{\f1 One theme we will explore is the perennial tension about the aims of
schooling. In the U. S., for example, from the time of the common school era,
Americans have expected much of schools. And since then, purposes and aims
have multiplied, accompanied by more and more critique. Strategically, we will
consider multiple criticisms of schooling a nd the visions of reform they
spawn. Examining such waves of criticism and reform, we want to probe what
reformers explicitly promote for the improvement of education. And, because,
in times of ferment, multiple critiques and visions of reform co-exist, we
will try to uncover the conflicts and connections within the discourse about
schools and schooling in different cultural contexts. \par \par }{\i\f1 Who is
in the conversation, who is out, and who are they talking about? \par }{\f1
\par Another theme for our investigations concerns the actors and targets of
reform visions. Who critiques schools, who lobbies for what kinds of change,
and whose voices are heard and why? We notice, for example, that educational
discourse about other people's children differs from discourse about one ' s
own. We also note that the participants in debates about education change over
time. Who is talking? Who is being talked about? These differences in "who"
across the waves of critique and reform are important in uncovering shifts in
the conversation about the improvement of schooling. In making comparisons of
the different visions that reformers advanced, we want to look closely at how
who the actors are, and on whom they focus, affects the dynamic of the reform
and its consequences. \par \par }{\i\f1 The interconnectedness of dimensions
of schooling \par }{\f1 \par Although analysis of particular dimensions of
schooling can be illuminating, a fourth theme in our investigations of reform
is the interconnectedness of those dimensions. Isolating any one dimension
leads to misre presentation and oversimplification; we need to keep the
relationships complex. Views of learning are embedded within images of
teaching; the formal curriculum reflects the surrounding political context.
The emergence of particular reform ideas is sha p ed by larger societal
issues, and the content of textbooks is shaped by notions about who the
students are and what they need to learn. As we pursue questions about
teachers, teaching, content, learning, students, purposes of schooling, and
the contexts in which these are discussed, we want to look for relationships
among these dimensions that will offer clues to understanding schools and
those who seek to shape or change them. \par \par }{\i\f1 The unforeseen
consequences of reform \par }{\f1 \par Another theme in our inquiry is to look
beyond the obvious outcomes of the reform. As reformers seek to change the
processes and outcomes of schooling for particular students, it is reasonable
to ask about the extent to which their dreams are realized. However, we are
also concerned with wha t happens in the wake of efforts to make change. What
unforeseen consequences emerge that shape subsequent problems, critiques, and
reform efforts? What happens that reformers did not intend, and why? Does
anyone seem to notice these unintended conseque nces, and, if so, what do they
do about it? To what extent do solutions aggravate the problems they were
intended to remedy? To what extent do they create new problems? \par \par
}{\i\f1 Skepticism about change \par }{\f1 \par Finally, we want to cultivate
a skeptical stance toward the question of change. How can we distinguish
between superficial change and change that affects deep patterns and
assumptions? Are the views of knowledge that undergirded the curriculum of the
nineteenth century different from those reflected in the curr e nt reform
movement? Have the purposes of schooling changed? Who teaches and who goes to
school does seem to have changed: Has the relationship between teachers and
students changed? When we think we see deeper change, we want to try to
distinguish fund a mental shifts from accumulations and additions. Do we
sometimes see change along one dimension -- views of what is worth knowing in
a particular area -- without accompanying changes in related dimensions --
views of learning or knowing? We should not un d erestimate continuity in
practice and in the discourse about that practice; we also want to be on the
lookout for what really appears to have changed over time. A final theme in
our work will be to look critically at efforts to effect change, at evidenc e
of change and continuity, and at claims about the success -- and value -- of
change. \par }{\b\f1 \par Course organization \par }{\f1 \par Instead of
talking about focal themes, another way to explain the course involves
focusing on the structure of the syllabus and the way that we -- as a
collective -- will organize ourselves to do the work. As we already mentioned,
the course has three parts: the purposes of education; the consequent
manifestations or internal effects of competing purposes on knowledge,
learning, teaching, and stru c ture; and the relationship between society and
education. We will spend approximately three weeks examining questions of
purpose, after which time we will spend about 9 weeks on effects so that we
can closely examine issues of knowledge, learning, teach ing, and
organizational structure. We will conclude the class by spending two classes
considering the relationship between schooling and society. \par \par As a
class, we will move back and forth between working in smaller sections and as
a large group. When we mee t as a whole group, we will meet in 111 Erickson.
We have assigned everyone to one of two sections, one led by Michael, the
other by Suzanne. Michael\rquote s group will meet in 111EH, Suzanne\rquote s
in 109 EH. The section leader will take primary responsibility for reading and
responding to your work, and the meetings of the smaller sections are intended
to provide everyone with more opportunity to talk. We will announce each week
whether the entire cohort will meet the following week, or individual
sections. \par \par }{\b\f1 The work of the class: Inquiry through reading,
discussion, and writing \par }{\f1 \par Yet a third way to talk about the
course involves attending to the actual work entailed. This course involves
inquiring into educational issues in three ways: reading, discussing, and
writing. We explain our assumptions and expectations about each of these
below. \par \par }{\i\f1 Reading}{\f1 \par We will be reading a wide variety
of texts this semester. Some are primary source materials gathered from other
places and times; others are secondary or interpretiv e commentaries written
from different standpoints. The work we will be doing depends on reading
interactively, on bringing both collective and individual goals to the act of
reading, considering, and reconsidering our texts. In its most straightforward
e x pression, this involves bringing questions to think about while preparing
to read something, reading a text, and reflexively placing what one has read
in the context of both evolving scholarship bearing on a subject and one's own
development as a scholar. Below we pose several sets of general questions for
all of us to bring to our reading, questions that we and our colleagues have
found effective. \par \par }{\i\f1 \bullet \~What is the author trying to
say?}{\f1 \par What are the author's principal and subsidiary arguments or
theses? Wha t are the important conceptual terms? What do the author's
assumptions seem to be? What sorts of evidence and methods are used? Can you
identify specific passages that support your interpretation? Are there other
passages that either contradict or appear less consistent with your
understanding? What are the strengths and weaknesses of the author's argument?
Can you make sense of, or account for, these differences? \par \par }{\i\f1
\bullet \~How has the author constructed the text? \par }{\f1 What clues can
you get from the work's structur e? Does the organization give you insights
into the argument? Are there patterns in the author's presentation that help
you to locate and understand the most valuable material? What can you do to
concentrate your attention and interrogation of the text? \par \par }{\i\f1
\bullet \~What is the author's purpose? \par }{\f1 Who was the author? Why was
this work written? To whom was the author speaking and why? What can you know
or infer about the author's motivation? What seem to be the context for the
work's origination? Can you dissect its po litics? How does the work's purpose
seem to affect the author's selection of questions, methods, or
interpretation? Was the author trying to confront a body of scholarship with a
new interpretation based on new methodologies, or new evidence? Was the work
intended to persuade a segment of the public to change its mind or to act on
something it already believed? \par \par }{\i\f1 \bullet \~What are }{\f1
your}{\i\f1 purposes in reading this?}{\f1 \par Different purposes have
different requirements: should you skim the piece, acquire mastery or fluency,
use it as a source of examples or illustrations? \par \par }{\i\f1 \bullet
\~How do the author's assumptions and ideas fit with your own
understanding?}{\f1 \par How might your response to the work be affected by
values, beliefs, and commitments that you think that you share with the aut
hor? Can you read and make sense of the work on its own terms, not just that
it confirms your existing thinking or values? Can you consider all of the
work, rather than just those passages that you agree with, or which you can
label "good," or dismiss as "bad?" Can you approach it with a spirit of
discovery and let the story be told in its own right? Can you notice what
seems strange or surprising, and accept its offerings as opportunities for
discussion? \par \par }{\i\f1 \bullet \~How do the author's arguments fit
within various communities of discourse?}{\f1 \par How is a piece of work
connected to the efforts of others dedicated to similar purposes? In what
community or communities does the author locate him or herself? How can you
tell? How might an author's work connect with your own understanding of the
work of others, and of your own evolving work on an issue or topic? \par \par
It is essential that you read all of the required texts for each class
meeting. \par \par }{\i\f1 Discussion}{\f1 \par Because the course will be run
as a seminar, your participation in discu ssions is important not only for
your own learning but also the learning of others. What you learn in this
course will be influenced by the degree of everyone's engagement in and
contributions to these discussions. Preparing the readings and coming to c l
ass with questions, insights, and issues is crucial to making the course work.
A learning community like this one relies on the contributions and
participation of all its members. Building the culture of the class so that
genuine inquiry is possible wil l take all of our efforts. We want to make the
seminar a context in which in which people listen and are listened to, in
which evidence matters, in which thoughtful questioning of one another's
claims is desirable, and in which alternative perspectives and interpretations
are valued. \par \par }{\i\f1 Writing \par }{\f1 Writing is an important
vehicle for exploring and clarifying ideas, for trying out interpretations and
arguments, and for representing ideas and communicating with others. Writing
plays a central role in doctoral work, and in educational scholarship. For
some students, the amount of writing in the doctoral program is completely
new. You may never been asked to do much writing, not in school and not in any
position you have held. The writing you are asked to do may t h erefore be
unfamiliar, and perhaps even make you feel anxious. For other students,
writing is commonplace. You may feel comfortable with writing and write a lot.
You may have been told you are a good writer, and you may find writing easy
and enjoyable. However, whether you have done much writing or little, whether
you feel yourself to be a good writer or not, the writing we are trying to
help you learn to do is different from writing you have done in other school
and non-school contexts. It may be hel p ful to keep in mind that you are now
expanding, not replacing, your writing style and skill. You are learning to
participate in a community of educational scholars who have a specialized
discourse, of which writing is an important part. Because we want t he
proseminar to provide you with occasions to focus on and develop these new
aspects of your writing, we have structured the assignments to provide
guidance and resources, as well as the opportunity for comments and
suggestions. While we may occasionall y ask you to do some journal writing,
most of the writing you do in this course will involve three papers. \par \par
Paper 1. For the first paper, we will focus the topic and question about which
you will examine and then write. Doing this will engage all class mem bers in
working on a common issue. We do this for several reasons. First, we recognize
that the kinds of questions, analysis, and argument that academic scholarship
requires are new for students in the proseminar. By framing the first paper
ourselves, w e hope to bound the task and to provide guidance for the kind of
analysis and writing you will be learning. The task will be more focused and
less ambiguous. Second, posing a common issue for the entire class gives us
the opportunity to underscore some particularly important themes in the
course. Finally, by asking you to work on a common topic, we present the
opportunity for you to consult with colleagues and to exchange ideas as you
pursue your analysis and writing. \par \par We will distribute the assignment
for the first paper on October 13 and it will be }{\b\f1 due on October 20,
1998}{\f1 . During the intervening week you can confer with one another,
discussing the issues involved and alternative ways of arguing about them.
\par \par Paper 2. }{\f1\cf1 For the second paper, we will ask you to find an
historical artifact from schooling from at least the turn of the century. The
artifact might be a piece of curriculum, a student test, or another remnant of
schooling. We will also ask that you identify an analogous contemporary artifa
c t. You can choose to find these artifacts in small groups, pairing up with
someone with similar interests, say, in language arts or social studies
instruction. A mathematics education group might decide to locate curriculum
materials that were develope d for elementary school mathematics teaching in
1885 and a parallel set of materials from the current reform effort in
mathematics. We will then ask that each student or group consider the
following questions: What were the purposes of teaching the subjec t matter in
question in the early nineteenth century? What did teachers need to know in
order to teach school? What do these artifacts suggest about what it meant to
be a teacher at the turn of the century? Each group will also consider the
same questio ns in light of the contemporary materials. Each class member will
then write a paper that examines the contrast between the historical artifacts
and the contemporary ones.}{\f1 This paper will be }{\b\f1 due on November 24,
1998.}{\f1 \par \par Paper 3}{\f1\cf1 . For the third paper, we will ask you
to work in groups and investigate a local educational reform effort. The
school district of Lansing, MI has been instituting a standards-based reform
effort district-wide. Teachers have worked in subject matter committees and
developed standard s , some of the same teachers have worked on the
development of professional development and teaching standards. We will group
class members into subgroups and assign each a teacher committee to contact,
interview, and document. This project will allow ev e ryone the chance to
participate in collective inquiry, experiment with the use of interview data
and the analysis of interviews and documents, and examine a contemporary
reform in light of our discussions of the history of educational reform. While
group s will do the investigations, each individual will write a paper about
what they learned. Throughout the term, we will help the groups, plan for
their interviews, consider issues related to data analysis, and we will pose
the question for the individual papers. This paper will be }{\b\f1\cf1 due on
December 15, 1998}{\f1\cf1 . While this is the last paper due in the class,
work on this paper will begin relatively early in the term since it will
require field work and group meetings. \par }{\f1 \par Please note: The
writing you do for this course is to be your own work; standard practices for
citation and attribution are expected. Additionally, the writing should be
work produced solely and specifically for this course. \par \par To help you
with your writing, we have also assigned a text, }{\i\f1 The Craft of
Research}{\f1 , by Wayne Booth and his colleagues. While not intended to be a
primer for how to construct a scholarly argument, the authors of this text
nevertheless offer significant insights into scholarly work. We will expect
you to read this text thr oughout the course, and we will refer to it often
with reference to your writing assignments. \par \par }{\b\f1 Course
requirements and evaluation \par \par }{\f1 Your grade for this course will be
based on the following distribution: \par }{\b\f1 \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab
\tab \tab \tab \par }{\f1 Class participation\tab 20% \par Paper 1\tab \tab
\tab 25% \par Paper 2\tab \tab \tab 25% \par Paper 3\tab \tab \tab 30% \par
}\pard \qc\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \page Course Outline \par \par }\pard
\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 Note: a packet of required readings is available
at the Budget Printing Center, 972 Trowbridge Rd., East Lansing, 351.5060. The
required books are available at the MSU Bookstore in the International Center
next door to Erickson Hall. \par \par Week 1 (1 September 1998):
Introduction.}{\f1 \par How can different kinds of source material provide
clues about teaching, learning, and schooling? What hypotheses are supported
by available evidence? What questions do they expose or suggest? What is not
visible? \par }\pard \qc\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 I. Purposes \par \par
}\pard \widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 Weeks 2 and 3 (8 and 15 September 1998):
Public purposes. \par \tab \par Required reading. \par }{\f1 \par }\pard
\sl240\slmult0\widctlpar\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\adjustright
{\f1 David F. Labaree, "Public Goods, Private Goods: The American Struggle
Over Educational Goals," }{\i\f1 American Educational Research Journal 34}{\f1
(Spring 1997), pp. 39-81. \par }\pard \widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab \par
}{\f1 David K. Cohen and Barbara Neufeld, "The Failure of High Schools and the
Progress of Education," }{\i\f1 Daedalus}{\f1 110 (Summer, 1981), pp. 69-89.
\par }{\b\f1 \par }{\f1 Horace Mann, }{\i\f1 Fifth Annual Report of the
Secretary to the Board of Education of Massachusetts, }{\f1 excerpts. Boston,
1842. \par }\pard
\sl240\slmult0\widctlpar\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\adjustright
{\f1 \par Massachusetts school law of 1647. \par }\pard
\sl240\slmult0\widctlpar\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\adjustright
{\f1 \par }\pard
\sl240\slmult0\widctlpar\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\adjustright
{\f1 Treaty with the Indians of the Six Nations (1744). \par \par }\pard
\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \par }{\b\f1 Week 3-4 (15 and 22 September 1998):
Private purposes: What it meant to become educated. \par }{\f1 \par What was
it like to be a young person -- in differ ent communities, within different
cultural and ethnic groups and different classes -- during the first part of
this century in the U.S.? What seems to have been the meaning and value of
education for different communities and families? What were their a spirations
in life? How did schooling fit with those aspirations? \par \par }\pard
\widctlpar\box\brdrdb\brdrw15 \adjustright \shading500 {\b\i\f1 Educating
Rita. }{\b\f1 Film to be screened at 7:30-9:00 Wednesday, September 9, 1998,
in 111 Erickson.}{\f1 \par }\pard \widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \par }{\b\f1
Required reading: \par }{\f1 \par W. E. B. DuBois, "Of the Coming of John." In
DuBois,}{\i\f1 The Souls of Black Folk}{\f1 . New York, 1903. \par \par Maya
Angelou, }{\i\f1 I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings}{\f1 , excerpts. New York,
1970. \par \par Ron Suskind, \ldblquote Something to Push Against.\rdblquote
In }{\i\f1 A Hope in the Unseen: An American Odyssey from the Inner City to
the Ivy League}{\f1 , pp. 1-23. New York: Broadway Books, 1998. \par \par
Helen M. Todd, "Why Children Work: The Children's Answer," }{\i\f1 McClure's
Magazine}{\f1 6 (April 1913), pp. 68-79. \par \par }{\b\f1 \page Choice of one
novel, autobiography, or biography: \par }{\f1 \par Richard Wright,}{\i\f1
Black Boy. }{\f1 New York, 1937. \par \par Amy Tan, }{\i\f1 Joy Luck Club}{\f1
. New York, 1989. \par \par Frank Conroy, }{\i\f1 Body and Soul}{\f1 . New
York: Dell, 1993. \par \par E. Hoffman, }{\i\f1 Lost in Translation: A life in
a New Language}{\f1 . New York: Penguin, 1989. \par \par Richard Rodriquez,
}{\i\f1 Hunger of Memory: The Education of Richard Rodriquez}{\f1 . New York:
Bantam, 19. \par \par Sapphire, }{\i\f1 Push}{\f1 . New York: Knopf, 1996.
\par \par Ron Suskind, }{\i\f1 A Hope in the Unseen: An American Odyssey from
the Inner City to the Ivy League}{\f1 . New York: Broadway Books, 1998. \par
\par \par \par }\pard \qc\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 II. Effects and
Manifestations \par }\pard \widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \par }{\b\f1 Week 5 (29
September 1998): A formal view of school knowledge and curriculum. \par }{\f1
\par }{\b\f1 Required reading: \par }{\f1 \par Arthur Powell, Eleanor Farrar,
and David Cohen, "Origins." In}{\i\f1 The Shopping Mall High School: Winners
and Losers in the Educational Marketplace}{\f1 , pp. 233-308. Boston: Little
Brown, 1985. \par \tab \tab \par \par }{\b\f1 Week 6 (6 October 1998): A
classroom perspective on curriculum. \par }{\f1 \par }{\b\f1 Required reading.
\par }{\f1 \par Philip Cusick, }{\i\f1 The Egalitarian Ideal and the American
High School, }{\f1 excerpts. New York: Longman, 1983. \par \par \par }{\b\f1
Week 7 (13 October 1998): Changing theories of learning. \par \par Required
reading. \par \par }{\f1 John Dewey, }{\i\f1 Child and the Curriculum}{\f1 .
Chicago, 1902. \par }{\b\f1 \par }{\f1 Jerome S. Bruner, }{\i\f1 The Process
of Education}{\f1 , pp. 1-54. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1960/1977. \par \par \par }{\b\f1 \page Week 8 (20 October 1998): Alternative
perspectives on learning. \par \par Required reading. \par }{\f1 \par Lauren
B. Resnick, "Learning in and Out of School," }{\i\f1 Educational Researcher
}{\f1 16 (9) (1987), pp. 13-20. \par \par E.D. Hirsch, "Introduction: Failed
Theories, Famished Minds," "Intellectual Capital: A Civil Right," and
"Critique of a Thoughtworld." In Hirsch, }{\i\f1 The Schools We Need: Why We
Don't Have Them}{\f1 , pp. 1-47, 69-126. New York: Doubleday, 1996. \par \par
Anthony O'Hear, }{\i\f1 Education and Democracy}{\f1 , pp. 5-40. London, 1991.
\par \par D.C. Phillips, "The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: The Many Faces of
Constructivism," }{\i\f1 Educational Researcher 24}{\f1 (October 1995), pp.
5-12. \par \par Anna Sfard, \ldblquote On Two Metaphors for Learning and the
Dangers of Choosing Just One,\rdblquote }{\i\f1 Educational Researcher}{\f1
}{\i\f1 27}{\f1 (March 1998), pp. 4-13. \par }\pard\plain
\s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f16\fs20\cgrid {\f1 \par }\pard\plain
\widctlpar\adjustright \f16\fs20\cgrid {\b\f1 Week 9 (27 October 1998):
Traditions of teaching practice. \par \par Required reading. \par }{\f1 \par
Larry Cuban, }{\i\f1 How Teachers Taught: Constancy and Change in American
Classrooms 1890-1980. }{\f1 New York: Longman, 1984. \par \par David K. Cohen,
}{\i\f1 Plus \'c7a Change. }{\f1 National Center for Research on Teacher
Education, Issue Paper No. 88-3 (East Lansing, MI, 1988). \par \par \par
}{\b\f1 Week 10 (3 November 1998): Teaching: Views from the classroom. \par
\par Required reading. \par }{\f1 \par Linda McNeil, "Defensive Teaching and
Classroom Control," in }{\i\f1 Contradictions of Control, }{\f1 pp. 157-90.
Boston: Routledge, 1986). \par \par Michael Sedlak, Christopher Wheeler, Diana
Pullin, and Philip Cusick, }{\i\f1 Selling Students Short: Classroom Bargains
and Academic Reform in the American High School}{\f1 , excerpts. New York:
Teachers College Press, 1986. \par \par H.G. Bissinger, "School Days." In
Bissinger, }{\i\f1 Friday Night Lights}{\f1 , pp. 128-52. New York: Addison-
Wesley, 1990. \par \par Theodore R. Sizer. }{\i\f1 Horace's Compromise: The
Dilemma of the American High School}{\f1 , excerpts. Boston: Houghton Mifflin
Co., 1984. \par \par Peter McLaren, }{\i\f1 Life in Schools: An Introduction
to Critical Pedagogy in the Foundations of Education}{\f1 , excerpts. New
York: Longman, 1994. \par \par \par }{\b\f1 \page Week 11 (10 November 1998):
Instructional reform: Teaching in the new age. \par \par Required reading.
\par }{\f1 \par Timothy J. Lensmire, "Following the Child, Socioanalysis, and
Threats to Community: Teacher Response to Children's Texts," }{\i\f1
Curriculum Inquiry}{\f1 }{\i\f1 23}{\f1 (1993), pp. 265-99. \par \par Sarah
Theule Lubienski, "Successes and Struggles of Striving Toward 'Mathematics for
All:' A Closer Look at Socio-Economic Class." Paper presented at the annual
meeting of the American Educational Research Association, March, 1997. \par
\par \par }{\b\f1 Week 12 (17 November 1998): The educational system. \par
\par Required reading. \par }{\f1 \par Philip Cusick, }{\i\f1 The Educational
System: Its Nature and Logic}{\f1 . New York: McGraw Hill, 1992. \par \par
Adam Gamoran, Walter G. Secada, and Cora B. Marrett, \ldblquote The
Organizational Context of Teaching and Learning: Changing Theoretical
Perspectives,\rdblquote prepared for the Handbook of Sociology of Education,
Ed. Maureen T. Halliman, forthcoming. \par \par }{\b\f1 Week 13 (24 November
1998): Organizational patterns and differential access to knowledge. \par \par
Required reading. \par \par }{\f1 Jean Anyon, "Social Class and School
Knowledge," }{\i\f1 Curriculum Inquiry 11}{\f1 (1981), pp. 3-42. \par \par
Jeannie Oakes, "Keeping Track, Part 1: The Policy and Practice of Curriculum
Inequality," }{\i\f1 Phi Delta Kappan 62}{\f1 (September 1986), pp. 12-17, and
"Keeping Track, Part 2: Curriculum Inequality and School Reform," }{\i\f1 Phi
Delta Kappan 62}{ \f1 (October 1986), pp. 148-154. \par \par John Chubb and
Terry Moe, }{\i\f1 Politics, Markets, and America's Schools}{\f1 . Washington,
D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1990. \par \par }\pard \qc\widctlpar\adjustright
{\b\f1 III. Outcomes \par }\pard \widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \par Week 14 (1
December 1998): Theories of school and society. \par \par Required reading.
\par }{\f1 \par Theodore Schultz, Investments in Human Capital," }{\i\f1
American Economic Review 51}{\f1 (March 1961), pp. 1-17. \par \par Samuel
Bowles and Herbert Gintis, }{\i\f1 Schooling in Capitalist America:
Educational Reform and the Contradictions of Economic Life, }{\f1 excerpts.
New York: Basic Books, 1976. \par \par Michael Todaro, "Education and Human
Resources." In Todaro, }{\i\f1 Economic Development in the Third World,}{\f1
pp. 289-315. New York: Longman, 1981, 2nd. ed. \par \par \par }{\b\f1 \page
Week 15 (8 December 1998): Resistance theory and beyond. \par \par Required
reading. \par }{\f1 \par Paul}{\b\i\f1 }{\f1 Willis, }{\i\f1 Learning to
Labour: How Working Class Kids Get Working Class Jobs. }{\f1 New York:
Columbia University Press, 1977. \par \par Kathleen Weiler, "Critical
Educational Theory." In Weiler, }{\i\f1 Women Teaching for Change: Gender,
Class, and Power}{\f1 , pp. 1-25. South Hadley, MA: Bergin and Garvey, 1988.
\par \par James Traub, "Class Struggle," }{\i\f1 New Yorker}{\f1 , (September
19, 1994), pp. 76-90. \par }}

