## San Jose State University

##  Department of Mathematics and Computer Science

## Graduate Computer Science Coordinator

# List of Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)

As you may imagine, I get flooded with queries about the graduate program.
Unfortunately, I cannot respond to all routine questions personally. Most
queries can be answered simply by reading the materials at [
http://www.cs.sjsu.edu/mscs](index.html) and in this FAQ.

If you do not find your query answered, then I will be able to advise you
better if you complete the checklist at the end of this FAQ and return it with
your query.  

### General Issues  

**Q:** Can you give me any tips for writing effective email queries?  

**A:** I get a lot of email, often from thoughtful people with good questions.
But I also get a fair amount of email that appears ineffective. Hence this FAQ
entry...

Avoid these common problems:

  * Asking questions whose answers can be easily found on the web ("What is the tuition for international students?")
  * Asking questions that the recipient isn't likely to be able to answer ("I need legal advice about my immigration status...")
  * Bizarre spelling ("I rqst 2 nrol in ur dprtmnt...")
  * Inappropriate greetings ("Hey Cay")
  * Unreasonable demands ("I need to know by 9 am tomorrow...")

I also recommend Eric Raymond's useful article "[ How to Ask Questions the
Smart Way](http://www.tuxedo.org/%7Eesr/faqs/smart-questions.html) ".  

### About the MSCS Program  

**Q:** I work during the day. Can I obtain the MSCS degree while working?

**A:** Yes --the graduate courses are offered in the late afternoons and
evenings. You have up to 7 years (!) to finish the degree, although we
naturally don't recommend that you actually take that long. Many of our
students are professionals who obtain the MS degree while working full-time.

**Q:** I have been in California for X months/years. Am I entitled to in-state
tuition?

**A:** I am sorry--I don't know. My expertise lies in the academic criteria
for admission to the MSCS program. For general fee questions, try the online
catalog at [
http://info.sjsu.edu/home/catalog.html](http://info.sjsu.edu/home/catalog.html)

**Q:** I am an international student. Is there additional information
available?

**A:** The International Programs and Student Services office has an excellent
web site at [
http://www.sjsu.edu/depts/ipss/](http://www.sjsu.edu/depts/ipss/) .

**Q:** What form of financial assistance is available from the department?

**A:** Unfortunately, financial assistance is very limited. The department
does not offer full scholarships or tuition waivers. A limited number of
teaching associate, grader and lab assistant positions are available. However,
these positions are not open to incoming students. The salary for these
positions is not high, and you should not rely on them for financial support.

**Q:** I am an international student and need to be enrolled in a degree
program to obtain a student visa. However, I do not qualify for admission to
the MSCS program. How can I take the courses that I need to prepare myself?

**A:** You may consider enrolling in the "BSCS program. If you already have
another college degree, the "Second Baccalaureate" program may be appropriate
for you.

**Q:** What does it mean to enroll as a "second bachelor student"?

**A:** Second bachelor students are exempt from the core GE courses --except
that they have to take US & Cal. history & government (usually 6 units) if
they haven't already. They are expected to satisfy all of the major
requirements, including Physics & Phil 110. The department allow courses taken
elsewhere to count just as for ordinary transfer students. They apply using
the ordinary undergraduate application form. Foreign students are held to a
TOEFL score of 550\. For more information on the BSCS degree, please see [
http://www.cs.sjsu.edu/department/bscs.html](http://www.mathcs.sjsu.edu/department/bscs.html)
.  
  

**Q:** What is "Open University"?

**A:** "Open University" at SJSU allows individuals that are not registered in
a degree program to take university courses. There are a number of
restrictions.  

  * There must be space available in the course after all degree program students have registered
  * The instructor must agree to admit the student
  * The student must fulfill all prerequisites to the course
  * Students who have been denied admission in a graduate program cannot register for graduate courses
  * Courses can generally _not_ be transferred into a degree program

Open University is intended for students who want to take a small number of
courses outside a degree program. It is _not_ intended to take courses that
count towards a degree program.  

**Q:** I concluded that I need to take quite a few courses before I am ready
to apply for the MSCS. Can you advise me what courses I should take?  

**A:** Sorry--I can't help you with the planning of your courses. If you
decide to enroll in the BSCS program first, you can discuss courses with your
undergraduate advisor. If you enroll through open university, you will need to
employ your own best judgment and knowledge of the CS field to plan your
studies.

### Applying to the Program  

**Q:** What are the application deadlines?

**A:**

  
| **Fall Semester** | **Spring Semester**  
---|---|---  
**F/J Visa Holders** |  February 28 | August 31  
**All Others** |  March 31 | September 30  
  
**Q:** Do you accept late applications?

**A:** No.

**Q:** Do you accept incomplete applications?

**A:** No. You must mail ALL required information in ONE package.

**Q:** Can you mail me the application materials?

**A:** No. Please print out the online form.

  * F/J Visa Holders: [ http://www.sjsu.edu/intl_app/intlapplication.pdf](http://www.sjsu.edu/intl_app/intlapplication.pdf)
  * All Others: [ http://www.csumentor.edu/Support/pdfs/csugrad02-03.pdf](http://www.csumentor.edu/Support/pdfs/csugrad02-03.pdf)

**Q:** I don't have access to the web. Is there another way to get the form?

**A:** Write to

    
    
       Admissions and Records Office  
       San Jose State University  
       One Washington Square  
       San Jose, CA 95192-0009  
    

and ask for an application package. Indicate whether you need an international
(F/J Visa) or domestic package.

**Q:** Where should I mail the application?

**A:** IGNORE WHAT IT SAYS ON THE FORM. Mail your COMPLETE PACKAGE to

    
    
       Graduate Coordinator  
       Department of Computer Science  
       San Jose State University  
       One Washington Square  
       San Jose, CA 95192-0103  
    

**Q:** What should I include in my application?

**A:** EVERYTHING except official test scores.

  * Application form (including current email) 
  * Application fee 
  * Transcripts in sealed envelope 
  * Degree certificate 
  * Letters of recommendation in sealed envelopes 
  * If F/J Visa **:** Declaration of Finances 
  * If required, unofficial GRE General, GRE CS, and TOEFL scores (see [ http://www.cs.sjsu.edu/mscs](index.html) ) 

**Q:** I can't send in all required items by the application deadline. Should
I apply anyway?

**A:** No. First gather all items, and then apply for the following semester.

**Q:** What are the application fees?

**A:** For Fall 2002 applications, the fee is $55.

**Q:** I already submitted an application for to the university before I
realize that I should have sent it to the department. Should I send another
application to the department?

**A:** No. Submitting two applications would further increase the confusion.

**Q:** I'd like you to look over my application before I submit it.

**A:** Sorry --I can't help you with putting together your application. Simply
supply the information described in [ http://www.cs.sjsu.edu/mscs](index.html)
. If we have questions after receiving your application, we will contact you.
It is important that you supply a current email address for that purpose.

**Q:** I need to know NOW whether you will accept me later, so that I can
decide whether to work on undergraduate prerequisites, or whether I should try
applying at a different university.

**A:** Unfortunately, we cannot give you a guarantee now that we will admit
you later. It is always a good idea to apply at more than one university.

**Q:** I fulfill all requirements for admission. Am I guaranteed to be
accepted?

**A:** Unfortunately, no. When there are more qualified applicants than we
have space available in the program, we offer admission to those whom we
consider the most promising applicants, until all space is filled.  

**Q:** Should I provide letters of recommendation?

**A:** If you have recommenders who can write about your SPECIFIC achievements
in COMPUTER SCIENCE, go ahead and have them submit letters. On the other hand,
don't bother sending letters that merely dwell on your diligence and hard
work.  

**Q:** Where should I mail letters of recommendation?

**A:** Mail them to

    
    
       Graduate Coordinator  
       Department of Computer Science  
       San Jose State University  
       One Washington Square  
       San Jose, CA 95192-0103

**Q:** Is there a special form for recommendation letters?

**A:** No. They should simply be on university or company letterhead and in
sealed envelopes.

**Q:** My BSCS degree is older than 7 years. Can I still apply for the MSCS
program?

**A:** Yes, but take the GRE CS Subject test.  

**Q:** What is an ABET accredited program?

**A:** [ABET](http://www.abet.org) is the Accreditation Board for Engineering
and Technology. It is the official accreditation board for Computer Science
programs in the United States. You will find a list of accredited universities
at the ABET web site.

**Q:** My BSCS degree is not from an ABET accredited program. What should I
do?

**A:** Take the GRE CS Subject test.  

Note that many universities are accredited by other accreditation programs. We
only waive the GRE CS requirement for universities whose computer science
programs are accredited by ABET.

Universities outside the United States are generally not accredited.
International applicants should take the GRE CS subject test.

Some "top-tier" universities (such as Stanford and Carnegie Mellon) did not
bother to get accredited. In the interest of fairness, we require applicants
from those universities to take the GRE CS Subject test.  

**Q:** What is the GRE CS Subject test?

**A:** The GRE CS Subject test is a test developed by the Educational Testing
Service to test for undergraduate background in computer science. You can find
a sample test at [
ftp://etsis1.ets.org/pub/gre/239110.pdf](ftp://etsis1.ets.org/pub/gre/239110.pdf)
Unlike the GRE General test, the subject tests are only administered 3 times
per year.

For admission in the | Spring Semester | Fall Semester  
---|---|---  
You need to take the test by the preceding | November or December | April  
  
In some countries, the test is offered less frequently. Also, some test
centers "sell out" early. You need to register for the test well in advance
(see <http://www.gre.org/testdate.html#subdate> ).

**Q:** I'd like to take the GRE CS Subject test, but it is not offered before
the application deadline.

**A:** Generally, you will need to take the GRE CS Subject test first and
apply afterwards. In _rare cases_ , we may, at our discretion, conditionally
admit students who show _outstanding_ promise, and permit them to take the GRE
CS Subject test later. Examples of students with outstanding promise are: an
author of a publication in a refereed computer science journal, or a winner in
a national programming competition, or a significant contributor to an
important open source project.  

**Q:** What TOEFL and GRE scores do I need to have to be accepted?

**A:** If you are an international student, you need a TOEFL score of 550.
This is a requirement of Graduate Studies and Research. For the GRE test,
there are no hard cut-offs. We use the scores to compare and rank candidates.

**Q:** What is the status of my application?

**A:** If you sent your application to the Computer Science department, you
can email me after May 15 (Fall admissions) or November 15 (Spring admissions)
if you have not received a response from the university.

**Q:** Did you recently change the admission requirements?

**A:** Admission to the MSCS program is a competitive process. We continually
monitor the number of applicants and the number of spaces in the program. We
periodically revise our guidelines to give students accurate guidance for
submitting successful applications.

**Q:** What are my chances of being admitted?

**A:** Please note that I cannot predict your "chances" of being admitted to
the program. However, you may find the following guidelines helpful. We are
looking for students with a recent BSCS from an [ ABET accredited
program](http://www.abet.org/accredited_programs/CACWebsite.html) , or a
similar CS background and competitive score from the GRE CS subject test. If
you meet these criteria, we would like to encourage you to apply.

**Q:** I took college courses in (C|C++|Java|Cobol|Perl|Unix|Oracle)
programming. Do you consider these courses when evaluating my computer science
background?

**A:** No.

**Q:** I took certification courses in (Novell|Unix|NT) system administration.
Can I use them instead of college courses as course equivalencies?

**A:** No.

**Q:** What is a typical set of computer science courses that you might expect
of an applicant?

**A:** Here are some typical courses. This is not a complete list, but it
should give you a flavor of the kind of courses that are typically a part of a
BSCS degree.

  * Data Structures
  * Computer Architecture 
  * Operating Systems
  * Formal Languages
  * Computability Theory
  * Software Engineering
  * Computer Graphics
  * Graphical User Interface Programming
  * Object-Oriented Programming
  * Programming Language Design Principles
  * Functional Programming
  * Compiler Design
  * Analysis of Algorithms
  * Artificial Intelligence
  * Data Base Management Systems
  * Computer Networks 
  * Parallel Processing
  * Information Theory
  * Coding Theory
  * Cryptography and Computer Security 
  * OO Analysis and Design

A typical BSCS program will expect students to complete about 12 junior/senior
level CS courses (i.e. not counting introduction to programming).  

**Q:** Why are you requiring all this coursework? I am an experienced software
engineer and shouldn't have to take these academic prerequisites.

**A:** You don't need a master's degree to have a successful career in the
computer industry. A master's degree is an academic endeavor for those who are
interested in the fundamental principles of computer science. We believe that
an academic undergraduate background is an appropriate prerequisite for the
master's program.

**Q:** I am self-taught in computer science, and I don't want to take a lot of
undergraduate courses that repeat what I already know. Is there another way to
prove my knowledge in computer science?

**A:** Take the GRE CS Subject Test

**Q:** I already took some graduate level computer science courses at another
institution. Can I transfer them into the SJSU MSCS program once I am
admitted?

**A:** Yes, but there are three restrictions:

  1. You can transfer at most 6 units (2 courses)
  2. These courses must not have counted towards any prior degree ("no double dipping")
  3. The courses must be less than 7 years old.  

**Q:** I concluded that I need to take quite a few courses to prepare myself
for admission to the MSCS program. Can I be conditionally admitted and take
the courses as an MSCS student?

**A:** No. We do NOT offer conditional admission to students who are
unprepared for the MSCS program. If you do not have sufficient background, you
need to FIRST prepare yourself, THEN apply for the MSCS program.

**Q:** What is the purpose of conditional admission?

**A:** When we select the students whom we want to admit to the program, some
of them fall short of a particular requirement. In that case, we offer
conditional admission. The condition is to fulfill the missing requirement in
a timely manner.  

**Q:** I was accepted with a condition (to take certain undergraduate courses,
or to pass the GRE CS   Subject Test), but I don't like the condition. Can I
negotiate to have it waived or changed?

**A:** No. The condition is part of our admission offer to you. This is our
final offer, and it is not subject to negotiation. If you do not want to
fulfill the condition, or you do not think that you are able to, then you
should not accept our offer of conditional admission.

**Q:** I will be completing my undergraduate degree in the same semester in
which I submit an application. Is that ok?

**A:** For students in the US, yes. Be sure to clearly indicate that you
expect to earn your BS im the current semester. Completing the degree will be
a condition for admission. For international students, Graduate Studies wants
to see a degree certificate, so you will need to complete your undergraduate
degree. Note that the date that the degree is conferred _must_ be before the
first day of classes in the graduate program.

**Q:** I do not have a 4-year Bachelor degree. Can I be admitted to the MSCS
program?

**A:** A 4-year Bachelor degree is a minimum requirement for admission to the
graduate school. See [ http://info.sjsu.edu/web-
dbgen/catalog/policies/policies-66.html](http://info.sjsu.edu/web-
dbgen/catalog/policies/policies-66.html)

**Q:** The California State University policy states that in unusual cases,
the department may make exceptions to the 4-year Bachelor degree requirement.
Does your department make these exceptions?

**A:** We may make an exception if you can demonstrate a strong background in
computer science. We REQUIRE the GRE CS subject test before considering
exceptions.

**Q:** My application for a previous semester was rejected, but I disagree.
Can I appeal?

**A:** No.

**Q:** My application for a previous semester was rejected, but I have now
taken more courses/standardized tests. Can I submit those without reapplying?

**A:** No. Your previous application is no longer active. You need to reapply.

### Current MSCS Students  

**Q:** I was admitted as a conditionally classified student and fulfilled my
conditions a long time ago. Why am I still listed as "conditionally
classified"?

**A:** There isn't anyone who is monitoring your admission conditions and
completed courses on your behalf. YOU need to apply for "fully classified
status". You will be "fully classified" after you have completed your
conditions AND have applied for change of status. Pick up a form from the
department office.

**Q:** I am currently conditionally classified. How quickly should I obtain
"fully classified status"?

**A:** You should obtain that status as quickly as possible, since at least 18
units (6 courses) must have been completed AFTER you are fully classified.
Here's a handy graph to summarize the unit rules: You need 30 units (10
courses) to graduate, subject to these constraints:

    
    
       |  
       |  <= 6 units  
       |   
       x <-- admitted  
       |  
       x <- fully classified  
       |  
       | >= 18 units  
       |  
    

**Q:** I have been accepted to the program but I won't be able to attend for
another semester. Can I defer my acceptance?

**A:** Unfortunately, you will need to reapply. However, if you inform us that
you were accepted _in the prior semester,_ then you need not supply
transcripts and letters of recommendations again. You will need to pay the
application fee. If more than one semester has passed since your acceptance,
you will need to reapply and resubmit all materials.

**Q:** I have already been admitted to the MSCS program and would like help in
planning my program of study.

**A:** Please see a graduate advisor. You will find your advisor at [
http://www.mathcs.sjsu.edu/officeweb/GeneralAdvising.html](http://www.mathcs.sjsu.edu/officeweb/GeneralAdvising.html)

**Q:** I already wrote (a master's thesis|a best-selling novel|a letter to my
mom). Do I still have to take Technical Writing at SJSU?

**A:** If you obtain a waiver score on the WST (Writing Skills Test), we will
waive the Technical Writing requirement, A passing score on the WST is a
prerequisite for CS 100W, which is a prerequisite for the required CS297
course. Therefore, you should arrange to take the WST as soon as possible. For
more information on the WST, please see <http://www.sjsu.edu/testing/wst.html>

**Q:** What happens if my GPA drops to 3.0 or less?

**A:** If your _cumulative GPA is <= 3.0_, then you are on probation. If you
are on probation, you  

  * cannot register without seeing an advisor first
  * cannot graduate
  * will be disqualified from the MSCS program if your _semester GPA is <= 3.0_

Once your cumulative GPA is again > 3.0, you are no longer on probation.  
  
You should try very hard not to get onto probation in the first place. You
should plan on getting a B+ or better in all your courses. If you do end up
getting a B or less in one course, make sure that you have another course to
make up for it.

**Q:** What happens if I get a D or F in a class?

**A:** (1) You cannot use that class for graduation. You can repeat it or
select another course. (2) Your GPA will suffer, and you'll probably go on
probation. For more information, see the graduate program section in the
university catalog at [ http://info.sjsu.edu/web-dbgen/narr/catalog-
policies/catalog-policies-74.html](http://info.sjsu.edu/web-
dbgen/narr/catalog-policies/catalog-policies-74.html)  

**Q:** I was put on probation, and now I can't register for classes. What
should I do?

**A:** Go to the department office and get a form for removing your
registration hold, then go to your advisor to discuss your situation. Your
advisor needs to sign the hold form.  

**Q:** I got disqualified from the program. What should I do?

**A:** You can file a petition for reinstatement. Usually, such a petition
involves your committing to take a selection of undergraduate (!) courses, to
be approved by the graduate coordinator, that (a) more adequately prepares you
for graduate study and (b) lifts your cumulative GPA. These courses _do not_
count towards your graduate degree.  

**Q:** I would like to take a course from another department. What should I
do?

**A:** _Before you register_ , fill out an evaluation form (available in the
department office), and attach a syllabus for the course. The graduate
coordinator will evaluate the syllabus, or ask a faculty member who is
familiar with the subject matter to carry out the evaluation. Courses may be
approved as option courses or elective courses, at the discretion of the
graduate advisor.  

**Q:** How many courses can I take from other departments?

You must take 24 credit hours (i.e. 8 courses) from the CS department. You can
take up to 6 credit hours (i.e. 2 courses) from outside the department. Note
that this 2-course allowance includes transfer courses.  

### Office Hours and Appointments  

**Q:** When are your office hours?

**A:** Please check [
http://www.cs.sjsu.edu/faculty/horstman](http://www.mathcs.sjsu.edu/faculty/horstman)

**Q:** How do I schedule an appointment?

**A:** Please paste the checklist below into your email program, fill in the
responses, and send it to me. If your query can't be handled by email, I will
email you an appointment. My email address is [
horstman@cs.sjsu.edu](mailto:horstman@cs.sjsu.edu)

    
    
    1. Your name:  
      
     2. Your email address:  
      
    3. Your SJSU student number (if known):  
      
    4. What is your current status? Mark one with "Y"  
    a. Currently enrolled in the BSCS program at SJSU -  
    b. Currently enrolled as a conditionally classified MSCS student at SJSU -  
    c. Currently enrolled as a fully classified MSCS student at SJSU -  
    d. Currently taking classes through open university at SJSU -  
    e. Not currently taking any classes through SJSU -  
      
    5. At what institution did you obtain your bachelor degree?  
      
       Was it a 4-YEAR degree program? (Y/N):  
      
    6. In what field did you obtain your bachelor degree?  
         
    7. Your GPA in the last 60 units of undergradute study:  
      
    8. Your TOEFL score (for international students):  
      
    9. Your GRE General Test scores (optional for US  
       bachelor degree holders)  
       a. Quantitative:  
       b. Verbal:  
       c. Analytical:  
      
    10. Your GRE CS Subject Test score (optional for recent ABET  
        accredited BSCS degree holders)  
         
    11. Junior/senior level semester-long college courses  
        in computer science  
        (Skip this if you have a BS in Computer Science)  
        You can find SJSU equivalents at   
        <http://info.sjsu.edu/web-dbgen/catalog/departments/CS-courses.html>
    
    Course       	Course Taken   When?  Actual Convert   SJSU
    Title        	Number where?         Grade  to ABCDF  Equivalent
    
    1) 
       
    2) 
    
    3)
    
    4)
    
    5)
    
    6)
    
    7)
    
    8)
    
    9)
    
    10)
    
    
    

