#  Summer 1997 Mellon  
Course Project Participants

Ken Abernethy  
Gil Einstein  
Lee Hagglund | J. Thomas Allen, Jr  
Bob Chance | Christopher Blackwell | David Bost | Irene Kokkala | Daniel
Koppelman | Lisa R. Markus | Bruce Shoonmaker | Richard A. Stanford | Terry A.
Ferguson | Bill Teska | AnneMarie Wiseman | Dennis Wiseman

* * *

[ ![](/academics/grants/mellon/visit.gif)
](http://s9000.furman.edu/mellonj/index.htm) **Ken Abernethy  
Computer Science, Furman University  
** CS 18: Introduction to Scientific Computing

**Gil Einstein  
Psychology, Furman University  
** PSY 22: Experimental and Statistical Methods

**Lee Hagglund  
Mathematics, Wofford College  
** MTH 210: Multivariate Calculus

Project Title: Integrating Data Analysis and Visualization across the
Curriculum

This proposal focuses on the following two questions:

  * What will professionals in the mathematical sciences, the social sciences, and the natural sciences need to know about computing in the 21st century? 
  * Do our current science and mathematics curricula address these needs adequately? 

The easy answer to the first question is quite a bit since computers have
become indispensable tools for most scientific and mathematical work. In the
future, the significance of computers for such work will no doubt increase.
But what form should the future scientist's computing knowledge take and how
is it to be obtained? Will the ability to program in FORTRAN, C++, or other
third generation languages remain an important skill? While the case for this
can perhaps be argued, we believe that there are other skills that will take
precedence over programming for mathematicians and social and natural
scientists of the next century.

Desktop computing environments today rival the performance of larger systems
years ago in many respects. Indeed the ease with which data sets can be
analyzed, manipulated, and visualized using desktop systems is truly amazing.
And the ability to build and exercise sophisticated mathematical models is
within the grasp of those with a minimum of programming training these days.
Those involved in data analysis and visualization and the use of mathematical
models will need to master a set of skills appropriate to these new and
powerful tools.

This proposal seeks support for the development of a set of tutorials and
example problem suites focused on the most important of these new fundamental
scientific computing skills. The proposers will co-develop these instructional
modules which will likely be delivered via several modes -- including the
World Wide Web and CD-ROM. Once developed these modules will serve students in
a variety of courses including (but not limited to) CS18: Introduction to
Scientific Computing (Furman), PSY22: Experimental and Statistical Methods
(Furman), and Math 210: Multivariate Calculus (Wofford). While development of
a set of common instructional modules for these three courses will be the
primary goal of the project, it is expected that the modules developed will be
applicable to other courses such as (at Furman) CS16: Introduction to
Computing, SOC39: Methods of Social Research, SOC40: Analysis of Social Data,
and PS29: Introduction to Political Analysis, and (at Wofford) Math 181 and
182: Calculus I  & II, CS101: An Introduction to Computers, CS220: Programming
Mathematics and Science Applications, Psych 341 & 342: Experimental Methods I
& II, and Psych 360: Experimental Design.

We believe that learning outcomes for science and mathematics students are
especially enriched by the use of multimedia computing and scientific
visualization. Scientists and mathematicians have long understood the
importance of pictures in perceiving and communicating mathematical models and
concepts and the various functional relationships inherent in quantitative
data sets. Computers have greatly expanded the volume of data that can be
collected and managed, thus driving the need to improve our methods of data
interpretation, modeling, and communication. Importantly, these new computing
capabilities enable scientists and mathematicians to explore alternative and
competing models of the phenomena they are studying.

A crucial element in understanding the interaction among various physical
phenomena is visualizing what is occurring. Visualization through the aid of
computer graphics permits one to realize the effects of a wide variety of
factors and change on a system being studied. Pictures demonstrate relevance
and provide insight in a way that a traditional scientific or mathematical
text cannot. Many scientists and mathematicians think in pictures, and the
visual element makes more research intuitively understandable to students and
the general public.

The goal of the proposed instructional modules is to give science and
mathematics students a solid understanding of how scientific information and
data can be converted, processed, integrated, and distributed using the
computer as a digital common denominator, and how mathematical models and
concepts can be visualized using computer graphics. We expect to do this with
a set of self-paced interactive laboratory instructional modules.

Learning theory researchers agree that laboratory learning is ideal because it
is an active form of learning that engages the student in concrete experiences
that reinforce conceptual understanding. But, because of limits of physical
and human resources, the total amount of course laboratory experiences that
can be offered is often small compared to lectures. Lectures, like other
broadcast methods, are much more efficient. However, the student is often a
passive recipient rather than an active participant. Introductory students
often need timely feedback while they are engaged in study. But access to the
instructor is usually limited to either labs or normal office hours. It would
be desirable, then, if students had improved access to instruction and
assistance at other times.

Computing networks provide a heretofore unexploited alternative to lecture and
traditional lab modes of instruction. For example, some of the envisioned
laboratory activities involve introducing students to the organization and
usage of individual software applications. This, of course, is necessary
before the students can apply these tools to more significant science problems
and tasks. On-line tutorials could be a very efficient delivery mechanism for
these introductions. Students could complete these tutorials at a time and
place that is convenient to their own schedules. On the other hand, students
who have previous experience with these applications would not have to use
valuable lab time on these tutorials.

We expect to explore tutorials for a variety of tools, techniques, and
concepts, including (but not necessarily limited to) MatLab, Mathematica,
Harvard Graphics, and SPSS. Offering on-line tutorials alone would increase
the amount of laboratory time available for more meaningful instruction. But
we expect to go further than basic introductory on-line tutorials. We want to
create interesting and extended examples of the use of these software packages
in conducting meaningful scientific investigations. Working with realistic
data sets increases student interest in course projects and maximizes the
degree to which learning generalizes to real situations. We expect to depend
heavily on the World Wide Web for the presentation and delivery of these
focused advanced learning modules. With both basic and advanced tutorials on-
line, we will be able to use scarce laboratory and classroom time for more
significant investigations and problem-solving activities.

* * *

[ ![](/academics/grants/mellon/visit.gif)
](http://www.furman.edu/~chance/chance.html) **J. Thomas Allen, Jr.  
Computer Science, Furman University  
** CS16: Introduction to Computing

**Bob Chance  
Art, Furman University**

CS 16, Introduction to Computing, is an elective four-hour computer literacy
course offered by the Department of Computer Science at Furman University. The
course is composed of five hours of lectures and a two-hour structured
laboratory experience each week. In lectures, students are introduced to
fundamental concepts that promote a better understanding and assessment of the
capabilities and potential of computing technology. In laboratories and a
required term project, they are exposed to a variety of ways in which this
technology can be employed to perform useful tasks. These hands-on experiences
demonstrate to the students how software applications may be used to solve
problems and produce interesting and valuable results.

In recent years, a number of innovations introduced by the CS Department have
made it an outstanding model for computing literacy courses. With support from
the National Science Foundation (and other grants), we have been able to equip
a teaching theater and laboratory classroom with a network of 31 powerful
multimedia desktop systems. The lab has a variety of useful supporting
equipment. A professional-quality video display and sound systems support both
lectures and labs. The students may employ peripherals such as printers,
scanners, and digital cameras for laboratory and project work. The network
enables collaborative work and sharing of data, and provides access to
electronic mail as well as easy-to-use Internet tools. A variety of state-of-
the-art software applications are likewise available. Naturally, students are
exposed to traditional applications such as word processing, spreadsheets, and
databases. In addition, they are introduced to image processing and graphics,
digital sound recording and editing, digital video, as well as multimedia
authoring tools for integrating these diverse forms of information. Students
also learn how to exploit the vast stores of information on the Internet with
such tools as remote logins, file transfers, search engines, and, of course,
the World Wide Web. Students likewise learn about Web publishing by developing
and posting their own personal pages. Many of the projects also include
content published on the Web. In sum, CS16 exposes the student to a rich
variety of the ways in which informational technology can be exploited for
both professional and personal uses.

The success of the course is underscored by its popularity. Even though it is
an elective, the ten sections offered annually are always filled and often
oversubscribed. (Currently, we are serving between 250-300 students per year,
in spite of the fact that CS16 is not a required course in any curriculum.)

The design of CS16 like many other introductory courses for non-majors is
intended to serve a general audience. Thus, like other broadcast methods, the
same content is packaged and delivered to each recipient. We are all aware of
the economic constraints that warrant the use of such methods for delivering
information. Interestingly, though, our experiences with the use of the
Internet as a delivery medium for information has shown us that narrowcasting
methods are also economically feasible, if developed properly. In other words,
it is possible to tailor information for special interests of selective groups
and deliver it with comparable expense normally associated with mass media
methods. (Think of the many special interest publications supported by the
Internet and the World Wide Web, in particular.) These lessons, we believe,
can be adapted to the educational environment as well.

Very recently, the department has introduced a companion offering, CS18,
Introduction to Scientific Computing, which is based on the successful CS16
model. As the title suggests, CS18 is tailored to serve better the special
needs of students interested in pursuing further study in scientific
disciplines. The actual content of this course mirrors many of the topics
addressed in CS16. The differences are in emphasis and in the type of
experiences chosen for developing specific skills. We believe that CS18 will
be a valuable edition to the general service computing curriculum, and no
doubt will be popular among students in the sciences.But, by the same token,
we believe that there is another natural audience that might benefit by a
refitting of the CS16 model to serve their special interests. A number of
liberal arts students are interested in media arts: commercial graphics and
design, journalism, and communications. Digital informational technology has
had a significant impact on these fields as well. Indeed, professionals in
these areas in the future will become more and more dependent upon computer
technology for their practice. Unfortunately, though, traditional coursework
in these majors is not often equipped or designed to meet these requirements.
Our objective in this proposal is to develop a pilot course based on the CS16
model that is intended for this audience.

We will develop laboratory activities that will be relevant for those in media
arts. This will mean treating traditional subjects that have been heretofore
treated as separate curriculum areas and combining them in new and novel ways.
One of the goals of the courses will be to create in the students a fluency in
the use of the technology so that they will gain a basic knowledge of design
and become confident in using the computer as a design tool.

The class will use as its basis both the study of computers and the principles
and elements of two-dimensional design to address issues where this technology
will facilitate the solution of design problems. In addition to CS16s
conventional topics, the curriculum will include:

  * the development of projects illustrating element of design, 
  * basics of layout including manipulation of space and copy, 
  * basics of typography, 
  * the study of the principles of color theory (using a program design specifically for this purpose) 
  * methods for incorporating digitized photographic images into document layout 
  * development of web pages using the above concepts and web authoring guidelines 

To encourage students to develop their skills even further, we will offer an
option to the normal semester team project. Individuals may choose to submit
an digital portfolio of their own compositions in lieu of a team project.
These studies will result in imagery which will be the core of a digital
portfolio developed over the course of the term. This collection of imagery
will exhibit the students interest in specific uses of design (to include
theater, journalism, communication arts and graphic design) and will display
the students ability to use specific design strategies effectively using
computer technology. Students will be expected to create a personal
visual/artistic statement in this medium.Laboratory experiences in the
techniques of digital imaging and graphics will be the backbone of our
approach. But, we also plan to develop laboratory components that incorporate
these subjects for practical activities involving desktop publishing,
multimedia authoring, and Web publishing.

The faculty member from the Art department would be primarily responsible for
establishing guidelines for these portfolios.

Using the Mellon Course Development Grant this summer we will:

  * articulate guidelines for the course 
  * develop outcomes and objectives that will drive the course 
  * develop a methodology for attaining these goals 
  * develop a body of specific projects to be required of students enrolled in the course 
  * identify texts and references which will be useful in teaching the elements and principles of design 
  * develop resource materials which illustrate various design aspects using the computer and different software packages 
  * create a course syllabus 
  * develop and structure specific methods and tools for evaluation of student performance 
  * articulate a plan for implementation of the course 

During the following year, we will offer at least two sections of the pilot
course (winter and spring, 1998). In its pilot offerings, the faculty member
from the Computer Science department would continue as the primary instructor
for the course. The faculty member from the Art department would be
responsible for conducting several laboratory sessions that explore the
application of principles of graphic design with various digital media. Both
instructors, of course, would collaborate on the development of all laboratory
materials and in the supervision and assessment of the student term digital
portfolio. We believe that this division of labor is more practical for the
pilot offerings given scheduling constraints.

In addition to the normal University teaching evaluation instrument, we will
assess the results of the pilot project with additional strategies. Pre- and
post testing of course outcomes will be used as a means of evaluating
achievement rates. A specially designed questionnaire will be administered to
summarize student perceptions of unique features of the course.

If the pilot is successful, we are very much interested in exploring
additional opportunities for further collaboration in this course and,
perhaps, a follow-up or advanced course. We believe that the prospects are
both exciting and challenging and look forward to an interesting
collaboration.

* * *

[ ![](/academics/grants/mellon/visit.gif)
](http://www.furman.edu/~cblack01/webgreek/) **Christopher Blackwell  
Classical and Modern Languages, Furman University  
** GR 11: Elementary Greek I  
GR 12: Elementary Greek II  
LA 11: Elementary Latin I  
LA 12: Elementary Latin II

Classical languages--which are taught to be read, not spoken--present special
pedagogical challenges. Students have often not read widely in English, and
what they have read is often relatively simple prose. Greek and Latin are
inflected languages, in which the words' spelling rather than their order
determines their grammatical roles. These two facts together lead students to
try to absorb entire sentences at once, which can be overwhelming. The best
way I have found to teach students how to read Greek and Latin is to walk them
through a reading passage, slowly taking on each word, phrase, and clause, as
it comes, in the original word order. By slowing them down any by asking the
right questions, I can lead students to understand a passage of Greek _in
Greek_ (that is, without actually translating it.)

Unfortunately, there is not enough class time to do enough of this, since I
also have to introduce new grammatical concepts, give vocabulary quizzes, and
(ideally) discuss the cultural and historical context in which these languages
developed.

The I would like to undertake would move this pedagogy of  "directed reading"
out of the classroom and onto the world wide web, where it would be available
to students individually, on their own time, and at their own pace. Doing this
would allow me to evaluate individual students' progress, and focus on
individual problems.

There is already a body of electronic pedagogy for Latin and Greek, much of it
useful and innovative. I have written a set of applications to help students
drill themselves on vocabulary and forms, and there are others as well. These
do not, however, help students develop their reading skills. There are also a
number of "rich text" programs. These allow students to read a passage with
the aid of online notes, help, and dictionaries. The Transparent Language
Company's _LatinNow!_ package is an excellent example of this genre.
Middlebury College has developed a Guided Reading template for their
_XMediaEngine_ software, which allow instructors to enter and annotate text
for students' use--the annotations can include video and sound clips as well
as text. But these guided reading applications tend to encourage translation
rather than reading, and encourage too much reliance on reference tools rather
than on contextual insight. Of the packages I have seen, the XMediaEngine
application comes closest to what I would like to use, but even it has
limitations. It presents a text all at once, whereas I am interested in moving
students through a text, a bit at a time, at a deliberate pace. More
important, however, is the limitation imposed by any software application,
which must run on the MacOS or Windows, which must live on a particular
machine and thus be inconvenient for those students who do not have their own
machines, and which cannot easily be modified or updated once it is in the
students' hands.

The project I propose is a web-based pedagogy of directed reading. It will be
easy to manage and easy to access. Since HTML documents are merely text files,
it will be relatively easy to develop an authoring program with which an
instructor can create web-based lessons quickly and easily. So, the project
will involve two parts, to be developed in parallel:

  * A web-based interface for teaching students how to read Greek and Latin, by directing them through passages at a deliberate pace 
  * An authoring system that would allow instructors to enter and mark up reading passages, and that would automatically create HTML documents, ready to be uploaded onto the server. This could be done using any scriptable authoring system that can output text files--Apple/Claris' _Hypercard_ would work, as would Allegient's _SuperCard_ (which is available for MacOS and Windows). 

This is how I foresee the online lessons working. The student calls up the
assigned online reading lesson, a continuous passage from the textbook. She
would then move down the page, section by section. The first would present the
first sense-unit of the first sentence of the passage (in Greek or Latin). She
would be asked one or two questions about the unit and would choose an answer
from a pop-up menu. She would then click a button to move down to the next
screen. This one would present the next sense-unit, with the previous text
present (but grayed-out). After answering one or two questions about this
unit, she would click and move on. ONly once she had reached the end of the
sentence would she be invited to type a translation. At the end of the lesson,
she would click a  "Submit" button, which would email her answers and the
translation to the instructor. I have attached illustrations of three stages
in this process.

I would give two web-reading assignments each week. By getting their answers
and translations by email I could make sure they were doing the assignments
and get a feel for how successfully each student is reading and interpreting
the text. Currently this is often hard to assess when we go through readings
together, in class.

The questions asked of each sense-unit would be very generic, for two reasons.
The authoring system would be easier and faster to use; the instructor could
quickly choose a question from a menu of question-sets. More importantly,
though, the goal of these online lesson is to give students a methodology for
approaching sophisticated texts in Latin and Greek. By limited the range of
questions to a relatively small pool, students would be able to assimilate
them to their own use. Questions that were highly specific would have to be
based on the instructor's prior knowledge of the passage and would be less
useful to students in a broader context.

This description is brief and condensed, and leaves many technical issues
unexplained--the matter of displaying Greek on the web pages, for example. I
will be happy to discuss or clarify any aspects of my proposal with the
committee. I would summarize my proposal thus: I think that the immediacy and
flexibility of the world wide web can be (ironically) useful in teaching
students of Latin and Greek to slow down, analyze, and contextualize their
reading of ancient texts.

* * *

[ ![](/academics/grants/mellon/visit.gif) ](http://www.furman.edu/~dbost/)
**David Bost  
Classical and Modern Languages, Furman University  
** SPN 22: An Introduction to Literature Through Hypertexts

The course that I plan to develop this summer is Spanish 22, advanced
intermediate Spanish. Spanish 22 is a course designed, among other things, to
introduce students of Spanish to reading and the interpratation of basic
literary genres: novel, short story, essay, poetry, and drama. This course is
generally taught in both Fall and Spring terms, and occassionally during
Winter term. The enrollment is 22-25 students per class each time the course
is taught. During the last several years, the Classical and Modern Language
Department has offered this course at least three times per year. The course
can satisfy a number of different requirements: it often serves as the first
course of the Spanish major; it can satisfy the university's general education
requirement for an upper-level humanities course.

My experience using information technology to support my instruction has been
somewhat limited in scope but reasonably effective in application. Ever since
the general availability of e-mail, I have encouraged my students to make full
use of this medium for all levels of communication: assignments, questions
pertaining to course work, submission of essays, etc. I have also made
frequent use of material from the Internet in my introductory and intermediate
language classes: information from foreign news sources, examples of
particular language use in the Hispanic world, interesting web sites in other
countries, etc. This Spring in my Spanish 21 courses(intermediate Spanish) I
plan to make extensive use of the new language laboratory by giving students
assignments that will give them the opportunity to explore the Web.

The title of my Course Project is "Spanish 22: An Introduction to Literature
Through Hypertexts."

I choose texts in this course with a variety of goals in mind. I want the
students to have a linguistically challenging yet accessible text. I want them
to be able to identify with the basic themes and issues of the literary works,
yet I want the students to read about situations that are somewhat uniquie to
Spain or Latin America. I want to strike a balance between peninsular Spanish
texts and Latin American works, including whenever possible literature by
Hispanics in the U.S. One of the most challenging aspects in a course such as
Spanish 22for teachers and students is the problem of historical and cultural
context. Consequently, I find myself constantly mediating between the familiar
and the unfamiliar, explaining bit of culture and history that are often
completely aliean to most students at this level of language study. It is
difficult, if not impossible, to understand many of the literary works that
are routinely taught in Spanish 22 without some understanding of such events
as the Spanish Civil War, the Mexican Revolution, the Cuban Revolution, the
conquest and exploration of America, or the "desaparecidos" (disappeared ones)
of recent Argentinean history, among many, many other occasions. Reading and
understanding literature for most students of Spanish 22 is thus a task that
requires more of them than mere linguistic competence. They must acquire a
foundation in the history and culture embedded in the literary document in
order to comprehend the text. And each text presents the students with a host
of historical and cultural references that require some measure of
explanation.

While it is possible to use texts that are edited for student use-texts with
explanatory prefaces and notes-I have found that most students need far more
in the way of explanation and background than a traditional textbook can
provide. What I envision in my course project is to create a hypertext version
of a book that I have used many times in Spanish 22: Ram on Sender's _Mos en
Millan_. I use this book for several reasons: it is a complete novel, though
it is fairly short(70 pages); it is historically and culturally quite rich;
and it presents charactes and situations the students find appealing. The one
drawback to this work is, perhaps, its greatest strength: its historical
background is quite complicated. There are many references to people, customs,
places, and events that most students, even the best and the brightest, don't
understand. I find myself in most class sessions explaining certain aspects of
Spanish history and politics to help them understand the basis of the novel.
_Pedagogically speaking, I find that the students often become dangerously
dependent upon me and my "answers" to their questions. The focus often shifts
from a student-based approach to a teacher-based approach._

My solution to this inherent danger is to provide the students with a version
of the work that will enable them to read with a great deal more independence,
clarity, and understanding. A hypertext version of the novel with multi-media
"attachments" could begin to do this. Imagine the many different resources
that could help students understand the Spanish Civil War: posters, music,
poetry, film, contemporary newspaper accounts, art, photographs, and even
traditional historical summaries. Not only do I intend to make such items
available through the hypertext version of the novel, I hope to include links
to web sites in Spain(and elsewehere) that will further enliven their reading
and understanding of the text.

At this point I can only imagine how the reading and interpretive process will
differ from a traditional text-based approach. I suspect that students will
spend far more time than ever before with the text, simply because there will
be so much more corollary material to "experience" (I am reluctant to use the
word "read"). And I also suspectthat their reading and learning will be
considerably richer due to their contact with so many potential sources of
information and interpretation. With links to the Web, there are in fact
unlimited resources available to supplement the basic text. I hope to
communicate through this new medium that the interpretation of a literary text
is an extraordinarily complex event that is constantly evolving.

An added benefit to this approach is that it frees up class time to engage in
such activities as group discussions, debates, individual presentations, and
group problem solving. In this way, students have more opportunity in class to
talk, though in a somewhat structured format.

I believe that I can have a version of the novel up and running by the end of
the summer, though by no means a complete version. I can always update and
augment what I realistically expect will be a preliminary rendition of the
novel.

Since I have taught this novel many times, I have a sense of what to expect in
terms of student performance. Though I do not have a formal assessment tool
that could "objectively" measure performance (beyond traditional tests and
exams), I feel that I can intelligently monitor and gauge the degree to which
the student performance might change as a result of this novel medium.
However, I think that the experience of reading will be so fundamentally
different, any comparison wil have to take into account the essentially
distinct operations. Flying and hitchhiking to New York are both methods of
transportation, but beyond that they have little in common.

It is also difficult for me at this stage to predict how this approach to
reading might cut costs, except that eventually students would not have to buy
the book if it were accessible in the language lab. Photocopying costs would
also be reduced.

* * *

**Irene Kokkala  
Biology, Furman University  
** BGY 40: Chordate Morphology and Development

The embryology portion of Chordate Morphology and Development involves a
descriptive approach to embryonic processes using images. We use series of
embryonic stages to follow and study the first appearance and further
development of various structures and organs. In the laboratory portion of the
course the students survey hundreds of microscope slides of embryos. The
embryos used are sea urchin, frog, chicken and pig since the course is of
comparative nature. For each animal we have series of slides

of various stages of development for each of these animals. Some slides
contain a whole embryo others serial sections of embryos. The study of
comparative descriptive embryology is very tedious. Many hours of observation
of sections with the use of microscope. I have been teaching the course in
this way since 1985 and I have never been satisfied with this specific
portion. Recently I have found tutorials on CD-ROM developed for this kind of
course. I reviewed two different ones and I have not been satisfied with these
products. The collection of images is more of a sample size and the tutorials
are not as interactive as I expected. I am sure my students would not fully
benefit from their use.

What I envision is a series of web pages for each animal. All the microscope
images for each stage will be labeled for the identification of the
appropriate structures. The labels with be linked to paragraphs of background
information as necessary and / or other images, relevant graphs, etc. In this
way, the students will have a new way of identifying structures. The
traditional way is looking through the microscope finding a structure and then
looking in a book with images finding the same structure with its identifying
label. Students spend large number of hours trying to identify everything
required. If they had an image as is on the microscope with labels on a
computer screen with hypertext background information they would benefit
greatly. There are three different ways of developing a series of electronic
images. One involves digital camera that can be used in conjunction with a
microscope. The second involves videotaping the slides and digitizing the
images into computer files. The last and more traditional involves the
development of series of color photographs using a camera and scanning the
images. The last I have done already many times but it is extremely time
consuming and it will involve high cost for film purchase and development.

Another aspect of this project involves the development of a test bank for
practice purposes. I would like to have my students take a test on the
computer during which an image will be randomly selected and the student will
be directed to identify a structure. This can also be developed to the point
where students can take tests with results directly sent to my e-mail account.
I do not intend to use this tool to replace all activities in lab. The
microscope work cannot be replaced but it can be enhanced. It will be much
easier for the students to get back to the microscope and identify structure
once they trained on my proposed laboratory tool. The lecture will be impacted
directly based on the background information added in association to each
structure identified. I also plan to enrich the pages with links to relevant
sites. There is a plethora of anatomy related sites I already use.

In order to assess the impact of this project I will include a  "Mail to:"
form on the page, and I will invite the users to e-mail me their comments and
questions. A user - counter will also be a good tool for evaluation of usage
of the site on a daily or weekly basis. The grade distribution of the future
courses compared to the ones taught using traditional means will also be a way
to assess the effectiveness of this project.

* * *

[ ![](/academics/grants/mellon/visit.gif)
](http://www.furman.edu/~dkoppelm/Companion/Companion.html) **Daniel Koppelman  
Music Department, Furman University  
** MUS 21: Basic Theory I  
MUS 22: Basic Theory II  
MUS 23: Basic Theory III

One of the main pedagogical purposes of any first-year college music theory
class is to get students to use their ears in an analytical way. Since music
exists as sounds-in-time (as opposed to words-on-a-page), the study of music
is necessarily different from other non-time-based curricula. Unfortunately,
most of the materials which music teachers traditionally have to work with are
text-based, a situation which often results in students concentrating on the
text rather than the sounds being described by the text. It is one thing to
read about an orchestra, or a chord progression, or a rhythmic pattern; it is
an entirely different experience to listen to examples of these same topics.
With the development of CD-ROM (and, particularly, CD-recordable) technology,
we now have the potential to systematically change the instructional
methodology from text-based to sound-based. The CD companion to Music 21/22/23
will feature the following uses of this technology: (1) digital audio and MIDI
realizations of notated musical examples from the texts, with  "follow the
bouncing ball" synchronization of notation and audio material (digital audio
provides more realistic tonal quality while MIDI provides flexibility of
playback speed plus the ability to listen to various combinations of
instruments); (2) additional audio examples (with questions and answers) to
reinforce concepts introduced in the texts; and (3) extended excerpts and
complete works, demonstrating contextual uses of basic concepts. With the
audio materials literally right at their fingertips, students will take a more
active role in the learning process, developing effective self-study
techniques while improving their aural perception skills. As an added bonus,
instructors will no longer have to spend time preparing and duplicating tapes
to be put on reserve and/or played in class. The CD will contain all necessary
examples, prepared and ready for lecture use, resulting in a more efficient
use of instructor time (both in and out of class).

As important as these aural examples are, they are only one part of the CD
companion. The CD will also contain cross-platform files of all materials
normally photocopied and handed out to students: course syllabi, assignments,
listening lists, supplementary readings, notated examples, etc. Students will
be able to print out whatever files they need, or transfer them to their own
digital storage media (disks, laptops, e-mail accounts, etc). This will not
only relieve instructors and/or secretaries of the drudgery involved with
preparing such handouts, and save money on duplicating costs, but will also
offer students a fail-safe way to replace lost copies, verify test dates,
review course information, and check their class notes against the reference
files.

Self-study aids are the third component of the CD: (1) QuickTime movies of
mini-lectures by Furman music faculty (and possibly upper division Theory
majors) on a variety of relevant topics, and (2) CAI software for individual
drill and practice. In addition to supplementing regular class instruction,
and being available for convenient review, the mini-lectures will foster a
sense of community within the Music Department by providing students the
opportunity to "virtually" meet and learn from a variety of instructors. I
have already developed some CAI software which my students used this past Fall
to improve their skills, and I will continue this development through the
Winter and Spring terms. We have found that while some "off the shelf"
programs are helpful, there is often a difference in terminology or
pedagogical style with the way we wish to teach; developing course-specific
software is the solution to this problem.

The final component of the CD will be links to the already established Web
site for the first-year theory class. These links will direct students to
appropriate help sites and additional off-campus resources. Since the Web site
can be updated freely, it will serve as a good complement to the more static
CD.

* * *

[ ![](/academics/grants/mellon/visit.gif)
](http://www.furman.edu/~markus/math15f.htm) **Lisa R. Markus  
Mathematics, Furman University  
** MTH 15: Ideas in Mathematics

Math 15 (Ideas in Mathematics) will be a new course in Fall 1997. This course
will provide an alternative course to Math 16 (Finite Mathematics) for liberal
arts majors who choose not to do calculus. The catalog description will be the
following:

An examination of the ideas, concepts and paradigms which have had significant
influence on the growth of modern mathematical though, with an emphasis on an
appreciation for the creative side of mathematics and the fundamental role it
has played in the development of modern civilization. Topics will be drawn
from across the spectrum of mathematical thought and will be treated from a
historical and cultural as well as mathematical perspective.

I plan to put the course syllabus, schedule and assignments on the web. I plan
to use hypertext to add background information to the course and cross-
reference mathematical discoveries with the history and culture of where the
mathematics was taking place. For example: When I talk about Egyptian
mathematics, around 1800 BC, I will cover the mathematics in class and provide
internet resources where students can read up on Egyptian Civilization from
the same time period. In class, I can show them a Java Applet which works out
Egyptian fractions, and they can play with this outside of class. (The
Egyptians, around 1800 BC only wrote fractions with a numerator of 1, except
for 2/3 which had its own symbol, even though it could, of course, be written
as 1/2 + 1/6.) Web pages will include pictures of primary sources (such as the
Rhine Papyrus, 1800 BC) and maps of the regions.

After completing the Advanced World Wide Web Workshop, I would like to use
library resources to find articles on using history in teaching mathematics.
Then spend some time reading them and think about ways to incorporated
technology and history together in the teaching of mathematics. Also, I will
do an internet search to see if similar courses are taught at other
institutions. I will develop a web page for each of the topics the class will
cover. On each of the pages I anticipate having information and links for the
history of each topic, the history of the country during that period and the
key mathematicians involved.

I will be spending part of the Summer in California, so I have reserved one of
Furman's Omni Notebooks to take with me. I will be able to work on my project
there with the aid of a local internet provider and the library at Stanford
University.

I am excited that Furman will be offering this new course. I hope that with
the aid of the internet, I can make this course an attractive alternative to
Math 16 for Humanities majors. After taking this class, I hope the students
will have a better appreciation of the creative side of mathematics and the
role mathematics has played in the development of modern civilization.

* * *

[ ![](/academics/grants/mellon/visit.gif) ](http://www.furman.edu/~bschoon)
**Bruce Schoonmaker  
Music Department, Furman University  
** MUS 82: Voice  
MUS 07: Opera Workshop  
MUS 74: Stage Techniques in Opera

want to develop extensive interactive, multimedia materials for voice students
in vocal technique, vocal interpretation, vocal hygiene, operatic stage
techniques, and professional development. Students who take voice or
participate in opera workshop (or opera productions) benefit from external
reinforcement of the concepts being taught in voice lessons, during opera
classes, and rehearsals. I intend these materials to offer external support,
especially for disseminating information that all students need, so that my
time with them individually is used more efficiently. For instance, all
students need help in developing goals and objectives in voice. They need help
in developing strategies for successful practicing, for techniques in
memorizing, for aids in keeping the voice and body healthy, and for
interpreting vocal music. Interactive multimedia learning tools offer the
optimum means of reinforcing these concepts, allowing me to work with the
student through interactive scripting whereby the student focuses on his
individual needs. It allows me to present visual and auditory reinforcement
for proper techniques, inviting the students to emulate correct behavior. They
can also see and hear incorrect techniques. While some of this information
could be presented in the form of printed documents, interactive multimedia
allows the student to see and hear as well as choose to view those areas she
most needs to study. Music ideas present themselves in the branch-like
structure available in multimedia form better than they do in linear, written
form.

A CD offers the best approach to helping students gain information in these
areas by offering printed text in addition to actual music performance in the
form of audio clips and video clips. Singing students need visual
reinforcement of concepts surrounding posture, correct stage presence, and
acting skills in opera. The CD format allows us to teach the skills in an
incremental approach with visual and auditory reinforcement beyond the printed
word.

Students would be able to access on this CD subjects such as:

  * Introduction 
  * Technique 
  * Posture 
  * How to Practice 
  * How to Memorize 
  * How to Interpret Song Literature 
  * The Interrelationship of voice with theory and history 
  * Opera Stage Techniques 
  * Character Development in Opera 
  * How to Audition 
  * On Becoming a Professional Musician 
  * Setting goals 
  * Time Management 
  * Vocal Hygiene 
  * Effects of medication on the voice 
  * Great vocal artists to emulate (including visual and audio clips) 
  * Great operatic actors and singers (including video clips) 
  * WWW links on singing, opera, and acting 

Each segment would feature audio and video clips appropriate to the material
presented. I have often given voice students a list of great singers whose
recordings they might try to find. This technology allows me to give students
the information while presenting audio or video clips of these singers'
greatest moments.

* * *

[ ![](/academics/grants/mellon/visit.gif) ](http://www.furman.edu/~stanford/)
**Richard A. Stanford  
Economics and Business Administration, Furman University  
** ECN 21: Macroeconomic Principles  
ECN 22: Macroeconomic Principles  
ECN A40: Economic Growth and Development  
ECN 41: Money and Banking  
BA 56: Managerial Economics

Using no more than two pages, please explain, in a manner that is
understandable to persons outside your discipline, the course project
development activity you envision. Identify what is novel about your approach
and how the application of information technology is essential to enable your
vision. Specifically, discuss how student learning will be improved by your
approach and identify ways that you could assess that improvement. Discuss, as
appropriate, activities going on at other institutions in your discipline or
in a related discipline that relate to your proposed activity and how you can
benefit from these.

Given my earlier participation in a Mellon Advanced Workshop (summer of 1996),
I am confident that I either already know or can find most of what I need to
learn in regard to multimedia presentation of materials on the web. What I
cannot yet accomplish is enabling a web user to manipulate quantitative
information in a web-accessible software program. The manipulation of
quantitative information is necessary to enable web-based statistical
analyses, gaming, simulation modeling, and multiple-choice interactive drill
with answers randomized before screen presentation.

I have identified two programming languages which should allow me to prepare
such web-implementable software: Web Basic and Java. Web Basic is a plug-in to
Visual Basic. I have acquired Visual Basic and in the near future will begin a
process of familiarizing myself with it and exploring the effectiveness of the
Web Basic plug-in for accomplishing my objective. However, I am skeptical that
Web Basic alone will be sufficient to meet the need, in which case I will have
to resort to the Java programming language. This will require a substantial
learning effort on my part since as yet I have no knowledge of Java. Once I
learn the basics of Java and can begin to gain experience with programming
Java applets, I should be able to transfer the preexisting logic of my ZBasic
computational programs into Java language syntax for web implementation. The
accomplishment of this objective will enable me to introduce interactive
exercises in nearly every one of the courses which I teach. Once these
applications are available on the web, they may be accessed by parties at
other academic institutions as well as by my students at Furman.

As an example of a possible inter-institutional application, students at
Furman and several other institutions may be invited to form teams which
function as operating officers of hypothetical business firms competing with
each other in the same industry and product market. They may submit decision
sets via the web on a period-by-period basis. Performance computations can be
made at the home (Furman) web site and remote players can receive performance
feed-back reports via the web. Similarly, it will become possible for
simulation modeling, economic forecasting, regression analysis, and multiple-
choice interactive drill to be done over the web by students at Furman or by
students at any other institution which has access to the internet.

* * *

**Terry A. Ferguson  
Geology, Wofford College  
** GEO 111: Introductory Physical Geology

The proposed project will involve the developments of an interactive
multimedia presentation of the geology and geophysics of the Rio Grande Rift
of Colorado, during the summer of 1994 I participated in the Summer Applied
Geophysical Experience (hereafter SAGE). During this intensive National
Science Foundation, Los Alamos funded field project I acquired an extensive
knowledge of the geology of the Rio Grande Rift while engaging in in
geophysical investigations. I was also able to fully document graphically the
geology and geophysical study techniques. My project is to take these
materials and produce an interactive field study in Colorado and to show how
on-going geophysical investigations are changing our understanding of this
region and tectonic theory.

I will produce both web and CD-ROM components, primarily using Asymmetric
Toolbook multimedia authoring tools. This project will be novel in that it
will allow me to use a distant and geologically different locality in my
course in a manner similar to that which I currently use South Carolina
localities. I will also be able to show how geophysical research is conducted;
something which is currently difficult due to lack a expensive equipment.

Student learning should be greatly improved through the use of an actual
extended field research experience. By presenting the research materials in a
temporal sequence students will be expected to ask their own questions,
perform their own analyses on the data and then compare their conclusions with
those of the ongoing research. I will assess how the student improvement in
the understanding of the content through the use of interactive questions
throughout the exercises. I will also compare the grade performance on
laboratory reports produced for this interactive  "virtual lab" with those
produced during more traditional laboratory exercises.

* * *

**Bill Teska  
Biology, Furman University**

My immediate objective is to develop interactive materials to assist students
in learning the idectification of mammals, reptiles, and amphibians. Field
Zoology, the course that I teach every other spring, is oriented towart
terrestrial vertebrates(excluding birds). The students learn about the natural
history and biology of these animals during lectures and through readings. In
the laboratories, the students utilize a taxonomic identification key that I
wrote to identiry the common reptiles and amphibians of our region. At
present, the students work with specimens that have been preserved in formalin
and alcohol. These preservatives cause the color of the animals to fade. I
have supplemented their identification with photographic slides and field
guides so that the students can see the animals' true colors. After learning
to identify th animals, there are field trips to observe and study the animals
in their natural habitats. For the Advanced Workshop, I have proposed to
develop at least one interactive taxonomic identification exercise for a
laboratory in Field Zoology. The Course Project, proposed here, will allow me
to continue and greatly expand that activity and to develop materials that
would permit the offering of a new course oriented toward nonmajors in the
natural history of vertebrates.

Because there was not a commercially available a taxonomic key to the
vertebrates of the Southeastern United States, when I developed the
laboratories for Field Zoology; I wrote a 52-page dichotomous key that could
be used by my students. This key, which is text only, leads a student through
the identification of an animal in hand. At each point, it asks the students
to examine the specimen and decide whether the specimen possesses one feature
or an alternate. Once a decision is reached, the student is then directed to
other choices, until all possibilities except one are eliminated. For example,
the key might ask the student to decide whether the specimen has a fold of
skin across its head or whether this feature is absent. Some identification
features depend upon color, which unfortunately has usually faded in preserved
animals. A student might have to examine as many as 20 different attributes of
an animal before identification can be assured. Such a process lends itself
well to an interactive medium because each student proceeds at a different
pace, and through mistakes, must reverse his/her decision path until the
correct decision is made. If the specimen is not present, it would require a
resource that could make available to the student multiple images of an
organism. No one photograph could possibly illustrate all the important
taxonomic features. for example, to identify some frogs, one needs to look at
the back of the head, the size of the external ear drum, the extent of webbing
on the toes, and the presence of spots on the belly. Some even require sounds.
The only way to separate two species of treefrogs is to hear their individual
mating calls.

I propose to develop an interactive multimedia taxonomic key to the reptiles
and amphibians of the Southeastern United States, with supplemental materials
for the mammals. I have not developed a formal dichotomous key for the mammals
because the taxonomy of mammals is dependent upon skeletal features, and
therefore keys that are based upon external characteristics are artificial and
not phulogentically based. Such a key would emphasize features that would
reinforce taxonomically irrelevant points. Nonetheless, supplemental materials
that aid in the identification of mammals are appropriate and highly
desirable; it just would not in the format of a dichotomous key.

The key and materials that I will prepare will include multiple images of the
species to be identified. It would also provide video images of the animals'
characteristic movements, postures, and when appropriate, their sounds.
Computer graphics and imaging could be used to help guide the students to
diagnostic features. The material would be arranged in a flexible, self-
directed, interactive CD-ROM. It would also include self-test exercises that
would allow a student to study those characteristics or animals that require
additional attention. Still images, videos and recordings that could be used
as a starting point. Other photgraphs will need to be made as part of my
activity. It is possible that not all of the reptiles, amphibians, and mammals
in the Southeast will be able to be illustrated. In which case, I will orient
the taxonomic key towards those animals common to South Carolina and the area
near Greenville.

My ultimate goal is to develope a new course offering for Furman's nonmajors.
Through the years, I have discussed the need to have a course that would be
oriented toward the natural history of the vertebrates. One of the stumbling
blocks for such a course, is the dependence upon specimens for the
identification of these animals in the laboratories. Photographic slides could
be used, but students unfamiliar with the animals do not achieve self-
sufficiency in identification through just the use of still photographs. The
CD-ROM materials that I would prepare for Field Zoology will be easily
modified for the use in such a course. Furthermore, since I have taught Field
Zoology repeatedly, I will be able to assess and revise the learning modules
through the use by upper level students in Spring 1998.

I propose to attend at least one professional meeting during Summer 1997 to
discuss with colleagues their efforst to incorporate multimedia and
interactive methods in laboratories to identify mammals, reptiles, and
amphibians. I am familiar with the current methods that are being used to
teach similar courses at the University of Georgia and Michigan State
University, for example. Most faculty use traditional methods based upon
written keys and dead specimens. I am unaware of others who have tailored
multimedia presentations for specific taxonomic courses; but I intend to
discuss this project when I attend these professional meetings.

* * *

[ ![](/academics/grants/mellon/visit.gif)
](http://s9000.furman.edu/~wofford/amwiseman/www/) **AnneMarie Wiseman  
Foreign Languages, Wofford College  
** Cross Cultural Training

I want to design, develop, and implement a course (which has not yet been
approved by the curriculum committee and will therefore be offered on a trial
basis without academic credit) which will prepare students for an academic
experience overseas. The course will have three parts:

  * An orientation - to be completed while the student is still on campus, selecting the program of study, completing the application and preparing for departure. 
  * A section to be completed while overseas, probably in the form of journal entries to be email back to Wofford. 
  * A reintegration section to be completed once the student returned to campus. 

Most of the work for the student will be done in the form of a tutorial
through the world wide web. The student will have certain assignments
(readings, research, interviews of former participants, etc) and will meet
with the foreign study advisor periodically for the tutorial. All of our
foreign study sites now have email available (although not always access to
the www), therefore the  "on-site" portion of the course can be a number of
journal entries or epistolary correspondence with the advisor. The third
portion will mirror the first part, in that wit will once again be in the
format of a tutorial with assignments on the www and several wrap up meeting
with the advisor. An extremely high workload has prevented me from designing
such a course in the traditional sense. I simply could not take on another
teaching assignment. The technology would allow me to begin teaching this very
important component of the foreign study experience.

Since the foreign study semester is evaluated and assessed in a systematic way
(orientation and debriefing sessions, interviews, consortium evaluations,
surveys, questionnaires, statistical information on participation and grades,
foreign language tests, faculty input) I feel that it will be very feasible to
assess the improvement in the students' learning.

I have attended a workshop on using the WWW in the foreign study office, which
was led by the advisor from the University of California at Irvine. I have
also contacted the University of Minnesota and Middlebury College to find out
about their uses of technology in international education. I will also make
use of my electronic discussion group (National Association on Foreign Student
Affairs/Section on Study Abroad) to find out how is best using technology for
advising, orientation, and reintegration purposes.

* * *

**Dennis Wiseman  
Foreign Languages, Wofford College  
** FR 421: French Film Seminar  
FR 304: French Culture and Civilization

Firstly, let me emphasize that this is not a new course that I am proposing
but rather a significant retooling of an already existing course that
underwent significant revision after my participation in an NEH seminar in
contemporary French studies at Northwestern University in the summer of 1995.

I cannot claim to have a vision; my idea is an endeavor to create a set of
multimedia materials that will combine primary source materials in art, music,
and literature with critical documents all of which will serve to use film as
a model which reflects shifts in social behavior in the course of the
twentieth century. (Please don't tell Gerald Thurmond that this is my project.
He might not like someone doing sociology.)

A first unit that I'd like to undertake would treat representation of the
French classroom in film and how those representation illustrate the slow
decay and disappearance of the French Empire from just prior to World War I
through the 1990's.

For example, the film _La Gloire de mon p ere_ is situated in 1906 France; the
classroom is tightly administrated, the teacher a secular humanist believing
in progress through technology. The Empire, subtly suggested in backdrop, was
never stronger. I'd put film clips suggesting this strength, belief, pedagogy
in the company of written documents from Ernst Renan, paintings from Renoir,
Monet, Manet, programmatic musical compositions such as Erik Satie. And then
I'd move to _Le Ch ateau de ma mere_ ( _Gloire_ 's companion piece) which is
sit

