## Technology: Talking About a Revolution

A funny thing happened to Catherine Yoes on her way to getting a Ph.D. in
English last May. She fell in love with computers.

It began innocently enough in 1992, three years into her studies, when Yoes
got her first UCLink account. She started out using e-mail. Soon she was
browsing the World Wide Web, then building her own Web sites and launching
chat rooms and online discussions. She became so fluent in cyberspace acronyms
--HTML, URLs, MOOs, and MUDs--that she began holding workshops for
undergraduates, fellow graduate students, and even professors. After Yoes
completed her Ph.D., her cyberskills landed her a job as technology
coordinator for the Interactive University, the digital arm of Berkeley's K-12
outreach program.

Is this the future of graduate studies?

As recently as three years ago, the Web was the province of only a handful of
self-proclaimed techies. Today it's used everywhere on campus, from University
administration to academic research to classroom teaching.

The University of California, Los Angeles, garnered headlines last fall when
it required all 3,000 of its undergraduate courses to have Web sites.
Nationwide, e-mail is now used in a third of college courses, according to
_The Chronicle of Higher Education_.

Here at Berkeley, about 200 class Web sites are listed in a database assembled
by the Instructional Technology Program (ITP), one of several units on campus
that provide technical services for faculty and graduate students. Since
posting on the database is voluntary, no one on campus really knows how many
courses have Web sites.

What the technology experts on campus do know is that where you find Web
sites, you'll often find graduate students.

"Given the fact that faculty are pretty busy, in many cases graduate students
drive some of this activity," says Diane Harley, academic coordinator of
Berkeley's Center for Studies in Higher Education and recently appointed
executive director of the Berkeley Multimedia Research Center. "They're the
ones who come in with the technical skills. They're the ones who come in and
set up the Web pages and maintain the Web pages--not always, but frequently."

**Technology at Berkeley**

Harley, who holds a Ph.D. in anthropology from Berkeley, has a unique vantage
point from which to observe the Web revolution on campus: She coordinated last
spring's well-received CyberSemester. The University's first "theme" semester,
CyberSemester showcased the ways technology is being used on campus and in
society. Activities ranged from technology-enhanced freshman seminars to
special Library workshops on how to use technology to public forums on
technology's effects.

The [CyberSemester Web site](http://socrates.berkeley.edu/~cybersem/)
(http://socrates.berkeley.edu/~cybersem/) gives an overview of the semester's
accomplishments and provides links to other "hot campus Web sites."

One of CyberSemester's links, for example, takes you to the Institute for
International Studies (IIS) Web site, home of the "[Conversations With
History](http://globetrotter.berkeley.edu/conversations/)" series
(http://globetrotter.berkeley.edu/conversations/). IIS for the past 15 years
has produced an innovative video series featuring conversations with
diplomats, economists, scientists, historians, writers, artists, and other
movers and shakers who have visited Berkeley over the years. Beginning last
spring, this remarkable archive is now available over the Web in text, audio,
and video formats. With a click of your mouse, you can see and hear filmmaker
Oliver Stone discussing history and the movies, Nobel laureate Linus Pauling
relaying his perspective on the peace movement, or Soon Cho, mayor of Seoul,
talking about governing a global city.

These interviews have been videotaped since 1982, clear proof that using
technology to supplement instruction is not new for Berkeley. Software
applications, for example--some developed by faculty or graduate students--are
used in calculus classrooms and language labs. What is new is the World Wide
Web, which didn't become widely used until the development of software
"browsers" just a few years ago made Internet information more accessible.
Consequently, many class Web sites are still works in progress, as faculty
members and graduate students figure out how to best use this new medium or
whether to use it at all.

One of Berkeley's first experiments with the Internet in the classroom,
according to ITP's assistant director, Fred Beshears, was an evolutionary
biology seminar first taught by Professor David Wake as a pilot project in
1994. [ITP helped Wake set up a virtual discussion
group](http://socrates.berkeley.edu:7521/projects/IB160/)
(http://socrates.berkeley.edu:7521/projects/IB160/) that linked students in
the class, via e-mail, to an international network of renowned scholars. The
project was designed to bridge the gap between discussion sections and
textbook material by taking advantage of scholars' increased reliance on
electronic correspondence.

"It was just e-mail and a Web server," says Beshears. "But it was able to
bring in scholars from around the world. Wake had contacts all over the world,
people who wanted to participate in his seminar because he's a leading
authority on evolutionary biology."

Students in Integrative Biology 160: Evolution were required to come up with
questions based on weekly reading assignments and pose their questions to
selected scholars. The remote scholars then posted answers to a class e-mail
list so that everyone could follow the exchange. One measure of the virtual
discussion group's success is that students were motivated to keep up with
heavy weekly reading requirements because they didn't want to ask a foolish
question of a famous biologist.

The value of the virtual discussion group is expected to increase over the
years as the transcripts of past discussions become an ever-expanding resource
for students and other scholars.

A more recent example of this kind of virtual discussion group is a freshman
seminar that Professor Alice Agogino taught last spring called [ Cybercafe:
Lunch With Women Engineers in
Cyberspace](http://best.me.berkeley.edu/~aagogino/e24/e24.html)
(http://best.me.berkeley.edu/~aagogino/e24/e24.html). Students explored Web
sites that featured women engineers and talked with women engineers from
academe and industry using desktop video conferencing speaker phones and
Internet chat sessions, new technologies that allow for synchronous
discussions.

**A Virtual Showcase**

Agogino, professor of mechanical engineering and associate dean of the College
of Engineering, is a leading voice on campus for technology in the classroom.
A class she taught last fall, [ Managing the New Product Development Process:
Design Theory and
Methodology](http://hart.me.berkeley.edu/~aagogino/me290p/f97/index.html)
(http://hart.me.berkeley.edu/~aagogino/me290p/f97/index.html), demonstrates
her most recent use of the Web in the classroom.

The class was made up of graduate students in architecture, business, and
engineering who worked in teams to study market needs and develop product
prototypes to meet those needs. Students came up with such innovative products
as a motion recorder that acts as an "external conscience" to verify
compliance in physical therapy routines and a mechanical toy that operates on
a timer to keep pets entertained while their owners are gone. At the end of
the semester, students held a trade show to present their prototypes.

Agogino, like many instructors using Web sites, posted information about the
class--class schedule, instructors, office hours--along with a syllabus,
lecture notes, and a reading list with links to online sources.

She also listed the students in the class, with optional links to their own
Web sites. And she provided links to other product Web sites to show students
how to find the most up-to-date information for their market research. For
example, the class took apart a Mattel Color Spin toy to study design for
assembly principles; they were able to read a related case study online.

In addition to these uses, the Web site itself became a kind of continual
trade show. Agogino had students post project abstracts and progress reports.
By scanning and then posting slides, students could create multimedia
presentations on the Web that are accessible any time, not just at a scheduled
trade show. Not only did students develop cutting-edge products, they learned
the latest methods to do market research and to, in turn, market their
products, all via the Web. The site also will serve as a class archive, giving
future students the opportunity to learn from past projects.

Particularly useful is the site's [ Resources
Page](http://hart.me.berkeley.edu/~aagogino/me290p/f97/resources.html), a
series of links she provides on how to build and design Web sites
(http://hart.me.berkeley.edu/~aagogino/me290p/f97/resources.html).

**An Art History Experiment**

Some intriguing Web innovations on campus can be found where you might least
expect them: inside humanities classrooms. Take a look at the Web site Carol
Paxson, a graduate student in the Department of History of Art, developed as a
Graduate Student Researcher (GSR) for [Art History
10](http://ishi.lib.berkeley.edu/arthist10), the introductory course for
ancient and medieval art (http://ishi.lib.berkeley.edu/arthist10). The site
was one of seven pilot projects of the [Berkeley Humanities and Technology
Project](http://ishi.lib.berkeley.edu) (http://ishi.lib.berkeley.edu),
directed by Harley and funded by the Dean of Humanities through the Center for
Studies in Higher Education.

The site Paxson developed demonstrates two different approaches to using the
Web. One is essentially a fancy delivery system for posting a class syllabus
and reading list and for reproducing things that happen in class. For example,
in Art History 10, students receive a slide list in class containing all the
artworks they will be discussing, along with dates and other information.
Paxson posted the list, including pictures of the actual artwork, on the site.
This delivery-system approach is used across departments and is typical of
many of the 200 Web sites listed in the [ITP Course Homepage
Registry](http://socrates.berkeley.edu:7521/chpr/)
(http://socrates.berkeley.edu:7521/chpr/).

The second, more innovative approach takes advantage of the Web's
interactivity and engages students in a creative, open-ended process. Paxson
posted a quiz program to help students prepare for exams in which they are
shown slides and asked to identify the artwork, artist, and date produced. The
program allows students to test themselves over and over again, using randomly
chosen artworks. Paxson also posted pictures of important artworks and
encouraged students to discuss them online. She listed themes the professors
hoped to get across in the class and asked students to choose artworks that
illustrated the themes. She offered comparisons of two artworks and asked
students to suggest what each comparison revealed, a common technique in art
history.

Associate Professor Harvey Stahl, who taught the fall 1996 course and helped
Paxson conceptualize the Web site, was particularly pleased with the
interactive component, a kind of virtual classroom. Initially, Stahl
considered the site an experiment, wondering whether the Web could complement
classroom teaching.

Does he consider the experiment a success? Yes and no. Students did use the
comparisons to study for final exams, and they were enthusiastic about the
quiz program and the slide list. But few took part in online discussions.

"The students who used the site were extremely positive," Stahl says. "But the
sampling wasn't as large as we would have liked. Also, because it got started
so late in the semester, there wasn't time to break the ice. We really need
more than one semester to test it."

And here lies one of the problems in the still-evolving field of instructional
technology. A grant to develop a Web site doesn't necessarily include enough
funding to sustain it. A sophisticated Web site like the one Paxson developed
needs regular maintenance, but Paxson's already moved on to another Web
project, heading up the art history department's program with the Interactive
University. As for other art history graduate students, they lack Paxson's
experience, which includes a master's degree in computer science.

Paxson assesses the experiment this way: "Students used the site to help them
get control of the basic facts of the class--artworks and dates--but not to
move on to the higher level of discussion, which is what we were really hoping
to promote."

So was she disappointed? A little. Has she given up on the Web?

"I haven't given up at all," she says. "I still think that, given time and
more practice, students might use a site like ours to have a free-form
discussion about art."

**Oral History as Multimedia**

Student involvement is also a key concern of Sarah Lau, a graduate student in
the Department of Ethnic Studies who developed the [Asian American Oral
History Site](http://www.itp.berkeley.edu/~asam150/)
(http://www.itp.berkeley.edu/~asam150/). The project is the class Web site for
Asian American Studies 150: Gender and Generation in Asian American Families,
taught by Professor Evelyn Nakano Glenn.

In Glenn's class, students research and write their family histories. The
resulting stories--of a grandmother's life in a small village in China, of a
mother's escape from Vietnam, of entrepreneurial immigrant parents--make up a
vivid history of Asian Americans, told one family at a time.

That's all very interesting, you may say, but what does it have to do with the
Web? Students have researched and written papers long before anyone linked the
words "instruction" with "technology."

This is where Lau comes in. Oral history, she points out, was "multimedia"
long before the term was coined.

"Think about how people do oral history research," she says. "They'll tape or
videotape interviews, then they'll do text transcripts. Maybe they'll use
excerpts of the text transcripts in their written essay or book. But it's
very, very flat. It's static. It's not interactive. And it's not the original
source material itself."

Posting photographs and video and audio excerpts on the Web is a way of
"getting back in touch with the original source material as opposed to having
that molder in a box in somebody's garage."

So in addition to telling their stories in text, students post family
photographs, maps, and documents. Click your mouse on an audio icon, and you
can hear excerpts of interviews. Another click links you to related Web sites
on Asian American literature, history, or organizations. A timeline plots each
family's story against key moments in Asian American history.

Lau hopes that the Asian American Oral History Site, which is ongoing, will
eventually become a research source not just for students in the class but for
graduate students, faculty members, and other researchers, especially five
years down the road as the number of students contributing to the site
continues to grow.

"Participating students get a chance to do original research and interviews,
learn how to create Web sites, and think of themselves as scholars," says Lau.

**From Plato to the Web**

Exciting as these examples are, not all graduate students are taking part in
the Web revolution or are even convinced it is a revolution. The same holds
true for faculty. The World Wide Web has been hailed as a technological
breakthrough that will radically change higher education as we know it. Then
again, it's been dismissed as a fad that will have as little impact on
teaching as the last technological revolution, television, did. Then the
byword was distance education, with televised lectures touted as replacing the
classroom experience.

"Obviously, television is pervasive in our living rooms," say ITP's Beshears,
"but on college campuses, at least in this country, it really didn't change
things that much. It didn't really change the nature of the faculty role. So
if you look at that example, you come away from it saying, 'Gee, will the same
thing happen with computers? Will all this hype about the Internet subside?'"

Beshears asks this question because he likes to answer it with a resounding
no.

One major difference between television and computers, he notes, is that
computers are more integral to our lives. We use computers as a tool: for
spreadsheets, computer-aided design, or simply for word processing. We use
them to send e-mail and to gather information via newsgroups or the Web.

Beshears may be a computer whiz, but talking about technology takes him back
to the philosophy he once studied as an undergraduate. To find a comparable
example in which technology really made a fundamental difference in
instruction, he says, you have to go back farther than television. You have to
go all the way back to Plato.

"In the history of philosophy, it's quite clear that Socrates did not write.
We learned everything about Socrates from his graduate student, Plato," says
Beshears. "Prior to the advent of writing, the educational establishment of
Greece consisted largely of poet societies. Poetry was not just an art form,
it was a teaching technique to help pass the knowledge from one generation to
the next. There was a great deal of consternation about the advent of writing.
Educators in that era were afraid that technology was going to replace
educators, the poets."

As we now know, education flowered after the introduction of writing. And this
is where Beshears brings the conversation back to the World Wide Web.

"Inevitably," he predicts, "when we look back at this period of time, it will
be as significant as the introduction of writing technology a couple of
thousand years ago."

**The Skeptics**

Of course, we don't yet have the benefit of looking back on the Web
revolution. So, for the time being, the reviews are more mixed.

"I would say the majority of faculty use e-mail," Harley says, "if for no
other reason than research. It's become an important part of doing research in
any discipline. I don't think anyone would quibble with the fact that e-mail
has strengthened these global networks of scholars."

The degree to which faculty use technology in teaching, she says, is much less
pervasive. Many professors feel that technology doesn't necessarily enhance
the classroom experience.

"And they may be right," she adds. "There is no consensus. The jury's still
out on what it does for teaching."

Yes, there are success stories, like Lau's. "I've heard of a number of cases
where faculty are quite amazed when students post their own papers on the Web
for class discussion and critique," Harley says. "The quality of the writing,
in fact, goes up."

But faculty have reservations as well. One of the biggest fears about
technology, says Harley, is the depersonalization of the educational
experience.

"You could argue," she adds, "that perhaps it's already pretty depersonalized
in some situations." After all, undergraduates in a lecture course with two or
three or four hundred other students aren't exactly having one-on-one contact
with the faculty member.

Faculty also worry that students may confuse surfing the Web with scholarly
research. How will they determine whether a certain Web site is or isn't a
good source? And then there's the issue of how lifting information off the Web
and dropping it into a research paper makes plagiarism easier than ever.

In addition to doubts like these, faculty have other, more personal, concerns,
like time and money.

"Faculty have a lot on their plates," Harley points out. "They teach, they do
research, and they have administrative obligations, committees and so on. It's
immensely time consuming to make technology a part of your life. It's supposed
to save time, but the fact of the matter is, it takes a lot of time."

And the time they do put into technology has not yet translated into tenure
and promotion.

Graduate students certainly have similar problems when it comes to lack of
time. In addition, they have another reason to fear getting too involved in
technology: Stories abound of graduate students getting so caught up in Web
work that they never finish their Ph.D.'s. (Yoes, by the way, is an exception,
but then she's a Texan and attributes finishing her program to what she calls
"sheer perversity.")

As for rewards--career or financial rewards--that's still open to debate.

"Of the students who've worked for me, there's no question this is a bird in
the hand," says Harley. "They know they'll get jobs in some form or another
with these skills."

Tenure-track faculty positions? Harley admits that that's harder to predict.

**A Teaching Revolution?**

With Lau and with other graduate students, talking about the Web leads to
talking about a shift away from lectures and toward making students more
active participants in the learning process. Beshears, ever the philosopher,
likens such talk to a Copernican Revolution, with students replacing faculty
members as the center of the academic solar system. The real revolution, then,
perhaps is not so much about technology as it is about teaching.

Whether they want sweeping or incremental changes, whether they define
themselves as radical or mainstream, everyone interviewed for this story--even
the most ardent techie--agrees that technology is only a tool. A cool tool,
but a tool.

"Just as teachers have always debated how to improve classroom discussions,
they'll have to figure out how to make the Web worthwhile," says Will Murray,
a Graduate Student Instructor (GSI) in the Department of Mathematics. "It is
one thing to set up a newsgroup and another to make the resulting discussion
productive. I think this will require a mix of old-fashioned pedagogy and
skills that have only recently become important, like how to teach students to
cope with information overload and weed out comments that are incorrect or
irrelevant."

Murray credits workshops like a noon forum on teaching and technology
sponsored by the Graduate Student Instructor Teaching and Resource Center last
fall with helping him figure out how to combine pedagogy and technology. Which
brings us back to Yoes, who led that workshop.

Yoes firmly believes that problems attributed to technology are really
problems of teaching. Take the problem of getting students to participate in
online discussion groups.

"Getting students to understand this is a discussion, an exchange of ideas, is
harder than teaching them to log on," Yoes says. "People don't know how to do
research. They don't know how to have a discussion."

The Web, she says, can be a tool to help promote discussion. The fact that
it's a "weird and new" tool may actually help students see previously routine
assignments in a new way.

**Web Tips**

In the workshops she leads for graduate students, Yoes provides the following
tips from her own backlog of successes and what she calls "interesting
failures":

  * Ask your students how easily they can log on to check their e-mail or a class Web site. Access to the campus Web server, especially from home, can be excruciatingly slow. You can't use a mailing list or update a page and expect students to get the information the next day if they only check once a week. 

  * Because people learn differently, even students who have very good access to computers may still prefer hard copy. Rather than be frustrated, be flexible: Give them paper. 

  * In setting up e-mail discussions, you need to set up some guidelines, or a handful of students may dominate the discussion. Yoes handles this by making online discussion 10 percent of the grade and requiring students to send 10 messages over the semester (and not all in the very last week). She also discourages monopolizers by offering students credit for the 10 messages only. 

  * Chat rooms need structure. You can't just say, "I've set up a chat room, go talk." The trick is not just figuring out how to use the technology but what to do with it. 

  * It's not fair to ask people to do things that you haven't given them the skills to do. You shouldn't just say, "Okay, everybody make a Web page." Instead, reserve a computer lab for your class and show your students how things are done. 

When using a computer lab, however, be prepared for equipment to fail or a Web
link not to work. It happens! Remember, you can always improvise with paper
and pencil.

  * If you're using a computer lab, don't give your students the information they'll need to log on until you've finished lecturing. Otherwise, they'll be sitting in the back of the class checking out something like the Bart Simpson Web site.

One final note: "There isn't any need for professors or GSIs to be gurus when
it comes to the World Wide Web or instructional technologies," says Lau, who
sometimes teaches workshops with Yoes. "That's the function of people like
myself--Graduate Student Researchers working at ITP--and the ITP staff. We're
the bridge between the pedagogy--the teaching, learning, and conceptualization
of a particular class--and how you use instructional technologies."

So, if you want to get your class up on the Web, first check with your
department to see what (if any) facilities are available. Then, talk with the
people at [ITP](http://www.itp.berkeley.edu) (642-1668;
http://www.itp.berkeley.edu), the [Teaching
Library](http://www.lib.berkeley.edu/

TeachingLib/) (643-9959; http://www.lib.berkeley.edu/TeachingLib/), or the
[Office of Media Services](http://www-oms.berkeley.edu/index.html) (643-8637;
http://www-oms.berkeley.edu/index.html). They're the campus experts. Yoes even
provided us with her own handy guide to the best computer resources, a list
she distilled during her years as a GSI (see [Tech Resources for
GSIs](s98tecre.htm)).

Finally, keep in mind what technology can't do. In Lau's words, "Technology
can't take the place of the teacher, the individual human mind that conceives
of the idea. Technology is an instrument, a medium, a tool. Yes, it has the
power to do some very transforming things. But what inspires that, what drives
that, is teachers and students."

_What do you think the Web means for graduate education specifically and for
higher education in general? E-mail us at[
gradpub@uclink4.berkeley.edu](mailto:gradpub@uclink4.berkeley.edu). We'll post
your comments on the Graduate Division Web site
(http://www.grad.berkeley.edu/). _

* * *

[[Table of Contents/Spring 1998](index.html)]
[[Publications](../../index.shtml)] [[Graduate Division
Home](../../../index.shtml)]

* * *

  

