[![](/programs/images/header_white_01.gif)](/) |
[![](/programs/images/header_socfound.gif)](/cgi-pub/programs/socfound)|  
---|---|---  
![](/programs/images/header_uga.gif)  
  
**_Summer Semester 1999  
  
_**

**_EFND 8210: MULTICULTURAL EDUCATION Research Seminar_**

|  Instructor:  |    |  Dr. Mary M. Atwater  
  
  
---|---|---  
Day & Time:  |   |  Monday - Friday, 10:30- 12:45 am  
  
  
Location:  |   |  215 Aderhold Hall  
  
  
Office:  |   |  212 Aderhold Hall  
  
  
Phone:  |   |  Office (706) 542-1763; Home (706) 613-9644  
  
  
Office Hours:  |   |  Tuesday, Thursday, 9:30-10:25 am  
  
  
  
This three semester course is designed for graduate students who plan to
conduct research in the field of multicultural education. The focus of this
course is on the research that relates to assessment and evaluation,
curriculum, learning, teaching, and educational policies and practices of
cultural groups found in the United States. It will cover such topics as
critical theory, feminist theory, Afrocentricity, social justice, culture,
class, language, gender, ethnicity, life styles, oppression and
discrimination, and empowerment. This is an upper level graduate course on the
influential research studies in the discipline of multicultural education.
Graduate students are expected to attend class, be involved in class
discussions based on readings, make a multicultural education research
presentation, and complete a culminating multicultural education research
project related to their discipline. The research project can utilized the
following methodologies: experimental research methods, qualitative research
methods, survey research methods, and secondary data methods which include
historical research methodologies. Readings, group activities, and projects
will be components of the course. The maximum enrollment for the course is 25.  
  

**_GOALS OF THE COURSE  
  
_**

  1. To aid students to develop their knowledge and skills about the influential research in multicultural education.   
  

  2. To facilitate students' construction of the causes that hinder multicultural education research.   
  

  3. To assist students in understanding the ways in which research has been used to support oppression and structural inequities that exist in their own lives.   
  

  4. To help students conduct multicultural education research projects in their areas of study.   
  
  

**Materials for the Course:**  
  
Textbook: No assigned textbook. Suggested book: _Handbook of Research on
Multicultural Education_ edited by James Banks and _Dictionary of
Multicultural Education_ edited by Carl A. Grant & Gloria Ladson-Billings.
There are assigned readings. A tape recorder and tapes are needed if you plan
to do a qualitative research project.  
  

**_REQUIREMENTS  
  
_**

  1. Mandatory class attendance   
  

  2. Participating in class discussions   
  

  3. Group or individual presentation on a multicultural education topic in the course   
  
Your presentation provides the opportunity and impetus for you to apply,
explore, and test the materials from the multicultural education readings and
class discussion in different settings. Your presentation must be related to
one of the identified topics in the syllabus. The presentation can be given by
a group of three or less. Your presentation must be approved by the
instructor. You will determine the date of your presentation. Please be
prepared to make the presentation at the scheduled time.  
  

  4. Individual multicultural education research project completed. Your project will provide you with the practice of both writing and presenting your research project. It will facilitate your mastery of multicultural education research theories and techniques that are important in multicultural education research. The research project can be related to any topic in multicultural education, however if must focus on one or more cultural groups found in this country such as females, Irish-Americans, Mexican Americans, African Americans, and Chinese Americans. For example, it could be related to your classroom teaching, assessment and evaluation of some multicultural education activities for your discipline, a mini-research project, or a historical in-depth investigation of an area of multicultural education. The instructions for **doing** project may seem vague to you because it is an open-ended assignment. There are no set answers or endings, and part of the project will be figuring out a way to do it that works best for you. However, if you don't understand the **purpose** of the project, **DEMAND** an explanation. If you need additional assistance, please do not hesitate to visit with me during my office hours or make an appointment. I am here to help you to develop and grow.   
  

  5. Completion of a take home midterm examination   
  

  6. Students are required to become informed of the standards of academic honesty at the University of Georgia. Please read these standards. Honesty and ethical behavior are expected and demanded in the profession. If you are willing to cheat to obtain a better grade, then you will be willing to cheat on your research or to discuss students' performance and problems with just anyone, treat people unfairly in classes to impede their learning, support other people's unethical behavior, or fail to report dishonesty. If you are willing to take the easy way out by getting credit for group work in which you did not help create, or copying other works without giving the authors credit, won't you do it again. Students and professors have a responsibility of creating a professional and ethical environment in classes. The following examples constitute academic dishonesty in my class. This list is not exhaustive, but it serves only as an illustration.   
  

    1. Writing papers in which others' ideas are used without giving them credit. Plagiarism   
  

    2. Giving dishonest excuses for missing class or class assignments.   
  

    3. Copying the efforts of someone else on written assignments.   
  

    4. Attempting to undermine your partner's efforts during your presentation.   
  

    5. Copying another's answers on an examination or quiz.   
  

**_Grading_**  
  
Weighting  
  

Classroom Participation  
  
|  15%  
---|---  
Take-home Examination  
  
|  30%  
Student Oral Presentation of Research Project  
  
|  25%  
Student Written Presentation of Research Project  
  
|  30%  
  
Criteria for Grading Assignments  
  

Accuracy  
  
|    |  1 2 3 4 5  |   |  30%  
---|---|---|---|---  
Creativity  
  
|   |  1 2 3 4 5  |   |  10%  
Difficulty  |   |  1 2 3 4 5  
  
|   |  35%  
Thoroughness  |   |  1 2 3 4 5  
  
|   |  25%  
Grading Scale  
---  
100-90  |  A  
89-80  |  B  
79-70  |  C  
69-60  |  D  
<60  |  F  
  
  
  
  
**SCHEDULE**  
  
_EFND 8210  
  
MULTICULTURAL EDUCATION RESEARCH SEMINAR  
  
_

**June 14 Introduction and Overview of Course**  
  
**June 15,16** Norman K. Denzin & Yvonne S. Lincoln. (1994). Introduction:
Entering the field of qualitative research. In N. K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln,
(Eds.), _Handbook of qualitative research._ Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE
Publications.  
  
**June 17** Patti Lather. (1994). In B. F. Crabtree, W. L. Miller, R. B.
Addison, V. J. Gilchrist, & A. Kuzel (Eds.), _Exploring collaborative research
in primary care_ (pp. 103-114). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.  
  
**June 18** Grant, C. A. & Millar, S. (1992). Research and multicultural
education: Barieers, needs, and boundaries. In C. A. Grant (Ed.), _Research
and multicultural education: From the margins to the mainstream._ Washington,
DC: Falmer Press.  
  
**June 21** Shirley Brice Heath. (1995). Ethnography in communities: Learning
the everyday life of America's subordinated youth. In J. A. Banks (Ed.).
_Handbook of research on multicultural education_ (pp. 114-128). New York:
Macmillan Publishing USA.  
  
**June 22** Kathleen Bennett. 1991). Doing school in an urban Appalachian
first grade. In C. E. Sleeter (Ed.), _Empowerment through multicultural
education_ (pp. 27-48). Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.  
  
**June 23** Christine E. Sleeter & Carl A. Grant. 1991). Mapping terrains of
power: student cultural knowledge versus classroom knowledge. In C. E. Sleeter
(Ed.), _Empowerment through multicultural education_ (pp. 49-68). Albany, NY:
State University of New York Press.  
  
**June 24,25** Stanley Aronowitz. (1997). Between nationality and class.
_Harvard Educational Review,_ 67(2), 188-207.  
  
**June 28** Sonia Nieto. (1992).Chapter 4 and Case studies: Avai Abramson: I
didn't know what to expect 'cause it was such a different curriculum. In S.
Nieto (Ed.), _Affirming diversity: The sociopolitical context of multicultural
education_ (pp. 87-97). New York: Longman.  
  
**June 29, 30** Kevin G. Welner & Jeannie Oakes. (1996). (Li)ability grouping:
the new susceptibility of school tracking systems to legal challenges.
_Harvard Educational Review,_ 66(3), 451-470.  
  
**June 30, July 1** Ardy Bowker. (1993). An overview of the history and
politics of Indian education in America. _Sisters in the blood: The education
of women in Native America._ (pp.13-28). Newton, MA: WEEA Publishing Center,
Education Development Center, Inc.  
  
**July 2** Pauline Lipman. (1997). Restructuring in context: A case study of
teacher participation and the dynamics of ideology, race, and power. _American
Educational Research Journal,_ 34(1), 3-38.  
  
**July 3** Olugbemiro J. Jegede (1997). Traditional cosmology and collateral
learning in non-western science classrooms. _Effects of traditional cosmology
on science education._ Report on an international scientific research program
(joint research). Mito, Ibaraki: Grant-in-aid for Scientific Research.  
  
**July 5** Holiday  
  
**July 6** Mara Sapon-Shevin. (1993). Gifted education and the protection of
privilege: Breaking the silence, opening the discourse. In M. Fine & Lois
Weis, _Beyond silenced voices: class, race, and gender in United States
Schools (pp. 25-44)._ Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.  
  
**July 7, 8, 9** Research Project Presentations  
  
  

**_MULTICULTURAL EDUCATION  
  
_**

**_EFND 8210 BIBLIOGRAPHY_**  
  

**Books on Multicultural Education  
  
**

Atwater, M., Radzik-Marsh, K.,  & Strutchens, M. (1994). _Multicultural
education: Inclusion of all._ Athens, GA: The University of Georgia.  
  
Banks, J. A. (194). _An introduction to multicultural education._ Boston:
Allyn and Bacon.  
  
Banks, J. A. (1994). _Multiethnic education: Theory and practice._ Boston:
Allyn and Bacon.  
  
Banks, J. A.,  & McGee Banks, C. A. (1993). _Multicultural education: Issues
and perspective._ Boston: Allyn and Bacon.  
  
Bernal, M. (1987). _Black Athena: The Afroasiatic roots of classical
civilization Volume I: The fabrication of ancient Greece 1785-1985._ New
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.  
  
Bernal, M. (1991). _Black Athena: The Afroasiatic roots of classical
civilization. Volume II: The archeological and documentary evidence._ New
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.  
  
Bowker, A. (1993). _Sisters in the blood._ Newton, MA: WEEA Publishing Center.  
  
Cushner, K., McClelland, A.,  & Safford, P. (1992). _Human diversity in
education: An integrative approach._ New York: MacGraw-Hill, Inc.  
  
Graff, G. (1992). _Beyond the culture wars._ New York: W. W. Norton  &
Company.  
  
Kozol, J. (1991). _Savage inequalities: Children in America's schools._ New
York: Crown Publishers, Inc.  
  
Lynch, J. (1984). _The multicultural curriculum._ London: Batsford Academic
and Educational Ltd.  
  
Nieto, S. (1992). _Affirming diversity: The sociopolitical context of
multicultural education._ New York: Longman Publishing Group.  
  
Preston, P. W. (1997). _Political/cultural identity: Citizens and nations in a
global era._ Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.  
  
See, L. A. (1986). _Tensions and tangles between Afro Americans and Southeast
Asian refugees._ Atlanta, GA: Wright Publishing Company.  
  
Takaki, R. (1993). _A different mirror: A history of Multicultural America._
Boston: Little, Brown and Company.  
  

**Articles on Multicultural Education Issues  
  
**

Atwater, M. M. (1994). Cultural diversity in the learning and teaching of
science. In D. Gabel (Ed.), _Handbook of research on teaching and learning of
science_ (pp. 558-576). York, PA: MacMillan Publishing Company.  
  
Atwater, M. M. (1990). Multicultural science education: Assumptions and
alternative views. _The Science Teacher,_ 60(3), 32-37.  
  
Banks, J. A. (1993). The canon debate, knowledge construction, and
multicultural education. _Educational Researcher,_ , 4-14.  
  
Banks, J. A. (1993). Multicultural education: Development, dimensions, and
challenges. _Phi Delta Kappan,_ , 22-28.  
  
Delpit, L. D. (1986). Skills and other dilemmas of a progressive black
educator. _Harvard Educational Review,_ 56(4), 379-385.  
  
Ehrenberg, R. G.,  & Murphy, S. H. (1993). What price diversity? _Change,_
25(4), 64-73.  
  
Grant, C. A. (1994). Challenging the myths about multicultural education.
_Multicultural Education,_ 2(2), 4-9.  
  
Gordon, B. M. (1990). The necessity of African-American epistemology for
educational theory and practice. _Journal of Education,_ 17(2), 88-106.  
  
Hill, P. J. (1991). Multi-culturalism: The crucial philosophical and
organizational issues. _Change,_ 23(4), 38-47.  
  
Howe, I. (1991). The value of the canon. _The Republic,_ 3967, 40-47.  
  
Schensul, J. J.,  & Carroll, T. G. (1990). Visions of America in the 1990's
and beyond: Negotiating cultural diversity and educational change. _Education
and Urban Society,_ 22(4), 339-345.  
  
Sigel, F. (1991). The cult of multiculturalism. _The New Republic,_ 3966,
23-39.  
  
Takaki, R. (1994). Reflections from a different mirror. _Teaching Tolerance,_
3(1), 11-15.  
  
Washburn, D. E. (1994). Let's take a hard look at multicultural education.
_Multicultural Education,_ 2(2), 20-23.  
  

**Oppression, Discrimination, and Racism  
  
**

Apple, M. W. ( ). Producing inequality: Ideology and economy in the national
reports on education (AESA R. Freeman Butts Lecture - 1986).  
  
Frere, P. Translated by Ramos, M . B. (1994). _Pedagogy of the oppressed._ New
York: Continuum.  
  
Habermas, J. Translated by Shapiro, J. M. (1971). _Knowledge and human
interests._ Boston: Beacon Press.  
  
Habermas, J. Translated by McCarthy, T. (1984). _The theory of communicative
action: Reasons and the rationalization of society._ Boston: Beacon Press.  
  
Helms, J. E. (1992). _A race is a nice thing to have._ Topeka, KS: Content
Communications.  
  
Nieto, S. (1994). Moving beyond tolerance in multicultural education.
_Multicultural Education,_ 1(4), 9-12,35-38.  
  
Sleeter, C. E. (1994). White racism. _Multicultural Education,_ 1(4), 5-8,39.  
  
Scheurich, J. J. (1993). Toward a White discourse on White racism.
_Educational Researcher,_ 22(8), 5-10.  
  
Tatum, B. D. (1992). Talking about race, learning about racism: The
application of racial identity development theory in the classroom. _Harvard
Education Review,_ 62(1), 1-24.  
  
Walsh, C. E. (1991). _Pedagogy and the struggle for voice: Issues of language,
power, and schooling for Puerto Ricans._ New York: Bergin  & Garvey.  
  
Young, I. M. (1992). Five faces of oppression. In T. E. Wartenberg (Ed.).
_Rethinking of power_ (174-195). New York: State University of New York Press.  
  

**Equity  
  
**

Baptiste, Jr., H. P., Waxman, H. C., deFelix, J. W.,  & Anderson, J.E. (Eds.).
(1990). _Leadership, equity, and school effectiveness._ London: Sage
Publications.  
  
Secada, W. G. (1994). Equity and the teaching of mathematics. In M. M.
Atwater, K. Radzik-Marsh, and M. Strutchens (Eds.), _Multicultural education:
Inclusion of all._ Athens, GA: College of Education, The University of
Georgia.  
  
Secada, W. G. (1990). Race, ethnicity, social class, language, and achievement
in mathematics. In D. Grouws (Ed.), _Handbook of research on mathematics
teaching and learning._ New York: Macmillan.  
  
Weinberg, M. (1994). _Multicultural Education,_ 1(4), 13-16.  
  

**Learning in Multicultural Contexts  
  
**

Bishop, A. J. (1988). Mathematics education in its cultural context.
_Educational Studies in Mathematics,_ 19, 179-191.  
  
Fasheh, M. (1982). Mathematics, culture, and authority. _For the Learning of
Mathematics,_ 3(2), 2-8.  
  
Fordham, S. (1993).  "Those loud black girls": (Black) women, silence, and
gender "passing" in the academy. _Anthropology and Education Quarterly,_
24(1), 3-32.  
  
Harris, M. (1987). An example of traditional women's work as a mathematics
resource. _For the Learning of Mathematics,_ 7(3), 26-28.  
  
Kohl, H. (1992). I won't learn from you! Thoughts on the role of assent in
learning. Rethinking Schools, _Autumn,_ 16-19.  
  
McLean-Donaldson, K. B. (1994). Through students' eyes. _Multicultural
Education,_ 2(2), 26-28.  
  
Novak, J. D. (1993). _Meaningful learning: The essential factor for conceptual
change in limited or inappropriate propositional hierarchies (LIPHs) leading
to empowerment of learners._ Paper presented at the Third International
Seminar on Misconceptions and Educational Strategies in Science and
Mathematics, Ithica, NY.  
  
Saxe, G. B. (1988). Candy selling and math learning. _Educational Researcher,_
August-September, 14-21.  
  
Saxe, G. B. (1988). The interplay between children's learning in school and
out-of-school contexts. In M. Gardner, J. Greeno, F. Reis,  & A. Schoenfeld
(Eds.), _Toward a scientific practice of science education._ Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.  
  
Saxe, G. B.  & Posner, J. (1983). The development of numerical cognition:
Cross-cultural perspectives. In H.P. Ginsburg (Ed.), _The development of
mathematical thinking_ (pp. 291-317). New York: Academic Press, Inc.  
  
Strike, K. A., & Posner, G. J. (1992). A revisionist theory of conceptual
change. In R.A. Duschl & R.J. Hamilton (Eds.), _Philosophy of science,
cognitive psychology, and educational theory and practice_ (pp. 147-176).
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.  
  

**Communication  
  
**

Kochman, T. (1981). _Black and white: Styles in conflict._ Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.  
  

**Teaching in Multicultural Contexts  
  
**

Bowers, C. A.,  & Flinders, D. J. (1990). _Responsive teaching: An ecological
approach to classroom patterns of language, culture, and thought._ New York:
Teachers College Press.  
  
Cardenas, J. A. (1986). The role of Native-language instruction in bilingual
education. _Phi Beta Kappan,_ 67(5), 358-363.  
  
Cochran-Smith, M.  & Lytle, S. (1992). Interrogating cultural diversity:
Inquiry and action. _Journal of Teacher Education,_ 43(2), 104-115.  
  
Gill, D.,  & Levidow, L. (Eds.). (1987). _Anti-racist science teaching._
London: Free Association Press.  
  
Haller, E. J. (1985). Pupil race and elementary school ability grouping: Are
teachers biased against black children? _American Educational Research
Journal,_ 22(4), 465-483.  
  

**Multicultural Curriculum  
  
**

Atwater, M. M. (1992). Textbook selection: In J. P. Riley (Ed.). _A guide to
curriculum planning for science education grades K-4._ Atlanta, GA: The
Georgia Department of Education.  
  
Baptiste, Jr., H. P. (1989). Multicultural education and urban schools from a
sociohistorical perspective: Internalizing multiculturalism. In J.L. Burdin
(Ed.), _School leadership: A contemporary reader_ (pp 187-204). Newbury Park,
CA: UCEA & Sage Publications.  
  
Garcia, R. & Baptiste, H. P. (1990). Minority recruitment and retention in
teacher education. _Teacher Education and Practice,_ 6(2), 13-21.  
  
White, B. (1990). Schools try offering more than academics for troubled kids.
_The Atlanta Journal and Constitution,_ January 31, 1990, page A1.  
  

**Assessment and Evaluation  
  
**

Darling-Hammond, D. (1994). Performanced-based assessment and educational
equity. _Harvard Educational Review,_ 64(1), 5-30.  
  
Hanson, F. A. (1993). _Testing testing: Social consequences of the examined
life._ Berkeley: University of California Press.  
  
LaCelle-Peterson, M. W. (1994). Is it real for all kids? A framework for
equitable assessment policies for English language learners. _Harvard
Educational Review,_ 64(1), 55-75.  
  
Madaus, G. F. (1994). A technological and historical consideration of equity
issues associated with proposals to change the nation's testing policy.
_Harvard Educational Review,_ 64(1), 76-95.  
  
Pullin, D. C. (1994). Learning to work: The impact of curriculum and
assessment standards on educational opportunity. _Harvard Educational Review,_
64(1), 31-54.  
  

**Research in Multicultural Education  
  
**

Grant, C.A. (Ed.). (1992). _Research and multicultural education: From the
margins to the mainstream._ London: The Falmer Press.  
  
Atwater, M. M.  & Riley, J.P. (1993). Multicultural science education:
Perspectives, definitions, and research agenda. _Science Education,_ 77 (6),
661-668.  
  

**Gender and Feminist Issues  
  
**

Belensky, M. F., Clinchy, B. M., Goldberger, N. R., Tarule, J. M. (1986).
_Women's ways of knowing: The development of self, voice, and mind._ New York:
BasicBooks.  
  
Collins, P. H. (1990). _Black feminist thought: Knowledge, consciousness, and
the politics of empowerment._ New York: Routledge.  
  
Eccles, J. S. (1981). Bringing young women to math and science. In M. Crawford
& M. Gentry (Eds.), _Gender and thought: Psychological perspectives_ (pp.
36-58). New York: Springer-Verlag.  
  
Kahle, J. B. (1990). Real students take chemistry and physics: Gender issues.
In K. Tobin, J. B. Kahle, & B. J. Frasier (Eds.), _Windows into science
classrooms: Problems associated with higher-level cognitive learning_ (pp.
92-134). London: The Falmer Press.  
  
Kahle, J. B. (1989). _Development of a theoretical basis for gender
differences in interest levels and retention rates in science._ Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the National Association for Research in
Science Teaching, San Francisco, CA.  
  
Kahle, J. B. (1988). Gender and science education II. In P. Fensham (Ed.),
_Development and dilemmas in science education_ (pp. 249-265). Philadelphia,
PA: The Falmer Press.  
  
Kahle, J. B. (1982). _Double dilemma: Minorities and women in science
education._ West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University.  
  
McIntosh, P. (1988). _White privilege and male privilege: A personal account
of coming to see correspondes through work in women's studies._  
  
The war against women. (1994, March). _U.S. News & World Report,_ p. 42-48.  
  

**Gays and Lesbians  
  
**

Blumenfield, W. J. (Ed.) (1992). _Homophobia: How we all pay the price._
Boston: Beacon Press.  
  
Chesler, M. A.  & Zuniga, X. (1991). Dealing with prejudice and conflict in
the classroom: The pink triangle exercise. _Teaching Sociology,_ 19(2),
173-181.  
  
Committee on Lesbian and Gay Concerns. (1991). Avoiding heterosexual bias in
language. _American Psychologists,_ 46(9), 973-974.  
  
Crumpacker, L. Vander Haegen, E.M. (1984). _Integrating the curriculum:
Teaching about lesbians and homophobia._ Working paper # 138. ED337379.  
  
Duberman, M. (1991). _About time: Exploring the gay past._ New York: Penguin
Books.  
  
Gomez, J. L.  & Smith, B. (1992). Taking the home out of homophobia: Black
lesbian health. In M. Silvera _Piece of my heart_ (pp. 40-57). : Sister
Vision.  
  
Grene, B. (1991). _The drowning of Stephan Jones._ New York: Bantam Books.  
  
Harbeck, K. M. ed. (1992). _Coming out of the classroom closet._ New York:
Harrington Park Press.  
  
Morales, E. S. (1990). Ethnic minority families and minority gays and
lesbians. In _Homosexuality and family relations._  
  
Newman, B. S. (1989). Including curriculum content on lesbian and gay issues.
_Journal of Social Work Education,_ 25(3), 202-211.  
  
Newman L. (1989). _Heather has two mommies._ Boston: Alyson Publications.  
  
Savin-Williams, R. C.  & Cohen, K. M. _Coping with verbal and physical abuse
among sexual minority youths: Associations with school problems, running away,
substance abuse, prostitution, and suicide._  
  
Sears, J. T. (1991). Helping students understand and accept diversity.
_Educational Leadership,_ 49(1), 54-56.  
  

**Empowerment  
  
**

Cummins, J. (1986). Empowering minority students: A framework for
intervention. _Harvard Educational Review,_ 56(1), 18-36.  
  
Delpit, L. D. (1988). The silenced dialogue: Power and pedagogy in educating
other people's children. _Harvard Educational Review,_ 58(3), 280-298.  
  
Nel, J. (1992). The empowerment of minority students: Implications of Cummins'
model for teacher education. _Action in Teacher Education,_ 14(3), 38-46.  
  
Sleeter, C. E. (Ed.). (1991). _Empowerment through multicultural education._
New York: State University of New York Press.  
  

**Giftedness  
  
**

Ford, D. Y. (1992). Determinants of underachievement as perceived by gifted,
above-average, and average Black students. _Roeper Review,_ 14(3), 130-136.  
  
Frasier, M. M. (1987). The identification of gifted Black students: Developing
new perspectives. _Journal for the Education of the Gifted,_ 10(3), 155-180.  
  
Kitano, M. K. (1991). A multicultural education perspective on serving the
culturally diverse gifted. _Journal for the Education of the Gifted,_ 15(1),
4-19.  
  
Matthews, J. L., Golin, A. K., Moore, M. W.,  & Baker, C. (1992). Use of SOMPA
in identification of gifted African-American children. _Journal of the
Education of the Gifted,_ 15(4), 344-356.  
  
Rhodes, L. (1992). Focusing attention on the individual in identification of
gifted Black students. _Roeper Review,_ 14(3), 108-110.  
  

**Multicultural Teacher Education  
  
**

Atwater, M. M. (1989). Including multicultural education in science education:
Definitions, competencies, and activities. _Journal of Science Teacher
Education,_ 1(1), 17-20.  
  
Banks, J. A. (1989). _Teacher education and students of color: Conceptualizing
the problem._ Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American
Educational Research Association, San Francisco, CA.  
  
Baptiste, Jr., H. P. (1986). Multicultural education and urban schools from a
sociohistorical perspective: Internalizing multiculturalism. _Journal of
Educational Equity and Leadership,_ 6(4), 295-312.  
  
King, S. H. (1993). The limited presence of African-American Teachers. _Review
of Educational Research,_ 63(2), 115-150.  
  
Midkiff, R. B.  & Lawler-Prince, D. (1992). Preparing tomorrow's teachers:
Meeting the challenge of diverse family structures. _Action in Teacher
Education,_ 14(3), 1-6.  
  
Shulman, L. S. (1990). Reconnecting foundations to the substance of teacher
education. _Teachers College Record,_ 91(3), 300-310.  
  
Trent, W. (1990). Race and ethnicity in the teacher education curriculum.
_Teachers College Record,_ 91(3), 361-369.  
  

**Competency Testing of Teachers  
  
**

Guyton, E.  & Farokhi, E. (1987). Relationships among academic performance,
basic skills, subject matter knowledge, and teaching skills of teacher
education graduates. _Journal of Teacher Education,_ 38(5), 37-42.  
  
Haney, W., Madaus, G.,  & Kreitzer, A. (1987). Charms talismanic: Testing
teachers for the improvement of American education. In E.Z. Rothkopf (Ed.),
_Review of Research in Education_ (pp. 169-237). Washington, D.C.: American
Educational Research Association.  
  
Madaus, G. F. & Pullin, D. (1987). Teacher certification tests: Do they really
measure what we need to know? _Phi Delta Kappan,_ 69(1), 31-37.  
  
Murray, F. B. (1986). Teacher education. _Change,_ 18(5), 18-26.  
  
Popham, W. J.  & Kirby, W. N. (1987). Recertification tests for teachers: A
defensible safeguard for society. _Phi Delta Kappan,_ 69(1), 45-49.  
  
Shulman, L. S. (1987). Assessment for teaching: An initiative for the
profession. _Phi Delta Kappan,_ 69(1), 38-44.  
  
Smith, G. P. (1984). The critical issue of excellence and equity in competency
testing. _Journal of Teacher Education,_ 35(2), 6-9.  
  

**Higher Education Issues  
  
**

Anderson, J. A. (1991). The politics of retention: Rhetoric vs. reality.
_Black Issues in Higher Education,_ 116\.  
  
Anderson, J. A. (1988). Cognitive styles and multicultural populations.
_Journal of Teacher Education,_ 39(1), 2-9.  
  
Atwater, M. M. (1992). A response to  "nurturing talent for science:
Underrepresented science college students'. In T. Lopushinsky (Ed.),
_Proceedings of a forum on the needs and problems of the underrepresented
college student, with possible solutions_ (pp. 9-13). Cedar City, Utah:
Society for College Science Teachers.  
  
Raymond, C. (1991). Pioneering research challenges accepted notions concerning
cognitive abilities of infants. _Chronicle of Higher Education,_ A6-A7.  
  
  

_EFND 8210  
  
MULTICULTURAL EDUCATION IN THE  
UNITED STATES  
  
_

DIRECTIONS: Write the following information on an index card: your name,
social security number, address, and telephone number. If you have a
university address, please include it. Then answer the following questions.  
  

  1. What are your reasons for taking this course?   
  

  2. What do you want to get out of this course? 

