|  |  |  
---|---|---|---  
![Handbook for Directors of Undergraduate Studies](../media/dushbkheader.gif)
|  
  
[**front page**](../index.html) ** | [table of contents](contents.html) |
[yale college dean's office](http://www.yale.edu/yalecollege/)**  

|  |  
  
* * *

|  
|

## Section II

## The DUS and the Department

This section concerns the role of the DUS within the department or program.
While usages vary from department to department, most directors of
undergraduate studies will perform most of the departmental tasks that are
described here.

**1\. The DUS and the Departmental Faculty.** The DUS has a major
responsibility for fitting together the interests of the department's faculty
members with the needs of the department in undergraduate instruction. You
advise the chair on what is required or desirable in order to maintain the
quality and range of the department's undergraduate offerings. You consult
with course directors, the chair of the department, and the director of
graduate studies about the staffing of laboratories and multisection courses.
In conjunction with the department chair, you negotiate with members of the
department and with directors of special programs in Yale College about the
participation of your department in those programs. You claim the time of
members of your department for advising majors, supervising and evaluating
senior essays, preparing and grading the departmental examination, and
awarding departmental prizes. If you do not do it yourself, you appoint a
colleague or colleagues to supervise the procedures for matters of freshman
placement in August and September.

The DUS is one of the main persons who introduces new faculty members to their
responsibilities in the department and to the usages of Yale College. You
inform them of their undergraduate teaching duties before their arrival at
Yale. After their arrival, you brief them on the Yale College grading system
and on the regulations relat-ing to the conduct of courses or teaching methods
used in the department, and on their various obligations to Yale College and
its students. If a new member of the faculty is teaching a section of a
multisection course, you intro-duce the new instructor to the course director.
You should be especially alert to the problems of an instructor who has had no
previous experience in an American university, or who has limited previous
teaching experience. In departments where such is the practice, you might
encourage new faculty members to visit the classes of experienced colleagues,
and you may yourself, with their consent, visit their classes or ask other
experienced teachers to do so.*

* Appended to this section are letters written by the dean of Yale College and the chair of the Course of Study Committee on undergraduate teaching and grades in Yale College.

Even senior members of the department will almost always welcome a brief
review by the DUS of the reg-ulations of Yale College that most concern them
as instructors of undergraduates. The DUS at the first depart-mental meeting
in the fall should outline the rules governing grades and the Credit/D/Fail
option [(section B of the Academic Regulations, chapter III of the _YCPS_
);](http://www.yale.edu/ycpo/ycps/chapters/chapter3a.html#2) course
withdrawals (section F); the reading period and the final examination period
(section G); work missed during the term (section H); postponement of final
examina-tions (section H); work incomplete at the end of term and the mark of
Temporary Incomplete (section H); cut restriction (section I); and auditing
(section K). Your colleagues may in fact regard you as an expert on all of the
academic regulations contained in chapter III of the _YCPS_ , so you should
attempt to get to know them well.

**2\. The Undergraduate Major.** The requirements for a major have been
approved by the department or program, by the [Yale College Course of Study
Committee](http://www.yale.edu/yalecollege/pages/cos.html) (or, more recently,
the Committee on Majors), and by the Yale College Faculty. The DUS is the
officer of the department charged with the enforcement of these requirements.
All students, once they have chosen a major, must have their course programs
approved at the beginning of each term by the DUS or by a member of the
department designated by the DUS (see below, under "The Advising of Majors").
The DUS or the departmental adviser must be satisfied each term that the
student is making satisfactory progress toward meeting the requirements of the
major.

Most departments give you as DUS the authority to use your judgment as to when
it is academically appropriate to waive a requirement or to approve a course
in substitution for one normally required. The most common case is that of a
student who wishes a course in a related department or a residential college
seminar to be counted toward the requirements of the major. Unless the
substitution is self-evidently plausible, you should ask for a copy of the
syllabus of the course, and you might want to require the student to make the
request in writing, describing how the course fits into the work of the major.
When a substitution is approved, keep a careful record of it against the day
when you must certify to the registrar that the student has completed the
requirements of the major (see section VIII, "How to Graduate a Senior"). If
the department has delegated to the DUS the authority to make appropriate
waivers or substitutions in a student's major program, no further approval
from Yale College is required. Obviously, on any matter that raises a question
of general policy, you will want to consult your colleagues in the department,
or perhaps the departmental curriculum committee.

**3\. The Departmental Examination, Senior Essay, or Senior Project.** In 1967
the Yale College Faculty voted that a department or program might, with the
approval of the Course of Study Committee, substitute an alternative to the
departmental examination then required of all seniors in the spring. In recent
years the standard two-day, four-hours-per-day departmental examination has
almost disappeared; but this examination, or some specific and identifiable
substitution approved by the Course of Study Committee, is a requirement of
Yale College to which every department and program must adhere. The DUS is
responsible for administering the departmental examination or its equivalent,
though in the largest departments this responsibility is sometimes delegated
to a colleague or to a committee.

The senior requirement measures whether the student can demonstrate some form
of mastery or substantial competence in some significant aspect of the subject
of the major. A few departments have substituted oral examinations on prepared
special topics for the written examination; others have substituted senior
seminars or tutorials. The most common substitute is the senior essay. In most
cases the senior project or senior essay carries course credit, but it does
not necessarily do so. Every senior in the major must complete the senior
requirement satisfactorily, or he or she cannot be graduated; it may not be
waived in any circumstance. A department may not change its senior requirement
without approval from the Course of Study Committee.

The grade for the senior requirement, whether or not it carries course credit,
is important in determining a student's eligibility for Distinction in the
Major: see [section VI,](chapter6.html) "The DUS and the Committee on Honors
and Academic Standing II: Distinction in the Major, Special Divisional Majors,
and Special Term Courses."

**4\. The Departmental Student Advisory Committee.** In most departments, the
DUS organizes and chairs an advisory committee that includes students and that
meets at regular intervals during the year to review aspects of the
department's undergraduate curriculum as it affects both majors and nonmajors.
If you are not the chair of this committee, you are an important member of it.
The functions of the departmental student advisory committee vary somewhat
from department to department, but typically it advises the department on such
matters as ideas for new courses and programs, proposals for improvement of
instruction or advising in the department, and suggestions for changes in the
requirements of the major. The composition and size of the committee also
vary, but normally it includes both senior and junior members of the faculty
as well as undergraduates. It is advisable, particularly in large departments,
for the undergraduates to be drawn both from majors and from nonmajors.
Through this committee, and through being in touch with individual students,
with the chair, and with departmental colleagues, the DUS is in a unique
position to formulate both short-range and long-range plans for the
curriculum.

While the role of the student advisory committee may vary from department to
department and from year to year, the DUS and the department should note that
the option of having no such committee at all is not open. All major programs
were directed, by vote of the Yale College Faculty in 1966, to organize a
student advisory committee at least once every four years; in 1979 the Faculty
amended this legislation and recommended that the student advisory committee
meet at least once a year. The text of the Course of Study Committee's
proposal on student advisory committees voted by the Faculty in 1979 is
informative about the expected nature of these committees, and is given in
full below. This policy still stands.

In February 1966 the Yale College Faculty, on motion of the Steering
Committee, approved a proposal recommending the establishment in each major
program of a student advisory committee consisting of majors and appropriate
nonmajors "to advise the faculty on the effectiveness of its curriculum and to
assist the faculty in improving it." Matters which the proposal suggested that
such a committee might consider included "the scope and sequence of course
offerings, the requirements of the standard and honors programs . . . [the]
usefulness and interest of specific courses to nonmajors, the role of the
Senior essay, the amount of choice on course selections available to students
within the major, standards of expected student performance and of grading,
etc." A student advisory committee was not formally to be consulted concerning
the teaching performance of individual instructors, nor was it to be asked to
evaluate candidates for promotion. But it was expected that "the existence of
a committee of students with regular channels of communication to the faculty
should increase the amount and perhaps the quality of the informal and casual
information on teaching performance on which departments already rely."
Finally, as the proposal said, "a committee would be expected to express its
own views on subjects of its own choice as well as on questions suggested by
the faculty. The committee should also serve as a channel through which
solicited or unsolicited opinions of other students could be expressed."

> Over the years most departments and programs have appointed such committees
and there is broad agreement that they have given useful advice on a wide
variety of matters concerning undergraduate instruction in general and on the
structure and requirements of the major in particular. Last year the Course of
Study Committee polled all Directors of Undergraduate Studies concerning the
usages of the various departments and programs relating to student advisory
committees, and as a result proposes to the Yale College Faculty that it
reaffirm the general principles of its legislation of 1966, amending it in the
following ways:

    

> > (1) The proposal approved by the Faculty in 1966 stipulated that student
advisory committees be composed entirely of students and that the chairmen of
such committees be students. Experience has demonstrated that some of the most
successful committees have included members of the faculty as chairmen, and
the Course of Study Committee accordingly recommends that the composition and
structure of each committee be left to the determination of the individual
departments and programs.

    

> > (2) The legislation of 1966 proposed that student advisory committees be
appointed "from time to time (at least every four years)." The usefulness of
these committees has been demonstrated to be such that the Course of Study
Committee recommends that they meet at least once annually.

    

> > (3) In some departments with few majors, student advisory committees have
not been appointed because in the nature of things there is frequent contact
between students and faculty members and frequent informal conversations among
them concerning the curriculum. The Course of Study Committee believes,
however, that there would be considerable value in establishing a specific
time and place for an occasional structured discussion of the department's
instructional program, and recommends that in small departments and programs
that do not already have advisory committees such a discussion be formally
scheduled each year with interested majors and nonmajors.

    

> > (4) The proposal of 1966 recommended that the advisory committees include
students not majoring in the department. In many cases this practice has
fallen into disuse, and the Course of Study Committee reaffirms the
recommendation that nonmajors be members of these commit-tees, particularly
when such students compose a substantial fraction of a department's
enrollments.

**5\. The Advising of Majors.** The DUS establishes and oversees the
department's advisory system. This is one of your most important and demanding
jobs, and the more majors a department has, the more assistance you will need
from colleagues. Obviously three things are desired: (1) that students in the
major and students contemplating the major receive full information about the
department's offerings; (2) that they receive advice that takes into account
their special interests and individual abilities; and (3) that they meet with
their advisers frequently enough to accomplish the first two objectives. A
good advising system may be easier to establish in a smaller department than
in a larger one, but one arrangement that many large departments have found
extremely successful is that of appointing departmental representatives in the
residential colleges. By this scheme, you designate as your representative in
each of the twelve residential colleges a member of the fellowship who is also
a departmental colleague. This departmental representative advises
undergraduate majors in the college and approves their course schedules at the
beginning of each term. If a college does not have in its fellowship a member
of the departmental faculty who is available for advising, the DUS should not
hesitate to recommend to the master of the college the name of a colleague who
would be a good adviser. A new member of the full-time faculty is eligible to
be elected to a college fellowship after one term of teaching at Yale.

If you delegate to departmental advisers the responsibility of approving
course schedules, you should keep in mind that you have made them partners in
the job of enforcing the requirements of the major. Make certain that they are
thoroughly conversant with these requirements, and keep them informed of
changes in the undergraduate curriculum.

If only certain faculty signatures are valid on students' course schedules,
the Registrar's Office and the residential college deans should be so informed
so that they can refuse to accept schedules that are not approved by the right
advisers.

**6\. The Advising of Other Students.** The DUS and the departmental advisers
have the important and substantial task of advising interested nonmajors,
especially freshmen and sophomores, about the department's courses and
programs. Some departments have developed systematic methods of such advising,
such as holding a meeting at the beginning of the fall term for students
tentatively interested in entering the major, but for the most part the DUS
and departmental representative respond to the initiative of individual
students who make inquiries.

Freshmen are advised by faculty program advisers drawn from the fellowships of
their residential colleges. These advisers are assigned by the dean of the
residential college on nomination by the master. At registration in the fall
term the dean's office supplies the freshman faculty program advisers with the
names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all directors of undergraduate
studies. (A copy of the current list of directors of undergraduate studies is
appended to this section.) Thus you may expect questions at that time and at
the beginning of the spring term from faculty program advisers and from
freshmen themselves; their questions about the department's course offerings
will frequently concern matters of placement. Freshmen are also encouraged to
consult the departmental advisers as well about any matter connected with the
department's courses or programs. The DUS should make certain, therefore, that
the departmental advisers are thoroughly conversant with the department's
curriculum.

The Yale College Dean's Office is in general charge of a program of sophomore
advising that has the following features:

> (1) Except for sophomores majoring in engineering, mathematics, or the
natural sciences, whose advisers are stipulated by their departments, a
sophomore may choose as an adviser any member of the faculty who is willing to
counsel him or her.

>

> (2) Sophomores are instructed to discuss their course schedules carefully
with their advisers each term. In addition, each sophomore is asked to have a
discussion with a member of the Yale College faculty at some point in the
spring term concerning long-range academic plans, both in regard to work in
the major and in regard to his or her education as a whole. Usually the
sophomore discusses these long-range plans with the same member of the faculty
who signs the course schedule, but the student may have the discussion with
another member of the faculty.

For the most part, therefore, the freshman and sophomore advising systems do
not require much initiative from the DUS, though you and your departmental
advisers should plan on responding to a fair number of inquiries from or on
behalf of freshmen and sophomores, particularly at the beginning of a term.
Experience has also shown that departmental advisers, especially those with
offices in the residential colleges, may expect to receive a fair number of
requests to be sophomore advisers.

**7\. Freshman Placement and Acceleration Credit.** The policies of Yale
College and the various departments on placement and on the award of
acceleration credit for subjects in which Advanced Placement or SAT subject
tests are given are described in great detail in the annual publication
_Freshman Handbook._ A brief description of these policies and a list, by
department, of the actual criteria upon which acceleration credits are
awarded, both upon entrance and after the successful completion of specified
courses during freshman year, constitute chapter II of the _YCPS_ , "Freshman
Placement and Acceleration."

The yearly review of a department's placement policies and policies on
acceleration credit is an important task, because questions of where a
freshman should begin the study of a subject, what college-level work may have
been anticipated in high school, and how previous work may be worth credit
toward an accelerated bachelor's degree are of great educational and
institutional consequence. Each year the Yale College Dean's Office will ask
the DUS for any revisions that should be made in both the _[Freshman
Handbook](http://www.yale.edu/ycpo/freshhbk/)_ and in [chapter II of the
_YCPS_.](http://www.yale.edu/ycpo/ycps/chapters/chapter2.html) Almost all
departments have an interest in the _Freshman Handbook_ , since that is the
primary place for freshmen to seek advice about available and appropriate
courses. In addition, the DUS of a department that offers acceleration credit
(either as a result of performance on College Board Advanced Placement tests
or as result of successful completion with a grade of B or above of specified
courses during freshman year) will be asked to review the department's
policies on the award of such credit described in chapter II of the _YCPS_ as
well as in the _Freshman Handbook_. Currently, the following departments and
major programs offer acceleration credits: Biology, Chemistry, Classics
(Greek, Latin), Computer Science, East Asian Languages and Literatures
(Chinese, Japanese, Korean), Economics, English, French, German, History,
History of Art, Italian, Mathematics, Music, Near Eastern Languages and
Civilizations (Arabic, Hebrew), Physics, Political Science, Slavic Languages
and Literatures (Russian), and Spanish.

To assist in the placement of freshmen in large departments, you might enlist
the aid of one or two colleagues as placement officers; in smaller
departments, the DUS usually serves as the placement officer. If placement
officers wish to examine the records of incoming freshmen, either to place
them or to schedule the appropriate introductory courses, the placement
officers must be available to do so in August, before the freshmen arrive. If
the department gives its own placement test in the fall, you must arrange for
it well in advance to be sure the date and time of the examination are listed
through the Yale College Dean's Office in the _[Calendar for the Opening Days
of College](http://www.yale.edu/ycpo/codaze/)_ (see below). In either event,
the DUS and the placement officers should be readily accessible in late August
and early September, particularly during the days of freshman registration, to
answer inquiries from students, freshman faculty advisers, and the college
deans about the department's policies and particular courses.

Questions about general policies connected with placement and acceleration
should be addressed to the deputy registrar, 246 Church Street, extension
2-2335. Questions about access to records of incoming freshmen for placement
or about the actual recording of acceleration credit on students' academic
records should be addressed to Roberta Esposito, Assistant Registrar, 246
Church Street, extension 2-2344. DUSes in departments offering placement
examinations should schedule them through the Yale College Dean's Office,
which is the compiler of the _Calendar for the Opening Days of College_. The
Dean's Office takes the initiative in the spring to secure this information
from the DUS of any department that has offered such examinations in the past.

**8\. Tutorial Courses.** Most departments and programs offer tutorial courses
with such titles as  "Independent Research," "Individual Reading," or
"Individual Writing Tutorial." In such courses the DUS is almost always the
instructor of record, responsible for collecting the grades from the
instructors and reporting them to the Registrar's Office. It is one of the
departmental responsibilities of the DUS to see that the tutorial course in
the department is administered in accordance with the following principles
established by the Course of Study Committee:

> (1) The work of the course must not be able to be accomplished within an
already-existing graduate or undergraduate course to which the student has
access.

>

> (2) The course must have a "product," such as a term essay, a series of
short essays, laboratory or project reports, a portfolio, or a final
examination.

>

> (3) The instructor must meet with the student regularly, normally for a
least an hour a week.

>

> (4) The approval of the director of undergraduate studies as well as that of
the instructor is required for the student's intended work in the course.

>

> (5) Attention should be given to the number of times such a course may be
taken by the same student.

Instruction in these courses is to be given only by persons with faculty
appointments. You may on rare occasions and for unusual and compelling reasons
allow an advanced graduate student, for example, or a member of the curatorial
staff of the University Library to be the instructor of a tutorial course, but
in that event you should exercise special and personal care to see that the
course is properly conducted, that the graduate student has permission from
his or her DGS and the relevant associate dean of the Graduate School to take
on these responsibilities, and that the grade is awarded on a basis comparable
to that used in regular Yale College courses.

The department may or may not open these courses to nonmajors. You should try
to protect new and popular instructors from taking on a burdensome load of
tutorial courses in addition to their regular teaching duties. Some
departments have established a limit on the number of tutorial courses that an
instructor may teach in a year. Members of the departmental faculty will need
to be reminded from time to time about the nature and requirements of these
courses. Finally, you should review the description of such courses in the
_YCPS_ to be certain that the requirements and standards of the tutorial
course are clearly specified.

If a department does not have a tutorial course, students may apply to the
Committee on Honors and Academic Standing for a Special Term Course in order
to undertake individual work for credit with a member of the department's
faculty: see [section VI](chapter6.html) of this _Handbook_ , "The DUS and the
Committee on Honors and Academic Standing II: Distinction in the Major,
Special Divisional Majors, and Special Term Courses."

**9\. Junior Year or Term Abroad.** With the approval of the Committee on the
Junior Year or Term Abroad and the department of his or her major, a student
who has at least a B average may study at the junior level in a foreign
country. Such study may be undertaken for an academic year or for a term,
either by enrolling in a program sponsored by Yale or another American college
or university, or by enrolling directly and independently at a foreign
university. Details on the Junior Year or Term Abroad are given in [chapter I
of the _YCPS._](http://www.yale.edu/ycpo/ycps/chapters/chapter1c.html) The
chief areas of concern for the DUS are:

> (1) giving advice for the Junior Year or Term Abroad and approving the plans
of prospective majors. Applicants for a Junior Year or Term Abroad will
consult the DUS of their intended major(s) about the feasibility of their
plans for foreign study. The committee has prepared a form for the DUS to
complete and sign as part of the student's application. The committee
obviously wishes to be certain that the applicant's plans for foreign study
make academic sense and that they meet the expectations of the student's
prospective major. The DUS is asked to discuss the student's plans, review his
or her transcript, and determine whether or not the proposed course of study
will interfere with completing the major. If the student hopes to receive
credit toward the major from study abroad, explain your expectations (e.g.,
amount of class time, number and length of papers). The student should contact
you if he or she deviates significantly from the proposed course of study.

>

> (2) giving advice for the Junior Year or Term Abroad to students not
intending to major in your discipline. Some students who intend to major in
other departments will consult you about courses in your discipline that they
might wish to take abroad.

>

> (3) approving the award of credit for students in any majors who have
completed foreign study on an "independent" Junior Year or Term Abroad. If a
student enrolls in a Junior Year or Term Abroad program sponsored by another
American college, such as the Sweet Briar College in Spain, the committee will
usually give credit toward the 36-course-credit requirement for graduation on
the strength of the student's transcript. In some cases the relevant DUS will
be consulted. A student who wishes to receive credit toward the major should
supply a copy of his or her transcript and any written work you require. If a
student takes an "independent" Junior Year or Term Abroad, i.e., if the
student enrolls directly in a foreign university, then he or she must seek
approval from the relevant DUSes both for credit toward the major and for
credit toward the 36-course-credit requirement. Thus a student who takes
courses in three different disciplines must seek approval for credit from the
three appropriate directors of undergraduate studies. On approving credit from
outside Yale, see [section N of the Academic Regulations, chapter III of the
_YCPS_](http://www.yale.edu/ycpo/ycps/chapters/chapter3e.html#1) _,_ and
"Endorsement of a Student's Request for Credit for Course Work Done Outside
Yale" in [section V](chapter5.html) of this _Handbook._

Finally, a student in any major, with the approval of the DUS and the
committee, is eligible for a Junior Year or Term Abroad. Directors of
undergraduate studies should note particularly the following description of
the Junior Year orTerm Abroad (chapter I, _YCPS_ ):

In recognition of the special value of formal study abroad, Yale College
allows students to earn a full term or year or term of credit toward the
bachelor's degree through the Junior Year or Term Abroad program.
Participation in the Junior Year or Term Abroad program provides students the
opportunity to approach academic study through a different cultural
perspective and, most significantly, to speak, write, and learn in a foreign
language.

Questions about the Junior Year or Term Abroad may be addressed to the
associate director of international and fellowship programs, Ms. Karyn Jones,
55 Whitney Avenue, extension 4-8339.

**10\. Simultaneous Award of the Bachelor's and Master's Degrees.** A Yale
College undergraduate of extraordinary ability may, with the permission of the
department and Yale College, undertake graduate work that will qualify the
student at the end of senior year or term for the simultaneous award of the
bachelor's and master's degrees. Each department decides whether or not it
wishes to permit this arrangement. A student must consult carefully with the
DUS and the director of graduate studies of the department before applying.
The two degrees must be in the same department. The student then applies for
the simultaneous award through the DUS who, after securing the necessary
approval from the department, forwards the application, with a letter of
support, to the chair of the Committee on the Simultaneous Award of the
Bachelor's and Master's Degrees, Dean Joseph W. Gordon, 110 SSS, extension
2-2920. Questions about the program may be referred to him.

Although departments set the specific requirements for combined degrees, a
number of general regulations apply to all BA/MA-degree candidates. These are
published in [chapter I of the _YCPS_
](http://www.yale.edu/ycpo/ycps/chapters/chapter1c.html)(refer to the index
for specific pages). Two of these regulations should be kept particularly in
mind:

> (1) Students may not enroll in Yale College for more than eight terms in
order to qualify for the simultaneous award of the two degrees. It is
permitted to earn both degrees in fewer than eight terms, but not by the use
of acceleration credits.

>

> (2) During their last four terms of enrollment, simultaneous-award
candidates must take at least six term courses outside of their major; and in
the last two terms of enrollment, they must take at least two undergraduate
courses. Graduate work may not be entirely concentrated in the last two terms.

With regard to eligibility, there are two somewhat different routes to the
award of both degrees. One is through a department with an approved program.
This is now the case with the Departments of Biology, Chemistry, Economics,
Mathematics, Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, and Physics. Specific
requirements in each of these approved programs appear under the headings for
those departments in [chapter IV of the _YCPS_.
](http://www.yale.edu/ycpo/ycps/programlist.html)

The other route allows students in a department not offering an approved
program for the combined degrees to petition, with the support of the
department, the Committee on the Simultaneous Award of the Bachelor's and
Master's Degrees on an _ad hoc_ basis. Such students must apply immediately
after their fifth term of enrollment and must present a record of grades of A,
A-, or Honors in at least two-thirds of all their course credits as well as
grades of A, A-, or Honors in at least two-thirds of their course credits in
the major. For students in departments with an approved program, the deadline
for application and the specific grade requirements may differ. But in all
departments, a student is officially recognized as a candidate for two degrees
only after approval by both the department and the committee. Candidates for
the combined degrees must petition the Graduate School for the award of the
Master's Degree by the deadline published in the Graduate School bulletin,
_Programs and Policies,_ usually around the middle of March.

**11\. Transfer Students.** Each year, Yale College accepts a small number of
transfer students from other colleges and universities. They arrive at
different stages of their academic careers, but all transfer students must
complete a minimum of eighteen course credits in four terms of enrollment at
Yale. Those entering as juniors and those entering as sophomores planning to
major in the sciences are instructed to call immediately on the DUSes of their
intended majors.

The Yale College Dean's Office will have determined, and expressed only as a
total number of course credits, the credits already earned by each transfer
student that can be counted toward the bachelor's degree. The DUS must
determine which specific courses of the student's previous work may or may not
be counted toward the requirements of the major. You may decline to give major
credit for courses that have been included in the credit awarded by the Dean's
Office, but clearly it is important to be as accommodating as possible to
transfer students. Particularly for students taking science courses and for
those entering Yale in January, the DUSes in relevant departments should
attempt to match Yale's courses with those of the previous school so as to
minimize wasted or duplicated effort.

Because transfer students are at first naturally unfamiliar with the Yale
curriculum, please offer them special help in enrolling in courses that will
give them a good start at a new place. Questions about transfer students or
the credits awarded to them by the Dean's Office should be addressed to Dean
Jill Cutler, 110 SSS, extension 2-7035.

**12\. Students Readmitted to Yale College.** Students who have withdrawn from
Yale College or who have been required to withdraw may ordinarily in due
course apply for readmission according to the procedures administered by the
Committee on Readmissions of the Yale College Dean's Office. Candidates for
readmission are occasionally referred by the chair of the committee to their
directors of undergraduate studies to discuss the courses they will take after
their return, or courses that they should take while withdrawn in order to
prepare for readmission.

In order to control the enrollment of Yale College, the University may in some
year or terms place a restriction on the number of students who may be
readmitted to a particular term, and the Committee on Readmissions may specify
that a student requiring an odd number of terms for the completion of his or
her undergraduate program may be readmitted only to a spring term. This
restriction on the term to which a student may be readmitted will sometimes
require a discussion between a candidate for readmission and the DUS about the
most appropriate time, in terms of the sequence of courses the student must
take, for readmission. The chair of the Committee on Readmissions is Dean Jill
Cutler, 105 SSS, extension 2-7035.

**13\. The Use of Undergraduates in Support of Instruction.** With proper
supervision, undergraduates may be employed to assist the instructor of a Yale
College course in photocopying course materials, preparing laboratory
materials, gathering information for recommended reading lists, showing
slides, giving technical assistance at computer terminals, or similar tasks.
In these instances, the undergraduates should be employed by arrangement with
the Office of Student Employment, 246 Church Street, extension 2-0167.
Instructors should closely monitor these student workers to be sure that
appropriate precautions are taken to safeguard the integrity of course
materials.

On occasion, an undergraduate may be appointed as an Undergraduate Course
Tutor under the general oversight and within the guidelines of the Yale
College Tutoring Program (see section 14, below) to provide academic support
for other students. An Undergraduate Course Tutor may hold occasional group
help-sessions as well as individual sessions. In accordance with longstanding
Yale College policy, it is not appropriate under any circumstances for an
Undergraduate Course Tutor or any undergraduate to lead discussion sections.
Appointments of Undergraduate Course Tutors require the permission of Dean
Judith D. Hackman, 131 HGS, extension 2-2757, and special arrangements with
the director of the Yale College Tutoring Program, 105 SSS, 2-2914.

On rare occasions, and only when no graduate student is available in your
department or in any related program for this duty, an instructor may request
permission from the Yale College Dean's Office to hire an Undergraduate Course
Grader to assist in the scoring of objective course assignments. This excludes
any participation in the grading of final examinations, but may include
scoring objective tests and problem sets that might contribute toward a
student's overall course grade. It is not appropriate under any circumstances
for an Undergraduate Course Grader to evaluate essays, essay questions on
examinations, or any other nonobjective work that calls on subjective or
individual judgment. Undergraduate Course Graders should be selected with
special care. Only those students who have demonstrated sufficient expertise
and complete trustworthiness should be considered for this important
responsibility. Requests for permission to hire Undergraduate Course Graders
should be directed to Dean Judith D. Hackman, 131 HGS, extension 2-2757.

In making a request for permission to hire an Undergraduate Course Grader, you
and the instructor must attest to all of the following stipulations: that no
graduate student is available for these responsibilities; that no graduate
student will be performing the exact same set of tasks for this course as an
undergraduate grader; that the faculty instructor - not a teaching fellow, a
part-time acting instructor, or other graduate or professional school student
- will be training and supervising the undergraduate grader; and that the
faculty member has put in place a system to preserve the anonymity of the
students whose work is being scored by the undergraduate grader and to ensure
the integrity of the grading for the course.

**14\. The Yale College Tutoring Program.** The Yale College Dean's Office
administers a tutoring program for students who are experiencing difficulties
in their course work. Any student enrolled in Yale College is eligible to
apply to the Yale College Tutoring Program for up to ten hours of tutorial
assistance per course each term. The director of the Tutoring Program
maintains a list of tutors in the various subjects of instruction. Tutors may
be either graduate students or advanced undergraduates. All tutors are
approved to be such by the appropriate director of graduate studies or
director of undergraduate studies. Students are eligible for as many as ten
hours of tutoring per course, paid for by the Yale College Dean's Office. To
arrange for assistance from a tutor, the student must take the initiative and
submit a form establishing eligibility. These forms are usually available to
students from the residential college dean and at the Yale College Dean's
Office, but the DUS may also be supplied with copies that can be given to
students. (A sample copy of the form is appended to this section.) The Dean's
Office encourages the referral of eligible students. Students should submit
their forms to the residential college deans. The director of the Yale College
Tutoring Program can be reached at 105 SSS, extension 2-2914.

In addition to the Tutoring Program, two other networks of tutors are
available to undergraduates. In each residential college, a writing tutor and
a mathematics and science tutor are available during regular office hours to
assist students on a one-to-one basis with their writing and with their work
in the natural and quantitative sciences. Detailed information about the
Writing Tutor Program is available from the office of the Bass Writing
Program, 493 College Street, extension 2-1895. Detailed information about the
Math and Science Tutoring Program is available from the Yale College Dean's
Office, 105 SSS, extension 2-2914.

**15\. Prizes.** Yale College has a large number of prizes. They are listed
and briefly described in the booklet _[Undergraduate
Prizes,](http://www.yale.edu/secretary/undergraduate_prizes/)_ available from
the Office of the Secretary of the University. Most of these prizes are
administered by individual departments and programs. The DUS is responsible
for appointing a prize committee to evaluate the performance of students in
competition for the department's prizes. The prizes should be well publicized
among the faculty of the department and the students in the major. If a prize
is open to students from other majors, the DUS or the chair of the prize
committee chooses and may announce the winner of a prize, but the Office of
the Secretary of the University actually awards it. The winner's name should
be sent to the Secretary's Office, Woodbridge Hall, so that a citation may be
inscribed, a check drawn, and both conveyed to the student.

Besides prizes given for excellence in a particular subject, there are also
prizes for general scholarship and character administered by the Council of
Masters and by the Yale College Committee on Honors and Academic Standing. If
you have among your majors a candidate for one of these prizes, it is wise to
nominate the student in concert with the residential college dean, who will
have information about the student's activities outside the major. Among the
most important of these prizes are the Alpheus Henry Snow Prize "for the
senior who, through the combination of intellectual achievement, character,
and personality, shall be adjudged by the faculty to have done the most for
Yale by inspiring classmates with an admiration for scholarship," and the Hart
Lyman Prize for a junior "for character and achievement." These are
administered by the Committee on Honors and Academic Standing, and at the
appropriate season the chair of the committee solicits nominations from
masters, deans, and directors of undergraduate studies. Directors of
undergraduate studies in the humanities and the social sciences should also
note the various Wrexham Prizes, which are described in the booklet
_Undergraduate Prizes_.

|  |  
  
* * *

|  
  
[**front page**](../index.html) ** | [table of contents](contents.html) |
[yale college dean's office](http://www.yale.edu/yalecollege/)**  

|  |  
![Handbook for Directors of Undergraduate Studies](../media/dushbkheader.gif)
|  
|  |  |  |  |  |  |

