**THE COLLEGE OF WILLIAM AND MARY**

**FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES**

**AD HOC COMMITTEE ON TEACHING ASSISTANTS**

**Introduction**

On October 2, 1996, the Ad Hoc Committee on Teaching Assistants convened to
begin discussions in response to the charge spelled out in the Spring 1993
Final Report on the New Curriculum. This committee included Professor David
Armstrong (Physics), Professor Waldemer Eger (Modern Languages), Professor
Mark Fowler (Dean of Undergraduate Studies), Professor Franz Gross (Dean of
Graduate Studies), Deonna Johnson (Physics graduate student), Professor
Richard Lowry (American Studies), Todd Pfannestiel (History graduate student),
Christopher Scalia (English undergraduate student), Professor Alan Wallach
(Art and Art History), and Professor Larry Wiseman (Biology). Professor John
Selby (History) chaired the committee.

In the ensuing month, the committee met several times to discuss relevant
issues and devise a series of recommendations concerning the training and
supervision of teaching assistants at The College of William and Mary.
Following are the committee's observations and recommendations.

**Charge of the Committee**

The ad hoc committee's charge, as spelled out in the Final Report on the New
Curriculum, included the formulation of policies and procedures regarding the
training and supervision of teaching assistants at the College. Specifically,
the report outlined the following general principles to guide the committee:

(1) William and Mary has built its state and national reputation upon its
commitment to undergraduates, as evidenced by its reliance on regular, full-
time faculty to perform the teaching mission. Undergraduates expect to be
taught by professors, not by graduate students. To preserve the
distinctiveness of the College, we recommend that departments not employ M.A.
candidates as instructors on their own. Teaching assistantships should be
reserved for doctoral candidates in the second year of graduate school and
beyond. In addition, we urge departments to rely chiefly upon regular faculty
for introductory courses and to provide other teaching opportunities--for
example, upper-level seminars on specific fields of expertise--for advanced
doctoral students. Even as it prepares a modest number of graduate students
for teaching careers, William and Mary need not--and should not--follow the
example of many large public and private universities.

(2) In preparing graduate students for the college classroom William and Mary
should develop a formal plan for their training and support. With such
support, young graduate students, excited about their subjects, close in age
to undergraduates, and prepared for teaching, may bring to the classroom a
special enthusiasm and freshness.

**Formal Response to the Charge**

The ad hoc committee agrees that William and Mary should not follow the
example of many large universities where many of the lower-level courses are
taught by teaching assistants. However, the College does has a small but
significant number of graduate students in the Arts and Sciences. While many
doctoral candidates will not go into teaching and therefore do not require
such preparation, a number will; thus, the university has "the responsibility
to prepare doctoral students for teaching."

When the committee did look at the role of these assistants in a university
where "undergraduates expect to be taught by professors, not by graduate
students," it made two observations:

(1) William and Mary occasionally hires new faculty members who have not
completed all the requirements for the Ph.D. degree when they arrive. This
means that some of our students are taught by "professors" who are in essence
still graduate students somewhere else.

(2) Some of our departments use adjunct lecturers who may not have the
qualifications to become regular professors. In Modern Languages, for example,
a minimum of an M.A. is generally expected for adjunct lecturers.

If William and Mary used some of its own doctoral candidates as Teaching
Assistants, they would be as qualified as some regular faculty members, and
they could easily be better qualified than some of our adjunct lecturers. In
light of these facts, the committee does not recommend that our assistants
teach only "upper-level seminars on specific fields of expertise." We give
three reasons for that:

(1) Upon entering the job market, having taught a survey course will be a
significant advantage for our doctoral students, since most new professors
will have to teach such courses in their first year.

(2) Our assistants will be as qualified to teach survey courses as some of our
adjuncts or new professors, or more so if the graduate schools of the latter
did not give them a chance to teach a course.

(3) Enrollments in upper-level seminars taught by our assistants most likely
would be low because the new assistants would compete against courses taught
by regular professors with whom concentrators have become familiar during
their years of study.

**Undergraduate Concerns**

At the request of the ad hoc committee, the undergraduate representative on
the committee undertook an informal survey of undergraduates at William and
Mary. His sampling included students from all classes--freshmen to fifth-year
seniors--as well as majors in all three areas. All who were surveyed
previously had a TA, usually in a science course. None had taken a course
taught by a graduate student as the instructor of record, nor did many know
that graduate students taught courses at William and Mary. Some admitted that,
as entering freshmen, they did not realize that the College utilized TAs. The
primary concerns of those surveyed included:

(1) Many students were apprehensive about TAs grading their work. Some found
the grading to be inconsistent from one TA to the next. Others noted that TAs
were inexperienced graders who often made mistakes or were too harsh. Many
suggested that one way to avoid such problems would be for instructors of
record to establish more rigid grading guidelines for their TAs to follow.

(2) With regard to advanced graduate students serving as instructors of
record, opinions were mixed. Some felt that youthful instructors were
advantageous, in that they could more easily relate to undergraduate students'
questions and concerns. However, other students said they would have more
confidence in a professor on the basis of experience alone.

(3) Specifically with regard to advanced graduate students serving as
instructors of record, most students surveyed felt that graduate instructors
should be restricted to entry-level courses. Once undergraduates enroll in an
upper-level course in the major field, most would prefer that a college
professor with greater teaching skills and general knowledge direct the
course.

**Specific Recommendations**

Following a series of intensive discussions, as well as a survey conducted by
Dean Fowler of all undergraduate programs concerning their use of teaching
assistants, the ad hoc committee devised the following specific
recommendations regarding TAs. These recommendations are divided into three
categories: plans for collegewide TA orientation and training; guidelines for
the training and use of graduate and undergraduate students as TAs; and
guidelines for the training and use of advanced graduate students as
instructors of record.

(1) Collegewide TA Orientation and Training.

The ad hoc committee felt that it was important to make a distinction between
TA orientation and TA training. Orientation, as organized by the Dean of
Research and Graduate Studies in the past few years, is a 2 hour session in
which TAs are introduced to the Dean of the Undergraduate Program, are told
about the Counseling Center and other services which the College provides to
help students, are introduced to the Honor Code and issues of sexual
harassment, and participate in a short group discussion of problems and fears
which teachers often face while teaching. The ad hoc committee believes that
this program must be attended by all first-year TAs (both graduate and
undergraduate), but that it is in no way a substitute for the training and
mentoring which is the most vital part of TA training.

The ad hoc committee believes that TA training begins after the TA orientation
ends. We propose is that the Dean of Research and Graduate Studies should
provide up to one day of training for all TAs beyond the initial 2 hour
orientation period. Such training should include instruction on grading
assignments and directing lab or drill sections. However, while this limited
training session might be sufficient for students whose sole responsibility is
to grade or teach labs, students who lecture or run review sessions should
receive additional training and mentoring through a program run by the
students' departments, and tailored to the needs of each discipline. These
latter programs are the major focus of this report, and should be submitted
for approval by the Educational Policy Committee and the Committee on Graduate
Studies.

(2) The Training and Use of Graduate and Undergraduate Students as Teaching
Assistants.

A survey of various departments and programs at William and Mary revealed a
wide range of responsibilities given to students who have been labeled
"teaching assistants." The ad hoc committee has grouped these different job
descriptions into five general categories, based upon the level of
instructional responsibilities in each category, with different
recommendations for each category. These categories are:

(a) Non-instructional assistants.

These positions are not of an instructional nature, and are not associated
with particular undergraduate courses. Examples include the Computer Science
graduate students employed as computer/network "techies," students paid to
work in the chemistry library, students paid to maintain the slides library
for Art and Archaeology courses and to operate the projector. We would not
classify such students as "teaching assistants," and do not consider these
positions to be within the purview of this committee.

(b) Graders.

These positions have as a primary responsibility the grading of objective-
answer materials (for example in physics, chemistry, economics, government,
etc.). There may also be a small component of contact with undergraduate
students (e.g. physics graders are required to have office hours to allow
students to get assistance on problems they had done incorrectly).

These positions are held by graduate students or by upper-level
undergraduates.

Recommendations: Graders should attend the collegewide orientation and
training sessions, organized by the Dean of Research and Graduate Studies, to
introduce them to appropriate College guidelines and regulations. The
instructor of record has the responsibility of supervising the TA by meeting
with the TA at the start of the course to discuss expectations and procedures,
by periodically checking graded material to ensure that the TA is being
conscientious and fair in grading, and by providing some assessment to the TA
on the quality of his/her work.

(c) Lab TAs.

Laboratory teaching assistants are used in many of the teaching laboratories
on campus (chemistry, biology, geology, computer science, mathematics,
sociology, psychology, physics, etc.). Responsibilities generally include
assisting students in performing experiments or working exercises, grading lab
reports, enforcing safety regulations, etc. In some cases the TAs may be
expected to give short lectures at the beginning of the lab or to run tutoring
sessions. These TAs are supervised by a faculty member or laboratory
coordinator, who is the instructor of record. These positions involve a
greater level of contact with the students than grading.

These positions are generally held by graduate students or by upper-level
undergraduates.

Recommendations: Same as for graders (see above), with two additions: i) the
faculty supervisors, if they do not also regularly attend the labs, should
make periodic visits to the lab and give the TA feedback on his/her
performance, and ii) the TA should be provided with teaching evaluations from
the students. The supervisor should discuss these evaluations with the TA.
Both of these steps should be viewed as part of the mentoring process, to help
develop the TA's teaching ability.

(d) Drill Leader.

Here the TA runs an individual session, often to review materials previously
presented by the instructor in the lecture portion of the course. Several
departments use TAs in this manner, particularly the Modern Languages program.
However, unlike the TA who directs review sessions and discussions as
described in the next category, drill leaders are not responsible for formally
grading any assignments in the course.

Although such positions are generally held by graduate students, given the
restriction on grading it is not uncommon to have qualified, upper-level
undergraduates lead drill sessions.

Recommendations: Same as for Lab TAs (see above).

(e) Communication Consultant.

Here the TA is trained specifically to work as a writing or oral communication
consultant in conjunction with the Writing Resources Center and the Oral
Communication Studios located on campus. The TA will have direct contact with
undergraduate students seeking assistance in improving their communication
skills.

These positions are generally held by upper-level undergraduate students.

Recommendations: In addition to attending the collegewide orientation session
organized by the Dean of Research and Graduate Studies, communication
consultants are required to attend the specific training sessions arranged by
the directors of the Writing Resources Center and the Oral Communication
Studios. In the case of the former, this includes a one-credit course taken
during the spring semester before the student becomes a writing consultant; in
the latter, intensive training sessions are conducted prior to the beginning
of each academic year.

(f) Discussion Section Leader.

Here the TA runs a regularly-scheduled individual session (these classes are
known by such terms as review session, recitation session, problem session,
etc.). Such arrangements have been used by several departments (religion,
history, economics, etc.). Grading of materials such as quizzes may be a
component of the job as well. The instructor of record is not the TA, but is
the faculty member delivering the formal lectures associated with the
discussion section. The position of discussion leader involves a large
instructional component, and a great deal of contact with undergraduate
students.

These positions are normally held by graduate students, and we do not believe
that it would be appropriate for undergraduates to be given this level of
responsibility.

Recommendations: Same as for Lab TAs (see above), with the addition that we
recommend that departments/programs offer supplemental training in leading
discussions.

(3) The Training and Use of Advanced Graduate Students as Instructors of
Record.

The ad hoc committee has established the following as a set of recommendations
concerning the use of graduate student teaching interns as instructors for
undergraduate courses. These recommendations are modeled on the longstanding,
successful teaching intern program utilized by the Department of History at
William and Mary. Each department/program which trains graduate students to
serve as instructors of record in undergraduate courses at The College of
William and Mary should be required to submit a set of written guidelines re:
training and supervision of such students to the Committee on Graduate Studies
for its approval.

(a) Definition.

A "teaching intern" shall be defined as a graduate student of The College of
William and Mary who is the instructor of record for a particular course.
Although he/she will receive direct supervision from regular faculty within
the department, the teaching intern is normally responsible for designing the
syllabus, selecting the readings, delivering the lectures, preparing/
evaluating all written or oral assignments, and determining the final grade.

(b) Qualifications.

Teaching internships should be reserved for graduate students at the ABD
(post-comprehensive exam) level. This is not to say that all ABD graduate
students should be allowed to teach their own courses; rather, teaching
internships should be reserved for those ABD students who have distinguished
themselves in their classwork and comprehensive exams, and have shown
themselves capable of teaching their own courses.

(c) Eligible Courses.

The individual departments/programs should determine in which courses--
introductory and/or advanced--they will allow their teaching interns to serve
as instructors.

(d) Department Orientation.

Each department or program which decides to employ graduate ABD students as
teaching interns should arrange a department-level orientation--beyond the
collegewide orientation conducted by the Dean of Research and Graduate Studies
--to introduce the interns to applicable department regulations, the
department handbook, etc.

(e) Workshops.

It is highly recommended that individual departments/programs should arrange
workshops on issues relevant to teaching within their discipline (leading
discussion, preparing syllabi, evaluating coursework, etc.). Such workshops be
organized for teaching assistants, in order that they may receive exposure to
these ideas before beginning their teaching internships. Thus, the workshops
will serve a dual purpose: first, as an educational experience for teaching
assistants; and, second, as practical preparation for those graduate students
who will eventually become teaching interns.

(f) Supervision.

Close supervision being the key to a successful teaching intern program, each
department will be expected to arrange a system of supervision consistent with
the following guidelines:

  * The graduate director should oversee the administration of the teaching intern program, including the department-level orientation, reviewing the proposed course syllabi, etc.   

  * The individual teaching intern's graduate advisor should also play an integral role in the internship, particularly in reviewing the syllabus and visiting the classroom.   

  * Each teaching intern should have a classroom visit at least twice during the semester by one of the following three persons: the graduate director, the department/program chair, and/or the graduate advisor. If the teaching intern wishes, he/she may schedule more than two classroom visits, including visits by persons other than those listed above. Faculty members should be as accommodating as possible in scheduling these visits.   

  * Following each classroom visit, the faculty member should write a brief evaluation of the teaching intern's performance to be placed in the intern's graduate file with a copy given to the intern. Such reports are advantageous, not only in terms of their immediate feedback, but also during the preparation of job dossiers. In addition, the intern should schedule a brief visit with the visiting faculty member to discuss the intern's strengths and weaknesses. 

(g) Exit Interviews.

Each department should conduct exit interviews of the graduate teaching
interns when their courses are complete. At this interview, the graduate
director should discuss the student evaluations of the teaching intern, as
well as request comments from him/her regarding the entire internship process.

**Conclusions**

The ad hoc committee firmly believes that teaching assistants and teaching
interns, as we have defined them, are an integral part of the College's
academic community. While our commitment to the undergraduates at William and
Mary cannot, and should not, be diminished in any fashion, the College also
cannot afford to overlook its commitment to the training and supervision of
graduate and undergraduate students who aspire to become college or university
professors. It is, after all, a mutually beneficial relationship for all
concerned: undergraduate students--as the 1993 Final Report on the New
Curriculum suggested--receive assistance, and in some cases instruction, from
young graduate students and upper-level undergraduates who are enthusiastic
and fresh, as well as close in age to the students in the course; teaching
assistants and teaching interns receive vital advice, training, and
supervision, as they prepare for careers in academe; and full-time professors
at the College receive important classroom assistance.

**Final Recommendations**

The ad hoc committee offers the following concluding recommendations regarding
the training and use of teaching assistants and teaching interns at William
and Mary:

(1) Departments and programs training graduate students as teaching interns
should submit formal plans for their training and supervision for the approval
of the Educational Policy Committee and the Committee on Graduate Studies.
Normally, such plans should incorporate the recommendations listed under
section three above (re: the training and use of advanced graduate students as
instructors of record), but alternative approaches will be considered when
supported with appropriate rationales.

(2) Departments and programs training students (graduate and undergraduate) as
teaching assistants (as defined above) should report their implementation of
the recommendations concerning training and supervision procedures to the
Educational Policy Committee and the Committee on Graduate Studies.
Alternative approaches will be considered when supported with appropriate
rationales.

(3) Logically, ABD adjuncts (hired from other colleges and universities)
having little or no teaching experience should receive the same mentoring and
supervision while teaching William and Mary undergraduates as do our own ABD
instructors. Although we are not responsible for their career preparation, our
responsibility to the William and Mary students is the same whether they are
taught by adjunct or our own ABDs. In the event that ABD adjuncts from other
institutions lack the necessary teaching experience, departments and programs
should make sure that they receive appropriate mentoring and supervision
during their first year here.

Submitted February 21, 1997 David Armstrong Waldemer Eger Mark Fowler Franz
Gross Deonna Johnson Richard Lowry Todd Pfannestiel Christopher Scalia Alan
Wallach Larry Wiseman John Selby, Chair  
  
---

