# Afroamerican and African Studies (Division 311)

**_Introductory Courses

_ 100\. Introduction to Afro-American Studies.** _(4). (SS).  
_ This course introduces and provides a general overview of the area of
Afroamerican Studies. It employs a multi-disciplinary perspective which
combines elements from conventional historical, political, sociocultural and
behavioral orientations in the analysis of Afroamerican culture and
institutions. The course format is a lecture-discussion with three weekly
lectures. Students meet with T.A.s once weekly to discuss course readings and
lectures. The course will be supplemented by guest lecturers, selected CAAS
colloquia, films, and special projects. WL:4 (Lewis)

**_Historical Perspectives

_** **230/Hist. 274. Survey of Afro-American History I.** _(3). (SS).  
_ This course surveys Black historical and cultural developments through the
Reconstruction Period emphasizing African backgrounds and African cultural
persistence, strength of Black families during slavery, the slavery
experience, Black self-liberation efforts, the formation of Black institutions
and organizations. (Barkley-Brown)

**_Literature and the Arts

_ 108/Hist. of Art 108. Introduction to African Art.** _(3). (HU).  
_ See History of Art 108. (Quarcoopome)

**204\. Cultural History of Afro-America.** _(3). (Excl).  
Section 001 - Literary and Legal Constructions of the African-American
Experience._ This seminar course weaves together law and literary narratives
about slavery, lynching, Black women's positionality within the law, and
affirmative actions, to ask:  "How have various legal and cultural texts
shaped Black subjectivity? Who gets to describe "the law"? How are lawyers,
courts, the judicial system presented in African-American literature? What do
the characters think of the formal criminal justice system. (Berger)

**274/English 274. Introduction to Afro-American Literature.** _(3). (HU).  
_ See English 274. (Zafar)

**_Individual Behavior, Cultural Systems, and Social Organization

_ 241/Women's Studies 231. Women of Color and Feminism.** _(3). (Excl).  
_ See Women's Studies 231.

# American Culture (Division 315)

**170/Hist. 170/UC 170/Women's Studies 210. Histories of "Witchcraft."**
_First-year students only. (4). (Introductory Composition).  
Histories of  "Witchcraft"_ is a multi-disciplinary and cross-cultural course
offered to first year students only. Students will attend a twice-weekly
lecture class focusing on the 1692 "witchcraft" outbreak in Salem,
Massachusetts, and second, on similar or sometimes contrasting beliefs and
practices in other societies. Readings and visual materials for the lecture
part of the course will be drawn from history, literature, film, art,
journalism, sociology, psychology, and anthropology. In addition, each student
will enroll in _one_ of the six, twice-weekly discussion sections listed below
(which function as six mini-courses with the larger course). Initially,
discussion in each of these sections will focus on the Salem outbreak, but
subsequently students will direct their attention to the issues raised on
individual sections. Readings and visual materials for these sections will
vary according to the topics and approaches of the instructors. In both
lecture sections, we will be primarily interested in why such a wide variety
of beliefs and practices have so often been labeled and understood as
"witchcraft." This is a reading-intensive and writing-intensive course that
fulfills the first-year composition requirement. (Du Puis)

_Section 002 - Spirits Rising: Race, Gender, and Colonialism in the New
World._ From the course's common beginning in 17th century New England, this
section will continue to examine the New World under European colonization and
as the United States. Moving to a multi-cultural approach, we will look at the
beliefs and practices expressed by Anglo-American, Spanish-American, Native-
American, African American, and Latino/a groups - less witchcraft as
understood  "shamanism," "root work," and "spirits." Throughout, we will
explore issues of power and domination, resistance and autonomy, and racial
and gender stereotypes as portrayed in history, anthropology, literature, and
film. (Ardizzone)

_Section 003 - Gender, Magic, and Power in Java, 1900-1966._ Beginning with an
exploration of  "traditional" Javanese culture, including shadow puppet plays
( _Wayang_ ), spirit beliefs, and magic, this section will concentrate on the
relationship between tradition and power during periods of great social change
in twentieth-century Java (Indonesia). Mindful of the pervasive effects of
Dutch colonial rule, we will use European ideas about gender, which gained
currency with the rise of Indonesian nationalism during the 1920s and 1930s,
to examine in-depth how this relationship between tradition and power played
itself out in a modern political case - the 1965 _Year of Living Dangerously_
coup and its especially violent aftermath. (Sullivan)

_Section 004 - "Calling out the Witch": Images of Women's Power in American
Culture._ This section will focus on the multiple uses of the witch image in
the United States from the late 19th century to the recent Senate hearings on
Supreme Court nominee Clarence Thomas. Drawing on art, fiction, films, TV,
news media, and other sources, it will pose questions about the relationship
between popular culture and politics, between individuals accused o witchcraft
in 17th century New England and more recent witchcraft representations, and
between historical witch figures and contemporary feminists who label
themselves witches as part of their political strategy. Issues of gender,
race, class, age, and sexual orientation will guide our inquiry. (DuPuis)

_Section 005 - Transformations and Transgressions: The Many Faces of the Witch
in German Literature and Culture._ Vampire, werewolf, healer, beautiful young
woman, ugly old hag, venerable wizard - the witch has had many faces in German
culture, from the medieval period to the present day. This section will look
at fairy tales, short stories, films, operas, paintings, and drawings as we
consider how the witch transgresses the borders between good and bad, male and
female, aristocracy and peasantry, and the marvelous and the natural by
transforming herself into creatures of many shapes and possibilities. With the
assistance of feminist theory, we will discuss the  "witch" as not only myth
but also an object of fantasy, fear, power, and desire. (Lenckos)

_Section 006 - Aztl an and Beyond: Spirituality, Sexuality, and Healing
Traditions in the Southwestern United States._ At the core of this section are
the interconnections between sexuality, healing, and spirituality. We will
begin with an historical exploration of the spiritual traditions that inform
contemporary beliefs and practices in the Southwestern United States. We will
evaluate the colonial legacy of the Catholic Church within this geographic
region and trace its impact on women and indigenous peoples. We then turn to
the discussion of particular traditions among Latina/os, such as curanderismo,
Santerio, and Espiritismo. We will close the term by examining both the
cultural tensions along the Texan-Mexican border and recent accusations of
witchcraft in South Texas. Historical, ethnographic, cinematic and literary in
perspective, we will stress the work by Chicanas who are most insistent in
reconstructing culturally-specific spiritual practices. (Hernandez)

_Section 007 - Missionaries, Obeah, and Rebellion: Colonizing the West Indies,
1600-1865._ This section of  "Histories of Witchcraft" will trace the
development of a creole religious tradition - that is, one built from elements
of European and West African religions - in the English-speaking Caribbean. We
will specifically examine the efforts of English planters and colonial
administrators to stamp out West African, derived beliefs and rituals, the
impact of white English and Black American missionaries on Afro-West Indian
religion, the role of religion in inspiring and structuring political
resistance and rebellion, and the intersection and mutual reinforcement of
public discourses about race, civilization, and culture. We will rely heavily
on primary documents - letters, colonial laws, and governors' despatches from
the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries - but will also consider secondary sources
on West African, West Indian, and English Protestant religious tradition and
history. (Buffington)

**201\. American Values.** _(4). (HU).  
_ This course offers an interdisciplinary introduction to the formation of
twentieth-century American culture. Focusing on the period from the end of the
Civil War to the present, it examines the evolution of American values,
attitudes, and community life, focusing on such changes as the growth of mass
production, the emergence of modern gender ideals and sexualities, the growth
of and challenges to institutionalized racism, and the rise of the consumer
culture. The course does not focus on some assumed `core' of American ideals
or experiences; rather it traces the open-ended process by which diverse
groups of Americans have shaped, resisted, and tried to change the meaning of
"America." It links that cultural dialogue to the history of social diversity,
material inequality, and political struggle in the late 19th- and 20th-
century U.S. We will explore these issues using a multidisciplinary range of
methods and source materials, including novels, photographs, popular music,
journalism, architecture, memoirs, and movies. (Scobey)

**272\. Environment and Society.** _Permission of instructor. (3). (Excl).  
_ The topic of this course is the interactions among social forces that
generate environmental problems and the consequences of those problems for
society. Environmental issues at the local, national, and international levels
will be explored through the lens of race, ethnicity, and gender. Topics will
include biological theories of race, ethnicity and gender, the evolution of
the hydrocarbon society, and the growth and spread of agriculture. Two exams,
a single research paper, weekly short essays and class participation will
determine course grade. The course is limited to 25 students. (Vandermeer)

**_Courses in Spanish

_** **307/Spanish 307. Spanish for U.S. Latinos.** _Basic knowledge of Spanish
language or permission of instructor. (3). (Excl).  
_ This course addresses the particular linguistic needs and interests of
students of Hispanic descent and heritage born and/or educated in the United
States interested in acquiring a formal and structural knowledge of Spanish,
in further expanding vocabulary at the abstract and professional levels, and
in developing their skills in formal and professional writing. Sociolinguistic
aspects of Spanish in the United States - code-switching, linguistic
attitudes, bilingualism - also will be explored in relation to the politics of
cultural identity. Short weekly assignments and exercises emphasizing the
differences between oral and written modes of communication and between formal
and informal Spanish will be required, along with a mid-term and a final exam.
Readings will include cultural essays, literature, and scholarly articles.
(Aparicio)

# Anthropology

## Biological Anthropology (Division 318)

**161\. Introduction to Biological Anthropology.** _(4). (NS). (BS).  
_ The course explores the biological basis for variation in human morphology,
physiology, and behavior across different modern populations around the world,
and through human evolutionary history. Major topics discussed are
evolutionary theory, genetics, human adaptation, primate and human behavior,
and the human fossil record. No special knowledge is required or assumed.
Cost:2 WL:2 (Strassmann)

**168\. First Year Seminar in Primate Field Studies.** _(3). (NS). (BS).  
_ A seminar designed for incoming freshmen. Students will be introduced to
science as a mode of inquiry by applying Darwin's theory of natural selection
to the behavior of nonhuman primates. Emphasis will be given to long-term
field studies of primates in the wild. One three-hour discussion/lecture.
Class participation, weekly writing assignments, and a term paper required.
(Mitani)

## Cultural Anthropology (Division 319)

**101\. Introduction to Anthropology.** _Primarily for freshmen and
sophomores. No credit granted to those who have completed or are enrolled in
222 or 426. (4). (SS). (This course fulfills the Race or Ethnicity
Requirement).  
_ This introductory course exposes and explores the structures of inquiry
characteristic of anthropology and surveys the field's four subdisciplines
(biological, archaeological, cultural, and linguistic anthropology), providing
a first glimpse of the field's overall context, history, present status, and
importance. The principal aim of the course is to help students develop a
coherent view of the essential concepts, structures, and intellectual methods
that typify the discipline. It stresses unifying principles that link the
subdisciplines and thereby create anthropology's comprehensive, holistic world
view. It teaches students various ways of learning and thinking about the
world's many designs for living in time and space. It prepares them to
integrate and interpret information, to evaluate conflicting claims about
human nature and diversity, and to think critically. Topics covered include:
the nature of culture, human genetics, evolution, and the fossil record, the
concept of race, primate (monkey and ape) behavior, language and culture,
systems of marriage, kinship and family organization, sex and gender roles,
economics, politics, and religion in global perspective, the cultural
dimension of economic development and contemporary social change, and the
emergence of a world system. Required readings may include an introductory
text and various paperbacks. Lectures and discussion. Two objective exams
(multiple choice and true or false questions) cover the two halves of the
course. The second exam is given on the last day of class. There is no final
exam and no term paper. Section leaders require quizzes and, perhaps a short
paper. Satisfies diversity requirement. Cost:2 WL:1,3,4 (Section 001:Kottak;
Section 150:Peters-Golden)

**222\. The Comparative Study of Cultures.** _No credit granted to those who
have completed or are enrolled in 101 or 426. Students with credit for Anthro.
101 should elect Anthro. 327. (4). (SS).  
_ The purpose of this course is to acquaint students with the great variety
existing in human culture and society so that they can place their own
particular way of life in proper perspective. Its subject matter is world
ethnology with special emphasis on social organization and economy. Lectures
and readings are organized according to complexity of society; the course
begins with hunters and gatherers, progresses through various tribal and
peasant societies, and concludes with contemporary industrial nations. The
approach is comparative. Lectures are supplemented by weekly discussion
sections augmented by a variety of readings, primarily ethnographic in nature,
and by frequent showings of ethnographic films. Course requirements include a
midterm examination, a final examination, and a paper applying principles
learned in the course to some aspect of the student's own life. Both
examinations consist primarily of essay questions. This course is intended for
non-concentrators. Cost:3 WL:4 (Lockwood)

**282\. Introduction to Prehistoric Archaeology.** _(4). (SS).  
_ This course will combine a presentation of the techniques, methods, and
theories of anthropological archaeology with a general survey of world
prehistory. Discussion of method and theory will cover field and laboratory
techniques for acquiring information about past cultures, methods for using
that information to test ideas about past cultural organization and evolution,
and current theoretical developments in anthropological archaeology. The
survey of world prehistory will focus on four major topics: (1) the emergence
in Africa of the first proto-humans, between two and six million years ago;
(2) the appearance of the first anatomically and behaviorally "modern" humans;
(3) the origins of domesticated plants and animals and the development of the
first village farming communities; and (4) the rise of more complex stratified
"state-level" societies. The course will be oriented as much toward students
with a general curiosity and interest in the human past as toward students who
will become eventual concentrators. There will be three one-hour lectures plus
one discussion section per week. Requirements: three in-class hourly exams and
a final examination, plus 3-4 take-home exercises that give students firsthand
experience with the analysis and interpretation of archaeological data.
Required readings: ARCHAEOLOGY (1989, 2nd edition), by David Hurst Thomas,
plus additional readings to be announced. Cost:3 WL:2 (Sinopoli)

# Armenian Studies

**171/Slavic Ling. 171. First-Year Armenian.** _(4). (LR).  
_ See Armenian 171 under Slavic Linguistics (Division 474). (Bardakjian)

# Asian Languages and Cultures

## Buddhist Studies (Division 332)

**230/Asian Studies 230/Phil. 230/Rel. 230. Introduction to Buddhism.** _(4).
(HU).  
_ Lecture and discussion of readings introducing the religious traditions that
derive from the teachings of Siddhartha Gautama, the Buddha. The core of the
course is two extensive units: "The Story of Buddhism as Legend and History,"
and "Questions and Meanings: Symbol, Doctrine, Ritual and Experience." The
first of these units traces the history of Buddhist beliefs and practices from
their origins in India to later developments in Tibet and East Asia. The
second unit addresses issues of doctrine and philosophy (e.g., enlightenment
and Nirvana), practice (e.g., meditation, ritual), and society (e.g., women
and Buddhism, Buddhism and war). Additionally, the course explores the origins
of Western notions about "Buddhism," and the connection between modern
academic studies of Buddhism and traditional Buddhist scholarship. No previous
background is required. Grade will be based on two take-home examinations and
a final. (Gomez)

## Chinese (Division 339)

**101\. Beginning Chinese.** _(5). (LR). Laboratory fee ($10) required.  
_ Chinese 101 is an introductory course in speaking, understanding, reading
and writing Chinese. The student is expected to achieve control of the sound
system, basic sentence patterns and basic vocabulary of Standard Mandarin
Chinese. Starting the 5th week, we will learn to read and write the
characters. In Chinese 101, the major emphasis is on _speaking_ and _aural
comprehension_. We recommend that students listen to the tapes one hour per
day. This is a five-credit-hour course. We meet one hour each day. Tuesdays
and Thursdays are lectures; Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays are recitations.
Students are required to register for both a lecture section and a recitation
section. Attendance is taken everyday and _no audits are allowed_. Textbooks:
(a) John DeFrancis, _Beginning Chinese_ (Yale Univ. Press) (b) John DeFrancis,
_Beginning Chinese Reader_ , Part I and II (Yale Univ. Press). Materials
covered (Fall Term): _Beginning Chinese_ , Lessons 1-13. _Beginning Chinese
Reader_ , Lessons 1-12. Cost:2 WL:1 (Tao)

**250\. Topics in Chinese Civilization.** _No knowledge of Chinese required.
(1-3). (Excl).  
Section 001 - The Story of the Stone. _ This semester this course will present
an introduction to late imperial China through the acclaimed translation by
David Hawkes and John Minford of its most famous and complex novel, _The Story
of the Stone_ (5 volumes, Penguin, 1977-86). _The Story of the Stone_ is
simultaneously a tragic love story and the chronicle of the decline of an
enormous aristocratic household. With its reputation as a  "veritable
encyclopedia of traditional Chinese life," it provides an excellent window on
a vanished society. This fictional portrait of eighteenth-century China will
be supplemented by readings in Naquin and Rawski, _Chinese Society in the
Eighteenth Century_ (1987) and a variety of visual materials shown in class.
Requirements will include two short papers, a take home midterm, a final exam,
and active class participation. Cost:2 WL:1 (Rolston)

**301\. Reading and Writing Chinese.** _Permission of instructor. No credit
granted to those who have completed or are enrolled in Chinese 101, 102, or
361. (4). (LR).  
_ This course is designed for students with native or near-native speaking
ability in Chinese, but little or no reading and writing ability. Chinese 301
meets four hours per week; it focuses on reading and writing Chinese and will
cover the regular 101-102 reading materials. Students will be graded on the
basis of daily classroom performance, daily quizzes, periodic tests, and
homework assignments. The basic text is _Beginning Chinese Reader_ by John
DeFrancis. Cost:1 WL:1

## Japanese (Division 401)

**101\. Beginning Japanese.** _(5). (LR). Laboratory fee ($7) required.  
_ A thorough grounding is given in all the language skills: listening,
speaking, reading, and writing. The aim of the oral component is to provide
the student with the speaking and comprehension skills necessary to function
effectively in practical situations in a Japanese-speaking environment.
Attention is given to the social and cultural differences in the use of the
language. In the reading and writing component the two _Kana_ syllabaries (
_Katakana_ and _Hiragana_ ) and elementary characters ( _Kanji_ ) are
introduced. The goal of this component is to develop proficient reading skills
through practice reinforced by oral and written short question-answer
exercises. Students are required to practice with audio/video tapes a minimum
of two hours for each class hour (10 hours per week). From the first day,
recitation sessions are conducted entirely in Japanese; no English is
permitted. Recitation sessions emphasize speaking/reading in Japanese contexts
at normal speed with near native pronunciation, accent, intonation, rhythm and
appropriate body language. Analyses, explanations, and discussions involving
the use of English are specifically reserved for lectures with a linguist.
Texts: Eleanor Harz Jorden and Mari Noda, _Japanese: The Spoken Language,
Parts I-II_ ; Eleanor Harz Jorden and Hamako Ito Chaplin, _Reading Japanese_.
Cost:2 WL:1

**201\. Second-Year Japanese.** _Japanese 102 or equivalent. (5). (LR).
Laboratory fee ($9) required.  
_ Further training is given in all the language skills (listening, speaking,
reading, and writing) for students who have acquired a basic language
proficiency. The aim of the oral component is to provide the student with the
speaking and comprehension skills necessary to function effectively in more
advanced practical situations in a Japanese-speaking environment. In the
reading and writing component, the emphasis is on reading elementary texts,
developing an expository style, and writing short answers/essays in response
to questions about these texts. Discussions on the social and cultural use of
language are provided. Students are required to practice a minimum of two
hours for each class hour (12 hours per week). Recitation sessions are
conducted entirely in Japanese; no English is permitted. Recitation sessions
emphasize speaking/reading in Japanese contexts at normal speed with near-
native pronunciation, accent, intonation, rhythm, and appropriate body
language. Analyses, explanations, and discussions involving the use of English
are specifically reserved for lectures. Texts: Eleanor Harz Jorden and Mari
Noda, _Japanese: The Spoken Language, Part II_ ; Eleanor Harz Jorden and
Hamako Ito Chaplin, _Reading Japanese_. Cost:2 WL:1

## Korean (Division 409)

101\. Beginning Korean. _(5). (LR).  
_ As the first half of the beginning-year course in spoken and written Korean,
it will emphasize the aural / oral skill, but attention will also be given to
grammatical structure. Class regularly meets five times a week--2 hours of
lecture and 3 hours of aural / oral practice--and daily attendance is
expected. In addition, students are required to do additional hours of work
for listening practice on their own in the language lab. Through lectures,
students will learn Korean characters, be able to read sentences with
considerable fluency, and understand the basic grammatical structures of
Korean. Based on the knowledge obtained through lectures, recitation classes
will help the students develop an ability to use basic conversational
expressions freely. The checkpoints for evaluation include homework
assignments, weekly quizzes, reading aloud, and oral interviews. Those
interested in taking this course are recommended to see the instructor before
registration. WL:3 (Park, Staff)

## Courses in South and Southeast Asia (S&SEA) (Division 483)

**_S &SEA Language Courses  
_  
101\. Beginning Thai.** _(5). (LR).  
_ Standard Thai, the language of Thailand, is typical of several Asian
languages in its grammar and tonal pronunciation. Focus of the course is the
use of language in everyday situations. Upon successful completion of the two-
term sequence, students will be able to conduct conversation dealing with
several survival concerns, e.g., introduction, ordering food, transportation,
banking, post-office trip, shopping, etc. From the first day of class,
students will learn Thai scripts and will be able to read course materials and
short passages in Thai at the end of the term. Writing assignments are also
assigned. Thai cultures will be offered both in the content of the language
lessons and supplementary presentations. Placement test required before
registration. Cost:1 WL:4 (Montatip Brown)

**103\. Beginning Indonesian.** _(5). (LR).  
_ Indonesian is the national language of Indonesia, a country noted for its
rich and deep cultural heritage as well as for its remarkable cultural
diversity. With its 180,000,000 speakers, Indonesian is the sixth most
prevalently spoken of world languages. The relatively simple syntactic and
grammatical structures which characterize Indonesian make it an accessible
language for native speakers of English. The elementary course comprises a
two-term sequence designed to provide the student with a basic working
knowledge of the Indonesian language. The course aims at the acquisition of
the four basic language skills - listening, speaking, reading, and writing -
in modern Indonesian. The class emphasizes aural-oral exercises and practice
and the learning of culture throughout the course. The text used is keyed to a
set of tapes for use in the language lab and concentrates on practical
knowledge of the language. Evaluation is based on classroom performance,
homework assignments, tests, and a final exam. Cost:2 WL:4 (Sudarsih)

**107\. Beginning Tagalog.** _(4). (LR).  
_ Tagalog is the national language of the Philippines. Elementary Tagalog is a
two-term sequence designed to give the student who has little or no knowledge
of Tagalog the necessary basis for learning to speak it and to have an
acquaintance with the cultural context in which it functions. Tagalog is
particularly interesting in the way it has integrated the broad influences of
both Spanish and English into its own syntactic and semantic systems. The oral
approach is greatly emphasized in the classroom, using questions and answers
and short dialogues to develop active use of the language in the most natural
way possible. This is complemented by the use of taped lessons in the Language
Laboratory. There are frequent short quizzes, a midterm, and a final
examination. At the end of the first year, the student should be able to
handle brief exchanges in common social situations and to read and write
simple Tagalog. For the student specializing in Philippine studies, learning
Tagalog is a must. For the student specializing in language studies, a number
of linguists of note have found Tagalog structure highly instructive in
understanding certain aspects of language. For the student with Philippine
affinities, learning Tagalog provides a bond of understanding and for some, a
link to one's roots. For the student who has neither a Philippine connection
nor a specialist interest in language, learning Tagalog can be rewarding as it
provides an experience of new modes of expression and new ways of looking at
the world around us and within ourselves. Cost:1 WL:1 (Naylor)

**109\. Beginning Sanskrit.** _(3). (LR).  
_ This course will work toward developing a proficiency with the basic tools
necessary to read and write Sanskrit, the classical language of India. Lessons
will include study of the script (Devanagari), elementary grammar and
vocabulary. The grade will be based on completion of regular homework
assignmentst, weekly quizzes, a mid-term and a final examination.

**115(381). Beginning Vietnamese.** _(5). (LR).  
_ This is the introductory course in speaking, listening, reading, and writing
Vietnamese, the language of about 70,000,000 speakers. With the lifting of the
trade embargo and a prospective normalization in American-Vietnamese
relations, there is no doubt that a knowledge of the Vietnamese language and
culture will provide many opportunities that will be available then. This
course is designed for the students with no knowledge of the Vietnamese
language as well as those with some knowledge but desire to develop the four
basic language skills - listening, speaking, reading, and writing. The format
will be as follows: four class hours a week will be focused on the aural-oral
approach, in reading, dialogue form, translation, question-and-answer on the
content of the texts. One class hour will be devoted to quizzes or tests. In
addition, there will be home assignments and works in the lab. Classes will be
largely conducted in Vietnamese to help the students acquire sufficient
automaticity and fluency in spoken Vietnamese. Course evaluation will be
graded on classroom performance, class attendance, home assignments, and a
final examination. WL:3 (Nguyen)

**301\. Reading and Writing for Native Speakers.** _Native speaking ability in
a South/Southeast Asian language and permission of instructor. (4). (Excl).  
_ This is the first half of a two-term sequence designed for Vietnamese
students who have some knowledge of the spoken language, but no or little
reading and writing ability. This course covers S&SEA 115 & 116 in one term.
The sequential course (S&SEA 302) will cover S&SEA 215 & 216 in the winter
term. The course meets four hours a week, with primary emphasis on reading and
writing through the second-year level. It also aims at improving the student's
skills in speaking and aural comprehension. Course grade will be based on
classroom attendance, classroom performance, homework and a final examination.
No credit granted to students who have completed any formal Vietnamese course.
Native Vietnamese speakers are encouraged to take this course rather than
S&SEA 115 & 116\. See the instructor for placement test before registration.
Cost:1 WL:3 (Nguyen)

**_Courses in English

_** **225/Religion 225. Hinduism.** _(3). (HU).  
_ Hinduism is a major world religion practiced by over a billion people,
primarily in South Asia, but it also was the precursor of Buddhism, and along
with Buddhism it had a major impact on the civilizations in East and Southeast
Asia. We will cover its origins and development, its literature, its belief
and practices, its unique social structures and doctrines, its interactions
with other religions, and finally its confrontation with and accommodation of
"modernity". We will use reading materials, lectures, discussions, and audio
and video resources. Students will be expected to read selections from Hindu
religious literature in translation as well as read modern studies of the
various aspects of Hindu beliefs, practices, social systems, et cetera. The
overall approach will be more in the direction of a general history of this
religion and the people who adhere to it. Students will be graded on the basis
of a set of in-class written exams as well as term papers. (Deshpande)

# Asian Studies (Division 323)

**121/Hist. 121. Great Traditions of East Asia.** _(4). (HU).  
_ See History 121. (Forage)

**230/Buddhist Studies 230/Phil. 230/Rel. 230. Introduction to Buddhism.**
_(4). (HU).  
_ See Buddhist Studies 230. (Gomez)

# Astronomy

**Introductory Courses and courses for non-concentrators.** Astronomy 101/111
discusses our explorations of the solar system. Astronomy 102/112 deals with
stars and the rest of the Universe beyond the solar system. Students in
Astronomy 101 and 102 attend a weekly discussion section. Students in
Astronomy 111 and 112 actively participate in a laboratory which meets in the
evening each week. None of these courses is a prerequisite for any of the
others. High school mathematics through plane geometry is useful. All students
in each course will have opportunities for a planetarium visit and for evening
observations with telescopes.

**101\. Introductory Astronomy: The Solar System.** _No credit granted to
those who have completed or are enrolled in 111, 130, 160, or 221. (4). (NS).
(BS).  
_ Astronomy 101 students attend the same lectures as Astronomy 111 students
(see course description below). (Section 001: Sears; Section 006: Bernstein)

**102\. Introductory Astronomy: Stars, Galaxies, and the Universe.** _No
credit granted to those who have completed or are enrolled in 112, 130, 160,
or 222. (4). (NS). (BS).  
_ Astronomy 102 students attend the same lectures as Astronomy 112 students
(see course description below). Instead of laboratory sections, Astronomy 102
incorporates weekly one-hour discussions and associated homework, which is
considered along with examinations and quizzes for course grades. Cost:2 WL:4
(Section 001:MacAlpine; Section 006:Seitzer)

**111\. Introductory Astronomy: The Solar System.** _No credit granted to
those who have completed or are enrolled in 101, 130, 160, or 221. (4). (NS).
(BS).  
_ This course presents an introduction to the field of astronomy and
astrophysics with an emphasis on the discoveries from space exploration. The
first third of the course deals with understanding the history of astronomy,
orbits, gravitation, optics and the properties of light and matter. The rest
of the course explores the properties, origin and evolution of the major
planets, asteroids, comets, the Sun and other components of the Solar System
with particular emphasis on comparative aspects with respect to the Earth. The
origin and formation of the Solar System and the origin of life will also be
discussed. This course is intended for non-science concentrators with a basic
high school math and science background. Astronomy 111 has a two-hour
laboratory section every week. Astronomy 101 has a one-hour discussion
section. Course requirements include assigned reading, section meetings,
homework, observations, quizzes, midterm and a final examination. Laboratory
sections include observations with telescopes. Cost:2 WL:4 (Section 001:
Sears; Section 005: Bernstein)

**112\. Introductory Astronomy: Stars, Galaxies, and the Universe.** _No
credit granted to those who have completed or are enrolled in 102, 130, 160,
or 222. (4). (NS). (BS).  
_ This course is intended primarily for non-science concentrators, who wish to
understand the phenomena and properties of the universe beyond our solar
system. There are no astronomy prerequisites, and a basic high school math
background (e.g., not calculus) will suffice. Students examine the widest
possible range of interrelated natural phenomena, from sub-atomic particles to
the Universe as a whole. Lectures inventory the different types of stars and
examine how red giants, white dwarfs, black holes, supernovae, and people all
fit together in one grand, remarkable scheme. The larger picture includes our
Milky Way galaxy, less hospitable exploding galaxies, and enigmatic quasars.
The present state of knowledge or speculation regarding the origin and
ultimate fate of our universe will also receive special attention. It all came
from somewhere, but where...and why? Course grades will be derived from
scheduled quizzes or exams, and laboratory exercises. Laboratory sections,
which meet for two evening hours each week, will include planetarium
demonstrations and observations with telescopes (weather permitting). Cost:3
WL:4 (Section 001:MacAlpine; Section 006:Seitzer)

**130\. Explorations in Astronomy.** _No credit granted to those who have
completed or are enrolled in 101, 102, 111, 112, 160, 221, or 222. (4). (NS).
(BS).  
_ This course is a one-term exploration of a few selected topics representing
all of astronomy. Here are a few examples of possible topics. 1) The stars:
how we are able to learn about them, how they evolve and die, how they produce
chemical elements and generate energy. 2) The formation of stars and solar
systems. What we are learning about star formation. How our solar system tells
us about star formation. Recent developments in our understanding of the
planets during our age of planetary exploration. 3) Cosmology: the expansion
of the universe, and its eventual fate. The formation of structure and of
galaxies, the cosmic radiation fields. This course will include assigned
reading, some homework, quizzes, a midterm and a final. Cost:2 WL:4
(Richstone)

**160\. Introduction to Astrophysics.** _Math. 115, and prior or concurrent
enrollment in Phys. 140; or permission of instructor. No credit granted to
those who have completed or are enrolled in 102, 112, 130, 221, or 222. (4).
(NS). (BS).  
_ Some of the most exciting phenomena and concepts in astronomy and
astrophysics are explored in this survey course. One major theme is the
structure and evolution of stars from their birth in giant molecular clouds
through their death as white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black holes. Another
important theme is galaxies, with discussions about the missing or dark matter
in galaxies, galaxy-galaxy interactions, and the large-scale distribution of
galaxies in the Universe. We conclude with an examination of the Big Bang, the
Inflationary Universe, and the Cosmic Background radiation. This course is
directed toward students with an interest in science and mathematics. There
are problem sets and a weekly two-hour laboratory using telescopes. Cost:2
WL:3 (Mateo)

**204/AOSS 204/Geology 204. The Planets: Their Geology and Climates.** _High
school mathematics through plane geometry and trigonometry. Those with credit
for GS 113 may only elect Astro. 204 for 2 credits. (3). (NS). (BS).  
_ See Geological Sciences 204. (Atreya and Pollack)

**261/NOEP 301. Navigation.** _(2). (Excl).  
_ The purpose of this course is to educate students in all aspects of marine
navigation, from getting a vessel underway from port through open ocean
navigation using both celestial and electronic means. The content of the
course is divided into three major areas. The first section focuses on
piloting, emphasizing the safe navigation of vessels in coastal waters. This
section provides an introduction to navigational instruments and aids to
navigation. The second section concerns celestial navigation, the ability to
determine position through observation of celestial bodies. Students learn how
to determine position based on the use of the sextant and various almanacs and
mathematical tables. The third section of the course considers electronic
navigation. The course consists of two ninety minute lectures a week. Grading
is done on the basis of homework, quizzes, a project, and examinations. The
primary textbooks for the course are _Marine Navigation I_ and _Marine
Navigation II_ by Richard R. Hobbs.

# Atmospheric, Oceanic, and Space Sciences (Division 241)

Although AOSS 202 is offered through the College of Engineering, the course is
approved by LSA to earn LSA credits and may be used to meet Natural Science
distribution requirements. Other Atmospheric, Oceanic, and Space Sciences
courses are listed in the COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING BULLETIN, and in the Time
Schedule as part of the offerings of the College of Engineering in the AOSS
subsection and may be elected by LSA students as a part of non-LSA course
work. These other courses do not help meet LSA distribution requirements.
Students who have a serious professional interest in the field should consult
the department (2233 Space Research Building, 764-3335).

**202\. The Atmosphere.** _(3). (NS). (BS).  
_ The focus of the course is on understanding the basic nature and behavior of
the Earth's atmosphere. Students learn to relate features revealed on the
daily weather maps to atmospheric processes and characteristics. They learn to
appreciate the forces which shape and change the climate and to understand the
processes which produce atmospheric phenomenon, such as thunderstorms,
tornadoes, winter snowstorms, and hurricanes. The course also considers the
atmosphere as a natural resource covering aspects such as the greenhouse
effect, weather and man, air pollution, acid rain, etc. (Baker)

# Biology (Division 328)

**100\. Biology for Nonscientists.** _Not open to those with Advanced
Placement or "Departmental" credit in biology, nor to those concentrating in
the biological sciences. Credit is granted for a combined total of 10 credits
elected in introductory biology. (4). (NS). (BS).  
_Biology 100 is a one term course designed to introduce students to current
biological concepts. The course consists of three hours of lecture per week
plus a coordinated discussion session which occupies two hours per week.
Biology 100 provides an introduction to some general principles of biology and
concentrates on the areas of cell biology, genetics, evolution, and
environmental biology. A major objective of this course is to point out to
students the nature of the scientific process and illustrate the uses and non-
uses of science in contemporary life. Wherever possible, the ethical and
social implications of contemporary scientific effort will be discussed.

This course is designed for students with a minimal background in the
biological sciences but we do assume some exposure to biology at the high
school level. Discussion sections enroll 20 students and are taught by
graduate student teaching assistants. In the discussion section, students have
the opportunity to review material presented in lecture and participate in
discussions of issues raised in the lecture segment. Cost:3 WL:1; you MUST
attend the first discussion section to claim your place in the course.

**101\. Biology and Human Affairs.** _Credit is granted for a combined total
of 10 credits elected in introductory biology. (4). (NS). (BS).  
_ This course is an introduction to those aspects of biology that have direct
applicability to the lives of people in today's world. It covers current
controversies within biology, especially as they relate to human life and
human affairs. Topics discussed include IQ and genetics, sex roles,
agriculture, world hunger, and the environment. Background information is
given for each topic, but the emphasis is placed on the controversies and the
role of science in human affairs. In addition to the two lectures per week,
there is a two-hour discussion period in which the topics are further explored
and films are frequently shown. Cost:3 WL:1

**130\. Animal Behavior.** _Credit is granted for a combined total of 10
credits elected in introductory biology. (3). (NS). (BS).  
_ The course is an introduction to the behavior of animals in their natural
environment. Social behavior of birds, mammals, and insects is emphasized.
Topics include: the environment as animals perceive it, natural selection and
adaptations, development of behavior, communication, sexual cooperation and
mate choice, social behavior of animals in groups, the importance of family
relationships, and the evolution of traditions. The course objectives are to
gain a background in the natural behavior of animals and to explain the
evolution of behavior. By the end of the course you should be able to: 1)
evaluate the evidence that behavior is shaped by natural selection, 2)
recognize the interaction between environmental modification and genetic
determination, and 3) explain sexual behavior, aggressive behavior, and social
interactions in terms of evolution. The course consists of lectures, readings,
slides and movies. Grades are based on two midterms, and a final exam; exams
are multiple choice. Texts: _The Selfish Gene_ (rev. ed., R. Dawkins) and
_Animal Behavior, an Evolutionary Approach_ (5th ed., J. Alcock). Cost:2 WL:1
(Payne)

**140\. Genetics and Society.** _Credit is granted for a combined total of 10
credits elected in introductory biology. (4). (NS) (BS).  
_ This course is designed for students not concentrating in the sciences. The
course will provide students with a background in genetics, 1) to allow them
to understand and appreciate some of the latest developments in genetics
reported in the local and national press, 2) to discuss the social history of
the field of genetics, 3) to introduce students to "the scientific method" as
applied to genetics, and finally 4) to discuss aspects of genetics which have
a bearing on our everyday lives. Topics to be discussed will include, but not
be limited to (in no particular order): genetics, race and IQ; forensic
applications of genetic fingerprinting; gene therapy; recombinant DNA
technology and possible environmental concerns, T.D. Lysenko and the communist
ideal, the human genome project, genetic diseases and therapeutic abortion.
The course will meet three times a week, and two hours will be devoted to
discussion. Course evaluation will be based on exams (consisting mainly of
questions requiring short essay answers) and one or more term papers. Cost:1
WL:1 (Adams)

**152\. Introduction to Biology: Term A.** _Chem. 130 or the equivalent, or
Chemistry 210 placement. No credit granted to those who have completed or are
enrolled in Biol. 195. Credit is granted for a combined total of 10 credits
elected in introductory biology. Those with credit for Biol. 100 are advised
to elect Biol. 195. (4). (NS). (BS).  
_ First term of a two-term introductory sequence (152/154) intended for
concentrators in biology, other science programs or preprof studies. Other
suitably prepared students wishing detailed coverage of biology are also
welcome. The aims of Biology 152/154 are: (1) to provide factual and
conceptual knowledge, (2) to afford experience in obtaining and interpreting
biological hypotheses, (3) to give an integrated overview of modern biology
and (4) to develop thinking and writing skills. Topics in Biology 152 are
divided among four areas: (a) cellular and molecular biology, (b) genetics,
(c) evolution, and (d) ecology. Students MUST: (1) attend 3 lectures and one
3-hour lab/discussion section each week; (2) ATTEND THEIR ASSIGNED LAB/DISC
MEETINGS EACH WEEK STARTING WITH THE FIRST WEEK OR THEIR SPACE MAY BE GIVEN TO
SOMEONE ON THE WAITING LIST; and (3) RESERVE the times and dates for the
midterm and final exams (as specified in the Time Schedule) before enrolling.
There are usually two midterm exams and a final exam. Students usually
purchase a textbook, lab manual and course pack consisting of a syllabus and
lecture notes. No other study guides or supplementary materials need be
bought. For further information contact the Biology 152/154 office, 1039 Chem
Bldg (764-1430). Cost:3 WL:2, but go to 1039 Chem.

# Chemistry (Division 334)

The Chemistry Department has three types of courses available for students
starting out toward careers in any of the sciences, engineering, or medicine.
Students are placed into these courses according to the results of the tests
in chemistry and mathematics that they take during orientation.

For students interested in the sciences, engineering or medicine, either Chem
130 or Chem 210/211 can be their starting point. Students who have had a
strong course in high school (which may include AP credit in chemistry) are
advised to start in Chem 210 and 211, the laboratory course that accompanies
it. Chem 130 is recommended for all other students. Section 400 of Chem 130 is
reserved for students who would benefit from a smaller lecture section and
more frequent contact with both senior faculty and teaching assistants.

Students who have had little or no laboratory work in high school should plan
to elect Chem 125 with Chem 130. Other students electing Chem 130 may postpone
laboratory to a subsequent term.

**105/AOSS 105. Our Changing Atmosphere.** _(3). (NS). (BS).  
_ This course considers the science needed to understand human-induced threats
to the atmospheric environment, with special emphasis on the global changes
that are taking place, or are anticipated. We will discuss the greenhouse
effect (and its impact on climate), ozone depletion, the polar ozone holes,
and urban air pollution. Some basic meteorology will be presented, including
how climate changes might affect the frequency and severity of hurricanes and
tornadoes. This lecture course is intended for non-science concentrators and
there are no prerequisites. Grades will be based on three one-hour exams (no
final exam) and homework. Cost:1 WL:1 (Barker)

**125\. General and Inorganic Chemistry: Laboratory.** _To be elected by
students who are eligible for (or enrolled) Chem. 130. (2). (NS). (BS).  
_ This laboratory course can be elected with, or following, Chem 130. It is
intended that students planning to enroll in Chem 130 that have had little or
no previous chemistry laboratory enroll concurrently in Chem 125. The focus of
this guided inquiry laboratory is to foster critical thinking that allows
students to design, perform, and interpret experiments. An emphasis is placed
on what constitutes valid data and provides the burden of proof for testing
hypotheses and theories. In addition, the student acquires technical skills
that are required for further advancement in experimental sciences. Although
an ability to collect and analyze data in a quantitative manner is developed,
the emphasis of the course is to provide a qualitative understanding of the
basic concepts of chemistry. This is accomplished by demonstrating that
chemical principles are derived from experimental data. The format of the
course is organized into three sections. Pre-laboratory reading and questions
are completed prior to the four-hour laboratory. The second component is
performance in the laboratory. The third begins in the last hour of the
laboratory where individual data are shared, evaluated, and discussed.
Students then provide a laboratory report based on the combined data of the
section. A one-hour lecture provides support for the topics that are
investigated in the laboratory. Microcomputer simulations also supplement the
student's laboratory experience. There are two one-hour written examinations,
scheduled for Tuesday evenings, that constitute 30% of the grade. The
remaining 70% of the grade is based on the acquired in the laboratory points.
Refer to the _Time Schedule_ for examination dates and times. Cost:2 WL:2
(Penner-Hahn, Kerner)

**130\. General Chemistry: Macroscopic Investigations and Reaction
Principles.** _Three years of high school math or Math. 105; one year of high
school chemistry recommended. Placement by testing, or permission of Chemistry
department. Intended for students without AP credit in chemistry. (3). (NS).
(BS). (QR/2).  
_ This General Chemistry course is intended to fulfill the one term chemistry
requirement for students interested in science, or as a natural science
elective for non-science concentrators. This course may also be used as the
first term in a four or more term chemistry sequence (probably 130, 210/211,
215/216, 340 etc.) for science concentrators and pre-professional students.
Chemistry 130 is intended for students without AP credit in Chemistry.

Chemistry 130 provides an introduction to the major concepts of chemistry,
including the microscopic picture of atomic and molecular structure, periodic
trends in the chemical reactivity, the energetics of chemical reactions and
the nature of chemical equilibria. Students will be introduced both to the
fundamental principles of modern chemistry, the descriptive chemistry of the
elements, and to the underlying theories that account for observed macroscopic
behavior. In Chem 130, students will learn to think critically, examine
experimental data, and form generalizations about data as chemists do. Chem
130 will meet three times each week in lecture sections with senior faculty
(the intensive section will have four lectures a week), and once a week in
small group discussion classes led by graduate teaching assistants (the
Comprehensive Study Program discussion class will meet three times a week).
Lecturers and teaching assistants will have scheduled office hours for after
class help, and computerized study aids will be available to all students.
Course grades will be determined from discussion class evaluation, 3 one-hour
examinations (Tuesday nights) and a final examination. See _Time Schedule_ for
examination times and dates.

The intensive lecture section (section 400) is intended for those students who
would benefit from a smaller lecture section (maximum 100 students) and more
lectures so that the pace is slower and there is more feedback. Placement by
LSA testing or permission of the Chemistry Department (Room 1500 Chemistry) is
needed for enrollment in this section. The CSP discussion section is intended
for those students who would benefit from more group study meetings with a
graduate teaching assistant. Permission of the Comprehensive Studies Program
is needed for enrollment in this section. Cost:4 WL:2

**210\. Structure and Reactivity I.** _High school chemistry. Placement by
examination during Orientation. To be taken with Chem. 211. (4). (NS). (BS).  
_ Chemistry 210 is the first course in a two-term sequence in which the major
concepts of chemistry are introduced in the context of organic chemistry.
Emphasis is on the development of the capacity of students to think about the
relationship between structure and reactivity and to solve problems in a
qualitatively analytical way. This course is a particularly good first course
for students with AP credit in chemistry, Honors students and other students
with a strong interest in chemistry and biology. The course has three lectures
with the professor and one hour of discussion with a teaching assistant per
week. There are three hour examinations (Tuesday nights) and a final
examination. See _Time Schedule_ for examination times and dates.

NOTE: This course is linked to Chemistry 211. The recitation sections for
Chemistry 210 and the corresponding laboratory sections for Chemistry 211 are
listed together in the _Time Schedule_ under Chemistry 210. Students must
elect both Chemistry 210 (for 4 credit hours) and Chemistry 211 (for 1 credit
hour). Cost:3 WL:2

**211\. Investigations in Chemistry.** _To be taken with Chem. 210. (1). (NS).
(BS).  
_ Chemistry 211 is a laboratory introduction to methods of investigation in
inorganic and organic chemistry. Students solve individual problems using
microscale equipment and a variety of techniques such as thin layer
chromatography, titrations, and spectroscopy. The course consists of a four-
hour laboratory period with a teaching assistant under the supervision of the
professor. Students keep laboratory notebooks, which also serve as laboratory
reports. Grades are based on performance in the laboratory and the laboratory
notebooks.

NOTE: This course is linked to Chemistry 210. The recitation sections for
Chemistry 210 and the corresponding laboratory sections for Chemistry 211 are
listed together in the _Time Schedule_ under Chemistry 210. Students must
elect both Chemistry 210 (for 4 credit hours) and Chemistry 211 (for 1 credit
hour). Cost:1 WL:2

The Department of Classical Studies believes that the literature, monuments,
and social institutions of the ancient world, together with the reflections of
the Greek and Roman thinkers about their own cultures, are of unique value in
themselves, well worth our contemplation and understanding; and that as we
attempt to learn about and appreciate classical civilization, we necessarily
learn as well a variety of contemporary methodologies and disciplines.

The department offers three groups of courses for distribution, those in
Classical Civilization (introductory courses that require no knowledge of
Greek or Latin), courses in Classical Archaeology, and upper level language
courses in Greek and Latin authors or genres. While only a few courses are
repeated in yearly or biennial rotation, most courses are offered less
regularly. This system guarantees that the instructor approaches the subject
each time with fresh impetus. We believe in a healthy change and variation in
our course offerings. The undergraduate advisor of the Department of Classical
Studies will consider and, if appropriate, authorize other classical
civilization, literature, and archaeology courses for distribution credit upon
request by students during the first drop/add period each term.

Classical Civilization offerings include the general surveys of Greek and
Roman civilizations (CC 101 and 102), which provide (through readings,
lectures, and discussions) a broad understanding of the literatures, thought,
and social development of ancient Greece and Rome, and thus provide the
student with knowledge of and appreciation for our cultural origins, as well
as an acquaintance with modern methods for understanding an ancient culture.
These courses are taught each year. CC 101 is offered in the Fall and CC 102
is offered in the Winter. Other courses provide understanding of particular
aspects of the ancient world, approached from a variety of disciplines and
studies - literary, philosophical, historical, sociological, and so on. Some
students (particularly those who have already developed special interests in
such disciplines) may wish to explore one of these topics without having had a
broader introduction.

Classical Archaeology offerings include the broad surveys of the archaeology
and monuments of Greece (Cl.Arch 221 - offered in the Fall) and Rome (Cl.Arch
222 - offered in the Winter) and a general introduction to archaeological
field methods (Cl.Arch 323). Other courses use the material remains of
specific cultures both to introduce students to the diversity of the ancient
world and to demonstrate how, through a variety of multi-disciplinary
approaches, the archaeological record can be used to reconstruct the life-ways
of past societies.

# Classical Studies

## Classical Archaeology (Division 342)

**221/Hist. of Art 221. Introduction to Greek Archaeology.** _(4). (HU).  
_ This course surveys the history and art of Crete and Greece as revealed by
archaeology from the third millennium through the 4th century B.C. In the
prehistoric period, particular attention is given to architectural and ceramic
developments as well as to the crosscurrent of trade and economic contacts
among Asia Minor, Crete, and mainland Greece. Emphasis is also given to the
impact archaeology has had on views and theories of history: the destructions
of the civilizations of Crete and Troy, the end of the bronze age, the
volcanic eruption of Thera. In the historic period, major artistic
developments in architecture, sculpture, and painting are considered and
special attention is given to social interpretations: temples as banks and
monasteries; sculpture as dedication, decoration, and commemorative
propaganda; architectural sculpture as realized myth. Discussions in the
sections will concentrate on the historical background, archaeological field
techniques, methods of dating and stratigraphy. The sections will meet in the
Kelsey museum where it will be possible to work with the actual ancient
artifacts recovered in University of Michigan excavations. There are two one-
hour examinations and a final, as well as illustrated lectures and assigned
readings. Cost:2/3 WL:1 (Pedley)

## Classical Civilization (Division 344)

_Courses in this division do not require a knowledge of Greek or Latin._ They
are intended for students who wish to acquire knowledge of ancient literature,
life, and thought, and of the debt modern civilization owes the Greeks and
Romans.

**101\. Classical Civilization I: The Ancient Greek World (in English).** _No
credit granted to those who have completed or are enrolled in Great Books 191
or 201. (4). (HU).  
_ This course serves as an introduction to the civilization of ancient Greece
from its beginnings to the Hellenistic age. All reading is in English
translation. Lectures will trace the development of Greek literature and
thought within the context of Greek society. Literature read includes _The
Iliad_ and _The Odyssey_ of Homer; selected homeric hymns; selected tragedies
of Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides; selected comedies of Aristophanes;
selections from the historians Herodotus and Thucydides; and philosophical
writings of Plato and Xenophon. The readings average about 90 pages per week.
There will be a midterm, two brief papers, and a final examination. Freshmen
Honors students in Honors sections will write enough to meet the Introductory
Composition requirement. This course is the first of a two-term series.
Classical Civilization 102 is offered in the Winter Term and represents an
equivalent treatment of the civilization of ancient Rome. It is recommended
that the course be taken as a sequence, but it is not required. Cost:3 WL:4
(Dillery)

## Classical Greek (Division 385)

**101\. Elementary Greek.** _Graduate students should elect the course as
Greek 502. (4). (LR).  
_ In combination with Greek 102, this is the first half of a year-long
introduction to ancient Greek and is designed to prepare students for the
reading of Greek texts. Greek 101 concentrates on fifth-century B.C. Attic
Greek which was the language of the "golden age" of Athens. The Greek language
of that time and place represents a cultural and linguistic central point from
which students can pursue their own interests within a wide range of Greek
literature which extends from the Homeric epics to the Byzantine era and which
includes the archaic, classical, and hellenistic periods as well as the
_koine_ Greek of the New Testament. The purpose of the course is to develop
the fundamentals of the language so that these fundamentals can then be
applied to whatever area of ancient Greek students wish to pu

