# Afroamerican and African Studies (Division 311)

**_Introductory Courses

_ 100\. Introduction to Afro-American Studies.** _(4). (SS).  
_ This course introduces and provides a general overview of the area of
Afroamerican Studies. It employs a multi-disciplinary perspective which
combines elements from conventional historical, political, sociocultural and
behavioral orientations in the analysis of Afroamerican culture and
institutions. The course format is a lecture-discussion with four weekly
lectures. Students meet with T.A.s once weekly to discuss course readings and
lectures. The course will be supplemented by guest lecturers, selected CAAS
colloquia, films, special projects and field trips. WL:4

**_Literature and the Arts

_ 108/Hist. of Art 108. Introduction to African Art.** _(3). (Excl).  
_ See History of Art 108. (Quarcoopome)

**341/Theatre 222. Introduction to Black Theatre.** _(3). (HU).  
_ See Theatre and Drama 222. (Jackson)

**342/Theatre 233. Acting and the Black Experience.** _Permission of
instructor (brief interview). (3). (HU).  
_ See Theatre and Drama 233. (Jackson)

**_Individual Behavior, Cultural Systems, and Social Organization

_ 241/Women's Studies 231. Women of Color and Feminism.** _(3). (Excl).  
_ See Women's Studies 231.

# American Culture (Division 315)

Unless otherwise stated, the permission required for the repetition for credit
of specifically designated courses is that of the student's concentration or
B.G.S. advisor.

**170/History 170/University Courses 170/Women's Studies 210. Histories of
"Witchcraft."** _First-year students only. (4). (Introductory Composition)._

" **witch** \- 1) one that is credited with usually malignant supernatural
powers, especially a woman,...a sorceress; 2) an ugly old woman, hag; 3) a
charming or alluring girl or woman. "  
-Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary 

This is a multi-disciplinary and cross-cultural course offered to first-year
students only. Its format is somewhat unusual. Students will attend a twice-
weekly "lecture" class that focuses on the 1692 "witchcraft" outbreak in
Salem, Massachusetts, and on the accusations and trials that preceded this
dramatic event in both New England and Europe. Readings for this section of
the course are drawn from history, literature, journalism, sociology,
psychology, and anthropology (see lecture syllabus). In addition, each student
will enroll in a twice-weekly discussion section (a kind of mini-course within
the larger course) that focuses initially on the Salem outbreak but
subsequently on other histories of "witchcraft."

**210\. Topics in Ethnic Studies.** _(3). (SS). May be repeated for credit
with permission.  
Section 002 - Latinos in the United States: An Introduction._ Latinos - or
Hispanics - are the second largest minority in the U.S. Comprised of those
whose origins - however near or far - come from the Spanish-speaking countries
of Latin America, Latinos comprise very variegated experiences in the U.S.
Both the reasons of migration from their countries and their processes of
incorporation in American society vary widely. Together we will seek to
understand both what they share and what is unique. This course explores the
experiences of the major groups of Latinos in the U.S. - Chicanos, Mexicans
immigrants, Puerto Ricans, Cubans - both for what it tells us about them and
for the social problems and social issues they serve to exemplify: family,
immigration law and its consequences, the different meaning of race in Latin
America and the U.S., the unfolding drama of revolution, the  "culture of
poverty" and the like. Overall we will seek to understand to what extent
Latinos are insiders or outsiders to this society, and why. (Koreck)

**_Courses in Spanish

_** **307/Spanish 307. Spanish for U.S. Latinos.** _Basic knowledge of Spanish
language or permission of instructor. (3). (Excl).  
_ This course addresses the particular linguistic needs and interests of
students of Hispanic descent and heritage born and/or educated in the United
States interested in acquiring a formal and structural knowledge of Spanish,
in further expanding vocabulary at the abstract and professional levels, and
in developing their skills in formal and professional writing. Sociolinguistic
aspects of Spanish in the United States - code-switching, linguistic
attitudes, bilingualism - also will be explored in relation to the politics of
cultural identity. Short weekly assignments and exercises emphasizing the
differences between oral and written modes of communication and between formal
and informal Spanish will be required, along with a mid-term and a final exam.
Readings will include cultural essays, literature, and scholarly articles.
(Aparicio)  

# Anthropology

## Courses in Biological Anthropology (Division 318)

**161\. Introduction to Biological Anthropology.** _(4). (NS).  
_ The course explores the biological basis for variation in human morphology,
physiology, and behavior across different modern populations around the world,
and through human evolutionary history. Major topics discussed are
evolutionary theory, genetics, human adaptation, primate and human behavior,
and the human fossil record. No special knowledge is required or assumed.
Cost:2 WL:2  

## Courses in Cultural Anthropology (Division 319)

**101\. Introduction to Anthropology.** _Primarily for freshmen and
sophomores. No credit granted to those who have completed or are enrolled in
222 or 426. (4). (SS).  
_ This introductory course exposes and explores the structures of inquiry
characteristic of anthropology and surveys the field's four subdisciplines
(biological, archaeological, cultural, and linguistic anthropology), providing
a first glimpse of the field's overall context, history, present status, and
importance. The principal aim of the course is to help students develop a
coherent view of the essential concepts, structures, and intellectual methods
that typify the discipline. It stresses unifying principles that link the
subdisciplines and thereby create anthropology's comprehensive, holistic world
view. It teaches students various ways of learning and thinking about the
world's many designs for living in time and space. It prepares them to
integrate and interpret information, to evaluate conflicting claims about
human nature and diversity, and to think critically. Topics covered include:
the nature of culture, human genetics, evolution, and the fossil reles,
economics, politics, and religion in global perspective, the cultural
dimension of economic development and contemporary social change, and the
ecord, the concept of race, primate (monkey and ape) behavior, language and
culture, systems of marriage, kinship and family organization, sex and gender
romergence of a world system. Required readings may include an introductory
text and various paperbacks. Lectures and discussion. Two objective exams
(multiple choice and true or false questions) cover the two halves of the
course. The second exam is given on the last day of class. There is no final
exam and no term paper. Section leaders require quizzes and, perhaps a short
paper. Satisfies diversity requirement. Cost:2 WL:1,3,4 (Kottak)

**222\. The Comparative Study of Cultures.** _No credit granted to those who
have completed or are enrolled in 101 or 426. Students with credit for Anthro.
101 should elect Anthro. 327. (4). (SS).  
_ The purpose of this course is to acquaint students with the great variety
existing in human culture and society so that they can place their own
particular way of life in proper perspective. Its subject matter is world
ethnology with special emphasis on social organization and economy. Lectures
and readings are organized according to complexity of society; the course
begins with hunters and gatherers, progresses through various tribal and
peasant societies, and concludes with contemporary industrial nations. The
approach is comparative. Lectures are supplemented by weekly discussion
sections augmented by a variety of readings, primarily ethnographic in nature,
and by frequent showings of ethnographic films. Course requirements include a
midterm examination, a final examination, and a paper applying principles
learned in the course to some aspect of the student's own life. Both
examinations consist primarily of essay questions. This course is intended for
non-concentrators. Cost:3 WL:4 (Lockwood)

**282\. Introduction to Prehistoric Archaeology.** _(4). (SS).  
_ This course will combine a presentation of the techniques, methods, and
theories of anthropological archaeology as a social science with a general
survey of world prehistory. The presentation of method and theory will cover
field and laboratory techniques for acquiring information about past cultures,
methods for using that information to test ideas about past cultural
organization and evolution, and current theoretical developments in
anthropological archaeology as a social science. The survey of world
prehistory will focus on four major problems in the development of human
culture: (1) the emergence of Africa, between two and six million years ago,
of the first proto-humans; (2) the appearance approximately 40,000 years ago
of the first anatomically and behaviorally "modern" humans; (3) the origins of
domesticated plants and animals and the development of the first village
farming communities; and (4) the rise of more complex, stratified societies
from these simpler farming societies. The course will be oriented as much
toward students with a general curiosity and interest in the human past as
toward students who will become eventual concentrators. There will be three
lectures (one hour each) plus one discussion section per week. Requirements
include three in-class hourly exams and a final examination, plus four take-
home exercises that give students firsthand experience with the application of
analytical methods to real archaeological data. Required Readings: ARCHAEOLOGY
(2nd edition, 1989), by David Hurst Thomas, plus additional readings, to be
announced. Cost:3 WL:2 (Speth)  

# Asian Languages and Cultures

## Courses in Buddhist Studies (Division 332)

**230(320)/Asian Studies 230/Phil. 230/Rel. 230. Introduction to Buddhism.**
_(4). (HU).  
_ An introduction to the Buddhist religion, with attention to its moral and
philosophical teachings, its modes of practice (e.g., meditation and ritual),
and its social and institutional structures. The course takes a historical
approach, concentrating on the origins of the Hinayana, Mahayana, and Tantric
traditions in India, and the subsequent development of those traditions in
Tibet and East Asia. Students attend three hours of lecture and a one-hour
discussion section each week. There will be a midterm, final exam, and a
paper. No previous knowledge of the subject is required. Cost:3 WL:4 (Foulk)  

## Courses in Chinese (Division 339)

**101\. Beginning Chinese.** _(5). (LR).  
_ Chinese 101 is an introductory course in speaking, understanding, reading
and writing Chinese. The student is expected to achieve control of the sound
system, basic sentence patterns and basic vocabulary of Standard Mandarin
Chinese. Starting the 5th week, we will learn to read and write the
characters. In Chinese 101, the major emphasis is on _speaking_ and _aural
comprehension_. We recommend that students listen to the tapes one hour per
day. This is a five-credit-hour course. We meet one hour each day. Tuesdays
and Thursdays are lectures; Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays are recitations.
Students are required to register for both a lecture section and a recitation
section. Attendance is taken everyday and _no audits are allowed_. Textbooks:
(a) John DeFrancis, _Beginning Chinese_ (Yale Univ. Press) (b) John DeFrancis,
_Beginning Chinese Reader_ , Part I and II (Yale Univ. Press). Materials
covered (Fall Term): _Beginning Chinese_ , Lessons 1-13. _Beginning Chinese
Reader_ , Lessons 1-12. Cost:2 WL:1 (Tao)

**201\. Second-Year Chinese.** _Chinese 102 or equivalent. (5). (LR).  
_ This course is a continuation of work begun in Chinese 101-102. Students
electing the course should have mastered the spoken language material
presented in DeFrancis' BEGINNING CHINESE or a similar introductory text and
should be able to recognize and write about 400 characters and 1200
combinations. The primary goal of the course is achievement of a basic level
of reading competence within a vocabulary of 800 characters and accompanying
combinations. A closely integrated secondary goal is continued improvement of
aural understanding and speaking competence. These goals are approached
through classroom drill, out-of-class exercises, and work in the language
laboratory. Daily class attendance is required. Students are graded on the
basis of daily classroom attendance, and weekly quizzes or tests. The text is
INTERMEDIATE READER OF MODERN CHINESE (Princeton University Press, 1992).
Students who are native or near-native Mandarin Chinese speakers are not
eligible for this course. They should enroll in Chinese 302 (Reading and
Writing Chinese) which covers all of the material presented in Chinese 201 /
202 and is offered in the Winter term. No visitors are allowed. Cost:3 WL:1
(Liang)

**301\. Reading and Writing Chinese.** _Permission of instructor. No credit
granted to those who have completed or are enrolled in Chinese 101 or 102.
(4). (LR).  
_ This course is designed for students with native or near-native speaking
ability in Chinese, but little or no reading and writing ability. Chinese 301
meets three hours per week; it focuses on reading and writing Chinese and will
cover the regular 101-102 reading materials. Students will be graded on the
basis of daily classroom performance, daily quizzes, periodic tests, and
homework assignments. The basic text is _Beginning Chinese Reader_ by John
DeFrancis. Cost:1 WL:1 (Staff)  

## Courses in Japanese (Division 401)

**101\. Beginning Japanese.** _(5). (LR).  
_ A thorough grounding is given in all the language skills: listening,
speaking, reading, and writing. The aim of the oral component is to provide
the student with the speaking and comprehension skills necessary to function
effectively in practical situations in a Japanese-speaking environment.
Attention is given to the social and cultural differences in the use of the
language. In the reading and writing component the two _Kana_ syllabaries (
_Katakana_ and _Hiragana_ ) and elementary characters ( _Kanji_ ) are
introduced. The goal of this component is to develop proficient reading skills
through practice reinforced by oral and written short question-answer
exercises. Students are required to practice with audio/video tapes a minimum
of two hours for each class hour (10 hours per week). From the first day,
recitation sessions are conducted entirely in Japanese; no English is
permitted. Recitation sessions emphasize speaking/reading in Japanese contexts
at normal speed with near native pronunciation, accent, intonation, rhythm and
appropriate body language. Analyses, explanations, and discussions involving
the use of English are specifically reserved for lectures with a linguist.
Texts: Eleanor Harz Jorden and Mari Noda, _Japanese: The Spoken Language,
Parts I-II_ ; Eleanor Harz Jorden and Hamako Ito Chaplin, _Reading Japanese_.
Cost:2 WL:1 (Staff)

**201\. Second-Year Japanese.** _Japanese 102 or equivalent. (5). (LR).  
_ Further training is given in all the language skills (listening, speaking,
reading, and writing) for students who have acquired a basic language
proficiency. The aim of the oral component is to provide the student with the
speaking and comprehension skills necessary to function effectively in more
advanced practical situations in a Japanese-speaking environment. In the
reading and writing component, the emphasis is on reading elementary texts,
developing an expository style, and writing short answers/essays in response
to questions about these texts. Discussions on the social and cultural use of
language are provided. Students are required to practice a minimum of two
hours for each class hour (12 hours per week). Recitation sessions are
conducted entirely in Japanese; no English is permitted. Recitation sessions
emphasize speaking/reading in Japanese contexts at normal speed with near-
native pronunciation, accent, intonation, rhythm, and appropriate body
language. Analyses, explanations, and discussions involving the use of English
are specifically reserved for lectures with a linguist. Texts: Eleanor Harz
Jorden and Mari Noda, _Japanese: The Spoken Language, Parts II-III_ ; Eleanor
Harz Jorden and Hamako Ito Chaplin, _Reading Japanese_. Cost:2 WL:1 (Staff)  

## Courses in South and Southeast Asia (Division 483)

**_Language Courses

_ 101\. Beginning Thai.** _(5). (LR).  
_ Standard Thai, the language of Thailand, is typical of several Asian
languages in its grammar and tonal pronunciation. Focus of the course is the
use of language in everyday situations. Upon successful completion of the two-
term sequence, students will be able to conduct conversation dealing with
several survival concerns, eg., introduction, ordering food, transportation,
banking, post-office trip, shopping, etc. From the first day of class,
students will learn Thai scripts and will be able to read course materials and
short passages in Thai at the end of the term. Writing assignments are also
assigned. Thai cultures, history, geography, etc. will be offered both in the
content of the language lessons and supplementary presentations. Placement
test required before registration. Cost:1 WL:4 (Brown)

**103\. Beginning Indonesian.** _(5). (LR).  
_ Indonesian is the national language of Indonesia, a country noted for its
rich and deep cultural heritage as well as for its remarkable cultural
diversity. With its 180,000,000 speakers, Indonesian is the sixth most
prevalently spoken of world languages. The relatively simple syntactic and
grammatical structures which characterize Indonesian make it an accessible
language for native speakers of English. The elementary course comprises a
two-term sequence designed to provide the student with a basic working
knowledge of the Indonesian language. The course aims at the acquisition of
the four basic language skills--listening, speaking, reading, and writing--in
modern Indonesian. The class emphasizes aural-oral exercises and practice and
the learning of culture throughout the course. The text used is keyed to a set
of tapes for use in the language lab and concentrates on practical knowledge
of the language. Evaluation is based on classroom performance, homework
assignments, tests, and a final exam. Cost:2 WL:4 (Sudarsih)

**105\. Elementary Hindi-Urdu.** _No credit granted to those who have
completed or are enrolled in S &SEA 315. (4). (LR).  
_South and Southeast Asia 105 is the first term in the sequence of Hindi-Urdu
courses offered by the Department of Asian Languages and Cultures. The course
meets four hours per week in four sessions. If enrollments warrant, there will
be a separate course (SSEA 315) intended for students who have some knowledge
of the spoken language but do not know the writing system. In the first year
only the Devanagari writing system (for Hindi) is introduced. Nastaliq (for
Urdu) comes in the second year. The course concentrates on developing skills
in reading, writing, speaking, and aural comprehension. Evaluation is based on
attendance, written homework assignments, quizzes, dictations, and
examinations. There are no prerequisites (no previous knowledge of Hindi is
required). Cost:2 WL:1

**109\. Beginning Sanskrit.** _(3). (LR).  
_ This course will work toward developing a proficiency with the basic tools
necessary to read and write Sanskrit, the classical language of India. Lessons
will include study of the script (Devanagari), elementary grammar and
vocabulary. The grade will be based on completion of regular homework
assignmentst, weekly quizzes, a mid-term and a final examination.

**111\. Beginning Punjabi.** _(4). (LR).  
_ This course offers an introduction to spoken and written Panjabi, a major
language of northern India and of Pakistan, with some 80 million speakers. It
will begin with a concentration on the spoken language, emphasizing oral-aural
skills, and introducing the Gurmukhi script. Students will be encouraged to
begin basic conversation in class. The written aspects of the language will be
introduced through graded readings and written exercises. This course is
oriented toward developing a basic practical proficiency in the language.
Teaching materials will be drawn from a variety of sources: available
reference grammars, textbooks of Panjabi, and instructor- prepared materials.
Evaluation of students' performance will be based on daily class work,
homework, a midterm, and a final. Cost:1 (Singh)

**115\. Beginning Vietnamese.** _(5). (LR).  
_ Vietnamese 115 is the introductory course in reading, listening, speaking
and writing the only language of more than 65,000,000 speakers, from the South
to the utmost northern part of Vietnam. This country is now moving towards the
free market economy and needs foreign capital and knowhow. In addition, with
prospective normalization of US-Vietnamese relations in the very near future,
one cannot doubt that a knowledge of the Vietnamese language and culture will
be a crucial asset in enabling one to participate in many opportunities that
will be available then. This first half of the two-term sequence course is
designed to accomodate students with no knowledge of the Vietnamese language
as well as those with some knowledge but desire to develop the four basic
language skills - listening, speaking, reading and writing, and to improve
their knowledge in Vietnamese history and culture. The format will be as
follows: three class hours a week will be focused on the aural-oral approach -
in reading, dialogue form, translation, question-and-answer on the content of
the texts. One class hour a week will be devoted to quizzes and tests, and one
class hour to guided conversation. In addition, there will be written
assignments and works in the language lab. Throughout the course, students
will be encouraged to communicate in Vietnamese, and classes will be largely
conducted in Vietnamese in view to develop the students' ability to acquire
sufficient automaticity and fluency in spoken Vietnamese. Course evaluation
will be graded on classroom performance, class attendance, home assignments
and a final examination. WL:3 (Nguyen)

**315\. Reading and Writing Hindi-Urdu.** _Speaking and listening
comprehension proficiency (as determined by interview). No credit granted to
those who have completed or are enrolled in S &SEA 105 or 106. (4). (LR).  
_S&SEA 315 is the first course in a two-term sequence designed for students
with some background in spoken Hindi-Urdu. It covers the first (elementary)
year of Hindi-Urdu in one term. A follow-on course (S&SEA 316) covers the
second (intermediate) year of Hindi-Urdu in the winter term. The course meets
four times a week for one hour each session. Students coming from Hindi- or
Urdu-speaking families are encouraged to take this course rather than S&SEA
105-6. See the instructor for placement. Cost:2 WL:1 (Hook)  

# Asian Studies (Division 323)

**111/University Courses 172/History 151. South Asian Civilization.** _(4).
(HU).  
_ See UC 172. (Dirks)

**121/History 121. Great Traditions of East Asia.** _(4). (HU).  
_ See History 121. (Forage)

**230(320)/Buddhist Studies 230/Phil. 230/Rel. 230. Introduction to
Buddhism.** _(4). (HU).  
_ See Buddhist Studies 230.  

# Astronomy (Division 326)

INTRODUCTORY COURSES AND COURSES FOR NON-CONCENTRATORS. Astronomy 101/111
discusses our explorations of the solar system. Astronomy 102/112 deals with
stars and the rest of the Universe beyond the solar system. Students in
Astronomy 101 and 102 attend a weekly discussion section. Students in
Astronomy 111 and 112 actively participate in a laboratory which meets in the
evening each week. None of these courses is a prerequisite for any of the
others. High school mathematics through plane geometry is useful. All students
in each course will have opportunities for a planetarium visit and for evening
observations with the telescopes mounted on Angell Hall.

**101\. Introductory Astronomy: The Solar System.** _No credit granted to
those who have completed or are enrolled in 111, 130, 160, or 221. (4). (NS).  
_ Astronomy 101 students attend the same lectures as Astronomy 111 students
(see course description below). (Section 001:Sears; Section 006:Worthey)

**102\. Introductory Astronomy: Stars, Galaxies, and the Universe.** _No
credit granted to those who have completed or are enrolled in 112, 130, 160,
or 222. (4). (NS).  
_ Astronomy 102 students attend the same lectures as Astronomy 112 students
(see course description below). Instead of laboratory sections, Astronomy 102
incorporates weekly one-hour discussions and associated homework, which is
considered along with examinations and quizzes for course grades. Cost:2 WL:4
(Section 001:Mateo; Section 006:Seitzer)

**111\. Introductory Astronomy: The Solar System.** _No credit granted to
those who have completed or are enrolled in 101, 130, 160, or 221. (4). (NS).  
_ This course presents an introduction to the field of astronomy and
astrophysics with an emphasis on the discoveries from space exploration. The
first third of the course deals with understanding the history of astronomy,
orbits, gravitation, optics and the properties of light and matter. The rest
of the course explores the properties, origin and evolution of the major
planets, asteroids, comets, the Sun and other components of the Solar System
with particular emphasis on comparative aspects with respect to the Earth. The
origin and formation of the Solar System and the origin of life will also be
discussed. This course is intended for non-science concentrators with a basic
high school math and science background. Astronomy 111 has a two-hour
laboratory section every week. Astronomy 101 has a one-hour discussion
section. Course requirements include assigned reading, section meetings,
homework, observations and examinations. Laboratory sections include
observations with telescopes. Cost:2 WL:4 (Section 001: Sears; Section 005:
Worthey)

**112\. Introductory Astronomy: Stars, Galaxies, and the Universe.** _No
credit granted to those who have completed or are enrolled in 102, 130, 160,
or 222. (4). (NS).  
_ This course is intended primarily for non-science concentrators, who wish to
understand the phenomena and properties of the universe beyond our solar
system. There are no astronomy prerequisites, and a basic high school math
background (e.g., not calculus) will suffice. Students examine the widest
possible range of interrelated natural phenomena, from sub-atomic particles to
the Universe as a whole. Lectures inventory the different types of stars and
examine how red giants, white dwarfs, black holes, supernovae, and people all
fit together in one grand, remarkable scheme. The larger picture includes our
Milky Way galaxy, less hospitable exploding galaxies, and enigmatic quasars.
The present state of knowledge or speculation regarding the origin and
ultimate fate of our universe will also receive special attention. It all came
from somewhere, but where...and why? Course grades will be derived from
scheduled quizzes, a midterm and a final exam, and laboratory exercises.
Laboratory sections, which meet for two evening hours each week, will include
planetarium demonstrations and observations with telescopes (weather
permitting) mounted on Angell Hall. Cost:3 WL:4 (Section 001: Mateo; Section
006: Seitzer)

**160\. Introduction to Astrophysics.** _Math. 115, and prior or concurrent
enrollment in Phys. 140; or permission of instructor. No credit granted to
those who have completed or are enrolled in 102, 112, 130, 221, or 222. (4).
(NS).  
_ This course introduces students with some science and math background to
methods and concepts of modern astrophysics. Topics: astrophysical processes;
modern telescopes and instrumentation; stellar spectra, motions, and
atmospheres; stellar interiors and nuclear energy generation; evolution of
stars and their planetary systems from birth in giant molecular clouds to
deaths as white dwarfs, neutron stars, or black holes; stellar systems, our
Milky Way galaxy; dark matter and interactions in galaxies; the distribution
of galaxies and quasars in the Universe; cosmic background radiation and the
Big Bang. Problem sets and a weekly two-hour laboratory using telescopes on
Angell Hall. Cost:2 WL:3 (Aller)

**204/AOSS 204/Geology 204. The Planets: Their Geology and Climates.** _High
school mathematics through plane geometry and trigonometry. Those with credit
for GS 113 may only elect Astro. 204 for 2 credits. (3). (NS).  
_ See Geology 204. Cost:1-2 WL:4 (Atreya and Pollack)

**261/NOEP 301. Navigation.** _(2). (Excl).  
_ The purpose of this course is to educate students in all aspects of marine
navigation, from getting a vessel underway from port through open ocean
navigation using both celestial and electronic means. The content of the
course is divided into three major areas. The first section focuses on
piloting, emphasizing the safe navigation of vessels in coastal waters. This
section provides an introduction to navigational instruments and aids to
navigation. The second section concerns celestial navigation, the ability to
determine position through observation of celestial bodies. Students learn how
to determine position based on the use of the sextant and various almanacs and
mathematical tables. The third section of the course considers electronic
navigation. The course consists of two ninety minute lectures a week. Grading
is done on the basis of homework, quizzes, a project, and examinations. The
primary textbooks for the course are MARINE NAVIGATION I and MARINE NAVIGATION
II by Richard R. Hobbs. (Staff)  

# Atmospheric, Oceanic, and Space Sciences (Division 241)

Although AOSS 202 is offered through the College of Engineering, the course is
approved by LSA to earn LSA credits and may be used to meet Natural Science
distribution requirements. Other Atmospheric, Oceanic, and Space Sciences
courses are listed in the COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING BULLETIN, and in the Time
Schedule as part of the offerings of the College of Engineering in the AOSS
subsection and may be elected by LSA students as a part of non-LSA course
work. These other courses do not help meet LSA distribution requirements.
Students who have a serious professional interest in the field should consult
the department (2233 Space Research Building, 764-3335).

**202\. The Atmosphere.** _(3). (NS).  
_**Note:** AOSS 202 is in the process of being restructured for the Fall Term.
Section 001, pending final approval, will become Chem/AOSS 105. Section 002
will remain AOSS 202. Students electing Section 001 will be informed of any
changes by the AOSS Department.

_Section 001: Our Changing Atmosphere._ The science of the greenhouse effect,
stratospheric ozone depletion, the polar ozone holes, and urban smog. These
phenomena and their possible consequences are discussed along with the
properties and behavior of the atmosphere and its interactions with other
components of the environment (Barker)

_Section 002: Climate Change and Weather_ There is a real possibility that the
climate of the 2000's will be dramatically different from today's. The climate
change portion of this course investigates what changes are forecast in
temperature, precipitation and storminess in the coming century and how
climatic and meteorological variability may influence our way of life. Topics
include: origins of the atmosphere, natural and unnatural climatic
variability, global atmospheric circulation, and the role of air pollution. In
the weather portion topics include: the science and art of weather forecasting
and photographic and video presentations on severe weather topics including
lightning, thunderstorms, tornados and hurricanes. Grades are based on three
hourly exams each covering one-third of the material and a final report based
on an analysis of either personal weather observations or weather folklore
interviews. (Baker)  

# Biology (Division 328)

**100\. Biology for Nonscientists.** _Not open to those with Advanced
Placement or "Departmental" credit in biology, nor to those concentrating in
the biological sciences. (4). (NS).  
_Biology 100 is a one term course designed to introduce students to current
biological concepts. The course consists of three hours of lecture per week
plus a coordinated discussion session which occupies two hours per week.
Biology 100 provides an introduction to some general principles of biology and
concentrates on the areas of cell biology, genetics, evolution, and
environmental biology. A major objective of this course is to point out to
students the nature of the scientific process and illustrate the uses and non-
uses of science in contemporary life. Wherever possible, the ethical and
social implications of contemporary scientific effort will be discussed.

This course is designed for students with a minimal background in the
biological sciences but we do assume some exposure to biology at the high
school level. Discussion sections enroll 20 students and are taught by
graduate student teaching assistants. In the discussion section, students have
the opportunity to review material presented in lecture and participate in
discussions of issues raised in the lecture segment. Cost:3 WL:1; you MUST
attend the first discussion section to claim your place in the course.

**101\. Biology and Human Affairs.** _(4). (NS).  
_ This course is an introduction to those aspects of biology that have direct
applicability to the lives of people in today's world. It covers current
controversies within biology, especially as they relate to human life and
human affairs. Topics discussed include IQ and genetics, sex roles,
agriculture, world hunger, and the environment. Background information is
given for each topic, but the emphasis is placed on the controversies and the
role of science in human affairs. In addition to the two lectures per week,
there is a two-hour discussion period in which the topics are further explored
and films are frequently shown. Cost:3 WL:2 (Vandermeer)

**110/University Courses 110. Introduction to Global Change I.** _No credit
granted to those who have completed or are enrolled in Natural Resources 110.
(4). (NS).  
_ The course will be an introduction to the natural world in which humans
live. It will include an introduction to the evolution of the universe, the
earth and its environments, and the evolution of living organisms.
Consideration will be given to fundamental processes by which organisms grow
and reproduce, how they interact with their environments, and the distribution
to major groups of organisms on earth. The ecological roles of organisms will
be studied at the level of the individual, the population and the community.
The causes and consequences of past and present changes in the earth's
environment will be discussed on scales from local to global. The course will
conclude with a consideration of the causes and consequences of human
alterations of the earth's environment with discussion of the implications for
the management of the earth and its ecosystems. The course grade will be based
on a midterm exam and a final exam, plus successful completion of the required
weekly laboratory exercises. There are no prerequisites for this course and no
science background is assumed. The course is appropriate for all first year
students, irrespective of intended concentration. Cost:3 WL:4 (Teeri)

**140\. Genetics and Society.** _(3). (NS)  
_ This course is designed for students not concentrating in the sciences. The
course will provide students with a background in genetics, 1) to allow them
to understand and appreciate some of the latest developments in genetics
reported in the local and national press, 2) to discuss the social history of
the field of genetics, 3) to introduce students to "the scientific method" as
applied to genetics, and finally 4) to discuss aspects of genetics which have
a bearing on our everyday lives. Topics to be discussed will include, but not
be limited to (in no particular order): genetics, race and IQ; forensic
applications of genetic fingerprinting; gene therapy; recombinant DNA
technology and possible environmental concerns, T.D. Lysenko and the communist
ideal, the human genome project, genetic diseases and therapeutic abortion.
The course will meet three times a week; one hour will be devoted to
discussion. Course evaluation will be based on exams (consisting mainly of
questions requiring short essay answers) and one or more term papers. (Adams)

**152\. Introduction to Biology: Term A.** _Chem. 130 or the equivalent, or
Chemistry 210 placement. No credit granted to those who have completed or are
enrolled in Biol. 195. (4). (NS).  
_ First term of a two-term introductory sequence (152/154) intended for
concentrators in biology, other science programs or preprof studies. Other
suitably prepared students wishing detailed coverage of biology are also
welcome. The aims of Biology 152/154 are 1) to provide factual and conceptual
knowledge, 2) to afford experience in obtaining and interpreting biological
hypotheses, 3) to give an integrated overview of modern biology and 4) to
develop thinking and writing skills. Topics in Biology 152 are divided among
four areas: (a) cellular and molecular biology, (b) genetics, (c) evolution,
and (d) ecology. Students MUST: 1) attend 3 lectures and one 3-hour
lab/discussion section each week; 2) ATTEND THEIR ASSIGNED LAB/DISC MEETINGS
EACH WEEK STARTING WITH THE FIRST WEEK OR THEIR SPACE MAY BE GIVEN TO SOMEONE
ON THE WAITING LIST; and 3) RESERVE the times and dates for the midterm and
final exams (as specified in the Time Schedule) before enrolling. There will
be two midterm exams and a final exam. Students usually purchase a textbook,
lab manual and course pack consisting of a syllabus and lecture notes. No
other study guides or supplementary materials need be bought. For honors
credit, register in lecture 002 of Biology 152 and ANY lab/disc, plus Biology
153. For further information contact the Biology 152/154 office, 1563 CCL Bldg
(764-1430). Cost:3 WL:2, but go to 1563 CCL.  

# Chemistry (Division 334)

The Chemistry Department has three types of courses available for students
starting out toward careers in any of the sciences, engineering, or medicine.
Students are placed into these courses according to the results of the tests
in chemistry and mathematics that they take during orientation. In addition
there are two distribution course, Chem 101 offered in the Fall Term and Chem
100, in the Winter Term.

For students interested in the sciences, engineering or medicine, either Chem
130 or Chem 210/211 can be their starting point. Students who have had a
strong course in high school (which may include AP credit in chemistry) are
advised to start in Chem 210 and 211, the laboratory course that accompanies
it. Chem 130 is recommended for all other students. Section 400 of Chem 130 is
reserved for students who would benefit from a smaller lecture section and
more frequent contact with both senior faculty and teaching assistants.

Students who have had little or no laboratory work in high school should plan
to elect Chem 125 with Chem 130. other students electing Chem 130 may postpone
laboratory to a subsequent term.

**125\. General and Inorganic Chemistry: Laboratory.** _To be elected by
students who are eligible for (or enrolled) Chem. 130. (2). (NS).  
_ This laboratory course can be elected with, or following, Chem 130 or 230.
It is intended that students planning to enroll in Chem 130 that have had
little or no previous chemistry laboratory enroll concurrently in Chem 125.
The focus of this guided inquiry laboratory is to foster critical thinking
that allows students to design, perform, and interpret experiments. An
emphasis is placed on what constitutes valid data and provides the burden of
proof for testing hypotheses and theories. In addition, the student acquires
technical skills that are required for further advancement in experimental
sciences. Although an ability to collect and analyze data in a quantitative
manner is developed, the emphasis of the course is to provide a qualitative
understanding of the basic concepts of chemistry. This is accomplished by
demonstrating that chemical principles are derived from experimental data. The
format of the course is organized into three sections. Pre-laboratory reading
and questions are completed prior to the four-hour laboratory. The second
component is performance in the laboratory. The third begins in the last hour
of the laboratory where individual data are shared, evaluated, and discussed.
Students then provide a laboratory report based on the combined data of the
section. A one-hour lecture provides support for the topics that are
investigated in the laboratory. Microcomputer simulations also supplement the
student's laboratory experience. There are two one-hour written examinations,
scheduled for Tuesday evenings, that constitute 25% of the grade. The
remaining 75% of the grade is based on the acquired in the laboratory points.
Refer to the _Time Schedule_ for examination dates and times. Cost:2 WL:2
(Penner-Hahn, Kerner)

**130\. General Chemistry: Macroscopic Investigations and Reaction
Principles.** _Three years of high school math or Math. 105; one year of high
school chemistry recommended. Placement by testing, or permission of Chemistry
department. Intended for students without AP credit in chemistry. No credit
granted to those who have completed Chem. 123 or 124. (3). (NS).  
_ This General Chemistry course is intended to fulfill the one term chemistry
requirement for students interested in science, or as a natural science
elective for non-science concentrators. This course may also be used as the
first term in a four or more term chemistry sequence (probably 130, 210/211,
215/216, 340 etc.) for science concentrators and pre-professional students.
Chemistry 130 is intended for students without AP credit in Chemistry.

Chemistry 130 provides an introduction to the major concepts of chemistry,
including the microscopic picture of atomic and molecular structure, periodic
trends in the chemical reactivity, the energetics of chemical reactions and
the nature of chemical equilibria. Students will be introduced both to the
fundamental principles of modern chemistry, the descriptive chemistry of the
elements, and to the underlying theories that account for observed macroscopic
behavior. In Chem 130, students will learn to think critically, examine
experimental data, and form generalizations about data as chemists do. Chem
130 will meet three times each week in lecture sections with senior faculty
(the intensive section will have four lectures a week), and once a week in
small group discussion classes led by graduate teaching assistants (the
Comprehensive Study Program discussion class will meet three times a week).
Lecturers and teaching assistants will have scheduled office hours for after
class help, and computerized study aids will be available to all students.
Course grades will be determined from discussion class evaluation, 3 one-hour
examinations (Tuesday nights) and a final examination. See Time Schedule for
examination times and dates.

The intensive lecture section (section 400) is intended for those students who
would benefit from a smaller lecture section (maximum 100 students) and more
lectures so that the pace is slower and there is more feedback. Placement by
LSA testing or permission of the the Chemistry Department (Room 1500
Chemistry) is needed for enrollment in this section. The CSP discussion
section is intended for those students who would benefit from more group study
meetings with a graduate teaching assistant. Permission of the Comprehensive
Studies Program is needed for enrollment in this section. Cost:4 WL:2
(Rasmussen, Hallada)

**210\. Structure and Reactivity I.** _High school chemistry. Placement by
examination during Orientation. To be taken with Chem. 211. (4). (NS).  
_ Chemistry 210 is the first course in a two-term sequence in which the major
concepts of chemistry are introduced in the context of organic chemistry.
Emphasis is on the development of the capacity of students to think about the
relationship between structure and reactivity and to solve problems in a
qualitatively analytical way. This course is a particularly good first course
for students with AP credit in chemistry, Honors students and other students
with a strong interest in chemistry and biology. The course has three lectures
with the professor and one hour of discussion with a teaching assistant per
week. There are three hour examinations (Tuesday nights) and a final
examination. See Time Schedule for examination times and dates.

NOTE: This course is linked to Chemistry 211. The recitation sections for
Chemistry 210 and the corresponding laboratory sections for Chemistry 211 are
listed together in the _Time Schedule_ under Chemistry 210. Students must
elect both Chemistry 210 (for 4 credit hours) and Chemistry 211 (for 1 credit
hour). Cost:3 WL:2 (Staff)

**211\. Investigations in Chemistry.** _To be taken with Chem. 210. (1). (NS).  
_ Chemistry 211 is an laboratory introduction to methods of investigation in
inorganic and organic chemistry. Students solve individual problems using
microscale equipment and a variety of techniques such as thin layer
chromatography, titrations, and spectroscopy. The course consists of a four-
hour laboratory period with a teaching assistant under the supervision of the
professor. Students keep laboratory notebooks, which also serve as laboratory
reports. Grades are based on performance in the laboratory and the laboratory
notebooks.

NOTE: This course is linked to Chemistry 210. The laboratory sections for
Chemistry 211 are listed in the _Time Schedule_ along with the recitations
sections for Chemistry 210. Students must elect both Chemistry 210 (for 4
credit hours) and Chemistry 211 (for 1 credit hour). Cost:1 WL:2 (Staff)  

# Classical Studies

The Department of Classical Studies believes that the literature, monuments,
and social institutions of the ancient world, together with the reflections of
the Greek and Roman thinkers about their own cultures, are of unique value in
themselves, well worth our contemplation and understanding; and that as we
attempt to learn about and appreciate classical civilization, we necessarily
learn as well a variety of contemporary methodologies and disciplines.

The department offers three groups of courses for distribution, those in
Classical Civilization (introductory courses that require no knowledge of
Greek or Latin), courses in Classical Archaeology, and upper level language
courses in Greek and Latin authors or genres. While only a few courses are
repeated in yearly or biennial rotation, most courses are offered less
regularly. This system guarantees that the instructor approaches the subject
each time with fresh impetus. We believe in a healthy change and variation in
our course offerings. The undergraduate advisor of the Department of Classical
Studies will consider and, if appropriate, authorize other classical
civilization, literature, and archaeology courses for distribution credit upon
request by students during the first drop/add period each term.

Classical Civilization offerings include the general surveys of Greek and
Roman civilizations (CC 101 and 102), which provide (through readings,
lectures, and discussions) a broad understanding of the literatures, thought,
and social development of ancient Greece and Rome, and thus provide the
student with knowledge of and appreciation for our cultural origins, as well
as an acquaintance with modern methods for understanding an ancient culture.
These courses are taught each year. CC 101 is offered in the Fall and CC 102
is offered in the Winter. Other courses provide understanding of particular
aspects of the ancient world, approached from a variety of disciplines and
studies -- literary, philosophical, historical, sociological, and so on. Some
students (particularly those who have already developed special interests in
such disciplines) may wish to explore one of these topics without having had a
broader introduction.

Classical Archaeology offerings include the broad surveys of the archaeology
and monuments of Greece (Cl.Arch 221--offered in the Fall) and Rome (Cl.Arch
222--offered in the Winter) and a general introduction to archaeological field
methods (Cl.Arch 323). Other courses use the material remains of specific
cultures both to introduce students to the diversity of the ancient world and
to demonstrate how, through a variety of multi-disciplinary approaches, the
archaeological record can be used to reconstruct the life-ways of past
societies.  

## Courses in Classical Archaeology (Division 342)

**221/Hist. of Art 221. Introduction to Greek Archaeology.** _(4). (HU).  
_ This course surveys the history and art of Crete and Greece as revealed by
archaeology from the third millennium through the 4th century B.C. In the
prehistoric period, particular attention is given to architectural and ceramic
developments as well as to the crosscurrent of trade and economic contacts
among Asia Minor, Crete, and mainland Greece. Emphasis is also given to the
impact archaeology has had on views and theories of history: the destructions
of the civilizations of Crete and Troy, the end of the bronze age, the
volcanic eruption of Thera. In the historic period, major artistic
developments in architecture, sculpture, and painting are considered and
special attention is given to social interpretations: temples as banks and
monasteries; sculpture as dedication, decoration, and commemorative
propaganda; architectural sculpture as realized myth. Discussions in the
sections will concentrate on the historical background, archaeological field
techniques, methods of dating and stratigraphy. The sections will meet in the
Kelsey museum where it will be possible to work with the actual ancient
artifacts recovered in University of Michigan excavations. There are two one-
hour examinations and a final, as well as illustrated lectures and assigned
readings. Cost:2/3 WL:1 (Pedley)  

## Classical Greek (Division 385)

**101\. Elementary Greek.** _Graduate students should elect Greek 502. (4).
(LR).  
_ In combination with Greek 102, this is the first half of a year-long
introduction to ancient Greek and is designed to prepare students for the
reading of Greek texts. Greek 101 concentrates on fifth-century B.C. Attic
Greek which was the language of the "golden age" of Athens. The Greek language
of that time and place represents a cultural and linguistic central point from
which students can pursue their own interests within a wide range of Greek
literature which extends from the Homeric epics to the Byzantine era and which
includes the archaic, classical, and hellenistic periods as well as the KOINE
Greek of the New Testament. The purpose of the course is to develop the
fundamentals of the language so that these fundamentals can then be applied to
whatever area of ancient Greek students wish to pursue. Cost:2 WL:1 (Dillery)  

## Modern Greek (Division 433)

**101\. Elementary Modern Greek.** _Graduate students should elect Modern
Greek 501. (4). (LR).  
_ An introductory course in language with special emphasis on developing
speaking skills. Most of the classroom time is spent on drills and on
elementary dialogues among the students and between the students and the
instructor. A creative approach to language learning is followed, whereby the
class simulates everyday life situations and the students are asked to
improvise responses to those situations. Instruction also focuses on
elementary grammar and syntax. Homework involves preparation for the dialogues
and drills. Additional exercises - at home and in the classroom - include
descriptions of objects and contexts, problem-solving, interviews among
students, and conversion of dialogues into narratives. (Van Dyke)  

## Latin (Division 411)

**_Elementary Courses_**

Two convictions are basic to the Elementary Latin Program of the Department of
Classical Studies: (1) it is possible for every able-minded person to master
the basic facts of a foreign language and (2) the learning experience leading
to such a mastery is a privilege that is very specifically human and ought to
be most satisfying. Essential facts of morphology, syntax, semantics,
vocabulary, history and culture are taught, and a knowledge of these facts
enables students to understand Latin written by the famous authors of the
Golden Age. Since at least 50% of the vocabulary of an educated speaker of
English is Latin in origin, English vocabulary improves as Latin stems and
derivatives are learned. The program normally takes four terms to complete. A
placement test may be taken at the beginning or end of a term, and a student
may succeed in placing out of one or more courses in the introductory
sequence.

In the Elementary Latin Program, the department is offering Latin 101, 102,
193, 231, and 232. Latin 101 (see below) is for students with little or no
previous Latin. A placement examination will determine the appropriate course
for other students who enter the elementary sequence. Students with questions
about which course to elect are encouraged to visit the department office in
2016 Angell Hall, 764-0360, or contact Professor Knudsvig in 2012 Angell Hall,
764-8297.

**101\. Elementary Latin.** _No credit granted to those who have completed or
are enrolled in 103, 193, or 502. (4). (LR).  
_ All of the assigned tasks/exercises in Latin 101 are directed toward the
reading and translation of Classical Latin and not toward writing or
conversation. The course has as its primary objective the acquisition of a
fundamental understanding of basic Latin grammar. The text for the course is
Knudsvig, Seligson, and Craig, LATIN FOR READING. Latin 101 covers
approximately the first half of the text. Grading is based on quizzes, class
participation, hour examinations, and a final. Cost:1 WL:3 (Staff)

**102\. Elementary Latin.** _Latin 101. No credit granted to those who have
completed or are enrolled in 193 or 502. (4). (LR).  
_ All of the assigned tasks/exercises in Latin 102 are directed toward the
reading and translation of Classical Latin and not toward writing or
conversation. The course continues the presentation of the essentials of the
Latin language as it covers the last half of Knudsvig, Seligson, and Craig,
LATIN FOR READING. Extended reading selections from Plautus (comedy) and
Eutropius (history) are introduced. Grading is based on class participation,
quizzes, hour examinations, and a final. Cost:1 WL:3 (Staff)

**193\. Intensive Elementary Latin I.** _No credit granted to those who have
completed or are enrolled in 101, 102, 103 or 502. (4). (Excl).  
_ This course is a rapid introduction to Latin and is intended for students
with little or no prior Latin. Upperclass undergraduates in such fields as
history, medieval or renaissance literature, or linguistics and who need to
acquire a reading competence in Latin as quickly and as efficiently as
possible should elect this course. So should other undergraduates who intend
to continue the study of Latin and want a rapid introduction that enables them
to take upper-level Latin courses as soon as possible. This first term course
covers elementary grammar and syntax. Cost:1 WL:1

**231\. Introduction to Latin Prose.** _Latin 102 or 103. No credit granted to
those who have completed or are enrolled in 194, 222, or 503. (4). (LR).  
_ This course reviews grammar as it introduces students to extended passages
of classical Latin prose through selections from such authors of the first
centuries B.C. and A.D. as Caesar and Livy. Class discussions center upon the
readings. Grading is based on class participation, quizzes, hour examinations,
and a final. Cost:1 WL:3 (Staff)

**232\. Vergil, Aeneid.** _Latin 231 or 221. No credit granted to those who
have completed or are enrolled in 194, 222, or 503. (4). (LR).  
SECTIONS 001 and 003._ The goal of this course is simple: to learn to read
extensive passages of Vergil's _Aeneid_ , with comprehension and enjoyment.
Careful attention is paid to Vergil's style, the more common poetic features
he employs, mythological references, and the relation of the text to the life
and time of the Emperor Augustus. Quizzes, hour exams, a two-hour final, and
regular participation in class will determine the course grade; there are no
papers. Cost:2 WL:1 (Staff)

_SECTION 002._ The goal of this course is simple: to read extensive passages
of Vergil's _Aeneid_ with comprehension and enjoyment. To the degree that
there is mastery of the paradigm forms and the principal parts of the most
common irregular verbs, the daily assignments will be made easier. Careful
attention is paid to Vergil's style, the more common poetic features he
employs, mythological references, and the relation of the text to the life and
times of the Emperor Augustus. Three hour exams, a two-hour final, and regular
participation in class will determine the course grade; there are no papers.
In-class translation is followed by a discussion of the text under
consideration that day. (Nissen)

**_Intermediate Courses

_ 301\. Intermediate Latin I.** _Latin 194, 222, 232 or equivalent. (3). (HU).  
_ The primary goal of this course is to serve as an introduction to the study
of Latin literature, and, through the literature, of Roman culture. Texts by
major poets and prose authors will be read with a view to their literary,
historical, and political contexts. Translation, and review of morphology and
syntax as needed, will be stressed. There will be quizzes, a midterm, and
final exam. Cost:2 WL:3,4 (Garbrah)

**401\. Republican Prose.** _Latin 301 or 302 or permission of instructor.
(3). (HU). May be repeated for a total of 9 credits.  
Section 001: Cicero's Orations._ We will read two or three speeches by the
renowned late Republican orator Cicero. The first aim of the course is to
ensure that all students can read Latin prose with confidence; to that end, we
will review grammar as required and try to increase reading speed. Beyond
that, we will look at Cicero's speeches in their historical context and also
as polished products of Roman rhetoric at its very best. Grades will be based
on several short papers, a mid-term, and a final examination. Books should
cost less than $50. (Frier)  

## Classical Civilization (Division 344)

_Courses in this division do not require a knowledge of Greek or Latin._ They
are intended for students who wish to acquire knowledge of ancient literature,
life, and thought, and of the debt modern civilization owes the Greeks and
Romans.

**101\. Classical Civilization I: The Ancient Greek World (in English).** _No
credit granted to those who have completed or are enrolled in Great Books 191
or 201. (4). (HU).  
_ This course serves as an introduction to the civilization of ancient Greece
from its beginnings to the Hellenistic age. All reading is in English
translation. Lectures will trace the development of Greek literature and
thought within the context of Greek society. Literature read includes THE
ILIAD and THE ODYSSEY of Homer; selected homeric hymns; selected tragedies of
Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides; selected comedies of Aristophanes;
selections from the historians Herodotus and Thucydides; and philosophical
writings of Plato and Xenophon. The readings average about 90 pages per week.
There will be a midterm, two brief papers, and a final examination. Freshmen
Honors students in Honors sections will write enough to meet the Introductory
Composition requirement. This course is the first of a two-term series.
Classical Civilization 102 is offered in the Winter Term and represents an
equivalent treatment of the civilization of ancient Rome. It is recommended
that the course be taken as a sequence, but it is not required. Cost:3 WL:4
(Dillery)

**372\. Sports and Daily Life in Ancient Rome.** _(4). (HU).  
_ Readings include selections from ancient writers in translation and from
recent scholarship on topics in Roman history and society available in a
course pack obtainable from AccuCopy at the corner of Maynard and East
William. In the lectures we begin with some background on Roman religion and
history and then consider the different social classes and their lifestyles;
the second half of the course deals with the major sports of chariot racing,
gladiator fights, and wild beast hunts, and also includes activities at the
baths. Grades will be based upon midterm and final examinations and upon
participation in class. (Potter)  

# Communication (Division 352)

**100\. Public and Interpersonal Communication.** _Not open to seniors. (3).
(Excl).  
_ This course focuses on helping students to develop effective public and
interpersonal communication skills. We will review the basics of communication
theory and models of effective communication in interpersonal and public
settings. The emphasis of the course will be on creating opportunities of
learning by doing and on encouraging students to reflect on their performance
in communication activities both within and outside of the course. Verbal
communication is typically an activity which receives little attention in our
daily lives and is rarely addressed in most courses. It is our philosophy,
however, that oral communication is a critical life skill which requires both
effort and thought to fully develop. Cost:2 WL:1  

# Computer Science (Division 353)

**183/EECS 183. Elementary Programming Concepts.** _(4). (NS).  
_ This is an introductory course for students who do not plan to concentrate
in computer science or engineering. The course is designed to give students a
good fundamental knowledge of programming techniques in a high-level language.
Suggested as a prerequisite for CS 280 for students whose programming
background is not strong. Students who know how to program, but want to learn
Pascal as a means of getting into 280 should not take 183, but Engineering 104
instead. Introduction to a high-level programming language, top-down design,
and structured programming. Basic searching and sorting techniques. Basic data
structures; arrays and records; introduction to pointers and dynamic data
structures. No previous experience in computing or programming i

