![TitleProgramBook.gif](TitleProgramBook.gif)  
![RedLine.jpg \(6683 bytes\)](RedLine.jpg) | ![](clear.gif) | ![](clear.gif) |
![](clear.gif)  
---|---|---|---  
|  |  |  
**I.** | **GENERAL INFORMATION**  
  | **A.** | **University Policies**  
  |   | This handbook includes a few of the general University policies that
have special relevance to Electrical Engineering (EE), but does not attempt to
include all of the policies that can affect your stay at Penn State. This
handbook in no way supersedes any general policy of the University.  
  |   | The Graduate Degree Programs Bulletin is often a useful reference,
especially with regard to academic issues. Special procedures related to
registration, thesis approvals, health insurance, housing, and visas are not
included in this handbook but they are well documented elsewhere.  
  |   | Recently, the World Wide Web has expanded to include many topics. It
provides an extensive listing of student policies that can be located under
the Penn State home page at **[http://www.psu.edu _._](http://www.psu.edu/)**
You can access the E E home page directly at **<http://www.ee.psu.edu>**.  
  |   | Anyone unable to locate needed information may inquire in 121
Electrical Engineering East for referrals to the appropriate source.  
  | **B.** | **Safety and Compliance**  
  |   | The Electrical Engineering Department has published a safety manual
that deals with many issues relevant to our laboratories. Please familiarize
yourselves with this booklet and refer to it when you initiate any laboratory
activity. In addition to the expected electrical hazards, many labs will
include mechanical and chemical hazards as well. Any questions regarding
safety should be directed to your research supervisor, to David Sarge
regarding issues in the semiconductor lab facilities, and generally to
Environmental Health and Safety at 865-6391.  
  |   | **EMERGENCIES 911**  
  |   | Beyond the safety issues are federally mandated compliance issues.
Filing applications and obtaining approvals for the proposed work must precede
any activities involving human subjects, vertebrate subjects, biohazardous
material, and radioactive materials. Details are available at
**<http://www.research.psu.edu/orc/>**.  
  | **C.** | **Ethics, Patents, and Copyrights**  
  |   | These topics are addressed at **<http://www.research.psu.edu/pp/>**
under the specific subheading of Research Ethics.  
  | **D.** | **Graduate Student Association and Other Graduate Organizations**  
  |   | The Graduate Student Association (GSA) provides numerous services and
information to graduate students. GSA invites graduate students to participate
in its meetings and functions. More information about GSA is available at
**<http://www.clubs.psu.edu/gsa/>**.  
  |   | Many other student organizations exist, including the Engineering
Graduate Student Council, the student branch of IEEE, hobby and sports clubs,
etc. The GSA is a good source of information.  
**II.** | **ADMISSION, ADVISING, AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING MINORS**  
  | **A.** | **Admission to Graduate Programs**  
  |   | Students may be admitted to the M.S. program, to the Ph.D. program
after completing an M.S. program, or directly to the Ph.D. program, bypassing
the M.S. program. Applicants are expected to have a B.S. degree in Electrical
Engineering. Exceptional candidates from related fields are also welcome to
apply. Only well prepared and highly competitive candidates should apply to
enter the Ph.D. program directly from the B.S. program because they will be
required to take the candidacy examinations within one year of entry into the
program.  
  |   | Applicants are required to complete the University's application form
and the Electrical Engineering Department's supplemental application form.
They must provide formal transcripts, general GRE scores, letters of
reference, and a personal statement of technical interests, goals, and
experience. An international student whose first language is not English must
submit a TOEFL score and, for consideration as a teaching assistant, a score
from the Test of Spoken English (TSE). It should be noted that students
admitted to the graduate program who do not demonstrate satisfactory
proficiency in English will be required to alleviate this deficiency by taking
additional English and/or Speech Communication courses.  
  |   | Students who intend to continue from the M.S. into the Ph.D. program
should apply to resume study at least one semester prior to the transition. An
updated personal statement and a letter of reference from a professor should
accompany that request. Standards for entry to the Ph.D. program are generally
more rigorous than for the M.S. program. Satisfactory completion of the M.S.
program does not guarantee admission to the Ph.D. program.  
  | **B.** | **Advising**  
  |   | Academic advising usually comes from the faculty member who has been
selected to supervise a student's research or who plans to move into that
role. Other members of the student's research committee also serve as
advisors. Because these people are not yet appointed for the new student, each
newly arriving student will meet with a Faculty Welcoming Committee that will
provide initial advising and refer the student to other faculty members for
further advising. The Graduate Program Coordinator, who ultimately approves
graduation, is also available to consult and assist with difficult decisions.
Students are encouraged to meet with faculty members in their fields of
interest and strive to reach at least an informal agreement on a research
topic by the end of the first semester.  
  | **C.** | **Electrical Engineering Minors for Students in Other Fields**  
  |   | The general requirements for a minor in Electrical Engineering shall
be consistent with those of the Graduate School as stated in the _[Graduate
Degree Programs Bulletin](http://www.gradsch.psu.edu/bulletin/)_.  
  |   | All graduate students desiring minors in Electrical Engineering shall
formally register such minors with the E E Graduate Program Coordinator as
soon as the decision to enter upon such a minor has been made. At the time of
registration, a program of study shall be formulated and any departure from
these courses must have the approval of the E E Graduate Program Coordinator.  
**III.** | **M.S. PROGRAM IN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING**  
  | The M.S. degree may fill several different objectives. It can be a
terminal degree or it can focus toward preparing for the Ph.D. The M.S. degree
can be research oriented or it can emphasize a breadth of graduate level
course work. These various objectives are possible because of a choice between
preparing an M.S. thesis or an M.S. paper. Course requirements are different
for the two options.  
  | One other option available is that a student who is admitted to one
program may concurrently pursue a second master's degree. Instructions and
application forms are available from Graduate Enrollment Services, 114 Kern
Building, or the E E Graduate Program Staff Assistant. Both programs and the
Graduate School Dean must approve concurrent degree program requests.  
  | Regardless of what options are chosen, several general requirements must
be met. At least 50% of the total course credits required (excluding
colloquium and research credits) must be Electrical Engineering Department
courses. The student's program shall include no more than 3 credits registered
as independent studies (E E 496 or E E 596). At most, 12 credits taken at the
400 level may be counted toward the degree requirements, though students can
and often do take credits beyond degree requirements. Students may take
demonstrably relevant 400-level technical courses from other graduate programs
as long as they do not duplicate other course work they have taken. All
students are expected to take one credit of colloquium (E E 590) in the fall
semester and one credit in the spring semester. Degree requirements should be
completed during a 6-year period.  
  | Students who have deficiencies in the use of spoken or written English may
be required to take courses in these topics in addition to the usual degree
requirements.  
  | Courses have been grouped into areas for the purpose of incorporating
distribution requirements into the M.S. program. These areas are:

>   * Computer Engineering

>   * Electromagnetic Fields and Propagation

>   * Electronic Materials, Devices, and Circuits

>   * Lasers and Electro-Optics

>   * Signals and Systems

>

  
  
  | The most recent listing of courses by area can be obtained from the
Graduate Program Staff Assistant. It should be noted that some CSE courses are
included in one of the areas. Not all courses are included in the listings.
Only those listed are acceptable for the distribution requirements  
  | The new M.S. student will consult with possible research supervisors and
formulate plans, including courses to be taken and the choice between thesis
and paper. The research supervisor may suggest and approve 500-level courses
from other departments to be included in the M.S. program. The student and
advisor will also identify other faculty members who will serve on the
student's committee. At least six months before the date of the defense, the
committee should be appointed and the student should complete the "Option and
Committee Membership Approval Form" requesting the approval of the student's
committee, tentatively identifying the research topic, and choosing the thesis
or paper option. The committee members and the Department Head ultimately sign
the student's thesis or paper.  
  | **A.** | **M.S. Committee Specifications**  
  |   | A student's M.S. committee must have at least two members, and may
have more. The chairperson or one co-chairperson must have a tenure-track
appointment in the Department of Electrical Engineering. The second member of
the committee must be either an Electrical Engineering Graduate Faculty member
or have a professorial appointment within the department. The committee may
have additional members, including a co-chairperson, who are members of the
graduate faculty at large.  
  | **B.** | **Thesis Option**  
  |   | The degree requires 32 credits including 24 course credits with at
least 12 at the 500 level, 2 colloquium credits, and 6 thesis credits
identified as E E 600 or E E 610\. The distribution requirements stipulate
that at least one course (3 credits) must be taken at the 500 level in three
of the previously mentioned five areas.  
  |   | Original research usually requiring at least two semesters of work
(nominal 6 credits) is expected for a thesis. The work should be an in-depth
investigation intended to extend the state of the art in some specialty area.
Mere application of some existing engineering technology is generally not
sufficient.  
  |   | At the beginning of the research, each student should obtain a "Thesis
Guide" from the Thesis Office in 115 Kern Graduate Building or from the Thesis
Office web page at **<http://www.gradsch.psu.edu/thesis/thesis.guide.html>**.
Thus, the written or graphical materials generated from time to time can be in
the format acceptable to the Graduate School. Thesis deadlines, which are
available from the Graduate Program Staff Assistant, should be carefully noted
as well. Committee members may request periodic progress reports that may
contain materials that will appear in the thesis. As work is satisfactorily
completed, the grade of 'R' is assigned to 600-level credits.  
  |   | **Two weeks prior to the thesis defense** , the completed thesis
should be delivered to the committee members and a defense date should be
scheduled with the Department's Graduate Program Staff Assistant who will
provide assistance with room reservation and publicity for the public
presentation. After the defense, all members of the committee and the
Department Head will sign the signature page of the approved thesis. These
individuals will also sign a thesis completion report to be placed in the
student's file. The student will provide copies of the approved thesis to all
committee members and to the Graduate School as required.  
  | **C.** | **Paper Option**  
  |   | The degree requires 34 credits including 30 course credits with at
least 18 at the 500 level, 2 colloquium credits, and 2 credits of either E E
594 or E E 600. The distribution requirements stipulate that at least one
course (3 credits) must be taken at the 500 level in three of the previously
mentioned five areas.  
  |   | The paper is intended to be a relatively short document compared to
the thesis. Typically, it is the length of a manuscript prepared for
submission to a journal. The work should be done while a student is enrolled
in the M.S. program at Penn State. The paper should be written according to
the standards set for an IEEE publication and should represent a contribution
to a specific engineering activity. It should depict application at the state
of the art. Interdisciplinary activity is encouraged.  
  |   | Near the beginning of the student's last semester, the student must
notify the Graduate Program Staff Assistant that a paper is in progress. This
information is then forwarded to the Graduate School. When the paper is
successfully completed, all committee members and the Department Head will
sign a paper completion report that will be held with a copy of the paper in
student's file.  
  |   | In conjunction with the paper, the student is required to present a
seminar on the work. The student should schedule the seminar through the
Graduate Program Staff Assistant who will arrange the proper publicity and
reservations. **The paper should be delivered to the committee members and the
seminar scheduled at least two weeks prior to the event.**

A student may fulfill the 2-credit paper requirement by registering for either
E E 594 or E E 600. In either case, a grade of 'R' is submitted if the work is
satisfactory.  
  
  | **D.** | **M.S. Time Limits**

The E E Department has established a six-year time limit for completion of the
M.S. degree. Any extension beyond six years requires the approval of the E E
Graduate Committee.

The M.S. committee must be appointed **at least six months** before the
master's paper or thesis seminar. The seminar must be scheduled with the
Graduate Staff Assistant and a copy of the thesis or paper provided to all
committee members **at least two weeks** prior to the seminar date.  
  
**IV.** | **Ph.D. PROGRAM IN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING**  
  | The doctoral student's goal will be to establish a reputation as a
research specialist with a broad supporting analytical base, experience
presenting research results at conferences, and related publications. To these
ends, the student will take written and oral candidacy exams to verify a
sufficient base of study, develop a dissertation proposal to be presented at a
general oral comprehensive exam, conduct the proposed research, and
disseminate the results through the dissertation and related publications.
While accomplishing these, the student must demonstrate competence in the use
of English. As a part of the program, the student will complete 48 course
credits and 2 colloquium credits beyond the B.S. degree, with at least 27
course credits at the 500 level. No more than 9 of these credits may be
independent studies (E E 496 or E E 596) and 500-level courses not in E E
require the approval of the research supervisor. The Ph.D. student who has
graduate credits from other institutions may count a maximum of 30 previous
course credits with the approval of the Graduate Program Coordinator.  
| **A.       Advisor and Committee**

> Soon after starting the Ph.D. program, the student should identify a
tentative research supervisor who will also be an advisor in the preliminary
phases of the program. The student is expected to form a doctoral committee no
later than the end of the next semester after the student has passed the
candidacy exam. The committee will consist of at least four members of the E E
Graduate Faculty and one non-E E Graduate Faculty member. The chairperson or
one co-chairperson of the committee and one other member of the committee must
be members of the Electrical Engineering Graduate Faculty with tenured or
tenure-track appointments in the Department of Electrical Engineering. Either
the chairperson or one of the co-chairpersons will normally be the primary
research supervisor. In addition to the chairperson, at least two members of
the doctoral committee should have a specific interest in the dissertation or
a closely related area. With the permission of the Graduate Program
Coordinator, a special member of the committee (as defined in the _[Graduate
Degree Programs Bulletin](http://www.gradsch.psu.edu/bulletin/)_ and approved
by the Dean of the Graduate School) may be substituted for one of the four
Electrical Engineering Department committee members. The student must request
the appointment of the committee through the Graduate Program Staff Assistant.  
  
  | **B.** | **Admission to Candidacy**  
  |   | Admission as a Ph.D. student does not imply admission to candidacy
which is granted only by the Graduate Committee after the student passes the
candidacy examination. The decision for or against candidacy is reported to
the Graduate School. Positive recommendations are entered on the transcript
but failures are not recorded.  
  |   | **1.** | **Eligibility**  
  |   |   | Only Ph.D. students with a GPA of at least 3.0 are eligible to
take the candidacy exam. A student must take the candidacy exam **no later
than two semesters** (excluding summer) after entry to the Ph.D. program.  
  |   |   | The examination is normally scheduled in January and in August.
Registration is expected at least 2 months prior to the scheduled date.  
  |   | **2.** | **Procedure**  
  |   |   | Each student takes a written exam that is graded on a pass-fail
basis. Those who pass will then have an oral examination. The primary
functions of the oral examination are to evaluate the candidate's oral
presentation skills and technical competency, and to prescribe any requirement
to be met before the comprehensive exam.  
  |   | **3.** | **Written Exam**  
  |   |   | The candidacy exam will ask that the student answer six questions
from a collection of sixteen that represent a broad spectrum of undergraduate
electrical engineering studies and the underlying physics and mathematics. The
questions will emphasize reasoning as well as technique. For each examination,
the questions will be selected from a pool provided by eight area
coordinators.  
  |   |   | An exam syllabus will identify the area coordinators and textbooks
representative of the areas that will be included on the exam.  
  |   |   | The exams will be scheduled twice a year at the beginning of each
semester. The exam duration will be four hours. No books or notes will be
allowed, though calculators will be permitted. Students should bring pens or
pencils and erasers but no paper.  
  |   |   | Students who do not pass may retake the exam once more the next
time it is offered. Those students who fail the written exam for the second
time will be disqualified from the program.  
|

**4.     Oral Exam**

  
  |   |

Each student who registers for the candidacy exam will choose a specialization
area from those listed on the syllabus. The oral exam will be conducted by
three faculty members from that (or a closely related) area and will focus on
the student's preparation for work in that area.

  
  |   |

The exam will begin with a prepared presentation by the student of
approximately 15 minutes in duration. The topic is to be chosen from the
student's area of research interest and may be based on previous research or
study. During and after the presentation, the faculty members will examine the
student on topics from the presentation and other topics relevant to the
technical area. The examination will assess the student's oral and
presentation skills as well as the technical competency.

  
  |   |

At the close of the session, the oral examining committee will complete a
report to the Graduate Committee and the Graduate Program Coordinator. The
committee's recommendation may take one of several forms.

  
  |   |   |

> a. The student is prepared to proceed with doctoral research and should
request to have a doctoral committee appointed.  
  
  |   |   |

> b. The student may proceed to form a doctoral committee and start research
but will be required to complete additional course work before scheduling a
comprehensive exam. This course work may include relevant technical courses or
nontechnical courses such as those emphasizing communication or presentation
skills.  
  
  |   |   |

> c. The student failed the first oral exam and may have the opportunity to
take a second oral exam. The Graduate Committee will determine the date for
the second oral exam based on the recommendation of the oral exam committee.
The student may choose a different area for the second oral exam.  
  
  |   |   |

> If a student fails the second oral exam, the student will be disqualified
from the Ph.D. program in Electrical Engineering.  
  
  |   |   |

>  
  
  | **C.** | **Communication and Language Competence**  
  |   | The Ph.D. student shall demonstrate competence in the use of the
English language for purposes of both written and oral communication. He or
she should be able to communicate technical material in a clear, concise, and
well-organized manner. The candidacy committee or the doctoral committee may
require that the student take formal courses in technical writing, speech,
etc., if it is determined that the communication skills are inadequate. There
will be various communication experiences throughout the program, starting at
the beginning of the first semester at Penn State.  
  |   | **1.** | **Writing Requirements**  
  |   |   | A writing exam given each spring by the College of Engineering is
to be taken the first time that it is offered after the student enters the
program. Passing is required prior to taking the comprehensive exam. Students
who do not pass will be referred to classes appropriate to their needs.  
  |   |   | A **dissertation proposal** will be expected as preparation for
the comprehensive exam. Though the nature of this proposal is under the
jurisdiction of the doctoral committee, it is recommended that it should be
prepared by adhering to the guidelines provided for research proposals
submitted to such agencies as the National Science Foundation. That would
require limiting the size of the main body of the proposal to the equivalent
of sixteen single-spaced pages of text. This proposal should contain, as a
minimum, the background and motivation for the research being undertaken, the
specific problems to be tackled, and the approach as well as methods to be
adopted for attempting the solution together with a summary of any preliminary
results. Any additional material that does not belong to the core of the
proposal, but provides either justification of the proposed scheme or
documentation of preliminary efforts, could be included in an appendix.  
  |   |   | The student is encouraged to submit original findings to reviewed
journals for peer evaluation well before the final oral defense is scheduled.  
  |   |   | The doctoral committee is to review and critically evaluate any of
the student's written work, including the dissertation proposal, interim
reports and manuscripts.  
  |   |   | The dissertation is to meet the standards set forth by the
Graduate School and is to be evaluated by the doctoral committee for the
quality of the writing as well as technical content.  
  |   | **2.** | **Oral Requirements**  
  |   |   | The student will have an interview at the beginning of study.
During the first year, students whose first language is not English must
demonstrate speaking and listening skills.  
  |   |   | The student will make a 15-minute presentation as a part of the
candidacy exam.  
  |   |   | The student will make an oral presentation of approximately
30-minutes in length to the doctoral committee on the dissertation problem and
the approach to its solution. This presentation will normally be a part of the
comprehensive exam. The use of audiovisual aids is encouraged.  
  |   |   | The student is encouraged to travel to conferences to make oral
presentations of his or her work.  
  |   |   | In addition, an oral presentation at a departmental seminar on the
results of the dissertation research is required. This seminar will be the
introductory part of the final dissertation defense.  
  | **D.** | **Comprehensive Exam**  
  |   | The Ph.D. candidate will take the comprehensive exam following
completion of a major portion of the course work and upon the recommendation
of the doctoral committee. The student will be responsible for determining a
time for the exam that is acceptable to the committee. The student will then
notify the Graduate Program Staff Assistant. The Graduate Coordinator will
request the Dean of the Graduate School to schedule the exam. The exam must be
scheduled **at least three weeks prior to the exam date.** The dissertation
proposal (Section IV.C.1) must also be submitted to the doctoral committee at
that time. **The exam may be canceled if documents are not delivered to
committee members at least three weeks prior to the exam date.**  
  |   | The Graduate Program Coordinator will submit the request for
scheduling the comprehensive exam when:

  * the committee has been appointed; 
  * the committee chairperson has approved the date; 
  * all conditions stipulated following the candidacy exam have been met; 
  * any required English courses have been completed.

  
  |   | The comprehensive exam will consist of three parts:

  * the oral presentation on the dissertation problem and the approach to its solution (including a discussion of the importance of the problem and the current state-of-the-art in related areas); 
  * the oral examination by the doctoral committee which will seek to determine the student's qualifications to pursue the proposed dissertation research, i.e., the preparation in the appropriate specialized and related areas, and the student's general background and knowledge;
  * the committee's verbal evaluation of the student's progress and recommendations for any additional course work and research.

  
  |   | Upon completion of the comprehensive examination, the chairperson of
the student's doctoral committee will report the result to the Graduate
Program Coordinator who will forward it to the Dean of the Graduate School.
The Graduate School requires a favorable vote of at least two-thirds of the
committee for passing this examination.  
  |   | Students who have passed the comprehensive exam and who have met the
residency requirement may register using E E 601. This is an inexpensive way
to register as a full time student. Such a student may take 3 additional
credits with reduced tuition or with no extra charge if registered for audit.  
  | **E.** | **Final Oral Exam**  
  |   | The final oral exam must be completed within 8 years of admission to
candidacy and within 6 years of passing the comprehensive exam. A minimum of
five months must have elapsed since the comprehensive exam. The student's
advisor must sign the thesis approval form before the thesis may be
distributed to the other committee members. **At least three weeks before the
exam date** , the student will distribute copies of the thesis to the
committee members and submit the request to schedule the final oral exam to
the Graduate Program Staff Assistant. **The exam may be canceled if documents
are not delivered to committee members at least three weeks prior to the exam
date.** Before forwarding this request to the Graduate School Dean, the
Graduate Program Coordinator will require that the student has either
completed or registered for all necessary course work.  
  |   | The Graduate School Dean then notifies the members of the doctoral
committee and the student by letter regarding the time and place of the
examination. This examination, open to the public, relates in large measure to
the dissertation but may cover the entire field of study. The doctoral
committee determines the exact examination procedure. The results of the
examination are reported to the Graduate Program Coordinator and the Graduate
School Dean. A favorable vote of at least two-thirds of the committee is
required for passing. If the student fails, it is the responsibility of the
doctoral committee to determine whether or not another examination may be
taken. The approval of the dissertation rests entirely with the doctoral
committee and the Department Head.  
  |   | One bound copy of the dissertation shall be supplied to the
department. Copies shall be supplied to all committee members and to The
Graduate School as required.  
  |   | Final oral exams and dissertation submissions must meet The Graduate
School's published deadlines for graduation at the end of that semester or
summer session.  
  |   |  
  | **F.** | **       Other Constraints**  
  |   |  | To be eligible for the candidacy, comprehensive, and final oral
exams, a student must have a minimum grade point average of 3.0, must be
registered, and must have no missing or deferred grades.  
  |   |  | Over some twelve-month period, while enrolled in the Ph.D. program,
the student must spend at least two consecutive semesters as a registered
**full-time** student engaged in academic activity at University Park Campus.

After passing the comprehensive exam, a student must maintain continuous
registration for each fall and spring semester until the Ph.D. dissertation is
accepted. A post-comprehensive student who is in residence during the summer
must register for the summer. Students who fail to register are subject to
retroactive tuition assessments.  
  | **  G.** |  | **Ph. D. Time Limits**

**College of Engineering English Proficiency Exams**  
All Ph.D. students must participate in the English proficiency exams **the
first time that they are offered** (usually spring semester) after entering
the Ph.D. program.

**Candidacy Exam**  
A student must take the candidacy exam **no later than two semesters**
(excluding summer) after entry to the Ph.D. program. The student should
register for the exam two months in advance with the Graduate Program Staff
Assistant. (In case of failure, the second exam must be taken the next time it
is offered.)

**Committee Appointment**  
After admission to candidacy, a student's Ph.D. committee must be appointed no
later than the end of the following semester (excluding summer).

**Comprehensive Exam**  
The comprehensive exam may be scheduled only after the student has
substantially completed the required course work, received English proficiency
certification, and satisfied all conditions stipulated by the candidacy exam
committee. (The dissertation proposal must be provided to the members of the
Ph.D. committee and the comprehensive exam must be scheduled with the Graduate
Program Staff Assistant **at least three weeks** prior to the exam date.)

**E E 601**  
Registration is permitted only for semesters following the semester in which
the student has passed the comprehensive exam **and** met the residency
requirement. A student may register for E E 601 (full time dissertation
research, zero credits) to maintain continuous registration between the
comprehensive and final oral exams at reduced tuition.

**Final Oral Exam**  
The final oral exam must be scheduled no less than 5 months or more than 6
years after passing the comprehensive exam. (The thesis must be provided to
the members of the Ph.D. committee and the final exam must be scheduled with
the Graduate Program Staff Assistant **at least three weeks** prior to the
exam date.)

**Program Time Limit**  
A doctoral student must complete the program and submit an accepted thesis
**within eight years** of passing the candidacy exam.  
  
**V.** | **POLICIES FOR GRADUATE ASSISTANTS**  
  | Graduate assistant policies from several sources are summarized here for
easy reference. We expect that when both assistants and their supervisors are
acquainted with the University's and the Department's expectations for such
appointments, the services rendered by assistants will be more efficient and
more effective. Thus, all in the Department will benefit. Some of the relevant
sources that will take precedence if this summary is found to be unclear are
the _[Graduate Degree Programs
Bulletin](http://www.gradsch.psu.edu/bulletin/)_ , University Policy PR-6, the
TA Coordinators Handbook published by the Instructional Development Program,
and The Engineering Teaching Assistant Manual.  
  | **A.** | **General Policies**  
  |   | **1.** | **Types of Appointments**  
  |   |   | Appointments may be for 1/4 time, 1/2 time, and 3/4 time on a
full-time basis of 40 hours per week. Thus, the typical half-time appointment
requires 20 hours per week. The pay rates may vary depending on the nature of
the job and the student's experience. Students with half-time appointments pay
no tuition and must take from 8 to 11 credits per semester or 4 to 6 credits
in the summer during the period of the appointment. All appointments
automatically terminate at the end of the spring semester, if not before, and
appointments carry no guarantee of renewal. Students who have had appointments
for both fall and spring semesters on **internal** funds are eligible to apply
for a summer tuition waiver if the assistantship is not renewed for the
summer.  
  |   |   | Appointments may be for a variety of duties generally classified
as research (RA) or teaching (TA). Teaching appointments will be supported by
internal funds. Research appointments may be supported by either internal
funds or externally funded research. The latter is more common. Some
appointments may be supported by two sources of funds in which case the
service is to be split in proportion to the funds from each source.  
  |   |   | A graduate assistant is not eligible for other forms of employment
such as part-time hourly wage payroll, either within or outside of Penn State,
unless approval is obtained from those supplying the assistantship, the
Program Coordinator, and the College Dean. However, a graduate assistant is
allowed to receive fellowship funds in addition to the assistantship.  
  |   |   | A graduate assistant may deviate from the prescribed course loads
(if given permission from the source of funds, the Program Coordinator, and
the Graduate School Dean) only to the extent that one heavy semester is
balanced by another that is light.  
  |   | **2.** | **Periods of Service**  
  |   |   | Unless specified otherwise, a semester appointment requires 18
weeks of service and a summer appointment requires 12 weeks. A full year's
appointment will then be 48 weeks. It is notable that class is in session for
a total of only 44 weeks including exam periods and the intersession. Research
assistants work independently of the academic calendar, more or less, while
the responsibilities of teaching assistants are concentrated during the weeks
when class is in session. Teaching assistants may have pre-class preparation
as well.  
  |   | **3.** | **Health Insurance**  
  |   |   | All graduate assistants must have health insurance. A person may
choose to purchase insurance separately and provide timely evidence that the
policy meets Penn State standards. Otherwise a student is enrolled in a group
policy for students and pays 20% of the premium. Because the details are too
numerous to be repeated here, the student should contact the [Graduate Student
Association](http://www.clubs.psu.edu/gsa/) or the Student Insurance Office
for information.  
  |   | **4.** | **Pay Periods**  
  |   |   | Stipends are delivered electronically near the end of the month to
the student's local bank account five times each semester and twice during the
summer. A new arrival will not receive the first paycheck on time unless prior
processing of the appointment has occurred. In such a case, the student may
request an advance of up to 70% of the gross for that first check.  
  |   | **5.** | **Applicability of Assistantship to Degree Requirements**  
  |   |  </td

