![](images/spacer.gif) |

![](rosie.gif)

**HIST 1302**  
4 credits/Spring 2002  
M/W 11:15AM-12:05 PM  
Willey Hall 175  



**Professor Barbara Welke**  
752 Social Sciences Tower  
Office Hours:  
M/W 12:30-2:00 p.m.  
tel: (612) 624-7017  
[welke004@tc.umn.edu](mailto:welke004@tc.umn.edu)

| ![](images/spacer.gif) |

**HIST 1302: United States History**

**1865 to the Present  
**![](images/spacer_grn.gif)

| **Syllabus** |  | | [Schedule](1302sch.htm) | | | [Lectures](1302lec.htm) |
| | [Internet Resources](http://www.hist.umn.edu/%7Ehist20c/internet/index)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
![](images/spacer_grn.gif)

  
**Syllabus**

**COURSE DESCRIPTION**

This is a writing intensive survey course open to both history majors and
those outside history. Our goals this semester are not only to get a feeling
of what life was like and how it changed (or didn't change) in the period from
the end of the Civil War through the 20th century, but also to understand why;
to understand the relationship between forces in the larger world and change
at home; to highlight America's triumphs and accomplishments, as well as to
grapple with its' shortcomings. We will talk about national politics and
everyday life, about popular culture and technological innovation, about
corporate power and government regulation, about international affairs and
economic development. I want to convey both something of the sweeping nature
of the changes in American life and America's place in the world, along with
the stubborn persistence of racial, gender, and economic inequities. It is a
challenge of the highest order to attempt to grapple with a century and a half
of history in 15 weeks. There will be many important issues that receive only
cursory coverage, others that we will miss altogether. That said, you should
nevertheless leave the course with a broad narrative timeline, a strong grasp
of the issues that defined this period, and many questions that you would like
to explore further on your own and in more focused history courses.

Most important of all, you should leave this course with the understanding
that we can only understand the past by questioning it. With that goal in
mind, much of our reading will be in primary sources - speeches, interviews,
letters, articles, photographs, films, advertisements,and more - the actual
"stuff" of history and from which history is written. Ask questions of the
sources we read, of yourself, and each other, participate, have fun, be
troubled. It is by engaging the past that we develop a sense of who we are
today.

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS**

Students are responsible for all assigned readings and regular attendance at
lectures and discussions. You should always bring your assigned readings to
class because we will be referring to them.

**CLASSROOM DECORUM**

This is a big class requiring everyone to use their best public manners.
Following a few guidelines will assure that everyone can get the most out of
the class. First, please turn off cellular phones and beepers during lectures
and discussion sections. Second, be on time, remain in your seat throughout
the class, and do not start packing up your notes until after
lecture/discussion has ended. Third, limit computer use to note-taking (in
other words, no web-surfing, e-mail, etc.). Finally, please no unrelated
reading (e.g., the newspaper) in class.

**REQUIRED TEXTS**

The following texts are required reading. They are available at the H. B.
Smith Bookstore on the West Bank.

1\. Nelson Lichtenstein, Susan Strasser, Roy Rosenzweig, _Who Built America?
Working People and the Nation's Economy, Politics, Culture, and Society, vol.
2, 1877 to the Present_ (New York: Worth Publishers, 2000)(American Social
History Project).  

2\. Anne Moody, _Coming of Age in Mississippi_ (1968, New York: Dell
Publishing, 1976).  

3\. John David Smith, _When Did Southern Segregation Begin?_ (Boston:
Bedford/St. Martin's Press, 2001)(Historians' at Work Series).

**INTERNET LINKED READINGS**  

The bulk of our readings this semester will be primary sources drawn from the
internet resources link to the course webpage. You should familiarize yourself
with the course website:

  * [http://www.hist.umn.edu/~bywelke/H1302](http://www.hist.umn.edu/%7Ebywelke/H1302)

The syllabus and schedule are on-line. In addition, as much as possible, I
will include links on the "lecture" page to primary written and visual sources
I refer to in lecture. You can then go to these links and read documents in
full, as well as review images we have viewed in class. You also, of course,
can make full use of the internet links page and the recommended books at the
end of each chapter in the survey text to explore issues more fully on your
own.

For the hours and locations of all University computer labs, please contact
Academic & Distributed Computing Services.

**GRADES**

Your grade will be based on the following formula: class participation 30%
(including attendance, participation in discussions, short writing assignments
relating to readings and quizzes); historians at work paper 10%; midterm exam
#1 20%; midterm exam #2 20%; history of a day paper 20%. Each of these
elements is described in greater detail below.

**PARTICIPATION IN SECTIONS**

The small group discussions are key sites of learning in this course. There
you will prepare to write papers, practice using specific evidence to support
large generalizations and become acquainted with your T.A., who grades your
performance in the course. Sections also provide opportunities to clear up
questions about the lectures. (You should feel welcome to also raise questions
during or after lecture or with me in office hours.) Participation in
discussion (including attendance, informed participation in discussion, and
completion of short papers or quizzes) makes up 30% of your final grade.
Attendance at discussion is mandatory; failure to attend discussion will
result in a grade of "F" for the course.

The T.A.s are as follows (with the discussion sections they are leading):

  * Panteleymon Anastasakis (anas0008@tc.umn.edu) 11, 20 
  * Mark Blincoe (meblincoe@aol.com) 5, 12 
  * Sarah Crabtree (crab0020@tc.umn.edu) 8, 80 
  * Greg Gidden (gidd0011@tc.umn.edu) 16, 19 
  * Chris Hains (hain0048@tc.umn.edu) 3, 22 
  * Linda Janke (br00234@binghamton.edu) 6, 10, 23 
  * Nicole Phelps (phelp008@umn.edu) 2, 4 
  * Todd Rowlatt (rowl0064@tc.umn.edu) 7, 17 
  * Karl Ryavec (ryav0001@umn.edu) 13, 21 
  * Jason Stahl (stah0064@umn.edu) 9, 14 
  * Brie Swenson (swen0331@tc.umn.edu) 15, 18 

Your T.A. will distribute a syllabus for the discussion section the first day
of discussion. The syllabus will note office hours, discussion section
expectations, and other details. Students in all sections will be reading the
same materials and will have comparable workloads, but the timing of
assignments from one section to another will vary. In other words, if you have
a friend in another section, you may find that your schedules differ somewhat.

**HISTORIANS AT WORK PAPER**

**Due:** W/Th. 1/30 or 1/31 in discussion sections.

This assignment has two parts intended to introduce you to (1) making a
historical argument supported by evidence; and (2) evaluating the strength of
one argument versus another where historians differ in their interpretation.

From grade school through high school most students learn history as a set of
facts. History is taught as though it exists outside of interpretation, as
though its' sequence and meaning are givens. One goal of this course is to
begin to unsettle that received wisdom.

On questions large and small historians often disagree as to what exactly
happened, why it happened, what it meant at the time and later, how
significant it was vis-a-vis other questions, indeed, they often disagree on
whether it is worth thinking about at all. Moreover, even long settled
understandings are often challenged and toppled by later historians bringing
to bear new questions, evidence, or perspective. A historian's interpretation
of a given historical question takes the form of an argument supported by
evidence.

**Part I:** Making a Historical Argument

Using either the Ayers, Rabinowitz, or Welke excerpt (your TA may assign a
particular excerpt for all students in the section to do), outline the
argument, including (1) stating the author's argument; (2) noting its' major
points; (3) noting the evidence supporting the argument. You should include
here the type of evidence rather than the specifics, e.g. newspaper rather
than _Montgomery Advertiser_ , or legal opinion rather than _Hall v. Decuir_ ,
etc. The finished product for Part I should look something like an outline,
beginning with Thesis (argument), key subpoints, and evidence filled in
between.

You should put things in your own words rather than simply quoting from the
author. There is no set minimum or maximum page limit here. Your outline
should be complete whether it takes 1 page or 3 pages.

**Part II:** Evaluating History

Considering the book as a while, write a two-page commentary noting which
arguments you found most persuasive and why and which arguments you found
least persuasive. Is it possible that more than one of these authors is right?
Having read this book, how would you answer the questions "When did Southern
segregation begin?" and why does it matter?

**Late Papers** will be marked down 1 letter grade for each day they are late.

**EXAMS**

1\. There are two midterm exams (one fairly late in the term) and no final
exam. The format for both exams will be essay and/or short answer
identifications.

2\. I will distribute a list of potential questions one week in advance of
each exam from which I will draw the exam.

2. On both exams we will be using blind-grading. 

3\. Exam Dates:

Midterm Exam #1: Monday, March 4 (in class).

Midterm Exam #2: Wednesday, April 24 (in class).

Our second midterm will be as close to a final exam as we will get. In place
of a final exam, there will be a short written assignment due the final day of
class relating to the material covered in the last part of the course. No late
papers accepted.

Make-up exams will take place at the regularly scheduled make-up time for the
Spring Semester. Permission to take the make-up exam must come from Professor
Welke. I will only grant permission where a student has a documented
University conflict; medical emergency; or family tragedy.

**HISTORY OF A DAY PAPER**

In a paper of 6-7 pages you will write the history of one day in a year
assigned to you by your T.A. The date, within that year, will be your
birthday.

Sources: You will use at least two newspapers as primary sources. The best
starting place is the _New York Times_ which is on microfilm in the basement
of Wilson Library. Start by looking up your date. That will tell you the news
people read about when they got up on your day. It will not, however, tell you
what happened that day. For that you have to look at the day after (and
perhaps several more after that if you happen onto an unfolding story). If you
find yourself in the middle of some event (for example, a scandal of some sort
or a foreign negotiation or a battle) you can use the Index of the _NYT_ to
find other stories on that topic around the same time. You should also use a
more local paper (Minneapolis or St. Paul -- or if you wish a paper from a
place of your choosing) or a paper directed at a more particular audience
(e.g., _The Chicago Defender_ , _The Revolution_ ) to get at least one more
perspective on what happened and how people in different places or from
different perspectives learned about the event or didn't. Pay attention not
only to "big news" \-- the stuff on the front page -- but also to editorials,
letters to the editor, feature articles, fashions and advertisements. These
will give you insight into the history of everyday life at the time, what
people did in their free time, what newspaper editors thought women or men
were interested in, what problems advice columnists were asked about, what
humor was like.

Guidelines for drafts (your T.A. will give you additional instructions as
well):

1\. CITE YOUR SOURCES. Throughout your paper a reader should be able to tell
where you are getting your information. Do this with footnotes using the form
suggested in the University of Chicago Manual of Style. It is better to have
too many than too few citations. For newspaper articles the following examples
will usually work:

Jane Smith, "Technology Changes Work Patterns," _New York Press_ , January 3,
1955, Section C, p. 4.

"Earthquake Shakes Cleveland," _Cleveland Tribune_ , July 18, 1903, p. 1.

2\. ANALYSIS IS AS IMPORTANT AS EVIDENCE. You will be tempted to give lots of
information from the papers you read without stopping to ask what it means.
You need to be asking yourself questions about what you read. Ask yourself if
there were evident biases in the ways news was written and presented. Could
you tell much about what cultural or political attitudes seemed dominant? Why
do you think certain issues were prominent and others less so? Don't take what
you read at face value. Someone wrote those stories -- highlighting some facts
and ignoring others, perhaps even getting it wrong. Some editor decided what
went on which page and wrote the headlines. Ad agencies designed ads with
specific markets in mind, etc.

3\. THINK ABOUT LINKAGES, THEMES. One of the difficult things about this
assignment is the range of information in a newspaper. In most cases, you will
need to narrow the number of things you discuss in order to avoid jumping from
one to another ("and then, . . . and then"). Difficulty with transitions can
signal you that you need to think about how these issues are linked. In most
cases you can move beyond recognizing coincidence (it all happened on the same
day) to think about what it means that these things were simultaneous. It
helps to know something about the broader context (from your textbook,
lecture, or discussion). Sometimes juxtaposition is very effective (the
dramatic and the mundane, the international and the local), but it does not
mean much without analysis. Evidence does not speak for itself!

4\. VERBS: Be consistent with verb tense. In a history paper, past tense is
usually most appropriate. Also avoid passive verbs whenever possible. They
obscure the actor(s).

**First Draft Due:** Week V (in section. Your T.A. will assign the specific
date.

**Final Draft Due:** Week X in section. Your T.A. will assign the specific
date.

**Late Papers:** Late papers will be marked down 1 letter grade for each day
they are late.

******UNIVERSITY POLICIES**

**GRADES AND GRADING POLICIES**

University-wide grading standards are as follows:

  * A - achievement that is outstanding relative to the level necessary to meet course requirements 
  * B - achievement that is significantly above the level necessary to meet course requirements 
  * C - achievement that meets the course requirements in every respect
  * D - achievement that is worthy of credit even though it fails to meet fully the course requirements 
  * S - achievement that is satisfactory, which is equivalent to a C- or better
  * F(or N) - Represents failure (or no credit) and signifies that the work was either (1) completed but at a level of achievement that is not worthy of credit or (2) was not completed and there was no agreement between the instructor and the student that the student would be awarded an I (see also I) 
  * I - (Incomplete) Assigned at the discretion of the instructor when, due to extraordinary circumstances, e.g., hospitalization, a student is prevented from completing the work of the course on time. Requires a written agreement between instructor and student 
  * Academic dishonesty in any portion of the academic work for a course shall be grounds for awarding a grade of F or N for the entire course. 

**SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY**

Scholastic Dishonesty is broadly defined as "any act that violated the right
of another student with respect to academic work or that involves
misrepresentation of a student's own work. Scholastic dishonesty includes (but
is not limited to) cheating on assignments or examinations, plagiarizing,
inventing or falsifying research and other findings with an intent to deceive,
submitting the same or substantially similar papers (or creative work) for
more than one course without consent of all instructors concerned, depriving
another of necessary course materials, and sabotaging another's work." It is
your responsibility to know what scholastic misconduct is and to avoid it. I
will report all instances of scholastic dishonesty to the Student Scholastic
Conduct Committee.

What is Plagiarism? Plagiarism is the use of written material (such as
quotations) and/or ideas from the work of other scholars or writers without
acknowledgement. While I reserve the right to treat cases of unintentional
plagiarism, you should be aware that the College of Liberal Arts recommends a
failing grade for any plagiarized assignments. A second offense would result
in a failing course grade.

For more information on academic conduct, contact the [Student Dispute
Resolution Center](http://www.tc.umn.edu/%7Esos/), 107 Eddy Hall (625-5900).

**EQUAL OPPORTUNITY**

The University of Minnesota is committed to the policy that all persons shall
have equal access to its programs, facilities, and employment without regard
to race, religion, color, sex, national origin, handicap, age, veteran status,
or sexual orientation. For further information, contact the Office of Equal
Opportunity and Affirmative Action in 419 Morrill Hall (624-9547).

**SEXUAL HARASSMENT**

Sexual harassment is defined as "Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for
sexual favors, and other verbal or physical contact of a sexual nature when
(1) submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term
or condition of an individual's employment or academic advancement, (2)
submission to, or rejection of, such conduct by an individual is used as the
basis for employment decisions or academic decisions affecting the individual,
or (3) such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with
an individual's work or academic performance or creating an intimidating,
hostile, or offensive working or academic environment." All faculty,
supervisors, and administrators are legally and ethically obligated to take
appropriate action to prevent sexual harassment. For further information,
contact the Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action in 419 Morrill
Hall (624-9547).

**DISABILITIES **

The University will provide accommodation for students with special needs.
Please inform me if this may apply to you. For further information, contact
[Disability Services](http://disserv3.stu.umn.edu/index2.html), 180 Gateway
Center (626-1333).

![](images/spacer_grn.gif) [Main](H1302.htm) | | | [Schedule](1302sch.htm) | |
| [Lectures](1302lec.htm) | | | [Internet
Resources](http://www.hist.umn.edu/%7Ehist20c/internet/index) | | | top  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
![](images/spacer_grn.gif)

  
  
  |   |   |  

