[IUP Computer Science Department](http://www.iup.edu/co/)

|



|

[Spring 2001](http://www.iup.edu/registrar/calendars/cal0050.htmlx)  
  
---|---|---  
  
[COSC 362, Unix Systems](http://www.iup.edu/~jacross/362/)

|



|

    [Dr. Cross](http://www.iup.edu/~jacross/office-hours.htmlx)  
  
**1\. Catalog Description (approved by Computer Science Department in Fall
1998)**

COSC 362  Unix Systems
3c-0l-3sh  
Prerequisites: CO 310 or permission of instructor

An introduction to the features, syntax, applications, and history of UNIX.
Coverage includes utilities, system administration, development environments
and networking concerns including distributed systems, client server computing
and providing Web services.

**Notes on Course Purpose and Form:** Experience has proven that university
curricula in computer science must be based on fundamental concepts. I will
present and use many syntactic details and language features in the course,
but you must commit yourselves to discover and apply fundamental concepts

Although they are popular, UNIX and its utilities are "unfriendly." For
example, they are case sensitive. Some UNIX commands are obscure, difficult to
guess, and weirdly abbreviated. UNIX and C/C++ are closely connected. They
allow their users to tie the system into an impenetrable state of confusion
and thoroughly baffle programmers. Thus, the Computer Science Department
intends the prerequisites for this course to do more than assure you are
prepared to pick up UNIX fairly quickly; you must be prepared to cope with a
computing and programming environment which at times will seem to be fragile,
unhelpful, and even hostile. You may also need some of the dynamic data
structures and OOP techniques you studied in COSC 310.

**2\. Course Objectives**

A. Students will demonstrate understanding of basic terminology, concepts,
language syntax, technical features, and standards of UNIX, Perl, and related
network concerns. Specific topics will include client server computing,
providing Web services on Unix systems, scripting administrative and user
services, installing Unix, open source software, and security.

B. Students will use UNIX effectively as a computing and system development
tool, a way to provide services, and a system administrator.

C. Students will demonstrate an understanding of the historical context of
UNIX including its roots, current successes and flaws, applications,
"culture," features that appear in other popular systems, trends, and
scenarios for future computing environments.

D. Students will make sound judgments about UNIX in system design and
administration situations. These judgments will be based on knowledge of
strengths and weaknesses of UNIX, trends in computing hardware and software,
and alternatives.

E. If time and resources allow, students will be introduced to additional
topics of current and foreseeably lasting relevance to UNIX computing. ****



|

**_COSC 362: Course Outline for Spring 2001_**  
  
---|---  
  
Week 1

|

Syllabus and course introduction; Student data sheet; Sign agreement on policy
for student computing privileges; Sobell Chapter 1, The UNIX OS, and
Powerpoint/Web on UNIX; Preview hands-on (see first sentence p. 20). Course
support on the Web; Setup system logins for "users" (Linux on Kodiak);
command-line editing (bash); pico, joe, and nano editors; mail (pine); text
editing (pico); create, list, display, and delete text files; Sobell Chapter 2
(ls, man, cat, more, rm, passwd, special characters, quoting characters);
hidden files; printing; online help. Assign Project 1.  
  
Week 2

|

UNIX utilities and regular expressions: finger, w, who, whois, talk, write,
learn, man, echo, date, cp, mv, lpr, grep, head, tail, sort, uniq, whereis,
which, diff, compress, zcat, gzip, and regular expressions (Appendix A).
Assign Project 2.  
  
Week 3

|

Unix File Systems; Distributed (UNIX) file systems; UNIX Shells, pipes, links,
sed, find.  
Assign Project 3.  
  
Week 4

|

GUI's in Unix; networking and the Net; mail and newsgroups; vi and other text
editors in Unix; Bash; devices and processes; aliases, history.  
  
Week 5

|

Shell CLI's and scripting: Bash, Bourne, C, TC, Korn, Z. Exam 1: Open book and
notes; Covers thru Chapter 11 and Appendix A, hands-on and projects, the bash
shell, pine and pico, distributed file systems.  
  
Week 6

|

Programming Tools: Make, C and C++, Gnu, system calls, source code management
(RCS and CVS).  
  
Week 7

|

System administration: superuser, cron, backup, special files, sockets,
booting the system, single user mode, mount, bringing the system down,
crashes, important files and directories, tar, compression utilities, diff,
guarding against hardware failures, system logs. Assign RedHat installation
project.  
  
Week 8

|

Continue system administration: security, software installation and upgrades,
trouble shooting, booting Linux, community and help.  
  
Week 9

|

Extend networking topics: NFS, FTP, web services, the client-server model,
Unix and Internet security: security checklist, system monitoring, profiles
for cracking incidents, wrappers and proxies.  
  
Week 10

|

Continue security topics. Exam 2: Open book and notes; Covers everything since
Exam 1 and everything on Exam 1.  
  
Week 11

|

Continue security topics: the Unix password system, cryptography and PGP,
firewalls, DOS attacks, responding to attacks.  
  
Week 12

|

Extend scripting skills and tools: awk, sed, perl.  
  
Week 13

|

Continue scripting; port scripts from and to Linux; cgi scripts; security for
server-side services. Unix standards and other versions of Unix; open source;
Linux and its distributions.  
  
Week 14

|

Time to continue previous topics and add special topics.  
  
**3\. Textbooks and Other Documents.**

Textbooks:

  * Required: Sobell, Mark G. _A Practical Guide to Linux_. 1996. Addison Wesley. (Note that there is a new and much improved version of this book scheduled to be published in March, 2001.)
  * Optional: Garfinkel, Simson, and Spafford, Gene. _Practical UNIX & Internet Security_ _, Second Edition_. O'Reilly  & Associates, Inc. 1996. See also [ http://security.oreilly.com/](http://security.oreilly.com/)
  * Optional: Ball, Bill. Red Hat Linux 7 Unleashed. 2000 by Sams Publishing. ISBN 0672319853\. $49. 1200 pages. Includes CD.
  * Optional: Wall, Larry, Christiansen, Tom, and Orwant, Jon. [Programming Perl, 3rd Edition](http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/pperl3/). July 2000. ISBN 0-596-00027-8. 1092 pages, $49.95. O'Reilly & Associates, Inc. 
  * Optional: Wall, Larry, Schwartz, Randal. [Learning Perl, 2nd Edition](http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/lperl2/). July 1997. ISBN 1-56592-284-0. 300 pages, $29.95. O'Reilly & Associates, Inc.   

Other books:

  * Nemeth, Evi, and others. _[UNIX System Administration Handbook](http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/pperl2/)_. 1989\. Prentice-Hall. 
  * Newham, Cameron and Rosenblatt, Bill. _Learning the Bash Shell_. O'Reilly  & Associates, Inc. 1996. 
  * Aho, Kernighan, and Weinberger. _The AWK Programming Language_. 1988. Addison-Wesley.
  * [Online resources for this course.](http://www.iup.edu/~jacross/362/)
  * C/C++ Users Journal. Available in Str 319, maybe, and at ftp://ftp.mfi.com/pub/cuj/1999/
  * Man and Web pages for all compilers and utilities related to this course!  
  

**4\. Special Resource Requirements.** IUP will provide you with access to all
the necessary computer hardware and software. You will use the  "kodiak" Linux
system that is supported by the College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics
for the Computer Science Department. Everything else is TBA.

The Computer Science Department encourages students to acquire sufficient
personal computing resources to access IUP computing facilities for this
course and do significant computing on your own. Your instructor,
Microcomputer Support Services (Mack and/or Johnson Data Center), and the IUP
Co-op Bookstore will provide free consultation to students who are considering
the purchase of personal computing resources.

**5\. Evaluation Methods.** I will award points for your performance on
projects, activities, quizzes, two exams, and a final exam. All exams will be
open book and openness. There will be roughly 280 points for examinations and
quizzes and 225 points for other graded activities. The final exam is
scheduled for Tuesday, May 9, 12:30-2:30 PM.

I use point scores to determine grade cutoffs. The grade cutoffs will reflect
my best judgment of what letter grade a particular point total represents.
Grade cutoffs will be no higher than 90-80-70-60% of the possible point total
for grades A through D. I will determine your course grade based on your point
total relative to the grade cutoffs, plus my personal judgment for students
who are at a borderline score. The primary factor for deciding a borderline
score will be exam scores.

I am under no obligation to grade late assignments and I may simply lose them.
If you are not finished working when a program is due, submit what you have
finished. I will assess up to a 5 point penalty per meeting for all late
assignments or assignments requiring resubmission (grade R), up to 50% off. If
you fail to hand in any assignment, I may assign a one letter grade penalty in
addition to a zero for the assignment. You may check your grades throughout
the academic session by using the "grade-check" program on the academic VAX.
**_Don't be late; don't procrastinate; don't miss class._**

**6\. Attendance and "The Buddy System". **Any class absence jeopardizes your
chance to benefit from this course and achieve a good grade. This course
relies heavily on lecture notes and classroom interactions. Make arrangements
with a classmate to share notes and pick up handouts if you are not in class.
This is my "buddy system." Please let me know if your buddy appears to be
drowning!

According to university policy, you are responsible for all class activities,
including quizzes, exams, and handouts. The new Banner system collects data on
your class attendance. In accordance with official IUP policy, your grade for
the course may be reduced for excessive class absence. ANY absence for
oversleeping, working on programming assignments, or any other reason short of
health or sudden personal problems, is unwarranted. Lateness will be recorded
as absence at the beginning of the class period. My attendance roster will
indicate that you are present, late, excused (within IUP limits and policy),
or absent. If you are late, check that I adjust my roster before you leave
that class. If you have a reason for your absence, send me an email stating
the reason for your absence no later than 5:00 P.M. on the day you return to
class. The subject of this email must be "attendance in COSC 315". All class
absences detract from your participation in this course. **_Do not miss class
and do not fall behind!_** __

Any class absence jeopardizes your chance to benefit from this course and
achieve a good grade. This course relies heavily on lecture notes and
classroom interactions. Make arrangements with a classmate to share notes and
pick up handouts if you are not in class. This is my "buddy system." Please
let me know if your buddy appears to be drowning!

**7\. Academic Conduct.** Computing technology presents unique opportunities
for inappropriate academic conduct, for example, copying things from the Web
and submitting it as your own work or hiring a ghost-writer. These and other
unethical and/or illegal acts will be penalized by loss of points and/or
grades, plus any other penalties allowed in IUP policy. Because these
behaviors are uniquely harmful to the goals of the course and the university,
we must deal with them in ways that may seem uniquely harsh to you. If you are
concerned about anything that happens in this course relative to possible
charges of academic misconduct, **contact me immediately and in writing.**
E-mail is uniquely well suited to immediate contact that can be used as a
formal record if there is a possibility that you may be accused or implicated
in academic misconduct.

**8\. People who will help you learn.** The best way to contact me outside of
class is through VAX E-mail To: JACROSS. You may check my online [office hours
and teaching schedule.](http://www.iup.edu/~jacross/office-hours.htmlx) If you
want to see me at another time, you may make an appointment through e-mail or
by phoning me. Note that online glossaries can be helpful, but you must add
key definitions to your notes before you take exams and quizzes.

If you need technical help, please access appropriate man pages or help as a
first step. When you come to my office for help, bring as much current hard
copy with you as you can. "Bringing something up on my screen" should be a
last resort. Note that my course support pages begin at
<http://kodiak.co.iup.edu/~jacross/362/index.htmlx>

The student helpers in public work areas will probably not be much help, with
the possible exception of some of the staff in Stright 107. I encourage you to
learn from each other. Talk with fellow students, but be careful that you do
not get or give too much help on programming assignments. Inspecting each
other's plans and code is good professional behavior; group coding and
submitting someone else's work as yours are serious forms of academic
misconduct. Email me and annotate anything that I may construe as improper
academic conduct.

**9\. Handins for projects.** Handin documents that are suitable for a
"student portfolio." That is, you must document your work so that you have a
complete, reusable record. Students should keep thorough records of their work
because they may be able to reuse it later and because prospective employers
may be interested in it.

Prepare a computer-printed document that includes a title page, table of
contents, and page numbers. If you have hand-written sheets, include them
appropriately. If necessary, you may number pages manually. When you submit
greenbar paper, fold it once and attach it to your printed document. DO NOT
staple your handin in a way that makes it difficult to read; use binder clips
or paper clips. The title page for your printed document MUST contain the
following data.

(your name)  
COSC 362  
PROJECT (project number): (project title)  
SUBMITTED (date submitted)

**_Annotate each project requirement and how you met it_**. A handin that is
easy to grade may receive bonus points; a project that is difficult to grade
may have additional points taken off. A project with incorrect output is
likely to receive more favorable consideration if you annotate the flaws in
the output, possibly with your best guess about what went wrong. You must
provide adequate demonstration that your project does what it is supposed to
do. Usually this requires multiple tests with the correctness or flaws of the
results annotated. If your printed handin contains extraneous things, line
them out so that the grader does not get annoyed or confused. Do not edit any
script or carbon files except to make them printable. Always include a
directory listing of the pertinent files, with date of last modification and
size. **_The work you submit must be yours, with the exception of clearly
stated references to the source of anything that is not your original work._**
Projects are due in Stright 107 on the due date by 5:00 P.M. You may submit
projects in class on the due date. Do not submit anything that may be **
_construed as improper academic conduct._**

**10\. Style**. All programs  (including programs written in the command
language interface for an operating system) must begin with comments that
declare three things: the problem; the responsible programmer's name; and the
date when the program was written. A good guideline for what to comment beyond
the introductory comments is to consider what was said in the problem
statement and your algorithm design. Every good program or script should have
a plan; the minimum for a plan is a sequence of statements about program data
and steps in the procedure. Write your plan before you write code. Put these
statements into your code in appropriate places. Then write the code.

Use upper and lower case, following standard English usage, in interactive
dialogue and comments. Follow the style of your text for using upper and lower
case in UNIX, Perl, other utilities, and C/C++.  Although your programs and
scripts may run correctly with incorrect indentation, you must have correct,
consistent indentation in your code or points will be subtracted from your
grade.

A good guideline for what to comment is to consider what was said in the
problem statement and your algorithm design. Every good program or script
(e.g., a .com file) or other coded document (e.g., an HTML file) must have a
plan. The minimum for a plan is a sequence of statements about program data
and steps in the procedure. Before you write a plan for your program, write a
test plan. This requires you to develop your understanding of the problem.
Include test data, a sequence of commands that will compile, link, and run
your program, and a way to compare your results with the correct results. Then
write a plan for your program before you write code. Design your solution so
that it will be easy to verify, reuse, and modify. Put your statements about
your plan into your code in appropriate places. Then write the code and verify
that it is correct.

_*End of Syllabus for COSC 362 *  
Last updated Thu January 12, 2001_



