Position Vacancies Table of Contents

  * Managerial Positions  

  * Faculty Positions  

  * Administrative, Professional and Technical (APT) Positions  

  * UH Foundation
  * Research Corporation  

The University of Hawai'i is an equal opportunity/affirmative action
institution. All qualified applicants will be considered, regardless of race,
sex, age, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, disability, marital
status, arrest and court record, sexual orientation, or status as a disabled
veteran or veteran of the Vietnam era. Women, members of minority groups,
veterans, and persons with disabilities are encouraged to apply. Deaf and
hard-of-hearing persons may call 1-711 or 643-8833.

Employment is contingent on satisfying employment eligibility verification
requirements of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986. Applicants for
APT positions must be legal residents of the State of Hawai'i at the time of
application and must complete UH Form 64 "Application for Employment." APT
applicants with re-employment rights or priority status are responsible for
informing the recruiting unit, which will verify eligibility with the
employing unit as provided by the BU 08 contract.

Official transcripts must have the official seal of and be mailed directly
from the degree-granting institution to the address indicated.

|

University of Hawai'i at Hilo

Senior Vice President and Chancellor

The University of Hawai'i invites applications and nominations for the
position of Senior Vice President and Chancellor of the University of Hawai'i
at Hilo. The Hilo campus consists of the Colleges of Arts and Sciences and of
Agriculture with approximately 2,700 students. The University seeks an
inspired leader who can guide it into the next phase of its development as
reflected in its Strategic Plan.

_**Minimum Qualifications**_

  * An earned doctorate or the equivalent and professional experience sufficient to command respect within the higher education community 
  * Administrative experience in higher education 
  * Ability to understand and work effectively in Hawai'i's multi-cultural society 
  * Experience with budget formulation 
  * Experience working with community leaders 
  * Ability to work with governing boards and legislative bodies 

**Desired Qualifications**_

  * Enthusiasm in championing the University of Hawai'i at Hilo and articulating its mission to a wide variety of audiences 
  * Vision for the University's development in current educational delivery systems and the use of available technologies 
  * Ability to develop effective working relationships within the University community as well as with businesses, research agencies and other outside entities 
  * Effective communication skills, including both appropriate consultation and decisive decision-making 
  * Ability to promote the University's growing international role, particularly in Asia and the Pacific 
  * A commitment to marketing UH Hilo in local, national and international roles 
  * Ability to be an effective fund-raiser for the University community 

It is anticipated that an appointment would be made by Spring 1998\.
Recruitment will continue until the position is filled. Only applications
postmarked by August 18, 1997, are assured of receiving full consideration.
Applications should include a letter addressing how the minimum and desirable
qualifications are met, a curriculum vitae and the names, addresses and
telephone numbers of five references, addressed to: Senior Vice President and
Chancellor Search Committee, c/o Executive Assistant to the President, Office
of the President, University of Hawai'i, 2444 Dole Street, Bachman Hall 202,
Honolulu, Hawai'i 96822. Nominations are also welcomed. Inquiries: (808)
956-5287 (Executive Assistant to the President) or (808) 974-7468 (Search
Committee Chair).  

* * *

Managerial Position

**ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT (CC),** M03-M, Position No. 89028; Kapi'olani CC;
full-time, general funds, to begin approx. 09/97, pending position clearance
and availability of funds. **Duties:** Directs the college's institutional
research activities and management information systems as they relate to
planning, management, and evaluation of the college programs; designs and
implements techniques for regular program reviews, research studies on
educational effectiveness, and benchmarking and other evaluation measures;
provides technical support to administrative deans and directors on business
process re-engineering designed to improve workflow, work performance and
public satisfaction; coordinates the development of all campus planning,
including strategic plans, long range development plans, and campus academic
development plans; provides advice to the Provost and administrative staff on
the implications of system policies for campus operations; represents the
Provost in a liaison role with various constituences such concerned citizens,
students, faculty, staff, advisory committees, community groups, and the
University community; prepares memoranda, reports, speeches, newsletters, and
other communications under the direction of the Provost; serves as a
troubleshooter for the Provost, providing assistance to other administrative
personnel as directed by the Provost, and carrying out other duties as
assigned. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's Degree and three years
experience in higher education and/or planning and research. Ability to design
and implement statistical research and educational assessment programs;
ability to develop effective planning processes; ability to analyze both
business and academic practices and policies and their impacts on college
operations; ability to write effectively; demonstrated ability to work with
the various constituencies within the college environment. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Doctoral degree. **Pay Range:** M03-M, minimum $3,772/month.
To apply: Send Community College Application (Form 27A), resume, official
transcripts, three references, and a brief one-page statement outlining how
you meet the minimum/desirable qualifications to the Office of the Provost,
Kapi'olani Community College, 4303 Diamond Head Road, Honolulu, HI 96816. All
materials must be postmarked no later than closing date. **Closing Date:**
08/04. **Inquiries:** 734-9565.

* * *

Faculty Positions

**LECTURER IN ART** , Photography Lab Supervisor. Part-time, approximately
8-10 hours/week, beginning fall semester, approximately 08/25. **Duties:**
Supervise photography laboratory; order, stock and mix chemicals, order and
maintenance of equipment, manage lab assistants, assist students with use of
equipment and technical concerns, assist faculty as needed in class/lab
preparation and clean up. Direct student lab employees/volunteers in all
concerns as required by program faculty. **Minimum Qualifications:** BFA or BA
with extensive experience in photo lab. **Desirable Qualifications:**
Experience with a variety of photographic techniques and methods, in
particular-35mm and larger format camera use including darkroom/lab/studio
requirements, lighting, color and black and white processing, chemistry and
associated techniques. **Salary:** total compensation for a semester, $2,094.
To Apply: Send resume three letters of reference to Robert Jay, Chair, Art
Department, 2535 The Mall, Room 142, University of Hawai'i at Manoa, Honolulu,
HI 96822. **Inquiries:** 956-8251. **Closing date:** 07/22.

**LECTURER,** Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawai'i at
Manoa, general funds, for Fall 1997 and Spring 1998 semesters to teach
"Introduction to Computer Programming Methods in C Language". **Minimum
Qualifications** : Master's degree with practical industrial experience.
**Desirable Qualifications** : PhD in electrical engineering or computer
science. To apply: Submit curriculum vitae to K. Najita, Chairman, Department
of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawai'i at Manoa, 2540 Dole Street,
Holmes Hall 483, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date** : 07/22.

**ASSOCIATE OR FULL ASTRONOMER FOR HALEAKALA;** 88668; UH Manoa; full-time;
state-funded, tenure-track; available 12/97. The Institute for Astronomy (IfA)
is seeking a scientist to take a leading role in the scientific research
activities of the Haleakala Observatory. The IfA operates the Lunar Ranging
Experiment (LURE) and the Mees Solar Observatory and will have access to the
3.7-meter Advanced Electro-Optical System (AEOS) telescope currently under
construction and other telescopes planned on Haleakala such as the 2-meter
University of Tokyo optical/infrared (MAGNUM) telescope. Areas of scientific
interest at the Haleakala Observatory include solar, solar system, stellar,
and extragalactic astronomy, especially in the areas of optical and infrared
spectroscopy. Other ongoing areas of scientific activities include space
altimetry and geodesy measurements and atmospheric seeing characterization.
Appointment will be made primarily on the basis of research excellence and
degree to which the candidate's interests and abilities complement or enhance
IfA's research and contribute to the observing facilities available at the
Haleakala Observatory. **Duties:** The successful candidate is expected to
undertake a vigorous observational research program utilizing research
facilities at the Haleakala Observatory and to represent the IfA's scientific
interest in the current and future facilities at Haleakala Observatory. This
will require frequent travel between O'ahu and Maui and also to the Haleakala
Observatory. Additional duties include providing input to the planning and
development of the Haleakala site, and, if located in Honolulu, participation
in the teaching program. **Minimum Qualifications:** PhD in astronomy or
physics; and at least four years experience at the Associate level for the
Full Astronomer; and at least four years of experience at the Assistant level
for the Associate Astronomer. Ability to work at the 10,000 foot altitude of
the Haleakala Observatory. **Desirable Qualifications** : Willingness to be
located on Maui. Technical background in telescope and instrumentation design
and operations. **Minimum Annual Salary:** Full Astronomer: $62,376;
Associate: $51,264. To apply: Please send a curriculum vitae (including
bibliography), a statement of current research interests, future research
plans, and three letters of reference to Personnel Officer, Institute for
Astronomy, 2680 Woodlawn Drive, Honolulu, HI 96822. Please reference position
number 88668. **Closing Date:** 09/30. **Inquiries:** Dr. Alan Tokunaga, Chair
of Search Committee (808) 956-6691.

**JUNIOR OR ASSISTANT SPECIALIST** , Office of Student Services, College of
Education, University of Hawai'i at Manoa, full-time, tenure-track, general
funds, pending position clearance. **Duties** : Under general direction of the
Assistant Dean, assist in providing all services of the office with major
responsibilities to include, but not limited to: recruitment, admission,
academic advising, and retention of students; conducting application,
information, and orientation sessions including traveling to schools and
agencies on Oahu and neighbor islands; administering college tuition waiver
programs and other special programs as needed; working closely with faculty
within the College of Education and other Offices of Student Services within
the University of Hawai'i system; and other duties as assigned. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Master's degree in education or related area; two years of
experience in student academic advising; considerable knowledge of the
academic requirements of a teacher education program; demonstrated ability to
(1) relate to culturally diverse student populations; (2) work effectively
with faculty and support staff; (3) work collaboratively in groups and teams;
(4) work effectively with minimal supervision; (5) undertake a variety of
tasks; and (6) communicate effectively in verbal and written forms in a
variety of contexts. Assistant Specialist also requires 30 graduate credits
beyond the Master's degree and at least three years experience at the Junior
Specialist rank or equivalent. **Desired Qualifications:** Doctorate in
education or related field; advising and teaching experience at the post-
secondary level; knowledge of UH academic and support programs, computerized
student information systems, and appropriate computer programs; demonstrated
ability to relate to Hawai'i's culturally diverse student population.
**Minimum Salary** at the rank of Junior Specialist is $33,312; Assistant
Specialist is $40,524. To apply, send letter of application, resume, and names
and phone numbers of three employment-related references to Search Committee,
Office of Student Services, College of Education, 1776 University Avenue,
Honolulu, HI 96822. **Inquiries:** (808) 956-7915. Review of applications will
begin on 07/28 and will continue until position(s) are filled.

**ASSISTANT/ASSOCIATE/PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE** , Pos. No. 088778T, 088436T,
I3-M, I4-M, I5-M, Department of Medicine, located at St. Francis Medical
Center and/or the Queen's Medical Center, UH John A. Burns School of Medicine,
federal funds, annually renewable depending on performance and/or funding;
part-time, 11 month, temporary, non-tenurable; to begin approximately 08/01;
subject to position clearance and availability of funds. **Duties** : Teach
Endocrinology to medical students and residents; conduct clinical research in
Endocrinology. **Minimum Qualifications: (Asst):** MD degree, certified by the
American Board of Internal Medicine and demonstrated ability in teaching and
patient care. **(Assoc):** Same as Asst plus 4 years at the rank of Asst. Prof
or one year at the rank of Assoc. Prof. or equivalent combination of teaching
and experience. **(Prof):** Same as Assoc plus 4 years at the rank of Assoc
Prof or one year at the rank of Professor or equivalent **. Desirable
Qualifications** : Experience teaching, grantsmanship and research in
Endocrinology **Minimum Annual Salary (at full-time):** **(Assist)** $78,924;
**(Assoc.)** $92,340; **(Prof)** $99,876. To Apply: Send updated CV,
bibliography, and three references to: James E. Hastings, MD, Professor and
Chairman, UH School of Medicine, Department of Medicine, 1356 Lusitana Street
7th floor, Honolulu, HI 96813. **Closing Date** : 07/22.

**GRADUATE ASSISTANTS IN KOREAN** , position no.85018, Department of East
Asian Languages and Literatures, half-time, general funds, to begin 08/01,
temporary for the academic year 1997-1998 only, pending position availability
and funding. **Duties** : To teach lower-level skill courses in Korean under
supervision. **Minimum Qualifications** : Matriculated candidate for the MA or
PhD program in Korean or related discipline; sufficient bilingual fluency in
Korean and English to be able to teach. **Minimum Monthly Salary** : $985
(GA-1) and $1,065 (GA-3). Application forms and information relating to duties
and selection criteria may be picked up at the Department of East Asian
Languages and Literatures. Apply to Dr. Ho-min Sohn, Chair, Department of East
Asian Languages and Literatures, University of Hawai'i at Manoa, 1890 East-
West Road, Moore Hall 382, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Inquiries** : 956-8940.
**Closing Date** : Completed applications, including letters of
recommendation, must be received by 07/22.

**ASSISTANT OR ASSOCIATE ASTRONOMER;** 86224T; UH Manoa; full-time; federally
funded, non-tenure track, annually renewable subject to availability of funds;
to begin 09/97. The Institute for Astronomy (IfA), NASA 3-meter Infrared
Telescope Facility has one support astronomer position. The incumbent will
have access via the TAC review process to all the telescopes on Mauna Kea on
which the University of Hawai'i has guaranteed observing time. Residence will
be at the IfA in Honolulu, and travel to the island of Hawai'i will be
required. **Duties:** The incumbent will join the IRTF scientific staff, and
contribute to all scientific aspects of operation of the observatory. The
design, commissioning, characterization, and support of infrared (IR)
astronomical instruments and the support of visiting observers will be the
primary service activities. About 50% time will be available for independent
personal research. **Minimum Qualifications:** PhD in astronomy or physics;
and at least four years experience at the Assistant level for the Associate
Astronomer, which includes the use, operation, support, or development of
astronomical telescopes and instrumentation; and for the Assistant Astronomer,
at least three years of experience in the use, operation, support, or
development of astronomical telescopes and instrumentation. Ability to work at
4,200 meter altitude on Mauna Kea, and possession of a valid driver's license.
**Desirable Qualifications** : Hands-on experience with IR astronomical
instrumentation using modern detector arrays and data reduction techniques.
Experience with large telescopes and in solar system research. **Minimum
Annual Salary:** Associate Astronomer: $51,264; Assistant: $40,524. To apply:
Please send a curriculum vitae (including bibliography), a statement of
current research interests, future research plans, and three letters of
reference to Dr. Donald N.B. Hall, Director, Institute for Astronomy, 2680
Woodlawn Drive, Honolulu, HI 96822. Please reference position number 86224T.
**Closing Date:** 08/15. **Inquiries:** Dr. Thomas Greene, (808) 956-6527 or
greene@ifa.hawaii.edu.

**JUNIOR SPECIALIST,** S2-1, Position No. 895224T, College of Education, Dept.
of Teacher Education and Curriculum Studies, Federal funds, full-time,
temporary, non-tenure track, 12 month, appointment beginning 08/25 pending
manpower clearance. Position requires year-round residence on the island of
Tutuila, American Samoa. **Duties:** Act as liaison between College of
Education, UHM; the Department of Education of American Samoa (ASDOE) and The
American Samoa Community College (ASCC) Office of Teacher Education. Provide
information regarding future Program needs. Be responsible for informal
student advising, registration, collecting book money, and advertising
courses. Collect and disseminate information regarding the educational needs
of ASDOE inservice teachers. Coordinate student teaching and conduct student
teaching seminar. Assist in coordination of field based experiences associated
with UH courses. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree in Education.
Ability to prepare and maintain records of student progress, to prepare
routine reports, and to provide academic advice and guidance to degree-bound
students. Evidence of knowledge of or experience in teacher education.
Evidence of commitment to professional growth and development. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Demonstrated knowledge or experience with K-12 educational
system in American Samoa. Three years teaching experience in American Samoa.
Knowledge and familiarity with Samoan culture and values. Knowledge of teacher
education programs and models, especially field-based programs. Competence and
experience in one, or more, of the following: mentoring student teachers,
teaching college-level education courses, conducting needs assessments,
working in multi-cultural settings. Evidence of interpersonal and
communication skills. **Annual Salary:** $33,312. To Apply: Send letter of
application, addressing how you meet the minimum and desirable qualifications,
official transcripts, curriculum vitae, and names and phone numbers of three
to five references to Dr. Anthony J. Picard, Professor of Education, Dept. of
Teacher Education and Curriculum Studies, College of Education, UHM, 1776
University Avenue, Honolulu, HI 96822. FAX: (808) 956-3918. Application
materials much be postmarked by 07/22.

**INSTRUCTOR,** Position 085641T, I 2, Office of the Dean/Imi Ho'ola Post-
Baccalaureate Program, UH, John A. Burns School of Medicine. Federal funds,
annually renewable depending on performance and/or funding; full-time, 11
month, temporary, non-tenurable. To begin approximately 08/16; subject to
position clearance and availability of funds. **Duties:** Teach students from
disadvantaged backgrounds a review course in general chemistry, organic
chemistry, biochemistry, and introduction of molecular biology.
Responsibilities include formal lectures, group and individual tutorials, and
laboratory sessions. Perform related work as assigned. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Master's in biochemistry, evidence of ability to teach
effectively. **Desirable Qualifications:** Experience in teaching students
from various cultures. **Minimum Annual Salary:** $33,312. To Apply: send CV.
letter of application and 3 letters of recommendation to Dr. Nanette Judd,
Program Director, Imi Ho'ola Post-Baccalaureate Program, UH School of
Medicine, 1960 East-West Road, Honolulu, HI, 96822. **Closing Date:** 07/22.
**Inquiries:** Dr. Nanette Judd, 956-6590.

**JUNIOR RESEARCHER,** Position Number 084359T, Department of Microbiology,
University of Hawai'i at Manoa, 75% FTE, temporary, extramural funds, to begin
approximately 08/11. **Duties:** Conduct research on signal transduction of
the Archaeon _Halobacterium salinarium_. Construct expression vectors for
halobacterial transducers and purify recombinant proteins. Carry out complex
scientific data analysis, write manuscripts for publication. **Minimum
Qualifications:** PhD degree with extensive experience in the bacterial signal
transduction. Knowledge of archaebacterial molecular biology, DNA and plasmid
isolation techniques. **Desirable Qualifications:** Experience working with
molecular genetics of the halophylic archae. **Pay Range:** R2-2, $2,165/month
(75%). To apply: Send cover letter, resume, and arrange three letters of
recommendation to be sent to: Dr. Paul Q. Patek, Chairman, Department of
Microbiology, 2538 The Mall, Snyder Hall, Room 207, Honolulu, HI 96822.
**Closing Date:** 07/22. **Inquiries:** Dr. Maqsudul Alam, (808) 956-8121.

**LECTURERS,** School of Hawaiian, Asian and Pacific Studies for Fall 1997 and
Spring 1998 and continuous recruitment for Asian Studies, part-time, general
funds, non-tenure, contingent upon enrollment, position availability and
funding. **Duties:** Teach undergraduate course ASAN 491P Topics: Philippines
(Fall 1997). **Minimum Qualifications:** MA in Asian Studies, relevant social
science, or humanities discipline with concentration in the Philippines;
ability in interdisciplinary approaches; professional background in
performance and performance studies; demonstrated competence as a teacher with
positive student response in undergraduate courses; research level competence
in a Philippine language. **Desirable Qualifications:** Broad background in
Asia and its cultures; ability to work effectively in a multicultural setting;
previous experience in ASAN 491P or similar course. Graduate study beyond the
MA **Duties:** Teach undergraduate course ASAN 320C, Asian Nations:
Philippines (Spring 1998). **Minimum Qualifications:** MA in Asian Studies,
relevant social science, or humanities discipline with concentration in the
Philippines; ability in interdisciplinary approaches; demonstrated competence
as a teacher with positive student response in undergraduate courses; research
level competence in a Philippine language. **Desirable Qualifications:** Broad
background in Asia and its cultures; ability to work effectively in a
multicultural setting; previous experience in ASAN 320C, 491P or similar
course. Graduate study beyond the MA **Pay Range:** minimum $925 per credit
hour; maximum $1,299 per credit hour. To apply: submit letter of application,
current curriculum vitae, and names and telephone numbers of 3 work-related
references to Dr. Ricardo D. Trimillos, Chair, Asian Studies, 1890 East-West
Road, Moore 315, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Inquiries:** 956-9708. **Closing
Date:** Continuous recruitment until needs are met.

**POSTDOCTORAL FELLOW** , UHM, CTAHR, Dept. of Environmental Biochemistry,
full time or part time; to begin approximately 08/97 for one year.
Continuation dependent upon performance and availability of funds. **Duties**
: To study recombinant antibodies and develop immunoassays for monitoring of
environmental pollutants in Hawai'i. **Minimum Qualifications** : PhD in
molecular biology, or in a related field. **Desirable Qualifications:**
Experience in recombinant antibodies and immunoassays. **Minimum Annual
Stipend** : $28,415 (full time); commensurate with experience. To apply: send
_curriculum vitae_ with three references (include address, phone and e-mail)
to Dr. **** Qing X. Li, Department of Environmental Biochemistry, University
of Hawai'i, **** 329 Henke, 1800 East-West Rd, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing
Date** : 07/22. **Inquiries** : (808) 956-8352.

**POSTDOCTORAL FELLOW** , UHM, CTAHR, Dept. of Environmental Biochemistry,
full time; to begin approximately 08/97 for one year. Continuation dependent
upon performance and availability of funds. **Duties** : To study pesticide
fate and pollution of ground and surface water in Hawai'i. **Minimum
Qualifications** : PhD in environmental or soil chemistry, or in a related
field. **Desirable Qualifications** : Experience in analysis of pesticides in
groundwater following GLP, and knowledge of soil chemistry and chemical
leaching assessment. **Minimum Annual Stipend** : $28,415; commensurate with
experience. To apply: send _curriculum vitae_ with three references (include
address, phone and email) to Dr. **** Qing X. Li, Department of Environmental
Biochemistry, University of Hawai'i, **** 329 Henke, 1800 East-West Rd,
Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date** : 07/22. **Inquiries** : (808) 956-8352.

**ASSISTANT EXTENSION AGENT (Pacific Regional Environmental Education):** A3,
Position No. 086331T, Sea Grant Extension Service, located on the UH Manoa
Campus; full-time, non-tenure track, extramural funds, 6-month appointment to
begin approximately 08/97. Continuation dependent upon the availability of
funds and satisfactory work performance. **Duties:** Under the general
supervision of the Sea Grant Extension Director, the agent will be responsible
for the coordination and implementation of the Sea Grant Pacific regional
environmental education goals and programs with local, federal, and regional
agencies and organizations in the U.S.-affiliated Pacific Island region,
including the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI), Federated
States of Micronesia (FSM), Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI), Republic
of Palau, and territories of Guam and American Samoa; develop environmental
education materials and curricula; administer and coordinate regional
environmental education projects and workshops for formal and informal
educators of public and private institutions; provide technical assistance
regionwide; develop and maintain a communication network regionwide; represent
Sea Grant Director and Sea Grant Extension Service Director at local, regional
and national levels as principal specialist in Pacific regional environmental
education initiatives and activities; and perform other duties as required.
**Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree from an accredited university,
with major work in natural science or science education, or a related field;
at least three years of experience dealing with science education issues and
island natural science including the implementation of extension and outreach
programs. **Minimum Monthly Salary:** $3,002/month. Submit letter of
application and resume to: Dr. Bruce Justin Miller, Director, Sea Grant
Extension Service, 1000 Pope Road, Room 226, Honolulu, HI 96822.
**Inquiries:** (808) 956-8191. **Closing Date:** 07/22.

**INSTRUCTOR, CC (Continuing Education Coordinator And Teacher Trainer),**
Position No. 87130, Honolulu CC, full-time, 9 months, non-tenurial, temporary,
possible renewal, general funds, to begin approximately 08/97 pending position
clearance and availability of funds. **Duties:** Provide instructional and
professional support services in the development, implementation and
coordination of continuing education training programs. Develop, modify and
deliver existing inservice teacher training curricula for non-credit and
apprentice instructors including course scheduling, teaching and evaluation.
Coordinate existing continuing education programs as assigned. Assist in the
identification, development, delivery and coordination of new non- credit
programs, courses and services responsive to workforce development and the
continuing education needs of adults. Maintain regular office hours. Begin to
provide college and community service. Participate in professional and self-
development activities. Duties will include evening, weekend, and off-campus
assignments. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree or Bachelor's degree
in Education and three years of related work experience. Degree and
qualifications must be in the fields/disciplines offered at Honolulu Community
College. **Desirable Qualifications:** Knowledge of continuing education for
adults; experience in program and course development; teaching experience;
experience in the use of computers. **Pay Range:** C2; minimum $2,669/monthly.
To Apply: Send community college application for faculty or
executive/managerial positions (CC Personnel Form 27A) and transcript(s)
verifying minimum educational qualifications (official or copy) to the
Director of Continuing Education and Training, Honolulu CC, 874 Dillingham
Blvd., Honolulu, HI., 96817, ATTN: Victoria Toguchi, An incomplete or late
application will not be considered. Additional documentation such as a letter
of application describing how the applicant meets the minimum qualifications
and desirable qualifications in relation to stated duties is welcome.
Materials submitted will not be returned. Appointment is contingent upon
verification of all minimum qualifications and any additional qualifications
used to justify an above minimum salary, including official transcript(s),
license(s), certificate(s), and work experience documentation. All minimum
qualifications must be met by effective date of hire. **Closing Date:** 07/21.
**Inquiries:** 845-9141.

**INSTRUCTORS** in **ANTHROPOLOGY,** Position No. 086649V; **FAMILY
RESOURCES,** Position No. 086621V; **and PSYCHOLOGY,** Position No. 086558V.
Social Sciences Department, Kapi'olani CC, variable FTE ranging from 50% to
full-time contingent on course offerings and student demand; temporary
positions, non-tenurial, 9-month, general fund, to begin approximately 08/97,
pending position clearance, availability of funds, and actual staffing
requirements. **Duties:** Under general supervision, primary responsibilities
are to teach introductory college level courses. Instruction is competency
based, emphasizes writing, may include use of computers, and may include
community based activities. Related work activities include, but are not
limited to: advising and counseling of students; assisting in campus student
activities; participating in college based committees; performing community
service; conducting in-service training; maintaining an approved program of
professional self-development; collecting data and preparing reports; and
evaluating instructional and non-instructional activities. Duties and
responsibilities may include evening classes and/or distance education classes
as part of the regular workload. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree
in respective fields: Anthropology, Human Development (Family Resources), and
Psychology. **Desirable Qualifications:** 1) College level teaching
experience; 2) ability to work in a multi-cultural setting; 3) ability to
incorporate writing, thinking skills, and an Asian-Pacific emphasis into
instruction; 4) effective verbal/written communication skills; 5) involvement
in community activities; 6) ability to integrate use of the Internet/computing
into instruction; and 7) familiarity with collaborative learning methods in
the classroom. **Pay Range:** C2; $32,028 minimum annual salary for full-time;
salary is prorated accordingly based on FTE. Salary commensurate with
education/experience. To Apply: Send community college faculty application,
three letters of recommendation, official transcripts, and a sample course
syllabus to Mike Tagawa, Dept of Social Sciences, Kapi'olani CC, 4303 Diamond
Head Road, Honolulu, HI, 96816. **Closing Date:** 07/21. All materials must be
postmarked no later than the closing date. Minimum qualifications must be met
by effective date of appointment. **Inquiries:** Mike Tagawa, 734-9438.

**JUNIOR SPECIALIST S2 (Study Abroad Advisor/Recruiter).** Position numbers
088126 and 088740T, .50% FTE each. UH Manoa Study Abroad Center, general funds
to begin approximately 9/1, annually renewable depending on performance and/or
funding, 11-month, temporary, non-tenurable. **Duties:** Under the direct
supervision of the Director of the Study Abroad Center, the Study Abroad
Advisor/Recruiter advises potential study abroad students, organizes, manages
and implements publicity and recruitment campaigns, and performs all study
abroad related administrative, programmatic and student related work. Assists
the director in programmatic and administrative duties as and when necessary.
**Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree with an academic concentration in
an international field. Experience in university study abroad programs or
equivalent overseas experience. Ability to communicate well orally and in
writing. Excellent interpersonal skills to work effectively with students,
faculty and relevant administrators. Demonstrated ability to use personal
computers and standard software. **Desirable Qualifications:** Familiarity
with student recruitment at the university level. Effectiveness in planning,
organizing and implementing student recruitment programs. Proficient in a
second language other than English, have studied overseas for at least a
semester, demonstrated public speaking and motivational skills. **Minimum
Annual Salary:** $16,656 (at half time). Send letter of application,
curriculum vitae, and three current references to: Dr. Joseph H. O'Mealy,
Acting Associate Dean & Chair of the Council on Study Abroad, Colleges of
Languages, Linguistics and Literatures, University of Hawai'i Manoa, 2545 The
Mall, Bilger 101, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Telephone:** 956-7193, fax 956-9879.
**Closing Date:** 08/01.

Correction to ad that appeared in _Ku Lama_ on 06/13

**INSTRUCTORS IN MATHEMATICS, BIOLOGY/ZOOLOGY, CHEMISTRY, AND
PHYSICS/ASTRONOMY,** Math/Science Department, Kapi'olani Community College,
variable FTE ranging from 50% FTE to full-time contingent on course offerings
and student demand; nontenurial, 9-month contract, general funds, to begin
approximately 08/97, pending position clearance, availability of funds, and
actual staffing requirements. **Duties for the Mathematics position only:**
Under general supervision, to teach mathematics courses in developmental math,
Algebra, Pre-Calculus, and Calculus; develop and teach applied mathematics
classes offered for vocational education programs and students; develop and
teach math for special purposes as related to vocational education programs at
KCC. These positions may be assigned to one or more of the vocational
education programs. **Duties for the Science Positions in Biology/Zoology,
Chemistry, and Physics/Astronomy only:** Under general supervision, to teach
courses in the respective science discipline for non-majors and majors, as
needed. **General Duties for all of the Mathematics and Sciences positions:**
Develop teaching strategies, instructional materials and methods which 1) use
computers in instruction where appropriate, 2) integrate instruction of
appropriate thinking skills into course content, 3) use competency based
instruction, and 4) address the needs of community college students; develop
and maintain an approved program of self-improvement; maintain at least one
office hour per week for every three credits taught, counsel and advise
students, identify student needs and implement constructive responses to them;
prepare and revise course objectives and syllabi; plan, organize, and carry
out independently, instructional and non-instructional assignments; perform
related duties as assigned, as part of regular workload. Evening classes may
be assigned as part of regular workload. Duties and responsibilities may
include instructional assignments involving distance education. **Minimum
Qualifications for developmental Mathematics position only:** Master's degree
in Mathematics (MA in Mathematics, or MS in Mathematics, or MAT in
Mathematics); or a Master's in Education with a Bachelor's degree in
Mathematics; or a MEd in Mathematics. **Minimum Qualifications for other
Mathematics position only:** Master's Degree in Mathematics (MA in
Mathematics, or MS in Mathematics, or MAT in Mathematics). **Minimum
Qualifications for the Science Positions in Biology/Zoology, Chemistry, and
Physics/Astronomy only:** Master's Degree in Zoology, Chemistry, and Physics,
respectively. **Desirable Qualifications for all of the Mathematics and
Sciences Positions:** Successful community college and/or university teaching
experience as the primary instructor (as opposed to a teaching assistant), as
substantiated by student and peer evaluations, and professional references;
successful experiences in conducting course assessments, and in working with
peers, coordinators, department chairs, and administrators, as substantiated
by student and peer evaluations, and professional references; experience
teaching students from a variety of cultural backgrounds. A teaching sample
may be required as part of the interview process. **For Math positions only:**
Work experience in one of the vocational education fields offered by KCC.
**Annual Salary:** $32,028 minimum annual salary for full-time; salary is
prorated accordingly based on FTE. Salary commensurate with
education/experience. To Apply: Send community college application, official
transcripts from all colleges attended, three letters of recommendation
attesting to the desirable qualifications listed above, summaries of student
and peer teaching assessments, and a brief one-page statement outlining the
ways in which you meet the minimum and desirable qualifications, to Prof.
Charles Matsuda, Math/Sciences Department, Kapi'olani Community College, 4303
Diamond Head Road, Honolulu, HI, 96816. **Closing Date:** 07/08. All materials
must be postmarked no later than the closing date. Minimum qualification must
be met by effective date of appointment. **Inquiries:** (808) 734-9255.

**ASSISTANT PROFESSORS,** #84393T, #84391T; part-time or full-time, Manoa;
temporary; beginning approximately 08/01 pending approval to fill one or both
positions and availability of funds for one or both positions. **Duties:**
teaching large undergraduate computer science courses. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Applicants must have a doctorate in computer science or a
closely related discipline from an accredited college or university and
demonstrate a commitment to effective teaching. **Pay Range:** minimum annual
full-time salary $34,644. To apply: Interested applicants are invited to send
a resume and three letters of reference to: Stephen Y. Itoga, Chairman,
Department of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Hawai'i at
Manoa, 2565 The Mall, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date:** 07/22.
**Inquiries:** Stephen Y. Itoga, 956-3500 or itoga@hawaii.edu.

**POST DOCTORAL FELLOW,** Water Resources Research Center, extramural funds to
begin approximately 07/01 for minimum of one year pending availability of
funds. **Duties:** To be project supervisor for program in disinfecting
wastewater using ultraviolet light UV systems. **Minimum Qualifications:** PhD
in microbiology with experience in research in water quality microbiology.
**Desirable Qualifications:** Experience with recovery and detection methods
for bacteria and viruses from water, disinfection with UV systems, maintenance
of tissue culture and use of genetic and molecular microbial methods.
**Minimum Annual Stipend:** $30,000 to $32,000. To apply, submit curriculum
vitae and names of two references to Dr. Roger Fujioka, Water Resources
Research Center, University of Hawai'i, 2540 Dole Street, Honolulu, HI. 96822.
**Closing Date:** 07/04.

**JUNIOR RESEARCHER,** R-2, Position No. 088760T, Pacific Biomedical Research
Center, full-time, non-tenurable, extramural funds, for one year, continuation
dependent upon the availability of funds. **Duties:** Work with the Principal
Investigator of a specialized, in-depth study on the molecular biology of the
extracellular matrix, particularly the role of the elastin gene in the
development of Williams syndrome and supravalvular aortic stenosis (SVAS).
**Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree in biomedical sciences with prior
experience in molecular biology. **Minimum Annual Salary:** $33,312. To apply,
send a letter of application, an updated curriculum vitae and the names of
three potential references to: Professor Charles Boyd, Pacific Biomedical
Research Center, 1993 East-West Road, Honolulu, HI 96822-2359. **Inquiries:**
956-6341. **Closing Date:** 07/22.

**JUNIOR RESEARCHER,** R-2, Position No. 088757T, Pacific Biomedical Research
Center, full-time, non-tenurable, extramural funds, for one year, continuation
dependent upon the availability of funds. **Duties:** Work with the Principal
Investigator of a specialized, in-depth study on the molecular biology of the
extracellular matrix, particularly the role of the elastin gene in the
pathogenesis of vascular disease. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree
in biomedical sciences with prior experience in molecular biology and training
in site-directed mutagenesis. **Desirable:** PhD in biomedical sciences.
**Minimum Annual Salary:** $33,312. To apply, send a letter of application, an
updated curriculum vitae and the names of three potential references to:
Professor Charles Boyd, Pacific Biomedical Research Center, 1993 East-West
Road, Honolulu, HI 96822-2359. **Inquiries:** 956-6341. **Closing Date:**
07/22.

**POST-DOCTORAL FELLOW,** Pacific Biomedical Research Center, full-time,
extramural funds, for one year, continuation dependent upon the availability
of funds. **Training To Be Performed:** Work with the Principal Investigator
participating in research of a specialized, in-depth study on the molecular
biology of the extracellular matrix, with reference to the role of lysyl
oxidase in the pathogenesis of colon cancer. **Minimum Qualifications:** PhD
in the biomedical sciences with prior experience in the biochemistry of lysyl
oxidase and with the standard techniques of molecular biology. **Minimum
Annual Salary:** $28,415. To apply, send a letter of application, an updated
curriculum vitae and the names of three potential references to: Professor
Charles Boyd, Pacific Biomedical Research Center, 1993 East-West Road,
Honolulu, HI 96822-2359. **Inquiries:** 956-6341. **Closing Date:** 07/22.

**POST-DOCTORAL FELLOW,** Pacific Biomedical Research Center, full-time,
extramural funds, for one year, continuation dependent upon the availability
of funds. **Training To Be Performed:** Work with the Research Director of the
Laboratory of Matrix Pathobiology participating in research on the expression
studies of a new family of extracellular matrix genes. **Minimum
Qualifications:** PhD in the biomedical sciences, training in molecular
biology and prokaryotic genetics with prior experience in transient expression
assays. **Minimum Annual Salary:** $28,415. To apply, send a letter of
application, an updated curriculum vitae and the names of three potential
references to: Professor Charles Boyd, Pacific Biomedical Research Center,
1993 East-West Road, Honolulu, HI 96822-2359. **Inquiries:** 956-6341.
**Closing Date:** 07/22.

* * *

Administrative, Professional and Technical (APT) Positions

**UH EDUCATIONAL SPECIALIST II (Continuing Education and Training),** Position
No. 81638, Hawai'i CC, full-time, general funds, to begin approx 09/97,
pending position clearance and availability of funds. **Duties:** Under
general supervision, is responsible for but not limited to planning,
budgeting, marketing, implementing, managing and evaluating community service
programs, courses, projects and special events that will make the educational
resources of Haw CC more accessible to the diverse communities of people of
the Island of Hawai'i. Identify individual and community concerns, needs,
and/or problems, and develop community education programs. Develop and
maintain extensive contacts in the community to promote programs. Direct and
coordinate Continuing Education programs offered to the public. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Graduation from an accredited four-year college or
university with major course work in Liberal Arts, Education Administration,
or related field. Two years of related professional experience in continuing
education, community education, and/or community services programs.
Considerable knowledge of the principles of continuing education, community
education and/or community services; and the methods, materials, procedures
and techniques utilized in planning, budgeting, marketing, implementing and
evaluating programs which bring various educational resources to bear on
community needs. Ability to understand and follow complex oral and written
instructions; prepare and maintain comprehensive records and to prepare
routine reports; communicate effectively, both orally and in writing with the
general public, students, faculty and staff; establish and maintain rapport
with students, faculty, staff and the public served; supervise the work of
professional, technical, and/or clerical personnel should the need arise; use
the IBM and/or Macintosh personal computer for word processing, database
management, and some desktop publishing; occasionally work nights and
weekends; drive a car. Or any equivalent combination of education and/or
experience. **Pay Range:** PO6, $2,723/mo. To apply: 1) submit application (UH
Form 64); 2) transcripts (copies are acceptable; however, official transcripts
will be required at the time of hire); 3) names and phone numbers of three
references familiar with job performance; 4) a statement outlining how you
meet the minimum qualifications; 5) resume to Dean of Outreach and Special
Programs, Hawai'i CC, 200 W. Kawili St., Hilo, HI, 96720-4091. Letters of
recommendation are welcome. An incomplete application will not be considered
and documents submitted will not be returned. **Inquiries:** (808) 974-7531.
**Closing Date:** 07/21.

Correction to ad that appeared in _Ku Lama_ on 06/13

**COMPUTER SPECIALIST I,** Position #081388, College of Arts and Humanities,
temporary, may be converted to permanent position, full-time, general funds,
to begin 08/01. **Duties** : Train faculty, staff, and other designated users
in operation of hardware and software systems; assist and advise college and
departmental offices regarding acquisition, use, management, and maintenance
of computers, software, and peripherals currently and prospectively in use by
the college office and departments; plan, direct, organize, and coordinate
computer functions of the college and keep abreast of constantly growing field
of information technology. **Minimum Qualifications** : Graduation from an
accredited four-year college or university with course work in computer
science and other course work in related fields which provides the following
knowledge, abilities, and skills: installation, training, use, management, and
maintenance of IBM/MacIntosh hardware and software systems. Knowledge of
electronic data processing coding practices necessary for programming
instructions for an electronic computer and peripheral equipment; knowledge of
the applicability of data processing to a variety of situations and processes;
knowledge of statistical analysis methods and techniques; knowledge of the
limitations, capabilities, uses, and service requirements of the electronic
computer and allied equipment; knowledge of the terminology accepted
practices, and procedures of the programs or systems analyzed; knowledge of
one or more computer programming languages; ability to prepare clear, detailed
programs of instruction for efficient machine utilization. **Desirable
Qualifications** : One year of progressively responsible professional
experience in a computer field or equivalent. Considerable knowledge and
experience with computers and operating systems, computer multimedia
applications, and world wide web server administration. **Pay Range** : P03;
$2,348 minimum/month. To Apply: Submit completed APT Application for
Employment (UH Form 64), official college transcripts, and three letters of
recommendation to: Associate Dean, College of Arts and Humanities, 2500 Campus
Road - Hawai'i 101, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date:** 07/08.
**Inquiries:** 956-6051.

* * *

UH Foundation

**MAJOR GIFTS OFFICER:** The University of Hawai'i Foundation seeks a major
gifts officer for the UH Athletics Department. The UH Athletics Department is
a member of the Western Athletics Conference with 17 teams. The major gifts
officer will be responsible for creating a major gifts program for the
Athletics Department which will be part of the University of Hawai'i's
upcoming comprehensive campaign. Demonstrated success in launching major gifts
programs is required. Familiarity with athletics fund raising is highly
desired. The ability to lead and motivate volunteers in the soliciation of
gifts greater than $10,000 is expected. A bachelor's degree and five or more
years of fund raising experience is required. Salary commensurate with
experience. The University of Hawai'i Foundation offers an excellent benefits
package. Send resume and cover letter, including salary requirements to: UH
Foundation,  "Major Gifts Officer-Athletics", 2444 Dole Street, Bachman Hall,
Room 101, Honolulu, HI 96822.

* * *

Research Corporation

**For a comprehensive listing of all active RCUH regular job vacancies, you
may refer to the following: RCUH Job Vacancy Bulletin Board located at
Sakamaki Hall D-100 or at any Hawai'i State Employment Service.**

**TECHNICAL SERVICES CLERK** \- ID# 185. School of Ocean  & Earth Science &
Technology (SOEST), Physical Plant Support Facility (PPSF), Regular (limited
term appointment of six months, with possibility of extension), Full-Time,
RCUH Non-Civil Service, Revolving funds, with the School of Ocean & Earth
Science Technology located at the University of Hawai'i Manoa campus.
Continuation is dependent upon program/operational needs, satisfactory work
performance, and availability of funds. **Minimum Monthly Salary:** $2,020.
**Duties:** Provides overall support for office procedures for the Physical
Plant Support Facility (PPSF). Other duties as assigned. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Associates degree from a business school/community college
in secretarial science, accounting, or related field. Two to four years of
progressively responsible work experience in the area of administrative and
fiscal support. A business school/community college degree in secretarial
science, accounting, or related field may be substituted for two years of
experience. Knowledge of practices and techniques of modern business
management. Some knowledge of hardware and construction materials, inventory,
and procurement. Ability to understand and follow complex oral and written
instructions; communicate orally and by preparation of written reports;
analyze, interpret, and use sound logic and judgment in application of a
variety of financial/administrative rules and regulations. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Familiar with UH, RCUH, UH Foundation policies and
procedures; valid driver's license. Experience using Microsoft Excel and
Access or similar spreadsheet and database software. **Inquiries:** Gary Wai,
956-8983. Application Requirements: Send cover letter (note ID#) with
narrative on your qualifications for the position, resume with salary history,
the names and phone numbers of three work related references, and copy(ies) of
diploma(s) and/or certificate(s) used to qualify for position to the Director
of Human Resources, Research Corporation of the University of Hawai'i, 2530
Dole Street, Sakamaki Hall, D-100 Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date:** 07/11.

**SECRETARY II** \- ID# 190. Institute for Astronomy (IFA), Regular, Full-
Time, Federal funds, RCUH Non-Civil Service position with the Institute for
Astronomy located at the University of Hawai'i Manoa campus in Honolulu, HI.
Continuation is dependent upon program/operational needs, satisfactory work
performance, and availability of funds. **Minimum Monthly Salary:** $1,941.
**Duties:** Provides secretarial support services through the IFA
Administrative Recharge System to the Institute's group of research scientists
in astronomy, as well as other technical staff. Perform other duties as
assigned. **Minimum Qualifications:** Associate's degree from an accredited
community college or business school in secretarial science and 1 year of
secretarial experience with includes experience with word processing software
or equivalent work experience. Ability to type 55 wpm and use or operate
common office equipment. Knowledge of business English, spelling, arithmetic,
and acceptable office practices and procedures. Working knowledge of word
processing software. Good verbal and written communication skills. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Working knowledge of Microsoft Word, e-mail system such as
Telemail, and other forms of electronic data transmission. Knowledge of RCUH
and UH policies and procedures. Experience working in a research setting and
in supervising. **Inquiries:** Michele Tom 956-7593. Application Requirements:
Send cover letter (note ID#) with narrative on your qualifications, resume
with salary history, the names and phone numbers of three work related
references, and copy(ies) of diploma(s) and/or certificate(s) used to qualify
for position to the Director of Human Resources, Research Corporation of the
University of Hawai'i, 2530 Dole Street, Sakamaki Hall D-100, Honolulu, HI
96822. **Closing Date:** 07/07.

**CASHIER/RECEPTIONIST** \- ID# 196. Waikiki Aquarium. Full-time, RCUH Non-
Civil Service position with the Waikiki Aquarium located in Honolulu, HI.
Continuation is dependent upon program/operational needs, satisfactory work
performance, and availability of funds. **Minimum Monthly Salary:** $1,476.
**Duties:** Responsible for cashiering, answering the telephones; providing
basic visitor service: greeting and orienting guests; conducting operations at
the admission desk and reception area; and opening and closing the facility.
Other duties as assigned. **Minimum Qualifications:** High school diploma, one
year experience operating a cash register, handling and reconciling cash, and
operating a multi-stationed/lined telephone system or an equivalent
combination of experience and training which provides knowledge, abilities and
skills to perform the job. Must be bondable. Able to work at reception desk
for extended periods and tolerate warm working conditions. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Computer literate. Ability to converse in Japanese or a
European language other than English. Valid driver's license and/or own means
of transportation. **Inquiries:** Mary Morioka, 923-9741. Application
Requirements: Send cover letter (note ID#) with narrative on your
qualifications for the position, resume with salary history, names and phone
numbers of three work related references, and copy(ies) of diploma(s) and/or
certificate(s) used to qualify for position to the Director of Human
Resources, Research Corporation of the University of Hawai'i, 2530 Dole
Street, Sakamaki Hall D-100, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date:** 07/11.

