

## HANDBOOK FOR UNDERGRADUATE PSYCHOLOGY STUDENTS

## MARQUETTE UNIVERSITY

#### COPYRIGHT 2001

#### MARQUETTE UNIVERSITY

#### DEPARTMENT OF PSYCHOLOGY



##### THIS HANDBOOK IS FOR INFORMATION PURPOSES ONLY. A STUDENT'S CONTRACT
WITH THE UNIVERSITY, AND ITS ASSOCIATED COURSE REQUIREMENTS, IS FOUND IN THE
UNDERGRADUATE BULLETIN, SPECIFIC TO THE YEAR THE STUDENT BEGINS STUDY AT
MARQUETTE UNIVERSITY.

##### TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. OVERVIEW

> A. PSYCHOLOGY PROGRAM GOALS AND PURPOSE

>

> B. DECLARATION OF MAJOR

>

> C. HISTORY OF MARQUETTE UNIVERSITY

>

> D. FACILITIES

>

>> 1\. Libraries

>>

>> 2\. Information Technology Services (ITS) Computer Center

>>

>> 3\. Department Computer Lab

>

> E. THE GRADUATE PROGRAM IN CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY

II. DEPARTMENT FACULTY AND STAFF

> A. FACULTY AND RESEARCH INTERESTS

>

> B. ADJUNCT FACULTY

>

> C. UNDERGRADUATE COMMITTEE

III. COURSEWORK AND REQUIREMENTS

> A. ARTS & SCIENCES CORE CURRICULUM REQUIREMENTS

>

> B. PSYCHOLOGY MAJOR CURRICULUM & REQUIREMENTS

>

>> 1\. MAJOR

>>

>> 2\. MINOR.

>>

>> 3\. TEACHING MAJOR.

>>

>> 4\. TEACHING MINOR..

>>

>> 5\. EDUCATION COURSES FOR TEACHING MAJOR AND TEACHING MINOR..

>

> C. PSYCHOLOGY MAJOR: CURRICULUM WORKSHEET:

>

> D. RECOMMENDED COURSE SELECTIONS

>

> E. RECOMMENDED COURSE SEQUENCE

>

> F. PSYCHOLOGY COURSE OFFERINGS

IV. DEPARTMENTAL AND COLLEGE OF ARTS AND SCIENCES REGULATIONS

> A. SEMESTER COURSE LOADS

>

> B. TRANSFER OF CREDITS

>

> C. GRADES OF "C/D" AND "D"

>

> D. PROCEDURES FOR CHANGING FINAL GRADES

V. PSYCHOLOGY MAJOR ADVISING PROGRAM

VI. RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES

> A. INDEPENDENT STUDY (PSYC 195)

>

> B. SENIOR THESIS (PSYC 199)

>

> C. DESIGNATED UPPER DIVISION COURSES

>

> D. RESEARCH EXPERIENCE THROUGH VOLUNTEER PARTICIPATION

>

> E. PSI CHI COMPETITIONS

>

> F. EXTERNALLY FUNDED PROGRAMS

VII. PSI CHI: THE NATIONAL HONOR SOCIETY IN PSYCHOLOGY

> A. WHAT IS PSI CHI?

>

> B. WHY JOIN?

>

> C. REQUIREMENTS

>

> D. HOW TO JOIN OR GET INFORMATION

>

> E. OFFICERS

VIII. DEPARTMENTAL COLLOQUIA

IX. CAREER PLANNING

X. SUPERVISED EXPERIENCES IN APPLIED SETTINGS

XI. AWARDS IN PSYCHOLOGY

> A. OUTSTANDING STUDENT AWARD IN PSYCHOLOGY

>

> B. ALVIN C. BUECHNER II MEMORIAL SCHOLARSHIP

>

> C. OUTSTANDING SENIOR AWARD IN ARTS & SCIENCES







I. OVERVIEW

A. Psychology program goals and purpose

Psychology is the science that studies, through controlled observation and
laboratory experimentation, the mental processes and the behavior of humans
and animals. Marquette's undergraduate curriculum prepares students for the
graduate study required for a professional psychology career. It is also good
preparation for medical, dental, law, and physical therapy careers. Students
who do not pursue advanced degrees may find jobs in psychology-related areas,
such as state or local rehabilitation and social service agencies, civil
service, human resources departments, and institutions that provide care for
people with physical and emotional disabilities.

As a content area, psychology offers many thematic courses that students use
as a means of learning more about themselves: Theories of Personality, Human
Motivation, Human Sexuality, Death and Dying, Psychology of Religion,
Developmental Psychology, Social Psychology, Cognitive Psychology, and
Biological Psychology. The statistics/measurement and research methods and
design courses (both required) teach the systematic analytical skills
necessary to being an informed consumer of information, as well as for
observing, measuring, and evaluating change in behavior. Psychology courses
can be used to also fulfill the social science and math requirements of the
Core curriculum.

The objectives of the psychology major include knowledge of individual
behavior, cognition, and affect, as well as skills in measuring individual
change as a result of controlled cause-effect conditions.

B. Declaration of Major

Students wishing to major in Psychology should obtain a Declaration of Major
form from the Psychology Department office (SC 454). One copy will be placed
in the student's file in the Department, and the other will be filed with the
College of Arts and Sciences. Students are encouraged to formally declare the
major as early as possible in order to make the most of the Department's
advisory program. Each student is assigned a Psychology Department faculty
member as an academic advisor.

C. History of Marquette University

Marquette University is a Jesuit institution that maintains a Catholic,
Christian setting for its educational mission. Men and women of many faiths
and nationalities teach and study at Marquette, giving testimony to the fact
that the Christian faith does not inhibit but, rather, encourages academic
freedom and excellence. Marquette is recognized nationally and internationally
for its strong academic programs, its distinguished faculty, and its talented
students. Together they provide a friendly, scholarly, and stimulating
environment.

Marquette University is an independent, coeducational institution of higher
learning founded in 1881 by members of the Society of Jesus, a Catholic
religious order established in 1540 by St. Ignatius Loyola. The University is
named after Father Jacques Marquette (1637- 1675), a French Jesuit missionary
and explorer in North America. He came to the New World to convert Indians to
Christianity, and that desire led him to explore the continent. In 1673, as
part of an expedition that traveled the Mississippi River, he was one of the
first Europeans to visit the Milwaukee area.

The origins of Marquette University lie in the desires of the first Catholic
bishop of Milwaukee, John Martin Henni, to start a Jesuit college in his
diocese. While on a fundraising trip to Europe in 1848-49, he obtained a
pledge of $16,000 from Guillaume DeBoey, a Belgian businessman. Henni asked
the Jesuits to open a school in Milwaukee. Moreover, mindful of Jacques
Marquette's work as a missionary and explorer in the Midwest, Henni proposed
that the institution be called Marquette College. Since Jesuits lacked
personnel to staff such an institution for decades to follow, the college did
not open until 1881.

Marquette remained a small liberal arts college for men at 10th and State
Streets until 1907. That year, its leaders obtained a university charter from
the State of Wisconsin and moved operations to a new building, completed in
1894, on Wisconsin Avenue east of Gesu Church. Between 1907 and 1913,
Marquette expanded to include divisions of medicine, dentistry, nursing,
pharmacy, law, business, engineering, music, and journalism. In 1909,
influenced by requests from local Catholics and the Archbishop of Milwaukee,
as well as by the needs of Catholic parochial schools for certified teachers,
the president of Marquette decided that the University would conduct a summer
school (itself an innovation for Catholic colleges and universities) and admit
female students. By 1917, 375 women attended Marquette. Currently, women total
about 49 per cent of the Marquette student body.

Following World War II, enrollment at Marquette increased dramatically, as
happened at other American colleges and universities. Demand for graduate and
professional education grew, and the University's student body became more
national in its composition. In the 1960s and 1970s, Marquette introduced
doctoral programs in various fields, including religious studies, biology,
history, and chemistry. In 1969, the University expanded its Board of
Trustees. At the present time, 9 Jesuits and 19 lay men and women serve as
Board members.

Today, Marquette University has a campus of approximately 80 acres and 50
buildings located on the western edge of downtown Milwaukee. It consists of 15
colleges, schools, and programs. Marquette continues to stress the liberal
arts, and it remains committed to offering an education marked by intellectual
excellence, the Judeo-Catholic tradition, and service to others.

Approximately 11,000 students are enrolled at Marquette with about 2,200 of
them in graduate programs. The Graduate School at Marquette administers 17
doctoral and 39 master's programs.

D. Facilities

1\. Libraries

The University libraries support the teaching, research and service mission of
Marquette University by providing access to recorded knowledge through their
collections, services and cooperative programs. Collections of more than one
million volumes of books, bound journals, microtext, electronic sources and
audio visual media and more than 10,000 periodical, newspaper and other serial
subscriptions are housed in three facilities. The Science Library contains
more than 200,000 volumes, while about 60 percent of the collection is located
in Memorial Library.

The Library on-line catalog, MARQCAT, provides access to book and periodical
holdings, electronic indexes to journal literature and directional information
on library hours, staff, programs, and services. Students also many use
library terminals and PC's for access to the Internet and World Wide Web
services, other library catalogs in the state, region and worldwide. MARQCAT
and CD-ROM indices are full-text sources on library and other campus servers
which are accessible over the Marquette network from any campus location. On-
line research resources include PSYCINFO, MEDLINE, and ERIC. A well developed
instructional program supports faculty and students in the use of electronic
information resources.

A variety of cooperative arrangements extend and supplement Marquette's
library resources. The collections of Milwaukee Public Library (within four
blocks of the campus), University of Wisconsin Milwaukee (several miles
northeast of the campus), and the Medical College of Wisconsin (7 miles west
of Campus) are open to Marquette students and faculty. Students and faculty
have access to more than 120 public, academic and special libraries in the
metropolitan area through Marquette's permanent membership in the Library
Council of Metropolitan Milwaukee.

The libraries of the University of Wisconsin in Madison and throughout the
state lend books or supply photocopies of journal articles through the
Wisconsin Interlibrary Service. An additional 5,000,000 volumes of research
material are available through the University's membership in the Center for
Research Libraries in Chicago. The libraries provide direct access for
students and faculty, through the University computer network and the Internet
to library catalogs and other databases all over the world.

2\. Information Technology Services (ITS) Computer Center

Information Technology Services (ITS), formerly called the Computer Services
Division (CSD), is a support organization responsible for providing voice and
data communications and computer-based services and training to all members of
the Marquette community. ITS manages MarquetteNet, the University's campus-
wide fiber optic network built to handle the voice, video, and data needs of
the Marquette community. Once completed, MarquetteNet will allow students to
access the computing resources distributed throughout campus as well as the
Internet from their residence hall rooms. Students can access the central
computing facilities consisting of a cluster of Digital Equipment Corporation
computers via various public workstations, dial-up connections, or through
MarquetteNet. SPSS (Statistical Package for the Social Sciences) is used
extensively by Psychology faculty and students, both for research and for
class assignments. SPSS is supported on both the mainframe (SPSS 4.0) and on
PC's in the student labs in Cudahy Hall (SPSS for Windows 95).

ITS provides technical support for the PC's, Macintoshes, terminals, laser
printers, and scanners in the Campus Computer Lab, Cudahy Hall, 240. Members
of the Marquette community can receive computing information and assistance
from the Help Desk during normal office hours. ITS supports business and
information processing for University administrators as well as instructional
and research needs of academic areas. ITS staff aid in designing, developing
and implementing both third-party software and locally created systems. In
addition, free, introductory training courses covering a variety of mainframe
and microcomputer topics are offered each semester.

3\. Department Computer Lab

The Psychology Department maintains a 16-computer laboratory to support
students enrolled in Statistics and Research Methods courses. The computer
lab, located on the fourth floor of the Schroeder Health Sciences Complex, may
also be used with the permission of a faculty member in other research
activities.

E. The Graduate Program in Clinical Psychology

The Department of Psychology has offered graduate training in clinical
psychology for over 35 years. For most of that period, the Department has
operated a two-year terminal masters program that has emphasized training in
psychological assessment, research skills, and psychological interventions.
Graduates of that program usually have taken positions in social or health
services or have continued their graduate study in doctoral programs. Since
1994, the Department also has offered a doctoral program in clinical
psychology. Over 40 students are enrolled in the five-year doctoral program.
In 2000, the program graduated its first doctoral students. The American
Psychological Association currently is considering the Department's
application for accreditation of the doctoral program. Both the terminal
masters and the doctoral programs regularly admit graduates of the Marquette
bachelor's program in psychology.

Many graduates of the undergraduate psychology program at Marquette are
successful in gaining admittance to graduate programs. In fact, a survey taken
in 1989 of Marquette psychology graduates found that 60% had gone on to
graduate or professional degree training within five year's of the bachelor's
degree. Many top graduates have been accepted into high quality doctoral
programs in clinical psychology, including Marquette's graduate program.



II. DEPARTMENT FACULTY AND STAFF

A. Faculty and Research Interests



Donald A. Czech, Ph.D. (Syracuse University, 1969)

Feeding and drinking; physiological mechanisms of reinforcement; behavioral
pharmacology of anti-anxiety drugs; neuropeptides and behavior



Ed de St. Aubin, Ph.D. (Northwestern University, 1995)

Life span development, personality, personal ideology, narrative psychology,
psychosocial maturity and well-being



Stephen L. Franzoi, Ph.D. (University of California at Davis, 1981)

Self-awareness, self-consciousness, and body esteem



John H. Grych, Ph.D. (University of Illinois, 1991)

Family influences on adaptive and maladaptive child development; the effects
of marital conflict, domestic violence and divorce on child adjustment



Stephen J. Guastello, Ph.D. (Illinois Institute of Technology, 1982)

Chaos and catastrophe theory; organizational behavior; occupational accidents;
computer-based test interpretations; expert systems; personality factors in
group dynamics; personnel selection



Robert J. Lueger, Ph.D., Department Chair (Loyola University of Chicago, 1977)

Assessment of quality of mental health services; delivery of mental health
services to at-risk families and to patients in primary care; recovery of the
capacity to work



Rita T. McDonald, Ph.D. (Loyola University of Chicago, 1971) Emerita



Richard Nash, Ph.D. (Tulane University, 1972)

Animal behavior; predator-prey relationships



Kristy A. Nielson, Ph.D. (Southern Illinois University at Carbondale, 1993)

Cognition; memory in aging; Alzheimer's Disease; memory modulation; cognitive
neuroscience; neuropsychology



M.Y. Quereshi, Ph.D. (University of Illinois, Champaign-Urbana, 1958)

Psychological statistics; measurement and evaluation methodology; experimental
design



Stephen M. Saunders, Ph.D., (Northwestern University, 1990)

Processes and outcomes of psychotherapy; help-seeking for emotional problems



Anees A. Sheikh, Ph.D. (University of Western Ontario, 1966)

Mental imagery



Mary Anne Siderits, Ph.D. (University of Michigan)

Gender; the psychology of religion; children's issues



Mary Wandrei, Ph.D. (Loyola University of Chicago, 1997)

Personality theory; treatment of abuse



Michael Wierzbicki, Ph.D. (Indiana University, 1980)

Depression; personality assessment; psychotherapy outcome



B. Adjunct Faculty



Sheryl Catz, Ph.D. (Louisiana State University, 1997)

Kimberly Norden, Ph.D. (State University of New York-Stony Brook, 1996)



C. Undergraduate Committee

The Department Chairperson, acting in concert with the Departmental faculty as
a whole, has final authority within the Department on all matters pertinent to
the undergraduate and graduate programs.

The Undergraduate Committee consists of three faculty members, elected by the
Departmental faculty, and one undergraduate student member, elected by the
students in the Department. The student representative participates in all
recommendations and deliberations, except those directly connected with other
students.

The Undergraduate Committee has a number of responsibilities concerning the
operation of the undergraduate program, including review of all suggested
changes in course content and sequence, course transfer policy, etc.



III. COURSEWORK AND REQUIREMENTS

A. Arts & Sciences Core Curriculum Requirements

ENGLISH COMPOSITION (2 courses)

LITERATURE-FINE ARTS (3 courses) (Includes Literature Courses in Foreign
Languages)

FOREIGN LANGUAGE (number of courses required may vary through placement)

MATH-LOGIC-COMPUTER (2 courses) (May not be satisfied by two Logic courses.)

NATURAL SCIENCE (2 courses) (Non-science majors may prefer to take ANTH 002 or
106, BIOL 002, CHEM 008, PHYS 005, 006, 007, 008, 009)

PHILOSOPHY (4 courses)

HISTORY (2 courses)

SOCIAL-BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE (2 courses)

THEOLOGY (3 courses)

The same course may not be used to fulfill two different core requirements.

B. PSYCHOLOGY MAJOR CURRICULUM & REQUIREMENTS

1\. MAJOR. Thirty-five hours including PSYC 001, 060 and 090, and at least one
course from at least five of the following eight content areas: Developmental
(101 or 103); Social (111 or 104); Learning (121 or 122); Assessment (127 or
131); History and Systems (128); Personality Theories (132); Physiological
(129 or 135); and Abnormal (137).

2\. MINOR. Six courses in psychology, including PSYC 001.

3\. TEACHING MAJOR. Thirty-four hours including PSYC 001, 060, 090, 101, 121
or 122, 128, 131, 132, 137 and any one upper division course. Students should
see the department adviser for secondary teaching majors or minors to consult
about the appropriate sequence of courses. It is also important that
prospective teachers study carefully the School of Education section of this
bulletin regarding university and state requirements for teacher
certification.

4\. TEACHING MINOR. Twenty-five hours including PSYC 001, 060, 090, 101, 128,
131, and 132.

5\. EDUCATION COURSES FOR TEACHING MAJOR AND TEACHING MINOR. Teaching majors
and minors are also required to take 27 semester hours of courses in education
including EDUC 078, 088, 095, 130, 145, 155, and 158.

C. Psychology Major: Curriculum Worksheet:

PSYCHOLOGY - REQUIRED (3 courses): PSYC 001 PSYC 060 PSYC 090

PSYCHOLOGY - ELECTIVES (minimum of 8 courses; no maximum)

At least one course from at least five of the following eight content areas:

1\. Developmental (PSYC 101 or 103)  
2\. Social (PSYC 111 or 104)  
3\. Learning (PSYC 121 or 122)  
4\. Assessment (PSYC 127 or 131)  
5\. History and Systems (PSYC 128)  
6\. Personality Theories (PSYC 132)  
7\. Physiological (PSYC 129 or PSYC 135)  
8\. Abnormal (PSYC 137)  
9\. Additional psychology electives:

At least 15 hours in the major and 9 hours in the minor must be completed at
Marquette.

Recommended Course Selections

a. The major requirements for the B.A. in psychology are as follows:

Thirty-four hours including PSYC 001, 060, and 090 (formerly 125), and at
least one course from at least five of the following eight content areas:

1\. Developmental (PSYC 101 or 103)  
2\. Social (PSYC 111 or 104)  
3\. Learning (PSYC 121 or 122)  
4\. Assessment (PSYC 127 or 131)  
5\. History and Systems (PSYC 128)  
6\. Personality Theories (PSYC 132)  
7\. Physiological (PSYC 129 or PSYC 135)  
8\. Abnormal (PSYC 137)  

b. Students preparing for graduate school should be encouraged to acquire a
broad background by taking a course in the following areas:

1\. Developmental (PSYC 101 or 103)  
2\. Social (PSYC 111 or 104)  
3\. Learning (PSYC 121 or 122)  
4\. Assessment (PSYC 127 or 131)  
5\. History and Systems (PSYC 128)  
6\. Personality Theories (PSYC 132)  
7\. Physiological (PSYC 129 or PSYC 135)  
8\. Abnormal (PSYC 137)  


c. Students interested in pursuing a career in business following an
undergraduate major should be encouraged to take the following courses:

1\. Industrial - Psyc 104, 204*, 205*  
2\. Human Factors - Psyc 114  
3\. Individual Differences - Psyc 131  
4\. Testing - Psyc 127  
5\. The business administration minor (33 hrs.) should be pointed out

d. Students preparing for professional school (e.g., Law, Nursing, Physical
Therapy, Medicine) should consider the following courses:

1\. Developmental - Psyc 078 or 101 or 103  
2\. Social - Psyc 111  
3\. Individual Differences - Psyc 131  
4\. Personality - Psyc 132  
5\. Abnormal - Psyc 137  
6\. Sexual Behavior - Psyc 165  
7\. Gender Roles - Psyc 166  
8\. Death and Dying - Psyc 170  
9\. Fantasy and Imagination - Psyc 180  
10\. Physiological &endash; Psyc 135 or 129  
11\. Learning &endash; Psyc 121 or 122

e. Those students with a bachelor's degree interested in mental health
applications of psychology (e.g., child care worker) should consider the
following:

1\. Developmental - Psyc 101  
2\. Exceptional Child - Psyc 107  
3\. Behavior Problems in Children - Psyc 108  
4\. Fantasy and Imagination - Psyc 180  
5\. Social - Psyc 111  
6\. Motivation - Psyc 130  
7\. Individual Differences - Psyc 131  
8\. Personality - Psyc 132  
9\. Abnormal - Psyc 137  
10\. Gender Roles - Psyc 166

f. Students planning to teach psychology in secondary school must take the
following courses to receive a teaching major certificate:

1\. Introductory - Psyc 001  
2\. Statistics - Psyc 060  
3\. Research Methods and Designs - Psyc 090  
4\. Developmental - Psyc 101  
5\. Learning - Psyc 121 or 122  
6\. History - Psyc 128  
7\. Individual Differences - Psyc 131  
8\. Personality - Psyc 132  
9\. Abnormal - Psyc 137  
10\. 1 upper division course in psychology  
11\. 26 hours of education courses

g. Those students desiring a teaching minor must take a total of 25 hours in
psychology, including:

1\. Introductory - Psyc 001  
2\. Statistics - Psyc 060  
3\. Developmental - Psyc 078, 101  
4\. Research Methods and Designs - Psyc 090  
5\. History - Psyc 128  
6\. Individual Differences - Psyc 131  
7\. Personality - Psyc 132

h. Those students with other special interests should select a series of
courses in close consultation with their faculty advisor.

E. Recommended Course Sequence

Freshman Year

(6) English 001 & 002  
(6) History 001& 002  
(6-8) Two Natural Science courses  
(6-8) Foreign Language 001 & 002 (or as placement dictates)  
(3) Introduction to Theology (001)  
(3) General Psychology (001)  
30-34 credits

Sophomore Year

(4) Psychology Measurements & Statistics (060)  
(also fulfills 1 Math-Computer-Logic requirement)  
(4) Research Methods and Designs (090) (Lab course; Note: Psyc 060 is
prerequisite)  
(6) Two Literature Courses  
(6-8) Foreign Language 003 & 004 (or as placement level dictates to complete
requirements)  
(3) Philosophy 050  
(6-9) Elective  
29-34 Credit Hours

Junior Year

(12) Four Psychology Courses (see curriculum guidelines)  
(also satisfies Social-Behavioral Science requirements)  
(3) Literature or Fine Arts Course  
(6) Two Theology Courses  
(6) Two Philosophy Courses  
(3-9) Electives  
30-36 Credit Hours

Senior Year

(12) Four Psychology Courses (see curriculum guidelines  
(3) Philosophy course  
(3) Math-Computer-Logic Course  
(9-12) Electives  
27-30 Credit Hours

128 TOTAL Credit Hours, at 2.0 QPA average, required for graduation. 48 hours
must be Upper Division (100-level courses). 34 credit hours are required in
Psychology for the Major (35 beginning with the Fall 1999 semester).

Senior Residency Requirement: Once a student has senior classification (92
hours), a minimum of 30 hours of remaining courses normally must be completed
at MU.

F. Psychology Course Offerings

001\. General Psychology 3 sem. hrs.

Introduction to scientific psychology: biological bases of behavior;
perception; principles of learning; intelligence and personality testing;
current theories of personality; conflict, adjustment and mental health;
interpersonal relations; social processes; applications of psychological
principles to human affairs. Three hours of classroom instruction and one
optional discussion hour for review of exams and special assistance with
selected areas of course content. Offered every semester.

060\. Psychological Measurements and Statistics 3 hrs. lec., 2 hrs. lab 4 sem.
hrs.

Logic and rationale of psychological measurement. Scales of measurement and
statistical techniques. Descriptive statistics, the normal distribution and
sampling theory, introduction to statistical inference. T-test, simple
analysis of variance, chi square, measures of correlation. Offered every
semester. Prereq: PSYC 001, and three years of high school mathematics or MATH
020 or equivalent. 078. Introduction to Life-Span Developmental Psychology 3
sem. hrs.

Principles, theories, and research in development. The entire life- span from
conception to death will be studied with emphasis on theoretical approaches
and empirically obtained data. The effects of genetic, social, and
environmental factors on typical development patterns. Offered every semester.
Prereq: PSYC 001 or equivalent.

090\. Research Methods and Designs in Psychology 3 hrs. lec., 2 hrs. lab., 4
sem. hrs.

Scientific methods and their application in psychology with emphasis on the
experimental method. May include experimental, quasi experimental,
correlational and survey designs as well as selection and implementation of
descriptive and statistical analyses. Individual laboratory projects and
preparation of scientific reports. Offered every semester. Prereq: PSYC 001 or
equivalent; and PSYC 060 (mandatory).

101\. Developmental Psychology 1: Conception Through Adolescence 3 sem. hrs.

Examines the developing human being from conception through adolescence. The
concepts, methods, and theories relevant to the study of the developing child
and adolescent will be considered. Investigates the major physical, cognitive,
social and emotional changes during this phase of the life course, as well as
the genetic and contextual influences on development. Offered annually.
Prereq: PSYC 001 or equivalent.

103\. Developmental Psychology 3: Adulthood and Aging 3 sem. hrs.

Survey of theory and research in adulthood. Emphasis on adulthood, middle age,
and old age. Typical developmental patterns will be analyzed, as will genetic,
social, and environmental determinants. Offered annually. Prereq: PSYC 001 or
equivalent.

104\. Industrial Psychology 3 sem. hrs.

Psychology applied to basic problems of industry: personnel selection,
motivation, training, job satisfaction, job safety, leadership, performance
appraisal, job analysis, and pertinent legal issues. Offered annually. Prereq:
PSYC 001 or equivalent; and PSYC 060 or equivalent.

107\. The Psychology of the Exceptional Child 3 sem. hrs.

Description and psychological implications of various forms of physical and
mental deviations. Educational, vocational, therapeutic and social facilities
for exceptional children. May be taken for credit in special education by
minors in special education-speech therapy. Offered annually. Prereq: PSYC 101
or equivalent; or consent of instructor.

108\. Childhood Psychopathology 3 sem. hrs.

The major types of psychological disturbances in children viewed as deviations
from normal development. Causative factors in the genesis of behavior
problems, with emphasis on social learning. Behavior modification techniques
used with children. Offered annually. Prereq: PSYC 101 or cons. of instr.

111\. Introductory Social Psychology 3 sem. hrs.

The scientific study of how the person's thoughts, feelings, and behavior are
influenced by others. Areas of study include the self, social cognition,
attitudes, conformity, friendship, romance, prejudice, helping, aggression,
and group behavior. Situational, cultural, biological, and evolutionary
factors will be examined. Offered every semester. Prereq: PSYC 001 or
equivalent.

112\. The Psychology of Prejudice 3 sem. hrs.

An overview of theory and research on the psychological underpinnings of
intergroup intolerance, with emphasis given to racism, sexism, and
heterosexism. Prereq: PSYC 001.

114\. Human Factors Engineering 3 sem. hrs.

Person-machine interactions, including sensory and motor phenomena and human
limitations, controls and displays for computer-based and conventional
machines, human information processing and artificial intelligence, workspace
and environmental factors that influence optimal performance, relevant legal
issues and human functioning in outer space. Offered annually. PSYC 001 or
equivalent; or Sr. stndg. in Engineering.

121\. Learning and Behavior 3 sem. hrs.

A comprehensive survey of methods and findings of classical and operant
conditioning. Some introduction to theories of learning. Offered annually.
Prereq: PSYC 001 or equivalent.

122\. Cognition 3 sem. hrs.

A systematic survey of classical and contemporary research topics in human
learning; information processing, concept formation, problem- solving, verbal
and motor learning. Offered annually. Prereq: PSYC 001 or equivalent.

127\. Principles of Psychological Testing 3 sem. hrs.

The nature of psychological measurement. Principles of evaluation,
construction and analysis of tests. Uses and classification of tests.
Standards of ethical conduct in using tests. Individual and group tests of
aptitude, achievement, interests, attitudes, values and personality
adjustment. Offered annually. Prereq: PSYC 001 or equivalent; and PSYC 060.

128\. History and Systems of Psychology 3 sem. hrs.

The development of psychological thinking from the 17th century to the
present. The contributions of Descartes and Newton to Locke and the other
British empiricists and, through them, to German mechanism and physiological
psychology. The influence of Darwin, Freud, behaviorism and Gestalt
psychology. The phenomenological and humanistic movement after World War II.
Offered annually. Prereq: PSYC 090 or Sr. stndg.

129\. Sensory Processes and Perception 3 sem. hrs.

The physiological processes underlying the various sensory systems with
special emphasis on visual and auditory sensory and perceptual phenomena.
Offered annually. Prereq: PSYC 001 or equivalent.

130\. Psychology of Motivation 3 sem. hrs.

Theoretical and empirical aspects of the concepts of motivation as they relate
to various behaviors. The nature of arousal and primary drives (hunger, sex,
etc.) will be explored with emphasis given to learned motives. Offered
annually. Prereq: PSYC 001 or equivalent.

131\. The Psychology of Individual Differences 3 sem. hrs.

Problems and methods in the study of human differences. Physical, mental,
racial, social and cultural variability. Offered annually. Prereq: PSYC 001 or
equivalent; and PSYC 060.

132\. Theories of Personality 3 sem. hrs.

The formulation of personality theory, its purpose and problems.
Psychoanalytic, behavioral, humanistic, and other theories of personality and
their various applications to human behavior. Review of relevant research
findings. Offered every semester. Prereq: PSYC 001 or equivalent. (Replaces
PSYC 133 and 134 formerly offered.)

135\. Biopsychology 3 sem. hrs.

Biological foundations of behavior with emphasis on the nervous system.
Physiological mechanisms in sensation, perception, motivation, emotion and
learning. Functional neuroanatomy. Offered without a laboratory component.
Offered annually. Prereq: PSYC 090 or consent of instr.

136\. Animal Behavior 3 sem. hrs.

Animal behavior, both in natural and experimental situations, emphasizing
early experience, motivation, physiological mechanisms, adaptiveness and the
evolution of behavior. Offered occasionally. Prereq: PSYC 001 or equivalent.

137\. Abnormal Psychology 3 sem. hrs.

The nature of normality-abnormality. Defense mechanisms and neurotic
symptomatology. Functional psychoses and the personality pattern disturbances.
Character disorders including sociopathy and passive-aggression, the
addictions and sex deviations. Organic and psychosomatic disorders. Offered
every semester. Prereq: PSYC 001 or equivalent.

139\. Introduction to Clinical Psychology 3 sem. hrs.

Clinical psychology as a science and profession is discussed. Topics include
the history, ethics, theories, roles, and methods of clinical psychology. Also
addressed are current issues concerning the practice of clinical psychology.
Offered occasionally. Prereq: PSYC 132 and 137, or equivalents.

145\. Psychology of Language 3 sem. hrs.

Survey of methods and results of research on language development and
function; verbal behavior; language learning and bilingualism; speech
perception; language disorders. Offered occasionally. Prereq: PSYC 001.

157\. Psychology of Marriage and Family 3 sem. hrs.

Psychological theory and research pertinent to understanding marital and
family functioning. Topics vary, but include the development of intimate
relationships, the transition to parenthood, divorce, and family violence.
Offered occasionally. Prereq: PSYC 001 or equivalent.

160\. Psychology of Religion 3 sem. hrs.

Empirical research and findings pertinent to religion and religious
experiences; psychological theories regarding religion; religious practices
and experiences, religious orientation and awareness. Offered occasionally.
Prereq: PSYC 001.

165\. Human Sexuality 3 sem. hrs.

The scientific study of human sexuality from both a biological and behavioral
perspective. Topics include: male and female sexual anatomy and sexual
functioning, conception, pregnancy, childbirth, sexual variations, and
sexually transmitted diseases. Offered annually. Prereq: PSYC 001 or
equivalent or cons. of instr.

166\. Psychology of Gender Roles 3 sem. hrs.

Biological and cultural bases of gender roles; the psychology of women and men
and the consequent relationships between the sexes; the pressures of gender
stereotype and the bases of non-stereotypic childrearing; implications of
anthropological investigations for an understanding of sex role ascriptions;
relationship between gender role and responses to sexuality; remedial
education for personhood. Offered annually. Prereq: PSYC 001 or equivalent.

170\. The Psychology of Death and Dying 3 sem. hrs.

Review of the psychological literature on death. Social and individual
attitudes toward death. Reactions to the anticipation of the death of self and
of significant others. Ways of responding to loss and death including grief,
mourning, and bereavement. A survey of the various theories of death and
suicide. Offered annually. Prereq: PSYC 001 or equivalent.

175\. Health Psychology 3 sem. hrs.

This course examines the psychological aspects of health and illness. Topics
include health promotion, stress and coping, risk factors and prevention,
lifestyle and health, psychological adaptation to chronic illness and pain,
rehabilitation, and health service delivery. Offered occasionally. Prereq:
PSYC 001 or equivalent.

180\. The Psychology of Fantasy and Imagination 3 sem. hrs.

Review of theoretical, experimental, and clinical literature on fantasy and
imagination; development of imaginal processes; types of imagery; cerebral
asymmetries and the imaging process; physiology of imagination; imagery and
learning; imagery and verbal communication; role of fantasy and imagination in
creativity; imagination and make believe play; function of fantasy in sexual
behavior; diagnostic and therapeutic uses of fantasy and imagination; role of
imagination in hypnosis. Offered annually. Prereq: PSYC 001 or equivalent.

195\. Independent Study 1-3 sem. hrs.

Independent study and research under the direction of a faculty member.
Offered every semester. Prereq: Cons. of dept. chair.

196\. Advanced Undergraduate Seminar 3 sem. hrs.

Readings and discussion course designed to provide a high level overview of
psychology with an emphasis on selected current topics. Each student will be
expected to design and propose, but not necessarily conduct, a specific
scholarly project. Offered annually. Prereq: six psychology courses including
PSYC 090, a 3.000 GPA and cons. of instr.

198\. Selected Topics in Psychology 3 sem. hrs.

Contemporary theoretical and research trends in selected contemporary areas of
psychology. Topics to be announced. Offered occasionally. Prereq: Cons. of
instr.

199\. Senior Thesis 3 sem. hrs.

Conduct empirical research involving an original research question under the
direction of a psychology faculty adviser. Open to psychology majors. Offered
every semester. Prereq: PSYC 090 or sr. stndg.; and grade point average of at
least 3.500 in psychology, and 3.000 overall; and cons. of dept. ch. Maximum
of six credits available for 199 alone or 195 and 199 combined.

IV. DEPARTMENTAL AND COLLEGE OF ARTS AND SCIENCES REGULATIONS

A. Semester Course Loads

The minimum course load to be considered a full-time student is 12 semester
hours. Psychology majors are normally expected to take 15-18 hours per
semester. A load of 16 hours per semester is needed in order to graduate in
four years.

Faculty advisors may approve a course load of up to 20 semester hours, but
this is not generally recommended. Dean approval is required for a load
exceeding 20 hours. In addition, the College of Arts and Sciences imposes
additional tuition for a load greater than 18 hours.

B. Transfer of Credits

Students transferring to Marquette University from other institutions are
frequently given credit for Core requirements and for typical "freshman"
courses. This determination is made by the College of Arts and Sciences at the
time of student acceptance.

Students should never assume that upper division courses will automatically
transfer for full or partial credit toward the requirements of the major in
Psychology. This will be determined on a case-by-case basis. The Chair of the
Department of Psychology evaluates the scope and content of the course(s) to
be transferred based on a course catalog description or course syllabus
provided by the student to the Department, and makes recommendations to the
College of Arts and Sciences for final determination.

Students planning to take courses for transfer, including summer courses and
study abroad, must seek approval before registering for the course(s) from the
Department Chair. Special forms for this purpose can be obtained from the
department office.

C. Grades of "C/D" and "D"

Psychology courses (including required courses 001, 060, and 090) completed
with a grade of "C/D" or "D" do satisfy the course requirements and the
content area requirements, but do not count toward the 35 credits requirement
for the major. Courses with a "C/D" or "D" grade may be used toward the 128
credit hour requirement for the B.A. degree. Credit is never given for the
same course twice, so repeating courses is not recommended. Instead, a
different course may be taken to satisfy a particular area requirement, or a
different area may be used. Courses with a grade of "F" do not count toward
the required content area in a major or towards Arts and Sciences
requirements.

D. Procedures for Changing Final Grades

A student may appeal a final grade in any psychology course if the student
believes that his/her performance was evaluated differently from the
performance of other students in the course during the semester in question. A
copy of the appeals procedures can be obtained from the Department Office, or
review the Marquette University Undergraduate Bulletin.

V. PSYCHOLOGY MAJOR ADVISING PROGRAM

The Department of Psychology provides individual faculty advising for all of
its majors. A student is assigned to a member of the faculty who will serve as
their advisor throughout the remainder of his/her academic career at
Marquette. Although initial assignment to an advisor is based on faculty
availability, any student may request a particular faculty member as his/her
advisor.

Faculty advising periods occur twice a year, usually in November and March.
Students should check the advising assignment lists posted in the Department.
Once they have determined their advisor's name, students sign up for an
appointment on a sheet posted outside that person's office. The purpose of the
advising periods is to provide students with a time to consult with their
advisors, who work with the students in planning their curriculum to fulfill
and Arts and Sciences requirements as well as those for the Psychology major.
Proper scheduling will ensure that the student will graduate in four years and
have the necessary courses for admission to professionals schools. The faculty
advising period precedes the early TVR period, when each student may register
for the following semester. The Department also encourages all majors to take
advantage of the early TVR registration period, and register for their courses
during this time.

While most advising takes place during the two faculty advising periods and
involves course selection for the following semester, we encourage you to seek
the advice and counsel of your advisor on any problems that concern you at any
time. Let your advisor get to know you as an individual. You will benefit from
this association especially toward planning career or graduate education
choices, and when you are seeking letters of evaluation for jobs or
professional schools.

VI. RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES

Research experience is a valuable part of undergraduate training in
psychology. It is also now a virtual requirement for admission to graduate
study in psychology and many other disciplines. In either case, independent
study and research participation assists the student in developing a mentoring
relationship with a faculty member whose scholarship area is attractive to the
student. Students join faculty projects and learn the methods of conducting a
systematic research program in a particular area of study. Through close
interaction with the student, the faculty member gets to know the student
well, which is crucial to writing an effective letter of reference for jobs or
graduate school.

Psychology majors and minors are able to gain this valuable research
experience through several course offerings in the Department and through
externally funded research grants. The former are available as part of the
regular curriculum, while availability of the latter is dependent on current
funding.

A. Independent Study (PSYC 195)

The Independent Study course allows the student to gain variable research
credit (1-3 credit hrs.) through participation in faculty-sponsored and
directed research projects. These projects can be part of ongoing research
programs or be initiated by the student. Students can identify areas and
faculty research interests from materials available from the psychology
department office. Once these have been determined, the student would
ordinarily contact the faculty member(s) to discuss available or proposed
research and to determine if the faculty member is able and/or willing to
serve as a project sponsor/director during a given semester. If agreement is
reached, Department and College application materials available from the
Department office are completed and forwarded to the Registrar's office for
formal course enrollment. While there is no formal deadline, it is expected
that sufficient time will be allowed to complete preparations prior to the
start of the semester in question. Consent of the Department Chair is a
prerequisite.

B. Senior Thesis (PSYC 199)

The Senior Thesis option provides an opportunity to conduct empirical research
involving an original research question under the direction of a faculty
advisor. While similar in many respects to the Independent Study course, it is
expected that the student will play a more prominent role in all facets of the
research, from initial identification of the research problem through
preparation of final report-- thus demanding a greater level of student
responsibility. Identification of faculty and sponsorship are often the same,
although information from course-related contacts is more typical. Opportunity
for presentation at a scholarly forum or meeting, or submission of a paper for
possible publication, might also be available. The senior thesis option is
open to psychology majors only, and has the following prerequisites: PSYC 090
or senior standing; GPA of at least 3.5 in psychology and 3.0 overall; consent
of Department Chair.

C. Designated Upper Division Courses

Some advanced Departmental courses include an applied research component as a
part of the course requirements. Students can gain research experience by
enrolling in such courses as PSYC 196. Students in the Honor's Program can
contract to conduct or assist in faculty-approved independent research as an
extension of the work normally required in a number of upper-division courses,
in order to obtain recognition for achievement under the college's Honors
Program. Interested students should contact the course instructor to indicate
a desire to enter into an honors credit contract, and to discuss
proposed/possible activities. Participants need to maintain a minimum GPA of
3.2. Complete information can be obtained from the Honors Program Office.

D. Research Experience Through Volunteer Participation

Students can also volunteer their time and talents to assist in one or more of
the ongoing faculty or graduate student research programs. While volunteering
does not provide academic credit, it provides a rich source of experience and
the opportunity for meaningful collegial involvement in the university
research community-- interacting and learning with both faculty and fellow
students.

E. PSI CHI competitions

PSI CHI, the National Honor Society in Psychology, also promotes and sponsors
research projects that are conducted by its members. Information about PSI CHI
can be found in the following section.

F. Externally Funded Programs

Some research opportunities available which also provide funding for the
student. These are typically competitive. The Ronald E. McNair Scholars
Program prepares eligible students for graduate school by providing
opportunities to attend and participate in a broad spectrum of scholarly
activities and events throughout the year. During the summer, McNair students
can apply to participate in SOAR (Summer Opportunities for Academic Research),
a paid research internship which provides an in-depth research experience,
working one-on-one with a faculty mentor. These summer projects can often be
continued with the faculty mentor for academic credit during the year through
Independent Study sections (PSYC 195). Students present their research at the
end of the summer program, and many have been later selected to present at the
National Conference on Undergraduate Research, held annually at major
universities throughout the U.S. Eligibility for the McNair program is limited
to low-income students whose parents do not have an undergraduate degree, or
are African-American, Hispanic, or Native American. The number of internships
varies each year according to available funding. Contact the Marquette
University Educational Opportunity Program Office for more information or
about mentors.

The Howard Hughes Medical Institute Undergraduate Research Apprenticeship
Program provides a 10-week summer stipend and a senior research year in the
biological and biomedical sciences at Marquette University (departments of
Basic Health Sciences, Biology, Biomedical Engineering, Chemistry,
Mathematics, and Psychology) and several participating laboratories at the
Medical College of Wisconsin in Wauwatosa. Eligibility is limited to juniors
majoring in participating departments who have a cumulative GPA of 3.0 or
better. Selection is based on interviews and a suitable match with a faculty
mentor. Apprentices are encouraged to continue research during their senior
year, registering for Independent Study (e.g., PSYC 195). Applicants can
identify participating faculty and areas of interest from a booklet available
from the program office in the Department of Biology. The program's
availability and number of apprentices varies with the availability of
funding. Check with the Biology Department to verify the status for the
present year.

VII. PSI CHI: THE NATIONAL HONOR SOCIETY IN PSYCHOLOGY

A. What is PSI CHI?

PSI CHI is the National Honor Society in Psychology. It is affiliated with the
American Psychological Association and the Association of College Honor
Societies. On this level, PSI CHI not only recognizes your scholastic
achievement and interest in psychology, but lends academic prestige to its
members by the mere fact of membership. On a local chapter level, PSI CHI
offers you an enjoyable supplement to regular scholastic activities. It is
also a way to use you talents and meet others who share your enthusiasm for
psychology. PSI CHI's local chapters attempt to stimulate understanding of
professional positions through a speaker series and the sponsoring of related
events. It's purpose is to encourage and enhance the individual member's
scholasticism, especially in psychology, and to generally advance the field of
psychology.

B. Why Join?

  * Membership indicates to all graduate schools that you have attended an accredited school whose program in psychology met PSI CHI approved standards. Permanent records of membership are maintained at PSI CHI Headquarters.
  * PSI CHI serves as a means of recognizing students' achievements in research, giving awards for outstanding contributions to research.
  * PSI CHI allows free admittance for its members to the American Psychological Association and the PSI CHI National Convention.
  * Because Psychology is an ever-expanding field, PSI CHI represents a forum for new ideas and a chance to learn about the many areas of psychology.
  * PSI CHI serves as a means of meeting potential colleagues and to develop contacts that will benefit its members throughout their professional lives.

C. Requirements

  * Applicants must have completed a full nine (9) credit hours in psychology.
  * Applicants must be registered with psychology as either a major or a minor.
  * Undergraduate applicants are required to have attained at least a 3.0 overall GPA and a 3.0 average in psychology. Graduate applicants must have attained an overall average grade of "B" or better .
  * All applicants must demonstrate high standards of personal behavior.
  * Each applicant must have a sincere interest in learning and sharing ideas about psychology and display a willingness to be involved in the activities of PSI CHI.

D. How to Join or Get Information

Applications may be picked up from and returned to the Psychology Department
Office in Schroeder Complex, Room 454. Applications are typically due in late
September and early February. When your eligibility is verified, you will
receive a registration card to complete, and be inducted at the next ceremony,
where you will receive a certificate of membership. There is a one-time
membership fee ($35.00) that guarantees a lifetime membership. Call the
Psychology office (288-7218) for information.

E. Officers

Each spring, new PSI CHI officers are elected to serve during the next
academic year. Elected officers (Co-Presidents, Vice-president, Treasurer, and
Secretary) lead, plan, organize, and originate all society activities. In
addition, several committees are typically formed each semester (Bake Sale,
Induction ceremony, etc.). Committee members and chairs are always needed. If
you are interested in serving in any of these capacities, please attend a PSI
CHI meeting or contact one of the current officers for information.

VIII. DEPARTMENTAL COLLOQUIA

The Psychology Department conducts a colloquium series for graduate and
undergraduate students and faculty. Colloquia highlight new research findings,
faculty research activities, clinical approaches, and specialty topics in
psychology and related fields. Speakers include Departmental faculty as well
as other local and national experts. Psychology graduate student attendance is
required, but all undergraduate students are also welcome and encouraged to
attend. See the Psychology Department office or the PSI CHI bulletin board for
a schedule of upcoming speakers.

IX. CAREER PLANNING

In addition to career discussions with an academic advisor, students are
encouraged to seek assistance from the Career Services Center (CSC; 05
Marquette Hall, 288-7423). The CSC offers career counseling and testing, job
fair and campus interview information, a resume book in which students can
file a resume for prospective on- and off-campus employers to see, and JOBTRAK
listings of jobs available in local and regional companies for Marquette
students and alumni.

X. SUPERVISED EXPERIENCES IN APPLIED SETTINGS

The Department does not currently offer a formal internship in an applied
setting for undergraduates in psychology. However, it is possible to arrange,
under the direction of a Department faculty member, an independent study
experiences involving applied experience.

To do so, a student would enroll in PSYC 195, Independent Study, for one to
three credit hours. A field experience typically requires a supervisor in the
applied setting in addition to the Psychology faculty member directing the
PSYC 195.

An alternative way of gaining applied experience is through Psychology courses
in which the instructor includes a Service Learning opportunity.

XI. AWARDS IN PSYCHOLOGY

A. Outstanding Student Award in Psychology

The Outstanding Student Award in Psychology is intended to acknowledge
exceptional academic performance and service or leadership contributions in
Psychology. The recipient of the award is selected by the Psychology
Department faculty. Basic requirements for nomination are a GPA of at least
3.0, at least 60 credit hours in residence during the junior and senior years,
no grades of WA or F on the transcript, and integrity. The award is presented
at the Arts and Sciences Honors Convocation each year in April. The award
consists of a $50 award and a plaque for the student, as well as a listing on
the Departmental plaque displayed in the case at Schroeder Complex 454.

B. Outstanding Senior Award in Arts & Sciences

The Outstanding Senior Award is an Arts & Sciences award for which the single
recipient is selected from amongst all nominees from the College. The
recipient must be a graduating senior whose academic excellence is
complemented by demonstrated leadership and service contributions. The
Psychology Department typically nominates one student each year. Basic
requirements for nomination are a GPA of at least 3.0, at least 60 credit
hours in residence during the junior and senior years, no grades of WA or F on
the transcript, high level of service both on and off campus, and integrity.
The award is presented at the Honors Convocation in Spring.





