# Courses in Afroamerican and African Studies (Division 311)

**_Introductory Courses

_ 100\. Introduction to Afro-American Studies. **_(4). (SS).  
_ This course introduces and provides a general overview of the area of
Afroamerican Studies. It employs a multi-disciplinary perspective which
combines elements from conventional historical, political, sociocultural and
behavioral orientations in the analysis of Afroamerican culture and
institutions. The course format is a lecture-discussion with three weekly
lectures. Students meet with T.A.s once weekly to discuss course readings and
lectures. The course will be supplemented by guest lecturers, selected CAAS
colloquia, films, and special projects. WL:4

**_Literature and the Arts

_ 108/Hist. of Art 108. Introduction to African Art. **_(3). (HU).  
_ See History of Art 108. (Quarcoopome)

**274/English 274. Introduction to Afro-American Literature.** _(3). (HU).  
_ See English 274. (Gunning)

**_Individual Behavior, Cultural Systems, and Social Organization

_ 241/WS 231. Women of Color and Feminism. **_(3). (Excl).  
_ See Women's Studies 231.

# Courses in American Culture (Division 315)

Unless otherwise stated, the permission required for the repetition for credit
of specifically designated courses is that of the student's concentration or
BGS advisor.

**102\. First Year Seminar in American Studies.** _Limited to Freshpersons and
Sophomores. (3). (SS).  
Section 001 - What Is An American? The Making of National Identities, Past and
Present._ The question _What is an American?_ has been a central preoccupation
and a source of conflict among Americans throughout our history. This seminar
will explore how different groups have answered it both in the past and
present. Our working assumption will be that, given the complex, multicultural
fabric of the U.S. society, there is no single, _right_ answer to this
question. Rather, definitions of national identity are always changing,
reflecting conflicting ideas about the qualities needed to transform
individuals into Americans or make American society unified and good. We will
pay particular attention to the ways competing visions of  "the American" have
worked to include, exclude, or privilege different social (racial, ethnic,
religious, regional, sexual, and other) groups. The seminar will draw on a
broad range of interdisciplinary materials, including fiction, drama, movies,
advertising, and popular music. We will focus especially on the ways that
national identity and social diversity have been handled in four arenas of
American life: the law, religion, sexual mores, and popular culture. Thus we
will explore such issues as racial assumptions in immigration or citizenship
policy; the image of _normal_ American sexuality in popular culture; changing
notions of whether the U.S. is a Christian nation. The seminar will move back
and forth between present-day politics and culture and historical periods such
as Reconstruction or the 1920s. It is not meant as a comprehensive history
course, but as an exploratory dialogue between our contemporary  "culture
wars" over American values and diversity and parallel conflicts in the past.
WL:2 (Scobey)

_Section 002 - Race, Class and Gender in American History._ In this seminar
students will be introduced to the techniques of historical analysis as we try
to unravel how gender, race and class have functioned in American history. We
will also explore how historians have identified, analyzed, and written about
these subjects and how those approaches have changed over time. Students will
be introduced to the concept of cultural construction - the idea that
categories of race, gender and even class status are not fixed, universal,
biological entities, but are shaped and determined by cultural values, time,
and place. Students will also be urged to think about how these categories
intersect, for example, the ways in which race structures class or class
influences concepts of masculinity and femininity. Throughout the term
students will be required to maintain a journal and record questions, thoughts
and comments about their reading. Two thought papers will also be assigned,
intended to stimulate students to grapple with the issues discussed in class.
Cost:3 WL:2 (Morantz-Sanchez)

**201\. American Values.** _(4). (HU).  
_ This course offers an interdisciplinary introduction to the formation of
twentieth-century American culture. Focusing on the period from the end of the
Civil War to the present, it examines the evolution of American values,
attitudes, and community life, focusing on such changes as the growth of mass
production, the emergence of modern gender ideals and sexualities, the growth
of and challenges to institutionalized racism, and the rise of the consumer
culture. The course does not focus on some assumed 'core' of American ideals
or experiences; rather it traces the open-ended process by which diverse
groups of Americans have shaped, resisted, and tried to change the meaning of
"America." It links that cultural dialogue to the history of social diversity,
material inequality, and political struggle in the late 19th- and 20th-century
U.S. We will explore these issues using a multidisciplinary range of methods
and source materials, including novels, photographs, popular music,
journalism, architecture, memoirs, and movies.

**240/WS 240. Introduction to Women's Studies.** _Open to all undergraduates.
(4). (HU). (This course fulfills the Race or Ethnicity Requirement).  
_ See Women's Studies 240.

**272\. Environment and Society.** _(3). (Excl).  
Section 001 - Ecological Constraints on Development._ This course will explore
the ecological forces involved in the development process. Factors such as the
maintenance of the natural resource base and internalization of externalities
such as pollution, will be discussed in the context of contemporary political
realities. An appropriate background in natural science will be presented in a
series of lectures (including climate and ecosystem formation, structure and
function of soils, agroecosystem classification and function, sustained yield
management of natural populations, etc.). The history and current function of
economic, social and political structures (including dependency theory,
international diplomacy, imperialism and neocolonialism, the Bretton Woods
system, structural adjustment, etc.) will be presented through a series of
course pack readings. Student participation will be ensured through class
discussion which will occupy at least 50% of the classroom time. Evaluation of
students will be through (1) two standard examinations, (2) weekly essays, (3)
a term project, and (4) class participation. WL:2 (Vandermeer)

**_Courses in Spanish

_****307/Spanish 307. Spanish for U.S. Latinos.** _Basic knowledge of Spanish
language or permission of instructor. (3). (Excl). This course does not
fulfill the language requirement.  
_ This course addresses the particular linguistic needs and interests of
students of Hispanic descent and heritage born and/or educated in the United
States interested in acquiring a formal and structural knowledge of Spanish,
in further expanding vocabulary at the abstract and professional levels, and
in developing their skills in formal and professional writing. Sociolinguistic
aspects of Spanish in the United States - code-switching, linguistic
attitudes, bilingualism - also will be explored in relation to the politics of
cultural identity. Short weekly assignments and exercises emphasizing the
differences between oral and written modes of communication and between formal
and informal Spanish will be required, along with a midterm and a final exam.
Readings will include cultural essays, literature, and scholarly articles.
(Aparicio)

# Anthropology

## Courses in Biological Anthropology (Division 318)

**161\. Introduction to Biological Anthropology.** _(4). (NS). (BS).  
_ The course explores the biological basis for variation in human morphology,
physiology, and behavior across different modern populations around the world,
and through human evolutionary history. Major topics discussed are
evolutionary theory, genetics, human adaptation, primate and human behavior,
and the human fossil record. No special knowledge is required or assumed.
Cost:2 WL:2 (Strassmann)

**168\. First Year Seminar in Primate Field Studies.** _(3). (NS). (BS).  
_ A seminar designed for incoming freshmen. Students will be introduced to
science as a mode of inquiry by applying Darwin's theory of natural selection
to the behavior of nonhuman primates. Emphasis will be given to long-term
field studies of primates in the wild. One three-hour discussion/lecture.
Class participation, weekly writing assignments, and a term paper required.
(Mitani)

## Courses in Cultural Anthropology (Division 319)

**_Introductory Courses

_ 101\. Introduction to Anthropology. **_Primarily for freshmen and
sophomores. No credit granted to those who have completed or are enrolled in
222 or 426. (4). (SS). (This course fulfills the Race or Ethnicity
Requirement).  
Section 001. _ This course will introduce students to the four major subfields
of anthropology: cultural anthropology, archaeology, linguistic anthropology,
and biological anthropology. In the process, we will focus on how each of
these subfields helps to explain the cultural, social, and physical aspects of
human diversity. An explicit part of this process is exploring how
sociocultural differences like gender, and racial and ethnic identity are
constructed, and the roles these differences may play in our lives. The first
part of the course is devoted to outlining some basic questions that will be
addressed throughout the term: What is "culture"? Is there a distinctively
human nature? What is the basis of human social groupings, such as culture,
race, ethnicity, and class? What kinds of evidence are useful in addressing
issues involving human diversity? The subsequent parts of the course will
approach specific topics within the discipline both as subjects in their own
right and as means to getting answers to these questions. (Brawn)

_Section 150._ This introductory course exposes and explores the structures of
inquiry characteristic of anthropology and surveys the field's four
subdisciplines (biological, archaeological, cultural, and linguistic
anthropology), providing a first glimpse of the field's overall context,
history, present status, and importance. The principal aim of the course is to
help students develop a coherent view of the essential concepts, structures,
and intellectual methods that typify the discipline. It stresses unifying
principles that link the subdisciplines and thereby create anthropology's
comprehensive, holistic world view. It teaches students various ways of
learning and thinking about the world's many designs for living in time and
space. It prepares them to integrate and interpret information, to evaluate
conflicting claims about human nature and diversity, and to think critically.
Topics covered include: the nature of culture, human genetics, evolution, and
the fossil record, the concept of race, primate (monkey and ape) behavior,
language and culture, systems of marriage, kinship and family organization,
sex and gender roles, economics, politics, and religion in global perspective,
the cultural dimension of economic development and contemporary social change,
and the emergence of a world system. Required readings may include an
introductory text and various paperbacks. Lectures and discussion. Two
objective exams (multiple choice and true or false questions) cover the two
halves of the course. The second exam is given on the last day of class. There
is no final exam and no term paper. Section leaders require quizzes and,
perhaps a short paper. Cost:2 WL:1,3,4 (Peters-Golden)

_Section 200 - Honors Introduction to Anthropology._ This seminar introduces
anthropology's modes of inquiry and its four subfields (biological,
archaeological, cultural and linguistic anthropology), through the examination
of subjects which have been central to the discipline's development, such as
race, gender, sexuality, and conflict. The course seeks to develop the
capacity for informed and critical thinking about evolution and adaptation,
human nature and cultural diversity, and to suggest how anthropology can help
us understand contemporary issues. It presents students with unifying
principles of analysis which link the subfields, as well as with debates
through which Anthropology continues to change. The course allows students to
explore certain subjects in greater depth. We will use a variety of materials
and activities, and students are expected to participate actively in class.
There will be an exam and two papers, supplemented by short writing exercises.
(Skurski)

**222\. The Comparative Study of Cultures.** _No credit granted to those who
have completed or are enrolled in 101 or 426. Students with credit for Anthro.
101 should elect Anthro. 327. (4). (SS).  
_ The purpose of this course is to acquaint students with the great variety
existing in human culture and society so that they can place their own
particular way of life in proper perspective. Its subject matter is world
ethnology with special emphasis on social organization and economy. Lectures
and readings are organized according to complexity of society; the course
begins with hunters and gatherers, progresses through various tribal and
peasant societies, and concludes with contemporary industrial nations. The
approach is comparative. Lectures are supplemented by weekly discussion
sections augmented by a variety of readings, primarily ethnographic in nature,
and by frequent showings of ethnographic films. Course requirements include a
midterm examination, a final examination, and a paper applying principles
learned in the course to some aspect of the student's own life. Both
examinations consist primarily of essay questions. This course is intended for
non-concentrators. Cost:3 WL:4 (Frye)

**282\. Introduction to Prehistoric Archaeology.** _(4). (SS).  
_ This course will combine a presentation of the techniques, methods, and
theories of anthropological archaeology with a general survey of world
prehistory. Discussion of method and theory will cover field and laboratory
techniques for acquiring information about past cultures, methods for using
that information to test ideas about past cultural organization and evolution,
and current theoretical developments in anthropological archaeology. The
survey of world prehistory will focus on four major topics: (1) the emergence
in Africa of the first proto-humans, between two and six million years ago;
(2) the appearance of the first anatomically and behaviorally "modern" humans;
(3) the origins of domesticated plants and animals and the development of the
first village farming communities; and (4) the rise of more complex stratified
"state-level" societies. The course will be oriented as much toward students
with a general curiosity and interest in the human past as toward students who
will become eventual concentrators. There will be three one-hour lectures plus
one discussion section per week. Requirements: three in-class hourly exams and
a final examination, plus 3-4 take-home exercises that give students firsthand
experience with the analysis and interpretation of archaeological data.
Required readings: ARCHAEOLOGY, by David Hurst Thomas, and _Images of the
Past,_ by G. Feinman and D. Price. Cost:3 WL:2 (Sinopoli)

# Courses in Armenian Studies (Division 322)

**171/Slavic Ling. 171. First-Year Armenian.** _(4). (LR).  
_ See Armenian 171 under Slavic Linguistics (Division 474). (Bardakjian)

# Asian Languages and Cultures

## Courses in Buddhist Studies (Division 332)

**230/Asian Studies 230/Phil. 230/Rel. 230. Introduction to Buddhism.** _(4).
(HU).  
_ Lecture and discussion of readings introducing the religious traditions that
derive from the teachings of Siddhartha Gautama, the Buddha. The core of the
course are two extensive units: "The Story of Buddhism as Legend and History,"
and "Questions and Meanings: Symbol, Doctrine, Ritual and Experience." The
first of these units traces the history of Buddhist beliefs and practices from
their origins in India to later developments in Tibet and East Asia. The
second unit addresses issues of doctrine and philosophy (e.g., enlightenment
and Nirvana), practice (e.g., meditation, ritual), and society (e.g., women
and Buddhism, Buddhism and war). Additionally, the course explores the origins
of Western notions about "Buddhism," and the connection between modern
academic studies of Buddhism and traditional Buddhist scholarship. No previous
background is required. Grade will be based on two take-home examinations and
a final. Cost:3 WL:1 (Gomez)

# Courses in Chinese (Division 339)

**_Language Courses

_ 101\. Beginning Chinese. **_(5). (LR). Laboratory fee ($10) required.  
_ Chinese 101 is an introductory course in speaking, understanding, reading
and writing Chinese. The student is expected to achieve control of the sound
system, basic sentence patterns and basic vocabulary of Standard Mandarin
Chinese. Starting the 5th week, we will learn to read and write the
characters. In Chinese 101, the major emphasis is on _speaking_ and _aural
comprehension_. We recommend that students listen to the tapes one hour per
day. We meet one hour each day. Tuesdays and Thursdays are lectures; Mondays,
Wednesdays, and Fridays are recitations. Students are required to register for
both a lecture section and a recitation section. Attendance is taken everyday
and _no audits are allowed_. Textbooks: (a) John DeFrancis, _Beginning
Chinese_ (Yale Univ. Press) (b) John DeFrancis, _Beginning Chinese Reader_ ,
Part I and II (Yale Univ. Press). Materials covered (Fall Term): _Beginning
Chinese_ , Lessons 1-13. _Beginning Chinese Reader_ , Lessons 1-12. Note:
students who can speak Chinese already **are not allowed** to take Chinese
101, and should take Chinese 301 instead. Cost:2 WL:1 (Tao)

**301\. Reading and Writing Chinese.** _Permission of instructor. No credit
granted to those who have completed or are enrolled in Chinese 101, 102, or
361. (4). (LR).  
_ This course is designed for students with native or near-native speaking
ability in Chinese, but little or no reading and writing ability. Chinese 301
meets four hours per week; it focuses on reading and writing Chinese and will
cover the regular 101-102 reading materials. Students will be graded on the
basis of daily classroom performance, daily quizzes, periodic tests, and
homework assignments. The basic text is _Beginning Chinese Reader_ by John
DeFrancis. Cost:1 WL:1

**_Literature Courses/Culture Courses

_ 250\. Undergraduate Seminar in Chinese Culture. **_No knowledge of Chinese
language is required. (3). (HU). May be repeated with department permission.  
Section 001 - Gender, Sexuality, and Identity: Women in Chinese Literature._
The representation and construction of women in China's long history has
undergone many dynamic changes. Through examples of literature past to present
we will examine women's place in the male-dominated Confucian system, the
_femme fatale_ in the master historical narrative, conventions of female
impersonation, women as projections of male desire: erotic objects or the
cause of transgression against the moral order. We will consider how women
have sought to express themselves within the system's constraints, the
creation of women's communities, and even in one area using a  "women's
script" unknown to men. In the 20th century women are first "discovered" to
have been prime victims of oppression as writers advocate social reform, then
appropriated as "liberated" subjects by the Communist revolution. Meanwhile
women writers have been searching for their own voice; their struggle for
subjectivity and identity posing powerful challenges to the Maoist hegemonic
discourse. We will also explore how issues of gender and sexuality intersect
with cultural identity in works by Chinese-American woman writers. Readings
will include traditional and modern poetry and fiction, selections from the
great 18th century novel _Dream of the Red Chamber_ , stories by Ding Ling,
Xiao Hong, Maxine Hong Kingston ( _The Woman Warrior_ ), Amy Tan ( _The Joy
Luck Club_ ), and others. Towards the end of the course we will look at
representations of women in Chinese films: _Raise the Red Lantern_ , _Farewell
My Concubine_ , _Ju Dou_ , _The Girl from Hunan_. Requirements: 3 or 4 several
short papers and a final exam. No prerequisites. Cost:2 WL:1 (Y. Feuerwerker)

_Section 002 - Love and Desire in Traditional Chinese Drama._ This first-year
seminar course will introduce traditional Chinese stagecraft - through
videotapes and in-class demonstrations - and the development of Chinese drama
from its beginnings to its fate in modern China. Through the careful reading
and discussion of a few major plays in a variety of dramatic genres we will
investigate how traditional Chinese drama, as a largely public art, tried to
satisfy both the demands of love and those of society. Requirements will
include several brief papers, a final exam, and active class participation.
Texts will include _Master Tung's Western Chamber Romance,_ _The Story of the
Western Wing,_ _The Peony Pavilion,_ and _the Peach Blossom Fan._ _Romeo and
Juliet_ will be read for comparative purposes. Cost:3 WL:1 (Rolston)

# Courses in Japanese (Division 401)

**_Language Courses

_ 101\. Beginning Japanese. **_(5). (LR). Laboratory fee ($7) required.  
_ This course is designed to develop all the four language skills in Japanese;
listening, speaking, reading, and writing. "Knowing it" is never sufficient.
Students must be able to use the language they have learned. Students are
required to practice with audio tapes a minimum of two hours for each class
hour (10 hours per week). Recitation sessions are conducted entirely in
Japanese; no English is permitted. Recitation sessions emphasize speaking and
reading in Japanese contexts at normal speed with near native pronunciation,
accent, intonation, rhythm and appropriate body language. _Katakana,
Hiragana,_ and some _Kanji_ are introduced. Grammatical explanations and
discussions involving the use of English are specifically reserved for
lectures. The textbooks are _Japanese: The Spoken Language Part I_ and its
supplement, _Japanese Typescript_ by Eleanor Hartz Jorden and Mari Noda.
_Reading Japanese_ by Eleanor Hartz Jorden and Hamako Ito Chaplin is also used
for reading and writing. Cost:2 WL:1

**201\. Second-Year Japanese.** _Japanese 102 or equivalent. (5). (LR).
Laboratory fee ($9) required.  
_ Further training is given in all the language skills (listening, speaking,
reading, and writing) for students who have acquired a basic language
proficiency. The aim of the oral component is to provide the student with the
speaking and comprehension skills necessary to function effectively in more
advanced practical situations in a Japanese-speaking environment. In the
reading and writing component, the emphasis is on reading elementary texts,
developing an expository style, and writing short answers/essays in response
to questions about these texts. Discussions on the social and cultural use of
language are provided. Students are required to practice a minimum of two
hours for each class hour (12 hours per week). Recitation sessions are
conducted entirely in Japanese; no English is permitted. Recitation sessions
emphasize speaking/reading in Japanese contexts at normal speed with near-
native pronunciation, accent, intonation, rhythm, and appropriate body
language. Analyses, explanations, and discussions involving the use of English
are specifically reserved for lectures. Texts: Eleanor Harz Jorden and Mari
Noda, _Japanese: The Spoken Language, Part II_ ; Eleanor Harz Jorden and
Hamako Ito Chaplin, _Reading Japanese_. Cost:2 WL:1

**225\. Calligraphy.** _Japanese 101 or equivalent, or permission of
instructor. (1). (Excl). May be repeated for a total of three credits.  
_ In this course students will start to learn the basic skills of Japanese
Calligraphy. Students who have taken the course previously will be permitted
to enroll in the course and will learn intermediate or advanced calligraphy.
Tools will be available for renting; however, students are encouraged to
purchase their own calligraphy sets (approximately $20.00). Students are also
required to pay a paper fee of approximately $10.00. Contact the department at
764-8286 regarding the first meeting date. Cost:1 WL:1

# Courses in Korean (Division 409)

**101\. Beginning Korean.** _(5). (LR).  
_ Students who intend to continue Korean already begun at home or school must
take a placement test to determine the course level at which they will start
their college Korean instruction. Students who began Korean at another college
or university also take the placement test. The recitation section 006 is open
to students who have no Korean background whatsoever or are of non-Korean
origin. As the first half of the beginning-year course in spoken and written
Korean, it provides hard training for all the five language skills: listening,
speaking, reading, writing, and Chinese characters. Class meets 5 hours a week
- 2 hours of lecture, 2 hours of aural/oral practice, and 1 hour of Chinese
characters and free conversation. Students are also required to do additional
hours of work for listening practice on their own in the language lab, and
watching 4 video tapes incorporated. Daily attendance is emphasized, and
weight will be placed on class performance, seven homework assignments (or in-
class quizzes), Chinese character assignments, three midterms, and a final
written and oral exam. The textbooks for the course are (1) _Myongdo's Korean
I_ by A.V. Vandesande, and seven lessons (from Lesson 1 to Lesson 7) will be
covered, and (2) _Chinese Characters in Manuscript_ by Korean Program at the
UM. Those who successfully finish the course will gain sustained control of
basic conversation skill and write their name in Chinese characters. Cost:2
WL:1 (Cho)

**201\. Second Year Korean.** _Korean 102 or equivalent. (5). (LR).  
_ The recitation section 005 is open to students who do not have enough
knowledge of beginning Korean, or are of non-Korean origin. This is the first
half of the intermediate-level Korean, emphasizing the aural/oral skill, and
minimizing grammatical chores. Class meets 5 times a week - 2 hours of
lecture, 2 hours of aural/oral practice, and 1 hour of Chinese characters and
free conversation. Students are also required to do additional hours of work
for listening practice on their own in the language lab, and watching 4 video
tapes. Daily attendance is expected. Through lectures, students will learn
relatively complex structural patterns of Korean, and get acquainted with
various aspects of Korean culture and society. Based on the knowledge obtained
through lectures, recitation classes will help the students develop an ability
to carry on survival level of conversation. In evaluation, weight will be
placed on oral participation, seven homework assignments (or in-class
quizzes), Chinese character assignments, a short essay, three midterms, and a
final written and oral exam. The textbooks for the course are (1) _Myongdo's
Korean 2_ by A.V. Vandesande, and seven lessons (from Lesson 16 to Lesson 22)
will be covered, and (2) _Chinese Characters in Manuscript_ by Korean Program
at the UM. Those interested in taking this course are recommended to see the
instructor before registration. Cost:2 WL:1 (Cho)

# Courses in South and Southeast Asia (S&SEA) (Division 483)

**_S &SEA Language Courses

_101\. Beginning Thai. **_(5). (LR).  
_ Standard Thai, the language of Thailand, is typical of several Asian
languages in its grammar and tonal pronunciation. Focus of the course is the
use of language in everyday situations. Upon successful completion of the two-
term sequence, students will be able to conduct conversation dealing with
several survival concerns, e.g., introduction, ordering food, transportation,
banking, post-office trip, shopping, etc. From the first day of class,
students will learn Thai scripts and will be able to read course materials and
short passages in Thai at the end of the term. Writing assignments are also
assigned. Thai cultures will be offered both in the content of the language
lessons and supplementary presentations. This class is not for students who
can speak Thai already. Cost:1 WL:4 (Brown)

**103\. Beginning Indonesian.** _(5). (LR).  
_ Indonesian is the national language of Indonesia, a country noted for its
rich and deep cultural heritage as well as for its remarkable cultural
diversity. With its 180,000,000 speakers, Indonesian is the sixth most
prevalently spoken of world languages. The relatively simple syntactic and
grammatical structures which characterize Indonesian make it an accessible
language for native speakers of English. The elementary course comprises a
two-term sequence designed to provide the student with a basic working
knowledge of the Indonesian language. The course aims at the acquisition of
the four basic language skills - listening, speaking, reading, and writing -
in modern Indonesian. The class emphasizes aural-oral exercises and practice
and the learning of culture throughout the course. The text used is keyed to a
set of tapes for use in the language lab and concentrates on practical
knowledge of the language. Evaluation is based on classroom performance,
homework assignments, tests, and a final exam. Cost:2 WL:4 (Sudarsih)

**105\. Elementary Hindi-Urdu.** _No credit granted to those who have
completed or are enrolled in S &SEA 315 or 365. (4). (LR).  
_South and Southeast Asia 105 is the first term in the sequence of Hindi-Urdu
courses offered by the Department of Asian Languages and Cultures. The course
meets four hours per week in four sessions. If enrollments warrant, there will
be a separate course (SSEA 315) intended for students who have some knowledge
of the spoken language but do not know the writing system. In the first year
only the Devanagari writing system (for Hindi) is introduced. Nastaliq (for
Urdu) comes in the second year. The course concentrates on developing skills
in reading, writing, speaking, and aural comprehension. Evaluation is based on
attendance, written homework assignments, quizzes, dictations, and
examinations. There are no prerequisites (no previous knowledge of Hindi is
required). Cost:2 WL:1 (Siddiqi)

**107\. Beginning Tagalog.** _(4). (LR).  
_ Tagalog is the national language of the Philippines. Elementary Tagalog is a
two-term sequence designed to give the student who has little or no knowledge
of Tagalog the necessary basis for learning to speak it and to have an
acquaintance with the cultural context in which it functions. Tagalog is
particularly interesting in the way it has integrated the broad influences of
both Spanish and English into its own syntactic and semantic systems. The oral
approach is greatly emphasized in the classroom, using questions and answers
and short dialogues to develop active use of the language in the most natural
way possible. This is complemented by the use of taped lessons in the Language
Laboratory and short films in Tagalog. There are frequent short quizzes,
homework, and a final examination. At the end of the first year, the student
should be able to handle brief exchanges in common social situations and to
read and write simple Tagalog. For the student specializing in Philippine
studies, learning Tagalog is a must. For the student specializing in language
studies, a number of linguists of note have found Tagalog structure highly
instructive in understanding certain aspects of language. For the student with
Philippine affinities, learning Tagalog provides a bond of understanding and
for some, a link to one's roots. For the student who has neither a Philippine
connection nor a specialist interest in language, learning Tagalog can be
rewarding as it provides an experience of new modes of expression and new ways
of looking at the world around us and within ourselves. Cost:1 WL:1 (Weller)

**109\. Beginning Sanskrit.** _No credit granted to those who have completed
or are enrolled in S &SEA 369. (3). (LR).  
_This course will work toward developing a proficiency with the basic tools
necessary to read and write Sanskrit, the classical language of India. Lessons
will include study of the script (Devanagari), elementary grammar and
vocabulary. The grade will be based on completion of regular homework
assignmentst, weekly quizzes, a midterm and a final examination. (Deshpande)

**111\. Beginning Punjabi.** _No credit granted to those who have completed or
are enrolled in S &SEA 371. (4). (LR).  
_This course offers an introduction to spoken and written Punjabi, a major
language of northern India and of Pakistan, with some 80 million speakers. The
course will include reading and writing (Gurmukhi script) as well as the
spoken language. Students will be encouraged to begin basic conversation in
class. The written aspects of language will be introduced through graded
readings and written exercises. The emphasis will be on basic constructions,
composition, vocabulary development, and conversational skills. Particular
attention will be paid toward developing a basic practical proficiency in the
language. Students will be introduced to the rich cultural heritage of the
Punjab. A video film will be shown to examine the spoken language of the
Punjab. Throughout the course the students will be encouraged to communicate
in Punjabi language. There will be two tests: a midterm worth 20% and a final
worth 30%. In addition there will be homework assignments worth 30%. The
remaining 20% of marks will be allotted to oral communication, dictation and
instructor's own evaluation. Midterm test: October 21, 1995. There will be a
final exam in December. Texts: Ujjal Singh Bahri, _Introductory Course in
Spoken Punjabi,_ Bahri Publications, New Delhi, 1993. Harjit Singh Gill and
Henry A. Gleason, Jr., _A Reference Grammar of Punjabi,_ Patiala, 1969. Hardev
Bahri, _Teach Yourself Punjabi,_ Punjabi University, Patiala, 1973. A course
pack will be available from Dollar Bill Copying, 611 Church Street. (Singh)

**115\. Beginning Vietnamese.** _(5). (LR).  
_ This course is designed for the students with no knowledge of the Vietnamese
language as well as those with some knowledge but desire to develop the four
basic language skills - listening, speaking, reading, and writing. The format
will be as follows: four class hours a week will be focused on the aural-oral
approach, in reading, dialogue form, translation, question-and-answer on the
content of the texts. One class hour will be devoted to quizzes or tests. In
addition, there will be home assignments and works in the lab. Classes will be
largely conducted in Vietnamese to help the students acquire sufficient
automaticity and fluency in spoken Vietnamese. Course evaluation will be
graded on classroom performance, class attendance, home assignments, and a
final examination. WL:3 (Nguyen)

**301\. Reading and Writing for Native Speakers.** _Native speaking ability in
a South/Southeast Asian language and permission of instructor. (4). (Excl).  
Section 009 - Vietnamese. _ This is the first half of a two-term sequence
designed for Vietnamese students who have some knowledge of the spoken
language, but no or little reading and writing ability. This course covers
S&SEA # 115-116 in one term. The sequential course (S&SEA # 302) will cover
S&SEA #215-216 in the winter term. The course meets four hours a week, with
primary emphasis on reading and writing. Course evaluation will be graded on
classroom attendance and performance, homework assignments and a final
examination. Native Vietnamese speakers are encouraged to take this course
rather than S&SEA # 115-116. See the instructor for placement test before
registration. Cost:2 WL:3 (Nguyen)

**_Culture Courses

_ 250\. Undergraduate Seminar in South and Southeast Asian Culture. **_No
knowledge of any Asian language required. (3). (HU). May be repeated with
department permission.  
Section 001 - Modern Thai Cultures: History and Nationalism in Mainland
Southeast Asia._ Thailand: the only country in Southeast Asia to avoid direct
colonization in the 19th century and escape hostile occupation in WWII. Pro-US
during the Vietnam War, a Khmer Rouge ally in the period thereafter, the
kingdom has now emerged as one of the region's principal economic powers. A
study of cultural identities in modern Thailand, this course will consider
Thailand's modern history and cultures in an effort better to understand the
cope of change in Southeast Asia over the past century. (Copeland)

# Courses in Asian Studies (Division 323)

**111/UC 172/Hist. 151. South Asian Civilization.** _(4). (HU).  
_ See History 151. (Trautmann)

**121/Hist. 121. Great Traditions of East Asia.** _(4). (HU).  
_ See History 121. (Forage)

**230/Buddhist Studies 230/Phil. 230/Rel. 230. Introduction to Buddhism.**
_(4). (HU).  
_ See Buddhist Studies 230. (Gomez)

# Asian/Pacific American Studies (see American Culture)  
Courses in Astronomy (Division 326)

INTRODUCTORY COURSES AND COURSES FOR NON-CONCENTRATORS. Astronomy 101/111
discusses our explorations of the solar system. Astronomy 102/112 deals with
stars and the rest of the Universe beyond the solar system. Students in
Astronomy 101 and 102 attend a weekly discussion section. Students in
Astronomy 111 and 112 actively participate in a laboratory which meets in the
evening each week. None of these courses is a prerequisite for any of the
others. High school mathematics through plane geometry is useful. All students
in each course will have opportunities for a planetarium visit and for evening
observations with telescopes.

**101\. Introductory Astronomy: The Solar System.** _No credit granted to
those who have completed or are enrolled in 111, 130, 160, or 221. (4). (NS).
(BS). (QR/2).  
_ Astronomy 101 students attend the same lectures as Astronomy 111 students
(see course description below). (Section 001:Bernstein; Section 006:Sears)

**102\. Introductory Astronomy: Stars, Galaxies, and the Universe.** _No
credit granted to those who have completed or are enrolled in 112, 130, 160,
or 222. (4). (NS). (BS). (QR/2).  
_ Astronomy 102 students attend the same lectures as Astronomy 112 students
(see course description below). Instead of laboratory sections, Astronomy 102
incorporates weekly one-hour discussions and associated exercises, which is
considered along with examinations and quizzes for course grades. Cost:2 WL:4
(Section 001:MacAlpine; Section 006:Seitzer)

**111\. Introductory Astronomy: The Solar System.** _No credit granted to
those who have completed or are enrolled in 101, 130, 160, or 221. (4). (NS).
(BS). (QR/2).  
_ This course presents an introduction to the field of astronomy and
astrophysics with an emphasis on the discoveries from space exploration. The
first third of the course deals with understanding the history of astronomy,
orbits, gravitation, optics and the properties of light and matter. The rest
of the course explores the properties, origin and evolution of the major
planets, asteroids, comets, the Sun and other components of the Solar System
with particular emphasis on comparative aspects with respect to the Earth. The
origin and formation of the Solar System and the origin of life will also be
discussed. This course is intended for non-science concentrators with a basic
high school math and science background. Astronomy 111 has a two-hour
laboratory section every week. Astronomy 101 has a one-hour discussion
section. Course requirements include assigned reading, section meetings,
homework, observations, quizzes, midterm and a final examination. Laboratory
sections include observations with telescopes. Cost:2 WL:4 (Section
001:Berstein; Section 005:Sears)

**112\. Introductory Astronomy: Stars, Galaxies, and the Universe.** _No
credit granted to those who have completed or are enrolled in 102, 130, 160,
or 222. (4). (NS). (BS). (QR/2).  
_ This course is intended primarily for non-science concentrators, who wish to
understand the phenomena and properties of the universe beyond our solar
system. There are no astronomy prerequisites, and a basic high school math
background (e.g., not calculus) will suffice. Students examine the widest
possible range of interrelated natural phenomena, from sub-atomic particles to
the Universe as a whole. Lectures inventory the different types of stars and
examine how red giants, white dwarfs, black holes, supernovae, and people all
fit together in one grand, remarkable scheme. The larger picture includes our
Milky Way galaxy, less hospitable exploding galaxies, and enigmatic quasars.
The present state of knowledge or speculation regarding the origin and
ultimate fate of our universe will also receive special attention. It all came
from somewhere, but where...and why? Course grades will be derived from
scheduled quizzes or exams, and laboratory exercises. Laboratory sections,
which meet for two evening hours each week, will include planetarium
demonstrations and observations with telescopes (weather permitting). Cost:2
WL:4 (Section 001:MacAlpine; Section 006:Seitzer)

**120\. Frontiers of Astronomy.** _No credit granted to those who have
completed or are enrolled in Astro. 125. (3). (NS).  
_ Astronomy is one of the most visible sciences, with exciting discoveries
reported regularly in the media. In this class, students will study the
forefront astronomy and astrophysics behind the stories, which will feature
the topics of black holes, the nature of dark matter, the Big Bang model of
the universe, and the formation of structures in the universe. We will
highlight observations from NASA's Great Observatory program, which features
the Hubble Space Telescope, and from the new generation of large telescopes on
Earth. Students will learn how discoveries are made, with a discussion of the
climate surrounding the work, the scientists involved in the discoveries, and
the twisting path of scientific discovery, which is rarely visible to the
public. There will be in-depth discussions of how such scientific research can
be interpreted to reveal fundamental information about the universe in which
we live. Also, we will examine the process by which discoveries are reported
in the media, and in some cases, how the import of the work becomes badly
distorted in this process. Cost:2 WL:3 (Bregman)

**130\. Explorations in Astronomy.** _No credit granted to those who have
completed or are enrolled in 101, 102, 111, 112, 160, 221, or 222. (4). (NS).
(BS). (QR/2).  
_ This course is a one-term exploration of a few selected topics representing
all of astronomy. Here are a few examples of possible topics. (1) The stars:
how we are able to learn about them, how they evolve and die, how they produce
chemical elements and generate energy. (2) The formation of stars and solar
systems. What we are learning about star formation. How our solar system tells
us about star formation. Recent developments in our understanding of the
planets during our age of planetary exploration. (3) Cosmology: the expansion
of the universe, and its eventual fate. The formation of structure and of
galaxies, the cosmic radiation fields. This course will include assigned
reading, some homework, quizzes, a midterm and a final. Cost:2 WL:4
(Richstone)

**160\. Introduction to Astrophysics.** _Math. 115, and prior or concurrent
enrollment in Phys. 140; or permission of instructor. No credit granted to
those who have completed or are enrolled in 102, 112, 130, 221, or 222. (4).
(NS). (BS). (QR/2).  
_ Some of the most exciting phenomena and concepts in astronomy and
astrophysics are explored in this survey course. One major theme is the
structure and evolution of stars from their birth in giant molecular clouds
through their death as white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black holes. Another
important theme is galaxies, with discussions about the missing or dark matter
in galaxies, galaxy-galaxy interactions, and the large-scale distribution of
galaxies in the Universe. We conclude with an examination of the Big Bang, the
Inflationary Universe, and the Cosmic Background radiation. This course is
directed toward students with an interest in science and mathematics. There
are problem sets and a weekly two-hour laboratory using telescopes. Cost:2
WL:3 (Mateo)

**204/AOSS 204/Geology 204. The Planets: Their Geology and Climates.** _High
school mathematics through plane geometry and trigonometry. Those with credit
for GS 113 may only elect Astro. 204 for 2 credits. (3). (NS). (BS).  
_ See Geology 204. (Atreya and Pollack)

**261/NOEP 301. Navigation.** _(2). (Excl). (BS).  
_ The purpose of this course is to educate students in all aspects of marine
navigation, from getting a vessel underway from port through open ocean
navigation using both celestial and electronic means. The content of the
course is divided into three major areas. The first section focuses on
piloting, emphasizing the safe navigation of vessels in coastal waters. This
section provides an introduction to navigational instruments and aids to
navigation. The second section concerns celestial navigation, the ability to
determine position through observation of celestial bodies. Students learn how
to determine position based on the use of the sextant and various almanacs and
mathematical tables. The third section of the course considers electronic
navigation. The course consists of two ninety minute lectures a week. Grading
is done on the basis of homework, quizzes, a project, and examinations. The
primary textbooks for the course are _Marine Navigation I_ and _Marine
Navigation II_ by Richard R. Hobbs.

# Courses in Atmospheric, Oceanic and Space Sciences (Division 241)

Although AOSS 202 is offered through the College of Engineering, the course is
approved by LSA to earn LSA credits and may be used to meet Natural Science
distribution requirements. Other Atmospheric, Oceanic, and Space Sciences
courses are listed in the COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING _BULLETIN_ , and in the
_Time_ _Schedule_ as part of the offerings of the College of Engineering in
the AOSS subsection and may be elected by LSA students as a part of non-LSA
course work. These other courses do not help meet LSA distribution
requirements. Students who have a serious professional interest in the field
should consult the department (2233 Space Research Building, 764-3335).

**202\. The Atmosphere.** _(3). (NS). (BS).  
_ The focus of the course is on understanding the basic nature and behavior of
the Earth's atmosphere. Students learn to relate features revealed on the
daily weather maps to atmospheric processes and characteristics. They learn to
appreciate the forces which shape and change the climate and to understand the
processes which produce atmospheric phenomenon, such as thunderstorms,
tornadoes, winter snowstorms, and hurricanes. The course also considers the
atmosphere as a natural resource covering aspects such as the greenhouse
effect, weather and man, air pollution, acid rain, etc. (Baker)

# Courses in Biology (Division 328)

**100\. Biology for Nonscientists.** _Not open to those with Advanced
Placement or "Departmental" credit in biology, nor to those concentrating in
the biological sciences. Credit is granted for a combined total of 10 credits
elected in introductory biology. (4). (NS). (BS).  
_Biology 100 is a one term course designed to introduce students to current
biological concepts. The course consists of three hours of lecture per week
plus a coordinated discussion session which occupies two hours per week.
Biology 100 provides an introduction to some general principles of biology and
concentrates on the areas of cell biology, genetics, evolution, and
environmental biology. A major objective of this course is to point out to
students the nature of the scientific process and illustrate the uses and non-
uses of science in contemporary life. Wherever possible, the ethical and
social implications of contemporary scientific effort will be discussed.

This course is designed for students with a minimal background in the
biological sciences but we do assume some exposure to biology at the high
school level. Discussion sections enroll 20 students and are taught by
graduate student teaching assistants. In the discussion section, students have
the opportunity to review material presented in lecture and participate in
discussions of issues raised in the lecture segment. Cost:3 WL:1; you MUST
attend the first discussion section to claim your place in the course.
(Goldberg)

**110/AOSS 171/UC 110/NR &E 110. Introduction to Global Change I. **_Credit is
granted for a combined total of 10 credits elected in introductory biology.
(4). (NS). (BS).  
_ An interdisciplinary (team-taught) introduction to the evolution of life and
the human species on Earth, with a focus on problems of global change produced
by recent human advances in technology and institutions. The discussion
includes reference to: evolution of the universe, the Earth and its
environments; evolution of living organisms; growth and reproduction;
interaction of organisms with their environments; ecological roles of
organisms. Extensive use of multi-media presentation tools: videos, slides,
etc. Course grade will be based on a midterm and final exam, plus successful
completion of the required weekly laboratory exercises. There are no
prerequisites for this course and no science background is assumed. The course
is appropriate for all first year students, irrespective of intended
concentration. (Killeen/Allan/Teeri)

**140\. Genetics and Society.** _Credit is granted for a combined total of 10
credits elected in introductory biology. (4). (NS). (BS).  
_ This course is designed for students not concentrating in the sciences. The
course will provide students with a background in genetics, (1) to allow them
to understand and appreciate some of the latest developments in genetics
reported in the local and national press, (2) to discuss the social history of
the field of genetics, (3) to introduce students to "the scientific method" as
applied to genetics, and finally (4) to discuss aspects of genetics which have
a bearing on our everyday lives. Topics to be discussed will include, but not
be limited to (in no particular order): genetics, race and IQ; forensic
applications of genetic fingerprinting; gene therapy; recombinant DNA
technology and possible environmental concerns, T.D. Lysenko and the communist
ideal, the human genome project, genetic diseases and therapeutic abortion.
The course will meet three times a week, and two hours will be devoted to
discussion. Course evaluation will be based on exams (consisting mainly of
questions requiring short essay answers) and one or more term papers. Cost:1
WL:1 (Adams)

**150\. Introductory Biology Workshop.** _Freshman or sophomore standing.
Recommended for students considering a concentration in Biology. (1). (Excl).
Offered mandatory credit/no credit.  
_ Small groups of students meet weekly with a faculty member for group
discussions on topics selected by the faculty member. Topics may include
biological issues in the news, history of biological ideas, and ethical issues
in biological sciences. Students will be introduced to biological research
through discussion of faculty research projects and tours of active research
laboratories and museum collections. Such tours will be coupled with
discussion of scientific questions being pursued in the laboratories visited.
Introductory students will have the opportunity to interact directly with a
faculty member who will introduce them not only to the basic areas of
scientific research but also to the structure and opportunities available in
Biology concentration programs. Evaluation of students will be through class
participation and short written assignments.

**152\. Introduction to Biology: Term A.** _Chem. 130 or the equivalent, or
Chem. 210 placement. No credit granted to those who have completed or are
enrolled in Biol. 195. Credit is granted for a combined total of 10 credits
elected in introductory biology. Those with credit for Biol. 100 are advised
to elect Biol. 195. (4). (NS). (BS). Laboratory fee ($32) required.  
_ First term of a two-term introductory sequence (152/154) intended for
concentrators in biology, other science programs or preprof studies. Other
suitably prepared students wishing detailed coverage of biology are also
welcome. The aims of Biology 152/154 are: (1) to provide factual and
conceptual knowledge, (2) to afford experience in obtaining and interpreting
biological hypotheses, (3) to give an integrated overview of modern biology
and (4) to develop thinking and writing skills. Topics in Biology 152 are
divided among four areas: (a) cellular and molecular biology, (b) genetics,
(c) evolution, and (d) ecology. Students MUST: (1) attend 3 lectures and one
3-hour lab/discussion section each week; (2) ATTEND THEIR ASSIGNED LAB/DISC
MEETINGS EACH WEEK STARTING WITH THE FIRST WEEK OR THEIR SPACE MAY BE GIVEN TO
SOMEONE ON THE WAITING LIST; and (3) RESERVE the times and dates for the
midterm and final exams (as specified in the _Time Schedule)_ before
enrolling. There are usually two midterm exams and a final exam. Students
usually purchase a textbook, lab manual and course pack consisting of a
syllabus and lecture notes. No other study guides or supplementary materials
need be bought. For honors credit, register in lecture 002 of Biology 152 and
ANY lab/disc, plus Biology 153. For further information contact the Biology
152/154 office, 1039 Chem Bldg (764-1430). Cost:3 WL:2, but go to 1039 Chem.

# Courses in Chemistry (Division 334)

The Chemistry Department has three types of courses available for students
starting out toward careers in any of the sciences, engineering, or medicine.
Students are placed into these courses according to the results of the tests
in chemistry and mathematics that they take during orientation.

For students interested in the sciences, engineering or medicine, either Chem
130 or Chem 210/211 can be their starting point. Students who have had a
strong course in high school (which may include AP credit in chemistry) are
advised to start in Chem 210 and 211, the laboratory course that accompanies
it. Chem 130 is recommended for all other students. Section 400 of Chem 130 is
reserved for students who would benefit from a smaller lecture section and
more frequent contact with both senior faculty and teaching assistants.

Students who have had little or no laboratory work in high school should plan
to elect Chem 125 with Chem 130. Other students electing Chem 130 may postpone
laboratory to a subsequent term. _Chem. 125 may not be elected for credit
after completion of Chem. 211.

_**105/AOSS 105. Our Changing Atmosphere.** _(3). (NS). (BS).  
_ This course considers the science needed to understand human-induced threats
to the atmospheric environment, with special emphasis on the global changes
that are taking place, or are anticipated. We will discuss the greenhouse
effect (and its impact on climate), ozone depletion, the polar ozone holes,
and urban air pollution. Some basic meteorology will be presented, including
how climate changes might affect the frequency and severity of hurricanes and
tornadoes. Students will have access to real-time weather information via
computer. This lecture course is intended for non-science concentrators and
there are no prerequisites. Grades will be based on three one-hour exams (no
final exam) and homework. Cost:1 WL:1 (Barker)

**125\. General and Inorganic Chemistry: Laboratory.** _To be elected by
students who are eligible for (or enrolled in) Chem. 130. Chem. 125 may not be
elected for credit after completion of Chem. 211. (2). (NS). (BS). Laboratory
fee ($60) required.  
_ This laboratory course can be elected with, or following, Chem 130 or 230.
It is intended that students planning to enroll in Chem 130 that have had
little or no previous chemistry laboratory enroll concurrently in Chem 125.
The focus of this guided inquiry laboratory is to foster critical thinking
that allows students to design, perform, and interpret experiments. An
emphasis is placed on what constitutes valid data and provides the burden of
proof for testing hypotheses and theories. In addition, the student acquires
technical skills that are required for further advancement in experimental
sciences. Although an ability to collect and analyze data in a quantitative
manner is developed, the emphasis of the course is to provide a qualitative
understanding of the basic concepts of chemistry. This is accomplished by
demonstrating that chemical principles are derived from experimental data. The
format of the course is organized into three sections. Pre-laboratory reading
and questions are completed prior to the four-hour laboratory. The second
component is performance in the laboratory. The third begins in the last hour
of the laboratory where individual data are shared, evaluated, and discussed.
Students then provide a laboratory report based on the combined data of the
section. A one-hour lecture provides support for the topics that are
investigated in the laboratory. Microcomputer simulations also supplement the
student's laboratory experience. There are two one-hour written examinations,
scheduled for Tuesday evenings, that constitute 30% of the grade. The
remaining 70% of the grade is based on the acquired in the laboratory points.
Refer to the _Time Schedule_ for examination dates and times. Cost:2 WL:2

**130\. General Chemistry: Macroscopic Investigations and Reaction
Principles.** _Three years of high school math or Math. 105; one year of high
school chemistry recommended. Placement by testing, or permission of Chemistry
department. Intended for students without AP credit in chemistry. (3). (NS).
(BS). (QR/2).  
_ This General Chemistry course is intended to fulfill the one term chemistry
requirement for students interested in science, or as a natural science
elective for non-science concentrators. This course may also be used as the
first term in a four or more term chemistry sequence (probably 130, 210/211,
215/216, 340 etc.) for science concentrators and pre-professional students.

Chemistry 130 provides an introduction to the major concepts of chemistry,
including the microscopic picture of atomic and molecular structure, periodic
trends in the chemical reactivity, the energetics of chemical reactions and
the nature of chemical equilibria. Students will be introduced both to the
fundamental principles of modern chemistry, the descriptive chemistry of the
elements, and to the underlying theories that account for observed macroscopic
behavior. In Chem 130, students will learn to think critically, examine
experimental data, and form generalizations about data as chemists do. Chem
130 will meet three times each week in lecture sections with senior faculty
(the intensive section will have four lectures a week), and once a week in
small group discussion classes led by graduate teaching assistants (the
Comprehensive Study Program discussion class will meet three times a week).
Lecturers and teaching assistants will have scheduled office hours for after
class help, and computerized study aids will be available to all students.
Course grades will be determined from discussion class evaluation, 3 one-hour
examinations (Tuesday nights) and a final examination. See _Time Schedule_ for
examination times and dates.

The intensive lecture section (section 400) is intended for those students who
would benefit from a smaller lecture section (maximum 100 students) and more
lectures so that the pace is slower and there is more feedback. Placement by
LSA testing or permission of the Chemistry Department (Room 1500 Chemistry) is
needed for enrollment in this section. The CSP discussion section is intended
for those students who would benefit from more group study meetings with a
graduate teaching assistant. Permission of the Comprehensive Studies Program
is needed for enrollment in this section. Cost:4 WL:2

**210\. Structure and Reactivity I.** _High school chemistry. Placement by
examination during Orientation. To be taken with Chem. 211. (4). (NS). (BS).  
_ Chemistry 210 is the first course in a two-term sequence in which the major
concepts of chemistry are introduced in the context of organic chemistry.
Emphasis is on the development of the capacity of students to think about the
relationship between structure and reactivity and to solve problems in a
qualitatively analytical way. This course is a particularly good first course
for students with AP credit in chemistry, Honors students and other students
with a strong interest in chemistry and biology. The course has three lectures
with the professor and one hour of discussion with a teaching assistant per
week. There are three hour examinations (Tuesday nights) and a final
examination. See _Time Schedule_ for examination times and dates.

NOTE: This course is linked to Chemistry 211. The recitation sections for
Chemistry 210 and the corresponding laboratory sections for Chemistry 211 are
listed together in the _Time Schedule_ under Chemistry 210. Students must
elect both Chemistry 210 (for 4 credits) and Chemistry 211 (for 1 credit).
Cost:3 WL:2

**211\. Investigations in Chemistry.** _To be taken with Chem. 210. (1). (NS).
(BS). Laboratory fee ($67.50) required.  
_ Chemistry 211 is a laboratory introduction to methods of investigation in
inorganic and organic chemistry. Students solve individual problems using
microscale equipment and a variety of techniques such as thin layer
chromatography, titrations, and spectroscopy. The course consists of a four-
hour laboratory period with a teaching assistant under the supervision of the
professor. Students keep laboratory notebooks, which also serve as laboratory
reports. Grades are based on performance in the laboratory and the laboratory
notebooks.

NOTE: This course is linked to Chemistry 210. The recitation sections for
Chemistry 210 and the corresponding laboratory sections for Chemistry 211 are
listed together in the _Time Schedule_ under Chemistry 210. Students must
elect both Chemistry 210 (for 4 credits) and Chemistry 211 (for 1 credit).
Cost:1 WL:2

**Classical Studies**

The Department of Classical Studies believes that the literature, monuments,

