**RICHARD BLAND COLLEGE  
**

of  

The College of William and Mary  
  
  
  
  

**POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL  
  
**

**for  
  
**

**ADJUNCT FACULTY  
  
  
  
  
**

**SPRING, 1997  
**

**FOREWORD  
**

Welcome to Richard Bland College. As an adjunct member of the faculty you are
an integral part of the Richard Bland College commitment to quality education
and instruction.  

The Richard Bland College POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL FOR ADJUNCT FACULTY
provides information concerning the policies and related administrative
matters associated with the role of an adjunct faculty member. Any questions
concerning the administrative policies of the college may be directed to the
Provost. Concerns and questions related to course content and instructional
needs may be directed to the appropriate Academic Division Chair and/or the
Office of the Provost.  

This manual and the RICHARD BLAND COLLEGE CATALOGUE are provided for your
information and preparation for serving as an adjunct member of the Richard
Bland College faculty.  
  
  

**MISSION  
**

* **Richard Bland College of The College of William and Mary in Virginia was founded in 1960. It is The Junior College of the Commonwealth of Virginia. The College offers a traditional curriculum in the liberal arts and sciences leading to the associate degree, and other programs appropriate to a junior college. The curriculum is intended to allow students to acquire junior status after transferring to a four-year college, or to pursue expanded career opportunities. The College also recognizes its responsibility to serve the public by providing educational and cultural opportunities for the community at large.**

  

**GENERAL STATEMENT OF POLICY  
**

**Richard Bland College is an equal educational opportunity institution, and
makes no distinction in the admission of students or in any of its official
activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, religion,
political affiliation, handicap, veteran's status, or other non-merit factors;
all standards and policies governing student employment, recruitment,
admissions, financial aid, and support programs are applied accordingly.  
**

**ACCREDITATION  
**

**Richard Bland College is accredited by the Commission on Colleges of the
Southern Association of Colleges and Schools ( _1866 Southern Lane, Decatur,
Georgia 30033-4097: Telephone number 404-679-4501_ ) to award the associate
degree.  
**

**In accordance with the Commission on College's _Criteria for_
_Accreditation_ (1996), Richard Bland College agrees to and affirms the
following:  
**

**That it will comply with the _Criteria for Accreditation_ of the College
Delegate Assembly consistent with the policies and procedures of the
Commission on Colleges.  
**

**That the Commission on Colleges, at its discretion, may make known to any
agency or member of the public requiring such information, the nature of any
action, positive or negative, regarding the status of Richard Bland College
with the Commission.  
**

**That the College will comply with Commission requests, directives,
decisions, and policies, and will make complete, accurate, and honest
disclosure.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
**

**ADMINISTRATIVE STRUCTURE  
**

_BOARD OF VISITORS  
_

The Board of Visitors is the governing authority, charged with the
responsibility of establishing policies and supervising the operation of The
College of William and Mary and Richard Bland College.  

Members of the Board of Visitors are appointed by the Governor and serve
without compensation. They are empowered to select a Rector, a Vice Rector, a
Secretary and to appoint the Presidents, faculty, and such other agents and
employees as in their judgment may be necessary or appropriate to conduct
successfully the activities of each institution under the Board's
jurisdiction.  
  

_CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS  
_

President Dr. James B. McNeer  

Provost and Dean of the Faculty Dr. Rodger A. Bates  

Dean of Administration and Finance Dr. Russell E. Whitaker, Jr.  

Director of Institutional Advancement Mr. Richard M.B. Rennolds  

Associate Provost Dr. Gracie M. Bailey  
  
  

_ACADEMIC DIVISION STRUCTURE  
_

Mr. David Majewski, Chair

Division of Humanities and Social Sciences

Art Business Criminal Justice Economics English Economics French Geography
Government History International Studies Music Philosophy Psychology Religion
Sociology Spanish  
  

Mr. Steve Martin, Chair

Division of Science and Quantitative Methods

Accounting Biology Chemistry Computer Science

Health Mathematics Physical Education

Physics  
  

**POLICIES AND PROCEDURES  
  
**

_FACULTY RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES  
_

1\. Richard Bland College endorses the principles of _academic freedom_ and
subscribes to the Principles on Academic Freedom and Tenure, adopted jointly
in 1940 and interpreted in 1970 by the Association of American Colleges and by
the American Association of University professors, the main points which are:  

Faculty members are entitled to freedom in research and in the publication of
the results, subject to the adequate performance of their other academic
duties and compliance with College policies.  

Faculty members are entitled to freedom in the classroom in discussing their
subjects. Controversy is at the heart of free academic inquiry. Faculty
members should be careful not to introduce into their teaching controversial
matter which has no relation to their subjects.  

Faculty members are entitled to their political rights and should be free from
institutional censorship or discipline for exercising them, but their special
position in the community imposes special obligations. They should remember
they are members of a learning profession and officers of an educational
institution.

Hence, they should at all times be accurate, should exercise appropriate
restraint, should show respect for the opinions of others, and should make
every effort to indicate they are not institutional spokespersons.  

This protection of academic freedom applies to all faculty members and to all
others who exercise teaching or research responsibilities while they are
fulfilling their responsibilities as faculty members.  

2\. Faculty members are _responsible_ for supporting the Mission of Richard
Bland College and its academic, administrative, and institutional policies.  

3\. _Faculty Misconduct_ involves inappropriate faculty actions with regard to
students, other faculty, classified employees, members of the administration,
or the community at large. Failure to comply with the institution's policies
concerning sexual harassment, consensual amorous relationships with students,
reasonable accommodation to students protected under the Americans with
Disabilities Act, and other institutional policies or specific administrative
directives are considered instances of faculty misconduct. Instances of
faculty misconduct will be reviewed by the Provost who will determine the
extent of the misconduct and the appropriate institutional response.  

In instances of significant or repeated violation of institutional policies or
administrative directives, the Provost initially will , with the involvement
of the division chair, counsel the faculty member to insure future cooperation
and compliance. If counseling is not successful , or if the misconduct is
extreme or clearly confrontational, then the Provost will administer
additional sanctions. These _sanctions_ may include, but are not limited to:  

a. Memorandum of Concern - A Memorandum of Concern is the first step in

formally documenting an inappropriate faculty action. This sanction will

be considered by the Provost in his/her evaluation of a faculty member's

Annual Performance Review.  

b. Letter of Reprimand \- A Letter of Reprimand is a second, and/or more
serious

step in formally documenting an inappropriate faculty action. This sanction

will be considered by the Provost in his/her evaluation of a faculty member's

Annual Performance Review and will be considered in any pre/post-tenure

review or consideration for reappointment.  

c. Suspension - Suspension involves the temporary removal of a faculty member

from College service. This suspension may be with or without pay, for a

specified period of time, usually one semester. Suspension involves a

serious instance of faculty misconduct requiring significant institutional

response. In addition, conditions of continued employment may be specified.

Recommendations for suspension will be reviewed and authorized by the

President.  

d. Termination for Cause - Termination for Cause involves the permanent

severing of all contractual ties between the individual and the institution.

Termination for Cause will be recommended by the Provost and approved by

the President.  

Individuals sanctioned for faculty misconduct have the right of appeal. The
appeal procedure, as stated in the Statement of Academic Tenure, (noted in the
_Faculty Handbook_ ) will be followed.  

4\. Adjunct faculty must make themselves available to their students. It is
the responsibility of the faculty to advise their students as to when they can
meet to advise, counsel and or provide information related to the course in
which students are enrolled. This information will be a part of each course
syllabus.  
  
  

_PERSONNEL POLICIES  
_

1\. Adjunct faculty must have an official copy of their college and graduate
_transcripts_ on file in the Office of the Provost before a contract for
instruction can be offered.  

2\. Adjunct faculty must complete all required _personnel forms_ prior to
receiving payment for instruction.  

3\. Adjunct faculty members will be issued a restricted, temporary , part-time
_contract_ . Upon completion of this assignment, no further obligation on the
part of Richard Bland College is implied or may be construed.  

4\. _Salaries_ for adjunct instruction will be specified in the contract.
Contracts are dependent on receipt of funds appropriated by the General
Assembly, and is subject to the Appropriations Act. All contracts are
contingent upon sufficient enrollment, as determined by the Provost.  

5\. In the event that an adjunct faculty member is unable to meet a scheduled
class because of _illness_ or another appropriate reason, the Office of the
Provost should be informed (862-6242).  

6\. Adjunct faculty must make themselves available to their students. It is
the responsibility of the faculty to inform their students as to when they can
meet.  
  
  

_ACADEMIC POLICIES AND GUIDELINES  
_

1\. _Do not change_ the time and location _or postpone_ any of your classes
without prior permission from the Office of the Provost (862-6242).  

2\. A _course syllabus_ is required for all courses offered by Richard Bland
College. In preparing your course syllabus, please adhere to the following
guidelines:

a. Include the mission statement of the College at the beginning of

each syllabus.  

b. State your attendance policy in such a manner that it is

important for students to attend all class sessions. Also,

remember that you are required to take and retain a record

of attendance in each class at least once a week .  
  
  
  

c. Indicate office hours or times when you will be available to

advise, counsel, and respond to student questions and concerns. Adjunct
faculty members should allocate approximately one hour a week for each course
they instruct.  

Normally, this involves approximately 30 minutes prior to and after a class
that meets once a week. For classes meeting more than once a week,
approximately 15 minutes before and after each session is appropriate. All
adjunct faculty also should be available by appointment.  
  

d. Please state, in clear detail, the grading policies which will be

followed in your class. Indicate the number of tests, papers,

quizzes, and other graded activities, what proportion of the final

grade they will compose, your grading scale for each activity.

( i.e. 80-89% = B), and your method of calculating final grades.

If class attendance or participation is considered part of your

grading procedure, please indicate the manner in which it will

be calculated in the evaluation process.  

e. In planning your course, please make sure that sufficient tests

quizzes or other graded activities are conducted and reported

to students sufficiently prior to the end of the  "drop" period.

Also, please do not advise students that they can "drop" a

course after the end of the "drop" period . The only exception

to the rule will be students with authentic medical

documentation. The same policy exists for students attempting

to change from credit to audit status.  

These policies are stated in the Catalogue, but are _only fair_ if the

faculty provides sufficient evaluation and feedback before the

end of the drop period. This notification should provide you

with ample time to pre-schedule the appropriate activities for

your classes.  

f. Course schedules should be specific enough so that students

should know the material they are to prepare for each class and

when tests, papers. etc. are due. If your syllabus does not give

a specific date for certain activities, sufficient notice should be

given prior to the activity, with reminders provided prior to the

event.  
  

4\. Faculty _will monitor_ all tests, quizzes and final examinations.  

5\. _Final Examinations_ will be given for all scheduled academic classes.
These examinations will be conducted at the established examination time.  

6\. Final examinations will be _not involve take-home examinations._ A special
request to administer a take-home final examination must be discussed with the
Provost significantly prior to the final examination period.  

7\. All courses taught by Richard Bland College faculty (regular/adjunct) will
be evaluated through _Student Course Evaluations_. These instruments of
assessment will be provided by the Office of the Provost and will be
administered prior to the final examination. All campus faculty and those
adjunct instructors who teach in a multi-instructor environment will arrange
for a fellow instructor to administer the Student Course Evaluations. In a
single instructor environment, the faculty member should designate a
responsible student to administer the Student Course Evaluations, seal them in
an envelope and sign their name across the seal. These evaluations should be
returned to the appropriate division secretaries (campus courses) or the
Office of the Provost for off-campus instruction.  

8\. All faculty must _retain all examinations_ for at least one year, in the
event of a grade appeal or litigation.  

9\. _Final Grades_ _**will**_ be turned in to the Registrar's Office within 48
hours of the examination.  

10\. Blanket _Incompletes_ in any course are not acceptable. If an

"Incomplete" is given, the student must be made aware, _by the_ f _aculty
member_ , that such a grade may influence their financial aid status for the
next semester. The grade of  "Incomplete" exists for unusual circumstances. It
is not an "automatic option" for the student who does not complete the
required work in a course. A student cannot "take and incomplete." A faculty
member may award an "Incomplete" in a special or unusual circumstance.
However, this should involve a meeting or discussion between the faculty
member and the student . Written documentation of all requirements necessary
for the completion of an "Incomplete" will be placed on file with the faculty
secretary of the division in which the course is offered for on-campus courses
and in the Office of the Provost for off-campus.  

11\. _Official Grades_ will be provided to students by the Office of the
Registrar. Faculty electing to post grades may do so, but students **cannot be
identified** by name, social security number, or student identification
number.  

12\. It is the responsibility of faculty member to remind students of the
principles of the _Honor System_ and the consequences for its violation. This
discussion is required during the first week of all courses. It should be
noted in the syllabus. The STUDENT HANDBOOK states the following:

"Faculty cooperation is required in order for the Honor

System to function effectively. Therefore, any faculty who

observes a violation of the Honor System should report it in accordance with
the procedures for reporting infraction.

There will be occasions (such as in the evaluation of laboratory reports,
critical reviews, themes, term papers, etc.) when only the instructor will
know that a violation has occurred. Again, it is incumbent on the instructor
to report such violations and appear as a witness, if necessary. No faculty
member should adjudicate a violation of the Honor System. Those who do so only
disserve themselves, the student body, and the College as a whole."

A more extensive discussion of faculty obligations and responsibilities
concerning the Honor System may be found on page 38 of the STUDENT HANDBOOK.  

As a Richard Bland faculty member, support of the Honor System

is not optional.  

13\. All faculty must certify to the Office of the Registrar (862-6206) the
names of all students and the class and section in which they are enrolled as
soon as possible following registration. It is important that this information
be confirmed **as soon as you receive your official copy of your class roll so
the _verification of rolls_ can be completed.  
**

14\. On-campus adjunct faculty will submit their typing and photocopying
requests to their division secretary at least three days prior to the date it
will be needed.  

15\. All _registration and selling of books_ must be handled by the designated
college officials.  

16\. Students requesting to _drop_ or _withdraw_ from a class will be directed
to the office of the Registrar so that the appropriate forms can be completed.
This must be done **before** the penalty/withdrawal date which is published in
the Course Schedule each semester. Unless a student **officially** withdraws,
a grade of  "F" will appear on his/her permanent record. Any exceptions to
this rule must be for verifiable medical or legal circumstances and must be
approved by the Provost.  

Information concerning the tuition _refund policy_ of Richard Bland College
may be found in the College Catalogue. Questions regarding refunds should be
referred to the RBC Office of Administration and Finance.  
  
  

_INSTITUTIONAL POLICIES_

_Sexual Harassment -_ Richard Bland College desires to provide a positive,
discrimination-free educational and working environment. In this spirit,
sexual harassment in the educational setting or work place is unacceptable and
will not be tolerated. This policy applies to all members of the College
community including students, classified employees and members of the
instructional, administrative and professional faculty.  

Sexual harassment is a form of sex discrimination prohibited by Title IX of
the Educational Amendment of 1972 and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964. For purposes of this policy, sexual harassment is defined as unwelcome
conduct of a sexual nature, physical or verbal, by a member of the College
community when:  

a. submission to such conduct is made explicitly or implicitly a term or

condition of work or academic performance, or,  

b. submission to or rejection of such conduct is used as a basis for an

employment decision, performance evaluation, or academic performance

evaluation concerning a member of the College community, or,  

c. such conduct is known or should have been known to interfere with an

individual's work or academic performance, or to create an intimidating,

hostile or offensive working or educational environment.  

It is a violation of College policy for any faculty member, administrator,
student or staff employee, hereafter referred to as members of the College
community, to seek or offer gain, advancement or consideration in return for
sexual favors.  

It is a violation of College policy for any member of the College community to
make an intentionally false accusation of sexual harassment.  

It is a violation of College policy for any member of the College community to
initiate a negative personnel or academic action against an individual in
retaliation for reporting an incident or allegation of sexual harassment,
except in cases of intentionally false accusations of sexual harassment.  

In determining whether the alleged conduct constitutes sexual harassment,
those charged with such determinations will consider all relevant information,
including the nature of the alleged sexual conduct and the context in which
the alleged conduct occurred. Such determinations will be based on fact and
will be made on a case-by-case basis.  

Students who believe that they have been subjected to harassment by other
students are advised to use the procedures described in the _Student Handbook.  
_

Classified employees of the College who believe they have been harassed by
other classified employees and who wish to pursue their complaints through
formal internal resolution procedures are advised to use the _Grievance
Procedure for State Employees,_ administered by the personnel office. Such
grievances must be filed within 30 days from the onset of the behavior
construed as sexual harassment.  

Incidents alleged to be sexual harassment which involve a member of the
instructional, administrative or professional faculty as a party are subject
to the procedures described in the _Faculty Handbook._ (07/01/93)  
  
  

_Policies and Procedures Affecting Consensual Amorous Relationships_ Policy:  

The appearance of a compromising conflict of interest, or of coercion,
favoritism or bias in educational or academic evaluation is prejudicial to the
interests of Richard Bland College, its members, and the public interest which
it serves. Amorous relationships between faculty members and students with
whom they also have an academic evaluative role creates such an appearance,
even where the relationship is genuinely consensual. Such relationships are
particularly susceptible to exploitation. The respect and trust accorded a
professor by a student, as well as the power exercised by the professor in an
academic or evaluative role, make voluntary consent by the student suspect.
Even when both parties initially have consented, the development of such a
relationship renders both the faculty member and the institution vulnerable to
possible later allegations of sexual harassment in light of the significant
power differential that exists between faculty and students.  

Therefore, faculty members are advised against participating in amorous
relationships with students enrolled in their classes, or with students whom
they otherwise evaluate, grade or supervise. Similarly, faculty members should
avoid situations requiring to evaluate, grade, or supervise students with whom
they currently have an amorous relationship. Whenever such a situation arises
or is foreseen, the faculty member shall report the situation promptly and
seek advice and counsel from an appropriate administrative superior. That
superior shall take effective steps to insure unbiased supervision or
evaluation of the student.  

For purposes of this policy, "faculty" shall include all full-time or part-
time College personnel who teach, including graduate students and
administrators with faculty status. Evaluative situations may include, but are
not limited to, supervising instruction, evaluating academic performance, or
serving on committees for awards, prizes, or thesis supervision.  

Procedures:  

Members of the College community who believe themselves to be affected
adversely by a violation of this policy may initiate a complaint with the
appropriate division chair. A complaint alleging that a division chair or an
administrator has violated this policy may be filed with the Provost or other
appropriate administrative authority. Complaints must be filed within 10
calendar days of the time at which the complainant becomes aware of the
adverse effect of an alleged violation of this policy, but not more than two
years after the alleged violation.  

Failure to comply with the foregoing policy shall be handled in accordance
with the provisions for handling allegations of misconduct described in the
_Faculty Handbook_ , including the procedural quarantees therein outlined.
(07/01/93)  

In cases of alleged sexual harassment, an ad-hoc faculty committee will be
appointed by the Provost to review and resolve the allegation. Procedural
standards similar to the appeal procedure, as stated in the Statement of
Academic Tenure, (noted elsewhere in the _Faculty Handbook_ ) will be
followed.  
  
  
  
  
  
  

_Inclement Weather Policies_

The decision to close the College due to inclement weather will be made by the
President or his/her designated representative. When an announcement is made
to close the College, **all day** and **evening** activities, both on-campus
and off-campus, will be cancelled. Faculty teaching at locations other than
the main campus will follow the inclement weather policies of their host
institutions.  

Inclement weather announcements will be broadcast over the following media:

TV - CBS Channel 6, ABC Channel 8, and NBC Channel 12

Radio - WRVQ (Q-94) FM, WRXL (XL-102) FM, WRVA 1140 AM

  

_Parking Policies_ \- All faculty vehicles must have a parking decal displayed
on the right rear bumper or rear window. New decals are available in the
Office of Administration and Finance at the beginning of the academic year at
no charge to adjunct faculty. Tickets will be issued for improper parking and
failure to display a decal.

**SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS AND INFORMATION**

**FOR FACULTY TEACHING AT THE**

**DEFENSE SUPPLY CENTER RICHMOND  
**

PROCEDURE AND POLICY  

Adjunct faculty teaching at the Defense Supply Center Richmond (DSCR) are
asked to read and comply with the following information pertaining to the use
of classroom facilities. Faculty also are requested to review the Inclement
Weather Policy and the Policy on Drops and Withdrawals, noted previously, to
their students at the beginning of each semester.  

No special pass is required to enter the DSCR. When entering the gate,
identify yourself as a Richard Bland College faculty member.  

CLASSROOM INSTRUCTIONS

BUILDING 32, A BAY  

_Training Facility_ \- You will be assigned Classroom 1, 2,or 3. Use this
number in actions referring to your classroom The facilities are managed by
the Career Development Division (training office) staff, 279-4775.  

_Security_ \- Audiovisual and other valuable equipment is kept in the
classrooms. You are responsible for insuring that all reasonable actions are
taken to protect this equipment. DSCR Security Officers unlock the outside
doors every weekday morning before 6:30 a.m. They lock most of them again
after 6:00 p.m. When there are classes in session, security will keep the
South door to the ramp and smoking area open until the **scheduled** end of
the class. Security is open 24 hours a day and is located in **Building 33,
(279-4888).  
**

Students should not wander through the building or go in any other rooms other
than their classrooms, the breakroom, or restroom.  

_Sharing Classrooms_ \- (Daytime Users) -- You must assume that the classroom
is going to be used in the daytime. You should take the following steps to
help:

1\. Daytime classes end approximately at 4:30. Please start your classes no
sooner than 4:45 p.m.  

2\. At the end of each class:

a. return all furniture and equipment to the original layout;

b. have students clear their desks and take their personal

belongings and classroom materials home with them;  

c. clean the markerboard and/or chalkboard.  

3\. If you have a problem with the previous tenant (trash on tables, furniture
out of arrangement, etc.) , inform the Office of the Provost.  

_Equipment_ \- Screens are permanently mounted in the ceiling; they are raised
and lowered by using the key to the left of the boards. They should be fully
retracted after use.  

_Lights_ \- General controls are at each door. Two additional controls to dim
or brighten different banks of lights are in the front near the boards. Turn
all lights off at the end of your class. In addition, the last instructor
should turn out as many lights as possible in the restrooms, breakroom, and
halls. Certain lights remain on permanently and cannot be turned off. These
should provide adequate light to leave.  

_Audio-visual Equipment_ \- The rooms are equipped with a sound system. The
speakers are in the ceiling. Please let your contact know if you need to use
the system. Regular or portable microphones are available. VCR, TV monitors,
overhead projectors and movie projectors are stored in the room. Please do not
use without contact staff permission or if you are unfamiliar with their
operation.  

_Supplies_ \- The training staff will provide markerboard pens and cleaning
supplies. You should provide all other items including flip chart paper.

Contact the Office of the Provost (862-6242) for specific supplies.  

_Safety_ \- A fire extinguisher is located in each room. There are fire alarms
near each of the exterior doors. The emergency evacuation plan is posted in
each room.  

_Markerboards_ \- Care should be taken to maintain the boards in good
condition. Thus,  

1\. use **only** erasable markers. You should take all precautions to make
sure that

indelible (flip chart style) markers are kept away from the board. Use only
makers provided.  

2\. the markers are expensive. Please replace the cap immediately after use.  

3\. erase the boards at the end class.  

4\. when needed, use **only** markerboard cleaner and the cheese cloth
provided by the training office or use a damp cloth to clean. (Do not use the
erasers on a wet board or to wipe off the liquid cleaner.)  

_Smoking_ \- There is **no smoking allowed** inside the classroom or in any

part of A Bay, including the foyers, restrooms and breakroom. **The smoking
area is on the covered ramp outside the South door.** There is no smoking
allowed outside the West and North entrances because of the propane tank.  

_Break Area_ \- Located near the West door. There are soda, coffee, ice, and
snack machines and a water fountain. Lunches and food may be eaten in this
room.  

_Food and Drink Policy_ \- **No food or beverage in classrooms.  
**

_Parking_ \- Space is available on Road J adjacent to Classrooms 1, 2, and 3
and in parking lot across Fifth Street. There is parking for loading and
unloading only on the ramp off of Fifth Street leading to the South door.  

_Phones_ \- Pay phones are located near each of the entrances. There is a
phone (for on-post use only) in the break room. This should be used only for a
maximum of three minutes at a time when other people are waiting. Students
should not use the training office phones.  

_Holidays_ \- Classes scheduled to be held on holidays observed by the DSCR
will be cancelled.  
  

**** BUILDING 32

CLASSROOM 4, BAY A  

Classroom 4, Bay A is a special computer equipped classroom. This facility is
for those classes which involve computer-based instruction. If you class is
computer-based, please contact the Office of the Provost in advance of the
semester to arrange for the use of this facility. If you are teaching in
another classroom and need the resources of a computer equipped classroom for
one or more evenings, please contact the training office concerning the
availability of this resource.  

Please refer to the previous section for other policies and procedures
governing instruction in Building 32, Bay A.  

OTHER CLASSROOMS

DEFENSE SUPPLY CENTER RICHMOND  

At times, RBC adjunct faculty will be teaching in classrooms located in other
facilities. Most of these classrooms will be similarly equipped and the
policies and procedures specified for Building 32, Bay A are applicable. If
you have any questions, instructional needs, or concerns, contact the Office
of the Provost or the training office located in Building 32, Bay A.

**SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS AND INFORMATION**

**FOR FACULTY TEACHING ON-CAMPUS  
  
  
**

PROCEDURE AND POLICY  

Adjunct faculty teaching on-campus are asked to read and comply with the
following information pertaining to the use of classroom facilities. Faculty
also are requested to review the Inclement Weather Policy and the Policy on
Drops and Withdrawals, noted previously, to their students at the beginning of
each semester.  
  

_Sharing Classrooms_ \- (Daytime Users) -- You must assume that the classroom
is going to be used in the daytime. You should take the following steps to
help:

1\. Daytime classes end approximately at 4:30. Please start your classes

as scheduled.  

2\. At the end of each class:

a. return all furniture and equipment to the original layout;

b. have students clear their desks and take their personal

belongings and classroom materials home with them;

c. clean the markerboard and/or chalkboard.  

3\. If you have a problem with the previous tenant (trash on tables, furniture
out of arrangement, etc.) , inform the Office of the Provost.

****

_Equipment_ \- Please return or secure all equipment used in your class.  

_Lights_ \- General controls are at each door. Turn all lights off at the end
of your class.  

_Food and Drink Policy_ \- **No food or beverage in classrooms.  
**

_Smoking_ \- There is **no smoking allowed** inside the classroom.  

_Parking Policies_ \- All faculty vehicles must have a parking decal displayed
on the right rear bumper or rear window. New decals are available in the
Office of Administration and Finance at the beginning of the academic year at
no charge to adjunct faculty. Tickets will be issued for improper parking and
failure to display a decal.  
  

**MISCELLANEOUS INFORMATION  
  
**

LIBRARY FACILITIES  

Adjunct faculty are strongly encouraged to make use of the Richard Bland
College Library. Richard Bland College students also can check out books from
the libraries of John Tyler Community College and Virginia State University.
Students in the Richmond area can make in-house use of the libraries at
Virginia Commonwealth University (Academic and medical School Campuses), the
University of Richmond, the Richmond Public Library, the Virginia State
Library, and the public libraries in their specific localities.  
  

The Richard Bland College Library is open Monday - Thursday from 8:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.; Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.; and Sunday from 2:00 to 5:00
p.m. The summer hours are 8:00 to 5:00 p.m. Monday - Friday.  

The Richard Bland College Library is a member of VIVA and is electronically
linked with all of the major libraries throughout the state. Extensive
holdings may now be directly accessed electronically through the computers in
the library. INTERNET access also is available through the Richard Bland
College Library.  
  

COUNSELING

Adjunct faculty are encouraged to advise their students of the _counseling
services_ offered by Richard Bland College.  

Counseling Services are available in three main areas:  

1\. Educational Counseling \- for recommending appropriate courses of study,
establishing effective study habits, and planning future goals , and
preparation for transfer to a baccalaureate level institution;  

2\. Vocational Counseling \- assistance in determining the profession or
occupation for which the student is best fitted, or choosing the field of
study in which the student intends to major;  

3\. Personal Counseling \- assistance in overcoming difficulties in personal
and social adjustment, difficulties caused by uncertainties of aims and
pursuits and other problems.  
  

The _Testing Service_ offers students opportunity for gathering information
about themselves for making decisions regarding programs, vocations, and
personal adjustments. Placement tests are provided when needed in English,
mathematics, and other areas to determine course-level placement. Interest
inventories and aptitude tests are available to all students who desire help
in choosing their major field of study.  

_The Office of Student Services_ offers a student academic or vocational
information to assist him/her in making choices. College catalogs and
occupational information may be found in the Library and in the Counselor's
Office.  

The Provost is available to work with students who need assistance in these
and other matters and will refer students to the appropriate College office or
staff member for further assistance and counseling.  
  

ADVISING  

A program of _academic advising_ involving the Office of Student Services and
the faculty is available to all students.  

This program provides personal contacts and assistance to students in planning
their academic studies. Though each student is ultimately responsible for
their academic program, advisors provide information and assistance in
planning academics schedules and courses of study. Major emphasis in placed on
encouraging students to carefully plan their course of study in order to
complete a fully transferable associate degree program.  
  

