![Brown Disabilities Support Services](Blind.gif)

###  "A blind traveler I am, but unaware I am not."  
-Robert Leslie Newman. 

* * *

## Faculty Resources.

* * *

* * *

### Introduction  
Student Responsibilities  
General Procedures  
Appropriate Terminology  
Interacting with Students with Disabilities  
Teaching Students with Disabilities:

###

  * Visual Disabilities

###

  * Hearing Disabilities

###

  * Speech Impairements

###

  * Mobility or Medical Disabilities 

###

  * Manual Disabilities

###

  * Learning Disabilities

###

  * Attention Deficit Disorder

###

  * Psychological Disabilities

###

  * Other

###  
Essential Components of a Course or Program  
Where to Get More Help

* * *

### _INTRODUCTION_

#### Brown University strives to provide an environment that allows for the
utmost in the personal and intellectual growth of all its students. The
University respects each student's dignity, capacity to contribute, and desire
for personal growth and accomplishment. Brown's commitment to students with
disabilities is based on awareness of what students require for success, and
the University seeks to foster an environment in which that success may be
achieved. As part of the commitment to help all students reach their full
academic potential, Brown offers equal educational opportunities and
reasonable accommodations for the needs of qualified students with
disabilities in accordance with the law. Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act
of 1973, recently reinforced by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of
1990, maintains that no qualified individual with disabilities shall, solely
on the basis of their disability, be excluded from participation in, be denied
the benefits of, or otherwise be subjected to discrimination under any program
or activity in higher education.

In keeping with its commitment to students with disabilities, Brown University
provides support services necessary to enable them to develop their maximum
academic potential. Services for these students are provided by various
offices of the University and coordinated by Disability Support Services (DSS)
in the Office of Student Life.

Brown University neither imposes accommodations on students nor pre-empts
their responsibility to disclose and define one's disability and one's need
for accommodation. Self-identifying a disability, and asking for
accommodation, are personal decisions. If a student requests accommodations at
Brown he or she is responsible for completing the process of registering with
Disability Support Services. Although the DSS assists students with
disabilities with many tasks, it is up to the student to take the initiative
and remain actively involved in the accommodation process. Please refer to the
section entitled "Student Responsibilities" for further information.

In addition to the existing support services provided by the University,
faculty and staff also play an integral role in the success of students with
disabilities. The purpose of this handbook, therefore, is to heighten
awareness about disabilities and to provide basic information such that both
you and the students can benefit.

_

### STUDENT RESPONSIBILITIES

_

The decision to self-identify a disability and ask for accommodations is a
personal one for students. If accommodations are requested at Brown, students
must first complete the registration process with Disability Support Services.
This process involves providing clinical documentation regarding the student's
disability to the Coordinator of DSS and meeting with her or him to discuss
appropriate accommodations. Accommodations are not provided until a careful
review of all the provided documentation is made. Guidelines for acceptable
documentation may be found on the [ DSS home
page.](http://www.brown.edu/Student_Services/Office_of_Student_Life/dss/index.html)
Registration with DSS is not mandatory; students may want to arrange their own
accommodations. The University, however, is not required to provide
accommodations to students who have not provided appropriate documentation as
outlined by DSS.

Although DSS assists students with disabilities in many tasks, it is up to
individuals to take the initiative and remain actively involved in the
accommodation process. Students are responsible for requesting accommodations
from DSS in person at least two weeks before they are needed. In addition, the
adequacy of any accommodations should be confirmed as soon as possible and
problems should be brought to the attention of the DSS Coordinator. Students
are also responsible for meeting with their instructors at the beginning of
each semester to discuss all accommodations.

###  _GENERAL PROCEDURES

_

Support from faculty is integral to students' academic success. Instructors
are key players in ensuring that students with disabilities receive the
necessary accommodations in order to reach their potential. It is important to
remember that accommodations are not advantages, but rather, they are a means
of providing each student with full access to Brown's educational programs.
After all, fair evaluations of students should reflect their course
achievement and not their disabilities.

An essential point to keep in mind when teaching students with disabilities is
that you should treat them as you would all your students. The similarities
among students far outweigh any of their differences. After all, students with
disabilities came to college with the same range of backgrounds, experiences,
intelligence, and skills as other students and harbor the same high
aspirations. The only difference is that these students require accommodations
in order to achieve their true potential, which is often masked by their
disability.

The following are some guidelines for accommodating students with disabilities
who may be taking your class. These are general suggestions and accommodations
that are provided should be appropriate for each student's situation.

_

### GENERAL ACCOMMODATIONS_

_Basic Guidelines_

  * Standards for academic credit should not be modified for students with disabilities. All students must meet the required level of understanding and performance competencies for a given course. There may need to be modifications in the evaluation or testing method, but the content should not be changed. 
  * It is unnecessary to rewrite an entire course to accommodate students with disabilities; simply modify the presentation of materials to make it accessible to them. If a specific task is impossible for these students to carry out, consider an alternative assignment unless the task is deemed an essential element of the course (see "Essential Components of a Course or Program" for guidelines on determining what are essential elements). 
  * Treat students with disabilities as individuals. Be careful of making assumptions based on stereotypes. If one student with a particular type of disability has difficulty with a specific task, do not assume that the next student with the same type of disability will experience similar problems. 
  * When ordering textbooks or videos for a class:   
* check with the publisher and get books that available in accessible formats, i.e. computer disk, large print, Braille   
* ask the publisher for an extra desk copy of a text to be made available for services for the hard of hearing/Deaf   
* ask the publisher to donate a copy of the text to Recordings for the Blind and Dyslexic   
* buy versions of videos with closed captioning Early in the Semester: 
  * Announce on the first day of class the desire to speak individually with students with disabilities as soon as possible. Ask these students how their disability affects them and how their learning may be facilitated by you. 
  * Provide students with a course syllabus in advance, if possible, or at the very beginning of the semester. Placing the syllabus on-line, or handing it out in an enlarged format, will enhance its accessibility. Detail all course requirements, including the material to be covered, grading methods, and due dates. 
  * Announce on the first day of class your policies regarding attendance and make-up work. Reinforce this information by clearly stating it in the syllabus. These measures will allow students with disabilities who may anticipate being absent from class to make informed decisions about which courses to take. 
  * A syllabus statement, addressing students with disabilities, will let them know that while you are approachable and willing to work with them, it is their responsibility to communicate their needs to you in advance. The syllabus statement might read, "Brown University is committed to full inclusion of all students. Students who, by nature of a documented disability, require academic accommodations should contact the professor during office hours. Students may also speak with Disability Support Services at x3145 to discuss the process for requesting accommodations." 
  * Announce reading assignments well in advance since it can take several weeks to get a book tape-recorded. Also consider using a textbook that has a companion study guide which students have the option of using. 

_

### Common Classroom Accommodations:

_

  * Change of classroom to an accessible location. 
  * oPreferential seating in the classroom. 
  * Use of various modes and formats to present classroom material, including the chalkboard, overhead projectors, videos, or demonstrations. Provide visual and hands-on learning opportunities when possible. 
  * Faculty member facing the class when speaking and/or wearing an assisted listening device. 
  * Use of interpreters. 
  * Permission to tape record lectures. 
  * Use of volunteer note-takers. 
  * Provision of copies of overhead transparencies and lecture notes. 
  * largement of exam questions, notes, class handouts, and required readings. 
  * Tape-recording required readings. 
  * Alternative access to material covered in an inaccessible field trip or required community event. 
  * Extended time for written assignments. 

_Laboratory accommodations:_  
* providing individual orientations to laboratory and equipment   
* clearly labeling all tools and materials   
* use of specialized adaptive equipment   
* pairing the student with a non-disabled student, the instructor, or a TA 

_Exam accommodations:_  
* extended time   
* a separate room that is quiet and free of distractions   
* breaks when necessary 

_Rare Accommodations_  
These accommodations are uncommon and are only provided in extraordinary
situations to students with severe and well-documented disabilities.

  * Use of a scribe for in-class written exercises. 
  * Tape recording of test and exam questions by faculty member or student assistant. 
  * Tape recording of answers to tests and exams by the student. 
  * Use of computers in class or access to computers for tests, exams, and other required written work. 
  * Alternative test designs, e.g. oral exams, taped exams, take-home exams, proctored exams separate from the rest of the class, and individual demonstrations or presentations. 
  * Alternative or supplementary assignments to evaluate a student's mastery of the course material. Examples include taped interviews, slide presentations, photographic essays, or hand-made models, which may lead to more accurate evaluations. 

The general guidelines listed above may apply to any student with a
disability, and more suggestions can be found in the sections dealing with
specific disabilities. In the effort to provide accommodations, faculty are
also encouraged to communicate regularly with students about their individual
requirements. Students may know from past experience which types of
accommodations work for them and which do not. In addition, Disability Support
Services may be consulted for questions that may arise regarding
accommodations.

* * *

### _APPROPRIATE TERMINOLOGY

_

When speaking to someone who has a condition that is unfamiliar, people are
often wary of saying the wrong thing and giving offense. To help alleviate
some of that uncertainty, here are some general suggestions for speaking to
and about people with disabilities. Although each person has her or his own
style of communication, these guidelines may assist with interactions.

In referring to people with disabilities, it is preferable to use language
that focuses on their abilities rather than their disabilities. Therefore, the
use of the terms "handicapped," "able-bodied," "physically challenged," and
"differently abled" is discouraged. It may also be helpful to keep the
following points in mind when communicating with or about people with
disabilities:

  * Never use the article "the" with a specific disability to describe people with that disability. The preferred term, "people with disabilities," stresses the humanity of the individuals and avoids objectification. If it is appropriate to refer to a person's disability, be sure to use the correct terminology for the specific disability.   
Example: NOT "the blind"  
USE "people who are blind"

  * Be wary of implying that people with disabilities deserve to be pitied, feared, or ignored, or that they are somehow more heroic, courageous, patient, or "special" than others who do not have a disability. 
  * Never use the word "normal" to refer to people who do not have a disability in contrast to people with disabilities. Use "non-disabled" instead.   
Example: NOT "Jane did as well on the exam as the normal students."  
USE "Jane did well on her exam."

  * Avoid using terms that define a person's disability as a limitation.   
Example: NOT "confined to a wheelchair" or "wheelchair bound"  
USE "wheelchair user" or "uses a wheelchair"

  * Terms such as "victim" or "sufferer" should not be used to refer to people who have a disability or disease as this is dehumanizing and implies powerlessness.   
Example: NOT "AIDS sufferer"  
USE "person with HIV/AIDS"

* * *

### _INTERACTING WITH STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES_

Many of us lack experience interacting with people with disabilities. We may
feel awkward around them for fear of inadvertently saying or doing the wrong
thing. Even our best intentions may be thwarted by our misperceptions about
people with disabilities. Furthermore, as educators, stereotypes and unfounded
attitudes we may hold, might color our expectations for their academic
performance. Thus, in a university setting, the first step towards positive
interactions, which will result in a supportive academic environment, is to
evaluate, and possibly revise, our perceptions and attitudes. In addition,
observing the following principles may help to ease discomfort and contribute
to having more successful interactions with students with disabilities both in
the classroom and one-on-one.

  * Keep in mind that students with disabilities are often hampered more by other people's attitudes and by physical and methodological barriers than by any functional limitations they may have. 
  * Maintain an open mind about what a student with a disability can or cannot do. Often we assume that because we have not met someone with a disability in a given field, it cannot be done. Let the student determine her or his own capabilities. 
  * Act as an advocate for treating students with disabilities with the same dignity and respect you would any student. Allowing jokes about people with disabilities, discussing a student's disability with others without prior consent, expecting a student to represent the views of all people with disabilities, and other forms of tokenism are inappropriate. 
  * Understand that there is a joint responsibility for successful interactions. Instructors must work with students in a partnership to find solutions to issues that confront them. 
  * Plan to have classes, sections, and office hours in consistent and accessible locations. Also make yourself accessible in a variety of ways: e.g. telephone, email, and open office hours. 
  * Always address a student with a disability directly. Speak clearly, at a moderate pace and volume, and allow the student time to respond. Do not address the student's companions, including interpreters and aides, rather than the student. Also avoid exaggerating or slowing your speech. 
  * It is not necessary to speak more loudly than usual to a student with a hearing disability. In fact, the louder the voice, the more likely the sound will distort when passing through a hearing aid. 
  * When communicating with a student who has a hearing disability, make sure there is sufficient lighting and that your mouth is not obscured. Be prepared to repeat or rephrase what you are saying to facilitate comprehension. If there is a lack of comprehension, it is not considered insulting by most Deaf or hard of hearing people for you to write down what you are saying. Be aware that stressful and emotional situations make speech reading even more difficult than usual. 
  * Do not pressure a Deaf student to have a conversation using speech reading if the student is uncomfortable communicating in that way. If the student indicates that she or he would like an interpreter, arrangements can be made through DSS. 
  * Face your class while you lecture. Turning towards the blackboard while you talk makes it difficult for any student to hear what you are saying. In addition, facing the class will enable students with hearing disabilities to read your lips. Students with visual disabilities will also benefit from being able to hear you clearly since they may not be able to see what is written on the blackboard. 
  * It is okay to offer assistance to a student with a physical disability but be sure to respect the student's personal space and dignity by asking before assisting. A good way to ask if you can help is, "May I give you a hand with that?" or "Do you want/need me to do anything?" Even if the student refuses, it is still not wrong to ask. 

* * *

### _TEACHING STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES_

A person with a disability is defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act
of 1990 as one who (a) has a physical or mental impairment which substantially
limits one or more major life activities, (b) has a record of such an
impairment, or (c) is regarded as having such an impairment. The range of
disabilities that students may have is broad. While it is not expected that
instructors become an expert on any disabilities, it is important for you to
have some working knowledge of issues that may affect your students. Awareness
of these issues will ensure that appropriate accommodations can be provided in
order for students with disabilities to reach their potential in an academic
setting.

Keep in mind that accommodations ensure complete access to, and full
participation in, the educational process for students with disabilities. They
are not intended to require faculty to compromise academic standards. Rather,
they make it possible for students to truly learn the material presented to
them, and for instructors to fairly evaluate their understanding of the
material, without interference from their disability.

Another point to remember is that many students with disabilities depend on
adaptive technology or special services in order to do their work. Be
understanding when problems arise with these accommodations that result in an
interference with course work.

If any difficulties develop when teaching a student with a disability, attempt
to discern if the problem is disability-related or a problem that any student
would have. Concerns about the success of provided accommodations or the
student's learning should be discussed with her or him. In addition,
Disability Support Services is available for consultation.

_

### VISUAL DISABILITIES_

Visual disabilities encompass disorders in the structure and function of the
eye that are manifested by at least one of the following: (1) visual acuity of
20/70 or less in the better eye after the best possible correction, (2) a
peripheral field so constricted that it affects the student's ability to
function in an academic setting, (3) a progressive loss of vision which may
affect the ability to function in an educational setting. Some examples of
visual disabilities are cataracts, glaucoma, retinal detachment, retinal
pigmentosa, and strabismus.

Students with visual disabilities are constantly challenged by traditional
classroom instructional strategies, which are largely visually dependent.
Although lectures and discussions are easily heard by these students, class
syllabi, textbooks, overhead projector transparencies, maps, videos, written
exams, demonstrations, films, etc., are not easily accessed. Fortunately, many
students with visual disabilities have developed strategies to learn
effectively.

For many individuals with visual disabilities the advancements in modern
technology have been extremely beneficial. The equipment that is now available
makes learning much more accessible to them. Students with visual disabilities
use synthesized voice adaptations or enlarged print when using a computer.
Machines are available to enlarge the print of any printed material, or
printed material can be converted to Braille. Another machine can convert
printed material into a synthesized voice. Some students also use talking
calculators, and for others, a tape recorder is helpful for taking notes.

The following is a listing of suggestions that may assist you when instructing
students with visual disabilities: Suggestions listed in the "General
Procedures" section may also apply to students with visual disabilities.

  * Provide reading lists or syllabi in advance to allow time for arrangements to be made for taping or Brailling of texts and other required readings. Provide copies of classroom materials in large print formats by enlarging them on a photocopier or use at least an 18 point high contrast font when word processing. 
  * Plan field trips and special projects such as internships well in advance and alert field supervisors to whatever adaptations may be needed. 
  * Get to know students with visual disabilities early in the semester. Meet with them and find out what, if anything, they are able to see. Approximately 80% of students with visual disabilities will have some usable vision. 
  * Like anyone else, students with visual disabilities appreciate being asked if help is needed before it is given. Ask a student if she or he would like some help and then wait for a response before acting. 
  * If a student has a harnessed guide dog, it is working and should not be treated as a pet by others in the class. 
  * Be specific when giving directions or alerting students with a visual disability to obstacles. It is more helpful to say, "Please have a seat--there is a chair directly on your right," rather than, "Have a seat over there." Convert directions to the student's perspective. When giving assistance in seating, place the person's hand on the back or arm of the seat. 
  * Never leave a person who is blind in a open area. Instead, lead her or him to the side of the room or to a chair or some landmark from which she or he can obtain a direction for travel. Also do not leave the person abruptly after talking in a crowd, or where there is noise that may obstruct the person's hearing, without saying that you are leaving. Otherwise, she or he may continue talking when no one is listening or present. 
  * When there is a blind student in the classroom, remember not to use phrases such as "this and that." For example, "The sum of this, plus that, equals that," is very confusing. 
  * By using enhanced verbal descriptions in your class, blind students as well as sighted, will benefit from the vivid descriptive materials. Use familiar objects in comparisons and analogies that don't depend on prior visual knowledge, such as foods or objects found around the house. 
  * Words and phrases that refer to sight, such as "I'll see you later," are commonly used expressions and usually go unnoticed unless the speaker is particularly self-conscious. Students with vision loss can still "see" what is meant by such expressions and may not be offended by them. They may be embarrassed, however, by clumsy attempts to avoid such common usage. 
  * When writing on the blackboard or using overheads, read aloud the written material. 
  * During discussions, try to acknowledge students by name so that students with visual disabilities will know who is participating. 
  * When lecturing, pace the presentation of material; if referring to a textbook or handout, allow sufficient time for students to find the information. 
  * Partially sighted students should not be overlooked. They sometimes have greater difficulty in college than do totally blind students, partly because some try to "blend in," and don't use special assistance or ask questions. 

_

### HEARING DISABILITIES_

Students with hearing disabilities may experience varying degrees of hearing
loss. Their hearing disability may be due to conditions such as conductive
hearing impairment or Deafness, sensorineural hearing impairment or Deafness,
high or low tone hearing loss or Deafness, or acoustic trauma hearing loss or
Deafness. Gestures and guttural sounds made by a person who is Deaf or hard of
hearing are not signs of anger, belligerence, or intoxication, but they may be
the individual's only method of nonspoken communication. Keep in mind,
however, that many individuals with hearing disabilities have very clear
speech.

People who are Deaf or hard of hearing also communicate in a variety of
nonspoken ways depending on where they were educated and what type of
education they received. The following are some of the ways that Deaf or hard
of hearing people communicate:

  * American Sign Language (ASL) - Many people born profoundly Deaf since birth (pre-lingually Deaf) identify with this distinct language and culture. ASL is a rich, yet different language than English, used by Deaf people in the U.S. Students who use ASL rely primarily on a qualified ASL interpreter in the classroom. 
  * Various Forms of Signed English - Sign systems exist in which Deaf persons use sign language and mouth movements which follow the syntax of English. Students who use this type of signing will rely on a qualified Signed English Transliterator in the classroom. 
  * Cued Speech - Some Deaf people have been educated in a system which uses specific hand signals representing the sounds of the English language. The cues, when used along with lip movements, help a Deaf person to more clearly understand the numerous words which look alike on the lips. 
  * Speech Reading - Also known as lip reading, this method is the least precise way of communicating with a Deaf or hard of hearing person. It is estimated that only 30% of words in the English language are understood via speech reading. This method is guess-work at best. When speech reading is used, it is often helpful to have a pen and paper ready to write down words which may be difficult for the student to discern. 
  * FM and Infrared Loop Systems - Since hearing aids amplify speech sounds, as well as environmental noises such as noisy air conditioning, the FM System or Infrared Loop System cuts out background noises and allows a hard of hearing person to receive a spoken message sent directly to the hearing aid. Faculty wear a microphone that allows the student to pick up the signal broadcast solely in his or her hearing aid. Although devices such as hearing aids do help, it is important to remember that they still do not represent full hearing acuity. 
  * Text Telephones (TTY/TT/TTD) - Text telephones, identified by the acronym TTY (and sometimes TT or TTD), enable Deaf and hard of hearing people to have conversations by typing messages that are sent through the telephone network. A TTY works by converting text messages into a sound-based code that sounds like loud beeps on the telephone line. Another TTY, used by the person being called, then decodes the sounds back into text. TTY's are available at DSS. 
  * Telephone Relay Service (TRS) - Direct telephone conversations can take place only if each party has a TTY. If a user needs to call a number where there is no TTY, then the person typically uses a telephone relay service (TRS). The TRS operator reads the TTY messages from the caller to the person who does not have a TTY, and types that person's spoken messages back to the TTY user. In Rhode Island, call Relay Rhode Island at 1-800-745-5555 (TTY/voice) for this service. 

Deaf or hard of hearing people require a variety of services in the classroom
and during special events on campus. These services might include the
following:

  * Interpreting Services - Sign Language interpreters are highly trained qualified professionals who have passed National Certification standards and have experience interpreting in a college setting. Interpreters always work with a one-to-several second time lag. Be sure to allow the Deaf student time to receive what is interpreted. 
  * Oral Interpreting - Many Deaf and hard of hearing people rely solely on speech reading to receive information in a classroom. Given that classrooms are rarely ideal for speech reading (i.e. the lighting may be inadequate, faculty may often turn to face the board, or the speaker may have facial hair or an accent), professionals are used to clearly mouth everything being said to the student. The interpreter is trained to clarify words that may look similar on the lips and may include some natural gestures if necessary, to ensure comprehension. 
  * Cued Speech Transliterators - These professionals have experience cueing in an academic setting. Transliterators, like sign interpreters, often cue with a few seconds time lag as well. Be sure to allow the student enough time to receive the cued information. 
  * CART (Computer Aided Real-Time) Reporters - These individuals are trained court stenographers who use a computer program which changes steno into written English using a steno machine and a laptop computer. A Deaf or hard of hearing student will read the lecture verbatim on the laptop as it is being given in class. This service is used primarily if a student does not sign, use cued speech, or have any other way to receive direct first hand information in a classroom. 
  * C-Print(tm) Captionists - C-Print(tm) is a computer-aided speech-to-print transcription system. Captionists using this system type the lecture and students' comments into a laptop computer. The typed information is then displayed simultaneously on a second laptop or television monitor for students to read during class. Afterward, the printed text is available to students for review purposes. 
  * Transcription Services - At times it may be appropriate to record a lecture and have it transcribed, especially if the student is using speech reading in the class but wants to ensure that pieces of information are not missed entirely or misunderstood. 
  * Note-Taking Services - Given that Deaf and hard of hearing students often must focus on an interpreter, a CART Reporter, etc., it is difficult to simultaneously take quality notes. Therefore, students with a hearing loss will benefit from a printed copy of faculty lecture notes. They will also require transcripts of pre-recorded materials, including film and videotape soundtracks, if captioning is not available and Sign Language is not appropriate. Every effort should be made to enlist volunteer note-takers in the class. 
  * Closed Captioning - Many films and videotapes used as instructional materials in a class may be available in a closed caption version. It is crucial that closed caption versions be used in a class with a Deaf or hard of hearing student. When caption versions are not available, arrangements should be made with the student and with DSS to have the film/videotape interpreted or transcribed. 

Students who are Deaf or hard of hearing are diverse and do not all have
similar characteristics. Individuals will employ different methods of
communication as detailed above. Regardless of the method used, most students
who are Deaf or hard of hearing have experience communicating with the hearing
population. Let these students be your guide on how best to communicate with
them. To further enhance communication, note that many individuals who are
Deaf or hard of hearing rely heavily upon visual input when communicating.
Learning to use the visual aspects of communication (i.e. body language,
gestures, and facial expression) often feels awkward to those who are more
accustomed to the auditory; however, it is essential that faculty transcend
this feeling and learn to effectively communicate with students who are Deaf
or hard of hearing.

It is essential to recognize that English is actually a second language for
many students who are Deaf and some students who are hard of hearing. When
grading written assignments and/or essay tests, it is important to be
objective. Emphasis should be placed on accurate and comprehensive content
rather than writing styles. Students should be encouraged to go to the Writing
Center for assistance in writing if necessary.

The following is a list of suggestions for enhancing classroom learning for
students who are Deaf or hard of hearing. Guidelines listed in the "General
Procedures" section may also be useful.

  * Make sure you have a Deaf student's attention before speaking. A light touch on the shoulder, a wave, or other visual signal will help. 
  * Use visual aids to reinforce spoken presentations when possible. However, do not talk with your back to the class when writing on the blackboard. It destroys any chance of the student getting facial or speech reading cues. 
  * Make sure that your face is clearly visible at all times. Keep your hands away from your face and mouth while speaking. Sitting with your back to a window, gum chewing, cigarette smoking, pencil biting, and similar obstructions of the lips can interfere with effectiveness of communication. Facial hair that partially or completely obscures the lips will also impede communication with students with hearing disabilities. 
  * Be flexible with your language. If a word is not understood, try another word rather than simply repeating yourself or saying it louder. 
  * When showing slides, movies, or videos, it is helpful if an outline or summary of the materials to be covered is provided. A closed-caption version of any audiovisual presentation should be used if one is available. If an interpreter is used in the classroom, ensuring that she or he is visible is important. 
  * When questions are asked from the class, it would be of great help if the questions are repeated before answering, or phrase the answers in such a way that the questions are obvious. If you have given the student preferential seating so that you can be seen and heard easily, she or he may not be able to see and hear the rest of the class. 
  * Beware of giving procedural information while handing out papers. Loss of eye contact may mean loss of information. Make sure such information is clearly understood by the student. Likewise, allow time for reading materials that are passed out before beginning any discussion of those materials. 
  * If the student needs to use either Sign Language or oral interpreting services, discuss with the student and the interpreter(s) where it would be best for the interpreter(s) to be located in order to provide the greatest benefit for the student without distracting other class members. Experimenting with different placements may be necessary until the most successful one is found. It is important not to place the interpreter(s) within the path of the instructor because walking in front of the interpreter causes information to be lost. 
  * The interpreter is in the classroom only to facilitate communication. She or he should not be asked to run errands, proctor exams, or discuss the student's academic or personal life. The interpreter should not participate in the class in any way and must not express her or his personal opinions at any time. 
  * The interpreting process is highly taxing, both mentally and physically. If there is only one interpreter in the classroom, she or he will need a break after 45 minutes of working. Please plan your lectures with this in mind. In the event that there are two interpreters in the classroom, they will provide their own breaks by alternating the interpreter responsibilities. 
  * The interpreter is in the classroom to facilitate communication for both the student and the instructor. Speak directly to the student as you would to any other student. Feel free to ask for clarification of what the student has said if it seems unclear by speaking to the student whose clarification will be interpreted to you by the interpreter. Likewise, the interpreter may request clarification from the instructor to ensure accuracy of the information conveyed. 

_

### SPEECH IMPAIRMENTS

_

Speech impairments interfere with communication, learning, vocational
training, and social adjustment. They include disorders of language,
articulation, fluency, or voice. Some examples of speech impairments are cleft
lip and/or palate, difficulties in projection, as in chronic hoarseness and
esophageal speech, and fluency problems, as in stuttering and nominal aphasia,
that alters the articulation of particular words or terms.

Some speech difficulties can be managed by such mechanical devices as
electronic "speaking" machines or computerized voice synthesizers. Other
individuals may be treated through speech therapy. Any speech impairment can
be aggravated by the anxiety inherent in oral communication.

The most important element in teaching students with speech impairments is
patience. Guidelines listed in the "General Procedures" section may apply to
teaching these students. The following are some additional strategies for
enhancing effectiveness in the classroom.  Students the opportunity, but do
not force them to speak in class. Calling on them and putting them "on the
spot" will only serve to increase their anxiety levels.

* Permit students the time they require to express themselves, without unsolicited aid in filling in gaps in their speech. 
* Maintain comfortable eye contact and posture with the student at all times. 
* Address students naturally and in a regular speaking voice. Do not assume that they cannot hear or comprehend what you are saying. 
* Consider course modifications, such as one-to-one presentations and the use of a computer with a voice synthesizer, in lieu of a traditional oral presentation. 

_

### MOBILITY OR MEDICAL DISABILITIES

_

A wide range of conditions may limit mobility. Among the most common permanent
disorders are musculoskeletal disabilities, such as partial or total
paralysis, amputation, or severe injury; active sickle cell anemia; muscular
dystrophy; multiple sclerosis; and cerebral palsy. Students with mobility or
medical impairments may have a wide variety of characteristics, even with the
same disability. Individuals who have experienced a spinal cord injury, for
example, are likely to exhibit differing degrees of limitations. Often
crutches, braces, a wheelchair, or customized vehicles are used by students
with mobility disabilities. In some instances, a student may be accompanied to
class by a personal care attendant.

Many medical impairments are hidden disabilities and caused by such conditions
as arthritis, cardiopulmonary disorders, cancer, lupus, cystic fibrosis,
orthopedic limitations, post surgery status, chronic fatigue syndrome, asthma,
seizure disorder, etc. The strength, speed, endurance, and coordination of
students with these conditions may be affected. They may have limited energy;
have difficulty walking, standing or sitting for long periods of time; or have
any number of other disabling characteristics.

The degree of disability may vary widely among students with mobility or
medical disabilities. Some will require little or no accommodations, while
others may experience difficulty with things such as going to and from class,
performing in class, and managing out-of-class assignments. A major concern of
students who are physically disabled is accessibility of classrooms. Those who
use wheelchairs, braces, crutches, canes, or prostheses, or who fatigue
easily, find it difficult moving about, especially within the time constraints
imposed by class schedules. Thus, occasional lateness may be unavoidable.
Furthermore, tardiness or absence may be caused by problems not within the
students' control, such as adaptive transportation delays, elevator or
wheelchair malfunctioning, or inclement weather.

In-class accommodations for students with mobility or medical disabilities
must be tailored to the individual. The following list of suggestions may be
helpful in assisting these students. Keep in mind, however, that these are
general suggestions and any accommodations should fit the student and her or
his disability. Additional suggestions may also be found in the "General
Procedures" section.

  * Consider whether physical access to a classroom is a problem either before or early in the semester and discuss it with the student. Be prepared to arrange for a change of classroom or building if it is not accessible to her or him. Also be prepared to move class if something such as an elevator is temporarily out of service and the location is no longer accessible to the student. 
  * In a few situations a student may be unable to use the type of chair provided in a particular classroom and special seating arrangements will need to be made. 
  * Students who have upper body limitations may need assistance taking notes. Some may choose to tape record lectures, some will likely get notes from another student in class, or some may ask the instructor for assistance in accessing class notes. 
  * In laboratory courses, it is likely that anyone using a wheelchair will need a lower lab table to accommodate the wheelchair and to allow the student to work at a comfortable level where she or he can manipulate tools and perform the experiment alone. Make sure, however, that the lower lab table has sufficient under-counter knee clearance. 
  * Instructors in courses requiring field trips or internships need to work with the student to arrange transportation and assure accessibility of the destination if the student uses a wheelchair. If a student has severe energy limitations, she or he will likely address this situation, and special arrangements may be necessary. 
  * Some students experience regular flare-ups of a chronic condition requiring bed rest and/or hospitalization. In most situations students are able to make up the incomplete work, but they may need extra time. Other arrangements may have to be made if a student misses class excessively and/or is unable to make up the essential requirements of the class. 
  * For students with mobility impairments, use of the library for reading or research assignments may present obstacles. The student may have to prearrange with library personnel to access bookshelves, microfiche, and other equipment. Completion of required work may be delayed as a result. Instructors should be receptive to extending deadlines or giving alternative assignments to accommodate these students. 

_

### MANUAL DISABILITIES_

Students with manual disabilities have limited hand function due to conditions
such as arthritis, amputation, repetitive stress injury, carpal tunnel,
serious injury, or broken bones. These students require assistance with many
aspects of student life. They may have difficulty with routine tasks,
including taking notes, performing experiments, and taking exams, both in the
classroom and in the laboratory. Suggestions for accommodations may be found
in the "General Procedures" section. The following are additional guidelines
for accommodations and considerations that would be helpful to students with
hand function limitations in their academic pursuits.

  * Instructors should be aware of classroom accessibility. Often levered door handles or other adaptations are necessary. 
  * When using an overhead projector or writing on the blackboard, consider making those materials available as a class handout. 
  * Students should be permitted to complete any in-class written assignments outside of class with the use of a scribe, or other appropriate aid, if necessary. An unplanned written exercise, such as filling out forms during class, may require student or faculty assistance. 

_

### LEARNING DISABILITIES

_

Learning disabilities (LD) is a generic term that refers to a group of
disorders which are manifested by significant difficulties in at least one of
the following areas: oral expression, listening comprehension, written
expression, basic reading skills, reading comprehension, mathematical
calculation, or problem solving. People who have learning disabilities may
also have some difficulty with sustained attention, time management, or social
skills.

Students with LD have average or above-average intelligence, but are hampered
in their demonstration of their capabilities such that there is often a marked
discrepancy between achievement and potential in individuals with LD. The
effects of learning disabilities on students' academic life are different for
different people, even if they have the same type of learning disability. Each
individual's experience will be unique, and the severity of his or her
learning disability will vary. As a result, students may not realize that they
have a learning disability until they are placed in a situation where their
coping strategies are no longer effective.

Awareness of some of the characteristics of individuals with LD, therefore,
serves two functions for instructors. First, your knowledge about learning
disabilities may help you to better understand the needs of your students and
make you more sensitive to areas in which they may have difficulty. For
instance, although many students with LD are highly articulate, some have
severe difficulty in speaking, responding, or reading in front of groups.
Thus, it would be beneficial to students if you are aware of this issue and
are able to assess their ability to participate in classroom activities. Your
knowledge will make you more prepared to accommodate your students with LD and
to discuss privately with them any academic difficulties that they may face.

Secondly, your knowledge of the attributes of individuals with LD will provide
a basis for referral of undiagnosed students taking your classes who
demonstrate these characteristics for testing. It is important to keep in
mind, however, that while many students may experience difficulties in some of
these following categories at one time or another, students with LD will often
have difficulties in several of these areas with varying degrees of severity.
In fact, students who have a learning disability are characterized by a
pattern of strengths and weaknesses. Thus, individuals may be strong in some
areas and significantly weak in others.

  * Reading--slow reader, have to re-read several times, experience headaches or falling asleep when reading 
  * Writing--difficulty organizing thoughts, procrastination 
  * Spelling--very poor speller 
  * Listening--difficulty following what someone is saying, difficulty translating speech into written language 
  * Coordination/Orientation--problems with left/right, hyperactivity 
  * Memory--forget names, day of the week, etc., lose things often 
  * Concentration--easily distracted, tire easily when studying 
  * Tests--often does not finish in the allotted time, often misinterprets questions or directions on tests 
  * Mathematics-- reversing numbers, difficulty understanding word problems 
  * Foreign Languages--difficulty with vocabulary and oral performance 
  * Psychological Barriers--feeling lazy, stupid, ashamed 
  * Speech--difficulty getting a point across, stuttering 

Despite their difficulties, students with learning disabilities can and do
succeed in the classroom. They can and do meet the same course requirements
and performance standards as all other students when allowed to use learning
strategies that compensate for their specific deficits. Students with learning
disabilities should be expected to perform at a level commensurate with their
peers; instructors should not expect less from them.

For students with learning disabilities, comprehension and retention of class
material are more likely when there is clarity, repetition, variety, and
flexibility in teaching style. Thus, in order for students with LD to have the
same opportunities to learn as their peers, several teaching strategies should
be taken into consideration. The following guidelines may, therefore, be
helpful to faculty in working with students with various types of learning
disabilities in the classroom and in the laboratory. Further suggestions may
be found in the section titled "General Procedures."

_For Auditory Learning Disabilities_

Some students may experience difficulty integrating information presented
orally, possibly resulting in an inability to easily follow the logic and
organization of a lecture.

  * During class, provide periodic summaries of the important points. At the end of the lecture, briefly recap the key points to stress their importance one more time. Write new terms and important information on the chalkboard or on an overhead transparency, and use them in context to further convey meaning. 
  * When dealing with abstract concepts, paraphrase them in specific terms--illustrate them with concrete examples, personal anecdotes, hands-on models, or visual tools, such as charts and graphs. 
  * Instructors should speak distinctly and at a relaxed pace, pausing occasionally to allow students to ask questions or to catch up in their note-taking. 
  * Try to recognize and respond to non-verbal signals of confusion or frustration. Gauge students' understanding by periodically asking them to volunteer an example, a summary, or a response to a question. Keep in mind that students with LD sometimes have difficulty with oral expression. Thus, be sure to only call on volunteers to avoid unnecessary embarrassment. 

_For Visual Learning Disabilities_

Students with LD often read at a slow and deliberate pace, and their
comprehension may be impaired. This is particularly true when dealing with
large quantities of material. For these students, comprehension and speed are
expedited dramatically with the addition of auditory input.

  * Make lists of required readings well before the first day of class to allow students to begin their reading early or to arrange to obtain texts on tape. 
  * Arrange for handouts to be tape-recorded before they are given out in class. 
  * Read aloud material that is written on the chalkboard or overhead transparencies. 
  * Provide students with chapter outlines or study guides that cue them to key points in their readings. For Problems with Memory Processing Memory or sequencing difficulties may impede students' execution of complicated directions. 
  * Keep oral instructions concise. 
  * Repeat or re-word complicated directions. 
  * To avoid confusion, give assignments both orally and in written form. 

_

### ATTENTION DEFICIT HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER_

The essential feature of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is a
persistent pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity that is more frequent
and severe than is typically observed in individuals at a comparable level of
development. Diagnosis occurs only after a series of tests have ruled out
other disorders of a neurological or psychological nature which might explain
the individual's behavior.

Students who are diagnosed with ADHD frequently exhibit many characteristics
that make learning difficult. Those who have attention problems are easily
distracted by extraneous stimuli, such as buzzing fluorescent lights in the
classroom; have difficulty sustaining attention during lectures or
conversation; have difficulty persisting in sedentary activities like
studying; are frequently disorganized; often lose things; and have difficulty
completing tasks. Those who are hyperactive, in addition to having attention
problems, may have persistent body movements, have difficulty remaining
seated, have difficulty pursuing quiet activities, may blurt out answers to
questions before the questions have been completed, and may persist in
speaking when doing so is inappropriate. Frequently, the effects of the
characteristics of ADHD impact not only students' academic performance, but
their socialization in the workplace and at home as well.

Some students who have ADHD take medication that helps her or him focus on
tasks better. The goal of taking the medication is to increase the attention
span while decreasing distractibility and impulsiveness.

As with any other type of disability, there is considerable variability among
students diagnosed as having ADHD. The following is a list of suggestions that
may be helpful when teaching these students, but keep in mind that they will
not be helpful to all students with ADHD due to the uniqueness of each
individual's experience. More guidelines are also listed in the "General
Procedures" section.

  * Students with ADHD perform better if given a syllabus with clearly delineated expectations and due dates. 
  * Break long assignments into smaller parts and provide feedback between parts. Frequent opportunities for feedback are another way to provide students with needed structure. 
  * Students with ADHD frequently have difficulty paying attention to a class lecture for an extended period of time. If a class meets for the equivalent of two periods, a break may be necessary after 45 minutes. 
  * Remind students to check their work, especially if it appears rushed or sloppy. 

_

### PSYCHOLOGICAL DISABILITIES_

A common psychological disability among college students is depression,
whether long-standing or temporary in nature. It may be a response to
inordinate pressures at school, on the job, at home, or in students' social
lives. Depression may manifest itself as apathy, disinterest, inattention,
impaired concentration, irritability, fatigue, or other physical symptoms
resulting from changes in eating, sleeping, and other living patterns.

Anxiety is another prevalent psychological disability among college students
and may also be a reaction to stress. Students who experience severe anxiety
may have reduced concentration and distorted perceptions that interfere with
the learning process. Anxiety may manifest itself as withdrawal, constant
talking, complaining, joking, crying, or extreme fear, sometimes to the point
of panic. Bodily symptoms might include episodes of lightheadedness or
hyperventilation.

While many students who have a history of psychological disabilities are
stable and show no symptoms, a few may have fluctuations in behavior and
performance. Some may experience side effects when increasing or decreasing
their medication. These students have as little control over their
disabilities as do students with physical disabilities. Note, however, that
having a documented psychological disability does not entitle students to
disrupt a class or any other part of the university experience. Students with
psychological disabilities are expected to adhere to every rule and regulation
pertaining to the behavior of all students as detailed in the Tenets of
Community Behavior. It is important to acknowledge, however, that most of
these students are not disruptive at all. Course participation is as much a
part of their goals as for students without disabilities, and with the
appropriate planning, students with psychological disabilities can be expected
to participate fully in the academic environment.

Psychological disabilities may pose many challenges to effective study. A
common difficulty faced by students with a psychological disability is low
motivation, or even apathy. Students may also have trouble concentrating as a
result of the disability or as a side effect of medication. These problems can
be both frustrating and anxiety-provoking for the individual. Instructors
should remember that some people with psychological disabilities may be
hesitant to disclose their history due to a fear of the stigma that could
result. This is true even when a student may be experiencing academic
difficulties. Faculty should respect the student's privacy and treat any
disclosures of this nature with the utmost tact and confidentiality. The
following are some practical ways for faculty to help identified students with
psychological disabilities succeed in the classroom. Additional guidelines
that may be relevant can be found in the "General Procedures" section.

  * Understand the facts about the disability. Do not pre-judge or assume that a student is unmotivated or lazy. Often the symptoms of a psychological disability, or the effects of medication, can affect a student's ability to submit work on time or take exams in a traditional manner. 
  * Ask what support the student may need. She or he is the expert on what specific accommodations will make a difference. 
  * Often the type and level of support needed by students with a psychological disability will fluctuate. Most illnesses are episodic and many students may have extended periods where they do not need or want any special consideration. Let each student's ability to cope with academic requirements, and not the clinical diagnosis, be your guide. 
  * Discuss any inappropriate behavior with the student privately and forthrightly, delineating the limits of acceptable conduct. In your discussion, do not attempt to diagnose or treat the student, but focus only on the student's conduct in the course. 
  * Nonverbal communication, i.e. tone of voice, posture, eye contact, facial expression, and physical distance between speakers, is the key to talking to students with psychological disabilities. The goal is for the instructor to create an inviting, comfortable setting and an environment of trust. 
  * If the student has periods of poor concentration, suggest audio-taping lectures to supplement note-taking. This will allow the student to review lecture material at her or his own pace. Preferential seating near the front of the class may also be beneficial for staying focused. 
  * Exam time is stressful for everyone and for a student with a psychological disability, stress can be especially difficult to handle. Speak with the student prior to deadlines about appropriate mechanisms that will not disadvantage either the student with the disability or other students in the class. 
  * Students may be admitted to a hospital or need to take time off. This does not necessarily mean that they will need to defer or end their studies. It is possible, with the appropriate support, to continue with academic progress. 

_

### OTHER DISABILITIES_

While it is impossible to list all disabilities, the same non-discriminatory
policies of access and accommodation apply to any disability that interferes
with academic life. These disabilities, whether they are visible or not, may
necessitate an administrative or academic adjustment in order to accommodate
the individual.

Some disabling conditions that may affect students include, but are not
limited to, arthritis, cancer, diabetes, epilepsy, chronic fatigue syndrome,
HIV/AIDS, multiple sclerosis, multiple chemical sensitivities, hemophilia,
cystic fibrosis, traumatic brain injury, and Tourette's Syndrome. Symptoms
associated with these conditions, such as limited mobility or impaired vision,
and the types of intervention required for students, may resemble those
covered elsewhere for other disabilities. It is essential for faculty to touch
base with students with disabilities to identify their particular disability
and to discuss both its manifestations and the necessary accommodations for
the students' success in the classroom. Below are brief descriptions of some
of the more prevalent disabilities among students, as well as recommended
accommodations. Accommodations listed in the "General Procedures" section may
also apply.

_HIV/AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome)_

HIV/AIDS destroys the body's immune system and leaves the person vulnerable to
infections and cancers that can usually be fought off when the immune system
is in working order. Although effects of HIV/AIDS are varied, extreme fatigue
is a common symptom. Due to the variability in manifestations of this
condition, classroom accommodations will likewise vary. Please refer to
applicable sections on specific disabilities to accommodate students with
HIV/AIDS. Remember that strict confidentiality is a must because of the
intense social stigma surrounding this condition.

_Cancer_

Cancer can occur in almost any organ system of the body, thus, making its
disabling effects greatly variable from one person to another. Some people
experience visual problems, lack of balance and coordination, joint pains,
backaches, headaches, abdominal pains, drowsiness, lethargy, difficulty in
breathing and swallowing, weakness, bleeding, or anemia. Furthermore, the
treatments for cancer, namely radiation, chemotherapy, and surgery, may cause
additional symptoms. These include violent nausea, drowsiness, fatigue,
paralysis, sensory deficits, and language and memory problems. For classroom
accommodations, please refer to applicable sections on specific disabilities.

_Cerebral Palsy_

Cerebral Palsy is caused by an injury to the brain, which may have occurred
before, during, or shortly after birth. The injury results in disorders of
posture or movement. The effects of cerebral palsy vary from mild to severe.
In some people, the condition is barely noticeable, and in others, there may
be significant limitations. Manifestations may include involuntary muscle
contractions, rigidity, spasms, poor balance, or poor spatial relations.
Visual, auditory, speech, hand function, and mobility problems might also
occur, as well as convulsive disorders. For appropriate classroom
accommodations, refer to the sections on visual impairments, speech
impairments, mobility or medical disabilities, and manual disabilities.

_Traumatic Brain Injury_

Students with Traumatic Brain Injury often exhibit one or more of the
following symptoms: short-term memory problems, serious attention deficits,
auditory dysfunction, cognitive deficits, behavioral problems, problems of
judgment, and serious anxiety attacks. For classroom accommodations, refer to
the sections on learning disabilities and seizure disorders.

_Multiple Sclerosis_

Multiple Sclerosis is a progressive disease of the central nervous system that
is characterized by a decline of muscle control. Symptoms may range from mild
to severe and may include blurred vision, legal blindness, tremors, weakness
or numbness in the limb

