AUBURN UNIVERSITY

4.  Instruction

* * *

 **Click on the link below to select specific sections.**

 **Instruction**

 **1.The University's Concern for Good Teaching**

 **2.Teaching Loads**

 **3.Resources for Improved Teaching Effectiveness**

 **     A. Teaching Grant-In-Aid Programs**

 **     B. General Fee Equipment Fund**

 **     C. University Lectures Program**

 **     D. Professional Improvement Leave**

 **4.Evaluation of Teaching**

 **5.Awards**

 **6.Academic Regulations**

 **     A. Class Attendance and Related Procedures**

 **     B. Violations of Honesty and Integrity**

 **     C. Student Academic Grievance**

 **     D. Examinations and Reporting of Grades**

 **     E. Grade Assignment for Courses Dropped**

 **     F. Retention of Exams by Faculty**

 **7.The Graduate School**

 **     A. The Graduate Council**

 **     B. The Graduate Faculty**

 **         1\. Introduction**

 **         2\. Graduate Faculty Membership**

 **         3\. Nomination and Review of Candidates**

 **         4\. Periodic Review of Department Plans**

 **8.Textbooks**

 **9.Secretarial and Clerical Assistance**

 **10.Instructional Media Programs**

 **11.Guidelines for Instructing Students with Special Needs**

* * *

  
  
  
  
  
  

 **CHAPTER 4:  
INSTRUCTION  
  
**

  

**I. THE UNIVERSITY'S CONCERN FOR GOOD TEACHING  
**

  
Auburn University recognizes that the classroom experience represents
something of a partnership between student and professor. For the partnership
to be successful, each has a right to expect certain things of the other: just
as the professor may expect students to meet their responsibilities which he
or she has made explicit on such matters as instructional objectives and
evaluation procedures, so the student should expect the professor to meet his
or her obligations also. The University believes that each faculty member in
conducting classes should exhibit high standards of professional behavior
through his/her scholarship, personal integrity, and enthusiasm for the
profession of teaching.

More specifically, each professor has a responsibility to himself or herself
and to his or her students:

1\. To state, in writing at an early meeting of the class, specific course
objectives and the manner in which they are to be attained.

2\. To exercise care in the organization and presentation of all materials
toward the end of achieving the stated instructional objectives.

3\. To state, in writing at an early meeting of the class, grading and
evaluation procedures, including:

    a. the grading system and method of determining the final grade;

    b. the relative importance of assigned papers, quizzes, examinations, class preparation, and participation; 

    c. the approximate schedule for examinations (other than the final exam); and 

    d. the policy on unannounced quizzes.   
4\. To arrive promptly at all scheduled classes. If absence is anticipated,
the class should be informed in advance of contingency arrangements.

5\. To maintain regular, posted office hours each week for conferences with
students.

6\. To grade and return examinations within a reasonable period of time.

The University's concern for good teaching is spelled out in the Board of
Trustees Policies Manual. The following excerpt (pp. C-1-2), "Position on
Quality Instruction," was adopted in 1989.

    The Board of Trustees views the instruction of students as the foremost activity of Auburn University. It is proud of the outstanding levels of quality achieved throughout the institution in preparing graduates to enter the professions, graduate programs and leadership positions in all walks of life. To underscore and support this process, the Board identifies those characteristics that it views to be central to the teaching/learning process.

    1\. Class sizes, particularly at the freshman and sophomore levels, should be sufficiently small to provide for individual student attention and opportunity for free exchange of ideas.

    2\. Faculty teaching loads should not be so burdensome as to preclude the availability of faculty for individual or small-group counseling, advising, and informal discussion with students.

    3\. Early in their Auburn career, all students should have opportunity for exposure to the University's best scholars. Senior faculty should have some teaching responsibility at the lower division level.

    4\. Particular care should be exercised to assure that those who have classroom instructional responsibility possess strong communication skills.

    5\. Innovative teaching approaches should be encouraged. To foster creativity in the instructional arena, a "learning center" should be organized to assist any faculty member who may desire its use. Junior faculty should be supervised carefully to assure that support is provided as needed.

    6\. The curriculum should reflect a desire that graduates be effective in communication and reasoning skills, as well as being well founded in the major discipline.

    7\. There should be an honors program and other similar opportunities for the exceptionally talented and curious student.

    8\. Outstanding teaching will be recognized and rewarded.

    9\. The Board supports a regular, validated, and effective faculty evaluation system that relies upon student, peer, and administrator input. Such a program should have performance improvement as its primary goal.

    10\. The Board will strive to provide adequate operating budgets, so that support materials are available to enhance the teaching/learning process.

    Teaching is a dynamic and complex activity, and learning is an individual process. The Board of Trustees recognizes that a wide variety of teaching methods are available, that no singular approach is superior to others, and that circumstances dictate the style most appropriate. The Board recognizes and congratulates the faculty and administration on their ability to attract to Auburn high quality students. By endorsing this statement, the Board desires that faculty, department heads, and deans be aware of its interest in and support of their dedicated efforts to offer Auburn students the highest possible quality of instruction.

Back to top

 **2\. TEACHING LOADS  
**

  
 _The University recognizes the impossibility of creating a "teaching load"
formula that would be applicable to the complex academic programs embraced by
the various colleges, schools and departments. Considerable flexibility is
given to the individual department head, in consultation with the dean, in
assigning faculty workloads to meet the department's instructional, research,
and public service commitments. Faculty workloads are regularly reported to
the Provost and are utilized by the Central Administration of the University
in budgetary management of the academic program._

Although there is no set teaching load formula at the University level,
normally every attempt is made to give appropriate reduction in the classroom
assignments of those faculty significantly engaged in research, graduate
teaching, the direction of graduate student theses, or University service.
Such reduction should be applied equitably to all eligible faculty. However,
the University believes it is important that senior faculty who have
distinguished themselves through research and publication be directly involved
in undergraduate teaching.

  

Back to top

 **3\. RESOURCES FOR IMPROVED TEACHING EFFECTIVENESS  
**

  

 **A. TEACHING GRANT-IN-AID PROGRAMS  
**

  
 _Department heads, individual faculty members, and academic deans are
encouraged to work together for the innovation and improvement of instruction.
One avenue through which the University will support such efforts, to the
limit of available funds, is the Teaching Grant-in-Aid program. Both
competitive and discretionary grants are available through the Office of the
Provost. The purpose of the Teaching Grant-in-Aid program is to encourage
improvement of teaching through financial support of selected projects
(competitive awards may be funded up to a maximum of $15,000 and discretionary
grants to a maximum of $1,000). Projects should directly benefit the teacher,
the students, and the University's overall teaching program. Full-time faculty
are eligible to apply. The call for proposals for competitive grants is issued
by the Provost, typically during the fall semester with a spring semester
deadline for application. Funding of projects may commence June 1 and include
support of summer teaching improvement activities. Discretionary grants may be
considered anytime throughout the year. From time to time, grants may be
designated by the University for the advancement of particular instructional
programs, such as Computer-Aided Instruction. Grants typically are restricted
to the support of such items as:_

1\. Personnel support, such as programming, secretarial, or graduate
assistant;

2\. Release time, usually limited to part-time release for one semester;

3\. Summer term support to participate in teaching improvement activities;

4\. Consulting and travel expenses for inviting experts in teaching
effectiveness to conduct workshops;  
  
5\. Purchase of non-routine instructional equipment and supplies;  
  
6\. Publication assistance.

General and specific regulations and instructions for applying for both
competitive and discretionary Teaching Grants-in-Aid are contained in TGIA
Form 400, "Policies and Procedures Governing the Auburn University Teaching
Grant-In-Aid Program" available from the Office of the Provost.

An application for a competitive grant should consist of:

1\. The "Application for Competitive Teaching Grant-in-Aid" (TGIA Form 100)
with original signatures of the department head and dean;

2\. A one-page abstract of the proposed work;

3\. A detailed research proposal using the "Outline for Competitive Teaching
Grant-in-Aid Application" (TGIA Form 200);

4\. A faculty vita.

The original and six copies of the application (not exceeding ten pages,
including attachments) must be submitted to the Provost no later than
announced deadlines. Applications are considered by the Teaching Grant-in-Aid
Committee which is a subcommittee of the Teaching Effectiveness Committee.
Recommendations of the committee are sent to the Provost. The Provost then
selects projects for funding and processes the appropriate documents to
activate the grant. The Teaching Effectiveness Committee showcases faculty who
have been awarded teaching grants.

Requests for funding for a discretionary grant should be made on TGIA Form
300, "Application for Discretionary Teaching Grant-in-Aid." The original and
two complete copies should be submitted to the Provost.

The Office of the Provost supplies other TGIA Forms of interest: TGIA Form 500
"Request for Extension of TGIA Award," TGIA Form 600 "Teaching Grant-in-Aid
Final Report," TGIA Form 700 "Guidelines for Computer-Aided Instruction
Proposals," and TGIA Form 800 "Criteria for Evaluating Teaching Grant-in-Aid
Proposals."  
  

Back to top

 **B. GENERAL FEE EQUIPMENT FUND  
**

  
 _The General Fee Equipment Fund is another resource for the improvement of
instruction. A portion of the student fees are set aside for the purchase of
teaching aids, equipment, and programmatic changes. The monies are disbursed
by the Provost to each college/school. Each dean may establish guidelines and
restrictions for its use. Application for instructional equipment funds is
made through the department head to the academic dean.  
  
_

Back to top

 **C. UNIVERSITY LECTURES PROGRAM  
  
**

 _The University Lectures Program may be utilized by faculty members to invite
speakers to Auburn University to complement an instructional program.
Application for funding is made through the Office of the Provost. That Office
can provide the following forms: "Guidelines and Procedures for University
Lectures Program" and "Application for University Special Lectures Program
Support." The Lectures Committee considers the applications. Requests for
financial support should be made at least one month in advance of the
anticipated program. Preference is given to lecture programs with interest
beyond one class; large audience appeal is desired.  
  
_

Back to top

 **D. PROFESSIONAL IMPROVEMENT LEAVE  
**

  
A Professional Improvement Leave may be awarded for faculty development. One
semester of leave with pay may be requested for each 15 quarters of full-time
service (see details in Chapter 8). The Provost shall send out an annual call
for Professional Improvement Leave funded by his or her office. A standardized
application form and schedule shall also be furnished. Applications for
Professional Improvement Leave shall be made through department heads and
deans. These academic administrators shall be asked to provide additional
information, and all applications must have their support. A written copy of
the action taken by these administrators, with the additional information,
shall be supplied to the applicant. The purpose of the leave should be
consistent with departmental missions and goals. Decisions of the Professional
Improvement Leave Committee are based on the merit of the proposed activity
during the leave, and are not influenced by the amount of resources available
to the Provost or the amount of funding requested in the application. The
Provost shall fund the Professional Improvement Leave applications with
available resources following the ranking established by the Committee.
Faculty members may appeal actions taken on Professional Improvement Leave
applications directly to the Office of the Provost. The application form,
faculty vita, prospectus detailing the nature of the study, and other
supporting documents should be forwarded to the Provost in advance of the
announced fall semester deadline. It should be noted that applications are
made during the fall of the year preceding the requested leave time.

  

Back to top

 **4\. EVALUATION OF TEACHING  
**

  
The University views the evaluation of teaching as an on-going process which
relies on multiple assessment measures. One such measure is the University's
computerized Teaching Effectiveness Survey for gathering student perceptions.
Faculty members are required to have this standardized instrument administered
in their classes one semester per year, usually fall semester.

Departments send completed cover sheets and scan sheets to the Division of
University Computing for analysis.

Administration procedures for the survey are explicit. Each college/school,
department or faculty member may include "optional questions" or evaluation
materials in addition to, but not in lieu of, the University's survey. While
their classes are being evaluated, faculty members shall not be present in
their classrooms. Persons conducting class evaluations shall encourage
students to print their comments. It is recommended that handwritten comments
be typed before they are given to faculty members, after final grades have
been awarded. It is inappropriate for faculty members to contact students to
discuss individual evaluation responses. The class data from the scan sheets
and any additional comments from the students are reported to the faculty
member; the department head also receives the data on each class and each
faculty member evaluated.

These data along with other assessments of teaching will be used in the yearly
review of each faculty member by his or her head, in the third year review by
the department, and in review for promotion and/or tenure by the department,
and by the school/college and University-level committees. In addition, the
academic dean receives data from each department without identifying faculty
information. The departmental data yield a college/school summary which is
distributed to the Provost.

Faculty and the various departments are urged to employ additional measures of
teaching effectiveness. Possibilities include alumni assessments, employer
assessments of matriculated students, evaluations from persons or
organizations external to the University for which the faculty member consults
or provides instructional services of some kind, and administrator assessment
of performance. An important method of assessment is evaluation by
professional colleagues.

Peer evaluations, mandated by the Board of Trustees, may be achieved in a
variety of ways. Faculty members and/or departments should develop an
appropriate peer evaluation strategy or strategies. Evaluation by professional
colleagues might include the following:

1\. Evaluation of the faculty member's syllabi, tests, handouts, and other
materials used in class.

2\. Evaluation of the faculty member's preparation of students for subsequent
courses in the field.

3\. Evaluation of the faculty member's work in a team teaching situation by
his or her partner.

4\. Comparison of the faculty member's work with that of others teaching the
same course.

5\. Observation of the faculty member's classes.

6\. Evaluation of a portfolio developed by the faculty member in which he or
she presents him or herself as a teacher. The portfolio might include a
general statement on teaching philosophy; syllabi with detailed information on
course content and objectives, teaching methods, reading and homework
assignments, and student evaluation procedures; materials that show the extent
of student learning, such as scores on standardized tests taken before and
after the course, term papers and laboratory manuals, and work from the best
and poorest students; a list of courses taught with enrollment and grade
distributions; etc.

To further confirm the University's concern for quality instruction and
instructional programs, the Teaching Effectiveness Committee, the Curriculum
Committee and the Core Curriculum Oversight Committee have been established.
These committees are charged with carrying out a process of continuing
evaluation and enhancement of instructional programs and evaluation of
proposed changes in the curriculum.

  

Back to top

 **5\. AWARDS  
**

  
 _The University, and units within the University, offer formal recognition of
meritorious teaching and of scholarly achievements in the broader sense.
Through private gifts and state matching funds, the University obtains and
retains eminent scholars. Currently the eminent scholar positions include:  

      
     ALFA Eminent Scholar in Agriculture  
    Breeden Eminent Scholar in Liberal Arts  
    Lowder Eminent Scholar in Business  
    Purcell Eminent Scholar in Business  
    West Point Stevens Eminent Scholar in Liberal Arts  
    Williams Eminent Scholar in Engineering  
Many colleges and the University itself also offer positions of endowed chairs
or salary enhancement for exceptional faculty. These include:_

    Alabama Power Distinguished Professorship in Engineering  
    Alumni Writer in Residence in Liberal Arts  
    Ann and Batey Gresham Professorship in Architecture  
    Bruno Professor in Human Sciences  
    Colonial Bank Professorship in Business  
    Feagin Professorship in Engineering  
    Gottlieb Professorship in Engineering  
    Hargis Professorship in Liberal Arts  
    Hollifield Professorship in Liberal Arts  
    Howard E. Carr Professorship in Sciences and Mathematics  
    Hudson Professorship in Liberal Arts  
    Humana Germany-Sherman Distinguished Professorship in Education  
    J.O.W. Rash Professorship in Veterinary Medicine  
    John Edward Wilborn Chair in Architecture  
    J. T. Walker Professorship in Sciences and Mathematics  
    KPMG Peat Marwick LLP Professorship in Business  
    Mosley Professorship in Sciences and Mathematics and Forestry  
    Olan Mills Professorship in Business  
    Peake Professorship in Forestry  
    Philpott-West Point Stevens Professorship in Engineering  
    Privett Professorship in Business  
    Professor of Consumer Behavior in Human Sciences  
    Regions Bank Professorship in Business  
    Scharnagel Professorship in Sciences and Mathematics  
    SouthTrust Bank Professorship in Business  
    Square D Power Professorship in Engineering  
    Sterling Ednowed Professorship in Pharmacy  
    Taylor Professorship in Business  
    Thomas Walter Center Professorship in Business  
    Torchmark Professorship in Business  
    Wayne T. Smith Professorship in Business  
    Wiatt Distinguished Professorship in Architecture  
    Woodruff Professor in Business  
    Wrangler Professorship in Human Sciences  
In addition, the Auburn University Alumni Association supports a number of
Alumni Professorships, Alumni Professorships are non-renewable and carry an
annual $3,500 salary supplement for five years. Nominees must be tenured
faculty members, at the rank of professor or associate professor, with direct
responsibilities in two or more of the institutional missions of instruction,
research, and outreach. Nominees must have demonstrated exceptionally
meritorious performance, distinctive competence, and potential for continued
high productivity and excellence in at least two of the three institutional
missions. Although years of distinctive service and quantity of contributions
may be a selection criterion, the quality of performance during years of
service is the primary consideration in identifying recipients. To ensure that
less senior faculty receive serious consideration, the committee reviewing
nominations shall be asked to consider the period of time over which the
contributions have been made. Continuation during the five-year appointment
shall be contingent upon the recipient maintaining the high level of
performance that initially warranted the appointment. The title "Alumni
Professor" or "Alumni Associate Professor" shall be relinquished at the end of
the appointment period.

The Provost shall issue the annual call for nominations during January of
every year. The call shall be directed to academic deans, department
heads/chairs, and faculty members. Nominations may be initiated by individual
faculty members or department heads/chairs, and shall be prepared in the
format of promotion dossiers. Nominations shall be reviewed and endorsed at
the level of the department head/chair and dean, and nominees shall be
informed in writing of the action taken by these academic administrators.

The Alumni Professorships Committee shall review nomination dossiers and shall
recommend recipients to the Provost who shall make recommendations for
appointment to the President.  
  
The highest honor a faculty member can achieve on the Auburn campus is the
designation of Distinguished University Professor. The President bestows this
honor, with concurrence of the Board of Trustees, following recommendations
from the Distinguished University Professor Committee that acts on nominations
of the various departments and schools in response to a call from the Office
of the President. The number of Distinguished University Professors cannot
exceed one percent of the full-time faculty.

  
  
  
  
  
Colleges and schools offer various awards for teaching and scholarship as do
many University related and student organizations. The table below provides an
overview of available awards.

_Unit|  Award| Gift| Comments  
---|---|---|---  
Agriculture  
| Dean's Award| $2000, individual certificate and permanent plaque in Dean's
Office|  
Architecture| Faculty Achievement| $1000|  
Business| Dean's Award| $1000|  
Education| Undergraduate  
Program Award| Plaque|  
| Graduate Program Award| Plaque  
|  
Engineering| Outstanding Instructor| Certificate| Awarded in each department  
| Fred H. Pumphrey Teaching Award | $500 and certificate|  
| Birdsong Superior Teaching Award| $6000 and certificate  
| Presented to faculty members involved in the instruction of engineering
students. Includes engineering, mathematics, physics, chemistry, English,
history, etc.  
| Birdsong Merit Teaching Award| $3000 and certificate| Same as above  
Forestry| Christen Award for Teaching| Plaques: one for awardee, one for
display of names of awardees| Awarded semi annually (in odd years)  
Human Sciences| Outstanding Teacher| Plaque|  
Liberal Arts| Teaching Award in Humanities| $500|  
Teaching Award in Social Sciences| $500|  
Teaching Award in Communications| $500  
|  
Best Teaching in Political Science| Plaque|  
Best Teaching in History| Plaque  
|  
Achievement in  
Humanities | $500 and a plaque|  
Nursing| Outstanding Faculty| Plaque|  
Pharmacy| Outstanding Teacher| $250| Includes travel to annual meeting  
Sciences/Math| Outstanding Teacher| $1000 and a plaque | Two awards are given  
| Favorite Teacher in Geology| Plaque|  
| AED-Professor of the Year| Plaque|  
Veterinary Medicine| Norden Distinguished Teaching| $1000 and a plaque|  
Student Government Association | SGA Outstanding Teacher Awards| Plaque  
| One from each college/school  
Mortar Board Honor Society| Mortar Board Favorite Educator| Certificate| Two
per semester  
Alumni Association| Alumni Undergraduate Teaching Excellence Award| $500| Two
are awarded; call for nominations is late summer/early fall; awards made in
February  
| Alumni Extension Excellence Awards| Up to six $500 awards; additional
plaques| Intended for faculty on and off campus for excellence in extension
programs; call for nomination in fall  
Alumni Association and the Graduate School| Distinguished Graduate Faculty
Lectureship| $2000| Awarded in the spring to one member of the Graduate
Faculty for excellence in scholarship  
  
  
_

Back to top

6\. ACADEMIC REGULATIONS  

  
Faculty members are expected to know and observe the following academic
regulations. The publication, the Tiger Cub, elaborates on many of these
regulations.  
  

 **A. CLASS ATTENDANCE AND RELATED PROCEDURES  
**

  
A student is expected to attend all scheduled University classes. College work
proceeds at such a pace that regular class attendance is necessary to receive
proper instruction. Specific policies regarding class attendance are the
prerogative of the individual faculty member. The faculty member shall inform
each class in writing at the beginning of the course regarding the effect of
absences on the determination of grades.

The student is expected to carry out all assigned work and to take
examinations at the class period designated by the instructor. Failure to
carry out these assignments or to take examinations at the designated times
may result in an appropriate reduction in grade, except as enumerated below.

The faculty member shall determine the policy regarding grading which he or
she feels is best for the course. This policy shall be presented to the class,
in writing, at the beginning of the semester and will govern the actions of
the faculty member in the course.

Arrangement to make up missed major examinations (e.g. hour exams, mid-term
exams) due to properly authorized excused absences (as defined by the Tiger
Cub) shall be initiated by the student within one week from the end of the
period of the excused absence. Normally, a make-up exam shall occur within two
weeks from the time that the student initiates arrangements for it.
Instructors are encouraged to refrain from giving make-up examinations during
the last three days prior to the first day of final examinations. The format
of make-up exams and opportunities for students to make up work other than
major examinations are at the discretion of the instructor whose make-up
policies should be stated in writing at the beginning of the term. A faculty
member will be expected to excuse absences for:

1\. Illness of the student or serious illness of a member of the student's
immediate family. The instructor shall have the right to request appropriate
verification.

2\. The death of a member of the student's immediate family. The instructor
shall have the right to request appropriate verification.

3\. Trips for members of the student organizations sponsored by an academic
unit, trips for University classes, and trips for participation in
intercollegiate athletic events. When feasible, the student must notify the
instructor prior to the occurrence of such absences, but in no case shall such
notification occur more than one week after the absence. Instructors may
request formal notification from appropriate University personnel to document
the student's participation in such trips.

4\. Religious holidays. Students are responsible for notifying the instructor
in writing of anticipated absences due to their observance of such holidays.

5\. Subpoena for court appearance.

6\. Any other reason the instructor deems appropriate.

The regularly accepted time for class to begin shall be ten minutes after the
hour. If the instructor does not appear within 20 minutes after the hour, it
may be assumed that the class is canceled. All classes shall be dismissed
promptly on the hour.

It is University policy that all classes will meet as scheduled on the last
day before and the first day after holiday periods designated by the
University.

Unresolved problems regarding class attendance and/or procedures should be
referred to the Student Academic Grievance Committee.

Back to top

 **B. VIOLATIONS OF HONESTY AND INTEGRITY  
**

  
Auburn University expects students to pursue their academic work with honesty
and integrity. Violations of this principle are enumerated in the Tiger Cub.
Briefly, violations include:

1\. The possession, receipt, or use of any material or assistance not
authorized in the preparation of an assignment or during tests.

2\. Giving assistance to another in such practices.

3\. Furnishing in any way material containing future examination questions or
answers.  

    4\. Plagiarism (submission of work that is not one's own without proper acknowledgment).  

    5\. Attempting to alter an assigned grade.

6\. Other actions delineated by the instructor.

The "University Academic Honesty Code" may be found in the SGA Code of Laws
cited in the Tiger Cub.

An "Easy Guide to Reporting Honesty Cases" appears in the Tiger Cub. An
instructor with evidence of a violation of honesty should report the case to
the Academic Honesty Committee. This helps ensure that sanctions can be
consistent and that multiple offenders can be caught.

A student may charge another student with a violation of the honesty code. A
faculty member charging a student should follow these standard procedures:

1\. The faculty member should try to meet with the student and tell the
student that he or she plans to report the incident. The faculty member should
assume the student is innocent and allow the student to attend class and take
exams.

2\. Within 15 days, the faculty member should send the student a letter with
copies to (a) the Provost, (b) the student's dean, (c) the faculty member's
dean, and (d) the faculty member's department head. This letter should
pinpoint the date and describe the alleged violation but details of evidence
may be omitted. The letter to the student should also describe the sanctions,
if any, that the faculty member is recommending.

3\. The faculty member should send all incriminating evidence, plus a full
description of what happened, to the Provost. This material will be supplied
to the Academic Honesty Committee. At this point the Provost will issue the
formal letter of charge to the student. The letter will state that if the
student desires a hearing, he or she must respond in writing, within five
days, to the Provost. Whether the student waives the right to a hearing or
not, he or she is asked to respond to the charge with a written statement.

4\. If the student elects to have a hearing before the Academic Honesty
Committee, the faculty member will be asked to appear. The faculty member and
the student may bring witnesses.

5\. Following the hearing (or if the hearing was waived, following review of
the evidence) the Academic Honesty Committee will meet to decide on the case
and on recommended sanctions, if any. The committee will forward its
recommendations to the Provost.

6\. The faculty member will be informed by the Provost of his or her decision
and have the right to appeal the decision to the President.

Back to top

 **C. STUDENT ACADEMIC GRIEVANCE  
**

  
At times, alleged academic grievances may arise which cannot be resolved
through informal discussion between student and professor or through student
consultation with the academic department head and dean. A formal procedure,
approved by the Student Senate and the University Senate, has been established
to resolve such issues. The complete "Student Academic Grievance Policy" is
printed in the Tiger Cub and faculty members should be aware of its contents.

Back to top

 **D. EXAMINATIONS AND REPORTING OF SEMESTERLY GRADES  
  
**

Faculty members are referred to the Auburn University Bulletin, "Examinations
and Grades," for a detailed definition of the grading system.

The following regulations apply to the administering of all announced tests
and final examinations:

    Announced tests in undergraduate courses will be administered at a regularly scheduled meeting of the course. Exceptions to this regulation may arise in specialized courses requiring performances or oral tests, and in multiple-sectioned laboratory classes requiring practical laboratory tests. A faculty member with a sound reason for scheduling a test at a time other than the regularly scheduled meeting time must obtain approval from the department head prior to the beginning of the semester and must present written notice of the change to the class during the first few days of the semester. A rescheduled test should not interfere with other scheduled academic endeavors of the students involved, and an appropriate reduction in regularly scheduled class time should be given to compensate for the rescheduled test period.

    A faculty member is encouraged to refrain from giving announced tests on the last three days prior to the first day of final examinations, since it is generally recognized that tests given during this period may interfere with student preparation for final examinations.  
      
    A final examination is a desirable means of evaluation in most undergraduate courses. In unusual circumstances, performance tests, term papers, research projects or other forms of evaluation appropriate to the objectives of the course may be substituted for final examination with approval of the department head, who will report his or her action to the dean and Provost. A faculty member not giving a final examination is to present to the class at the beginning of the semester a written description of the method by which final grades will be determined.

    Final examinations will be administered during the hours specified in the semesterly examination schedule. Due to the specialized nature of many small upper-level undergraduate courses and graduate courses, deviations from this requirement are sometimes warranted. Such deviations are to be approved by the Provost, and rescheduled examinations must not interfere with scheduled academic activities of the students involved. The professor teaching a 600-level course shall determine whether a formal final examination is appropriate.  
For detailed regulations on special examinations, e.g., those allowed because
of a student's absence from a final examination due to illness, obligation to
report for active military duty, etc., faculty are referred to the Tiger Cub.

Grades on examinations or in courses may not be publicly posted using
students' names or social security numbers. If a faculty member wishes to post
grades, he or she must do so in such a manner that no student can be
personally identified by others.

Grades in all subjects are reported to students by the University after the
end of each semester.

Back to top

 **E. GRADE ASSIGNMENT FOR COURSES DROPPED  
**

  
No penalty shall be assigned for dropping a course on or before mid-semester.
A student who withdraws from a course prior to the tenth class day will have
no grade assignment; however, after the first ten days a W (Withdrawn Passing)
grade will be recorded for the course.  
A course may be dropped with a W after mid-semester only under unusual
conditions. When approval for dropping the course under such circumstances is
granted by the student's dean, a W may be assigned only when the instructor
indicates that the student is clearly passing the course. Otherwise, a grade
of WF (Withdrawn Failing) is assigned.

Back to top

 **F. RETENTION OF EXAMS BY FACULTY  
**

  
Final examinations or similar evaluative material that has not been returned
by faculty members should be retained by faculty members until the first day
of the third semester after the final grade has been assigned.

  

Back to top

 **7\. THE GRADUATE SCHOOL  
  
A. THE GRADUATE COUNCIL  
  
**

The governing body of the Graduate School is the Graduate Council. Graduate
Council members represent the Graduate Faculty as a whole rather than the
particular areas from which they come.

The Council is advisory to the President and acts on regulations and policies
governing all graduate study and graduate degrees and on curriculum requests
and proposals for new graduate programs, and assists the Dean of the Graduate
School in carrying out regulations and policies. The Council helps to
formulate changes in Graduate School policy. All actions of the Graduate
Council are subject to the University President's review and approval. All
general policy recommendations of the Graduate Council shall be reviewed by
the University Senate before going forward to the President.  
  

Back to top

 **B. THE GRADUATE FACULTY  
  
1\. INTRODUCTION  
**

  
Auburn University maintains a Graduate Faculty in accord with the requirements
and recommendations set forth in SACS Criteria for Accreditation: Commission
on Colleges, 8th ed., 1992, Section 4.4.2.3. These are quoted below:

    Institutions offering master's degrees must demonstrate a high level of faculty competence in teaching and scholarship. Institutions offering doctoral degrees must demonstrate the research capability of the faculty teaching in these programs. Eligibility requirements for faculty teaching graduate courses must be clearly defined and publicized.

    All institutions must have adequate resources to attract and retain a qualified faculty, especially in the disciplines in which doctoral programs are offered. Faculty members responsible for the direction of doctoral research must be experienced in directing independent study. In addition, faculty members engaged in graduate teaching should demonstrate, by their involvement in institutional activities, their commitment to the academic community and the institution which they serve, as well as to their students and their academic disciplines.

    Each faculty member teaching courses at the master's degree level must hold the terminal degree, usually the earned doctorate, in the teaching discipline or a related discipline. . . . All faculty members teaching courses at the doctor's degree level must hold the earned doctorate in the teaching discipline or a related discipline.

    The Commission recognizes also that in unusual cases institutions may appropriately include as graduate faculty members those who have demonstrated exceptional scholarly or creative activity, or professional experience, but who may not possess the required academic credentials.  
The Criteria further elaborates (Section 4.2.5):

    The effectiveness of a graduate program depends largely on the scholarly stimulation obtained when a group of students interacts with faculty in complementary specialties. For this reason, graduate faculty members should be productive, creative scholars, readily accessible to their students. The institution must provide an environment which supports and encourages scholarly interaction and accessibility among the faculty and students consistent with the quantitative intent of the Criteria.  

Back to top

 **2\. GRADUATE FACULTY MEMBERSHIP  
**

  
Each department which offers a graduate degree shall develop and submit to the
Graduate Council for approval a plan specifically detailing how those faculty
members involved in teaching, directing research, or rendering other service
to the program are selected and reviewed. New plans and modifications of
approved plans may be submitted at any time. Guided by SACS criteria, the
Graduate Council shall approve or disapprove the plans submitted. Department
heads shall be responsible for ensuring that their departments comply with
their approved plan.  
  
While departmental plans may differ considerably, depending on local variables
and on the nature of graduate instruction and research across the disciplines,
all plans should include two main sections, one setting forth standards for
appointment and one detailing procedures to be followed by the departments in
determining whether faculty members have met those standards.

The following guidelines shall be observed:

1.All plans shall set forth specific and relevant standards for graduate
faculty membership in the department in question. Where appropriate, plans may
set forth distinct standards for the various levels of involvement in the
graduate program, such as directing graduate student research, teaching
graduate courses, serving on examining or advisory committees, or rendering
other service to the graduate program.

2.All plans shall clearly state the term of appointment. No term shall exceed
7 years. Plans should contain criteria and standards for reappointment.

3.All plans shall specify clear and appropriate review procedures to be
followed in considering candidates for initial appointment, and, where
appropriate, reappointment. All plans that provide for more than one kind of
appointment shall also specify appropriate procedures for considering changes
in the kind of appointment.

4.All plans shall provide a coherent rationale for the criteria and procedures
they propose.

Back to top

 **3\. NOMINATION AND REVIEW OF CANDIDATES  
**

  
Candidates are nominated for Graduate Faculty membership and for renewal of
membership in accord with the timetable set forth in their department's plan
or in response to a call for nominations issued each fall semester by the Dean
of the Graduate School. This call is timed to coincide with the Provost's call
for nominations for promotion and tenure.

Each department shall review candidates for graduate faculty membership in
accord with the plan approved by the Graduate Council.

Nominations shall be forwarded by department heads through the Dean of the
College/School to the Dean of the Graduate School. Each nomination shall
include 1) a letter from the department head which explains how the
candidate's record and performance meet approved standards and demonstrates
that the department has followed approved procedures, and 2) a vita from the
candidate including the Standard Biographical Data sheet supplied by the
Office of the Provost. It is recommended that the candidate submit the same
vita compiled for consideration for promotion and tenure.

If the Dean of the Graduate School is satisfied that the candidate has met the
criteria for his or her department and that the nominating department has
complied with its approved plan, he or she shall recommend to the President
the candidate's appointment.

If the Dean of the Graduate School judges that the candidate has not met
approved criteria or that the nominating department has not followed approved
procedures, he or she shall notify the nominee and the department head that
the nomination shall be forwarded to the President with a recommendation
against appointment. In such a case, the candidate may request an independent
review of his or her credentials before the recommendation goes to the
President. The Dean of the Graduate School shall then appoint an ad hoc review
committee to render an independent assessment and recommendation. The
committee shall be composed of three graduate faculty members from the
candidate's discipline or from one closely related to it. The Dean of the
Graduate School's recommendation and the ad hoc committee's recommendation
shall then go forward to the President, whose decision is final. A candidate
who is turned down at the department level may also request an independent
review of his or her credentials by a similar committee. Such requests shall
be sent to the Dean of the Graduate School through the department head.

Back to top

 **4\. PERIODIC REVIEW OF DEPARTMENT PLANS  
  
**

The Graduate Council shall conduct periodic reviews of existing plans and of
departmental compliance. Typically, these shall be timed to coincide with the
SACS accreditation reviews.

  

Back to top

 **8\. TEXTBOOKS  
**

  
 _Textbook orders for each instructional semester are placed with the Auburn
University Bookstore and the private book stores in the city of Auburn through
a University-wide system. Individual faculty orders are secured at the
departmental level (on a specially prepared adoption form) and sent directly
to local bookstores. Faculty are asked to cooperate fully in placing their
orders well in advance and to utilize the University system, which is devised
to ensure that textbooks will be available to students at all book stores and
that instruction will not be impeded during the early part of the semester
because texts are not available._

Faculty involvement in the writing or editing of textbooks published and
marketed through national or regional publishing houses is regarded by the
University as a legitimate and praiseworthy form of scholarly activity. At
times, however, faculty members may wish to develop instructional materials
for local use in their own classrooms. These nontraditional, duplicated
packets or booklets of materials may be used supplementary to or in place of
traditional textbooks.  
  
The Auburn University Bookstore, working directly with the faculty member,
obtains copyright clearance for duplication of all requested materials in
advance of distribution. The AU Bookstore then reproduces, binds, and
distributes the instructional material at cost plus overhead with no profit or
revenue accruing to either the department or the faculty member. This system
ensures that Auburn University and Auburn University faculty are not illegally
using copyrighted material and exposing the University to liability and
embarrassment. University endorsement has also been given to a procedure
whereby individual faculty members, with the approval of their department
heads, may arrange to have manuscripts for classroom use printed (only after
obtaining copyright clearance) and sold by commercial duplicating services
exterior to the campus.

Faculty shall refrain from selling textbooks or instructional materials
directly to the students. Such practices are questionable financially and
ethically.

  

Back to top

 **9\. SECRETARIAL AND CLERICAL ASSISTANCE  
**

  
 _Secretarial assistance is customarily provided faculty members within their
departments. Such assistance is usually limited to the handling of
correspondence or the preparation of classroom materials, although use of the
secretarial staff by faculty to assist in preparation of professional
manuscripts normally is available within the departmental framework. Such
work, of course, should not be permitted to interfere with or retard the
handling of official University or departmental work. In the case of a
textbook, laboratory manual, syllabus, or other publication for which the
faculty member may receive financial compensation, the cost of preparation
normally is borne by the individual faculty member._

The University operates Temporary Office Services to provide temporary
secretarial or typing service to departments. This is an auxiliary service and
the work performed is charged at cost to the department for which it is done.
All arrangements for this type of temporary service should be made through the
University Personnel Services (Langdon Hall), where Temporary Office Services
is located.  

Back to top

 **10\. INSTRUCTIONAL MEDIA PROGRAMS  
  
**

 _The University provides, through the Division of Telecommunication/ETV,
assistance to individual faculty members who wish to enhance their classroom
presentations with various forms of instructional media. Within the limits of
its budget and personnel, and for instructional purposes only, the Division
will provide graphic art, film printing, slides, slide copying, 35mm
Ektachrome and black and white film processing, and a limited number of
television related services and products._

For projects not covered by the Instructional Media Program, full audio visual
services, including tape duplication, satellite teleconferences, and studio
productions are available to all University associated units.  

Back to top

 **11\. GUIDELINES FOR INSTRUCTING STUDENTS WITH SPECIAL NEEDS  
**

  
Faculty should be aware of resources available for students with special
needs. A faculty member has an obligation to accommodate a student's special
needs so that the student can participate in his or her class. _Some of the
pertinent resources are cited below; others are described in the_ Tiger Cub.

     AU Speech and Hearing Clinic: _1199 Haley Center (#4-9600). Provides evaluation and treatment services for a variety of communication disorders. These services include accent reduction for speakers of English as a second language; corrective help for articulation, language, voice and stuttering disorders; and help following neurological damage and hearing loss, including the fitting of amplification devices and aural rehabilitation.  
  
    _ Diagnostic and Evaluation Clinic: _1234 Haley Center (#4-5943). Provides individual evaluation and testing services for persons of all ages, including the areas of academic achievement, intellectual/cognitive skills, and vocational skills._

     Auburn University Medical Clinic _: Drake Center (#4-4422 and #4-2352). Provides medical screening and referral services as well as office treatment of routine non-emergency complaints, on a fee-for-service basis.  
  
    _ International Liaison: _310 Martin Hall (#4-2353). The Office of Admissions provides an international liaison/admissions counselor for recruiting and servicing the needs of international scholars and students.  
  
    _ Program for Students with Disabilities: _1234 Haley Center (#4-5943). Ensures student's disability is appropriately documented; recommends reasonable accommodations which may include, but are not limited to: priority registration, specific equipment in the resource room, extended time on exams, exam proctors, alteration in test format, notetakers, readers, support groups, etc. Program personnel also refer students to available campus resources and provide information to faculty regarding student needs. Under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, students with any of the following disabilities qualify: orthopedic problems, learning disabilities, deafness or hearing impairment, blindness or visual impairment, communication disorder, epilepsy, cerebral palsy, diabetes, psychological disorder, cancer, heart disease, muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, AIDS, alcoholism, drug addiction, or perceptual handicap. Reasonable accommodations for students with disabilities must ensure maximal participation in academic programs._

     Reading Center: _5040 Haley Center (#4-6881). Offers diagnostic and tutoring services to enhance reading comprehension and study skills.  
  
    _ Career Development Services: _303 Martin Hall (#4-4744). Provides services to students relative to career counseling, career testing, and career placement. It also provides information on summer jobs, internships, and job search assistance._

     Academic Support: _315 Martin Hall (#4-5972). Includes Testing Services, Study partners Program, "Learning Skills" audio-cassette program, and Supplemental Instruction.   
  
    _Vocational Rehabilitation Services: _1104 Haley Center (#4-4473). Provides a variety of services to qualifying persons, including: evaluation and assessment; counseling and guidance; physical restoration; training and related services; maintenance, equipment and transportation; job development and job placement; and post-placement assistance.  
  
    _ The Writing Center: _3183 Haley Center (#4-5749). Provides tutorial aid in prewriting, outlining, organization, grammar usage, style, and documentation. The Center is a service of the Department of English and is open to students, faculty, and staff.  
_ University guidelines and policies of related interest include the following
two pamphlets:  
  

    "Guidelines for Dealing with High-Risk Students and/or Students in Need of Psychological Treatment"

    "Guidelines for Dealing with AIDS and AIDS-Related Conditions"  
Additional information can also be found in the Tiger Cub.

Back to top

