![UW-Madison Computer Sciences Header Map \(textual version at bottom of
page\)](/images/topnav.gif)  
---  
[![Useful Information](/images/hed_info1.gif)](/information.html)[![UW-Madison
CS People](/images/hed_people1.gif)](/people.html)[![UW-Madison CS Graduate
Program](/images/hed_graduate2.gif)](/graduates.html)[![UW-Madison CS
Undergraduate Program](/images/hed_academic1.gif)](/ugrads.html)[![Research at
UW-Madison CS Dept](/images/hed_research1.gif)](/research.html)[![Useful
Resources](/images/hed_resources1.gif)](/resources.html)  
  
# 2000-2001  
Graduate Guidebook

**_Created January 2000_**

A [postscript version of this guidebook](http://www.cs.wisc.edu/~pubs/grad-
guidebook/grad-guidebook.ps) is also available.

World-Wide Web sites at the University of Wisconsin are undergoing a rapid
evolution. Please report any mistakes in this document's hyperlinks, as well
as useful additions, to [ron@cs.wisc.edu](mailto:ron@cs.wisc.edu).

  

##  Contents

  * [Contents](graduate_guidebook.html)
  * [Introduction](graduate_guidebook.html#SECTION00020000000000000000)
  * [Financial Aid](graduate_guidebook.html#SECTION00030000000000000000)
  * [M.S. Degree Requirements](graduate_guidebook.html#SECTION00040000000000000000)
  * [Ph.D. Degree Requirements](graduate_guidebook.html#SECTION00050000000000000000)
  * [Program Planning](graduate_guidebook.html#SECTION00060000000000000000)
  * [Satisfactory Academic Progress](graduate_guidebook.html#SECTION00070000000000000000)
  * [Computer Sciences Courses](graduate_guidebook.html#SECTION00080000000000000000)
  * [Computing Facilities](graduate_guidebook.html#SECTION00090000000000000000)
  * [Additional Information](graduate_guidebook.html#SECTION000100000000000000000)
    * [Requirements for a Ph.D. Minor in Computer Sciences](graduate_guidebook.html#SECTION000101000000000000000)
    * [Adding Computer Sciences as a Second Major (M.S. only)](graduate_guidebook.html#SECTION000102000000000000000)
    * [Technical Reports](graduate_guidebook.html#SECTION000103000000000000000)
    * [Alumni Group](graduate_guidebook.html#SECTION000104000000000000000)
    * [SACM - Student ACM Chapter](graduate_guidebook.html#SECTION000105000000000000000)
    * [Key Contacts (1998-1999)](graduate_guidebook.html#SECTION000106000000000000000) 

#  Introduction

The Department of Computer Sciences at the University of Wisconsin - Madison
strives to maintain the highest standards in education and research. Through
our educational programs and our research we have made significant
contributions to the field of computer science. Our faculty and students have
earned high regard nationally and internationally for their achievements. In
both education and research, we stress both theoretical and experimental
methods for solving fundamental as well as practical problems.

The Department offers graduate programs leading to the Master of Science
degree and Doctor of Philosophy degree in Computer Sciences. This guidebook is
intended for Computer Sciences graduate students who are developing programs
leading to one of these degrees. The [_Graduate School
Catalog_](gopher://gopher.adp.wisc.edu/11/.browse/.METAUPBGS) and the
[_Graduate Student
Handbook_](http://www.wisc.edu/grad/gs/admissions/handbook/handbook.html)
provide additional, essential information regarding general University
requirements. The information in this guidebook should also be supplemented by
individual consultation with the Graduate Advising Committee so that both
individual needs and interests, and all degree requirements, are met.

Additional information is available via the [Department's World-Wide Web (WWW)
page.](http://www.cs.wisc.edu/) Students may also wish to consult the
[Graduate School's WWW page.](http://www.wisc.edu/grad/) Foreign students may
find useful the Graduate School document [_Essential Information for Newly
Admitted International
Students._](http://www.wisc.edu/grad/gs/international/new_stu.html)

#  Financial Aid

Financial aid is available to graduate students in the form of teaching
assistantships, research assistantships, University fellowships, National
Science Foundation fellowships, and research assistantships or fellowships
sponsored by various companies. The [Graduate
School](http://www.wisc.edu/grad/) has placed on the World-Wide Web
information about [graduate-student financial
support.](http://www.wisc.edu/grad/gs/admin/support.html) All applications,
whether or not they involve requests for financial aid, can be for the fall
semester only and must be completed by December 31\.

Outstanding students are strongly encouraged to apply to the [National Science
Foundation](http://www.nsf.gov/) for an NSF Graduate Fellowship before the
November deadline. For information, write National Science Foundation, Forms
and Publication Unit, Room P15, 4201 Wilson Blvd., Arlington, VA 22230.

Most teaching assistantships are awarded at approximately the same time that a
student is admitted into the Department. Occasionally, there are last minute
temporary appointments also available. Students interested in such temporary
appointments should contact the Assistant to the Chair.

To receive a new or renewal appointment as a research assistant (RA) or
teaching assistant (TA), a student must be making satisfactory academic
progress (SAP) in the Department. See the chapter below on SAP requirements
for details.

It is often possible for a Computer Sciences graduate student to find, after
arrival on campus, a part-time job which pays well enough to support the
student while in graduate school. There are several thousand computers on the
Madison campus, and many of them require programmers. These computers are
owned and operated by a wide variety of departments and projects on the
campus, and the kind of programmer needed varies greatly. There is no one way
to find out about all of these jobs. Students should also consider contacting
the Division of Information Technology [(DoIT)](http://www.wisc.edu/doit) and
individual departments on campus for information.

#  M.S. Degree Requirements

In addition to the requirements of the [Graduate
School](http://www.wisc.edu/grad/) \-- see their publication [_Expecting Your
Master's Degree?
V.I.P._](gopher://gopher.adp.wisc.edu/00/.browse/.METAGRSMD/.00000002) \-- and
the University in general, the Computer Sciences Department has the following
requirements for the M.S. degree:

##  I. Courses

The student must receive at least 24  credits in courses numbered 400 or
above, with an average grade of at least B in these courses (the grade average
enforced for admissions starting after January 1, 1997). Fifteen of these
credits must be received for _core_ courses: CS courses numbered 700-889
(excluding  [ 799](graduate_guidebook.html#cs799)). No courses - including [CS
837](graduate_guidebook.html#cs837), [838](graduate_guidebook.html#cs838), and
[880](graduate_guidebook.html#cs880) \- may be counted more than once, though
up to six credits of [CS 790](graduate_guidebook.html#cs790) may be counted if
a Master's thesis or project is filed with the Department (see next section).
A qualifying core course for which a grade of S is received may be counted
only for non-core credit. Also, all sections of CS 837, 838 and 880 will be
considered non-core courses, unless designated as a core section by their
instructor. Non-core courses will not be counted if a grade of S is received.
At its discretion, the Graduate Advising Committee (GAC) may declare an
individual section of CS 837, 838, or 880 exempt from the repetition
restriction.

During registration week of the first semester of the student's full- or part-
time graduate tenure in the Department, the student must, in consultation with
GAC, file with the Department a formal proposal of a course plan leading to
the Master's degree. This plan must be continually updated for accuracy,
substitute courses being noted prior to the end of the semester or summer
session during which they are taken.

A course taken outside the Department which is to be counted toward degree
requirements must be formally approved in writing by GAC by the end of the
semester or summer session during which the course is taken. Such courses can
only be used for non-core credit. Students from other departments admitted as
``Masters only'' cannot use non-CS courses for their Computer Science Degree.
Credits transferred from other educational institutions will not count toward
the M.S. degree requirements.

##  II. Thesis or Project (Optional)

Students may choose to write a Master's thesis or project report. A maximum of
six hours of [CS 790](graduate_guidebook.html#cs790) (Master's thesis) may be
used to satisfy the M.S. requirements provided that the thesis is approved by
two Computer Sciences faculty members. A maximum of three hours of CS 790 may
be used to satisfy the M.S. requirements provided that a Master's project
report is filed with the Department. Note that CS 790 can be counted as core
credit. The responsibility for finding a thesis or project advisor is solely
that of the student; the Department does not guarantee that an advisor will be
provided.

Only a few Master's theses have been written in the Department, but this
option is worth considering. There are no rules about the form of a Master's
thesis, but it is expected to be a substantial piece of work, for example, a
comprehensive survey of a particular area. The difference between an M.S.
thesis and a Ph.D. thesis is that the former need not contain original
research work. An M.S. thesis might well serve as a basis and major first step
toward subsequent Ph.D. research. A Master's project can be somewhat less
formal than a Master's thesis, describing a project carried out under the
supervision of a faculty advisor. Students who write an M.S. thesis should
consult the Graduate School publication [_A Guide to Preparing Your Master's
Thesis_.](gopher://gopher.adp.wisc.edu/00/.browse/.METAGRSMD/.00000001)

#  Ph.D. Degree Requirements

The requirements for a Ph.D. in Computer Sciences include satisfying the
general University residency and minor field requirements, satisfying the
Department's breadth requirement, passing the Department's qualifying,
preliminary, and final oral examinations, and writing a dissertation. The
student will be formally admitted to candidacy for the Ph.D. only when he or
she has satisfied requirements I, II, and III below. A student who has
satisfied requirements I, II, III, and IV below, and has satisfied the
[Graduate School's](http://www.wisc.edu/grad/) residence requirement, is
officially a dissertator in Computer Sciences. Details of the Graduate
School's requirements can be found in the [_Graduate School
Catalog_.](http://www.wisc.edu/grad/catalog)

Requirements I and II comprise the Department's qualifying process. The
student must pass the qualifying process by the end of the sixth semester.
Students who received 8 or more Master's credits for courses taken before
being admitted as a Master's degree candidate are allowed only five semesters
to complete the qualifying process, and only four semesters if 16 or more
credits were received. Those entering with a Master's degree in Computer
Science are allowed only four semesters. Students who believe their situation
warrants additional time should consult with the GAC chair during the first
semester after entry. After this time, the time limit can be changed only by a
written appeal to GAC.

Students who do not register and are not on probation may resume their studies
up to one year later without re-applying for admission. No additional time
will be permitted for passing the qualifying process without written approval
from the chair of GAC.

##  I. Breadth Requirement

To fulfill the Breadth Requirement for the Ph.D. degree, a student must meet
the following:

1\.     Satisfy a three-course requirement: Complete one 700-level or
800-level Computer Sciences course in each of three distinct areas other than
the depth area.

or

Satisfy a four-course requirement: Complete one Computer Sciences course in
each of four distinct areas other than the depth area, two at the 700- or
800-level and two at the 500- or 600-level.

2\.     All grades in these courses must be AB or higher.

3\.     Only the following UW-Madison Computer Sciences Department courses can
be used to fulfill the breadth requirement:

  * Artificial Intelligence: [540](graduate_guidebook.html#cs540), [731](graduate_guidebook.html#cs731), [760](graduate_guidebook.html#cs760), [761](graduate_guidebook.html#cs761), [762](graduate_guidebook.html#cs762), [766](graduate_guidebook.html#cs766), [771](graduate_guidebook.html#cs771)
  * Computer Architecture and VLSI: [552](graduate_guidebook.html#cs552), [752](graduate_guidebook.html#cs752), [755](graduate_guidebook.html#cs755), [757](graduate_guidebook.html#cs757)
  * Database Systems: [564](graduate_guidebook.html#cs564), [764](graduate_guidebook.html#cs764), [784](graduate_guidebook.html#cs784)
  * Mathematical Programming: [525](graduate_guidebook.html#cs525), [526](graduate_guidebook.html#cs526), [635](graduate_guidebook.html#cs635), [719](graduate_guidebook.html#cs719), [720](graduate_guidebook.html#cs720), [726](graduate_guidebook.html#cs726), [727](graduate_guidebook.html#cs727), [730](graduate_guidebook.html#cs730)
  * Modeling and Analysis of Computer Systems: [547](graduate_guidebook.html#cs547), [737](graduate_guidebook.html#cs737), [747](graduate_guidebook.html#cs747)
  * Numerical Analysis: [513](graduate_guidebook.html#cs513), [514](graduate_guidebook.html#cs514), [712](graduate_guidebook.html#cs712), [713](graduate_guidebook.html#cs713), [717](graduate_guidebook.html#cs717)
  * Operating Systems: [537](graduate_guidebook.html#cs537), [640](graduate_guidebook.html#cs640), [736](graduate_guidebook.html#cs736), [739](graduate_guidebook.html#cs739), [740](graduate_guidebook.html#cs740)
  * Programming Languages and Compilers: [536](graduate_guidebook.html#cs536), [538](graduate_guidebook.html#cs538), [701](graduate_guidebook.html#cs701), [703](graduate_guidebook.html#cs703), [704](graduate_guidebook.html#cs704)
  * Theory of Computing: [520](graduate_guidebook.html#cs520), [577](graduate_guidebook.html#cs577), [787](graduate_guidebook.html#cs787), [810](graduate_guidebook.html#cs810) 

4\.     Only courses taken after receiving a Bachelor's degree may be used to
fulfill the breadth requirement. (Note that courses taken at UW-Madison as a
Special Student do count, as long as the student has a Bachelor's degree from
some college or university.)

##  II. Qualifying Depth Examination

Students must pass a demanding depth examination in one of the main research
areas of the Department. Every semester, the Department offer a four-hour
written depth exam in each of the following areas:

  * Artificial Intelligence 
  * Computer Architecture and VLSI 
  * Database Systems 
  * Mathematical Programming 
  * Modeling and Analysis of Computer Systems 
  * Numerical Analysis 
  * Operating Systems 
  * Programming Languages and Compilers 
  * Theory of Computing 

A student is allowed at most two chances to pass any area's depth exam. Each
exam is graded on a scale of P+ (high pass), P (pass), P- (near pass), or F
(fail). A grade of P+ or P is required to pass the Depth Examination
Requirement.

A syllabus is published in advance of the exams listing the topics to be
covered in each exam. Depth exams are designed to test the preparation of
students intending to do Ph.D. research in a given area. These exams cover
topics included in courses, as well as additional papers and publications.
Copies of previous exams are available [on-
line.](ftp://ftp.cs.wisc.edu/uw/grad/exams/)

Qualifying examinations are currently offered early in each regular semester.
Students are required to register with the Graduate Coordinator in advance for
these exams. Registration deadlines and qualifying exam dates are announced in
advance on the Department bulletin board. Registration dates are strictly
enforced.

##  III. Preliminary Examination

To pass this oral examination, the student is expected to display depth of
knowledge in the area of specialization in which research for the dissertation
will be conducted. Students should plan for the examination, and determine
when they are ready to take it, in consultation with the major professor.
Students requiring longer than one year beyond the deadline for completing the
qualifying exam must have a major professor certify that progress is being
made toward the exam. In any case, the preliminary exam must be taken within
two years after the deadline for completing the qualifying exam.

The preliminary examination committee consists of three members. The
composition of the committee will be suggested by the student's major
professor in consultation with the student and must be approved by the Chair
of the Department. The student should approach each proposed member of the
committee, secure agreement to serve, and then discuss a program for preparing
for the examination. It is advisable for the student to do this about a
semester before the examination is to be scheduled.

Before the preliminary examination, students need to get a _warrant_ from the
Graduate School. The Department's Graduate Coordinator can provide assistance.
Students should be sure to check the Graduate School's calendar to see the
cutoff dates by which the exam needs to be completed in order to be eligible
for dissertator status (becoming a dissertator has the added benefit of
substantially lowering one's tuition).

##  IV. Minor Field

The Graduate School determines the requirements for fulfilling the minor field
requirement for a Ph.D. There are two methods of fulfilling this requirement.
One option (Option A) is to fulfill the minor field requirement as specified
by another department other than Computer Sciences. Students should contact
the individual department for details. Computer Sciences graduate students
minoring in mathematics should note that special regulations apply to the use,
for satisfying minor requirements, of courses cross-listed in both Computer
Sciences and Mathematics.

A second option (Option B) is available under which the Computer Sciences
Department can arrange special minors for Computer Sciences graduate students
who require a program not covered by an orthodox choice of courses in some
other single department. For Computer Sciences graduate students, the
requirements for an interdepartmental minor are:

1\.     Approval by the Department of the use of the Option B minor and of the
content of the minor course program. This approval must occur no later than
half-way through the minor course sequence.

2\.     Completion of at least 12 graduate credits in two or more departments
other than Computer Sciences, in related courses selected for their relevance
to a particular area of concentration, with an average grade no lower than B,
and with no individual grade lower than BC. One course cross-listed with
Computer Sciences may be included in this program if it is staffed by another
department and is not applicable to requirements of the student's major
program.

Students selecting Option B to satisfy their minor requirement should:

  * Consult with the major professor early in the degree program, and decide on a proposed Option B set of courses. Complete a form provided by the departmental office, and have it signed by the major professor and the Department Chair. This constitutes Departmental approval of the proposed courses for satisfying the minor requirement. 

  * File the approved Minor Agreement Form with the Graduate Coordinator before starting the third minor course. 

  * After completing the program, bring the preliminary examination warrant to the Graduate Coordinator. The warrant will then be signed by the Department Chair to certify completion of the minor program, and will be returned to the student. 

Students who do not yet have a major professor and who want some preliminary
advice on the kinds of programs likely to be approved may speak with the minor
advisor or a member of GAC.

##  V. Dissertation

The student must conduct a substantial piece of original research in computer
science and report it in a dissertation that meets the highest standards of
scholarship.

The initiative in selection of a research supervisor (major professor) is
entirely with the student. A professor should be approached for this purpose
at as early a stage in the student's graduate work as possible, though usually
not until after the student has taken some of the professor's courses or has
worked for and demonstrated ability to the professor in some way.

The [Graduate School](http://www.wisc.edu/grad/) publishes several relevant
documents:

    

    [_A Guide To Preparing Your Doctoral Dissertation_](http://www.wisc.edu/grad/gs/cleo/phd.html)

    [_The 3-D's: Deadlines, Defending, Depositing_](http://www.wisc.edu/grad/gs/cleo/ddd.html)

    _Doctoral Dissertation and Degree Completion Requirements_

    _Everything You Wanted To Know About Dissertator Status But Were Afraid To Ask_

##  VI. Final Oral Examination

In a final oral examination, the student must explain and defend the contents
of the dissertation and exhibit detailed knowledge of the general area in
which the reported research falls.

The final oral examination and defense of the dissertation will take place
before a committee of five, three of whom will constitute the reading
subcommittee. The composition of the committee will be suggested by the
student's major professor and approved by the Chair of the Department. At
least one of the five members must have a faculty appointment in some
department other than Computer Sciences.

As with the preliminary exam, students need to obtain a _warrant_ from the
Graduate School. The Department's Graduate Coordinator will also help students
obtain this document.

#  Program Planning

##  I. Starting Out Right and Maintaining Acceptable Progress

Graduate students who have half-time jobs (or less) are generally advised to
take three courses per regular semester. However, it is permissible to take
four. The beginning graduate student should select 400-, 500- or 700-level
courses depending on his or her undergraduate background. Students with little
or no programming background are encouraged to acquire programming skills
prior to beginning their regular graduate studies. Most graduate courses
offered by the Department require at least a minimal level of programming
skills. Students who are accepted for admission, but who lack basic computer
science prerequisites ([CS 354](graduate_guidebook.html#cs354) and [
367](graduate_guidebook.html#cs367)), should contact the Graduate Advising
Committee (GAC) well in advance of beginning their first semester.

All entering students should consult with GAC no later than the beginning of
registration week to discuss the planning of their schedules. GAC must
formally approve all graduate schedules each semester. Students who have
completed the Master's degree requirements or the qualifying process and who
have an official doctoral major professor may have their schedules approved by
that professor.

It is important that the student maintain satisfactory academic progress
(SAP). Unsatisfactory academic progress (USAP) leads to ineligibility for
financial support through teaching assistantships and, if continued for a
second semester, results in dismissal from the Department. Initially, failure
to complete an adequate course load is the only reason for USAP. Students who
are doing badly so that USAP is possible should immediately discuss the
problem with a member of GAC.

##  II. Sources of Advice

  * Members of GAC are available during regular schedule office hours, with special hours during registration periods. They will give advice and must also formally approve proposed courses of study. 

  * An informal advising service is run by graduate students during registration periods. This is an excellent source of information about the pros and cons of courses and professors. 

  * Particular questions about a course can often best be resolved by contacting the course instructor. 

  * The University provides counseling services for help with personal problems. See the handbook _The Wheat and the Chaff._

##  III. The Normal Schedule for a Computer Sciences Graduate Student

    

    _Master's degree_   
Most full-time students obtain this degree in three or four semesters.

    _Breadth-courses requirement_   
Upon arrival, students should plan a course of study that will satisfy their
breadth-courses requirement during the period allotted. It is important to
check the prerequisites of 700-level classes, as well as the [schedule of
course offerings.](http://www.cs.wisc.edu/~bobh/timetable) Many 700-level
classes are offered only once a year, and some are only offered every third or
fourth semester.

    _Doctoral qualifying examination_   
Students generally take their qualifying examination during their second or
third year as a graduate student, but should begin preparing for their
qualifying examination well in advance. They are stiff examinations which many
students fail. Topic and reading lists for the various areas are available
from the Graduate Coordinator. Also, students may find the [on-line collection
of previous examinations](ftp://ftp.cs.wisc.edu/uw/grad/exams/) useful in
determining what will be expected of them. In general, the qualifying
examination (a) requires a broad and unified knowledge of an area, (b) is
closed-book, (c) is written under time constraints, and (d) often contains
questions that require essay answers. It is a good idea for a student to
discuss preparation for the qualifying examination with appropriate faculty
members once the area of specialization has been decided.

    _Doctoral preliminary examination_   
This should be taken within two semesters after the qualifying examination
deadline has been passed. Before taking it, the student should have satisfied
the minor requirement and should have worked on some project for his or her
major professor.

    _Oral defense of Ph.D. dissertation_   
In ideal circumstances, the student will be at this final step four years
(eight semesters) after entry; the student should certainly be here by the
tenth or eleventh semester as a graduate student.

Students who do not maintain a schedule reasonably close to these
recommendations should not expect continued financial support from the
Department.

##  IV. Scheduling Courses in Particular Areas

    

    _Artificial Intelligence_   
The Department's standard course offerings in Artificial Intelligence include
a senior-level survey of the field, [CS 540](graduate_guidebook.html#cs540); a
graduate-level survey of the field, [CS 731](graduate_guidebook.html#cs731);
and a series of 700-level courses each covering one sub-area of the field. The
sub-areas and the primary courses covering them are Machine Learning ([CS
760](graduate_guidebook.html#cs760)), Deductive Problem Solving and Logic
Programming ([CS 761](graduate_guidebook.html#cs761)), and Computer Vision
([CS 766](graduate_guidebook.html#cs766)). Each of the 700-level courses has
CS 540 (or 731) as a prerequisite. Staff shortages may make it impossible for
the Department to regularly offer CS 731\. When it is offered in a semester
appropriate for their course scheduling, graduate students should take CS 731
instead of 540\. Students will be prepared for the Ph.D. qualifying exam in AI
if they have mastered the material presented in CS 540 (or 731) and in two of
CS 760, 761, and 766\.

The AI qualifying exam is designed to test for both a general ``breadth''
knowledge of AI, plus a deeper specialized knowledge of one particular sub-
area within AI. _Students are required to specify their sub-area when they
sign up for the exam, and then answer corresponding questions in that sub-
area._ Specifically, the exam will consist of questions in nine separate
sections. There will be two ``general'' AI questions (in section G540/731),
two ``basic'' questions in each of the three sub-areas (in sections B760,
B761, and  B766), and two ``advanced'' questions in each of the three sub-
areas (in sections A760, A761, and A766). To pass the examination, students
will have to answer satisfactorily one of the two questions in section
G540/731; both of the questions in one of the A sections; both of the
questions in the B section for the same sub-area; and two additional questions
from any of the other B sections. The two additional questions can be but do
not have to be from the same section. The A section chosen must correspond to
the sub-area for which the student is signed up.

    _Computer Architecture and VLSI_   
There are three main courses in computer architecture, one in VLSI design, and
one in design tools for VLSI. All are cross-listed as Electrical and Computer
Engineering courses with the same number. [CS
552](graduate_guidebook.html#cs552) is the basic course. [CS
752](graduate_guidebook.html#cs752) and [757](graduate_guidebook.html#cs757)
cover advanced topics in computer architecture, [CS
755](graduate_guidebook.html#cs755) covers advance topics in VLSI design, and
[CS 756](graduate_guidebook.html#cs756) covers design tools for VLSI. CS 752
is usually offered by the Computer Sciences Department in the fall and by the
ECE Department in the spring. CS 755 and 757 are usually offered in the fall
under the auspices of the ECE Department and in the spring under the Computer
Sciences Department. Though the same basic course, the emphasis in CS 755
varies considerably, and CS graduate students who do not have an undergraduate
engineering degree usually experience difficulty with the course as offered by
ECE. The Ph.D. qualifying exam requires knowledge of material covered in CS
552 and 752 and some extra readings, most of which are covered in CS 757\.

    _Database Systems_   
At the present time three courses for graduate students are offered in the
area of database systems ([CS 364](graduate_guidebook.html#cs364), which
provides a general introduction to database systems, is for undergraduates
only). [CS 564](graduate_guidebook.html#cs564) provides a systems-oriented
introduction to databases and their implementation. Students with an interest
in more advanced topics and current research directions in the area, such as
students preparing for the database Ph.D. qualifying exam, should take [CS
764](graduate_guidebook.html#cs764) and [784](graduate_guidebook.html#cs784)
after completing CS 564\. Those students who are planning on taking the
database Ph.D. qualifying exam are expected to complete their preparation for
the exam independently. In addition, students interested in pursuing research
in the database systems area are advised to consider taking courses in the
related areas of operating systems, performance evaluation, and artificial
intelligence to prepare for their work in this relatively broad area.

    _Mathematical Programming_   
Students should first take [CS 525](graduate_guidebook.html#cs525) unless they
have had a thorough introductory course in linear programming. After
completing a good linear programming course, students may take [CS
719](graduate_guidebook.html#cs719) or [720](graduate_guidebook.html#cs720)
(which emphasize combinatorial optimization) without further prerequisites,
and students with a background in basic mathematical analysis may take [CS
726](graduate_guidebook.html#cs726), [727](graduate_guidebook.html#cs727), or
[730](graduate_guidebook.html#cs730) (which emphasize continuous, nonlinear
optimization). (Note that CS 525 is not a prerequisite for CS 726, 727 or
730.) Some background in probability is recommended for [CS
723](graduate_guidebook.html#cs723), which is not taught every year. All of
the 700-level courses may be taken independently of each other. Ph.D. students
planning on taking their qualifying examination in this area should be
familiar with the material in CS 525 and 719, 720, 726, 727, 730 and
optionally 723. Master's and Ph.D. students minoring in math programming
should take CS 525 and at least one of the 700-level courses in the area.

    _Modeling and Analysis of Computer Systems_   
The various techniques for performance modeling and analysis of computer
systems constitute the topics in the MA area. Three courses, [CS
547](graduate_guidebook.html#cs547), [737](graduate_guidebook.html#cs737), and
[747](graduate_guidebook.html#cs747), are currently offered in this area. CS
547, which introduces analytic modeling methods and some elementary queueing
theory results, is offered in the Fall semester each year. Students enrolling
in CS 547 are expected to have some background in operating systems,
databases, or computer architecture, which provide some of the systems
analysis questions that are used as examples in the course. Students with
little or no background in probability theory should audit or enroll in Math
431 prior to or concurrently with CS 547\. Both CS 737 and 747 are usually
offered in the spring semester each year. CS 747 covers additional and more
advanced analytical modeling methods, while CS 737 covers performance-
simulation methods. CS 547 is a pre-requisite for CS 737 and 747\. CS 547 and
747, plus additional reading on the reading list, are required for the Ph.D.
qualifying exam in MA.

    _Numerical Analysis_   
The two-course sequence [CS
513](graduate_guidebook.html#cs513)-[514](graduate_guidebook.html#cs514)
provides the basic introduction to numerical analysis. Students planning to
take the Ph.D. qualifying exam in numerical analysis should also take the
course sequence: [CS 717](graduate_guidebook.html#cs717),
[712](graduate_guidebook.html#cs712) and [713](graduate_guidebook.html#cs713).
This sequence also serves as the starting point for the more advanced courses,
[CS 883](graduate_guidebook.html#cs883), [884](graduate_guidebook.html#cs884),
[887](graduate_guidebook.html#cs887), [718](graduate_guidebook.html#cs718),
[881](graduate_guidebook.html#cs881), [882](graduate_guidebook.html#cs882),
and [885](graduate_guidebook.html#cs885). Numerical analysis is a broad field
and Ph.D. students usually take several courses in mathematics as well as
independent reading courses. Prospective Ph.D. students should consult with
numerical analysis faculty about their course of study.

    _Operating Systems_   
Three courses are offered in the area of operating systems. [CS
537](graduate_guidebook.html#cs537) introduces the subject, providing hands-on
experience with building parts of operating systems in simple environments;
there are several large programming assignments. [CS
736](graduate_guidebook.html#cs736) is an advanced course, often run as a
seminar, which discusses a selection of advanced topics. This course often has
a large project associated with it. [CS 739](graduate_guidebook.html#cs739)
takes up where CS 736 leaves off. It covers distributed systems in greater
depth, studying a wide variety of systems and examining issues such as
replication, fault tolerance, load balancing, and security. The Ph.D.
qualifying exam covers material in CS 537 and 736 and advanced material from
CS 739 and [640](graduate_guidebook.html#cs640) (computer networks).

    _Programming Languages and Compilers_   
Students interested in the area of programming languages should first take [CS
536](graduate_guidebook.html#cs536) and [538](graduate_guidebook.html#cs538).
The former provides an introduction to compilers and to programming-language
implementation techniques. The latter provides an introduction to the theory
and design of programming languages. The graduate courses in the area are CS
701, 703, and 704\. [CS 701](graduate_guidebook.html#cs701) is the graduate
compiler course. It covers program analysis, optimization, and code
generation. [CS 703](graduate_guidebook.html#cs703) covers a selection of
advanced topics, such as alternative parsing methods and dataflow analysis.
[CS 704](graduate_guidebook.html#cs704) covers graduate-level topics in the
theory of programming languages, including the study of functional languages
and formal language semantics. Occasionally, a section of [CS
838](graduate_guidebook.html#cs838) deals with issues in programming language
design; this course is extremely valuable for students intending to do Ph.D.
work in programming languages. For the Ph.D. qualifying exam, CS 536, 538,
701, and 704 are required and CS 703 is recommended.

    _Theory of Computing_   
The basic concepts in the theory of computation are introduced in the
undergraduate theory courses, [CS 520](graduate_guidebook.html#cs520) and
[577](graduate_guidebook.html#cs577). Students preparing for the Ph.D. exam in
theory should take [CS 810](graduate_guidebook.html#cs810) and
[787](graduate_guidebook.html#cs787), and should study topics from at least
two courses in the following list: [CS 709](graduate_guidebook.html#cs709),
[767](graduate_guidebook.html#cs767), [812](graduate_guidebook.html#cs812),
[820](graduate_guidebook.html#cs820), [830](graduate_guidebook.html#cs830). CS
709, 767, 787 and 812 focus on algorithms for specific problems, and CS 810,
820 and 830 study models of computation and complexity classes; students are
advised to take both types of courses in their program. All students
interested in theory are encouraged to take [CS
880](graduate_guidebook.html#cs880), a special-topics course, when offered.

##  V. Transfer of Credits Toward the Master's Degree

    

    _Other UW Departments and UW Special Students_   
Computer Sciences students who were previously special students or students in
other departments may apply some or all of their previous courses at the
University toward a Computer Sciences Master's degree, subject to the
following restrictions:

    

1\.     A course must either be a Computer Sciences course or it must satisfy
the criteria for ``approved'' courses (see part VII below). In either case,
the course must be entered on the student's GAC file, and be initialed as
approved by a GAC member.

2\.     At most, one-fourth of the courses applied toward one graduate degree
may be applied toward a second graduate degree. Courses applied toward an
undergraduate degree may not be applied toward a graduate degree.

    _Other Universities_   
Courses taken at other universities may not be counted toward the Master's
degree.

##  VI. Maintenance of Student Records

GAC maintains two types of records about each student. These records are
stored in the Graduate Coordinator's offices, and are available for inspection
and verification by the student. It is the responsibility of the student to
see that these records are correct and up-to-date.

    

    _The Master's Degree/Qualifying Examination Course Plan_   
The course plan must be prepared, in consultation with GAC and the student's
personal faculty adviser, during registration week of the student's first
semester as a graduate student. The purpose of the course plan is to ensure
that the student understands Department regulations and is pursuing a suitable
course of study. The course plan may be changed at any time in consultation
with GAC and the student's personal faculty adviser. For most students the
course plan represents a course of study leading to a Master's degree. For
graduate students not pursuing a Master's degree, the course plan represents a
course of study preparing for the doctoral qualifying examination.

    _The Course-History Record_   
The course history record card contains a record of all courses completed or
being taken. This record must be brought up to date during each registration
week.

In addition to the above records, a student wishing to obtain a Master's
degree should submit a completed application form, available from the
Department office, not less than one month before the end of the semester when
the degree is desired.

##  VII. Approved Courses

Courses taken outside the Department that are to be counted, either toward
satisfactory academic progress or toward a Master's degree, must be approved
by GAC. Approval must be obtained before the course has been taken. Usually
approval is given during the registration period, but approval can be
requested at an earlier stage if a student wishes to plan ahead.

To be approved, a course must materially contribute to the specific computer
science education for which the student is working. In doubtful cases, GAC
will require a note from a Department faculty member supporting the request
for approval. Only CS courses are approved for students from other departments
enrolled in the ``Masters only'' degree program.

#  Satisfactory Academic Progress

Each graduate student is responsible for planning and carrying out a program
of study that continually meets with the approval of the Department. Students
should meet with a member of the Graduate Advising Committee (GAC) every
semester, usually during the registration period, to get approval for the plan
for the following semester. The record of approvals and future plans is
maintained in a file that is available at any time for the student to inspect.
Any exceptions to rules that have been granted to the student are also
recorded in this file. A student who wants to drop or add a course during the
semester should get the change approved by a member of GAC.

The rules enforced by the Department for satisfactory progress are distinct
from the rules used by the Graduate School. The student must satisfy both sets
of rules. We will concentrate here primarily on the rules of the Department.

##  I. Definitions

    

    _Full-load and Part-load_   
Part-load students do not have to take as many credits during a semester as
full-load students. (The specific rule is discussed below.) All students are
considered to be full-load students unless they have been granted part-load
status by GAC. Part-load status is granted semester by semester to students
who have full-time jobs, non-academic duties, or substantial family
responsibilities. Such students should apply in writing to GAC at the
beginning of each semester for which they want part-load status. They will be
notified in writing whether their request has been approved.

Full-load status is distinct from full-time status as determined by the
Graduate School for residence credit. Because of Graduate School rules,
students often need to take 8  instead of 6 credits during a semester. The
combined effect of the various rules is this:

> Part-load dissertators take 1 credit. Part-load students and dissertators
take 3 credits. Full-load students who are TAs, PAs, or unsupported by the
Department take at least 6 credits. Research assistants and fellows take at
least 8 credits.

It is essential for foreign students and students receiving V.A. benefits to
be full-load students. Foreign students should check with the Graduate School
and the Office for Foreign Students to ensure that they are satisfying
residence, visa, and other requirements.

    _Regular Semester_   
In the following requirements, _regular semester_ denotes either fall or
spring semester of an academic year; it does not include summer session.

    _Approved Courses_   
Approved courses are courses that have been approved by GAC as appropriate for
a student's studies. For students who have neither obtained a Master's degree
in Computer Science nor passed the qualifying process, GAC usually approves
only courses leading toward the Master's degree.

Courses are approved only if they fall into one of the following categories:

    

1\.     Courses from other departments that GAC considers to be an important
part of the student's program. These courses will usually be numbered 400 or
above. To comply with current Graduate School requirements, except as noted
below in point 2, no course numbered less than 300 will be approved.

2\.     [CS 302](graduate_guidebook.html#cs302), 352,
[354](graduate_guidebook.html#cs354), and
[367](graduate_guidebook.html#cs367), and Math 221, 222, and 223, provided
that the student has been admitted with deficiencies that are being removed by
taking these courses.

3\.     All University of Wisconsin-Madison CS courses numbered 400 and above
(and courses cross-listed with such CS courses) taken by a student and not
applied to any other degree.

    _Satisfactory Completion of Courses_   
Courses taken for credit and passed with letter grades A, AB, B, BC, C, S, and
P are satisfactorily completed. These criteria determine satisfactory
completion for the Department. The Graduate School has its own rules, and they
should be consulted if any question arises.

    _Examinations_   
The terms _qualifying examination process, preliminary examination_ and _final
oral examination_ designate the procedures and/or examinations of those names
supervised by the Department of Computer Sciences. The requirements for the
Ph.D. include time limits for their completion.

##  II. Satisfactory Academic Progress Criteria

A graduate student in Computer Sciences shall be considered to have made
satisfactory academic progress (SAP) at the end of any regular semester only
if, at the end of the semester, the following conditions are all satisfied:

    

1\.     (a) Before achieving dissertator status: the student has
satisfactorily completed at least six (if full load) or three (if part load)
credits of approved courses during the semester.

(b) After achieving dissertator status: the student has satisfactorily
completed at least three credits of courses approved by the student's major
professor.

2\.     The student has removed all incomplete grades from any previous
regular semester or summer session.

3\.     The student has passed any required exams and procedures within
designated time limits.

##  III. Dismissal

Any graduate student who fails to make SAP during two consecutive regular
semesters (fall and spring, or spring and fall) will be dismissed from the
Department at the end of the subsequent summer session. Any student who fails
to make SAP because of criterion II.3 above will be dismissed from the
Department at the end of the subsequent summer session.

##  IV. Financial Support

To be eligible for financial support from sources controlled by the Computer
Sciences Department a student must be making SAP in the Department.

##  V. Appeal Procedure

Any graduate student may appeal any aspect of the SAP rules, provided that the
appeal is made in a timely way. In particular, appealing a decision that a
student did not make SAP must be initiated not later than the end of the
fourth week of the subsequent regular semester.

To appeal, the student should write a letter to the Chair of GAC stating the
basis for the appeal. This letter should explain clearly the reasons for the
appeal, and should be accompanied by appropriate documents such as a medical
certificate if the appeal is on the grounds of ill health or such as a
supporting letter from a Computer Sciences faculty member if the appeal
concerns an unusual combination of courses. It will often be useful for the
student to discuss the problem with a member of GAC or with the student's
personal faculty advisor before putting the appeal into writing.

GAC will consider every such written appeal and will notify the student of its
decision at the earliest opportunity, normally within four working weeks. A
student who is not satisfied with the decision by GAC may submit a further
appeal in writing to the Chair of the Department. The Chair will place the
appeal on the agenda of a regular faculty meeting, will circulate the letter
of appeal and accompanying documentation, and will give the student written
notification of the meeting. The meeting will be scheduled at the earliest
opportunity, normally within four working weeks after receipt of the letter to
the Chair. The student and any of the student's advisors may attend the
meeting to present the appeal, provided that the Chair of the Department is
advised in writing before the start of the meeting. In accordance with
Wisconsin law, the meeting will begin in open session, but the Chair will move
that the meeting convene in closed session before the appeal is considered.

#  Computer Sciences Courses

##  General Information about Courses

Courses numbered 399 and below may be taken for undergraduate credit only.
Courses numbered 400 through 699 may be taken by either undergraduate or
graduate students. Courses numbered 700 or above are intended only for
graduate students. Undergraduates are allowed to take courses numbered 700 or
above, but only if permission is obtained from the dean's office.

Courses offered less than once every two years are marked as ``infrequently
offered;'' students should not count on taking these classes when planning
their schedules. [Tentative timetables for upcoming
semesters](http://www.cs.wisc.edu/~bobh/timetable) are available.

World-Wide Web pages for the [current semester's
offerings](http://www.cs.wisc.edu/directories/classes.html) of many Computer
Sciences courses are available. Additional information about many cross-listed
courses can be found via the [College of
Engineering's](http://www.engr.wisc.edu/) and the [Department of
Mathematics'](http://math.wisc.edu/courses/) WWW home pages.

##  110 Elementary Programming 1 cr.

This course is designed to give engineering students an introduction to a
computer programming language, such as Fortran or C. It will cover elementary
concepts such as variable type, control structures, loops, and arrays. Prereq:
Advanced high school mathematics. Open to Fr. Students who take both CS110 and
[CS 302](graduate_guidebook.html#cs302) will receive a total of 3 credits for
the two courses.

##  132 Using Computers 4 cr.

Introduction to use of computers. Description of how computers work.
Introduction to programming concepts, with emphasis on productivity tools such
as word processing, spreadsheets, database systems, graphics, communications
and networks. Not intended for Computer Sciences majors. Prereq: Minimum
mathematical competency (two years of high school math). Open to Fr. Cannot be
used to satisfy the L&S BA math requ.

##  302 Introduction to Programming 3 cr.

Instruction and experience in the use of an object-oriented programming
language. Program design; development of good programming style; preparation
for other Computer Science courses. Prereq: Problem solving skills such as
those acquired in a statistics, logic, or advanced high school algebra course;
or consent of instructor. Open to Fr. Students who take both  [CS
110](graduate_guidebook.html#cs110) and CS302 will receive a total of 3
credits for the two courses.

##  
310 [Problem Solving using Computers](/areas/na/cs310-all.html) 3 cr.

Gives engineering students an introduction to computer and analytical skills
to use in their subsequent course work and professional development. Discusses
several methods of using computers to solve problems, including elementary
Fortran and C programming techniques, the use of spreadsheets, symbolic
manipulation languages, and software packages. Techniques will be illustrated
using sample problems drawn from elementary engineering. Emphasis on
introduction of algorithms with the use of specific tools to illustrate the
methods. Prereq: Math 222 and an elementary knowledge of Fortran or C or
Pascal.

##  
352 [Digital Systems
Fundamentals](http://www.cs.wisc.edu/~arch/uwarch/courses/cs352.html) 4 cr.
[(also ECE)](http://www.engr.wisc.edu/ece/courses/ece352.html)

Logic components, Boolean algebra, combinational logic analysis and synthesis,
synchronous and asynchronous sequential logic analysis and design, digital
subsystems, computer organization and design. Prereq: [CS
302](graduate_guidebook.html#cs302) or equivalent. Not open to students with
EGR classification.

##  
354 [Machine Organization and Basic
Systems](http://www.cs.wisc.edu/~arch/uwarch/courses/cs354.html) 4 cr. [(also
ECE)](http://www.engr.wisc.edu/ece/courses/ece354.html)

An introduction to current system structures of control, communication,
memories, processors and I-O devices. Projects involve detailed study and use
of a specific small computer hardware and software system. Prereq: [CS
302](graduate_guidebook.html#cs302) or consent of instructor. Open to Fr.

##  364 Introduction to Database Management Systems 3 cr.

Design, use, and application of database management systems. Role of a
database management system as a corporate decision-making tool. The Entity-
Relationship and Relational data models for database design. File structures,
data independence, integrity, privacy, security, application development, and
the role of the database administrator. Students use several database
management systems. Students may not receive credit for both CS 364 and
[564](graduate_guidebook.html#cs564). Prereq: [CS
302](graduate_guidebook.html#cs302) or consent of instructor.

##  367 Introduction to Data Structures 3 cr.

Study of data structures (including stacks, queues, trees, graphs, and hash
tables) and their applications. Development, implementation, and analysis of
efficient data structures and algorithms (including sorting and searching).
Experience in use of an object-oriented programming language. Prereq: [CS
302](graduate_guidebook.html#cs302) or consent of instructor. Students are
strongly encouraged to take CS 367 within two semesters of having taken [CS
302](graduate_guidebook.html#cs302).

##  368 Learning a New Programming Language 1 cr.

This course is for students who are familiar with at least one programming
language and are interested in learning a new language. Different sections
will teach different languages. Prereq: [CS
302](graduate_guidebook.html#cs302) or consent of instructor. Some experience
with data structures is required, so students are strongly advised to have
completed at least 5 weeks of  [CS 367](graduate_guidebook.html#cs367) (or an
equivalent data structures course at another university). Students may receive
credit for a particular language only once. Students will not receive credit
for both [CS 302](graduate_guidebook.html#cs302) and CS 368 in the same
language, or fo

