**_Education 173 / History 196-30:_**

**__**

**_American Higher Education in Historical Context_**

**__**

****

****

****

Brown University Fall 2000

MWF, 11:00-11:50 Smith-Buonanno 206











Dr. Luther Spoehr

Education Department

Campus Box 1938



Office: Barus 201

Telephone: 863-9236

E-mail: Luther_Spoehr@brown.edu



Office Hours:

Tuesday, 11:00-12:00

Thursday, 1:00-2:00

or by appointment













This course studies 350 years of American higher education, from the premodern
college to the modern research university. The course's first emphasis is
historical. It involves reading, discussing, and writing about the history of
higher education in the United States, particularly that of the last 125
years.

The second emphasis of the course involves using historical perspective to
examine issues facing higher education today. Particular attention will be
given to the evolution of professionalization; the often competing priorities
of teaching, research, and service; academic freedom; diversity and
multiculturalism; affirmative action; the role of athletics; and relations
with government and industry. All students will investigate topics of their
own choosing, present preliminary results of their research to class, and then
write final essays on that topic.

This syllabus should be viewed as a "work in progress." Some assignments later
in the semester may be changed to respond to student interests, while others
may be moved to different weeks to accommodate the schedules of guest
speakers.







**_Course Expectations, Writing Assignments, Deadlines, and Grades_**





Each student is expected to complete the required reading on time, attend
class and participate actively in class discussion, and hand in written work
as scheduled. Writing requirements include:

1) a series of very brief essays responding to the readings and classroom
presentations, as assigned by the instructor;

2) the First Midterm Exam in class on _October 20;_

3) the Second Midterm Exam, a take-home due at noon on _November 20;_

4) a final essay, 15-20 pages long. _Due at noon on Wednesday, December 13_.



Class preparation, attendance, response essays, classroom presentations, and
participation (taken together) will count 30% toward the final grade. The two
midterms will each count 20%, and the final paper will count 30%.













**_Books for the Course_**

The following paperback books are required reading for the course and are
available at the Brown Bookstore:



Roger L. Geiger, ed., _The American College in the Nineteenth Century_

Helen Lefkowitz Horowitz, _Campus Life: Undergraduate Cultures from the End of
the Eighteenth Century to the Present_

Christopher Lucas, _American Higher Education: A History_

Janet M. Phillips, _Brown University: A Short History_

Ronald A. Smith, _Sports and Freedom: The Rise of Big-Time College Athletics_

Laurence Veysey, _The Emergence of the American University_

__

Overall, reading for the course will average about 175 pages per week.
Readings are generally listed in the order in which they should be read, and
the instructor will indicate (usually in class on Fridays) which readings
which be completed for each day of the following week.





**__**

**_Schedule of Readings_**

****

**(* indicates that reading is on reserve at the Rockefeller Library.)**





September 6 Introduction to course



September 8 Packet of brief essays that introduce issues in contemporary
higher education





Week beginning September 11

Lucas, _American Higher Education_ , pp. 90-137.

Leon Jackson, "The Rights of Man and the Rites of Youth: Fraternity and Riot

at Eighteenth-Century Harvard" in Geiger, ed., _The American College in the_

_Nineteenth Century_ , pp. 46-79.

Horowitz, _Campus Life_ , pp.1-55.

Smith, _Sports and Freedom_ , pp. 3-51.



Week beginning September 18

Phillips, _Brown University_ , pp.7-47.

*John S. Whitehead and Jurgen Herbst, "How to Think About the Dartmouth

College Case" in Goodchild and Wechsler, eds., _The History of Higher_

_Education_ , pp. 162-172.

Roger L. Geiger, "New Themes in the History of Nineteenth-Century Colleges"

in Geiger, ed., _The American College in the Nineteenth Century_ , pp. 1-36.

Roger L. Geiger with Julie Ann Bubolz, "College as It Was in the Mid-

Nineteenth Century" in Geiger, ed., _The American College in the Nineteenth_

_Century,_ pp.80-90.

*George M. Marsden, "The Soul of the American University: An Historical

Overview" in George M. Marsden and Bradley J. Longfield, eds., _The_

_Secularization of the Academy_ (1992), pp. 9-45.

Peter Dobkin Hall, "Noah Porter Writ Large? Reflections on the

Modernization of American Education and Its Critics, 1866-1916" in Geiger,

ed., _The American College in the Nineteenth Century_ , pp. 196-220.

Lucas, _American Higher Education_ , pp. 139-182.



Week beginning September 25

Veysey, _Emergence of the American University_ , pp. vii-x, 1-56, 252-259,

**_AND EITHER_** 57- 120 (Utility) **_OR_** 121-179 (Research) **_OR_**
180-251

(Liberal Culture).

Horowitz, _Campus Life_ , 56-97.

Phillips, _Brown University,_ pp. 48-65.



Week beginning October 2

Veysey, _Emergence of the American University_ , pp. 261-444.

Week beginning October 9 (No class meeting on Monday, October 9)

*Ronald Schaffer, "The University at War: Veblen, Yerkes, Beard, and Cattell"

in Ronald Schaffer, _America in the Great War_ (1991), pp. 127-148.

Lucas, _American Higher Education,_ 185-263.

*Philo A. Hutcheson, "McCarthyism and the Professoriate: A Historiographic

Nightmare?" in Goodchild and Wechsler, eds., _The History of Higher_

_Education_ , pp. 610-627.



Week beginning October 16

Smith, _Sports and Freedom_ , 52-98, 118-218.

*Craig Lambert, "The Professionalization of Ivy League Sports" in _Harvard_

_Magazine_ , September-October 1997, pp. 36-49, 96-98.

Special Presentation: David Roach, Director of Athletics, Brown University

(October 18)



**First Midterm Exam: October 20**



Week beginning October 23

*David O. Levine, "Discrimination in College Admissions" in Goodchild and

Wechsler, eds., _The History of Higher Education_ , pp. 510-527.

*Geoffrey Kabaservice, "'The Birth of a New Institution': How Two Yale

Presidents and Their Admissions Directors Tore Up the 'Old Blueprint' to

Create a Modern Yale" in _Yale Alumni Magazine_ , December 1999, pp. 26-41.

Horowitz, _Campus Life_ , pp. 245-294.

Packet of information for Admissions Committee Simulation

Special Presentation: Michael Goldberger, Director of Admissions, Brown

University (October 25, 27)



Week beginning October 30

Horowitz, _Campus Life,_ pp. 98-173.

*F. Scott Fitzgerald, _This Side of Paradise_ , pp. 37-89 ("Spires and Gargoyles")



Special Presentation: Brian Casey, author of "Romancing the Campus: Emotion

and the American College and University, 1880-1940" (November 3)



Week beginning November 6

Phillips, _Brown University_ , pp.67-87.

*David Levering Lewis, _W.E.B. DuBois, Biography of a Race, 1868-1919_

(1993), pp. 79-116.

*James D. Anderson, "Training the Apostles of Liberal Culture: Black Higher

Education, 1900-1935" in Goodchild and Wechsler, eds., _The History of_

_Higher Education_ , pp. 432-458

*Harold Wenglinsky, "Students at Historically Black Colleges and Universities:

Their Aspirations and Accomplishments" (Princeton, NJ: ETS Policy

Information Report, 1997), pp. 1-26.

*Julian B. Roebuck and Komanduri S. Murty, "Historically Black Colleges and

Universities: Their Place in American Higher Education" in Goodchild and

Wechsler, eds., _The History of Higher Education_ , pp. 667-676.

*Richard M. Freeland, "The World Transformed: A Golden Age for American

Universities, 1945-1970" in Goodchild and Wechsler, eds., _The History of_

_Higher Education,_ pp. 587-609.





Week beginning November 13

*Patricia A. Palmieri, "From Republican Motherhood to Race Suicide:

Arguments on the Higher Education of Women in the United States, 1820-

1920" in Goodchild and Wechsler, eds., _The History of Higher Education_ ,

pp. 173-182.

*Linda M. Perkins, "The Impact of the 'Cult of True Womanhood' on the

Education of Black Women" in Goodchild and Wechsler, eds., _The History_

_of Higher Education_ , pp.183-190.

Roger L. Geiger, "The 'Superior Instruction of Women,' 1836-1890" in Geiger,

ed., _The American College in the Nineteenth Century_ , pp. 183-195.

Margaret A. Nash, "'A Salutary Rivalry': The Growth of Higher Education for

Women in Oxford, Ohio, 1855-1867" in Geiger, ed., _The American College_

_in the Nineteenth Century_ , pp. 169-182.

*Paula Fass, "The Female Paradox: Higher Education for Women, 1945-1963"

in Goodchild and Wechsler, eds., _The History of Higher Education_ , pp. 699-

723.



Week beginning November 20 (No class meetings on November 22 or 24)

**Second Midterm Exam/Essay due at noon on Monday, Nov. 20**





Week beginning November 27

*Diane Ravitch, _Troubled Crusade: American Education, 1945-1980 (1983)_ ,

pp. 182-227.

*Milton Viorst, "Clark Kerr: Igniting Berkeley, 1964" in Viorst, _Fire in the_

_Streets: America in the 1960's_ (1979), pp. 273-306

*Jerry Farber, _The Student as Nigger_ (1967), pp. 13-46.

*"Campus Explosions" in Alexander Bloom and Wini Breines, eds., _Takin' it to_

_the Streets: A Sixties Reader_ , pp. 384-405.

*Herbert L. Packer, "Academic Freedom & the Franklin Case" in _Commentary_ ,

April 1972, pp. 78-84.

*Stephen Macedo, ed., _Reassessing the Sixties: Debating the Political and_

_Cultural Legacy_ (1997), read **_ONE_ ** of the following: Sheldon Wolin,
"The

Destructive Sixties and Postmodern Conservatism," pp. 129-156; Walter

Berns, "The Assault on the Universities: Then and Now," pp. 157-183;

Alan Wolfe, "Two Cheers for Professionalism: The 1960s, the University,

and Me," pp. 184-203.



Week beginning December 4

Student reports on research projects



**Final Paper due at Noon on Wednesday, December 13**

