**" Decisions, Decisions "  
**  
_A paper contributed to the Fall 1999 electronic chemistry conference._ _  
_  
See: <http://www.ched-ccce.org/confchem/1999/c/index.html>  
  
Brian P. Coppola  
Department of Chemistry  
The University of Michigan  
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-1055  
bcoppola@umich.edu  
  

* * *

  
  
I. Introduction  
  
(1) Foreword  
(2) Some voices who answer the question  
(3) Personal reflection  
  
II. Underlying assumptions (or are they myths?)  
  
III. Two Replies  
  
(1) The answer we already give  
(2) What sits beneath the surface  
  
Bibliography  
  

* * *

  
  
  
**I. INTRODUCTION**  
  
**(1) Foreword**  
  
The question driving this electronic conference seems simple enough: "What
should students know when they leave a General Chemistry course?" It is not
simple. This topic is just one chamber sitting at an intersection of an
n-dimensional labyrinth. To make matters worse, the various pathways in this
maze shift unreasonably with the perceptions and experiences of both the maze-
makers and the maze-walkers. How can any single decision or recommendation
guide anyone? Nearly any recommendation is reasonable, and the criteria by
which value judgments can be made are conspicuously absent. The perplexing
choices of the labyrinth invite many instructors to the same answer: just sit
down and make a list of scientific topics, comfortably characterized, neatly
separated, and conveniently tested and graded. Instructors can convincingly
justify including any given topic as important, so a compelling answer cannot
rest solely on good rhetoric. The criteria on which value judgments can be
based are needed.  
  
Many students in the labyrinth visit this introductory chemistry chamber we
have made and they spend a short while. We certify their visit (and sometimes
their visits), then they exit. What our students learn varies wildly, so I am
only confident about one generalization about what students learn when they
leave General Chemistry courses. Namely, I am sure that 'A' and 'B' students
have learned how to perform well on general chemistry examinations. Is this
the same as learning chemistry? We assume so. Does this achievement permit
students to make informed decisions about anything even about becoming a
better learner? We want to think so. Are we designing and supporting learning
environments that invite and then educate students to achieve a plurality of
goals? We hope so.  
  
A labyrinth, _n'est-ce pas_?  
  
In the first part of this paper, including this foreword, I will reflect on
the variety of voices I have heard in conversations about introductory
chemistry instruction over the last decade or so. The last voice will be mine.
In the second part, I will offer a set of underlying assumptions (or, I might
argue, myths) that shape the different voices in the first part. Finally, in
the third part, I will reply directly to the question (maybe you just want to
skip ahead) in two ways. First, I will provide the information we already give
to students and faculty in direct reply to the question about our
expectations, and second, I will give a broader answer that underlies the
first reply.  
  
My overall goal is to raise ideas that might inform student and faculty
practice about the decisions they make regarding introductory chemistry
education. These suggestions include possible criteria with which value
judgments could be made.  
  
**(2) Some voices who answer the question**  
  
Stakeholders in two main categories are impacted by the General Chemistry
question. The first category includes those who have decided that this course
is prerequisite to something else.  
  
(a) _A voice from sophomore organic chemistry._  
  
Organic chemistry instructors certainly presume prior chemical knowledge.
Students who have not encountered certain fundamental ideas (particulate
nature of matter, atomic and molecular models, periodic properties, pH and pK)
would not usually have the background they need to succeed in the organic
course. A more provocative idea is whether students with an adequate high
school experience gain any added value from taking a year of college chemistry
before taking organic chemistry. Surely, this depends on the expectations of
the organic chemistry program. In general, though, the discussion goes
something like this: a general chemistry instructor will ask  "How can an
organic student possibly understand esterification without the understanding
of equilibrium provided by the introductory course?" This raises a recurring
theme (call it an ideological battle) relating to the interplay between
mathematical and molecular representations for chemical phenomena. The reply I
give to this question reveals my prejudice, namely, "How can a student
possibly understand equilibrium without a concrete context like
esterification?" After completing the first drafts of this manuscript, I
happened to review a series of three instructional videotapes for organic
chemistry students ("The Deep-Fried World of Organic Chemistry," Parts 1, 2,
and 3. Cerebellum Corporation, 1997, www.cerebellum.com) Interestingly enough,
this group devoted 1 hour of the first 2-hour tape to reviewing explicitly
"What you should remember from General Chemistry." The topics they selected
were atomic structure, Lewis structures, VSEPR, covalent and ionic bonding,
intermolecular forces, and acids and bases.  
  
(b) _A voice from pre-professional health science._  
  
Sometimes I think that medical, dental, and veterinary schools should remove
basic science requirements from the undergraduate program, just to demonstrate
how dramatically faculty beliefs have been impacted by the tyranny of the
standardized examination. Having contributed questions to these examinations
in the past, I find it humorously ironic that it is always the impersonal
"they" who are blamed for confining the topics on these examinations. "They"
are "we," and we are caught in a closed loop. We have created a national
standard without a national conversation, so conservatism rules: the general
set of topics that these students review in 1999 looks remarkably like the
list from 1969 except for the addition of, say, buckminsterfullerene. My
colleagues in the medical school certainly believe that an education in the
physical sciences is necessary for success in medical bio-science courses. In
contrast, my former students (now in medical school) report that molecular
thinking is more of a surreptitious advantage than a prerequisite since their
courses do not particularly depend on molecular understanding. While I do not
actually wish for a dramatic, wholesale change in pre-health science
requirements, I do think there should be better and more public articulation
between members of the American Chemical Society and the medical, dental, and
veterinary societies on this topic.  
  
(c) _A voice from pre-professional chemical sciences._  
  
We know this group has a minority voice in all of introductory chemistry, and
includes future chemists, chemistry and science teachers, and chemical
engineers. We believe deeply in the structured ordering of courses and in the
foundational nature of an introductory course. This voice also asks us to make
undergraduate education more relevant to teamwork and topics that more closely
resemble the chemistry professions that chemistry majors pursue. In many ways,
this minority voice has the most influence on curriculum design.  
  
  
The second category of voices includes those who own the General Chemistry
course. While no individual needs to represent a single characteristic, the
intrinsic orientations of instructors naturally impacts their instructional
goals. Loud, vocal answers to what students should know after leaving General
Chemistry are often heard from extremists, so understanding these characters
is the first step to a strategy for turning monologues into conversations.  
  
(a) The traditionalist is known for aphorisms.  "If it was good enough for me,
it is good enough for you." Or, "If it ain't broke, don't fix it." As in other
introductory courses, there is a body of knowledge that represents the topic,
and this knowledge needs to be transmitted to students.  
  
(b) The experimentalist focuses on instructional methodology but suffers from
a kind of "magic bullet" mentality. Uninformed by ideas of pedagogical content
knowledge (PCK, or the strategic match between content and the methodology
used to design instruction), the experimentalist deconstructs the (evil)
lecture classroom, or begins classroom voting on every topic, or tends to
assign collaborative projects that do not require more than parsing the
workload and using a stapler to join it together. The experimentalist can
sometimes become the evangelist.  
  
(c) The sociologist subordinates the centrality of chemistry (in a chemistry
course) for issues under the heading of relevance. Environmentalism,
biological application, nutrition, and so forth, are important and interesting
topics, but there is a significant difference between learning chemistry and
learning how it has been applied in aligned areas of study.  
  
(d) The reductionist maintains that chemistry is a derivation of physics.
Indeed, until recently, philosophers of science saw no need to identify a
separate philosophy of chemistry because it was believed to reduce to physics.
According to this premise, chemistry simply follows the provision of the
theoretical, quantum mechanical model for atoms.  
  
(e) The cynic can be jaded for many reasons. "Students today " are never quite
as bright or motivated as they were in the old days. The course is invariably
being "dumbed down." I have visited departments where the faculty was so
outrightly suspicious and communally hostile towards students who wanted to
ask questions and meet in office hours because "everyone knows they are just
trying to improve their grades and get letters of recommendation."  
  
(f) Like the cynic, the mechanical instructor is more or less serving time in
a course and does not typically advance the teaching in the course. This could
be either a highly research-active person or an all-but-retired person who are
joined in their disinterest in the curriculum. Followers rather than leaders,
these folks will often not get in the way of new ideas, either, and can work
in team situations as long as they do not have to be decision-makers.  
  
  
**(3) Personal reflection**  
  
As many know, The University of Michigan faculty implemented a new
undergraduate chemistry program in 1989 that we revised in 1996 ([ link to a
quick refresher course on our program if you're interested](UMprogram.html)).
From 1982-86 I taught sophomore organic chemistry in a small department in the
University of Wisconsin system and then from 1986-89 in Ann Arbor. Since Fall
1989 I have helped to lead the first-year, organic chemistry based course
sequence we call _Structure and Reactivity_. For 10 years, a steady-state
population of 50-55% of first-term, first-year students have enrolled each
Fall term, the remainder being students who waited until their sophomore year
(including but not exclusively those who have taken our one-term general
principles course).  
  
We know the following as facts.  
  
(a) Students who enroll in _Structure and Reactivity_ directly from high
school do slightly better, but not significantly so, compared with students
who have already taken a college chemistry course.  
  
(b) Advanced Placement students (35-40% of the class) on average, perform the
same as non-AP students (the trend within the AP group, however, follows the
AP score: AP3 below class average, AP4 at the average, AP5 above the average).  
  
(c) Students with poor chemistry backgrounds, as indicated by a placement test
that recommends their enrollment in the principles course, can achieve at the
same level as Honors students if they take the _Structure and Reactivity_
course along with a Supplemental Instruction option (instead of taking the
principles course).  
  
As I stated earlier, it is not clear whether students with an adequate high
school experience gain any added value from taking a year of college chemistry
before taking organic chemistry.  
  
As an organic chemistry instructor who had taught sophomores for 6 years, I
was curious (and a little cautious) about working with first-year students
when we began _Structure and Reactivity_. Except for a kind of naivet e about
university life, students without prior college chemistry have been
consistently more flexible in learning and in accepting a quite different way
of looking at chemistry compared with a class of sophomores. Although the
nature of the organic chemistry subject matter is usually blamed for
"sophomore shock" in chemistry, it is more likely the change in expectation
from one kind of subject to another. Consequently, we have still seen a
"sophomore shock" when the students from the _Structure and Reactivity_ course
move into more mathematically-oriented introductory physical and analytical
courses during the second year of our program. This observation is important
because it attenuates the idea that problems with the General Chemistry to
Organic Chemistry transition are due to the subject matter. In our experience,
it is more a question of students becoming accustomed to a style and then
having difficulty with change.  
  
**II. Underlying assumptions (or are they myths?)**  
  
At the end of the last section, I have demonstrated that an underlying
assumption about the relationship between courses can impact the question
about what students should know when they leave General Chemistry. If the
"sophomore organic shock" is due to inadequate preparation in the subject
matter, then there are certain strategies that might be followed that relate
to the subject matter. If the shock is more due to the fact that any change is
traumatic because it goes against the expectations that have been built up the
year before, then there are different strategies that do not relate to the
subject matter at all. In this section, I will propose that a number of
assumptions like this one need to be acknowledged, and their validity
reconciled, before a productive answer can be generated. The myths that
underlie chemistry instruction impact greatly on the answer to the question
about what needs to be learned.  
  
_Assumption/Myth 1: the chemistry curriculum is a highly articulated hierarchy
of courses and course content._  
  
I have picked this one first because it follows directly from the previous
paragraph. While students with no prior chemistry knowledge would have a
difficult time in organic chemistry, in our experience there is a smaller need
for General Chemistry than its place as a prerequisite implies. If anything,
it is easy to believe the organic wags who claim, as do some medical school
faculty, that filtering ( "weeding out") students in the introductory course
based on their general learning skills contributes more significantly to the
performance of students than any mastery of particular subject matter. Most
faculty members I know, it seems, find it impossible to assume prerequisite
knowledge when they teach and take the time to present (re-present, or is that
represent?) key ideas from the vantage of the new course. I think this is
okay, and faculty should just accept the reality of this and move on. Because
articulation between courses is so difficult unless someone has taught both of
them, it is difficult for a faculty member to know in what way the students
learned and understand ideas. I think the organic course pair is one of the
few left where the prerequisite of the first term course for the second term
course is real. If course sequences were actually highly articulated, then
this kind of linkage would exist through the entire curriculum (i.e., the
older idea of a "course of study"). It does not. Many programs are too large
and too diverse, and the demands on faculty too great (including in small
departments), to achieve this kind of cross-course communication.  
  
_Assumption/Myth 2: consumer-oriented curriculum design is inevitable._  
  
Consumerism has infected many parts of higher education, and it is most
obvious is in recruitment and advising. As far as I am concerned, the worst
thing to happen in higher education has been the consumer-client model for
relating to students. Paying tuition does not buy any particular outcome, job
offer, or post-graduate position. Paying tuition provides access to courses
and an opportunity. This does not let faculty members (or the institution) off
the hook and allow them to do whatever they feel like, because there are still
responsibilities and obligations of the highest order. In addition, and this
is a downfall, designing effective instructional environments is not something
faculty are trained to do, even though it is part of the job. Consumerism
affects course and learning expectations by adding an external dictatorial
voice. It turns instructional goals and learning outcomes from skills and
knowledge into products, and students into receivers of market goods. In a
consumer-based education, the only viable student outcome is for them to learn
how to perform well on chemistry examinations regardless of whether they learn
chemistry or not. Faculty members are (still) wholly responsible for design
and supervision of courses, and I think that a faculty better educated in ways
of design and supervision is needed to counterbalance consumer rhetoric. (A
footnote on design. There are all sorts of designs, both effective and
ineffective. A cultural evolution has taken place that rejects the quaint 19th
century  "spare the rod " methodology with both education and child-rearing.
Given the number of classrooms and research groups that appear to operate with
a "what does not kill you makes you stronger" mentality, it seems that
education still needs to do a little catching up. Again, I have seen
departments where the first reaction to consumerism has been to tighten the
thumbscrews, and that is troublesome.)  
  
_Assumption/Myth 3: the good of the few outweighs the good of the many._  
  
All future chemical scientists are in the introductory chemistry program, and
chemistry faculty members feel a justifiable obligation to their progeny. But
these students will be with us for a long while, so I think an introductory
program dominated by serving numerous imagined needs for this minority group
has distorted introductory instruction. In cases where all students take a
single course sequence, this means that every student is a member of the farm
team of future chemistry majors and the program takes on a aura of delayed
gratification. Its mantra is  "Trust me, you need to know this for the
future." In other cases, the so-called non-majors course avoids this problem
but can introduces another, depending on the sense and sensitivity of the
faculty. The non-majors course is easy to marginalize, and the resulting
marginalized populations are notoriously good at living down to their
stereotypically lowered expectations. Classrooms of students can easily
understand if they are deemed to be of lower value, so this is also a case
where the good of the many non-majors can be subordinated to the few majors.
In fact, the entire future of chemical science is the introductory course,
from chemists to chemistry teachers, to anyone who will reflect on their
experience in chemistry and help formulate the public perception of chemistry.
If we do well for the majority of students, won't we also be doing well for
the future chemists?  
  
_Assumption/Myth 4: if students only knew mathematics better, they would know
the chemistry better._  
  
My chemical education research colleagues have demonstrated beyond any doubt
that students are able to solve mathematical chemistry word problems without
needing to understand the underlying chemical ideas. Students who know
mathematics better simply know mathematics better. Certainly they are better
equipped to not be hindered in their learning of chemistry because of lack of
mathematical skills, but that is not the same as learning chemistry any more
than good punctuation skills are the same as good writing. I am not opposed to
mathematical representations for phenomena and relationships, but I sincerely
question the way introductory chemistry is presented if students can so easily
avoid learning the subject. With respect to the driving question about what
students will know after the introductory course, this paragraph is a reminder
that student learning is a central issue. Like a syllabus, a list of topics
does not imply anything about the way in which those topics are understood.
Let me emphasize that I am referring to the surface assumption that actual
mathematics skills are the critical issue. It is not the only one. Students
who score well of mathematics are generally better learners, regardless of the
mathematical demand in the performance task. While the Math SAT score is a
consistently strong predictor for general student achievement, cause and
effect must be carefully considered. The ability to solve math problems taps
into intrinsic analytical reasoning skills. For instance, the course
performance of our Structure and Reactivity students correlates strongly with
the Math SAT score as an independent variable, even though no formal
mathematics appear in the course at all. It does not follow, however, that
improving a student's math skills improves reasoning skills. The causal
direction is just the opposite. Math performance is simply a sensitive measure
of a learner's reasoning skills, but these skills do not necessarily follow
from learning how to do math problems.  
  
_Assumption/Myth 5: we must cover the topics necessary for standardized
examinations._  
  
One of the most powerful exchanges between a faculty member and a student that
I have ever seen came a few years ago during a group exit interview between
some of my colleagues and some of our majors. One of our physical chemists,
who is also one of our best classroom instructors, raised the obligation for
being sensitive to MCAT examination topics that he assumed would be a
preeminent issue for the students going on to medical school. Not one student
supported this idea. The overwhelming reply was that students would always
prepare for these examinations on their own and what they needed was the kind
of education that would allow them to prepare appropriately when the time
came. My colleague pressed the issue a bit, I think partly because it was such
a strongly held belief. One of the students heading to medical school, in a
bit of a pique to counter this idea, turned and said  "I did not pay tuition
to attend Kaplan University!" That sentence still rings in my ears. The
recommendation I made in the first section is worth reiterating. Whenever the
"MCAT topics" were originally codified, it was a reflection of the chemistry
contents of the time. If we want to be free from whatever tyranny is
attributed to covering topics for standardized examinations, then the
chemistry community needs to enter into a dialog about this (like this
conference). We must find a way to promote better communication with the
agencies that administer these examinations in conjunction with the health
science professional societies  
.  
_Assumption/Myth 6: chemistry reduces to physics._  
  
Expecting to be shot at sunrise, I ask the question: to what degree is
physical chemistry really chemistry, and to what degree is it applied physics?
To one reading of history, the rise of the engineering disciplines in post-
Industrial Age America contributed greatly to introductory chemistry
instruction taking on its physical chemical looks. The remnants of this still
persist in many engineering curricula, although the requirement-turned-
recommendation for a semester of chemistry may not remain a fixture once the
dust has settled on this latest round of ABET certification discussions. Once
the century was underway, this momentum continued as a more physical inorganic
chemistry emerged and the nature of the chemical bond became a significant
focus. I am not going to try to summarize the ongoing debate in the philosophy
of science community except to say that I agree with those who argue that a
fundamental chemical identity exists in nature. Historically, there has been
no substantial challenge to the implicit claim by philosophers of physics that
everything in chemistry can be ultimately represented by physics and therefore
"chemistry" does not exist independently and does not warrant philosophical
consideration. The nature of quantum mechanics is the territory where this
battle is being fought, in effect, to decide where the line should be drawn.
It is an interesting question that impacts directly what we think students
need to know after the introductory course in chemistry. When I think of
chemistry, I think of the wonderful explanations that we have created for
phenomena in the material world . I think of change and how we tell stories to
describe these changes: changes in concentration, changes in state, changes in
shape, changes in connectivity, and changes in aggregation. I understand and
appreciate the quantitative relationships from which principles flow, but I
think that chemistry is a story told about what that quantitative relationship
implies about the world. My point here (before the sun rises) is that a core
philosophical debate during the 20th century on the nature of chemistry and
physics must be considered when we take up this question of what students need
to know. If chemistry does not reduce to physics, and I do not think it does,
then we owe introductory chemistry students the benefit of basic chemical
ideas rather than physical ones.  
  
_Assumption/Myth 7: we must tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but
the truth._  
  
Does quantum mechanics, or any of its results, belong in the introductory
chemistry course? From one perspective, and I consider it a distorted one,
some argue that certain ideas must be implanted and repeated numerous times
just so that chemistry students get accustomed to the terminology. That way,
when they are ready to learn the material in an upper level course, it will
not be a surprise. This triumph of  "the good of the few " results in first-
year chemistry students seeing the Schrodinger equation. From another
perspective, and I consider this an instructional corollary of Occam's Razor,
students should be most responsible for a level of explanation that fulfills
the needs of the data. The "most responsible" in this recommendation is
critical. If my goal is to teach about the shape of the earth for the purpose
of launching satellites, then the planetary scale is appropriate. Although the
shape of the earth is fluxional and irregular, the degree to which these
subtleties impact my need will dictate how much attention I give to those
details. How much do my satellite students need to know in order to do what
they need? If my students are architects who build private homes, it is
certain that they learn the flat earth model for our planet: two plumb lines
separated by a distance are parallel. I am convinced that if chemists where
responsible for introductory architecture instruction they would spend an
entire unit on correcting the squaring of walls for the curvature of the
earth. Later on in their programs, many kinds of architecture students need to
learn about accounting for the earth's curvature because certain structures
are large enough to warrant its inclusion, but doing this for all students in
their first year would be guaranteed to exclude other more generally useful
information. This exclusion is a central issue we rarely deal with. I
understand that all subject matter is important to someone, but I also know
that an introductory course excludes topics on a scale that is orders of
magnitude higher than it includes them. What could first-year students be
learning about if they were not trying to understand why the Schrodinger
equation was written on the board? Substantial parts of what we know today as
truth, and probably all of it, is just the latest version of a "flat earth"
model of nature and of the world, and it is not a problem. Science advances
when conflicts arise between the data and our current explanations. Students
need a better sense of what a scientific model means so that they do not get
lost in relativism when they realize that scientific theories change and
scientific facts are subject to reinterpretation. One way to organize
instruction to reflect this is by using need-to-know as a decision-making
tool.  
  
  
  
**III. Two replies**  
  
Here I will give two specific replies to the driving question.  "Replies"
rather than "a reply" because there are too many audiences, voices, and
assumptions to permit a simple satisfactory answer.  
  
(a) The answer we already give.  
  
Given the course structure at The University of Michigan, it might not be
surprising that we answer the prior knowledge question directly. At the
beginning of the _Structure and Reactivity_ course (Chem 210/211,
lecture/lab), we provide our students with a one-page handout titled  "Basic
Chemical Knowledge for students starting out in Chemistry 210/211." It was
tempting to present the one-page paper to this symposium and write "been
there, done that." The handout looks like a list of topics written by a
faculty member who sat down in the middle of that chamber in the labyrinth I
described at the beginning, and I share this with you here ([link to one-page
handout](advice/handout.html)). We also provide a more elaborate essay on our
instructional philosophy and some detailed recommendations for student
learning ([link to teaching and learning essay](advice/index.html)). This
essay begins to dig more deeply into what we would like students to be
thinking and doing, and it is not limited to what students should know as they
leave a General Chemistry course. More accurately, these are the ideas and
practices we hope were started in introductory instruction that we can add our
own momentum to as the students move through our course.  
  
(b) What sits beneath the surface.  
  
We wrote the one-page handout with the comfort of our intended audience in
mind. High school chemistry students should be familiar with a body of
knowledge and ideas, and the conceptual relationships that hold them together.
The essay on study skills is meant to open up a broader discourse on learning.
There are more comprehensive ideas at work under the surface of the course,
and these must be exposed along with the subject matter. Faculty should always
think about instructional goals as student learning outcomes, and these goals
come simultaneously on three distinct levels. These are (1) _professional
technical goals_ , or the learning outcomes that are tied directly to an
understanding of the subject matter (e.g., organic chemistry), (2)
_professional intellectual goals_ , or the broader disciplinary contexts into
which the professional technical goals fit (e.g., chemistry and science), and
(3) _general intellectual goals_ , or the way in which learning the specific
content within the broader contexts helps students achieve an education in the
broadest sense (e.g., a liberal arts education).  
  
What should students know after the leave a General Chemistry course based on
answering the question at all three levels?  
  
_o The professional technical level._  
  
I would like to supplement the one page handout, perhaps even replace it, with
a set of questions that point to the skills that I would like students to have
when they leave a General Chemistry course. In the section for this level, as
well as for the other two, I will not be providing an exhaustive list, but
hopefully enough examples to make my point.  
  
A. Given: H 2O + H2O <=> H3O+ \+ OH-  
  
(A1) Derive the relationship between pH and pKa for H2O as an acid.  
(A2) Prove that the pKa of hydronium ion is equal to -1.7.  
(A3) Formic acid is a weaker acid than hydronium ion. Using equilibrium
chemical equations and the pH/pKa relationship, prove that the pKa value for
formic acid is higher than -1.7.  
(A4) Provide the balanced chemical equation, using complete Lewis structures,
for the acid-base reaction between formic acid (HCO2H) and sodium hydroxide.
Label the conjugate acid-base pairs.  
(A4) Can a solution of a weak acid have a lower pH than the pH of a solution
of a stronger acid? Why or why not?  
(A5) Sketch and label the titration curve expected from adding aqueous sodium
hydroxide to an aqueous solution of formic acid (HCO2H, pKa 3.75). What is the
approximate ratio of formic acid to formate ion, its conjugate base, when 0.25
equivalent of NaOH has been added; when 0.5 equivalent has been added; when
0.75 equivalent has been added?  
(A6) Describe how acid-base indicators work. Add information to your titration
curve in A5 to illustrate your explanation.  
  
  
B. The water solubility at about room temperature for NaCl is 37 g/100 mL, for
NaI is 184 g/100 mL, for CsCl is 180 g/100 mL, and for CsI is 55 g/100 mL.  
  
(B1) Create a 8-panel storyboard that depicts the dissolving process for NaCl
in water.  
(B2) Using words and drawings, provide a rationalization for the differences
in water solubility between NaCl and NaI.  
(B3) Is the CsCl/CsI trend in water solubility consistent or inconsistent with
your explanation to B2?  
(B4) In general, increasing the temperature of a solution increases the
solubility of a solute. Use words and pictures to explain this observation.  
  
C. The pKa of acetic acid (CH3CO2H) is 4.75, the pKa of chloroacetic acid
(ClCH2CO2H) is 2.89, the pKa of dichloroacetic acid (Cl2CHCO2H) is 1.30, and
the pKa of trichloroacetic acid (Cl3CCO2H) is 0.66.  
  
(C1) Provide an explanation for this trend. Use words and labeled drawings.  
(C2) What parts of your explanation involve ideas about enthalpy and what
parts involve entropy?  
(C3) The standard enthalpies (dH, cal/mol) and entropies (TdS, cal/mol) for
the ionization of these acids in water are acetic acid (dH = -137, TdS =
-6570), chloroacetic acid (dH = -1120, TdS = -5040), dichloroacetic acid (dH =
-100, TdS = -1790), trichloroacetic acid (dH = +1000, TdS = +595). Are these
measured values consistent with your explanation or not? If so, explain fully
the trends in the numerical values with words and drawings. If not, reconcile
your answer with these values.  
  
D. Water and methanol are completely miscible while water and oil are not.
Provide an explanation for each of these observations, including labeled
drawings.  
  
E. Electrons were discovered around 1900, and they were accepted as the basis
for chemical bonding around 1920.  
(E1) Briefly describe a basis for chemical bonding prior to 1900.  
(E2) What sort of observations led chemists to believe that atoms could be
bonded in the first place?  
  
_o The professional intellectual level_  
  
A. There is a frequent public debate about natural versus synthetic chemical
substances. Is a sample of natural vitamin C (ascorbic acid) extracted,
isolated and purified from a fruit or plant source the same or different from
a sample of vitamin C prepared from simpler substances in a laboratory
setting?  
  
B. Word origins often reveal scientific information and historical information
about science. Briefly explain why the names  "oxygen" and "hydrogen" were
selected for these substances, and also the origin of the terms
"electronegative" and "cation."  
  
C. Chemists understand phenomena by explaining observable or detectable
changes.  
(C1) Provide an example where a change in molecular concentration is used to
make an explanation.  
(C1) Provide an example where a change in molecular aggregation is used to
make an explanation.  
(C1) Provide an example where a change in state is used to make an
explanation.  
(C1) Provide an example where a change in molecular connectivity is used to
make an explanation.  
(C1) Provide an example where a change in molecular shape is used to make an
explanation.  
  
D. You are an undergraduate research student engaged in the study of
structural effects on the rates of reaction of a particular class of
compounds... After performing a careful set of triplicate experiments, you go
to your research director with a graph of rate constant vs. polarity. With the
results of 10 different systems plotted, 8 of the 10 fall nicely on a straight
line, but 2 points are well above the line. Your research director is
convinced that the two "deviant" points are in error and strongly recommends
that you repeat those cases. What should you do? Who is affected by these
choices?  
  
_o The general intellectual level_  
  
The lessons at this level are typically provided  "by example" rather than "as
examples." Short, direct questions to students are not the kind of assessment
that can reveal these attributes. Instead, techniques involving surveys,
interviews, and performance tasks are needed to answer educational and
educational psychology research questions.  
  
A. Do students take on more of a teaching and explanation role when they
answer questions and work with their peers?  
B. Have students developed their view about the epistemology of scientific
knowledge?  
C. Have students developed deeper learning skills or a greater sense of
intrinsic motivation?  
D. Can students provide critical feedback on their work and the work of
others?  
E. Are students capable of designing their own tasks and carrying them out?  
F. Can students encounter counterintuitive information and reconcile it?  
  
  
  
If the questions surrounding introductory chemistry could be answered easily,
they would have been already. In this essay, I have pointed to the characters
and ideas that make answering the question an interesting challenge. Whatever
the content of the introductory course, however, I think that the more
important issue is how we can make the ongoing examination of education a more
informed and evolutionary process. My recommendations are:  
  
(a) Broaden future faculty development to improve pedagogical decision-making
skills.  
(b) Improve or institute articulation between courses within chemistry
departments.  
(c) Improve or institute articulation between chemistry and the educational
divisions of health science professions.  
(d) Following from (a), (b), and (c), chemists could step back from
preconceived and inherited ideas about introductory chemistry as a _corpus
rigor mortis_ (with accompanying  "examinus abominus _ad nauseum_ ") and
introduce chemistry, a molecular and supra-molecular science.  
  

* * *

  
  
**BIBLIOGRAPHY**  
  
_The University of Michigan's undergraduate curriculum_  
  
(a) Ege, S. N.; Coppola, B. P. ; Lawton, R. G.  "The University of Michigan
Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum. 1. Philosophy, Curriculum, and the Nature
of Change", _J. Chem. Educ._ **1997** , _74_ , 74-83.  
(b) Coppola, B. P. ; Ege, S. N. ; Lawton, R. G. "The University of Michigan
Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum. 2. Instructional Strategies and
Assessment", _J. Chem. Educ._ **1997** , _74_ , 84-94.  
(c) Coppola, B. P.; Pearson, W. H. "Heretical Thoughts II. These on Lessons We
Learned from our Graduate Advisor that have Impacted on our Undergraduate
Teaching" _Journal of College Science Teaching_ **1998** , _27_ , 416-421.  
  
_Educational goals_  
  
(d) Coppola, B. P.; Daniels, D. S.  "Mea Culpa: Formal Education and the Dis-
Integrated World" _Science and Education_ **1998** , _7_ , 31-48.  
  
_Teaching research ethics_  
  
(e) Coppola, B. P.; D. H. Smith  "A Case for Ethics" _J. Chem. Educ.,_
**1996** , _73_ , 33-34.  
(f) Kovac, J. "Professional Ethics in the College and University Science
Curriculum" _Science & Education_ **1999** , in press.  
(g) Kovac, J. "Scientific Ethics in Chemical Education" _J. Chem. Educ._ ,
**1996** , _73_ , 926-928.  
  
_Broadening the definition of scholarship - future faculty development_  
  
(h) Boyer, E. L. _Scholarship Reconsidered: Priorities of the Professoriate._
Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching: Princeton, N. J., 1990.  
(i) Glassick, C. E.; Huber, M T.; Maeroff, G. I. _Scholarship Assessed:
Evaluation of the Professoriate_ Jossey-Bass: San Francisco, 1997.  
(j) CSIE: Chemical Sciences at the Interface of Education ([
www.umich.edu/~csie](http://www.umich.edu/~csie))  
(k) Shulman, L. "Taking Learning Seriously" _Change_ , **1999** , _31_ (4),
11-17  
  
_Thermodynamics of substituted acetic acids  
_  
(l) Calder, G. V.; Barton, T. J.  "Actual Effects Controlling the Acidity of
Carboxylic Acids" _J. Chem. Educ._ **1971** , _48_ , 338-340.  
(m) Edward, J. T. "Entropy and Equilibrium" " _J. Chem. Educ._ **1982** , _59_
, 354-356.  
(n) Allen, C. R.; Wright, P. G. "Entropy and Equilibrium" " _J. Chem. Educ._
**1964** , _41_ , 251-253.  
  
_Concept learning versus problem solving  
_  
(o) Nurrenburn, S.; Pickering, M.  " Concept Learning versus Problem Solving:
Is There a Difference?" _J. Chem. Educ._ **1987** , _64_ , 508-510.  
(p) Nakhleh, M. B.; Mitchell, R. C. "Concept Learning versus Problem Solving"
_J. Chem. Educ._ **1993** , _70_ , 190-192.  
(q) Pickering, M. _J. Chem. Educ._ "Further Studies on Concept Learning versus
Problem Solving" **1990** , _67_ , 254-255.  
(r) Sawrey, B. A. . "Concept Learning versus Problem Solving: Revisited" _J.
Chem. Educ._ **1990** , _67_ , 253-254.  
  
_Stereotyping and intellectual identity  
_  
(s) Steele, C. M.  "A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape the
intellectual identities and performance of women and African Americans"
_American Psychologist_ **1997** , _52_ , 613-629.  
  
_Philosophy of chemistry  
_  
(t)  "The Philosophy of Chemistry" A special issue of _Synthese_ , June 1997.

