Disability Support Services  
  
* * *

## ![](red_arrow.gif) TABLE OF CONTENTS

[From the Director](sthdbk.html#dir)

[You Are Leader of the Team...](sthdbk.html#ldr)

[Disability Support Services ](sthdbk.html#dss)

  * [Introduction](sthdbk.html#int)
  * [DSS Mission](sthdbk.html#mis)
  * [Description of DSS Services](sthdbk.html#svc)
  * [Eligibility Under the Law and Accessing DSS Services](sthdbk.html#law) _
  * [Hidden Disabilities](sthdbk.html#hid)_
  * [DSS Intake Process](sthdbk.html#intpr) _
  * [New Students](sthdbk.html#new)_
  * [DSS Advising and Registration](sthdbk.html#reg) 
[Working With Your Professors ](sthdbk.html#work)

[Step by Step Process ](sthdbk.html#step)

[Your Rights and Responsibilities ](sthdbk.html#rts)

  * [The Request is the Key ](sthdbk.html#req)
  * [Discrimination Defined in Higher Education ](sthdbk.html#def)
  * [Complaints and Grievance Procedures ](sthdbk.html#com) 
[Student and Advocacy Involvement (a letter from a student)](sthdbk.html#adv)

* * *

## ![red arrow](red_arrow.gif) CONTACT US

  * [Email, Address, Phone and Hours of Operation](hrph.html) 
  

* * *

## ![](red_arrow.gif) FROM THE DIRECTOR

### TO STUDENTS AND PROSPECTIVE STUDENTS:

UALR has historically attracted a diverse group of students. Students with
disabilities have been attending UALR in large numbers for many years. The
increasing sense of empowerment among persons with disabilities and the
awareness of legal mandates for reasonable accommodation are opening wider the
doors of higher education and the world of work.

We at Disability Support Services (DSS) hope your experience at UALR will be a
good one. As you progress through your coursework, you should feel a greater
sense of satisfaction and achievement as you gain academic knowledge and get
closer to your career goals.

**Each person's situation is unique.**

Some students start UALR knowing what works for them in an academic setting
and have had a lot of experience and support from family and/or professionals.
They have learned how to use their strengths and compensate for weaknesses.
Other students have only recently acquired a disability and do not understand
fully what their needs are in an academic setting. Sometimes a person's
disability has changed over time, making strengths and weaknesses more
difficult to determine. Whatever situation you face, the academic environment
will always be a demanding one. Juggling those demands and using disability
accommodations takes time, patience, and perseverance. Always remember that
your long-term goals are worth the hard work!

**This handbook is designed to supplement the UALR publication titled "New
Student Guide."**

Included in that publication are descriptions of many programs and services
you will use while at UALR, as well as the "Student Handbook", which outlines
UALR policies and grievance procedures. Please ask for a copy of the "New
Student Guide" at the office of the Dean of Students or at DSS.

UALR welcomes you and hopes this handbook supplement will give you some tips
and strategies for being successful in all that you do.

Sincerely,

[Susan Queller, DSS Director](mailto:slqueller@ualr.edu?Subject=Disabiltiy
Support

Services)

[Return to the top of this page.](sthdbk.html#top)  
  
  
  

* * *

## ![](red_arrow.gif) YOU ARE THE LEADER OF THE TEAM...

Every person wants to control his or her own life. People with disabilities
have a long history of other people controlling their everyday lives,
sometimes to the point of losing total control over what happens to them. The
college environment at UALR offers you the chance to be in charge of your
situation. This can be confusing at times. You may not always know what steps
you should take or whether the campus has resources to help you with a
particular problem.

**Being as independent as possible is essential.**

There are many services to assist you along the way, some on a regular basis
and some just a few times during your entire degree program. If you are unsure
how to proceed or where to go, use the written resources available (e.g., New
Student Guide/Student Handbook, this handbook supplement, Solution Finder,
Undergraduate and Graduate Bulletins, etc.), but also do not hesitate to ask.
Always, you must ask the questions, state your needs, and take responsibility
for the outcome. Even if situations get rocky, you must always seek the
solutions that will further your goals.

**Each office on campus has its own system of operating**

and its own role to play in getting your needs met. No one office is the
expert on all offices outside its own. Think of the various faculty and staff
as members of a team of people that facilitate your educational achievements
at UALR. And you are the leader of the team. Make sure you understand the
information you are given and follow through on the necessary steps to
complete whatever procedures are necessary. The University College publication
"New Student Guide" has a description of the programs on campus and their
roles in assisting students. This book is available at the Office of the Dean
of Students and at Disability Support Services. No one staff or faculty member
can coordinate and complete all of the tasks you will face: registration,
study skills training, payment of tuition, test taking, graduation
applications, etc. If you receive services from agencies off campus like
Arkansas Rehabilitation Services or Division of Services for the Blind it is
essential that you include them as part of the team you must oversee and
coordinate.

Many people feel at the mercy of professionals or administrators. You may
assume that these persons are more knowledgeable than you, or that their
authority could be used in a way that prohibits your success. You may know a
lot about what your needs are, but may not be sure how well other people will
listen.

**You do not have to feel powerless.**

Rather than handing over control to others or getting angry, your best bet is
to adopt the attitude that you can share control of your situation with those
who may have some other ideas in order to resolve a problem, or who may
sometimes be able to use their connections to help remove a barrier you face.

Ultimately, you must see yourself as the one responsible for what grades are
on your transcript, what qualifications you have to offer a potential
employer, and most importantly, what degree of personal satisfaction and
achievement you feel.

Following are some tips from former students with disabilities that enabled
them to succeed in the UALR environment.

  * Explain your disability to faculty and staff using terms that are easy to understand and in such a way that others can understand the practical day-to-day ways the disability affects you. 

  * Learn to not be ashamed or embarrassed about having a disability. Understand that asking for assistance is not a sign of weakness or dependence. 

  * Use accommodations available for classroom, laboratories, and testing situations; for computer labs and library research; for tutorial and other academic enhancement services; for career counseling and planning needs; for student organization meetings and activities. 

  * Balance the time needed for non-academic, personal responsibilities and the time needed for learning course material. 

  * Know your legal rights, develop good negotiation skills, practice good follow-through skills in order to obtain accommodations. 

  * Become skilled at negotiating the physical environment for maximum independence and access to all buildings, services, and programs. 

  * Continually improve your organizational skills and time management strategies. 

  * Improve your basic skills in reading comprehension, mathematics, and writing. 

  * Disclose your disability to Disability Support Services staff as early as possible, provide documentation of it, and let DSS staff help you assess your needs and plan each semester carefully. 

  * Understand what duties DSS staff will complete on your behalf, what tasks faculty members agree to complete, and what you, as the student, must take care of. 

[Return to the top of this page.](sthdbk.html#top)  
  
  
  

* * *

## ![](red_arrow.gif) DISABILITY SUPPORT SERVICES

### INTRODUCTION

DSS is here to assist you in gaining equal access to all UALR services. We
will also assist you in determining how UALR can best help you meet your
accommodation needs in the classroom. DSS is the primary office on campus with
the specialized knowledge and experience in disability issues. It also is the
central location for maintaining information about your disability through
written records and staff contact. **The DSS office is located in the Donaghey
Student Center, Room 103. The phone numbers are 501-569-3143 (Voice) and
501-569-8097 (TDD).**

DSS serves students with learning, hearing, visual, mobility, medical, and
psychiatric disabilities. If you have a disability, a DSS staff member can
help you develop an individualized plan to make the most of your college
career. If you suspect that you may have a disability, but you are not sure,
the DSS staff can refer you to appropriate professionals in the community for
diagnostic testing.

**DSS provides intake, assessment of needs on campus, and facilitation of
academic and other accommodations for students with disabilities attending
UALR.**

It acts as a liaison between students and faculty, as well as with community
agencies such as Arkansas Rehabilitation Services. The department, along with
its Student Advisory Council, advises the UALR administration on policies and
procedures relevant to students and employees with disabilities and acts as a
general information and referral service on disability issues.

DSS maintains statistics on students with disabilities and advocates to the
university administration for improved services, more adaptive equipment, etc.
So, not only do DSS staff work with you individually, but they spend part of
every day behind the scenes advocating on behalf of the entire group of
students with disabilities. DSS also provides training to faculty and staff so
that the UALR community gains a greater understanding of your needs and of the
advantages of a team approach to serving students with disabilities.

[Return to the top of this page.](sthdbk.html#top)  
  
  
  

### DSS MISSION

The mission of DSS is to eliminate physical and academic barriers and to
fulfill the Division of Educational and Student Services concept of assisting
students in achieving their educational, career, and personal goals through
the full range of institutional and community resources. In addition, the
office was established to insure that students with special needs receive
support services and accommodations to allow them equal access to all UALR
programs, and that they have the opportunity to realize their potential.

#### Description of DSS Services

Students should come to DSS or call for an appointment to inquire about the
following services:

  * **New student orientation for students with disabilities:** This session is offered at the beginning of each fall semester. 

  * **Priority registration:** Students with disabilities may register early each academic term (see under "Advising and Registration" in this section). 

  * **Standardized test accommodations:** DSS works with students and the UALR Office of Testing to facilitate accommodations on standardized tests such as the ACT, GRE, LSAT, and any tests required of all UALR students. The Office of Testing has developed a publication titled "Testing Examinees with Disabilities at UALR." Many students are unaware that through documenting their disabilities and following the process for requesting accommodations established for each test, they are eligible for accommodations such as extended time, a tape recording, large print, braille, reader, scribe, etc. Students should dixcuss any need for special administration of these tests with a DSS staff person before registering for the test. **Some tests, including the ACT, require a separate application form.** Tests that are administered with accommodations are administered on a day that is different from the published test date. The date for your test will be arranged through the Testing Office once accommodations have been approved. 

  * **Faculty consultation and inservice training:** DSS works with faculty to facilitate classroom and testing accommodations. Faculty are encouraged to modify rather than waive specific requirements, so that all students, as much as possible, get the same academic experiences. 

  * **[Faculty memo:](facmemex.html) ** DSS provides letters for students to take to their professors as one method of communicating their needs to their instructors. Students who choose to use them must get these letters at the beginning of each semester from DSS. An alternative of a laminated card which lists accommodations needed, and which the student simply shows to each professor may also be available. For those with hidden disabilities the letter (or card) lets the professor know that you have a documented disability. It also indicates that, based on the documented disability, the accommodations listed are necessary to provide you equal access and opportunity to succeed in the class. A description of this memo is included in the "Faculty memo" link above. 

  * **Faculty Handbook on Teaching Students with Learning Differences and Accommodations needs:** This handbook has been distributed to all faculty and is part of the packet new faculty members receive. It describes how to accommodate for each general type of disability, but emphasizes using an individualized approach, working as part of a team, and communicating with students as part of an ongoing assessment of needs. 

  * **Counseling and advocacy services:** for academic planning, social or personal concerns, and problem solving techniques. DSS emphasizes helping students to develop strong self-advocacy skills. 

  * **Auxiliary aids:** Interpreters, readers, and [assistive technology](adeqp.html) including adaptive computer equipment are examples of aids some students will need. DSS can provide information about assistive technology evaluations and possible purchase of equipment through Rehabilitation Services or other funding sources. A list of adaptive equipment and where it is located on campus is located at the "assistive technology link" above. 

  * **Recorded textbooks and other alternative formats:** DSS can assist students who have vision, learning, and physical disabilities with ordering taped textbooks. It is important for students to register for classes at the earliest possible time and to contact professors regarding reading assignments immediately after registering. The best recordings, available through Recordings for the Blind in New Jersey, can take up to 4 to 6 months. 

  * **Liaison with community services:** DSS maintains a close working relationship with agencies that sponsor students in college, such as Rehabilitation Services, and can work with students and agencies on individual concerns. 

  * **Resource library of information concerning disability-related issues:** This is available in the DSS office to students, faculty, and staff. 

  * **Volunteer program:** Students may receive a wide range of services through DSS volunteers, including readers, typists, notetakers, and tutors. Some volunteers also assist with scanning and editing printed material on the computer in order to convert it to braille or large print, making raised-line graphics, designing brochures or artwork for publications, writing grants, and doing general office work. Students interested in receiving these services through the volunteer program, or students who want to become volunteers themselves, should contact DSS staff. 

[Return to the top of this page.](sthdbk.html#top)  
  
  
  

### ELIGIBILITY UNDER THE LAW AND ACCESSING DSS SERVICES

If you have a disability, you are entitled by law to equal access to
university programs and facilities. The most relevant laws are [Section 504 of
the Rehabilitation Act of 1973](http://www.fiu.edu/~disser/laws.htm), and the
[Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990](http://janweb.icdi.wvu.edu/kinder/pages/ada_statute.htm). Under these
laws you cannot be discriminated against on the basis of your disability. In
the university setting, this often means that alterations must be made in the
classroom or in testing procedures. In a few cases there may be a change in
the courses required for graduation. For example, a student with a visual
impairment may request to substitute another course for the visual arts
requirement. If you would like to learn more about these laws, the DSS office
has information in its resource library, and periodically holds workshops for
students on the law.

Some of the most obvious accommodations are for students who have a severe
hearing and/or vision loss or a physical disability that makes it hard to
write out answers on exams or take notes. These students usually know what
kind of services they need, and they often stop by the DSS office to arrange
for interpreters, readers, and to find out about adaptive technology available
on campus.

Those who have less severe disabilities may have gotten by all their lives
without special accommodations, and may plan to get through college without
asking for them. These students may not be aware of technological advances, or
even some very simple accommodations that can make their college experiences
much easier and more successful.

**Hidden Disabilities**

Some disabilities are not obvious, but are also covered under the law.
Examples are learning disabilities, medical disabilities, many psychiatric
disabilities, and a history of addiction (rehabilitated or recovering
substance abusers). If you want to find out if you are entitled to any
accommodations, make an appointment at DSS.

Learning disabilities are among the most difficult to diagnose and to deal
with in a university setting. Students with these disabilities are not slow
learners, mentally retarded or unmotivated learners. In fact, a number of
famous intellectuals have reportedly had learning disabilities (Albert
Einstein, Leonardo DaVinci, Thomas Edison). Learning disabilities vary from
person to person, but usually they are related to the way information is
transmitted from the environment to the brain and vice versa. Understanding
and using the best method of transmitting information for the individual is
critical. For example, some learn best when they listen versus when they read,
and would benefit from tape recorded books.

Some students who have learning disabilities may have trouble discussing it
with their professors. They may not understand the nature of the disorder well
enough to describe it clearly to a teacher, or they may not feel comfortable
asking for support services they are entitled to by law. Some of these
accommodations are extra time on tests, a distraction-free room for testing,
oral tests or tests on tape, assistance finding a volunteer notetaker, and
tape recording classroom lectures. DSS can provide information about the
disability, as well as about diagnostic testing.

If you have a learning disability, or suspect that you have one, don't
hesitate to talk it over with a DSS staff member. You may be able to make it
through college without any accommodations, but you can probably do much
better if you receive the services to which you are entitled by law. Research
has shown that it often takes a student with a learning disability three to
four times longer than the average student to do college work. You are not
asking for unfair advantages when you request a change in the testing
procedure or environment.

[Return to the top of this page.](sthdbk.html#top)  
  
  
  

### DISABILITY SUPPORT SERVICES INTAKE PROCESS

Before receiving any DSS services, you should make an appointment and visit
with a DSS staff member. You will complete an intake form with the staff
member and discuss what your needs will be. This intake process is a standard
procedure and is required by the university prior to receiving any disability
accommodations. You do not have to identify your disability to the university
in the admissions process. However, if you know that you will need
accommodations in your classes, you will need to make your needs known by
completing the intake with DSS.

**DSS requires you to provide documentation of your disability.**

This information is confidential. If it is alright with you for us to discuss
your disability with your professors, we ask that you sign your name
indicating your permission on your intake form. The most important reason for
keeping this information on file is to provide the most appropriate service
for you.

The intake form has 4 sections: 1) general information, 2) your education
background, 3) your disability, and 4) requested services. A DSS staff person
will conduct a short interview with you and will assist as needed in
completing the form. At the same time you will receive information regarding
the university and the services available. You will be asked to sign a form
which will allow DSS to receive information about your disability from other
specific sources (e.g., your physician, Arkansas Rehabilitation Services).

In most cases, it is determined whether or not you are qualified for services
at the interview. The staff person will then provide information as to how to
inform your instructors of any specific adaptations or devices you require for
your studies. Later, once classes begin, you may find that you require other
specific services or may not need what you already have. That's okay, but
please discuss these changes with a DSS staff person so we can get the
information on record and can respond appropriately if a professor should call
us.

Since DSS has a separate computerized student information system based on the
information you provide at intake, it is critical that you let us know when
you change your address or phone number. You must also contact the Admissions
and Records office about address and phone number changes.

#### New Students

It is recommended that you contact the DSS office as soon as possible to begin
the intake process. This is especially true for students who will need to
request books on tape and for those who require sign language or oral
interpreters. If possible, six months advance notice, prior to your first
semester, is suggested.

We strongly urge high school students considering attending UALR to visit with
DSS, even as early as the junior year, as a means of gathering information and
making any plans they can in advance. High school seniors who have been
admitted by the middle of the spring semester may be able to get in on the
early registration period for fall classes. Again, this is important for
anyone using books on tape or interpreters.

### DSS ADVISING AND REGISTRATION

Students registering for support services at DSS can take advantage of
priority registration. This is not published in the regular registration
schedule. It means that you may enroll in classes as soon as registration
opens for the first group of students listed in that schedule (seniors and
graduate students). Anyone unable to use the telephone registration system
because of a disability should seek assistance at DSS or at the registration
Help Center.

Students should make their first academic advising appointments (to select
their classes) when they enter the university in the Academic Advising office
(Ross Hall 406, 569-3386). Make your advising appointments early since offices
get very busy close to registration time. You will get information on this in
your letter of acceptance to the university. Some students will be required to
sign a form with the Academic Advising office indicating specific
developmental courses required based on ACT scores. After the initial semester
you may continue to be advised by Academic Advising, or the DSS office can
advise students who have not yet declared a major. Advising is required, and
the registration computer system will not allow you to register until you've
seen an advisor.

Once you declare a major, your advisor is someone in your major department.
Again, you may still get information, faculty memos, and registration and
accommodation assistance from DSS staff, but your department advisor becomes
your source of information on how to complete your degree requirements.

[Return to the top of this page.](sthdbk.html#top)  
  
  
  

* * *

## ![](red_arrow.gif) WORKING WITH YOUR PROFESSORS

### POINTERS FOR TALKING TO FACULTY ABOUT ACADEMIC ACCOMODATIONS

  1. It is best to introduce yourself before or directly after the first class period and make an appointment to go to your instructor's office where you can talk in private about any special needs you may have. The instructor may want you to come during his or her regularly scheduled office hours. You might take along the "Getting to Know Your Professors" form. 

  2. Be on time for your appointment. 

  3. Be business-like, confident, pleasant, and respectful. We urge you to practice an assertive, reasonable approach to communicating your needs. 

  4. State your disability in simple terms. 
    * I have muscular dystrophy. 
    * I am partially sighted. 
    * I am hard of hearing. 
    * I have a learning disability. 

  5. Explain how your disability may affect you or limit you from doing the tasks of that course in the regular manner. Know what you can and cannot do and state it plainly and simply. 

    * I don't have good coordination or strength in my arms and hands, and I cannot write fast enough to get good lecture notes. 
    * I cannot see material on the board and I cannot read regular print. 
    * I cannot take my own notes because I have to watch your lips to help me know what you're saying. 

  6. My learning disability affects my reading and writing skills. Sometimes words look different to me than they actually are. I have trouble with spelling and often get letters and words turned around or mixed up. Sometimes I am easily distracted and have trouble concentrating on the material. It takes me longer to do reading and writing assignments. 

  7. Suggest a method of accommodation that will work for you. Tell the instructor what you need. 

    * I need to tape record the lectures so I can listen to them again and take notes at my own pace. 

    * I need help finding someone in the class to let me get a copy of their notes. I can then read them on my magnifier at home. I will need a large print copy of the tests. I may also need extra time on tests because it takes me longer to read. I cannot see well enough to mark computer answer sheets, but I can write the answers down on a plain sheet of paper, or circle the answer on a large print answer sheet. 

    * I will need to see your face at all times during the lecture. It would be helpful if you would repeat questions or comments by class members because I won't be able to hear or get a good view of them. I will have a notetaker with me. 

    * I plan to use recorded textbooks which will help with most of my reading assignments, but I would like to use a tape recorder to make sure I get all the lecture. I will need extra time to read and write my tests. I need to take tests in a distraction free setting because I have an attention deficit disorder, which makes it very difficult for me to focus my attention on what's important. 

    * I need to get a copy of another student's notes. You can distribute this flyer (provided by DSS) and announce that you would like someone who takes good notes to volunteer. I would prefer not to be pointed out directly in class, but rather have volunteers come forward after class to meet me, or leave their names and phone numbers with you. If you know a good student in the class you might ask that person directly. I can provide carbon paper, self-carboning paper, or pay for my own photocopies. 

  8. If the teacher makes alternative suggestions to the ones you suggest, be willing to listen to them. Be reasonable. Take into consideration individual preferences of teachers and be willing to try reasonable alternatives if they will work for you. There often is more than one way to accomplish the same goal. For example, if you need extra time for tests the instructor may let you come in early to start the test, stay after class to finish it, or take it at another time in the instructor's office. 

  9. Do not hesitate to speak up, however, if the suggested alternative method is not satisfactory for your needs. Just be prepared to explain why it doesn't work for you. 

  10. Above all, communicate to the teacher in some way that you are interested in meeting all requirements of the course, that you are not trying to get out of anything or looking for the easy way out, but that you need to do things in a way that is different from the usual manner because of your disability. 

[Return to the top of this page.](sthdbk.html#top)  
  
  
  

* * *

## ![](red_arrow.gif) STEP BY STEP PROCESS

You may not feel at ease initiating the arrangements needed for appropriate
accommodations. There are a number of reasons why students become apprehensive
within this process. Some of these may include: drawing attention to their
differences, acquiring labels that stigmatize, experiencing negative reactions
in the past, asking for accommodations others may perceive as unfair, lacking
confidence in approaching those in power, and/or having never been required to
assess their own needs and initiate required actions.

Two people with the same disability may require different accommodations. For
example, one student who is deaf may request an interpreter for exams, another
may not. One student with low vision may request exams and handouts in large
print, while another may be able to read the small print using a magnification
device.

The Provost has asked that all faculty include the following statement about
how to request any accommodations needed because of a disability. If you do
not see this statement on your syllabus, please bring it to the attention of
DSS staff.

**DISABILITY SUPPORT SERVICES--It is the policy of UALR to accommodate
students with disabilities, pursuant to federal law, state law, and the
University's commitment to equal educational opportunities. Any student with a
disability who needs accommodation, for example in seating placement or in
arrangements for examinations, should inform the instructor at the beginning
of the course. The Chair of the department offering this course is also
available to assist with accommodations. Students with disabilities are
encouraged to contact Disability Support Services, which is located in the
Donaghey Student Center, Room 103, telephone 569-3143 Voice/TDD.**

### THE PROCESS

  
DSS is asking the students and faculty to follow a process in working with you
in meeting your accommodation needs. Below are the 3 steps that you are
recommended to follow as well.

  1. **Complete your DSS Intake** (refer to [DSS Intake Process ](sthdbk.html#intpr)in this web page) and use the "faculty memo". 

During intake, students are informed about an accommodation letter to faculty
(refer to [ Description of the faculty memo ](facmemex.html) in this web site)
that they may pick up and deliver to you at the beginning of each semester.
Some students choose not to use the letter, but DSS especially encourages
those with "invisible" disabilities to do so. This letter is not meant to be
an all-encompassing document that gives faculty all the answers, but it does
identify the accommodations determined to be necessary, verify the person does
have a disability, and open the door for further discussion.

Understand that faculty have concerns about fairness and not wanting to give a
student an unfair advantage over others. If you do not take a letter to your
professors they may not be certain how to proceed with accommodations. They
may ask you to go to DSS for an intake or for a faculty memo.

  2. **Meet with Faculty to Discuss Issues.**

Approach your professors either before classes begin or within the first few
days of class. Scheduling an appointment to discuss accommodations during
office hours or at some mutually convenient time eliminates the feeling of
being rushed, a sense of being caught by surprise, and competition with other
students wanting the professor's attention before or after class. It also
ensures privacy, minimizes distractions, and sets the stage for building a
comfortable working rapport.

Faculty must commit to confidentiality regarding information you disclose to
them personally, or through the faculty memo. This also applies to information
they gain through contacts with DSS if you have given DSS permission to talk
to faculty about your concerns.

Your professor may ask for more information from you than he or she sees in
the DSS "faculty memo". You should feel comfortable answering questions
related to the need for accommodations requested. Also, you may want to give
the faculty member more information about the specific disability. Of course
you are not obligated to give any information you feel is personal or does not
relate to the accommodations requested.

Faculty are encouraged to not let it drop if the student has not given enough
information for them to respond to requests. You may need to meet with the
instructor again. He or she may probe, ask questions, and try to make you feel
comfortable enough to provide as much helpful information as possible. If
these efforts are not successful, you or the faculty member should contact
DSS. For many students, well-executed accommodations mean the difference
between success and failure. Try to react positively when a faculty member is
being inquisitive and to communicate openly. If you, faculty, and DSS approach
meeting your needs as a team and from the perspective of finding the best
workable approach, a solution is usually not difficult to find.

Finally, work out any logistical arrangements (e.g., where the tests will be
taken when extended time and a distraction-free room are needed). Consider
using a written record of your meeting. You may want to use the [Accommodation
Plan Checklist ](cklst.html) linked to this web page, adding any additional
information or details that may not be on the form. (Note: copies of the
Checklist may be obtained at DSS.)

  3. **Implementation and Periodic Review of Accommodations.**

Retain a copy of the [Accommodation Plan Checklist ](cklst.html) (take the
completed form with you to any appointments with the professor to remind each
of you what your plans were) and begin implementation. **For testing
accommodations it is important to check in again with your professor a few
days before the test date** as a reminder and to be sure you both have the
same understanding of what will occur.

Throughout the semester, you and your instructor should meet to discuss
whether the accommodations are adequate or need revision. There is no single
formula that works for everyone, and sometimes trial and error using a variety
of accommodations is necessary. Also, sometimes what both of you thought would
work turns out not to be adequate (e.g. the distraction-free room has
unanticipated distractions).

Unanticipated needs do arise and periodic review can identify alternative
accommodations to get the issues resolved quickly.

If you want to provide additional written information to your professors DSS
has handouts such as [Language and Disability](lang_dis.html), "Using a TDD
and the Relay System", "Working with Interpreters", and "The Learning
Disability: Some Common Characteristics of LD College Students".

[Return to the top of this page.](sthdbk.html#top)  
  
  
  

* * *

## ![](red_arrow.gif) YOUR RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Students are encouraged throughout their college careers, and as they move
into the work force, to become their own best advocates. The ability to assess
your own needs, develop a plan for accommodation or a course of action, and
communicate your needs effectively to others is a skill that may be critical
to your success here on campus, and in employment. Watch your mailbox for
information on workshops that will help you develop stronger self-advocacy and
leadership skills. You may also wish to work on this individually with DSS
staff. Students who have strong self-advocacy skills may wish to help other
students through participating in or assisting to lead workshops, or through
being paired individually with another student as a peer mentor.

Students should keep in mind that any discrimination that might occur based on
the disability is covered under the law. This means that if your disability
puts you at a disadvantage in any way in terms of your grades, or in accessing
any programs or services at UALR you are entitled to a reasonable
accommodation. Many students have expressed that they fear they will be
perceived as someone who is asking for special favors. Sometimes they feel
that getting an accommodation that is meant to give them an equal opportunity
to succeed is really special treatment. Keep in mind that the intent of the
law is to level the playing field, not to provide unfair advantages to
students with disabilities.

All federal laws require that you make your individual disability needs known
if you expect disability accommodation. The specific needs that you have may
be only known by you and no one cannot read your mind the minute you enroll in
classes. You have to speak up!

[Return to the top of this page.](sthdbk.html#top)  
  
  
  

* * *

## ![](red_arrow.gif) THE REQUEST IS THE KEY!

#### Requesting a service or accommodation can mean one or more of the
following:

  * You fill out a piece of paper requesting a service, like a financial aid application, a complaint form at the UALR Human Relations office, a DSS Intake, a disabled parking request form, a Student Support Services Tutor Request Form, etc. 

  * You make an appointment to speak with an academic advisor, a career counselor, faculty member, department chair, student government president, etc., and request specific accommodations that you will need during the appointment time -- such as an interpreter, large print materials, and so on. 

  * During an appointment with a faculty or staff member you make arrangements to receive future accommodations, such as classroom/testing accommodations from faculty, a accessible format of a career planning magazine from a career counselor, or a disability-related policy review by a vice chancellor, etc. 

  * You make a walk-in request for an accommodation such as asking for a UALR Bulletin or class schedule in an oral format, completing a paper form you cannot fill out independently, etc. 

### DISCRIMINATION DEFINED IN HIGHER EDUCATION

Discrimination based on disability can be an actual act or behavior committed,
or a procedure not followed by a person a group in the institution that had
effect of denying you equal access to a program, service, or other amenity
available to all qualified students. There may be two general reasons this
occurred:

  1. You needed accommodations for your disability and you requested them in the appropriate manner or through the correct channel. You have not yet received the requested accommodation(s) and are currently not getting equal access. Your grades may be jeopardized, your access to library materials may be limited, your need for career counseling is significantly limited, etc. 

  2. You assumed a person or group in the institution had disability accommodations already built into the system, so you did not specifically request any accommodations or thought you did not need to make your individual needs known. For example: 

    * You may have forgotten to check ahead of time on whether you needed to make a formal request. 
    * You may have not made your request early enough for the accommodation to be provided to you in the time frame requested. 
    * Your interpretation of what your legal rights are is different from what the person or group in the institution believes is legally required. 
    * You and/or the person or group at the institution are unaware that certain accommodations are covered under the law. 
    * You and/or the person or group at the institution disagree about how, or are uncertain about how specific accommodation requests are to be handled on a day-to-day basis.  

#### Complaints and Grievance Procedures

If you have concerns about the way your instructors are responding to your
special needs, please contact the [DSS ](sthdbk.html#ctc)office. A staff
member can meet with you to work on a solution to your problem and may also
work with your instructor. If you believe you have been discriminated against
based on your disability outside the classroom through any UALR policies,
practices, or individual experiences, again, please bring this to the
attention of DSS staff. In addition, a Human Relations Officer in 204
Administration South (569-8675) can assist you in making any complaints and
give you information about your legal rights.

The UALR "Student Handbook" (which is included in the New Student Guide)
distributed by the Office of the Dean of Students (205 Adminstration North
569-3308) provides information on grievance procedures and appeals committees.
In addition to contacting DSS and/or the Human Relations Office, these
grievance procedures provide you with a means of due process for dealing with
concerns whether they are related to your disability or not. Students who
would like a copy of this information in braille, large print, or on cassette
should request these at DSS.

[Return to the top of this page.](sthdbk.html#top)  
  
  
  

* * *

## ![](red_arrow.gif) STUDENT ADVOCACY AND INVOLVEMENT...

### A LETTER TO UALR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES

Hi. I'm really glad I was asked to write about my involvement on campus while
I have been a student here at UALR. I've been a volunteer for Disability
Support Services (DSS) since arriving as a student. I later became the
chairperson of the DSS Student Advisory Council. The stories I could tell and
the fun I've had have made it worthwhile. It was not easy to volunteer and be
a full-time student, but I decided how much time I could give to the committee
and other projects.

#### Why should people volunteer and get involved with student activities?

For me, learning leadership skills and having work experiences to add to my
resume were practical reasons for getting involved. The more non-tangible
reasons are:

  * having a sense of belonging 
  * making a contribution no matter how small to my community 
  * helping improve services for all of us with disabilities 

#### What does it mean to be involved on campus and how much time does it
take?

  * Knowing your schedule and being able to balance school and other commitments are essential to getting involved. I have been lucky, as a student and as a volunteer. Sometimes I've had to stay away from volunteering for new projects so that I could focus on my school work. 

  * Getting involved should never take priority over school work. Getting involved should enrich your college experience. There are clubs and associations and committees within different departments. As a student you need to decide what you are interested in. If you are interested in being involved with disability issues, read on. 

#### Where can you get involved?

Depending on your preferences, there is a lot of flexibility in how much time
is given to involvement on campus:

**[Advocates for People with Disabilities (APD)](apd.html)** \- Belonging to
APD allows you to meet others with disabilities and getting to know what is
happening on campus. APD tries to offer a way that people learn about each
other's disabilities, how different disabilities affect students' functioning
on campus, and ways that APD can advocate for better services to meet the
unique needs of its members. Membership with the APD involves meetings once a
month and parties at the end of each semester. If the meetings and parties do
not fit your schedule, you can help the organization by stuffing envelopes,
running errands, giving your input, drawing posters, etc.

**Officer for APD** \- Any member of APD can run for an officer position.
Becoming an officer requires more time, but there is some flexibility.
Officers can adjust the schedules according to their school workloads. To be
an officer it is important to be a team player and to work with other
officers. Officers learn leadership, diplomacy, and effective communication
skills. This is something that you could add to a resume to show that you have
had leadership experience.

**Barrier Awareness Week (An APD Activity)** \- The goals and purposes behind
Barrier Awareness are that of informing the public about disabilities and the
many ways people with disabilities adapt to and succeed in all facets of life.
Community service providers set up display tables and promote the services
they offer. Technology demonstrations are also provided so that students,
staff, and faculty can stay current with the latest equipment. Barrier
Awareness Week takes place in April. APD, DSS, and others work together to
plan events. A lot of volunteers are people who come for a short time each
day.

**Volunteer at DSS** \- Many students with disabilities, myself included, are
dependent on volunteers to help accommodate their academic needs. What's nice
about volunteering is that you decide how much time you can commit. But, keep
in mind once you commit time it's important to follow through. Volunteer
experience can be listed on resumes and you can ask whoever you volunteer for
to write a letter of recommendation. Some of the possibilities are:

  * recording books or handouts on tape 
  * tutoring 
  * typing reports or homework 
  * converting books or handouts to braille 
  * notetaking 

**DSS Student Advisory Council** \- This committee serves as a student panel
for DSS. Students on the committee have given feedback on handbooks and
inservice training presentations. The Student Advisory Council as other campus
committees is based upon selection and needs. The Student Advisory Council has
limited itself to five member each of who have different disabilities.
Commitment and regular attendance is required. Some exceptions are made for
school work in particular. The best way to get on the Student Advisory Council
is let committee members know you are interested in the committee. When a spot
opens there's a chance that you would be considered for it.

**ADA Committee** \- Five student representatives serve on the campus-wide
committee charged with implementation of the Americans with Disabilities Act.
The DSS Director recommends students who are then selected by the chancellor.

#### Conclusion

Obviously, I am really big on volunteering and helping others. The
satisfaction I get from getting a job done is tremendous. The things I've
learned from working with others with disabilities are things not necessarily
found in a book. The skills I've gained will help me throughout my life. Best
of all has been the friendships I've made.

Good luck and take care!

Lucille Blackwell

1994 UALR Alumni  
  
  
  

[Return to the top of this page.](top)

* * *

## ![](red_arrow.gif) CONTACT US

  * [Email, Address, Phone and Hours of Operation](hrph.html) 
  

[Return to the top of this page.](sthdbk.html#top)

[Return to DSS Publications page.](pub.html)

[Return to UALR DSS home page.](index.html)

Updated March 8, 2002

