Instructor:     _                                           _  Telephone
Number:     _                               _

Office Number:    _                  _ Office Hours:    _
_



**HUMANITIES DIVISION**

**ENGLISH 2320**

**COURSE SYLLABUS**

**COURSE INFORMATION**

> Course Title:                 **British Literature I**

>

> Course Description:        This course considers British literature from the
Anglo-Saxon  epic through the Age of Reason.

>

> Prerequisites:               Grade of "C" or better in English 1101 and 1102
or in English 1101H and 1102H.

**TEXTS:**

**REQUIRED** :  Abrams, M.H., _et al **,**_ eds. _The Norton Anthology of
English Literature_. Vol. 1., 6th edition. New York: W. W. Norton and Co.,
Inc. 1993.

**OR**   Damrosch, David, et al, eds. _The Longman Anthology of British
Literature_. Vol. 1. New York: Addison-Wesley, Longman. 1998.

**OPTIONAL:    **Hodges, John C., and Mary E. Whitten. _Harbrace College
Handbook_. Current Edition. New York: Harcourt Brace and Jovanovich, 1986.
Lester, James D. _Writing Research Papers_. New York: Scott Foresman and Co.,
1993.

**COURSE CONTENT** :  The instructor will select representative readings from
the periods covered by the course:

  * The Middle Ages * The Early Seventeenth Century
  * The Sixteenth Century * The Restoration and the Eighteenth Century

Or, the instructor may select representative readings from the _genres_
covered by the course:

  * Drama -- Poetry -- Essay

**HOW GRADES WILL BE DETERMINED** \-- The course grade will be computed as
follows:

  1. Tests and classroom performance 55%
  2. Writing assignments 25%
  3. Final examination 20%



**REQUIREMENTS FOR WRITING ASSIGNMENT(S)**  
The student should demonstrate in writing some grasp of the meaning of
literary periods, themes, and _genres_ through assignments that might be
chosen from among the following:

_At least one assignment must be chosen from 1 - 3 below to meet ASSESSMENT OF
EXPECTED EDUCATIONAL RESULTS_. See section A. 2: "A critical analysis paper(s)
(using secondary sources) of one or more aspects of a representative work or
works of literature will be required of each student to develop skills in
research, analysis, and synthesis."

  1.  A conventional literary research paper of six to eight pages, documented.
  2.  An interpretative paper of approximately five to seven pages accompanied by an annotated bibliography representing a minimum of fifty pages of secondary source reading in three separate sources.
  3. Three papers of approximately three pages each, one or more of which must be research based, involving the student in different periods and/or _genres_ covered in the course.

_Other assignments might be chosen from the following:_

  4. Two five-page interpretative papers based on intensive study and examination of relatively short primary sources.
  5. An annotated bibliography on extensive outside reading.
  6. Take-home test(s) assignment that requires extensive reading and essay answers.

**PROVISION FOR LATE WORK AND MAKE-UP EXAMS** :  Work is expected to be
submitted on time. When absolutely necessary, arrangements for late work and
make-up exams may be made on an individual basis with the instructor.

**WRITING CENTERS** :  A writing center with free tutorial services is
provided for day and evening students. The center provides additional help for
students and serves as a convenient place for other kinds of written work.
Instructors may assign tutorial center work for those students who need or
desire extra help.

**CHEATING / PLAGIARISM POLICY** ( _Georgia Perimeter College Catalog_ ):
Cheating is contrary to the policy of Georgia Perimeter College. Cheating
includes any attempt to defraud, deceive, or mislead the instructor in
arriving at an honest grade. Plagiarism is a form of cheating that involves
presenting as one's own ideas the ideas or work of another. Through course
syllabi or course requirements, students will be informed of the cheating
policy. Violation of the cheating policy may result in a lowered grade on a
portion of the course or a grade of "F" in the course. A grade assigned a
student because of an alleged cheating policy violation may be appealed by the
student through the grade appeals process of the college. A student found to
have violated the cheating/plagiarism policy more than one time, in addition
to having a grade or grades lowered, may be referred to the appropriate
administrator for consideration of further action.

If in the opinion of the administrator the violations warrant, a disciplinary
charge may be filed against the student with the Student Court. (See Student
Conduct Code.)

**ATTENDANCE AND WITHDRAWAL POLICY:   **It is the student's responsibility to
attend all classes, laboratories, and examinations as scheduled and in
accordance with the class attendance policy of the instructor. All class
attendance policies are on file with the appropriate department head and are
part of the course syllabus. The result of a student's violation of attendance
policy will be withdrawal (if violation occurs by mid-term date) or failure in
the course (if violation occurs after mid-term date).

_June 1998_

