* * *

**W3201.001**|  **Spring 1995**|  **Robert Lieberman**  
---|---|---  
**American Politics and Government**  
[PoliSci Homepage | [PoliSci Courses| [Undergrad info| [Grad info  
  
* * *

1306 IAB  
4-4725  
rcl15@columbia.edu  
Office hours: Tuesday 2-4, and by appointment

**Teaching Assistants:  
** Marianne Ide  
mei2@columbia.edu  
Office hours: TBA  
  
Lynn Jansen  
laj5@columbia.edu  
316-2902  
Office hours: TBA

This course is intended to introduce students to the fundamental elements of
American national government. We will explore the basic governing institutions
and political processes that operate in American government and politics. We
will examine some of the principles that animate American politics and the
evolution of American political institutions and processes over the course of
American history. The course will also encourage students to evaluate American
politics critically. We will examine how well the American political system
has lived up to the promises of 1776 and 1789 both through a periodic
discussion of the place of African-Americans and other minorities in American
politics and through discussions of contemporary political debates and
developments. In lectures, discussions, and writing assignments, students will
be asked to develop skills of critical analysis.

### Books and Readings

The following five books have been ordered from Barnard Bookforum, 2955
Broadway:

  * `Jeffrey H. Birnbaum and Alan S. Murray, Showdown at Gucci Gulch (Vintage)`
  * `Walter Dean Burnham, ed., The American Prospect Reader in American Politics (Chatham House) [designated on syllabus as B]`
  * `Andrew Hacker, Two Nations: Black and White, Separate, Hostile, Unequal (Ballantine)`
  * `Alexander Hamilton, John Jay, and James Madison, The Federalist Papers, ed. Clinton Rossiter (New American Library) `
  * `Ann G. Serow, W. Wayne Shannon, and Everett C. Ladd., eds., The American Polity Reader (Norton) [designated on syllabus as S]` 

There is also a photocopied packet of readings available at The Village
Copier, 601 W 115th Street [designated on syllabus as P].

All reading is on reserve in College Reserves, Butler Library.

In addition to the reading on the syllabus, students should read a major daily
newspaper preferably the _New York Times_ , the _Wall Street Journal_ , or the
_Washington Post_.

### Writing

A further aim of this course is to encourage clear and concise writing about
politics, free of cant, obfuscation, and other nonsense. Written work will be
evaluated not only for quality of ideas but also for clarity and economy of
expression. Bad writing, in fact, usually conceals muddled thinking.

In addition to the required readings, copies of _The Elements of Style_ , by
William Strunk and E. B. White, are available at Barnard Bookforum and
elsewhere. If you do not already own this book, you should strongly consider
buying it. Read it. Read it again. Put it under your pillow at night. If you
use it wisely your writing will probably improve, for which your teachers will
thank you.

You should also consider reading some nonfiction essays by masters of the
genre. Some authors to consider are George Orwell, E. B. White, and Joseph
Mitchell. Above all, read Orwell's essay "Politics and the English Language"
(required), which is both a model of tight construction and sound argument and
a polemic against the common faults of writing about politics. You will find
this and other essays by these writers entertaining as well as instructive.

### Course Requirements

  * Take-home midterm examination, passed out in class, 1 March; due in class, 8 March (20% of final grade) 
  * Paper, 6-8 pp., due in class, 1 May (30%) 
  * Final examination (40%) 
  * Discussion section attendance and participation (10%) 

### Course Outline and Required Readings

**Introduction** (18 January)

  * George Orwell, "Politics and the English Language," in Orwell, _A Collection of Essays_ 

**Founding and Foundations**

  * Liberty and Equality (23 January) 
  * The Declaration of Independence (P) 
  * The Articles of Confederation (P) 
  * The Constitution of the United States (in the _Federalist_ ) 
  * Rossiter, Introduction to the _Federalist_
  * _Federalist_ , Nos. 1-2, 10, 51, 85 
  * Tocqueville, Democracy in America" (S, pp. 6-10) 
  * Bryce, "The American Commonwealth" (S, pp. 10-14) 
  * Lincoln-Douglas Debates, excerpts (P) 

**Separation of Powers: Effective Government? (25 January)**

  * _Federalist_ , Nos. 10, 23, 37, 39, 47-49, 51 
  * Centinel, Letter I (P) 
  * Woodrow Wilson, "Congressional Government" (S) 
  * Paul Starr, "Can Governnment Work?" (B) 

**Democracy and Power: Limited Government? (30 January)**

  * _Federalist_ , Nos. 10, 35, 55, 57 
  * Brutus, I-IV (P) 
  * Melancton Smith, Speech (P) 
  * Hartz, "The Liberal Tradition in America" (S) 
  * Mills, "The Power Elite" (S) 
  * Dahl, "Who Governs?" (S) 
  * Keene and Ladd, "Government as Villain" (S) 
  * Cohn, "Damaged Goods" (B) 

**Federalism: Multiple government? (1 February)**

  * _Federalist_ , Nos. 14-16, 39, 45-46 
  * Brutus, V (P) 
  * _McCullough_ v. _Maryland_ (P) 
  * Elazar, "American Federalism" (S) 
  * Van Horn, "The Quiet Revolution" (S) 
  * Haas, "Just Saying No" (S) 

#### **American Politics**

**Political Parties (6-8 February)**

Samson,  "Toward a United Front" (S)

Burnham, "Critical Elections and the Mainsprings of American Politics" (S)

Broder, "The Party's Over" (S)

Kayden and Mahe, "The Party Goes On" (S)

Edsall and Edsall, "Chain Reaction" (S)

Valelly, "Divided They Govern" (B)

Faux, "The Myth of the New Democrat"; Marshall, "Friend or Faux"; Faux, "The
Evasion of Politics" (B)

**Interest Groups (13 February)**

  * Tocqueville, "Democracy in America" (S, pp. 400-402) 
  * Schattschneider, "The Semisovereign People" (S) 
  * Lowi, "The End of Liberalism" (S) 
  * McFarland, "Public Interest Lobbies vs. Minority Faction" (S) 
  * O'Rourke, "Parliament of Whores" (S) 
  * Paget, "Citizen Organizing" (B) 
  * Judis, "The Pressure Elite" (B) 

**The Media (15 February)**

  * Sabato, "Feeding Frenzy" (S) 
  * Salisbury, "A Time of Change" (S) 
  * Donaldson, "Hold On, Mr. President" (S) 
  * Taylor, "See How They Run" (S) 
  * Fishkin, "Talk of the Tube" (B) 

**Public Opinion (20 February)**

  * Bryce, "The American Commonwealth" (S, pp. 366-68) 
  * Lippmann, "The Phantom Public" (S) 
  * Key, "Public Opinion and American Democracy" (S) 
  * Yankelovitch, "Coming to Public Judgment" (S) 
  * Cantril, "The Opinion Connection" (S) 

**Political Participation and Voting (22 February)**

  * Valelly, "Vanishing Voters (B) 
  * Kennedy, "Lani Guinier's Constitution" (B, pp. 86-99) 

**Campaigns and Elections (27 February - 1 March)**

  * Flanigan and Zingale, Political Behavior of the American Electorate (P) 
  * Ganz, "Voters in the Crosshairs" (B) 
  * Ackerman, "Crossing the Voters" (B) 
  * Sabato, "The Rise of Political Consultants" (S) 
  * Drew, "Politics and Money" (S) 
  * Malbin, "Money and Politics in the United States" (S) 
  * Shields, "Political Humor" (S) 
  * Fenno, "Home Style" (S) 
  * Starobin, "Pork: A Time-Honored Tradition Lives On" (S) 

**Take-home midterm exam**

  * Passed out in class, 1 March; due in class, 8 March 

**6 March: No class**

**8 March: Possible Film, _The War Room_**

**Spring break: If you want to get a head start, begin reading Birnbaum and
Murray, _Showdown at Gucci Gulch_.**

#### **The Institutions of American Government**

**The Congress (20-22 March)**

  * Birnbaum and Murray, _Showdown at Gucci Gulch_ (entire) 
  * Davidson and Oleszek, "Congress Against Itself" (S) 
  * Mayhew, "Congress: The Electoral Connection" (S) 
  * Aberbach, "Keeping a Watchful Eye" (S) 
  * Polsby, "Constitutional Mischief" (B) 

**The Presidency and the Executive Branch (27-29 March)**

  * _Federalist_ , Nos. 67-73 
  * Rossiter, "The American Presidency" (S) 
  * Neustadt, "Presidential Power and the Modern Presidents" (S) 
  * Schlesinger, "The Imperial Presidency" (S) 
  * Smith, "The Power Game" (S) 
  * Lincoln, "Message to Congress in Special Session" (P) 
  * _Ex Parte Milligan_ (P) 
  * _Korematsu_ v. _United States_ (P) 
  * Hays, Guess Who's Coming to Dinner (S) 
  * Heclo, "A Government of Strangers" (S) 
  * Wilson, "Bureaucracy" (S) 
  *   * The Courts (3-5 April) 
  * _Federalist_ , No. 78 
  * _Marbury_ v. _Madison_ (P) 
  * Rostow, "The Democratic Character of Judicial Review (S) 
  * O'Brien, "Storm Center" (S) 
  * Stone, "Race, Gender, and the Supreme Court" (B) 
  * Bork, "Interpretivism," (S) 
  * Tribe, "On the Nomination of Robert Bork" (S) 
  * Sunstein, "Constitutional Politics and the Supreme Court"; Sperling, "Does the Supreme Court Matter?"; Sunstein, "Cass R. Sunstein Responds" (B) 

#### **Politics and Policy: Promises Fulfilled?**

**Civil Liberties (10 April)**

  * Glasser, "Visions of Liberty (S) 
  * Glendon, "Rights Talk" (S) 
  * Lewis, "Gideon's Trumpet" (S) 
  * _Engel_ v. _Vitale_ (P) 
  * _Abington School District_ v. _Schempp_ (P) 
  * _Lee_ v. _Weisman_ (P) 
  * Epstein, "Civility and its Discontents" (B) 

**Civil Rights (12-17 April)**

  * Hacker, _Two Nations_ , chs. 1-4 
  * _Plessy_ v. _Ferguson_ (P) 
  * _Brown_ v. _Board of Education_ (P) 
  * Kluger, "Simple Justice" (S) 
  * _University of California Regents_ v. _Bakke_ (P) 
  * Carter, "Reflections of an Affirmative Action Baby" (S) 
  * Sowell, "Civil Rights: Rhetoric or Reality" (S) 

**Political Economy and Social Welfare (19-24 April)**

  * Hacker, _Two Nations_ , remainder 
  * Roosevelt, "Commonwealth Club Address" (P) 
  * "Republican Contract with America" (P) 
  * Friedman, "Free to Choose"
  * Galbraith, "The Affluent Society" (S) 
  * Harrington, "The Other America" (S) 
  * Harrington, "The New American Poverty" (S) 
  * Joint Center for Political Studies, "Black Initiative and Governmental Responsibility"(S) 
  * Brooks, "Rethinking the American Race Problem" (S) 

**The United States in the World (26 April)**

  * Krauthammer, "The Unipolar Moment" (S) 
  * Kahler, "The International Political Economy" (S) 
  * Woodward, "The Commanders" (S) 

American Society and Politics: Toward the Next Century (1 May)

  * Putnam, "The Prosperous Community" (B) 

