![](celtic.gif)

    
    
    
    
    ### History 263
    
    
    
    ## History of England to 1688
    
    
    
    #### Fall, 1997
    
    Carolyn P. SchriberOffice: 310 CloughOffice Phone: 843-3586Office Hours: MWF, 9:00--10:00	     	 	   TTh, 9:00--10:30	

This course traces the development of the English nation from the Anglo-Saxon
conquests through the Anglo-Norman, Plantagenet, and Tudor-Stuart eras. It
emphasizes major political and constitutional developments, including Magna
Carta, English Common Law, the growth of Parliament, the English civil war,
and the settlement of the Glorious Revolution.

Required Texts:

  * Hollister, C. Warren. _The Making of England: 55 B.C. to 1399_ , 6th ed. Lexington, MA: D. C. Heath, 1992. 
  * Smith, Lacey Baldwin. _This Realm of England: 1399 to 1688_ , 6th ed. Lexington, MA: D. C. Heath, 1992. 
  * Smith, Lacey Baldwin and Smith, Jean Reeder. _The Past Speaks: Sources and Problems in English History_ , vol. 1: To 1688, 2nd ed. Lexington, MA: D. C. Heath, 1993. 

Course Requirements:

Because of the size of this class, most classes will be conducted in lecture
format, but they may also involve a more general discussion of the assigned
topic. I am always willing to be interrupted by intelligent questions. All
students will be expected to contribute to class discussion sessions and to
demonstrate that they have read assigned materials. I also strongly recommend
that you make arrangements to come in to see me in my office at least once
during the semester, preferably early in the year. I can do a better job of
guiding the class if I know you as individuals and have a chance to explore
your personal interests and concerns. If our schedules conflict, I will be
happy to set up appointments for times before or after my regular hours.

Members of the class should familiarize themselves with the resources
available to them in the computer lab. I will communicate with the class via a
distribution list and will expect everyone to check e-mail frequently.
Additional reading assignments may be assigned from World Wide Web sites, such
as [ORB](http://orb.rhodes.edu) or other library collections. My folder on the
Academic Volume and the ORB website contain copies of [this
syllabus](http://orb.rhodes.edu/schriber/121_97.html), [writing
guidelines](http://orb.rhodes.edu/schriber/Writing_Guide.html), and other
helpful tips. Take time to discover what is available and use it to your own
advantage.

During the semester, you will write three short papers (3-5 pages), in which
you will take a position on a major problem of English history. These papers
will draw on your knowledge of events, as well as your personal reactions.
Research into the problems may lead you to documents from _The Past Speaks_ ,
as well as other primary source materials found on the World Wide Web.
Specific instructions for each of these papers appear at the appropriate
places in the syllabus.

There will be two exams during the semester: a midterm and a final exam that
will cover the entire course. Exams will be in essay format, and students will
be expected to include material gathered from assigned reading and from
lecture and discussion sessions. Essays will be graded on both content and
composition.

Attendance is mandatory; if you must miss class because of illness, please
notify me immediately, either by phone or by e-mail. Final grades will reflect
both participation and attendance. You may assume that your final grade in
this class will be no higher than the percentage of classes you attend. (This
class meets 42 times. If you miss 5 classes, your attendance is 88%, which
would be a B+.) Assuming that your attendance is regular, final grades will be
based on the following scale:

  * Three short papers 30% (10% apiece) 
  * Midterm 30% 
  * Final Exam 30% 
  * Participation 10% 

    
    
    Lectures and Reading Assignments:Aug. 27     Introduction to course     The geographic and ethnic origins of EnglandAug. 29     Roman Britain     Read Hollister, Chap. 1Sept. 1	Labor Day	No classesSept. 3     The Coming of the Anglo-Saxons     Read: Hollister, Chaps. 2 and 3, and _The Past Speaks_ , Chap. 1Sept. 5     Dual Invasions: Christian Missionaries and Marauding VikingsSept. 8     The Unified Anglo-Saxon State     Sept. 10     The Norman Invasion     Explore the [Bayeux Tapestry](http://orb.rhodes.edu/schriber/Bayeux_Tapestry.html) on the Academic Volume or the Web.     Read Hollister, Chap. 4, and _The Past Speaks_ :          "The Life of William the Conqueror," p. 25          "Anglo-Saxon Chronicle," p. 29          "Abingdon Chronicle," p. 31          "Statute of William the Conqueror," p. 33          "Anglo-Saxon Chronicle," p. 41          "Customs of Chester," p. 42Sept. 12     The Reorganization of the Land

Paper Due:

Problem A: Who Shall Be King?

In 1066, King Edward the Confessor died without leaving a son to succeed him.
The claims of three rival competitors for the English crown were persistently
urged. These claimants were Harald Hardrada, King of Norway, whose claim was
based upon an alleged compact of King Hardicanute with King Magnus, Harald's
predecessor; Duke William of Normandy, to whom Edward had allegedly promised
the throne; and the Saxon Harold, son of Godwin, Earl of Wessex, and from 1053
to 1066 chief minister of Edward. You are to write a campaign speech for one
of the three, defending his right to become the next king of England.

    
    
    Sept. 15     Domesday Survey and Other Devices     Explore the Digital Chisel projects on the Academic Volume     Sept. 17     Inherited Thrones and Fraternal Rivalries     Read Hollister, Chap. 5, and _The Past Speaks_ :          "The Coronation Charter of Henry I," p. 34          "Anglo-Saxon Chronicle," p. 43          "Establishment of the Royal Household," p. 54Sept. 19     The Judicial Creations of Henry ISept. 22     Stephen and Matilda: Disputed Succession and Civil War     Sept. 24     The Coming of the Angevins     Read Hollister, Chap. 6, to p. 164, and _The Past Speaks_ :          "Constitutions of Clarendon," p. 71          "Assize of Clarendon," p. 73          "Description of Henry II," p. 87          "Account of the Martyrdom of Thomas # Becket," p. 130          "Knight-Service Owed by Roger of York," p. 38          "The Course of the Exchequer," p. 57          "Description of King Richard I," p. 100          "Policraticus," p. 104Sept. 26     The Becket ControverySept. 29	Henry II and his SonsOct. 1     Richard the Lion-hearted     Oct. 3     The Disastrous Reign of King John     Read Hollister, Chap. 6, pp. 165-176, and _The Past Speaks_ :          "Treatise on the Laws and Customs of England," p. 36          "Magna Carta," p. 75          "Song of Lewes," p. 78          "Letters Regarding the English Crisis," p. 81* * * * * * * * * FALL RECESS * * * * * * * * * *OCT. 8     The Struggle with the PapacyOct. 10     Magna Carta     Oct. 13     Midterm ExamOct. 15     Social Conditions of Medieval England     Read Hollister, Chap. 7, and _The Past Speaks_ :          "The Tale of the Palfrey," p. 93          "The Knight and the Crucifix," p. 126          "The Dolorous Knight," p. 176          "William of Malmesbury," p. 128Oct. 17     Economy and Politics in Medieval EnglandOct. 20     Rise of Parliament: Henry III     Read Hollister, Chaps. 8, 9, 10, and _The Past Speaks_ :           "On Kingship," p. 119          "Statutes of Edward I," p. 51          "How to Hold a Parliament," p. 64Oct. 22     Rise of Parliament: Edward I     

Paper Due:

Problem B. Who Speaks for England?

In the years following the signing of Magna Carta, England struggled with the
question of authority. Strong kings expected to rule as well as reign. Members
of the nobility defended their right to advise the king. Among the property-
controlling (and therefore tax-paying ) commoners, it seemed only fair that
their tax money should be granted only if the king offered them something in
return. Out of such expectations grew the institution of Parliament; the
balance of power, however, tipped first one way and then another. You are to
defend the position of one of the three sources of authority--king, lords, or
community of the realm.

    
    
    Oct. 24     Rise of Parliament: Edward IIOct. 27     Edward III and the Hundred Years War     Read Hollister, Chaps. 11-12, Smith, Chap. 2, and _The Past Speaks_ :          "Description of the Black Death," p. 199          "Description of the Peasants' Revolt," p. 202Oct. 29     Black Death      Oct. 31     Social and Economic Disasters under Richard II     Read Smith, Chaps. 1 and 3, and _The Past Speaks_ :          "Charges Against Richard II," p. 205          "Abdication of Richard II," p. 206          "Proclamation of Grievances," p. 208Nov. 3     The Rise of the House of Lancaster     Nov. 5     The Wars of the RosesNov. 7     Catch-up Reading Day; no classNov. 10     The Tudor Monarchy: Henry VII     Read Smith, Chaps. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and _The Past Speaks_ :          "Utopia," p. 223          Other documents, pp. 237-250Nov. 12     Henry VIII and the ReformationNov. 14     All the Little Tudors     Nov. 17     Good Queen Bess and Spain     Read Smith, Chaps. 9 and 10, and _The Past Speaks_ , pp. 251-258 and     315-325Nov. 19     Mary Queen of ScotsNov. 21     The Stuarts: James I     Read Smith, Chaps. 11 and 12, and _The Past Speaks_ , 327-350	

Paper Due:

Problem C. Who Rules the Church of England?

Henry VIII is most often given credit for establishing the Church of England,
but his three children were instrumental in determining the structure and
doctrines of that institution. During the reign of Edward VI, his Protestant
uncles introduced reforms modelled after the continental Reformation. Mary I
did her best to restore Catholic influence and practices. Elizabeth played the
role of a politique, seeking a settlement that would satisfy almost all
believers. The final form of the Church was far from settled, however, when
James I came to the throne. You are to assume the role of religious consultant
to the new king. Whose religious policies will you urge him to follow?

    
    
    Nov. 24     The Stuarts: Charles I     * * * * * * * * * THANKSGIVING BREAK * * * * * * * * * *Dec. 1     The English Civil War     Read Smith, Chaps. 13-14, and _The Past Speaks_ , pp. 351-363Dec. 3     To Kill a KingDec. 5     Oliver Cromwell, the Army, and the Rump     Read Smith, Chaps. 15-16Dec. 8     The RestorationDec. 10     The Glorious RevolutionFINAL EXAM SCHEDULED FOR SATURDAY, DEC. 13, AT 1:00 P.M.

