### HISTORY 514.01  
TUDOR and STUART BRITAIN, 1500-1700



This course is a survey of early modern British history, concentrating mostly
on England but with some attention to Ireland, Scotland and Wales. The
following required books are available for purchase at SBX, and will all
except the textbook be available on reserve at the Undergraduate Library. In
addition there is a Xerox packet of required reading, available for purchase
at Cop-EZ in the basement of Bricker Hall, which will also go on reserve.



**Readings:**

  1. Roger Lockyer, _Tudor and Stuart Britain_ , 2nd edition. 
  2. Richard S. Sylvester and Davis P. Harding, editors, _Two Early Tudor Lives_. 
  3. Thomas Dekker, _The Shoemaker's Holiday_. 
  4. Aphra Behn, _Oroonoko: or the Royal Slave_. 



**COURSE REQUIREMENTS:** All students are required to attend lectures,
complete reading assignments on time, and participate in weekly discussions.
You will also be writing two short papers, a midterm and a final exam. No
make-up exams or paper extensions will be given except in cases of dire
emergency and with advance permission. The reading will be most beneficial to
you if you read the textbook chapter before each week's lectures, and the
discussion reading before discussion. Please **do not hesitate** to contact me
in case of any kind of difficulty with the course, as I am here to help you
learn. Do not wait until a problem becomes a crisis. If you cannot come to
office hours I will be happy to see you at another time.

**GRADING:**

    
    
        Discussion participation = 20%
        Paper #1 = 15%
        Midterm = 20%
        Paper #2 = 15%
        Final Exam = 30%
    

Improvement over the course of the quarter will be taken into account in
determining final grades. You must complete all assignments in order to
receive a passing grade in the course.



CLASS SCHEDULE:

**

Week 1 - September 25-27 - Britain in 1500

**

Lockyer, Tudor and Stuart Britain. 1471-1714, chaps. 1-2

W: Introduction, Geography

F: Britain in 1500: Politics, Society and the Church

**

Week 2 - Sept. 30 - October 4 - Henry VIII

**

Lockyer, chap. 3

M: Henry VIII's Early Years

W: Revolution in Religion: the Political Reformation

F: DISCUSSION on the nature of English society: _COURSE READER_ (hereafter CR)
1-25, _A Relation, or Rather A True Account of the Island of England...About
the Year 1500_ ; Barbara Hanawalt, "Lady Honor Lisle's Networks of Influence",
CR.

**

Week 3 - Oct. 7 - 11 - the Political Reformation

**

Lockyer, chap. 4

M: Political Reformation II: enforcement and significance

W: An Activist Crown: the reigns of Edward VI and Mary I

F: DISCUSSION of William Roper's _Life of Sir Thomas More_ in Richard S.
Sylvester and Davis P. Harding, editors, _Two Early Tudor Lives_ ;
"Impressions of Henry VIII from various sources", License for Sir Thomas More
to keep and read heretical books (1528), Letters of Henry VIII to Anne Boleyn,
(1527-8), selections. _CR.

_**

Week 4 - Oct. 14 - 18 - the English Reformation at Mid-Century

**

Lockyer, chaps. 5, 8

M: Queen Elizabeth I's Early Problems: the Church

W: DISCUSSION of the English Reformation, _CR_ 41-71, Protestant accounts by
William Maldon, Thomas Bilney, Thomas Hancock and Bernard Gilpin.

F: NO LECTURE OR DISCUSSION (I must attend a conference in Chicago) - A
videotape, "ELIZABETH R", will be shown during class period.

**

Week 5 - Oct. 21 - 25 - Elizabethan England

**

Lockyer, chaps. 6, 10

M: Gender, Rebellion & Monarchy// Family and Household

W: Poverty, Disease and Crime in early modern England

F: DISCUSSION of witchcraft beliefs and persecutions. Selections commenting on
evidence by George Gifford and Reginald Scot. "Witches at Chelmsford",
''Northamptonshire Witches", "The Witch in the Alehouse"; Clive Holmes,
"Popular Culture? Witches, Magistrates and Divines in Early Modern England."
CR.

**

PAPER #1 DUE AT BEGINNING OF CLASS Fri. Oct. 25** \- English Witchcraft: The
purpose of this assignment is to provide you with an opportunity to analyze a
small group of primary sources carefully, in order better to understand a
significant aspect of early modern English history. Your assignment is not to
summarize these materials at length, but to focus on their most important
points, with this agenda as your guide. Using the documents in your Course
Reader titled "Witches at Chelmsford", "Northamptonshire Witches" and "The
Witch in the Alehouse", write a 5-page paper in which you describe and analyze
what made a witch a witch: that is, the process by which a witch was
suspected, identified, accused and prosecuted. What characteristics did
accused witches share? In what context did they tend to be accused? Was it
their "fault" they were prosecuted, convicted? How are they portrayed in these
documents? What range of meanings do these cases suggest that witchcraft held
in late 16th and early 17th century England? The article by Clive Holmes
provides additional information: use it as a reference and not as the basis of
your paper.

**

Week 6 - Oct. 28 - November 1 - Trouble at Home and Abroad

**

Lockyer, chap. 9

M: Plots, Conspiracies and Foreign Policy

W: The English in Ireland

F: MIDTERM EXAM FRIDAY NOVEMBER 1

**Week 7 - Nov. 4 - 8 - Early Stuart England**

Lockyer, chaps. 11, 14

M: James I and the Tudor Legacy

W: Bright Lights, Big City?: Tudor-Stuart

London

F: DISCUSSION of Thomas Dekker, _The Shoemaker's Holiday_ ; Sir Walter
Raleigh, "The Last Fight of the 'Revenge"' (1591). CR.

**

Week 8 - Nov. 11 - 15 - The Fateful Reign of Ring Charles I

**

Lockyer, chap. 12

M: Charles I and Parliament

W: The Personal Rule and the Crisis of 1639-40

F: DISCUSSION of Puritanism

**

PAPER #2 DUE AT THE BEGINNING OF CLASS Fri. Nov. 15** \- a Puritan Roundtable:
William Stubbes, "A Crystal Glass for Christian Women, containing a most
excellent Discourse of the Godly Life and Christian Death of Mistress
Katherine Stubbes" (1591); Paul Seaver, _Wallington's World: A Puritan Artisan
in Seventeenth-Century London_ , chap-. 1-2; Alan Macfarlane, _The Family Life
of Ralph Josselin a Seventeenth-Century Clergyman_ , chap. 11, "Attitudes to
pain, sin and God"; Lucy Hutchinson, "'Memoirs of the Life of Colonel
Hutchinson." All CR.

Using the lives of these four devout English Puritans, write a 5 page paper in
which you analyze how their religious beliefs shaped their views of
themselves, of other people, and of the world in which they lived. What did
Puritans think was most important? What standards did they set themselves and
others, and at what cost? How would you describe the range of Puritan
experience?

**

Week 9 - Nov. 18 - 22 - Civil** **War and Revolution, 1642-49

**

Lockyer, chap.13

M: From crisis to civil war, 1640-42

W: Why the King lost both civil wars

F: DISCUSSION of radical groups, the Diggers, Quakers, Fifth Monarchists and
Levellers, during the Interregnum. Christopher Hill, "Gerrard Winstanley and
Freedom"; Barry Reay, "Quakerism and Society"; Phyllis Mack, "Women as
Prophets during the English Civil War"; "The First Agreement of the People"
(Levellers, 1647). CR.

**

Week 10 - Nov. 25 - 27 - From Revolution to Restoration **Lockyer, chap. 15,
16

M: Radicals at the top?: the King's execution and the revolutionary
governments

W: The return of the monarchy: unsolved problems

F: THANKSGIVING BREAK - NO CLASS

**

Week 11 - Dec. 2 - 6 - Later Stuart Britain: Continuity & Change

**

M: James II and the Glorious **Revolution of 1688

**

W: Ireland, Scotland and England's early empire

F: DISCUSSION of _Oroonoko: or the Royal Slave_ by Aphra Behn

**

SUGGESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION READING

**

The discussion reading permits us to explore significant topics we may only
have time to touch on in lecture. Allow enough time to do the reading, in case
you have questions and also so that you can let it sink in a while before
discussion. How does it relate to what you ire learning in lecture and in the
textbook? What strikes you as most important and interesting about it? I find
it helpful to skim through the entire assignment first, especially if I am
planning to take notes, to get a sense of what the crucial points or arguments
will be, and to have a better idea of how to pace my reading and focus my
attention. Please come to discussion with your questions as well as with your
comments and opinions.

**

GUIDELINES FOR YOUR PAPERS

**

You should make an argument in your paper. A thesis need not shake the world;
rather, it is your own answer to the topic questions. _Begin_ by clearly
stating your thesis and what you intend to demonstrate; at the end, state your
conclusion clearly. In between these two points, your paper should follow a
logical progression; a well put together introductory paragraph will provide
both you and the reader with a road map to your paper. Where possible, use the
paragraph as a unit of information, each paragraph being devoted to a single
argument and the evidence to support it.

You should always support your arguments with evidence drawn _from the texts_.
When citing word for word use quotation marks, with simple footnotes or
endnotes (for example,  "Miscarriage", p.30, or Seaver, p.120, are fine).
Quote sparingly - do not let your paper become an anthology. Quotations should
only be used as part of your argument.

Present your ideas in your own words. An essay is a formal piece of writing,
however, in which slang and contractions are not appropriate. Avoid mistakes
in spelling, grammar and diction by allowing enough time to edit and proofread
your paper. Your paper will be graded both for content and writing. _Everyone_
needs help with writing, and you should not hesitate to get it. The Writing
Center is very helpful. Please plan to come see me if you are uncertain how to
proceed or if you would like to discuss the material or your ideas for your
paper in advance.

All papers should be typed, double-spaced, with no more than one inch margins
on all sides, and should have a separate title page covering them.

