**36M:191**

**Philosophy of Media**

**Spring Semester 1997, University of Iowa**



Prof. John D. Peters.  
Department of Communication Studies.  
Class Meeting: 1:30-2:20 p.m., MWF, 201 BCSB.  
Office: 125 BCSB; Phone 353-2258.

Departmental office: 105 BCSB; Phone 335-0575.

E-mail: [jdpeters@blue.weeg.uiowa.edu.](MAILTO:jdpeters@blue.weeg.uiowa.edu)

URL: http://twist.lib.uiowa.edu/36M191/

Office Hours: T 3-4 p.m., F 10-11:30 a.m., and by appointment. Feel free to
drop by for office hours. Right after class is almost always a good time to
catch me. In busy times of the semester, I will post a sign-up sheet on my
office door.

** **

**Overview**

Electronic media have a relatively short lifespan in the broader history of
human civilization. But the issues they raise have been debated for ages. Even
though the thinkers we will be studying lived in very different conditions of
communication than we do, they can cast much light on what it means to live in
a media age. Some of the biggest and oldest philosophical questions confront
us every time we turn on a television set. Why are human beings so fascinated
by sex and violence? How do these symbols and stories help some groups
maintain power over others? Should a healthy society place limits upon the
content and form of public communication? Is a democratic public sphere
possible in a time of distraction and short attention spans? How can a large-
scale society hold together without self-destructing? How can we tell the real
from the fake? How can women and minorities be represented in just ways? How
should we respond to pictures of other people suffering in distant places?
These very contemporary questions have been also asked by thinkers such as
Augustine, Marx, Mill, Tocqueville, Freud, and Benjamin.

In a way, the founding question of philosophy is more relevant than ever in an
age of digital technologies, docudramas, and dubious news: What can we believe
of the representations swirling around us? This was Plato's question about the
"appearances" that strike our senses, but it can also apply to a time in which
much of our knowledge is dependent on equally fallible sources, the media.
Even though media are often ridiculed as an unfit subject for deep thought,
this class aims to explore some of the large social, political, moral, and
aesthetic problems the media imply. It is high time to bring the media into
dialogue with the great ideas and thinkers of our tradition.

We will also use a variety of examples from media genres--film clips, TV
shows, popular music, newspapers, advertisements--to animate many of the
issues discussed in the philosophical writings and in class. In this way, we
will study not only philosophy of media, but philosophy in media. Many of our
leading questions have been taken up by creative personnel in twentieth
century media.

** **

**What it Takes**

This class is aimed at advanced undergraduates--courses numbered in the 190s
are the most advanced. It would be an excellent class for honors students. I
will assume you've had relevant prerequisites (such as 36M:25, 36M:35, 36M:45,
36M:80), and are comfortable at an advanced level. It could also be
appropriate for beginning graduate students--who should be willing to moderate
technical vocabulary for the educational welfare of all concerned! The key
ingredients for success in this class, in any case, are a willingness to work
hard with difficult material and a spirit of adventure. Though few of the
authors talk about "media" directly, their ideas form the intellectual core of
media studies. Most of our authors lived in different worlds than our own--
worlds without network TV, photography, computers, or even electricity. It
will take (1) imagination and effort to bridge our time to theirs and (2)
concentration not to be distracted by the many things that do not immediately
seem relevant to the philosophy of media. This course will require you to work
hard at the readings and assignments, and to develop your opinions and
positions on some difficult, lasting, and fascinating issues.

Another key ingredient for student success is a willingness to read--even the
enjoyment of reading. You may be outraged, confused, and delighted by these
writers at different moments. Our analysis of them may sometimes be a mining
operation--sifting through lots of material for the nuggets. I am convinced
that the chosen authors have unusual relevance for understanding many of the
curiosities of life in a media age. Even though many of our communication
technologies are historically new, the problems they bring have been around
for much longer.

** **

**Goal**

The main goal of this class is to acquaint students with the philosophical and
historical foundations of contemporary debates about media and society, so as
to enable you to understand and critique contemporary issues more profoundly.
This goal should be of value for everyone, whether you are planning a career
in the industry or a life in the next millennium. To reach this goal, students
will study both some representative writings of key figures, and learn the
outlines of several schools of thought which they represent, such as
Christianity, Marxism, Liberalism, Communitarianism, Psychoanalysis, Feminism,
Critical Race Theory, and Postmodernism. Lectures will make clear the basic
principles of these different philosophies of media, comparing and contrasting
as we go.

** **

**Readings**

Seven books have been ordered at Iowa Book and Supply, 8 South Clinton Street
(downstairs).



Augustine, _The Confessions_.

Alexis de Tocqueville, _Democracy in America_.

The Marx-Engels Reader.

John Stuart Mill, _Political Writings_.

Sigmund Freud, _Civilization and its Discontents_.

Walter Benjamin, _Illuminations_.

Milan Kundera, _Immortality_ (recommended).



We will be reading judicious selections (and not every page) of these books,
some of which are very fat. A few readings will also be placed on reserve in
the reserve room on the second floor of the Main Library. You may join
together to take turns photocopying these readings for each other on your own
if you wish.

** **

**Grading and Requirements**

Your grade will be calculated as follows:



10% Class participation

10% reading notes (keep folder)

20% Assignment #1

20% Assignment #2

20% midterm

20% final examination



Participation in class discussion is essential. To take part intelligently,
you will have to keep up with the readings. Since many philosophical issues
are "essentially contestable" (cannot admit of a single "right" answer) we
will emphasize debate and discussion. Your reading notes (explained more fully
in a forthcoming handout) should serve as a rehearsal of sorts for class
discussion. To do well in class participation you should express your views in
class--the quality of your comments is more important than their quantity.
Attendance is an important part of class participation. I expect you to come
to class. Plus/minus grading, incidentally, will be used for the final grades.

The examinations will be designed to reward those who master the readings and
the lectures and think about them in fresh ways. The connections between
philosophical writings, the lectures, the media excerpts, and contemporary
life will up to you to make. I will be looking not only for a knowledge of
viewpoints, but an ability to explain their implications and to compare and
contrast them; the course material will reward thoughtful consideration. The
examinations will probably be largely essay format, with some short answer
questions or identification questions (will be explained more later).

** **

**Assignments**

Written assignments will be explained further in a forthcoming handout. All
work should be double-spaced, typed, carefully proofread, professionally done,
carefully thought out and well-crafted. Every student should own and follow a
style manual such as MLA, APA, University of Chicago, Turabian, or any other
of your choice. It does not matter to me which you follow, as long as you are
consistent. The options will be two short (5-7 page) papers, or one long paper
(10-20 pages). You will need to turn in a proposal by Valentine's Day, 14
February, stating which option you plan to follow. Graduate students will
write a book review and an essay of about 20 pages.

** **

**Policies**

Plagiarism, the unattributed use of another's words or work, is an academic
crime and a violation against honor among scholars and against one's own
integrity. Any instance of it will result at least in a course grade of F, and
potential expulsion from the university; same for cheating. If you have any
question at all about what constitutes plagiarism, please see me in advance of
an assignment's due date, and I will be happy to confer with you about
specific questions.

I will be happy to make whatever arrangements are necessary to make this class
and classroom a productive learning environment for you. Please let me know at
your earliest convenience of any special needs you might have.

I will plan to start class on time and end on time. Please be on time.

Please always bring the text under discussion to class.

You are responsible for all announcements and material covered in class. If
you miss class, you are still responsible for any announced schedule changes,
assignment changes, etc. If you miss class, it is your responsibility to see
that you get a hand out, not mine; I may sometimes have extras, but otherwise
you should get them from someone in the class. No incompletes will be offered
in this class.

** **

**Schedule**

This is a tentative schedule and subject to change. It is your responsibility
to keep up to date on any changes announced in class. Please note that the
reading is to be done before the class period on the given date. Fridays will
often involve more discussion and/or partaking of a relevant media text.

Abbreviations. TBA = to be arranged; MER = Marx-Engels Reader; REC =
recommended reading; GRAD = reading for graduate students.



January

W 22 Introduction to Class

Hand out syllabus



F 24 Philosophy of Media: An Introduction to the Various Schools

READ: Get started on _The Confessions_.

** **

**I. Christian Sources**



M 27 The Human Fascination with Sex and Violence

READ: Augustine, _Confessions_ , books 1-4.



W 29 The Dangers of the Roman Circus

READ: Augustine, _Confessions_ , books 5-6.



F 31 Viewing: "Bread and Circuses"

BRING: Reading note to class.



February

M 3 Fallen Human Nature and the Origins of Evil

READ: Augustine, _Confessions_ , books 7-8.



W 5 The Way out of the Predicament

READ: Augustine, _Confessions_ , books 9-10.

GRAD: _The City of God_ , books 13-14.

REC: Augustine, _Confessions_ , books 11-13.



F 7 "Suffering at a Distance": Augustine's Image Ethics

BRING: reading note to class

** **

**Section II. Marxism**



M 10 Marx and Marxism: An Introduction

READ: Life-lines of Marx and Engels, xv-xviii in MER.

READ: Marx on the history of his opinions, 3-6.

READ: Marx, "Theses on Feuerbach," 143-145.

READ: Marx, "The German Ideology," 172-175.

GRAD: Marx, "The German Ideology," 146-200.



W 12 Human Nature: Alienated. And Plastic.

READ: Marx, "Estranged Labor," 70-81, MER.

GRAD: Marx, MER, 66-86.



F 14 Alien-nation: Film Clips, TBA.

Proposal for Assignment Due

Get started on next week's reading.

BRING Reading note to class.



M 17 The Critique of Consumer Culture.

READ: Marx, 87-91, MER.

READ: Marx, "The Power of Money in Bourgeois Society, 101-105, MER.

GRAD: Marx, MER, 87-125.



W 19 Commodity Fetishism, Continued

READ: Marx, "The Fetishism of Commodities," 319-329, MER.

GRAD: Marx, _Capital_ , 294-319, MER.

GRAD: Benjamin, "Some Motifs in Baudelaire," _Illuminations_.



F 21 Discussion and Examples: Commodity Fetishism in Media

BRING examples--magazines? TV commercials? Film? CD covers? T-shirts?

** **

**Section III. Liberalism**



M 24 Mill: Human Nature: Fallible but Capable of Improvement.

READ: Mill, _On Liberty_ , ch. 1.



W 26 Why Liberty of Speech and the Press should be Unlimited.

READ: Mill, _On Liberty_ , ch. 2, first three quarters.



F 28 Test Cases: Absolute Liberty of Communication?

READ: Finish _On Liberty_ , ch. 2.

GRAD: Mill, _The Subjection of Women_.

BRING Reading note to class.



March

M 3 Threats to Individuality; the Specter of Mass Society

READ: _On Liberty_ , ch. 3.

Assignment #1 due, at the beginning of class. No late papers.

Compare with Marx's critique of bourgeois society.

Compare with Tocqueville's concern about democratic despotism.



W 5 Defending Individualism

READ: On Liberty, ch. 4; or other Mill, TBA.

READ: Marx, _Grundrisse_ , on political animals, 222-223, MER.

GRAD: _On Liberty_ , ch. 5.

GRAD: Marx, "The Jewish Question," 26-52, MER.

REC: Tocqueville, "Of Individualism," _Democracy in America_ , 506-8.

Hand out review sheet for midterm



F 7 Summing Up: Review of First Half.

COME to class with questions from review sheet.



M 10 Midterm Examination

** **

**IV. Communitarianism**



W 12 Tocqueville's Critique of Liberalism

READ: Tocqueville, "Author's Introduction," 9-20.

READ: Tocqueville, "The Omnipotence of the Majority," 245-261.

GRAD: Skim parts of Volume 1 of _Democracy in America_.



F 14 The Press in America

READ: Tocqueville, "Freedom of the Press," 180-188.

READ: Start on Tocqueville, 465ff.

BRING Reading note to class.



M 17 The Arts in America: Tocqueville Prophesies of Television

READ: Tocqueville, 417-8.

READ: Tocqueville, 465-500.

GRAD: Tocqueville, 429-465.



W 19 Of Democratic Despotism: How American Culture Can Go Bad

READ: Tocqueville, 503-508, 690-702.



F 21 Mass Society Horrors: Media Examples of Tocqueville's Prophecies

READ: Tocqueville, 702-705.

BRING Reading Notes to Class.

Return Midterms.

Proposal for Assignment #2 due



Spring Break

** **

**V. The Question Concerning Technology**



M 31 Why is it so Hard for People to be Happy? Questions for Technological
Society

READ: Freud, Civilization and Its Discontents, sections 1-3 (pp. 10-52).

REC: Peter Gay, "Freud: A Brief Life," Civilization and its Discontents, ix-
xxiii.



April

W 2 Libido at Large

READ: Freud, sections 4-8 (pp. 53-112).



F 4 Prosthetic Gods: Discussion and Film Clips

BRING: Reading Note to class.



M 7 Cultural Consequences of Mechanical Reproduction

READ: Benjamin, "The Work of Art in the Age . . . ," Illuminations, pp.
217-226.



W 9 The Work of Art, Continued.

READ: Benjamin, "The Work of Art in the Age . . . ," Illuminations, pp.
226-242.



F 11 TBA

** **

**VI. Contemporary Developments in the Philosophy of Media**

(under construction)



*******



Final Exam: 7:30 a.m., Monday, 12 May 1997.



