> ![ridiculously long URL banner](longurl.gif)

>

> BLS 365 (LN 8392)

>

> ### EXPLORING AMERICAN CULTURE:

>

> # POPULAR AND CONSUMER CULTURE

>

> Autumn 2000

>

>  
>

> Tuesdays/Thursdays 8:00-10:05 p.m., Room UW1-010

>

> ![](blueline.gif)

>

> Instructor: [David Goldstein-Shirley, Ph.D.](CV.html)

>

> Click here to [send e-mail to Prof. Goldstein-
Shirley](http://depts.washington.edu/ctlt/catalyst/umail/mail.cgi?user=davidgs&form=5)
(with or without your name)

>

> Office: UW1-149

>

> Office hours: Wednesdays 12:00-1:00, Thursdays 6:45-7:45p.m., and by
appointment

>

> ![](blueline.gif)

>

> This course will develop students' understanding of theory and methods that
will enable them to analyze elements of consumer culture as manifested in
popular culture. We will take an interdisciplinary, American studies approach,
emphasizing literature, film, history, and theory. This course meets
requirements for the [American
Studies](http://www.bothell.washington.edu/IAS/BLS/AMS/) (for which it is a
core course) and the [Culture, Literature, and the
Arts](http://www.bothell.washington.edu/IAS/BLS/CLA/) concentrations of the
Liberal Studies major. It also is an elective course for the other
concentrations.

>

> Students will be expected to engage a considerable amount of material,
including fiction and non-fiction books, various scholarly and popular
articles, and several films and other media, mostly outside of class. Some
material will comprise "primary" sources that we will analyze individually or
as a class; other material will comprise "secondary" sources, including other
individuals' theories and analyses of popular and consumer culture. We then
will discuss the material in class. The instructor will lecture occasionally,
but students will be active participants in the course. Written and oral
communication, in various forms, will be integral to the course.

>

> Be prepared to read critically, to step back from what you take for granted
about popular culture and capitalism, and to share your developing ideas.
Prior coursework emphasizing some kind of textual analysis would be very
helpful. Students with experience in research and writing are more likely to
succeed in this course.

>

>  
>

> ![](smallbook.gif)_Required texts_ (available in the UWB Bookstore and in
library reserve/reference).  Note: [_Click
here_](http://www.bookstore.washington.edu/public/bookstore.acgi$/textsrv.taf?_function=textbooksrv)
to order books online (free shipping). Click on "Fall Quarter 2000," then
enter 8392 for "UW SLN Code" (leave other spaces blank) and hit 'enter.'

>

>   * DeLillo, Don. _White Noise_. 1985. New York: Penguin, 1998. (ISBN
0140274987)

>   * Dreiser, Theodore. _Sister Carrie_. 1900\. New York: Oxford UP, 1999.
(ISBN 0192835742)

>   * Fiske, John. _Understanding Popular Culture_. New York: Routledge, 1989.
(ISBN 0415078768)

>   * Frank, Thomas. _The Conquest of Cool: Business Culture, Counterculture,
and the Rise of Hip Consumerism_. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1997. (ISBN
0226260127)

>   * Lipsitz, George. _Time Passages: Collective Memory and American Popular
Culture_. Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 1989. (ISBN 0816618062)

>   * McCracken, Grant. _Culture and Consumption: New Approaches to the
Symbolic Character of Consumer Goods and Activities_. Bloomington: Indiana UP,
1988\. (ISBN 0253206286)

>

![](genx.gif)

>

> _Grading_ : Your grade will be based on these assignments, which are
described on separate pages online (links will be activated when ready):

>

> [Print advertisement analysis](PopCultAd.html) (two pages; due Oct. 5)

>

> |

>

> 15 pts.  
>  
> ---|---  
>  
> [Term paper](PopCultTerm.html) (five pages; due Nov. 21)

>

> |

>

> 45 pts.  
>  
> Unannounced [quizzes](Quizzes.html) (best two of three; ten pts. each)

>

> |

>

> 20 pts.  
>  
> [Self-evaluation](PopCultEval.html) (online; due between Dec. 2 and 8:00
p.m. on Dec. 5)

>

> |

>

> 5 pts.  
>  
> [Final examination](PopCultFinal.html) (Dec. 12)

>

> |

>

> 55 pts.  
>  
> [Participation (in class and online)](Partic.html)

>

> |

>

> _60 pts._  
>  
> **TOTAL**

>

> |

>

> **200 pts.**  
>  
>  
>

> A note about grades: I know that students often need to juggle school, work,
family, and other obligations. I never second-guess students' priorities, and
I never think less of students who choose to devote more time and effort to
one of these other obligations rather than to an assignment or the course as a
whole. I respect the maturity of students who establish their priorities, make
difficult choices, and accept the consequences of those decisions. Also,
remember that your grade is based solely on my professional assessment of the
quantity and quality of your work, not on your effort or on my opinion of you
as an individual.

>

> _Final Course Grade Scale_ :

>

> 190-200: 4.0

>

> |

>

> 176-177: 3.3

>

> |

>

> 162-163: 2.6

>

> |

>

> 148-149: 1.9

>

> |

>

> 134-135: 1.2  
>  
> ---|---|---|---|---  
>  
> 188-189: 3.9

>

> |

>

> 174-175: 3.2

>

> |

>

> 160-161: 2.5

>

> |

>

> 146-147: 1.8

>

> |

>

> 132-133: 1.1  
>  
> 186-187: 3.8

>

> |

>

> 172-173: 3.1

>

> |

>

> 158-159: 2.4

>

> |

>

> 144-145: 1.7

>

> |

>

> 130-131: 1.0  
>  
> 184-185: 3.7

>

> |

>

> 170-171: 3.0

>

> |

>

> 156-157: 2.3

>

> |

>

> 142-143: 1.6

>

> |

>

> 128-129: 0.9  
>  
> 182-183: 3.6

>

> |

>

> 168-169: 2.9

>

> |

>

> 154-155: 2.2

>

> |

>

> 140-141: 1.5

>

> |

>

> 126-127: 0.8  
>  
> 180-181: 3.5

>

> |

>

> 166-167: 2.8

>

> |

>

> 152-153: 2.1

>

> |

>

> 138-139: 1.4

>

> |

>

> 124-125: 0.7  
>  
> 178-179: 3.4

>

> |

>

> 164-165: 2.7

>

> |

>

> 150-151: 2.0

>

> |

>

> 136-137: 1.3

>

> |

>

> 0-123: 0.0  
>  
>  ![](emptycart.gif)

>

> _Schedule_ (readings listed by author; textbooks are in bold; articles are
marked with an asterisk and are listed below schedule; films to be viewed as
homework are marked with a double asterisk and are listed below schedule):

>

>  
>

> **DATE** |  **READING/ASSIGNMENTS DUE** |  **IN-CLASS WORK**  
> ---|---|---  
>  
> Tu 09/26

>

> |

>

> |

>

> Dyad introductions; questionnaire  
>  
> Th 09/28

>

> |

>

> Associated Students of U of Washington, Bothell*; Chandler* (esp. ch. 2, 7,
9, and 16)

>

> |

>

> Lecture and discussion: Consumer Culture and Popular Culture; _Still Killing
Us Softly_ (film)  
>  
> Tu 10/03

>

> |

>

> **Fiske** ch. 1-3, 5-6

>

> |

>

> Discuss Fiske  
>  
> Th 10/05

>

> |

>

> [Print advertisement analysis due](PopCultAd.html)

>

> |

>

> Discussion of gender and advertising  
>  
> Tu 10/10

>

> |

>

> **McCracken** ch. 1, 5  [note change from print syllabus], 6-9

>

> |

>

> Discuss McCracken  
>  
> Th 10/12

>

> |

>

> Marling*; _Westworld_ **

>

> |

>

> Lecture and discussion: Main Street, U.S.A. and Westworld as Simulacra  
>  
> Tu 10/17

>

> |

>

> **Dreiser**

>

> |

>

> Discuss Dreiser  
>  
> Th 10/19

>

> |

>

> Gordon*

>

> |

>

> Lecture and discussion: Class and Consumerism Between the Wars  
>  
> Tu 10/24

>

> |

>

> Radway*

>

> |

>

> Discuss Radway  
>  
> Th 10/26

>

> |

>

> Goldberg*

>

> |

>

> _The Truman Show_ (film)  
>  
> Tu 10/31

>

> |

>

> Halloween participation

>

> |

>

> NO CLASS MEETING; discuss _The Truman Show_ online this week  
>  
> Th 11/02

>

> |

>

> **Frank** ch. 1-2

>

> |

>

> _The Graduate_ (film)  
>  
> Tu 11/07

>

> |

>

> **Frank** ch. 5-9, 11

>

> |

>

> Discuss Frank and _The Graduate_  
>  
> Th 11/09

>

> |

>

> Whiting*; Lipsitz ("Listening")*

>

> |

>

> NO CLASS MEETING; discuss Whiting and Lipsitz online this week  
>  
> Tu 11/14

>

> |

>

> **Lipsitz** ( _Time Passages_ ) ch. 1-3, 5, 7, 9, 11

>

> |

>

> Discuss Lipsitz  
>  
> Th 11/16

>

> |

>

> Work on your term paper

>

> |

>

> _Hype!_ (film)  
>  
> Tu 11/21

>

> |

>

> hooks*; _Bulworth_ **; [term paper due](PopCultTerm.html)

>

> |

>

> Discuss _Hype!_ , hooks, and _Bulworth_  
>  
> Tu 11/28

>

> |

>

> Holbrook and Hirschman*; _Gremlins_ **

>

> |

>

> Discuss Holbrook and Hirschman and _Gremlins_  
>  
> Th 11/30

>

> |

>

> **DeLillo**

>

> |

>

> Discuss DeLillo  
>  
> Tu 12/05

>

> |

>

> [Self-evaluation due](PopCultEval.html)

>

> |

>

> Review  
>  
> Tu 12/12

>

> |

>

> |

>

> [Final examination](PopCultFinal.html)  
>  
>> *Articles list (at Library Reserves Desk and, except as noted, online at
[_http://www.bothell.washington.edu/library/reserve.html_](http://www.bothell.washington.edu/library/reserve.html)
):

>

>   * Associated Students of U of Washington, Bothell. "Avoiding Academic
Misconduct." Online
<[http://faculty.washington.edu/davidgs/Integrity.html](http://faculty.washington.edu/davidgs/Integrity.html)>.
NOT AVAILABLE IN LIBRARY RESERVES.

>   * Chandler, Daniel. "Semiotics for Beginners." Online
<[http://www.argyroneta.com/s4b/semiotic.html](http://www.argyroneta.com/s4b/semiotic.html)>.
NOT AVAILABLE IN LIBRARY RESERVES.

>   * Goldberg, Michael. "How to Read a Film." Online
<[http://www.bothell.washington.edu/faculty/mgoldberg/students/readafilm.htm](http://www.bothell.washington.edu/faculty/mgoldberg/students/readafilm.htm)>.
NOT AVAILABLE IN LIBRARY RESERVES.

>   * Gordon, Ian. "Envisioning Consumer Culture: 'Gasoline Alley' and 'Winnie
Winkle,' 1920-1945." _Comic Strips and Consumer Culture, 1890-1945_.
Washington: Smithsonian, 1998. 106-27.

>   * Holbrook, Morris B. and Elizabeth C. Hirschman. "Gremlins as Metaphors
for Materialism." _The Semiotics of Consumption: Interpreting Symbolic
Consumer Behavior in Popular Culture and Works of Art_. New York: Mouton de
Gruyter, 1993\. 265-76.

>   * hooks, bell. "Madonna: Plantation Mistress or Soul Sister?" _Black
Looks_. Boston: South End, 1992. 157-64.

>   * Lipsitz, George. "Listening to Learn and Learning to Listen: Popular
Culture, Cultural Theory, and American Studies." _American Quarterly_ 42
(December 1990), 615-36.

>   * Marling, Karal Ann. "Disneyland, 1955: The Place That Was Also a Show."
_As Seen on TV: The Visual Culture of Everyday Life in the 1950s_. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard UP, 1994. 86-126.![Mickey](mickey_laugh.jpg)

>   * Radway, Janice. "The Scandal of the Middlebrow: The Book-of-the-Month
Club, Class Fracture, and Cultural Authority." _South Atlantic Quarterly_ 89
(Fall 1990): 703-36.

>   * Whiting, Cecile. "Shopping for Pop." _A Taste for Pop: Pop Art, Gender,
and Consumer Culture_. New York: Cambridge UP, 1997. 7-49.
![artist](artist.gif)

>

>  
>

> ![](camleft.gif)

>

> **Films list (rent on your own or view copy in [Library Media
Center](http://www.bothell.washington.edu/media/)):

>

>   * _Bulworth_. Dir. Warren Beatty. Prod. Warren Beatty and Pieter Jan
Brugge. Twentieth Century Fox, 1998. 100 min. Call number: BORES BOTDVD 6.

>   * _Gremlins_. Dir. Joe Dante. Exec. prod. Steven Spielberg, Frank
Marshall, and Kathleen Kennedy. Warner Bros., 1984. 106 min. Call number:
BORES BOTDVD 5.

>   * _Westworld_. Dir. Michael Crichton. Prod. Paul N. Lazarus III. MGM,
1973. 90 min. Call number: BORES BOTDVD 1.

>

>

> ![](Filmstrip.gif)

>

> The final examination will be held 8:00 to 10:05 p.m. on **Tuesday, 12
December**. Mark it on your calendar _now_ ; it cannot be made up if missed.
This schedule is subject to change. The most current schedule will always be
posted here ( _http://faculty.washington.edu/davidgs/PopCult.html_ ) for your
reference, and changes will be announced in class or on the _popcult_
electronic discussion list.

>

> Keep a copy of all submitted work. No extra credit or paper re-writes will
be permitted except as noted, but I will gladly assist you with your work. In-
class exercises cannot be made up for any reason because the group interaction
is irreproducible. Late assignments will be accepted only in extenuating
circumstances that could not have been anticipated, and only as specified;
penalties will apply as specified. Keep all graded materials; you will need
them for your graduation portfolio.

>

> In accordance with University policy, I give Incompletes only if you are
passing the course and attending class to within two weeks of the end of the
quarter, and then only in extenuating circumstances that can be proven.

>

> I will do my best to accommodate all [documented
disabilities](http://www.bothell.washington.edu/students/dss/index.html).

>

> ![](alert.gif) IMPORTANT: I insist on academic integrity. You are
responsible for understanding all aspects of University regulations regarding
academic integrity. Breaches of academic integrity, including but not limited
to **cheating** (e.g., copying another person's work or obtaining examination
answers in a dishonest manner) and **plagiarism** (i.e., using another
person's words or ideas without proper acknowledgment), _whether intentional
or accidental_ , will result in a zero for the assignment or examination;
additional sanctions may be imposed by the University administration. Note
that American rules regarding plagiarism might differ markedly from those in
other countries. You can find more information in the University Handbook and
in the document, ["Avoiding Academic Misconduct."](Integrity.html) I will help
you any way I can so you can succeed while maintaining academic integrity. I
truly want you to do well. Visit my office hours often!

>

> ![](tv.gif)

>

> This course requires the use of e-mail and the World Wide Web, with which we
will assist you. You can obtain a University of Washington e-mail account,
which is free for enrolled students. If you ever need further assistance, call
Computing and Communication at (206) 543-5970 or visit a consultant in the UWB
Computer Lab. You can find helpful information online at
[_http://www.bothell.washington.edu/library/newstudent.html_](http://www.bothell.washington.edu/library/newstudent.html)
if you already know how to use the World Wide Web.

>

> You must subscribe to the electronic discussion list ( _popcult_ ) by **8:00
p.m. on Friday, Sept. 29** ; instructions are below. I urge you to subscribe
early so that, if you encounter difficulties, you can surmount them before the
deadline. You alone are responsible for subscribing successfully by the
deadline.

>

> To subscribe to the _popcult_ list, [ click
here](http://depts.washington.edu/ctlt/catalyst/isubscribe/sub.cgi?list=23)
and follow instructions. When prompted, **enter the e-mail address you will
use for the course** (a UW account, a work account, or a private ISP account,
including free ones like Hotmail), or any combination of these (multiple
subscriptions are permissible). If you subscribed successfully, you will
receive, in your regular e-mail, a welcome message from the _popcult_ list. If
you do not receive the welcome message within a few hours of sending your
subscription request, you made a mistake and should try again or notify the
instructor. Forward to the instructor (my e-mail address is on the "hard copy"
of the syllabus) any error messages that you receive. When subscribed, you
will automatically receive, in your personal e-mail, all messages posted by
your classmates on the _popcult_ list. You, too, can post messages simply by
sending e-mail to the list. (Instructions will be provided when you
subscribe.) You are required to check your e-mail at least once a week (i.e.,
do not let more than seven days pass without checking e-mail) and to read
everything posted to the list.

>

> For more information about using an electronic discussion list, click
[here](http://www.washington.edu/computing/listproc/subscribers/).

>

> Welcome to the course!

>

> ![](blueline.gif)

>

> This page last updated 22 October 2000.

>

> Silly icons courtesy of [The Corporation](http://www.thecorporation.com) and
[Web Gurus](http://www.webgurus.com).

>

>  ![Tibet!](tibet.gif)

>

> ![Door](anidoor.gif)[Back to Popular Culture Gateway](PopCult.html)

