#  LIT 205-150

##  ETHNIC LITERATURE

##  Longmont Campus

##  SPRING 2002

##  Meg Gallagher

| Course Requirements  | Syllabus  | Literature Links | [Daily
Assignments](dailyspring02ethnic.html) |

[![](Diversity.gif)](file:///C|/My Documents/liter115.htm)

> > > > **OFFICE HOURS:**

             _Office_ : Longmont, Room 203.2, 303-516-8920   
             _Office Hours_ : M, 10-11 a.m.; W, 2:30-3 p.m.; T/R, 1-3 p.m.; or by appointment   
                   E-Mail Address: [meg.gallagher@lc.frcc.cccoes.edu](mailto:meg.gallagher@lc.frcc.cccoes.edu)

**_TEXTS_ :**

  * **_The House on Mango Street_** by Sandra Cisneros
  * **_A Gathering of Old Men_** by Ernest J. Gaines
  * **_The Joy Luck Club_** by Amy Tan
  * **_House Made of Dawn_** by N. Scott Momaday
  * Other reading materials will be provided by instructor

**_REQUIRED MATERIALS_ :**

  * one 2-pocket folder for notes, handouts, etc.
  * pen/pencil for some type of writing implement (no crayons or hard-to-read gel pens!)
  * paper (preferably lined)
| Click here for syllabus  |

**_SYLLABUS & EXPECTATIONS_:**

Ethnic Literature explores the literary and cultural elements in selections by
Hispanic, Native American, African American, and Asian American writers. This
course is designed to expand your awareness and understanding of diversity in
American society as you listen to and analyze the various "voices" in
literature. The course includes short stories, poems, and essays by ethnic
writers in addition to the novels listed above under "TEXTS."

_Quizzes and Tests_ :  Periodically, unannounced quizzes will be given to make
sure you are keeping up with the reading.  They will be given usually at the
beginning of class, so if you are late, you will not be given extra time to
take or finish a quiz. Also, tests will be given over required novels and
other readings.  Each test will be worth 100 points.  You CANNOT make up a
quiz or a test.

_Essays_ :  You will write four short papers during the semester.   Possible
topics are outlined on the Daily Assignments.  You are expected to use
accurate grammar, mechanics, and spelling.  Each essay is worth 100 points.
| Click here to continue syllabus |

_Attendance_ :  Being here every class period ON TIME and being prepared are
very important since discussions depend upon YOU!  Three absences will be
allowed, but beginning with your fourth absence, your grade for the course
will be lowered one letter grade for each subsequent day you are absent.

_Arriving Late/Leaving Early_ :  Three tardies (late 10 minutes or more)=one
absence.  
If you leave class early (over 5 minutes), the same policy applies: three=one
absence.

_Extra Credit_ does not exist in this class.   Keep up with the required
assignments and be prepared for discussions, quizzes, and tests.

_Plagiarism_ :  Plagiarism will not be tolerated!  Using someone else's words,
ideas, etc. without acknowledging your outside sources will result in an "F"
for the assignment.

_Students with disabilities_ : If you require accommodations because of a
physical, learning, psychiatric, vision, or hearing disability, you must
contact the Special Services Office at 303-404-5302 at the beginning of the
semester in order to document your disability. After you have documented your
disability, please see me during my office hours or make an appointment so we
can discuss your accommodations. | Click here for Literature Links |

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Click below for Literature Links:

    * [Issues on Diversity: Race in America (MSNBC)](http://www.msnbc.com/news/RACEINAMERICA_Front.asp)
    * [Literary Criticism Pathfinders](http://www.ipl.org/ref/QUE/PF/litcrit.html)
    * [Online Literary Criticism Collections](http://www.ipl.org/ref/litcrit)
    * [Midnight at the Internet Cafe Reference Collection](http://www.aclin.org/~maic/)
    * [American Authors](http://www.frostburg.edu/dept/engl/gartner/amerauth.htm)
    * [Rudolfo Anaya](http://www.accd.edu/sac/english/portales/anaya.htm)
    * [Chicano literature links](http://www.accd.edu/sac/english/bailey/mexamlit.htm)
    * [Latina/o Literature and Cultural Studies: THE QUARRY](http://home.uchicago.edu/~weorchar/homepage.htm)
    * [Latina/o Literature and Literature of the Americas at UNC](http://asweb.unco.edu/latina/default.htm)
    * [Sandra Cisneros](http://voices.cla.umn.edu/authors/SandraCisneros.html)
    * [Pat Mora](http://voices.cla.umn.edu/authors/patmora.html)
    * [Black History Month (Feb.)](http://www.galegroup.com/free_resources/bhm.htm)
    * [African American Literature Book Club](http://www.aalbc.com/)
    * [The Hue-Man Experience (African American Book Store-Denver)](http://www.thehuemanexperience.com/Pages/home.html)
    * [Zora Neale Hurston](http://voices.cla.umn.edu/authors/ZoraNealeHurston.html)
    * [Asian American Literature](http://falcon.jmu.edu/~ramseyil/asialit.htm)
    * [Amy Tan](http://voices.cla.umn.edu/authors/AmyTan.html)
    * [Native American Literature Bibliography](http://www.ipl.org/ref/native/biblio2.html)
    * [Native American Authors, Titles, Tribes](http://www.ipl.org/ref/native/)
    * [Native American History](http://jupiter.lang.osaka-u.ac.jp/~krkvls/history.html)
    * [Jemez Pueblo](http://www.jemezpueblo.org/index.html)
    * [Kiowa Tribe](http://home.swbell.net/starwolf/main.html)
    * [N. Scott Momaday](http://www.ipl.org/cgi/ref/native/browse.pl/A50)
    * [Center of the American West at CU-Boulder](http://www.centerwest.org/academics/index.html)
    * [Sites on Women Writers](http://www.vcu.edu/engweb/eng384/links.htm)
    * [Domestic Goddess](http://www.womenwriters.net/domesticgoddess/sitemap.htm/)
    * _[VOICES FROM THE GAPS: Women Writers of Color](http://voices.cla.umn.edu/)_
    * [Women Writers: A Literary Magazine](http://www.womenwriters.net/)
    * [Photography Collection: Western History](http://gowest.coalliance.org)
    * [BEDFORD INTRO. TO LITERATURE (textbook web site)](http://www.bedfordstmartins.com/literature/bedlit/research_links.htm)

  Back to top of page   | Go to FRCC
[homepage](http://frcc.cc.co.us/lg/index.html)

  
  
  
  

