##  THEORY OF EHTICS  
Philosophy 528

* * *

##  Syllabus - Spring 1997

**REQUIRED BOOKS:**      Conduct and Character (2nd ed.), edited by Mark
Timmons     Great Traditions in Ethics (8th ed.), edited by Theodore Denise,
Sheldon Peterfreund, and Nicholas White     Customized Reading Packet  

**COURSE OBJECTIVES:**      Philosophy 528 is an upper division course
intended primarily for Philosophy majors and minors. Course requirements are
three units of philosophy.  
    This course is intended as a historical introduction to philosophical thinking about ethics, beginning with some thoughts of Plato, and ending with some very contemporary thoughts. In the case of each philosopher whose ideas will be studied, we will focus only upon certain major features of that philosopher's thinking, in order primarily to develop a historical perspective of the progression of philosophical thought about ethics. Consequently, we will not go deeply into the thought of any individual philosopher.   
    Though students necessarily must finally arrive at their own ideas about these very complex subjects, emphasis in the course will be upon understanding what the philosopher has to say, and why it is important, rather than upon criticizing the philosopher's thought. You will be graded on the extent to which you show understanding of the philosopher's ideas, rather than on your individual originality about these subjects.  

**COURSE PROCEDURES:**      All Classes will be primarily lectures and
discussion, with discussion emphasized on Fridays. The readings are extremely
important to the material of this course. Though the lectures will cover much
of the same material as the readings, it is imperative that you do the
readings before hearing the lecture and possibly after the lecture also.
Understanding of what these philosophers have to say usually requires several
readings and very careful digestion.  
    Class attendance is an important part of success in this course. Though there will be no regular role taking, I will employ a number of other techniques to keep track of who is in class. If it becomes apparent that an individual has missed at least forty percent of the classes, that person will not receive credit for the course no matter what scores they may have achieved on their written work.  

**REQUIRED WRITTEN WORK:**      There will be a midterm and a final exam, as
well as one announced quiz, covering the course material, and requiring essay
answers. A two-page paper and a three-page paper will be required. Possible
topics for the papers will be distributed for the required papers at least two
weeks prior to the due date. A portfolio will be required at the end of the
course. Next week I will distribute a set of instructions for composing the
portfolio. There will also be additional unannounced "quizzes" intended
primarily to keep track of who is in class, and who is doing the reading.
These quizzes will usually require single sentence answers, since they are not
intended to determine your understanding of the material.  

**GRADING:**      Your final grade will be determined on the basis of the
following percentages:  

  * 5% each for the announced quiz and for the total received on the unannounced quizzes.  

  * 10% each for the two-page paper, for the portfolio, and for classroom participation.  

  * 15% each for the midterm and the three-page paper.  

  * 30% for the final exam.

**SCHEDULE:**      Dates indicated in the first column refer only to the
Monday of each week. However, all pages of assigned reading are regarded as
"due" for every class day of the week, unless I indicate otherwise. Conduct
and Character is designated by "CC" in the reading assignments. Great
Traditions in Ethics is designated "GT." All Chapters in GT begin with a
summary of the philosopher whose work is featured in that chapter. In cases in
which I assign only part of the philosopher's writings, I include only the
page numbers of those pages containing the assigned part of the philosopher's
writings. However, you should always read the editor's summary of that
philosopher also, even if the page numbers for the summary are not included
below.  

    
    
    DATE  ASSIGNED READINGS      TOPICS                      WORK DUE
    
    1/27  CC 1-23; GT 1-8        Terminology; Basic Distinctions
    
    2/3   GT 9-26; CC 27-37      Plato; Egoism; Consciousness
    
    2/10  CC 228-244; GT 28-46   Aristotle; Virtue Ethics
    
    2/17  GT 56-60, 74-77;
          CC 65-71               Epicurus; Epictetus;
                                 Ethical Relativism
    
    2/24  CC 72-99; GT 114-123   Acquinas; Natural Law
                                 Divine Command;
                                 Ethical Absolutism  	Quiz 2/28
    
    3/3   GT 125-145, 163-178    Hobbes, Social Contract
                                 Hume, Sympathy
    
    3/10  CC 148-156; GT 179-198 Kant, Rationality           Two-Page Paper
                                 Categorical Imperative      Due 3/14
    
    3/17  CC 100-114; GT 207-217 Bentham; Mill; Utilitarianism
    
    3/24   HAVE A NICE SPRING BREAK!
    
    3/31  GT 275-295, 366-379    Nietzsche; Sartre           Midterm 4/4
                                 Existentialism
    
    4/7   GT 315-330, 358-364    Moore; Naturalistic Fallacy
                                 Stevenson; Emotivism
    
    4/14  GT 296-314; CC 218-227 Dewey; Institutions
                                 Principles
    
    4/21  GT 398-415; CC 125-136 Rawls; Fairness; Justice
                                 Rules; Institutions
    
    4/28  CC 178-208             Psychological Development   Three-Page Paper
                                 Caring                      Due 5/2
    
    5/5   Reading Packet;
          CC 38-44               Sociobiology; Ecology
                                 Purposes
    
    5/12                         Review
    
    5/21  FINAL EXAM  (10:30-12:30)                      	Portfolios Due
    

My office is located at AH 4133. Office phone is 594-6577. Office hours are:
MWF 10:00-10:50, 13:00-13:50, and by appointment. You are encourage to come in
to discuss anything concerning the course. Late papers will be accepted with
lowered grades. Make-ups are allowed only for extraordinary circumstances.

  
  
  

* * *

[Back to Philosophy 528](528.html)  
  
  
[![](../image/smcolumn.gif)

  
  
  
**_Return  
to  
Eugene  
Troxell's  
Home  
Page_**  
](../index.html)

