Philosophy 379 01                  Contemporary Moral Issues
Dr. Waller

MW    7-8:15                          Office hours:   5:30-6:45
Office: LCH 3rd floor

Office Phone: (310) 243-2402  

Email is the best way to reach me: viennaravens@socal.rr.com

                                               

Required Text: Kolak and Martin, _Self and Identity_

Required Readings on Reserve at Library:  Plato, Aristotle, Descartes, Kant,
Marx, and special topics readings.





Prerequisite: PHI 316 and PHI 120 are recommended.



_Course Description_ : This is an upper division course relating problems of
self and consciousness to problems in contemporary morality.  We will begin by
examining a variety of traditional and modern views of the self.  Students are
asked to choose, develop and defend a notion of the self, and use it to answer
a moral problem relevant today (such as morality versus non-morality, human
responsibility, animal rights, individual versus societal values, morality
versus legality, abortion versus right to life, cloning, and the euthanasia
decision.)



_Course Objectives_ : Students are expected to accurately explain course
readings and presentations in writing on the final exam and in the final
paper.  The final paper will also demonstrate student mastery of thesis
defense, philosophical concepts (such as utilitarianism, deontology, virtue
theory, rigid designation, definite description, category mistake, etc.) and
clarity in writing.  Students will be able to state a view fully and
carefully, give reasons for that view, and defend the view against common
objections. Students will not commit formal or informal fallacies. Students
will understand the relationship between notions of self and moral problems.
Students will, through understanding this larger relationship, know several
philosophical notions of self and the problems associated therewith, and
students will understand several philosophical theories of morality and their
drawbacks.



_Learning Outcomes:_

*      Students will show ability to carry out a sustained thesis defense in the final paper.

*      Students will show mastery of philosophical concepts in the final paper and in the final exam

o      Ethical Concepts: utilitarianism, deontology, egoism, etc.

o      Ontological Concepts: rigid designators, social construction, self

o      Epistemic Concepts: category mistake, skepticism, evidence

*      Students will show an awareness of objections to philosophical schools of thought on the final exam, and will explore one set of objections in an in-depth and refined way on the final paper.

*      Students will be able to argue without using appeals to emotion or other fallacies in the final paper and during the in class presentation.





_Course Requirements_ :

**There will be 1 long **PAPER** , _no shorter than_ 2000 words and _no longer
than_ 2500 words (roughly 9 -10 pages) consisting of both a **summary of the
assigned reading** , and **your own well supported position on a question or
issue at hand**.   Notice that using large fonts or triple spacing your paper
will not affect how many words are in the paper.  I reserve the right to count
words in your paper. Grades are based on: _Accuracy and completeness of
summary (40%, 5 pts. each error), how well your argument is supported (40%, 5
pts. each error), number of fatal errors (20%,1 pt. each error), and
finesse/originality (fudge factor)._ The position that you choose to attack or
defend is entirely up to you. (Of course it must pertain to the current
reading and class discussion.)   I hope you will pick a topic that interests
you.  The paper is worth a total of 200 points. No late papers are accepted.

**100 points will be determined by a **short in-class presentation** of the
paper in progress.

**100 points will be determined by a **final exam**.

You will be happier if you do the reading to be discussed in class before that
class day.

The total possible number of points earned in the course is 400.  The grading
scale is:

A         90%-100%      360-400 points   A+ 386 and up, A 373-385, A- 360-372

B         80%-89%        320-359              B+ 345-359, B 332-344, B-320-331

C         70%-79%        280-319              C+ 305-319, C 292-304, C-280-291

D         60%-69%        240-279              D+ 265-279, D 252-264, D-240-251

** **jeopardy** is played for extra credit points and is useful for review.







GROUND RULES

If you miss a class, YOU are responsible for understanding all material
presented that day. The final exam cannot be missed and the final paper cannot
be late.  If you encounter extenuating circumstances (e.g. hospitalization,
etc.) I may grant you a grade of incomplete when presented with the proper
documentation. If you interfere with anyone else's learning process I reserve
the right to report you to the dean of your college after a single warning.

**The policy regarding academic integrity can be found on page 14 of the
University Catalog.**

**You are responsible for understanding the ground rules and all other
information in this syllabus**.  















                                                            _SCHEDULE_ (subject to change)



M Jan. 29        Syllabus, course overview, review of philosophy (read: Plato
selection on reserve)



W Jan. 31        Plato's Tripartite Soul, Caste Systems, Rosa Parks, Civil
Disobedience and Plato's definition of justice.  Revisionist history, Robert
Faurisson & censorship.



M Feb. 5         Aristotle's DeAnima, Virtue Ethics



W Feb. 7         Aristotle & Plato v. Judith Jarvis Thompson on Abortion



M Feb. 12       Parfit "Personal Identity, Rationality and Morality"



W Feb. 14 & 19          NO CLASS - President's Day



W Feb. 21       Don Marquis "Why Abortion is Immoral"



M Feb. 26       Jaynes "Consciousness and the Voices of the Mind"

Animal rights



W Feb. 28       Animal rights: Peter Singer & Michael Leahy



M Mar. 5         Cartesian Dualism

                        Humean epistemological problems with the self



W Mar. 7        Parfit "Divided Minds and the Nature of Persons"



M Mar. 12       Kant's noumenal self, Deontology



W Mar. 14      Death Penalty: Ernest van den Haag



M Mar. 19       Death Penalty: Hugo Adam Bedau



W Mar. 21      Marx and the self as economic construct,

Poverty and the Obligations of the Wealthy



M Mar. 26       Garrett Hardin "Lifeboat Ethics"



W Mar. 28      Peter Singer "Practical Ethics"



M Apr. 2         Wilkes "Fugues, Hypnosis and Multiple Personality"



W Apr. 4         Feinberg "A Ride on the Bus"



M Apr. 9 & 11            **** **Spring Break** ****



M Apr. 16       Unger: "The Physical View" ****

** **

W Apr. 18       Unger  "The Physical View"

                        Euthanasia: James Rachels ****



M Apr. 23       Unger  "The Physical View"

                        Euthanasia: Gay-Williams



W Apr. 25       Nozick "The Closest Continuer View"

Cloning and Human Rights ****



M Apr. 30       Nozick "The Closest Continuer View"

Cloning and Human Rights ****



W May 2         **Presentation(s)**



M May 7         **Presentation(s)**



W May 9         **Presentation(s)**



M May 14       **Presentation(s)**



W May 16       **Jeopardy**

** **

Final Exam: Monday May 21 at 7pm



