**HIEU 507 MODERN THEORY: MARX, ARENDT, SARTRE, FOUCAULT**

Allan Megill, University of Virginia, Fall 2001

**Rouss Hall 111, 1:00-3:30 p.m., Fridays**

c:\507\50701des.yes

  
  

**COURSE DESCRIPTION AND REQUIREMENTS**

  
  

**Note** : For full information about this course, you need to have in your
possession, and to read carefully, **three** handouts: this one, "Selective
Bibliography, and Finding a Paper Topic," and "Syllabus." _You should read all
three handouts carefully_. ****

  
  

**INSTRUCTOR CONTACT INFORMATION** : _Office Location_ : 221 Randall Hall.

  
  

_Scheduled Office Hours_ : Normally Monday 2:00-4:00 (note: these office hours
will change if my 378 discussion section is canceled), **and by arrangement**.
You should not feel confined to my scheduled office hours. An efficient means
of arranging appointment times is by e-mailing me, at _megill@virginia.edu_ ;
it is best to e-mail me a day or two in advance.

  
  

**Note:** On occasion I shall have to cancel office hours because of other
obligations. **It is very wise, therefore, to contact me ahead of time, even
if you plan to come during regularly scheduled hours.** I cannot _guarantee_
my presence at any particular scheduled office hour, unless you have alerted
me that you will be coming to see me then. __

  
  

_Telephone Numbers_ : _Office_ : 924-6414 (voice-mail after several rings if
there is no answer). _Home_ : 971-8744 (answering machine after several
rings). You shouldn't hesitate to phone me at home: I prefer working there to
working in Randall Hall. If we are otherwise occupied we generally don't
answer the phone; but avoid 5 p.m.-8 p.m., and don't phone later than 10:30
p.m.

_E-mail_ : megill@virginia.edu. _Instructor home page_ :
http://www.people.virginia.edu/~adm9e

  
  

_Course home page_ : http:/toolkit.virginia.edu/HIEU507-1.

  
  

**Course Subject and Rationale** : In this course we shall examine four major
theorists: Karl Marx, Hannah Arendt, Jean-Paul Sartre, and Michel Foucault.
What unites the last three of these thinkers is the common conviction that we
can no longer rely on "the firm basis of traditional values" (as Arendt put it
in 1946). They also respond, in one way or another, to the looming shadow of
Marx. Each of these thinkers could easily be the subject of an entire
semester's work, and so our examination of them will necessarily be selective
in character: we cannot do justice to any of these thinkers over a period of
only thirteen or fourteen weeks. But at least we can gain insight into some
interesting aspects of each thinker's work: what you do with that insight
later is up to you.

  
  

We should try, insofar as possible, to think about how our society, and our
experience of that society, can be illuminated by, and can illuminate, what
these thinkers have to say.

  
  

**Mode of Operation** : We shall read selectively in the writings of the four
theorists, and even more selectively in the secondary literature. Very often I
shall assign to one or two students the task of discussing and commenting on a
particular reading: sometimes these will be readings that the class in general
will not be doing. _Do_ expect frequent assignments to explicate something,
and to report back about it by e-mail, or in class. Characteristically, each
week I shall begin by speaking for 10-15 minutes in an attempt to situate the
reading for that week and to pose some issues for discussion. We shall then
discuss the reading.

  
  

**Requirements in Brief:** The requirements are to do the reading, to
participate in discussion, to introduce, on occasion, readings in class, to
write several short reaction pieces or class summaries to be posted on the
class e-mail list, and, _most important_ , to write a paper. The course is
mainly intended to provide an opportunity for students to explore in some
depth a topic related to one or another of the four thinkers. I envisage a
paper of ca. 20 double-spaced pages on some aspect of the work of one of the
theorists, or on the literature concerning the theorist, or on a problem with
which the theorist was concerned.

  
  

The nature of the material and level of the course dictate that students
should have some background in political theory, intellectual history,
religious studies, or philosophy. While the course is open to qualified upper-
level undergraduates and to graduate students, pre-enrollment data suggest
that most students in the course will be undergraduates.

  
  

**Requirements in Greater Detail** : Because this is an advanced
undergraduate/graduate class, significant contributions to class proceedings
will be required.

  
  

**(a)** The student will be expected to offer several summative and critical
reports over the course of the semester. Very often I will "hand" a student
something--a chapter, an article--to be explicated for the benefit of the
class in general. The student should seek to clarify the piece of reading,
linking it to the more general themes of the course. It is expected that these
reports will be (a) clear, (b) accurate, and (c) interesting to the class in
general. They should also be short: a characteristic error by students, when
making oral reports in particular, is to speak too long, losing sight of the
class's wandering attention. But even written reports should be fairly brief.

  
  

**(b)** Additionally, one or two students will be responsible each week for
summarizing in writing what was said in the class for that week
(characteristically, one student handles the first half of the class and the
other student the second half). Before 6 p.m. on the following Sunday, the
student will be expected to have posted a one- or two-page summary of the
preceding week's discussion to the class mailing list,
**hieu507-1@toolkit.virginia.edu**.

Each student is expected to consult his or her e-mail regularly. The class
toolkit gives automatic access to a class e-mail list.

  
  

**(c)** A major part of the course requirements is careful completion of the
reading. The student is expected to be able to contribute in class to the
discussion of the reading. To some extent (to be determined by the size and
needs of the class), students will be asked to provide "reading reactions,"
via e-mail, to fellow class members prior to the session in which that reading
will be discussed.

  
  

It is expected that students will access their e-mail late Thursday in order
to read and think about the summaries of the preceding class meeting and about
any other items that have been posted. It is hoped that this will improve the
quality of discussion. Students are also encouraged to respond to the
discussion by making postings after the class meets.

  
  

**Students should be aware that special care needs to be taken in making
e-mail postings.** A certain tentativeness of expression may well be advisable
in your e-mail correspondence. Remember that irony is easier to miss in
electronic statements than in statements made face to face.

  
  

( **d** ) The most important single requirement is the writing of a research
paper. For the purposes of this course, I define a "research paper" as a paper
that advances an original argument concerning some aspect of the material of
the class. (Note that this is a wider definition of "research paper" than the
one that normally applies in, for example, 800-level graduate seminars in
history, where a research paper would usually be a paper that relies in some
important measure on the examination of primary sources in the original
language.) See the "Syllabus/Selective Bibliography" for this course: in
Section 1 of that handout (especially Section 1.A) I give some guidance
concerning the search for a paper topic, and the Selective Bibliography itself
may give you a start. Note also that, as noted in that handout, it is required
that you arrange your work in such a way that by **Monday, October 8, 2001**
you and I will be in agreement that you have a plausible paper proposal. One
can imagine a wide variety of possible topics, but the possibilities _must_ be
thoroughly discussed with the instructor. The due date is **Friday, December
7, 2001** by 4 pm (although some negotiation with regard to the due date is
possible).

  
  

( **e** ) **Grading protocol** : You should assume that quality of class
participation (including discussion in class, plus particular presentations
you make in class, plus e-mail contributions) counts for about 50% of the
grade, and the paper for the remaining 50%. I should say that, in practice, I
tend to see the paper as summative of what you have learned in the class.

**Books** : The following books have been ordered at the University of
Virginia Bookstore::

  
  

Hannah Arendt: _Between Past and Future_ ; _The Human Condition_ , 2d ed.;
_The Life of the Mind_ ; _On Revolution_ ; _On Violence_

  
  

Michel Foucault: _Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth_ ( _Essential Works of
Foucault_ , vol. 1); _The Archaeology of Knowledge_.

Jean-Paul Sartre: _Being and Nothingness_

  
  

Karl Marx: _Marx-Engels Reader_ , 2d ed.

  
  

Michael Ignatieff, _The Rights Revolution_

  
  

All books will be on reserve.

  
  

**Addendum concerning _Karl Marx: The Burden of Reason (Why Marx Rejected
Politics and the Market)_** __: I have placed the entire May 29, 2001 print-
out of _Karl Marx: The Burden of Reason (Why Marx Rejected Politics and the
Market)_ in the materials section, in the subdirectory MARXBOOKMAY29. This
isn't _quite_ the final version of the book, which will be available in
December, but it is very close to it. (In all substantive respects it is the
same as the soon-to-be-published book; the differences are a matter of
improved wording, corrections of typos, and the like.) It is available to
students in this class, but not to others. The files are password-protected:
students should sign in as **xxxxxx** , and use the password **xxxxxxxx**.).

  
  

It is probably better to read the files on an on-Grounds computer. You may
need to experiment with recent versions of both Internet Explorer and Netscape
to see which generates a more legible monitor image: my impression is that
Internet Explorer, when the various surrounds are minimized and when the zoom
is correct, is better than Netscape, but this may not be universally correct.
If you want to read the material _seriously_ , you will need to print it out.
Do so at Clemons or at some other similar computer-and-printer location. You
may have to experiment to get the printing to come out right; please share
your expertise with your classmates.

  
  

In addition, around September 15 I expect to see the page proofs of the
finished book. _Possibly_ , I shall divide the proofs up and have people read
the book that way. But let's play the matter by ear. I could certainly use
some help in finding the last remaining typos.

