The Philosophy Department

Southwest Texas State University  
601 University Drive  
San Marcos, Texas 78666  
(512) 245-2285  
fax (512) 245-8335

**

Syllabus

**

PHIL 1305.262/Fall 2002 Jo Ann Carson phone: 245-3143 e-mail:
[jc28@swt.edu](mailto:jc28@swt.edu)

Office: 134E Psychology Building

Office Hrs: TTH 1:00-3:00 or by appt.
[mailto:jc28@swt.edu](mailto:jc28@swt.edu)

**

TEXT**

Norman Melchert, _The Great Conversation_ , Vol. I, 3rd edition (Mayfield,
1999)

**

COURSE DESCRIPTION**

This course will emphasize thinking, speaking, and writing critically about
the major questions and issues which have shaped the Western philosophical
tradition.

**

COURSE GOALS

**

  * To foster intellectual literacy by surveying the main ideas of several major thinkers; 
  * To explore some of the perennial questions of metaphysics, epistemology, ethics and religion which have motivated these thinkers; 
  * To develop the concepts, skills, and discipline necessary to read and evaluate a philosophical text; to prepare students for higher level courses in philosophy or related disciplines by helping them to construct an adequate framework of background knowledge; 
  * To provide opportunities for clear, coherent, and concise written exposition of major philosophical views; 
  * To encourage logical thinking and rational presentation of students' own ideas. 

**

COURSE REQUIREMENTS AND GRADING

**

75% Exams: There will be three exams counting 25% each.

25% Quizzes/Critical Thinking Lab assignment/Attendance

There will be four quizzes counting 20 points each plus one CTL assignment
which will

count the same as a quiz (20 points) for a total of 100 possible points.
Students having more than 3 unexcused absences will lose points from their
grade **in this category only** according to the following guidelines:

4 unexcused absences - 3 points

5 unexcused absences - 5 points

6 unexcused absences - 7 points

7+ unexcused absences -10 points

**

CRITICAL THINKING LAB (CTL) PSY 104 Hrs: M-Th 8:00 a.m.-9:00 p.m.; F 8-5

**

The CTL consists of a computer bank designed to help students practice
critical thinking skills. Here you will find a program to help you master
material regarding some common forms of fallacious (faulty) reasoning. All
students will be expected to do some work in the lab to complete an assignment
which will be provided by the professor.

**

PHILOSOPHY DIALOGUE SERIES: PSY 132

**

From time to time students will be given the opportunity to participate and/or
observe some of the events in the Philosophy Dialogue Series. Written
critiques (due no later than 1 week after the event) may be used to replace up
to three quiz grades (but not the CTL assignment). More information about the
dialogue series will be forthcoming.

**

POLICIES

**

  * Make-up exams will be given only in documented cases of illness or emergency. 
  * No make-up quizzes will be given. However written critiques of events in the philosophy dialogue series may be used to replace up to three quiz grades. 
  * Class attendance is expected and will affect your final grade. (See grading requirements.) In order for an absence to be excused you must provide documentation. (I prefer that this be done during my office hours or after class.)   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

**

COURSE OVERVIEW AND READING SCHEDULE

**

Class 1 1/15 Introduction: What is Philosophy?

**

I. Logic and Critical Reasoning

**

Class 2 1/17 Read "A Word to Students" (pp. xi-xiv)

A Little Logic: Definitions and Basic Concepts

Class 3 1/22 A Little More Logic: What is a Good Argument?

Class 4 1/24 Logic, continued

Read Chpt. 1: Before Philosophy

**

II. The Seeds of Philosophy: The Pre-Socratics, Socrates, and the Sophists

**

Class 5 1/29 Some Common Fallacies: Class discussion **Quiz #1

**

Read Chpt. 2: Philosophy Before Socrates

Automatic 'W' deadline: Wed., Jan 30

Class 6 1/31 The Pre-Socratics, continued

More Fallacies _

_

Class **** 7 **** 2/5 **** The Pre-Socratics, continued

CTL assignment distributed

Class 8 2/7 Read Chpt. 3: The Sophists, Rhetoric, and Relativism

Class 9 2/12 The Sophists, continued

**

CTL assignment due** (counts as Quiz #2)

Class 10 2/14 Read: Chpt. 4: Socrates on Knowing Oneself

Class 11 2/19 **EXAM #1

III. Plato and Aristotle on Reality and Knowledge

**

Class 12 2/21 Read Chpt. 5: The Socratic Method in _Euthyphro

_

Class 13 2/26 Read Chpt. 5: Socrates on Trial: _Apology

_

Class 14 2/28 Read Chpt. 5: The Death of Socrates: _Crito/Phaedo

_

Class 15 3/5 **** Read Chpt. 6: Plato's Two-World Theory **Quiz #3

**

Class 16 3/7 Read Chpt. 6: Plato on Education and Justice

Spring Break

Class 17 3/19 Read Chpt. 7: Aristotle and the Reality of the World

Class 18 3/21 Aristotle, continued

Class 19 3/26 **Exam #2

III. Classical Ethical Theories

**

Class 20 3/28 Read Chpt. 7: Aristotle on Happiness and the Good Life

Class 21 4/2 **** Read Chpt. 8: Epicureans, Stoics, and Skeptics **

**

Class 22 4/4 Chpt. 8, continued

Class 23 4/9 Read Chpt. 9: Christian Ethics

Class 24 4/11 Kant's Ethics (hand-out) **Quiz #4

**

Class 25 4/16 Mill's Utilitarianism (hand-out)

**

IV. Descartes and the Beginnings of Modern Philosophy

**

Class 26 4/18 Read Chpt. 13: Descartes: Doubting Our Way to Certainty

Drop By Phone Deadline: Thurs., April 18

Class 27 4/23 Descartes, continued **Quiz #5**

Class 28 4/25 Descartes's Legacy

Class 29 5/7 **EXAM #3** (Final) 8:00-10:30

Tuesday

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  

