    
**Philosophy 201**

**Introduction to Philosophy: Human Nature and Conduct**

**Spring 2001**

**Charles Starkey**

**Office** : 042 Catt Hall

**Office Hours** : TR 9-10; W 1-3 or by appointment

**Phone** : 294-7599 **E-mail** : cstarkey@iastate.edu  


**Course Description:**  


This course provides an introduction to some of the central issues and puzzles
of philosophy. The aim of the course is to both become familiar with these
issues and to develop and refine our thoughts about them. As we move from
issue to issue, we will take note of the relevance of each of them to our
personal lives, our culture, and to other cultures. Because a goal of the
course is to improve certain skills, participants must involve themselves in
the course, through critical thinking and discussion, as an active
participant: a passive spectator can digest information, but only one who is
actually doing something can develop a new skill.  


**Texts:** Pojman, _The Quest For Truth_ \+ additional readings available on
course web page or on reserve  


**Course Work :** First exam (30%), second exam (30%), third exam (30%), plus
brief papers and participation (10%). In addition, announced quizzes or other
activities may be assigned.  


**Policies:**  


* Attendance and Participation. The grade is based principally on the exams. However, attendance and participation are essential to the course, as the tests will emphasize issues stressed in class and related discussions.   


* Preparation. Students are expected to have carefully read the assigned readings prior to the class meeting in which they are to be discussed, and are expected to participate in discussions and activities regarding the materials. An essential part of this course is critical thought about and discussion of philosophical issues - that is, _doing_ philosophy, not just reading _about_ it. The reading in not extensive, but it will be difficult at times for people unacquainted with philosophy. Accordingly, the readings should be done critically, and be done with care.   


* Brief Papers. Brief paper will be periodically assigned, and are to be 3/4 to 1 single-spaced page in length, and will be graded on a pass/no pass basis (check / minus). A topic will be assigned to half the class at a time, so that papers will be due on alternating weeks. The purpose of the papers is to generate critical thought about a specific topic prior to lecture/discussion of that topic. The brief paper topics will be assigned in the week before they are due, and they will address an issue or line of thought presented in the readings for the upcoming week. The brief paper topics also serve as study questions to direct attention to some of the important elements of the week's readings. Each person will be given the opportunity to write five brief papers over the course of the semester, and is required to submit and pass _three_. Details are provided in the brief paper writing guide following the syllabus.   


* Exams. Specific details regarding the format and content will be provided in the weeks prior to the exam dates. Note also that the exam dates are tentative and may be subject to change.   


* Office Hours. If you have any questions or concerns, I encourage you to contact me or see me during my office hours. If you don't quite understand a particular article or argument, or feel that you don't know what is important in a reading, please let me know. The same goes for any questions regarding test and brief paper expectations, etc. I am willing to assist you, but it is your responsibility to take the initiative and seek assistance.   
    
    


***** E-mail and Web Page. E-mail may be sent to class members on a regular
basis. Participants are expected to check their University E-mail regularly.
Some readings and assignments will be posted to a course Web Page
(http://www.public.iastate.edu/~phil201)  


* This syllabus provides an outline of the course and a list of readings. _Note that the syllabus is subject to change and supplementation, and that it is the responsibility of each participant to follow these changes._ The pace of the course will vary depending on depth of treatment, student needs and interests, and the use of additional resources (group activities, videos, etc.).   
    
    


**_TOPIC READINGS_**  
    
    


**I. Humans and the Divine: Religion, Reason and Evil**  


1\. Why is there evil?

\- Dostoevski Pojman, pp. 73-76

\- Johnson Pojman, pp. 77-82

\- Hick Pojman, pp. 83-87  


**II. Human Nature and Reality**

2\. What is human nature? Traditional view.

\- Plato Selections (R) and Pojman, pp. 295-300

\- Aristotle Selections from _Nicomachean Ethics_ (R)  


3\. Is the mind separate from the body?

\- Descartes Pojman, pp. 222-227

\- Ryle Pojman, pp. 229-234  


4\. Can mental states be reduced to physical things?

\- Churchland Pojman, pp. 246-260

\- Nagel Pojman, pp. 261-268  


5\. Minds and computers - Are our minds simply machines? Can a machine
"think?"

\- Churchland (review)

\- Searle Pojman, pp. 269-276  


6\. Is reason the most important or defining quality of human beings?

\- Plato Pojman, pp. 295-299 (review)

\- Aristotle Selections from _Politics_ (R)

\- Spelman Selections from "Woman as Body" (R)

\- Sartre Pojman, pp. 447-452  


7\. Is there a human nature?

\- Marx Selections from _The German Ideology_ et al. (R)

\- Darwin Selections from _The Origin of Species_ et al. (R)  
    
    


8\. Do human beings really have freewill?

\- d'Holbach Pojman, pp. 326-330

\- James Pojman, pp. 331-341

\- Stace Pojman, pp. 341-347

\- Hospers Pojman, pp. 348-356  


9\. Knowledge of the world around us: Do humans _discover_ reality or _create_
reality?

\- Locke Pojman, pp. 136-147

\- Berkeley Pojman, pp. 148-156  
    
    


**III. Human Nature and Conduct**  


10\. Ethical relativism and realism: Do humans _create_ or _discover_ right
and wrong?

\- Benedict Pojman, pp. 370-375

\- Rachels Pojman, pp. 376-384  


11\. Ethical theory: How should humans decide how to act?

\- Mill Pojman, pp. 431-436

\- Kant Pojman, pp. 419-430  


12\. What should we strive for?

\- Bentham Selections from _Principles of Morals_ (R)

\- Nietzsche Pojman, pp. 453-460

\- Epictetus Pojman, pp. 523-532  
    
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Brief Paper Requirements and Writing Advice

  
  
  

Brief paper requirements and grading policy:  


* Each student will be assigned five papers over the course of the semester, and is required to submit and pass three of those five. Papers will be graded on a pass/no pass basis ("" or "-"). A check-minus will be received if the paper reflects a lack of reading or a lack of serious and thoughtful engagement with the topic. If a paper is not passed, you may submit the fourth paper, and if it is a passing paper, it will substitute for the non-passing paper. Because the purpose of the papers is to generate critical thought about a specific topic prior to lecture/discussion of that topic, late papers will not be accepted for credit. Three passing papers are required, and the participation grade will be reduced proportionately for each missing paper.   


* Papers are to be 3/4 to 1 single-spaced page in length.   


* In the course of the semester, other class projects may be assigned in addition to or as a substitute for the brief papers.   
    
    


Advice regarding writing brief (and other) papers:

1\. Regarding format: the papers should generally first of all provide a
synopsis of the issue that the topic deals with, and should then provide a
critical commentary (e.g. your criticisms of an idea or theory, or your view,
supported by specific reasons).  


2\. Answer each of the questions directly, and organize your thoughts before
beginning to write. Scattered thoughts result in scattered writing.  


3\. Write simply and clearly. Making complex ideas simple, or keeping simple
ideas simple, is a virtue and a key to effective writing.  


4\. Be specific. Do not provide a vague gloss of an idea or concept.
Relatedly, make _specific_ references to the text that the idea or concept
comes from.  


5\. Use _examples_ to illustrate and clarify what you are trying to say. Good,
concrete examples are one of the best ways to both _clarify_ to the reader
what you mean and to _convince_ the reader.  


6\. If you are asked to critically discuss a concept or provide your opinion
on some issue, be sure to _argue_ your point - that is, provide reasons for
it. Do not simply assert it ("I _strongly_ believe...." is not an argument).  


7\. Make the argument in an appealing way. It is more than a technical point -
it is something you believe in and are trying to convince other people of.  


8\. Quotes should be _brief_ : they should support, not substitute for, what
you are writing about. Quotes should be followed by a page reference and
author name (if not obvious).  


