Phil. 451 and Phil. 510  
Aristotle's Metaphysics  KH 2007 |

 MW 4:20-6:00  
---|---  
Professor: | [H](../../../index.htm)[enry
Me](../../index.htm)[ndell](../../../index.htm)  
---|---  
Office | E&T 422  
Telephhone | (323) 343-4178  
Email addresses | [hmendel@calstatela.edu](mailto:hmendel@calstatela.edu)  
Office hours  (appointments for other times may be possible) | Mon., Wed.
10:00-10:30, 6:15-7:15 PM  
Tues. 11:35-12:45 AM  
Requirements (Phil. 451) | one midterm and one final  
Requirements (Phil. 510) | one term paper  
Syllabus Phil. 451: [P451SylS02.pdf](P451SylS02.pdf) | Syllabus Phil. 510.:
[P510SylS02.pdf](P510SylS02.pdf)  
  
Required Book

Aristotle. _The Complete Works of Aristotle_. The Revised Oxford Translation.
2 vols. Ed. Jonathan Barnes. Bollingen Series, vol. 71. Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1984.

Description of the course

Times of Arrival

Contents of Metaphysics V ( D)

  * **Description of the course** 

With the possible exception of Plato, Aristotle is the most influential
Western philosopher. His thought more or less dominated the Western world
(including the Islamic part of it) from the second century until the
seventeenth century. He is commonly regarded as the father of logic, biology,
the systematic study of political systems, as well as having made significant
contributions to physics, the theory of poetry, the theory of rhetoric.

The concept of what philosophy is has changed many times since Aristotle. His
_Metaphysics_ , however, remains, without doubt one of the most difficult
books in philosophy which is worthy of study. It concerns two questions: what
are the basic realities, what is there? and is there a science of it and if so
what are its basic principles?

In this course, we shall attempt to read the whole of the _Metaphysics_. In
some ways, this task is peculiar, since it is unclear that the _Metaphysics_
even constitutes a complete, unified work (Book v is a dictionary) or that all
of it is by Aristotle (Book xi is in doubt), or the compositional relation of
its different books (while vii-xi seem to be a unified treatise, xii seems to
be separate and may even be somewhere between a written out lecture and notes
for one). Hence, we shall not attempt to read all the book linearly.

Even if it is difficult to speak of a literary unity to the Metaphysics, the
work has the typical structure or at least elements of an Aristotelian
treatise in many ways.

  1. a description of the subject of the treatise; 
  2. a survey of the phenomena, what seems to the wise, with a view to establishing tableaux of the basic underlying assumptions and motivations of previous thinkers; 
  3. a survey of the puzzles that a solution must have; 
  4. solutions to the puzzles which preserve the most important of the underlying assumptions and motivations; 
  5. an analysis of the rejected views and a demonstration of why they are not needed. 

top

  * **Times of Arrival** 

#### Note that readings may be added from time to time; these additions will
be posted below.

Date | Reading Assignment | Subject  
---|---|---  
3 April |  | Survey of the _Metaphysics_  
8 April | Categories, esp. 1-5 |  
10 April | Book I (A) and Book II (a); On the Ideas, fragments 185-6 (Barnes,
pp. 2435-41);  
rec. Nic. Ethics I ch. 6, Book XIII, ch. 4-5 | Background to the study of what
is, with an historical survey sifting out the issues  
15 April | cont. |  
17 April | Book III (B); rec. Book XI, ch. 1-2 | 15 Problems concerning what
is. Download an outline of the puzzles: [Met. B
puzzles.pdf](Met.%20B%20puzzles.pdf)  
22 April | cont. |  
24 April | Book IV (G); rec. Book XI, ch. 3-4 | The science of what is in the
respect that it is, and the most basic principles of such a science:  PNC and
Excluded Middle  
29 April | cont. |  
1 May | Book VI (E) | First Philosophy is theology, and distinguished from
mathematics and physics  
6 May | Book VII (Z) | The most basic reality, from a choice of essence,
universal, genus, substratum  
8 May | Midterms Due (Phil. 451)--Paper topics due (Phil. 510) |  
13 May |  |  
15 May | Book VIII (H) | perceptible substance, a particular as a unity of
matter and form, i.e. potentiality and actuality  
20 May | Book IX (Q) | potentiality and actuality  
22 May | Book X (I)  | the per se attributes of substance:  one, contrary,
different  
27 May | Book XII (L) | review (?) of the nature of perceptible substance, the
gods as pure actuality, the first god.  
29 May | cont.  
rec. _On the Heaven_ II 10   |  
3 June | Book XIII (M) | contra intermediate geometricals, the positive
account, contra Platonic Forms, contra Platonic accounts of numbers, relation
between elements and wholes, account of how we can know universals and
individuals  
5 June | cont. |  
10 June | Book XIV (N) | Mostly contra Platonic and Pythagorean views that
make numbers first principles of things.  
12 June | Finals to be handed in 4:30-7:00 |  
  
  * **Table of Contents of Book V ( D) **  
  1.  origin or principle (arche) | 11\. prior (protera) and posterior (hystera) | 21\. affection (pathos)  
---|---|---  
2.  cause or what is responsible for something (aition) | 12\. capacity or potentiality (dynamis) | 22\. privation (steresis)  
3.  element (stoicheion) | 13\. quanta or so much (poson) | 23.  to have (echein)  
4.  nature (physis) | 14\. qualified (poion) | 24\. being from or out of something (to ek tinos einai)  
5.  necessary (anagke) | 15\. relative (pros ti) | 25.  part (meros)  
6.  one (hen) | 16\. complete or perfect (teleion) | 26\. whole (holon)  
7.  being (on) | 17.  limit (peras) | 27\. mutilated (kolobon)  
8\. substance (ousia) | 18\. that according to which (to kath' ho) | 28.  kind
or genus (genos)  
9\. same (tauto) and different | 19\. disposition (diathesis) | 29.  false
(pseudos)  
10\. Opposites (antikeimena) | 20\. having or condition or habitude (hexis) |
30\. accident or incidental (kata sumbebekos)  

top

