**Visual Images of the Cold War**

**HIST 269 Sec 40 (#3010017)**

Summer II 2000                            (6 July - 10 Aug 2000)
[Instr: Dr Larry Beck](http://alamo.nmsu.edu/~lbeck/resume.htm)  
TE 128
Office: Faculty 104  
T - Th 6:45 - 10:05 **PM                 3 Credit Hours
**Office Phone: 439-3730  
Office Hours: After Class
Home Phone: 437-1017  
or by appointment
[ email: LRB@nmsua.nmsu.edu](mailto:LRB@nmsua.nmsu.edu)

**SYLLABUS** **_Course Materials_**

No Textbook. Some materials on Library Reserve.

**_Course Rationale_**

The Cold War is a blanket term that we use for the global struggle between the
two superpowers, the USA and USSR, that emerged from World War II. That
struggle affected almost every aspect of American life. Even though the Soviet
Union collapsed in 1991, that struggle is still relevant today. One way we can
understand the Cold War better is through the visual images of the time,
documentary films and Hollywood movies can add another dimension to students'
knowledge of this important historical era.

**_Course Description_**

This course will meet from 6:45 until 10:05 (double class period) on Tuesday
and Thursday evenings and Friday 7 July (to make up for the 4th.) We will
spend much of the class time watching and discussing documentaries and movies.
These discussions will be supplemented by instructor lectures and student
presentation of research. Documentaries will be interrupted often for
discussion, but Hollywood movies will be watched straight through and
discussed (after reflection) at the beginning of the following class session.
Student research papers and special project results will be shared with the
class by distribution, oral presentation and/or being placed on reserve in the
library.

**_Course Objectives_**

Upon completion of the course, students will have a better understanding of
the Cold War's impact on and reflection in American culture.

**_Class Policies_**

There will be no textbook and no exams. However, there will be readings on
library reserve and History Survey textbooks available which should assist
with preparation for class discussions. Students are expected to conduct
themselves as mature scholars. Historical events can lend themselves to
several interpretations and the Cold War is no exception. You are encouraged
to participate in class discussions which explore these interpretations.
However, arguments must be based on fact and there will be no personal attacks
in class discussion. You are encouraged to share ideas and to get peer input
on written work before it is submitted for grade, but the final product must
be your own. Have someone (human or electronic) check for mechanical
(spelling, typing, grammar) errors before submission for grading. Having
someone (human preferred) check for logical or structural errors before
submission is **not** cheating; it is prudent. The **minimum** penalty for
cheating or plagiarism is a **zero (0)** grade on that assignment. Such
academic dishonesty could jeopardize a student's academic career. There will
be no eating or smoking in the classroom. If you have needs that require
special accommodation, contact me privately to make suitable arrangements
(also see "Students with Disabilities" section).

**_Grading Criteria_**

Grades will be based on the **quality** and **quantity** of work you do, based
on a portfolio approach. You may choose any combination of the components to
earn the points you need. You will state your grade "goal" the first night,
but you may adjust it (up or down).

**"C"/"S"** To earn a "Gentleman's 'C'" or a "S"atisfactory, you must attend
all the 12 class sessions and write an **essay**on "The Cold War", earning at
least a 70%. You may miss up to four (4) classes if you write a make-up paper
related to the session missed.

**"B"** To earn a "B" grade, you must meet the requirements for a "C" (above)
and attain an 80% weighted average on a portfolio of written work totaling
**300 points** (your choice, see below).

**"A"** To earn an "A" grade, you must meet the requirements for a "C" (above)
and attain a 90% weighted average on a portfolio of written work totaling
**500 points** (your choice, see below).

**_Writing Portfolio Components_**

**"Essay" (100 points)** A 2-3 page essay on any aspect of the Cold War that
you choose. _(Required for _all_ grades)_

**"Critique" (100 points)** A 2-3 page [critical review ](bookrev.htm)of a
Cold War movie or book. Movie critiques must include citations of at least
four (4) movie reviews or book references.

**"Paper" (200 points)** A four to six (4-6) page academic research paper
citing at least five sources on some aspect of the Cold War. Topics must be
approved in advance and one progress discussion scheduled no later than July
25th. A longer (8-12 pg) paper with at least 9 sources may be substituted for
two short papers to earn **400 points**.

**"Project" (100 - 1000 points)** You may elect to do a special project that
suits your needs and learning style. We will negotiate project points based on
the scope of the project. Some possible projects would include Cold War Lesson
Plans, a Review/Critique of Cold War treatment in textbooks, or Annotated
Bookmarks of Cold War related Web Sites. If you wish, you may do a **Group
project** which will have points assigned as if it were an individual project
and the points will then be divided among the group by the members based on
each individual's proportional participation in the project.

**All written work is due no later than August 8th.** Papers/projects
submitted by July 21st will be graded and returned for possible re-write. Re-
written papers may earn up to 10% (one letter grade) increase. Research Paper
and Special Project results will be shared with the rest of the class.

**_Students with Disabilities_** : If you have or believe you have a
disability, you may wish to self-identify. You can do so by providing
documentation to the Counselor for Special Populations, Mr. Jim Payne
(439-3720). Appropriate accommodations may then be provided for you. If you
have a condition which may affect your ability to exit from the premises in
case of an emergency or which may cause an emergency during class, you are you
are encouraged to discuss this in confidence with me or the ADA Coordinator.
If you have general questions about the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA),
call ADA Coordinator Mrs. Doris Lynch, 439-3716.

**_In Case of Emergency_** If anyone needs to contact you in an emergency,
they should use the following telephone numbers: **439-3751 / 439-3761** To
expedite finding you, the person calling should know the class (HIST 269) you
are in at the time (i.e. give family members and childcare providers a copy of
your class schedule with these numbers.)

**_[Calendar](calcoldwar.htm)_**  
    


