
    
     Content-type: text/plain; charset="iso-8859-1"
     Content-transfer-encoding: quoted-printable
     Worlds of Music
     MUS 241/ANTH 241
     =46all, 1997:  Tuesday, Thursday 2:00-3:20 and Monday 12:00-12-50
     Ewell Hall 151
    
     Anne Rasmussen
     Office: Ewell 265		Tel: 221-1097	email: [akrasm@facstaff.wm.edu](mailto:akrasm@facstaff.wm.edu)
     Office Hours: Monday 9:30-11:30 or by appointment
    
     Nature of the course
     How does music relate to the larger picture of human experience, and how is
     that larger picture reflected or created by music? What important
     information is conveyed by a musical event?  During this course, we will be
     listening to music from a diversity of geographical areas and performance
     traditions.  One of our aims will be to develop critical listening skills
     useful for a cross-cultural appreciation and analysis of music.  Another
     aim of the course is to explore the topics that have and continue to
     comprise the study of music and culture including organology (the study of
     musical instruments),  musical aesthetics,  musical sound and structure,
     the process of performance, native concepts about music,  music patronage
     and education,  music and mass media, the relationship of music to
     community and religious life, and the role of music in the construction of
     identity.  Finally, using the methods and concepts of ethnomusicology, an
     ultimate aim of the course is to relate musical expression to human
     experience and to bring questions about music into the domain of the
     humanities and social sciences.
    
     Structure of the Course
     The semester will be organized into a number of units that include a
     geographical focus as well as a topical agenda.  Our work will include
     regular reading assignments,  as well as a significant audio-visual
     component of music recordings and films.  There will be numerous tape
     notes, term sheets, and other materials handed out in class for which you
     are responsible.  Please keep all of these materials together in a three
     ring notebook or folder.  Materials from the beginning of the semester will
     be of importance later on.  Stay up to date and be sure to see me if you
     need to miss class or arrive late!
    
     1. Class
     You will be judged throughout the semester on your ability to incorporate
     cultural and technical information into your analysis of the music cultures
     investigated during the semester.  Therefore, class sessions that
     incorporate lecture and discussion, listening sessions, videotapes, films,
     and musical demonstration and performance are of primary importance. Active
     participation is expected of everyone!  Unexcused absences will not go
     unnoticed.  You are expected to prepare all of the assigned reading and
     listening material on time for in-class written commentaries or discussion.
    
    
     2.  Required Texts and Recordings
     1.  Worlds of Music:  An Introduction to the Music of the World's Peoples
     (third edition) Jeff Todd Titon, General Editor,  New York: Schirmer Books,
     1996.
     2.  Accompanying set of compact disc or cassette recordings to Worlds of Mus=
     ic
     3.  Popular Music of the Non-Western World:  An Introductory Survey by
     Peter Manuel, New York, Oxford:  Oxford University Press, 1988.
     	4.  Articles on reserve in the Music Library
     	5.  Class composite tapes (+/- 6) -- on reserve in the Music Library.
    
     3.  Library Reserve Reading
     To compliment reading from the required texts, Xeroxed-articles or excerpts
     from books will be assigned on a regular basis and available at the music
     library reserve.  I will put multiple copies on reserve.  To avoid
     confusion when searching for a source, bring your syllabus to the library.
     You may access our reserve list on the library computer here in Ewell or at
     SWEM terminals:  Simply click on "Reserve Desk" and type in Rasmussen after
     clicking on "Instructor".
    
     Please respect library policy regarding time alloted for reserve items.
     Please honor the William and Mary community by respecting library policies
     -- let's not have any mysterious dissappearances.
     Reserve items may leave the building if you want to xerox them,
     but please return them promptly.
     (You must leave your I.D. when taking a reserve item out of the library)
    
    
     4. Listening/Viewing
     All audio-visual materials can be found on reserve in the Music
     Library-Ewell 250.
     In addition to the "Worlds  Recordings" that you will purchase from the
     bookstore, we will be working with composite class tapes and notes.  In an
     effort to be simple and streamlined, class tapes will be labeled: Worlds
     Tape 1: Intro., Worlds Tape 2: Latin America etc.  You may make copies of
     cassette tapes placed on reserve in the music library either with the high
     speed dubber we have in the library or by bringing your own "boom box."
     Notes for supplementary tapes will be distributed in class.  We will also
     be working with LP (33 rpm) and CD recordings.
    
     Monday class ("lab") sessions will be reserved for dealing primarily with
     audio-visual materials -- particularly films.  Everything we view will be
     available on reserve.  Two video stations accommodate four people each.  If
     you recognize your classmates, join with them to view  or review video
     assignments.
    
     The music we'll be listening to this semester is quite varied so open your
     ears and your minds!  No previous musical experience is required for the
     course but we will be working with a lot of musical material so genuine
     interest is a must.   We will be developing and honing our listening skills
     throughout the semester but please feel free to see me if you have
     questions on how to approach this music.  The value of repeated listening
     to the music for this class cannot be overestimated!  Once will not be
     enough!  Keep The Listening Checklist  close by.
    
     The Music Library Schedule (Ewell 250)
     M-Th: 10 a.m.-11 p.m.; F: 10 a.m.-5 p.m.; Sat: 1-5 p.m.; Sun: 3-11 p.m.
    
     5. Assignments and Objectives
     Over the course of the semester I'd like to see you develop:
     	*   a relativistic approach to cross cultural studies that is
     sensitive to bias and 		ethnocentrism;
     *  the ability to talk and think about music using some of the basic
     terminology and concepts of ethnomusicology;
     *  the ability to recognize and identify the technical and cultural
     features of various World musics;
     To this end, our assignments will include:
     *  two short papers written in response to questions regarding reading
     listening and viewing assignments, and class lecutres, presentations, and
     discussions
     * two shorter critique/reaction/position papers
     *   one mid-term exam and one final exam
     * preparation for and participation in class activities (which may include
     occasional response papers)
    
     Guidelines for papers and exams will be given out in class.  Although it is
     not a common occurance, student papers have, in the past gotton lost.
     Please make copies of your work -- at least on disc to avoid this
     nightmare!
    
     6. Evaluation:
     Grades will be roughly based on the following:
     Two Exams (one mid-term)				40% (20% each)
     Two Papers						40% (20% each)
     Two Short Critiques/Position Papers  		10% (5% each)
     Prompt, regular attendance and participation		10%
     Total							110%
    
    
     7.  Final Note:
     *  On Attendance:  Learning in MUS/ANTH 241, Worlds of Music  happens in
     the classroom as a group.  Your outside work is preparation and follow-up.
     Lax attitudes towards participation in this community of learners will not
     be tolerated and will certainly be reflected in your grades.
     *  Please keep class materials in an organized notebook.  There will be
     handouts weekly.
     *  Please see me or call me if you have to miss class and to collect
     handouts and assignments.
     *  Don't fall behind!!  Hand your work in on time!!  Late papers will be
     docked 1/2 grade for every day they are late.  BUT PLEASE do not skip class
     because you are putting the finishing touches on a paper or because you are
     printing it out.  Coming to class is the single most important thing you
     can do!   I am a reasonable person and will accept a paper later on in the
     day if you notify me in advance.
     *  Finally, consider this syllabus a contract -- by enrolling in the course
     you are agreeing to meet the requirements outlined herein.
    
     =0CWORKING TIMETABLE
     (subject to alteration)
    
    
     UNIT I:  An Introduction to the History,
     Methods, and Ideas of Ethnomusicology
    
     Week 1: August 28		Course Overview; Listening to Music,
     Talking  						about Music,
     Documenting Music
    
     READ:	*Worlds   Preface and Chapter One:  "The Music-Culture as a World
     of Music"
     			by Jeff Todd Titon and Mark Slobin  Pp. 1-16.
     		* Popular Musics  Chapter 1:  Perspectives on the Study of
     non-Western Music
    
     		* You may also get started on Worlds Chapter Ten,
     familliarize yourself with our			texts!
    
     LISTEN:  	Class Tape I: An Organological Introduction to Musics of
     the World  			(on reserve in the music library, notes
     distributed in class)
    
     Week 2: September 1, 2, 4, 	Ethnomusicology and the Early Ethnography
     of 						Native American Musical
     Traditions
    
     READ:  	* Worlds  Chapter Two:  "North America/Native America" by David P.
     McAllester  			Pp. 17-70.
     		* RESERVE:  "The Study of Indian Music in the 19th Century"
     by Frances 			Densemore (in American Anthropologist 29
     [1927]) Pp. 77-86.
    
     LISTEN:  	Worlds  Native America Examples
    
     MON/LAB:	Dancing to Give Thanks
    
    
     UNIT II:  Latin America: Musical Genre as Cultural Microcosm
     Music of the Andes, Salsa and Conjunto, Bossa Nova, Tango,
     Nueva Cancion
    
     Week 3: September 8, 9, 11
    
     Guidelines for Paper #1 distributed
    
     READ:	*Worlds  Chapter Nine "Latin America/Ecuador"  by John Schechter
     Pp. 428-494.
     LISTEN:	Worlds  Latin America Examples
    
     MON/LAB:  	Salsa: Music of the Cities
    
     Week 4: September 15, 16, 18	  --
    
    
     READ:	*  Popular Musics  Chapter 2: Latin American and the Caribbean
    
     LISTEN:	Class Tape II: Latin America
    
     MON/LAB:	Chulas Fronterras  or Tex-Mex:  Music of the Texas Mexian
     Borderlands or Cuban 		Music  Series
    
    
     UNIT III:  African and African-American Music:
     Continuity, Change, Creativity
    
     Week 5: September 22,23,25
     ***Paper #1 Due Thursday, September 25
    
     READ:	* Worlds  Chapter Three:  "Africa/Ghana" by David Locke Pp. 67-104.
    
     LISTEN:	Worlds  Africa Examples
     		Class Tape 3:  Some Traditional and Popular Musics of Africa
    
     		"Afro-Pop World Wide"  with Josh Collinet, Radio Program on
     =46M 89.5, Friday 			evenings at 7:00 p.m.
    
     MON/LAB: 	Atumpan  or TBA
    
     Week 6: October 29, 30, 2
    
     READ:	* Popular Musics Chapter 3:  Africa
     		*  [RESERVE:  "Music in Africa: The Manding Contexts," by
     Roderic Knight 			(in Performance Practice  Ed. by Gerard
     B=E9hague, Westport, CT: 				Greenwood Press, 1984)  Pp.
     53-90.]
    
     LISTEN:	Class Tape 3:  Some Traditional and Popular Musics of Africa
     		"Afro-Pop World Wide"  with Josh Collinet, Radio Program on
     =46M 89.5, Friday 			evenings at 7:00 p.m.
    
     MON/LAB:  	Born Musicians -- Traditional Music from the Gambia
    
     Week 7: October 6, 7, 9  	African American Musical Cultures:
     						Gospel and Blues
    
     READ:	*  Worlds  Chapter Four:  "North America/Black America" by Jeff
     Todd Titon Pp. 			144-210.
    
     LISTEN:	 Worlds  African American examples
     		"Afro-Pop World Wide" Friday at 7.
    
     MON/LAB:  	The Land Where the Blues Began  (by Alan Lomax and Co.)
    
     October 13,14	 FALL BREAK:  NO CLASS!!
    
     Week 8: October 16: 	Midterm Exam
    
     =0CUNIT IV:  Mediterranean Music Culture
     =46estival, Ritual, and the Ethnography of Performance
    
     Week 9:  October 20, 21, 23:
     Guidelines for Paper #2 distributed
    
     READ:	*Worlds   "Bosnia and Central/Southeast Europe:  Musics and
     Musicians in Transition"  by Mark Slobin,  Pp. 1211-251.
     		*  Popular Musics Chapter 4:  Europe
    
     LISTEN:	Worlds  Europe examples
     		Class Tape 4:  Around the Mediterranean
    
     MON/LAB:  	Rembetika:  the Blues of Greece  VCA 1718
    
     Week 10:  October 27, 28, 30
    
     READ:	*  RESERVE:  Falassi, Alessandro "Festival:  Definition and
     Morphology,"  (from 		Time out of Time:  Essays on the Festival
     (Albuqurque:  U. of N.M. Press, 		1987.)
     *  RESERVE:  "A Macedonian Sabor:  Anatomy of a Celebration"  by Tim Rice
     in Journal of American Folklore Vol. 93 No. 136, 1980: 113-128.
     * RESERVE:  Sugarman, Jane "The Nightingale and the Partridge . . . "
     Ethnomusicology
     * RESERVE:  Lord, Albert "Introduction and Cahpter Two: Singers,
     performance and Training,"  Singer of Tales  Cambridge, MA Harvard
     University Press:  3-29.
     		* Worlds  Chapter Ten:  "Discovering and Documenting a
     World of Music" by 		David B. Reck, Mark Slobin, and Jeff Todd
     Titon Pp 495-520.
    
     LISTEN:  	Class Tape 4:  Around the Mediterranean
    
     MON/LAB	The Romany Trail:  Gypsy Music into Europe
    
     UNIT V:  History and Politics in Middle Eastern Music Culture
     Mesopotamia, the Ottoman Empire, and Arab World
    
     Week 11: November 3, 4, 6
    
     READ:	* Popular Music   Chapter 5:  The Arab Middle East (by Virginia
     Danielson)
     		 RESERVE: "Arab Music:  An Overview"  by Ali Jihad Racy,
     and "Instrument Pages,"  Maqam:  Music of the Islamic World and its
     Influences   New York:  The Alternative Museum
    
     LISTEN: 	Class Tape 6 with notes:  The Arab World and Turkey
    
     Week 12:  November 10, 11, 13
    
     READ:	*  Popular Music  Chapter 6:  The Non-Arab Middle East
    
     LISTEN:  Class Tape 6 with notes:  The Arab World and Turkey
    
    
     =46riday, November 14:  The William and Mary Middle Eastern Music Ensemble
     with Special Guest Artist.  Ewell Hall 8:00 Free.
     UNIT V:  South Asia
     History, Aesthetics, and Musical Patronage, Traditional and Popular Music
    
     Week 13: 17, 18, 20
     READ:	*Worlds  Chapter Six "India/South India" by David B. Reck  Pp. 209-265=
     =2E
    
     LISTEN:	Worlds  CD examples for Chapter 6
     		Class Tape 5: India; Various CD-s on Reserve
    
     MON/LAB:	Nusrat : Live at Meany!  (Pakistani Qawwali Music)
    
    
     Week 14: November 10,11,13:
    
     READ:	* RESERVE:Popular Music  of the Non Western World --  Chapter Seven
     "South Asia," by Peter Manuel,  New York, Oxford:  Oxford University Press,
     1988 Pp. 171-197.
    
     LISTEN:	As above
     MON/LAB:	There Will Always be Stars in the Sky:  The Indian Film
     Industry
    
     UNIT VI:  Indonesia:  Cosmology & Tourism
    
     Week 15: December 1, 2, 4:
    
     READ:	*Worlds  Chapter Seven "Asia/Indonesia" by R. Anderson Sutton Pp.
     316-368.
     		*  Popular Music  "Southeast Asia:  Indonesia sections Pp.
     205-219.
     *  RESERVE: "Earth, Fire, and Sakti, and the Javanese Gamelan,"  by Judith
     Becker in Ethnomusicology  Vol 32, No. 3, Fall 1988
    
     LISTEN:	Worlds  Indonesia examples
     		Class Tape 4
    
     MON/LAB:	Gong Foundries of Java and Bali
     		Films from the Rasmussen Collection
    
     =46inal Exam:  Tuesday, December 10, 1996 =0C
    
    
    
     Dr. Anne K. Rasmussen
     Assistant Professor of Music and Ethnomusicology
     Director, The William and Mary Middle Eastern Music Ensemble
     The College of William and Mary
     Box 8795
     Williamsburg, VA 23187-8795   (757) 221-1097 -- [akrasm@facstaff.wm.edu](mailto:akrasm@facstaff.wm.edu)

