![POSITION VACANCIES](/News/kulama/images/position.vacancies.gif)  
[Professional vacancies archive](/news/job.vacancies.html)

The University of Hawai`i is an equal opportunity/affirmative action
institution. All qualified applicants will be considered, regardless of race,
sex, age, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, disability, marital
status, arrest and court record, sexual orientation or status as a disabled
veteran or veteran of the Vietnam era. Women, members of minority groups,
veterans and persons with disabilities are encouraged to apply. (Persons with
hearing disabilities may call 1-711 or 643-8833.) Applicants with hearing or
speech impairments may use the TDD relay service by calling 1-711.

Employment is contingent on satisfying employment eligibility verification
requirements of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986. Appointments
to positions are subject to statutory residency requirements, campus
recruitment guidelines and the collective bargaining agreement. APT applicants
with re-employment rights or priority status are responsible for informing the
recruiting unit, which will verify eligibility with the employing unit as
provided by the BU 08 contract.

Official transcripts must have the official seal of and be mailed directly
from the degree-granting institution to the address indicated.

Civil Service vacancy announcements are available for viewing at the Office of
Human Resources, Post Office Building, UHM campus, Monday-Friday, 7:45
a.m.-4:30 p.m. and via the OHR home page at
[www.hawaii.edu/dhmr/ohr/](http://www.hawaii.edu/dhmr/ohr/#EMPLOYMENT).

* * *

Managerial Positions

**ASSISTANT ATHLETIC DIRECTOR FOR ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES** , Position #89300,
Athletic Department, full-time, revolving funds, to begin approximately
01/2002. **Duties** : Under the direction of the associate athletics director,
the assistant athletics director for administrative services is responsible
for and provides leadership for business and ticketing affairs, promotional
and marketing activities, publicity and sports information. Assumes the
associate's position in the absence of the incumbent. Works with the athletic
director and associate athletic director in planning and setting of immediate
and long range goals; oversees all booster club activities to ensure
conformity with various entities; reviews and approves all purchases,
disbursements and other financial transactions; monitors the sale and
distribution of tickets for athletic events; provides leadership and direction
to the athletic business manager, sports information director and promotions
and marketing director; and performs other duties as directed. **Minimum
Qualifications** : Master's degree in athletic administration, education or
related field from an accredited college or university and five years of
experience in university athletic administration or related field, or any
equivalent combination of experience and education. **Monthly Pay Range**
(M04-M), $4,348 (minimum); $6,818 (maximum). **To Apply** : Submit to
Personnel Office, Athletic Department, 1337 Lower Campus Rd, Honolulu, HI
96822: 1) letter of application; 2) resume 3) three letters of reference
attesting to job performance and personal character and 4) one page statement
outlining how you meet the minimum qualifications. **Closing Date** :
01/02/2002.

**___**

**_**

Faculty Positions

**INSTRUCTOR (Counselor)** Position No. 83347, general funds, 9-month,
beginning approx. 01/02, full-time, non-tenurial, temporary, with the
possibility of becoming tenurial, pending position clearance, availability of
funds and actual staffing requirements. **Duties:** Under the general
supervision of the Dean of Student Services, independently plan, organize, and
carry out instructional and non-instructional assignments; be responsible for
academic advising and counseling of students, including but not limited to
outreach, recruitment, admissions advising, orientation, placement testing,
academic or educational planning, graduation and transcript evaluations,
general financial aid information, and vocational and career
exploration/testing, counseling; personal counseling especially to students at
risk. Assignments may include day, evening, and/or weekend work on-campus or
off-campus. Other Duties: Perform related work as assigned, including, but not
limited to, serving on institutional and system-wide committees, participating
in community service, pursuing in-service training; and other programs of
professional self-improvement; collecting data and preparing reports;
assisting in the planning, implementing, revising, and improving of programs
and services under the Student Services Division, including Division
objectives and program targets. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree in
counseling and guidance, counseling psychology, college student personnel
services, human resources (to include both CTAHR and Personnel) or related
field; OR Bachelor's degree in counseling and guidance, counseling psychology,
college student personnel service, human resources (to include both CTAHR and
personnel), or related field and three years related work experience. Minimum
qualifications must be met by the effective date of appointment. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Counseling and academic advising experience at the community
college level; experience in career/life counseling or vocational guidance in
educational institutions, preferably at the post-secondary level; demonstrated
ability to adapt to change and handle varied assignments; demonstrated
teaching ability; and experience with disabled, minority, under-represented,
or disadvantaged adults. **Pay Range:** C2; minimum $2862.75/month. **To
Apply:** Submit to Human Resources Office, Leeward CC, 96-045 Ala Ike, Pearl
City, Hawaii 96782: 1) Faculty or Executive/Managerial (CC Personnel Form 27A)
application form
([www.hawaii.edu/ohr/employ.htm](http://www.hawaii.edu/ohr/employ.htm)), 2)
graduate and undergraduate transcript(s) showing degrees and coursework to
date appropriate to the position (transcript copies are acceptable; however,
official transcripts will be required at the time of hire), 3) a brief one-
page statement outlining how you meet the minimum and desirable
qualifications, 4) three letters of recommendation (optional) attesting to job
performance and personal character, and 5) resume (optional). Separate
documents and application materials must be submitted for each position.
Original signature required on application. All requested
documents/information must be postmarked by the closing date and become the
property of the College. Failure to submit all required documents shall deem
an application to be incomplete. **Closing Date:** 12/17. **Inquiries:**
455-0326.

**ASSISTANT RESEARCHER;** Position No. 70006T, Etiology Program, Cancer
Research Center of Hawai`i; full-time; non-tenure track, to begin 01/2002.
**Duties:** to establish a research program that will complement existing
research on infectious agents and cancer, to collaborate with other faculty in
ongoing molecular investigations, and to work with population-based tumor
registry data and a growing tissue repository. **Minimum Qualifications** :
PhD in the biomedical sciences, with significant training in epidemiology and
molecular biology. **Desirable Qualifications:** MPH in epidemiology and/
health services admin. Experience coordinating large-scale epidemiological
studies and supervising population-based registries. Demonstrated ability to
conducted original research in molecular epidemiology. **Pay Range:** Salary
commensurate with qualifications and experience. **To Apply:** Send letter of
application, curriculum vitae, statement of research interest and the names
and addresses of three references. Send materials to Marc Goodman, PhD, Cancer
Research Center of Hawai`i, 1236 Lauhala Street, Honolulu, HI 96813. **Closing
Date:** 01/02/2002. **Inquiries:** Marc Goodman (808) 586-2987.

**LECTURERS IN MUSIC** , University of Hawai`i at Manoa, Music Department, for
placement on lecturer pool, part-time, non-tenurial, contingent on
availability of funds and actual staffing requirements. Classroom lecturers in
Hawaiian ensemble, slack key guitar, and elementary music, and applied music
lecturer positions in bassoon, violin, viola, cello, bass, flute, oboe,
saxophone, trumpet, french horn, trombone, tuba/euphonium, percussion and
ethnic ensembles in gamelan and oceanic music. **Classroom Duties:** Teach one
or more courses in Hawaiian ensemble, slack key guitar, or elementary music.
**Applied Music/Ethnic Ensemble** **Duties:** Provide individual instruction
(applied music); must be able to give lessons on regular basis. **Minimum
Qualifications (Applied):** Bachelor's degree in music or equivalent
professional experience. **Mininum Qualifications** **(Classroom):** Master's
degree in music with appropriate concentration or equivalent level expertise.
**Desirable Qualifications:** Three years of formal teaching experience (in
the area of application). **Minimum Salary:** $1,030 per credit
(classroom)/$257.50 per credit hour for applied music. **To Apply:** Submit
vita, including description of prior experience in teaching and performance
along with the names and addresses of three references to: Chair, Music
Department, University of Hawai`i at Manoa, 2411 Dole Street, Honolulu, HI
96822. **Closing Date:** continuous recruitment through fall 2002.

The College of Education is seeking full-time faculty for tenure-track
positions with a preferred start date of 08/01/2002. The College of Education
has developed a number of programs and projects involving collaboration
between the college and the Hawai`i State Department of Education. These
initiatives offer faculty opportunities to work closely with teachers at their
schools and to conduct collaborative field-based research. For all positions,
engagement in field-based, outreach and distance education programs is
essential. Experience working in these kinds of programs is desirable.
**EDUCATIONAL FOUNDATIONS: Assistant/Associate/Full Professor:** Teach courses
in comparative/international education and general foundations of education at
the undergraduate and graduate levels; advise students in the master's and
doctoral programs; maintain an active program of research and publications in
the area of comparative/international education; work collaboratively within
the college, university and the Hawai`i Educational Policy Center; teach on
neighbor islands and via a variety of distance delivery modes; participate in
department, college, university and community service. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Doctorate in comparative/international education, or closely
related field, with strong emphasis on the Asia/Pacific region; evidence of
research productivity; demonstrated ability to collaborate with other
educational professionals in school, state, and university settings; strong
research background in at least one of the social sciences; interest and
ability in contributing to educational policy studies and to field-based
teacher education. Associate Professor also requires at least four years of
full-time college/university teaching experience at the rank of assistant
professor, or equivalent, a record of publication and scholarly work
appropriate to the associate professor rank, and a demonstrated record and
continued interest in grant writing. Full Professor also requires a minimum of
four years of full-time college/university teaching experience at the rank of
associate professor, or equivalent, research productivity which has resulted
in significant recognition by the national or international community of
scholars active in the field, and a strong and sustained record and commitment
to grant writing. **Desired Qualifications:** Research and scholarly focus on
Asian/Pacific national systems of education, K-higher education; strong social
science credential in anthropology, sociology or political science; strong
language competency in an Asian/Pacific language; ability to teach courses on
the role of education in national modernization and development; interest in
relating Eastern, Pacific and Western ideals, ways of life and cultural norms
and values. For a position at a senior rank, track record and interest in
securing large-scale grants from Asian and American foundations and
governments. **Contact Person:** David Ericson, Chair, (808) 956-4243,
[ericson@hawaii.edu](mailto:ericson@hawaii.edu) **EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY:
Assistant Professor:** Teach undergraduate and graduate courses in
psychological foundations of education, educational assessment and evaluation
for teacher preparation, in-service and outreach programs; provide leadership
in integrating learning, assessment, and evaluation competencies throughout
the educational psychology curriculum and particularly in courses required in
the college's professional educator preparation programs; supervise and
participate in the master's and doctoral programs; maintain an active program
of research and publications; teach on neighbor islands and via a variety of
distance delivery modes; participate in department, college, university and
community service. **Minimum Qualifications:** Doctorate in educational
psychology or related discipline, emphasizing assessment/evaluation;
demonstrated teaching ability; evidence of research productivity. **Desired
Qualifications:** Experience with field-based teacher preparation programs,
classroom assessment, and school-based research methods; experience in
distance delivery instruction. **Contact Person:** Ann Bayer, Chair, (808)
956-7775, [abayer@hawaii.edu](mailto:abayer@hawaii.edu)

**TEACHER EDUCATION & CURRICULUM STUDIES: Assistant/Associate Professor
(Mathematics Education): **Teach mathematics education classes in elementary
and secondary field-based teacher education programs as part of an
interdisciplinary team; supervise students in field-based settings;
participate in advising and selection of students; engage in school and
curriculum renewal efforts; teach on neighbor islands and via a variety of
distance delivery modes; teach graduate level courses and advise students in
the master's and doctoral programs; maintain an active program of research and
publication in mathematics education; provide service to and participate in
collaborative relationships with K-12 schools; provide service to the
university and the broader community; teach on neighbor islands and via a
variety of distance delivery modes. **Minimum Qualifications:** Doctorate in
mathematics education or in education with an emphasis in mathematics or
related field; K-12 teaching experience; experience supervising teacher
candidates in field settings; experience working with multicultural student
populations; evidence of research productivity. Associate Professor also
requires four years teaching experience at the undergraduate and graduate
levels at the rank of assistant professor or equivalent, and a record of
publication and scholarly work appropriate to associate professor rank.
**Desired Qualifications:** Experience in college level teaching, distance
delivered instruction and working as a team member; ability to lead a cohort
of students. Competence and experience in any of the following: field-based
teacher education programs; school-university partnerships; collaborative
research; graduate level instruction; integration of educational technology in
the classroom/school; multicultural education; curriculum theory.
**Assistant/Associate Professor (Science Education):** Teach science education
classes in elementary and secondary field-based teacher education programs as
part of an interdisciplinary team; supervise students in field-based settings;
participate in advising and selection of students; engage in school and
curriculum renewal efforts; teach on neighbor islands and via a variety of
distance delivery modes; teach graduate level courses and advise students in
the master's and doctoral programs; maintain an active program of research and
publication in science education; provide service to and participate in
collaborative relationships with K-12 schools; provide service to the
university and the broader community; teach on neighbor islands and via a
variety of distance delivery modes. **Minimum Qualifications:** Doctorate in
science education or in education with an emphasis in science or related
field; K-12 teaching experience; experience supervising teacher candidates in
field settings and working with multicultural student populations; evidence of
research productivity. Associate Professor also requires four years teaching
experience at the undergraduate and graduate levels at the rank of assistant
professor, or equivalent, and a record of publication and scholarly work
appropriate to associate professor rank. **Desired Qualifications:**
Experience in college level teaching, distance delivered instruction and
working as a team member; ability to lead a cohort of students. Competence and
experience in any of the following: field-based teacher education programs;
school-university partnerships; collaborative research; graduate level
instruction; integration of educational technology in the classroom/school;
multicultural education; curriculum theory. **Assistant Professor (Language
Arts Education):** Teach language arts and literacy classes in elementary and
secondary classes in field-based teacher education programs as part of an
interdisciplinary team; supervise students in field-based settings;
participate in advising and selection of students; engage in school and
curriculum renewal efforts; teach graduate level courses for master's and
doctoral programs; maintain an active program of research and publication in
language arts/literacy education; participate in collaborative relations with
K-12 schools provide service to the university and broader community; teach on
neighbor islands and via a variety of distance delivery modes. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Doctorate in language arts and literacy education or in
education with an emphasis in language arts or related field; K-12 teaching
experience; experience supervising teacher candidates in field settings and
working with multicultural student populations; evidence of research
productivity. **Desired Qualifications:** Experience in college level
teaching, distance delivered instruction, and working as a team member;
ability to lead a cohort of students. Competence and experience in any of the
following: multicultural education; curriculum theory; field-based teacher
education programs; school-university partnerships; collaborative research;
graduate level instruction; integration of educational technology in the
classroom/school. **Contact Person:** Frank Walton, Chair, (808) 956-7908;
[franwal@hawaii.edu](mailto:franwal@hawaii.edu) Degrees must be earned from
accredited institutions. Applicants should, in a letter of application,
clearly specify the position they are applying for and address how they meet
the qualifications for the position and forward a curriculum vitae, reprints
of publications, transcripts of graduate degrees, and names, addresses and
phone numbers of five professional references, to the appropriate contact
person at the College of Education, University of Hawai`i at Manoa, 1776
University Avenue, Honolulu, HI 96822. Review of materials will begin on
01/22/2002 and continue until positions are filled. Salaries are competitive.

**FULL PROFESSOR,** Rank I-5, Department of Chemistry, UH Manoa, full time,
general funds, 9-month, tenurable, to remain open until filled, subject to
availability of funds. The successful applicant is expected to occupy The
Joanna Sullivan Distinguished Chair in the Cancer Research Center of Hawai`i
and to serve as program director of the Natural Products Program, a multi-
disciplinary drug discovery program aimed at the discovery and
characterization of new anti-cancer agents. The successful applicant is
expected to contribute to the educational mission of the Department of
Chemistry by teaching undergraduate or graduate courses, and to maintain an
independent research program that will complement existing research in the
Natural Products Program. **Minimum Requirements:** PhD degree in chemistry,
medicinal chemistry, biochemistry or equivalent, and a strong record of
published research and extramural funding. The position attracts a competitive
salary. **To Apply:** Send letter of application, curriculum vitae, statement
of current and future research interests, and the names and addresses of three
references to Carl-Wilhelm Vogel, MD, PhD, Director, Cancer Research Center of
Hawai`i, 1236 Lauhala Street, Honolulu, HI 96813. **Phone:** 586-3013; Fax:
586-3052; E-mail:
[personnel@crch.hawaii.edu](mailto:personnel@crch.hawaii.edu).

**ASSISTANT OR ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY & HEALTH (OSH):** UH
at Hilo, College of Arts and Sciences, position number 86451T, federal funds,
full-time, 11-month type appointment, temporary, to begin approximately
01/2002 and end 06/30/2002, pending position clearance and funding.
**Duties:** Train non-OSH Psychology faculty in the basics of OSH, help
develop an undergraduate minor and courses in OSH. Teach undergraduate
courses, including: Intro to OSH, Principles of Industrial Hygiene and
Toxicology and an Internship **. Minimum Qualifications:** For assistant
professor: OSH related PhD with some OSH experience (teaching or practice) or
CIH with OSH teaching experience. For associate professor: In addition to the
qualifications of the Assistant, at least five years of full-time college or
university teaching in the rank of assistant professor or higher. **Desirable
Qualifications:** OSH practice and OSH undergraduate teaching experience. CIH
also desirable. **Applications:** Submit resume, letter of application and the
names and telephone numbers of three references to: JP Michaud, Department of
Chemistry, College of Arts and Sciences, University of Hawai`i, 200 W. Kawili
St., Hilo, HI 96720-4091. **Inquiries:** (808) 974-7320; FAX: (808) 974-7693;
e-mail: [jonpierr@hawaii.edu](mailto:jonpierr@hawaii.edu) **. Application
Deadline:** First review of applications will begin 01/02/2002 and continue
until the position is filled.

**JUNIOR RESEARCHER,** R2, Position No. 86634T, Pacific Biomedical Research
Center, Kewalo Marine Laboratory, temporary, to begin 01/2002 for one year,
full-time, federal funds, renewal dependent upon availability of funds.
**Duties:** To investigate how the luminous bacterium Vibrio fischeri
colonizes the epithelial cells of the squid light organ. Research projects
include identification and examination of host-induced swelling of host
epithelium. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's in biological sciences, with
appropriate research experience in both laboratory and field studies with an
emphasis on experimental design, molecular methods, and data analysis.
Computer skills are expected. Experience with bacterial molecular genetics or
protein biochemistry is required. **Desirable Qualifications:** PhD in
biological sciences. **Minimum Annual Salary:** $33,312. **To Apply:** E-mail
resume and the names and e-mail addresses of three references to Edward Ruby
at [eruby@hawaii.edu](mailto:eruby@hawaii.edu). **Closing Date:** 01/02/2002.

**LECTURER** , UH Manoa, Department of Natural Resources and Environmental
Management; spring 2002, part-time, non-tenurial, contingent upon student
enrollment at registration and availability of funding. **Duties** : Teach the
3-credit graduate course AREC 637, Resource Economics, cross-listed as ECON
637. Prepare course syllabus, conduct lectures and interactive discussions,
and evaluate student performance. Identify and collaborate with other faculty
and resource persons who may also contribute to the course. Hold office hours
of at least two hours per week outside of class time. **Minimum
Qualifications** : Earned doctorate in agricultural and resource economics,
economics or closely related discipline with research experience in resource
economics. **Desirable Qualifications** : Experience with analyzing problems
of development and management of natural resources. **Pay Range** : $1,030 to
$1,447 per credit hour depending on academic degree and teaching experience.
**To Apply** : Send letter of application, curriculum vitae and names and
phone numbers of three work-related references to S. A. El-Swaify, Chair,
Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Management, 1910 East-West
Road, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date** : 01/02/02. **Inquiries** : (808)
956-8708.

**JUNIOR ENTOMOLOGIST** , R2, Position #85515T, College of Tropical
Agriculture and Human Resources, Department of Plant and Environmental
Protection Sciences, full-time, grant funds, to begin approximately 02/2002
for one year, renewal dependent upon satisfactory performance and availability
of funds. **Duties** : Conduct field and laboratory experiments addressing
searching behavior and parasitism efficacy in parasitoids of _Liriomyza_ spp.
on different host plants. Develop guidelines for classical and augmentative
biological control incorporating behavioral data. Statistical analysis of data
and publication of results in peer-reviewed journals. **Minimum
Qualifications** : PhD in entomology or related field; evidence of successful
completion of research projects by publication in peer-reviewed journals.
Ability to independently conduct field and laboratory work on parasitoid
insects. Knowledge of statistics and experimental design. Driver's license.
**Desirable Qualifications:** Research experience with parasitoids and insect
behavioral studies. Understanding of IPM practices. **Pay Range:** R2,
$2,776/month. **To Apply** : Send application letter, resume, reprints, and
three letters of reference to Mark G. Wright, Department of Plant and
Environmental protection Sciences, University of Hawai`i at Manoa, 3050 Maile
Way Rm. 310, Honolulu HI 96822. **Closing Date:** 01/15. **Inquiries** : Phone
(808)956-7670; FAX (808)956-2428; e-mail
[markwrig@hawaii.edu](mailto:markwrig@hawaii.edu)

**JUNIOR ENTOMOLOGIST** , Position #85117T; College of Tropical Agriculture
and Human Resources, Department of Plant and Environmental Protection
Sciences, full-time, non-tenure, grant funds, to begin approximately 01/2002
for one year, renewal depending on availability of funds. **Duties** : Carry
out research on the ecology and management of subterranean and drywood
termites in Hawai`i. Design, implement and analyze laboratory and field
studies of chemical and non-chemical termite control methods, and conduct
field surveys to determine the distribution of various termite species in
Hawai`i. **Minimum Qualifications** : PhD in entomology or closely related
field; proven ability to work independently, including preparing reports and
publishing results; computer literacy; valid driver's license; ability to
conduct field research, including air travel to other islands, lifting heavy
equipment, hiking through rough areas, and working in attics and crawl spaces
of buildings. **Desirable Qualifications:** Research experience with termites,
including experience in identification of species. **Pay Range:** R2,
$2,776/month. **To Apply** : Send letter of application, resume, contact
information for three references, and arrange to have college transcripts sent
to J.K. Grace, Dept. of Plant and Environmental protection Sciences,
University of Hawai`i at Manoa, 3050 Maile Way Rm. 310, Honolulu Hi 96822.
**Closing Date:** 01/02/02. **Inquiries** : Phone (808) 956-6744.

**ASSOCIATE SPECIALIST (Associate Director -Sea Grant College Program);**
Position No.87923; Sea Grant College Program, full-time, permanent, non-tenure
track, general funds, to begin approximately 03/2002. **Duties:** Serve as the
associate director of the University of Hawai`i Sea Grant College Program
(UHSGCP). Provides assistance to the Director of the Program in the daily
administration of the Program and assists the director with the development,
implementation, and evaluation of the Program. Oversees the development and
preparation of the core UHSGCP Institutional Proposal and works with
scientists, educators, and advisory staff to develop a proposal that will
address the problems and needs of the state in conjunction with the mission of
the UHSGCP. Participate and coordinate the federal Program Assessment Team
(PAT) evaluation process. Manage and/or serve as Principal Investigator on
various projects. Provide administrative oversight of the Sea Grant College
Program. Serve as acting director in the absence of the UHSGCP Director.
Conducts an on-going program of evaluation of core and non-core projects and
programs as assigned by the director. **Minimum Qualifications:** PhD in
marine science or field related to the research and/or educational objectives
of the UHSGCP; ability to write and speak effectively; demonstrated record of
research and teaching excellence; experience in academic personnel
coordination and management; ability to interact and work effectively and
sensitively with administrators and researchers in universities, state and
federal agencies; ability to assess, promote and develop research over a broad
spectrum of marine disciplines and to convey the value of research findings
for needed public education and technology transfer **. Desirable
Qualifications:** Experience in administration of a Sea Grant program.
Knowledge of the Sea Grant grants and proposal process **. Pay Range:** S4,
$51,264/year minimum. **To Apply:** Submit a letter of application, current
C.V. and contact information of at least three professional references to
Wesley Kau, Administrative Officer, 2525 Correa Road, HIG 236, Honolulu, HI
96822. Recruitment will be continuous until the position is filled. For full
consideration, applications should be submitted by 02/10/2002. **Inquiries:**
E. Gordon Grau, (808) 956- 7031.

**LIBRARIAN II,** Position No. 84208, Head, Access Services, University of
Hawai`i Library, full-time, tenure track, general funds, available 01/2002.
**Responsibilities:** Under general direction of the Public Services Division
Head, provide leadership and management of operational aspects of circulation,
book stacks, business humanities and social sciences current periodical
stacks, Microform Reading Room, and Interlibrary Loan/Document Delivery;
planning, coordination, developing, interpreting and implementing system-wide
policies and procedures pertaining to Access Services. Access Services
consists of 15 full-time staff and approximately 85 student assistants.
Represent the library in local, state and national consortia related to access
services. **Minimum Qualifications:** ALA accredited MLS or international
equivalent. Minimum of three years of increasingly responsible and successful
managerial experience, preferably in an academic library. **Desired
Qualifications:** Experience: 1) managing Circulation Services in an academic
library; 2) in stack management; 3) working with an automated circulation
system; 4) with evaluation and assessment of services and programs; 5) in
developing and implementing policies, procedures and services pertaining to
access services. Knowledge of: 1) interlibrary loan and document delivery
operations; 2) consortial borrowing and lending programs; 3) course reserves
operations in an academic library. Demonstrated: 1) mastery of technical
skills and knowledge of technologies for document requesting and delivery; 2)
knowledge of planning. Ability to: 1) communicate logically, clearly and
effectively in oral and written form; 2) work independently; 3) develop and
maintain effective working relationships with faculty, students and staff; 4)
provide other public services activities such as reference, instruction and
consulting as appropriate. Strong customer service orientation **. Salary
Range:** $33,312-$49,296. **To Apply:** Submit letter of application which
addresses the minimum and desired qualifications, resume and names of three
references to Personnel Officer, University of Hawai`i Library, 2550 McCarthy
Mall, Honolulu, HI 96822. Interviewees will be expected to make a presentation
to library faculty and staff as part of the screening process. **Inquiries:**
956-7207. **Closing Date:** 01/09/2002.

**LIBRARIAN II,** Position No. 86310T, Systems, Hamilton Library, full-time,
temporary, Special funds, available 01/2002 through 12/2002, possibility of
extension pending availability of funds and needs of department.
**Responsibilities:** Under general direction of the Head of Systems, provide
support for the development, maintenance and operation of the Library
Management System (LMS) application software. Analyze and determine source of
problems with the LMS. Work with librarians and staff to develop functional
specifications for new products and enhancements to existing code and staff
workflows. Perform quality assurance testing on all new products and releases.
Develop documentation and conduct training for staff. These activities support
UH system-wide campus libraries and also encompass support to the Hawai`i
Medical Library, the Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum, and the Hawai`i State
Archives. The successful candidate will work with a team of systems librarians
and Information Technology Specialists. **Minimum Qualifications:** ALA
accredited MLS or international equivalent. Previous experience using an
automated system. **Desired Qualifications:** Ability to translate technical
concepts into terms understandable by library support staff. Outstanding
interpersonal skills. Excellent communication skills including writing skills.
Able and willing to work early morning or evening hours, weekends and/or
holidays as scheduled. One-year library experience, preferably in an academic
research library. Knowledge and experience with USMARC. Knowledge and
experience with client server architecture and/or PC architecture.
Demonstrated aptitude for learning new technologies, and a commitment to
library service. **Salary Range:** $33,312-$49,296. **To Apply:** Submit
letter of application, which addresses the minimum and desired qualifications,
resume and names of three references to Personnel Officer, University of
Hawai`i Library, 2550 McCarthy Mall, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Inquiries:**
956-7207. **Closing Date:** 01/092002.

**INSTRUCTOR CC, (Coordinator),** Position No. 88011T, Honolulu CC, full-time,
temporary, 11-month, non-tenurial, federal funds, to begin approximately
01/2002 to 07/31/2002, possible renewal, pending position clearance and
availability of funds. **Duties:** Under the general supervision of the dean
of Student Services, the instructor (coordinator) will provide
educational/vocational advising and personal support and special credit and
noncredit offerings to Native Hawaiian potential Vocational Education high
school students; market and recruit high school students; develop vocational
and career service components for the students; assist in academic
advising/planning and provision of support services; assist in application for
financial aid as appropriate; provide liaison with faculty, Learning Resource
Center, Career Center; coordinate the HCC Summer Program for Native Hawaiian
students interested in vocational education; serve as resource to faculty who
participate in project; provide information to the community, high
schools/agencies about the college, its programs and the support services of
this project; and perform other related work as assigned. Related work
activities include, but are not limited to, participating in faculty and
administrative committees, community service and in-service training;
maintaining an approved program of professional self-improvement; collecting
data and preparing reports; assisting in the planning, implementing, revising,
monitoring the budget and improving of programs and services under the Student
Services Division, including division objectives and program targets;
independently planning, organizing, and carrying out instructional and non-
instructional assignments. Possible evening, weekend and off-campus
assignments. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's in any field or discipline
offered at the college OR bachelor's degree in any field or discipline offered
at the college plus three years related work experience. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Experience working with Native Hawaiian students, minority
students; experience and knowledge of minority students; knowledge career/life
counseling or vocational guidance in educational institutions; demonstrated
ability to adapt to change and handle varied assignments. **Pay Range:** C2A;
minimum $3,315.75/month. **To Apply:** Send community college application for
faculty or executive managerial positions (CC Personnel Form 27A) and
transcript(s) verifying minimum educational qualifications (official or copy)
to the Dean of Student Services, Honolulu CC, 874 Dillingham Blvd., Honolulu,
HI, 96817. An incomplete or late application will not be considered.
Additional documentation such as a letter of application describing how the
applicant meets the minimum and desirable qualifications in relation to stated
duties is welcome. Materials submitted will not be returned. If selected for
the position, appointment is contingent upon verification of all minimum
qualifications and any additional qualifications used to justify an above
minimum salary, including official transcript(s), license(s), certificate(s)
and work experience documentation. All minimum qualifications must be met by
effective date of hire. **Closing Date:** 01/02/2002. **Inquiries:** 845-9141.

**LECTURERS,** Windward CC, Spring 2002, part-time, for lecturer applicant
pool. Non-tenurial, pending availability of funds and actual staffing
requirements. May be for Windward CC day, evening or weekend offerings.
**Duties:** Teach assigned courses in the discipline; maintain minimum of one
office hour per week for each course taught; prepare course syllabus and
reports related to teaching and student progress; work under supervision of
department chair in integrating teaching efforts with other instructors in the
discipline area. Duties and responsibilities may include work with multimedia
presentations and distance education instruction. **Minimum Qualifications:**
As listed below. All minimum qualifications must be met by the effective date
of appointment. **Agriculture:** Master's in agriculture, or bachelor's in
agriculture and three years related work experience. **Anthropology:**
Master's in anthropology. **Astronomy:** Master's in astronomy. **Botany:**
Master's in botany. **Chemistry:** Master's in chemistry. **Geography:**
Master's in geography. **Hawaiian Language/Culture:** Functionally native oral
and written fluency in Hawaiian language, the ability to communicate in
English and one of the following: a) Master's in Hawaiian (language or
literature); or b) Master's in Hawaiian as a Second Language; or c) Master's
in the study of the culture or history of the people who speak Hawaiian; or d)
Master's in linguistics, ESL, education or another language. At least 12
credits of advanced course work in second language methodology, Hawaiian
literature, Hawaiian culture or any combination thereof; or e) Bachelor's in
Hawaiian (language or literature) as a Second Language and three years related
work experience; or g) Bachelor's in the study of the culture or history of
the people who speak Hawaiian and three years related work experience; or h)
Bachelor's in linguistics, ESL, education or another language. At least 12
credits of advanced course work in second language methodology, Hawaiian
literature, Hawaiian culture or any combination thereof, and three years
related work experience. **History:** Master's in history. **Mathematics:**
Master's in mathematics. **Microbiology:** Master's in microbiology.
**Philosophy:** Master's in philosophy. **Physics:** Master's in physics.
**Religion:** Master's in religion. **Desirable Qualifications For All
Positions Listed:** Teaching experience at community college level.
Demonstrated ability to work with adult learner. Familiarity with competency-
based instruction and behavioral objectives. Demonstrated ability to
communicate effectively; ability to develop curriculum. **Surf Science,
Culture and Technology:** Master's in oceanography or other physical science
with course work in physical oceanography and at least three years experience
in the professional surfing industry, including experience in surfboard
design, manufacture and repair, competitive surfing, organizing surfing
competition events, surf forecasting and operating a business involved in the
surfing industry. **Desirable Qualifications:** Familiarity with the people
and places of importance to surfing in the Hawaiian Islands as well as around
the world. Knowledge of the Hawaiian culture, including Hawaiian religion and
language. Knowledge of the history of surfing and its importance in pre-
contact and post-contact Hawaiian culture. Certification and experience in
lifeguard, water safety, first aid and CPR. Teaching experience at the
community college level, especially in areas relevant to surfing. Demonstrated
ability to work with adult learners. Demonstrated ability to communicate
effectively. Ability to swim 500 yards and tread water for at least 30 minutes
in the open ocean. Familiarity with competency-based instruction and
behavioral objectives. Experience in curriculum development. **Pay Range:**
$1,030 per credit hour minimum. **To apply:** Submit the following to the Dean
of Instruction, Windward Community College, 45-720 Kea`ahala Road, Kane`ohe,
HI 96744: 1) Faculty or Executive/Managerial application form (CC Form 27A,
available at
[www.hawaii.edu/ohr/bor/forms/uh27.pdf](http://www.hawaii.edu/ohr/bor/forms/uh27.pdf)),
and 2) graduate and undergraduate transcript(s) showing degrees and course
work appropriate to the position (transcript copies are acceptable; however,
official transcripts will be required at the time of hire), 3) Two letters of
recommendation. Separate documents and application materials must be submitted
for each position. Original signature required on application. Submitted
documents become property of the college. Failure to submit all required
documents shall deem an application to be incomplete. **Closing Date:**
Continuous recruitment until needs are met. **Inquiries:** 235-7421.

**INSTRUCTOR, Librarian,** Position No. 082766, Leeward CC, 11-month,
tenurial, general funds, beginning 02/02, pending position clearance,
availability of funds, and actual staffing requirements. For Leeward CC day,
evening or weekend on-and off-campus. **Duties:** Under the supervision of the
Head Librarian, develop and assess programs, reference and instructional
services, and collections to meet curricular and research needs of students
and faculty in the sciences at the academic level. Provides reference service,
library orientation, and innovative instruction in the effective use of print
and electronic resources, including the online catalog, electronic databases,
CD ROM, the Internet and new developments for the sciences. Consults and works
as the library liaison to the math and science division working closely with
faculty to develop the library's collections and services. Maintains and
provides leadership in incorporating new technologies into instruction and
services. Develops and maintains library Web pages that supports the
curriculum. Coordinates library support for distance learners; understands and
maintains awareness of developments in information technology and potentials
for innovative library services for distance learning; works with students,
faculty and other libraries engaged in distance learning activities. Provides
assistance to the Systems Librarian in library system support. Participates in
evening/weekend duties; and other duties as assigned. Related activities
include but are not limited to participation in library grant proposals,
college and community service and maintaining an approved program of
professional improvement. May include instructional assignments involving
distance education. **Minimum Qualifications** : Master's degree in library
studies from an ALA accredited institution. Minimum qualifications must be met
by the effective date of appointment. **Desirable Qualifications:** Academic
background in the sciences and experience in collection development for the
sciences. Knowledge of science collections, bibliographic tools and research
strategies for science information. Knowledge of science collections,
bibliographic tools and research strategies for science information. Knowledge
of emerging technologies to deliver electronic reference services; ability to
adapt to, evaluate and use emerging information technologies with all students
and programs. Experience in Web design and construction, and understanding of
basic and advanced Web technology and applications. Evidence of experience in
working closely with faculty and students. Experience in planning and managing
projects, and creative problem solving. Possess effective written and oral
communication skills, exceptional interpersonal skills, initiative and team
motivation. Experience and knowledge of working with distance learning
students, faculty and library services for them. **Pay Range:** C2-1A; minimum
$3,315.75/month. **To Apply:** Submit to Human Resources Office, Leeward CC,
96-045 Ala Ike, Pearl City, HI 96782: 1) Faculty or Executive/Managerial (CC
Personnel Form 27A) application form
([www.hawaii.edu/News/job.vacancies.html](http://www.hawaii.edu/News/job.vacancies.html)),
2) graduate and undergraduate transcript(s) showing degrees and course work to
date appropriate to the position (transcript copies are acceptable; however,
official transcripts will be required at the time of hire), 3) a brief one-
page statement outlining how you meet the minimum and desirable
qualifications, 4) three letters of recommendation (optional) attesting to job
performance and personal character, and 5) resume (optional). Separate
documents and application materials must be submitted for each position.
Original signature required on application. All requested
documents/information must be postmarked by the closing date and become the
property of the college. Failure to submit all required documents shall deem
an application to be incomplete. **Closing Date:** 01/02/2002. **Inquiries:**
455-0326.

**FULL/ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR, Limited-Term Director,** Position No. 85448,
Center for Pacific Islands Studies (CPIS), School of Hawaiian, Asian and
Pacific Studies. Full-time, tenurable, general funds, begin 08/01/2002. We
seek a dynamic, visionary leader who can help guide the Center for Pacific
Islands Studies in new directions, while continuing the center's strong record
in publication, extramural grants, graduate education, and outreach. In
particular, the center would like to explore establishing a PhD program in
Pacific Islands studies; incorporate new technologies in outreach,
publications, and instruction; engage with Pacific Islander communities in
Hawai`i; expand undergraduate offerings; and join with other Pacific studies
programs to share resources and engage in collaborative teaching and
curricular projects. The successful applicant will have the ability to make
Pacific cultural sensibilities, knowledge and epistemologies a central part of
the center's activities, and be able to work collaboratively with diverse
groups in the university and in the community, including an advisory
committee. As director of the only U.S. Department of Education National
Resource Center for Pacific Islands studies, she/he will also give evidence of
the ability to direct an interdisciplinary academic program and represent the
center in a wide variety of international and national settings including
interactions with government funding agencies. **Duties:** The term of
director (on duty 11 months) is 3-6 years, after which the director returns to
senior faculty service (on duty nine months). A faculty member has a minimum
instructional load of four courses per year, is on duty for nine months, is
expected to have an active record in research/publication, strong
instructional skills, and a willingness to provide service to the institution
and academic community. Because the director is responsible for the
administration of the center's academic, research and training programs as
well as oversight of faculty, she/he has a reduced instructional load of two
courses per year and is on duty 11 months with additional compensation for
those two months of additional work. **Minimum Qualifications:** PhD in social
sciences, humanities or related field, with emphasis on Pacific Islands
studies. Extensive knowledge of the region and research experience in the
Pacific outside Hawai`i. Demonstrated strength in interdisciplinary teaching.
National and international scholarly recognition and achievements in the
field. Evidence of innovative and collaborative leadership. Demonstrated
strengths in the personnel, planning, and fiscal functions required of a
department chair. Full professor: four years of full-time college or
university teaching at the rank of associate professor or equivalent.
Associate professor: four years of full-time college or university teaching at
the rank of assistant professor or equivalent. **Desirable Qualifications:**
Experience in securing and administering extramural grants. Experience in
academic program development. Ability to speak one or more indigenous
languages of the Pacific. Salary: Salary is commensurate with qualifications
and experience. **To Apply:** Submit a letter of interest addressing the
fulfillment of the minimum and any additional qualifications, a curriculum
vitae, and the names, addresses, telephone and e-mail addresses of three
references to Willa Tanabe, Dean, School of Hawaiian, Asian and Pacific
Studies, 1890 East-West Road, Moore Hall 309, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing
Date:** 02/15/2002. **Inquiries:** Willa Tanabe (808) 956-8922, e-mail:
[wjtanabe@hawaii.edu](mailto:wjtanabe@hawaii.edu).

Administrative, Professional and Technical (APT) Positions

Cancellation of ad that appeared in _Ku Lama_ on 11/16

**UH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SPECIALIST** ; Position No. 77108T; College of
Engineering, Department of Civil Engineering, Hawai`i Local Technical
Assistance Program (HLTAP); 100% FTE, temporary, federal funds, to begin
approximately 01/02/2002. Renewal is dependent upon extension of project and
availability of funds. **Duties:** Maintains, troubleshoots and ensures
consistency of LAN, servers and applications. Creates custom applications for
managing and archiving mailing lists, workshop attendance and transportation
library materials. Assists in maintaining transportation based mailing lists
to be used for newsletter mailings, announcements of workshops and training
sessions. Designs, creates and implements all aspects of a professional Web
site dedicated to serving HLTAP clients and local transportation community.
**Minimum Qualifications:** Bachelor's degree in computer science. Working
knowledge of Java, SQL, Visual Basic, HTML, ASP, UNIX, MS Office especially
Access, Adobe Acrobat, image manipulation programs and Windows 2000
Professional and Server including Active Directory. Knowledge of computer
hardware and peripherals from a variety of manufactures to be used in
maintaining, troubleshooting and advising new equipment purchases. Experience
in planning, organizing and coordinating technical workshops, conferences and
training sessions; or any equivalent combination of education and experience
which provides the following knowledge of ability and skills: Coordination of
technical workshop as it relates to meeting, training and technology transfer
needs of transportation agencies. Ability to establish and maintain rapport
with funding agencies, local organizations and the public served. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Knowledge and experience in database design, development of
forms, creating Web sites and PowerPoint presentations, bandwidth limitations
and training non-expertise people. Also the ability to understand and apply
network protocols such as TCP/IP, HTTP, LDAP, SMTP, POP3 and IMAP toward
custom solutions. **Pay Range:** PBA minimum $2,583/month. **To Apply:** Send
completed APT application form (UH Form 64,
[www.hawaii.edu/ohr/docs/forms/](http://www.hawaii.edu/ohr/docs/forms/),
resume, cover letter with narrative of your qualifications for the position,
and the names, phone numbers and e-mail addresses of three work- related
references to: Program Manager, Hawai`i Local Technical Assistance Program,
2540 Dole Street, Holmes 200, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date:** 12/04.
**Inquiries:** (808) 956-9006.

**UH ADMINISTRATIVE & FISCAL SUPPORT SPECIALIST**; Position no. 80905; Office
of the President; full-time; general funds; to begin approximately 01/16/2002.
**Duties:** Provides various administrative and fiscal support services for
the Office of the President; coordinates and initiates procurement and
disbursement requirements; researches purchases and obtains and evaluates
quotations; provides advice on procurement regulations and procedures;
maintains inventory control of office; ensures expenditures are within the
allocated program budget; assists in performing special assignments and
projects; and performs other duties as required. **Minimum Qualifications:**
Graduation from an accredited four-year college or university with some course
work in accounting or business administration; or any equivalent combination
of experience and training which provides the following knowledge, abilities
and skills: some knowledge of practices and techniques of modern business
management; ability to understand and follow complex oral and written
instructions, to communicate orally and by preparation of written reports, to
prepare and maintain comprehensive records, to work weekends, holidays and
nights beyond normal working hours, and to analyze, interpret and use sound
logic and judgement and critical thinking skills in the application of a
variety of financial/administrative rules and regulations. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Knowledge of university policies and procedures and
university accounting systems; knowledge and experience with word processing,
spreadsheets and database management. **Pay Range:** P01; $2,385/month. **To
Apply:** Submit a completed APT Application for Employment (UH Form 64), cover
letter and the names and contact information of three professional references
to the University of Hawai`i, Office of the President, 2444 Dole Street,
Bachman 202, Honolulu, HI 96822 Attn: Jean Imada, Administrative Assistant to
the President. **Closing Date:** 01/02/2002. **Inquiries:** 956-5280.

**UH STUDENT SERVICES SPECIALIST III (Recruitment/Outreach):** UH at Hilo,
#81028T, University Relations, full-time, general funds, temporary, to begin
approximately 01/2002 and end 06/30/2002, with extension pending position
clearance and availability of funds. **Duties:** Under the general direction
of the director, this position is responsible for directing the recruitment
and outreach programs for UH at Hilo. Directs recruitment/outreach programs
for UH at Hilo with collaborative efforts with the College of Arts and
Sciences, College of Agriculture, Forestry and Natural Resource Management,
and Ka Haka Ula O Keelikolani. Provides enrollment services and student
academic support. Plans, develops and coordinates programs focusing on
developing and improving relationships and linkages with community colleges,
high schools, middle schools and community entities. Implements university
policies governing admissions, financial aid and academic requirements.
Supervises professional, clerical and student workers **. Minimum
Qualifications:** Graduation from an accredited four-year college or
university with major course work in educational counseling, social sciences
or related field and four-years progressively responsible professional
experience working with students and student groups as it relates to the
recruitment of students for higher education; or any equivalent combination of
experience and training which provides the following knowledge, skills and
abilities: thorough knowledge of the methods, practices and procedures in the
development of programs for student recruitment and for business and community
outreach; thorough knowledge of the policies and regulations as applied to the
recruitment of students and outreach initiatives typical of an institution of
higher education; considerable knowledge of the programs and organizations,
their purposes and functions typical of an institution of higher education;
considerable knowledge of the methods, materials, practices and techniques
involved in developing and directing a campus recruitment and outreach
program, researching and analyzing recruitment trends, developing recruitment
and outreach strategies and initiatives, and assessing potential local,
national and international target markets; considerable knowledge of the
methods, practices and procedures of student admission, advising,
registration, records, counseling and other applicable student services areas;
ability to cooperate with and establish and maintain effective working
relationships with executives, academic and nonacademic administration,
faculty, staff, students and business and community groups; ability to
communicate effectively both orally and in writing with various local,
national and international audiences including administrators, parents and
prospective students for purposes of conducting presentations to public
audiences and meeting individuals and small groups; ability to initiate,
direct and manage recruitment, outreach and community initiatives, activities
and events; ability to plan, develop and supervise the work of assigned
personnel; ability to work outside normal scheduled work hours including
evenings, weekends and holidays as directed; and the ability to travel off
island, including neighbor islands, mainland and foreign countries, several
times a year for up to approximately two-week periods for purposes including
college fairs, visitations and presentations. **Desirable Qualifications:**
Experience in college recruitment, outreach and marketing; experience in
generating budgets and monitoring expenses; knowledge of computerized student
information systems. **Pay Range:** P09 with a minimum of $3,277/month.
**Applications:** Submit letter addressing how minimum and desirable
qualifications are met, APT application (UH Form 64), r esume, three current
letters of recommendation and official transcripts to: Yu Yok Pearring,
Director of Marketing, University of Hawai`i at Hilo, 200 W. Kawili St., Hilo,
HI 96720-4091. **Inquiries:** (808) 974-7501. **Application Deadline:**
Postmarked no later than 01/02/2002.

**UH EDUCATIONAL SPECIALIST I,** Position No. 81309T, Honolulu CC, .75 FTE,
possibility of conversion to full-time, 11-months, general funds, temporary,
to begin approximately 01/2002 to 06/30/2002, possible renewal, pending
position clearance and availability of funds. **Duties:** Provide support for
international students by developing materials and providing individualized
and small group instruction, tutoring in ESL or remedial English, assisting in
securing housing and health insurance, facilitating acculturation of
international students on campus and in the community, maintaining up-to-date
knowledge and records of U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service policies
and procedures, and registering and preparing forms for visa applications for
noncredit students/clients; assist in developing brochures, flyers, and other
marketing materials and gathering and maintaining current information about
college programs and services; develop and maintain a Web site for
international students, maintain the program's inventory of computers,
equipment and software; and perform other related duties as assigned.
**Minimum Qualifications:** Graduation from an accredited four-year college or
university with major course work in international studies, ESL or
communication. Knowledge of the principles and practices in providing
individualized and small group instruction and development of learning skills.
Knowledge of the methods, materials, procedures and techniques utilized in
providing individualized and small group instruction and development of
learning skills. Ability to provide individualized and small group instruction
in the development of learning skills to be successful in college. Ability to
tutor ESL or remedial English. Ability to understand and follow complex oral
and written instructions. Or, any equivalent combination of education and/or
experience. **Desirable Qualifications:** Experience in working with
international students and clients in a college setting. Knowledge of student
visa regulations. Ability to develop and maintain documents for the World Wide
Web. Ability to troubleshoot and maintain PC computers, including the
installation and troubleshooting of PC hardware and software. Experience
providing individualized and small group instruction in the development of
learning skills to be successful in college. Experience in marketing and
promotion. **Pay Range:** P03, minimum $1,937.25/month. **To Apply:** Send APT
Application for Employment (UH Form 64) and transcript(s) verifying minimum
educational qualifications (official or copy) to International Affairs and
Development, Office of the Provost, Honolulu Community College, 874 Dillingham
Blvd., Honolulu, HI 96817. An incomplete or late application will not be
considered. Materials submitted will not be returned. If selected for the
position, appointment is contingent upon verification of all minimum
qualifications, including official transcript(s), license(s), certificate(s)
and work experience documentation. Minimum qualifications must be met by the
closing date. **Closing Date:** 01/02/02. **Inquiries:** 845-9141.

**UH EDUCATIONAL SPECIALIST II,** Pos. Nos. 81559 and 81476, Honolulu CC,
full-time, general funds, to begin approx. 01/02, pending position clearance
and availability of funds. **Duties:** Identify and implement equipment,
parts, materials, manuals, technical information, tooling, audio-visuals,
teaching aids, software, supplies, etc. purchases for the Aeronautics
Maintenance Technology program using specialized knowledge of FAA approved
Part 147 program requirements, the aviation maintenance technology industry,
and the State of Hawai`i purchasing system; research/make recommendations on
availability of commercially developed aviation systems teaching aids or the
parts/supplies needed to construct in-house developed aviation maintenance
training teaching aids; organize, receive, verify, and inventory equipment,
parts, materials, teaching aids, software, etc.; maintain and/or schedule
servicing of equipment; develop minimum competencies and performance
objectives in proper use of aviation tools and equipment; supervise student
projects; provide one-to-one instruction during lab sessions; in consultation
with faculty develop/implement training plans to train students in the proper
use and maintenance of aircraft tools; develop lab activities; participate in
curriculum development; serve as program's environmental and safety
representative; coordinate scheduling of program facilities. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Graduation from an accredited four-year college or
university with course work in aeronautics maintenance technology or aviation
related fields, two years of progressively responsible professional experience
in aeronautics maintenance, and a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
Airframe and Power Plant License.

