![POSITION VACANCIES](/News/kulama/images/position.vacancies.gif)  
[Professional vacancies archive](/news/job.vacancies.html)

The University of Hawai`i is an equal opportunity/affirmative action
institution. All qualified applicants will be considered, regardless of race,
sex, age, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, disability, marital
status, arrest and court record, sexual orientation or status as a disabled
veteran or veteran of the Vietnam era. Women, members of minority groups,
veterans and persons with disabilities are encouraged to apply. (Persons with
hearing disabilities may call 1-711 or 643-8833.) Applicants with hearing or
speech impairments may use the TDD relay service by calling 1-711.

Employment is contingent on satisfying employment eligibility verification
requirements of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986. Appointments
to positions are subject to statutory residency requirements, campus
recruitment guidelines and the collective bargaining agreement. APT applicants
with re-employment rights or priority status are responsible for informing the
recruiting unit, which will verify eligibility with the employing unit as
provided by the BU 08 contract.

Official transcripts must have the official seal of and be mailed directly
from the degree-granting institution to the address indicated.

Civil Service vacancy announcements are available for viewing at the Office of
Human Resources, Post Office Building, UHM campus, Monday-Friday, 7:45
a.m.-4:30 p.m. and via the OHR home page at
[www.hawaii.edu/dhmr/ohr/](http://www.hawaii.edu/dhmr/ohr/#EMPLOYMENT).

* * *

Faculty Positions

**ASSISTANT RESEARCHER** , #86065T, Hawai`i Natural Energy Institute, SOEST,
full-time, 11-month, non-tenure track, federal funds, to begin approximately
05/01. **Duties:** Participates in research to develop novel thin films and
devices for energy conversion and imaging applications. Responsible for
deposition of semiconductor thin films and devices; characterization of
optical, electrical and structural properties of thin films; and the design,
modeling, and testing of photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical devices.
Assists in supervising and directing activities of subordinates. Prepares
project summaries, reports and renewal proposals. Presents results of research
in archival publications and at scientific conferences. Writes research
proposals to develop independent research in related areas. Supervises and
evaluates students, post-doctoral fellows and technicians as required.
Performs related duties as required. **Minimum Qualifications:** PhD in
physics, engineering, materials science, or related field. Proven research
experience as demonstrated by publication of research results in peer-reviewed
and archival scientific journals and technical reports. Demonstrated
proficiency in planning and conducting experiments, analyzing experimental
results, and in preparing technical reports and summaries. Good oral and
written communication skills. Ability to pursue independent research projects
and write research proposals as appropriate. **Desirable Qualifications:**
Practical experience in the deposition of amorphous silicon alloy films and
devices and experience in the design and use of instrumentation to
characterize transient phenomena in films. Familiarity with LabView. **Minimum
Annual Salary:** $57,672 or commensurate with experience. **To Apply:** Submit
statement of research interest, curriculum vitae, and the names and phone
numbers of three work-related references to Personnel Officer, Hawai`i Natural
Energy Institute, 2540 Dole Street, Holmes 246, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing
Date:** Must be postmarked by 04/22/02. **Inquiries:** Dr. Richard Rocheleau
at (808) 956-8346.

**INSTRUCTOR IN CLASSICS** (Position #82603): Half-time, non-tenure track
position, for Fall 2002 and Spring 2003 semesters, renewable depending on
position availability and funding. **Minimum Qualifications:** MA in Classics,
with expertise in ancient Greek and classical Latin; experience in teaching
lower-division classical language courses at the college or university level,
with evidence of excellent student evaluations. **Desirable Qualifications:**
Extensive background in Greek and Latin classical literary texts (prose and
poetry), as well as familiarity and experience with the methodology developed
for teaching classical languages at UH. **Duties:** Teaching first-year and
second-year courses in ancient Greek and classical Latin under the appropriate
supervision; meeting with students individually and in small groups for
tutorial and review purposes; participating in grading sessions at regular
intervals with other members of the Classics faculty; other assigned duties as
appropriate. **Minimum Monthly Salary:** $1,257. **To Apply:** Send letter of
application, resume, and the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of three
references to Dr. Robert J. Ball, Chair of the Classics Division, Department
of Languages and Literatures of Europe and the Americas, University of Hawai`i
at Manoa, 1890 East-West Road, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Inquiries:** Telephone
=(808) 956-4164; E-mail = [rball@hawaii.edu](mailto:rball@hawaii.edu).
**Closing Date:** 04/22/02.

**JUNIOR SPECIALIST,** S2-1 Position #86478T , College of Education, Center on
Disability Studies, (Real Choices Access Project) 11-month full-time, non-
tenurable, temporary position beginning approximately 04/01/02. **Duties:** To
plan, develop, coordinate, and carry out training and material development
activities, including; working with project work groups to ascertain training
needs, develop training materials, train others to deliver training, and
conduct actual training sessions (materials and training focused upon the
access and use of a Web-based single point of entry-SEP); developing
collaborative linkages within and across numerous partners, gathering
grassroots input on barriers and solutions; and working with faculty and
staff, and contractors to document and evaluate training processes and
outcomes. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree in communications,
technology, education, psychology, disability studies or closely related
field; experience working within collaborative university faculty teams;
excellent oral and written communication skills; and computer-based production
skills and distribution techniques. **Desirable Qualifications:** Experience
working with interdisciplinary/interagency groups, such as Health and Human
Service agencies and Centers for Independent Living; and Asian and persons
aging and with disabilities in multicultural settings. **Minimum Annual
Salary:** $33,312 **.** Submit letter of application, curriculum vitae,
official transcripts, 3 letters of reference to: Personnel Search Committee,
Center on Disability Studies, University of Hawai`i at Manoa, 1776 University
Avenue, UA4-6, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Inquiries:** (808) 956-8741. **Closing
Date:** 04/22/02.

**LECTURERS**. The Art Department, University of Hawai`i at Manoa, is
recruiting lecturers for the academic year 2002-2003 and for the lecturer pool
list. These positions are part-time, pending enrollment and funding:
**Duties:** To teach beginning and intermediate graphic design (Art 265,
Design I, and Art 266, Typography I). **Minimum Qualifications:** MFA or
equivalent professional experience. **Desired Qualifications:** Teaching
experience, strong typographic and design skills, knowledge of graphic design
history and theory, knowledge of computer technology currently used in the
graphic design profession. **Duties:** To teach Art 103, Introduction to Fiber
or Art 238, Intermediate Loom Weaving , or Art 239, Fiber-Surface Design, or
Art 339 Advanced Fiber (structure and surface design). **Minimum
Qualifications** : MFA Graduate student with specialized experience will be
considered. **Duties:** To teach courses in introduction to printmaking, and
beginning lithography. **Minimum Qualifications:** MFA or professional
equivalent. Graduate students with specialized experience will be considered.
**Minimum Salary:** $1,061 per credit hour; courses are usually 3 credits.
**To Apply:** send resume, three letters of reference  & slide portfolio of
your work to John Wisnosky, Chair, Art Department, 2535 McCarthy Mall, Room
142, University of Hawai`i at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Inquiries:**
956-8251. **Closing Date:** 04/22 for fall; continuous recruitment for spring
and summer.

**LECTURERS,** College of Education, for Fall 2002 and Spring 2003, contingent
upon enrollment and availability of funds. Positions are part-time, non-tenure
for lecturer candidate pool. **Duties:** To teach various undergraduate or
graduate courses in the following areas: (1) **Teacher Education & Curriculum
Studies**-elementary methods courses in math, science, language arts and
literacy, multicultural education, social studies, or curriculum foundations,
including supervision of field experiences or student teaching; qualitative
research methods; (2) **Educational Psychology** -psychological foundations in
education; fundamentals of research in education; student assessment; (3)
**Educational Foundations** -general foundations of education; foundations of
educational theory; comparative/international education; (4) **Educational
Administration** -graduate seminars in higher education student services;
higher education leadership; higher education finance; K-12 leadership; (5)
**Special Education** -exceptional students in general education classrooms;
family-professional partnerships; introduction to special education; classroom
organization and management; assessment and methods for teaching students with
mild, moderate, and/or severe disabilities; supervision of field experiences
or student teaching; (6) **Counselor Education** -graduate seminars in
counseling in schools, substance abuse counseling, consultation theory and
practice, or theory and assessment of intelligence, including supervision of
practica and internships. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree or
doctorate degree in appropriate field. Teaching experience in the appropriate
field. Considerable knowledge about relevant field. Ability to teach assigned
course. **To Apply:** send vitae and names and phone numbers of 3 work-related
references to College of Education, 1776 University Avenue, Honolulu, HI
96822. Address applications to appropriate department. **Duties:** Teach
undergraduate courses in educational media and technology, computers in
education, Internet integration in K-12 environments, technology mentoring,
and graduate courses in visual design, computer authoring, and other
educational technology topics. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's or
doctoral degree in education technology or equivalent; knowledge, experience,
and ability to teach assigned courses. **Desired Qualifications:** Ability to
teach online courses; knowledge of integration of technology into standards-
based teaching; professional experience designing and producing instructional
media; expertise in video, graphic arts, and distance education. **To Apply:**
send vitae and names and phone numbers of 3 work-related references to Chair,
Educational Technology, 1776 University Avenue, Honolulu, HI 96822.
**Duties:** To teach (1) aerobic fitness, basketball, badminton, golf, karate,
swimming, track and field, volleyball, water polo, water aerobics, weight
training, yoga, Hawaiian dance, social dance, softball, or athletic training
field supervision (1 credit courses); (2) health methods, drug education or
leisure education and life skills development (3 credit); and/or (3) first aid
and CPR (first responder level), music and rhythm in physical education, or
techniques of officiating (2 credit) courses. All courses meet twice weekly.
**Minimum Qualifications:** Bachelor's degree in physical education or
athletic training (as appropriate) or equivalent; experience teaching in
relevant area; ability to teach assigned course. **Desired Qualification:**
Master's degree in appropriate field. **To Apply:** send vitae and names and
phone numbers of 3 work-related references to Chair, KLS, PE/A Complex, Room
231, 1337 Lower Campus Road, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Minimum Salary:** $1,061
per credit hour. **Closing Date:** Applications will be reviewed on 04/22/02;
continuous recruitment until needs are met.

**ASSISTANT RESEARCHER** (R3), position no. 85344T, Department of Mechanical
Engineering, College of Engineering, full-time, temporary, non-tenurable,
extramural funds, to begin approximately 07/01/02, subject to availability of
funds. **Duties and Responsibilities:** Performs professional and scientific
research in underwater robotics; develops a semi-autonomous underwater robot
vehicle and arm including analysis and design of control algorithms for an
underwater vehicle-manipulator system, high-level and low-level control
programming in VxWorks real-time operating environment, development of
multiprocessor distributed control architecture in VME bus, and calibration
and integration of various software modules as well as sensor/actuator modules
of the project; assists project director in project management; and develops
technical reports and research proposals. **Minimum Qualifications:** PhD in
Mechanical Engineering, Electrical/Electronics Engineering, Computer
Science/Engineering or System Engineering; knowledge of nonlinear control
theories and intelligent control such as fuzzy logics and neural networks;
minimum 2-year practical experience with AUV control and sensor systems such
as adaptive control and sonars; experience and knowledge of
interpreter/compiler for high level task description language, digital circuit
design and fabrication including VME- and PC-based hardware design, and
digital image processing; design and implementation experience of multi-CPU
based real-time distributed system in VxWorks, vision-based robot manipulator
control, multi-processor concurrent system, controller design with MatLab and
Simulink, Ethernet communication with TCP/IP and UDP, and Windows programming
with Visual C++ and OpenGL; min. 10-year experience with real-time operating
systems; extensive knowledge on Motorola MC680x0 and Intel 80x86  & Pentium
CPUs; and fluent computer language skills in C/C++, Assembly (MC680x0, i80x86,
i80x1), and Visual BASIC. **Minimum Monthly Salary:** $3,377. **To Apply:**
Submit resume including list of publications and the names, addresses, fax
numbers, and email addresses of at least three references, to Mr. Wesley
Sugimoto, Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Hawai`i, 2540
Dole Street, Holmes 302, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Inquiries:**
[sugimot@wiliki.eng.hawaii.edu](mailto:sugimot@wiliki.eng.hawaii.edu).
**Closing Date:** 04/22/02.

**INSTRUCTOR (Nursing),** Position No. 86763, Kauai CC; 9-month, general
funds, to begin 08/02 with selected assignments in Medical-surgical Nursing,
Maternal-Child Nursing, and Mental Health Psychiatric Nursing; pending
position clearance and availability of funds. **Duties:** In an NLN accredited
nursing program, and under general supervision, to teach courses, supervise
student clinical experiences in selected nursing specialties, and conduct
seminars at the community college level, and to perform related work as
assigned. Collect data and prepare reports; plan, organize, and carry out
instructional and non-instructional assignments. Commitment to community
college principles and philosophy is essential. The college strongly
emphasizes an  "open door" concept and serves a diverse student and community
population. Evening work may be required. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's
degree in Nursing, which included content for academic credit in curriculum
development, evaluation and teaching methods. Registered nurse eligible for
Hawai`i State License. License required prior to assumption of clinical
responsibilities. IF QUALIFIED APPLICANTS ARE NOT AVAILABLE, THOSE NOT MEETING
MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS WILL BE CONSIDERED AS ACTING INSTRUCTOR. Bachelor's in
Nursing. Education must have included content for academic credits in
curriculum development, evaluation and teaching methods; and at least three
years of acute care nursing experience in one of the areas of teaching
expertise within the last five years of date of application. Registered nurse
eligible for Hawai`i State License. License required prior to assumption of
clinical responsibilities. **Desirable Qualifications:** Clinical currency in
area of expertise. Demonstrated ability to work with community college
students. Demonstrated ability to work effectively with a multi-ethnic, multi-
cultural population. Ability to employ writing assignments and critical
thinking skill development as a part of the learning experience. Willingness
and ability to teach using different technological modes. **Pay Range:** C2,
minimum $3035/month, commensurate with education and experience. **To Apply:**
Submit 1) completed Application for Faculty or Executive/Managerial Positions
(CC Personnel Form 27A), 2) transcript(s) showing degrees and course work
appropriate to the position (copies are acceptable, however official
transcripts will be required at the time of hire), 3) a one-page summary
stating how you meet the minimum and desirable qualifications, 4) one or more
letters of recommendation attesting to job performance and personal character,
and 5) resume to Personnel Office, Kauai Community College, 3-1901 Kaumualii
Hwy, Lihue, HI 96766-9591. Original signature required on application. All
requested documents/information must be postmarked by the closing date and
become the property of the college. All minimum qualifications must be met by
the effective date of appointment. **Closing Date:** 04/17. **Inquiries:**
245-8372.

**INSTRUCTOR,** Position No. 86702, Kapi`olani CC, Non-credit Computer
Education Program, Business Education Department, full-time, eleven month
appointment, non-tenurial, special funds, to begin approximately 05/02 pending
position clearance, availability of funds and actual staffing requirements.
**Duties:** Under general supervision of Business Education Department Chair,
coordinate and manage non-credit computer education program; serve as a
liaison between Business Education and industry to identify non-credit
community and workforce educational and training needs and instructional
computer program needs; recruit and supervise part-time non-credit instructors
and staff; must be able to develop and design curriculum; develop marketing
materials; market computer courses, negotiate and write contracts/proposals;
planning, organizing, implementing, and evaluating programs of courses,
workshops, seminars, conferences, meetings, and other related offerings;
manage fiscal and budgetary matters; develop new non-credit computer program
areas; teach non-credit courses in computer education. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Master's Degree in Education Technology, Business
Administration, Communications, Marketing, IT, Human Resources; or Bachelor's
Degree as mentioned above plus three years relevant experience; proven
experience utilizing creativity. **Desirable Qualifications:** Program
management experience; sales and marketing experience; curriculum and program
development experience; non-credit, computer education program work
experience; grant-writing experience; organizational skills and able to work
evenings and weekends. **Pay Range:** $3,515/month minimum; salary
commensurate with education and work experience. **To Apply:** Send CC
Personnel Form 27A (available at
[www.hawaii.edu/ohr/employ.htm](http://www.hawaii.edu/ohr/employ.htm)),
official transcripts, three letters of recommendation attesting to job
performance, and a brief one-page statement outlining how you meet the minimum
and desirable qualifications to: Dennis Vanairsdale, Chair, Business Education
Department, Kapi`olani Community College, 4303 Diamond Head Road, Honolulu, HI
96816. **Closing Date:** 04/17. All materials must be postmarked no later than
closing date. Applications received after this date will not be considered.
All minimum qualifications must be met by effective date of the appointment.
**Inquiries:** (808) 734-9141.

**GRADUATE ASSISTANT** , UH Manoa, Joint Institute for Marine and Atmospheric
Research, Pelagic Fisheries Research Program, temporary, federal funds, to
begin 08/02. **Duties:** Conduct oceanographic and stock assessment research
relevant to the management of pelagic fisheries. **Minimum Qualifications:**
Student enrolled in graduate program at the University of Hawai`i. Relevant
research experience. **Minimum Salary:** $1348 per month. **To Apply:** Submit
letter of application and curriculum vitae to Dr. John Sibert, Manager,
Pelagic Fisheries Research Program, University of Hawai`i at Manoa, 1000 Pope
Road, Marine Science Building 312, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date:**
05/01/02.

**GRADUATE ASSISTANT** , UH Manoa, Joint Institute for Marine and Atmospheric
Research, Pelagic Fisheries Research Program, temporary, federal funds, to
begin 08/02. **Duties:** Conduct socio-economic research relevant to the
management of pelagic fisheries. **Minimum Qualifications:** Student enrolled
in graduate program at the University of Hawai`i. Relevant research
experience. **Minimum Salary:** $1348.00 per month. **To Apply:** Submit
letter of application and curriculum vitae to Dr. John Sibert, Manager,
Pelagic Fisheries Research Program, University of Hawai`i at Manoa, 1000 Pope
Road, Marine Science Building 312, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date:**
05/01/02.

**INSTRUCTOR IN ENGLISH (Writing),** Position No. 86844, Leeward CC, full-
time, 9-months, tenurial, general funds, beginning Fall 2002, pending position
clearance, availability of funds, and actual staffing requirements. May be for
Leeward CC day, evening, or weekend offerings on- and off-campus. **Duties:**
Under general supervision, teach composition at the developmental and college
levels, perform related work as assigned and may be required to teach Leeward
CC day, evening, or weekend offerings on- and off-campus. Related work
activities include, but are not limited to, advising and counseling students,
assisting in campus-related student activities; participating in
faculty/administrative committees, community service, and in-service training;
maintaining an approved program of professional self-improvement, collecting
data and preparing reports, preparing/adapting/revising course objectives;
independently planning, organizing, and carrying out instructional and non-
instructional assignments. May include instructional assignments involving
distance education. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree in English OR
Master's degree in Education with a Writing Specialty OR Master's degree in
Linguistics OR Master's degree in English as a Second Language. Minimum
qualifications must be met by the effective date of appointment **. Desirable
Qualifications:** Course work, experience, or training in teaching composition
to adult native speakers of English; course work, experience, or training in
teaching English as a Second Language to adults; teaching experience at the
community college level; experience with computers for writing instruction;
familiarity with performance-based instruction and student learning outcomes;
demonstrated ability to work with adult learners; demonstrated ability in
curriculum development; demonstrated ability to communicate effectively;
demonstrated ability to work with students on an individual/informal basis.
**Pay Range:** C2; minimum $3035/month. **To Apply:** Submit to Human
Resources Office, Leeward CC, 96-045 Ala Ike, Pearl City, HI 96782: 1) Faculty
or Executive/Managerial (CC Personnel Form 27A) application form
([www.hawaii.edu/ohr/employ.htm](http://www.hawaii.edu/ohr/employ.htm)), 2)
graduate and undergraduate transcript(s) showing degrees and course work to
date appropriate to the position (transcript copies are acceptable; however
official transcripts will be required at the time of hire), 3) a brief one-
page statement outlining how you meet the minimum and desirable
qualifications, 4) three letters of recommendation (optional) attesting to job
performance and personal character, and 5) resume (optional). Separate
documents and application materials must be submitted for each position.
Original signature required on application. All requested
documents/information must be postmarked by the closing date and become the
property of the College. Failure to submit all required documents shall deem
an application to be incomplete and will not be considered. **Closing Date:**
04/22. **Inquiries:** 455-0326.

**INSTRUCTOR, (Food Services),** Windward Community College, Employment
Training Center and Continuing Education/Special Programs, Position No. 83581,
full-time, 11 month, tenure track, general funds, to begin approximately
05/02. **Duties:** Under the general supervision of the Assistant State
Director teach introductory level courses in food preparation and baking for
"at-risk" youth and adults; conduct instruction in all areas of food
preparation to include pantry, food preparation and baking, covering both
theory and practical, hands-on instruction; provide instruction tailored to
the needs and learning styles of students and the open-entry/open-exit mode of
intake and completion; work with colleagues to address student needs; and
participate in professional and self-development activities. Perform other
duties as assigned. Duties and responsibilities may include instructional
assignments involving distance education. Possible evening, weekend, and off-
campus assignments. **Minimum Qualifications:** Bachelors degree in subject
area and three years related work experience which may include professional
training OR Associates Degree in subject area and five years related work
experience which may include professional training OR 15 college credits and
seven years related work experience which may include professional training OR
Master recognition by Food Services Community. If applicants meeting minimum
qualifications are not available, those not meeting minimum qualifications may
be considered on an Acting Instructor basis. **Desirable Qualifications:**
Demonstrated ability to work with youth and adult learners who are
educationally or economically disadvantaged,  "at-risk" youth and adults who
often have social and personal barriers to education and employment. Knowledge
of industry standards and industry needs in food preparation and service;
ability to establish and maintain effective working relationships with
faculty, staff and community groups; knowledge of and ability to use a variety
of teaching styles to address the spectrum of learning styles; experience
working in a multi-cultural environment. **Pay Range:** C2A, $3,315.75/month.
**To Apply:** Submit: 1) Completed Community College application for Faculty
or Executive/Managerial positions (CC Personnel Form 27A); 2) transcript(s)
verifying minimum educational qualification and course work to date
(transcript copies are acceptable, however, official transcripts will be
required at the time of hire); 3) one page statement outlining how you meet
the minimum and desirable qualifications;4) three letters of recommendation
attesting to job performance and personal character to: Windward Community
College, Employment Training Center and Continuing Education/Special Programs,
Interim Assistant State Director, 45-720 Kea`ahala Rd. Kane`ohe, HI 96744.
Incomplete applications will not be considered. Application and related
materials postmarked after the closing date will not be considered. All
minimum qualifications must be met by the effective date of hire. **Closing
Date:** 04/22. **Inquiries:** 235-7361.

**INSTRUCTOR (Spanish),** Position No. 86672A, Windward CC, 9 months, half-
time, permanent, non-tenurial, beginning 8/02, pending position clearance,
availability of funds and actual staffing requirements. **Duties:** Under
general supervision teach college-level courses in Spanish and perform related
work including, but not limited to, preparing/revising course outlines,
developing curriculum, participating in departmental, faculty and
administrative committees, community service, in-service training and advising
students. Must be able to independently plan, organize and carry out
instructional and non-instructional assignments. May require teaching
evenings, Saturdays and at off-campus sites. Duties and responsibilities may
include instructional assignments involving distance education. Maintain
office hours. **Minimum Qualifications:** (a) Master's degree in Spanish
(language or literature); or (b) Master's in Spanish as a Second Language; or
(c) Master's in the study of the culture or history of the people who speak
Spanish; or (d) Master's in Linguistics, ESL, Education or another language.
At least 12 credits of advanced coursework in second language methodology,
Spanish literature, Spanish culture, or any combination thereof. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Ability and experience in teaching college-level freshman
and sophomore Spanish language and Hispanic culture courses. Coursework in
language teaching methodology. Demonstrated ability to communicate clearly.
Experience in the use of multimedia for language instruction. Successful
teaching experience at the community college level as substantiated by student
and peer assessments. Experience and commitment to community involvement and
service. Ability to work with students, peers and staff. Knowledge and
understanding of the community college philosophy. Sensitive to cultural
diversity. Demonstrated commitment to professional self-development. **Pay
Range:** C2, minimum $18,210 annual. **To Apply:** Submit the following
requirements postmarked by closing date to Dean of Instruction, Windward CC,
45-720 Kea`ahala Road, Kane`ohe, HI 96744: 1) application (CC Personnel Form
27A); 2) transcript(s) (copies acceptable; however, official transcripts will
be required at time of hire); 3) three letters of recommendation; and 4) one-
page statement outlining how applicant meets the minimum and desirable
qualifications. All minimum qualifications must be met by the effective date
of hire. An incomplete application will not be considered and materials will
not be returned. **Closing Date:** 04/29. **Inquiries:** 235-7424.



Readvertisement of ad that appeared in _Ku Lama_ on 09/21/01

**INSTRUCTOR (Geography),** Position No. 87027, Windward CC, 9 months, half-
time, permanent, non-tenurial, beginning 08/02, pending position clearance,
availability of funds, and actual staffing requirements. **Duties:** Under
general supervision teach college-level courses in geography and perform
related work including, but not limited to, preparing and revising course
outlines, developing curriculum, developing alternate delivery systems for
geography courses, participating in departmental, faculty and administrative
committees, community service, in-service training and advising students. Must
be able to independently plan, organize and carry out instructional and non-
instructional assignments. May require teaching evenings, Saturdays and at
off-campus sites. Duties and responsibilities may include instructional
assignments involving distance education. Maintain office hours. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Master's degree in Geography from an accredited institution.
**Desirable Qualifications:** Successful teaching experience at the community
college level as substantiated by student and peer assessments. Experience and
commitment to community involvement and service. Ability to work with
students, peers and staff. Knowledge and understanding of the community
college philosophy. Sensitive to cultural diversity. Demonstrated commitment
to professional self-development. **Pay Range:** C2, minimum $18,210 annual.
**To Apply:** Submit the following requirements postmarked by closing date to
Dean of Instruction, Windward CC, 45-720 Kea`ahala Road, Kane`ohe, HI 96744:
1) application (CC Personnel Form 27A); 2) transcript(s) (copies acceptable;
however, official transcripts will be required at time of hire); 3) three
letters of recommendation; and 4) one-page statement outlining how applicant
meets the minimum and desirable qualifications. All minimum qualifications
must be met by the effective date of hire. An incomplete application will not
be considered and materials will not be returned **. Closing Date:** 04/29.
**Inquiries:** 235-7424

**ASSISTANT/ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR IN PSYCHOLOGY** (87585T, 87679T, 87586T) The
Center for Psychosocial Rehabilitation (PSR) at the University of Hawai`i
Manoa is currently recruiting three behaviorally oriented psychologists to
begin approximately 05/15/02, full time, 11 month appointment, non-tenure
track. These are annually renewable contracted positions funded through
agreement the State Department of Health, Adult Mental Health Division. The
Center's primary mission is to provide psychosocial rehabilitation services to
AMHD facilities including the Hawai`i State Hospital. Psychologists will hold
joint, non-tenure track appointments in the Department of Psychology at the
University of Hawai`i at Manoa. Psychologists will provide 15-20 hours of
direct clinical services per week; participate in program development and
evaluation; supervise graduate students and teach one graduate level course
related to psychosocial rehabilitation per year; and participate in the
Center's research agenda which focuses on the improvement of psychosocial
rehabilitation services and issues related to optimal system development.
Scholarly publications and grant writing will be strongly encouraged and
supported. **Minimum Qualifications** : Assistant Professor: PhD in Clinical
Psychology or a related field and record of scholarly achievement. Associate
Professor: In addition to that of Assistant Professor, four years full time
college or university teaching at the rank of assistant or equivalent.
**Desirable Qualifications** _:_ Experience in one or more of the following
treatment modalities is preferable: 1) Liberman's Social  & Independent Living
Skills Modules, 2) Behavioral Family Therapy for Schizophrenia, 3) Brenner's
Integrated Psychological Therapy for Schizophrenia, 4) Dialectical Behavior
Therapy, 5) Integrated Substance Abuse Treatment, and/or 6) Applied Behavior
Analysis. Applicants should be license eligible in Hawaii. Demonstrated
ability to develop and coordinate funded mental health services research in
areas of PSR and severe mental illness; Knowledge of policies and practices of
federal and state mental health agencies; PhD in clinical psychology from an
APA accredited program. **Salary Range:** Salary commensurate with
qualifications. **Closing Date** : 04/30/02. Send vitae, reprints and
preprints, three letters of reference, and a cover letter outlining research
program and teaching competencies to: A. Michael Wylie, PhD, Mental Health
Services Research Search Committee, Department of Psychology, 2430 Campus
Road, Honolulu, HI 96822.



Correction of ad that appeared in _Ku Lama_ on 03/15

**ASSISTANT RESEARCHER,** Position Number #85371T, UHM, College of Tropical
Agriculture  & Human Resources (CTAHR), Molecular Biosciences and
Bioengineering, full time, federal funds, to begin approximately 05/02.
**Duties** : **** To identify genes encoding bioactive compounds from plants
and marine organisms, to study the mechanism of gene silencing, and to alter
biosynthetic pathways in recombinant hosts. **Minimum Qualifications:** PhD in
Genetics, Biochemistry or related field with several years of postdoctoral
experience. Expertise in molecular biology with an emphasis in constructing
full length cDNA libraries. **Desirable Qualifications:** Experience in
molecular genetics, marine biotechnology, ethnobotany, virology, microarray
technology, and bioinformatics is desirable. **Salary Range:** R3; ****
$40,524-$49,296. **To Apply:** Please send curriculum vitae, reprints, and a
list of references to: Dr. Monto H. Kumagai, Dept of Molecular Biosciences  &
Bioengineering, University of Hawai`i, 1955 East West Road, Agricultural
Science, Rm. 218, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date:** 04/10/02.
**Inquiries:** E-mail: monto@hawaii.edu.

**INSTRUCTOR IN HAWAIIAN STUDIES,** Position No. 82306, Leeward CC, full-time,
9-month tenurial, general funds, beginning Fall 2002, pending position
clearance, availability of funds and actual staffing requirements, possible
renewal. May be for Leeward CC day, evening, or weekend offerings on- and off-
campus. **Duties:** Under general supervision, teach Hawaiian Studies courses
including Hawaiian Culture, Hawaiian Religion, Hawaiian Mythology, and
Hawaiian Literature. Help develop an interdisciplinary curriculum for a
Hawaiian Studies Certificate. Perform related work as assigned. Related work
activities include, but are not limited to, advising and counseling students;
assisting in campus-related student activities; participating in faculty and
administrative committees, community service, and in-service training;
maintaining an approved program of professional self-improvement; collecting
data and preparing reports; preparing, adapting, and revising course
objectives; independently planning, organizing, and carrying out instructional
and non-instructional assignments. May include instructional assignments
involving distance education. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's with focus
on Hawaiian and/or Pacific Island areas OR Bachelor's with a focus on Hawaiian
and/or Pacific Island areas and 3 years related work experience. All minimum
qualifications must be met by the effective date of appointment. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Academic background in and community college teaching
experience as substantiated by student and peer evaluations in Hawaiian
studies, Hawaiian culture, Hawaiian religion, Hawaiian language, Hawaiian
mythology and Hawaiian literature. Experience in curriculum development;
demonstrated ability to work with people; familiarity with competency-based
instruction and behavioral objectives; demonstrated ability to work with adult
learners; demonstrated ability to communicate clearly **. Pay Range:** C2;
minimum $3035/month. **To Apply:** Submit to Human Resources Office, Leeward
CC, 96-045 Ala Ike, Pearl City, HI 96782: 1) Faculty or Executive/managerial
(CC Personnel Form 27A) application form
([www.hawaii.edu/ohr/employ.htm](http://www.hawaii.edu/ohr/employ.htm)), 2)
graduate and undergraduate transcript(s) showing degrees and course work to
date appropriate to the position (transcript copies are acceptable; however,
official transcripts will be required at the time of hire), 3) a brief one-
page statement outlining how you meet the minimum and desirable
qualifications, 4) three letters of recommendation (optional) attesting to job
performance and personal character, and 5) resume (optional). Separate
documents and application materials must be submitted for each position.
Original signature required on application. All requested
documents/information must be postmarked by the closing date. Failure to
submit all required documents shall deem an application to be incomplete and
will not be considered. **Closing Date:** 04/22. **Inquiries:** 455-0326.

**INSTRUCTOR IN DIGITAL ARTS,** Position No. 82247, Leeward CC, full-time,
9-month, tenurial, general funds, beginning Fall 2002, pending position
clearance, availability of funds, and actual staffing requirements. May be for
Leeward CC day, evening, or weekend offerings on- and off-campus. **Duties:**
Under general supervision, teach a wide range of classes in transfer level in
digital photography and digital imaging, and teach digital art and/or digital
drawing, to develop curriculum, facilitate equipment purchase and maintenance
activities in these areas, to develop teaching strategies, instructional
materials, and methods that 1) emphasize writing as an important skill for
students, 2) use computer in instruction where appropriate, 3) integrate
instruction of critical thinking skills into course content, and 4) use
competency-based instruction. Related work activities include, but are not
limited to, advising and counseling students, assisting in campus-related
student activities; participating in faculty/administrative committees,
community service, and in-service training; maintaining an approved program of
professional self-improvement, collecting data and preparing reports,
preparing/adapting/revising course objectives; independently planning,
organizing, and carrying out instructional and non-instructional assignments.
May include instructional assignments involving distance education. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Master's in Fine Arts in studio art with a specialization in
digital arts, design, printmaking, photography or painting with course work in
computer graphics, multimedia design, Web design; or Master's degree in any
area with course work in computer graphics, multimedia design, Web design; or
Master's degree in any area and 3 years of professional experience in computer
graphics, multimedia design or Web design. Minimum qualifications must be met
by the effective date of appointment. **Desirable Qualifications:** teaching
experience at the community college level as substantiated by student and peer
evaluations; strong background in digital imaging, multimedia and
interface/interaction design; extensive knowledge of computer graphics
applications including Photoshop, Quicktime VR and Illustrator; demonstrated
ability to teach in both MAC and PC computing environments; ability to develop
teaching strategies, instructional materials and methods that address items
1-5 under duties above; evidence of on-going professional development;
experience with teaching students from a variety of backgrounds; ability to
work in a professional manner with peers, administrators, and members of the
business community; familiarity with competency-based instruction and
behavioral objectives; demonstrated ability to work with adult learners;
demonstrated ability in curriculum development; demonstrated ability to
communicate effectively; demonstrated ability to work with students on an
individual/informal basis. **Pay Range:** C2; minimum $3035/month. **To
Apply:** Submit to Human Resources Office, Leeward CC, 96-045 Ala Ike, Pearl
City, HI 96782: 1) Faculty or Executive/Managerial (CC Personnel Form 27A)
application form
([www.hawaii.edu/ohr/employ.htm](http://www.hawaii.edu/ohr/employ.htm)), 2)
graduate and undergraduate transcript(s) showing degrees and course work to
date appropriate to the position (transcript copies are acceptable; however
official transcripts will be required at the time of hire), 3) a brief one-
page statement outlining how you meet the minimum and desirable
qualifications, 4) three letters of recommendation (optional) attesting to job
performance and personal character, and 5) resume (optional). Separate
documents and application materials must be submitted for each position.
Original signature required on application. All requested
documents/information must be postmarked by the closing date and become the
property of the College. Failure to submit all required documents shall deem
an application to be incomplete and will not be considered. **Closing Date:**
04/22. **Inquiries:** 455-0326.

**INSTRUCTOR IN FOOD SERVICE (Dining Room Service),** Position No. 82683,
Kapi`olani CC, Food Service Education Department, full-time, temporary,
11-month, general funds, to begin approximately 08/02, pending position
clearance and availability of funds. **Duties:** Under general supervision, be
able to teach courses in Dining Room Service and other related credit and non-
credit courses. Strong emphasis is placed on the development of customer
service skills; incorporate the latest local and global hospitality industry
service trends; develop teaching strategies, instructional materials and
methods which 1) use competency-based instruction, 2) integrate critical
thinking skills into instructional methods, 3) emphasize writing as an
important skill for students, 4) utilize technological advances in both
operations and instruction, 5) address the needs of community college
students. Candidate will develop and maintain a professional development
program, maintain office hours as determined by teaching schedule, counsel
students, identify students' learning needs and implement constructive
teaching strategies, prepare and revise course objectives and syllabi; plan,
organize, and carry out instructional and non-instructional assignments
independently. Perform related duties as assigned. Day, evening, off-site
and/or Distance Education classes may be assigned as part of Candidate's
regular workload. Candidate may be assigned operational duties as part of
regular workload. **Minimum Qualifications:** Bachelor's Degree in subject
area plus three years related work experience which may include professional
training; or Associate Degree in subject area plus five years related work
experience which may include professional training; or 15 college credits plus
seven years of related work experience which may include professional
training, or Master recognition by Food Services Community. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Successful teaching experience in a community college
culinary program or equivalent as substantiated by student, peer, and
administrative assessments; work experience as a dining room manager or
maitre'd with experience in supervising multiple operations and in training
subordinate employees in restaurant service and general customer service
skills; knowledge on operating and service procedures in Quick Service,
Limited Service, and Full Service dining establishments; working knowledge of
various traditional and temporary service styles; Understanding of classic and
contemporary food terminology; well rounded knowledge in mixology and
alcoholic beverage regulations; active involvement in related professional
associations, documented ability to work with a variety of cultures and
audiences. **Pay Range:** C2A, $42,180 minimum. Salary commensurate with
education and work experience. **To Apply:** Send community college
application (CC Personnel Form 27A, available at
[www.hawaii.edu/ohr/employ.htm](http://www.hawaii.edu/ohr/employ.htm)),
official transcripts, three letters of recommendation attesting to job
performance, and a brief statement outlining how you meet the minimum and
desirable qualifications to Gladys Sato, Chair, Food Service & Hospitality
Education Department, Kapi`olani Community College, 4303 Diamond Head Road,
Honolulu, HI 96816. **Closing Date:** 04/29. All minimum qualifications must
be met by the effective date of appointment. **Inquiries:** (808) 734-9485.

**INSTRUCTOR IN FOOD SERVICE (Culinary Arts Instructor),** Position No.
82922T, Kapi`olani CC, Food Service Education Department, temporary, full-
time, 11-month, nontenurial, special funds, to begin approximately 8/02,
pending position clearance and availability of funds. **Duties:** Under
general supervision, able to teach courses in the Culinary Arts Department,
which includes and are not limited to Navy Homeport Training Program, Command
Navy Surface Group, and other military programs, International short and long-
term programs and other related credit and non-credit courses. Courses should
include, but not limited to General Mess Operations, Private Mess Operations,
Public Quarters/Flag Mess, Mid-Pac, Fundamentals Cookery, Intermediate
Cookery, Continental Cuisine, and Asian Pacific Cuisine. Strong emphasis is
placed on the cuisines in military environment, hotels and fine dining
establishments; incorporate the latest trends in industry; develop teaching
strategies, instructional materials and methods which 1) use competency-based
instruction, 2) integrate critical thinking skills into instructional methods,
3) emphasize writing as an important skill for students, 4) utilize
technological advances in both operations and instruction, 5) address the
needs of traditional and non-traditional students. Candidate will develop and
maintain a professional development program, maintain office hours as
determined by teaching schedule, counsel students, identify students' learning
needs and implement constructive teaching strategies, prepare and revise
course objectives and syllabi; plan, organize, and carry out instructional and
non-instructional assignments independently. Perform related duties as
assigned. Day, evening, off-site, and/or Distance Education classes and/or
operational duties may be assigned as part of Candidate's regular workload.
**Minimum Qualifications:** Bachelor's Degree in subject area plus three years
related work experience which may include professional training; or Associate
Degree in subject area plus five years related work experience which may
include professional training; or 15 college credits plus seven years of
related work experience which may include professional training; or Master
recognition by Food Services Community. **Desirable Qualifications:**
Successful teaching experience in a community college culinary program or
equivalent as substantiated by student, peer, and administrative assessments;
successful teaching experience with the Navy or other branch of the military;
successful completion of service with the Navy or other branch of the military
as a mess specialist; work experience as an executive or sous chef in a hotel,
free standing restaurant, or institutional foodservice establishment with
experience in supervising multiple operations and in supervising and training
subordinate employees; food and beverage procurement, costing, preparation,
service, and knowledge of safety and sanitation standards; knowledge of
operating and service procedures in quick service, limited service, and full
service dining establishments; working knowledge of various traditional and
contemporary food preparation styles; knowledge and proficiency in P.C. and/or
Mac applications, involvement as a judge, mentor, or coach in local, national,
or international culinary arts competition; active involvement in related
professional associations, documented ability to work with a variety of
cultures and audiences. **Pay Range:** C2A, minimum $42,180 annual. Salary is
commensurate with education and work experience. **To Apply:** Send community
college application (CC Personnel Form 27A, available at
[www.hawaii.edu/ohr/employ.htm](http://www.hawaii.edu/ohr/employ.htm)),
official transcripts, three letters of recommendation attesting to job
performance, and a brief statement outlining how you meet the minimum and
desirable qualifications to Gladys Sato, Chair, Food Service & Hospitality
Education Department, Kapi`olani Community College, 4303 Diamond Head Road,
Honolulu, HI 96816. **Closing Date:** 04/29. All minimum qualifications must
be met by the effective date of appointment. **Inquiries:** (808)734-9485.

**INSTRUCTOR IN ACCOUNTING,** Position No. 83221, Kapi`olani CC, Business
Education, 9-month, tenure track, full-time, general funds, to begin
approximately 08/02, pending position clearance, availability of funds.
**Duties:** Under general supervision to teach transfer level accounting
courses, to teach vocational courses in data gathering and record keeping,
introductory accounting, cost accounting, intermediate accounting, income
taxes (individual and small business), and payroll and general excise taxes;
to teach courses using general ledger software and using spreadsheets in
accounting; to develop and teach courses in back office administration for
eBusiness enterprises; to establish and maintain relations with businesses and
employers in accounting; to develop teaching strategies, instructional
materials, and methods which: 1) emphasize writing as an important skill for
students, 2) use computers and the Internet/World Wide Web in instruction, 3)
integrate instruction of appropriate thinking skills into course content, 4)
use competency-based instruction, 5) emphasize communication skills and
teamwork as important business skills, 6) use multi-ethnic and multi-cultural
approaches, and 7) address the needs of community college students; to
constantly update courses to keep up with the profession; to develop and
maintain an approved program of professional self-improvement; to maintain at
least one office hour per week for each course taught; to counsel students,
identify student learning needs, and implement constructive responses to
students; to prepare and revise course objectives, outlines, and syllabi; to
plan, organize, and carry out, independently, instructional and non-
instructional assignments such as in-service training for peers, or
development of extramural funding sources; to perform related duties as
assigned; and to teach evening and weekend courses as part of regular
workload. Duties and responsibilities may include instructional assignments
involving distance education and/or non-credit teaching assignments. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Master's in accounting; or MBA including 18 credits in
Accounting (graduate or undergraduate); or bachelor's degree in accounting
plus three years related work experience in accounting. **Desirable
Qualifications:** 1) Certified Public Accountant, Certified Management
Accountant, or other substantive professional accounting certification; 2)
Experience at a managerial level in accounting such as: comptroller,
controller, or accounting manager; 3) experience in income tax preparation; 4)
significant/extensive experience working with eBusiness enterprises, either
(for-profit or not-for-profit type); 5) significant/extensive experience using
computerized general ledger software and/or spreadsheets; and 6) successful
teaching experience at community college or university levels as substantiated
by student and peer evaluations. **Pay Range:** C2, minimum $36,420 annually.
Salary commensurate with education/experience. **To Apply:** Submit community
college application (Form 27A available at
[www.hawaii.edu/ohr/employ.htm](http://www.hawaii.edu/ohr/employ.htm)),
official transcripts, three letters of recommendation attesting to job
performance, and a brief one-page statement outlining how you meet the minimum
and desirable qualifications to Dennis Vanairsdale, Chairperson, Business
Education Department, Kapi`olani Community College, 4303 Diamond Head Road,
Honolulu, HI 96816. **Closing Date:** 04/29. All materials must be postmarked
no later than closing date. Applications received after this date will not be
considered. All minimum qualifications must be met by the effective date of
the appointment. **Inquiries:** (808) 734-9140.

**INSTRUCTOR (Counselor)** Position No. 86864T, Kapi`olani CC, Holomua
(DEVELOPMENTAL STUDIES) Department, special funds, full-time, temporary,
11-month, non-tenurial, to begin approximately 07/02 pending position
clearance, availability of funds, and actual staffing requirements.
**Duties:** (1) Plan, implement and provide full range of counseling
(orientation, career, academic, enrollment and assessment) and other student
personnel services to basic and developmental students enrolled at the
college; (2) provide counseling services for at- and high-risk students; (3)
work with other Holomua faculty, counselors, and staff to enhance student
success and retention; (4) teach Holomua learning skills, workshops, or
classes as assigned; (5) participate in professional development activities
and planning sessions; (6) serve on committees and participate in college-wide
activities; (7) develop and implement a professional self-improvement plan;
(8) perform other duties as assigned. Evening and weekend duty may be assigned
as part of workload. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree in Counseling
and Guidance, Counseling Psychology, College Student Personnel Services, Human
Resources, Communications or related field; or Bachelor's degree in Counseling
and Guidance, Counseling Psychology, College Student Personnel Services, Human
Resources, Communications or related field and three years of related work
experience. **Desirable Qualifications:** (1) Knowledge of college student
services (academic advising, learning support, career, enrollment, financial
aid and disability services); (2) demonstrated ability to create counseling
strategies appropriate to students with basic/developmental academic needs
and/or with disabilities aimed at improving student success and retention; (3)
ability to write clear prose; (4) successful use of technology, both as a tool
to support counseling activities and student learning; (5) commitment to the
mission and values of the community college with its open-door policy and
multicultural population; (6) demonstrated ability to work collaboratively
with faculty, staff and students; and (7) ability to initiate, execute, and
complete projects, including setting specific objectives and measuring
results. **Pay Range:** C2A, minimum $3,315.75/month ($3,515/mo eff 8/1/02).
**To Apply:** Submit to Jill Makagon, Holomua Chair, Kapi`olani CC, 4303
Diamond Head Road, Honolulu, HI 96816: 1) Faculty or Executive/Managerial CC
Personnel Form 27A application form
([www.hawaii.edu/ohr/employ.htm](http://www.hawaii.edu/ohr/employ.htm)), 2)
graduate and undergraduate transcript(s) showing degrees and coursework to
date appropriate to the position, 3) three letters of recommendation attesting
to the fulfillment of the desirable qualifications listed above, 4) a two-page
statement outlining counseling competencies and ways in which you meet the
desirable qualifications **. Closing Date:** 04/22. **Inquiries:** Jill
Makagon, 734-9450. All materials must be postmarked no later than the closing
date for an application to be considered complete.

**LECTURERS,** Leeward CC, Fall 2002, part-time, for lecturer applicant pool.
Non-tenurial, pending availability of funds, and actual staffing requirements.
May be for Leeward CC day, evening, or weekend offerings on- and off-campus.
**Duties:** Teach assigned courses in the discipline; maintain minimum of one
office hour per week for each course taught; prepare course syllabus and
reports related to teaching and student progress; work under supervision of
discipline coordinator/division chairperson in integrating teaching efforts
with other instructors in the discipline area. May include instructional
assignments involving distance education. **Minimum Qualifications:** As
listed below. Minimum qualifications must be met by the effective date of
appointment. **Desirable Qualifications for all positions:** Teaching
experience at the community college level. Demonstrated ability to work with
adult learners. Familiarity with competency-based instruction and behavioral
objectives. Demonstrated ability to communicate clearly **. Pay Range:**
$1,061 minimum per credit hour. **To Apply:** Submit to Human Resources
Office, Leeward CC, 96-045 Ala Ike, Pearl City, HI 96782: 1) Faculty or
Executive/Managerial (CC Personnel Form 27A application form
([www.hawaii.edu/ohr/employ.htm](http://www.hawaii.edu/ohr/employ.htm)), 2)
graduate and undergraduate transcript(s) showing degrees and course work to
date appropriate to the position (transcript copies are acceptable; however,
official transcripts will be required at the time of hire), 3) a brief one-
page statement outlining how you meet the minimum and desirable
qualifications, 4) three letters of recommendation (optional) attesting to job
performance and personal character, and 5) resume (optional). Separate
documents and application materials must be submitted for each position.
Original signature required on each application. Continuous recruitment until
needs are met. Inquiries: 455-0326. **Accounting:** Master's in Accounting or
MBA including 18 credits in Accounting (graduate or undergraduate) or
Bachelor's in subject area and 3 years experience in accounting. **Art
(History & Theory):** Master's in Art. **Hawaiian Studies:** Master's with
focus on Hawaiian and/or Pacific Island areas OR Bachelor's with a focus on
Hawaiian and/or Pacific Island areas and 3 years related work experience.
**History:** Master's in History. **Literature:** Master's in English or
Master's in Literature. **OAT:** Master's in Education with major in Business
Education or Bachelor's in Education with major in Business Education and 3
years related experience; or Associate Degree in subject area and 5 years
related work experience. **Philosophy:** Master's in Philosophy. **Political
Science:** Master's in Political Science. **Psychology:** Master's in
Psychology. **Religion:** Master's in Religion. **Speech:** Master's in Speech

**SPECIALIST** , Position Nos. 82048, 83635; UHM Counseling and Student
Development Center (CSDC). Two (2) part-time (50% FTE) general funds, annually
renewable pending availability of funds, non-tenurial, beginning approximately
6/02. **Duties** : Conduct psychiatric evaluations, medication management,
consultation with CSDC and University Health Services staff on client
treatment, assisting with psychiatric hospitalizations, crisis consultation,
participate in case management and other Center meetings. **Minimum
Qualifications** : MD degree; completion of residency in general or child
psychiatry; board certified or eligible for board certification, which must be
attained within two years; at least four years of experience providing direct
clinical services or its equivalent; at least two years experience working
with a diverse multicultural client population; knowledge of both psychiatry
and psychotherapy; demonstrated ability to work collaboratively with medical
and mental health professionals. **Desirable Qualifications** : Expertise and
experience in university student mental health. **Pay** **Range** : S5;
minimum $31,188/year, commensurate with education & experience. **To Apply** :
Submit letter of interest, CV, and three letters of recommendation to: Allyson
Tanouye, PhD, CSDC, University of Hawai`i at Manoa, 2600 Campus Road, QLC 312,
Honolulu, HI 96822. **Inquiries** : (808) 956-7927. **Closing Date** : First
consideration will be given to those application received by 05/01/02.
Position open until filled.

**GRADUATE ASSISTANT,** Web course development and Web site management;
National Foreign Language Resource Center, Office of the Dean, College of
Languages, Linguistics and Literature, UH Manoa, .50 FTE, 9-month or 11-month
appointment to begin 08/01/2002, pending funding availability. **Duties:** 1)
To assist in the development of a Web-based, database-linked online course in
beginning Mandarin Chinese, including Web page, Web site, and database design
and management. 2) To assist in updating and maintaining an informational Web
site for language educators on the topic of the evaluation of language
learning software. **Minimum Qualifications:** Classified graduate status in
foreign language, ESL, linguistics, computer science, communications, or
related field; good writing and organizational skills; advanced language
skills in Mandarin and English; excellent HTML skills (ability to make Web
pages - Dreamweaver or other Webpage editor), especially working in non-Roman
character sets such as Big5 and GB2312; good knowledge of databases (creating
tables, fields, inputting data); Web site design experience; interest in
and/or knowledge of issues related to second/foreign language learning; good
communication skills. **Desirable Qualifications:** good knowledge of SQL and
its syntax and Microsoft SQL servers; good knowledge of Cold Fusion. Good
graphic design skills (ability to create and edit images - Photoshop,
Fireworks, Paintshop Pro, etc.). **Minimum Monthly Salary:** (.50 FTE, GA-1).
$1,246.50 **To Apply:** Application forms and information relating to the
duties and selection process may be obtained

