![POSITION VACANCIES](/news/kulama/images/position.vacancies.gif)  
[Professional vacancies archive](/news/job.vacancies.html)

The University of Hawai`i is an equal opportunity/affirmative action
institution. All qualified applicants will be considered, regardless of race,
sex, age, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, disability, marital
status, arrest and court record, sexual orientation or status as a disabled
veteran or veteran of the Vietnam era. Women, members of minority groups,
veterans and persons with disabilities are encouraged to apply. (Persons with
hearing disabilities may call 1-711 or 643-8833.) Applicants with hearing or
speech impairments may use the TDD relay service by calling 1-711.

Employment is contingent on satisfying employment eligibility verification
requirements of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986. Appointments
to positions are subject to statutory residency requirements, campus
recruitment guidelines and the collective bargaining agreement. APT applicants
with re-employment rights or priority status are responsible for informing the
recruiting unit, which will verify eligibility with the employing unit as
provided by the BU 08 contract.

Official transcripts must have the official seal of and be mailed directly
from the degree-granting institution to the address indicated.

Civil Service vacancy announcements are available for viewing at the Office of
Human Resources, Post Office Building, UHM campus, Monday-Friday, 7:45
a.m.-4:30 p.m. and via the OHR home page at
[www.hawaii.edu/dhmr/ohr/](http://www.hawaii.edu/dhmr/ohr/#EMPLOYMENT).



* * *

PositionVacancies

The University of Hawai`i is an equal opportunity/affirmative action
institution. All qualified applicants will be considered, regardless of race,
sex, age, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, disability, marital
status, arrest and court record, sexual orientation or status as a disabled
veteran or veteran of the Vietnam era. Women, members of minority groups,
veterans and persons with disabilities are encouraged to apply. (Persons with
hearing disabilities may call 1-711 or 643-8833.) Applicants with hearing or
speech impairments may use the TDD relay service by calling 1-711.

Employment is contingent on satisfying employment eligibility verification
requirements of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986. Appointments
to positions are subject to campus recruitment guidelines and the collective
bargaining agreement. APT applicants with re-employment rights or priority
status are responsible for informing the recruiting unit, which will verify
eligibility with the employing unit as provided by the BU 08 contract.

Official transcripts must have the official seal of and be mailed directly
from the degree-granting institution to the address indicated.

Civil Service vacancy announcements are available for viewing at the Office of
Human Resources, Post Office Building, UHM campus, Monday-Friday, 7:45
a.m.-4:30 p.m. and via the OHR home page at
[www.hawaii.edu/dhmr/ohr](http://www.hawaii.edu/dhmr/ohr).  


Managerial Positions

**DEAN,** College of Continuing Education and Community Service: UH at Hilo,
position #89057, full-time, general funds, excluded, to begin approximately
07/00. **Duties:** Under the general direction of the vice chancellor for
academic affairs, plans, administers, coordinates and supervises the staff and
programs of the college. Works with collegiate units at the UH at Hilo and the
University system. Works closely with federal, state and community agencies in
cooperative program planning. Secures special grants to support the diverse
learning needs of the community as well as program innovation. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Master's degree from an accredited college or university,
attainment of the rank of associate professor or comparable experience, three
years experience in continuing education administration, demonstrated ability
to work with community groups in a multicultural setting and the demonstrated
ability in program development and budget administration. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Doctorate degree and experience in information
telecommunication technologies; experience in securing and administering funds
from external sources. **Pay Range:** M06-M, with a minimum of $59,520/year.
**To Apply:** Submit a letter explaining how the minimum and desirable
qualifications are met, resume and the names, addresses and telephone numbers
of three references to Kerwin Iwamoto, Human Resources, UH at Hilo, 200 W.
Kawili St., Hilo, HI 96720-4091. First review of applications will begin on
06/21, however, the position will remain open until filled.

Faculty Positions

**LECTURERS FOR THE COLLEGE OF SOCIAL SCIENCES,** for fall 2000 and spring
2001, contingent upon registration, position availability and funding.
Positions are part-time, non-tenure for lecturer candidate pool. **Duties:**
To teach various courses in the departments of Anthropology, Communication,
Economics, Ethnic Studies, Geography, Journalism, Political Science,
Psychology, Sociology, Urban and Regional Planning and the programs of
Population Studies, Women's Studies and Public Administration, and the Spark
M. Matsunaga Institute for Peace. **Minimum Qualifications:** BA, MA or PhD in
appropriate field. If qualified applicants are not available, those not
meeting minimum qualifications may be considered. **Minimum Salary:** $1,000
per credit hour. **To Apply:** Send letter of application with curriculum
vitae and three work-related references to appropriate Department or Program.
When applying, address letter to: Name of Department, Campus Building,
University of Hawai`i, Honolulu, HI 96822 Attn: Lecturer Pool. The names of
departments/programs and campus buildings are: Anthropology Dept, Social
Sciences Bldg 346 // Communication Dept, George Hall 337 // Economics Dept,
Social Sciences Bldg 542 // Ethnic Studies Dept, 1859 East-West Rd, Room 115
// Geography Dept, Social Sciences Bldg 445 // Journalism Dept, Crawford Hall
208 // Political Science Dept, Social Sciences Bldg 640 // Population Studies
Program, Social Sciences Bldg 438 // Psychology Dept, Gartley Hall 110 //
Public Administration Program, Social Sciences Bldg 631 // Sociology Dept ,
Social Sciences Bldg 247 // Spark M. Matsunaga Institute for Peace, Social
Sciences Bldg 717 // Urban and Regional Planning Dept, Social Sciences Bldg
107 // Women's Studies Program, Social Sciences Bldg 722. **Closing Date:**
Continuous Recruitment.

**LECTURER IN PHILIPPINE DRAMA AND FILM,** Department of Hawaiian and Indo-
Pacific Languages and Literatures. Contingent upon registration, position
availability, and funding for fall 2000. **Duties:** To teach the course,
Modern Philippine Drama and Film, maintain office hours, and prepare syllabus
and reports relative to teaching and student progress; work under the
supervision of the Ilokano and Philippine Theatre Program Coordinator in
integrating teaching efforts with the other faculty in the program. **Minimum
Qualifications:** BA in relevant field and demonstrated evidence of successful
college teaching. **Desirable Qualifications:** MA or higher degree in
relevant field. **Minimum Salary:** $1,000 per credit per semester. Send
letter of application, together with resume, phone number and if applicable,
visa status, letters from three current references to Chair, Department of
Hawaiian and Indo-Pacific Languages and Literatures, University of Hawai`i at
Manoa, 2540 Maile Way, Spalding Hall 255, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Telephone:**
(808)956-8672. **Fax:** (808)956-5978. **Closing Date:** 06/21 or until needs
are met.

**LECTURERS.** The School of Travel Industry Management, University of Hawai`i
at Manoa, is recruiting lecturers for the academic year 2000-2001 or for
placement in lecturer pool.These positions are part-time, non-tenurial,
pending enrollment and funding. **Duties:** To teach courses in hospitality
sales, hospitality operations and management, convention management and
marketing, hospitality accounting and/or finance, travel information systems
technology, quantity food production. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's
degree or bachelor's degree and equivalent professional experience. **Desired
Qualifications:** Teaching experience, professional certification, minimum
three years experience in the topic area. **Minimum Salary:** $1,000 per
credit hour. **To Apply:** send resume, copies of transcripts, and names,
addresses, and phone number of three references to: Fredrick M. Collison,
Interim Associate Dean, School of Travel Industry Management, 2560 Campus
Road, George Hall 346, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Inquiries:** 956-8946. **Closing
Date:** 06/30 for fall 2000; continuous recruitment for following semesters or
pool.

**ASSISTANT/ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF OBSTETRICS AND GYNECOLOGY** , M3/M4,
Position No 085697T, Department of OB-GYN, John A. Burns School of Medicine,
University of Hawai`i, 10% FTE, 11-month, temporary, Trust funds, annually
renewable based on performance and availability of funds, non-tenurable, to
begin approximately 08/01. **Duties:** Supervise and teach maternal-fetal
curriculum to medical students and residents at University of Hawai`i, John A.
Burns School of Medicine affiliated hospitals, in both an ambulatory clinic
and tertiary hospital setting. Clinical responsibilities include joining an
existing group composed of four perinatologists. Primarily consultative
practice offering a wide range of perinatal services with an emphasis on
prenatal diagnosis and perinatal outreach. **Minimum Qualifications:**
Assistant: MD degree, residency trained and/or Board certified, fellowship
trained in maternal-fetal medicine and/or Board certified, Hawai`i medical
license, unrestricted hospital privileges and demonstrated ability in teaching
and patient care or equivalent; Associate: MD degree, Diplomate, Board
certified, Hawai`i medical license, unrestricted hospital privileges, proven
ability in research, program administration and seven years of clinical and
teaching experience or equivalent. **Desirable Qualifications:** Strong
interest in medical education. **Minimum Annual Salary (at full-time):**
Assistant $78,924/Associate $92,340. Salary commensurate with qualifications
and experience. **To Apply:** Send CV, letter of application and three letters
of recommendation to Roy Nakayama, MD, Chairman, Department of Obstetrics,
Gynecology and Women's Health, University of Hawai`i, 1319 Punahou St., #824,
Honolulu, HI 96826. **Inquiries:** (808) 956-7457. **Closing Date:** 06/21.

**ASSISTANT/ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR** , (Ad #: HSH-17), Class Code 99630/99640,
Pos. No. 088687T and No. 088813T. Pay Range M3/M4, UH John A. Burns School of
Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, 100% FTE, temp general funds, 11-month,
temporary, non-tenurable, to begin approximately 07/00 pending position
clearance and funding availability, and is annually renewable dependent on
funding and/or performance. The UH School of Medicine and the State of Hawai`i
Adult Mental Health Division are jointly recruiting for the Department of
Health, Adult Mental Health Division which includes the Hawai`i State
Hospital. **Duties:** Positions will be responsible for the care and treatment
of the chronically mentally ill and for the teaching and training of medical
students and residents. **Minimum Qualifications:** Assistant Professor: MD
degree, eligible for Hawai`i license (NBME or FLEX). Board Eligible/Board
Certified, clinical experience and interest in chronic mental illness/forensic
psychiatry/child & adolescent psychiatry, and demonstrated ability in teaching
of medical students and residents in psychiatry. Associate Professor: same as
Assistant Professor plus Board Certified, four years in the Assistant
Professor rank or seven years clinical and teaching experience or the
equivalent, and proven ability in teaching, research and program
administration. **Desirable Qualifications:** Scientific publications.
**Minimum** **Annual Salary:** Assistant Professor $78,924; Associate
Professor $92,340. Appointment will be based on individual's qualifications
and work experience. Salary will commensurate with qualifications and
experience. **To Apply:** Send letter of application (referencing ad #HSH-17),
CV, and three letters of recommendation to Naleen N. Andrade, MD, Chair, UH
School of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, 1356 Lusitana Street, 4th Floor,
Honolulu, HI 96813. **Closing Date:** 06/28. Continuous recruitment until
position is filled; however, only applications postmarked by 06/28 are assured
of receiving full consideration.

**ASSISTANT/ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR** , (Ad #: HSH-16), Class Code 99630/99640,
Pos. No. 085752T, No. 087118T and No. 085589T. Pay Range M3/M4, UH John A.
Burns School of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, 100% FTE, temp general
funds, 11-month, temporary, non-tenurable, to begin approximately 07/00
pending position clearance and funding availability, and is annually renewable
dependent on funding and/or performance. The UH School of Medicine and the
State of Hawai`i Adult Mental Health Division are jointly recruiting for the
Department of Health, Adult Mental Health Division which includes the Hawai`i
State Hospital. **Duties:** Positions will be responsible for the care and
treatment of the chronically mentally ill and for the teaching and training of
medical students and residents. **Minimum Qualifications:** Assistant
Professor: MD degree, eligible for Hawai`i license (NBME or FLEX). Board
Eligible/Board Certified, clinical experience and interest in chronic mental
illness/forensic psychiatry/child & adolescent psychiatry, and demonstrated
ability in teaching of medical students and residents in psychiatry. Associate
Professor: same as Assistant Professor plus Board Certified, four years in the
Assistant Professor rank or seven years clinical and teaching experience or
the equivalent, and proven ability in teaching, research and program
administration. **Desirable Qualifications:** Scientific publications.
**Minimum** **Annual Salary:** Assistant Professor $78,924; Associate
Professor $92,340. Appointment will be based on individual's qualifications
and work experience. Salary will commensurate with qualifications and
experience. **To Apply:** Send letter of application (referencing ad #HSH-16),
CV, and three letters of recommendation to Naleen N. Andrade, MD, Chair, UH
School of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, 1356 Lusitana Street, 4th Floor,
Honolulu, HI 96813. **Closing Date:** 06/28. Continuous recruitment until
position is filled; however, only applications postmarked by June 28 are
assured of receiving full consideration.

**ASSISTANT PROFESSOR** , Position No. 0088815T, M3, University of Hawai`i,
John A. Burns School of Medicine, Department of Family Practice and Community
Health and the Native Hawaiian Center of Excellence, located at the University
of Hawai`i at Manoa and The Physician Center in Mililani, part-time, 11-month,
temporary, non-tenurable, extramural funds, to begin approximately 07/00
pending position clearance and availability of funds, annually renewable
depending on performance and/or funding. **Duties:** Teach and strengthen
medical students' and residents' clinical and research

skills, provide clinical service, conduct research project(s) and assist
administering residency program. Devote 20% of time to the Native Hawaiian
Center of Excellence on one of several on-going projects. **Minimum
Qualifications:** MD or DO degree, eligible for Hawai`i license, residency
trained and/or Board certified, demonstrated ability in teaching and patient
care. **Desirable Qualifications** : Interest in health care research in
Hawai`i and Pacific Basin. **Minimum Annual Salary:** $78,924 (at full time);
salary commensurate with experience and qualifications. Send CV, letter of
interest and three letters of recommendation to Kay A. Bauman, MD, MPH,
University of Hawai`i, Department of Family Practice and Community Health,
95-390 Kuahelani Avenue, Mililani, HI 96789. **Closing Date:** 06/21.

**ASSISTANT/ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE** , Position No. 85692T, M3/M4,
Department of Medicine, John A. Burns School of Medicine, located at St.
Francis Medical Center, part-time/full-time, 11-month, temporary, private
funds, to begin approximately mid 07/00, for one year, annually renewable
depending on performance and/or funding, non-tenurable. **Duties:** Manage and
administer a Critical Care Unit; teach general internal medicine, critical
care medicine and inpatient care to medical students and residents. **Minimum
Qualifications** : (Assistant): MD degree, certified by the American Board of
Internal Medicine (ABIM); Boarded in the subspecialty of Critical Care and
Pulmonary Medicine and demonstrated ability in teaching. (Associate): Same as
an Assistant plus ABIM certification in a subspecialty and four years at the
rank of Assistant Professor or one year at the rank of Associate Professor.
Proven ability to teaching, research and program administration. Experience
and knowledge regarding local critical care issues; Intensive Care Unit
experience. **Minimum Annual Salary** : (Assistant) $78,924 (full-time),
(Associate) $92,340 (full-time). **To Apply:** Send updated curriculum vitae,
bibliography and three letters of recommendation to James E. Hastings, MD,
Professor and Chairman, Department of Medicine, John A. Burns School of
Medicine, University of Hawai`i, 1356 Lusitana Street, 7th Floor, Honolulu,
HI. 96813. **Closing Date:** 06/21.

**INSTRUCTOR IN HUMAN DEVELOPMENT,** Position number 86938, Kapi`olani CC,
Social Science Department, full-time, tenurial, 9-month contract, general
funds to begin approximately 08/00, pending position clearance, availability
of funds and actual staffing requirements. **Duties:** Under general
supervision to teach college-level human development classes. Must articulate
instructional objectives in terms of competencies; develop student thinking
skills as part of the writing process; and, where appropriate, use multimedia
resources, including computers and computer-mediated communications, as part
of the instructional strategy. Related work activities include, but are not
limited to, advising and counseling students; assisting in campus-related
student activities; participating in faculty and administrative committees and
community service; maintaining an approved program of professional
development; collecting data and preparing reports; preparing, adapting and
revising course objectives; independently planning, organizing, delivering and
evaluating instruction; and maintaining at least one office hour per week for
each course taught. Evening classes, distance education and/or noncredit
instruction may be assigned as part of the regular workload. **Minimum
Qualifications:** MA in human development. **Desirable Qualifications:**
Successful community college and/or university teaching experience as
substantiated by student and peer assessments; research experience; PhD;
ability to integrate Hawai`i, Pacific and Asia content; knowledge of writing-
intensive, community-based, and online instructional strategies. **Pay
Range:** C2, $32,028/annum, $2,669/month, minimum. Salary commensurate with
education/ experience. **To Apply:** Send community college application (CC
Form 27A, available at
[www.hawaii.edu/ohr/bor/forms/uh27.pdf](http://www.hawaii.edu/ohr/bor/forms/uh27.pdf)),
official transcripts, and three letters of recommendation to Robert Franco,
Chair, Social Science Department, Kapi`olani Community College, 4303 Diamond
Head Road, Honolulu, HI. 96816. **Inquiries:** 808-734-9438. **Closing Date:**
06/20. All materials must be postmarked no later than the closing date.
Minimum qualifications must be met by the effective date of the appointment
(08/01).

**ASSISTANT/ASSOCIATE RESEARCHER;** Position No. 86227, Cancer Research Center
of Hawai`i, University of Hawai`i at Manoa; full-time; 11-month, tenure-track,
to begin approximately 08/00. The Cancer Research Center of Hawai`i, an NCI-
designated Cancer Center at the University of Hawai`i, invites applications
for a tenure-track position at the Assistant or Associate Researcher level in
the area of molecular genetics of cancer. **Duties:** The successful applicant
will be expected to establish an independent research program that will
complement existing research in the multidisciplinary Cancer Etiology Program.
The unique ethnic composition of Hawai`i provides for excellent opportunities
to conduct genetics research. It is anticipated that this individual will also
interact closely with the Genomics Shared Resource of the Center. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Assistant: MD or PhD degree and a record of published
research in the field of molecular biology. Associate: MD or PhD degree, four
years experience at Assistant level and strong record of published research in
the field of molecular biology. **Pay Range:** Minimum salary: Assistant
$40,524; Associate $51,264. Rank and salary commensurate with qualifications
and experience. **To Apply:** Send letter of application, curriculum vitae,
statement of research interests, and the names and addresses of three
references to Carl-Wilhelm Vogel, MD, PhD, Director, Cancer Research Center of
Hawai`i, 1236 Lauhala Street, Honolulu, HI 96813. **Inquiries:**
(808)586-3013; Web site: [www.hawaii.edu/crch](http://www.hawaii.edu/crch);
E-mail: [personnel@crch.hawaii.edu](mailto:personnel@crch.hawaii.edu).
**Closing Date:** Position will remain open until filled.

**LECTURER IN SPEECH,** Hawai`i CC, part-time, non-tenurial, for lecturer
candidate pool, assignments as needed, contingent on availability of funds and
actual staffing requirements. This is for lectureship in both Hilo and West
Hawai`i. May include instructional assignment involving distance education.
Possible evening, weekend and off-campus assignments. **Duties:** Conduct
courses of instruction, prepare and revise course objectives, identify a range
of student learning needs, and implement constructive responses to them; plan,
organize and carry out instructional and non-instructional assignments;
conduct academic advising of students; develop and maintain a professional
self-improvement plan; participate in division, college, and university
service as appropriate; perform related duties as assigned. Maintain at least
one office hour/week for each class taught. **Minimum Qualifications:**
Master's degree in speech or related fields. **Desirable Qualifications:**
Community College teaching experience; ability to work with peers and
vocational and liberal arts students in a multicultural environment;
experience in curriculum development, telecommunications, distance learning
and broadcast production. **Minimum Salary:** $1,000 per credit hour. **To
Apply:** Send Community College application and transcript(s) (official or
copy) to: Dean of Instruction, Hawai`i CC, 200 W. Kawili Street, Hilo, HI
96720-4091. Materials submitted will not be returned. Appt. is contingent upon
verification of all MQs and any additional qualifications used to justify an
above minimum salary, incl. official transcripts, licenses, certificates and
work exp. documentation. All MQs must be met by effective date of hire.
**Inquiries:** (808)974-7484. **Closing Date:** Continuous recruitment until
needs are met.

**INSTRUCTOR (Counselor),** Position No. 86475, University of Hawai`i Center,
West Hawai`i, Student Services, full-time, permanent, 11-month appointment,
general funds, to begin approximately 08/01, tenurial, pending position
clearance and availability of funds. Assignments may include day, evening
and/or weekend, and on and off campus. **Duties:** Expected focus will be
academic counseling for new, continuing, and transfer students at the two-
year/community college level. Provide information to design a transfer plan to
prepare students for entry into the four year and graduate programs of UH
institutions delivered at the center. Provide liaison services for students to
access academic and student support services from the institutions delivering
programs at the center. Provide retention and transition services which
include academic and financial aid advising, transfer credit evaluations, and
transfer counseling. Team with other Student Services staff to provide
recruitment, orientation, and registration services. Provide range of services
to include admissions, academic, career and transfer counseling. Deliver
student success workshops, student life services, service to special
populations and disabilities services as may be needed. Utilize technology,
i.e. Internet, HITS-Hawai`i Interactive Television, telephone, and e-mail to
provide these support services as appropriate. Teach specific courses, both
credit and noncredit to support student orientation and success, and as
appropriate, design and offer these courses via the Internet. New and/or
changing responsibilities reflective of programming needs will be required.
**Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree in counseling and guidance,
counseling psychology, college student personnel services, human resources or
related fields; OR bachelor's degree in any of the above fields or related
fields and three years of related work experience. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Postsecondary counseling experience. Experience evaluating
transcripts. Knowledge of community college philosophy and purpose.
Understanding of community college academic and vocational/technical programs.
Knowledge of distance education models of higher education and the impact on
academic and student support services. Experience with distance education
models of higher education and integrating student support services into the
delivery. Knowledge of how to utilize technology in the design and delivery of
student support services. Community college teaching experience. Experience
working with minority, academically under-prepared and/or disadvantaged, and
under-represented students. Financial aid training or experience. Grant
writing experience. **Pay Range:** C2-A, minimum $3,122/month. **To Apply:**
1) submit application (CC Form 27A), 2) transcripts (copies are acceptable,
however, official transcripts will be required at time of hire), 3) name and
phone numbers of three references familiar with job performance, 4) a
statement outlining how you meet the minimum and desirable qualifications, and
5) resume to: Director, University of Hawai`i Center, West Hawai`i, P.O. Box
2059, Kealakekua, HI 96750. Letters of recommendation are welcome. An
incomplete application will not be considered. Materials submitted will not be
returned. All minimum qualifications must be met by the effective date of
appointment. **Inquires:** 322-4850. **Closing Date:** 06/21.

**INSTRUCTOR IN BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES;** Position No. 86496V; Hawai`i CC,
University of Hawai`i Center at West Hawai`i, 60-100% time depending upon
course offerings and student demand, 9-month appointment, general funds, to
begin approximately 08/00, non-tenurial, temporary, pending position
clearance, availability of funds and actual staffing requirements. May include
instructional assignment involving distance education or non-credit courses.
Possible evening, weekend and off-campus assignments. **Duties:** Under
general supervision conduct biological science courses and labs in human
biology, general biology, human anatomy and physiology, general botany,
microbiology and principles of zoology. Maintain the lab with adequate
supplies and equipment. Ensure compliance with biosafety regulations for a
biological science laboratory. Ensure compliance with OSHA, HIOSH, EPA
regulation for chemical importation and chemical waste disposal. Maintain a
professional self-development plan. Other related work activities include, but
are not limited to: advising students; assisting in campus related activities;
participating in faculty administrative committees, community service and in-
service training; maintaining office hours; working with other faculty members
in preparing, adapting and revising program objectives; perform related duties
as assigned. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree in biological
sciences (biology, botany, microbiology or zoology). **Desirable
Qualifications:** Three years of continuous, hands-on laboratory experience.
Teaching experience at the community college level; Demonstrated ability to
teach lecture and lab course in the biological sciences. Familiar with
biosafety regulations for biological sciences laboratory; Demonstrated ability
to work with peers and students in a multicultural setting. **Pay Range:** C2,
minimum $2,669/month @100% FTE. **To Apply:** Submit postmarked by closing
date, (1) application (CC Form, 27A), (2) transcripts awarding the degree from
an accredited institution (copies are acceptable; however, official
transcripts will be required at the time of hire), (3) a statement outlining
how you meet the minimum and desirable qualifications, and (4) resume to:
Professor Noreen Yamane, Hawai`i CC, Math and Natural Science Division,
Chairperson, 200 West Kawili Street, Hilo, HI 96720-4091. Letters of
recommendation are welcome. An incomplete application will not be considered.
Materials submitted will not be returned. All minimum qualifications must be
met by the effective date of employment. **Inquiries:** (808) 974-7421.
**Closing Date:** 07/05.

**INSTRUCTOR IN FOOD SERVICE (Dining Room Service),** Position, No. 82683,
Food Service and Hospitality Education Department, Kapi`olani CC, temporary,
full-time, 9-month, non-tenurial, general funds, to begin approximately 08/00,
pending position clearance and availability of funds. **Duties:** Under
general supervision, be able to teach courses in dining room service and other
related credit and noncredit courses. Strong emphasis is placed on the
development of customer service skills; incorporate the latest local and
global hospitality industry service trends; develop teaching strategies,
instructional materials and methods which 1) use competency-based instruction,
2) integrate critical thinking skills into instructional methods, 3) emphasize
writing as an important skill for students, 4) utilize technological advances
in both operations and instruction, 5) address the needs of community college
students. Candidate will develop and maintain a professional development
program, maintain office hours as determined by teaching schedule, counsel
students, identify students' learning needs and implement constructive
teaching strategies, prepare and revise course objectives and syllabi; plans,
organizes and carries out instructional and non-instructional assignments
independently. Perform related duties as assigned. Day, evening, and/or
distance education classes may be assigned as part of candidate's regular
workload. Candidate may be assigned off-site instructional or operational
duties as part of regular workload. **Minimum Qualifications:** Bachelor's
degree in subject area plus three years related work experience which may
include professional training; or Associate Degree in subject area plus five
years related work experience which may include training; or 15 college
credits plus seven years of related work experience which may include
professional training, or Master recognition by food services community.
**Desirable Qualifications:** Successful teaching experience in a community
college culinary program or equivalent as substantiated by student, peer, and
administrative assessments; work experience as a dining room manager or
maitre'd with experience in supervising multiple operations and in training
subordinate employees in restaurant service and general customer service
skills; knowledge on operating and service procedures in quick service,
limited service, and full service dining establishments; working knowledge of
various traditional and temporary service styles; Understanding of classic and
contemporary food terminology; well rounded knowledge in mixology and
alcoholic beverage regulations; active involvement in related professional
associations, documented ability to work with a variety of cultures and
audiences. **Pay Range:** C2, $32,028 minimum annual salary. Salary
commensurate with education and work experience. **To Apply:** Send community
college application (CC Personnel Form 27A, available at
[www.ccc.hawaii.edu/ohr/bor/forms/uh27.pfd](http://www.ccc.hawaii.edu/ohr/bor/forms/uh27.pfd)),
official transcripts, three letters of recommendation attesting to job
performance, and a brief statement outlining how you meet the minimum and
desirable qualifications to Alfredo Cabacungan, Chair, Food Service &
Hospitality Education Department, Kapi`olani Community College, 4303 Diamond
Head Road, Honolulu, HI, 96816. **Closing Date:** 07/05. All minimum
qualifications must be met by the effective date of appointment.
**Inquiries:** 734-9485.

**INSTRUCTORS (Nursing);** Maui CC, temporary, non-tenurial, 11 month,
position number 86731X and tenure-leading, 9-month, position number 86682,
beginning 08/00, pending position clearance, availability of funds and actual
staffing requirements. **Duties:** Under general supervision, to teach nursing
courses and conduct seminars in the community college in one or more of the
following areas, medical-surgical, maternal-child, psychiatric nursing, and to
perform related work as assigned. Develop teaching strategies, instructional
materials and methods which: 1) use computer instruction where appropriate, 2)
integrate instruction of appropriate thinking skills into course content, 3)
use competency-based instruction, 4) emphasize writing as an important skill
for students, and 5) address the needs of community college students. Evening
and weekend classes may be assigned as part of regular workload. Duties and
responsibilities may include instructional assignments involving distance
education. **Minimum Qualifications:** Applicants must meet both
education/experience requirement and licensing requirement. Master's degree in
nursing which included content for academic credits in curriculum development,
evaluation, and teaching methods. RN eligible for Hawai`i state license.
License required prior to assumption of clinical responsibilities. IF
QUALIFIED APPLICANTS ARE NOT AVAILABLE, OTHERS WILL BE CONSIDERED AS ACTING
INSTRUCTOR. Bachelor's degree in nursing, (Education must have included
content for academic credits in curriculum, development, evaluation, and
teaching methods and at least three years acute care nursing experience in one
of the areas of teaching expertise within the last five years of date of
application. RN eligible for Hawai`i state license. License required prior to
assumption of clinical responsibilities. **Desirable Qualifications:**
Evidence of successful teaching in a college setting, working with multiethnic
student population, ability to teach critical thinking skills, technical
skills, and writing skills, ability to instruct using technical media and
recent clinical experience in areas of teaching assignment. **Pay Range:**
11-month position, minimum annual salary, C2, $37,464, commensurate with
education and experience. 9-month position, minimum annual salary, C2, $32,028
,commensurate with education and experience. **To Apply:** Submit by closing
date the following information 1) a completed Community College Faculty or
Executive/Managerial application form (CC Personnel Form 27A), 2) official
graduate and undergraduate transcript(s) showing degrees and course work to
date appropriate to the position (transcript copies are acceptable; however,
official transcripts sent directly to Maui Community College from institution
granting credit will be required at the time of hire), 3) documents verifying
work experience or certificate(s) held, 4) resume, 5) names and phone numbers
of three professional references, 6) three letters of recommendation attesting
to job performance and personal character (optional). E-mail and faxed
information may be submitted but originals must be submitted at the time of
hire. All requested documents must be postmarked by the closing date and
information will become the property of the college. Mail To: Nancy Johnson,
Nursing Department, Maui Community College, 310 Ka`ahumanu Avenue, Kahului, HI
96732. **Closing Date:** 07/05. **Inquiries:** 984-3250.

**ASSISTANT/ASSOCIATE RESEARCHER,** position number 86876T, Department of
Geology and Geophysics, School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology
(SOEST), full-time, temporary, non-tenure track, extramural funds, to begin as
soon as possible for one year with extension subject to availability of funds.
**Duties:** Research in volcanology and petrology of basaltic-felsic volcanic
provinces. **Minimum Qualifications:** PhD degree in geological sciences;
scientific research experience (four years for associate rank); and evidence
of obtaining extramural funding. **Desirable Qualifications:** Experience in
field aspects of basaltic and felsic volcanic rocks and in electron microprobe
analysis. **Pay Range:** R3, minimum $3,377/month; R4, minimum $4,272/month.
**To Apply:** submit a statement of interest, resume including list of
publications, and the names and addresses of three referees to Professor
Stephen Self, Department of Geology and Geophysics, School of Ocean and Earth
Science and Technology, University of Hawai`i at Manoa, 2525 Correa Road,
Honolulu, HI 96822 (applications via e-mail will be accepted). **Closing
Date:** 06/21. **Inquiries:** Professor Stephen Self,
[self@soest.hawaii.edu](mailto:self@soest.hawaii.edu).

**ASSISTANT OR ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR (5 positions),** position numbers 82736,
83875, 85359, 85442, 88614, Department of Ocean and Resources Engineering
(ORE), School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology (SOEST), full-time,
9-month, tenure-track, to begin 01/2001. Ocean and Resources Engineering is a
graduate department offering MS and PhD degrees. The program is accredited by
ABET. Program areas of emphasis include coastal engineering, offshore
engineering, ocean resources engineering, and marine bio-product engineering.
These positions are part of a new phase of growth resulting from the
establishment of the Marine Bioproducts Engineering Center (MarBEC) under the
sponsorship of the Engineering Directorate of NSF. The Department of Chemical
Engineering at the University of California at Berkeley is the academic
partner with UHM in MarBEC. MarBEC is an industry/university collaborate
engineering research center for the development of an integrated marine
bioproducts industry for the 21st century. The goal of MarBEC is to develop
the engineering and research foundations to allow a continuum from product
discovery in marine microorganisms to production and processing of high-value
end-products. Candidates in each of the following areas of expertise are
invited to apply: 1) metabolic engineering, functional genomics and biochips
(theoretical or experimental analysis of metabolic pathways for systematic
redirection of cellular activities, microfabrication technology for biological
analysis); 2) materials science engineering (design and synthesis of novel
organic polymeric or semiconductor materials with an emphasis on biological
applications); 3) bioreactor modeling and design (reactor design, kinetics,
heat and mass transfer); 4) sensing and process control (control theory,
mathematical modeling of biological systems, and development of sensors for
bioprocess monitoring); 5) protein separation and purification engineering
(biological separation processes, including chromatography, extraction or
novel separation processes). **Duties:** Develop an externally-funded,
nationally recognized research program and have a strong commitment to
teaching excellence at the graduate level. **Minimum Qualifications:** PhD in
chemical engineering, biochemical engineering, electrical engineering,
environmental engineering, bioengineering, biophysics, cell or molecular
biology with a physical sciences emphasis, or related field; scientific
research experience (four years for associate rank); superior communication
skills; leadership capabilities, and the ability to motivate and inspire
graduate students. **Desirable Qualifications:** university teaching
experience, industrial work experience, record of successful research
experience, ability to establish and maintain effective working relationships
with fellow university faculty, students and industry partners. **To Apply:**
submit a detailed resume, statement of teaching and research interests, copy
of one publication or manuscript, and the names and addresses (including
e-mail) of five references to Professor Alexander Malahoff, Chair of Ocean and
Resources Engineering, University of Hawai`i at Manoa, 2540 Dole Street,
Holmes Hall 402, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date:** 09/01. **Inquiries:**
(808)956-7572. For more information about MarBEC, please visit the Web site at
[www.MarBEC.org/](http://www.MarBEC.org/).

**JUNIOR SPECIALIST;** Position No. 0085244T, College of Education, Dept. of
Teacher Education and Curriculum Studies, Federal funds, full-time, temporary,
non-tenure track, 11-month, appointment beginning approximately 08/14.
Position requires year-round residence on the island of Tutuila, American
Samoa. **Duties:** Act as cohort coordinator for Territorial Teacher Training
Assistance Program (TTTAP), including one or more of the following
instructional duties: teach one of the College of Education foundation
courses; teach one or more methods courses. Provide information regarding
future program needs. Assist in TTTAP evaluation. **Minimum Qualifications:**
Master's degree in education. Three years K-12 teaching experience. Knowledge
of teacher education programs, especially field-based programs. Evidence of
commitment to professional growth and development in teacher education.
**Desirable Qualifications:** Competence and experience in one or more of the
following: teaching education courses at the college level, teaching
elementary math, science, or social studies methods courses, performing the
duties of college coordinator for student teaching, conducting needs
assessment, working in multicultural settings. Demonstrated knowledge of and
experience in the K-12 educational system of American Samoa. Knowledge of and
familiarity with Samoan culture and values. Experience in mentoring university
students. Evidence of interpersonal and communication skills. **Minimum Annual
Salary:** $33,312. **To Apply:** send letter of application addressing how you
meet the minimum and desirable qualifications, official transcripts,
curriculum vitae, and names and phone numbers of three to five references to
Neil Pateman, Search Committee Chair, University of Hawai`i, College of
Education, Dept. of Teacher Education and Curriculum Studies, 1776 University
Avenue, WA2-223, Honolulu, HI 96822. Review of applications will begin on
06/21 and will continue until the position is filled. **For more
information,** contact Neil Pateman at 956-4413 or via e-mail at
[pateman@hawaii.edu](mailto:pateman@hawaii.edu).

**GRADUATE ASSISTANT.** UH Manoa Division of Medical Technology; (0.50 FTE);
private funds; to begin approximately 07/01, continuation pending on
satisfactory performance and availability of funds. **Duties:** Research will
involve the investigation of natural products as anti-atherosclerotic agents
and tasks will include tissue culture, protein electrophoresis,
chromatography, ELISA, RNase protection assay, liver perfusion, etc. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Should be a full-time graduate student enrolled in the
biomedical science or cell and molecular biology graduate program. Should have
a strong background in biochemistry and molecular/cell biology. **Minimum
Salary:** $15,000 \+ tuition waiver + benefits/year. **Apply To:** Andre
Theriault, Division of Medical Technology, John A. Burns School of Medicine,
Biomed Bldg. C-206; 956-8656. **Closing Date:** Position will remain open
until filled.

**INSTRUCTOR,** Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Hawai`i at
Manoa; one full-time, temporary, non-tenurable, position and possibly one part
time temporary, non-tenurable possible, to begin 08/00. **Duties:** Teach
undergraduate courses in physics. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree
in physics; demonstrated teaching ability in multicultural settings.
**Desirable Qualifications:** previous experience in teaching large, lecture
section courses at a university. **Annual Salary:** dependent on experience.
**To Apply:** send letter of application, addressing minimum and desired
qualifications; a curriculum vitae; and names and phone numbers of three
references to: James R. Gaines, Department of Physics, 2505 Correa Road,
Honolulu, HI 96822. **Inquiries:** 956-7087. **Closing Date:** 06/21or until
positions are filled. Applications received after 06/21 may not be given full
consideration.

**POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWSHIP** , Hawai`i Natural Energy Institute, SOEST, federal
funds. To begin approximately 07/01. **Training to be performed:** Participate
in research in the areas of vacuum deposition of thin film semiconductors;
optical, electrical and structural characterization of thin film
semiconductors; and the design, modeling, and testing of photovoltaic and
photoelectrochemical devices for energy conversion and imaging applications.
**Minimum Qualifications:** PhD in physics, engineering or related field. Good
experimental and communication skills. Ability to pursue research with minimum
supervision. **Stipend:** $3,500/month. **To Apply:** submit statement of
research interest, curriculum vitae, the names and phone numbers of three
work-related references, and sample of one relevant authored publication to
Personnel Officer, Hawai`i Natural Energy Institute, 2540 Dole Street, Holmes
246, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date** : Postmarked by 06/21. Incomplete
applications will not be considered. **Inquiries** : Richard Rocheleau at
(808) 956-2337.

**JUNIOR SPECIALIST** , position #85270T, Curriculum Research & Development
Group, full-time, temporary, non-tenure track position, general funds, 07/00
to 07/01, with possible extension. **Duties** : Assist in the development and
dissemination of model secondary mathematics curricula which is consistent
with national standards and which reflects the way students think and learn.
Duties may include: assisting in the overall design of the curriculum as well
as writing lessons and tasks; teaching mathematics classes in grades 6-12;
assisting in data collection and analysis, including participating in teaching
experiments with individual students; and assisting in the development of a
teacher training program and in the dissemination of project materials and
research findings. **Minimum Qualifications** : Master's degree in mathematics
education or related field from a college or university of recognized
standing; experience teaching secondary mathematics. **Desirable
Qualifications** : Experience in curriculum research and development;
experience in teacher training; experience in problem-solving based
instruction. **Minimum Annual Salary** : $34,644; actual salary dependent upon
qualifications and experience. **To Apply** : Send letter of application,
resume, and names of three references to Karyn Yoshioka, 1776 University
Avenue, CM 130, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Inquiries** : Barbara Dougherty,
Director, Mathematics Section 956-6216 or FAX: 956-4984. E-mail:
[bdougher@hawaii.edu ](mailto:bdougher@hawaii.edu)**Closing Date** : 06/21 or
until position is filled.

**LECTURERS** , University Laboratory School, Curriculum Research &
Development Group, for fall 2000 and spring 2001. Lecturers are being sought
to teach at the University Laboratory School in the following subject areas:
**DRAMA/THEATRE ARTS: Duties:** Under general supervision, teach the following
courses (each course is 3 credit hours and meets daily, except as noted):
Greek to Renaissance Period, grade 8; 17th Century to the Modern Period, grade
9; Acting and Stage Craft including one production per school year, grades
10-12 (meets Monday-Thursday). **Minimum Qualifications:** Bachelor's degree
in theatre arts, drama or English with theatre production experience. At least
two years teaching and directing drama/school productions with junior and
senior high school students. **Desirable Qualifications** Master's degree in
the appropriate subject area. **Inquiries:** Loretta Krause, 956-7833.
**FRENCH LANGUAGE: Duties:** Under general supervision, teach one or more of
the following courses (each course is 3 credit hours and meets daily):
Beginning French Language, Grade 10; Intermediate French Language, Grade 11;.
Advanced French Language, Grade 12. **Minimum Qualifications:** Bachelor's
degree in education or French language. Ability to teach the subject and grade
level. **Desired Qualifications:** Master's degree in the appropriate subject
area. Teaching experience in subject and grade level. **Inquires:** Elly
Nielsen, 956-7833. **JAPANESE LANGUAGE: Duties:** Under general supervision,
teach one or more of the following courses (each course is 3 credit hours and
meets daily): Beginning Japanese Language, Grade 10; Intermediate Japanese
Language, Grade 11; Advanced Japanese Language, Grade 12. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Bachelor's degree in education or Japanese Language. Ability
to teach the subject and grade level. **Desired Qualifications:** Master's
degree in the appropriate subject area. Teaching experience in subject and
grade level. **Inquires:** Elly Nielsen, 956-7833. **SECONDARY MATHEMATICS:
Duties:** Under general supervision, teach up to four of the following high
school mathematics courses (each course is 3 credit hours and meets daily
unless specified): Geometry, grade 9 (1 class); Algebra II, grade 10 (2
classes); Precalculus, grade 11 (2 classes); Concepts of Calculus, grade 12 (2
classes). **Minimum Qualifications:** Bachelor's degree in mathematics,
mathematics education, or related field. To teach geometry, candidate must
have successfully completed CRDG Mathematics summer institutes. **Desired
Qualifications:** At least two years experience teaching secondary
mathematics. Knowledge of and experience in problem-based instruction,
student-centered learning and cooperative instructional strategies. Experience
teaching heterogeneously-grouped classes. Philosophy of teaching and learning
consistent with the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM)
standards. **Inquiries:** Cynthia Beppu, 956-6216. **SOCIAL STUDIES: Duties:**
Under general supervision, teach one to five of the following courses (each
course is 3 credit hours and meets daily): World Geography  & early
Civilizations, grade 7; Early America & the U.S. Constitution, grade 8; Modern
History of Hawai`i, grade 9; World History and Geography, grade 10; U.S.
History & Government, grade 11; Ethics, grade 12; Comparative Political &
Economic Systems, grade 12. Assignments are contingent on staffing
requirements. **Minimum Qualifications:** Bachelor's degree in education,
history or the social sciences. Ability to teach the subject and grade level.
**Desired Qualifications:** Master's degree in an appropriate subject.
Teaching experience in subject and grade level. **Inquiries:** Eileen Tamura,
956-6831 or Linda Menton, 956-6719. **Minimum Salary:** $1,000 per credit
hour, $3,000 per course per semester. **To Apply:** Send application letter,
resume, and names of three references to Karyn Yoshioka, University Laboratory
School, 1776 University Avenue, Castle Memorial Hall Room 130, Honolulu, HI
96822. **Closing Date:** 06/21 or until positions are filled.  


Readvertisement of ad that appeared in _Ku Lama_ on 05/12

**JUNIOR ENTOMOLOGIST** , R2, Pos. #85478, College of Tropical Agriculture and
Human Resources, full time, grant funds, to begin approximately 07/00 for one
year, renewal dependent upon satisfactory performance and availability of
funds. **Duties** : Conduct field and laboratory research directed at
analyzing the influence of crop diversification/intercropping on various
lepidoptera pests (e.g., diamondback moth) that infest broccoli; determine
oviposition and survival rates of lepidoptera pests in monoculture and
intercropped broccoli; and evaluate the relationship between yellow
sweetclover leaf canopy establishment and broccoli planting times relative to
optimum lepidopterous pest suppression. **Minimum Qualifications** : PhD in
entomology. Ability to successfully conduct independent laboratory and field
research on crop diversification, IPM and biological control as evidenced by
publications in refereed journals. Knowledge of statistics and experimental
design. Driver's license. **Desirable Qualifications** : Research experience
in vegetable IPM programs and familiarity with broccoli pests and their
natural enemies. **Minimum Monthly Salary** : $2,776. **To Apply:** Submit
application letter, resume, transcript(s), reprints, and arrange to have three
letters of reference sent to Marshall W. Johnson, Department of Entomology,
University of Hawai`i at Manoa, 3050 Maile Way Rm. 310, Honolulu, HI 96822.
**Closing Date** : 06/21. **Inquiries** : (808)956-8432; Fax: (808)956-2428.

**LECTURERS:** Center for Hawaiian Studies, School of Hawaiian, Asian and
Pacific Studies, University of Hawai`i at Manoa, part-time, general funds,
non-tenurial, to begin 08/21 for fall semester and continuous recruitment.
Contingent upon enrollment, position clearance and availability of funds.
**Duties:** To teach lower division courses on traditional Hawaiian
navigation, or courses on cultivation of taro, Hawaiian fiber arts, fishpond
mangement, or introductory courses in Hawaiian studies. **Minimum
Qualifications:** BA in a field of study closely allied to Hawaiian culture,
history, language, and/or arts; working knowledge of Hawaiian language.
**Desirable Qualifications:** MA in a field of study closely allied to
Hawaiian culture, history, language, and/or arts; teaching experience at the
college level, fluency in Hawaiian language, demonstrated knowledge of
Hawaiian cultural traditions. **Pay Range:** Minimum $726 per credit
hour/semester; maximum $1,405 per credit hour/semester. Placement commensurate
with academic degree and teaching experience. **To Apply:** Send letter of
application with current vitae, and names and phone numbers of three work-
related references to Lilikala Kame`eleihiwa, Director, Center for Hawaiian
Studies, 2645 Dole Street, Room 209A, University of Hawai`i at Manoa,
Honolulu, HI 96822. Fax applications not acceptable. **Closing Date:** 06/30
for fall 2000 hire. **Inquiries:** 973-0989.

**JUNIOR RESEARCHER,** R2, Position No. 86163T, UHM, Pacific Biomedical
Research Center, 11-month, temporary, extramural funds, full-time, beginning
07/00, annually renewable dependent on availability of funds. **Duties:** To
provide technical expertise for studies being conducted as part of the
University's Specialized Neurosciences Research Program. The junior researcher
will apply molecular biological techniques in research on pathogenesis of AIDS
Dementia Complex (ADC). Specifically, the incumbent will develop and extend
methods for construction of recombinant viruses to be used in cytotoxic T
lymphocyte (CTL) assays. These assays will measure host immune responses
directed against autologous strains of HIV-1, as a possible mechanism for the
evolution of escape mutants within the infected CNS. In addition, the junior
researcher will refine tissue culture techniques for measurement of
HIV-1-specific CTL responses in samples with low cellnumbers. Finally, the
incumbent will develop sensitive assays, utilizing reverse transcription-
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), to characterize HIV-1 quasispecies in the
CNS and peripheral blood of study subjects. **Minimum Qualifications:** MS in
relevant discipline and experience with expression of proteins in mammalian
cells, preferably by viral-mediated gene transfer; gene amplification and
tissue culture techniques; knowledge of cellular immunology; ability to safely
handle HIV-1. **Desirable Qualifications:** Doctoral level training in
biomedical sciences; ability to conduct independent research. **Minimum
Monthly Salary:** $2776. **To Apply:** Send resume and names of three
references to Allison Imrie, Retrovirology Research laboratory, Le`ahi
Hospital, 3675 Kilauea Avenue, Honolulu, HI 96816. **Closing Date: 0** 6/21.

**JUNIOR RESEARCHER,** R2, Position No. 86160T, Pacific Biomedical Research
Center, Kewalo Marine Laboratory, 11-mo., full-time, federal funds, non-
tenurable, temporary, to begin approximately 07/00, continuation dependent
upon availability of funds. **Duties:** To purify and characterize
antibacterial proteins and peptides from an animal host. To determine the
influence of bacterial products on host cell membrane permeability. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Master's degree in biological sciences with experience in
molecular and cell biology. **Desirable Qualifications:** PhD in biological
sciences. An understanding of animal-bacterial interactions. **Minimum Monthly
Salary:** $2,776. **To Apply:** Send resume to: Margaret McFall-Ngai, Kewalo
Marine Laboratory, 41 Ahui St., Honolulu, HI 96813. **Inquiries:** Margaret
McFall-Ngai, 539-7310. **Closing Date:** 06/21.

**INSTRUCTOR,** Position No. 82599, University of Hawai`i at Manoa, College of
Business Administration, Department of Decision Sciences. Full-time,
temporary, non-tenure track, to begin 08/01 __ subject to position clearance.
Annually renewable upon satisfactory work performance and availability of
funds. **Duties:** Teach undergraduate courses in business information
systems, supervise independent study activities, provide academic support to
students and perform related tasks as assigned. **Minimum Qualifications:** A
master's degree from a college or university of recognized standing with major
work in information systems; demonstrated ability in teaching at the
university level. **Desirable Qualifications:** PhD or working toward a PhD in
information systems from an accredited college or university. **Minimum Annual
Salary:** $36,024. Send updated curriculum vitae and bibliography to William
G. Chismar, Chair, Department of Decision Sciences, College of Business
Administration, University of Hawai`i at Manoa, 2404 Maile Way, Honolulu, HI
96822. **Closing Date:** 06/21.

**ASSISTANT SPECIALIST** , College of Business Administration, UH , Position
No. 85146T, temporary, non-tenure track, general funds, to begin approximately
06/00. **Duties:** Assist with the academic advising of more than 900 students
in the CBA; process academic actions, including degree checks, academic
probation and eligibility for honor societies; coordinate outreach activities
with other UH programs, local high schools and UH system schools, including
the articulation of courses and meeting with counselors and prospective CBA
students; implement a new automated BBA degree audit program; maintain student
academic records and update the student data base; provide support to CBA
student organizations; advise students on equivalent courses and programs
offered by exchange institutions. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree
in relevant field, specifically business administration; 30 credits of
graduate study from a college or university of recognized standing and in a
discipline relevant to field learning. Three years of experience in relevant
area. **Desirable Qualifications:** Strong communication skills; ability to
interact with diverse constituencies; knowledge of basic computer
applications; willingness to travel. **Minimum Annual Salary:** Assistant
$40,524. Send letter of application, curriculum vitae, names and addresses of
three references, and undergraduate and graduate transcripts to Jack P.
Suyderhoud, Associate Dean, College of Business Administration, University of
Hawai`i at , 2404 Maile Way, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date:** 06/21.
**Inquiries:** (808) 956-8377 or Fax (808) 956-9640.

**JUNIOR SPECIALIST (Mental Health Service Provider and Practicum
Instructor),** School of Social Work, UHM, Position No. 083573T, to be located
in a rural mental health setting on the Big Island. 100% FTE 11 month
appointment, non-general funds, to begin as soon as possible to 06/30/01.
Temporary position, continuation dependent upon satisfactory performance and
availability of funds. **Duties:** Provide direct mental health services to
include intensive case management and multi-modality treatment as part of an
interdisciplinary team based at a rural mental health clinic on the Big
Island; participate as an active and contributing member of the
interdisciplinary team; develop community-based support for clients; supervise
first and second year social work graduate students in mental health service
delivery; provide instructional services as needed. **Minimum Qualification:**
Master's degree in social work; two years of clinical mental health experience
including case management services as a member of an interdisciplinary team;
one year experience in practicum supervision. **Desirable Qualifications:**
Five or more years experience in clinical social work including case
management services in a mental health setting; two years experience in
community organization and development; three years experience in practicum
supervision; classroom teaching experience. **Minimum Salary:** $2,776 per
month or commensurate with experience. Send letter of application indicating
how minimum qualifications have been met, a resume, and the names and
addresses of three work-related references to, Jon Matsuoka, Interim Dean and
Professor, School of Social Work, 2500 Campus Road, Hawai`i Hall Room 206B,
Honolulu, HI, 96822. **Inquiries,** call Paula Morelli, at 956-6124. **Closing
Date:** 06/21.

**INSTRUCTOR (Service-Learning Coordinator),** Position No. 86621V, Kapi`olani
CC, Social Science Department, variable FTE ranging from 50% to 100% depending
on course offering and student demand, temporary, 9-month, general funds, to
begin approximately 08/01, pending position clearance, availability of funds,
and actual staffing requirements. **Duties:** Under general supervision
coordinate and promote the Service-Learning Emphasis with specific attention
to student recruitment, orientation, screening, community connection,
evaluation, recognition and database management; and support faculty
professional development in service-learning pedagogy, curriculum, reflection,
assessment and partnerships. Teach credit and noncredit courses in area of
expertise, depending on course offerings and student demands. Instruction is
competency-based, emphasizes writing, may include use of computers, and may
include community-based activities. Related teaching duties include, but are
not limited to: advising and counseling of students; assisting in campus
student activities; participating in college based committees; performing
community service; conducting in-service training; maintaining an approved
program of professional self-development; collecting data and preparing
reports; and evaluating instructional and non-instructional activities. Duties
and responsibilities may include evening, weekend, and/or distance education
classes. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree in any discipline/field
offered by the college. Six months of successful experience in managing a
service-learning program in relation to local and national standards.
**Desirable Qualifications:** Qualification to teach in an academic discipline
needed by the college; community college teaching experience; strong backg

