#  FY 1998 TAF Proposal Abstracts

These are the titles, principle investigators, and abstracts of the twenty-
nine TAF Grant Proposals that were submitted to the Information Systems
Division for the 1997-98 year. They are not listed in any specific order.

  

* * *

###  Web Search and Page Construction as Learning Tools



#####  Stan Franklin, Mathematical Sciences

 A Fall 1997 course on Control of Autonomous Agents will have students search
out cutting edge research on the web and present it. They will then construct
publicly available Web pages reflecting this material. In addition to the
material, students will learn webpage constructor negotiating skills.

  

* * *

###  Online 2601

#####  Maurice A. Crouse, History

Creation of an online parallel to History 2601, United States History to 1877,
an important course in the General Education Requirements of The University of
Memphis, to enable both students and instructors to use a rich diversity of
supplemental resources on the World Wide Web.

* * *

###  A Proposal to Establish an On-Campus Discussion List For the Purpose of
Raising and Discussing Issues Relevant To All Aspects of Teaching, With
Particular Emphasis on The Use of Technology in Instruction

#####  Joseph M. Hawes, History

The proposal will create an on-campus discussion list focusing on teaching and
related issues, with attention given to the use of technology in teaching.
discussion list will be supported by a Web site where materials can be posted
and where an archive will be maintained. The proposal will create an on campus
discussion list focusing on teaching and related issues, with particular
attention given to the use of technology in teaching. The discussion list will
be supported by a Web site where materials can be posted and where an archive
will be maintained A campus wide discussion list ? to which faculty (including
part-time faculty, adjuncts, and teaching assistants) can subscribe ? will be
established and maintained for a one year trial period.

  

* * *

###  Using GIS Software and Data in the International Relations Classroom

#####  T. David Mason, Political Science

GIS software can be used to enhance geographic literacy among students in
international and comparative politics courses. GIS software provides the
instructor with maps of every nation and region in world and permits the use
of maps as a visual presentation media for social, economic, and political
data on nations Use GIS software to increase substantially the number and
variety of maps available for use in classroom presentations.

  

* * *

###  WWW database of student comments assigned readings

#####  William H. O'Donnell, English

Develop and test a WWW site that can replace and expand the usefulness of
reader-response journals, where students write comments on assigned readings.
The goal is to produce a practical, tested, and immediately useful model that
can easily be adapted by faculty in humanities and social science courses.

  

* * *

###  Teaching Introduction to American Government Using World Wide Web
Technology

#####  Kenneth M. Holland, Political Science

A World Wide Web page will be developed for Political Science 1100,
Introduction to American Government. A single WWW page will link students in
all sections with their instructors, each other and course materials and to
web sites accompanying the leading American Government textbooks. The page
will be interactive and provide information in audio, video and text formats.

  

* * *

###  Web-Based Instructional Media for Internet Programming

#####  Gautam Das, Mathematical Sciences

The Internet and the WWW offer unlimited potential as instructional vehicles
in education. We seek to utilize these new technologies in two new courses
that deal with Web-based applications development and Java programming. The
Web will serve both as a subject of the courses as well as a teaching medium.

* * *

###  Improved Chemistry Instruction using the WWW

#####  Peter K. Bridson & Henry A. Kurtz, Chemistry

This project involves the preparation of an addition to the Chemistry
Department website that will present instructional materials and lecture
supplements to students in freshman and organic chemistry. Particular emphasis
will be placed on inclusion of interactive three-dimensional modeling
initially.

* * *

###  Supporting English Web Courses

#####  Emily Thrush, English

I would like to work with 4 other members of the English Department to put
identified courses for Spring, 1998 on the Web using WebCT (or other
university supported web tools).

* * *

###  The Development of Model Instructional System for the Web

#####  Charles J. Long & Xiangen Hu, Psychology

We have both integrated technology into teaching an have 8 courses presently
available on the Web. This proposal seeks support to build on these initial
developments by upgrading the existing material, integrating bulletin boards
sound and video clips, and developing a centralized testing and record system
for courses on the Internet. This proposal seeks support to allow us to
integrate the above into a model Internet course (Psyc. 1101).

* * *

###  Internet Programming Projects

#####  Giri Narasimhan, Mathematical Sciences

How to design programs or documents to be used with Web Browsers? These and
other Internet Programming skills are taught in several computer science
courses, both graduate and undergraduate. Projects for these courses are
designed to demonstrate how to be an "active" participant in the World Wide
Web.

  

* * *

###  Using the Apple Internet Server Solution (AISS) to Develop an English
Department Web Server and Train a Cadre of Webmasters

#####  Bill DeLoach, Brad Harris, et al., English

To jump-start English Department use of the Internet, we will develop a Mac-OS
based Web site modeled on one of the best sites in our discipline-The English
Server at Carnegie-Mellon University. We will train a cadre of student,
faculty, and staff Webmasters to help in running the site.

  

* * *

###  Interactive Accounting

#####  J. David Spiceland, School of Accountancy

Develop and maintain on the internet an interconnected set of webpages that
will make available (a) a wide variety of course resources and (b) all, or
significant portions of, the students1 textbook reproduced in an on-line
format that permits real-time viewing and hot-links among and within chapters.

  

* * *

###  Development of Multimedia, Interactive Nursing Curricula for the World
Wide Web : Facilitating Course Mastery Reaching the Distance Learner

#####  William Robert Bartlett, Loewenberg School of Nursing

This project will be completed in three phases: 1. Development of dynamic,
interactive WWW pages to be utilized as tutorial modules and clinical
simulations for NURS 3000, Pharmacology in Nursing. 2. Using the modules as a
template for launching the pharmacology course on the WWW. 3\. Replicating the
pharmacology template with other nursing courses currently offered in the
compressed video format.

  

* * *

###  Access to the Web at CERI

#####  Paul Rydelek, CERI

Student theses and faculty projects in the Geophysics/Geology programs at the
Center for Earthquake Research and Information (CERI) often require
geophysical (and other) data and analysis software that are available over the
World Wide Web. Much, if not all, of this software has been developed for PC
based platforms, which is incompatible with the present Macintosh systems at
CERI. Funds are requested to provide hardware and software that will be able
to access and use these valuable on-line resources We have no compatible way
to run PC executable code on our computer platforms. Install a 686/M2 class PC
computer running Windows NT that will be used as a general work station to
download data and/or run acquired programs from web sites as the need arises.

* * *

###  Critical Readers in an Internet Academic Community

#####  Kathryn S. Hawes, Developmental Studies

Critical Readers in an Internet Academic Community is a computer-based
collaborative student inquiry into social issues to clarify a point of view.
The instructor facilitates project-based learning as she teaches teams to
access internet sources and communicate via e-mail and ListServ or
newsgroup/bulletin board programs. Students continuously improve critical and
analytical skills as they react to peer products

* * *

###  FACTS: Freshman ACAD 1100 Computer/Technology Success

#####  Susan Magun-Jackson, Freshman Orientation Program, ACAD 1100

This project will infuse the use of technology and the World Wide Web in a
Freshman Orientation Course through on-line instructional training,
student/instructor conferencing, and student group projects. ACAD 1100, annual
enrollment of 800-900 students, has a history of success in improving student
academic performance and retention at this university.

* * *

###  Intermediate Algebra + Web Resources = Prepared Students

#####  Jeanette W. Glover, Developmental Studies

By incorporating on-line computation and problem-solving practice, student-
teacher interaction, and student collaboration into a traditional lecture-
discussion intermediate algebra class, students in this pilot course will
develop their algebra skills as well as prepare themselves for using computers
in a variety of ways in other courses Promote high expectations for students
by assuming that the mean score on the paper/ pencil comprehensive final
examination will be at least as high as the exam scores for a comparison
class.

* * *

###  Composition Online

#####  Betty Spence, Developmental Studies

Composition Online is an enhanced composition course. It prepares students for
college writing and the technological challenges of the 21 st Century. While
learning effective writing skills, students gain proficiency in Windows, MS
Word, and e mail, and access the World Wide Web for information and real time
global conferencing with writers and peers.

  

* * *

###  Web Enhanced Team Work and Office Hours

#####  Robert A. Malkin, Biomedical Engineering

Two innovations are described: (1) Web-enhanced office hours primarily
accomplished with asynchronous conferencing tools, and (2) Web-facilitated
team work primarily accomplished with team-ready web-document preparation
tools.

  

* * *

###  A Web Based Introduction to Network Programming

#####  Russell Deaton, Electrical Engineering

This project is to develop a Web-based course in critical technologies for the
Internet and World Wide Web. The core technologies are the Internet TCP/IP
protocol model, object-oriented programming with Java, and programming for the
Web. Computer projects and local industry participation are emphasized The
goal of the project is to develop a course that introduces engineering and
computer science students to three critical technologies for internet
applications and commerce: 1) The Internet, 2) Object Oriented Programming
with Java, and 3) the World Wide Web.The course will be based around a
sequence of computer projects that emphasize the main topics and that compare
and contrast different operating systems, programming styles, and network
technologies. A large component of the course will be constructed around
online learning, such as a WWW-based tutorial, online submission of
assignments, online office hours, and online review of video lectures.

  

* * *

###  A Web-Based Civil Engineering Tutorial System (CETS)

#####  Charles Camp, Shahram Pezeshk, and Paul Palazolo, Civil Engineering

This project will initiate the development of a web-based tutorial system for
Civil Engineering students. The system which will incorporate the following
web-based learning paradigms: a collaborative learning environment, multimedia
presentations, reinforcement of course concepts, provision for up--o-date
information, and provision for global resources.

* * *

###  The Application of the World Wide Web as an Art History Resource Tool

#####  Cathy Siegel/Lynn Cunningham CFA (Art)

This proposal seeks funding to initiate a pilot Website for the introductory
course World Art II, to exhibit art history images and their accompanying data
as a study resource for students.* This pilot project will establish the
foundations of a digital-image database and serve as a prototype for up to
fifty sections of Art 1101 and other courses to be added to the Website in
subsequent semesters.

  

* * *

###  "Unitus" Revue Wall

#####  James Gholson, Music

The "Unitus" bulletin board system proposes the development of a "Revue" wall
to house critiques and reviews written by music majors at the University of
Memphis. The project will stimulate theoretical , historical, and critical
study of music events at the university and be accessible to distance
learners.

* * *

###  Internet Access for Music Technology Lab

#####  B. Glenn Chandler, Music

The Department of Music has a Music Technology Lab with 16 workstations, built
partly with TAF funds. This lab does not have Ethernet connectivity to the
rest of the campus or the Internet. By wiring the MTL, 400+ music students and
20+ music faculty would gain access to these network resources.

  

* * *

###  Weaving the Web: The Net in Interior Design Education

#####  Cynthia Mohr, David Pohl, and Randle Witherington, ART

Through this project students will be introduced to web practices in fourteen
design classes during the school year. Participating students will benefit
from the ability to gather industry information in a concise and accessible
format. Activities include the development of individual web pages to
represent student work to potential employers.

* * *

###  Graphics Instruction on-line

#####  Arthur A. Terry, Journalism

I would like to develop a course of instruction which would enable the
department of Journalism to teach graphics courses across the Internet. This
would include, but would not be limited to, courses in vector-based drawing
programs such as Illustrator, Freehand and Corel, courses using image editing
programs such as Photoshop and desktop publishing courses using pagination
programs like Quark and PageMaker.

  

* * *

###  Integrating the World Wide Web and EDPR 2111- Human Development Across
the Life Span

#####  Jean A. Steitz, Counseling, Educational Psychology and Research

This project represents the initial stage of a multistage effort to re-think,
enhance, and re-design the structure and delivery of EDPR 2111 (330 + students
per semester) through the incorporation of technology and World Wide Web in a
new multilayered course syllabus, use of virtual office hours, and interactive
conferencing with students. Re-think and redesign the structure and delivery
of the EDPR 2111 course through the incorporation of technology and the WWW.

  

* * *

###  Comprehensive Course Resource Delivery System via HTML for HMSE 1100

#####  Melvin A. Humphreys (PI) (David J. Anspaugh & Michael H. Hamrick) Human
Movement Science and Education

We propose to develop a Comprehensive Course Resource Delivery System (C2RDS)
using html and the world wide web to enhance,enrich, and supplement the
teaching and learning in this course.

* * *

[Back to IT Academic Advisory Committee Information](/committees/itaac/)
[Back to Academic Systems](/depts/acadsys/)  [Back to Information
Systems](http://is.memphis.edu/)  [Back to The University of Memphis Home
Page](http://www.memphis.edu)

