![](sidebar.gif) |  

# Graduate Brochure -- 2001-2002

* * *

    * Capsule Description of the Department
    * Computer Facilities
    * Colloquia, Lecture Series, Seminars
    * Applied/Applicable and Pure/Core Mathematics
    * Statistics
    * Graduate Programs
      * Ph.D. Program in Mathematics
        * Ph.D. Mathematics Preliminary Exam Syllabi
      * Ph.D. Program in Computational and Applied Mathematics
      * M.A. Program in Mathematics
      * M.A. Program in Mathematics (Actuarial Focus)
      * M.S. Program in Computational and Applied Mathematics
      * M.S. Program in Statistics
    * Course Offerings
    * Financial Support
      * Teaching Assistantships and Assistant Instructorships
      * Graduate Research Assistantships
      * Fellowships
      * Cost of Study
    * How to Apply for Admission and Financial Assistance
    * City of Austin
    * Faculty

* * *

* * *

#  Contacts

    * **Department Chairman:** Efraim P. Armendariz, [efraim@math.utexas.edu](mailto:efraim@math.utexas.edu)
    * **Graduate Advisor:** Bruce Palka, [gradadv@math.utexas.edu](mailto:gradadv@math.utexas.edu)
    * **Graduate Coordinator:** Ben Garcia [bgarcia@math.utexas.edu](mailto:bgarcia@math.utexas.edu)
    * **Departmental Telephone:** 512-471-7711
    * **FAX:** 512-471-9038

* * *

* * *

#  Capsule Description of the Department

The faculty of the Mathematics Department comprises 52 regular, full-time
members and a varying number of emeritus, temporary or part-time members.
Several individuals have joint appointments with other departments, such as
Computer Sciences, Curriculum and Instruction, and General Business.

Approximately 140 graduate students are currently enrolled in degree programs
in the Department. For the most part, recent recipients of Ph.D.s from the
Department have found employment teaching in colleges and universities.
Holders of Texas Master's Degrees in Mathematics represent a wide variety of
professions, working as teachers at the primary, secondary or junior college
level, statisticians, actuaries, and computer programmers, to name a few.
Others have continued their educations at Texas or elsewhere in pursuit of
doctorates.

In 1984 the University launched a major program to spur development in a few
designated thrust areas of science and engineering, one of which was
Mathematics. To serve as centerpiece for this effort, the administration
created thirty-two handsomely endowed chair positions. The Department of
Mathematics was awarded four of the chairs. These positions are currently
filled by individuals of universally recognized distinction: Luis Caffarelli,
Cameron Gordon, John Tate and Karen Uhlenbeck. The program of chairs has
stimulated faculty recruitment at all levels.

In 1993 the University established an interdisciplinary program for graduate
education and research in Computational and Applied Mathematics (CAM). Jerry
Bona, one of the nation's most respected applied mathematicians, was appointed
to fill the first Chair in Computational and Applied Mathematics and thereby
to assume the leadership in developing the Department's contributions to the
CAM endeavor. At the same time, the College of Engineering hired into Chair
positions two premier numerical analysts, Ivo Babuska and Mary Wheeler, to
advance its build-up in the CAM area. New University initiatives are now
underway in Digital Science and Computational Biology. These are expected to
have a broad interface with Mathematics and the CAM program.  

* * *

#  Computer Facilities

The Department of Mathematics maintains a state-of-the-art computer network to
facilitate, research, and departmental administration. This is predominantly a
UNIX-based system consisting of Linux PC's and servers, with a few Sun
workstations and a number of Apple Macintosh systems. Every graduate student
office contains at least one Linux PC. Within the department, there are five
computer labs available for general use, including one 40-seat instructional
laboratory for its undergraduate mathematics program. The department's web
page (http://www.ma.utexas.edu) offers easy access and links to mathematics
information, locally developed mathematical software, and our internationally
recognized Mathematical Physics Electronic Journal (MPEJ) and preprint archive
(mp_arc). The most important element of the departmental computer operation is
the ready availability of innovative mathematical and instructional software
and free computer resources that create an environment conducive to
experimentation and exploration by faculty and students alike.

The University's Academic Computing and Instructional Technology Services
provides extensive on-campus computing facilities. In addition, the High
Performance Computing Facility (HPCF) at the Pickle Research Campus in north
Austin maintains two multi-processor Cray J90 supercomputers and will shortly
install a Cray T3E Parallel System. HPCF and the Texas Institute for
Computational and Applied Mathematics jointly run a Visualization Lab for
computer graphics centered on a Silicon Graphics Power Onyx system in ACES
Hall, as well as a beowulf cluster for high performance parallel processing.

* * *

#  Colloquia, Lecture Series, Seminars

The Department has a regular weekly colloquium. It also hosts two
Distinguished Lecturer Series, which yearly feature some of the world's
outstanding mathematicians. As a rule, these individuals remain in residence
in the Department for a week or longer, during which time they are available
for interaction with local faculty and students. Speakers during the past year
included Alexander Bobylev (applied mathematics), David Boyd (number theory),
Stephen Childress (analysis), Demetri Christodoulou (partial differential
equations), Giovanni Gallavotti (mathematical physics), David Harbater
(algebra), William Jaco (topology), Carlos Kenig (analysis), Sergiu Klainerman
(analysis), Serge Lang (algebra), Anatoly Neishtadt (mathematical physics),
John Neuberger (analysis), Peter Olver (mathematical physics), Ken Ono (number
theory), Tristan Riviere (analysis), Karl Rubin (number theory), Martin
Scharlemann (topology), Wolfgang Schmidt (number theory), Chi-Wang Shu
(applied mathematics), Takis Souganidis (applied analysis), Ian Stewart
(topology), De Witt Sumners (mathematical biology), Nicole Tomczak-Jaegermann
(analysis), Eugene Wachspress (applied mathematics), C. Eugene Wayne
(mathematical physics), Thaleia Zariphopoulou (financial mathematics), and a
host of others. An Introduction to Research lecture series, to which speakers
are invited because of their national reputations as fine expositors of
mathematics, is aimed at and extremely popular among graduate students.

Various groups within the Department sponsor regular seminars for faculty and
graduate students. Some of these are designed for students with a modest
background in the field under study; others target students at a more advanced
level. Naturally, the participants and the topics for the seminars change from
year to year. In recent years there have been seminars in mathematical
physics, topology, Banach spaces, harmonic analysis, complex analysis, partial
differential equations, computational and applied mathematics, number theory,
dynamical systems, differential geometry, gauge theory, iterative methods,
statistics, algebra, and algebraic geometry. It is expected that most of these
will continue during the coming year.

* * *

#  Applied/Applicable and Pure/Core Mathematics

Because of its long association with Robert L. Moore, the Department has
historically been viewed as a bastion of pure mathematics, especially strong
in Moore's own field of topology, whose policy it was to downplay applied
areas. To be sure, the Department's internationally recognized and respected
research groups in low-dimensional topology, differential geometry, Banach
space theory, harmonic analysis, ring theory, number theory and dynamical
systems bear witness to the fact that the traditional strength of Texas in the
pure (or core) areas of Mathematics persists. Many active seminars are
available to students with interests in these core areas. What might come as
something of a surprise, however, is the rapid growth of interest in
applicable mathematics at Texas, as evidenced by the Department's strong group
in mathematical physics, its appreciable strength in differential equations,
its solid reputation in probability and statistics, and its increasing
emphasis on computational mathematics. Moreover, other departments on campus
offer courses in -- and even extend to Mathematics graduate students the
option of undertaking Master's or Ph.D. work in -- such applied areas as
operations research, mathematical physics, optimization theory, optimal
control theory, numerical computation, engineering mechanics, statistics, et
cetera. Indeed, in Fall 1993 the Department of Mathematics, in conjunction
with the College of Engineering and the Departments of Computer Sciences and
Physics, instituted inter-disciplinary M.S. and Ph.D. degree programs in
Computational and Applied Mathematics. Certain seminars are likewise sponsored
jointly with other departments. Such seminars ran last year in mathematical
physics (with Physics), non-linear partial differential equations (with
Engineering Mechanics), numerical analysis (with Computer Sciences), and
applied statistics (with General Business).

* * *

#  Statistics

Statistics is the science and art of planning and modelling stochastic
observations and making inferences from them. The theories and methods for
doing this use a wide range of mathematics, including probability, analysis,
numerical analysis, and computing. Much of the mathematics is applied through
the medium of statistics to the physical and social sciences, medicine,
business, engineering, and many other areas. Statistics is a relatively new
field; however, because it has become so important, the National Science
Foundation has reported that in the future statistics, along with computer
sciences, will be one of the scientific fields with the highest employment
demand.

The mathematics department regularly offers graduate courses in statistics and
administers an interdisciplinary Master's in Statistics program.

* * *

#  Graduate Programs

##  Ph.D. Program in Mathematics

**Requirements for Ph.D. Degree in Mathematics**

The steps in obtaining a Ph.D. degree in Mathematics are as follows:

    1. passing three preliminary exams. 
    2. selection of an area of specialization and appointment of an advisory committee. 
    3. passing a candidacy exam in the area of specialization. 
    4. certification by the advisory committee of the candidate's knowledge of the chosen area and of the adequacy of the proposed program of coursework. 
    5. completion of any remaining Graduate School requirements and formal admission to Ph.D. candidacy. 
    6. writing a dissertation. 
    7. passing a final oral exam on the dissertation research. 

A description of each step follows.

**1.   Preliminary Examinations**

Preliminary examinations are offered in four areas:  Algebra, Analysis,
Applied Mathematics, Topology.  A Ph.D. student must establish his or her
competence in three of these areas, either by passing three of the associated
exams or by passing the exams in two of the areas and completing the prelim
option discussed below in the third area.  Each preliminary exam is based upon
the topics in a corresponding syllabus.  It is intended that these topics be
accessible to a student  who has completed a designated two-semester core
sequence of courses treating the examination area, although it is not
necessarily the case that every one of these topics will actually be covered
in the core courses.

Week-long preliminary examination periods occur twice yearly, typically just
before the beginning of each fall and spring semester.  Each preliminary exam
is a  written exam of at least three hours' duration.  A student may attempt
an exam in a particular area at most three times.

A student may select one area in which to bypass the preliminary exam, the
only restriction being that the student has completed the associated course
sequence with a grade of "A" for each semester.  The student can then
substitute for passage of the prelim exam in the designated area a specific
program of work that is proposed by the student, approved by the Graduate
Advisor and supervised by  a member of the Graduate Studies Committee (GSC).
This program or work will  consist of two post-prelim courses in the chosen
area, at least one of which must be an organized course (i.e., not a reading
course), along with the presentation  of a 50 minute lecture on some
reasonably advanced topic in the area.  The lecture will be announced in the
department calendar, and attendance will be open to all mathematics faculty
and graduate students.  (The logical forum for such a lecture would be the
regular department seminar in the specified area.)  In order for  a student to
exercise this option, all of its provisions must be fulfilled by the end of
the spring semester of the student's second year in the Ph.D. program.  If the
student has passed two prelim exams by January of the second year and uses
this alternate prelim option in his or her dissertation area, the required
lecture can, at  the discretion of the student's Ph.D. supervisor, serve as
part of the candidacy exam.

A student who wants to do interdisciplinary research (e.g., mathematical
biology) may replace one of the prelim exams by an exam that covers material
primarily from the other discipline (e.g., biology).  A syllabus for such an
exam shall be developed with input from suitable faculty.  The student shall
submit that syllabus to  the ASGSC (Administrative Subcommittee of the GSC)
for approval.  If the syllabus is approved by the ASGSC, then the Chair of the
GSC shall appoint three people to serve on the exam committee, and the exam
may be either written or oral as determined by that exam committee.

A student who has taken graduate level courses at another university may
petition the ASGSC for prelim relief in one or more areas.

A student who is admitted to the Ph.D. program immediately after completing a
Master's degree in mathematics at this university will be awarded credit for
passing  the prelim in the subject area of the Master's thesis or report,
provided that the program of coursework for the Master's degree includes the
prelim sequence of courses in that area.  This will be regarded as the
equivalent of the prelim option discussed in a previous paragraph - hence,
will exhaust that option.

In order to continue in the Ph.D. program, a student must have credit for
passing at least one prelim exam by January of the second year and three exams
by September of the third year.  Failing to accomplish the former, a student
will be barred from registering in the Ph.D. program for a third year;  a
student who manages the former but not the latter will be allowed to register
for the third year and will be given a TA position (if a TA position is
available and the student is qualified), but the third year will be the
terminal year for the student in the Ph.D. program.  An exception to this rule
is the student who enters the Ph.D. program upon completion of a Master's
degree in this department;  such a student must have credit for passing three
prelim exams by January of the second year in the Ph.D. program.  Failure to
accomplish this will result in the student's dismissal from the mathematics
graduate program at the end of his or her second year in the Ph.D. program.

    * [ Exam Syllabi](http://www.ma.utexas.edu/users/combs/Prelims-Syllabi/)
    * [ A Sampling of Previous Exams](http://www.ma.utexas.edu/users/combs/Prelims-Old/)   

**2.   Advisory Committee**

After passing the preliminary exams a student will select an area of
specialization and obtain the agreement of a member of the GSC to supervise
the student's doctoral dissertation.  In consultation with the student and the
prospective Ph.D. supervisor, the Graduate Advisor will appoint a three-person
committee, chaired by the proposed supervisor, that will help the student
determine what additional coursework is necessary in order (a) to prepare for
research in the chosen area, (b) to ensure a program of work which is
sufficiently broad and deep, and (c) to meet formal Graduate School
requirements.  In particular, the advisory committee will see that the
student's choice of minor subject and foreign language are made so as to
represent a meaningful and useful addition to the total program.  This
committee will also have responsibility for administering the candidacy exam.

**3.   Candidacy Exam**

No later than one year after completion of the preliminary exam process or by
the end of the fifth long semester in residence, whichever is later, the
advisory committee will examine the student in his or her chosen area of
specialization.  The exam may be written or oral - at the committee's
discretion.  The style, coverage and time of the exam will be set by the
advisory committee in consultation with the student.  If the advisory
committee deems that the student  has failed the candidacy exam, it may
recommend that the student be granted a second opportunity to pass the exam.
Otherwise, the student will not be allowed to continue in the Ph.D. program.
If the student fails a second candidacy exam, the student will be required to
leave the Ph.D. program.

**4.   Certification**

When a student has passed the candidacy exam and his or her advisory committee
is satisfied with the student's proposed research area of specialization,
subject preparation, program of coursework and choice of foreign language, it
shall so certify to the GSC.

**5.   Formal Admission to Ph.D. Candidacy**

Upon receipt of the required certification from the advisory committee, the
Chair of the GSC will appoint a five-person Doctoral Committee - this
committee is to be proposed by the student, is to be chaired by his or her
doctoral supervisor and is subject to certain Graduate School requirements as
to its composition - and will make a formal recommendation to the Graduate
School that the student be admitted to Ph.D. candidacy.  A Ph.D. student must
fulfill all requirements for admission to Ph.D. candidacy (i.e., prelim exams,
language requirement, candidacy exam) by the beginning of his or her fourth
year in the doctoral program.

**6.   Dissertation**

The dissertation is the most important part of the Ph.D. program.  It involves
original research in mathematics by the student, and the research topics
covered in the dissertation are selected by the student in consultation with
the student's supervising professor.  The student is expected to complete the
dissertation within three years of admission to Ph.D. candidacy.  Information
about the required format for the written dissertation can be obtained from
the Graduate School office.

**7.   Final Oral Exam on Dissertation**

After the dissertation is written, there is a final oral exam on the
dissertation.  This exam must be scheduled through the Graduate School office
at least two weeks in advance of the exam date.  The Doctoral Committee for
the student administers the exam.  After the student passes this exam, the
student is eligible to receive the Ph.D. degree after the student submits the
dissertation and some paperwork to the Graduate School office.  


**Remark:  ** An appeal for a waiver of or an exception to any of the
foregoing regulations must be submitted, in writing and accompanied by
documentation of the extenuating circumstances that underlie the appeal, to
the Chair of the GSC.  The ASGSC will be the final arbiter in all such
matters.  


##  Ph.D. Program in Computational and Applied Mathematics

This is an interdisciplinary program designed to provide education and
training at the graduate level in computational science, applied mathematics,
and mathematical modeling with applications in engineering and science. The
component fields of the program are Mathematics, Computer Science, Aerospace
Engineering and Engineering Mechanics, Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Mechanical Engineering and Physics. Students admitted to the CAM Ph.D. program
are required to qualify in three areas: (1) Applicable Mathematics, (2)
Numerical Analysis and Scientific Computation and (3) an applications area.
Later stages of the program include an oral presentation of the student's
proposed research project and submission of a dissertation. There are no
specific hour requirements for this degree.

##  M. A. Program in Mathematics

The M. A. in Mathematics requires that the candidate complete a minimum of
thirty semester credit hours of courses, including a thesis or a report. Of
the thirty required hours, six to twelve must be taken in a minor area outside
of mathematics. Students electing to write a thesis must complete at least
twenty-four hours of course work and six hours of thesis work. Those electing
to write a report in lieu of a thesis must complete a minimum of thirty hours
of course work in addition to the report course. The Department course
offerings enable an M. A. student to specialize in such areas as [actuarial
studies](http://www.utexas.edu/depts/acs/MA.html), algebra, analysis, general
applied mathematics, numerical analysis, and topology, among others.

##  M. A. Program in Mathematics (Actuarial Focus)

In the spring of 1999, the Mathematics Department approved a special focus on
Actuarial Studies within the general requirements of the standard M.A. in
Mathematics. Students successful in this program receive an M.A. in
Mathematics while taking classes that are actuarial or actuarially related. [
More information](http://www.utexas.edu/depts/acs/MA.html) is available in the
Actuarial Studies Website.

##  M. S. Program in Computational and Applied Mathematics

The M. S. CAM program requires thirty-three semester hours of coursework
including a research report or thirty-six hours without a report. Of these
thirty-three hours, a minimum of twenty-four must be selected from the five
major CAM areas with at least nine in each of two areas. Coursework for the
major area requirements must be taken on a letter grade basis. A maximum of
nine semester hours of approved upper-division undergraduate coursework can be
counted with no more than six in one area. The major CAM areas are: (1)
Applicable Mathematics, (2) Numerical Analysis and Scientific Computing, (3)
Parallel Computing and Computer Architecture, (4) Mathematical Modeling, (5)
Computational Mechanics and (6) Computational Finance. Each individual program
of courses is expected to contain substantial components in mathematics and in
an application area.

##  M. S. Program in Statistics

The M. S. program in Statistics requires a minimum of thirty-three semester
hours and includes a report. An identifiable minor of six or nine hours is
required. Some of the statistics courses that are included in the program are
taught by faculty members in other departments and are crosslisted. Students
are required to take a yearlong core sequence in Mathematical Statistics,
M384C,D and courses in Regression Analysis, M384G and Analysis of Variance,
M384E.  
[Masters in Statistics Web
Page](http://www.ma.utexas.edu/users/mks/statgrad/statgradindex.html)

* * *

#  Course Offerings

Each year the Department offers from 25 to 30 graduate courses covering a wide
range of topics. In addition, there is a regular schedule of seminars. Two-
semester course sequences aimed specifically at first-year graduate students
are taught each year in algebra, analysis, methods of applied mathematics,
numerical analysis and computation, statistics, and topology. Other standard
offerings include courses in differential geometry, number theory, functional
analysis, harmonic analysis, approximation theory, ordinary and partial
differential equations, numerical solution of differential equations,
multivariate statistical analysis, experimental design, algebraic topology,
and geometric topology. Courses dealing with special topics are scheduled in
response to faculty interest or student demand. Some recent offerings have
been:  
  |

  * Rings and modules
  * Group theory
  * Commutative ring theory
  * Group representations
  * Algebraic number theory
  * Geometry of numbers
  * Mathematical physics
  * Lie groups and algebras
  * Theory of algebraic groups
  * Banach spaces
  * Geometric Fourier analysis
  * Hilbert space methods in P.D.E.
  * Applied statistics
  * Markov processes
  * Knot theory
  * Quality assurance
  * Approximation theory
|

  * Frequency data
  * Sampling theory
  * Stochastic processes
  * Nonlinear elliptic P.D.E.
  * Calculus of variations
  * Minimal surfaces
  * Topological quantum field theory
  * Quasiconformal mappings
  * Riemann surfaces
  * Wavelets
  * Algebraic geometry
  * Low dimensional topology
  * Quantum mechanics
  * Statistical mechanics
  * Dynamical systems
  * Ergodic theory  
---|---  
    
**Note:  ** Individual conference courses are also encouraged.

* * *

#  Financial Support

It is the intent of Mathematics Department to provide six years (twelve
semesters) of financial support to all Ph.D. students who are making
satisfactory progress towards their degrees. Barring financial crises, we
fully expect to be able to furnish such support. We may be able to provide
financial aid to some Master's students if sufficient funds are available.

Financial support takes three forms: (1) Teaching Assistantships and Assistant
Instructorships; (2) Graduate Research Assistantships; (3) Fellowships. (Note:
International students must speak fluent English and pass an oral English
assessment exam administered by the University before they can be supported as
Teaching Assistants or Assistant Instructors.)

##  Teaching Assistantships and Assistant Instructorships

The most common form of financial aid is a Teaching Assistantship (or for more
advanced students, an Assistant Instructorship). Typically, a beginning
Teaching Assistant assists in one calculus course. The Professor lectures
three days a week; on the other two days the TA meets three discussion
sections consisting of approximately 40 students each. The TA also has some
responsibility for holding office hours. Assistant Instructors ordinarily
teach one or two sections of pre-calculus level mathematics, in which they are
the instructors of record.

##  Graduate Research Assistantships

When a student advances to candidacy in the Ph.D. program and begins doing
individual work with a supervising Professor, there is a possibility that the
student might receive a Graduate Research Assistantship (GRA) from that
supervisor. Faculty members who apply for grants often request that the
funding include extra money to support graduate students. If the faculty
member obtains the grant, then he or she may use that extra money to give some
student a GRA. This allows the student to pursue research without having to do
any teaching. Selection of students for GRAs is left to the individual grant
holders. In recent years, the department has had about ten GRA recipients per
year.

##  Fellowships

The Mathematics Department has some money available that can be used to award
fellowships to deserving students. These include the Edward Louis and Alice
Laidman Dodd Fellowship, the Arthur LeFevre, Sr., Scholarship in Mathematics,
the Regents Endowed Graduate Fellowships in Mathematics, the David Bruton, Jr.
Graduate Fellowships in Mathematics, the Professor and Mrs. Hubert S. Wall
Endowed Presidential Fellowship, the Charles Rubert Scholarship, and the John
L. and Anne Crawford Endowed Presidential Scholarship. The fellowships and
scholarships can be used either to augment TA salaries or to support students
fully, allowing them to pursue research free from teaching duties. Each year,
the Administrative Subcommittee of Graduate Studies Committee (ASGSC) selects
worthy students to receive departmental fellowships. In recent years, from two
to four students have been awarded full fellowships by the Department of
Mathematics.

The University also has a number of fellowships, which are awarded on a
competitive basis. The Graduate Advisor selects students to be nominated for
these fellowships on the basis of their academic performance. Annually,
between two and four students in the department receive University
fellowships.

The UT Department of Mathematics, in partnership with the [ Texas Institute
for Computational and Applied Mathematics ](http://www.ticam.utexas.edu/)
(TICAM), has received a VIGRE Grant for the period beginning July 2001. We
seek  qualified students to share in our pursuit of VIGRE goals.  
[VIGRE Graduate Traineeship
Information](http://www.ma.utexas.edu/vigre1/vigre.html#traineeships)

Finally, the Department of Mathematics tries to give some students summer
fellowship support. Recipients are chosen by the ASGSC. Finances permitting,
we hope to support ten to twelve students per summer with fellowships.

##  Cost of Study

Required tuition and fees during the 2001-2002 academic year for a full-time
graduate student (taking nine semester hours) are approximately $l,500 per
semester for Texas residents and recipients of any of the above
assistantships, fellowships, or scholarships. The corresponding figure is
approximately $3,500 for non-resident U.S. citizens and foreign students not
holding one of the above awards.  

* * *

##  How to Apply

The preferred method of applying for admission to the graduate mathematics
program at the University of Texas is to use the online application available
through our university's Web page.  You should start with
<http://www.utexas.edu/student/giac> and then follow the instructions.  Before
applying, please read carefully the information below.  **  
NOTE:   Beginning with the 2003 admission cycle, the deadline for applying for
Fall is January 15;  we do not admit new students in the spring or summer
semesters.**

On the above Web page, you need to select the appropriate application. U.S.
citizens and permanent residents should select "U.S. Graduate/Permanent
Resident Application."  If you are not a U.S. citizen or permanent resident,
you should select "International Graduate Application." Since the Mathematics
program, the Computational and Applied Mathematics program, and the Statistics
program are separately administered programs, you need to decide which program
is appropriate for you.  For questions about the Mathematics program, contact
the Mathematics Graduate Advisor: Bruce P. Palka <gradadv@math.utexas.edu>.
For questions about the Computational and Applied Mathematics program, contact
the Computational and Applied Mathematics Graduate Advisor:  Clint Dawson
<clint@ticam.utexas.edu>.  For questions about the Statistics program, contact
the Statistics Graduate Advisor:  Martha Smith <mks@math.utexas.edu>.  When
selecting the "Proposed Graduate Major" or the "Proposed Graduate Program of
Study" in the online application, you need to select either "Mathematics" or
"Computational and Applied Mathematics" or "Statistics", whichever is the
appropriate program for you.

If you select "Mathematics" as your "Proposed Graduate Major" or "Proposed
Graduate Program of Study",  then after filling out the online application,
you need to send various information to the Graduate and International
Admission Center and to the Graduate Advisor in the Department of Mathematics.

The following information should be sent to the **Graduate and International
Admissions Center,   UT-Austin,  P.O. Box 7608, Austin, TX 78713-7608, USA.**

    1. GRE scores (general test : verbal and quantitative parts).  These must be sent directly by the testing service. 
    2. TOEFL scores for international students. These must be sent directly by the testing service. 
    3. Official transcripts of undergraduate and previous graduate work. 
    4. Application fee of $50.00 for U.S. citizens and permanent residents and $75.00 for international students.  **Your application will not be processed until you pay this fee.**

The following information should be sent to the **Graduate Advisor, Department
of Mathematics, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712, USA**.   (If you are
applying to the Computational and Applied Mathematics program or to the
Statistics program, send the information listed below to the Graduate Advisor
for that program.)

    1. Three letters of recommendation from faculty who are familiar with your advanced mathematical training. 
    2. Statement of Purpose describing your mathematical interests and your reasons for doing graduate work at the University of Texas. 
    3. Unofficial copies of your GRE scores (and TOEFL scores for international students). 
    4. Unofficial copies (photocopies) of your transcripts. 

**If you are accepted for admission to our graduate program, you will
automatically be considered for financial assistance;   no separate
application for financial assistance is required**.  Although there are a
small number of fellowships, most of our beginning graduate students are
supported by Teaching Assistantships.  **International students must be able
to speak fluent English in order to receive a Teaching Assistantship.   We
expect international students to score at least 630 on the TOEFL test (or at
least 267 on the computer-based TOEFL test) and pass an oral English
assessment exam administered after they arrive at the University of Texas in
order for them to receive Teaching Assistantships.** If you are an
international student and you expect to receive fellowship or scholarship
assistance from a government agency in your home country, you should mention
that in your Statement of Purpose.

**Criteria for admission and award of financial aid:**  
 The department's Graduate Admissions and Financial Aid Committee will
consider the following factors, with no particular weight assigned to any
single factor, in arriving at its decision concerning the admission of and
awarding of financial aid to an applicant: undergraduate academic record,
especially performance in upper-division, conceptually oriented mathematics
classes; performance in prior graduate mathematics courses (if applicable);
letters of recommendation; the contents of the personal statement, especially
as they relate to the intellectual preparedness of the applicant to undertake
graduate studies in mathematics or to special circumstances in an applicant's
background that might indicate the potential for success in a graduate
mathematics program; performance on the Graduate Record Exam; performance on
the TOEFL Exam (if applicable).

**Anyone who is not able to use the online application can request a paper
application from the Graduate and International Admissions Center at the
address listed above.**

* * *

## City of Austin

Information about the city of Austin can be found at:
<http://www.utexas.edu/austin/>

* * *

## Faculty

# Professors

**Todd J. Arbogast,** _Ph.D., University of Chicago, 1987, Mathematics:
Numerical Analysis and Partial Differential Equations. The President's
Associates Centennial Teaching Fellow for 1997-98._

**Efraim P. Armendariz,** _Ph.D., Nebraska, 1966, Mathematics: Ring Theory.
Department Chairman._

**Ivo M. Babuska,** _Ph.D., Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences (Czechoslovakia),
1955, Mathematics: Applied Mathematics, Numerical Computation and Partial
Differential Equations. Robert B. Trull Chair in Engineering._

**William Beckner,** _Ph.D., Princeton University, 1975, Mathematics:
Analysis. Paul V. Montgomery Centennial Memorial Professor in Mathematics._

**Sterling Berberian,** _Ph.D., University of Chicago, 1955, Mathematics:
Operators in Hilbert Space, Operator Algebras, and Integration Theory.
(Emeritus)_

**Klaus Bichteler,** _Ph.D., Hamburg (Germany), 1965, Mathematics:
Probability._

**Jerry L. Bona,** _Ph.D., Harvard University, 1972, Mathematics: Partial
Differential Equations, Fluid Mechanics, Computational Mathematics, and
Mathematical Economics. Computational and Applied Mathematics Chair I._

**Robert S. Boyer,** _Ph.D., University of Texas (Austin), 1971, Mathematics:
Program Verification, Automatic Theorem Proving, and Artificial Intelligence.
Professor in Computer Sciences (No. 4 & No. 5)._

**Patrick L. Brockett,** _Ph.D., University of California (Irvine), 1975,
Mathematics: Probability and Mathematical Statistics. Gus Wortham Memorial
Chair in Risk Management and Insurance._

**Luis A. Caffarelli,** _Ph.D., University of Buenos Aires, 1972, Mathematics:
Harmonic Analysis and Partial Differential Equation. Sid W. Richardson
Foundation Regents Chair (No. 1)._

**L. Ray Carry,** _Ph.D., Stanford University, 1968, Mathematics: Mathematics
Learning and Curriculum Evaluation._

**E. Ward Cheney,** _Ph.D., Kansas, 1957, Mathematics: Approximation Theory
and Numerical Analysis._

**Alan K. Cline,** _Ph.D., University of Michigan (Ann Arbor), 1970,
Mathematics: Mathematical Software, Numerical Analysis, and Scientific
Computing. David Bruton, Jr. Centennial Professor in Computer Sciences (No.
2)._

**James W. Daniel,** _Ph.D., Stanford University, 1965, Mathematics: Actuarial
Mathematics, Numerical Computation and Optimization. Paul V. Montgomery
Centennial Memorial Professor in Actuarial Mathematics._

**Rafael de la Llave,** _Ph.D., Princeton University, 1983, Mathematics:
Mathematical Physics and Dynamical Systems.   Joe B. & Louise Cook Professor
in Mathematics_

**Edsger W. Dijkstra,** _Ph.D., Amsterdam, 1959, Physics: Program Correctness,
Algorithms, Systems. Schlumberger Centennial Chair in Computer Sciences._

**John D. Dollard,** _Ph.D., Princeton University, 1963, Physics: Mathematical
Physics and Scattering Theory. Associate Dean, Graduate Studies._

**John R. Durbin,** _Ph.D., Kansas, 1964, Mathematics: Group Theory._

**Don E. Edmondson,** _Ph.D., California Institute of Technology, 1954,
Mathematics: Lattice Theory. (Emeritus)_

**Daniel S. Freed,** _Ph.D., University of California (Berkeley), 1985,
Mathematics: Differential Geometry._

**Irene Martinez Gamba,** _Ph.D., University of Chicago, 1989, Mathematics:
Applied Mathematics, Partial Differential Equations._

**Clifford S. Gardner,** _Ph.D., New York University, 1953, Mathematics:
Applied Mathematics and Dynamical Systems. (Emeritus)_

**Frank E. Gerth (III),** _Ph.D., Princeton University, 1972, Mathematics:
Algebraic Number Theory._

**John E. Gilbert,** _Ph.D., Oxford (England), 1963, Mathematics: Harmonic
Analysis and Functional Analysis._

**Leonard Gillman,** _Ph.D., Columbia University, 1953, Mathematics: Rings of
Continuous Functions. (Emeritus)_

**Robert E. Gompf,** _Ph.D., University of California (Berkeley), 1984,
Mathematics: Geometric Topology. Joe B. and Louise Cook Professor in
Mathematics._

**Cameron McA. Gordon,** _Ph.D, Cambridge (England), 1971, Mathematics:
Geometric Topology. Sid W. Richardson Foundation Regents Chair (No. 2)._

**William T. Guy (Jr.),** _Ph.D., California Institute of Technology, 1951,
Mathematics: Integral Transforms. Distinguished Teaching Professor._

**Gary C. Hamrick,** _Ph.D., Virginia, 1971, Mathematics: Algebraic Topology.
Marian Harris Thornberry Centennial Professor in Mathematics. Department
Undergraduate Coordinator._

**Raymond C. Heitmann,** _Ph.D., Wisconsin, 1974, Mathematics: Algebra and
Commutative Rings._

**Peter W. M. John,** _Ph.D., Oklahoma, 1955, Mathematics: Statistical Design
of Experiments and Quality Assurance._

**Hans Koch,** _Ph.D., Geneva (Switzerland), 1978, Mathematics: Mathematical
Physics and Statistical Mechanics._

**George Lorentz,** _Ph.D., Tubingen (Germany), 1945, Mathematics: Analysis
and Approximation Theory. (Emeritus)_

**John E. Luecke,** _Ph.D., University of Texas (Austin), 1985, Mathematics:
Topology._

**Stephen J. McAdam,** _Ph.D., University of Chicago, 1970, Mathematics:
Commutative Algebra._

**Edward W. Odell,** _Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1975,
Mathematics: Functional Analysis._

**J. Tinsley Oden,** _Ph.D., Oklahoma State, 1962, Engineering Mechanics:
Numerical Computation and Partial Differential Equations. Cockrell Family
Regents Chair in Engineering (No. 2)._

**Bruce P. Palka,** _Ph.D., University of Michigan (Ann Arbor), 1972,
Mathematics: Complex Analysis. Department Graduate Advisor._

**Charles Radin,** _Ph.D., Rochester, 1970, Physics: Mathematical Physics._

**Haskell Rosenthal,** _Ph.D., Stanford University, 1965, Mathematics:
Functional Analysis. John T. Stuart III Centennial Professor._

**David J. Saltman,** _Ph.D., Yale University, 1976, Mathematics: Algebra and
Division Algebras. Mildred Caldwell and Baine Perkins Kerr Centennial
Professor._

**Ralph E. Showalter,** _Ph.D., University of Illinois (Urbana-Champaign),
1968, Mathematics: Partial Differential Equations. Jane and Roland Blumberg
Centennial Professor in Mathematics._

**Martha Smith,** _Ph.D., University of Chicago, 1970, Mathematics: Ring
Theory._

**Panagiotis Souganidis,** _Ph.D., Wisconsin (Madison), 1983, Mathematics:
Analysis, Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations_

**Michael P. Starbird,** _Ph.D., Wisconsin, 1974, Mathematics: Topology.
Distinguished Teaching Professor._

**John Tate,** _Ph.D., Princeton University, 1950, Mathematics: Algebraic
Number Theory. Sid W. Richardson Foundation Regents Chair (No. 4)._

**Philip Uri Treisman,** _Ph.D., University of California (Berkeley), 1985,
Mathematics: Undergraduate Mathematics Development. Director, Charles A. Dana
Center for Mathematics and Science Education._

**Karen K. Uhlenbeck,** _Ph.D., Brandeis University, 1968, Mathematics: Non-
linear Analysis, Differential Geometry, and Dynamical Systems. Sid W.
Richardson Foundation Regents Chair (No. 3)._

**Jeffrey Vaaler,** _Ph.D., University of Illinois (Urbana-Champaign), 1974,
Mathematics: Analytic Number Theory._

**James W. Vick,** _Ph.D., Virginia, 1968, Mathematics: Algebraic Topology.
Vice President for Student Affairs. Ashbel Smith Professor and Distinguished
Teaching Professor._

**Mikhail M. Vishik,** _Ph.D., Moscow (Russia), 1980, Mathematics: Partial
Differential Equations, Fluid Dynamics._

**Jose Felipe Voloch,** _Ph.D., Cambridge (England), 1985, Mathematics: Number
Theory, Algebraic Geometry._

**Mary F. Wheeler,** _Ph.D., Rice University, 1971, Mathematics: Numerical
Analysis and Partial Differential Equations. Ernest and Virginia Cockrell
Chair in Engineering._

**Robert F. Williams,** _Ph.D., Virginia, 1954, Mathematics: Dynamical Systems
and Global Analysis. (Emeritus)_

**Jack Xin,** _Ph.D., Courant Institute (NYU), 1990, Mathematics: Partial
Differential Equations, Asymptotic Analysis, and Scientific Computing &
Applications _

**David M. Young,** _Ph.D., Harvard University, 1950, Mathematics: Numerical
Analysis. Ashbel Smith Professor. Director, Center for Numerical Analysis.
(Emeritus)_

**Thaliea Zariphopoulou,** _Ph.D., Brown University, 1989, Mathematics:
Stochastic Control Theory, Partial Differential Equations. V.F. Neuhaus
Centennial Professor in Finance._

# Associate Professors

**Karoly Bezdek,** _Ph.D., Eotvos University (Budapest, Hungary), 1980,
Mathematics: Discrete, Convex, and Combinatorial Geometry._

**Xavier Cabre,** _Ph.D., Courant Institute (NYU), 1994, Mathematics: Partial
Differential Equations. Harrington Fellow._

**Ralph W. Cain,** _Ph.D., University of Texas (Austin), 1964, Mathematics:
Secondary Mathematics Education._

**Katherine M. Davis,** _Ph.D., Cornell University, 1974, Mathematics:
Harmonic Analysis._

**Charles N. Friedman,** _Ph.D., Princeton University, 1971, Mathematics:
Mathematical Physics, Functional Analysis, and Differential Equations._

**Sean M. Keel,** _Ph.D., University of Chicago, 1989, Mathematics: Algebraic
Geometry and Intersection Theory._

**Alan W. Reid,** _Ph.D., University of Aberdeen (U.K.), 1988, Mathematics:
Topology._

**Fernando Rodriguez-Villegas,** _Ph.D., Ohio State University, 1990,
Mathematics: Number Theory. (on leave 2001-2002)_

**Lorenzo Sadun,** _Ph.D., University of California (Berkeley), 1987, Physics:
Mathematical Physics, Differential Geometry, and Analysis. The Presidents
Associates Centennial Teaching Fellowship in Mathematics._

**Dale E. Walston,** _Ph.D., University of Texas (Austin), 1961, Mathematics:
Differential Equations, Numerical Analysis, and Mathematics Education.
(Emeritus)_

# Assistant Professors

**Oscar Gonzales,** _Ph.D., Stanford University, 1996, Applied Mathematics:_

**Constantin Teleman,** _Ph.D., Harvard University, 1994, Mathematics:
Algebraic and Differential Geometry, Mathematical Physics._

# Instructors

**Kirsten Boyd,** _Ph.D., Stanford University, 2001, Mathematics: Partial
Differential Equations._

**Diogo Gomes,** _Ph.D., University of California (Berkeley), 2000,
Mathematics: Partial Differential Equations._

**Junda Hu,** _Ph.D., University of Illinois (Chicago), 1999, Mathematics:
Arithmetic Geometry, Algebraic Geometry._

**Susan Marshall,** _Ph.D., University of Arizona (Tuscon), 2001, Mathematics:
Arithmetic Algebraic Geometry._

**David Mitra,** _Ph.D., University of South Carolina, 2000, Mathematics:
Functional Analysis and Banach Spaces._

**Adam Oberman,** _Ph.D., University of Chicago, 2001, Mathematics: Partial
Differential Equations._

**Ziemowit Rzeszotnik,** _Ph.D., Washington University (St. Louis), 2000,
Mathematics: Harmonic Analysis._

**Vladimir G. Troitsky,** _Ph.D., University of Illinois (Urbana-Champaign),
1999, Mathematics: Functional Analysis, Operator Theory._

**Adrian Vajiac,** _Ph.D., Boston University, 1999, Mathematics: Differential
Geometry._

**Vrej Zarikian,** _Ph.D., University of California (Los Angeles), 2001,
Mathematics: Operator Spaces and Operator Algebras._

# Lecturers

**Gary Berg,** _Ph.D., University of Texas (Austin), 1996, Mathematics:
Functional Analysis._

**Jean-Luc Guermond,** _Ph.D., University of Paris VI (France), 1985,
Mathematics: Partial Differential Equations and Numerical Analysis._

**Shinko Harper,** _Ph.D., University of Texas (Austin), 1997, Mathematics:
Algebraic Geometry._

**Juan Molina,** _MS., University of California (Berkley), 1991, Mathematics:_

**Yoav Moriah,** _Ph.D., University of Texas (Austin), 1986, Mathematics:_

**Katherine Naimark,** _Ph.D., Wiezmann Institute of science (Rehovot,
Isreal), 2000, Mathematics:_

**Mahesh G. Nerurkar,** _Ph.D., University of Minnesota (Minneapolis), 2000,
Mathematics: Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems._

**Thomas Sadler,** _Ph.D., University of Alabama, 1977, Mathematics: Algebra.
(on leave 2001-2002)_

**Adriana Sofer,** _Ph.D., Ohio State University, 1993, Mathematics: Number
Theory. (on leave 2001-2002)_

**Catherine Stacy,** _Ph.D., University of Texas (Austin), 2001, Pyschology:
Quantitative Methods and Cognitive Science._

**Mihaela Vajiac,** _Ph.D., Boston University, 2000, Mathematics: Differential
Geometry._

**Darrin Visarraga,** _Ph.D., University of Texas (Austin), 2001,
Mathematics:_

**Paul Wright,** _MS., University of Houston, 1980, Mathematics:_  
  

