> **Curriculum Analysis -- EL 720**

>

> * * *

>

> ****

>

> **Instructor** : Dr. Wenfan Yan **Year:** Spring, 1997  
>  **Phone:** (412) 357-7931 **Fax:** (412) 357-2961  
>  **E-Mail:** wyan@grove.iup.edu  
>  **Office Hours:** M, T, & R 10:30 - 12:30 or by appointment  
>  
>  
>  **Course Overview  
>  
>  ** This course is designed to provide doctoral students with a critical
analysis of curriculum theory and research. Various approaches will be
examined, with an emphasis on the unique theoretical and methodological
contributions of philosophical, psychological and social approaches to the
field of curriculum. Through an exploration of the literature, critique of
theories, and direct hands-on exercises, you will be able to build competency
in integrating effective curriculum analysis into your own educational praxis.  
>  
>  
>  **Course Goals  
>  
>  ** The goals of this course are to facilitate your professional knowledge
and critical inquiry skills in the field of curriculum:  
>  * understanding the nature and the various research methods in the study of
curriculum;  
>  * comprehending the concepts and language of original research in the field
of curriculum;  
>  * developing the skills used in the evaluation and analysis of a given
piece of curriculum;  
>  * increasing the likelihood of the future use of curriculum analysis in
your dissertation study and professional practice. **  
>  
>  
>  Course Objectives  
>  
>  ** By the end of the course, you will be able to demonstrate the following
knowledge and skills in curriculum analysis:  
>  * discuss and evaluate the unique theoretical, methodological contribution
of philosophical, psychological and social approaches to the field of
curriculum  
>  
>  * review and critique literature in the field of curriculum by identify
literature sources, locating relevant documents and synthesizing the finding;  
>  
>  * compare and describe the characteristics of different approaches in
conducting curriculum study, with emphasis on social and cognitive approaches  
>  
>  * identify and describe the designs and procedures for conducting
curriculum research, including both qualitative and quantitative methods  
>  
>  * use research methods such as surveys, interviews, data analysis, and
questionnaire design to assist in solving curriculum problems  
>  
>  * illustrate the dynamics roles of students, teachers and school
administrators in both the formal and informal curriculum and how the
effectiveness of curriculum can be optimized  
>  
>  * reflect your own learning and organization experiences, explain how
curriculum may be applied to your own organization situation and develop
personal curriculum theory  
>  
>  * use enormous growing technology resource for educators --include such
applications as electronic mail, Internet, listservs (electronically-
facilitated discussion forums), Gopher, and World Wide Web (WWW).  
>  
>  * develop skills to initiate innovative changes to improve curriculum
within your school district  
>  
>  
>  **Text Books  
>  
>  ** Ornstein, A., & Behar, L. (1995). Contemporary Issues in Curriculum.
Boston: Allyn and Bacon.  
>  
>  Bruer, J. (1993). Schools for Thought. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.  
>  
>  I hope these books will give you (a) an overview of the kinds of research
in the field of curriculum, (b) an introduction to many of conceptual issues
and methodological issues and (c) entry points into the relevant literature.  
>  
>  
>  **Course Guidelines  
>  
>  ** The current educational reform aims a restructured educational system
that qualitatively increases the performance of **_all_ ** students. This
reform suggests a much more dynamic view of classroom learning in which
teachers guide students through individual and collaborative activities that
encourage inquiry and the construction of knowledge (Means,1994). This shift
in classroom learning can be summarized as:  
>  
>  Traditional Beliefs and Practice Constructive  
>  Beliefs and Practice  
>  Classroom activity  
>  Teacher centered Didactic  
>  Learner centered  
>  Interactive  
>  Teacher role  
>  Fact teller  
>  Always expert  
>  Collaborator  
>  Sometimes learner  
>  Student role  
>  Listener  
>  Always listener  
>  Collaborator  
>  Sometimes expert  
>  Instructional goals  
>  Facts  
>  Memorization  
>  Relationships  
>  Inquiry and invention  
>  Concept of knowledge Accumulation of facts  
>  Transformation of facts  
>  Demonstration of success  
>  Quantity of memorized facts  
>  Quality of understanding  
>  Assessment  
>  Norm-referenced multiple-choice instruments  
>  Criterion-referenced Portfolios and performance  
>  
>  
>  This new conception of teaching and learning provides the guidelines for
this course.  
>  
>  **Learning Activities  
>  
>  ** The class time will be spent in various activities such as lecture,
presentation, group discussion, peer critique, and individual work with the
instructor. An attempt will be made to provide as much flexibility as possible
taking into account individual differences in learning styles, interests, etc.  
>  
>  The format of the course will consist primarily of seminar-type discussion.
We will work together to identify issues involved in curriculum analysis,
locate relevant articles, discuss the extent to which current knowledge of
curriculum is capable of improving educational practices, and discuss ways in
which future research might increase our understanding of effective
curriculum.  
>  
>  On the basis of principles derived from the research and my own teaching
experience, the following are offered as planning guidelines for our learning
activities:  
>  
>  * Structure the lessons with adequate introduction and guided practice.  
>  * Lecture as little as possible.  
>  * Introduce interactive group activities as quickly as possible.  
>  * Encourage peer interaction and continuous sharing of information.  
>  * Establish patterns of communication that will last after the class.  
>  
>  
>  **Course Requirements  
>  
>  ** This course is based primarily on a criterion-referenced portfolio
assessment. Portfolios contain collections of your work over time. They may
include your reflection journey, research proposal, worksheets, presentation
notes, and anything contain evidence that you have engaged in self-reflection.
During the course of developing the portfolio, you may include all work in the
portfolio for purposes of reflection, self-evaluation, and revision. However,
at the end of the semester, you may select the pieces that best demonstrate
your growth and achievement.  
>  
>  I will prepare worksheets and guidelines to stimulate your thinking, to
help you prepare your portfolio. You can use these worksheets in preparing for
the class discussion and your research papers. You are also expected to
prepare for each class meeting by reading the chapters indicated for that day  
>  
>  Your portfolios* will be due on the last class meeting. You should turn
your portfolios in to me on a 3.5" diskette as well as provide a printed copy.
I can use IBM-compatible or Mac disks but not Apple. Write on the disk both
the kind of computer and the name of the word-processing program you used.
Please indicate on the disk your name and the file name.  
>  
>  **_Worksheets  
>  
>  _** Worksheets are designed to help you understand the fundamentals of
curriculum analysis, and to prepare for your research papers. Three types of
worksheets will be used:  
>  
>  Concept worksheets will help you to understand the key concepts of
curriculum analysis developed through assigned readings. Each concept
worksheet is a short quiz consists of 25 multiple-choice tests (open books and
open notes). A total of six quizzes will be given based on the six topics
covered by the Ornstein's book.  
>  
>  Critique worksheets will help you to identify and criticize the published
studies in curriculum analysis. You can use critique worksheets as a blueprint
for your position paper.  
>  
>  Research proposal worksheet will help you to design and develop your
research proposals. You can use proposal worksheets as a blueprint for your
research project.  
>  
>  Objective feedback will be provided for you on the worksheets you turn in.
This feedback is intended to assist you in achieving a better understanding of
the material rather than merely to evaluate you.  
>  
>  **Position Paper and _Research Project  
>  
>  _** The major requirements for this course will be a position paper and a
research project to be completed by the end of the semester. The purpose of
position paper and research project is to help you to prepare for your
candidacy paper and comprehensive written examination.  
>  
>  In your position paper, you are required to examine a current issue in the
field of curriculum from two perspectives, and establish a strong and informed
personal position. The theoretical foundation for these perspectives must be
explicitly stated. Your research project should include (a) a description of
the problem, (b) a theoretical framework, and (c) design of the studies. For
the detailed requirements, please see my guidelines for research proposal and
position paper.  
>  
>  The position paper and research proposal can be on same topic, but must
relate, in some defensible manner, to the issues and ideas contained in this
course. You are encouraged to discuss your papers with me early enough in the
semester so that my feedback will be available in sufficient time to take it
into account in working on the paper.  
>  
>  
>  **Reflection Journals  
>  
>  ** You are required to write four reflection journals (one for each meeting
except the last one) during the semester. Please ask yourself the following
questions **** in your journal writing:  
>  * What happened this month that worked well? Why?  
>  * What happened this month that did not work as I expected? Why?  
>  * What are some questions I'd like to ask my classmates and professor?  
>  * What changes would you recommend?  
>  
>  You may organize your reflection on these questions by the following
categories:  
>  * Reflection on classroom instruction and discussion;  
>  * Reflection on the content/subject matter knowledge;  
>  * Reflection on learning strategies;  
>  * Reflection on anxiety and stress in learning  
>  
>  
>  **Grading  
>  
>  ** The issue of grading raises a number of problems in any course, and
unfortunately, it frequently becomes the major concern of the students. It is
not unusual for students to be more concerned with the grade they receive than
with what can be learned from taking the course, and this, I feel, is a very
sad misplacement of priorities. Nevertheless, grades are a reality in most
educational settings, and ways must be found for dealing with grading
requirements in a productive manner. This course is based primarily on a
criterion-referenced system of evaluation in which the level of achievement
ultimately attained by the student is considered to be more important than a
forced comparison among students.  
>  
>  The final grade will be based on the components weighted as follows:  
>  
>  **Components Percentage Overall Percentage and Grades**  
>  Presentations  & Participation 10%  
>  90 or Higher = A  
>  Portfolios  
>  80 -- 89 = B  
>  Reflection Journals 10% 79 or Lower = C  
>  Worksheets 30%  
>  Position paper 25%  
>  Research Proposal 25%  
>  **  
> Semester Calendar**  
>  **Date  
>  Topics  
>  **  
>  **Readings  
>  **  
>  1/25  
>  **_Introduction to the course:  
>  
>  _** * overview of syllabus  
>  * issues in curriculum  
>  
>  **_Curriculum and philosophy  
>  _** * What should be taught?  
>  * To whom, When and How?  
>  Ornstein & Behar,  
>  Chpts.1-6  
>  
>  2/15  
>  **_Methods of curriculum study  
>  _**  
>  * locating appropriate literature  
>  
>  * selecting appropriate approaches  
>  
>  * sythesizing the findings  
>  
>  **_Instructional Leadership I: Curriculum and teaching  
>  _** New concepts of teaching  
>  * teaching for understanding  
>  * expertise in teaching  
>  * research for improving teaching  
>  Implications for curriculum change  
>  Ornstein & Behar,  
>  Chpts.7-12  
>  
>  3/15  
>  **_Instructional Leadership II: Curriculum and learning  
>  
>  _** New concepts of learning:  
>  
>  * cognitive approach towards learning  
>  * cooperative learning  
>  * metacognition and critical thinking  
>  * motivation and moral development  
>  * alternative assessment  
>  Implications for curriculum change  
>  Ornstein & Behar,  
>  Chpts.13-18  
>  
>  Bruer,  
>  Chpts 1-9

>

>  
>  4/12  
>  **_Instructional Leadership III: Curriculum, instruction, and supervision  
>  
>  _** New concepts of Instruction and supervision  
>  
>  * tracking and detracking schools  
>  * inclusion and remedial education  
>  * technology integration  
>  * assessment and accountability  
>  Implications for curriculum change  
>  Ornstein & Behar,  
>  Chpts.19-31  
>  
>  5/3  
>  **_School reform: Curriculum and policy  
>  _**  
>  * cultural diversity  
>  
>  * gender issue  
>  
>  * national standards  
>  * school choice  
>  * school and community  
>  * decentralization/site-based management  
>  Implications for curriculum change  
>  
>  **_Research Project Presentation_** Ornstein  & Behar,  
>  Chpts.32-38  
>  **  
> Bibliography Reflecting the Knowledge Base**  
>  Acheson, Keith A.,  & Gall, Meredith Damien. (1992). Techniques in the
clinical supervision of teachers: Preservice and inservice applications (4th
ed.). White Plains, N.Y.: Addison Wesley Longman, Inc.  
>  Anderson, J., Reder, L., & Simon, H. (1996). Situated learning and
education. Educational Researcher. 25, 5-11.  
>  Aoki, Ted Tetsuo. (1988). Toward a dialectic between the conceptual world
and the lived world: Transcending instrumentalist in curriculum orientation.
In W. F. Pinar (Ed.), Contemporary curriculum discourses (pp. 402-416).
Scottsdale, AZ: Gorsuch, Scarisbrick.  
>  Aoki, Ted Tetsuo. (1992). Layered voices of teaching: The uncannily correct
and the elusively true. In William F. Pinar & William M. Reynolds (Eds.),
Understanding curriculum as phenomenological and deconstructed text
(pp.17-27). New York: Longman.  
>  Apple, Michael W. (1979). Ideology and curriculum. London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul.  
>  Apple, Michael W. (1982). Education and power. Boston: Routledge and Kegan
Paul.  
>  Apple, Michael W. (1985). Teachers and texts: A political economy of class
and gender relations in education. New York: Routledge and Kegan Paul.  
>  Apple, Michael W. (1993). Official knowledge. New York: Routledge and Kegan
Paul.  
>  Aronowitz, Stanley. (1992). The politics of identity: Class, culture,
social movements. New York: Routledge, Chapman, and Hall.  
>  Bergson, Henri. (1946). The creative mind: An introduction to metaphysics.
(M.L. Andison, Trans.). New York: Philosophical Library.  
>  Bowles, S., & Gintis, H. (1976). Schooling in capitalist America. New York:
Basic Books.  
>  Brandt, Ronald S. (1981). Applied Strategies for Curriculum Evaluation.
Alexandria, V.A.: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.  
>  Carson, Terrance R. (1987). Understanding curriculum and implementation. In
T. Aoki, D. Franks, & K. Jacknicke (Eds.), Understanding curriculum as lived:
Curriculum Canada VII. Vancouver: University of British Columbia.  
>  Castenell, Louis, Jr., & Pinar, William F. (1993). Understanding curriculum
as racial text: Representations of identity and difference in education.
Albany: State University of New York Press.  
>  Caswell, Hollis L., & Campbell, Doak S. (1935). Curriculum development. New
York: American Book Company.  
>  Chi, Michelene T. H., Glaser, Robert, Farr, Marshall J. (1988). The Nature
of Expertise. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers.  
>  Darling-Hammond, L., & Sclan, E. (1996). Who teaches and why: Dilemmas of
building a profession for twenty-first century schools. In J. Sikula, T.
Buttery, & E. Guyton (Eds.), Handbook of Research on teacher education
(pp.67-101). New York: Macmillian.  
>  Dewey, John. (1899). The school and society. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.  
>  Dewey, John. (1938). Experience and education. New York: Macmillan.  
>  Dewey, John. (1985). Democracy and education 1916. Carbondale and
Edwardsville: Southern Illinois University Press.  
>  Doll, Ronald C. (1992). Curriculum improvement: Decision making and process
(8th ed.). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.  
>  Doll, William E., Jr. (1993). A post-modern perspective on curriculum. New
York: Teachers College Press.  
>  Eisner, Elliot W. (1985). The educational imagination: On the design and
evaluation of school programs (2d ed.). New York: Macmillan.  
>  Eisner, Elliot W. (1991). The enlightened eye: Qualitative inquiry and the
enhancement of educational practice. New York: Macmillan.  
>  English, Fenwick W., & Hill, John C. (1990). Restructuring: The Principal
And Curriculum Change: A Report of the NASSP Curriculum Council. Reston, V.A.:
National Association of Secondary School Principals.  
>  Erickson, H. Lynn. (1995). Stirring the Head, Heart, and Soul: Redefining
Curriculum and Instruction. Thousand Oaks, C.A.: Corwin Press, Inc.  
>  Freire, Paulo. (1970). Pedagogy of the oppressed. New York: Herder and
Herder.  
>  Freire, Paulo. (1985). The politics of education: Culture, power, and
liberation. South Hadley, MA: Bergin and Garvey.  
>  Freire, Paulo, & Macedo, Donaldo. (1987). Literacy: Reading the word and
reading the world. South Hadley, MA: Bergin and Garvey.  
>  Giroux, Henry A. (1981). Ideology, culture, and the process of schooling.
Philadelphia: Temple University Press.  
>  Giroux, Henry A. (1988). Schooling and the struggle for public life:
Critical pedagogy in the modern age. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press.  
>  Giroux, Henry A. (1991). Postmodernism, Feminism, and cultural politics:
Redrawing educational boundaries. Albany: State University of New York Press.  
>  Giroux, Henry A. (1992). Border crossings: Cultural workers and the
politics of education. New York: Routledge.  
>  Giroux, Henry. A. (1993). Living dangerously: Multiculturalism and the
politics of difference. New York: Peter Lang.  
>  Giroux, Henry A., Penna, Anthony N., & Pinar, Willian F. (1981). Curriculum
and instruction. Berkeley: McCutchan.  
>  Glatthorn, Allan A. (1987). Curriculum Renewal. Alexandria, V.A.:
Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.  
>  Glickman, Carl. (1992). Supervision in transition. Alexandria, VA: ASCD
Press.  
>  Greene, Maxine. (1978). Landscapes of learning. New York: Teachers College
Press.  
>  Griffin, David Ray. (1988a). The reenchantment of science: Postmodern
proposals. Albany: State University of New York Press.  
>  Griffin, David Ray. (1988b). Spirituality and society: Postmodern visions.
Albany: State University of New York Press.  
>  Griffin, David Ray, Cobb, John B., Jr., Ford, Marcus P., Gunter, Pete A.
Y., & Ochs, Peter. (1993). Founders of constructive postmodern philosophy:
Peirce, James, Bergson, Whitehead, and Hartshorne. Albany: State University of
New York Press.  
>  Grumet, Madeleine R. (1988a). Bodyreading. In William F. Pinar (Ed.),
Contemporary curriculum discourses (pp. 453-473). Scottsdaale, AZ: Gorsuch,
Scarisbrick.  
>  Grumet, Madeleine R. (1988b). Bitter Milk: Women and teaching. Amherst:
University of Massachusetts Press.  
>  Grumet, Madeleine R. (1988c). Women and teaching: Homeless at home. In
William F. Pinar (Ed.), Contemporary curriculum discourses (pp. 531-540).
Scottsdale, AZ: Gorsuch, Scarisbrick.  
>  Hallinger, Philip, Leithwood, Kenneth, Murphy, Joseph. (1993). Cognitive
Perspectives on Educational Leadership. New York: Teachers College Press.  
>  Henderson, James G., & Hawthrone, Richard D. (1995). Transformative
Curriculum Leadership. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall.  
>  Huebner, Dwayne. (1975). Curriculum as concern for man's temporality. In W.
F. Pinar (Ed.), Curriculum theorizing: The reconceptualists. Berkeley, CA:
McCutchan.  
>  Husserl, Edmond. (1964). Phenomenology of internal time-consciousness.
Bloomington, IN: Midland.  
>  Jackson, Philip (Ed.). (1992). Handbook of research on curriculum. New
York: Macmillan.  
>  James, William. (1958). Talks to teachers: On psychology; and to students
on some of life's ideals. New York: W.W. Norton.  
>  Knapp, Linda Roehrig, & Glenn, Allen D. (1996). Restucturing Schools with
Technology. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.  
>  Kozol, Jonathan. (1975). The night is dark and I am far from home: A
political indictment of the United States public schools. New York: Continuum.  
>  Kozol, Janathan. (1991). Savage inequalities: Children in America's
schools. New York: Crown.  
>  Lather, Patti. (1989). Ideology and methodological attitude. JCT: An
Interdisciplinary Journal of Curriculum Studies, 9 (2), pp. 7-26.  
>  Lather, Patti. (1991). Getting smart: Feminist research and pedagogy
with/in the postmodern. New York: Routledge.  
>  Lapointe, A. E., Askew, J. M., & Mead, N. A. (1992). Learning science.
Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service.  
>  Lapointe, A. E., Mead, N. A. , & Askew, J. M. (1992). Learning mathematics.
Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service.  
>  Leshin, Cynthia B. (1996). Internet Adventures Version 1.2: Step-by-Step
Guide To Finding and Using Educational Resources. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.  
>  Marsh, Colin, & Willis, George. (1995). Curriculum: Alternative Approaches,
Ongoing Issues. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall.  
>  Maxcy, Spencer J. (1991). Educational leadership: A critical pragmatic
perspective. New York: Bergin and Garvey.  
>  McCarthy, Camron. (1990). Race and curriculum. London: Falmer.  
>  McCarthy, Camron. (1993). Multicultural approaches to racial inequality in
the United States. In Louis Castenell & William Pinar (Eds.), Understanding
curriculum as racial text: Representations of identity and difference in
education (pp. 225-246). Albany: State University of New York Press.  
>  McCutcheon, Gail. (1995). Developing the Curriculum: Solo and Group
Deliberation. White Plains, N.Y.:Longman Publishers.  
>  McLaren, Peter. (1989). Life in schools: An introduction to critical
pedagogy in the foundations of education. New York: Longman.  
>  McNeil, John. (1995). Curriculum: The Teacher's Initiative. Englewood
Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall.  
>  McNeil, Linda. (1986). Contradictions of control: School structure and
school knowledge. New York: Routledge and Kegan Paul.  
>  Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. (1962). Phenomenology of perception. London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul.  
>  Miller, Janet L. (1987). Women as teacher/researchers: Gaining a sense of
ourselves. Teacher Education Quarterly, 14 (2), pp. 52-58.  
>  Miller, Janet L. (1990). Creating spaces and finding voices. Albany: State
University of New York Press.  
>  Murphy, Joseph, & Louis, Karen Seashore. (1994). Reshaping the
Principalship: Insights From Transformational Reform Efforts. Thousand Oaks,
C.A.: Corwin Press, Inc.  
>  National Commission on Excellence in Education. (1983). A nation at risk:
The imperative for educational reform. Washington, DC: GPO.  
>  National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (1991). Professional standards
for the teaching of mathematics. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of
Mathematics.  
>  National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.(1989). Curriculum and
evaluation standards for school mathematics teaching. Teston, VA: National
Council of Teachers of Mathematics.  
>  National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.(1988). An agenda for action:
Recommendations for school mathematics of the 1980s. Reston, VA: National
Council of Teachers of Mathematics.  
>  National Research Council (1989). Everybody counts: a report to the nation
on the future of mathematics education. Washington, D.C.: National Academy
Press.  
>  Noddings, Nel. (1984). Caring: A feminine approach to ethics and moral
education. Berkeley: University of California Press.  
>  Noddings, Nel. (1989). Women and evil. Berkeley: California Press.  
>  Noddings, Nel. (1992). The challenge to care in schools: An alternative
approach to education. New York: Teachers College Press.  
>  Oliva, Peter F. (1992). Developing the curriculum (3rd ed.). Boston: Harper
Collins.  
>  Oliver, Donald W., & Gershman, Kathleen W. (1989). Education, modernity,
and fractured meaning: Toward a process theory of teaching and learning.
Albany: State University of New York Press.  
>  Ornstein, Allan C., & Hunkins, Francis. (1993).  
>  Curriculum: Foundations, Principles, and Theory.(2nd ed.) Boston: Allyn and
Bacon.  
>  Pagano, Jo Anne. (1990). Exiles and communities: Teaching in the
patriarchal wilderness. Albany: State University of New York Press.  
>  Pajak, Edward. (1989). The central office supervisor of curriculum and
instruction: Setting the stage for success. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.  
>  Pinar, William F., & Reynolds, William M. (Eds.) (1992). Understanding
curriculum as phenomenological and deconstructed text. New York: Longman.  
>  Resnick, Lauren B., & Kloper, Leopold E. (1989). Toward the Thinking
Curriculum: Current Cognitive Research (1989 Yearbook of the Association for
Supervision and Curriculum Development). Washington D.C.: Association for
Supervision and Curriculum Development.  
>  Saylor, J. G., Alexander, W. M., & Lewis, A. J. (1981). Curriculum planning
for better teaching and learning (4th ed.). New York: Holt, Rinehart, and
Winston.  
>  Schubert, William H. (1986). Curriculum: Perspective, paradigm,
possibility. New York: Macmillan.  
>  Sizer, Theodore. (1984). Horace's compromise: The dilemma of the American
high school. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.  
>  Slattery, Patrick. (1995). Curriculum Development in the Postmodern Era.
New York: Garland Publishing, Inc.  
>  Tanner, Daniel, & Tanner, Laurel. (in press). Curriculum development:
Theory into practice (3d ed.). New York: Macmillan.  
>  van Manen, Max. (1982). Edifying theory: Serving the good. Theory Into
Practice, 21 (1), pp. 44-49.  
>  van Manen, Max. (1986). The tone of teaching. Richmond Hill, Ontario:
Scholastic-Tab.  
>  van Manen, Max. (1988). The relationship between research and pedagogy. In
William F. Pinar (Ed.), Contemporary curriculum discourses (pp. 427-452).
Scottsdale, AZ: Gorsuch, Scarisbrick.  
>  van Manen, Max. (1990). Researching lived experience: Human science for an
action sensitive pedagogy. London, Ontario: Althouse Press.  
>  van Manen, Max. (1993). The tact of teaching: The meaning of pedagogical
thoughtfulness. Albany: State University of New York Press.  
>  Watkins, William H. (1993). Black curriculum orientations: A preliminary
inquiry. Harvard Educational Review, 63 (3), pp. 321-338.  
>  West, Cornel. (1988). Postmodernism and black America. Zeta Magazine, 1
(6), pp. 27-29.  
>  West, Cornel. (1990). The cultural politics of difference. October, 53, pp.
93-109.  
>  Wexler, Philip. (1992). Becoming somebody: Toward a social psychology of
school. (With the assistance of W. Crichlow, J. Kern, & R. Martusewich.)
London: Falmer Press.  
>  Whitehead, Alfred North. (1929). Aims of education. New York: Free Press,
Macmillan.  
>  Whitehead, Alfred North. (1933). Adventure of ideas. New York: Macmillan.  
>  Wiles, J., & Bondi, J. C. (1993). Curriculum development: A guide to
practice (4th ed.). Columbus, OH: Merrill.  
>  Willis, Paul. (1977). Learning to labour. Westmead, England: Saxon House.  
>  Zais, R.S. (1976). Curriculum: Principles and foundations. New York: Thomas
Y. Crowell.

