# Graduate Brochure -- 1997-98

* * *

  * Capsule Description of the Department
  * Computer Facilities
  * Colloquia, Lecture Series, Seminars
  * Applied/Applicable and Pure/Core Mathematics
  * Statistics
  * Graduate Programs
    * Ph.D. Program 
    * Ph.D. Program in Computational and Applied Mathematics
    * M.A. Program
    * M.S. Program in Computational and Applied Mathematics
    * M.S. Program in Statistics
  * Course Offerings
  * Financial Support
    * Teaching Assistantships and Assistant Instructorships
    * Graduate Research Assistantships
    * Fellowships
    * Cost of Study
    * How to Apply
  * Faculty 

* * *

* * *

#  Contacts

  * **Department Chairman:** Efraim P. Armendariz, efraim@math.utexas.edu 
  * **Graduate Advisor:** Frank Gerth, gradadv@math.utexas.edu 
  * **Graduate Coordinator:** Ms. Carrie Weber, cweber@math.utexas.edu 
  * **Departmental Telephone:** 512-471-7711 
  * **FAX:** 512-471-9038 

* * *

* * *

#  Capsule Description of the Department

The faculty of the Mathematics Department comprises 53 regular, full-time
members and a varying number of emeritus, temporary or part-time members.
Several individuals have joint appointments with other departments, such as
Computer Sciences, Curriculum and Instruction, and General Business.

Approximately 100 graduate students are currently enrolled in degree programs
in the Department. For the most part, recent recipients of Ph.D.s from the
Department have found employment teaching in colleges and universities.
Holders of Texas Master's Degrees in Mathematics represent a wide variety of
professions, working as teachers at the primary, secondary or junior college
level, statisticians, actuaries, and computer programmers, to name a few.
Others have continued their educations at Texas or elsewhere in pursuit of
doctorates.

In 1984 the University launched a major program to spur development in a few
designated thrust areas of science and engineering, one of which was
Mathematics. To serve as centerpiece for this effort, the administration
created thirty-two handsomely endowed chair positions. The Department of
Mathematics was awarded four of the chairs. These positions are currently
filled by individuals of universally recognized distinction: Luis Caffarelli,
Cameron Gordon, John Tate and Karen Uhlenbeck. The program of chairs has
stimulated faculty recruitment at all levels.

In 1993 the University established an interdisciplinary program for graduate
education and research in Computational and Applied Mathematics (CAM). Jerry
Bona, one of the nation's most respected applied mathematicians, was appointed
to fill the first Chair in Computational and Applied Mathematics and thereby
to assume the leadership in developing the Department's contributions to the
CAM endeavor. At the same time, the College of Engineering hired into Chair
positions two premier numerical analysts, Ivo Babushka and Mary Wheeler, to
advance its build-up in the CAM area. New University initiatives are now
underway in Digital Science and Computational Biology. These are expected to
have a broad interface with Mathematics and the CAM program.  

* * *

# Computer Facilities

The Department of Mathematics maintains a state-of-the-art computer network to
facilitate instruction, research and department administration. This is a
UNIX-based system which includes Sun SPARC workstations, IBM and Dell Pentium
PC's running linux and PowerMacs distributed among faculty and staff.
X-terminals or Wyse terminals are in every graduate student office. The
Department runs a 35-seat instructional laboratory (Dell Pentium PC's running
linux) for our undergraduate mathematics program. In addition, there are three
small research labs used by both graduate and undergraduate students. The
Department's Web page [http://www.ma.utexas.edu] offers easy access and links
to mathematics information, locally-developed mathematical software and our
internationally recognized preprint archive in mathematical physics. The most
important element of our computer operation is the availability of innovative
mathematical and instructional software and free computer resources that
create an environment conducive to experimentation and exploration by our
faculty and students.

The University's Academic Computing and Instructional Technology Services
provides extensive on-campus computing facilites. In addition, the High
Performance Computing Facility (HPCF) at the Pickle Research Campus in north
Austin maintains two multi-processor Cray J90 supercomputers and a Cray T3E
Parallel System. Jointly HPCF and the Texas Institute for Computational and
Applied Mathematics run a Visualization Lab for computer graphics centered on
a Silicon Graphics Power Onyx system in Taylor Hall.

* * *

# Colloquia, Lecture Series, Seminars

The Department has a regular weekly colloquium. It also hosts two
Distinguished Lecturer Series, which yearly feature some of the world's
outstanding mathematicians. As a rule, these individuals remain in residence
in the Department for a week or longer, during which time they are available
for interaction with local faculty and students. Speakers during the past year
included Colin Adams (topology), Mike Artin (algebraic geometry), Michel
Herman (dynamical systems), Philip Holmes (applied mathematics), Henryk
Iwaniec (number theory), Sergei Kuksin (mathematical physics), John Mather
(dynamical systems), Giles Pisier (analysis), Rick Schoen (differential
geometry), Ridgway Scott (numerical analysis), Roger Temam (partial
differential equations), and a host of others. An Introduction to Research
lecture series, to which speakers are invited because of their national
reputations as fine expositors of mathematics, is aimed at and extremely
popular among graduate students.

Various groups within the Department sponsor regular seminars for faculty and
graduate students. Some of these are designed for students with a modest
background in the field under study; others target students at a more advanced
level. Naturally, the participants and the topics for the seminars change from
year to year. During 1996-97 there were seminars in mathematical physics,
topology, Banach spaces, harmonic analysis, complex analysis, partial
differential equations, computational and applied mathematics, number theory,
dynamical systems, differential geometry, gauge theory, iterative methods,
statistics, algebra, and algebraic geometry. It is expected that most of these
will continue during the coming year.

* * *

# Applied/Applicable and Pure/Core Mathematics,

Because of its long association with Robert L. Moore, the Department has
historically been viewed as a bastion of pure mathematics, especially strong
in Moore's own field of topology, whose policy it was to downplay applied
areas. To be sure, the Department's internationally recognized and respected
research groups in low-dimensional topology, differential geometry, Banach
space theory, harmonic analysis, ring theory, number theory and dynamical
systems bear witness to the fact that the traditional strength of Texas in the
pure (or core) areas of Mathematics persists. Many active seminars are
available to students with interests in these core areas. What might come as
something of a surprise, however, is the rapid growth of interest in
applicable mathematics at Texas, as evidenced by the Department's strong group
in mathematical physics, its appreciable strength in differential equations,
its solid reputation in probability and statistics, and its increasing
emphasis on computational mathematics. Moreover, other departments on campus
offer courses in -- and even extend to Mathematics graduate students the
option of undertaking Master's or Ph.D. work in -- such applied areas as
operations research, mathematical physics, optimization theory, optimal
control theory, numerical computation, engineering mechanics, statistics, et
cetera. Indeed, in Fall 1993 the Department of Mathematics, in conjunction
with the College of Engineering and the Departments of Computer Sciences and
Physics, instituted inter-disciplinary M.S. and Ph.D. degree programs in
Computational and Applied Mathematics. Certain seminars are likewise sponsored
jointly with other departments. Such seminars ran last year in mathematical
physics (with Physics), non-linear partial differential equations (with
Engineering Mechanics), numerical analysis (with Computer Sciences), and
applied statistics (with General Business).

* * *

# Statistics

Statistics is the science and art of planning and modelling stochastic
observations and making inferences from them. The theories and methods for
doing this use a wide range of mathematics, including probability, analysis,
numerical analysis, and computing. Much of the mathematics is applied through
the medium of statistics to the physical and social sciences, medicine,
business, engineering, and many other areas. Statistics is a relatively new
field; however, because it has become so important, the National Science
Foundation has reported that in the future statistics, along with computer
sciences, will be one of the scientific fields with the highest employment
demand.

The Mathematics Department includes mathematical statisticians with varied
research interests. In addition to the relation of their work to the rest of
mathematics, they also collaborate with statisticians and data analysts at The
University of Texas. This is facilitated by a campus-wide Center for
Statistical Sciences which includes more than 30 faculty and many student
members from various UT departments. A common goal of both the Center and
Department is to stimulate excellence in statistics by bringing visiting
statisticians to campus, offering seminars, encouraging research projects, and
most importantly by providing a forum for the promotion of interdisciplinary
statistical research.

* * *

# Graduate Programs

## Ph.D. Program

No preordained amount of course work is mandated for the Ph.D. degree in
Mathematics. The Department does, however, strongly encourage its doctoral
students to take courses over a broad spectrum of mathematical topics. It has
an efficient system for advising students on course selection both prior to
admission to candidacy and during the subsequent writing of the dissertation.
The structure of the Department's preliminary examination procedures serves as
another mechanism by which breadth of mathematical experience is fostered.
Full details of the requirements for admission to candidacy can be obtained
from the Graduate Advisor. In summary the steps are as follows:

### (a) Preliminary Examinations

Preliminary examinations are offered in five areas: Algebra, Analysis,
Topology, Applied Mathematics, Statistics. A Ph.D. student in Mathematics must
establish his or her competence in three of these areas, at least two of which
are to be selected from Algebra, Analysis and Topology, either by passing all
three of the associated examinations or by passing the examinations in two of
the areas and exercising the prelim option discussed below in the third. A
Ph.D. student in Statistics is required to pass the examinations in two of the
areas listed, one of which must be Statistics. Statistics Ph.D. students must
also demonstrate, in a manner to be agreed upon by the student and the
Graduate Advisor for Statistics, a mastery of a third, Statistics-related
subject at a level commensurate with that demanded in the preliminary
examination areas. Each preliminary examination is based upon the topics in a
corresponding syllabus. It is intended that these topics be accessible to a
student who has completed a designated two-semester core sequence of courses
treating the examination area.

Week-long preliminary examination periods occur twice yearly, typically just
before the beginning of each fall and spring semester. A student is allowed to
attempt examinations in at most three such periods. (This means three total,
not three per subject. The three periods need not, however, be consecutive.)
Each preliminary examination is a written examination of at least three hours'
duration.

A Ph.D. student in Mathematics may single out one area in which to by-pass the
preliminary examination requirement, the only restriction being that the
student must have completed the associated course sequence with a grade of
"A" for each semester. The student can then substitute for passage of the
prelim in the designated area a specific program of work that is proposed by
the student, approved by the Graduate Advisor and supervised by a member of
the Graduate Studies Committee. This program of work consists of two post-
prelim courses in the chosen area, at least one of which must be an organized
course (i.e., not a reading course), along with the preparation and
presentation of a 50-minute lecture on some reasonable advanced topic in the
area. The lecture will be announced in the department calendar, and attendance
will be open to all mathematics faculty and graduate students.

### (b) Advisory Committee

An advisory committee is appointed to oversee a student's choice of course
work, demonstration of foreign language proficiency (usually French, German,
or Russian), and choice of minor subject material.

### (c) Candidacy Examination

An advanced examination (usually an oral exam) in a student's chosen area of
specialization is created and administered by the advisory committee.

After passing the candidacy examination, receiving approval from the advisory
committee for the program of course work, fulfilling the foreign language
requirement, and obtaining the agreement of a faculty member to serve as
dissertation supervisor, a student is recommended for admission to candidacy.
All requirements for admission to candidacy must be completed by the beginning
of the student's fourth year in the Ph.D. program.

## Ph.D. Program in Computational and Applied Mathematics

This is an interdisciplinary program designed to provide education and
training at the graduate level in computational science, applied mathematics,
and mathematical modeling with applications in engineering and science. The
component fields of the program are Mathematics, Computer Science, Aerospace
Engineering and Engineering Mechanics, Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Mechanical Engineering and Physics. Students admitted to the CAM Ph.D. program
are required to qualify in three areas: (1) Applicable Mathematics, (2)
Numerical Analysis and Scientific Computation and (3) an applications area.
Later stages of the program include an oral presentation of the student's
proposed research project and submission of a dissertation. There are no
specific hour requirements for this degree.

## M. A. Program

The M. A. in Mathematics requires that the candidate complete a minimum of
thirty semester credit hours of courses, including a thesis or a report. Of
the thirty required hours, six to twelve must be taken in a minor area outside
of mathematics. Students electing to write a thesis must complete at least
twenty-four hours of course work and six hours of thesis work. Those electing
to write a report in lieu of a thesis must complete a minimum of thirty hours
of course work in addition to the report course. The Department course
offerings enable an M. A. student to specialize in such areas as algebra,
analysis, general applied mathematics, numerical analysis, probability,
statistics, and topology, among others.

## M. S. Program in Computational and Applied Mathematics

The M. S. CAM program requires thirty-three semester hours of coursework
including a research report or thirty-six hours without a report. Of these
thirty-three hours, a minimum of twenty-four must be selected from the five
major CAM areas with at least nine in each of two areas. Coursework for the
major area requirements must be taken on a letter grade basis. A maximum of
nine semester hours of approved upper-division undergraduate coursework can be
counted with no more than six in one area. The major CAM areas are: (1)
Applicable Mathematics, (2) Numerical Analysis and Scientific Computing, (3)
Parallel Computing and Computer Architecture, (4) Mathematical Modeling, (5)
Computational Mechanics and (6) Computational Finance. Each individual program
of courses is expected to contain substantial components in mathematics and in
an application area.

## M. S. Program in Statistics

The M. S. program in Statistics requires a minimum of thirty-three semester
hours and includes a report. An identifiable minor of six or nine hours is
required. Some of the statistics courses that are included in the program are
taught by faculty members in other departments and are crosslisted. Students
are required to take a yearlong core sequence in Mathematical Statistics,
M384C,D and courses in Regression Analysis, M384G and Analysis of Variance,
M384E.

* * *

# Course Offerings

Each year the Department offers from 25 to 30 graduate courses covering a wide
range of topics. In addition, there is a regular schedule of seminars. Two-
semester course sequences aimed specifically at first-year graduate students
are taught each year in algebra, analysis, methods of applied mathematics,
numerical analysis and computation, statistics, and topology. Other standard
offerings include courses in differential geometry, number theory, functional
analysis, harmonic analysis, approximation theory, ordinary and partial
differential equations, numerical solution of differential equations,
multivariate statistical analysis, experimental design, algebraic topology,
and geometric topology. Courses dealing with special topics are scheduled in
response to faculty interest or student demand. Some recent offerings have
been:

  * Rings and modules 
  * Group theory 
  * Commutative ring theory 
  * Group representations 
  * Algebraic number theory 
  * Geometry of numbers 
  * Mathematical physics 
  * Lie groups and algebras 
  * Theory of algebraic groups 
  * Banach spaces 
  * Geometric Fourier analysis 
  * Hilbert space methods in P.D.E. 
  * Applied statistics 
  * Markov processes 
  * Knot theory 
  * Quality assurance 
  * Frequency data 
  * Sampling theory 
  * Stochastic processes 
  * Nonlinear elliptic P.D.E. 
  * Calculus of variations 
  * Minimal surfaces 
  * Topological quantum field theory 
  * Quasiconformal mappings 
  * Riemann surfaces 
  * Wavelets 
  * Algebraic geometry 
  * Low dimensional topology 
  * Quantum mechanics 
  * Statistical mechanics 
  * Dynamical systems 
  * Ergodic theory 

Individual conference courses are also encouraged.

* * *

# Financial Support

It is the intent of Mathematics Department to provide six years (twelve
semesters) of financial support to all Ph.D. students who are making
satisfactory progress towards their degrees. Barring financial crises, we
fully expect to be able to furnish such support. We may be able to provide
financial aid to some Master's students if sufficient funds are available.

Financial support takes three forms: (1) Teaching Assistantships and Assistant
Instructorships; (2) Graduate Research Assistantships; (3) Fellowships. (Note:
International students must speak fluent English and pass an oral English
assessment exam administered by the University before they can be supported as
Teaching Assistants or Assistant Instructors.)

## Teaching Assistantships and Assistant Instructorships

The most common form of financial aid is a Teaching Assistantship (or for more
advanced students, an Assistant Instructorship). Typically, a beginning
Teaching Assistant assists in one calculus course. The Professor lectures
three days a week; on the other two days the TA meets three discussion
sections consisting of approximately 40 students each. The TA also has some
responsibility for holding office hours. Assistant Instructors ordinarily
teach one or two sections of pre-calculus level mathematics, in which they are
the instructors of record.

## Graduate Research Assistantships

When a student advances to candidacy in the Ph.D. program and begins doing
individual work with a supervising Professor, there is a possibility that the
student might receive a Graduate Research Assistantship (GRA) from that
supervisor. Faculty members who apply for grants often request that the
funding include extra money to support graduate students. If the faculty
member obtains the grant, then he or she may use that extra money to give some
student a GRA. This allows the student to pursue research without having to do
any teaching. Selection of students for GRAs is left to the individual grant
holders. In recent years, the department has had about ten GRA recipients per
year.

## Fellowships

The Mathematics Department has some money available that can be used to award
fellowships to deserving students. These include the Dodd Teaching Fellowship,
the Arthur LeFevre, Sr., Scholarship in Mathematics, the Regents Endowed
Graduate Fellowships in Mathematics, and the David Bruton, Jr. Graduate
Fellowships in Mathematics. The fellowships can be used either to augment TA
salaries or to support students fully, allowing them to pursue research free
from teaching duties. Each year, the graduate advisor selects worthy students
to receive departmental fellowships. In recent years, from two to four
students have been awarded full fellowships by the Department of Mathematics.

The University also has a number of fellowships, which are awarded on a
competitive basis. The Graduate Advisor selects students to be nominated for
these fellowships on the basis of their academic performance. Annually,
between two and four students in the department receive University
fellowships.

Finally, the Department of Mathematics tries to give some students summer
fellowship support. Recipients are chosen by the Graduate Advisor. Finances
permitting, we hope to support ten to twelve students per summer with
fellowships.

## Cost of Study

Required tuition and fees during the 1997-98 academic year for a full-time
graduate student (taking nine semester hours) are approximately $l,300 per
semester for Texas residents and recipients of any of the above
assistantships, fellowships, or scholarships. The corresponding figure is
roughly $3,300 for non-resident U.S. citizens and foreign students not holding
one of the above awards.

## How to Apply

Applications for admission and for financial support can be obtained by
writing to: Graduate Advisor, Department of Mathematics, The University of
Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, 78712. Additional information on admissions can
be found in the official catalogue of the Graduate School.

* * *

## Faculty

# Professors

**Efraim P. Armendariz,** _Ph.D., Nebraska, 1966, Mathematics: Ring Theory.
Department Chairman.  
_

**Ivo M. Babuska** _,_ _Ph.D., Technical University (Czechoslovakia), 1951,
Mathematics, Ph.D., Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences (Czechoslovakia), 1955,
Mathematics: Applied Mathematics, Numerical Computation and Partial
Differential Equations Robert B. Trull Chair in Engineering.  
_

**William Beckner** _,_ _Ph.D., Princeton, 1975, Mathematics: Analysis. Paul
V. Montgomery Centennial Memorial Professor in Mathematics_.  

**Sterling Berberian,** _Ph.D., Chicago, 1955, Mathematics: Operators in
Hilbert Space, Operator Algebras, and Integration Theory. (Emeritus)  
_

**Klaus Bichteler** _,_ _Ph.D., Hamburg (Germany), 1965, Physics: Probability.  
_

**Jerry L. Bona** _,_ _Ph.D., Harvard University, 1972, Mathematics: Partial
Differential Equations, Computational and Applied Mathematics Chair I.  
_

**Robert S. Boyer,** _Ph.D., Texas (Austin), 1971, Mathematics: Program
Verification, Automatic Theorem Proving, and Artificial Intelligence.
Professor in Computer Sciences (No. 4 & No. 5).  
_

**Patrick L. Brockett,** _Ph.D., California (Irvine), 1975, Mathematics:
Probability and Mathematical Statistics. Gus Wortham Memorial Chair in Risk
Management and Insurance.  
_

**Luis A. Caffarelli,** _Ph.D., University of Buenos Aires, 1972,_

_Mathematics: Harmonic Analysis and Partial Differential Equation. Sid W.
Richardson Foundation Regents Chair (No. 1).  
_

**L. Ray Carry,** _Ph.D., Stanford, 1968, Mathematics Education: Mathematics
Learning and Curriculum Evaluation.  
_

**E. Ward Cheney,** _Ph.D., Kansas, 1957, Mathematics: Approximation Theory
and Numerical Analysis  
_

**Alan K. Cline,** _Ph.D., Michigan (Ann Arbor), 1970, Mathematics:
Mathematical Software, Numerical Analysis, and Scientific Computing. David
Bruton, Jr. Centennial Professor in Computer Sciences (No. 2).  
_

**James W. Daniel,** _Ph.D., Stanford, 1965, Mathematics: Actuarial
Mathematics, Numerical Computation and Optimization. Paul V. Montgomery
Centennial Memorial Professor in Actuarial Mathematics.  
_

**Rafael de la Llave,** _Ph.D., Princeton, 1983, Mathematics: Mathematical
Physics and Dynamical Systems.  
_

**Edsger W. Dijkstra,** _Ph.D., Amsterdam, 1959, Physics: Program Correctness,
Algorithms, Systems. Schlumberger Centennial Chair in Computer Sciences.  
_

**John D. Dollard,** _Ph.D., Princeton, 1963, Physics: Mathematical Physics
and Scattering Theory. Associate Dean, Graduate Studies.  
_

**John R. Durbin,** _Ph.D., Kansas, 1964, Mathematics: Group Theory.  
_

**William T. Eaton,** _Ph.D., Utah, 1967, Mathematics: Geometric Topology._

**Don E. Edmondson,** _Ph.D., California Institute of Technology, 1954,
Mathematics: Lattice Theory. (Emeritus)  
_

**Daniel S. Freed,** _Ph.D., California (Berkeley), 1985, Mathematics:
Differential Geometry. (on leave, 1997-98)  
_

**Irene Martinez Gamba,** _Ph.D., University of Chicago, 1989, Mathematics:
Applied Mathematics, Partial Differential Equations.  
_

**Clifford S. Gardner,** _Ph.D., New York University, 1953, Mathematics:
Applied Mathematics and Dynamical Systems. (Emeritus_ )  

**Frank E. Gerth III,** _Ph.D., Princeton, 1972, Mathematics: Algebraic Number
Theory. Department Graduate Advisor.  
_

**John E. Gilbert,** _Ph.D., Oxford (England), 1963, Mathematics: Harmonic
Analysis and Functional Analysis.  
_

**Leonard Gillman,** _Ph.D., Columbia, 1953, Mathematics: Rings of Continuous
Functions. (Emeritus)  
_

**Robert E. Gompf,** _Ph.D., California (Berkeley), 1984, Mathematics:
Geometric Topology. Joe B. and Louise Cook Professor in Mathematics.  
_

**Cameron McA. Gordon,** _Ph.D, Cambridge (England), 1971, Mathematics:
Geometric Topology. Sid W. Richardson Foundation Regents Chair (No. 2).  
_

**William T. Guy,** _Ph.D., California Institute of Technology, 1951,
Mathematics: Integral Transforms. Distinguished Teaching Professor.  
_

**Gary C. Hamrick,** _Ph.D., Virginia, 1971, Mathematics: Algebraic Topology.
Department Undergraduate Coordinator.  
_

**Raymond C. Heitmann,** _Ph.D., Wisconsin, 1974, Mathematics: Algebra and
Commutative Rings.  
_

**Peter W. M. John,** _Ph.D., Oklahoma, 1955, Mathematics: Statistical Design
of Experiments and Quality Assurance.  
_

**Hans Koch,** _Ph.D., Geneva (Switzerland), 1978, Physics: Mathematical
Physics and Statistical_ Mechanics.  

**George Lorentz,** _Ph.D., Tubingen (Germany), 1945, Mathematics: Analysis
and Approximation Theory. (Emeritus)  
_

**John E. Luecke,** _Ph.D., Texas (Austin), 1985, Mathematics: Topology.  
_

**Stephen J. McAdam,** _Ph.D., Chicago, 1970, Mathematics: Commutative
Algebra_.  

**Edward W. Odell,** _Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1975,
Mathematics: Functional Analysis.  
_

**J. Tinsley Oden,** _Ph.D., Oklahoma State, 1962, Engineering Mechanics:
Numerical Computation and Partial Differential Equations. Cockrell Family
Regents Chair in Engineering #2.  
_

**Bruce P. Palka,** _Ph.D., Michigan (Ann Arbor), 1972, Mathematics Complex
Analysis. Department Associate Chairman. Marian Harris Thornberry Centennial
Professor in Mathematics. (on leave, 1997-98)  
_

**Charles Radin,** _Ph.D., Rochester, 1970, Physics: Mathematical Physics.  
_

**Haskell Rosenthal,** _Ph.D., Stanford, 1965, Mathematics: Functional
Analysis. John T. Stuart III Centennial Professor.  
_

**David J. Saltman,** _Ph.D., Yale, 1976, Mathematics: Algebra and Division
Algebras. Mildred Caldwell and Baine Perkins Kerr Centennial Professor.  
_

**William F. Schelter,** _Ph.D., McGill (Canada), 1972, Mathematics: Algebra.
Pennzoil Company Regents Professor.  
_

**Ralph E. Showalter,** _Ph.D., Illinois (Urbana-Champaign), 1968,
Mathematics: Partial Differential Equations. Jane and Roland Blumberg
Centennial Professor in Mathematics.  
_

**Martha Smith,** _Ph.D., Chicago, 1970, Mathematics: Ring Theory_.  

**Michael P. Starbird,** _Ph.D., Wisconsin, 1974, Mathematics: Topology.  
_

**John Tate,** _Ph.D., Princeton, 1950, Mathematics: Algebraic Number Theory.
Sid W. Richardson Foundation Regents Chair (No. 4).  
_

**Philip Uri Treisman,** _Ph.D., California (Berkeley), 1985, Science and
Mathematics Education: Undergraduate Mathematics Development._

_Director, Charles A. Dana Center for Mathematics and Science Education.  
_

_**Karen K. Uhlenbeck,**_ _Ph.D., Brandeis, 1968, Mathematics: Non-linear
Analysis, Differential Geometry, and Dynamical Systems. Sid W. Richardson
Foundation Regents Chair (No. 3). (on leave, 1997-98)  
_

**Jeffrey Vaaler,** _Ph.D., Illinois, 1974, Mathematics: Analytic Number
Theory.  
_

**James W. Vick,** _Ph.D., Virginia, 1968, Mathematics: Algebraic Topology.
Vice President for Student Affairs. Ashbel Smith Professor and Distinguished
Teaching Professor.  
  
_

**Mary F. Wheeler,** _Ph.D., Rice University, 1971, Mathematics: Numerical
Analysis and Partial Differential Equations Ernest and Virginia Cockrell Chair
in Engineering.  
_

**Robert F. Williams** , _Ph.D., Virginia, 1954, Mathematics: Dynamical
Systems and Global Analysis. (on leave, 1997-98)  
_

**Gary L. Wise,** _Ph.D., Princeton, 1974, Electrical Engineering: Applied
Probability. Jewel McAlister Smith Professor.  
_

**David M. Young,** _Ph.D., Harvard, 1950, Mathematics: Numerical Analysis.
Ashbel Smith Professor. Director, Center for Numerical Analysis.  
  
_

# Associate Professors

**James T. Arbogast,** _Ph.D., Chicago, 1987, Mathematics: Numerical Analysis
and Partial Differential Equations. The President's Associates Centennial
Teaching Fellow for 1997-98.  
_

**Ralph W. Cain,** _Ph.D., (Austin), 1964, Mathematics: Secondary Mathematics
Education.  
_

**Katherine M. Davis,** _Ph.D., Cornell, 1974 Mathematics: Harmonic Analysis.  
_

**Charles N. Friedman,** _Ph.D., Princeton, 1971, Mathematics: Mathematical
Physics, Functional Analysis, and Differential Equations.  
_

**Lorenzo Sadun,** _Ph.D., California (Berkeley), 1987, Physics: Mathematical
Physics, Differential Geometry, and Analysis.  
  
  
  
_

**Mikhail M. Vishik,** _Ph.D., Moscow (Russia), 1980, Mathematics: Number
Theory, Fluid Dynamics.  
_

**Jose Felipe Voloch,** _Ph.D., Cambridge (U.K.), 1985, Mathematics: Number
Theory, Algebraic Geometry. (on leave,_

_Spring 1998)  
_

**Dale E. Walston,** _Ph.D., Texas (Austin), 1961, Mathematics: Differential
Equations, Numerical Analysis, and Mathematics Education. (Emeritus)  
  
_

# Assistant Professors

**Sean M. Keel,** _Ph.D., Chicago, 1989, Mathematics: Algebraic Geometry and
Intersection Theory.  
_

**Alec Norton,** _Ph.D., California (Berkeley), 1987, Mathematics: Geometric
Dynamical Systems.  
_

**Alan W. Reid,** _Ph.D., University of Aberdeen (U.K.), 1988, Mathematics:
Topology.  
_

**Fernando Rodriguez-Villegas,** _Ph.D., Ohio State University, 1990,
Mathematics: Number Theory.  
  
_

# Instructors

**Miguel A. Arcones,** _Ph.D., City University of New York, 1991, Mathematics:
Applied Probability and Statistics.  
_

**Kevin B. Ford,** _Ph.D., Illinois (Urbana-Champaign), 1994, Mathematics:
Analytic Number Theory. R. H. Bing Fellow.  
_

**Robert W. Ghrist** , _Ph.D., Cornell, 1995, Applied Mathematics: Low
Dimensional Topology and Dynamical Systems. R. H. Bing Fellow. (on leave, Fall
1997)  
_

**Nicholas S. Ormes,** _Ph.D., University of Maryland at College Park, 1997,
Mathematics: Topological Dynamics, Ergodic Theory, Matxix Theory.  
_

**Cristian D. Popescu,** _Ph.D., Ohio State University, 1996, Mathematics:
Algebraic Number Theory and Arithmetic Algebraic Geometry.  
_

**Michael Rudnev,** _Ph.D., CalTech, expected June 1997, Mathematics:
Dynamical Systems (Hamiltonian Perturbation Theory, Geometric Methods). R. H.
Bing Fellow.  
_

**James M. Speight,** _Ph.D., Durham (U.K.), 1995, Mathematics: Mathematical
Physics_.  

**Michelle M. Stocking,** _Ph.D., University of California, Davis, 1996,
Mathematics. Low Dimensional Topology. R. H. Bing Fellow.  
_

**Margaret Symington,** _Ph.D., Stanford, 1996, Mathematics: Symplectic
Topology. (on leave, Fall 1997).  
_

**David Weiland,** _Ph.D., Washington University, 1997, Mathematics: Harmonic
Analysis. R. H. Bing Fellow.  
_

**Jiahong Wu,** _Ph.D., University of Chicago, 1996, Mathematics: Applied
Mathematics.  
  
_

# Lecturers

**Sharad Agnihotri** , _Ph.D., New College, Oxford (U.K.), 1995, Mathematics:
Analysis. (Fall 1997 only).  
_

**Kevin B. Foltinek,** _Ph.D., Duke, 1996, Mathematics: Differential Geometry,
Partial Differential Equations.  
_

**Ileana Ionascu,** _Ph.D., New Hampshire, 1994, Mathematics: Analysis.  
_

**David Jorgensen,** _Ph.D., Nebraska, 1996, Mathematics: Algebra  
_

**Xian-Jin Li,** _Ph.D., Purdue, 1993, Mathematics, Analysis.  
_

**Malgorzata Peszynska,** _Ph.D., University of Augsburg (Germany), 1992,
Mathematics: Partial Differential Equations, Numerical Analysis and Parallel
Computing.  
_

**Victoria Rayskin,** _Ph.D., University of California at Berkeley, 1997,
Mathematics: Dynamical Systems.  
  
_

