**[](http://www.uncfsu.edu)[![Dept. of Government and
History](../_borders/gh.gif)](http://www.uncfsu.edu/w4/dpt/ghp/index.htm)![FSU
Home Page](../_borders/bluseal2.gif)Hist 500, Historiography--Home**  
[ Announcements](http://courses.uncfsu.edu/hist500/announce.htm) |
[Description](http://courses.uncfsu.edu/hist500/descrip.htm) |
[Resources](http://courses.uncfsu.edu/hist500/texts.htm) |
[Outline](http://courses.uncfsu.edu/hist500/outline.htm) |
[Requirements](http://courses.uncfsu.edu/hist500/requirem.htm) |
[Communication](http://courses.uncfsu.edu/hist500/commun.htm) |
[Syllabus](http://courses.uncfsu.edu/hist500/syllabus.htm) | [Home  
  
  
](http://courses.uncfsu.edu/hist500/index.htm)  
  
---  
  
[Announcements](http://courses.uncfsu.edu/hist500/announce.htm)  
[Description](http://courses.uncfsu.edu/hist500/descrip.htm)  
[Resources](http://courses.uncfsu.edu/hist500/texts.htm)  
[Outline](http://courses.uncfsu.edu/hist500/outline.htm)  
[Requirements](http://courses.uncfsu.edu/hist500/requirem.htm)  
[Communication](http://courses.uncfsu.edu/hist500/commun.htm)  
[Syllabus  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
](http://courses.uncfsu.edu/hist500/syllabus.htm) | |

NOTE: Print this out for use in class. However, the official syllabus for this
course is the website, NOT any printed version. Students are responsible for
checking the website regularly for updates and other information

#### Locator Information

|

**Course** |

**Instructor**  
---|---  
  
  * Semester/Year: **Fall, 2001**
  * Semester Hours of Credit: **3**
  * Section: **01**
  * Class Meeting Days and Time: **T 6:00-8:50 p.m.**
  * Class Location: **JKSA 207**

|

  * Instructor: **Dr. Theron E. Corse**
  * Office Location: **JKSA 206A**
  * Office Phone: **672-1044**
  * Alternate Phone (Dept.): **672-1573**
  * E-Mail: [tcorse@uncfsu.edu](mailto:%20tcorse@uncfsu.edu)
  * Office Hours: **W 9-11, 2-3; T, R 1:30-4:00; T 5:30-6:00; or by appointment**

  


#### Course Description

This course introduces students to fundamental questions about the nature of
history and to the varieties of history that different answers to these
questions have inspired.  Students will investigate the kinds of questions
historians ask about the past, the relationship between theory and evidence in
historical writing, and the varieties of evidence historians use to
reconstruct the past.

#### Objectives

At the end of this course, successful students will have the following
knowledge and skills:

  * **Knowledge** :
    * philosophical issues related to the nature of history
    * contemporary approaches to history
    * recent historiographical controversies

  * **Skills** :
    * ability to write a critical review
    * ability to research and discuss historiographical issues
    * ability to use the Internet to research historiographical debates

#### Teaching Strategies

This class is taught as a seminar. Students should be prepared to discuss
assigned readings weekly, to lead discussions as assigned, and to present the
results of their own research in class.  Students should also be prepared to
discuss the works and presentations of guest speakers.

#### Schedule of Assignments and Due Dates

**No.** | **Assignment** | **Weight** | **Due Date**  
---|---|---|---  
01 | First presentation | 5% | See [Outline](outline.htm) and
[Guidelines](assign/pres.htm) for specific assignments and due dates.  
02 | First critique essay | 10%  
03 | Second presentation | 5%  
04 | Second critique essay | 10%  
05 | Book critique | 10% | Nov. 20  
06 | Historiographic paper | 35% | Dec. 18  
07 | Project presentation | 5% |  
08 | Participation | 20% |  
  
#### Evaluation

Grades and their numerical equivalents are as follows:

**Numeric Score** | **Letter Grade**  
---|---  
90 or above | A  
80-91 | B  
70-79 | C  
69 or below | F  
Incomplete |

I  
  
**Incompletes** are granted only if the student is unable to complete specific
course requirements for reasons beyond his or her control. Incompletes are
granted only if the student contacts the instructor before the end of the
term, and then only if the instructor agrees that the circumstances merit an
incomplete. The student and the instructor must complete an Incomplete Grade
Form. **Students who do not contact the instructor before the end of the term
will receive a grade of F (0) on all missing work.**

####  Course Policies

#### Late Work

Students are responsible for all work assigned in this class, whether or not
they are present. Assignments must be completed on time. **Late work** will be
penalized one letter grade unless you have a good excuse, and no assignments
will be accepted more than one week late.

Students may **rewrite** their essays. Rewrites are due one week after the
instructor hands graded assignments back to the class, whether or not you
attend class that day.

**Make-ups** for missed examinations and quizzes are given at the discretion
of the instructor. The absence must be excused under the same conditions as
absence from class. In general, make-ups must be taken within one week of the
original date of the exam.

#### Attendance

Attendance is required. **Excessive absence** (more than 2 absences for weekly
classes) can affect the participation grade.

**Tardiness** disrupts the class and is also discouraged. Any student arriving
after the instructor has finished calling the roll may be considered tardy,
and two incidents of unexcused tardiness count as one unexcused absence.
Students who arrive late should check with the instructor at the end of class
to make sure they are not marked absent.

Students are expected to remain in class until they are dismissed, unless they
have received prior permission from the instructor to leave early. **Early
departure** from class will be treated the same as tardiness--two such
occurrences will constitute an unexcused absence.

**Excuses** for tardiness and absence will be accepted at the discretion of
the instructor. Written documentation may be required, especially for lengthy
or repeated problems. Students should bring excuses to the instructor's
attention as soon as possible--before the event if it is foreseeable,
immediately after if not. Excuses for tardiness should be discussed with the
instructor immediately after the class for which the student is tardy; excuses
for absence should be discussed the first day the student returns to class.
With rare exceptions, **excuses will not be accepted after these dates**.

#### Participation

All students are expected to come to class prepared to discuss the assigned
material. This implies that students should read the material before class.
Perfect comprehension is not expected at the beginning of class, but students
should be familiar with the topic and the major points, and they should have
identified areas they do not understand well enough to ask focused,
intelligent questions about them. The instructor reserves the right to give
unannounced quizzes or other assignments to check students' preparation.

There are three principal ways students can participate:

  1. by asking and answering questions in class, 
  2. by contributing to team projects
  3. by discussing courses material with the instructor during office hours. 

Students are expected to observe normal courtesy in class. They are expected
to pay attention to the instructor, to take detailed notes, to refrain from
personal conversation, and to avoid any other behavior that disturbs others. A
student who does not observe these courtesies may be asked to leave the room.

#### Academic Honesty

Students should be aware that a university is a community of scholars
committed to the discovery and dissemination of knowledge and truth. Without
freedom to investigate all materials, scrupulous honesty in reporting
findings, and proper acknowledgment of credit, such a community can not
survive. Students are expected to adhere to the highest traditions of
scholarship. Infractions of these traditions, such as plagiarism (cheating),
are not tolerated. Misrepresenting someone else's words or ideas as one's own
constitutes plagiarism. In cases where plagiarism occurs, the instructor has
the right to penalize the student(s) as he or she thinks appropriate. One
guideline holds that the first offence results in failure of the assignment,
the second offence in failure of the course.

### Outline

Readings for specific dates may vary slightly from the following table as the
pace of the class dictates. Students are responsible for keeping up with any
such changes, which will also be posted on this web site.

Underlined readings are links to web sites. Students are responsible for
learning how to use the World Wide Web to get readings. Students should print
out copies of the readings to bring to class. Plan ahead--the Web is a great
learning resource, but glitch happens. Do not tell me you could not get the
reading because the server went down ten minutes before class.

Readings marked "reserve" are available from the circulation desk of Chesnutt
Library. Students should also make copies to bring to class.

Assignments for presentations and critiques are indicated by the student's
initials in the right-hand columns. See [Requirements](requirem.htm) for more
information.

**Unit** | **Date** | **Topic: Reading** | **Assignments**  
---|---|---|---  
  
01 | Aug 28 | **Introduction** | **Pres.** | **Crit.**  
  
02 | Sep 4 | **Problems of Textbook History** : **An Exercise in
Historiography -** Selection of readings from textbooks - available from Dr.
Corse.   | Group |  
  
03 | Sep 11 | **An Example of Historical Debate** : Daniel Goldhagen,
["Ordinary Germans and the
Holocaust"](http://www.historyplace.com/pointsofview/goldhagen.htm); [Recent
Writings by Daniel Goldhagen](http://www.goldhagen.com/welcome.html), esp.
["The New Discourse of Avoidance"](http://www.goldhagen.com/nda0.html); Norman
Finkelstein, "[Articles and Reviews relating to the Goldhagen
Thesis](http://www.normanfinkelstein.com/articles.html)" (see esp.
[Finkelstein's Response To
Goldhagen](http://www.normanfinkelstein.com/goldhagenresponse.html));
Blumenthal, "[A Scholarly Dispute on the Cause of the
Holocaust](http://www.normanfinkelstein.com/nyt.html)"; [H-Net Discussion
Log](http://www.h-net.msu.edu/logs/)\--keyword search on "Goldhagen" and
"Finkelstein" |   |  
  
04

  | Sep 18 | **Problems of Historical Knowledge** : Wilson, chs. 1-2;
Thucydides: [On Inventing
Speeches](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/thucydid.html), from _History of
the Peloponnesian War_ ; Lord Acton: [Inaugural Lecture on the Study of
History](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1906acton.html); Gerald W.
Schlabach: [A Sense of History: Some
Components](http://www.bluffton.edu/~schlabachg/courses/sense.htm); James H.
Robinson: [Why Study History Through Primary
Sources](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/robinson-sources.html); [The
Need for Source Criticism: A Letter from Alexander to
Aristotle?](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/ancient/alexfake.html) |   |  
  
05 | Sep 25 | **History and Theory--Interpretations of Andrew Jackson** :
Frederick Jackson Turner, ["The Significance of the Frontier in American
History](http://wsrv.clas.virginia.edu/~tsawyer/DRBR/turnerth.txt)"; Alexis de
Tocqueville, [Principal Causes Which Tend to Maintain the Democratic Republic
in the United States](http://xroads.virginia.edu/~HYPER/DETOC/1_ch17.htm);
Henry Nash Smith, _Virgin Land: The American West as Symbol and Myth_ (1950).
Read the ["Prologue](http://xroads.virginia.edu/~HYPER/HNS/prologue.html) and
[Chapter XI](http://xroads.virginia.edu/~HYPER/HNS/chap11.html).  
|    |  
  
06 | Oct 2 | **Social History and Visual Evidence** : Wilson, ch 4; Riis,
_[How the Other Half
Lives](http://www.cis.yale.edu/amstud/inforev/riis/title.html);_   |   |  
  
07 | Oct 9 | **Actors--Gender** : Wilson, ch. 5; "[The Sexual Solipsism of
Freud](http://marxists.org/reference/subject/philosophy/works/us/friedan.htm)";
Solange Alberdo "Beatriz de Padilla: Mistress and Mother" (Handout from Dr.
Corse) |   |  
  
08 | Oct 16 | **History and the Human Sciences** : Wilson, ch. 3; [Geertz,
Thick Description](http://xroads.virginia.edu/g/DRBR/geertz2.txt) |   |  
  
09 | Oct 21 | **Intellectual History** : [Modern European Intellectual
History: An
Introduction](http://www.historyguide.org/intellect/lecture1a.html); Stephen
E. Lucas, ["The Stylistic Artistry of the Declaration of
Independence"](http://www.nara.gov/exhall/charters/declaration/decstyle.html);
[The Declaration of
Independence](http://www.nara.gov/exhall/charters/declaration/declaration.html)
|   |  
  
10 | Oct 30 | **Rational Actor Theory and Public Policy--The Decision to Drop
the Atomic Bomb** : [The Last Act - The Enola Gay and the Atomic
Bomb](http://www.nuclearfiles.org/docs/lastact.html) (A comparison of the
texts of the cancelled and final versions); [H-Asia Smithsonian Enola Gay
Exhibit Controversy](http://www.h-net.msu.edu/~asia/threads/thrdenola.html);
|   |  
  
11 | Nov 6 | **Social History and Oral Evidence** : Wilson, ch 4; [American
Slave Narratives: An Online
Anthology](http://xroads.virginia.edu/~HYPER/wpa/wpahome.html);  |   |  
  
12 | Nov 13 | **Postmodernism and History** : Wilson 6; Foucault, "[What Is an
Author?](http://www.georgetown.edu/irvinemj/english016/texts/foucault.html)";
Mary Klages, [Summary and Analysis of "What is an
Author?"](http://www.colorado.edu/English/ENGL2012Klages/foucault.html); John
R. Durant, [Summary and Analysis of "What is an
Author?"](http://mh.cla.umn.edu/ebibjd1.html) Tim Spurgin, ["Readers Guide to
'What is an
Author?'"](http://www.lawrence.edu/dept/english/courses/60A/handouts/author.html)
Jean Baudrillard, [ DisneyWorld
Company](http://www.ctheory.com/e25-disneyworld_comp.html)  |   |  
  
13 | Nov 20 | **Problems of Textbook History Revisited:** Forum on textbooks.
|    |  
  
14 | Nov 27 | **History and the Future** : Wilson, review; TBA |   |  
  
15 | Dec 4 | [**Virtual Discussion--History and
Quantification**](http://courses.uncfsu.edu/discusshist500/Default.htm):
Wilson, ch. 3; Dowdle, "The Protomodern Presidency" (reserve);  |    |  
  
16 | Dec 11 | **Student Presentations** |    |  
  
17 | Dec 18 | **Student Presentations** |    |  


#### Bibliography

#### Textbooks![wlsncov.jpg \(5279 bytes\)](images/wlsncov.jpg)

  * Rampolla, Mary Lynn.  _A Pocket Guide to Writing in History._ 2d ed.   New York: Bedford/St. Martin's, 1998.
  * Wilson, Norman J. _History in Crisis? Recent Directions in Historiography._ Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1998.

####  Reserve (Chesnutt Library)

  * Dowdle, Andrew J. "The Protomodern Presidency." Unpublished paper. 1999.

#### Web Resources

  * "American Slave Narratives: An Online Anthology." 1996-1998. <<http://xroads.virginia.edu/~HYPER/wpa/wpahome.html>> (16 August 1999).
  * Baudrillard, Jean. "DisneyWorld Company." 4 March 1996\. __<<http://www.ctheory.com/e25-disneyworld_comp.html>> (16 August 1999).
  * ___. "In the Shadow of the Millennium." September 1998\. <<http://www.ctheory.com/a61.html>> (16 August 1999).
  * "Disneyland Paris Home Page." <<http://www.disneylandparis.com/disney/smain.htm>> (16 August 1999).
  * "The Enola Gay and the Atomic Bomb." January 1995. <<http://www.nhk.or.jp/nuclear/e/text/sumiso.htm>> (16 August 1999).
  * "The Enola Gay Exhibit." 9 January 1999. <<http://www.nasm.edu/GALLERIES/GAL103/gal103.html>> (16 August 1999).
  * Finkelstein, Norman G. "[Articles and Reviews relating to the Goldhagen Thesis](http://www.normanfinkelstein.com/articles.html)". <<http://www.normanfinkelstein.com/articles.html>> (16 August 1999).
  * Friedan, Betty. "The Sexual Solipsism of Freud." 1963\. <<http://werple.net.au/~lynnbea/lib/friedan.htm>> (16 August 1999).
  * Goldhagen, Daniel J. "Ordinary Germans and the Holocaust". 1996. <<http://www.historyplace.com/pointsofview/goldhagen.htm>> (16 August 1999).
  * ___. "Recent Writings by Daniel Goldhagen". <<http://www.goldhagen.com/welcome.html>> (16 August 1999).
  * Geertz, Clifford. "Thick Description: Toward an Interpretive Theory of Culture." 17 Sep 1994. <<http://xroads.virginia.edu/g/DRBR/geertz2.txt>> (16 August 1999).
  * [](http://www.h-net.msu.edu/)H-Asia Smithsonian Enola Gay Exhibit Controversy. 10 Feb.- 25 Sept. 1995. <<http://www.h-net.msu.edu/~asia/threads/thrdenola.html>> (16 August 1999).
  * H-Net, Humanities and Social Sciences Online. <<http://www.h-net.msu.edu/>> (16 August 1999).
  * Pollan, Michael. "Town Building is No Mickey Mouse Operation." 14 December 1997. <<http://hellskitchen.net/develop/news/mp121497.html>> (16 August 1999).
  * Riis, Jacob. _How the Other Half Lives._ New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1890. Hypertext ed. David Phillips, 1995. __ <<http://www.cis.yale.edu/amstud/inforev/riis/title.html>> (16 August 1999).
  * Tokyo DisneyLand Official Home Page. <<http://www.tokyodisneyland.co.jp/>> (16 August 1999).
  * Turner, Frederick Jackson. "The Significance of the Frontier in American History." <<http://wsrv.clas.virginia.edu/~tsawyer/DRBR/turnerth.txt>[>](http://wsrv.clas.virginia.edu/~tsawyer/DRBR/turnerth.txt) (16 August 1999).

     
  
Contact Theron E. Corse ([e-mail](mailto:tcorse@uncfsu.edu); [home
page](http://spacer.uncfsu.edu/f_corse/index.htm)). Last updated 08/28/01.  
---

