* * *

## **BOARD OF EXAMINERS REPORT**

## **N C A T E**

* * *

**National Council for Accreditation off Teacher Education**

**Continuing Accreditation Visit to:**

**Florida Atlantic University  
Boca Raton, FL**

**April 1-5, 2000**

* * *

**_NCATE Board of Examiners Team:_**  
Maryann Mannning, Chari  
Gordon Horgen  
John Marsteller  
Lani Martin  
Carrie Robinson

**Florida State Team:  
** Robert Vos, Chair  
Bernadine Bolden  
William H. Caldwell  
Nancy McAleer

**Florida Department of Education Consultant:  
** Tom Hobbs

**Florida Board of Regents Representative:**  
Calr Blackman

**Florida Education Association Representative:  
** Betty Burden-Lee  
---  
  
* * *

**Report Contents**

Part I: Introduction

Part II: Findings for Each Standards Category

  * Category I: Design of Professional Education
  * Category II: Candidates in Professional Education
  * Category III: Professional Education Faculty
  * Category IV: The Unit for Professional Education

Part III: Sources of Evidence

* * *

**PART I  
INTRODUCTION  **

* * *

The University Founded in 1964 in Boca Raton, Florida Atlantic University
became the fifth university in the Florida public system. The University is
responsible for providing academic programs and public service to the counties
of Palm Beach, Broward, Indian River, Martin, St. Lucie, and Okeechobee with a
total population of approximately three million people. The threefold mission
of the University includes teaching, research, and public service in the
expanding urban environment of southeast Florida.

The original and main campus of Florida Atlantic University is the Boca Raton
Campus which is located on 850 acres of land three miles from the Atlantic
Ocean. The campus is located on a former U.S. Army airfield and is inhabited
by a variety of wildlife, including burrowing owls. The number of buildings on
the Boca Raton Campus has grown to over seventy, including the College of
Education Building which was completed in 1994, The university has expanded to
include six other campuses including those in Broward County (Davie Campus),
the Northern campuses in Jupiter (John D. MacArthur Campus), and Port St.
Lucie (Treasure Coast Campus). The team visited all campuses (Boca Raton,
MacArthur, Treasure Coast and Davie) with College of Education programs.

Over twenty thousand students are enrolled and nearly four thousand degrees
are awarded annually. In addition to the College of Education, the university
includes the College of Architecture; Urban and Public Affairs; the Dorothy F.
Schmidt College of Arts and Letters; the Colleges of Business, Engineering,
Honors, Liberal Arts, and Nursing and the Charles E. Schmidt College of
Science. There are over 800 full-time faculty members and nearly 3,500 full-
time employees. The current fund revenues for 1998-99 were $239,053,642.
Currently, the university offers 57 Bachelor's, 50 Master's, 3 Specialist and
15 Doctoral degrees.

The five-story Wimberly Library has a collection of 725,800 volumes, 2.5
million microfilms, and subscriptions to 4,300 scholarly journals and other
serials. The library also houses one of the nation's top Judaica collections
in addition to a large collection of monographs, serials, and other academic
resources. The Davie campus has a shared library with Broward Community
College. The Treasure Coast Campus utilizes the St. Lucie West Library which
is supported by St. Lucie County, Indian River Community College, and Florida
Atlantic University. The library on the MacArthur Campus is shared with the
community college.

The College of Education

The following is a statement from the graduate catalog: "The College of
Education is dedicated to the education of educational professionals;
individuals with a sound knowledge base built on the best available research,
theory, and practical applications; individuals with high standards of ethical
behavior and a commitment to excellence and continued learning." This mission
is carried out through the departments of Counselor Education, Educational
Leadership, Exceptional Student Education, Health Sciences, Educational
Technology and Research, and Teacher  Education.

There has been a 43.5% growth in students enrolled in programs in the College
of Education since the last NCATE visit. During the 1993-94 academic year
there were ,328.9 annualized student FTEs compared to 1998-99 when there were
1,907 annualized student FTES.

Degree programs offered are offered at the bachelor's, master's, specialist,
and doctoral levels. Undergraduate teacher education programs include
Elementary Education with ESOL endorsement; Secondary Education with
certification programs in English 6-8, Social Sciences 6-8, Biology 6-12,
Chemistry 6-12, Physics 6-12, Mathematics 6-12, Art K-12, Music K-12, French
K-12, German K-12, and Spanish K- 12; Teaching English to Speakers of Other
Language (TESOL); and Exceptional Student Education. Health Sciences programs
include a Bachelor of Science in Education with a Major in Exercise
Science/Wellness Education; and Bachelor of Science in Health Science.

Undergraduate certification programs include elementary education with ESOL
endorsement, exceptional student education, and medical technology. Graduate
certification programs include counselor education, early childhood education,
educational leadership, elementary education, exceptional student education,
social foundations, and speech-language pathology. Non-certification programs
include the Bachelor of Science Degree in Medical Technology, Master's Degree
in Science in Exercise Science and Wellness Education, Master's of Science
Degree in Communications Disorders, and the Master's of Science in Speech
Pathology and Audiology.

All undergraduate and graduate programs except graduate and undergraduate
exercise science and wellness (offered only at Davie Campus) are offered on
the Boca Raton campus.

Undergraduate, elementary education and graduate educational leadership
programs are offered on all four campuses. Counselor education and
undergraduate exceptional education are offered at three campuses (Boca Raton,
MacArthur and Davie). Undergraduate secondary education, graduate
communication disorders, graduate reading, graduate elementary, graduate
curriculum and instruction are offered at two campuses (Boca Raton and Davie).
faculty and adjuncts.

These courses are taught by full-time Most departments offer a few courses via
distance learning. No complete program is offered via distance learning but
graduate exceptional student education and varying exceptionalities programs
are being planned in collaboration with other universities in the Florida
State University System.

The Genesis Teacher Education Project is an experimental teacher education
five year program that offers a bachelor's and master's degree in both the
liberal arts and education. Genesis has a collaborative partnership with A.D.
Henderson University ~ School and the School Districts of Palm Beach County,
Martin County and St. Lucie County. Students receive certification in
elementary, middle school, secondary education and ESOL.

There are 177 full-time education faculty, 72% more than in 1995, and 200
adjunct faculty members. Fifty one percent of the current faculty have been
hired since 1995. The faculty has received many awards from learned societies
for research and scholarship.

The College of Education has developed twelve very successful professional
development schools (Genesis Academy for Teacher Excellence) which include
seven public elementary schools, one elementary/middle school, two public
middle schools, and one middle/senior high school, and one high school. This
network of professional schools is located in three counties. Currently, there
are plans to expand the number of professional development schools. The Karen
Slattery Educational Research Center for Child Development and A.D. Henderson
University School provide many rich experiences for students in early
childhood and elementary education.

Major changes the School of Education has made since the last NCATE visit:

，        hired 45 new faculty members

，        expanded programs

，        increased enrollment dramatically at all campuses

，        reorganized academic units

，        restructured educational leadership, teacher education, and counselor
education

，        established faculty assembly

，        expanded professional schools

，        established the Secondary Teacher Education Coordinating Committee

This was a continuing visit conducted by a team of five NCATE BOE members with
one observer and a team of four faculty members from Florida higher education
institutions, one representative of the Florida Department of Education and
one representative from the Florida Board of Regents.

* * *

**Back to Top**

* * *

**PART II  
FINDINGS FOR EACH CATEGORY OF STANDARDS**

* * *

**CATEGORY I: DESIGN OF PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION**

* * *

**A. _Observations_ **

The goal of the College of Education at Florida Atlantic University is to
prepare professionals to effectively meet the challenges and needs of teacher
education candidates in the context of their work with students and families
manifesting linguistic diversity, cultural diversity, learning, and behavioral
diversity in an increasingly interpendent and rapidly changing world. In order
to meet the aforementioned goal, the College of Education articulated as its
conceptual framework, Professional Preparation for a Diverse Society. The
College of Education's conceptual framework includes three specific academic
components in the preparation of professionals: foundational requirements,
experiential learning, and professional knowledge. The conceptual framework is
clearly articulated and does appear in some documents, i.e., on the College of
Education0s website, in some course syllabi, and in the field experience
handbooks that are distributed to all students enrolled in field experience
courses. The conceptual framework is not readily observable in places such as
student teaching handbooks, the catalogs [undergraduate and graduate], and the
College of Education brochure. Some facu4 and students did not appear to value
or be knowledgeable about the Conceptual Framework.

Extensive informal collaboration takes place between faculty in the College of
Education and the faculty in other colleges who teach content studies. The
Secondary Teacher Education Coordinating Council has been established since
the last NCATE visit.

Technology is integrated into every program. Alumni, students, and faculty
report that technology is a valued and important part of their collection of
teaching techniques. Candidates learn to integrate what they have learned in
their field experiences which are carefully planned and sequenced. Practica
prior to student teaching are part of methods classes as well as specifically
designed field experiences and take place in a variety of settings. Evaluation
forms for candidates documenting early field experiences, practical and
student teaching are extensive and spell out the expectations and
accomplishments of the candidates. Linguistic and cultural diversity are an
integral part of the experiences. Student teaching is a one-semester
experience unless the candidate is enrolled in the Genesis project in which
case the candidate serves as a paid intern during the fifth year.

Advanced programs include master's degree programs in Educational Leadership,
Counselor Education, Curriculum and Instruction, Reading Education,
Exceptional Student Education, and Health Sciences. The Educational Leadership
Department has used a review process, major national reports, and standards of
review agencies and learned societies which have resulted in extensive
changes. Using the College of Education0s conceptual framework, the department
has developed its own curriculum. There is an increased emphasis on
experiential learning, technology, and communication. The master0s and
doctoral programs have been redesigned; however, little focus has been given
to cultural and linguistic diversity. It is not written, however, professors
state that there is a departmental culture of honoring diversity. Although It
is stated in the College of Education Conceptual Framework and repeated in the
Education Leadership Department0s Conceptual Framework Connection to Program's
matrix, syllabi and bibliographies show few connections to diversity issues.
Students report, however, that classes do address issues of diversity.
Although it is not written, professors state that there is a departmental
culture of honoring diversity adhered to by the entire department. Issues of
diversity are addressed in courses throughout the Graduate School Counselor
program. The master's in Graduate School Counseling requires a course,
(Counseling Special Needs Populations), which deals with issues of minority,
bilingual, handicapped, and other special needs group.

Cultural and linguistic diversity are threaded throughout the teacher
education program. However, the Secondary Teacher Education Coordinating
Committee exhibits little knowledge of the Conceptual Framework. This
committee is made up of faculty and administrators from outside the College of
Education who teach the content for secondary certification.

Adjunct and new faculty receive a handbook which covers issues such as
preparation of the syllabus, professionalism, textbooks, emergency procedures,
audio- visual procedures and contact people. Mentors are assigned to new
faculty to assist them in the promotion and tenure process. Detailed outlines
for the required portfolios which faculty must submit for tenure and promotion
are provided to each new faculty member. Department chairs observe new and
adjunct faculty members ' classes. A three year review prepares the faculty
member for the tenure and promotion process which comes at the sixth year.
Department chairs review student evaluations each semester and consult with
faculty if assessment indicates changes should be made.

The field experience requirements in all programs have been increased since
the last NCATE visit. In Counselor Education, the field experience requirement
has been changed from the old requirement of 100 practicum hours to one 150
hour practicum plus a 600 hour internship. In Educational Leadership at the
master's level students are now required to complete a 100 hour internship, as
well as participate in simulations and case study analysis in other courses.
At the Specialist level students are required to take 9 hours of experiential
learning and each student must produce a Learning Portfolio as a requirement
for the internship. The 9 hour requirement consists of a 6 hour internship and
a 3 hour field project. In Exceptional Student Education students have
numerous opportunities for practical experience, including observation
requirements, methods courses that require students to work with individual K-
12 students. Additionally, all ESE students at the master's level complete
either a 3 credit hour or a 6 credit hour internship. In Teacher Education
clinical requirements exist in each program, the amount depending upon the
emphasis area.

**B _. Weaknesses Corrected since the Previous Visit_**

**Standard I.A.** The knowledge base is not clearly articulated across all
programs within the unit. A new conceptual framework has been developed and
includes all programs.

**Standard I.C. [Previous Standard I.D].** Professional education faculty do
not collaborate with faculty who teach the specialty studies. Informal
discussions are held and advisors collaborate.

**Standard I.H [Previous Standard II.A]** Advanced. The unit does not assure
that all advanced programs at each degree level include clinical and field-
based experiences.

All programs include required clinical and field-based experiences.

**_Weakness Continued from the Previous Visit_**

None were cited.

**New Weakness**

**Standard I.A.** The conceptual framework is not fully infused into the
culture of the College of Education.

Many individuals both within and outside the College of Education are unaware
of the conceptual framework and it is not included in some course syllabi and
some documents.

* * *

**Back to Top**

* * *

**CATEGORY II: CANDIDATES IN PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION**

* * *

**A. _Observations_**

The criteria for admission to initial and advanced programs in the College of
Education are detailed in the university catalogues, as well as in brochures
for each specific program within the unit. The recruitment efforts have been
successful in attracting high quality candidates to the programs of the unit.
To assure basic skills competence, initial teacher preparation candidates must
have an overall grade point average of 2.5 or higher on a 4.0 scale, and pass
the College Level Academic Skills Test (CLAST) with scores of 295 in
mathematics, reading, English, and an essay score of 6. Furthermore, they must
have an ACT score of 20 or higher or an SAT score of 960 or higher. Over the
past two years, the College of Education entering student demographics
indicate that 60 % of the candidates held an Associate of Arts Degree from a
Florida community college and eight percent held a Bachelor0s Degree. Two
candidates held a rnaster0s degree before entering the prograrn. Of those
entering the college, more than 35% of the students had a GPA of 3.5 or
higher, and their average age was twenty-six. Applicants for admission to a
graduate degree-granting program of the university must meet the minimum
standards set forth by the Florida Board of Regents. The candidate must have a
OBO (3.0 on a 4.0 scale) average or better when registered as an upper
division student working for a baccalaureate degree. Alternately, the
candidate must have obtained a minimum combined score of 1000 (quantitative
and verbal) on the Graduate Record Exam (GRE) or a graduate degree from a
regionally accredited institution.

The candidate must also meet the specific requirements set by the program.

The College of Education works toward recruiting, admitting, and retaining a
diverse student body. The unit in concert with the Florida Atlantic University
has instituted a variety of initiatives to meet this goal. The University
established a Director of Development position for the College of Education to
secure endowments and grants. The Florida Department of Education offers
financial assistance to minority students through its Bright Futures
Scholarship Program. The University also has specific scholarships designated
for academically gifted Spanish and African-American students. A grant
proposal, "Recruiting for Gender Equity and Diversity in Teacher Education",
has been submitted to the University Provost. The College of Education
Director of Academic and Student Services meets with students and counselors
at the community colleges to encourage diverse students to enter the teacher
program, The appointment of a minority Associate Director for Academic and
Student Services provides minority students with a role model and person with
whom they feel comfortable discussing their progress.

To admit high potential minority applicants, the college has employed the 10%
rule for admitting promising applicants who do not meet the Board of Regent's
minimum requirements for admission to graduate school. A "Grow Your Own"
program provides financial assistance to minority students who want to pursue
a graduate degree. Supplementary student services exist through the Office of
Multicultural Affairs to increase retention rates of minority and other
special student populations.

The Academic Enhancement Programs, Cultural Diversity Week, Math /English
Labs, Book Loan Program, Counseling Program, and Mentoring Program accomplish
the overall goal of retention.

The percentage of minority enrollment in the undergraduate program rose from
11.3% in 1995 to 25.8% in 1999, and during the same time period the percentage
of initiatives have had a positive effect by raising the percentage of
minority students enrolled in the College.

Academic advising is an integral part of the unit0s program. Once complete
records are on file in the Office for Academic and Student Services, entering
candidates are assigned advisors and formally begin their program. Candidates
enrolling in content area. Advisors are available to the candidates on a walk-
in basis.

Once admission requirements to graduate programs are met, students are
complete a planned program of study. At the specialist and doctoral levels,
candidates are assigned a faculty advisor and additional committee members are
added. Testimonials from students were very positive concerning the
accessibility and helpfulness of the advisors.

A student may sign up for classes at any of the campuses, but all records are
kept at the campus nearest to the student0s residence. A back-up of all
records is electronically kept on the mainframe in the Office for Academic and
Student Services at the Boca Raton Campus. This centralization of files
enables faculty to monitor a candidate0s progress.

Student's progress in initial and advanced courses is monitored using multiple
sources of data as they move toward mastery of established exit criteria.
Student progress in field experiences is evaluated using a check list of
performance during classroom experiences. Special requirements for enrollment
in student teaching must be met before the candidate is allowed to begin an
internship. Elementary and secondary majors must present passing scores on the
Florida Teacher Certification Examination, a GPA of 2.5, and security
clearance. The student teaching experience is monitored by a university
supervisor and a cooperating teacher who has completed state mandated clinical
educator training. The student's progress is monitored in a variety of ways
including written forms, conferences, self reflection, demonstrations and
other measures. The candidates culminate their professional experience by
developing a portfolio which will provide a tool for authentic assessment of
their professional growth. The graduating students must meet the state testing
requirements for licensure by having already achieved passing scores on the
College Level Academic Skills Test (CLAST) and on the Florida Teacher
Certification Examination.

Cooperating teachers, school administrators, candidates, and graduates value
the quality of the teacher preparation programs at the Florida Atlantic
University College of Education.

The Florida Atlantic University0s November 30, 1999 Institutional Program
Evaluation Plan (IPEP) to the Florida Department of Education reports that the
FAU graduates had a 100% rehire rate.

**B. Weaknesses Corrected since the Previous Visit**

None were cited.

**C. Weaknesses Continued from the Previous Visit**

None were cited.

**D. New Weaknesses**

None were cited.

* * *

**Back to Top**

* * *

**CATEGORY III: PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION FACULTY**

* * *

**A. Observations**

Nearly all of the unit's professional education faculty in both the initial
and advanced programs hold terminal degrees in their fields; all are qualified
for their assignments. There are 117 full-time faculty and 200 adjunct faculty
members. Fifty- one percent of the faculty have been hired since 1995. In
1995, 14.7% of the full-time faculty were minorities, while in 1999, 18.5%
were minorities. Ninety-four faculty members are on tenure-track. The faculty
is engaged in the professional community as teacher scholars. During the
1998-1999 academic-year, faculty members wrote and published 4 books, wrote 40
chapters for books, and published 75 articles in refereed journals. Faculty
were also involved in making professional presentations and served in
leadership positions in professional organizations at the state, regional ,
and national/international levels. Faculty were also involved in state and
local education task forces, advisory councils, and initiatives

Numerous non-tenured faculty members are engaged in one day per week service
in public schools. These faculty members have been assured that this level of
involvement would not adversely effect tenure and promotion.

An overwhelming majority of adjunct faculty members hold terminal degrees and
have expertise and experience in the areas in which they teach or supervise.
An _Adiunct/New Faculty Handbook_ is used to orient them to working in the
College of Education. Adjunct faculty members are required to use a syllabus
provided by the department chair.

The unit has implemented a Minority Faculty Recruitment Plan that was revised
in June of 1998. The plan includes specific activities intended to attract
minority applicants for positions within the unit. Some aspects of the plan
include faculty networking with colleagues at other institutions of higher
education to identify potential candidates, and the use of an Equal Employment
Opportunity Search and Screen package. The process also includes advertisement
in the _Chronicle of Higher Education_ , advertisement in an appropriate
publication oriented to a minority audience, and letters to professional
contacts. The activities of the Minority Faculty Recruitment Plan Committee
are well documented. Within the unit, there is a "Grow Your Own" program that
recruits minority students to serve as instructors with free tuition and a
salary while pursuing a doctorate. A tally of the current faculty indicated
twenty-one minority members. Of this number, 7 are Blacks, 6 are Hispanics, 7
are Asian or Pacific Islanders, and 1 is Native American. Two of the six
department chairpersons are members of a minority group

A companion piece to the Minority Faculty Recruitment Plan is a Retention
Plan. This plan includes orientation for new faculty members, support from the
department chair, and the assignment of a faculty mentor. All new faculty
members have a minimum of one observation during the first year of employment.
At the end of each academic year, a written assessment of "Progress Toward
Tenure" is completed for each non-tenured faculty member until tenure is
awarded at the University.

Each faculty member is assigned to teach nine semester hours each semester,
and is expected to keep six office hours per week. The remainder of the
faculty member's time is spent on research and service. The supervision of
four student teachers/interns is equivalent to one course taught. Overloads
are not recommended. Non-tenured faculty members are counseled about the
possible negative impact that an overload may have on their progress toward
tenure. There are clearly stated criteria for consideration for promotion and
tenure. Faculty members are considered for promotion and tenure
simultaneously; however, separate votes are taken.

There are opportunities for faculty development activities. The College
supports faculty development if it addresses a programmatic need or individual
professional development. The major sources of revenues for professional
development are allocated from funds budgeted to a travel committee within the
college of education. Funds are also available from the Dean's Office for
faculty participation in professional development activities. Activities may
also be funded through grants or at the personal expense of the faculty
member. Leave for participation in professional development activities
requires approval from the department chair and the Dean. The Area Center for
Educational Enhancement has provided workshops for faculty members on topics
such as Sunshine State Standards, the Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test,
and Curriculum Planning Tool Software. The Information Resource Management
Office offers free classes and faculty members may take tuition free courses
within the university.

**B. _Weaknesses Corrected since the Previous Visit_**

**Standard Ill. B (previously Standard IV.A):**

There is no written plan for the continuing recruitment of a diverse faculty.
Response-. The unit has implemented a Minority Faculty Recruitment Plan that
includes a Retention Plan and was last revised in June of 1998.

**C. _Weaknesses Continued from the Previous Visit_**

**None were cited.**

**D. _Now Weaknesses_ **

**None were cited.**

* * *

**Back to Top**

* * *

**CATEGORY IV: THE UNIT FOR PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION**

* * *

**_A. Observations_**

The College of Education has six departments: Counselor Education, Educational
Leadership, Exceptional Student Education, Teacher Education, Health Sciences,
and Educational Technology and Research. In conjunction with the University's
reorganization, the role of department chair has changed from that of faculty
to administration. Department chairs are now appointed by the dean of the
College and serve for a period of three years at the dean's discretion.

There are insufficient numbers of full-time faculty to support programs
although the number of faculty has increased since the last NCATE visit from
65 to 117. However, the number of new hires has not sufficiently kept up with
the dramatic increase in enrollment.

Curriculum vitae for the adjuncts hired to teach courses and supervise
clinical experiences document they are of extremely high quality but adjuncts
are not available to advise students and engage in College of Education and
department committee work. There were 200 adjunct faculty hired for the 1999
fall semester.

Standing committees within the College of Education include the Executive
Committee, Graduate Programs Committee, Undergraduate Programs Committee,
Undergraduate Petitions Committee, Promotion and Tenure Committee, and a
Library Committee. The College of Education's Promotion and Tenure Committee
consists of one member from each department. This committee makes
recommendations to the dean who forwards the committees recommendation to the
provost as well as the University's Promotion and Tenure Committee.

There is a variety of advisory committees that support the faculty and
administration of the College of Education. The Faculty Assembly, composed of
all full- time tenure-track faculty within the College of Education, meets
twice each semester. All academic departments have one member who serves on
the steering committee. The Faculty Assembly establishes formal procedures for
evaluating chairs, deans, and associate deans, however, the Faculty Assembly
has little responsibility for governance because it is only advisory to the
dean. The Advisory Council consists of representatives from seven school
districts, private parochial schools, two students, ten members of the
business community and additional members recommended by the chairperson. This
Council meets with the dean four times a year. A student advisory committee
acts as a liaison among students, faculty, and administration and is currently
chaired by a doctoral student.

The College of Education and the other colleges at Florida Atlantic University
have separate budgets for the other respective campuses [MacArthur and
Treasure Coast campuses], the Boca Raton campus, and the southern
(Davie/Broward campuses. The associate deans for each campus are responsible
for the appropriation and monitoring of budget expenditures for their
respective campuses. The allocation of funds is made by the campus vice
presidents on the northern and southern campuses, and by the associate provost
on the Boca Raton campus. The dean has complete authority and control of
budgets and allocations on the Boca Raton campus. Funds can be moved from one
budget category to another without the approval of the Associate Provost on
the Boca Raton campus. On the northern and southern campuses, funds can be
moved from one budget category to another only at the request of the
respective campus vice president.

The unit has reactivated the Secondary Teacher Education Coordinating
Committee [STECC]. This committee meets annually to give recommendations to
the dean. The purpose of the committee is to engage the faculty outside of the
College of Education in decision-making for the benefit of secondary education
candidates and programs. Since meetings are held only once a year, there is
limited opportunity for input or decision making.

A wide variety of technological resources is available to support faculty
scholarship, teaching, and service. These include a computer on the desk of
all faculty, Renaissance Technology Center, and professional development
workshops to enable faculty to utilize technology for the advancement of
teaching, scholarship, and service. Florida Atlantic University is a part of
the Florida University Library system. Comprehensive library facilities are
available on each of the campuses. Each campus has adequate numbers of
education or related current books and journals. At the Boca Raton campus
there are 38,460 books and 483 journals, the MacArthur campus has 7,500 books
and 66 journals, the Treasure Coast campus has 1,439 books and 20 journals,
and the Davie campus has 6,436 books and 159 journals. The S. E. Wimberly
Library on Florida Atlantic University's Boca Raton campus houses new and
innovative assistive technology workstations for persons with disabilities in
the reference department. The equipment, which has ADA compliant software, is
set up on new study carrels with extra high table tops to accommodate persons
in wheelchairs.

**B. _Weaknesses Corrected since the Previous Visit_**

**Standard IV.A [Previous Standard V.B]**

There is excessive use and dependence on adjunct and regular FTE Faculty
overloads to meet course and program demands.

Although there is a large number of adjuncts utilized, there are few faculty
overloads. The number of adjuncts is addressed under resources for the unit.

**C. _Weaknesses Continued from the Previous Visit_ **

**Standard IV.A [Previous Standard V.A]**

Faculty involved in professional education [particularly those who programs
reside in colleges outside of the College of Education] are not provided with
equal opportunities for a voice in the unit's decision making process.

Although STECC [Secondary Teacher Education Coordinating Committee] exists, it
only meets annually which provides only limited opportunity for participation
in the decision making process.

**New Weakness**

**Standard IV.A**

There are insufficient numbers of full-time faculty to support programs.
Although there has been a significant increase in the number of new faculty,
the hires have not kept up with the dramatic increase in enrollment.

**Standard IV.C**

Budget resources are not allocated directly and controlled by the College of
Education on the Davie, MacArthur and Treasure Coast Campuses. The Dean of the
College of Education receives a direct allocation for the Boca Raton campus.
The College maintains complete control of these funds. However, the control is
different on each of the other campuses.

* * *

**Back to Top**

* * *

**PART III  
SOURCES OF EVIDENCE**

* * *

**PERSONS INTERVIEWED**

**Administrators (University)**

Dr. Anthony Catanese, President  
Dr. Richard Osburn, Provost Dr. Nathan Dean, Vice Provost

**Administrators (Campus)**

Dr. Diane Alperin, Associate Provost, Boca Raton Campus  
Dr. Robert Huckshorn, Vice President, North Campuses  
Dr. Mary McBride, Vice President, Broward Campuses

**Advisory Council**

Mr. John Almond, Chair, Education Manager, Motorola Corporation  
Ms. Cheryl Alligood, Associate Superintendent, Curriculum, Palm Beach County  
Ms. Eleanor Baldwin, Retired from Broward County School System  
Ms. Eleni Coukos, President, College of Education Student Advisory Council  
Mr. Robert Howell, Retired from IBM, FL. DOE, Palm Beach County School Bd.  
Dr. Joanne Kaiser, Chief Personnel Officer, Palm Beach County Schools  
Ms. Judith Klinek, Principal, LoggersO Run Middle School, Boca Raton  
Mr. Jon Levinson, President, REL Enterprises, Inc.  
Ms. Darlene Nowocien, Assistant Principal, Pioneer Park Elementary  
Mr. David Rinker, Rinker Foundation Dr. Bernard Shulman, Attorney School Board
Palm Beach County Ms. Joyce Swaffield, Principal, Del Prado Elementary School
Mr. Frank Vodolo, Middle School Coordinator, Broward School District

**Alumni - Undergraduate/Graduate**

Mr. Bob Barker  
Ms. Mapy Brown  
Ms. Michele Feldman  
Ms. Myra Julian Ms. Catherine Lee  
Ms. Pam Whigam  
Mr. Frank Yelinek

**Boca Raton High School**

Ms. Diana Harris, Principal  
Ms. Jean Wasko, Curriculum Specialist and former GATE Coordinator  
Dr. Janet Benton, FAU Liaison  
Mrs. Debbie Esposito - GATE Onsite Coordinator  
Ms. Tina Garofalo, English Teacher  
Miss Jennifer Quinn, English Teacher  
Ms. Nancy Feinberg, Social Studies Teacher  
Ms. Linda Mirro, FAU Student Intern

**Broward County Consortium**

Dr. Kathleen 0'Rourke  
Dr. Robert Parks Ms. Robin Nowling  
Ms. Donna Henderson

**Broward County School Representatives**

Dr. Mary Ann Butler-Pearson, Distance Learning Coordinator  
Dr. Gloria Moss, Senior Tech Specialist Deans/Associate Deans  
Dr, Jerry Lafferty, Dean - College of Education  
Dr. Mary Lou Caldwell, Associate Dean - North Campuses  
Dr. Robert Shockley, Associate Dean - Boca Raton Campus  
Dr. John Wisenfeld, Dean - College of Science  
Dr. Ingrid Johanson, Associate Dean - College of Science  
Dr. Kenneth Keaton, Associate Dean - College of Arts and Letters  
Dr. Dorothy Stetson, Associate Dean - College of Arts and Letters  
Dr. John Childrey, Associate Dean - College of Liberal Arts

**Department Chairs**

Dr. Valerie Bristor, Teacher Education  
Dr. William Nicoll, Counselor Education  
Dr. Simon Ogamdi, Health Sciences  
Dr. John Pisapia, Educational Leadership  
Dr. Cynthia Wilson, Exceptional Student Education

**Development**

Ms. Karen Drumheller, Director

**Educational Leadership - Graduate Programs**

Dr. John Pisapia, Chair  
Dr. Larry Decker  
Dr. Lucy Gugliemino, Adult and Community Education  
Dr. Pat Maslin-Ostrowski, School Leadership

**Educational Technology and Research Department**

Dr. John D. Morris, Chair  
Dr. Ray Cafolla  
Dr. Patsy Ceros-Livingston  
Dr. Don Gorman  
Dr. Khalid Hamza  
Dr. William Hunt  
Dr. Lieberman  
Dr. Roberta Weber

**Exceptional Student Education Undergraduate/Graduate**

Dr. Mary Lou Duffy  
Dr. Rangasamy Ramasamy  
Dr. Claudia Rinaidi (Davie Campus)  
Dr. Lydia Smiley  
Dr. Ron Taylor  
Dr. Beverly Warde

**Faculty**

Dr. Marlene Braunius, Teacher Education  
Dr. Sue Kinzer - TEA Director  
Dr. Richard Knee, Educational Technology  
Dr. Robert Parks, Educational Leadership

**Faculty Assembly**

Dr. Alex Miranda, Chair- 1999-2000  
Dr. Mary Lou Duffy, Secretary  
Dr. Richard Maeder, Member  
Dr. Carmen Morales-Jones, Member

**GATE - Professional Development Schools**

_A.D. Henderson University School _

Dr. Sandy Tsurutome, Director  
Dr. Steven Montes, Principal  
Ms. Lorraine Cross, On-Site Coordinator

_Acreage Pines Elementary School_

Mr. Steve Stills, Principal  
Ms. Sandee Fleming, On-Site Coordinator

_Boca Raton Community Middle School_

Mr. Mondy, Principal  
Ms. Brenda Darr, On-Site Coordinator  
Dr. Robert Bleicher, FAU Liaison

_Boca Raton Community High School_

Ms. Diana Harris, Principal  
Ms. Debbie Esposito, On-Site Coordinator  
Dr. Janet Benton, FAU Liaison

_Garden City Elementary_

Ms. Tina Eaker, On-Site Coordinator  
Dr. Marie Holbein, FAU Liaison

_Indian Pines Elementary School_  
Ms. Gail Pastercywk, Principal  
Ms. Pam Cornett, On-Site Coordinator  
Dr. Joseph Furner, FAU Liaison

_Jeff Davis Middle School_

Ms. Sandy Jinks, Principal  
Ms. Maribil Collin, On-Site Coordinator  
Ms. Denise Ross __

_Palm City Elementary School_  
Ms. Nancy Marin, Principal  
Ms. Janet LeMaster, On-Site Coordinator

_Pahokee Middle/Senior High School_  
Ms. May Gamble, Principal  
Mr. Allen Canaan, FAU Liaison

_Pioneer Park Elementary School_  
Ms. Anne Turner, Principal  
Ms. Shelly Miller, On-Site Coordinator  
Dr. Marris Ward, FAU Liaison

_Warfield Elementary School_

Ms. Essie Rains, Principal  
Ms. Jade Cheremis, On-Site Coordinator  
Dr. Sharon Crawley, FAU Liaison

Gate (Continued)

Dr.William Nicoll, FAU  
Dr. Toni Kirkwood  
Dr. Sally Robinson

**Genesis Program**

Dr. Peter Messmore, Director  
Dr. Janet Benton  
Dr. Robert Beecher  
Dr. Greg Brigman  
Dr. Toni Carked  
Dr. William Nicoll  
Dr. Sally Robinson

**Genesis - Students**

Ms. Kimberly Gordon  
Mr. Ryan H. Kasha  
Mr. Scott Podradchik  
Ms. Leila Revel  
Ms. Jennifer Roesler  
Ms. Suzanne Schweitzer

**Graduate Programs Committee**

Dr. John D. Morris, Committee Chair, Educational Technology and Research  
Dr. Ali Danesh, Health Sciences  
Dr. Carlos Diaz, Teacher Education  
Dr. Mary Lou Duffy, Exceptional Student Education  
Dr. Vasil Kerensky, Educational Leadership  
Dr. Richard Knee, Educational Technology and Research  
Dr. Ann Lynch, Counselor Education  
Dr. Pat Maslin-Ostrowski, Educational Leadership  
Dr. Alex Miranda, Counselor Education  
Dr. Carmen Morales-Jones, Teacher Education

Graduate Students

Mr. Afsaneh Afshar, Early Childhood Certificate  
Ms. Mindy Agier, Mental Health Counseling  
Ms. Eileen Bayanati, Masters and Certification in VE  
Ms. Raquel Byrne, Masters and Certification - Elementary Education  
Ms. Eleni Coukos, Educational Leadership - Higher Education  
Mr. Roderick Daniel, Multicultural Education w/ESOL Endorsement  
Ms. Cassandra Ewald, Special Education - Doctoral Student  
Ms. Jennifer Freeland, Educational Leadership K-12  
Ms. Gianna Gouveia, Multicultural Foundations - Teacher Education  
Ms. Deedara Hicks, Educational Leadership Ed.D.- Asst. Principal  
Ms. Geri Mayer, Educational Leadership - Adult/Higher Education  
Ms. Jessica Pruitt, Educational Leadership K-12  
Ms. Carolyn J. Randall, Mental Health Counseling  
Ms. Sonia Rodriquez, Executive Leadership Ed.D.  
Ms. Jodi Schaffier, Multicultural Foundations - Graduate Program  
Dr. Susan F. Schultz, Educational Leadership - Recent Graduate  
Ms. Adrienne Stevens, School Counseling - Counselor Education

**Grants**

CARD Grant - Center for Autism and Related Disabilities  
Dr. Jack Scoft

Multicultural Grants  
Dr. Carlos Diaz

Partnership Grant  
Dr. Greg Brigman

Holocaust Outreach Center

Dr. Ellen Heckler  
Ms. Eileen Shapiro  
Ms. Connie Packman

**Library**

Dr. William Miller, Director  
Ms. Rita Pelien  
Mr. Edward Erazo

Promotion and Tenure Committee

Dr. Lydia Smiley, Committee Chair, Exceptional Student Education  
Dr. Sara Ashworth, Teacher Education  
Dr. Richard Maeder, Counselor Education  
Dr. Dale Williams, Health Sciences

**Secondary Teacher Education Coordinating Committee (STECC)**

Dr. Don Baird, Chemistry & Biochemistry  
Dr. Janet Benton, English Education  
Dr. Robet Bleicher, Science Education  
Dr. John Childrey, English  
Dr. Pete Fraschefti, Art Education  
Dr. Jackie Gallagher, Geology (Earth Science)  
Dr. Stuart Glazer, Music  
Dr. Jerry Haky, Chemistry & Biochemistry  
Dr. Mark Jackson, Chemistry & Biochemistry  
Dr. Ken Keaton, A&L College Major, Social Science  
Dr. Toni Kirkwood, Social Science Education  
Dr. Lee Klingler, Mathematical Sciences  
Dr. Stephen Locke, Mathematical Sciences  
Dr. Fernando Medina, Physics  
Dr. Carol Meltzer, Music Education  
Dr. Carmen Morales-Jones, Foreign Languages Education  
Dr. Sally Robison, Mathematics Education  
Dr. Nancy Romance, ACEE  
Dr. Kathy Russo, Art  
Dr. Ron Schultz, Geography  
Dr. Dorothy Stetson, Political Science  
Dr. Herb Stewart, Biological Sciences  
Dr. Erny Weiser, Languages & Linguistics

**South Florida Center for Educational Leaders**

Dr. John Pisapia

**Students (Davie Campus)**

Ms. Shannon Arias, Elementary Education S.A.  
Ms. Charisse Chambers, Elementary Education - TEA, S.A.  
Ms. Rina Correa, Elementary Education, B.A.  
Ms. Lisa DaSilva  
Ms. Ann Musgrove, Masters, Educational Technology, Doctoral in Leadership  
Ms. Laynie Schurr, Exercise Science, M.S.

**Student Teaching Interns**

Ms. Jodi Honaker  
Ms. Lisa MacLeod  
Ms. Cami Marks  
Ms. Pamela Pironti  
Mr. Robert Shingler  
Ms. Marci York

**Student Teaching Supervisors**

Ms. Brenda Frank, Broward County  
Ms. Linda Grigg, Broward County  
Dr. Maria McNamara, Palm Beach County  
Ms. Kathy Ryberg, Palm Beach County

**Teacher Education - Undergraduate/Graduate**

Dr. Eileen Ariza  
Dr. Robert Bliecher  
Ms. Lorraine Cross  
Dr. Pete Fraschefti  
Dr. Marie Holbein  
Dr. Toni Kirkwood-Tucker  
Dr. Susan Lapp  
Dr. Carol Meltzer  
Dr. Carmen Morales-Jones  
Dr. Angela Rhone  
Dr. Sally Robinson  
Dr. Felicia Romeo  
Dr. Dilys Schoorman

**Tri-institutional Committee**

Dr. Peter Messmore, Chair  
Mr. Phil Jackson  
Dr. Robert Shockey  
Mr. Ed Whipple  
Dr. Jan Yates  
Ms. Tunjarnika Coleman-Ferrell

**Undergraduate Program Committee**

Dr. Peggy Goldstein, Chair  
Dr. Sue Graves

DOCUMENTS REVIEWED

AACTE/NCATE Yearly Reports, 1995-1999, **13S**  
Academic Program/Budget Development Presentation, **2S  
** Action Plan Documentation: Elementary Education Plus ESOL Endorsement,
**4S**  
Adjunct/New Faculty Handbook, **IV  
** Adjunct Vitae, Educational Technology and Research, **17Y  
** Adjunct Vitae, Teacher Education Alliance, **21Y  
** Adjunct Vitae, Teacher Education **20Y  
** Adjunct Vitae, Counselor Education, **15Y  
** Adjunct Vitae, Educational Leadership, **16Y  
** Adjunct Vitae, Exceptional Student Education, **18Y**  
Adjunct Vitae, Health Sciences, **19Y**  
Admissions/Advising Sample Folders, **2P**  
Advisory Council Minutes: COE, **1G**  
Annual Reports: COE, past 5 years, **1S**  
Approvals  & Requests to Go Beyond the 120 Credit Limit, **1**  
BOR Addendum Report (Spring 2000 Visit), **18S**  
Clinical Placements: Collaboration with Service Area Counties, Clinical
Educator Training, **12P**  
Community Counseling Network, **15P**  
Community College Counseling and Advising Handbook, **24G**  
Comprehensive Faculty Vitae, Health Sciences, **11Y**  
Comprehensive Faculty Vitae, Teacher Education Alliance, **13Y**  
Comprehensive Faculty Vitae, Teacher Education, **12Y**  
Comprehensive Faculty Vitae, Educational Technology and Research, **9Y**  
Comprehensive Faculty Vitae - Educational Leadership, **8Y**  
Comprehensive Faculty Vitae - Counselor Education, **7Y**  
Comprehensive Faculty Vitae, Exceptional Student Education, **1OY**  
Conceptual Framework: Documentation in Field Experience Booklets, **20S**  
Conceptual Framework: Professional Preparation for A Diverse Society, **16S**  
Conceptual Framework: Sharing with Adjuncts, **19S**  
Course Rotation Schedules - Health Sciences, **7P**  
Course Rotation Schedules - Other Departments, **8P  
** Department of Education (DOE) Unit Review (Site Visit) Team Report, 1995,
**8S**  
Department of Education (DOE) Program Review Team Report, 1995, **8S**  
Departmental Productivity Trends, **3S**  
Employer Survey of Graduates (newly developed), **17P**  
Employment Records of Graduates, **5P**  
Endowed Professorships (Major Gifts): Annual Reports, **25G**  
Endowments/Scholarships/Donations/Sponsored Research Samples, **23G**  
Executive Committee Minutes, 1996-1997, **IB**  
Executive Committee Minutes, 1998-2000, **2B**  
Faculty Assembly Constitution / Bylaws  & Minutes: COE, **9B**  
Faculty Development Plan  & Samples, **8V**  
Faculty Assignment / Development  & Evaluation Folio, **4V**  
Faculty Diversity by Departments, 2V Field Experience
Handbooks/Guidelines/Placements, **9P**  
Florida's Gold Coast Report: Statistics of Palm Beach County, **14P**  
GATE Conference: Cooperative Learning, **9V**  
GATE Activity Summary / Position Paper: Professional Development Schools,3G  
General Teaching Practices I  & 11 (EDG 3324 & EDG 3325), **1OP**  
Genesis Grant Proposals, **4G**  
Genesis Quarterly Reports 1997-1999, **7G-9G  
** Genesis Action Research, **6G**  
Governance Documents: Faculty Assembly, BOR/UFF Collective Bargaining
Agreement, **1OB**  
Graduate Faculty: Guidelines  & Membership, **7V**  
Graduate Policies and Procedures Manual, **20P**  
Graduate Program Committee Minutes: COE, **15B**  
Graduating Senior Survey, **16P**  
Guided Field Experiences I  & 11 (EDG 3321 & EDG 3322), **IIP**  
Henderson (Alexander D.) University School, **ISG**  
Holocaust Outreach Center: Reports, Holdings, Evaluations, **15G**  
Institutional Program Evaluation Plans (IPEP), 1999, **5S**  
Institutional Program Evaluation Plans (IPEP), 1997, **7S**  
Institutional Program Evaluation Plans (IPEP), 1998, **6S**  
International Partnerships, **2IG**  
Junior Achievement Partnership, **19G  
** Liaison Position between FAU and Broward County Public Schools, 22G  
Merit Pay Plans & Faculty Assignment Report Form: Departments, 5V  
Liaison Position between FAU and Broward County Public Schools, 22G  
Merit Pay Plans & Faculty Assignment Report Form: Departments, 5V  
Minority Faculty Recruitment Plan & Search Reports, 3V  
Minutes: Teacher Education Alliance, 8B  
Minutes: Department of Health Sciences, 6B  
Minutes: Department of Educational Technology and Research, 4B  
Minutes: Department of Exceptional Student Education, 5B  
Minutes: Social Foundations Governance Committee, 13B  
Minutes: Department of Teacher Education, 7B  
Minutes: Department of Educational Leadership, 3B  
Multicultural (Minority) Recruitment / Retention, IP  
NCATE Third Year Review, May 1998,14S  
NCATE Third Party Testimony & Public Announcements (Spring 2000 Visit), 15S  
NCATE Continuing Accreditation Report (Spring 2000 Visit), 17S  
NCATE Continuing Accreditation Visit Report, 1995, I IS  
Pine Jog Environmental Education Center, 14G  
Policies and Procedures Handbook: COE, 16B  
Program Folio: Curriculum and Instruction PreKindergarten/Primary, M.Ed., 20  
Program Folio: Curriculum and Instruction, M.Ed., **19**  
Program Folio: Undergraduate Music Certification, **8**  
Program Folio: Elementary Education, M.Ed., **21**  
Program Folio: School Counseling, M.Ed., Ed.S., **14**  
Program Folio: Undergraduate: Varying Exceptionalities, **2**  
Program Folio: Undergraduate: Elementary Education Plus ESOL Endorsement,
**3**  
Program Folio: Undergraduate: Secondary English Certification, **4**  
Program Folio: Undergraduate: Secondary Foreign Language Certification, **5**  
Program Folio: Undergraduate Social Studies Certification, **6**  
Program Folio: Curriculum and Instruction, Ed.S., **23**  
Program Folio: Reading, M.Ed., **22**  
Program Folio: Exceptional Student Education, M.Ed., **17**  
Program Folio: Undergraduate Chemistry Certification, **10**  
Program Folio: Undergraduate Physics Certification, **11**  
Program Folio: Undergraduate Mathematics Certification, **12**  
Program Folio: Elementary Education Plus Certification, M.Ed., (submitted to
DOE), **29**  
Minority Faculty Recruitment Plan  & Search Reports, **3V**  
Minutes: Teacher Education Alliance, **8B**  
Minutes: Department of Health Sciences, **6B**  
Minutes: Department of Educational Technology and Research, **4B**  
Minutes: Department of Exceptional Student Education, **5B**  
Minutes: Social Foundations Governance Committee, **13B**  
Minutes: Department of Teacher Education, **7B**  
Minutes: Department of Educational Leadership, **3B**  
Multicultural (Minority) Recruitment / Retention, **IP**  
NCATE Third Year Review, May 1998, **14S**  
NCATE Third Party Testimony  & Public Announcements (Spring 2000 Visit),
**15S**  
NCATE Continuing Accreditation Report (Spring 2000 Visit), **17S**  
NCATE Continuing Accreditation Visit Report, 1995, **IIS**  
Pine Jog Environmental Education Center, **14G**  
Policies and Procedures Handbook: COE, **16B**  
Program Folio: Curriculum and Instruction PreKindergarten/Primary, M.Ed.,
**20**  
Program Folio: Curriculum a

