![Graduate Student Handbook](academics/gradprogram/handbook_title.gif) **Table
of Contents**

  1. [Introduction.](academics/gradprogram/handbook.html#introduction) 
  2. [Research.](academics/gradprogram/handbook.html#research)
    * Faculty research areas.  
    * Choosing a research group and thesis advisor. 
    * Thesis work. 
    * Progress reports. 
    * Complaints. 
    * Completion of a thesis. 
    * Intent to graduate. 
  3. [Coursework.](academics/gradprogram/handbook.html#coursework)
    * Introduction. 
    * Ph.D. requirements. 
    * Masters Requirements. 
    * Teaching Assistants and Education Courses. 
    * Electives. 
    * Timing. 
    * Master's curriculum. 
    * Ph.D. curriculum. 
    * Space Science curriculum. 
    * Cognate in College Teaching. 
  4. [Ph.D. Qualifying Exam.](academics/gradprogram/handbook.html#quals)
    * Classical Mechanics. 
    * Electricity and Magnetism. 
    * Quantum Mechanics. 
  5. [Financial Aid.](academics/gradprogram/handbook.html#aid)
    * Introduction. 
    * Research assistantships. 
    * Teaching assistantships. 
    * Pay schedule. 
    * National graduate fellowships. 
    * UNH scholarships and fellowships. 
    * Other aid. 
  6. [Teaching assistantship responsibilities.](academics/gradprogram/handbook.html#TAs)
    * Introduction. 
    * Lab assistant responsibilities. 
    * Sample lab information sheet. 
    * Grader responsibilities. 
  7. [Resources.](academics/gradprogram/handbook.html#resources)
    * The physics library. 
    * Copying. 
    * Laboratory equipment. 
    * Computing facilities. 
  8. [Life outside the Department.](academics/gradprogram/handbook.html#life)
    * Housing
    * Transportation. 
    * Distractions. 

  1. Introduction 

The purpose of this handbook is to give physics graduate students an overview
of their rights and responsibilities while they are here at UNH. Sources
within the department for further information are the Graduate Advisor (for
physics questions) and the Physics Administrative Assistant (for paperwork).

There are also many sources of information outside of the department. Other
printed sources of information include the UNH Student Handbook and the UNH
Graduate Catalog.

The most important office outside the department is the Graduate School Office
on the first floor of Thompson Hall (T- Hall) which can offer help on general
(i.e. non-physics) graduate school questions. Their phone number is 2-3000.
They have various informational brochures available including information on
Dining Services, Recreational Sports, and Day Care. Also available is the
Graduate Student Organization's Survival Manual. It covers academic
procedures, student life issues, financial aid, payroll deductions, and
details about what the graduate student fees are and what they pay for.

Foreign students will find the International Student Office to be their best
resource for questions or problems related to their foreign status (e.g.
Visas).

     If there are any omissions or errors in this handbook, please let us know so that this document is as accurate as possible.
     John Calarco
     Summer 2000 
  2. Research 
    * Faculty Research Areas: 

The pursuit of research is one of the major goals of physics graduate
education. Therefore, the graduate students will seek the advice of faculty
involved in the research areas of interest to the student. The research
activities in the UNH Physics Department are centered around a few focused
fields:

     Gamma ray astrophysics 
     Nuclear physics 
     Space plasma physics 
     Solar-terrestrial physics 
     Solid state physics

In the table below we present a brief overview of the research interests of
the UNH faculty. A more detailed description of these research fields may be
found in the [UNH Graduate Brochure](academics/gradprogram/prospective.html)
which is available on the Web and in the Physics Department Office. Work on a
Masters and/or Ph.D. thesis is offered in all the fields mentioned above.

In addition to these physics research fields, the research activities of Space
Plasma Physics and Astrophysics are tied through the Space Science Center into
the Institute for the Study of Earth, Oceans and Space (EOS). This combination
offers the presence of research personnel with a broad range of expertise in
these fields under one roof. For the interested student, this opens the
possibility to work on subjects which have ties to both Physics and Earth
Sciences. Some examples of fields covered in the institute are chemistry and
transport of trace gases in the Earth's atmosphere, interaction between the
atmosphere and the oceans, and climate studies with ice cores. In addition,
thesis work in collaboration with the Mechanical and Electrical Engineering
Department is possible on special developments in high technology related to
the space instrumentation built in the Space Science Center. Such activities
may center around the development of new sensor techniques for the measurement
of fields, particles and gamma rays in space, as well as for data collection
systems. Interested students should contact faculty of the Space Science
Center for further information and the actual availability of such topics.
Check the web pages for further information about research topics.

        
                Name                Field         Topics              Experimental
                                                              /Theoretical
        
        Arnoldy, R.A.,      Space plasma  aurorae,            Experimental
        Professor                         magnetosphere
                                          solar wind-
                                          magnetosphere
                                          interaction
                                          
        Balling, L.C.,      Atomic        laser spectroscopy  Experimental
        Professor
        
        Calarco, J.R        Nuclear       electron            Experimental
        Professor                         scattering,
                                          nuclear and
                                          nucleon structure
        
        Chupp, E.L.,        Astrophysics  gamma rays, solar   Experimental
        Professor                         flares, particle
                                          acceleration
                                          
        Dawson, J.F.,       Nuclear       electron            Theory
        Professor                         scattering,
                                          quantum field
                                          theory
        
        Echt, O.E.,         Solid state   atomic clusters     Experimental
        Associate
        Professor
        
        Forbes, T.G.,       Space plasma  magnetosphere,      Theory
        Research Professor                solar
                                          flares
        
        Forrest, D.J.,      Astrophysics  gamma rays, solar   Experimental
        Res. Associate                    flares
        Professor
        
        Heisenberg, J.,     Nuclear       nuclear modeling    Experimental
        Professor
        
        Hersman, F.W.,      Nuclear       electron            Experimental
        Professor                         scattering, quark-
                                          gluon reactions
        
        Hollweg, J.V.,      Space plasma  solar atmosphere    Theory
        Professor                         and wind
        
                Holtrop, M.,        Nuclear       electron            Experimental   
        Res. Asst. Prof.                  scattering         
        
                                                      
        Isenberg, P.A.,     Space plasma  solar wind,         Theory
        Res. Associate                    comets,
        Professor                         interstellar gas
        
        Kaufmann, R.L.,     Space plasma  magnetosphere       Theory
        Professor                         electrodynamics
        
          
        Kistler, L.M.,      Space plasma  magnetosphere       Experimental
        Res.Assistant                     dynamics
        Professor
        
        Lee, M. A.          Space plasma  solar modulation    Theoretical
        Professor                         of  galactic
                                          cosmic rays;
                                          acceleration of
                                          particles in the
                                          heliosphere
        
        Leuschner, M. B.    Nuclear       tests of            Experimental
        Res. Assistant                    fundamental         
        Professor                         symmetries
                                          
        Lynch, K.           Space plasma  auroral particle    Experimental
        Res. Assistant                    acceleration;
        Professor                         dusty plasmas;
                                          isonospheric
                                          current
                                          filamentation
        
        Meredith, D.C.      Education     Freshman Physics 
        Associate Professor               Ed. methodology   
                                          
                                          
        McConnell, M.L.,    Astrophysics  gamma rays, cosmic  Experimental
        Res. Assistant                    rays
        Professor
        
        Moebius, E.S.,      Space plasma  particle            Experimental
        Professor                         acceleration,
                                          solar flares,
                                          magnetosphere,
                                          interstellar gas
                                          
        Ryan, J.M.,         Astrophysics  gamma rays, solar   Experimental
        Associate Professor               flares, cosmic
                                          rays, neutrons
                                          
        Shepard, H.K.,      Biophysics                        Theory
        Professor                         
                                          
                                          
        Torbert, R.B.,      Space plasma  magnetosphere,      Experimental
        Professor                         aurorae, solar
                                          system formation
                                          
        Wright, J.J.,       Atomic        laser, optics       Experimental
        Professor

    * Choosing a Research Group and Thesis Advisor: 

During their first year at UNH, graduate students should attend the lunch
talks given by faculty about their research. These talks are in DeMeritt 105;
talks are not given on a regular schedule, but a notice will be posted when a
talk is scheduled or students will be notified via electronic mail. These
talks are intended to give students a broad overview of research in the
Physics Department.

The next step in the selection process is detailed discussions with physics
faculty members about their research programs, research interests, and
potential research assistantship openings. Students should make every effort
to begin work with a group during the summer between their first and second
years as a trial run for the thesis selection. Based on their summer
experience, students should either continue work with this group or pursue
other options. Students should decide on a Thesis Advisor by the time thesis
work officially begins.

    * Thesis Work: 

Thesis work officially begins after completion of the five required courses
(for Masters students) or after completion of the fourteen required courses
and passing of the Ph.D. Qualifying Exam (for Ph.D. students). (See the
section on coursework for more details on classes.) While research work is
being completed, students register for Ph999 (Ph.D. thesis work) or Ph899
(Masters thesis work).

Masters students are allowed six credits maximum under Ph899 for their career
at UNH (the theory is that this is sufficient for most students). However, if
your thesis takes longer than this, you can sign up for Masters Continuing
Research which gives an automatic full time status, but carries no credits.
This is an option only if all of your coursework is completed. Part time
students who need to take time off may sign up for Masters Continuous
Registration, which carries zero credits, but which will keep them on the
books.

The Thesis Advisor provides the student with an outline of the expected thesis
project. Because a thesis will be a genuine research project, changes of the
scope may occur during the work on the project. However, the scope of the
study should only be extended in agreement with the student and the Thesis
Committee. The student should feel free to suggest shifts of the scope which
are in his/her own interest.

The expected duration of a thesis may vary from topic to topic and may depend
on accessibility of major experimental hardware during the project and
available resources. If unduly long delays are expected from problems with the
availability of resources, the Thesis Advisor shall explore alternate scopes
of the thesis with the student to allow the finishing of the thesis within a
reasonable time period. A reasonable time period for a Masters Thesis is 2-3
years, and for a Ph.D. thesis is 5-7 years (this is total time including
course work). These times are not hard cutoffs, but serve as warnings to the
student and Thesis Committee.

    * Thesis Committee: 

The purpose of a Thesis Committee is to oversee the progress of the thesis
work and propose changes to the scope of the work, if appropriate. The student
may seek advice from any member of the Thesis Committee with regard to his/her
thesis and related questions. The Thesis Committee will be involved in the
grading of the thesis and the defense of the thesis.

The members of the Thesis Committee (five for a Ph.D. thesis, three for a
Masters thesis) will be selected by the student and the Thesis Advisor after
the thesis topic is selected. The Thesis Advisor is always on the committee.
Usually three faculty members are in a research field closely related to the
thesis work, while one of the faculty members should be selected from a
different field. In the case of an interdisciplinary thesis, faculty from
other Departments of the University may be included in the Committee. If
collaboration with an outside research institution is a vital part of the
thesis work, an external scientist may be added to the Committee on request of
the student and/or Thesis Advisor. In such a case, the scientific reputation
of the external researcher must be documented by a Curriculum Vitae and
publication list.

It is suggested that the student ask the faculty members of his/her choice, to
see if they are willing to serve on the Thesis Committee. A brief oral outline
of the thesis project should be given to the prospective committee member so
he/she may make an informed decision to serve on the Thesis Committee or not.

As soon as the Thesis Committee has been formed, the student should obtain the
correct form from the Physics Office. This form is to be completed and
returned to the Physics Office, after which the Dean of the Graduate School
will formally appoint the Thesis Committee.

    * Progress Reports: 

The student should keep the members of the Thesis Committee informed about the
progress of his/her research. The first meeting should be within six months
after finding a Ph.D. advisor. Subsequent meetings are typically in February
or March every year. The Physics Office will notify students each year that it
is time to give their progress reports. It is then the student's
responsibility to present his/her progress at an informal meeting with the
Thesis Committee. The committee will give additional guidance for the further
work and discuss any appropriate changes in scope with the student and the
Thesis Advisor.

    * Complaints: 

If the student has any problems or complaints during the work on the thesis,
he/she may seek advice from any member of the Thesis Committee and/or the
Graduate Advisor of the Department.

    * Completion of a Thesis: 

When the research project is completed, the candidate will write a thesis and
submit a draft to the Thesis Committee. A final copy of the thesis is to be
submitted to the Graduate School. Before the student begins writing the
thesis, it is recommended that he/she get current information from the
Graduate School on the form the thesis should be in and number of copies
required. As of this writing, a minimum of three copies are required for a
Ph.D. thesis (one for the grad school microfiche, a bound copy for the physics
library, and a bound copy for the main library). Only the two bound copies for
the libraries are required for a Master's thesis.

Before submission of the final thesis, the candidate will defend his/her
thesis to the Thesis Committee. The defense consists of two parts and takes a
total of about 2 hours. The first part is a seminar open to the public. In
general, the candidate will present an oral overview of the thesis for about
50-55 minutes which will be followed by questions from the Committee and other
members of the audience. The audience will be asked to leave and the Thesis
Committee will continue to discuss the work with the thesis candidate for
about an hour. They will then ask the candidate to leave in order to discuss
the merit of the thesis and the defense and will then advise the candidate of
the result.

The last date a thesis defense may be scheduled is typically two weeks before
graduation, but may vary from semester to semester. It is announced every year
in the academic calendar of the university. To allow adequate time for reading
the thesis by the committee members and the necessary preparation of the
defense, the candidate should plan for completion of the thesis about one
month before the planned date of the defense.

    * Intent to Graduate: 

Students must file an intent to graduate form at the Registrar's Office during
the semester in which they expect to graduate. This form must be filed early
in the semester in order to avoid a late fee. Students rarely know with
certainty whether they will graduate in a given semester, however you are
allowed to file the form and not graduate, while it is impossible to graduate
if the form has not been filed.

    * Time Limits: 

There are both short and long time limits on study at UNH. Masters students
must spend at least one year on course work, but no more than six. Full time
Masters students should expect to take about two years. Ph.D. students must
spend at least three years at UNH, but no more than eight (or seven if they
arrived with a Master's degree in Physics). The national average for Physics
Ph.D.'s is about seven years.

    * Changing Degree Status: 

Often students switch from Masters to Ph.D. or Ph.D. to Masters. For
matriculated students, this can be done simply by filling out the appropriate
form from the Graduate Office. However, students who switch to a Ph.D. after
receiving their Masters must reapply to the graduate school in order to
switch. Since the graduate school has your grade transcripts already, you only
need to get three letters of reference to apply for Ph.D. status.

The timing for the qualifying exam is different for those students who switch
from the Masters program. These students must pass the qualifier either two
and a half years after matriculating into the UNH graduate Physics program, or
within a year (i.e. two attempts) after changing degree status, whichever is
longer.

  3. Course Work 
    * Introduction: 

All teaching and research assistants must take 6 credits per semester (two
classes) to be considered full time students; all other graduate students must
take 9 credits per semester (three classes) to have full-time status.

Graduate level courses are numbered in the 900's; most of a graduate student's
courses will be chosen from this group. In addition to the required lab course
(805), Ph.D. students are allowed to count only one of the physics courses
numbered 810 or higher toward their degree. Other Physics 800 level courses
may be taken to give full time status, but will not count toward degree
requirements. Master's students may take an unlimited number of 800 level
courses. Students may also take relevant courses in other departments (e.g.
Math or Chemistry); the graduate advisor must decide if a course in another
department is acceptable for graduate credit. Once all of the required courses
and electives are taken, students may sign up for as many credits in Master
Thesis (899) or Doctoral Thesis (999) as necessary to make them full time.
Ph.D. students must take a minimum of two semesters of 999.

There is no set time limit for finishing required courses. However, Ph.D.
students should try to finish the basic courses (Math Physics, E &M I and II,
Classical Mechanics I and Quantum Mechanics I) by the middle of their second
year so that they are prepared to take the Qualifying Exam within the
specified time period.

Students who feel rusty or unprepared for any of the basic courses should
consider taking the upper level undergraduate equivalent before proceeding to
graduate work. Students should consult the professor for the course or the
Graduate Advisor if they have questions about prerequisites for the graduate
courses. The expected undergraduate preparation for graduate work in physics
includes two semesters of quantum mechanics, two semesters of electricity and
magnetism, one semester of classical mechanics, and one semester of
mathematical methods of physics, all at the junior or senior level.

A grade of B- or better is required for all courses taken at the graduate
level. If a student receives a lower grade in a course, he/she must retake the
course in order for it to count toward his/her degree. Students who receive
three grades of C or lower are no longer eligible to continue in the graduate
program.

Students who have done graduate work at other schools should see the Graduate
Advisor about transferring credit to UNH. A catalog description of the course,
course syllabus, or name of text used helps in determining if transfer credit
is appropriate. Under certain circumstances, undergraduate courses may be used
to substitute for a required graduate course. However, the credit hours are
not transferable (since one course cannot count for two degrees) so another
graduate course must be added in place of the required course. A maximum of
eight credits may be transferred from another institution.

In addition to courses, it is expected that all graduate students regularly
attend the Physics Colloquia which are usually held every other Monday
afternoon at 4pm.

    * Ph.D. Requirements: 

The required courses for a Ph.D. are Experimental Physics (805), Mathematical
Methods of Physics (931, 932), Statistical Physics (935), Theoretical
Mechanics (939), Electromagnetic Theory (941, 942), and Quantum Mechanics
(943, 944). and either Fluids (940) , Geophysical Fluids (EOS 955) or Solar
Magnetohydrodynamics (Ph 954). In addition, four additional courses at the 900
level (not including the seminar courses or Doctoral Research) are required.
With appropriate additional work, a Ph.D. student may petition to receive
credit for one of the following courses: Astrophysics (810), Ionospheric
Physics (812), Solid State Physics (818) or Advanced Scientific Computing
(Math 854). Space Science students (those students whose Ph.D. advisor is a
member of the EOS faculty) have additional constraints on their course
requirements; these are discussed in the Space Science Curriculum section.

All Ph.D. students are required to develop and demonstrate proficiency in
lecturing. Normally this requirement is met by students satisfactorily
completing one year of teaching undergraduate laboratories or recitations
sections as a Teaching Assistant. The faculty will accommodate special
arrangements, by petition, to achieve and demonstrate the equivalent level of
oral communication.

There are no language requirements for a Ph.D.; however, students who are not
yet proficient in speaking or understanding English should take English As A
Second Language, which is offered through the English Department.

    * Masters Requirements: 

The required courses for a Masters are Experimental Physics (805),
Mathematical Methods of Physics (931), Theoretical Mechanics (939),
Electromagnetic Theory (941), Quantum Mechanics (943). In addition to the
required courses, the Master's student must select one of the following plans:

      1. Complete another 15 credits of coursework (not all must be three unit courses) chosen in consultation with the graduate advisor. 
      2. Complete another 9 credits of coursework and a Master's Thesis representing the equivalent of 6 semester hours' work, and pass an oral exam on the thesis.
      3. We strongly recommend the thesis option since research experience is highly valued by employers and is qualitatively different from coursework. For a Master's degree, any number of electives may be at the 800 level. Master's students do not take the Ph.D. qualifier. 
    * Teaching Assistants and Education Courses: 

All Teaching Assistants must enroll in Ph901 during their first semester as a
TA. This is a one credit course on Physics Teaching designed to help new TA's
with their duties.

For students who are contemplating college teaching as a career, there are
additional courses offered on campus. Grad 950 is a one credit course with
three different flavors: reading (where students read and discuss papers on
college education), shadowing (where students work with a professor/mentor for
a semester), and writing (where students work with Cindy Gannett on writing in
the learning process).

    * Electives: 

The graduate physics 900 level electives are Plasma Physics, Solar
Magnetohydrodynamics, Solar Wind and Cosmic Rays, Advanced Quantum Mechanics,
Advanced Solid State Physics, High Energy Astrophysics, Magnetospheres, and
Advanced Solid State. The 800 level electives are Advanced Scientific
Computing (offered through the Math Department), Introduction to Astrophysics,
Ionospheric Physics, Solid State, and Nuclear Physics. Students may also take
800 or 900 level courses in other departments if they are applicable to
physics (see the graduate advisor). Depending on the needs in the research
programs and availability of faculty, other special topics may be offered
under Physics 995.

Students should consult their Thesis Advisor about which electives are
necessary for their thesis work. Some electives should also be taken to give a
student a broader physics background.

    * Timing: 

All required courses are offered once a year, while others are offered only
every other year. Students should take this into account when planning their
schedules.

Offered every fall:

     Experimental 805 
     Math Physics I 931 
     Statistical Physics 935 
     Classical Mechanics I 939 
     E & M II 942 
     Quantum I 943 
Offered every spring:

     Advanced Scientific Computing Math 854 
     Math Physics II 932 
     E & M I 941 
     Quantum II 944 
Offered every other fall:

     Advanced QM I 961 (even years) 
     Plasma I 951 (odd years) 
     High Energy Astrophysics 988 (even years) 
     Magnetospheres 987 (odd years) 
Offered every other spring:

     Introduction to Astrophysics 810 (even years) 
     Ionospheric Physics 812 (odd years) 
     Solid State 818 (odd years) 
     Nuclear Physics 820 (even years) 
     Mechanics II 940 (odd years) 
     Geophysical Fluids EOS 955 or Solar MHD 953 (even years) 
     Solar Wind/Cosmic Rays 954 (odd years) 
     Plasma II 952 (even years) 
     Advanced QM II 962 (odd years) 
     Advanced Solid State 965 (even years)
    * Masters Curriculum: 

The following is a sample curriculum for a Masters student. Students with good
backgrounds should consider taking three courses per semester.

        
                  
                       Fall                     Spring
                                                
             Year 1    931 Math Physics I       941 E & M I
                       939 Mechanics I          Elective
                                                
             Year 2    805 Experimental         Elective
                       943 QM  I                Elective
                                                
             Year 3    Elective or Thesis       
                       Elective or Thesis       

    * Ph.D. Curriculum: 

We recommend that students with strong backgrounds consider taking three
courses per semester, while those who may need to do some catching up on their
own take two courses per semester. Students who are unsure of what to do
should try three courses, but evaluate their situation by the end of the
second week when they can drop one course with no monetary penalty.

        
                                      Two courses/semester
                                        
                       Fall                     Spring
                                                
             Year 1    931 Math Physics I       941 E & M I
                       939 Mechanics I          932 Math Physics II
                                                
             Year 2    942 E&M II               944 QM  II
                       943 QM  I                940 Mechanics II
                                                Qualifying Exam - first
                                                attempt
                                                
             Year 3    805 Experimental         Elective
                       935 Statistical          Elective
                                                
             Year 4    Elective                 999 Research
                       Elective                 
                                        
                             Three courses/semester
                                        
                       Fall                     Spring
                                                
             Year 1    931 Math Physics I       941 E & M I
                       939 Mechanics I          932 Math Physics II
                       943 QM  I                944 QM  II
                                                
             Year 2    942 E&M II               
                       805 Experimental         940 Mechanics II
                       935 Statistical          Elective
                                                Elective
                                                Qualifying Exam - first
                                                attempt
                                                
             Year 3    Elective                 999 Research
                       Elective                 

    * Space Science Curriculum: 

In addition to the classes required to pass the Qualifying Exam a basic
training in plasma physics is needed for Ph.D. research in space science.
Therefore, the class 812 (Physics of the Ionosphere) or 810 (Introduction to
Modern Astrophysics) - depending on the field chosen - and 951 (Plasma I) are
required. Ph952 (Plasma II) is highly recommended as a foundation of research
in the field. Students must also take three semesters of EOS seminar (EOS
901); this is a one credit course.

The space science curriculum is augmented by the following courses, out of
which the ones most closely related to the research topic of the thesis should
be selected as electives.

        
                  953                  Solar MHD
          954                  Solar Wind and Cosmic Rays
          987                  Magnetospheres
          988                  High Energy Astrophysics
          955                  Geophysical Fluid Dynamics

Depending on the research topic, expertise in other fields of physics will be
needed. Then also electives from the following list of courses should be
taken:

        
                  818                  Introduction to Solid State Physics
          961, 962             Advanced Quantum Mechanics
          820                  Nuclear Physics

Based on these requirements and recommendations, three model course schedules
have been prepared for space science students, depending upon their
performance. The assumption is made that all incoming graduate students will
enroll in three courses during the Fall of their first year. This is the
department's initial expectation. Students that have an excellent background
and preparation will have no problem with this course load. Students with only
an adequate background may have to take only two courses and remain with that
load for their graduate studies. There are also students with a moderate
background who may not fully appreciate the level of commitment expected at
UNH and will have trouble during the fall of the first year. However, they
will be capable of assuming three courses during the spring of that year and
continuing so.

Secondly, we encourage the accelerated student to exercise the option to
petition out of the second semester of Math Physics (932), as that semester is
primarily differential equations plus Sturm-Liouville theory and special
functions. There is sufficient exposure in E&M, QM, and Mechanics that will
supersede the level that is taught in 932. This option would allow such a
student to proceed with the "Excellent Background" curriculum described below
and lead to the Qualifying Exam relatively early.

        
                                      Excellent Background
          
                          Fall                     Spring
                                                
             Year 1    931 Math Physics         941 E & M
                       939 Mechanics            940 or 955
                       943 QM                   944 QM
                                                
             Year 2    942 E&M                  Qualifying Exam
                       935 Stat Mech            812 or 810
                       805 Exp. Physics         one of 818, (932), 863,
                                                954
                                                
             Year 3    999 (Research)           999 (Research)
                                                812 or 810 *
                       951 Plasma I  *          951 Plasma II  *
                       one of 953, 987, 961     one of 818, (932), 863,
                                                954
                                                
             Year 4    951 Plasma I *           952 Plasma II *
                       one of 953, 987, 961     
          
          
                               Moderate Background
          
                       Fall                     Spring
                                                
             Year 1    931 Math Physics         941 E & M
                       939 Mechanics            940 or 955
                           Dropped : 943 QM     932 Math Physics
                                                
             Year 2    942 E&M                  Qualifying Exam (try,
                                                no penalty)
                       935 Stat Mech (try)      812 or 810 *
                       943 QM                   944 QM
                                                one of 818, (932), 863,
                                                954
                                                
             Year 3    Qualifying Exam          812 or 810 *
                       951 Plasma I *           952 Plasma II *
                       935 Stat Mech**          999 (Research)
                       805 Exp. Physics         one of 818, (932), 863,
                                                954
                                                
             Year 4    999 (Research)           952 Plasma II *
                       951 Plasma I *           
                       one of 987, 953, 961     
          
          ** if not already taken in year 2.
                                        
                               Adequate Background
          
                       Fall                     Spring
                                                
             Year 1    931 Math Physics         932 Math Physics
                       939 Mechanics            941 E & M
                           Dropped : 943 QM     
                                                
             Year 2    942 E & M                Qualifying Exam (try;
                                                no penalty)
                       943 QM                   944 QM
                                                940 or 955
                                                812 or 810
                                                
             Year 3    Qualifying Exam          Qualifying Exam
                       805 Exp. Phys.           952 or 812 or 810
                       935 Stat Mech            one of  954,  988
                       951 Plasma I *           
                                                
             Year 4    999 (Research)           999 (Research)
                       951 Plasma I *           952 Plasma II *
                       one of 953, 987          one of 954, 988
          
        *It should be noted that Physics 812, the Introduction to
        Ionosphere, Physics 951, Plasma I, and Physics 952, Plasma II,
        are taught as an integral sequence, which is offered every other
        year. Therefore, it is recommended that the space

