![POSITION VACANCIES](/News/kulama/images/position.vacancies.gif)  
[Professional vacancies archive](/news/job.vacancies.html)

The University of Hawai`i is an equal opportunity/affirmative action
institution. All qualified applicants will be considered, regardless of race,
sex, age, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, disability, marital
status, arrest and court record, sexual orientation or status as a disabled
veteran or veteran of the Vietnam era. Women, members of minority groups,
veterans and persons with disabilities are encouraged to apply. (Persons with
hearing disabilities may call 1-711 or 643-8833.) Applicants with hearing or
speech impairments may use the TDD relay service by calling 1-711.

Employment is contingent on satisfying employment eligibility verification
requirements of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986. Appointments
to positions are subject to statutory residency requirements, campus
recruitment guidelines and the collective bargaining agreement. APT applicants
with re-employment rights or priority status are responsible for informing the
recruiting unit, which will verify eligibility with the employing unit as
provided by the BU 08 contract.

Official transcripts must have the official seal of and be mailed directly
from the degree-granting institution to the address indicated.

Civil Service vacancy announcements are available for viewing at the Office of
Human Resources, Post Office Building, UHM campus, Monday-Friday, 7:45
a.m.-4:30 p.m. and via the OHR home page at
[www.hawaii.edu/dhmr/ohr/](http://www.hawaii.edu/dhmr/ohr/#EMPLOYMENT).

* * *

Managerial Positions

**DEAN,** College of Continuing Education and Community Service: UH at Hilo,
position #89057, full-time, general funds, excluded, to begin approximately
07/00. **Duties:** Under the general direction of the Vice Chancellor for
Academic Affairs, plans, administers, coordinates and supervises the staff and
programs of the College. Works with collegiate units at the UH at Hilo and the
University System. Works closely with federal, state, and community agencies
in cooperative program planning. Secures special grants t support the diverse
learning needs of the community as well as program innovation. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Master's degree from an accredited college or university,
attainment of the rank of associate professor or comparable experience, three
years experience in continuing education administration, demonstrated ability
to work with community groups in a multi-cultural setting and the demonstrated
ability in program development and budget administration. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Doctorate degree and experience in information
telecommunication technologies; experience in securing and administering funds
from external sources. **Pay Range:** M06-M, $59,520 to $87,576/year. **To
Apply:** Submit a letter explaining how the minimum and desirable
qualifications are met, resume, and the names, addresses and telephone numbers
of three references to Kerwin Iwamoto, Human Resources, UH at Hilo, 200 W.
Kawili St., Hilo, HI 96720-4091. First review of applications will begin on
06/21, however, the position will remain open until filled.

**ASSOCIATE DEAN OF PUBLIC HEALTH,** Position #89127, general funded,
permanent, full-time, to begin approximately Fall 2000, pending position
clearance. Suitable applicants will have an outstanding academic track record
in research and teaching. We are especially interested in increasing our
funded research and educational base in any of the five areas related to
public health: epidemiology, biostatistics, health services administration,
environmental health, or social/behavioral science. Because the Associate Dean
will also have administrative responsibilities including faculty recruitment
and fiscal and budgetary management responsibilities, administrative
experience is essential. **Minimum Qualifications:** PhD in public health or
related field or MD; attainment of rank of associate professor; administrative
experience in a college or university as a department chair or comparable
administrative position in an academic organization; scholarly accomplishments
in public health sciences with a strong teaching, research, and publication
record; demonstrated commitment to creating a climate of research excellence
and scholarly achievements; and successful record in funded grants awards.
**Desired Qualifications:** Established senior public health scientist with a
commitment to scholarship in public health. Ability to interact and
communicate effectively with a broad and diverse multi- cultural constituency;
ability to link public health training and research with contemporary health
and social issues. Knowledge and skills to develop and implement a strategic
plan for the re-establishment of an accredited School of Public Health.
**Salary:** Commensurate with experience and qualifications. **To Apply:**
Send letter of application with curriculum vitae and the names, addresses and
telephone numbers of five references to Dr. Edwin Cadman, John A. Burns School
of Medicine, University of Hawai`i, 1960 East-West Road Biomed T-101,
Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date:** 09/01.

**SPECIAL EVENTS COORDINATOR (PUBLIC RELATIONS AND SPECIAL EVENTS MANAGER)** ;
Position No. 89269; University & Community Relations; general funds; full-
time; to begin August 1, 2000. **Wanted:** A creative, effective, and
responsible individual to manage the public relations and special events
functions for the University of Hawai`i. **Duties:** Develop, manage and
implement public relations strategies for the University; plan, coordinate and
implement special events to meet University goals; oversee the development and
implementation of University marketing strategies and activities; serve as
consultant to senior executives and designees and University units on
marketing policies, practices, plans and initiatives. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Graduation from an accredited four-year university or
college with major course work in communications, marketing, business,
education or related fields; five (5) years of progressively responsible and
effective professional work experience in communications, special events
management, public relations, and/or marketing, of which one year (1) involved
the management of a public relations and/or special events program and
operations; or equivalent combination of experience and training which provide
the following knowledge, skills and abilities: Knowledge of the theories,
principles and practices of organization and management; and of standard
events management and media relations protocols, procedures and techniques.
Ability to communicate effectively both orally and in writing; to establish
and maintain effective working relations with executives, faculty, and a
variety of interest groups; to analyze, interpret, and apply general
management principles and institutional rules and regulations to a variety of
work situations; to motivate colleagues to work cooperatively to achieve
stated goals and objectives; to exercise sound judgment, tact and discretion;
to supervise and coordinate the work of subordinate professional, clerical and
student support personnel; to work effectively under pressure. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Knowledge of higher education, organizational structure,
policies, procedures, and administrative rules and regulations; of the
development and implementation of marketing strategies. **Salary:**
Commensurate with education and experience. **To apply:** Applicants should
submit the following: (1) current curriculum vitae, (2) a letter addressing
how the minimum and desirable qualifications are met, (3) transcript verifying
degree (copies are acceptable during the application process; however,
official transcripts are required prior to date of hire), and (4) three to
five current letters of recommendation addressed to Executive Director,
University and Community Relations, 2444 Dole Street, Bachman 109, Honolulu,
HI 96822. **Inquiries:** (808) 956-6106. **Closing Date:** July 5, 2000.



Faculty Positions

**ASSISTANT RESEARCHER** , Position No. 85330T, Department of Electrical
Engineering, College of Engineering, University of Hawai`i at Manoa, full-
time, temporary, extramural funds, non-tenurable, appointment to begin
approximately 10/02 to 06/30/01, dependent on availability of funds.
**Duties:** Performs scientific research on Microelectro-mechanical Systems
(MEMS). These duties include simulating, fabricating, testing and modeling the
MEMS. Special emphasis is on developing acoustic MEMS (such as hydrophones,
focused acoustic beam transducers, acoustic resonators, microphones,
microspeakers, etc.) and various systems based on those devices. Performs
other related duties as assigned. **Minimum Qualifications** : PhD in
Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, or Materials Science; ability
to generate independent research reports, publications and grant proposals;
ability to interact effectively with students and assistants; initiative,
interest in scientific work and adaptability. **Desirable Qualifications:**
Experience in MEMS. **Minimum Monthly Salary** : $4,272. **To Apply** : Submit
letter of application and resume to Carrie Matsuzaki, College of Engineering,
Dean's Office, 2540 Dole Street, Holmes Hall 240, Honolulu, HI 96822.
**Inquiries:** (808) 956-2286. **Closing Date** : 07/05.

**DIRECTOR OF MEDICAL EDUCATION - ASSOCIATE/FULL PROFESSOR,** # 83245 M4/M5,
Office of Medical Education (OME), University of Hawai`i, John A Burns School
of Medicine, full-time, general fund, 11-month, tenure track, beginning
approx. 01/01/01. **Duties:** Serve as Director of Medical Education.
Responsibilities: provide leadership and foster growth of an established,
innovative and internationally recognized Problem-Based Learning (PBL)
curriculum, establish a program of funded research and training in medical
education, integrate teaching activities of basic science and clinical
faculty, mentor junior faculty in medical education and provide supervise
administration, implementation and evaluation of the PBL curriculum. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Assoc Prof : MD degree, experience with Problem-Based
Learning curriculum, training in medical education and eligible for Hawai`i
Medical License. Four years in rank of Assistant Prof or 7 years clinical and
teaching experience or equivalent. Also proven ability in research and program
administration. Full Prof: Same as Associate Professor level plus four years
at the rank of Associate Professor or equivalent. **Desirable
Qualifications:** In addition to MD degree, Master's degree in Medical
Education. Major research interest and expertise in at least one of the
following areas: curriculum development, faculty development; and able to
develop programs in international medical education. **Annual Salary Range:**
Assoc Prof: $92,340-$108,024. Full Prof: $99,876-$116,832. **To Apply:**
Submit letter of application, CV, and three letters of recommendation to: S.L.
Hammar, MD, Chairman of OME Search Committee, University of Hawai`i, School of
Medicine, Dept. of Pediatrics, Kapi`olani Medical Center for Women and
Children, 1319 Punahou St, Honolulu, HI 96826. **Closing Date:** All
application documents must be received no later than 10/01.

**INSTRUCTOR (Microbiology** ) **,** Position number 83864T, University of
Hawai`i at Manoa, half-time, 6 months, temporary, non-track tenure to begin
08/01, pending position clearance. **Duties:** To teach an upper division
lecture class (Bacterial Genetics) and the accompanying laboratory class
(Bacterial Genetics Laboratory) in the Department of Microbiology. **Minimum
Qualifications:** PhD in Microbial Genetics, or Microbial Molecular Biology,
post-doctoral experience in Bacterial Molecular Biology/Genetics, teaching
experience at the college-level and recent publications in peer-reviewed
journals. **Desirable Qualifications:** Ability to work with people from
diverse cultural backgrounds. **Pay Range:** I2-1 $7,116. **To Apply:** send
letter of application (referencing ad#), CV and 3 letters of recommendation to
Dr. Philip C. Loh, Chairman, Department of Microbiology, 2538 The Mall, Snyder
207, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date: 0** 7/05.

**LECTURERS,** College of Education, for Fall 2000 and Spring 2001, contingent
upon registration and availability of funds. Positions are part-time, non-
tenure for lecturer candidate pool. **Duties:** To teach various undergraduate
or graduate courses in the following areas: elementary or secondary teacher
education including supervision of student teachers, special education, health
education, physical education, athletic training, school administration,
higher education administration, educational foundations, educational
psychology, and counselor education. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's or
doctorate degree in appropriate field. Teaching experience in the appropriate
field. **Minimum Salary:** $1,000 per credit hour. **To Apply** , send letter
of application with curriculum vitae and three work-related references to
College of Education, 1776 University Avenue, Honolulu, HI 96822. Address
letter to appropriate department as follows: Teacher Education & Curriculum
Studies-Elementary or Secondary Program, Special Education, Kinesiology &
Leisure Science, Educational Administration, Educational Foundations,
Educational Psychology, or Counselor Education. **Closing Date:** continuous
recruitment.

**HENRY A. WALKER, JR., DISTINGUISHED PROFESSOR OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE \--**
Position No. 85100, full-time position, to begin academic year 2000-2001. The
University of Hawai`i College of Business Administration seeks a dynamic
leader, researcher, scholar and teacher to occupy the Chair of the Henry A.
Walker, Jr., Distinguished Professor of Business Enterprise. **Duties:** The
Chairholder will serve as a leader and catalyst for research, instruction and
practical application of the latest developments and trends in the area of the
interaction among private and public sector organizations, with special
emphasis on the role of entrepreneurship in the articulation of the College's
two academic strategic thrusts, international business and information
technology, in an Asia Pacific context. Responsibility to the community is
inherent in this position. The Chairholder will serve as a resource, liaison
and ambassador to the community and as a resource for the College's Doctoral,
Executive MBA and executive development programs. **Minimum Qualifications:**
Doctorate in business or related field from a college or university of
recognized standing; evidence of excellence in teaching; four years or more of
full-time college or university teaching at the rank of at least Associate
Professor or equivalent with evidence of increasing professional maturity;
senior-level academic or equivalent professional management experience which
has resulted in significant recognition by the national or international
community of scholars or practitioners in the same field. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Stature and reputation as a researcher and a teacher, in a
discipline related to entrepreneurship in the context of one or both of the
College's two academic strategic thrusts, international business and
information technology, in an Asia Pacific setting; distinguished service in
international business, private enterprise or the public sector; proven
ability to work with and provide professional expertise to the community.
**Salary:** Commensurate with qualifications and experience. **Application
Requirements** : Send letter of application, resume and supporting materials
including list of references to David McClain, Dean and First Hawaiian Bank
Distinguished Professor of Leadership and Management, College of Business
Administration, University of Hawai`i at Manoa, 2404 Maile Way, Honolulu, HI
96822. **Closing Date:** continuous recruitment until position is filled;
first screening date 09/01.

**INSTRUCTOR (Service-Learning Coordinator),** Position No. 86621V, Kapi`olani
CC, Social Science Department, variable FTE ranging from 50% to 100% depending
on course offering and student demand, temporary, 9-month, general funds, to
begin approximately 08/01, pending position clearance, availability of funds,
and actual staffing requirements. **Duties:** Under general supervision
coordinate and promote the Service-Learning Emphasis with specific attention
to student recruitment, orientation, screening, community connection,
evaluation, recognition, and database management; and support faculty
professional development in service-learning pedagogy, curriculum, reflection,
assessment and partnerships. Teach credit and non-credit courses in area of
expertise, depending on course offerings and student demands. Instruction is
competency-based, emphasizes writing, may include use of computers, and may
include community-based activities. Related teaching duties include, but are
not limited to: advising and counseling of students; assisting in campus
student activities; participating in college based committees; performing
community service; conducting in-service training; maintaining an approved
program of professional self-development; collecting data and preparing
reports; and evaluating instructional and non-instructional activities. Duties
and responsibilities may include evening, weekend, and/or distance education
classes. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree in any discipline/field
offered by the College. Six (6) months of successful experience in managing a
service-learning program in relation to local and national standards.
**Desirable Qualifications:** Qualification to teach in an academic discipline
needed by the College; community college teaching experience; strong
background in multiculturalism and diversity; excellent team-building skills;
ability to write clear and concise prose; computer skills in database and
budget management. Ability to articulate the relationship between service-
learning and general education standards and competencies; develop brochures,
websites, and other promotional materials, manage grant budgets. **Pay
Range:** C2, minimum $16,014/annum, $1835/month, at 50% FTE. **To Apply:**
Send community college application (CC Form 27A, available at [www.
hawaii.edu/ohr/bor/forms/uh27.pdf](http://www.%20hawaii.edu/ohr/bor/forms/uh27.pdf)),
official transcripts, coverl etter and two page statement outlining how you
meet minimum and desirable qualifications, and three letters of recommendation
to Robert Franco, Chair, Social Science Department, Kapi`olani Community
College, 4303 Diamond Head Road, Honolulu, HI 96816. **Inquiries:**
808-734-9438. **Closing Date:** 07/05. All materials must be postmarked no
later than the closing date. Minimum qualifications must be met by the
effective date of appointment (08/01/00).

**LECTURER IN SPEECH,** Hawai`i CC, part-time, non-tenurial, for lecturer
candidate pool, assignments as needed, contingent on availability of funds and
actual staffing requirements. This is for lectureship in both Hilo and West
Hawai`i. May include instructional assignment involving distance education.
Possible evening, weekend and off-campus assignments. **Duties:** Conduct
courses of instruction, prepare and revise course objectives, identify a range
of student learning needs, and implement constructive responses to them; plan,
organize, and carry out instructional and non-instructional assignments;
conduct academic advising of students; develop and maintain a professional
self-improvement plan; participate in division, college, and university
service as appropriate; perform related duties as assigned. Maintain at least
one office hour/week for each class taught. **Minimum Qualifications:**
Master's degree in Speech or related fields. **Desirable Qualifications:**
Community College teaching experience; ability to work with peers and
vocational and liberal arts students in a multi-cultural environment;
experience in curriculum development, telecommunications, distance learning,
and broadcast production. **Minimum Salary:** $1,000 per credit hour. **To
Apply:** Send Community College application and transcript(s) (official or
copy) to: Dean of Instruction, Hawai`i CC, 200 W. Kawili Street, Hilo, HI
96720-4091. Materials submitted will not be returned. Appt. is contingent upon
verification of all MQs and any additional qualifications used to justify an
above minimum salary, incl. official transcripts, licenses, certificates and
work exp. documentation. All MQs must be met by effective date of hire.
**Inquiries:** (808)974-7484. **Closing Date:** Continuous recruitment until
needs are met.

**INSTRUCTOR IN BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES;** Position No. 86496V; Hawai`i CC,
University of Hawai`i Center at West Hawai`i, 60-100% time depending upon
course offerings and student demand, 9-month appointment, general funds, to
begin approximately 08/00, non-tenurial, temporary, pending position
clearance, availability of funds and actual staffing requirements. May include
instructional assignment involving distance education or non-credit courses.
Possible evening, weekend and off-campus assignments. **Duties:** Under
general supervision conduct biological science courses and labs in Human
Biology, General Biology, Human Anatomy and Physiology, General Botany,
Microbiology, and Principles of Zoology. Maintain the lab with adequate
supplies and equipment. Ensure compliance with biosafety regulations for a
biological science laboratory. Ensure compliance with OSHA, HIOSH, EPA
regulation for chemical importation and chemical waste disposal. Maintain a
professional self-development plan. Other related work activities include, but
are not limited to: advising students; assisting in campus related activities;
participating in faculty administrative committees, community service and in-
service training; maintaining office hours; working with other faculty members
in preparing, adapting, and revising program objectives; perform related
duties as assigned. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree in Biological
Sciences (Biology, Botany, Microbiology, or Zoology). **Desirable
Qualifications:** Three years of continuous, hands-on laboratory experience.
Teaching experience at the community college level; Demonstrated ability to
teach lecture and lab course in the biological sciences. Familiar with
biosafety regulations for biological sciences laboratory; Demonstrated ability
to work with peers and students in a multi-cultural setting. **Pay Range:**
C2, minimum $2,669/month @100% FTE. **To Apply:** Submit postmarked by closing
date, (1) application (CC Form, 27A), (2) transcripts awarding the degree from
an accredited institution (copies are acceptable; however, official
transcripts will be required at the time of hire), (3) a statement outlining
how you meet the minimum and desirable qualifications, and (4) resume to:
Professor Noreen Yamane, Hawai`i CC, Math & Natural Science Division,
Chairperson, 200 West Kawili Street, Hilo, HI 96720-4091. Letters of
recommendation are welcome. An incomplete application will not be considered.
Materials submitted will not be returned. All minimum qualifications must be
met by the effective date of employment. **Inquiries:** (808) 974-7421.
**Closing Date:** 07/05.

**INSTRUCTOR IN FOOD SERVICE (Dining Room Service),** Position, No. 82683,
Food Service and Hospitality Education Department, Kapi`olani CC, temporary,
full-time, 9-month, non-tenurial, general funds, to begin approximately 08/00,
pending position clearance and availability of funds. **Duties:** Under
general supervision, be able to teach courses in Dining Room Service and other
related credit and non-credit courses. Strong emphasis is placed on the
development of customer service skills; incorporate the latest local and
global hospitality industry service trends; develop teaching strategies,
instructional materials and methods which 1) use competency-based instruction,
2) integrate critical thinking skills into instructional methods, 3) emphasize
writing as an important skill for students, 4) utilize technological advances
in both operations and instruction, 5) address the needs of community college
students. Candidate will develop and maintain a professional development
program, maintain office hours as determined by teaching schedule, counsel
students, identify students' learning needs and implement constructive
teaching strategies, prepare and revise course objectives and syllabi; plans,
organizes, and carries out instructional and non-instructional assignments
independently. Perform related duties as assigned. Day, evening, and/or
Distance Education classes may be assigned as part of Candidate's regular
workload. Candidate may be assigned off-site instructional or operational
duties as part of regular workload. **Minimum Qualifications:** Bachelor's
Degree in subject area plus three years related work experience which may
include professional training; or Associate Degree in subject area plus five
years related work experience which may include training; or 15 college
credits plus seven years of related work experience which may include
professional training, or Master recognition by Food Services Community.
**Desirable Qualifications:** Successful teaching experience in a community
college culinary program or equivalent as substantiated by student, peer, and
administrative assessments; work experience as a dining room manager or
maitre'd with experience in supervising multiple operations and in training
subordinate employees in restaurant service and general customer service
skills; knowledge on operating and service procedures in Quick Service,
Limited Service, and Full Service dining establishments; working knowledge of
various traditional and temporary service styles; Understanding of classic and
contemporary food terminology; well rounded knowledge in mixology and
alcoholic beverage regulations; active involvement in related professional
associations, documented ability to work with a variety of cultures and
audiences. **Pay Range:** C2, $32, 028 minimum annual salary. Salary
commensurate with education and work experience. **To Apply:** Send community
college application (CC Personnel Form 27A, available at
[www.ccc.hawaii.edu/ohr/bor/forms/uh27.pfd](http://www.ccc.hawaii.edu/ohr/bor/forms/uh27.pfd)),
official transcripts, three letters of recommendation attesting to job
performance, and a brief statement outlining how you meet the minimum and
desirable qualifications to Alfredo Cabacungan, Chair, Food Service &
Hospitality Education Department, Kapi`olani Community College, 4303 Diamond
Head Road, Honolulu, HI, 96816. **Closing Date:** 07/05. All minimum
qualifications must be met by the effective date of appointment.
**Inquiries:** 734-9485.

**INSTRUCTORS (Nursing);** Maui CC, temporary, non-tenurial, 11 month,
position number 86731X and tenure-leading, 9 month, position number 86682,
beginning 08/00, pending position clearance, availability of funds and actual
staffing requirements. **Duties:** Under general supervision, to teach nursing
courses and conduct seminars in the community college in one or more of the
following areas, medical-surgical, maternal-child, psychiatric nursing, and to
perform related work as assigned. Develop teaching strategies, instructional
materials and methods which: 1) use computer instruction where appropriate, 2)
integrate instruction of appropriate thinking skills into course content, 3)
use competency-based instruction, 4) emphasize writing as an important skill
for students, and 5) address the needs of community college students. Evening
and weekend classes may be assigned as part of regular workload. Duties and
responsibilities may include instructional assignments involving distance
education. **Minimum Qualifications:** Applicants must meet both
education/experience requirement and licensing requirement. Master's degree in
Nursing which included content for academic credits in curriculum development,
evaluation, and teaching methods. RN eligible for Hawai`i state license.
License required prior to assumption of clinical responsibilities. IF
QUALIFIED APPLICANTS ARE NOT AVAILABLE, OTHERS WILL BE CONSIDERED AS ACTING
INSTRUCTOR. Bachelor's Degree in Nursing, (Education must have included
content for academic credits in curriculum, development, evaluation, and
teaching methods and at least three years acute care nursing experience in one
of the areas of teaching expertise within the last five years of date of
application. R.N. eligible for Hawai`i state license. License required prior
to assumption of clinical responsibilities. **Desirable Qualifications:**
Evidence of successful teaching in a college setting, working with multi-
ethnic student population, ability to teach critical thinking skills,
technical skills, and writing skills, ability to instruct using technical
media and recent clinical experience in areas of teaching assignment. **Pay
Range:** 11 month position, minimum annual salary, C2, $37,464, commensurate
with education and experience. 9 month position, minimum annual salary, C2,
$32,028 ,commensurate with education and experience. **To Apply:** Submit by
closing date the following information 1) a completed Community College
Faculty or Executive/Managerial application form (CC Personnel Form 27A), 2)
official graduate and undergraduate transcript(s) showing degrees and course
work to date appropriate to the position (transcript copies are acceptable;
however, official transcripts sent directly to Maui Community College from
institution granting credit will be required at the time of hire), 3)
documents verifying work experience or certificate(s) held, 4) resume, 5)
names and phone numbers of three professional references, 6) three letters of
recommendation attesting to job performance and personal character (optional).
E-mail and faxed information may be submitted but originals must be submitted
at the time of hire. All requested documents must be postmarked by the closing
date and information will become the property of the College. Mail To: Nancy
Johnson, Nursing Department, Maui Community College, 310 Ka`ahumanu Avenue,
Kahului, Hi 96732. **Closing Date:** 07/05. **Inquiries:** 984-3250.

**JUNIOR SPECIALIST** , Position no. 82867T, UH Manoa, Outreach College; full-
time; temporary, non-tenure; special funds to begin ASAP, annually renewable
pending availability of funds and satisfactory performance. **Duties:**
Responsible for administering specific credit programs from development,
through implementation, to monitoring and evaluation: collaborate with
academic departments to meet the needs of students and to ensure the academic
integrity of all programs. Work with support units both within Outreach
College and the UHM to make these programs readily accessible. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Master's degree from a college or university of recognized
standing; Demonstrated ability to work collaboratively with professional
groups such as university departments and government agencies; At least one
year experience with program development or management of a self-supporting
program; Experience with computer-based technology, such as information
systems, databases and spreadsheets and an interest in developing technology-
based resources applicable to program development; Working knowledge of
academic and administrative policies and procedures; Demonstrated excellent
verbal and communication skills; Must be able to work evenings and weekends as
necessary. **Desirable Qualifications:** Master's degree in education or
business; Substantial experience with program development in a continuing
education setting; Demonstrated ability to plan, administer and coordinate
credit courses or programs that generate sufficient revenue to cover all
costs; Facility in planning, designing and using technology to support
administrative procedures; Ability to analyze programs for cost effectiveness;
Experience working with academic policies and procedures at a university
level; Experience with distance learning. **Pay Range:** $2,776/month. **To
Apply:** Submit cover letter, resume, and 3 letters of recommendation to UH
Manoa Outreach College, 2530 Dole St., Sakamaki C-400, Honolulu, HI 96822,
Attn: Personnel Officer. **Closing:** 07/05.

**JUNIOR SPECIALIST,** S2, Position No. 86167T, UHM, Pacific Biomedical
Research Center, full-time, federal funds, temporary, to begin approximately
08/00. **Duties:** Assist the program directors with administering two
minority undergraduate research and training programs; responsible for
motivating minority students towards science careers and the PhD degree
program. The incumbent will be in charge of recruitment of participants;
coordinating the summer orientation program; monitoring student progress with
research mentors; and monitoring student retention and motivation towards
attainment of science career goals. The incumbent will also collect and
analyze data for the evaluation component of the program; track former student
participants post baccalaureate careers. Assist in writing the annual progress
reports and competing renewal grants; and enhancing working relationships with
other UH systemwide minority development programs. Other duties as assigned.
**Minimum Qualifications:** Master's degree in psychology, public health, or
related field; experience as an assistant working with minority populations or
minority students/youths. **Desirable Qualifications:** Working knowledge of
UH Manoa undergraduate and graduate degree programs in the sciences and
familiarity with policies and regulations of the University system. Experience
motivating ethnic minority groups to seek higher education, and work
experience in a research-training program. Positive work attitude and
willingness to perform routine tasks. **Minimum Monthly Salary:** $2776. **To
Apply:** Send curriculum vitae and names of three references to: Healani
Chang, DrPH, Haumana Biomedical Program, 1993 East-West Road A251, Honolulu,
HI 96822. **Inquiries:** 956-8268. **Closing Date:** 07/05.

**ASSOCIATE SPECIALIST** , Position # 85916T; UH-Manoa, Cancer Research Center
of Hawai`i; full-time; 11-month; non-tenurable; to begin approximately 08/00;
annually renewable pending availability of funds. **Duties:** Perform research
in molecular biology of cancer under the supervision of the Cancer Research
Center Director. **Minimum Qualifications:** PhD in biochemistry plus four
years of research experience at the rank of Assistant Researcher or
equivalent. **Pay Range:** Minimum salary: $51,264; salary commensurate with
qualifications and experience. **To Apply:** Send curriculum vitae to:
Director, Cancer Research Center of Hawai`i, 1236 Lauhala Street, Honolulu, HI
96813. **Closing Date:** Position will remain open until filled; however,
first review of applications will begin 07/01.

**JUNIOR RESEARCHER,** R2, Position No. 88625T, UHM, Pacific Biomedical
Research Center, Bekesy Laboratory, 11 month, temporary, extramural funds,
full-time, one year with possible renewal, beginning 09/00, annually renewable
dependent on availability of funds. **Duties:** To provide technical expertise
for studies being conducted as part of the University's Specialized
Neurosciences Research Program. The Junior Researcher will apply biochemical
separation, protein chemistry and electrophysiological techniques to the study
of the mechanism of action of specific toxins purified from Carybdea alata
venom. Specifically, the applicant will conduct separation and biochemical
purification of marine toxins from crude cnidarian venoms to isolate and
characterize constitutive toxins responsible for the hemolytic, neurotoxic,
proteolytic, immunogenic and phospholipase activities. Future research
directions include characterization of neurotoxic effects of isolated toxins
using patch clamp and fluorescent imaging techniques. **Minimum
Qualifications:** MS degree in relevant discipline, knowledge and established
proficiency in the following areas: purification and characterization of
natural products/marine toxins (HPLC, CE, PCR), electron microscopy,
biological activity assays, and electrophysiological screening of toxins.
**Desirable Qualifications:** Doctoral level training in cnidaria toxicology,
ability to conduct independent research, grant and manuscript writing skills.
**Minimum Monthly Salary:** $2776. Please send CV, cover letter and three
references to Dr. Angel Yanagihara, Bekesy Laboratory of Neurobiology, 1993
East West Road, University of Hawai`i, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date:**
07/05.

**POST-DOCTORAL FELLOW,** Pacific Biomedical Research Center, Kewalo Marine
Laboratory, full time, to begin 08/01, initiation and continuation dependent
upon availability of funds. **Training to be performed:** The student will be
trained in aspects of microbial molecular biology and biochemistry, with
particular emphasis on developing an understanding of how specific characters
permit interaction with animal cells. **Minimum Qualifications:** PhD in
Biology, with skills in routine biochemistry and confocal microscopy.
**Desirable Qualifications:** Ability to work with marine invertebrates.
**Minimum Annual Stipend:** $28,415. **To Apply:** send resume and 3 letters
of recommendation to: Dr. Margaret McFall-Ngai, Kewalo Marine Laboratory, 41
Ahui St., Honolulu, HI 96813. **Inquiries:** Dr. Margaret McFall-Ngai,
539-7310. **Closing Date:** 07/05.

**SPECIALIST,** position no. 85633, School of Ocean and Earth Science and
Technology (SOEST), full-time, tenure-track, to begin approximately 08/00.
**Duties:** Exercising independent judgment, initiative and decision making
under broad policies and general operational rules, this position provides
leadership and staff support to SOEST's academic planning, institutional
assessment and policy analysis efforts including academic development
planning, program review and assessment; design, maintenance and distribution
of decision support databases; design and analysis of student, faculty and
staff surveys; preparation of related institutional studies and reports;
provides counsel, support, and infrastructure for the instructional components
of the school. Represents SOEST in official or quasi-official capacities when
appropriate. **Minimum Qualifications:** Doctoral degree in a field relevant
to the position or academic rank comparable to associate professor, or other
comparable professional experience; five years of administrative experience in
a research university; outstanding skills in verbal and written communication;
demonstrated ability to plan, direct and manage assigned activities including
the work of assistants when appropriate involving program administration,
teaching, counseling, institutional research and analysis, and academic
support responsibilities. **Desirable Qualifications:** Demonstrated
administrative experience in a large, comprehensive research university
encompassing both undergraduate and graduate programs working with people with
diverse backgrounds in geosciences, biotechnology, marine biology and ocean
sciences; demonstrated experience working with state legislation; demonstrated
record of research/creative activity, including extramural funding support;
familiarity with technological applications to student data bases for record
keeping and research; ability to administer effectively in an organization
built around a fluid team approach to management. **Pay Range:** S5, minimum
$6,577/month. **To Apply:** send letter of application, curriculum vitae, and
the names, addresses, and contact information of three current professional
references to Director of Administration, SOEST, University of Hawai`i, 1680
East-West Road, POST 802, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date:** 07/05.
**Inquiries:** (808)956-9110.

**ASSISTANT PROFESSOR (Paleoceanography/Paleoclimatology),** position number
88174, Department of Geology and Geophysics, School of Ocean and Earth Science
and Technology (SOEST), full-time, 11-mos. appt., tenure track, to begin
01/01, subject to position clearance. **Duties:** Study fundamental processes
affecting Earth's climate and environmental change in the past, present and
future, utilizing the geologic record and/or present oceanographic conditions.
Develop outstanding research and educational/teaching programs. **Minimum
Qualifications:** PhD degree in geology, oceanography or related fields,
scientific research experience, and demonstrated teaching ability. **Pay
Range:** I3-R, minimum $3,377/month. **To Apply:** send a curriculum vitae,
list of publications, summary of research interests, and addresses, phone
numbers and email addresses of three or more references, to
Paleoceanography/Paleoclimatology Search, Department of Geology and
Geophysics, SOEST, 1680 East-West Road, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date:**
09/01. Information about SOEST and the Department of Geology and Geophysics
can be found at our website:
[www.soest.hawaii.edu](http://www.soest.hawaii.edu/).

**ASSIST/ASSOC PROF IN SP-LANG PATH** , Position No. 83586, I3/I4, Division of
Speech Pathology and Audiology, UH John A. Burns School of Medicine, full
time, G-funds, 11-month, permanent, tenurable, annually renewable depending on
performance and/or funding, to begin approximately mid 01/01, pending position
clearance and availability of funds. **Duties** : Teach undergrad & grad
courses; specialty in neuroanatomy, and adult neurogenic and language
disorders; secondary area open. Clinical supervision; academic advising;
supervise MS students research. **Minimum Qualifications** : (Asst): earned
doctorate in SLP; CCC-SLP; eligible for state licensure; demonstrated record
of scholarly pursuit; clinical and research expertise in area of specialty;
basic knowledge of computers. University teaching experience in SLP, clinical
supervision and research at college/university level. Publication record
consistent with rank of appointment. (Assoc): same as Asst Prof plus four
years at Asst Prof level or equivalent and evidence of proficiency in
teaching. History of scholarly pursuit consistent with level at which
applying. **Minimum Annual Salary** : (Asst): $40,524; (Assoc): $51,264. **To
Apply** : Send cover letter, CV and three letters of recommendation to James
T. Yates, PhD, Professor and Chair, UH School of Medicine, Division of SPA,
1410 Lower Campus Road, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date** : 12/15.

**INSTRUCTOR IN THAI,** Position Number 83437T, Department of Hawaiian and
Indo-Pacific Languages and Literatures, full-time, nine-month, non-tenurial,
contingent upon position availability and funding beginning 08/01for academic
year 2000-2001. **Duties:** To teach elementary through advanced levels of the
Thai language; maintain office hours; work as Program Coordinator for Thai
language courses. **Qualifications:** MA in relevant field; high level fluency
in Thai and English; evidence of successful college level teaching.
**Desirable Qualifications:** Experience in curriculum and materials
development **.** **Minimum Annual Salary:** $28,464 (full-time basis). Send
letter of application, curriculum vitae, recent teaching evaluations, letters
from three current references to Chair, Department of Hawaiian and Indo-
Pacific Languages and Literatures, University of Hawai`i at Manoa, Spalding
Hall 255, 2540 Maile Way, Honolulu HI 96822. **Telephone:** (808)956-8672.
Fax: (808)956-5978. **Closing Date:** 07/05. All requested
documents/information must be postmarked by the closing date.

**ASSISTANT/ASSOCIATE/FULL PROFESSOR,** Pos. No. 85698T, M3/M4/M5, Department
of Pediatrics, UH School of Medicine, trust funds, to begin approximately
08/00, annually renewable depending on performance and/or funding, part-time,
11-month, temporary, non-tenurable. **Duties:** Clinical, teaching and
research responsibilities. The primary role will be to provide consultative
service in Pediatric Infectious Disease. Educational responsibilities include
teaching of medical students, residents and fellows and providing CME
lectures. **Minimum Qualifications:** Assist Prof: MD degree, eligible for
Hawai`i license, board certified or board qualified by the American Board of
Pediatrics, and by a Sub-Board of the American Board of Pediatrics (if a
subspecialist, and if appropriate). If board certified, must be recertified at
appropriate intervals designated by the American Board of Pediatrics. These
shall be individuals who have demonstrated teaching ability and high quality
patient care. Assoc Prof: Same as Assist Prof plus board certified and a
minimum of four years in the rank of Assistant Professor, or one year in the
rank of Associate Professor at another medical school of recognized standing
and have shown proven ability in teaching, research and program
administration. Prof: Same as Assoc Prof plus a minimum of four years in the
rank of Associate Professor, or a total of ten years of teaching in the rank
of Associate Professor and other medical and administrative experiences, or
one year in the rank of Professor at another medical school. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Physicians with funded clinical or laboratory-based
research. **Minimum Monthly Salary at Full Time:** Assist: $6,577; Assoc:
$7,695; Prof: $8,323. Send CV and three letters of recommendation to Raul
Rudoy, MD, Chair, Department of Pediatrics, UH School of Medicine, Kapi`olani
Medical Center for Women and Children, 1319 Punahou Street, Honolulu, HI
96826. **Closing Date:** 07/05.

**ASSISTANT SPECIALIST (Assistant Research Faculty),** School of Social Work,
UHM, Position No. 085886T, to be located at Hawai`i State Hospital. Full-time
(100% FTE), 11 month appointment, non-tenurable, to begin July 2000 or as soon
thereafter as possible. Annually renewable, depending on performance and
funding. **Duties:** Provide direct mental health services in psychosocial
rehabilitation (PSR) treatment modalities as part of an interdisciplinary team
at Hawai`i State Hospital; supervise PSR trainees; develop, conduct and
analyze research pertinent to mental health; write reports, grants and
manuscripts for publication; teach graduate level mental health courses.
**Minimum Qualifications:** Earned a doctorate in social welfare or related
health profession or social science field and evidence of successful
completion of research projects. Must have clinical mental health experience;
knowledge and interest in health, mental health or related area research;
ability to generate independent research reports, publications and grant
proposals; demonstrate conceptual abilities, oral and written skills,
competency in multicultural issues and strong interpersonal skills. **Minimum
Salary:** $4,272/month or $51,264 annually. **To Apply:** Send a letter
addressing qualifications for the position, current curriculum vitae with 3
references, 2 letters of recommendation, and proof of degree to: Dr. Jon K.
Matsuoka, Interim Dean, School of Social Work, University of Hawai`i at Manoa,
2500 Campus Road, Room 206B, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Closing Date:** 07/05.
**For Inquiries:** call Paula Morelli, PhD, at 956-6124, email:
[morelli@hawaii.edu](mailto:morelli@hawaii.edu).

**JUNIOR SPECIALIST** , position #85272T, Curriculum Research & Development
Group, full-time, temporary, non-tenure track position, 08/00 to 08/2001, with
possible extension. **Duties** : Work independently to develop and disseminate
mathematics curriculum which is consistent with national standards. **Duties
may include:** teaching demonstration and experimental math classes at the
middle school and/or secondary level in algebra; directing the school
visitation component of the Hawai`i Algebra Learning Project (HALP); designing
and conducting staff development workshops on implementation of innovative
algebra curricula and methods of instruction. **Minimum Qualifications** :
Master's degree in mathematics education or secondary education with an
emphasis in mathematics from a college or university of recognized standing.
Applicant must be certified to teach HALP curriculum prior to employment date.
**Desirable Qualifications** : Experience in curriculum research and
development; providing teacher training; and in problem-solving based
instruction. Knowledge of evaluation of curricular methods, practices,
materials, and techniques; of assessment and evaluation practices. **Minimum
Annual Salary** : $38,964; actual salary dependent upon qualifications and
experience. **To Apply** : Send letter of application, resume, and names of
three references to Karyn Yoshioka, 1776 University Avenue, CM 130, Honolulu,
HI 96822. **Inquiries** : Dr. Barbara Dougherty, Director, Mathematics Section
956-6216 or FAX: 956-4984. E-Mail:
[bdougher@hawaii.edu](mailto:bdougher@hawaii.edu). **Closing Date** : 07/05 or
until position is filled.

**ASSISTANT SPECIALIST OF TURFGRASS MANAGEMENT**. Position No. 84501, UHM,
College of Tropical Agriculture and Human Resources, 100%, 11-month tenure
track, to begin approximately 09/00. **Duties** : Provide leadership in
working with research faculty and extension specialists and agents; planning,
coordination, delivery, and integration of statewide educational and extension
programs related to the turfgrass industry; development of close working
relationships with Hawai`i's turfgrass industry, including conducting
educational sessions for the turfgrass industry and their organizations;
collaborate, advise and train County Agents; and prepare publications on
turfgrass science and management practices. Conduct research to solve problems
of the turfgrass industry, such as varietal improvement, use of sewage
effluent and brackish water for irrigation, pest management, environmental
stress, environmental impacts of fertilizers and pesticides, and cultural and
management practices. Teach an upper division course in turfgrass management,
contribute to portions of other horticulture courses, and advise undergraduate
and graduate students. **Minimum Qualifications:** A PhD in Horticulture,
Agronomy, or closely-related field with specialization or experience in
turfgrass. Research training on growth and development, crop physiology,
environmental interactions on turfgrasses, or ability to apply new
technologies to turfgrass improvement. Ability to communicate and interact
amicably with diverse industry and academic colleagues. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Training or experience in warm-season turf. Ability to
attract extramural funds. Ability to attract and work with graduate students.
Practical experience in turfgrass industry. **Pay Range:** Commensurate with
training and experience. **To Apply:** Send letter of application, curriculum
vitae, official transcripts of college training, and arrange to have three (3)
confidential letters of reference sent to Dr Russell Yost, Search Committee
Chairman, Department of Tropical Plant and Soil Sciences, College of Tropical
Agriculture and Human Resources, University of Hawai`i at Manoa, 3190 Maile
Way, Rm. 102, Honolulu, HI 96822-2279. **Closing Date:** 08/15. **Inquiries:**
Telephone (808) 956-7066; FAX (808) 956-3894; E-Mail:
[rsyost@hawaii.edu](mailto:rsyost@hawaii.edu).

**JUNIOR RESEARCHER** , Position # 85497T; Department of Plant and
Environmental Protection Sciences, College of Tropical Agriculture and Human
Resources; full time, temporary funds, to begin approximately 08/00 to
07/31/01, renewal depending on availability of funds and performance.
**Duties:** The goal of this research is to develop strategies to control CTV.
This position involves research on molecular characterization of CTV,
identification of mild strains of CTV, and development of transgenic citrus
plants, which are resistant to CTV infection. The research will include
cloning and sequence analyses of CTV, evaluation of mild-strain cross
protection, transforming citrus plants via _Agrobacterium tumefaciens_ or via
the biolistic process, characterizing transgenic plants for gene integration
and expression, and testing of transgenic plants for resistance to CTV.
**Minimum Qualifications:** MS degree in Plant Pathology. The candidate must
have first hand experience in development of transgenic plants, and have
extensive experience in molecular biology and plant virology. **Desirable
Qualifications:** The candidate has experience in PCR, cloning, and sequence
analyses of closteroviruses, and has experience in developing gene constructs
for production of transgenic plants. **Pay Range:** $33,312. **To Apply** :
submit letter of application, resume, transcripts, and three letters of
reference to: Dr. John Hu, Department of Plant and Environmental Protection
Sciences, University of Hawai`i, 3190 Maile Way, St. John 310, Honolulu, HI
96822. **Closing Date** : 07/05. **Inquiries** :
[johnhu@hawaii.edu](mailto:johnhu@hawaii.edu).

**INSTRUCTOR OF PHYSICS AND ASTRONOMY,** UH at Hilo, position no. 86386T,
full-time, temporary, non-tenure-track, to begin in 08/00 and end 07/31/01
extensions dependent upon position clearance and funding. **Duties:** Teach
introductory undergraduate laboratory classes in physics and astronomy;
supervise, develop curriculum for, and prepare manuals for the undergraduate
physics and astronomy laboratories; teach introductory undergraduate lecture
classes in physics or astronomy as needed; participate in department programs
and initiatives; advise and counsel students. **Minimum Qualifications:**
Master's degree in astronomy, physics, space science, or related area;
experience and demonstrated excellence in undergraduate classroom teaching of
physics and astronomy, space science, or related area. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Commitment to undergraduate teaching as evidenced by record
of previous experience and testimony of colleagues or mentors; experience with
teaching and learning strategies focused on active participation of students;
instructional interests which complement existing department programs and
activities. **Pay Range:** I2 with a minimum salary of $26,316/yr.
**Applications:** Send a letter of application addressing specific minimum and
desirable qualifications, curriculum vitae, and the names, addresses and
current phone numbers of three references to: Dr. Richard A. Crowe, Chair,
Physics and Astronomy Department, College of Arts and Sciences, University of
Hawai`i at Hilo, 200 W. Kawili Street, Hilo, HI 96720-4091. **Closing Date:**
Postmarked no later than 07/05.

**GRADUATE ASSISTANT** , 0.50 FTE to begin approximately 08/01/00 to 09/01/02
to work on 3-year grant project to help prepare faculty and future teachers to
infuse technology into instruction. Continuance subject to satisfactory work
performance and availability of federal grant funds. **Duties:** Under
supervision of grants manager and outreach manager, develop and conduct
professional development workshops and tutorials for faculty, preservice, and
inservice teachers. Assist instructors virtually and face-to-face in
developing online course material, video lessons for cable delivery, and
evaluation instruments. Create, update and maintain websites, email lists,
online discussion groups, and computerized records. Provide online technology
integration and technical consultation for faculty and students. Assist in
circulation of instructional materials and equipment, data collection and
analysis. Perform other duties and attend scheduled meetings as required. Two
positions are available. One will have an emphasis on Special Education and
assistive technologies, the other an emphasis on working with faculty and
students to promote technology integration in university courses. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Full-time graduate student in good standing in Educational
Technology or equivalent degree program. Knowledge and experience in
instructional design; distance learning and teacher education. Knowledge in,
multimedia and presentation software. Competence in both Windows and Macintosh
applications; and ability to work independently and within a team. Dependable
and flexible with schedule according to events. Good written and
organizational skills. Experience in teaching and conducting workshops and
ability to travel to K-12 schools sites and neighbor islands. **Desirable
Qualifications:** Completion of one year of the ETEC master's program; an
earned Bachelor's of Education degree or Basic Teaching Certificate.
Demonstrated interest in academic support for teaching and learning.
Experience in the management and troubleshooting of computer hardware and
software. Experience with Special Education and assistive technologies.
Experience with quantitative analysis methods and software and completed
coursework in quantitative research or equivalent. Knowledge in using WebCT
and Maile as a course designer and enhancer, and Filemaker Pro. Ability to
write grant proposals and conference papers. Ability to provide leadership to
fellow student workers. Ability to provide one-on-one technology assistance to
university faculty. **Minimum Monthly Salary:** $1198.50 plus health insurance
benefits and waiver of tuition. **Application Process:** To apply, submit
letter of application, resume, and three references to Ariana Eichelberger,
Grants Manager, Educational Technology Department, 1776 University Avenue,
Wist 228, Honolulu, HI 96822. **Inquiries:** (808) 956-3902 or
[ariana@hawaii.edu](mailto:ariana@hawaii.edu) (email). **Closing Date:**
06/19.

Hawai`i Community College is developing a Hospitality Training Institute at
the UH Center at West Hawai`i and is looking to fill the following positions:

**HOSPITALITY INSTRUCTOR/COORDINATOR** Position Number 83156, full-time,
permanent, 11-month appointment, general funds, tenurial, begin approximately
08/00, pending position clearance and availability of funds, possible renewal.
May include instructional assignment involving distance education. Possible
evening, weekend and off-campus assignments. **Duties:** Under general
supervision, develop a hospitality training institute and serve as its
coordinator; identify and develop courses needed for the training program;
teach credit and non-credit hospitality training courses; identify, develop,
and implement learning strategies to meet student needs; conduct academic
advising; coordinate Hawai`i Community College's credit and non-credit
Hospitality classes; work with the director of the center to schedule rooms,
academic support functions, and other activities; enforce all academic
policies and student conduct codes; maintain a professional self-improvement
plan; maintain office hours; participate in center, college, and university
activities as appropriate; perform other duties as assigned. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Master's in Professional Studies with emphasis in TIM,
Travel and Tourism; or MBA with emphasis in TIM, Travel and Tourism; or
Bachelor's in Professional Studies with emphasis in TIM, Travel and Tourism
and 3 years related work experience; or Bachelor's in any field and 5 years
related work experience including training; or Associate degree in Travel and
Tourism or Business Education and 5 years related work experience including
training; or 15 college credits in Travel and Tourism or Business Education
and 7 years related work experience including training; or Master recognition
by Travel and Tourism Community and 10 years related work experience.
**Desirable Qualifications:** Current hotel/visitor industry work experience
at management level; computer competency in new generation hotel/visitor
industry computer programs; teaching experience at community college level;
ability to work cooperatively with others; ability to work with diverse
students, faculty, and community; ability to communicate clearly; experience
in developing/modifying college courses and programs. If qualified applicants
are not available, those not meeting MQs may be considered.

**INSTRUCTOR IN FOOD SERVICE,** Position No. 86363, full-time, 9-month,
tenurial, general funds, begin 08/00, pending position clearance, availability
of funds, and actual staffing requirements. May include instructional
assignment involving distance education. Possible day, evening, or weekend
offerings on- and off-campus. **Duties:** Under general supervision teach food
service courses including advanced cookery, buffet preparation, pantry,
breakfast cookery, short-order cookery, and perform related work as assigned.
Related work activities include but are not limited to advising/counseling
students; assisting in campus-related student activities; participating in
faculty/administrative committees, community service, and in-service training;
maintaining an approved program of professional self-improvement; collecting
data and preparing reports; preparing/adapting/revising course objectives;
independently planning, organizing, and carrying out instructional and non-
instructional assignments. **Minimum Qualifications:** Master's in
Professional Studies with emphasis in TIM, Hotel/Restaurant Operations; or MBA
with emphasis in TIM, Hotel/Restaurant Operations; or Bachelor's in TIM,
Hotel/Restaurant Operations and 3 years related work experience; or Bachelor's
in any field and 5 years related work experience including training; or
Associate degree in Hotel/Restaurant Operations and 5 years related work
experience including training; or 15 college credits in Hotel/Restaurant
Operations and 7 years related work experience including training; or Master
recognition by Hotel or Food Service Community and 10 years related work
experience. **Desirable Qualifications:** Current practical work experience at
sous chef level or higher. Experience in fine dining cookery, ethnic cuisine,
buffet operations, garde manger, pantry, baking, chocolates, and breakfast
cookery. Demonstrated ability in costing menus, ordering food products,
organizing food events, and managing a profitable kitchen operation. Able to
work effectively with faculty/staff/students under crowded lab conditions and
network with industry partners. Experience in training, teaching or conducting
workshops. Experience in curriculum development. Familiarity with competency-
based instruction and behavioral objectives. Demonstrated ability to work with
people including adult learners, and ability to communicate clearly. **Pay
Range:** 9-month, C2, minimum $2,669/month; 11-month, C2, minimum
$3,122/month. **To Apply:** Submit postmarked by closing date 1)application
(CC Form 27A), 2)transcripts (copies are acceptable; however, official
transcripts will be required at the time of hire), 3)statement outlining how
you meet the minimum and desirable qualifications, and 4)resume to: Dean of
Instruction, Hawai`i CC, 200 W. Kawili Street, Hilo, HI 96720-4091. Letters of
recommendation are welcome. Materials submitted will not be returned. All
minimum qualifications must be met by the effective date. **Closing Date:**
07/05. **Inquiries:** (808)974-7484.

**INSTRUCTOR (Job Placement Counselor),** Position No. 86867T, Employment
Training Center, Student Services, full-time, temporary, non-tenurable,
general funds, to begin approximately 08/00, pending position clearance and
availability of funds. **Duties:** Provide individual and group counseling
services, and teach orientation, self development, and/or career exploration
course/seminar; provide individual and group career exploration and personal
development activities, perform direct job search, placement, and follow-up
services; develop employer relations and employer referral accounts; serve as
a resource to faculty and staff in the area of career/life planning and
integration of career/life planning concepts into curriculum; direct on and
off campus job placement activities; serve as a resource to division faculty;
participate in student support services offered by the ETC; and other related
duties as assigned. Occasional evening/Saturday work. **Minimum
Qualifications:** Master's degree in Counsel

