Staff Manual 2001-2002

## New Mexico State University  
Department of Mathematical Sciences

# Information For The Staff

### Academic Year 2001-2002

# Contents

1  ABOUT THE DEPARTMENT  
    1.1  WELCOME  
    1.2  THE DEPARTMENT  
    1.3  FACULTY  
    1.4  DEPARTMENT ADMINISTRATION AND STAFF  
        1.4.1  ADMINISTRATION  
        1.4.2  SECRETARIAL STAFF  
        1.4.3  TECHNICAL AND PROFESSIONAL STAFF  
    1.5  FIRST STEPS  
        1.5.1  SOME IMPORTANT DATES  
        1.5.2  PARKING  
        1.5.3  PAYROLL INFORMATION  
        1.5.4  DEPARTMENTAL FILES  
    1.6  KEEP US INFORMED PLEASE  
2  TEACHING  
    2.1  GETTING YOUR CLASSES UNDERWAY  
        2.1.1  TEXTBOOKS AND COURSE OUTLINES  
        2.1.2  OFFICE HOURS  
        2.1.3  COURSE INFORMATION HANDOUTS  
    2.2  PREREQUISITES, PLACEMENT, ETC.  
        2.2.1  PREREQUISITES  
        2.2.2  MATHEMATICS PLACEMENT EXAMINATION  
        2.2.3  DROP/ADD, DROP-BACK PROCEDURES  
    2.3  CLASSROOM POLICIES AND PROCEDURES  
        2.3.1  IN THE CLASSROOM  
        2.3.2  IF NECESSARY TO MISS A CLASS  
        2.3.3  COURSE COORDINATION  
        2.3.4  CLASS LISTS  
        2.3.5  EXAMINATIONS  
        2.3.6  GRADING  
        2.3.7  STUDENT EVALUATIONS OF TEACHING  
        2.3.8  GRADE RECORDS  
    2.4  MATHEMATICS LEARNING CENTER  
    2.5  TUTORING SERVICES  
3  FACILITIES AND SERVICES  
    3.1  FACILITIES  
        3.1.1  OFFICES  
        3.1.2  KEYS  
        3.1.3  MATHEMATICS READING ROOM  
        3.1.4  MATHEMATICS EDUCATION LAB  
        3.1.5  CONFERENCE ROOM SH 234  
        3.1.6  CONFERENCE AND SEMINAR ROOMS  
    3.2  SERVICES  
        3.2.1  COMPUTER SERVICES  
        3.2.2  GRAPHING CALCULATORS  
        3.2.3  VIDEO EQUIPMENT  
        3.2.4  MAIL  
        3.2.5  TELEPHONES  
        3.2.6  FAX MACHINE  
        3.2.7  PUBLICATION COSTS  
    3.3  TYPING, COPYING, PRINTING  
        3.3.1  TYPING  
        3.3.2  PHOTOCOPYING  
        3.3.3  COMPUTER PRINTOUT FINAL COPY  
        3.3.4  IN-OUT BASKETS  
    3.4  PROFESSIONAL TRAVEL  
        3.4.1  GENERAL TRAVEL INFORMATION  
        3.4.2  MILEAGE  
        3.4.3  AIR TRAVEL INFORMATION  
        3.4.4  PER DIEM  
        3.4.5  OTHER TRAVEL EXPENSES  
        3.4.6  REIMBURSEMENT INFORMATION  
    .1  DEPARTMENTAL COMMITTEES  
    .2  COLLEGE, UNIVERSITY, AND   
PROFESSIONAL ORGANIZATIONS  
        .2.1  COLLEGE OF ARTS AND SCIENCES:  
        .2.2  UNIVERSITY:  
        .2.3  PROFESSIONAL SOCIETIES:  
    .3  EVACUATION PLAN  

#  Chapter 1  
ABOUT THE DEPARTMENT

##  1.1  WELCOME

Welcome to the Department of Mathematical Sciences at New Mexico State
University. This manual contains important information for all faculty
members, staff members, and graduate students.

  

  

##  1.2  THE DEPARTMENT

The department consists of approximately 45 faculty members, 25 30 graduate
assistants, five secretaries, one accounting technician a computer operations
manager, five student computer technicians, over 50 undergraduate classroom
assistants, other graduate and undergraduate students, and other
mathematically connected individuals. It has the professional responsibility
to provide high quality instruction to both undergraduate and graduate
students, to produce high quality research, to provide service to the
university and the state, and to communicate the results of this research to
the mathematical community.

##  1.3  FACULTY

The Graduate and Undergraduate Catalogs provide reasonably up-to-date lists of
the faculty together with their areas of interest and (in the back of the
Undergraduate Catalog) where they received degrees. More detailed information
about faculty areas of research interest is available in the departmental
graduate student brochure. One way to connect names and faces is to study the
photographic display of faculty, secretaries and graduate assistants in the
display cabinet outside the department office (Science Hall 236). The
departmental phone list comes out early in each of the Fall and Spring
Semesters.

##  1.4  DEPARTMENT ADMINISTRATION AND STAFF

###  1.4.1  ADMINISTRATION

  * David Finston  ACADEMIC DEPARTMENT HEAD. 

  * Kitty Berver, Dick Bagby  ASSOCIATE DEPARTMENT HEADS  Administer placement program; respond to student inquiries on courses and instructors; advise students inquiring about challenge exams; oversee administration of student evaluations; assist with other administrative tasks in the department; serve on the Advisory Committee. 

  * Kitty Berver  DIRECTOR OF MATHEMATICS LEARNING CENTER  Duties similar to those of an academic department head, relative to the Mathematics Learning Center. 

  * Barbara Sallach, Sue Schibel  ASSISTANT DIRECTORS OF MATHEMATICS LEARNING CENTER  Provide general assistance with administrative tasks in the Mathematics Learning Center. 

###  1.4.2  SECRETARIAL STAFF

The secretarial staff functions as a team; however, each secretary has primary
responsibilities as follows.

  * Maria Sanchez  Secretary/assistant to the department head, office supervisor/manager; faculty/staff personnel records, graduate assistant records, office assignments,keys, IN-OUT workbasket, and unusual problems. 

  * Faith Ybarra  Purchasing/accounting, procurement card, staff travel, proposals and grants, inventory, student employment hiring and terminating, student employee records, reports and payroll. 

  * Yesenia Palma  Technical typing, initiate travel requests (A L), MLC search applications, graduate student prospective applications and graduate student academic records, faculty annual reports, and general secretarial work. 

  * Elizabeth Eres  Technical typing, initiate travel requests (M Z), room scheduling, WEEKLY READER, undergraduate student records, undergraduate inquiries, mathematics minor applications, faculty annual reports, textbook orders, faculty applications, and general secretarial work. 

  * Leticia Ogaz  Receptionist, mail, postage stamps, class lists, grade sheets, grade forms, copy billings, Reading Room and general secretarial. 

  * Sally Hoihjelle  Assigned to Math Learning Center, student payroll. 

  * Student office employees  Duties as assigned per office manager. 

###  1.4.3  TECHNICAL AND PROFESSIONAL STAFF

  * John Pierce  COMPUTER OPERATIONS MANAGER  Maintains computer and network facilities for Mathematical Sciences; serves as official liaison to the Computer Center. 

  * Student Assistants  Assist in maintenance of computer and network facilities for Mathematical Sciences. 

##  1.5  FIRST STEPS

###  1.5.1  SOME IMPORTANT DATES

  

  
Occasion | Fall Semester | Spring Semester  
---|---|---  
Start of Semester | August 20 (M) | January 3 (TH)  
Classes Begin | August 22 (W) | January 9 (W)  
Last Day to Add Courses | August 31 (F) | January 18 (F)  
Last Day to Drop with W | October 17 (W) | March 6 (W)  
Exam Week | December 10-14 (M F) | May 6 10 (M F)  
  
###  1.5.2  PARKING

A parking permit is required to park a car on campus. Permits may be obtained
at the University Parking Office. You must show a University ID and your
vehicle registration to obtain this sticker. Faculty, Staff, Retirees, and
Students may register at most two vehicles at the following rates per vehicle;
the fee for registration of a third vehicle is $100.

  **Faculty, Staff, Retirees:** |  $60 Annually; $34 Fall or Spring only;  
---|---  
| $19 Summer (I or II or both);  
**Students** |  $20 Annually; $14 Fall or Spring only;  
| $9 Summer (I or II or both).  
  
Parking places are scarce for faculty, staff and students. Maps are available
which indicate designated parking lots. For more information, see the Parking
Department's website; it can be reached easily through Visitor Information on
the NMSU website.

Note that there are fines for various offenses and penalties for non-payment
of these fines. See the Parking Department for copies of the regulations.

###  1.5.3  PAYROLL INFORMATION

In order for new employees to receive their paychecks, it is necessary for
them to sign an Employment Authorization Form. This form asks for your social
security number, present address, permanent address, birth date, and nearest
living relative. The Immigration and Naturalization Service has a law which
requires all employees hired after November l986 to fill out an I-9 Form. This
form is required as proof of eligibility for employment. Whenever an employee
changes employment status, a Personnel Action Form is usually required. Maria
Sanchez oversees these actions.

Faculty salaries for the academic year are based on the 10 months August
through May, with equal pay for each month, but faculty members can choose to
receive either 10 or 12 monthly checks; in both cases the income is reported
to the IRS as earned during the 10 month period. Paychecks are normally issued
on the last working day of each month, but faculty who choose to receive only
10 checks are paid on the last day of the semester in December and May.

Employees in Professional Staff positions are paid on the last working day of
each month; those in Classified Staff positions can choose to be paid either
monthly or twice a month.

Graduate Assistants are paid on the same schedule as faculty selecting the 10
check option; checks for other student employees are issued twice a month,
based on hours worked during the previous pay period.

Faculty and staff may arrange to have their checks sent directly to their
local bank. Forms are available for this.

In case of problems with paychecks, see Maria Sanchez. In emergencies,
individual checks are sometimes issued at times other than the scheduled
paydays, but the payroll office tries very hard not to.

###  1.5.4  DEPARTMENTAL FILES

Much information is available in labeled notebooks on bookshelves in the
department office. These are open and available for departmental use. They
should not be removed from the main office without permission. These include
minutes of the Faculty Senate, Academic Deans' Council, University Research
Council, Graduate Council, and Faculty Library Committee, as well as minutes
of department Faculty Meetings and Advisory Committee meetings. The current
minutes of many of these organizations are posted on the mailroom bulletin
board before being filed.

Information on RESEARCH FUNDING OPPORTUNITIES is filed in the office, and
faculty are invited to browse through this drawer. See the office staff for
location.

##  1.6  KEEP US INFORMED PLEASE

The office staff can do a much better and more efficient job if they are
informed of any unusual circumstance. If you are to be out of town or are ill
and have arranged to have your classes covered (we very definitely prefer that
you make the arrangements), let us know what these arrangements are and where
you can be reached. Please fill out a traveler's information form at the
receptionist's desk before leaving town.

Even if you are out of town during a period when you have no classes scheduled
(early January, Spring vacation, Summer), there are good reasons, including
insurance coverage, for keeping the office informed of your schedule.

The department office is open from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through
Friday. In emergencies outside regularly scheduled office hours, you should
contact Maria Sanchez, David Finston, Dick Bagby, or Kitty Berver.

#  Chapter 2  
TEACHING

##  2.1  GETTING YOUR CLASSES UNDERWAY

###  2.1.1  TEXTBOOKS AND COURSE OUTLINES

In the lower division courses, and to some extent in the core upper division
courses, the content is essentially a departmental rather than an individual
decision. In each lower division course, you are asked to teach the course as
specified by the textbook and the course outline. In multi-section courses, it
is particularly important that you follow the departmental outline closely for
the first couple of weeks since a number of students will find it necessary to
change sections as they adjust their schedules during this period.

Desk copies of textbooks, course outlines for most of the courses numbered
below 400, and class record books are available in the department office.
Class lists are not available until after the semester begins, but teaching
schedules, including the number of students enrolled in each section, are
posted in the department office prior to the beginning of classes.

###  2.1.2  OFFICE HOURS

All instructors are ... responsible for having office hours clearly posted and
being present during those times" (NMSU Faculty Handbook). A minimum of three
hours per week of office hours totally reserved for your students' access is
recommended. Since many students' schedules will conflict with any set of
office hours, try to be as available as possible to schedule appointments with
students during other times.

Graduate assistants teaching a lecture course that is not through the
Mathematics Learning Center will be asked to schedule some of these hours in
WH 99 for general undergraduate tutoring and other hours in their offices. GAs
should not announce their schedule to their students until all their class and
work hours have been arranged.

During the first week of classes, all instructors will receive a questionnaire
asking for their schedules of office hours, seminars, etc. These schedules are
kept in the department office for the information of staff and students;
therefore, they should be updated when changes occur.

###  2.1.3  COURSE INFORMATION HANDOUTS

The department has general outlines for most courses but you will still need
to prepare a personal course information handout to give to students in each
of your classes. This information should include your name, office number,
office telephone number, e-mail address, office hours, the course's
prerequisite and/or co-requisites, and, more importantly, your descriptions of
the objectives of the course and your plans for determining the students'
course grades. For multi-section courses, some policies on the number of
examinations, weighting of the examinations, etc., may be agreed upon jointly
by the instructors, so do not announce such policies until after the first
course coordination meeting.

The university administration has requested that instructors include certain
information in their written handouts. The web page www.math.nmsu.edu/dept
lists the current administrative requirements. Be very specific in your
policies for homework, attendance, makeup work and exams, extra credit work,
S/U grades, final examination, etc. It saves a lot of wear and tear on all if
your policies allow students to make up examinations missed due to illness,
etc., within reasonable limits. If you want to require a medical excuse, be
sure to include such a statement.

Upon recommendation of the instructor, before the last day to drop a course
with a W, the student's academic dean will drop a student for persistent
absences or for persistent failure to complete assignments. Absence report
forms for this purpose are available in the department office. If you expect
to request that students be dropped, you should state your policy in your
handout with a warning that students should check whether they have been
officially dropped.

The university administration recommends that the following paragraphs be
included in the course information handout:

Students with Disabilities. If you have or believe you have a disability, you
may wish to self-identify. You can do so by providing documentation to
Services for Students with Disabilities located at Garcia Annex (phone:
646-6840). Appropriate accommodations may then be provided for you.

If you have a condition which may affect your ability to exit safely from the
premises in an emergency or which may cause an emergency during class, you are
encouraged to discuss this in confidence with the instructor and/or the
director of Services for Students with Disabilities. If you have general
questions about the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), call the ADA
Coordinator at 646-3635."

##  2.2  PREREQUISITES, PLACEMENT, ETC.

###  2.2.1  PREREQUISITES

If you are teaching a graduate level course, you should review each student's
background for the course at the first meeting of the course. Anyone in your
class who does not have the appropriate prerequisites should be advised
accordingly.

The records of students enrolled in undergraduate courses are checked in the
department office within the first week of classes. You will receive notes to
be delivered to students suggesting appropriate action if their records
indicate that they may not have the prerequisites for your course. Please
check your mailbox before class during the first four weeks and deliver all
such notes at the next class meeting. Failure to communicate these to the
students can generate various unhappy effects. Return to the office those
notes that you cannot deliver after two attempts. Exceptions to prerequisites
must be approved and recorded in the mathematics department office or such
students will be disenrolled by their dean.

###  2.2.2  MATHEMATICS PLACEMENT EXAMINATION

All students who have not previously completed a college mathematics course
will be placed into mathematics courses according to their ACT score and their
high school grade point average. Transfer students and students who wish to
challenge this placement can take the Mathematics Placement Examination (MPE).
This placement program is designed to help academic advisors in evaluating
students' levels of preparation and to place them in appropriate courses.
MPE's are given en masse during freshmen orientation. The MPE can also be
taken in the Mathematics Learning Center during any hour the Testing Center is
open. Guidelines for interpreting the results have been distributed to all
undergraduate advisers on campus and are available in Science Hall, Room 236\.

###  2.2.3  DROP/ADD, DROP-BACK PROCEDURES

The department has specified a maximum for each section on the schedule, often
a few seats below room capacity. Through the last day to register (in a
semester, usually the second Friday of classes), students need only their
advisor's signature to drop and/or add classes which are not filled to the
specified maximum. The signature of the instructor and the permission of the
mathematics department head are required to add a class that is filled to the
listed maximum. This will not change the maximum, i.e., if students
subsequently drop from the section, the registration system will continue to
indicate that the section is full until enrollment drops below the original
maximum.

Generally, instructors whose sections are full should refer students to the
mathematics department office for advice on which sections of a course are
open. At their discretion and within the limits of room capacity, instructors
can sign for other students to be added to their section. When all (or most)
sections of a course are full, the department may increase the maximum in some
sections.

Students may transfer to a more elementary course prior to the last day to
drop with a W. This requires completion and processing of a DROP/ADD form with
signatures from the instructors of both courses and the department head. A
student needing to drop back should be referred to the department office to be
advised on placement in another course. Students may not add new courses to
their schedule after the last day to add (August 31 in Fall, January 18 in
Spring) except as a drop-back.

Students may withdraw from a course until midterm. The instructor is required
to sign the DROP form after the deadline for dropping a course without a W
(August 31, January 18). Take this opportunity to advise students on the DROP-
BACK option. Students who follow through on this find that it puts them in a
better position the next time that they enroll in the course they are
dropping.

A student may not change from credit to audit after the last day to register
but may withdraw and continue to attend with the permission of the instructor.
(NMSU Undergraduate Catalog) The department expects that you will encourage
students to take advantage of this opportunity.

##  2.3  CLASSROOM POLICIES AND PROCEDURES

###  2.3.1  IN THE CLASSROOM

At the first class meeting, introduce yourself to the students, make sure that
they understand the prerequisites and what will be expected of them.
Distribute the course information handout for your class as early as possible
in the semester.

By the end of the first two to three weeks, there should be sufficient written
work that you have checked carefully to determine whether your students are
making satisfactory progress. Some students may need to drop back into another
course and must not delay doing so.

If the room in which your class is being held is unsatisfactory for any
reason, report this fact to the department office and an attempt will be made
to change rooms. Do not change rooms without clearing it through the office.

Please remind students that it is generally expected, in all college courses,
that they spend a minimum of two hours of study outside class for each hour
scheduled in class. In general, daily assignments in undergraduate courses
should satisfy the following conditions:

  * The assignments should be specific, including, for example, the pages that the student must study. 

  * The assignments should be of such length that they can be completed by at least half the class in two hours. 

  * The assignments should be such that the student who has mastered all of them has mastered the fundamentals of the course. 

  * Written work in these assignments should be collected and graded, at least in part, and promptly returned. This is very helpful to the students, and they expect and appreciate some kind of credit for this. Be very clear how you allow or do not allow for absences, etc. 

All classes should begin on time and be dismissed on time; remember that
students have other classes to attend. The State of New Mexico has a right to
a full 50 (75/80/85) minutes of instruction. When possible, be available to
your students for a few minutes at the end of each class.

University policy does not give anyone at the department level the authority
to cancel any class period scheduled by the university, including the first
and the last days of regular classes and the final examination period. The
university has the responsibility to provide a full semester course, and
instructors are cautioned not to schedule the course requirements in such a
way as to effectively shorten the course. The scheduled final examination
period is considered part of the semester.

###  2.3.2  IF NECESSARY TO MISS A CLASS

Each faculty member is expected to ... notify the department head in advance
if it is necessary for the faculty member to miss a class. (NMSU Faculty
Handbook.) Procedures to be followed when attending professional meetings are
described in Chapter 3.

When you will be unable to meet a class, you should arrange for a qualified
person to cover for you. You should make these arrangements DIRECTLY with the
person who will cover your class. In an emergency, contact Dick Bagby, Kitty
Berver or Maria Sanchez. Inform someone in the department office of any
arrangements for covering your class and, if possible, where you can be
reached; it is very important that you do so PRIOR TO THE CLASS MEETING.
Failure to do so may create problems and embarrassment for you, your
substitute, your students and the department. Even when the arrangements are
handled well, it is important that we do not find out about these things from
an outsider. We are expected to know what is going on. It is also important
that we know whom to call when they forget to cover your class; it can happen.

###  2.3.3  COURSE COORDINATION

Each multi-section course will have a faculty member assigned as course
coordinator. The department head should arrange for alerting course
coordinators to their duties well before the beginning of each semester. (See
the intra-departmental web page for a listing of the 2001 course
coordinators.) The ratio of graduate assistant and inexperienced or non-
regular faculty instructors to experienced regular faculty instructors should
not exceed 3:1 in any given semester.

The duties of course coordinators are enumerated below. A coordinator should
consult the department head if clarification of duties is needed or if
situations not covered in the guidelines arise.

  1. Inexperienced instructors will often need guidance on the appropriate balance of emphasis between concepts and techniques in teaching; there can be a tendency to focus on techniques to the exclusion of concepts and the big picture. One of the most important roles for the coordinator is to provide guidance for instructors on the importance of various aspects of the course. In devising a plan for keeping close contact with instructors, the overall course coordinator should feel free to call on the other experienced regular faculty instructors to act as assistant coordinators. Their duties may include meeting with subgroups of the instructors to discuss teaching methods, course contents or updating of particular parts of the course, and making classroom visits. In general, assistant coordinators may be expected to serve as mentors for other instructors. 

  2. Meet with instructors before the first scheduled class meeting for the course. (During the previous semester, it may be useful to meet with the available instructors in order to be aware of issues for this first meeting, and in order to guide the preparation process of instructors without prior experience in the course.) In this meeting the coordinator should 

    * assess experience and preparedness of individual instructors. 

    * make instructors aware of different options for teaching styles, methods and materials for the course (this should include any materials in the resource binders in the Mathematics Reading Room). 

    * discuss grading, pace, syllabi and exams. Share and discuss possible course information handouts. At the beginning of the course, instructors should notify their students when the final exam will be. 

    * discuss common goals and activities for the course (emphasize that course coordination has been established for the general benefit of the students and to provide some consistency among sections, but not to infringe on academic freedom). 

    * obtain a consensus of the instructors on the weighing of the final exam. There is a long-standing policy in Math 191-192 that the common final exam should be weighted to count 25% to 40% of the course grade. Instructors should not use any grading scheme that deviates substantially from the agreed upon weighting. 

    * inform instructors of the common weekly meeting time. 

  3. Report any updates for the syllabus and suggestions for course modifications to the Undergraduate Curriculum Committee (UCC). At least one such report should be made every semester, and the UCC should ensure this. 

  4. Collect projects and exams from instructors as a resource for future instructors, and place the most interesting ones in the course resource binders in the Mathematics Reading Room. 

  5. Remind instructors that students with D or F grades should be notified of their grade before the last day to drop with a W. Sound out the instructors as to the approximate rate of failure in each section, and take appropriate action in conjunction with the department head if any serious concerns arise. 

  6. For sections taught by GAs, approve all handouts before distribution to the class. In particular, you should approve the syllabus and any test or quiz that takes more than ten minutes of class time; the purpose is to help the instructor avoid tests that are too hard or too easy. 

  7. Visit the classes of each GA at least once during the semester, and meet privately with the GA to discuss your observations. Remind the GAs that they must provide for student evaluations of their sections about three weeks before the end of classes. 

  8. The syllabi for Math 191 and 192 list optional material. At the first regular meeting, discuss and agree on what optional material will be covered on the common final. Begin work on the final exam at least six weeks before the scheduled exam date. Before grading the exam, reach a consensus on the awarding of partial credit; take time to instruct GAs on the grading techniques. After it has been graded, file a copy of the departmental final exam and its grade distribution in the department office. 

###  2.3.4  CLASS LISTS

During the first week of classes and periodically through the semester, you
will receive class lists of all students that have registered. Please check
these lists regularly against the students attending your class. Make sure the
students who attend are aware of their registration status, including whether
they are registered under the S/U option or as AU; mistakes need to be
corrected before the last day for adding a course. Report other discrepancies
to the Registrar or the department office; sometimes students are simply
attending the wrong section. Unreported discrepancies may result in problems
for the student, instructor, and department. Note that class lists relate
names and social security numbers; as such, they are regarded as sensitive
trash and should be shredded or deposited in the sensitive trash box in the
department office when you have no more use for them.

Names of students that switch from your course to another one, or that simply
drop your course before the end of the registration period, will disappear
from your class list. Names of other students that drop your course will
remain on your class list, with a grade of W assigned.

###  2.3.5  EXAMINATIONS

Generally, in an undergraduate course, you should plan to have at least three
full-period examinations or equivalent assignments in addition to the final
examination. The students usually prefer to have four or five such
assignments. You should either specify the dates for these in the syllabus you
hand out at the beginning of the semester, or inform the students of each
important date at least one week in advance. It is a good idea to give some
examples if you plan questions differing in style or type from those in the
text or the assignments. As noted above, your course syllabus should include
specific policies for makeup work for your section(s).

Instructors are encouraged to give a comprehensive final examination during
the two hours scheduled for this whenever such an exam is consistent with the
goals and content of the course. In multiple section courses, the instructors
should reach a consensus, during the first coordinating meeting, on the
material to be included in a final exam as well as the weighting of the final
in determining the course grade. In all cases, the instructor must hold a
culminating activity for the class during the scheduled final exam period.
Your plan for a final exam or term paper should be included in the written
information given to your students at the beginning of the semester.

If you want students to have their examinations returned when you are not
available, give them to the receptionist and tell the students to retrieve
them in the department office; ID cards may be needed. This procedure may also
be used for other student papers. Do not leave any examinations with names and
grades in boxes or buckets in the halls. If you want to put other papers
outside your office door, please obtain a wall rack; do not have any
containers on the floor. This conflicts with certain rules about access for
individuals with disabilities.

Make-up exams for individual students can be monitored in the Mathematics
Testing Center (WH102). Particular instructions may be given on the special
forms that are available in the department office and in the Mathematics
Testing Center booth.

Common final exams will be given in MATH 191 and 192. Dates and times for
these exams are listed in the class schedule; note that a single examination
period is used for all sections of each of these courses. The exams are to be
constructed and graded by the instructors of the course. Details are arranged
each semester via the coordinators.

A student wishing to get credit by examination for a mathematics course should
be sent to the department office for information on departmental policy and
procedures before making arrangements for a challenge exam. The department
considers granting such credit for Math 210G to be inappropriate.

###  2.3.6  GRADING

Most grades that are given to students at New Mexico State University are
standard. They are described in detail in the Undergraduate and Graduate
Catalogs. One nonstandard grade is RR (re-register); it is given to students
that meet certain criteria in unit mastery courses. These students must
register for the course again in the subsequent semester, then complete the
course to earn credit and a grade.

Any course in which an F was earned can be repeated to gain credit. When a
student repeats a lower division course in which a D or F grade has been
received, the student's GPA is calculated with the second grade replacing the
original grade. However, the original grade remains on the transcript, and all
grades for the course except the original one are permanent components of the
GPA calculation. Details are in the Undergraduate Catalog.

Under certain conditions, a student may elect to be graded on an S/U basis.
This will be indicated on the class list you receive from the registrar. For
courses in our department, S must be a minimum of C- or better. For details
about the S/U option, you should consult the Undergraduate and Graduate
Catalogs, since the regulations differ.

The grade of I (incomplete) is given for passable work that could not be
completed due to circumstances beyond the student's control. The I grade may
not substitute for a grade of D,  F,  U, or RR. The circumstances must have
developed after the last day to withdraw from the course. Some appropriate
circumstances are documented illness and documented death or crisis in the
student's immediate family. Job-related circumstances are generally NOT
appropriate grounds for assigning an I grade. An instructor who recommends an
I grade must fill out a special form justifying the I and specifying the
procedure the student must follow to remove the I. This form is available in
the department office and must be signed by the student, unless circumstances
do not permit this. With appropriate documentation attached, it is forwarded
to the Dean of Arts & Sciences for approval; in the absence of suitable
justification it will be disapproved and the I grade will not be processed.
Removal of an I may be accomplished by having the student either: (a) re-
enroll in the course or (b) complete the work in a manner acceptable to the
instructor.

Mid-semester grades are not mailed to students; those students earning D or F
grades at mid-semester must be so informed. This information should be posted
outside your office before the deadline for withdrawal (fall semester  October
17; spring semester  March 6). The posting must not reveal confidential
information. Many instructors assign a tentative grade to all students at
midterm.

In sections as small as ours, one cannot expect to see any particular pattern
in the distribution of grades in a single section. If you expect to have a
very large number of low grades, it is wise to discuss your class grades with
the Department Head or the course coordinator. The teacher of the course has
the responsibility of determining grades, but it is best to have departmental
backing in case there are a lot of low grades. Students who are not adequately
prepared for your course should be advised early in the semester to drop back
into a lower level course that will be more appropriate for them. In general,
follow up on any potential trouble early. You can discuss your problems with
the course coordinator, David Finston, Dick Bagby, or Kitty Berver.

Posting grades: The grades earned by individual students are private matters,
and you may not post grades in a way violating that right to privacy. It is
currently acceptable to list grades using the last four digits of the
students' Social Security numbers, but you need your students' permission to
reveal the entire numbers. If you do wish to use the entire number, notify the
students in writing, and include a statement such as the following: Students
who do not wish to be identified by Social Security Number for posting grades
must inform me of their wishes so that an alternative can be agreed upon.

###  2.3.7  STUDENT EVALUATIONS OF TEACHING

Graduate assistants are required to provide for student evaluations of their
teaching, and faculty members are encouraged to do so. Copies of the
departmental student evaluation form are available in the department office.
Someone other than the instructor should distribute these forms late in the
term and return them directly to the department office. This person and the
instructor should make it clear that evaluation results are kept secret from
the instructor until grades have been reported. Since some student couriers
have been seen reading the forms, please choose your collector carefully.

The University General Education Committee now requires a separate student
evaluation of such content in all G" courses. Approved copies of this form
will be available in the office.

###  2.3.8  GRADE RECORDS

Your grade records are an important source of information. Please retain these
records intact for at least two years. Please turn in recent records to the
department office for filing if and when you leave New Mexico State
University.

As noted above, you may leave final exams (etc.) with the receptionist. If you
are not going to be available just after the close of a session, please leave
a copy of your grade book with Dick Bagby, along with a clear description of
your rules for determining letter grades. No one will change a grade without
due process, and that starts with seeking the instructor's approval, but
having this information readily available will often allow us to satisfy
student doubts; some students need a quick answer to questions in order to
register properly.

##  2.4  MATHEMATICS LEARNING CENTER

Some of the teaching staff will have duties in the Mathematics Learning Center
(MLC). These duties could include but are not limited to grading quizzes,
tutoring students, checking out quizzes, answering questions about the
program, and teaching sections. Of course, there are always the other duties
as assigned to provide variety.

The major activity of the MLC is the support of instruction in the pre-
calculus courses: MATH 115 (intermediate algebra), MATH 180 (trigonometry),
and MATH 185 (college algebra). Students may be enrolled in either lecture or
mastery sections. Either type of section meets in regularly scheduled classes
with tutors assigned to help with paperwork and tutoring. Both types of
sections test outside of class time in the Testing Center, WH 102. Tutoring is
available in all three courses in the Tutoring Center, WH 101. A supervisor
oversees the Testing and Tutoring Centers at all times.

The administration of the instructional program of the MLC is primarily the
responsibility of Kitty Berver (Associate Department Head). If you are
teaching an MLC course, you will be assigned an experienced coworker as a
teaching partner. The teaching partner will be your mentor and will answer any
questions you have about teaching within the MLC. You may also ask any
experienced supervisor for help.

One unique feature of concern to the instructional staff that teaches mastery
sections or tutors in the Tutoring Center: you cannot plan to stay one day (or
week) ahead of the students. Students may be working at any point in the three
MLC courses and the questions they ask may involve any part of the subject
matter. The considerate help of the instructional staff is of vital importance
since students do a great deal of the learning through self-study.

Besides doing all testing and grading for the MLC courses, the Testing Center
administers a variety of examinations for courses outside the MLC. These
include an arithmetic skills exam (ASE) required for MATH 111 students, the
mathematics placement exam (MPE), and other diagnostic exams. Many instructors
of other courses use the Testing Center to give whole-class exams outside of
the regular class period or to give make-up exams for individual students.

##  2.5  TUTORING SERVICES

The department regularly provides a tutoring service in the Student Lounge, WH
99, located between the north and east entrances on the ground floor of Walden
Hall. Graduate assistants who are teaching class sections provide tutoring by
holding some of their office hours in WH 99. A schedule for this service is
posted early each semester and tutoring begins the second week of classes. The
finals week schedule of tutoring is available one week before finals. You
should announce this service and explain that is meant to supplement your help
as instructor of the class, not to replace it.

Generally speaking, WH 99 tutors provide help in math and statistics courses
numbered below 300. Students enrolled in MATH 111, MATH 112G, MATH 142G, and
MATH 210G may also receive tutoring in the Tutoring Center, WH 102, along with
those enrolled in MATH 115, MATH 180, and MATH 185. All tutors are instructed
to send students with questions on projects, themes, or weekly assignments to
their instructors.

#  Chapter 3  
FACILITIES AND SERVICES

##  3.1  FACILITIES

###  3.1.1  OFFICES

A private or shared office has been assigned to each faculty member, visiting
scholar, and graduate assistant. Office space may be available for other
mathematics graduate students upon request. The offices are for the use of the
occupants for study, meeting with students, and research. Before and after
each semester, offices in the basement of Walden Hall are inspected in
preparation for the incoming new graduate students.

There is no restriction on the hanging of pictures, etc. We do ask you to use
discretion and judgment; for example, a thumbtack in the wall is better than
tape. You can use the small cork strip over the chalkboard for posting
temporary items. Don't make major changes, such as new paint, without clearing
them through the department head.

Your office should be maintained so that it is presentable to students
visiting your office. It also needs to be accessible to the janitors for
cleaning, and for that reason throw rugs are not allowed. NMSU regulations
prohibit bicycles inside buildings, to assist janitorial services as well as
for safety reasons; bicycles in hallways violate the fire safety codes and may
block access by the handicapped. In some offices, previous occupants have left
old home furniture; if you do not want or need this furniture, please inform
Maria Sanchez and she will arrange to dispose of it.

If your office needs additional chairs, filing cabinets, bookcases, etc.,
report these needs to Maria Sanchez. There can also be a reasonable amount of
trading of office furniture as long as it is mutually agreeable. Please inform
Maria before making such changes.

###  3.1.2  KEYS

Keys may be obtained from and should be returned to Maria Sanchez. You will
receive four keys one to your office, one (the Walden Hall building key) that
opens Walden Hall and common areas inside Walden Hall, one that opens Science
Hall building doors, one that opens classrooms, and Reading Room in Science
Hall, and one that opens the mailroom, faculty lounge, seminar rooms, and
computer terminal rooms in Science Hall. Graduate students will be asked for a
$10 deposit for the New Science Hall keys.

###  3.1.3  MATHEMATICS READING ROOM

The Mathematics Reading Room is located in SH226. The doors should remain
locked at all times. This room, shared with Computer Science and Psychology,
contains approximately 2000 graduate level or advanced books, the current five
years (bound) of a selected list of approximately 15 journals, the current and
recent issues of approximately 30 journals, a complete set of Mathematical
Reviews dating from 1939, bound copies of NMSU mathematics doctoral
dissertations, and other miscellaneous mathematical information, such as grant
sources and newsletters.

Please do not shelve the books; leave them on the tables and a staff person
will shelve them.

Journals normally do not circulate except for photocopying. Mathematical
Reviews, unbound journals, and dissertations do not circulate. Please fill out
a card for any journal leaving the Reading Room and file it in the out box
under the journal name. Please keep a book only as long as you are actively
using it, and return it before the end of each semester. All books and
journals must be returned before you leave town for any extended period of
time.

All books or journals leaving the Reading Room must be checked out:

  1. Fill out the card with DATE (day, month, and year), NAME (please print), and how you can be reached. If there is no card, YOU are responsible for making one out. Please include CALL NUMBER, AUTHOR, TITLE. 

  2. Please file the card under the author's name for books and under the journal title for journals. 

For check-in cross off your name from the check-out card, replace the card in
the back of the book, but do not re-shelve.

Please note that the copies of journals in the Reading Room are the
University's only copies. If journal issues become missing or lost, the
University will no longer be able to allow us to keep journals in the Reading
Room.

The Reading Room is not to be used to administer tests or for other casual
purposes it is a research library.

David Pengelley will oversee the Reading Room. He accepts donations of books,
journals, etc., for the departmental collection.

###  3.1.4  MATHEMATICS EDUCATION LAB

The Mathematics Education Laboratory is located in Walden Hall 218; the door
should be locked at all times but can be opened with a Walden Hall building
key. An inventory of materials that should be there can be obtained from Sue
Schibel.

Please check out any books or equipment that you take from this room using the
check-out form provided therein and adhering to the following guidelines.

  * Only faculty members, graduate assistants, and staff may check out materials. 

  * Material issued to students must be checked out to the responsible instructor. 

  * Materials other than books may be checked out only for specific class times and must be returned to the lab at the end of the class. 

  * Materials checked out overnight or for week-ends should be returned early the next morning. 

  * Books may be checked-out for three days at a time. Write your name and the date on the card inside the back cover of the book and place the card in the file box. When you return the book, replace the card in the back cover pocket. 

  * Please return items to their original location if at all possible. 

  * We will be happy to accept materials that you care to donate; please leave them on the desk with a note labeling them as donations. 

###  3.1.5  CONFERENCE ROOM SH 234

SH234 is the Department Open Conference Room. It is a convenient gathering
place for faculty and graduate students, colloquium speakers and other
departmental guests, and more-or-less weekly departmental coffee and cookie
get-togethers. It is a place for informal discussions of mathematics,
teaching, research, and service. No seminars are scheduled in this room.

Coffee is available in the kitchen area, supported by members of a cooperative
managed by Maria. Members pay a flat fee of $3.00 per month. In an emergency,
nonmembers can reimburse Maria at the rate of $.25 per cup. Department members
are expected to provide their own coffee mugs; styrofoam cups are available
for the use of department guests. The continued existence of the coffee
cooperative depends on the self-identification of coffee drinkers as members
and on the prompt payment of monthly bills. Users of the kitchen area and the
coffee machine are responsible for keeping the counter clean and the kitchen
area generally presentable. As a courtesy to other users, you should make a
fresh pot if the one you use is almost empty.

###  3.1.6  CONFERENCE AND SEMINAR ROOMS

The Conference Room (SH235) is primarily for formal seminars and meetings
scheduled by faculty and graduate students. Graduate oral examinations are
scheduled there, and seminars, meetings, or informal users of the Conference
Room may be relocated in the event of a conflict. Classes are generally not
scheduled in SH235.

The rooms SH248, SH250, and SH252 are often available for seminars, meetings,
or small classes. Check with Elizabeth Eres to schedule these or other
classrooms.

##  3.2  SERVICES

###  3.2.1  COMPUTER SERVICES

The department maintains a variety of computer services available for faculty,
staff, graduate students and undergraduates. Offices, classrooms and labs in
both Science Hall and Walden Hall are connected to the university network. All
faculty offices have either a PC or a UNIX workstation installed on the
network.

 Two types of services are provided, UNIX and Microsoft Windows. The
department has a Sun Ultra 5 server (emmy) running Solaris, version 7.6, which
acts as a department file and e-mail server. This server supports about 20
workstations and provides access to TeX, MAPLE, MATLAB and a variety of
programming languages, such as C, C++, and FORTRAN. Typing the command
programs at the UNIX prompt lists most of our available local programs. The
department maintains two Windows 2000 domains with servers and backup servers
on each domain. One domain (math) serves all faculty, staff, and graduate
students. The other (mathlab) serves undergraduate students and the computer
labs located in SH118 and WH27. These servers support approximately 120 PCs
with Scientific WorkPlace, Maple, access to the Internet, mail, news, word
processing, spread sheets, database programs, programming languages and other
programs of general interest. The graduate student labs in rooms SH221 and
SH222 have X-terminals, Sun workstation/terminals and PCs installed on the
network and are available for general use.

 Security procedures for the safeguarding of computer equipment and software
include: computer access being obtained only by login names and passwords;
passwords not being shared; computers being logged off when left for a length
of time; computer equipment being properly tagged; security fiber optic cables
in the labs with a silent alarm to the police station; and, data being backed
up on a regular basis and stored in a safe place.

 For security reasons, the Solaris system blocks most requests from outside
NMSU unless the outside domain has specifically been allowed to come in.
Because of this restriction, faculty or staff members who desire to telnet or
ftp to emmy when away from campus must notify COG of their destinations and
the networks from which they will be connecting to permit them access to our
equipment. Otherwise, the server will deny access to them. Mail can be
accessed from anywhere as long as a POP3 mail reader is used, such as
Netscape, PC Eudora, or Microsoft Outlook. E-mail can also be accessed at:
http://webmail.nmsu.edu. Change the server to emmy and use your emmy password.

 To secure a computer account in order to access general-purpose machines, see
Faith Ybarra or Maria Sanchez for an application form. Once the account is
approved and created, you will be notified with a written sheet containing
your login name and password. Generally speaking, if you have been issued keys
and have a computer account, you may use any or all of the department
computing facilities. Problems with software or equipment should be carefully
recorded when they occur  details of the errant behavior can provide valuable
clues for diagnosis. Direct any technical questions and report problems to
John Pierce, mathcog@nmsu.edu. Questions on usage policy should be directed to
the Computer Advisors, Doug Kurtz and Ross Staffeldt.

 Notebook computers are available for faculty and staff. Intended for short-
term teaching needs, these computers will not be checked out for long-term
use. In addition, two cart machines, each with a computer and a projector, are
available for faculty and staff use. The cart machines will remain in Science
Hall or Walden Hall at all times; they will not be scheduled for use in any
other building. A fixed overhead projector, which can be connected to any of
this equipment, is available in SH110, and another overhead projector is
available in SH 118. Please schedule the use of any of this equipment with Liz
Eres.

Schedule the cart machines at least one working day before the machine is
needed. Please advise her of any special needs, such as additional software or
networking when you schedule the equipment. Such special requests may require
extra time to accommodate, so these requests must be made several days before
they are needed. The equipment will be set up in the classroom immediately
before the scheduled time and removed when the scheduled time elapses by COG
personnel, unless other arrangements are made.

 A student lab containing approximately 25 PCs and two printers is housed in
New Science Hall 118. These computers are equipped with Scientific Notebook,
Scientific WorkPlace with Maple, Maple, MS Word, MS Excel, and MS Access. The
lab has some unique software available to instructors using the lab for
teaching purposes. This software allows an instructor to place files in a
common class directory, accessible to all their students, and allowing the
instructor access to each student's directory for homework, etc. To use this
software, an instructor must provide COG with a class list of their students.
Computer accounts for these students will be created and placed in folders so
the instructor and students form a closed session. The computer accounts also
allow the students full access to all the software on the lab machines.

###  3.2.2  GRAPHING CALCULATORS

The department owns a variety of graphing calculators including the TI-80,
TI-81, TI-82, TI-85, TI-86, TI-89, TI-92, Casio 7700, Casio 9700, Casio 9800,
HP 48, and HP 38G. Faculty and graduate assistants may check out one
calculator for use during the semester. See Alyne Fulte in the MLC to check
out a calculator. Overhead models of the TI-81, TI-82, TI-85, TI-86, and three
overhead projectors are available for check out from the Mathematics Education
Lab (WH 218). A TI Calculator-Based Laboratory System (CBL), a portable data
collection device with sensors for measuring temperature, light, and voltage
that interfaces to a TI-82 or TI-85, is also available for check out from the
Mathematics Education Lab.

A classroom set of 20 TI-82 calculators is available for checkout from the
Mathematics Learning Center. See the MLC Supervisor if you would like to
schedule use of these calculators.

The department also makes 120 TI-83 calculators available for students to
lease each semester. If you plan to require a graphing calculator in your
class

