[movie
](http://palejandro.web.wesleyan.edu/wescourses/2000f/danc377/01/draft/test2.mov)

**Dance 377: Perspectives in Dance as Culture** **  
**

**

Wesleyan University

|

|

Pedro Alejandro, 107 CFA  
  
---|---|---  
  
Dance Department

|

|

x3026, Office hours: T,Th 1-2.30  
  
**

**Description  
** This course proceeds from two basic assumptions: everyone moves and
observes movement and dancing informally as part of everyday life; and 2), to
the extent that everyone participates in contemporary society, everyone,
whether consciously or unconsciously, contributes to the production of culture
through movement.

We will begin by discussing the basic issues involved in understanding the
link between movement and culture. We will rely on theories of movement
behavior, the Dance Studies literature, and films and videos to establish
cultural and historical context, define categories of dance, and sort
different aesthetic problems. Using this background, we will examine several
different dance forms and traditions as case studies and the writing about
them as examples of various theoretical and topical orientations.

Class participation will play an important part in this course. In addition to
completing the reading assignments, you will create a performance piece (no
longer than 10 minutes), and write a final research essay about the work.
There will also be a written commentary on a live performance, a midterm exam
and a book review.

The syllabus is subject to change as the class unfolds, we see how much we can
actually cover, and we see what particular topics of interests emerge from
class discussions.



**Books  
** The required books are available at Atticus Bookstore, other books can be
special ordered at your own discretion:

Time and The Dancing Image, Deborah Jowitt (Required)

Writing Dancing in the Age of Postmodernism, Sally Banes (Required)

Researching Dance, S. Fraleigh and P. Hanstein (Recommended)

Society and the Dance, Paul Spencer (Recommended)

*Also, a reading packet is required, and can be purchased at Copies, Plaza Middlesex, 400 College Avenue. Tel. 344-9339.



**Requirements**  
A written commentary on The Richard Bull Dance Theater performance. (September
26)

A midterm exam

A final (annotated) essay (10 pp.)

A performance piece (approximately 10 minutes)

Active participation in class discussions and activities.

A book review, selected from class list ( 5 pp.)

Brief ungraded assignments will be given and used to clarify discussions.

Attendance at an additional dance department concert chosen from performance
list



**Grading**  

Performance commentary

|  (3 pp.) |

15%  
  
---|---|---  
  
Midterm Exam

|  - |

25%  
  
Final Essay and Peformance Project

|  (10pp.) |

25% (averaged grade)  
  
Class participation

|  - |

20%  
  
Book Review

|  (5pp.) |

15%  
  
  
Note: more than two absences will affect your grade. More than three absences
constitutes failure.



**Topics**  
I. Looking at Movement as Culture:

**Week 1  
Thursday, August 31**  
Overview of basic issues of the course.

**Week 2  
Tuesday, September 5**  
What is Dance? Anthropological Perspectives and Problems of definition.

Film: "Pizza Pizza Daddy -O"  
Read: Royce, Anya P. Ch. 1, "The Dance." The Anthropology of Dance, 1977.  
Kealiinohomoku, Joann. "An Anthropologist looks at Ballet as a Form of Ethnic
Dance" What is Dance?, Copeland and Cohen eds., 1983.  
Merriam, Alan. "Anthropology and the Dance" CORD Research Annual VI: 9-27.  
Miner, Horace. "Body Ritual Among the Nacirema" The American Anthropologist 58
(1956), pp. 503-7.

**Thursday, September 7  
** Film:"Bitter Melons"  
Read: Geertz, Clifford. "Art as a Cultural System" Local Knowledge. pp. 94-
120.  
Novack, Cynthia. "Anthropological Analysis" Sharing the Dance, 1990.
Recommended: (On reserve, Olin)  
Blacking, John. "Movement and Meaning: Dance in Social Anthropological
Perspective" Dance Research Journal.  
Royce, Anya P. Ch. 2, "The Anthropological Perspective" The Anthropology of
Dance, 1977.

 II. The Meanings of Movement-- Cultural Styles, and Gendered Movement

**Week 3  
Tuesday, September 12  
** Link Between Culture and Style: Choreometrics.

Film: Dance and Human History: Step Style  
Read: Youngerman, Suzanne. "Curt Sachs and His Heritagei in CORD NEWS VI (2),
pp. 6-19.  
Bartenieff, I., Paulay, F., and Lomax, Alan. "Cross-Cultural Study of Dance:
Description and Implication"

**Thursday, September 14  
** Transmission of Movement Style and Cultural Space

Film: "Bathing Babies in Three Cultures"  
Film: "Invisible Walls"  
Read: Hall, Edward. The Hidden Dimension. pp. 91-164.  
Birdwhistle, Ray. "Masculinity and Femininity" in Kinesics and Context, pp.
39- 46.  
(In preparation for Richard Bull Dance Theater, Read: Sally Banes, iCriticism
as Ethnography" #3.)

**Week 4  
Tuesday, September 29  
** Cultural Performance and Movement Analysis

Film: Trobriand Cricket  
Read: Ness, Sally Ann. "Understanding the Cultural Performance: Trobriand
Cricket"

 III. Power and Ideology in Dance as Art and Ritual

Thursday, October 1

Power Through Spectacle

Film: Baroque Dance 1675-1725

Dancing/ Dance at Court

Read: Bryson, Norman,"Cultural Studies and Dance Historyi

Foster, Susan,"Dancing Bodiesi

Week 5

Tuesday, October 6

Power Through Ritual

Film: Trance and Dance in Bali,

Dances of Bali, Legong Kraton.

Read: Bourguignon, Erika,iTrance Dance" Dance Perspectives #35.

Novack, Cynthia. "Rituali The International Encyclopedia of Dance. 1993.

Bateson, Gregory & Holt, Claire. "Form and Function of the Dance in Bali" The
Function of Dance in Human Society. 1972



Thursday, October 8

Gendered Body and Cultural Context--"The Male Gazei

Film: Ways of Seeing, part 2

Read: Daly, Ann. "Unlimited Partnership: Dance and Feminist Analysisi

Goffman, Erving. "Gender Advertisements"



Week 6

Tuesday, October 13 Midterm Exam



Thursday, October 15



IV. Western Theatrical Dance-- Idealized Hierarchies

Week 7

Tuesday, October 20

Romanticism

Film: La Sylphide

Read: Jowitt, Preface: Ch. 1, pp 29-65.

Banes, Sally. "Power and the Dancing Body" #5.



Thursday, October 22

Classicism and Neo-Classicism

Film: TBA

Read: Jowitt, Ch. 6, pp 237-252, and 253-274.

Sally Banes,"Balanchine and Black Dance" #6.



Week 8

Tuesday, October 27

Ballet Russe: Authoring the Transgressive Male Body

Film: In Tribute to Nijinsky

Read: Jowitt, Ch. 3, pp. 105-123.

Moon, Michael,"Flaming Closetsi

Hanna, Judith Lynne,"Patterns of Dominance: Men, Women and Homosexuality in
Dancei



V. Subjectivity as Ritual-- American Women Writing the Body

Thursday, October 29

Modern Dance Body as a Utopia

Film: Isadora Duncan: Movement From The Soul

Read: Jowitt, Ch. 2

Dempster, Elizabeth,"Women Writing the Body: Letis Watch a Little How She
Dances"



Week 9

Tuesday, November 3

Modern Dance as Institution-- Transformation and Transgression

Film: Denishawn: The Contributions of American Dance

Read: Jowitt, pp. 125-147



Thursday, November 5

Constructed Selves--

Film: Night Journey/ Martha Graham

Read: Jowitt 151-177.

Wolff, Janet."Reinstating Corporeality: Feminism and Body Politicsi

(Optional: Jowitt, Ch. 5)



VI. Postmodern selves, and Forms-- Choreographing Difference

The films and readings for this section of the will depend largely on the
make-up of the class and the interest of students. To be announce after the
first day of class.



Week 10

Tuesday, November 10

Deconstructive Performance-- The Formal Politics of Postmodernism

Neo-Formalism

Film: Trio A, Yvonne Rainer.

Merce Cunningham (TBA)

Procession, Anna Halprin

Beyond The Mainstream,

Read: Susan Sontag"Against Interpretation"

Banes, Sally. "Yvonne Rainer: The Aesthetics of Deniali

Jowitt, Ch 7. "Illusion of Choice--Aceptance of Chancei, pp 275-302.

Jowitt, Ch 8."Everyday Bodiesi



Thursday, November 12

Reconstructive Performance-- Ideologies of Identity

Neo-expressionism

Film:"Retracing Steps, American Dance Since Postmodernismi

Read: "The Reenchantment of Art: Reflections on the Two Posmodernisms" Suzi
Gablik



Week 11

Tuesday, November 17

Japanese Neo-Expressionism

Film:"Butoh, Body on the Edge of Crisisi

Read:"Butoh, Twenty Years Ago We Were Crazy, Dirty, and Madi (TDR Vol. 30)



Thursday, November 19

The Postmodern Body in Search of Intimacy/ The Sexual and Racial Politics of
Latin Forms

Film: Dancing: Sex and Social Dancing

Contact Improvisation, Tape IV

Other Possibilities include:

Eddie Torres, The Making of a Latin Dance Company, and Salsa!

Read:"Sense, Meaning and Perception in Three Dance Cultures"

Cynthia Jean Cohen Bull

iLooking at Movement as Culture" Cynthia Novack

iSamba: The Body Articulate" Barbara Browning



Week 12

Tuesday, November 24-- You must give day, time and place of your Final project
by today.

African Diaspora, and African-American Strategies of Representation

Film: Chuck Davis, Dancing Through West Africa

Dance: Echoes of Jazz

Read: Amouku,"Africa and African American Music Traditionsi

Engelbrecht,"Swingin at the Savoy" (Dance Research Journal 15/2)



Thursday, November 26 Thanksgiving Recess





Week 13

Choreographed Difference: Black Postmodernisms

Tuesday, December 1

Film: Uncle Tomis Cabin, Bill T. Jones

Still/Here

Read: "Unrest and Uncle Tom: Bill T. Jones/ Arnie Zane Dance Companyis Last
Supper at Uncle Tomis Cabin/ The Promised Land" Jacqueline Shea Murphy

iThe Body Politic" Henry Louis Gates, Jr.

iMovement and Gender" Boyce, Daly, Jones, and Martin

iDiscussing The Undiscussable" Arlene Croce

iJones: Race a Factor in Croceis New Yorker eVictim Art" Catlin Sims
(optional)

iJews Take Over the Media!" Joan Acocella (optional)

iDacing His Life" Ted Hershey

iWhois the Victimi The New Yorker

iSensibility & Survivali Burt Supree (optional)

iBlack Dance" Lynn Garafola

iVictim Art" Terry Treachout

iClassical Ballet: A Discourse of Difference" Ann Daly



Thursday, December 2

The Queer Narrative

Film: The Hardnut, Mark Morris

The Nutcraker, Bolshoi Ballet

Read: Singer,"He Came to Save the Dance"

Bam Program Notes;

Acocella, Mark Morris,"The Story;i pp. 137-158. (on reserve)

Acocella, Mark Morris,"Irony & Sincerity" pp. 183-204. (on reserve)



Week 14

Presentation of Final Projects-- Students must announce the day, time, and
place of their projects by Nov. 24, before thanksgiving recess.



Tuesday, December 8



Thursday, December 10



[Dance Department](http://www.wesleyan.edu/dance/)

[Wesleyan Home Page](http://www.wesleyan.edu)

















































































