# ![](../USA.GIF)![](../mrbclogo1.gif)

# ENST 377/EEOB 377/DSTP 377

# Spring 2001

[![](../ORCSMissRver%26Bluffs2.JPG)](../ORCSMissRver%26Bluffs2.JPG)
[![](../BalmoralMdA1.JPG)](../BalmoralMdA1.JPG)
[![](../longwood.JPG)](../longwood.JPG)[
](../group.htm)[![](../Field%20trip%203%20images/ENST%202000%20Coles%20Creek%203.JPG)](../Field%20trip%203%20images/ENST%202000%20Coles%20Creek%203.JPG)

## [![](../HOME-OFF.GIF)](../enst_home.htm)

![](../syllabus-on.gif)

## [![](../announce-off.gif)](../announcements.htm)

## [![](../fieldtrips-off.gif)](../field_trips.htm)

[![](../projects-off.gif)](../class_projects.htm)

# [Links](MRBClinks.htm)

### [Home page address:
http://www.tulane.edu/~mrbc/enst_home.htm](http://www.tulane.edu/~mrbc/enst_home.htm)



## [_The Exam Review can be seen by clicking here_](examrevw2001.htm)

## [_The Student Web Projects can be seen by clicking
here_](http://www.tulane.edu/~mrbc/2001/2001projects.htm)

[ ](../../student%20web/2001/2001projects.htm) [Dr. Tristram R.
Kidder](mailto:kidder@tulane.edu) Anthropology Annex (7041 Freret St.)
862-3048 Office Hours: T, Th 11:00-11:50 or by appointment
<http://www.tulane.edu/~kidder>   [Dr. Scott Wall](mailto:swall@tulane.edu)
113 Richardson Memorial Hall 865-5389 Office Hours: T, Th 11:00-11:50 or by
appointment   [Click here to see photographs of the
instructors](instructors.htm)   **Class Meeting Time:** Tuesday and Thursday
2-3:15 & Tuesday 3:30-6:00 PM ("Lab") **_Location:_** Gibson Hall Room 126

This course is an interdisciplinary colloquium dealing with the Mississippi
River Basin. It is intended for an undergraduate audience. The goal of the
course is to give students a broad overview of the important social and
environmental issues surrounding the Mississippi River. We seek to encourage
an understanding and appreciation of the river from a holistic perspective.
The emphasis in the course is on experiential learning &emdash; "out-of
classroom" field trips, where students have the opportunity to see, firsthand,
important issues related to the Mississippi River, its environment, culture,
and the historic changes wrought upon the River, and their effects. To this
end, nine (9) [field trips](../field_trips.htm) are planned over the course of
the semester, and students receive an extra credit hour of "field work"
("Lab") for participating in them. The class will meet twice weekly (Tuesday
and Thursday afternoons) for an hour and 15 minutes. Tuesdays are generally
reserved for in-class lectures; Thursdays are reserved for local field trips
or lectures and class discussion. Transportation will be provided for all
local field trips. Field investigations to more distant locations are
scheduled for three weekends during the semester. One trip will be to west-
central Mississippi and northeast Louisiana, one will be to the mouth of the
Mississippi River, and one to the Gulf of Mexico. Transportation will be
provided on all of these trips, but students may bear the costs of meals and
special (very inexpensive) lodging arrangements. Since lecture time is
limited, students will be given reviews and other key readings on topics to be
covered. Lectures will emphasize the main points of each topic so that
students will have something to draw from on field trips. Drives to and from
field trip destinations will give us ample time to discuss the issues involved
in greater detail.

The course is organized into three sections: the first deals with the natural
environmental setting and summarizes geology, hydrology, and biology of the
Lower Mississippi River. We will visit the French Quarter, and Jean Lafitte
National Park during this phase. The second section of the course deals with
the influence of the River on human cultural development. This section
proceeds through the different phases of historic development in the
Mississippi Valley, investigating the reciprocal relationship between river
and culture. Trips to prehistoric archaeological sites, antebellum homes,
Civil War battlefields, river flood control facilities, and industrial
complexes along the river are planned. The final section of the course deals
with the impact of humans on the Mississippi River. During this time we will
explore many of the ways humans have modified the Mississippi River and the
environmental consequences of these modifications. Trips to the Louisiana
Universities Marine Consortium (LUMCON), the industrial corridor, chemical
plants, the Industrial Canal Navigation Lock Complex and other Corps of
Engineers' facilities are planned for this section.

**Readings** : There are only two assigned "texts" for this course. One is
John Barry's _Rising Tide_ , and the other is Mark Twain's _Life on the
Mississippi_. Both books will be available in the bookstore. To supplement
lectures we will assign specific articles or book chapters. These readings are
listed below in the syllabus and are listed in full in the
[bibliography](../enst377biblio.htm). To facilitate easy distribution of
assigned readings they will be placed on reserve in both Howard-Tilton
Memorial Library and the Architecture Library. Students are expected to
complete the readings prior to coming to the class for which they are
assigned. We have also compiled a series of web links for students to read or
explore. These links are generally informational, but many contain useful
articles or are good sources for better understanding the river and how it may
be studied. Please take time to look through these links before coming to
class or before we embark on a field trip.

**Grading** : Final course grades are based on the evaluation of four
performance categories: attendance, a regular journal, a group research
assignment, and a final exam.

  * **Attendance** : 20% of final course grade. Students are expected to attend class regularly and to participate in all field trips.
  * [**Journal**](../enst_377_journal.htm): 20% of final course grade. Students will be expected to keep comprehensive journals, including photos, sketches, and notes during the course of the semester's field work. Student journals will be reviewed once a month for completion (not for content) and returned the next class. Tips on how to keep a good journal can be found [Here](../enst_377_journal.htm). The final completed version of your Journal must be turned in at the final exam (Thursday, May 4, 1:00-5:00)
  * [**Research Project**](../research_projects.htm): 35% of course grade. Students will work in small groups to create web pages that will inform visitors about the river and its many aspects. The small group project will be linked to the course web page. Final projects will be completed in stages, with deadlines for each stage. The final product will be in the form of an HTML Web page suitable for linking to the class web page. Each group (and each member of the group) will make a short oral presentation to the class. This presentation will summarize the group project, its data, and conclusions. Further discussion of the research project and a list of research themes can be found [Here](../research_projects.htm).
  * **Final Exam** : 25% of course grade. A comprehensive final exam will be given during the scheduled exam period ( **Friday, May 11** ).

The course satisfies elective requirements in Ecological and Evolutionary
Biology (EEOB), the Environmental Studies Program (ENST), and Architecture
(DSTP). Students wishing to have this course satisfy requirements in other
departments should consult advisors in those departments.



### Date

|

### Topic

|

### Lecturer

|

### [Reading](../enst377biblio.htm)

|

### Assignments/Deadlines

|

### Web sites  
  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
Tues. Jan. 11

|

Introduction

|

Kidder/Wall

|

|

|  
  
Tues. Jan. 16

|

Geological Setting

|

M. Allison

|

Saucier 1994: Chs. 2, 3, & 8 & 1996

|

|

[Whole Lot of Shaking](http://quake.wr.usgs.gov/QUAKES/FactSheets/NewMadrid/)  
  
Thurs. Jan. 18

|  Field Trip: French Quarter |

E. Cizek

|

Kolb & Van Lopik 1966; Coleman 1988

|

Selection of Research Topic/Group Assignment

|  
  
Tues. Jan. 23

|

Biogeochemistry

|

B. McKee

|

|

|

[Digital Hydrology Watershed
lab](http://www.ncsa.uiuc.edu/Cyberia/RiverWeb/Projects/DWHL/Understand/storm.html)  
  
Thurs. Jan. 25

|

Hydrology/Sedimentary Geology

|

B. Coakley

|

Twain, _Life on the River_

|

|  
  
Tues. Jan. 30

|

River Continuum

|

H. Bart

|

Baker, Kilgore & Kasul 1991; Vannote et al. 1980; Ward & Stanford 1983

|

Journals Due

|  
  
Thurs. Feb. 1

|

Colonial Times

|

B. Meneray

|

|

Group Summary & Bibliography Due

|

[Sultana](http://sultana.org/);
[Slavery](http://www.cr.nps.gov/delta/slave.htm#cotton); [Civil
War](http://www.cr.nps.gov/delta/cwindex.htm); [Mark
Twain](http://users.telerama.com/~joseph/mtwain.html)  
  
Tues. Feb. 6

|  Field Trip: Jean Laffitte |

Wall/Kidder/Seelaus

|

|

|  
  
Thurs. Feb. 8

|

New Orleans and the River

|

T. Fitzmorris

|

|

|  
  
Fri., Feb. 9-Sun., Feb. 11

|  Poverty Point Field Trip |

Kidder/Bart/Wall

|

J. McPhee, _Control of Nature_ , Ch. ?

|

|

[Poverty Point](http://www.crt.state.la.us/crt/ocd/arch/poverpoi/mapopo.htm);
[Vicksburg](http://www.cr.nps.gov/delta/civwar.htm); [Vicksburg National
Military Park](http://www.nps.gov/vick/home.htm)  
  
Tues. Feb. 13

|  NO CLASS |

|

|

|  
  
Thurs. Feb. 15

|  NO CLASS |

|

|

|  
  
Tues. Feb 20

|

The Corps of Engineers

|

[E. Lyon](http://home.earthlink.net/~edwinlyon/mississi.htm)

|

|

|

[New Orleans District](http://www.mvn.usace.army.mil/); [Vicksburg
District](http://www.mvk.usace.army.mil/); [Waterways Experiment
Station](http://www.wes.army.mil/); [Mississippi River and Tributaries Project
brochure](http://www.mvn.usace.army.mil/pao/bro/misstrib.htm)  
  
Thurs. Feb. 22

|

Environmental Ethics (cancelled)

Research Reports |

M. Zimmerman

|

G. Hardin, _Tragedy of the Commons_ and Other Readings

|

|  
  
Mon-Sun Feb. 25-March 4

|  MARDI GRAS |

|

|

|  
  
Tues. March 6

|  Field Trip: Holy Cross/Industrial Canal Lock |

Yakubick/Wall/Kidder

|

|

Journals Due; Research Project status report

|

["Old Man River" (locks and Dams on the Upper
Mississippi)](http://www.mvp.usace.army.mil/history/pamphlets/old_man_river/);
[Animated lock demonstration
(USACE)](http://www.mvp.usace.army.mil/navigation/locks_and_dams/animated_lock/);
[IHNC brochure (PDF format
only)](http://www.mvn.usace.army.mil/pao/bro/IHNC_Bulletin1.pdf); [IHNC lock
replacement project](%20http://www.mvn.usace.army.mil/prj/ihnc/index.htm)  
  
Thurs. March 8

|

River in literature (Cancelled)

|

R. Mark

|

|

|  
  
Tues. March 13

|  Field Trip: Bonne Carre |

Wall/Kidder/Lyon

|

J. Barry, _Rising Tide_

|

|

[Bonne Carre Spillway ](http://www.mvn.usace.army.mil/pao/bcarre/bcarre.htm);
[1993 Flood](http://www.wes.army.mil/EL/flood/fl93home.html); [NOAA River
Forecast Center](http://www.srh.noaa.gov/lmrfc/)  
  
Thurs. March 15

|

Environmental Justice

|

T. Roberts

|

|

|  
  
Tues. March 20

|

Pollution epidemiology

|

P. Andrews/B. Luckett

|

Chen et al. 1998

|

|

[American Cancer Society "Statistics"](cancer_sites.htm)  
  
Thurs. March 22

|

No Class

|

|

|

|  
  
Tues. March 27

|  Field Trip: "Cancer Alley" |

Kidder/Wall

|

|

|

[Magnesium leaching](http://www.execpc.com/~magnesum/leaching.html)  
  
Thurs. March 29

|

New Orleans Topography

|

R. Campanello

|

Smith &Winkley 1996

|

|

[N.O. COE District Water Control
Data](http://www.mvn.usace.army.mil/eng/edhd/watercon.htm)  
  
Tues. April 3

|  Field Trip: Davis Pond |

|

Gosselink & Sasser 1995

|

Journals Due

|

[Barataria National Estuary Project](http://www.btnep.org/default.htm); [Coast
2050](http://coast2050.nwrc.gov/); [Coastal Wetlands Restoration and
Protection Act](http://www.lacoast.gov/); [Davis Pond brochure
(USACE)](http://www.mvn.usace.army.mil/pao/dpond/davispond.htm)  
  
Thurs. April 5

|

Water Quality (cancelled)

Bonne Carre Project Review

|

L. Sternberg

|

|

|  
  
Sat. April 7

|

Field Trip: Head of Passes

|

COE

|

|

|  
  
Tues. April 10

|

Field Trip: Tosco Alliance Refinery

|

Kidder/Wall

|

|

Preliminary draft of Research Project due

|  
  
Thurs. April 12

|

Project Discussion

|

Kidder/Wall

|

|

|

[Brown Marsh Phenomenon](http://www.lacoast.gov/brownMarsh/index.htm)  
  
Tues. April 17

|

The River & Music

|

B. Raeburn

|

|

|

[River of Song](http://www.pbs.org/riverofsong/); [Jazz on the
River](http://www.tulane.edu/~lmiller/raeburn/rivboatintro.htm)  
  
Thurs. April 19

|

No Class

|

|

|

|  
  
Sat. April 21-Sun, April 22

|  Field Trip: LUMCON |

Wall/Kidder

|

Anderson 1994, 1997; Rabelais et al. 1996; Turner & Rabelais 1994

|

|

[Oxygen Depletion in Coastal Waters ](http://state-of-
coast.noaa.gov/bulletins/html/hyp_09/hyp.html);
[LUMCON](http://www.lumcon.edu/)  
  
Tues. April 24

|

Research Presentations

|

Class

|

|

Final draft of Research Project placed on web

|  
  
Thurs. April 26

|

Research Presentations

|

Class

|

|

|  
  
Final Exam: **Friday, May 11, 8:00 AM- 12:00 PM**

    
    
    _Page created: 12/13/99
    Last Updated: 1/10/00_

