**COURSE OUTLINE AND WORK SCHEDULE**

**HISTORY 485 - JUNIOR TUTORIAL IN AMERICAN HISTORY, SECTION 2**

**Summer Term, 2001**

**12:00-1:50 p.m., MWF, 229 KMB**

Dr. Gary Lee Walker

207 KMB, Ext. 7046

Office Hours: Monday, 10-11 a.m.  
  
Required Text: PLEASE PURCHASE IMMEDIATELY!  
  
Bloch, Marc, The Historian's Craft, Vintage, 1953  
  
Carr, Edward Hallett, What Is History?, Vintage, 1961  
  
McMahon, Robert J., Major Problems in the History of the Vietnam War, D.C.
Heath and Company, 1990  
  

Reserve Library Assignment: Under my name in the Reserve Library is Edmund S.
Morgan's SO WHAT ABOUT HISTORY?, written in 1969. It is a short book
originally written for junior high and high school students, but now
considered to be constructive and thought-provoking reading for college
students, particularly history majors. You should have it read by the end of
the first week of school (Juvenile 901 M82s).

Also under my name is a book on the philosophy of history by Stern. Read the
Introduction, pp. 11-34, by the end of the week (D 13 S82).

Books used for class reading and presentation are also in the Reserve Library,
as will be noted below.

Course Content and Objectives: History 485 is designed to give students
experience in historical analysis and interpretation, and includes several
writing assignments. We also discuss some philosophies of history at the
beginning of the semester. To accomplish our studies, we shall examine four
areas which have created conflicting viewpoints and diverse interpretations in
the minds of American historians: the Civil War and Slavery; Reconstruction;
the "Problem" of the American Indian; and the Vietnam War. The perspectives of
political, social, intellectual, economic, and diplomatic history should be
kept in mind when discussing these topics.  
  
PLEASE NOTE: A basic knowledge of American history and how the individual
topics fit into the overall panorama of history is assumed. This means that
the successful completion of the American history surveys is required, along
with History 200 (this class is mandatory!). IF YOU DO NOT MEET THESE MINIMUM
REQUIREMENTS, PLEASE INFORM ME AT THE BEGINNING OF THE FIRST CLASS PERIOD.  
  
Course Requirements: The term will be divided into five sections. We shall
begin with the philosophies of history. You will be given work sheets to
complete outside of class. The material needed to complete these work sheets
will come from your reading of Bloch and Carr. On separate pieces of paper,
type the question and then your response. The completed assignment will be
handed in to the instructor on Monday, July 2. Additional information on the
philosophy of history will be given through lectures.  
  
Every student will read a significant volume on each of the four subject areas
and then present orally the high points and a brief critique of the book in a
20 minutes or less presentation. You should also summarize the salient points
of your presentation on paper and provide a copy for each class member and Dr.
Walker. Significant quotes are very desirable. Do not duplicate all of the
material on your handout in your oral presentation. The more material that is
presented to the class in both the oral presentation AND the handout, the
better prepared everyone will be to write a meaningful position paper. Include
the bibliographic data of your book in the heading of your notes (author,
title, publisher, date of publication). The exact format of these notes is
left to your discretion (OUTLINING THE BOOK IS NOT ACCEPTABLE). The following
should be considered when preparing your oral presentations AND your written
notes for class members:  
  
1\. The thesis should be presented first.

2\. The methodology and types of evidence the historian uses to support his or
her interpretation of subject.

3\. Your critique of the various points of view.

4\. A statement of your own point of view (does NOT have to agree with the
author!)

5\. Your reasons for your point of view. This will include evidence in support
and reasons for disagreeing with the author.

6\. Significant data, including the author's conclusions and important facts.

7\. The opinions and conclusions of two reviewers summarized in a few lines.

You are to be interpretative! Do NOT merely rehash what the book has to say,
unless such statements support your own thesis. The books that are being used
for our class are in the Reserve Library, under my name and with a 48 hour
renewable loan. There are a few second copies in the library, which you are
welcome to check out. If you find your book unavailable for use, please talk
to me immediately.  
  
You have reached a point in your university career when fast, accurate reading
is a necessity and should be cultivated.  
  
Concerning the Vietnam War topic, every student is to scan the McMahon book.
You have until the beginning of the unit to complete the book.  
  
The class will be a success only if you meticulously and methodically prepare
for each assignment and topic. Remember, seminar classes are not lecture
classes. Freedom to express opinions and to ask questions of both the
instructor and other students is both desirable and expected.

History 485 is quite demanding during the Spring and Summer terms. It is wise
not to take too many classes which also demand your time. Getting behind can
be very serious and often is impossible to remedy during Spring and Summer.

Writing Assignment: You will be required to write a "position paper" of eight
pages in length on a topic assigned by the instructor for each of the four
areas discussed during the term (the eight pages does not include a page of
bibliography). The length of the paper dictates that you are to write
concisely, making every word count.  
  
These papers are to represent your best writing efforts. Please use footnotes,
utilizing the Turabian style. Conciseness is essential in your writing. The
papers are to be double-spaced and printed in black ink. No draft print,
please! The margins will be one inch on both sides, and one inch at the top
and bottom. A paper that is not neat, has misspelled words, poor grammer, and
poor sentence and paragraph structure will lose points before serious reading
is even commenced. NO LATE PAPERS WILL BE ACCEPTED, EXCEPT IN CASES OF SERIOUS
ILLNESS OR FAMILY EMERGENCIES. A grading critique sheet will be handed out the
first day of class.  
  
GRADING: Your final grade will be determined by your philosophy of history
responses and four writing assignments, your participation in class, and your
oral presentations. This is a seminar class. Therefore, attendance is very
important and can reflect on your grade! Once individual presentations
commence, I request that students who find themselves ill or otherwise
incapacitated as the day of their report approaches telephone me. In this way
I can make every effort to keep the class running smoothly. Also, others can
be prepared to take your place.  
  
BYU HONOR CODE AND DISCRIMINATION STATEMENTS: While all students sign the
honor code, there are still specific skills most students need to master over
time in order to correctly cite sources, especially in this new age of the
internet; as well as deal with the stress and stain of college life without
resorting to cheating. Please know that as your professor I will notice
instances of cheating on exams or plagiarizing on papers. See
<http://www.byu.edu/honorcode> for specific examples of intentional,
inadvertent plagiarism, and fabrication, falsification.  
  
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 prohibits sex discrimination
against any participant in an educational program or activity that receives
federal funds. The act is intended to eliminate sex discriminations in
education. Title IX covers discrimination in programs, admissions, activities,
and student-to-student sexual harassment. BYU's policy against sexual
harassment extends not only to employees of the university but to students as
well. if you encounter unlawful sexual harassment or gender based
discrimination, please talk to your professor; contact the Equal Employment
Office at 378-5895 or 367-5689 (24-hours); or contact the Honor Code Office at
378-2847.  
  
Brigham Young University is committed to providing a working and learning
atmosphere which reasonably accommodates qualified persons with disabilities.
If you have any disability which may impair your ability to complete this
course successfully, please contact the Services for Students with
Disabilities Office (378-2767). Reasonable academic accommodations are
reviewed for all students who have qualified documented disabilities. Services
are coordinated with the student and instructor by the SSD office. If you need
assistance or if you feel you have been unlawfully discriminated against on
the basis of disability, you may seek resolution through established grievance
policy and procedures. You should contact the Equal Employment Office at
378-5895, D282 ASB.

FINAL EXAMINATION DAY: Your final writing assignment will be due Thursday,
August 16, by noon. Please leave them in the envelope on the bulletin board
adjacent to my office. We will not meet as a class!

HOPEFULLY A NOTE OF ENCOURAGEMENT: This will undoubtedly be the most difficult
class you have this term, and perhaps in your current academic career. It is a
seminar, which places great responsibility on the student to prepare and,
thus, to learn. There is a significant amount of reading which will require
planning on your part. If it becomes drudgery, then you will have problems.
Think positively, and KEEP IT FUN AND INTERESTING! Then you will learn and
have a great experience. With diligent work, and a proper attitude, you will
complete the course with a significantly expanded knowledge of the areas under
discussion, along with the acquisition of some new skills and ideas (AND a
respectable grade!).  
  
**NOW THAT YOU HAVE READ ALL OF THIS MATERIAL, PUT ASIDE YOUR FEARS AND WORK,
LEARN, AND ENJOY! EVERYONE CAN SURVIVE WITH AN EXCELLENT EXPERIENCE (AND
GRADE) IF YOU HAVE THE DESIRE AND RELAX!**  
  
Reading and Assignment Schedule **(DATES ARE APPROXIMATE!)** :  
  
June 25: INTRODUCTION TO CLASS. ASSIGNMENT OF READINGS FOR CLASS DISCUSSIONS.
Pass out Philosophy of History packets, to be completed outside of class. The
completed packets are due on **Monday, July 2.** Read SO WHAT ABOUT HISTORY?
in the Reserve Library, under my name/class (20 minute assignment). Call
number: JU 901 M82s  
  
June 27-29: SO WHAT ABOUT HISTORY?; development of historical writing;
development of historical writing in America.  
  
July 2: Begin Civil War/Slavery book presentations; Problems of Civil War
history. Due date for position papers will be one week after the last report.  
  
**July 4: Fourth of July Holiday**  
  
July 11: Civil War/Slavery book presentations concluded.  
  
July 13: Begin Reconstruction book presentations; Problems of Reconstruction
history.  
  
July 20: Reconstruction book presentations concluded.July 23: Begin "Problem"
of the Native Americans book presentations. Problems of Native American
history.  
  
July 30: Native America book presentations concluded.  
  
August 1: Begin Vietnam unit; Problems of Vietnam history. Begin book
presentations.  
  
August 13: Conclude book presentations. Explanation of final writing
assignment. Last day of class instruction. **YOU ARE ALMOST FINISHED!**  
  
August 14: READING DAY  
  
**A REMINDER** : **We will not meet as a class on the day of the final. Your
final writing exercise is due in my office August 16 by noon**. An envelope
will be hanging on the adjacent bulletin board.  
  

READING BIBLIOGRAPHY

Note: This is also the order of the oral class presentations.  
  
**CIVIL WAR AND SLAVERY:**  
  
1\. Gerald N. Grob and George Athan Billias, INTERPRETATIONS OF AMERICAN
HISTORY, 5th Ed., 1987, "The Civil War: Repressible or Irrepressible," 390;
and "American Slavery: Benign or Malignant," 346.  
E178.6.G68 1978 _(10 minutes)_ 2\. Avery O. Craven, THE COMING OF THE CIVIL
WAR,  
Rev Ed. 1957, E 338 .C92 _(20 minutes)_  
  
3\. William W. Freehling, PRELUDE TO CIVIL WAR, 1965.  
E 384.3 .F7 _(15 minutes)_

4\. Charles P. Roland, THE CONFEDERACY, 1960.  
E 487 .R7 _(10 minutes)_  
  
5\. John McCardall, THE IDEA OF A SOUTHERN NATION, 1979.  
F213.M13 1979 _(15 minutes)_

6\. Emory M. Thomas, THE CONFEDERATE NATION, 1861-1865, 1979.  
E 487 .T483 _(10 minutes)_  
  
7\. Eugene D. Genovese, THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF SLAVERY: STUDIES IN THE
ECONOMY AND SOCIETY OF THE SLAVE SOUTH, 1965.  
E 441 .642 _(15 minutes)_  
  
8\. Stanley Elkins, SLAVERY: A PROBLEM IN AMERICAN INSTITUTIONAL AND
INTELLECTUAL LIFE, 1959. E 443 .E4 _(15 minutes)_  
  
9\. John Blassingame, THE SLAVE COMMUNITY. E 443 .B55 _(15 minutes)_  
  
10\. Peter Kolchin, AMERICAN SLAVERY, 1619-1872. Hill and Wang: New York,
1993. E441 K64 1993 _(20 minutes)_  
  
11\. William S. McFeely, GRANT: A BIOGRAPHY, 1981. First half, pp.1-231.
E672.M15 _(10 m inutes)_  
  
12\. Articles -- one reading assignment: _(20 minutes)_

Charles W. Ramsdell, "The Natural Limits of Slavery Expansion," MISSISSIPPI
VALLEY HISTORICAL REVIEW, 16 (1929): 151-171.

J.G. Randall, "The Blundering Generation," MISSISSIPPI VALLEY HISTORICAL
REVIEW, 44 (1958): 3-28.  
  
Pieter Geyl, "The American Civil War and the Problems of Inevitability," NEW
ENGLAND QUARTERLY 24 (1961): 147-161.  
  
13\. Articles -- one reading assignment: _(20 minutes)_  
  
David Donald, "An Excess of Democracy" in CAUSES OF THE CIVIL WAR, ed Kenneth
Stampp, 95-100. Originally from AN EXCESS OF DEMOCRACY: THE AMERICAN CIVIL WAR
AND THE SOCIAL PROCESS, 1960.  
  
Richard Shryock, "The Nationalistic Tradition of the Civil War: A Southern
Analysis," SOUTH ATLANTIC QUARTERLY (1933): 294-305.  
  
Alexander Stephens, "Constitutional View of the War," in THE WAR BETWEEN THE
STATES, I, 12-47.  
  
14\. James M. McPherson, BATTLE CRY OF FREEDOM, 1988. E 173.094 v.6 _(10
minutes)_

15\. James M. McPherson, WHAT THEY FOUGHT FOR, 1861-1865, Louisiansa State
University Press, 1994. E 459.M24 1994

James M. McPherson, FOR CAUSE AND COMRADES: WHY MEN FOUGHT IN THE CIVIL WAR,
1997\. E492.3 nm.38 1997

_(15 minutes)_

**RECONSTRUCTION:**

1\. Gerald N. Grob and George Athan Billias, INTERPRETATIONS OF AMERICAN
HISTORY, 5th Ed., 1987, "The Reconstruction Era: Constructive or Destructive?"
E178.6.G68 1978 _(10 minutes)_  
  
2\. William Archibald Dunning, RECONSTRUCTION: POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC,
1865-1877, 1907\. _(20 minutes)_ E 178 .A54 v.22  
  
3\. Kenneth M. Stampp, THE ERA OF RECONSTRUCTION, 1865-1877, 1965. E 668 .S79
_(15 minutes)_  
  
4\. Avery Craven, RECONSTRUCTION: THE ENDING OF THE CIVIL WAR, 1969. E 668 .C9
_(15 minutes)_  
  
5\. William R. Brock, AN AMERICAN CRISIS: CONGRESS AND RECONSTRUCTION. E 668
.B85 _(10 minutes)_  
  
6\. John Hope Franklin, RECONSTRUCTION: AFTER THE CIVIL WAR. 973.8 F855r/E
668. F7 _(10 minutes)_  
  
7\. William S. McFeely, GRANT: A BIOGRAPHY, 1981. Second half, pp.232 - end.
E672 nm 15 _(10 minutes)_  
  
8\. Eric McKitrick, ANDREW JOHNSON AND RECONSTRUCTION, 1960. E 668 .M156 _(10
minutes)_  
  
9\. Roger L. Ransom and Richard Sutch, ONE KIND OF FREEDOM, 1977. HC 107 .A13
R28 _(10 minutes)_  
  
10\. Kenneth M. Stampp and Leon F. Litwack, eds., RECONSTRUCTION: AN ANTHOLOGY
OF REVISEMENT WRITINGS, 1969. (Skip McKitrick's article) E 668 .S792 _(15
minutes)_  
  
11\. James L. Roark, MASTERS WITHOUT SLAVES, 1977. E 668 .R64  
  
Leon F. Litwack, BEEN IN THE STORM SO LONG, 1979. E 185.2.L57 _(10 minutes)_  
  
12\. Howard N. Rabinowitz, RACE RELATIONS IN THE URBAN SOUTH, 1865-1890, E
185.2.R23 _(10 minutes)_  
  
13\. John Hope Franklin, ed., REMINISCENCES OF AN ACTIVE LIFE: THE
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF JOHN ROY LYNCH, 1970. F 341 .L97 A3  
  
Richard N. Current, "Carpetbaggers Reconsidered," in RECONSTRUCTION IN THE
SOUTH, Ed. Edwin C. Rozwenc, 88-106. Lexington, Massachusetts; CD Heath and
Co., 1972. (See Dr. Walker) _(10 minutes)_  
  
14\. Mark Wahlgren Summers, THE ERA OF GOOD STEALING, 1993. E 668 .S94 _(10
minutes)_  
  
15\. Allen W. Treleose, WHITE TERROR: THE KU KLUX KLAN CONSPIRACY AND SOUTHERN
RECONSTRUCTION, 1971. E 668 .T7 _(15 minutes)_

**THE "PROBLEM" OF THE AMERICAN INDIAN** :

1\. Calvin Martin, ed., THE AMERICAN INDIAN AND THE PROBLEM OF HISTORY, 1987.
_(10 minutes)  
_ E 76.8 .A47  
  
2\. Alvin M. Josephy, Jr., ed., AMERICA IN 1492: THE WORLD OF THE INDIAN
PEOPLES BEFORE THE ARRIVAL OF COLUMBUS, 1993. _(20 minutes)_ E58.A526 1992  
  
3\. Neal Salisbury, MANITOU AND PROVIDENCE: INDIANS, EUROPEANS, AND THE MAKING
OF NEW ENGLAND, 1500-1643, 1982. _(15 minutes)_ E 78 .N5 S24  
  
4\. Howard Peckham and Charles Gibson, eds., ATTITUDES OF COLONIAL POWERS
TOWARD THE AMERICAN INDIAN, 1969. _(10 minutes)_ E59.G6.A87 1969  
  
5\. Howard H. Peckham, THE COLONIAL WARS, 1689-1762, 1964. 973.2 P337c/E 195
.P4 _(10 minutes)_  
  
6\. Jack M. Sosin, THE REVOLUTIONARY FRONTIER, 1763-1783, 1967, 973.3 So73r
_(10 minutes)_  
  
7\. Francis Pual Prucha, AMERICAN INDIAN POLICY IN THE FORMATIVE YEARS: THE
INDIAN TRADE AND INTERCOURSE ACTS, 1790-1834, 1962. 970.5 P95A _(15 minutes)_  
  
8\. Ronald N. Satz, AMERICAN INDIAN POLICY IN THE JACKSONIAN ERA, 1975.
E93.s27 _(15 minutes)_  
  
9\. Robert M. Utley, FRONTIERSMEN IN BLUE: THE U.S. ARMY AND THE INDIAN,
1848-1865, 1981\. _(15 minutes)_ UA 25.U8 __  
  
10\. Robert M. Utley, FRONTIER REGULARS: THE US ARMY AND THE INDIAN, 1866-
1891, 1973\. _(15 minutes)_ E 83.866.U85 1974  
  
11\. D.S. Otis, THE DAWES ACT AND THE ALLOTMENT OF INDIAN LANDS, 1973. 970.634
ot 4d/KF 5660.085 _(15 minutes)_  

  * Adams, David Wallace, EDUCATION FOR EXTINCTION: AMERICAN INDIANS AND THE BOARDING SCHOOL EXPERIENCE, 1875-1928, 1995. E97.5 A35 1995. _(20 minutes)_

13\. Helen Jackson, A CENTURY OF DISHONOR: A SKETCH OF THE US GOVERNMENTS
DEALINGS WITH SOME OF THE INDIAN TRIBES, 1891. E93.J13 1985 _(10 minutes)_  
  
14\. Stephen Cornell, THE RETURN OF THE NATIVE: AMERICAN INDIAN POLITICAL
RESURGENCE, 1988\. _(20 minutes)_ E 93 .C79  
  
15\. M. Annette Jaimes, ed., THE STATE OF NATIVE AMERICA: GENOCIDE,
COLONIZATION, AND RESISTANCE, 1992. E 93.S77 1992 _(15 minutes)_

**VIETNAM WAR** :

1\. Stanley Karnow, VIETNAM: A HISTORY, 1983. DS 558 .K37 _(20 minutes)_  
  
2\. Guenter Lewy, AMERICA IN VIETNAM, 1978 DS 558 .L48 _(20 minutes)_  
  
3\. Loren Baritz, BACKFIRE, 1985. DS 558 .B37 _(20 minutes)_  
  
4\. Timothy Lomperis, THE WAR EVERYONE LOST - AND WON, 1984. DS 557.7.L65 _(15
minutes)_  
  
5\. Frances Fitzgerald, FIRE IN THE LAKE, 1984. DS 557 .A6 F53 _(20 minutes)_  
  
6\. Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., THE BITTER HERITAGE: VIETNAM AND AMERICAN
DEMOCRACY, 1941-1966, 1967. _(10 minutes)_ E 183.8.V5.53  

  * David Halberstam, THE BEST AND THE BRIGHTEST: TWENTIETH-ANNIVERSARY EDITION, 1992\. _(20 minutes)_ E841.425

8\. Brian Van de Mark, INTO THE QUAGMIRE: LYNDON JOHNSON AND THE ESCALATION OF
THE VIETNAM WAR, 1991. _(15 minutes)_ DS 558.v36, 1991  
  
9\. Townsend Hoopes, THE LIMITS OF INTERVENTION, 1973. DS 557 .A63 H6 _(10
minutes)_  
  
10\. Larry Cable, UNHOLY GRAIL: THE US AND THE WARS IN VIETNAM, 1965-8, 1991.
_(15 minutes)_ DS 558 .C35  
  
11\. Eric M. Bergerud, THE DYNAMICS OF DEFEAT: THE VIETNAM WAR IN HAN NGHIA
PROVINCE, 1991\. _(15 minutes)_ DS 559 .H38 .B47  
  
12\. Arnold Isaacs, WITHOUT HONOR: DEFEAT IN VIETNAM AND CAMBODIA, 1983. DS
557.7 .I82 _(10 minutes)_  
  
13\. Marilyn B. Young, THE VIETNAM WARS, 1945-1990, 1991. DS 557.7 .Y678 _(20
minutes)_  
  
14\. T. Louise Brown, WAR AND AFTERMATH IN VIETNAM, 1991. DS 557.57 .B76 _(15
minutes)_  
  
15\. Robert S. McNamara, IN RETROSPECT: THE TRAGEDY AND LESSONS OF VIETNAM,
1995. _  
(20 minutes)_ DS 558.M44 1995

