**MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS**  
**Biosc1980/Chem1590**  
[Link 1 to web-based
exercises](http://www.pitt.edu/~gilbertw/chem1590_web_folder/nmri.html)  
[Link 2 to web-based
excercises](http://www.pitt.edu/~gilbertw/chem1590_web_folder/NMR2/t9.html)  
                                    **MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS               **

**          ****Biosc1980/Chem1590**      **Course Syllabus** **    ****Spring
2002**  

### Lectures:    T/H 11:00 - 11:50AM        343 Crawford Hall

Instructors:

###          Linda Jen-Jacobson         320 Clapp Hall, 624-4969,
ljen@pitt.edu

         John Rosenberg               312 Clapp Hall, 624-4636, jmr@jmr3.xtal.pitt.edu. 

         Gilbert Walker                 G-12 Chevron, 383-9650, gilbertw@pitt.edu 

                                                                        _http://www.pitt.edu/~gilbertw_ __

         Office hours:                    _by appointment_

Teaching Assistants:  

#####          Arabela Grigorescu          332 Clapp Hall, 624-4639,
grigor@pitt.edu

         Rojana Leecharoen          G-12 Chevron Science Center, 383-9656, rleechar@pitt.edu

         Andrew Petersen             332 Clapp Hall, 624-4638, andrew@jmr2.xtal.pitt.edu

         Paul Sapienza                  320 Clapp Hall, 624-6450,  psapienz@pitt.edu

         Office Hours:                   _by appointment_

######   No.    Date                              Lecture Topic  

Module 1:        Introduction

1       1/8          Course Polices; Introduction to RNase-A  (I)

2       1/10        Introduction to RNase-A  (II)

.

_Module   2:       X-ray Crystallography_

3       1/15        Nature of the crystalline state; theory of crystal growth.

4       1/17        Properties and treatment of macromolecular crystals.

5       1/22        Diffraction theory; measurement of diffraction
intensities.

6       1/24        Electron density and the phase problem.

7       1/29        Theory of crystallographic refinement and validation

_ _

_Module   3:       Magnetic Resonance_

8       1/31        _Short exam (Module 2 material)_

                        Principles of NMR I:  Resonance and precession

9       2/5          Principles of NMR II: Fine structure, relaxation,
magnetization transfer

10     2/7          Principles of NMR III: 2D Methods

11     2/12        Using distances to determine structure:  Conformational
search strategies



Module  4:       Kinetics of RNAse Refolding and  Catalysis

12     2/14        _Short exam (Module 3 material)_

Electronic spectra

13     2/19        Molecules in motion

14     2/21        Protein conformational states: Two state vs. multistate

15     2/26        Folding kinetics

16     2/28        Enzyme kinetics



_Spring Break    (3/3  to 3/10)_

_ _

_Module5:          Thermodynamics of Protein Folding _

17     3/12        _Short exam (Module 4 material)_

                        Physical forces that determine the structure and stability of proteins

18     3/14        Thermodynamics of protein folding:  enthalpies, entropies
and heat capacity

19     3/19        Protein folding:  Thermal melting curves

20     3/21        Protein folding:  van't Hoff analysis  

####  

#### Module 6:        Thermodynamics of  Protein-Ligand  Binding

21       3/26        _Short exam (Module 5 material)_

Structure-functional relationships:  RNase-ligand complexes

22     3/28        Thermodynamics of RNase binding: substrate analogs,
products, inhibitors

23     4/2          Binding and linkage equilibria:  analysis by isothermal
titration calorimetry

_Module 7:        Theory and Simulation_

24     4/4          _Short exam (Module   6 materiall) _

Poisson-Boltzman equation, solvation energies and other continuum methods

25     4/9          Introduction to Modelling: Accessible surfaces, force
fields, topology and energy

                        minimization

26     4/12        Theory of normal modes, collective motions, and
thermodynamic calculations

27     4/16        Theory and practice of the generation of molecular dynamics
trajectories

28     4/18        Trajectory analysis:  Now that you've written the book,
make the movie.

_ _

_ _

_     Short exam (Module 7 material)_ _will be given   on date assigned by
University for Final Exam_

_             XXXXX    343 Crawford  Hall_

** **

**Biosc 1980/Chem 1590**           **COURSE POLICIES                   Spring
2002**

### A.     Course Objective

This course aims to introduce students to the physical chemistry of biological
macromolecules and the methods used to study their structure, interactions,
and function.  Concepts of positional and structural information will be
integrated with those of thermodynamics, statistical mechanics, and kinetics.
We will focus on the enzyme RNAse-A, a paradigm for the study of the physico-
chemical properties and mechanism of function of proteins. __

B.           Course requirements

1) Weekly assignments:  You are expected to attend and participate in all
lectures.  Reading assignments from journals and  books on reserve will be
given.  Mastery of the lecture and reading material will be an essential step
towards success in the examinations.

Because the concepts and methods of Molecular Biophysics are rapidly evolving
and multidisciplinary in nature, there is no current textbook which adequately
covers the material in this course.  Thus, extensive lecture notes prepared by
the instructors specifically for each module will be distributed to you.
There will also be reading assignments from reference books.  Additional
resources can be found at Prof. Walker's website:

                             **_http://www.pitt.edu/~gilbertw_**



         The  following reference books are **_on reserve   in Langley Library, except  where noted_.**

##### Advances in Protein Chemistry
Volumes 43, 46, 47

Biochemistry, 3rd edition
Stryer.

Biochemistry  (1999 edition)                                           Voet &
Voet

Biochemistry:  A Problems Approach                  Wood, Wilson, Benbow &
Hood

Biophysical Chemistry, Parts I, II, & III                          Cantor and
Schimmel

Circular Dichroism: Principles and Applications               Nakanishi,
Berova and Woody, Eds.

Computer Simulation of Liquids                                      Allen and
Tildesley

Crystal Structure Analysis:  A Primer                   Glusker and Trueblood

Crystal Structure Analysis for Chemists & Biologists Glusker and  Rossi

Crystallization of Biological Macromolecules      McPherson

Crystallography Made Crystal Clear                   Rhodes

Data Reduction and Error Analysis for the Physical    Sciences,  Bevington

Differential Equations: A Modeling Approach      Borelli and Coleman

Dynamics of Proteins and Nucleic Acids                         McCammon and
Harvey

Enzyme Structure and Mechanism                                   Fersht.

Error Analysis
Taylor  

Intermolecular and Surface Forces, 2nd ed.                     Israelachvili

Introd'n to Biophysical Methods for Protein and Nucleic Acids Research, Glasel
&Deutscher

Introduction to Protein Structure                                     Branden
& Tooze

Mathematica: A System for Doing Mathematics   Wolfram

Mathematics for Physical Chemistry                                Mortimer

Methods in Enzymology vols. 276, 277               Carter and Sweet

Modern NMR Spectroscopy, 2nd ed.                Sanders and Hunter ( _reserve,
Chem_.)

NMR of Proteins and Nucleic Acids                   W¨¹thrich.

Physical Biochemistry, 2nd ed.                                        van
Holde

Physical Biochemistry                                         Freifelder

Physical Chemistry, 6th ed                                              Atkins
( _reserve, Chem_ )

_Books on reserved (continued)_

Practical Protein Crystallography                                     McRee

Prediction of Protein Structure & the Principles of Protein Conformation,
Fasman, G. Ed.

Principals of Instrumental Analysis, 3rd ed.                      Skoog &
Leary  ( _5 th  ed. reserve, Math_)

Principles of Protein Structure                             Schulz & Schirmer

Principles of Protein X-ray Crystallography                     Drenth

Proteins: Structures and Molecular Principles (1993)  Creighton

Protein Structure:  a practical approach (1997)    Creighton

Protein Function:  a practical approach (1997)            Creighton

Proteins: A Theoretical Perspective of Dynamics, Structure and Thermodynamics

                                                                          Brooks, Karplus and  Pettitt 

The Physical Basis of Biochemistry                      Bergethon.



3)      Exams

###          There will be six short exams (30 minutes each)  administered in
class during the first

lecture of the succeeding module (see course syllabus).  You will be held
responsible for all material covered in the lectures and reading assignments.
Calculators will be needed.  Use of reference books and other resource
materials will not be permitted.

.

C.     Grading Policy

               There will be a short exam for each of modules 2-7.  Challenges to grading on exams must be

made in writing within one week of distribution of graded exams. _ _ You must
explain precisely the reason(s) for your challenge on a separate piece of
paper.  No additions or changes should be made on the test itself.  If an exam
is missed for a legitimate reason (or by prior arrangement with the
instructor)  then a make-up exam will be provided.

3\.      Plagiarism and Cheating

You should be aware of each student's obligations as stated in the Unibersity
Guidelines for Academic Integrity  (
_http://www.pitt.edu/%7Egraduate/aistudcode1.html)_. Any student suspected of
cheating, plagiarism, or other violations of the student 's obligations will
be dealt with according to the University Guidelines for Academic Integrity.



**ACADEMIC INTEGRITY**



This course will be offered according to the University guidelines on Academic
Integrity.  This includes but is not restricted to the February 1974, Senate
Committee on Tenure and Academic Freedom reported to the Senate Council, which
recommended the following general statement on academic integrity:



_The integrity of the academic process requires fair and impartial evaluation
on the part of faculty, and honest academic conduct on the part of students.
To this end, students are expected to conduct themselves at a high level of
responsibility in the fulfillment of the course of their study.  It is the
corresponding responsibility of faculty to make clear to students those
standards by which students will be evaluated, and the resources permissible
for use by students during the course of their study and evaluation._

  **MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS** ** ** **LABORATORY             **

**          ****Biosc 1990/Chem 1595    Course Syllabus        ****Spring
2002**



Labs:    T/H 1:00 to 5:00PM     _Lab sites will be announced_



Instructors:

         Linda Jen-Jacobson         320 Clapp Hall, 624-4969, ljen@vms.cis.pitt.edu

         John Rosenberg               312 Clapp Hall, 624-4636, jmr@jmr3.xtal.pitt.edu. 

         Gilbert Walker                 G-12 Chevron, 383-9650, gilbertw@vm2.cis.pitt.edu 

         Office hours:                    _by appointment_



Teaching Assistants:  

#####          Arabela Grigorescu          332 Clapp Hall, 624-4638,
grigor+@pitt.edu

         Rojana Leecharoen,         G-12 Chevron Science Center, 383-9656, rleechar@pitt.edu

         Andrew Petersen             332 Clapp Hall, 624-4638, andrew@jmr2.xtal.pitt.edu

         Paul Sapienza                  320 Clapp Hall, 624-6450, psapienz@pitt.edu

         Office Hours:                   _by appointment_

_No_.    _Date_                     _Laboratory session:   Learning Objective
_  

                        _Module 1:    Review of mathematics, computational skills _

1       1/8          No lab session

2       1/10        Computer skills tutorial:  Introduction to Unix

           

_Module 2:    X-ray Crystallography_

3       1/15        Crystals and crystal growth.

4       1/17        Crystal manipulation including cryoprotection.

5       1/22        Diffraction, data collection and processing.

6       1/24        Phasing and density fitting

7       1/29        Refinement and validation

_ _

_Module 3     Magnetic Resonance   _

8       1/31        Principles of NMR I:  Macroscopic coupled harmonic
oscillators

9       2/5          Using Mathematica to visualize the Bloch Equations

10     2/7          NMR of a model peptide

11     2/12        NMR titration curves of RNase histidine ring protons



<p class=MsoHeading8 style='ma

