this cell can't be empty, so text is same color as bgcolor  
---  
  
[Faculty, Staff & Students](NewDirectory/FacStaffDirectory.htm)  
[Graduate Studies](NewGraduateStudies/index.html)  
[Undergraduate Studies](NewUndergraduate/index.html) |

[![barhistory.jpg \(3194 bytes\)](file://Hist-
wwwnt/webpages/courses/FA01/HIST175/barhistory.jpg)](default.htm)**  
**[![barui.jpg \(2301 bytes\)](file://Hist-
wwwnt/webpages/courses/FA01/HIST175/barui.jpg)](http://www.uiuc.edu) |

[Resources & Events  
](NewResources/index.html)[Course Offerings](NewCourses/index.html)  
[Sitemap](NewSiteMap/sitemap.html)  
  


* * *

**H istory 175**

Fall 2001

* * *

  **LATIN AMERICA FROM CONQUEST TO INDEPENDENCE **

**Lectures Tue/Thur 9am, 213 Gregory Hall **



Instructor: **Nils Jacobsen** <njacobse@uiuc.edu>            Office Hours:
Tue, 4-5 p.m., Thur, 10-11
a.m.418 Gregory Hall, Tel. 333-2324



Teaching Assistants:

|

**Nicanor Dominguez** <domingz@uiuc.edu>

|

Daniel Kerner  <kerner@uiuc.edu>  
  
---|---  
  
Sections: Span, B, D

|

B1, D1, N, N1  
  
Office Hours: Wed, 9-11 a.m.

|

Tue, 11 a.m.-1 p.m.  
  
439-A Gregory Hall, Tel.: 333-2099

|

439-A Gregory Hall, Tel.: 333-2099  
  
**COURSE WEB SITE: http://www.history.uiuc.edu/courses/FA01/HIST175**  

**DESRCRIPTION** :  The course offers an introduction to the dramatic
transformations of Middle and South America, from the unique civilizations of
the Mayas, Aztecs and Incas, through the wrenching experiences of conquest and
colonization, the formation of new hybrid societies based on American,
European and African antecedents, to the struggles to rid the region from
European domination in the early nineteenth century.  The approach is problem
oriented, with a focus on social, ethnic, gender and economic structures, and
the contested power relations that emerged.  Regionally, most attention will
be given to Mexico, the central Andes and Brazil, but other areas will be
discussed whenever they appear particularly relevant for global changes in the
region.

**Format :**  Each student is required to attend the two lectures and one
discussion group weekly.  Regular attendance and participation at both is
essential and will be weighed in the grade.  We will conduct one Oxford style
debate on a core topic of Latin American history.  Students will write three
papers, altogether about 15 pages.  The shorter papers will be a crisply
argued advocacy paper on the topic of the debate, and a penetrating review of
a feature film on a topic of Latin American colonial history.  For the longer
paper students will be able to chose among a limited number of themes chosen
by the teaching staff.  A peer review (at least one typed page) of the first
draft of the long paper will be graded as part of the grade for the work in
discussion sections.  The mid-term and final examinations (80 % essay
questions, 20 % term identifications) will draw on material from the lectures,
discussion sections and from the readings.  The final grade will be composed
as follows:

**Requirements** **:  
** Attendance at lectures [more than 3 unexcused absences result in a 1/3
grade reduction per absence for the attendance grade]:    10 %

-Participation in discussion sections (incl. quizzes and a peer review of a student paper):    20 %

-Two short papers (1,000 words each): each 10 %

-One longer paper (2,000 words):       20 %

-Mid-term exam: 10 %

-Final exam:       20 % ** **

**Any work handed in late (incl. the first draft of the 2nd paper) will be
graded down.**  

**READINGS** :  All readings listed in the syllabus are required.  In
addition, there will be brief reading assignments in the sections which are
also required. Seven books are recommended for purchase, and they may be
acquired at the Illini Union Bookstore on Wright Street.  They are:
P.Bakewell, _A History of Latin America_ , K.Burns, _Colonial Habits_ ;
A.Carpentier, _The Kingdom of This World_ ; R.D.Cope, _The Limits of Racial
Domination_ ; J.de Lery, _History of a Voyage to the Land of Brazil_ ;
D.G.Sweet and G.B.Nash, eds., _Struggle and Survival in Colonial America_ ;
W.B.Taylor, _Drinking, Homicide and Rebellion in Colonial Mexican Villages_.
These books are also available at the reserve desk in the Undergraduate
Library.  

**_Syllabus of Topics and Readings_   **

**PART I: AMERICAN AND OLD WORLD ANTECEDENTS; ENCOUNTERS AND CONQUESTS**  

8/23:               **[Introduction: Environment and Peoples in the
Americas](175Outline1.htm)**  
                                    _Bakewell_ , 3-20 

8/28-9/4:            [**Lowland,** **Mesoamerican and Andean
Civilizations**](175Outline2.htm)  
                                    _Bakewell_ , 20-38  
                                    _de Lery_ , chs. 8-9, 13-18. 

9/6-9/11:            **[The Iberian Peninsula and Africa Around
1500](175Outline3.htm)**  
                                    _Bakewell_ , 39-56 

9/13-9/20:             **[Discoveries and Encounters, Invasions and
Conquests](175Outline4.htm)**  
                                    _Bakewell_ , 58 -100;  
                                    _de Lery_ , chs. 1-7, 20-22 

9/25:               **[Debate: Was the Conquest"Just" or "Beneficial", and for
Whom?](175Outline5.htm)** **[ ](175Outline5.htm)                       **

9/25: **                First Short Paper Due**

**PART II: Domination, Resistance and Accomodation in Iberian America to 1700
**

9/27: **    **            **[Spiritual Conquests and Resistance: Catholicism
and Popular Religiosity](175Outline6.htm)**  
                                    _Bakewell_ , 129-50  
                                    _Burns_ , ch. 1  
                                    _Sweet/Nash_ , 14 

10/2:              [ ](175Outlline7.htm)**[Spanish Instruments of
Rule](175Outlline7.htm)**  
                                    _Bakewell_ , 102-28, 210-21  
                                    _Sweet/Nash_ , ch. 17 

10/4:               **Mid-Term Exam (50 minutes)** **  **

10/9:               **[Native Peoples Under Colonialism](175Outlline8.htm)**  
                                    _Bakewell_ , 230-43, 303-06, 328-30  
                                    _Sweet/Nash_ , chs. 2, 7, 15 

10/11: **[The Slave Trade; African-American Communities and Cultures under
Colonialism](175Outline9.htm)**  
                                    _Sweet/Nash_ , chs. 9, 13, 16  
                                    _Cope_ , ch. 5 

10/16: " **[Race" and Class in Colonial Latin America](175Outline10.htm)**  
                                    _Cope_ , intro, chs. 1, 3-4, 6, conclusion  
                                    _Sweet/Nash_ , ch. 11 

10/15-10/19:            **First Draft of Long paPer Due in Section**  

10/18:            **[Gender Orders and Women's Roles](175Outline11.htm)**  
                                    _Bakewell_ , 244-49  
                                    _Burns_ , chs.3-4  
                                    Also consider the cases in chs. 9, 11, 13, and 15 of _Sweet/Nash_ for what they                                say about the interface of gender with race and class 

10/23: **[The Agrarian Base of Economy and Society](175Outline12.htm)**  
                                    _Bakewell_ , 187-97  
                                    _Burns_ , chs. 2, 5 

10/25: **[Early"Globalization" in Spanish America: Fleets, Silver and Merchant
Capita](175Outline13.htm)l**  
                                    _Bakewell_ , 174-87, 197-205, 221-30 

10/30:            **[Governance and Economy in Brazil to
1700](175Outline141.htm).**  
                                    _Bakewell_ ,296-303, 306-28, 330-38  
                                    _Sweet/Nash_ , ch.14                       

10/30: **LONG PAPER (FINAL DRAFT) DUE**  

**PART III: REFORMS, REBELLIONS AND REVOLUTIONS, 1700 - 1825**  

11/1:               **Imperial Decline, International Conflict and the
Enlightenment**  
                                    _Bakewell, 254-56_            

11/6:               **[The Bourbon Reforms in Spanish
America](175Outline151.htm)**  
                                    _Bakewell_ , 268-77  
                                    _Burns_ , ch.6                       

11/8:               **The "Second Wave of Globalization": Economic
Transformations and                                  Displacements in Spanish
America**  
                                    _Bakewell_ , 256-68 

11/13:            **Gold, Diamonds and Pombaline Reforms in Brazil**  
                                    _Bakewell_ , 338-51 

11/15: **Social Change, Culture and Identities in 18th Century Latin America**  
                                    _Bakewell_ , 249-53, 277-92  
                                    _Taylor_ , 20-27, and ch. 3  
                                    _Sweet/Nash_ , ch. 5 

11/17-11/25: **THANKSGIVING BREAK** **  **

11/27:            **[Tumults, Rebellions and
Insurrections](175Outline16.htm)**  
                                    _Cope_ , ch. 7  
                                    _Taylor_ , ch. 4, and 160-170 

11/29: **[The Revolution of St. Domingue/Haiti](175Outline17.htm)**  
                                    _Carpentier_ , entire 

12/4:               **[The Napoleonic Wars and the Revolutions of
Independence: Brazil and                          Southern South
America](175Outline18.htm)** **  
                                    **_Bakewell_ , 356-67, 380-84 

12/4:               **SECOND SHORT PAPER (FILM REVIEW) DUE**  

12/6:               **[The Revolutions of Independence: Northern South America
and Mexico](175Outline19.htm)** **  
                                    **_Bakewell_ , 367-380

12/15: **Final Exam** (Saturday, 8-11 a.m.)  
  


