**_Physics 104, Elementary Physics II, Syllabus_**

* * *

[Oberlin College](http://www.oberlin.edu), Spring semester 1998\.

Section PHYS-104-01

Times: Class: Mon.-Wed.-Fri. at 10:00 AM- 10:50 AM in Wright 103

Problem Sessions: 11:00 AM - 12:00pm Mon., 10:00 AM - 11:00 AM Thurs. and
11:00 AM - 12:00 PM Thurs.. All session are held in Wright 103. This syllabus
is intended merely as a approximate guide to this course and will be amended
during the course of the semester to accommodate the needs of the class.

This syllabus was last revised on Feb. 2, 1998.  


    1. **_Instructors_**
      * [Mr. Stephen Wong](http://wong.physics.oberlin.edu/courses/faculty/SWhome.htm)
  
Wright 224  
Phone: 775-8334  
e-mail: [Stephen.Wong@oberlin.edu](mailto:Stephen.Wong@oberlin.edu)  
Office hours: W-F 11:00 AM - 12:00 PM (subject to change, please check latest
schedule posted on Wright 224) and by appointment.  


      * Ms. Melinda Keller
  
Wright 105  
Phone: 775-8339  
e-mail:
[Melinda_Keller@qmgate.cc.oberlin.edu](mailto:Melinda_Keller@qmgate.cc.oberlin.edu)  
Office hours: Wed. 1:00 PM - 2:00 PM and Thurs 11:00 AM - 12:00 PM  


    2. **_Textbook_**
  
Vincent P. Coletta, "College Physics," Mosby, 1995.  


    3. **_Course Description_**
  
This course is the second semester continuation of Physics 103, Elementary
Physics I. which is a required prerequisite. This course will concentrate on
understanding electrical and magnetic phenomena, including electrostatic
forces and fields, magnetostatics, and DC and AC electrical circuits. Other
topics that will be briefly covered include quantum, atomic and nuclear
physics concepts. Calculus is not a requirement, though mathematics will be
used to model physical phenomena and as a problem-solving tool.  


    4. **_Course Objectives_**
  
The fundamental concepts which form the basis for physical science will be
presented and discussed. The student will explore how to apply scientific
methodology, fundamental physical concepts, and logical deductive reasoning
toward the understanding of physical phenomena and problem solving.  


    5. **_Homework Requirements_**
      1. **Exercises and Problems from the Book**
  
All problems are required to have prose explanations in addition to any
mathematical derivations. Purely mathematical answers or responses copied from
the book will not garner full credit! For example, merely writing down the
solution to a 5 point problem will be given only 1 point's worth of credit. On
the other hand, writing everything down except the final numerical solution
will be awarded 4 points. The emphasis is on the reasoning process, not on the
numerical answer.  


      2. **Additional Problems**
  
There are problems in addition to those from the book posted on the web at
this URL:
[http://wong.physics.oberlin.edu/courses/p104homework/p104addprob.htm.](http://wong.physics.oberlin.edu/courses/p104homework/p104addprob.htm)
The problems are due on the date specified.  Submission of comments and
questions on the problems is welcomed and encouraged.

      3. **Guidelines for Group Work**
  
It is expected that students will work together on homework assignments.
However, it is required that _each student_ _submit their own individual
write-ups_ of the work that was done, using their own individual expressions
of the solutions. Submissions that are mere copies of each other will not be
accepted.  


    6. **_Class Attendance and Participation_**

_**_Class attendance is mandatory_**._ There will be significant amounts of
material presented in lecture that is not covered in the book. The study of
physics involves much, much more than the presentation of facts. One of the
most important focuses of the class will be on the development of critical
thinking skills. This requires student interactions during class.

There will be three problems sessions that will be scheduled. Attendence at
these sessions, while not required, _is expected._ Physics is a study of
problem solving and there is no subsistute for practice and small group
discussions.

The laboratory component of the course is required and consitutes a
significant fraction of the total grade (see below).   See Ms. Keller for a
description of the grading policies for the laboratory component.  


    7. **_Grading_**
Class participation | 10%  
---|---  
Laboratories | 25%  
Homework | 20%  
In-Class Exams | 30%  
Final exam | 15%  
Extra credit work is always accepted and students are encouraged to do extra
work to counteract the effects of poor scores on tests and homework.

Grades are determined from an uncurved scale where 90%+ = "A", 80% = "B", 70%
= "C", and less than 67% is a "NE".  


    8. **_Web Access for Course Materials and Information_**

_WWW_ : <http://wong.physics.oberlin.edu> or through [Oberlin
Online](http://www.oberlin.edu) and the [Physics Dept. home
page](http://www.physics.oberlin.edu).

_Anonymous FTP_ : [wong.physics.oberlin.edu](ftp://wong.physics.oberlin.edu)

* * *

  [Topical Schedule](http://wong.physics.oberlin.edu/courses/p104sch.htm) |
[Additional
Problems](http://wong.physics.oberlin.edu/courses/p104homework/p104addprob.htm)
|  [Lab Schedule](http://wong.physics.oberlin.edu/courses/p104lab.htm) |
[Class Notes](http://wong.physics.oberlin.edu/courses/p104notes/p104note.htm)
|  [Wong's Web Server](http://wong.physics.oberlin.edu) |  [Physics Home
Page](http://www.physics.oberlin.edu)  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
  

