**![Syllabus](_derived/Syllabus.htm_cmp_blocks010_bnr.gif)**  
[![Home](_derived/home_cmp_blocks010_gbtn.gif)](./) [![MXP
Home](_derived/ext1006_cmp_blocks010_gbtn.gif)](http://mxp.physics.umn.edu/)

  
  
---  
| |

# Syllabus:  
Methods of Experimental Physics I

### Introduction:

This course is the first of a two-semester sequence on the techniques used in
a modern experimental physics laboratory. Because of the importance of
electronic instrumentation in today's physics experiments, the first semester
of the laboratory will deal with the use of digital and analog techniques for
processing electronic signals and the use of computer instrumentation. The
second semester laboratory will consist primarily of a single experimental
project taken by the student through the stages of design, proposal,
construction, data acquisition, analysis, oral presentation, and written
report.

### Prerequisites:

A knowledge of basic electricity and magnetism and circuits at the 1000 level
of physics is assumed, as is elementary modern physics at the 3000 level
sequence. English writing skills at the university level are required. No
previous knowledge of electronics or digital logic is assumed.

### Staff:

The faculty member for this course is: Paul Crowell (Office: Physics 349,
624-4828, [crowell@physics.spa.umn.edu](mailto:crowell@physics.spa.umn.edu))
Office hours: M, W: 11:15 - 12:20 and by appointment

Technical and teaching assistance for the laboratory and course is provided by
Kurt Wick (Office: Physics 69, 624-2831, [wick@umn.edu](mailto:wick@umn.edu))

The teaching assistants are:  
Doug Rowland Sections 3, 5 (Physics 472, 624-0378,
[rowland@fields.space.umn.edu](mailto:rowland@fields.space.umn.edu))  
Mathew Graham:  Section 2 (Physics 246, 624-4557,
[mgraham@hep.umn.edu](mailto:mgraham@hep.umn.edu))

### WWW Page:

We will update our class WWW page at:
[http://mxp.physics.umn.edu](http://mxp.physics.umn.edu/) with any new
information that pertains to the course.

### Lectures:

Three lectures will be given per week: M, W, F, 12:20 - 13:10, in room 170
Physics. You will be responsible for all announcements made in class.

### Recitation:

A recitation section will be held in Physics 65, Fridays, at 1:25 PM. Course-
related topics will be discussed in an informal manner. This session is
optional and will be held as long as there is sufficient demand.

### Labs:

Laboratory sections meet twice each week for two hours in room 65 (phone:
625-4829) of the physics department. Students will work in pairs and must
attend their assigned laboratory periods. Labs begin Wednesday, September 5.

To keep up, most students will find that a number of hours must be spent in
the laboratory each week in addition to their scheduled hours. The laboratory
may be used during off hours by checking out a key in the physics office, 148
Physics. The keys may be checked out overnight or over the weekend. Since the
number of keys is limited, please return them promptly to allow other students
access to the lab facilities.

### Laboratory Schedule:

|   | **Monday** | **Tuesday** | **Wednesday** | **Thursday** | **Friday**  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
**10:10** |    |  Section 5 |   |  Section 5 |  
**11:15** |    |  Section 5 |   |  Section 5 |  
**12:20** |    **Lecture** |   Section 3 | **  Lecture** |  Section 3 |
**Lecture**  
**1:25** |   Section 2 |  Section 3 |  Section 2 |  Section 3 |  
**2:30** |   Section 2 |   |  Section 2 |   |  
  
### Grade Policy:

Grading for this course will be based on an absolute scale of 375 points,
distributed according to the following table:

**Exam / Assignment** | **Number of Exams / Assignments** | **Possible Points
Each** | **Total Possible Points**  
---|---|---|---  
**Final Exam** |   1 |  50 |  50  
**Midterm Exams & Programming Quiz** |  3 |  25 |  75  
**Long Write-ups** |   4 |  25 |  100  
**Short Write-ups** |   10 |  15 |  150  
**TOTAL POINTS** |    | ** ** | **  375**  
  
Note that the lab write-ups make up approximately 70 % of the total grade.
Please see the attached note on the expectations for lab write-ups. Generally
speaking, A's will be awarded for outstanding work that shows mastery of the
material as demonstrated in both the lab write-ups and examinations. B's will
be awarded for good work that exceeds the basic course requirements. C's will
be awarded for work that meets the course requirements. Work that falls short
of the basic course requirements will earn a D. F's will be given in cases of
seriously deficient work. It will be very difficult to get an A or B in this
course without doing well on the exams. For this reason, make every effort to
really understand what is going on in lab!

### Exams:

Two exams will be held during class on October 1 and November 2 and one take
home C programming quiz will be due on November 21. The final exam will be
held on Wednesday, December 19, 8:30 - 11:30 AM.

### Academic Honesty:

All work on quizzes and the final examination must be your own, and you must
follow any rules stated for a given examination. No collaboration is permitted
on any of the quizzes or exams in this course. Your lab journal and your
written lab reports should also be your own work, although you are expected to
collaborate on collecting and discussing the data. Any other work submitted
for a grade must be completed according to the guidelines established by the
instructor or TA's. Note that it is understood that in handing in your lab
report you have actually completed all of the bench work. Failure to adhere to
these standards will result in penalties ranging from zero on a particular
quiz or assignment to expulsion from the University. Please note the official
IT policy statement, which can also be found in the IT Bulletin and Student
Guide:

_The Institute of Technology expects the highest standards of honesty and
integrity in the academic performance of its students. Any act of scholastic
dishonesty is regarded as a serious offense, which may result in expulsion.
The Institute of Technology defines scholastic dishonesty as submission of
false records of academic achievement; cheating on assignments or
examinations; plagiarizing; altering, forging, or misusing an academic record;
taking, acquiring, or using test materials without faculty permission; acting
alone or in cooperation with another to obtain dishonestly grades, honors,
awards, or professional endorsement. Aiding and abetting an act of scholastic
dishonesty is also considered a serious offense._

###  Access and Accommodation:

Please inform me in the first few days of the semester if there are any
special circumstances which you feel will affect your performance in this
course. Reasonable accommodation will be made according to University
policies. Additional information can be obtained from Disability Services,
Nicholson Hall, 626-1333.

### Laboratory Write-Ups:

Two different formats of lab write-ups exist, depending on the chapter in the
lab manual covered. Chapters 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12 and 13 are to be
handed in as short write-ups and count a maximum of 15 points each. In these
write-ups all questions in the lab manual must be answered. In approximately 3
pages, you should describe your work in a way that is comprehensible to the
TA, using complete English sentences where appropriate, demonstrating an
understanding of the material. The write-ups of chapters 2, 6, 9 and 14 are to
be longer and in a more complete format. They each count a maximum of 25
points. They should contain a complete description of the exercises and
results, including analysis, diagrams and plots, as well as answering all
questions in the lab manual. In addition, you must record all your laboratory
results in a lab notebook.

The write-up's are to be handed in to the TA's at the next lab session for the
short write-ups and at the second session after the assigned week for long
write-ups. For example, the short write-up from chapter 2 must be handed in
the first session of week 3. Tardy presentation of reports will be penalized
two points per lab session for short write-ups and 3 points per session for
long write-ups. (Exceptions: the short write-ups from chapter 1 and 12 may be
handed in at the second session after the assigned week without receiving any
late points.) All write-ups must be completed and they must be handed in at
the beginning of the lab session.

See the timetable for the list of exercises that will be done and their due
dates.

### Textbooks:

(Don't buy the textbook before the first day of class!)

_The Art of Electronics, P. Horowitz and W. Hill_ , (Cambridge University
Press). Second Edition.  
    or:  
_Electronics and Communications for Scientists and Engineers_ , M. Polnus,
(Harcourt / Academic Press).

### Lab Manual:

The lab manual will be handed out in class.

### Reading:

Regular reading assignments are specified in the lab manual. You will be
responsible for reading, either in the textbook or in other references,
material sufficient to gain a full understanding of what you are doing in the
laboratory.

### [Timetable:](Timetable.htm)

![](_themes/blocks/blorulee.gif)

Page Last Updated: 12/11/2001

