**Lesley College Graduate School of Arts and Social Sciences:**

**Expressive Therapies Program**



**Core Seminar in Dance Therapy**

**GEXTH 5108.01**

3 credits, Fall Semester 1999

Andrea DeSharone, M.A., A.D.T.R., L.M.H.C., N.C.T.M.B.

Office hours: By Appointment: Wednesdays 11:00-1:00. Phone: 349-8429





**Course Description:**

The core seminar will focus on the knowledge necessary to develop clinical
skills in the use of Dance Movement Therapy. It is directed toward developing
a theoretical and practical understanding of body awareness, movement response
and interaction.



**Course Objectives:**

1\. To provide an overview of the history, theory, principles and approaches
to Dance/Movement Therapy.

2\. To understand the nature of Dance/Movement Therapy as it applies to
individuals and groups.

3\. To further develop the purposeful use of the self as a professional
Expressive Therapist through discernment of personal interaction and movement
style.

4\. To understand group process as applied to Dance/Movement Therapy sessions.

5\. To understand varied techniques in group Dance/Movement Therapy.

6\. To develop leadership skills.

7\. To begin to understand the process through which people change and
develop.

8\. To foster an awareness of the clinical skills necessary to work with
varied populations and culturally diverse peoples.



**Course Structure:**

The course will consist of didactic and experiential approaches to learning
the disciplines of Dance/Movement Therapy. Discussions will integrate
underlying theory with experiential class content. Students are expected to
attend all classes. In the event of an emergency please call and leave a
message. Missing more than two classes will jeopardize your completion of the
class. There will be make-up work for any missed time.



**Course Requirements:**

1\. Required readings and readiness for discussion of topic.

2\. Students are required to keep a journal to document the learning process.
This is a description of your subjective experience during each class. There
will be 3 opportunities to share your journal within the structure of the
class in order to begin to articulate your experience to others.

3\. An experiential warm-up which will include choosing an approach to
Dance/Movement Therapy and writing an outline about the goals, and basic
theoretical approach for distribution to core group members. Bring copies to
class on assigned day.

4\. Brief paper describing what you learned and what moved you in the three
films you will be viewing on 9/20/99.

5\. Assignment on three movement profiles as specified on 9/27/99.

6\. An analytical paper (3-5pages in length) focusing on a particular aspect
of the course content that you found personally challenging. Paper should
reflect both a theoretical and personal perspective. Focus should include
individual and group process, and movement awareness, dynamics, and
reflections about your personal style. Final paper.

7\. Personal studio/lab time is an essential aspect of this course as it
enables an in-depth exploration and integration of the material. Please
schedule this into your week independent of class time. An average of two
hours weekly is expected. Students should keep a separate account of time
spent in this individual process - new awareness that develops and time spent
in the process. This will be periodically reviewed in class.



**Course Evaluation:**

Grading will be pass/fail, based on the following requirements:

1\. Participation: 25% of the grade

2\. Required readings: 25% of the grade

3\. Papers: 50% of the grade



**Required Texts:**

All articles can be found in the periodical section of the library. You can
make a personal copy or read on the premises.



Levy, Fran. (1992) Dance Movement Therapy A Healing Art. Routledge: New York.

Levy, Fran. (1995) Dance and other Expressive Art Therapies. When Words are
Not Enough. Routledge: New York

Yalom,I.D. (1995) The Theory and Practice of Group Psychotherapy. (3rd
edition) New York: Basic Books.



Recommended texts: on reserve in the library and also at the book store.

Benzwie, Teresa. (1987) A Moving Experience : Dance For Lovers of Children and
the Child Within. Zephyr Press: Arizona. This is a great book to own for warm-
up ideas using creative movement.

Canner, Norma. A Time To Dance. For review in the library.

Payne, Helen. (1992) Dance Movement Therapy: Theory and Practice.
Routledge/Travistock, London/New York.





**COURSE OUTLINE**

**September 13,1999**

The role of dance in history and culture: ritual dance, folk dance and
performance dance. History of DMT in psychiatry. Development of the field of
Expressive Therapy and Dance/Movement Therapy. Dance/Movement therapy and
Expressive Therapy defined.

Readings:

1\. Levy, DMT A Healing Art. : Unit 1, Early Development-The pioneers of Dance
Therapy, Unit 2 section A and chapter 17.

2\. Seigal, Elaine. Psychoanalytic Dance Therapy: The Bridge Between Psyche
and Soma. American Journal of Dance Therapy. Vol.17. No.2 Fall/winter 1995.

* * *

**September 20,1999**

Film Day (meet in film studio on second floor of main library)

View three films: A Time to Dance, Dance Therapy: The Power of Movement, A
Moving Experience.

* * *

**September 27, 1999**

Nonverbal communication: What and how do I communicate?

Assignment: Bring in paper describing the content of the films viewed last
week including particular things that moved you. Also bring in movement
observations of three personal interactions (include a self-observation).

Readings:

1\. Mettler, B. Creative Dance: Art or Therapy? American Journal of Dance
Therapy. Vol.12. No.2. Fall/winter 1990.

2\. Loman,S. and Merman, H. The KMP: A Tool For Dance/Movement Therapy.

American Journal of Dance Therapy. Vol.18. No. 1 Spring/Summer 1996.

* * *

**October 4,1999**

Imagery, Movement and Healing.

Developing and working with kinesthetic, auditory, visual, and conceptual
imagery.

Journal sharing. Also checking in on studio work.

Readings:

1\. Payne,Stanton, Imagery and Metaphor in group dance movement therapy: a
psychiatric out patient setting.

2\. Loman, Susan and Merman, H. The KMP: A Tool for Dance/Movement Therapy.

* * *

**October 11, 1999** ~ No class in honor of Columbus Day

* * *

**October 18, 1999**

Understanding group and individual dance/movement therapy.

Developing a sense of self, personal movement profile/study.

Stages of group development.



**Readings:**

1\. Yalom, Chapters 1 through 5.

2\. Payne, Penfield, Individual Movement Psychotherapy: DMT in Private
Practice.

3\. Schmais, Claire. Understanding the Dance/Movement Therapy Group. American
Journal of Dance Therapy. Vol. 20. No.1. Spring/Summer 1998.

4\. Schmais, Claire. Group Development and Group Formation in Dance Therapy.
The Arts and Psychotherapy. Vol. 8.pp. 103-107. 1981.

* * *

**October 25, 1999**

Authentic Movement/Jungian Approaches



**Readings:**

1\. Adler, Janet. Who is the Witness? Contact Quarterly. Volume 1. No.12.
1987.

2\. Musicant, Shira. Authentic Movement and Dance Therapy. American Journal of
Dance Therapy. Vol. 16. No.2. Fall/Winter 1994.

3\. Payne, Noack, On Jungian Approach to DMT.

4\. Yalom, Chapter 11.

* * *

**November 1, 1999**

The therapist as container. Exploring self as vessel and the therapeutic
analogy to the work of holding the space and story of the client.



**Readings:**

1\. Thesis of Anne Berg and /or Dee Beach.

* * *

**November 8, 1999**

Healing processes in DMT.

How does empathy develop?

Journal sharing and check-in regarding personal studio work.



**Readings:**

1\. Yalom, Chapters 6 and 7.

2\. Schmais, C. Healing Processes in Group Dance Therapy. American Journal of
Dance Therapy. Vol. 8. 1985.

* * *

**November 15, 1999**

Creativity and Transformation: Exploring your fullest potential as a
therapist.



**Readings:**

1\. Lewis, Penny. Transpersonal Arts Psychotherapy: Toward an Ecumenical World
View. The Arts in Psychotherapy, Vol.24. No.3. 1997.

2\. Levy, Chapter 16 : Psychotherapy a Multi-Modal Approach.

* * *

**November 22, 1999**

Understanding boundaries the use of self in the work.



**Readings:**

1\. Yalom, Chapters 9 and 12.

* * *

**November 29, 1999**

Exploring diversity within Dance Movement Therapy. Exploration of our cultural
backgrounds, similarities and differences.



**Readings:**

1\. Levy, DMT a Healing Art, Unit II , Section B

* * *

**December 6, 1999**

Guest Dancers: Neige Christenson and Susan Eaton

Storytelling as Metaphor. Exploration of the stories that we hold and the
means for developing imagery and movement to express the inner story.



**Readings:**

1.Franks, B. and Fraenkel, D. Fairytales and Dance/Movement Therapy :
Catalysts of Change for Eating Disordered Individuals. The Arts in
Psychotherapy. Vol.18. pp. 311-319. 1991.

2\. Mellon, Nancy. Make Way For Wild Things. Storytelling Magazine. Winter
1993.

3\. Yalom. Chapters 14 and 16.

* * *

**December 13, 1999**

Group Process: Reflecting on Stages of Group Development and Healing Stages
(Schmais' work) within group development.

Journal Sharing

Semester Ends, Final paper due.



**Readings:**

1\. Schmais, Claire. Understanding the Dance/Movement Therapy Group. American
Journal of Dance Therapy. Vol. 20. No.1. Spring/ Summer 1998.

2\. Payne, Tosey. The Snake Sheds a Skin: Themes of Order and Chaos in DMT.

* * *

**NOTE:** This course provides a means to explore the clinical process
including the use of yourself and your creativity as therapeutic tools.
Clinical work and reflection can easily engage you in personal issues.
Countertransference can manifest our own unresolved issues as well as provide
us with invaluable tools with which to understand and approach our clients.
Issues presented by others about their work can also move us, sometimes in
disturbing ways. While I hope that you will experience support and therapeutic
benefit from the course process: this is not therapy! You must to the best of
your ability, manage the boundaries of growth. If you find yourself
needing/wanting to explore issues in a therapeutic context, please utilize the
Counseling Center. Classes are clinical in nature with the intent of fostering
a climate to identify your transferential issues in service of the work. I
encourage self-responsibility around disclosure: assessing how much you can
tolerate as well as its' potential effect on others. Think about the stages of
group development and the need to pace yourself relative to creating the group
as a safe container.

Lesley College is committed to ensuring the full participation of all the
students in its programs. If you have a documented disability, and, as a
result, need classroom accommodations or other support services, you should
inform the Program Director,

Classroom instructor, or Coordinator of Disabilities Services. To request
reasonable accommodations you need to provide appropriate documentation of
your disability and make your request in a timely manner. Please consult your
faculty advisor or Disabilities Services at 349-8149.



