**  
Illinois State University Mathematics Department**  
  

MAT 326: Technology Tools for Secondary School Mathematics

Fall 2000  
4:30 - 7:20 pm M STV 332 and STV 314  
Dr. Roger Day ([day@math.ilstu.edu](mailto:day@math.ilstu.edu))  
  
---  
  
* * *

###  
Course Sy1labus  
  
  
---  
Introduction |  Goals |  Objectives |  Contact Information |  Office Hours  
Course Requirements |  Course Grades |  Available Resources |  Calculators |
Attendance  
  
* * *

**Introduction**

> Course activities will focus on some of the many mathematical
representations typically available through technology, including numerical,
tabular, graphical, statistical, algebraic, probabilistic, and geometrical
representations. We will explore these representations using hand-held
calculators as well as computer software, including electronic spreadsheets,
dynamic geometry software, and computer algebra systems. Common threads
running through the course include use of the Mathematics Department's
Macintosh computer laboratory and your own hand-held calculator to complete
activities that include technology integration with, or application to,
specific problems and topics in the secondary mathematics curriculum.

**Goals**

> A fundamental goal of the course is to become more familiar with some of the
technology tools available and appropriate for teaching and learning secondary
school mathematics. Much of our class time will be invested in mathematical
explorations using calculators or computers and in discussions of those
explorations.

>

> Some of the technology we explore and the methods we propose may be new,
provoking another goal of the course: to consider the implications of
available technology. It has been argued that because of technology, some
mathematics may be more accessible to learners, some mathematics may be
available for the first time to learners, and some mathematics may become
obsolete to learners. Throughout the course, we will consider questions such
as these:

>

>   * How does technology influence decisions about what mathematics should or
should not be taught?

>   * How does technology impact upon our teaching?

>   * How does technology affect our students' learning?

>   * How do technology-intensive mathematics classrooms differ from the
classrooms in which we may have learned mathematics?

>

>

> Active participation is crucial to the success of the course. We can all
expect to share findings, methods, observations and opinions. The course
activities and requirements are designed with that in mind.

**Objectives**

  1. To master the use of specific technology for teaching and learning mathematics.
  2. To become acquainted with publications and other resources dealing with technology.
  3. To become more familiar with the World-wide Web and the Internet as tools and resources.
  4. To consider effective ways to integrate technology into secondary school mathematics.
  5. To explore the potential of technology for doing mathematics.

**Course Requirements and Your Course Grade**

> The components described in this section represent the course assignments,
together with their value in determining your course grade. Refer to the
[course grading guidelines](gradeguide.html#course) and to the [assignment
grading guidelines](gradeguide.html#assignment) for more information about
evaluation of your work.

>

> _I: Problem Sets (25%)_

>

> You will often be given problem sets to be completed for the next week's
class session. The problem sets will focus on your mastery and application of
technology tools and your application of school and collegiate mathematics.

>

> _II: Writing Assignments (25%)_

>

> Writing assignments will be made throughout the course. Among other topics,
the assignments will likely require you to summarize and critique journal
articles or book chapters, review software and internet sites, and respond to
questions about using technology for teaching and learning mathematics.

>

> _III: Extended Assignment Option I: Mathematics Investigation (25%)_

>

> This assignment requires you to engage in a semester-long investigation of a
mathematical situation. It is intended that one or more technology tools play
a significant role in your investigation. Midway through the semester you will
be required to submit an update of your efforts and near the end of the
semester the final report of your investigation will be due. To be eligible to
earn an A in the course, you must present a report of your investigation to
your classmates.

>

> _IV: Extended Assignment Option II: Lesson Plan (25%)_

>

> During the semester you will submit a teaching plan for using technology to
present a secondary school mathematics lesson. Midway through the semester you
will be required to submit a draft or outline of your plan and near the end of
the semester the final version will be due. To be eligible to earn an A in the
course, you must present your plan to your classmates.

>

> _V: Semester Exam (25%)_

>

> A semester examination is scheduled for Monday, 11 December 2000, beginning
at 5:30 pm. The exam will help me evaluate your mastery of various technology
tools and your capacity to use technology to explore and solve mathematics
problems. The semester exam may also require you to write about the impact of
technology on the teaching and learning mathematics. A portion of the exam may
be given in advance with your response to be turned in at the scheduled time
for the exam.

**Grades**

> Your grade for the course will be based on your in-class involvement and
your completion of the course activities described here. Each component is
weighted according to the percent that accompanies each description above.

>

> The grading scale for the course will be no more severe than A: 92-100%, B:
84-91%, C: 76-83%, D: 68-75%, F: less than 68%.

**Required Textbooks**

> **Algebra in a Technological World** , by M. Kathleen Heid (editor).
Published in 1995 by the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. ISBN
0-87353-326-7.

>

> **Geometry from Multiple Perspectives** , by Arthur F. Coxford, Jr.
(editor). Published in 1992 by the National Council of Teachers of
Mathematics. ISBN 0-87353-330-5.

>

> **Advanced Algebra with the TI-89** , by Brendan Kelly. Published in 2000 by
Brendan Kelly Publishing Inc. ISBN 1-895997-12-7.

>

> **Statistics and Probability with the TI-89** , by Brendan Kelly. Published
in 2000 by Brendan Kelly Publishing Inc. ISBN 1-895997-14-3.

**Optional Materials**

> **The Geometer's Sketchpad Student Edition** (software). Published in 2000
by Key College Publishing. ISBN 1-55953-245-9.

**Calculators**

> We will use graphics calculators throughout the course. You are required to
get a Texas Instruments TI-89, TI-92, or comparable graphics calculator/CAS
calculator. In class demonstrations will be made with a TI-89, a TI-92, or a
TI-83. Please see me with your questions and concerns about calculators.

**Available Resources**

> There are excellent mathematics resources in STV 302. This room is open
throughout the day. There are multiple copies of many books, booklets,
pamphlets, and journals. You may use the materials there or check them out on
a limited basis.

>

> We will make extensive use of the computer lab in STV 314. On some occasions
we will meet in the computer lab rather than in STV 332\. A room adjacent to
the computer lab, STV 322, is open many hours of the day for your individual
use of hardware and software. Check out software at this location.

**Attendance, Make-up Work, and Extra Credit**

> Attendance and class participation is an important element in your
successful completion of the course. Your active involvement, individually, in
small groups, and with the entire class, is an important way to help meet the
course objectives. For you to be involved you must be present. If you are now
aware of conflicts or should you become aware of conflicts, please let me know
of them as soon as possible.

>

> Plan ahead to complete on time the required tasks of the course and to be
present for course exams. Make-up work and late assignment submissions are
negotiated on an individual basis and only under emergency situations.

>

> The course requirements are designed to meet the course objectives. Unless
announced otherwise, extra credit cannot serve as a substitute for successful
completion of the required components of the course.

>

> I invite and appreciate your comments and suggestions for the course as it
unfolds. Please share with me in person or in writing your reactions and
perceptions. Your contributions will serve to enhance the course for you, your
classmates, and future students.

**Contact Information**

> phone: 438-7096 (office)  
>  email: day@math.ilstu.edu  
>  URL: <http://www2.math.ilstu.edu/~day/courses/current/326>

**Office Hours**

> Mondays 3-4  
>  Wednesdays 10-11

>

> Other times can be arranged. Please make an appointment.

[**Important Dates**](http://www.calendar.ilstu.edu/)

> _03 September_ : last day to withdraw from a course with no withdrawal grade
assigned

>

> _04 September_ : University Holiday (Labor Day) no classes  
>  _22 September_ : last day to withdraw with a withdrawal grade (WX) assigned

>

> _13 October_ : University Holiday (Fall Break) no classes

>

> _10 November_ : last day to withdraw from the University  
>  _22 November_ : University Holiday (Thanksgiving Break) **begins** @ 5:30
pm

>

> _09 December_ : last day of Fall Semester classes  
>  _11 December_ : MAT 326 Semester Exam (5:30 pm)

>

>> * * *

>>

>> Any student needing to arrange a reasonable accommodation for a documented
disability should contact Disability Concerns at 350 Fell Hall, 438-5853
(voice), 438-8620 (TDD).

