![](461-title.gif)

Spring 2000

** | [University of Nebraska-Lincoln ](http://www.unl.edu/)  
---|---  
9:30 - 10:45 pm TTh | [Department of Computer Science and
Engineering](http://cse.unl.edu/)  
Mabel Lee, Room 262 |  
![](../../borders/blue-purple.gif)  
Instructor: Dr. [**Scott Henninger  
**](http://cse.unl.edu/~scotth) |  TA: Abid Mohammed  
**Office:** Ferguson 213E | **Office** : Room 6.8 501 Building  
**Office Hours:** 10:45 - 12:00 TTh | **Office Hours:** |  9:30 a.m - 10:30
a.m. M  
**E-mail:** [scotth@cse.unl.edu ](mailto:scotth@cse.unl.edu) |  |  9:30 a.m to
11.30 a.m. W  
| **E-mail:** [mohammed@cse.unl.edu](mailto:mohammed@cse.unl.edu)  
  
![](../../borders/blue-purple.gif)

**

Announcements

**

![](Bullet4.gif)   [Final Grades](final-grades.html) posted 5/5/00

![](Bullet4.gif)  [Team Evaluations](http://cse-
ferg41.unl.edu/eval360/461-team-eval.html) due by May 5th**

![](Bullet4.gif)  [Final Presentations](final-presentations.html)

![](Bullet4.gif)  [Scores as of 4/19](se00-grades-4-19.html) Please look over
for accuracy.

![](Bullet4.gif)  [Room 21](lab21.html) lab hours.

![](Bullet4.gif)  [Design Team Assignments](design-teams.html) With links to
project numbers - make sure you have the correct ones.

![](Bullet4.gif)  [Scores as of 3/28](se00-grades-3-28.html) Please look over
for accuracy (First posted 3/28/00)

![](../../borders/blue-purple.gif)

**

Homework Assignments

**

![](Bullet4.gif)   [Specification Assignment](design-assignment.html) **Due
Sunday, 4/23 at midnight,** no late penalty if turned in before 4/27. Turn in
as hardcopy or e-mail the .mdl file generated by Rational Rose. **

![](Bullet4.gif)   [Requirements Assignment and Project
Bidding](requirements.html) (Added Project #11, 2/23) **

![](Bullet4.gif)  [Team Assignments for Requirements](teams.html) (first
posted 2/25) **

![](Bullet4.gif)  First Design Exercise - Due March 23!

  * The assignment is available in paper only. If you were not in class Tuesday, you will need to contact Dr. Henninger to get a copy by either e-mail or come to his office in Ferguson 213e. 
  * For the data dictionary part of the assignment, you must have, as a minimum, the following fields: 
    * Name 
    * Description 
    * Type (relational database, file, string, variable, etc.) 
    * Process Readers (list of processes that get data from the data store) 
    * Process Writers (list of processes that write to the data store) 
    * any other information deemed necessary to describe the content and use of the data store  
**

![](Bullet4.gif)  [Evaluating Team Members and Bidding for Design
Projects](http://cse-ferg41.unl.edu/eval360/461-team-eval.html) (first posted
3/21)  

Click on the above link to execute a Java applet. Use you last name and your
student id as the password to log in. You **_must_** use Netscape Communicater
version 4 or greater to use this program (I will work on IE compatability
later).

There are two tasks to perform using this system:

    1. Evaluate you and your team members that worked on the requirements document (use the "Team Evaluation" tab in the applet).   

    2. Bid on projects. This time you are bidding on the project you would like to _design_. You will not be allowed to bid on the same project you did for the requirements assignment. (Use the "Project Bidding" tab in the applet.)  
**

![](Bullet4.gif)   **Midterm exam 4/4** : In case there's any ambiguity in my
slides here are the _topics_ that will be covered on the Midterm:

  * Intro to Software Engineering (lecture notes, Schach Ch. 1, Gibbs article) 
  * _Mythical Man-Month_ (Brooks Ch. 1-19, article by Harel) 
  * Software Life-Cycles (Schach Ch. 2, 3, Paulk et al. paper on CMM) 
  * Software Requirements (Ch. 4) 

Material from here on was not covered in the quiz and will be emphasized on
the Midterm:  
  

  * Computer-Aided Software Engineering (Schach Ch. 4, lecture notes) 
  * Specification and Design (Schach Ch. 10.1-10.3, 12.1-12.5, lecture notes) 
  * Software Testing (Schach Ch. 5, 13.5-13.11, 14.1-14.7, Dr. Elbaum's notes) 

**Lecture Notes**  
[Class schedule](461-schedule.html) (Last updated 4/3/2000)

![](Bullet4.gif)  [Week 1:](week1/index.htm) Introduction to Software
Engineering (updated 1/18 to include Schach Ch. 1)

![](Bullet4.gif) [Week 2-3:](week2-3/index.htm) Brooks' Mythical Man-Month

![](Bullet4.gif) [Week 4-5:](week4/index.htm) Brooks' No Silver Bullet

![](Bullet4.gif) [Week 6:](week6/index.htm) Software Lifecycle and Process

![](Bullet4.gif) [Week 7:](week7/index.htm) Requirements Engineering

![](Bullet4.gif) [Weeks 7&8:](week7-8/index.htm) Tools, CASE (last updated
3/2)

![](Bullet4.gif) [Week 9:](week9/index.htm) Structured Analysis (last updated
3/6)

![](Bullet4.gif) [Week 10:](week10/index.htm) Object Oriented Concepts (last
updated 3/21)

![](Bullet4.gif) [SASD Feedback](SASD/index.htm)(last updated 3/29)

![](Bullet4.gif) [Software Testing](testing/index.htm)(Dr. Elbaum's notes)

![](Bullet4.gif) [Week 13](week13/index.htm) Intro to UML, logical view

![](Bullet4.gif) [Week 15](week15/index.htm) UML interaction, deployment views

![](Bullet4.gif) [Project Presentations](week16/index.htm) UML interaction,
deployment views

![](Bullet4.gif) [Last Lecture!](trends/index.htm) Associations and
Dependencies, trends in software engineering

![](../../borders/blue-purple.gif)

# Course Syllabus

_

### Course Prerequisites:_

CSCE 310 or any basic data structures course

_

### Course Texts:_

_

  * The Mythical Man-Month,_ 20th Anniversary Edition, by Fredrick Brooks, Addison-Wesley 1995. 
_

  * Classical and Object-Oriented Software Engineering (With UML and Java),_ Third Edition, by Stephen Schach, Irwin 1999. 
  * Readings handed out in class

_

### Course Overview:_

The course will familiarize students with concepts in the field of software
engineering. A broad view of the different ways in which software engineering
is approached will be presented, with some focus on the issues of requirements
engineering, interactive systems and user interface design. Students will
become familiar with the issues involved in large-scale software development,
the software life-cycle and its stages, CASE tools, object-oriented design and
analysis, interactive systems design, and software maintenance, among others.
A team design project will be assigned in which students will put the
techniques to practice by designing a medium-scale software application for
clients outside the class.

_

### Grading:_

Students will be graded on the items listed below. Projects will be done in
teams of 4-7 people. The midterm exam will be closed-book, but a sheet of
notes will be allowed. Two or more take-home exams will be given. The take-
home exams will have a combination of essay and problem-solving questions.

**Graded Item** |  **

Undergrad** |  **

Grad**  
---|---|---  
Prerequisite Test |

2% |

2%  
  
Midterm Exam |

20% |

15%  
  
Take-home exams |

18% |

18%  
  
Design Exercises |

20% |

25%  
  
Project |

40% |

40%  
  
_

### Final Grades:_

Letter grades will be assigned at the end of the course. Final grades will be
based on a competitive curve. At least the top 25% students will receive an
'A'. Graduate and undergraduate students are graded separately. Students will
be informed of their standing at intervals throughout the course. Final grades
are _not_ negotiable. Unless there are mathematical errors, I will be
unavailable to discuss final grades (see the _Newsweek_ article posted on my
door for a general view of my attitude on students bartering for grades).
Borderline cases will be considered with extreme care, and fair grades will be
rendered.

_

### Attendance Policy:_

Students are expected to attend all lectures. Absences will not relieve you of
meeting course requirements. See the _TA_ to pick up any material handed out
in class. Make-up tests will only be allowed for those having a notice of
illness from the Student Health Center or a family physician. Late assignments
and reports will be downgraded one letter grade for each 24-hour period after
the due date (all due dates are at the _beginning_ of class period).

_

### Group Projects:_

The class will be divided into groups of 4-7 to for a term-long software
design exercise. Students will be responsible for forming groups. Students
will give formal presentations in the form of a proposal, status reports, and
final report. Grading criteria and project ideas will be posted in a project
Web page.

On occasion, students take advantage of group work, letting other members
perform the bulk of the work while they reap the benefits of a good grade and
can spend more time on other classes. This happens only occasionally, but it
will not be tolerated in this course. Two policies will help prevent this:

  1. Twice during the semester, group members will be asked to fill out a detailed peer assessment for group members. The aggregate score (throwing out scores deviating more than 25% of the average) will become part of the student's grading score (10% of the project score - that's 4% of total score). 

Merely attending meetings won't be enough. Group members must be prepared for
meetings, make good suggestions, perform their share of the work, and work
well with other members. The grading criteria for peer assessment is as
follows:

    1. Has the group member attended meetings? 
    2. Has the group member been prepared for group meetings? I.e. was he/she aware of assignment requirements, performed her/his duties, able to speak intelligently about the project, etc.? 
    3. Has the group member participated positively in meetings? 
    4. Has the group member performed their share of the work, as assigned? 
    5. Rate the quality of this group member's input to group discussions and design issues. 
    6. Has the group member been able to work well with others? 
    7. Rate the overall value of this group member to the project. 
    8. Rate the level of initiative this group member has exhibited in the project. 
    9. Other comments? 

  2. Groups experiencing problems with a student should let me know there's a problem. Do this **_early in the semester.**_ My experience is that group members wait until it's too late to take action. My objective is to ensure that each group member has the opportunity to succeed. I will handle the situation and ensure there is no animosity while resolving the problem. Usually, a brief discussion will clear the matter up entirely and without further problems. 

