![]()

  
    


**COURSE SYLLABUS**

George Mason University

DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE

Course Description

**CS 421 Introduction to Software Engineering**

Summer 2001

Professor David Rine; Department of Computer Science

[http://www.cs.gmu.edu/](http://www.cs.gmu.edu)or go to

<ftp://mason1.gmu.edu/drine/cs421> to get PowerPoint Lecture Slides

ST2 Room 345

Phone 703-993-1546

Email [drine@cs.gmu.edu](mailto:drine@cs.gmu.edu)

**OFFICE/LAB HOURS** :

Office Hours for Professor Rine, Summer Term A: 12:30 - 2:30pm Tues., Wed.,
Thurs. in STII-345.

Our Lab teaching and help sessions in STII-17 will be 12 noon - 3pm. They will
be Monday through Thursday. Mr. Karun Chilakapati.

They will be after the M-R Classes. See the posting outside the STII-17 or
eventually see <http://www.ite.gmu.edu/labs/>.

**LAB ASSISTANTS** :

The following CS421 Assistant will staff STII-17 and hold Office Hours, which
he will have posted. Email him for help to.

Mr. Karun Chilakapati, [kchilaka@osf1.gmu.edu](mailto:kchilaka@osf1.gmu.edu).

STII-17 is the location of the usual CS421 teaching and tutoring sessions.
Please attend regularly after class.

STII-17 LAB DEDICATED TIMES.

To see the times that the STII-17 Rational Rose Lab is dedicated to CS421
class sections view the schedule on <http://www.ite.gmu.edu/labs/>. For other
individual times you need to fill out a request for your personal Omni Lock
Code. Forms are available outside the STII-160 ITE Office.

RATIONAL SOFTWARE.

In addition to the Rational version 98 software in STII-17 and subset of
version 4.0 from the CD in the back of the UML Toolkit paperback from the
textbooks section of the GMU Bookstore in the Johnson Center, you can down
load to your own PC term-limited copies of full commercial version of Rational
Rose Enterprise 2000e Edition, SoDA, RequisitPro and other interesting tools
by going to <http://www.rational.com/> and clicking on the `Try It' entry on
the first page.

After the semester starts up, you will be asked to download a full commercial
version of Rational Rose 2000e from <http://www.rational.com/> and then use
its Key Administrator tool to activate Rational Rose 2000e by use of the Key
and Account numbers distributed in your class through the URL

[http://www.rational.com/AccountLink](http://www.rational.com/accountslink)

You will use this version of Rational Rose (UML programming environment) to do
your class project.

**DESCRIPTION** :

CS 421 is a 3-credit course with prerequisites ( Grade of C or better) CS 310
(data structures and algorithms), ENGL 302 (technical writing for scientists
and/or engineers) and junior/senior standing. It gives an introduction to
principles and techniques used in software engineering. Integration of
concepts of management, methodologies/processes and metrics. Presentation and
discussion of selected software engineering methods, documentation and tools.
Coverage of object-oriented requirements analysis and modeling. Working in
teams where students organize, manage and develop a software engineering
project.

**GRADING POLICY** :

A midterm examination and a final examination each count 1/3 of the class
grade on a 100 point scale; and grading is proficiency-based, no curve. The
combined project, homework and lab work comprise the remaining 1/3 of the
class grade. Students must hand in all home - work and lab work that is
requested to be turned in, but students may work on homework and lab work in
their project team groups. It is understood that the project is a major time
commitment, and students must work in their groups, taking advantage of
communications technology when appropriate.

**GRADE SCORE** :

Score = (1/3)*MidTerm + (1/3)*Final + (1/3)*((1/3)*Homework

\+ (2/3)*Team_Project)

**SYLLABUS CONTENT OUTLINE** :

*Software engineering and software engineering life cycle/process model

*UML and software supporting software engineering

*Software engineering as management, methods and metrics

*Software quality: relation to functional and non-functional attributes

*Software requirements and requirements analysis

*Verification and validation: relation to software quality - Software metrics

*Object-oriented software analysis/design and construction

*UML Requirements Modeling

*Software design and comparison of designmethods

*UML Components and Deployment Architectural Levels - The Component Object Model

*Software management: using a process model and improvements using

Metrics \- Cost and Effort Metrics (COCOMO)

*Software reuse: technical and social non-technical issues

*Team Projects illustrating the above materials

**REQUIRED TEXTBOOKS** :

1\. "Software Engineering", 6thEdition, 2001, Ian Sommerville.

Addison-Wesley.

2\. `The Unified Modeling Language Users Guide, 1st Edition, 1999, Grady

Booch, James Rumbaugh and Ivar Jacobson, Addison-Wesley.

3\. "UML Toolkit", 1998, Eriksson, John Wiley, CD-ROM.

4.Rational Rose 98 UML Software or Equivalent, Download Rational Rose
Enterprise Edition 2001 from

<http://www.rational.com>

5.Enterprise Rational Rose 98i UML STII-Lab Room 17 Accounts and Materials.

**REQUIRED LABORATORY HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE** :

1.Practice social and organization concepts in software engineering

2.Personal Computer, Windows 95, 98, 2000 or Windows NT, Connectivity to
Internet/Web, Web Browser.

3.Account on Mason1. Omni Lock Code for PC CAD Lab in STII-17. See
<http://www.ite.gmu.edu/labs>

4.Your own copy of Rational Rose. You can start with the student 4.0 version
on the CD in the back of the UML Toolkit paperback book available in the
textbooks section of the GMU Bookstore. However, this beginner's version will
not be sufficient for the course project.

5.The Lab Project will Focus on Requirements Engineering in UML

**Sommerville (6 th edition) Chapters/Exercises**.

Chapter 1 Introduction to Software Engineering. Exercise #1, 2, 3, 6, 8.

Chapter 2 Computer-based Systems Engineering. Exercises #1, 5, 7, 8.

Chapter 3 Software Processes. Exercises #1, 3, 4, 8.

Chapter 4 Project Management. Exercises #2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10.

Chapter 5 Software Requirements. Exercises #2, 3, 5, 7, 10.

Chapter 6 Requirements Engineering Processes. Exercises #1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10.

Chapter 12 Object-Oriented Design. Exercises #1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

Chapter 17 Critical Systems Specification. Exercises #1, 2, 5, 6, 7.

Chapter 18 Critical Systems Development. Exercises #1, 2, 6, 8, 10.

Chapter 19 Verification and Validation. Exercises #1, 3, 5, 8.

Chapter 20 Software Testing. Exercises #1, 2, 3(a), 4, 8, 9.

Chapter 23 Software Cost Estimation. Exercises #1, 2, 3, 4, 9.

SOURCES FOR CS421 LECTURE POWERPOINT SLIDES.

You can download the PowerPoint CS421 Lecture slides before each day's lecture
by either going to

[ftp mason1.gmu.edu/drine/cs421](ftp://mason1.gmu.edu/drine/cs421)

<http://www.software-engin.com/>

If you are in the distance education section, use ClassWise home page
<http://netlab.gmu.edu/cwpilot>

**Booch-Rumbaugh-Jacobson Chapters**.

Most of the chapters will be used/covered during the course of the semester.
This book will serve as a primary reference for the UML-based project work.
The book will take the place of "language" users guides and reference guides
normally used in other kinds of computer science classes. The default
implementation of UML in the class will be Rational Rose.

UML (Unified Modeling Language) is the defacto industry standard for
developing Object-oriented software. UML has been certified by the
international certifying organization Object Management Group (OMG) whose web
page is <http://www.omg.org/>. UML is evolving into the standard world-wide
notation for presenting object-oriented modeling and design.

