**Syllabus - Physics 1110 - Summer 2002**

Professor Paul Beale,  
Office: Duane F621  
Phone: 492-1685  
e-mail: Paul.Beale@colorado.edu  
Web page: <http://physics.colorado.edu/~beale>

**Class Meetings** : 9:15-10:25AM, MTWRF, 11:00-12:10 MTWRF G1B20, Duane
Physics Building.

**Text:** "Physics: For Scientists and Engineers" by Wolfson and Pasachoff,
__Third Edition__ (Chapters 1-22)

Formally, this course has a corequiste of first semester Calculus, MATH1300 or
APPM1350. However it is all but impossible for a student to successfully
complete both first semester physics and first semester calculus during a
Summer Session due to the enormous pace of both courses. Also Calculus is
spread over the entire summer so the pace does not fit well with the ordering
of the material in Phys1110. **Students are _strongly_ advised not to attempt
to complete both Physics 1110 and Calculus 1 during the one summer.** My
advice is to complete Calculus I and then take Physics I in a later term.

**Material Covered:** This is the first semester of a 2-semester survey of
introductory physics, PHYS 1110/ 1120. PHYS 1110 covers classical mechanics,
waves, and thermodynamics. This is a calculus-based course intended for
students majoring in the physical sciences, engineering, computer science and
mathematics. Life sciences majors usually take PHYS2010/2020 and non-science
majors usually take PHYS 1010/1020.

**Grading:** **5 exams, 10% each: 50% total  
CAPA computer graded homework: 25%  
Supplemental Homework: 25%**

All exams will be closed book. You may bring a single **8-1/2 "x11"** formula
sheet (one side only) to the midterm exams and final exam. You can write
anything you want on your formula sheet but you must write it by hand - no
photocopying or printing allowed. You should bring a calculator to every
recitation, and exam. Sharing of calculators during exams and quizzes will not
be allowed. A **few** calulators for emergency use will be available at the
exams. There will be no early, late, or make-up exams given. An absence from
one exam will be excused for sufficient personal reasons. Discuss the absence
with Professor Beale and submit a written statement to him within one week
following the exam.

[CAPA: an Internet-based homework
system](http://www.colorado.edu/physics/CAPA/Cindex.html) **:** This course
will use an internet-based homework system called CAPA ( _C_ omputer _A_
ssisted _P_ hysics _A_ ssignments). In the CAPA system, students receive a
personalized homework assignment (every student's assignment is slightly
different) with a CAPA ID number. Students log on to a CAPA server at
_http://capa.colorado.edu_ and submit their solutions online. The student is
told immediately whether the answers are right or wrong and, if wrong, the
student can try again, with no penalty, up to a maximum number of tries set by
the instructor. There will be CAPA homeworks due twice each week.
Conscientious students generally score 90-100% on CAPA assignments. All
students enrolled before June 3 are automatically enrolled in CAPA.   Students
who enrolled in PHYS1110 after this date need to see Professor Beale. __

[Recitation](../../../../../recitations/recitations.html) **:** In recitation
you will discuss CAPA-based and and supplemental homework problems.

[Office Hours](../../../../../officeHours/officeHours.html): Most office hours
are held in the Physics Help Room. For appointments at other times please see
Professor Beale or the recitation instructor.

[Help Room](http://capa.colorado.edu/cgi-bin/HelpRoom): The Department of
Physics runs the Physics Help Room in the rear of Duane G2B90. It is open
8AM-6PM Monday - Friday and staffed during office hours. Please walk quietly
past the lab/recitation area so as not to disturb ongoing classes.

**Change of registration:** All course registration changes can be made in the
Physics Office Duane E1B32.

**Incompletes:** Rules of the University require that grades of incomplete (IF
or IW) may only be awarded only if  ".. for reasons beyond the student's
control, the student is unable to complete the course requirements".  Requests
for a grade of Incomplete must be made to Professor Beale.

Friday June 7 4:30 PM: Deadline to drop a course without the instructor's
signature.

Friday June 14 4:30 PM: Deadline to drop the course without petitioning your
dean. Dropping between June 7 and June 14 requires Professor Beale's signature
on a special action form. **You must be passing the course to drop**. **For
this purpose alone** a passing grade is defined as the student having scored
at least 50% of the class average on the first exam, or having scored at least
60% on CAPA.

**Students with Disabilities:** If you have specific physical, psychiatric, or
learning disabilities and require accommodations, please let me know by
Wednesday June 5 so that your learning needs may be appropriately met.
Students should notify the Counselor for Students with Disabilities,
Disability Services Office, located in Willard 322 (phone303-492-8671). All
recommendations for accommodations must be in writing from Disability
Services.

