English 551 syllabus

## English 551 -- Composition II

## Spring 1996

_Sections 1077_

  * **Course Description**
  * **Your Teachers**
  * **Books and Materials**
  * **Grading**
  * **Attendance and other policy matters**
  * **[Calendar](cal551.html)** 

**Prerequisites:_**`:      You must have passed English 550 with a C or taken
an equivalent course at another university. If you are not sure you are in the
right class, check with your teachers.  

**Course Description:_**`:      The purpose of this course is to guide you
through the process of writing research-based argumentative essays. This
course will also prepare you for using the computer as a research and
communication tool that gives you access to the vast amount of information
found on the Internet and the World Wide Web. We will focus on the importance
of carefully and critically evaluating on-line sources just as you would
printed material. Because our class will have access to the Internet through
the Meshel Hall labs (thanks to the Computer Science and Information Systems
department), you will have the opportunity to communicate with and receive
feedback from readers and writers in and beyond our classroom.  

As you may have noticed, this class is also collaboratively taught -- you have
two teachers to help you learn about researched essays using computer
resources: one English and one Computer Science professor. We will be working
closely with you throughout the quarter to help you achieve the goals of this
course.  

Since this class includes computer research, you will need to plan extra time
in Meshel Hall to work on projects, unless you have access yo a modem
elsewhere. You will be getting UNIX accounts within a few days so you can use
the network.  

Each section will meet on MW in Meshel 301 and TF in Meshel 307.

**Your Teachers:**  

Mary Lou Henneman  
Office: DeBartlo 202  
Office Hours: M 10:00-10:50 and by appointment  
Phone: 742-3415  
[e-mail: bc657@yfn.ysu.edu](mailto:bc657@yfn.ysu.edu)  

[John Sullins](http://cis.ysu.edu/~john/)  
Office: Meshel 333  
Office Hours: M-Th 1:00-2:00, M 3:00-4:00, and by appointment  
Phone: 742-1806  
[e-mail: john@cis.ysu.edu](mailto:john@cis.ysu.edu)  

**Books and Materials:_**`:      Diana Hacker. _A Writer's Reference._ Third
edition Boston: Bedford, 1995.

Timothy W. Crusius and Carolyn E. Channell. _The Aims of Argument: A Brief
Rhetoric._ Mountain View, CA: Mayfield, 1995.

3 1/2 inch high-density disks (at least two) and labels (consider buying a
carrying case).

Folder with two pockets for papers an drafts.

Dictionary.

Notecards.

_Recommended:_  
A Word book, perhaps _Word for Dummies_ (one of our personal favorites), or
_Mastering Word,_ a more expensive and comprehensive text.

Dave and Mary Campbell. _The Student's Guide to Doing Research on the
Internet._ Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1995.  

**Grading:**  

[Paper #1](hw551.html#1): |  20%  | Paper #2: | 20%  | Research Paper: | 40%
| Short Assignments: | 20%

You must satisfy the course requirements and recieve at least a C- average on
all the graded work in order to receive credit for the course. We will compute
the grade on a simple percentage form: 90 - 100% = A; 80 - 89% = B; 70 - 79% =
C; 0 - 69% = NC (remember, there are no D's or F's in this class). To do this,
we will convert letter grades to numbers using the following formulas:

| A+ = 98 | A = 95 | A- = 92  | B+ = 88 | B = 85 | B- = 82  | C+ = 78 | C = 75
| C- = 72  **Attendance:**      Since the written assignments will be made and
written in class, and since a significant amount of the writing will be done
in class, regular class attendance and participation in class discussion and
activities are absolutely necessary to pass this course. Your grade will be
lowered 1/3 letter grade if you have more than four **unexcused** absences. A
formal record of attendance will be kept.

A certain number of individual conferences will be required in order to
discuss various aspects of your longer investigative essay. Failure to attend
any of these conferences may result in your receiving a No Credit for the
course. If a problem arises (Heart attacks, plane crashes, sister abducted by
UFOs), please contact one of us as soon as possible to reschedule the
conference.

**Assignments:**      As you will see on the assignment sheet (still to come),
you are responsible for in-class exercises and writing; out-of-class reading,
computer work, and research; out-of-class reading of all sorts; and a
collaborative project.

You will have a variety of reading assignments. Make sure that you have the
reading done on time and thoroughly. Bring relevant books to class -- we will
be moving between the traditional classroom and the computer lab, so you will
need the Internet book (and other handouts) for lab time, and the others
usually for class.

**Plagiarism:**      This means copying another person's writing word-for-
word, paraphrasing or summarizing without citing your sources, or (for this
class especially) borrowing someone's graphics without permission. Usually,
folks plagiarize accidentally, and we can catch it in the rough draft before
harm is done. However, for the criminal few who plagiarize intentionally,
punishment is merciless: F for the assignment with no chance of revisions, and
possible referral to the dean of students. Don't plagiarize. Ask for help if
you need it.

**Incomplete Policy:**      YSU has a new policy concerning incompletes: you
must be passing the course with a C and the problem must be beyond your
control. The teacher determines whether an incomplete is warrented in that
situation. All incompletes must be completed within a year or the grade
reverts to an F on your transcript.

**Final Notes:**      Come see us with any questions or problems you may have.
We keep lots of office hours for this purpose. Our goal is to help you learn
to write more professionally and quickly. We will do everything in our power
to help you as long as we know that you are working hard in the class.

