![UMass logo](icons/umassnew_small.gif) |  ** CMPSCI 383 Spring 2002 ** **
Artificial Intelligence  **

* * *

* * *

**Course Description and Administrative Information**

* * *

### Course Description

The course explores heuristic search as a basic building block for intelligent
computer systems. The class discussion and the weekly homeworks are organized
around three projects: Free Cell, jigsaw puzzles, and Amazons (two person
board game). In the final two weeks of the course, we survey a variety of
traditional topics in building intelligent systems, showing how heuristic
search applies. See the [course syllabus](http://www-
edlab.cs.umass.edu/cs383/sched.html) for more detailed information, a weekly
schedule, homework assignment and due dates, reading schedule, and related
information.

### Instructors

|  Prof. Allen R. Hanson  
CS Building 270  
Office Hours: TBA  
[hanson@cs.umass.edu](mailto:hanson@cs.umass.edu@cs.umass.edu)  
| TA1: Kelly Porpiglia  
LGRT 220  
Office Hours: Mon 4 - 5  
[kelly@cs.umass.edu](mailto:kelly@cs.umass.edu)  

|

TA2: Joseph Catalano  
LGRT 220  
Office Hours: Tues 12:45 - 1:15  
                         Wed 12:30 - 1:00  
[catalano@cs.umass.edu](mailto:catalano@cs.umass.edu)  

### Details

CMPSCI 383 Artificial Intelligence  
Schedule #318000  
Time: TuTh 2:30 - 3:45  
Meeting Place: LGRT 323  

### Textbook

There is no textbook for this course.

### Prerequisites

If you do not have the prerequisites, do not take the course. You need to have
taken CMPSCI 287 (and its prereqs) and CMPSCI 311 (and its prereqs). Taking
these during the same semester is not good enough. You need to have completed
these courses before taking CMPSCI 383. I need to count on the material and
sophistication acquired from the prereqs.

### Ed Lab

**Familiarity:** You need to become familiar with the EdLab machines. Although
the first few assignments do not depend on it particularly, you will need
access and familiarity later on. Also, when we get to Amazons, you will need
to have your player program available on EdLab machines. See me after class if
you need your login doesn't work.

**Getting Accounts in the Edlab:** Accounts for students in the AI course are
automatically generated from the course roster. You do not have to do anything
special to get your account **except** register for the course. Accounts
should be available one or two days **after** you register. The default
username for the account is the first letter of your first name followed by
your last name; if your name is Eileen Roberts, for example, your username
would be eroberts. The default password is your student ID number. If you have
trouble accessing your account, please see the course instructors.

**Working at home:** You are free to work on whatever machine you are most
comfortable with and in whatever language you want (Java or C++ recommended).
However, some assignments will require you to work on the Ed Lab machines. It
would be wise to get these accounts set up early in the term.

### Course Requirements

You need to come to class. This is particular important given that we do not
have a text and that there may be as much as a 1-2 day delay in the class
notes appearing on the course pages.

We will have weekly homeworks, most of which will be programming. We will also
have two hour exams and one final exam. Homeworks count for 50% of course
grade, the two hour exams count 20% (10% each), and the final counts 30%. Be
sure to follow directions. For example, if a homework assignment requires
submitting a transcript of the program running, and you do not, then you will
not have completed the requirements of the assignment.

### Late Policy

Hw#13 is due in class on May 14. You must come to class to turn it in, and to
fill out a course evaluation.

Written work is due at the beginning of class on the date listed. If you miss
that deadline, you may turn it in only at the Computer Science main office on
that same day. _Late homeworks will not be accepted._ Always hand in your best
effort on time.

### Collaboration and Academic Honesty

Collaboration is encouraged in this course up to the point of homework
submission - the homeworks that you hand in MUST be your own work. Talking
with fellow classmates is of course an important and exciting part of the
learning process, so you will need to use good judgement. If you are in doubt,
feel free to ask. Be sure to attribute correctly those ideas that you borrow
from others. Submitted homeworks that appear to be copies of each other will
be considered _prima facie_ evidence of violation of the University academic
honesty policy. Violation of this policy will result in an 'F' in the course.
No collaboration is allowed on exams.

### Intellectual Property

Many of the materials created for this course are the intellectual property of
the instructor(s). This includes, but is not limited to, the syllabus,
lectures and course notes. Most of the material on this web site is
copyrighted by Paul Utgoff. Other material is copyrighted by Allen Hanson.
Except to the extent not protected by copyright law, any use, distribution or
sale of such materials requires the permission of the instructor and/or the
copyright holder(s). Please be aware that it is a violation of university
policy to reproduce, for distribution or sale, class lectures or class notes,
unless copyright has been explicity waived by the faculty member.

## Java Links

* [Java 2 API Specification](http://java.sun.com/j2se/1.3/docs/api/index.html)
* [Java 2 SDK, Standard Edition Documentation](http://java.sun.com/j2se/1.3/docs/index.html)
* [ C++ for Java Programmers](http://www-ali.cs.umass.edu/~mckinley/377/labs/c++_for_java_programmers.html) by Barbara Staudt Lerner 

* * *

[E-mail the course instructors](mailto:hanson@cs.umass.edu,
kelly@cs.umass.edu, catalano@cs.umass.edu)

* * *

Last modified: January 17, 2002

(C) Copyright 2001, All Rights Reserved, Paul Utgoff and/or Allen Hanson,
University of Massachusetts

