**

CSE 7315: PLANNING AND MANAGING A SOFTWARE PROJECT

Syllabus

Course Description/Objective:** This course covers the process of planning and
managing a software development project. Primary topics include planning, risk
management, and estimating of cost, size and schedule. Additional topics
addressed include the software development process, the SEI Capability
Maturity Model, software lifecycle models, configuration management, quality
assurance, metrics, and continuous process improvement

**Instructor:** Dr. Dennis J. Frailey

Adjunct Professor

972-344-8366 (voice)

972-344-7701 (fax)

[CSE7315@seas.smu.edu](mailto:CSE7315@seas.smu.edu) (internet) |  **

SMU Contact:** Ms. Debra McDowell

Department of Computer Science &

Engineering

214-768-3080

debramcd@engr.smu.edu  
---|---  
**

Course Handouts and Other Info** : http://www.seas.smu.edu/~frailey/cse7315/

**

Office Hours:** By appointment and by internet conversation.

(No Appointment Required for brief meetings after class)

____________________________________________________________________________

**

Mailing Addresses for Assignments and Exams:

**

For U.S. Mail:

**

Southern Methodist University

Computer Science and Engineering

attn: Grader, CSE7315

P. O. Box 75275-0122

Dallas TX 75275-0122 ** |

For Overnight Mail:

**

Southern Methodist University

Computer Science and Engineering

attn: Grader, CSE7315

6425 Airline

Dallas TX 75275 **  
---|---  
  
____________________________________________________________________________

**

Schedule:** Depends on Specific Section and Format. See web site:

http://www.seas.smu.edu/~frailey/cse7315

**

Exams: ** Midterm: 25% of grade

Final: 25% of grade

**

Text:** Humphrey, Watts, __Managing the Software Process__. Reading, Mass.:
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1989. ISBN 0-201-18095-2.

**

Grading:** 25% for software development plan (assignments 2 [draft] and 5
[final])

25% for each exam;

25% for assignments 1,3, and 4

**

Policy for Late Work:** Short version: If you turn it in late, I grade it
late.

Long version: As in the real world, the effect of late work is a function of
the customer need. In this case, I (your customer) have scheduled time for
grading of all assignments. If you do not get the assignment to me on time, I
need to find some other opportunity to grade it. You get bottom priority,
compared with students who turned their work in on schedule, and my time is
limited. Therefore, the following "penalties" apply to late work:

\- **Grading may be late** by an indefinite amount of time. In particular,
results of assignments may not be returned when you want them -- in many
cases, they will not be graded until well after the end of the semester, and
perhaps not returned at all. This means it will be more difficult for you to
gauge how well you are doing.

\- **A grade of Incomplete** may be assigned, if work is not done by the end
of the semester. **_NOTICE: if you intend to request a grade of Incomplete,
you MUST turn in an incomplete request form no later than the last day of
class. This form is available from the instructor.

**_

\- **A grade of Failure (F)** will be assigned if work is not completed within
1 year of the due date (university policy).

**__

Due dates for each course offering are found in the assignment delivery
schedule, downloaded from the web site.

__

Assignments:** There are 5 Assignments, including 1 draft Software Development
Plan; 1 final Software Development Plan; 2 estimating spreadsheets and 1
library search. A separate **statement of work** is provided for each
assignment (downloaded from the web site). Each assignment has its own special
cover sheet, found as the last page of the corresponding statement of work.
Most assignments also utilize supplementary materials, also downloaded from
the web site.

The main assignment in the course is for each student to develop a Software
Development Plan (SDP). The instructor will provide a **statement of work**
outlining the details of the plan. A draft of the Plan is submitted as
assignment 2 and the final Plan is submitted as assignment 5.

**

Grading Scale and Expectations:**. A: 93-100; A-: 90-92; B+: 88-89; B: 83-87;
B- 80-82; C+: 78-79; C: 73-77; C- 70-72; and so forth. No curve is used. In
grading, I focus on evidence that the student has **__learned the concepts
taught in the class**__ and **__applied them**__ to the problem presented in
the examination or assignment. Rote memorization will not help the student as
much as seeking to understand the concepts through study, discussion and
application. I welcome dialog with students on these concept and encourage
discussion of the concepts among students (for example, study groups), so long
as students do not discuss specific details of assignments and examinations.

**

Recommended Readings: (not required, but probably helpful)

**

Adams, Scott, __The Dilbert Principle_ , _New York, HarperCollins Publishers
Inc., 1996. ISBN 0-88730-787-6.

Boehm, Barry W., __Software Engineering Economics__ , Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, 1981.

Brooks, Frederick, __The Mythical Man-Month (Anniversary edition)__ , Reading,
Mass.: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1995. ISBN 0-2-1083595-9.

DeMarco, Tom & Timothy Lister, __Peopleware_ ,_ Dorset House, 1987, ISBN
0-932633-05-6.

Department of Defense, __Cross Talk - The Journal of Defense Software
Engineering__ , Ogden ALC/TISE, Hill AFB, Utah 84056-5205.

Department of Defense, __Defense System Software Development__ , Dod-
STD-2167A, 29 Feb. 1988, Department of Defense, Washington D.C., 20201. (This
is an important, fundamental document that provides the foundation for many
software process models. It has been replaced by Mil-STD-498 and ISO/IEC
12207, but is still important to have.)

Department of Defense, __Software Development and Documentation__ , Mil-
STD-498, Dec, 1994. Available for download at
http://www.itsi.disa.mil/cfs/std498.html. (Commercial version is IEEE/EIA
J-STD-016-1995, which in turn was later replaced by IEEE-US 12207, which is
the U.S. version of ISO/IEC 12207 [international standard for software
development].) Expect further developments in this volatile (and non-
standard!) standards scene.

Humphrey, W.S., "Characterizing the Software Process: A Maturity Framework,"
__IEEE Software__ , Vol. 5 #2 (March, 1988), pp. 73-79.

IEEE, __Standard for Developing Software Life-Cycle Processes__ , IEEE-
STD-1074-1991. IEEE Computer Society, New York.

Paulk, Mark, et. al., __Capability Maturity Model for Software__ , Version
1.1, Software Engineering Institute, CMU/SEI-93-TR-2, February, 1993.

Reifer, Donald, __Tutorial: Software Management (third edition)__ , IEEE
Computer Society, order # 678, ISBN 0-8186-0678-9, IEEE catalog # EH0243-6

United States Air Force, __Software Management Guide__ , Software Technology
Support Center, OO-ALC/TISE, Hill AFB, Utah 84056.

OUTLINE

PLANNING AND MANAGING A SOFTWARE PROJECT

Text Chapter(s)

I INITIAL PLANNING

1\. Introduction

1.1 Course Overview

1.2 Software Process as the Framework for Software Engineering Preface

1.3 Facts and Myths about Software Engineering

1.4 Overview of the Planning Process

2\. Lifecycle Models

2.1 A General Model of a Lifecycle

2.2 The Project Lifecycle

Concept Exploration

Engineering Development

Final Product Development

Production and Maintenance

Sustaining and Updating

2.3 The System Engineering Lifecycle

Analyzing and Specifying Requirements

Developing a System Architecture

Decomposition into Subsystems and Sub projects

Selection of Products and Allocation of Requirements

2.4 The Software Development Lifecycle

Waterfall Model

Spiral Model

RAD (Rapid Application Development)

Tornado Model

3\. Initial Planning 6

3.1 Overview

3.2 Understanding the Customer and the Requirements

3.3 Defining the Approach

3.4 Analyzing the Environment

Lifecycle Analysis

Complexity Analysis

Roles and Communication Analysis

3.5 Selecting Process and Methods

II. DETAILED PLANNING 6

4\. Detailed Planning Overview and The Work Breakdown Structure

5\. Size Estimates -- Lines of Code / Function Points

6\. Effort and Cost Analysis

7\. Scheduling

8\. The Software Development Plan

8.1 Contents of a Software Development Plan

8.2 Documentation

III OTHER MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES

9\. Risk Management 5,6

9.1 Risk Management Process

9.2 Risk Assessment

9.3 Risk Control

9.4 Risk Examples

9.5 Risk Management Plan

10\. Measuring and Monitoring 6,15

10.1 Overview

10.2 Basic Issues

10.3 Selection of Metrics

10.4 Recommended Metrics for a Software Manager

10.5 Issues with Metrics

11\. Configuration Management 7, 12

11.1 The Need for Configuration Management

11.2 Configuration Management Functions

11.3 Configuration Management Responsibilities

11.4 Practical Problems

12\. Software Quality Engineering and Assurance 8

Managing Quality 16

Engineering Quality 9,10

Software Testing 11

IV SOFTWARE PROCESS MATURITY

13 Software Process Maturity, Assessment and Improvement 1,2,3,4

13.1 Software Process Maturity

13.2 The SEI Capability Maturity Model (CMM)

13.3 Reviewing the Five Levels

13.4 Details of Level 2

13.5 Assessment

14 Continuous Process Improvement  13,14,17

