##  H468: Contemporary Issues in Environmental Design

##  Course Syllabus

##  [Course Schedule](http://www.indiana.edu/~iucdp/468sched99.html)

##  Spring Semester 1999

##  Updated: 16 April

####  Contents

Course Projects  
Course Requirements  
Textbooks  


"Seminar" noun  1 A group of advanced students studying under a professor with
each doing original research and all exchanging results through reports and
discussions  


####  Instructor:

Dr. Tom Mitchell  
Memorial Hall East 240  
Office Telephone:  855-6425 (please do not call at home -- thanks!)  
Office Hours: Monday, Wednesday 1:00 - 2:00 pm (or by appointment)  
e-mail: MITCHELC  


####  Catalog Course Description:

Study of philosophical, theoretical, historical, behavioral, technological,
and research issues of contemporary interest to environmental design.  


####  Course Overview:

This is a seminar course on contemporary issues in environmental design. These
trends will be reviewed in terms of the design philosophy which arose in
response to industrialization -- modernism -- and the subsequent reactions to
and against it, such as postmodernism and deconstruction and others. In
addition, various more recent approaches, in which the experience of a design
takes precedence over its form, will be studied.

Note: This course qualifies for Intensive Writing Credit (COAS W333). Writing
skills portions will be included in quizzes and exams and it will be necessary
to perform well on these in order to receive the IW credit. You will be
quizzed on the material contained in [Tom's Tips for Avoiding Common Writing
Errors](http://www.indiana.edu/~iucdp/writingtips.html).  


####  Reading:

This course will unavoidably require a great deal of reading. Students must
locate and read texts on architects and trends and answer assigned questions
on them. This is not just a icourse requirement,i but instead is necessary for
students so that they contribute meaningfully to the seminar discussions.  


####  Participation:

As the definition indicates, the purpose of a seminar is the exchange of
students' ideas through reports and discussions. It is essential, therefore,
that students come to class prepared to discuss the day's topic and
participate meaningfully in each discussion. Students will be graded on the
extent of their participation.  


####  Research:

Students will be given a tour of the art library, as well as a few tips on
conducting research, after which they will be expected to research their
topics independently and to convey their ideas effectively in both written and
spoken English. The thoroughness of one's research \-- the variety of sources
cited, the types of sources, and their dates of origin -- will also be
assessed. Though many of you will already have had a tour of the art library,
this class will require more in-depth research than previous ones did.
Further, the indexing systems for libraries are constantly changing and you
need to reaquaint yourself with them on a regular basis.  


####  Course Projects:

#####  Precedent Reports:

Precedent Reports will be presented by groups of two students. They will focus
on an assigned trend or sub-trend of contemporary architecture \-- its origin,
context, focus, philosophy, and primary participants. Conclusions on the
importance of the trend presented, and its influence, should also be made, and
a bibliography included.

The second part of the report will present the work of two designers
identified with the each report sub-trend. These reports are to include the
designeris name, country of origin, a brief listing of their educational and
professional background, philosophical statements, a portfolio of 3 - 5 major
works (name, location, date, etc.), a precedent analysis of one building, and
a bibliography of publications by or about the architect. The precedent
analysis is the most important aspect of these presentations -- focus on
buildings, not biography! Groups will prepare a one page handout on their
topic for distribution to their fellow students (20 copies)-- include your web
page URL on this page!

[Click here for more detail](http://www.indiana.edu/~iucdp/precedent.html)  
    
[Click here for a generic template to
follow](http://www.indiana.edu/~iucdp/468template.html)

[Click here for a good student example to refer
to](http://php.indiana.edu/~ksamuels/h468/pres1.html)  


**Microtheme Papers**

Students will be asked to write two Microtheme papers \-- one on a Modern
architect's work, one on that of an After-Modern architect. For more
information visit the following links

[Microtheme Paper One: Brief and
Schedule](http://www.indiana.edu/~iucdp/micro1.html)

[Microtheme Paper Two: Brief and
Schedule](http://www.indiana.edu/~iucdp/micro2.html)

[Writing Help Page](http://www.indiana.edu/~iucdp/e103p1/detailsproj1.html)

[More on Thesis Statements (+ Microtheme Paper
Reminders)](http://www.indiana.edu/~iucdp/thesis.html)

[Click here for a good example of a Microtheme
Paper](http://www.indiana.edu/~iucdp/468goodmicro.html)  


#####  Columbus, Indiana Visit and Report

Class will not be held on 30 March or 1 April. Instead, during this week (or
before) students will be asked to visit Columbus, Indiana. You may either
participate in an organized or self-guided tour of the architecture there, but
in either case you are to visually document five buildings, presenting them in
a designerly way that identifies their name, date of completion, location,
architect, the movement they are associated with, the overall concept, and the
key design features (3 - 5). The choice of format is up to each student (e.g.
reports, boards, computer presentation).

Information on tours in Columbus, Indiana can be found at:

<http://columbus.in.us/page.asp?page=Architecture>

Maps to Columbus can be found at:

<http://columbus.in.us/page.asp?page=maps>

Extra Credit: is available for doing a second report on the new architecture
in Cincinnati.  


#####  In Class Writing Assignments:

There will be four in class writing assignments given during the semester.
Students will be provided a list of names and terms and will be asked to write
very short papers in class, with no notes, which relate the terms, and
demonstrate their significance.

[Click here for more information](http://www.indiana.edu/~iucdp/goodpara.html)  
    
[Click here for the In Class Writing Assignments
themselves](http://www.indiana.edu/~iucdp/inclass.html)  


#####  Quizzes:

Quizzes of visual and written identifications will be given to confirm the the
material introduced in class and through readings is being assimilated.  


#####  Mid-Term and Final Exams:

A Mid-Term and a Final exam will be given. These will consist of short answer
questions and visual identifications.  


#####  Assigned Questions:

Periodically, students will be asked to prepare responses to assigned
questions on their readings. These questions will also be the basis for in
class discussion; student's participation in these discussions will be
incorporated into the participation grade for the course.

[Click here for the questions](http://www.indiana.edu/~iucdp/studyqs.html)  


####  Course Requirements:

#####  Completion of Assigned Projects:

The primary requirement in this course will be the completion of assigned
projects.  Completion of each activity will be considered in determining your
grade. Preparedness and participation in all seminar activities is essential.
Your work will be due on designated dates and it will be given a late grade if
it is not turned in on schedule.  


#####  Late Work:

In general, late work will be graded down by one letter grade for each day it
is late. For example, the highest grade possible on work one day late is a B+,
two days late C+, three days late D+, etc. It is the instructor's prerogative
to make exceptions to this rule in the case of extenuating circumstances.  


#####  Attendance and Punctuality:

Each student is expected to be on time and remain for the full class time each
day. This is especially important as a courtesy to your fellow students who
are making presentations.  


#####  Grading:

The relative importance of the course components is:  
    
Precedent reports (x 2)  25%  
Microtheme essays (x 2)  17.5%  
Columbus report  10%  
In-Class Writing assignments  20% (i.e. 5% each, no drops)  
Quizzes (x5)  10% (i.e. 2% each)  
Mid-term exam  7.5%  
Final exam  10%  


#####  Grading Scale:

  A=90-100%  
  B=80- 89%  
  C=70- 79%  
  D=60- 69%  
  F=59% and below  


#####  Written Work:

All written work submitted must be presented using current and correct English
usage. Sentences used to express thoughts must always be complete sentences.
Written work which includes multiple misspellings, poor grammar, incomplete
sentences, or incorrect word usage will not be graded. Instead, such work will
be returned for correction.  


#####  Grade of Incomplete:

The criteria by which a student may receive an incomplete are described in the
COAS Bulletin.  


#####  Academic (Dis)honesty:

Research is a cooperative endeavor, experienced researchers rarely generate
any work without the input of colleagues and the citation of a range of
publications. Students do have the responsibility of interpreting information
and aid provided by others, and to take full responsibility for it. All work
produced for the course should be the product of their own intellect;
plagiarism will not be permitted.  


#####  Liberal Learning at I.U.:

You are enrolled in a university, not a vocational, program. The principle
purpose of the interior design program at I.U. is consistent with that of the
College of Arts and Sciences within which it is located \-- to promote liberal
learning. The specific goals of the liberal arts curriculum are set out in the
COAS Bulletin. In keeping with the goals of the College, this primary focus of
this course will be on the teaching of design thinking.  


####  Textbooks:

Many of these books are on reserve. Click
[here](http://www.indiana.edu/~libfind) and select "IUB Library Reserve
Catalog" under the first gray menu bar.

#####  Required:

_Modern Architecture_ , 3rd Edition by William J.R. Curtis

_Architecture of Today_ by Andreas Papadakis and James Steele  


#####  Recommended:

_Modern Architecture: A Critical History_ by Kenneth Frampton

_History of Modern Architecture_ , Volumes 1 + 2 by Leonardo Benevolo

_Modern Movements in Architecture_ by Charles Jencks

_Pioneers of Modern Design_ by Nikolaus Pevsner

_History and Theory in the First Machine Age_ by Reyner Banham  


_Architecture Today_ by James Steele

_The Language of Post-Modern Architecture_ , 6th edition by Charles Jencks

_Contemporary American Architects_ by Philip Jodidio (and his ones on
Contemporary European Architecture)

_Architecture Today,_ Revised and Enlarged Edition by Charles Jencks

_Postmodern Visions_ by Heinrich Klotz

_Postmodern_ by Paolo Portoghesi

_Architecture after modernism_ by Diane Ghirardo.

_What is post-modernism?_   by Charles Jencks.

_The history of postmodern architecture_   by Heinrich Klotz  


_Deconstructivist architecture_ by Philip Johnson and Mark Wigley.

_The architecture of deconstruction: Derrida's haunt_ by   Mark Wigley.

_High-tech architecture_ by Colin Davies.  


_New Thinking in Design: Conversations on Theory and Practice_ by C. Thomas
Mitchell

_The Hot House_ by Andrea Branzi

_Learning from Milan: Design in the Second Modernity_ by Andrea Branzi

_Design After Modernism: beyond the object_ edited by John Thackara

_Design Discourse_ edited by Victor Margolin

_Redefining Designing: From Form to Experience_ by C. Thomas Mitchell

    
Note: In addition there will be monographs or books on specific designers, and
on specific movements. You should seriously consider investing in those that
cover your assigned designers and movements.  


**Additional Useful Resources**

[Writing Tutorial Service](http://www.indiana.edu/~wts/wts/home.html)

[Student Academic Center](http://www.indiana.edu/~sac)

[Computer Education Program](http://iuep.iu.edu)  
    


* * *

  

* * *

  
Last Updated: 5.1.99 Send Comments and Suggestions to:
[mitchelc@i](mailto:mitchelc@indiana.edu)[ndiana.edu](mailto:username@indiana.edu)
[Copyright](http://www.indiana.edu/copyright.html) 1997, The Trustees of
[Indiana University](http://www.indiana.edu/)

* * *

  

