#  CS 1320 (Principles of Algorithm Design I):  
Syllabus

##  Prerequisites

None.

##  Course description

This course is the first course for computer science majors, following the
guidelines established by the Association for Computing Machinery. This course
also partially satisfies the requirements for _Understanding the World Through
Science_ of the common curriculum. The course content will include learning
about block structured strongly typed programming languages as well as
conceptual information including beginning data structures, computer
arithmetic, computer organization, operating systems, programming languages,
sorting, and searching. Our study will include data types, arrays, strings,
structures, files, recursion, decisions, and loops.

##  Course goals and objectives

The objectives of this course include, but are not limited to, the following:

  * learning fundamental problem-solving methodology 
  * applying problem-solving techniques to algorithm design 
  * implementing algorithms in a suitable programming language 
  * development and analysis of algorithms 
  * introduction to the basic topics in data structures 
  * introduction to sorting and searching algorithms 

##  Instructor

**Instructor:**      Dr. Berna Massingill **E-mail:**
[bmassing@cs.trinity.edu](mailto:bmassing@cs.trinity.edu) **Web page:**     [
http://www.cs.trinity.edu/~bmassing/](http://www.cs.trinity.edu/~bmassing/)
**Office:**      Halsell 201L **Office hours:**      See my Web page. **Office
phone:**      (210) 999-8138

##  Textbook

_Problem Solving in C++ Including Breadth and Laboratories_ ; Angela B.
Shiflet; PWS Publishing Company; 1998.

##  Other references

(This list of references graciously provided by Dr. Eggen.)

  * Cormen, Leiserson and Rivest, _Introduction to Algorithms_ , McGraw Hill, 1990. 
  * Eggen and Eggen, _Introduction to Computer Science using C_ , PWS Publishers, 1996. 
  * Hanly, Koffman, and Friedman, _Problem Solving and Program Design in C_ , Addison Wesley, 1993. 
  * Kelley and Pohl, _C by Dissection: The Essentials of C Programming_ , Benjamin Cummings, 1992, Second Edition 
  * Kernighan and Ritchie, _The C Programming Language_ , Prentice Hall, 1988, Second Edition. 
  * King, _C Programming: A Modern Approach_ , Norton Publishers, 1996. 
  * Schildt, _C: The Complete Reference_ , McGraw Hill, 1990, Second Edition. 
  * Sobell, _A Practical Guide to the Unix System_ , Benjamin Cummings, Third Edition, 1995. 

##  Grades

The grades in this course will be determined by the results of

  * three exams, two in class and one during the scheduled final-exam period, 
  * several homework assignments, and 
  * periodic quizzes. 
Averages will be calculated as a simple percentage, i.e., points earned
divided by points possible. Exams will account for approximately 40 percent of
the total points (with the two in-class exams equally weighted and the final
worth twice that much); homeworks will account for about another 40 percent;
quizzes will account for the remaining 20 percent. Letter grades will be
assigned according to the following scale

  * 90-100: A 
  * 80-89: B 
  * 70-79: C 
  * 60-69: D 
with plus and minus grades assigned in marginal cases.

##  Exams

Exams are comprehensive but will emphasize the most recent material. They are
scheduled as follows. Please plan accordingly.

  * Examination 1: February 18, in class 
  * Examination 2: March 24, in class 
  * Final Examination: May 6, 8:30am 

##  Quizzes

There will be a short quiz almost every Monday, covering material since the
previous quiz.

##  Homeworks

Several homework assignments will be required for successful completion of
this class. Each assignment will be due at the _beginning of the period_ on
the day assigned.

Most homeworks will be laboratory problems, which will be coded in a suitable
programming language. You are encouraged to use the department's network of
Unix machines, but unless otherwise specified for individual assignments, you
may use any other system that provides a suitable environment. Detailed
requirements for problem submission will be provided with each assignment.

##  Attendance

Regular class attendance is strongly encouraged.

##  Class Web page

Much course-related information (this syllabus, homework assignments and
sample solutions, example programs, and so forth) will be made available via
the World Wide Web. You can find the home page for the course at [
http://www.cs.trinity.edu/~bmassing/CS1320_2000spring/info.html](http://www.cs.trinity.edu/~bmassing/CS1320_2000spring/info.html).
This page is not only a starting point for Web-accessible course material but
will also be used for course-related announcements, so you should plan to
check it frequently.

##  Late and missed work

Exams can be made up only in cases of documented conflict with a university-
sponsored activity or documented medical emergency. The former requires prior
notice.

Homework will normally be accepted up to five days late, at a penalty of 10
percent off per day. More stringent deadlines may be imposed for individual
assignments.

Quizzes cannot be made up. However, in computing a final average for each
student, the lowest quiz score will be dropped, allowing each student to miss
one quiz without penalty.

##  Collaboration and academic integrity

Unless otherwise specified, all work submitted for a grade (exams, quizzes,
and homeworks) must represent the student's own individual effort. Discussion
of homework assignments among students is encouraged, but not to the point
that the actual program code is being written collectively. Programs that are
identical beyond coincidence are in violation of the Academic Integrity policy
of the university and will result in disciplinary action, including, but not
limited to, a failing grade on that assignment for all parties involved. You
are responsible for the security of your work, both electronic and hard copy.

