CS3733-D01 Course Details

# CS 3733-D01: Software Engineering

# Course Details

Staff | Discussion Board | Textbooks | Groups | Grading | Software | Policies
| [3733 Home Page](index.html)

* * *

##  Course staff

Position| Name| Email | Phone| Office| Office Hours  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
Professor| [Kathi Fisler](http://www.cs.wpi.edu/~kfisler/)|  _kfisler_ |
508-831-5118| Fuller 145| Tuesday 2-3,  
Thursday 10-11,  
and by appt | TA| Choong-Soo Lee|  _clee01@cs_ |  x5202*| FLA20| Thursday 2-4
| TA| Mike Sao Pedro|  _falcor@wpi_ |  x5202*| FLA20| Wednesday 1-3 *=phone
number during office hours; TAs are not at this number at other times

## Discussion Board

Direct all course-related discussion to the [discussion
board](http://my.wpi.edu/bin/common/forum_list.pl?course_id=_1793_1) in the
[MyWPI area for this
course](http://my.wpi.edu/bin/common/course.pl?course_id=_1793_1&frame=top).

##  Textbooks

**Required:** Object-Oriented Software Engineering: Concquering Complex and
Changing Systems. Bernd Bruegge and Allen H. Dutoit. Prentice Hall, 2000. ISBN
0-13-489725-0.

**Recommended:** The Mythical Man-Month. Frederick P. Brooks, Jr. Addison-
Wesley, 1995. ISBN 0-20-183595-9. (older editions also fine). _This book has
many fine insights on the process of software engineering and some of its
notable pitfalls. It's a classic in the field of software engineering and
highly recommended for anyone planning to work in software development._

## Groups

Several of the course projects are group projects. Each group will contain
three students. You may form your own groups by specifying group member names
on a form to be provided on the first day of the course. The course staff will
create or complete groups for students who do not express preferences.

If your group is having problems working together, you may discuss the
problems with the course staff. We will not reassign groups unless there are
extenuating circumstances, however, as learning to work through group problems
is an important job skill. See the [groups page](groups.html) for information
on which students are in each group and which project component each group is
implementing.

## Grading

There will be four projects (one individual and three group) and two exams.
Details on the projects will appear on the [assignments
page](assignments.html) as they become available. The four projects will be as
follows:

  1. _Individual Project_ : You will need to integrate two components written in different languages.

  2. _Requirements Analysis Project_ : Your group will need to produce a detailed requirements document for a large system.

  3. _Component Implementation_ (with Interface Document): Your group will implement one component for a large system that the entire class is developing (several groups will design versions of each component). Each group will present its design and implementation to the course staff in an oral code review (to be explained in detail on the project handout).

  4. _Component Extension_ : Your group will have to augment or alter the behavior of the component that you implemented for the previous project.

Course grades will be based on the following weights. Details on the grading
for each project will appear on the project handouts.

  * Individual Project (10%) 
  * Group Project (50% - broken down as follows) 
    * Requirements Analysis Project (20%) 
    * Interface Document (5%) 
    * Component Implementation (25%) 
  * Midterm (15%) 
  * Final (25%) 

##  Course Software

### MzScheme

We will use the [MzScheme](http://www.cs.rice.edu/CS/PLT/packages/mzscheme/)
variant of Scheme for all coding projects in the course. You must use the
MzScheme variant of Scheme. No other Scheme implementation provides the
object-oriented and component features that we will use in this course.

You can use MzScheme with your favorite editor, or you can use the [DrScheme
programming environment](http://www.cs.rice.edu/CS/PLT/packages/drscheme/),
which sits on top of MzScheme and provides several nice features, such as
source correlation of errors and a project manager. Both DrScheme and MzScheme
are installed on CCC (/usr/local/plt/bin/mzscheme and
/usr/local/plt/bin/drscheme). Alternatively, you can download either package
(for free) to your own computer (Unix, PC, Mac all supported, with files
portable between them). Note that installing DrScheme also installs MzScheme.

Both DrScheme and MzScheme support language levels (which tailor the keywords
available to the user). You should work in the "Full Scheme" level; turning on
graphics support as you need or choose.

### CVS

CVS is a version-control system. Using CVS, multiple team members can share
access and merge updates to files without manually tracking who has the most
up-to-date versions. You are not required to use CVS, but you may find it
helpful. It is installed on CCC. The [documentation
page](http://www.gnu.org/software/cvs/) contains more details and usage
instructions.

##  Administrative Policies

###  Make-up Exam Policy

Make-up exams will only be allowed in the event of a documented emergency. The
two exam dates are listed on the syllabus. You are responsible for avoiding
conflicts with the exams. Do not plan to leave campus for the term before the
final exam.

###  Late Homework Policy

The syllabus lists the due dates and times for each assignment. No assignment
will be accepted beyond the official due date without prior consent of the
professor (the TAs are not allowed to grant extensions). Extensions will be
granted only in the event of unforseen and documentable emergencies, or
extenuating circumstances that you discuss with the professor well in advance.
The inability of one group member to make a deadline will not be considered an
acceptable excuse for an extension in most circumstances.

###  Collaboration and Cheating Policy

The collaboration policy will vary across assignments. Each assignment handout
will contain a clearly marked collaboration policy. Failure to follow the
collaboration policy on an assignment will constitute cheating. No
collaboration is allowed on exams, which will be closed-book and closed-notes.

Violations of the collaboration policy on any assignment or exam will result
in no credit (NR) for the course and a referral to the Student Affairs Office
for disciplinary action. Your only chance of escaping an NR is to admit to the
cheating to the professor before the course staff detects it. If we detect it
first, an NR is assured.

### Special Needs and Disabilities Policy

Students requiring accommodation on exams or assignments due to disabilities
must speak with the professor at the start of the term (and at least two weeks
before the assignment due date or exam in question) to work out appropriate
arrangements.

* * *

|  This page maintained by [Kathi Fisler](http://www.cs.wpi.edu/~kfisler/)  
[Department of Computer Science](http://www.cs.wpi.edu/) [Worcester
Polytechnic Institute](http://www.wpi.edu/)  
  
---

