**CS 5512 - Spring 2000**  
**SYLLABUS**

**Course Title:** Artificial Intelligence II (Writing Intensive)

**Instructor:**     [Dean Hougen](http://www-users.cs.umn.edu/~hougen/), 6-195
EE/CSci, 612-624-4822, [hougen@cs.umn.edu](mailto:hougen@cs.umn.edu)

**Teaching Assistant:**      Bing Lu, [blu@cs.umn.edu](mailto:blu@cs.umn.edu)

**Class Hours:** Tuesday, Thursday 11:00-12:15, EE/CSci 3-115

**Office Hours:**  

Dean Hougen     2-3 Tuesday, Thursday in 6-195 Bing Lu     2-3, Wednesday,
Friday in 2-209

**Text Books:**      Required: _Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach_ ,
First Edition, Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig, 1995, Prentice Hall. Students
should read ahead the chapters that are expected to be covered in the class
period. Students should always bring their textbook with them to class,
including lectures and exams.      Recommended: _Writing for Computer Science_
, First Edition, Justin Zobel, 1997, Springer (ISBN 981-3083-22-0). This is an
excellent book to have if you expect to have a professional career in CS, even
if you are not in the WI version of the course.

**Communication:**      The primary means of transmitting class information to
the students will be through announcements during class time, announcements in
the Message of the Day, and web pages.

The best way for students to communicate with the teaching staff is to come to
scheduled office hours. If you cannot attend office hours in person, phone
calls can be accepted but students present in the office will get priority.
Email can also be used but a quick or detailed personal response is unlikely
as we get a **lot** of email and responding to email can be very time
consuming.

The best way for students to communicate with one another is through the class
newsgroup.

Details of all of the communication methods follow.

**WWW:**      Information about this class will be found on the class website.
The URL is  
**<http://www.itlabs.umn.edu/classes/Spring-2000/csci5512/>**  
This page will contain links to the directory of class materials and
announcements, the message of the day, the class newsgroup, and the email
addresses of the teaching staff. **Email:**      Students should use the email
addresses listed above. Note that we get a **lot** of email. Do not expect a
reply in minutes; one or two days is more likely in most cases. If you have
not heard back within five days, please resend your message. **Files:**
All class materials and announcements will be available on the IT Labs
machines in the directory  
**[/web/classes/Spring-2000/csci5512/materials](http://www.itlabs.umn.edu/classes/Spring-2000/csci5512/materials)**
**MOTD:**      A message of the day will be placed in the class file
directory. To automatically view this file on login, students should add the
command  
`cat /web/classes/Spring-2000/csci5512/materials/MOTD`  
to their `.login` scripts. **News:**      The newsgroup `umn.cs.class.5512`
exists for discussion of the materials in this course. Students are encouraged
to use this resource for communication with one another and with the teaching
staff but are warned that responses will not be as rapid as with direct email
communication.

**Expectations and Goals:**      The prerequisites for this course are a
knowledge of data structures (graphs and trees) and of predicate logic. This
course will cover the principles of Artificial Intelligence with emphasis on
representation and problem solving. For topics covered, see the schedule.

**Computer Accounts and Software:**      All students in this class should
have an IT Labs account. This will be used for writing programs and sending
and receiving materials electronically. All code written for this course
**MUST** run using the compilers or interpreters that will be specified for
the assignments. You may do your development work on whatever system you
choose but it is your responsibility to ensure that your code runs on the
school systems.

**Requirements:**      The graded assignments and their contribution to a
student's grade are given in the table below. (Subject to change.)

Item  |  Quantity  |  Percent  |  Homeworks  
Project  
Exam 1  
Exam 2  
Final  
|  top 8 (of 9)  
1  
1  
1  
1  
|  20%  
25%  
15%  
15%  
25%  

Graduate students will also be asked to give a brief in-class presentation.
This presentation will be graded only pass/fail and will count for 1/5 of the
project score (i.e., 5% of the total points for the course).

Class attendance in not required except for exams and presentations. For the
presentations, all students will be asked review them and give comments \--
failure to do so adequately will result in the loss of 5% of the total course
points.

All homework assignments, the project, and exams in this course are to be done
**ALONE** ; the work submitted by a student **MUST** be the student's own.
Group work is encouraged, but not required, for the programming assignment.

All work in projects and programs **must** properly cite sources. For example,
if you quote a source in your project, you **must** include the quotation in
quotation marks and clearly indicate the source of the quotation.

Assignments are due at the beginning of lecture (at 11am) on the due date.
Late assignments will be penalized 20% per day late. (All parts of days will
be rounded up.) After five days, you will not be able to turn in that
assignment for credit. If you are worried about being late for class and
loosing points, turn in the assignment ahead of time, either in office hours
or by slipping it under my office door.

All exams will be open book/open notes. **NO** electronic devices will be
permitted in the testing area.

Copying another's work, or allowing (even negligently) others to copy your
work, or possession of electronic computing devices in the testing area, is
cheating and grounds for penalties in accordance with the IT Bulletin.

