**

George Mason University

DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE

Course Description

CS455 Computer Networking

Section 001 Fall 2001: Wed 1920-2200, ST I Room 126

Section 002 Fall 2001: Wed 1920-2200, Internet Distance Education

Last revised 9-27-01

**





**

INSTRUCTOR

**

Mr. Duncan Thomson, Senior Technical Advisor, Network and Communication
Engineering, The MITRE Corporation

Address: Mail Stop W650, The MITRE Corporation, 11493 Sunset Hills Road,
Reston, VA, 20190-5214

No specific office hours, but can meet with students any time by prior
arrangement (preferably before or after class)

Preferred contact email: [dthomson@cs.gmu.edu](mailto:dthomson@cs.gmu.edu)

Backup email: [duncant@mitre.org](mailto:duncant@mitre.org)

Phone: 703-883-7337

**



DESCRIPTION

**

The course will present data communications fundamentals and computer
networking methods, using the ISO 7-layer reference model to organize the
study. Attention will be focused on the protocols of the physical, data link
control, network, and transport layers, for local and wide area networks.
Emphasis will be given to the Internet Protocol Suite. Students will program
simplified versions of the protocols as part of the course project.

Prerequisites: CS365 and STAT344 or equivalent; ability to program in C/C++.

**



COURSE PROJECT

**

We will use the Network Workbench (NW), software developed at GMU that
simulates a protocol stack and displays the results, using a text interface.
Students will create modules for Internet stack layers and run them in the NW
environment. NW will be available via IT&E computing labs in ST2-18, 133, and
137 and by dial-in. For information on the IT&E computing labs, including how
to get an account, please see the IT&E lab web site at
[http://ite.gmu.edu/labs](http://ite.gmu.edu/labs). Versions of NW are also
available for download and installation on Linux and Sun systems, and also for
Windows sytems that have Borland or Visual C++ compilers installed. Additional
information on NW can be found at
[http://netlab.gmu.edu/NW](http://netlab.gmu.edu/NW).

The CS455 Project TA is Rong Wang, email
[rwang@cs.gmu.edu](mailto:rwang@cs.gmu.edu), office hours 1500 to 1800 Monday
and 1600 to 1800 Wednesday in room 365 S&T2. She also is available by
appointment at other times, for example after class (send email at least 24
hours in advance to set up appointment). Well documented code must be
submitted by email to the TA for grading (submit the module you programmed,
plus diskout.txt, as ATTACHMENTS CLEARLY LABELED WITH FILE NAMES). Additional
projects are available for extra credit.

The project is documented in one of the required texts. Copies of class
slides, software and documentation for the project are included with this text
on CDROM.

**



LECTURE SLIDES

**

Slides used for lectures will be available for download 24 hours before the
lecture. Slides may be downloaded from
[http://cs.gmu.edu/~dthomson/cs455](http://cs.gmu.edu/~dthomson/cs455). Note
that these may be slightly different than the slides used by the other
sections. Please use these slides not the slides for the other sections. Also,
please see the copyright notice on the first page and avoid using GMU printers
to make paper copies.

**



DISTANCE EDUCATION (FOR NET SECTION STUDENTS)

**

Classes will be available on computer desktops at home or office by using
dial-up through GMU Internet facilities. System requirements are a multimedia
Pentium computer with Microsoft Windows 95 or later and Microsoft Internet
Explorer 4 or later, and a 28.8kbps or better modem. Instructor's voice,
slides, and slide annotations are delivered to the student's desktop; students
can ask questions via text input. Classes are recorded as delivered and can be
played back through the same setup. All classes may be taken over the network,
however students must appear in person for midterm and final exams.

For general information on the ClassWise product, and to test Internet class
reception, visit the [ClassWise web site](http://www.classwise.com/) using
Internet Explorer 4 or later.

The primary web site for the NET section of CS-455 is
[http://netlab.gmu.edu/disted](http://netlab.gmu.edu/disted). A password is
required to access online delivery and playback of classes. If you have
registered for the NET section and have not received a password, please send
an e-mail to [help@netlab.gmu.edu](mailto:help@netlab.gmu.edu).

**



HOMEWORK

**

The CS455 Homework TA is Sundhar Lakshminarsimhan, email
[slakshmi@cs.gmu.edu](mailto:slakshmi@cs.gmu.edu). His office hours are 14:00
to 16:00 on Monday and 17:00 to 19:00 Wednesday in room 365 ST2, and by
appointment at other times (including after class in the evening)- send email
to set up appointment. Students taking the course in the classroom section
should turn in their homework as hardcopy in class on the due date, but if a
student is for some reason unable to turn in hardcopy, the TA will accept
homework submitted by e-mail. Students in the distance education (NET) section
should submit their assignments by email to Sundhar. NET section homework
scores will be returned by email; the hardcopy assignments will be returned at
the midterm and final exams.

Assignments are due by 7:30PM on assigned date. Late assignments lose 10% per
class credit.

**



GRADING POLICY

**

Homework 10%, Midterm exam 25%, Project 30%, Final exam 35%.

Project credit breakout: DLC1, DLC2, LAN1, WAN2, and INT3 four points each;
DLC3 and TRN1 five points each; extra credit LAN2, WAN3, WAN4, INT1, and INT2
two points each.

Missed exams must be arranged with the instructor BEFORE the exam date.

All students are expected to abide by the Honor Code as stated in the GMU
catalog and elaborated for Computer Science.

Grading is proficiency-based (no curve), cutoffs will be in the vicinity of
(but not higher than) A - 90; B - 80; C - 70.

**



SYLLABUS (subject to revision)

**

Date / Lecture number and _topic_ / _Readings in Shay text_ / _Project
assignment discussed; due_

8-29 / Lecture 1 - Course introduction; network architecture and layering
concepts; 7-layer and 5-layer models / Chapter 1 / NW Setup

9-05 / Lecture 2 - Physical layer: transmission media, coding / Sections 2.1
to 2.3 / Project DLC1: Framing

9-12 / Lecture 3 - Analog/digital transmission, serial/parallel interfaces,
multiplexing, CRC / Sections 2.4 to 3.3, 4.3 / Project DLC2: CRC

9-19 / Lecture 4 - Data compression, security principles, integrity,
appropriate use / Section 3.5, Chapter 4 / Project DLC 1 due

9-26 / Lecture 5 - Data link control; discrete event simulation / Chapter 5 /
Project DLC 3: ARQ ; Project DLC 2 due

10-3 / Lecture 6 - Local area networks / Section 3.4, Chapter 6 / Project LAN
1: CSMA/CD LAN

10-10 / No class; (Monday classes meet on Wednesday)

**

10-17 / Mid-Term Exam covering Chapters 1 to 6

**

10-24 / Lecture 7 - Network Layer: WANs, X.25, routing concepts / Sections 7.3
to 7.4 /

10-31 / Lecture 8 - Internet Architecture (IPv4), routing algorithms /
Sections 7.1 to 7.2 / Project WAN 2: Forwarding and Optimization; Project DLC3
due

11-7 / Lecture 9 - Queueing basics; transport layer: TCP and UDP / Chapter 7.5
and 7.6 / Project TRN 1: Reliable Transport; Project LAN 1 due

11-14 / Lecture 10 - Multicast and multimedia networking / no reading /
Project WAN 2 due

**_

11-21 / No class - Thanksgiving Holiday Recess

**_

11-28 / Lecture 11 - Network Security and Network Management / Chapter 4 /
Project TRN1 due

12-05 / Lecture 12 - Higher layer protocols / Chapter 8 / Project INT 3:
Integrated Stack and Project Report; Project TRN 1 due

**

12-12 Final exam (comprehensive) / Chapters 1 to 8 / Project INT 3 and Report
due

**



**

READINGS

**

Required textbook: Understanding Data Communications and Networks, 2nd
Edition, Brooks/Cole Publishing, 1999

Required project book: Pullen, Understanding Internet Protocols, Wiley, 2000

References (available in library):

1\. Comer, Internetworking with TCP/IP, Vol. I, 3rd Ed., Prentice-Hall, 1996

2\. Stallings, Data and Computer Communications, 6th Ed., Prentice-Hall, 2000

3\. Tanenbaum, Computer Networks, 3rd Ed., Prentice-Hall, 1996

4\. Stevens, TCP/IP Illustrated, Volume 1, The Protocols, Addison-Wesley, 1994

Course notices and assignments will be provided via email. Students are
responsible to have an email account and provide an address to the instructor.
osf1.gmu.edu or other email addresses may also be used.

Course materials (for example, homework solutions) will be available though
the course webpage,
[http://netlab.gmu.edu/compnets](http://netlab.gmu.edu/compnets). Students are
responsible for assigned readings and all material outlined in lecture slides.



