![syllabus](imgs/syllabus_header.jpg) CS3724  
Spring 1999 Syllabus  
Introduction to Human-Computer Interaction  
Drs. Hix and Hartson  

**Course Goals:**  
This course presents basic components of human-computer interaction concepts,
theory, and practice. It takes a user-centered perspective, rather than a
system-centered one. We look at bridging the gulf between needs and
requirements of human users and capabilities and limitations of technology. We
discuss how to forge communication between users and system developers. We
base the course on a dichotomy between user interaction design and user
interface software design. The course covers iterative development of user
interaction design, including user requirements gathering, with emphasis on
usability goals; user analysis; user task analysis; design, rapid prototyping,
and user-centered evaluation. Iterative development activities are practiced
in the context of several team projects.

**Prerequisites:**  
Any course in Computer Science and junior-level standing. This prerequisite
will be strictly enforced and it will be considered an honor code violation to
attempt to get into this course without satisfying the prerequisite.

**Professors:**  
Dr. H. Rex Hartson, Computer Science, McBryde 635,
[hartson@vt.edu](mailto:hartson@vt.edu)  
Dr. Deborah Hix, Computer Science, McBryde 604,
[hix@vt.edu](mailto:hix@vt.edu)

**Office Hours:**  
Hartson: Tu and Th, 3:15 - 4:30  
Hix: Tu 3:15 - 4:30, Th 3:15 - 3:50

**Class Web Site:**  
http://ei.cs.vt.edu/~cs3724

**Class meeting times:**  

Dr. H. Rex Hartson section:  
    Tu, Th 2 - 3:15 Randolph 216 Dr. Deborah Hix, section:     Tu, Th 2 - 3:15 Norris 306 

**GTAs:**  

Hartson section: Rajat Gupta, [rgupta@vt.edu](mailto:rgupta@vt.edu)     Office
Hours: T,H : 9:00 - 10:30 McBryde 120 Hix section: Oleg Krouchinkin,
[oleg007@csgrad.cs.vt.edu](mailto:oleg007@csgrad.cs.vt.edu)     Office Hours:
M,W,F : 2 - 3:20 McBryde 120

**Required Text:**  
Ben Shneiderman. _Designing the User Interface, 3rd Edition._ Addison-Wesley,
1998.  
There will also be other readings on the Web or on reserve at Newman Library
from time to time.

**Lecture Notes:**  
[Class notes](http://ei.cs.vt.edu/~cs3724/readings.html) will be put on the
Web in advance of the class in which they will be covered. You should print
these notes and bring them to class with you. That will make it easy to keep
up in class.

**Grading:**

|  Midterm exam  |  15%  
---|---  
Final exam  |  20%  
Team project  |  55%  
          Project 0 (5%)  |     
          Project 1 (5%)  |     
          Project 2 (13%)  |     
          Project 3 (12%)  |     
          Project 4 (15%)  |     
          Project 5 (5%)  |     
Homework  |  10%  
  |  **100%**  
  
**Exams:**  
Exams are in-class, closed book, closed notes. The final exam for both
sections is on Friday, 7 May 1999, 7:45 - 9:45 AM. The final exam is
cumulative.

**Team project:**  
The class is divided into teams of three members each, on a random basis. No
swapping of team members is allowed. The team is given a grade for each part
of the project. Each individual team member's grade for each project
assignment is a weighting of the team grade, where the weighting is based on
an evaluation of individual contributions, collected from each team member at
the end of each project.

**Homework:**  
There will be several written homework assignments. Each assignment will both
be posted on the Web and announced in class well in advance of its due date.
Assignments will not be "handed out" (as in a paper version).

NOTE: If Virginia Tech is closed for inclement weather on a day when any
assignment is due, that assignment then becomes due NO LATER THAN 2 PM of the
first day the University is again open. A box will be outside your professor's
door for you to leave the assignment.

**Class Policies:**

_Reading assignments._

> You are responsible for keeping up with the textbook reading schedule given
on the Web.

_Homework and project assignments._

> All homework and project assignments must be turned in at the beginning of
class on the due date. All due dates for assignments are firm, and there are
no extensions, for any reason. Any assignment that you do not hand in on time
will be given a grade of zero. No late assignments will be accepted and there
will be no excused assignments, for any reason. If you are not able to
complete an assignment by the due date, you should hand in as much of it as
you have done. You must prepare your assignments electronically and hand in a
hardcopy by the due date/time. Assignments may not be submitted via e-mail to
either the professor or a GTA.

_Missed or early exams._

> If you miss an exam, your explanation will be considered valid only if you
have a note from a doctor or from your Dean's office explaining the situation.
There will be no early exams nor any make-up exams for any reason. It is up to
the discretion of the professor, on a case by case basis, what happens next
whenever an exam is missed for any reason.

_Questions about grading._

> While the professors establish grading standards, the GTAs actually grade
homework and project assignments. Therefore, when you have questions about
grading of these, you should first see the GTA who graded the work. All
questions regarding grading must be resolved within one week of return of the
graded work. Keep all graded work until the end of the semester. In case your
grade is incorrectly recorded, you will need to bring in the graded original
in order for the recorded grade to be changed.

_Responding to e-mail._

> The professors and GTAs will make every effort to answer your e-mail to them
in a timely fashion. However, due to the volume of e-mail with classes of this
size, you should not expect to get a reply in less than 24 hours. Many times
you may get a reply in less than 24 hours, but you should not count on it
(e.g., to answer questions about a homework or project assignment within the
last few hours before that assignment is due). Please put "CS3724" as the
subject line of your e-mail; that will help us identify your e-mails more
quickly.

_No "extra credit" work._

> Students sometimes ask for some extra credit work near the end of the
semester in an attempt to bring up poor grades. No extra credit work will be
given to any student for any reason at any time during or after the semester.

_Leaving class early._

> You are expected to remain through the entire class period, as leaving early
is disruptive and disturbs everyone else in the classroom. If you know in
advance that you must leave early, you are to clear it with the professor
before class begins, and then to sit as near the door as possible and leave
quietly. "I'm sleepy" is not a valid excuse for leaving early :>)

_Grades via e-mail._

> Because of the large number of students in each class, professors and GTAs
will not be able to reply to individual e-mail requests for final exam and/or
class grades at the end of the semester, but grades will be posted (on the Web
and otherwise).

**Honor System:**  
The current Honor System policies of the University are to be observed in this
course. All individual work (e.g., homework, exams) must be completed by you,
working alone. The group project should be carried out without assistance from
people outside the group, except as explicitly noted in an assignment.

**Special Needs:**  
If you have any special needs because of disabilities, please contact your
professor during the first week of classes.  
  


![](imgs/blue_dot.jpg)

![](imgs/blue_dot.jpg)  
![](imgs/blue_dot.jpg)



Webpage created by Oleg Krouchinkin.  
Please send your comments / suggestions to
[oleg007@csgrad.cs.vt.edu](mailto:oleg007@csgrad.cs.vt.edu)



