> > > > > Computer Science -150  
> Course Syllabus Spring 2001

  
Course Title: Fundamentals of Computer Science I  
Credit: 4 semester hours credit  
Lecture: MWF 10:00- 10:50am in Grote 208  
Laboratory: Monday 1:00 - 2:50pm in Grote 208

Instructor: Dr. Joseph M. Kizza  
212 Grote Hall  
Phone: 755-4043  
Office Hours: MWF 9:00 - 10:00 am  and by appointment  
Email: joseph-kizza@utc.edu  
Department office: Grote 326 Secretary's Phone: 755-4349

PREREQUISITES AND COREQUISITES: Four years of college preparatory mathematics
and Math placement scores of 30 or better or Math 135 or Math 145.

COURSE DESCRIPTION: An introduction to computer science concepts and computer
software development using a higher level language Algorithms, flowcharting,
programming, and documentation of numerical and non-numerical problems.
Introduction to computer science terminology and concepts such as computer
hardware and computer application areas. Lecture 3 hours and laboratory 2
hours.

COURSE OBJECTIVES: To introduce students to computer concepts, problem solving
and computer programming. The course will provide a broad overview of those
topics that are considered the most important areas of computer science. There
will also be discussions of the computer science profession and societal and
ethical issues.

COURSE REQUIREMENTS:

All work on lab assignments, tests, and the final exam is to be done on a
strictly individual basis unless otherwise notified. You may discuss lab work
with your lab partner, but all work handed in is to be your own. Credit may be
reduced or denied for work which has been copied or which is substantially
identical to the work of another student(s).

OTHER REQUIREMENTS:

1\. Regular class attendance is the main requirement of this course. Students
are expected to attend class regularly and to contact the instructor as soon
as possible in the event they miss class so that they may be informed of
material covered, upcoming labs/tests, etc.. Students are held responsible for
all materials covered and any labs due during their absence.  
2\. Active class participation, this means you must spend some quality time
preparing for your next class.  
3\. You have one week to finish an assigned lab. After one week no labs will
be accepted for a grade. There will be no making up of missed lab assignments  
4\. Three examinations and a comprehensive final examination will be given.
Only one missed exam can be made up by counting twice the grade you get in the
final examination. Miss two or more and you are likely to get an F.  
5\. Homework is assigned at end of each chapter covering the material
presented in class. All assigned homework is for practice purposes only. No
homework will be graded. However, solutions to the assigned homework will be
posted on the class list.  
6\. Individual extra credit assignments for the purpose of propping up a bad
grade will not be given.  
7\. Programs are graded out of 100 points if they are well documented and are
working according to the specifications. Otherwise, they are graded out of 70
points.

Notes taking is encouraged.

GRADING: Grades will be based on your performance on three in-class exams, a
comprehensive final examination, and your laboratory work.Your numerical
average will be based on the following weighting:

Exam #1 20%  
Exam #2 20%  
Exam #3 20%  
Comprehensive Final Exam 20%  
Laboratory 20%

Letter grades for the course will be assigned on the following scale:

GRADE DISTRIBUTION: 90+ = A; 80-89 = B; 70-79 = C; 60-69 = D; below 60 = F.

TENTATIVE SCHEDULE

Jan 8 -12: Chapter One - Using Computers  
Lab - Programming, Java Visual J++, and copy files

Jan. 15, 2001 Dr. Martin Luther King - Holiday

Jan. 17-19: Chapter Two - Software, Multimedia  
Lab - First Programming using Java

Ja. 22-26: Chapter Three - Documents, Worksheets, Data Bases  
Lab - Methods, Classes and Objects

Jan 29-Feb. 2: Chapter Four - Files & Data Storage  
Lab - Advanced Objects Concepts

Feb. 5-9  Lab - Using Methods  
Feb 9: Examination #1. Coverage: Chapters 1 -4  of Oja and Chapters 1-4 of
Java.

Feb. 12-16: Chapter Five - Computer Architecture  
Lab - Input and Decision Making

Feb. 19-23: Chapter Six - Computer Marketplace  
Lab - Looping, Short cuts and Arithmetic

Feb 26- March 2: Chapter Seven -LANS, E-Mail  
Lab - Arrays and Strings

March 5-9: Chapter Eight - Internet  
Lab - Advanced Arrays and Techniques

March 9: Examination #2. Coverage. Chapters 5-7 and Chapters 5-7 of Java.

March 19-23: Chapter Nine - Data Security & Controls  
Lab - Applets

March 26-30: Ten - Data Representation  
Lab - Graphics

April 2- 6:  Chapter Eleven -Communication Systems  
Lab - More Graphics

April 9-13 : Chapter 12 - Information Systems in Organizations  
Lab - Inheritence

April 13: Examination #3. Coverage. Chapters 8 - 10 and  chapters  8-9 of
Java.

April 16-20: Chapter 13 - Developing Information Systems  
Lab- Abstract Classes

TEXT BOOKS:

REQUIRED: Farrell and Gosselin. Java Programming with Visual J++ 6.0, 1999\.  
                      Parsons & Oja, Computer Concepts, Course Technology, 1998. 

AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT:

If you have a disability that may require special assistance or
accommodations, or you have questions related to any accommodations for
testing, note takers, readers, etc..., please speak to your professor as soon
as possible. Students may also contact the CAP/AAA(785-2202), Alicia Hatcher,
with questions about services offered to UTC students with qualified
disabilities.

SPRING SEMESTER IMPORTANT DATES:

Martin Luther King Jr. Day, Monday January 15,2001.  
Last day to drop without a "W" Monday, January 22, 2001.  
Last day to drop with a "W" Tuesday, March 6, 2001.  
Spring Break March 11-18, 2001.  
Last class meeting Monday, April 23, 2001  
Final exam Wednesday, April 25, 2001: 8:00 - 10:00 am  
    


