![New DU Banner](dunew.gif)

**American Nature/American Culture**

**Core 2340**

**Syllabus**

* * *

R. Boyce                            M. Viehmann  
330 Seeley Mudd Building          email:
[mviehman@du.edu](mailto:mviehman@du.edu)  
x3538  
email: [rboyce@du.edu](mailto:rboyce@du.edu)

OFFICE HOURS:  
Boyce: Tuesday 12-1 or by appt.  
Viehmann: by appt.

COURSE DESCRIPTION: This course will examine the history of Native American
and Euro-American interactions with specific ecosystems in the U.S. Focusing
on the Northeast and on the High Plains/Rocky Mountain regions, we will use
literature and historical ecology to explore questions of how humans have
interacted with and transformed these environments and how their cultures
expressed views of the land and changed with the land. We will use primary and
secondary historical, literary, and scientific readings, aerial photographs,
and field work to consider topics such as changes in plant diversity and plant
cover, ideas of the wilderness, and perceptions of the land and its values.

REQUIREMENTS: Two labs with lab reports (15% each), one literary essay on
Thoreau (20%), and two essay/short answer exams (25% each). The labs require
simple statistical analysis using Excel. There will be one optional workshop
on using this computer program for those who need orientation in Microsoft
Excel.

Lab reports and the paper are due at the beginning of class on the date shown.
Late reports and papers will be penalized.

EXPECTATIONS:

  * **Bring your texts to class**. We will make use of them during discussions. 
  * Attendence at labs and the field trip is **required**. Attendence at lectures and discussions is expected though not required, but it is unlikely that you will do well in this class if you miss them.

Most classes will meet in GCB 240. On some days we will break into smaller
groups midway through our class time and meet in seminar rooms (with Viehmann
in GCB 228; with Boyce in GCB 319). Please make note of the field trip and
laboratories; **the field trip requires an early departure time**. Vans will
depart promptly from the lot on Evans bounded by Driscoll South, Pioneer Hall,
and Columbine Hall. Computer labs will take place in Olin 103 and Boettcher
West 13; room assignments for each student will be announced before each lab.

TEXTS:

  * Cronon, William, _Changes in the Land_
  * Thoreau, Henry David, _Walden_
  * Norris, Kathleen, _Dakota: A Spiritual Geography_
  * Worster, Donald, _An Unsettled Country_
  * Course Reader

All texts are available in the DU bookstore. Additional copies of _Walden_ and
_Dakota_ can also be found at local libraries and bookstores.

* * *
    
    
    **SCHEDULE OF CLASS MEETINGS AND ASSIGNMENTS** 3/24    ORIENTATION TO COURSE
            Introduction:  What is Ecology? What is Culture?
               Relationships Between Humans, the Environment, and History
    
    THE NEW ENGLAND REGION:  HISTORICAL ECOLOGY
    3/29    The View From Walden Pond:  The World the Europeans Found
                    Readings: Cronon, chapters 1-3
                              Vale, _Plants and People_ selections in reader
                              Vankat,  "Deciduous Forest Vegetation" selections, in reader
    
    3/31    Transitions in Ecology Created by European Cultures in New England
                    Readings: Hamburg & Cogbill, "Historical decline of red spruce populations
                                    and climatic warming" in reader
                              Henry & Swan, "Reconstructing Forest History..." in reader
                              Bormann & Likens, _Pattern & Process in Forested Ecosystem_ in reader
                              Cronon, chapter 6
                              Harvard Forest Murals (in class)
    
    THE NEW ENGLAND REGION:  ECOLOGY, CULTURE & CHANGE
    4/5     Cultures in Collision, A World in Transition
                    Readings: Cronon, chapters 4, 5, 7
    
    4/7     Thoreau & Culture/Thoreau & Science
                    Readings: Thoreau, "Economy" "Where I Lived, and What I Lived For"
                              "The Bean-Field" "The Ponds" "House-Warming"
                              "Former Inhabitants and Winter Visitors" "Winter Animals"
                              "The Pond in Winter" "Spring" "Conclusion"
    
    4/12    Thoreau & Culture/Thoreau & Science continued
    
    THE NEW ENGLAND REGION:  CHANGES IN THE LAND
    4/14    _Evidence of Aerial Photographs--Lab Project_        **Location:  Boettcher East 102** 4/14-4/18  Evening Excel Workshop; time to be announced
    
    4/19    _Analysis of Aerial Photograph Data_        in Computer Lab, Olin 103
                   **Writing assignment on Thoreau due** 4/21    The New England Region Today
    
    4/26    **Midterm** WHERE THE MOUNTAINS MEET THE PLAINS:  HISTORICAL ECOLOGY OF COLORADO & ENVIRONS
    4/28    The Shortgrass Prairie
                    Readings: Vankat, "Grassland Vegetation" in reader
                              Pike, _Exploratory Travels..._ , pp. 195-206 in reader
                              Evans, _The Natural History of the Long Expedition to the Rocky
                              Mountains_ , "To the Rockies" (handout)
                    Guide to prairie plant identification
                    **Lab due**
    
    
     5/3     _Field Trip to the Plains Conservation Center--Plant Diversity of Disturbed & Undisturbed
                    Prairie
    _        **Meet at 7:45 am.** 5/5     _Analysis and Comparison of Plant Diversity_        in Computer Lab, Olin 103 or Boettcher West 13
    
    5/10    Into the Mountains
                    Readings: Pike, _Exploratory Travels..._ , pp. 206-31 in reader
                              Lewis and Clark journals, selections in reader
                              Evans, _The Natural History of the Long Expedition to the Rocky
                              Mountains_ , "Exploring the Front Range" (handout)
                              Worster, An Unsettled Country, Ch. 3
                   **~~Lab due~~** 5/12    Montane Ecology Then and Now
                    Readings: Vankat, "Montane Coniferous Forest" in reader
    
    WHERE THE MOUNTAINS MEET THE PLAINS:  ECOLOGY, CULTURE & CHANGE
    5/17    Culture in the Prairies and Mountains
                    Readings: Bird, _A Lady's Life in the Rocky Mountains_ , selections in reader
                    **Lab due (note new date)** 5/19    The Shortgrass Prairie Region Today 
                    Readings: Norris pp. 1-68, 79-89, 107-134, 142-158, 177-179, 188-190, 218-220
    
    WHERE THE MOUNTAINS MEET THE PLAINS:  CHANGES IN THE LAND
    5/24    The Rocky Mountain Region, Past and Present
                    Readings: Worster, _An Unsettled Country_ , Ch. 4
    
    5/26    The Rocky Mountain Region Today 
            General Discussion, Conclusions
            Student Evaluations
    
    6/1     **Final Exam  8-10 am**

![DU Button](http://www.du.edu/clipart/dubutton.jpg)[Return to main class
page](http://www.du.edu/~rboyce/anac.html)

