  |  **SYLLABUS**  
  
  
---|---  
  | **COURSE:** |  CMSC 120 \- Problem Solving with Computers  
  | **TEXT:** | _Exploring Brief Microsoft Office 2000 Professiona_ l, Robert
T. Grauer and Maryann Barber  
  | **PREREQUISITE:** |  none  
  | **TERM:** |  Spring Semester 2002  
  |   |  
  | **INSTRUCTOR:** |  Ms. Eileen G. Clark  
  | **OFFICE:** |  KN 226  
  | **OFFICE HOURS:** |  by appointment  
  | **PHONE:** |  (630) 829-6576  
  | **e-mail:** | [eclark@ben.edu](mailto:eclark@ben.edu)  
  |  
  

**INTENDED AUDIENCE:**

For students, without any previous programming experience, who need to
gather/generate, analyze/process, and display/graph data.

**CORE GOALS:**

This course is intended to enable students to continue to meet the following
core goals:

  1. demonstrate an effective level of cognitive, communicative (oral; written) and research skills;
  2. achieve a college level of computational skill and an ability to understand and interpret numerical data;
  3. apply liberal learning in problem solving contexts as preparation for active participation in society; and
  4. make informed ethical decisions that promote personal integrity, the legitimate rights and aspirations of individuals and groups, and the common good. 

**COMPUTER SCIENCE GOALS:**

Through the computer science curriculum students will:

  1. evidence problem solving skills and algorithm development;
  2. evidence an understanding of the scientific principles which underlie the computer science discipline; 
  3. evidence an understanding of the mathematical theory needed for computer science; and 
  4. evidence an understanding of programming concepts including: data types, control structures, conditional statements, arrays, functions and files. 

**COURSE DESCRIPTION/OBJECTIVES:**

In this course, students will be introduced to a programming language (Visual
BASIC) and spreadsheets (Microsoft Excel). Emphasis will be on using the
computer as a tool to implement problem solving techniques. Students will
study the methodology of science in this course. Specifically the course will
address the following questions:

  1. How does one "do" science?
  2. How does one properly observe a phenomenon in nature?
  3. What is a hypothesis?
  4. How does one devise an experiment to test the hypothesis? 
  5. When does one need to modify the hypothesis?
  6. When does one need to do more experiments to further test the hypothesis? 
  7. How does one properly present the results of the hypothesis, the experiments and the conclusions?

  
**LEARNER OUTCOMES:**

To successfully complete this course, the student will:

| LO1 \-  | evidence problem solving ability by demonstrating the following
capabilities: understanding the problem, assessing the need, identifying an
appropriate strategy to solve the problem, selecting the necessary tools to
implement the strategy, evaluating the effectiveness of the strategy,
synthesizing the experience in a manual page.  
---|---  
LO2 \-  | evidence the ability to program using the Visual Basic programming
language, at an introductory level.  
LO3 \-  | evidence an understanding of programming concepts including: data
types, control structures, conditional statements, arrays, functions and
files.  
LO4 \-  | demonstrate the ability to use Excel spreadsheets to solve a problem
and to graphically present the solution to the problem.  
LO5 \-  | evidence an understanding of an ethical issue in math or science.
The ethical issue will be researched and discussed via the Internet and the
results will be presented via Powerpoint.  
  


**LEARNER ACTIVITIES TO DEMONSTRATE OUTCOMES: (OUTCOMES IN PARENTHESES)**  
  
To successfully complete this course, the student will:

  * Design an experiment to determine who has a better short term memory: men or women? (LO1, LO4) 
  * Write a program to determine how many times a die must be rolled before a six appears? (LO1 - LO4) 
  * Research, present and discuss ethical issues in math and science. (LO5) 
  * Create a spreadsheet to determine what is the best type of home mortgage for my situation? (LO1, LO4) 
  * Use spreadsheets to analyze large amounts of data. (LO1 - LO4) 
  * Write a program that simulates the lottery to determine if it profitable to play the Illinois State Lottery Pick 4? (LO1 - LO5) 
  * Write programs to solve other problems and puzzles. (LO1 - LO4)

**COURSE GRADING:**

  * Written in-class examinations (70%). Three hourly exams (15%) each, and a final exam (25%). The content is cumulative. Contributes to LO1 through LO4. The hourly exams are scheduled for Thursday, February 7, Tuesday, March 5, and Thursday, April 4. The final exam will be given as scheduled during finals week, Tuesday, May 7, 8 - 10am. Normally, makeup exams will not be given. Exceptions may be made for documented illness. 
  * Homework and quizzes (20%). Assignments distributed and collected within WebCT, participation in online discussions within WebCT, online practice quizzes, and occasional in-class quizzes. Contributes to LO1 through LO5. 
  * PowerPoint presentation (10%). Students will be evaluated on three equally weighted parts: quality of research; quality of the oral presentation; and ability to use the PowerPoint presentation tool. Contributes to LO5. 
  * Grading Scale: A 90-100%; B 80-89%; C 70-79%; D 60 - 69%; F below 60%

Note: It is the responsibility of any student who is unsure of the grading
scale to ask the instructor for clarification.

**CLASS ATTENDANCE:**

All students are expected to attend each class meeting as class participation
is an essential ingredient for success in the course. Students are solely
responsible for all material presented in class.

**ACADEMIC HONESTY:**

It is assumed that all material submitted for grading represents the effort of
the student submitting the work. Failure to comply with this policy will
result in a grade of F for the course.

**LAST DAY TO DROP THE COURSE:**

Thursday, March 28th at 5:00pm

**NOTE:**

If you have a documented learning, psychological, or physical disability, you
may be eligible for reasonable academic accommodations or services. To request
accommodations or services, contact the Academic Resource Center in Kindlon
Hall, Room 249. All students are expected to fulfill essential course
requirements. The University will not waive any essential skill or requirement
of a course or degree program.  
  


