  **[Virginia Montecino](http://osf1.gmu.edu/~montecin/)**  
**[montecin@gmu.edu](mailto:mason.gmu.edu)**

**See[reflections on teaching a distance learning composition
class](http://mason.gmu.edu/~montecin/reflec~1.htm).**

**NOTE: This is the syllabus for the first distance learning composition class
I designed and taught in 1996.   Since then, I have redesigned my syllabus
format and use new tools to accomplish teaching and learning goals.  My
syllabus design is also different.  As you can see in this early incarnation,
my syllabus is much like the traditional syllabus.  I still use a format that
allows students to print out the man "bones" of the course without having to
go to many links to get the overall picture.  But my more recent designs I
think are more Web-friendly.  I keep this syllabus up for comparison  purposes
when I explain the evolution of my course.**  

* * *

I am excited about the possibility of teaching and learning in a virtual
environment. A composition class, I feel, lends itself well to computer-
mediated communication. I am convinced that a community of writers connected
primarily via computer can have a rewarding and exciting learning experience.
Since electronic mail is a hybrid of verbal communication and written
communication we can use this medium to our advantage to share ideas. We can
work out ways that works best for the small peer writing groups to get
together via modem or real time (if the need arises). Flexibility and self-
discipline will be the key to a successful experience. I may change some of my
requirements and/or concepts if I think such changes will make for a better
learning experience or if some technological breakthroughs between now and
then can enrich the way we interact with each other in this distance learning
experience. In this distance learning section we will meet for the first two
classes in a computer lab on campus and for the final exam date but we will
NOT meet regularly in a traditional classroom, but will meet regularly via the
computer to have discussions via e-mail and our newsgroup (gmu.course.engl302)
and send and receive the texts you produce via computer. _Syllabus follows_

* * *

##  English 302 - Distance Learning Section - N08

##  Natural Science

###  Spring 96

Real time meetings: RobA 105  
Jan 23 - 7:20 - 10:15pm  
Jan 30 - 7:20 - 10:15pm  
May 07 - 7:20 - 10:00pm - end of semester wrap up

See rest of schedule below for assignments and due dates.  **[Virginia
Montecino](http://osf1.gmu.edu/~montecin)**  
Office:Robinson A, Room 413  
Office phone:993-1173, Eng Dept: 993-1160  
Office hours: T, Th 11:00 - 12:00  
e-mail me at `[montecin@gmu.edu](mailto:montecin@gmu.edu)`

**PLEASE GET E-MAIL ACCOUNTS** right away (an osf1 account so we have the
flexibility of creating Web pages)- e-mail is our lifeline.

**COURSE DESCRIPTION:** This advanced composition course will be conducted
primarily via computer-mediated communication. We will meet as a class (in
person) for the first two sessions and the final exam date and occasionally
meet in small groups if required. This is a writing intensive, research
intensive advanced writing course. If you have not taken courses in your major
you will not be ready to take this class. You will be picking subjects in your
major to write about; therefore, not having some background in your major will
be a decided disadvantage. Most of the discussion, small group activities,
exchange of papers for comments and revision, and conferencing will be via
computer. This class will not be less work than a traditional class, and will
require a great deal of self-discipline to keep on schedule. But the good news
is you have more flexibility about when to do your work and when to meet
electronically with your writing response groups and with me. [Course
goals.](http://osf1.gmu.edu/~montecin/goals.htm)

To accomplish the tasks required in this class you will need a computer
equipped with a modem and communications software (I suggest at least a 486 or
better machine, with at least 8 megs of ram, Windows, a 14,400 modem with
communications software - if you have a MAC - the equivalent.) These
requirements will allow you to communicate search for information via lynx or
preferably a graphical user interface (GUI) browser like Netscape, and upload
and download class information and your compositions. We will use various
vehicles such as a newsgroup [(gmu.course.engl302)](news:gmu.course.engl302)
for computer-mediated communication, responding to each others' writing, and
having electronic discussions.

You will explore the writing culture and ways of knowing in your major by
interviewing professionals in your field in relation to the kinds of writing
they do and how they acquire and analyze their data. Since the Internet has
become another way in which knowledge is transmitted and shared, you will also
research and critique the cyberculture of your field based on the body of work
on the Internet: online journal, other texts, and graphics.

TEXTS: Suggested manuals: Research Paper Handbook: _Alvin Baron's Bud's Easy
Research Paper Computer Manual_ (has examples of citation forms for online,
CD-ROM, E-Mail, and other electronic sources). You may use any current edition
(many style manuals have been updated recently) of a style manual in your
major.[APA](http://humanities.byu.edu/linguistics/Henrichsen/APA/APA01.html)
is a style consistently used for scientific subjects. Another scientific
style, the number/date system is suggested in the Council of Biology Editors
manual (also often used for engineering, computer science, nursing). Julia
Case Bradley's _A Quick Guide to the Internet_ (e-mailing, newsgroups, mailing
lists, telnetting, downloading, uploading, etc.). Strunk's _[The Elements of
Style](http://www.bartleby.com/141/index.html)_ is an excellent general guide
for writing. For MLA and other styles, see Hacker's [Research and
Documentation Online](http://www.bedfordbooks.com/hacker/resdoc/). The course
book and readings will be stacked in the GMU Copy Center under my name and
course number. Some readings will come from the Internet.  


* [analysis of two articles on metaphors and science](http://osf1.gmu.edu/~montecin/meta.htm): draft 2/13; polished 2/20
* [research paper:](http://osf1.gmu.edu/~montecin/respap2.htm) drafts 3/19/ ,3/26; polished 4/2
* [examination of the writing culture in your major:](http://osf1.gmu.edu/~montecin/wricul.htm) draft 4/9; polished 4/16
* Internet project-[ Exploring and Critiquing the Web Culture in Your Major: ](http://osf1.gmu.edu/~montecin/disweb.htm)draft 4/23;Web page posted, group paper completed
* end of semester portfolio: due 5/7
****

  
**PORTFOLIO** (turned in at end of semester) to include all the work you
produced - drafts and final copies of texts you produced, copies of the
responses you made to other students on work in progress, the e-mails to me
reflecting on your log entries, your e-mail questions/ comments, peer
responses to papers, drafts of papers, final papers, etc - in other words,
your "footprints" of your work throughout the semester: all evidence of e-mail
discussions related to course work. I assume there will be (and hope there
will be) extraneous e-mail discussions. I don't want to eavesdrop on private
e-mail, so I only want "footprints" of class work via e-mail. I won't assume
the responsibility for keeping track of what you did. So accumulate your body
of work, electronic and otherwise. Yes, I know, requiring printouts does
nothing for the preservation of trees, but I can't keep an electronic record
of all work produced by 22 or so students. And since I have to evaluate your
progress, I will be looking for intellectual growth \- the development of
research skills in your chosen field of study, analytical reading skills,
helpful and critical (not the same as criticizing) responses to others'
writing, the ability to _RE-VISION_ your own writing in subsequent drafts, and
the ability to produce clear, interesting texts with a good sense of audience
and purpose. So, finally, I want paper copies of your work - published (I
know, in the old fashioned way!) You can revise all work until you turn in
your portfolio.

[CRITICAL ANALYSIS PAPER](http://osf1.gmu.edu/~montecin/meta.htm) \- Write a
critical response based on the two articles, _"Metaphor in the Language of
Science,"_ by Anne Eisenberg and the lecture by John Lawler _[Metaphors We
Compute By](http://www-personal.umich.edu/~jlawler/meta4compute.html)_.

JOURNAL/LOG kept throughout the semester, to include comments on readings,
insights about your writing, brainstorming for topics, experimental
approaches, research progress,etc). Write at least 3 to 4 full pages a week.
Once a week I expect you to e-mail me a comprehensive message, giving me some
insights into your journal entries. I will occasionally suggest topics for
your journal. Keep electronic "carbon copies" of your weekly e-mail reports to
me and include them in the portfolio you will turn in at the end of the
semester.

[RESEARCH PAPER](http://osf1.gmu.edu/~montecin/respap2.htm) on a topic in your
field of study. If you are working on a "real world" writing project or if you
are writing a paper in your major this semester (with my approval and that of
your other instructor). Requirements include:

  * Send me e-mail discussing three (3) possible topics for your paper and why you are interested in those topics. 

  * Electronically submit your research paper proposal, including a tentative list of 15 sources, with all publication information in the style you choose (APA preferred). (The appropriate form for your proposal will posted on the newsgroup.)

  * Electronically submit drafts of your paper to your peer response group and to me, along with your peer response form, indicating what questions you have about your text (that would elicit more than "yes" or "no" answers.

  * Submit an e-mail to me, indicating what you learned from your peer responses \- what changes you think you need to make in your draft, based on your peer response. What is working? What is not working?

  * Include a written copy of your paper in your final portfolio. Include (on a separate page/s what you want me to know about your paper - the parts you think are successful, the parts you struggled with, what you learned from the research and writing the paper. 

[EXAMINATION OF WRITING CULTURE IN YOUR
MAJOR](http://osf1.gmu.edu/~montecin/wricul.htm) \- You will interview a
professional in your major for the kinds of writing and reading he or she does
in that field, what publications he or she would publish in, including
Internet journals or Web sites, acquire samples of the writing, if possible,
and share this information with the class. Your interview will be in a Q & A
format (provided by me). Besides writing up the interview, you will also write
a paper sharing your impressions of the ways of knowing and the writing
culture in your major. It is possible some of this info may be included in
your Internet project below.

INTERNET GROUP PROJECT - [Exploring the Internet Culture in your Major
](http://osf1.gmu.edu/~montecin/disweb.htm)You will divide into small
electronic groups (which may or may not be your peer response groups) and
research the Web culture in your major. You will write a group report and
electronically share the information with the class, which may include
creating Web pages with hypertext links to your findings.

GRADING: Portfolio - **80%** , Participation - **20%**. You must earn a C or
better to pass English 302. I will inform you if your work in progress does
not meet this minimum standard. Since this is a composition class, you will be
graded primarily on your finished products and the revision skills you display
in the portfolio. Since a composition class depends on the community of
writers in the class, participation will also affect your grade. Participation
includes but is not restricted to regular e-mail and newsgroup correspondence
and discussion, attention to peer response. You will be given evaluation forms
to critique each others' participation in peer responses and other group
activities.

SCHEDULE:For the first two classes and the final exam date we will meet as a
group "real time." The schedule is subject to change depending upon what we as
a class, and you, in small peer response groups decide upon as reasonable.
Papers and readings will be centered around specific time frames. But there
will be flexibility within those time frames. We will maintain a schedule.
Pandemonium will not reign! Sticking to a schedule and being in close touch
electronically is crucial to a distance learning class.

Jan 23 - 7:20 - 10:00. In person class meeting - Introductions, sharing E-mail
addresses, dividing into small peer response groups. Review of syllabus,
discuss assignments, expectations and the culture of the distance learning
environment and review technology required. In-class writing (impression of
yourself as a writer/reader, subjects of interest to write about). Explanation
of reaction paper to articles on metaphors and science and computers:
_"Metaphors In the Language of Science"_ and _[Metaphors We Compute
By](http://www.ling.lsa.umich.edu/jlawler/meta4compute.html)_.

Jan 29 - Last day to drop with no tuition liability

Jan 30 - In person class meeting- 7:20 - 10:00. In-depth discussion of
readings on metaphors. Draft of paper on metaphors due 2/13; polished copy due
2/20. Get e-mail accounts. Technology workshops as required. Preliminary
searches using X-Libris and Netscape for your topics to write about for this
class.

Feb 6 - Read _"Plain Words Please,"_ and _"Simplicity."_ This week post to
your group's "meeting place" on the newsgroup
[gmu.course.engl302](news:gmu.course.engl302) your research strategy on the
subject in your major around which you have chosen to base your research paper
and your Internet project. What search "machines" and databases did you use
(don't rely on one medium alone)? What key word and/or search strings did you
use? Include in your message a representative a sampling of the Web sites
(with URL addresses)and titles of information, and text journals, incl.
authors, dates, and titles of the articles. Why did you choose this subject.
What did you find out about this subject through your research? From what
perspective do you think you will approach this subject? Do you need to revise
your search? Why? Why not?

Feb 13 - _Drafts of metaphor paper due_. Send electronic drafts (via a medium
we agree upon)of your metaphor papers to me and members of your peer response
group. Review peer response criteria posted on newsgroup (gmu.course.engl302)
for suggested ways to respond to each others' drafts. Send email messages to
me about what changes you need to make to revise your drafts.

Feb 20 - _Metaphor paper due_. Send me an e-mail (cc: your group) explaining
what adjustments you made in your search strategy in finding a subject for
your major assignments, and any changes you made in subject and/or focus.
Reminder to work on Writing Culture in your field assignment- due April 9.

Feb 23 - Last day to drop without dean's permission.

Feb 27 - Submit _preliminary research paper proposal_

Mar 5 - Submit to me and your writing group your _final proposal for research
paper._ Peer response to proposals. Reminder to continue work on Writing
Culture assignment.

Mar 11 - 18 - Spring Recess

Mar 19 - 1st submission of _draft of research paper_ to peer response group.
E-mail me about your research paper progress.

Mar 26 - Second submission of _draft of research paper_. Peer response

Apr 2 - Research paper due. Work on Internet Project.

Apr 9 - Submit _draft of Writing Culture_ assignment. E-mail me (cc: your
group) progress on Writing Culture assignment. Work on Internet Project.

Apr 16 - _Writing Culture assignment due_. Work on Internet Project. Elect a
member of your group to e-mail me this week your group's progress on the
Internet project.

Apr 23 - Work on Web page and polish draft of group paper on Internet Project

Apr 30 - _Internet Project due_ (Creation of Web pages on project
completed,incl. group paper

May 2 - Last Day of classes. E-mail me a progress report on finalizing
portfolio)

May 7 - Exam Day 7:20 - 10:00 pm . _Submit portfolios_ in person. In-person
sharing of portfolios. Sharing of Web pages on Internet project.

Grading Standard:

A - work far exceeds average requirements for the assignments - writes clear,
interesting, grammatically correct prose with a clear sense of audience and
purpose, shows individuality and highly developed thinking skills and writing
skills.

B - work exceeds average requirements for the assignments - writes clear,
grammatically correct prose with attention to audience and purpose, shows well
developed thinking skills and writing skills.

C - work meets average requirements of the assignments - writes understandable
prose to an appropriate audience, with a minimum of grammatical errors, shows
effort and progress in thinking skills and writing skills.

D- (a D is not a passing grade in English 302) work does not meet minimum
requirements for the assignments - lack of clear focus, does not exhibit
clarity of thought, consistent problems with sentence structure and/or
numerous grammar and mechanics problems interfere with readability.

**_English Department Statement on Plagiarism_**

_Plagiarism means using the exact words, opinions, or factual information from
another person without giving that person credit. Writers give credit through
accepted documentation styles, such as parenthetical citation, footnotes, or
endnotes; a simple listing of books and articles is not sufficient. Plagiarism
is the equivalent of intellectual robbery and cannot be tolerated in an
academic setting. Student writers are often confused as to what should be
cited. Some think that only direct quotations need to be credited. While
direct quotations do need citations, so do paraphrases and summaries of
opinions or factual information formerly unknown to the writers or which the
writers did not discover themselves. Exceptions for this include factual
information which can be obtained from a variety of sources, the writers' own
insights or findings from their own field research, and what has been termed
common knowledge. What constitutes common knowledge can sometimes be
precarious; what is common knowledge for one audience may not be so for
another. In such situations, it is helpful, to keep the reader in mind and to
think of citations as being "reader friendly." In other words, writers provide
a citation for any piece of information that they think their readers might
want to investigate further. Not only is this attitude considerate of readers,
it will almost certainly ensure that writers will never be guilty of
plagiarism._

* * *

In addition to the plagiarism statement, above, I want to advise you that
users of the Internet also have to be aware that material accessed
electronically must also be cited, giving credit to the sources. This material
includes but is not limited to e-mail (don't cite someone else's e-mail
without permission), newsgroup material, information from Web sites, including
graphics. Copying someone else's Web page and format is, in effect, stealing
that person's or institution's intellectual property. The unique format of a
hypertext document's markup language is also subject to copyright and
shouldn't be duplicated. Making links to a site is, at this time, okay. See
[Internet Issues](http://mason.gmu.edu/~montecin/copyright-internet.htm)
pertaining to copyright and related subjects.

**e-mail me at`[montecin@gmu.edu](mailto:montecin@gmu.edu)`**

**Return to[the home page of Virginia
Montecino](http://osf1.gmu.edu/~montecin/)**  
---

