**Wayne State University / Interdisciplinary Studies Program**

**Computers and Society, GST 271 Section 98119 / AGS 336 Section 98423**

**Winter 1996**

**Syllabus** (1/8/96)

Many documents for this course are available at _http://fls.cll.wayne.edu_

[[Return to Welcome Page]](welcome.htm)

* * *

**SyllabusContents:**

  1. Instructor information
  2. Class Location and Times
  3. Course Content
  4. Requirements and Grades
  5. Textbooks and other required items
  6. Assignment schedule 

* * *

### 1\. Instructor

David Bowen

2311 AAB / Wayne State University / Detroit, MI 48202

Telephones:

  * Office: 313-577-1498 
  * Home: 810-549-8518 
  * Ford: 313-390-2155 
  * FAX: 313-577-8585 

e-mail: drbowen@cll.wayne.edu

Office Hours at Oakland Center: Mondays, 4 - 6 PM

[Return to top]

### 2\. Class Location and Times

Mondays, 6PM - 9:40 PM at Oakland Center computer classroom

[Return to top]

### 3\. Course Content

  1. Computer Concepts and Architecture 
    1. Numbers and circuits 
    2. Architecture and function 
    3. Peripherals 
    4. Software 
    5. Communications and networking 
  2. Using computer applications 
    1. Word processing 
    2. Spreadsheet 
    3. Database 
    4. Graphics 
    5. Programming 
  3. Computers and Society 
    1. Personal experiences 
    2. Embedded systems 
    3. Artificial intelligence 
    4. Education and training 
    5. Jobs and employment  

**General Education Requirement:**

Since this course carries WSU General Education credit, the content must
follow the Computer Literacy (CL) requirement. This requirement is given
below. While the content is the same as the original, the form is slightly
different, due to the limitations of the HTML document formatting.

2.40 **COMPUTER LITERACY (CL)** : Since the application of computer technology
to virtually all academic disciplines and their corresponding array of
occupations is clearly a central fact of contemporary life, the need for
students to become computer-literate is essential. In the modern world, it is
vital that students possess some elementary knowledge of computer functions;
they should be able to initiate a file and operate word-processing software,
understand how to gain access to the University's main computer system, and
command the basic skills needed to perform simple on-line data retrieval and
manipulative operations. **PRIOR TO COMPLETING SIXTY CREDITS, ALL STUDENTS
MUST DEMONSTRATE COMPUTER LITERACY BY** :

  1. Completing successfully a suitable high school course in computing; OR 
  2. Passing the Advanced Placement (AP) Examination in Computer Science; OR 
  3. Passing the Computer Literacy Competency Examination; OR 
  4. Completing successfully an approved computer application course such as ACC 263; BE 101; CSC 100, 101, 105, 110, 112, 114, 211 or any higher level CSC course; GST 271; MUA 561; NUR 111, SPC 317; SPJ 202, 321; OR 
  5. Transferring credit received from successful completion of a comparable course taken at another college or university. 

2.41 The Competency Requirement in Computer Literacy may be met in a number of
ways: In all cases, however, certain specific skills must be demonstrated.
Thus, an adequate exposure to the use and applications of computers, usually
microcomputers, in one or more courses in high school or college may fulfill
the Computer Literacy Competency. The minimum knowledge and skills which must
be gained in such a course or courses are:

  1. Hands-on experience in starting the computer, installing a program, and running the program. (Programs are broadly interpreted to include self-authored or commercially available software for word processing; data management; spreadsheet manipulation; text editors for the construction of program or data files; graphic or musical composition; typesetting system, etc.) 
  2. Knowing the meaning of hardware and software and understanding their differences. 
  3. Understanding how basic hardware components work together through the application of software. (Basic hardware includes: the central processor, input and output devices, and storage devices). 
  4. Knowing the requirements for electronic communication between computer systems, e.g., use of modems to communicate to bulletin boards, to another personal computer, to mainframes, data resources, etc. 

[Return to top]

### 4\. Requirements and Grades

  * 30% Final Exam 
  * 25% Midterm Exam 
  * 20% Five Quizzes 
  * 20% Weekly homework assignments 
  * 5% Paper 

I will grade the Exams and Quizzes on a numerical basis, and the weekly
homework assignments and paper on a letter basis. The numerical and letter
grades correspond as follows:

  * A ~ 95 (for final grade, range is 90 - 100) 
  * B ~ 85 (for final grade, range is 80 - 89) 
  * C ~ 75 (for final grade, range is 70-79) 
  * D ~ 65 (for final grade, range is 60 - 69) 
  * E ~ 55 (for final grade, range is 0 - 59) 
  * A "+" on a letter grade adds three points; a "-" subtracts three. 

Missing assignments will be counted as zeroes. If you have missing
assignments, you can request a final grade of "I" (Incomplete) provided we
have agreed on a date by which all of your missing work will be turned in.

Quizzes and Exams are closed book, closed notes. You will need to bring

  * Paper and pencil or pen 
  * MTS user id and password 
  * Calculator (if desired) 

[Return to top]

### 5\. Textbooks and other required items

  * Ron Mansfield, _The Compact Guide to Microsoft Office Professional (covers version 4.3)_ , pub. Sybex, abbreviated MOP below 
  * Lawrence J. Magid, _The Little PC Book_ , pub. Peachpit Press, abbreviated LPB below 
  * 2 1.44MB floppy diskette (High Density). Home work assignments and quizzes will be done as documents saved to this floppy and printed out in class 
  * MTS account (purchase at Oakland Center, Science and Engineering Library basement computing facility or Student Center basement computing facility). First $10 is free, you pay for time after that. 
  * In addition to the text, there will be weekly handouts concerning computers 

[Return to top]

### **6\. AssignmentSchedule.** Assignments are due on the dates shown.

#### Class 1, January 8

  * Topics: Introduction to computers / Number systems / Computer applications 

#### January 15 - Martin Luther King Day, no class

  * Read: LPB Chpt 1 - 7 

#### Class 2, January 22

  * Topics: Number systems / MTS and mainframes 
  * Read: LPB Chpt 10 - 12; MOP Pages 1 - 48 
  * Turn in: Assignment 1 

#### Class 3, January 29

  * Topics: Computer storage and logic / MTS and mainframes 
  * Read: LPB Chpt 13 - 15; MOP Pages 57 - 93 & 99 - 113 
  * Turn in: Assignment 2 

#### Class 4, February 5

  * Quiz 1 
  * Topics: Computer architecture and function / Word & word processing 
  * Read: LPB Chpt 15 - 18; MOP 113 - 123, 133 - 149 (include Format Painter), 155 - 156, 167 - 168 & 294 - 300 
  * Turn in: Assignment 3 

#### Class 5, February 12

  * Topics: Input and output devices / Word & word processing 
  * Read: LPB Chpt 19 - 21; MOP 407 - 452 
  * Turn in: Assignment 4 

#### Class 6, February 19

  * Quiz 2 
  * Topics: Computer communications and networking / Word & word processing 
  * Read: LPB Chpt 22 - 25; MOP 454 - 461, 463 - 488 & 497 \- 507 
  * Turn in: Assignment 5 

#### Class 7, February 26

  * Topics: MTS & mainframes / Excel & spreadsheets 
  * Read: LPB Chpt 24 - 26; MOP 531 - 571 
  * Turn in: Assignment 6 

#### Class 8, March 4

  * Midterm exam 

#### March 11 - Spring Recess, no class

#### Class 9, March 18

  * Topics: The Internet / Excel & spreadsheets 
  * Read: LPB Chpt 27 - 30; MOP 773 - 811 
  * Turn in: Assignment 7 

#### Class 10, March 25

  * Quiz 3 
  * Topics: QBASIC programming language / Excel & spreadsheets 
  * Read: LPB 31 - 34; MOP 811 - 861 
  * Turn in: Assignment 8 

#### Class 11, April 1

  * Topics: QBASIC programming language / Access & databases 
  * Read: LPB 35 - 38; MOP 861 - 903 
  * Turn in: Assignment 9 

#### Class 12, April 8

  * Quiz 4 
  * Topics: QBASIC programming language / Access & databases 
  * Read: LPB 39 - 41; MOP 903 - 925 & 1013 - 1023 
  * Turn in: Assignment 10 

#### Class 13, April 15

  * Topics: Artificial Intelligence / Computer application to training and education / QBASIC & computer programming 
  * Read: LPB 42 - 44; MOP 1063 - 1085 
  * Turn in: Assignment 11 

#### Class 14, April 22

  * Quiz 5 
  * Topics: Computer application to training and education/ Embedded systems / QBASIC & computer programming 
  * Read: LPB 45 - 46; MOP 1085 - 1092 
  * Turn in: Assignment 12 

#### Class 16, April 29

  * Final exam 
  * Turn in: Paper 

[Return to top]

