## Computer Science 765-171  
Introduction to Programming  
Syllabus -Part 2

**Student Responsibilities**      If you are having trouble with the material
in the course, come and get some help RIGHT AWAY! You don't need an
appointment during regular office hours. Don't wait until the day before an
exam or a programming assignment is due. Take care of the little problems
before they compound into big ones. You are responsible for all material
discussed in every class, whether you are present or not. If you are absent
from class, get the notes from a class-mate or come to an office hour for
class details.

**If you are having any trouble whatever in this course, you must communicate
this to me as soon as possible so we can plan a corrective course of action
(see E-mail below, for example).**

Programs are to be completed and turned in on the assignment due date (by the
stated time on the due date). A 10% penalty will be levied for each day past
the due date that late work is turned in unless extraordinary circumstances
(e.g., illness, accident, etc.) dictate otherwise. All programs are to be
turned in to the MCS Office on the assignment due date at which time they will
be date and time stamped. Assignments not so date stamped may incur
significant late penalties. DO NOT SLIDE ASSIGNED WORK UNDER MY OFFICE DOOR OR
THE MATHEMATICS DEPARTMENT DOOR!

**E-Mail (or "virtual office hours")**      Every student at UW-Whitewater has
an e-mail account. I will use e-mail often in this course to contact everyone
in class and/or individual students with details regarding homework
assignments and examinations. You may use e-mail to contact me with specific
questions or concerns. It is an excellent way to communicate with me in
private on a 24 hour basis! I also post all class handouts and related
materials (along with essential data files) on the class web-site which you
may download at your convenience. You will be responsible for downloading many
class related materials from this web-site.

**Programming Requirements**      Programming in any computer environment is
both a science and an art. Programmers learn their craft by not only studying
generally accepted programming techniques but mainly by writing lots of
programs!

**Programs are to be completed and turned in on the assignment due date (by
the stated time on the due date). A 10% penalty will be levied for each day
past the due date that late work is turned in unless extraordinary
circumstances (e.g., illness, accident, etc.) dictate otherwise. All programs
are to be turned in to the MCS Office (McGraw Hall, Rm 104) on the assignment
due date at which time they will be date and time stamped. Assignments not so
date stamped may incur significant late penalties. DO NOT SLIDE ASSIGNED WORK
UNDER MY OFFICE DOOR OR THE MATHEMATICS DEPARTMENT DOOR!** Late penalties
cannot exceed the total value of the assignment, and even for hopelessly late
programs I generally give a scrap value of 10% of the assignment value. **All
lab assignments printed in the McGraw Lab must be turned in with the header
page _attached_ as given to you there.** If you intend to print your
assignments on your own PC, please see the attached special instructions. If
an assignment is not turned in within 48 hours of the date on the header page
of the program listing or the program file's date information on your
diskette's directory, it will be treated as if it were turned in on the day
that I receive it. Programming assignments not received on or before the final
day to turn in programs (as announced in class) will be assigned a grade of
zero. **NOTE WELL: I will, at my discretion, lower a student's final course
grade one letter grade for each zero earned on a programming assignment. Also
note that questions will appear on each exam which are geared to the
programming assignments since the last exam.**

Any program you turn in for credit must run without generating errors or
warning messages. All output must be correct as required by the assignment
using the input data supplied and/or input test data of my design. **Programs
which do not produce correct output, will not run without errors, or are
poorly written will be returned to be redone ( _and hence will incur a late
penalty of at least 20%, but more probably 25-30%_ ).**

It is expected that your programs will be clearly organized, readable and easy
to understand. **Violations of these rules (listed in detail in[ _Criteria for
writing/grading Program code_](criteria.html)) can also result in a program
being returned to be redone (depending on the severity of the errors):**

  1. Include a prologue including program assignment number, section number, project due date, assignment value, and a short description of the purpose of the program (see program #1). Correct English usage and spelling is required in all documentation (and points can be deduced for misspellings and poor grammar). 
  2. MEANINGFUL identifiers must be used throughout your code ("self-documenting code"). 
  3. Internal comments and documentation (in longer programs) are required to explain the purpose of various sections of your code. This is especially necessary in the headers of all user-defined functions and procedures. 
  4. Your output must be attractively formatted: headings centered over columns, columns aligned, output quantities properly labeled, useful messages to the user on screen during program execution, etc. 

**ALL WORK YOU TURN IN MUST BE YOUR OWN.** Never allow your diskettes to be
copied (secure them as you would any valuable document). Copying someone
else's code may result in a zero grade for the assignment. When it cannot be
clearly established who actually did the copying, all assignments involved
will receive zero grades. It is acceptable to discuss the assignment with
fellow students or with me, but only about general methods of attack, overall
design issues, clearing up trivial syntax errors, etc. Hint: it is far better
to turn in an assignment a day or so late than to engage in plagiarism! Be
sure to QUIT the Turbo environment in the Lab when you leave (you will see the
Lab menu on the screen). Save all your files on your own diskettes, never on
hard drives on Lab computers. Discard printed copies of your programs
(properly torn up) well away from the computer Labs-- **do not allow anyone to
see or use your discarded printer scrap!**

Discard printed copies of your programs (properly torn up) well away from the
computer Labs--do not allow anyone to see or use your discarded printer scrap!

* * *

[![](cs171.gif)](index.html) |  Return to  
CS-171  
Home Page |     | [![](uww.gif)](http://www.uww.edu) | Return to  
UW-W  
Home Page |     |  |  This page last updated  
30 August 2000

* * *

