

![](logo.gif)  
  
---  
  
|

* * *

[Schedule](syllabus.html) | Instructors | [Laboratory](lab/cs240_lab.html) |
Textbooks | Syllabus | Online Resources | Tutoring | Requirements | Grading |
Policies

##

* * *

Announcements

> There will be no laboratory held on Wednesday, September 4. Please come to
the first lecture on Friday, September 6, to resolve any registration issues
for lecture or laboratory. The first laboratory meeting will be on Wednesday,
September 11.

##

* * *

Introduction

> Computer Science 240, Introduction to Machine Organization with Laboratory,
is a 1.25 credit course, and is a requirement for students majoring or
minoring in Computer Science at Wellesley College. On a weekly basis, two
70-minute lectures and a 3-hour laboratory session are required components of
the course. There are no formal prerequisites; topics covered include:

>

>   * an overview of computer organization,

>   * introduction to digital logic and microprogramming,

>   * the conventional machine level and assembly language programming, and

>   * introduction to operating systems.

>

##

* * *

Schedule

> Lecture meets 9:50 - 11:00 P.M., Monday in room ? and Friday in room ? of
the Science Center.

>

> Laboratory meets 8:30 - 12:40 A.M.,Wednesday, in room E125 of the Science
Center. Note, before October 11, the lab will meet from 8:30 to 11:30. After
October 11, the entire time period will be used, and include a lab and a
lecture.

##

* * *

Instructors

|

**Lecturer:**

|

[ Dr. Jennifer Stephan](http://www.wellesley.edu/CS/jstephan.html)(please call
me Jennifer)  
  
---|---  
  
**Office:**

|

E104 Science Center  
  
**Phone:**

|

x3152  
  
**Email:**

|

[ jstephan@wellesley.edu](mailto:jstephan@wellesley.edu)  
  
**Office Hours:**

|

Monday, Wednesday, and Friday 11:00-12:00 and by appointment  
  
|

(Note - Jennifer works part time and is in on MWF)

(Note - Jennifer's last day of lecturing is October 11th. After October 11th,
Jean will take over lecturing. Please see the syllabus for the details.)  
  
###

**Lab Instructor:**

|

[ Jean Herbst](http://www.wellesley.edu/CS/jherbst.html)(please call me Jean)  
  
---|---  
  
**Office:**

|

E129 Science Center  
  
**Phone:**

|

x3162  
  
**Email:**

|

[ jherbst@wellesley.edu](mailto:jherbst@wellesley.edu)  
  
**Office Hours:**

|

? and by appointment  
  
|

(Note - Jean works part time and is in on MW)  
  
* * *

**Textbooks and Other Course Materials**

**Required:**

|

_Structured Computer Organization_ by Andrew Tanenbaum, 4th ed.

_Programmers Reference Manual_ by Motorola  
  
---|---  
  
Copies of these two items are on reserve in the Science Center Library.

We will also distribute regularly to you copies of the transparencies used in
class.

###

* * *

**Syllabus**

> Here's a coarse outline of material to be covered in the course: we will
start with an overview of the first two chapters of Tanenbaum, learning about
the multi-layered approach to machine organization, along with what you might
find in a typical computer system. Then, we will spend three weeks on Chapter
3, discussing Boolean logic and the technology associated with it. After that,
we will move on to Chapter 4, which addresses the microcode layer between
hardware and software. The midterm will cover all aforementioned material. We
will then shift gears and begin studying assembly language programming,
concurrently covering Chapter 5 of Tanenbaum and the Programmer's Reference
Manual for the remainder of the semester. At the end, we will spend one
lecture on Chapter 6 of Tanenbaum learning about operating systems.  
>  
>  Click [here](syllabus.html) to see a detailed schedule.

###

* * *

**Online Resources**

> There is a folder on FirstClass called CS240-F02 for this course. All class
materials and handouts, including the assignments and solutions, will be in
this folder. You can use the folder to post questions that you have about the
lectures and assignments. We will read the folder regularly; however, if you
see a student's question to which you know the answer, please go ahead and
post the answer.

###

* * *

**Tutoring**

###

**Drop-in:**





|

Weekly drop-in hours will be held by the CS240 tutor, Amrutha Nagarajan, day
and time to be announced.

  
  
---|---  
  
**Personal:**





|

Individual tutors (through the Learning and Teaching Center) are available to
students who find themselves in need of additional help. Please see us if you
would like to explore this option, and we will help you to determine whether
you need a tutor, and if so, help you to arrange a tutor through LTC.  
  
* * *

**Course Requirements**

This is a 1.25 credit course. The main components are:

> * Laboratory: Three hours in [ laboratory](lab/cs240_lab.html) weekly,
including a lab report (completed during the lab session). Also, weekly
laboratory assignments to be completed outside lab hours.  
>

> * Homework/Programming Assignments: There will be eleven homeworks or small
programming assignments during the semester (see [schedule](syllabus.html) for
due dates).  
>

> * Midterm Exam: The midterm will be on **Wednesday, October 23**. If special
circumstances prevent you from taking the midterm during the scheduled time
you must contact us as soon as possible to discuss your situation. The exam is
open book and notes.  
>

> * Final Project: There will be a large programming project due on
**Wednesday, December 20 by 4:30 PM**.  
>

> * Readings: The reading for each lecture are provided in the
[schedule.](syllabus.html)

### **

* * *

Grading**

> * Laboratory: 25%  
>

> * Homework/Programming Assignments: 25%  
>

> * Midterm Exam: 25%  
>

> * Final Project: 25%

### **

* * *

Policies**

> **Collaboration Policy**

>

> Please note that each course in the Computer Science Department has its own
collaboration policy. Indeed, even the collaboration policies for courses
taught by the same faculty member may significantly differ. Do not assume
anything about the collaboration policy for this course. Instead, be careful
to understand the policy outlined below, and see us if you have any questions.

>

> It is never acceptable to present someone else's work as if it were your
own. Unless stated otherwise, we will assume that all work you hand in is
yours and yours alone. Collaboration on class assignments is acceptable but
each student must submit her own individual assignments, indicating clearly
any other students with whom she works. If you get help from us or a TA that
constitutes a significant part of the assignment, you should acknowledge that,
too. If you are not sure, err on the side of caution.

>

> Copying other people's code or work is a serious violation and will be
regarded as a disciplinary matter.

>

> In general, it is acceptable to talk about your code and problem set
solutions using natural languages, but not acceptable to use any formal
language, and especially not assembly language. In other words, you should not
be looking at other people's code or problem set solutions or showing them
yours.

>

> When working on homework problems, it is perfectly reasonable to consult
public literature (books, articles, etc.) for hints, techniques, and even
solutions. However, you must reference any sources that contribute to your
solution. Assignments, exams, solutions and notebooks from previous terms of
CS240 are **not** considered to be part of the "public" literature - not every
student has access to such materials. You must refrain from looking at _any
materials_ from previous terms of CS240. **It is our policy that consulting
any materials from previous terms constitutes a violation of the honor code.**

>

> #### **Late Policy**

>

> LATE ASSIGNMENTS WILL NOT BE ACCEPTED FOR CREDIT. If you wish to hand in an
overdue assignment, we will acknowledge your effort and provide feedback, but
you will not receive a grade. Late assignments due to a medical or personal
emergency will be accepted only with a supporting note from a medical person
or Class Dean. Class extensions on an assignment will be announced in class
and on the FirstClass conference, so please check it regularly! Formal
solutions will be distributed soon after the due date for each problem set.

>

> #### **Students with Disabilities**

>

> We strongly encourage students with disabilities to visit me soon to discuss
appropriate accommodations that might be helpful to them.

* * *

Jean Herbst -- [
jherbst@wellesley.edu](mailto:jherbst@firstclass.wellesley.edu)  
Computer Science 240  
Date Created: August 28, 2000  
Last Modifed: June 12, 2002

