![alert_red.gif](alert_red.gif)![updated.gif](updated.gif)**LAST UPDATE:
2/6/02**![alert_red.gif](alert_red.gif) [![](csdlogo1.jpg)](../COSC
100/csdlogo1.jpg) |  ![](Logo120.gif) |

[![](ttracy.jpg)](../COSC 100/ttracy.jpg)  
  
---|---|---  
  
**COURSE SYLLABUS, SPRING SEMESTER, 2002**

**INSTRUCTOR:[Dr. Horton H. Tracy (Tony)](../FACULTYPAGES/index.html); [FSU
Faculty Page](http://www.fsu.umd.edu/dept/compsci/htracy.htm)**  
**CLASSROOM: Old Main, Room 205**  
**CLASS TIMES: MWF, 2:00-2:50 (![](alert_red.gif)**Because **this course is
completely online and selfdirected** , these are not lectures", i.e. no new
content will be presented; they are **"tutorial" sessions** where student
questions will be addressed and current topics, associated with the course
material, might be discussed.   Attendance is not required, but if you attend,
you should come during the time scheduled for the class for which you are
registered.  **Online students can attend any time**.   We will also
experiment with "virtual tutorial session" conducted as an online chatroom
during these hours; see the announcements and the link in the Navigation
Panel.)  
**OFFICE: Guild Center, Room 235**  
**OFFICE HOURS:   MW, 3:00-4:30 P.M. and TTh 3:30-4:30 P.M.   ([Will be
available via NetMeeting](MANAGEMENT/CheckLists.htm#2.4NetMeeting
Procedures))**  
**TELEPHONE: 687-4361(Office); 687-4364 (Sec./answering machine)**  
**E-MAIL:[ttracy@mail.frostburg.edu](mailto:ttracy@mail.frostburg.edu)**  
**WEB SITE OF THE
COURSE:<http://www.frostburg.edu/dept/cosc/htracy/cosc120/>**  


**_COURSE DESCRIPTION:_**

A **survey** of Cyberspace, with particular **emphasis on the Internet, using
Web Browsers**. There is a significant practical component focusing on
**research of the Internet resources In the student's major discipline** ;
there will be numerous writing assignments generating HTML documents using
HTML editors (rather than writing HTML code). Topics include a survey of the
content and facilities of the Internet and World Wide Web, other Internet
services (FTP, Telnet, newsgroups, mailing lists, Chat, Gopher and WAIS),
hardware and software for communications and networking, protocols (TCP/IP),
File types and multimedia, and the ethics of Cyberspace. Each student will
complete a project that summarizes the Internet resources in his/her major
discipline; the **project will be published as a Web site and presented in
class**.   Online students who are not enrolled in the oncampus section of the
course should begin by completing **[GETTING STARTED ON THE WEB
COURSE](MANAGEMENT/GettingStartedWeb120.htm)**.

**_LEARNING MATERIALS:_**

**TEXTS:[Internet in a Nutshell, by Valerie Quercia, O'Reilly & Associates;
ISBN:
1565923235](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1565923235/qid=903741884/sr=1-1/002-9091559-0604459).
** If you want to find the **best "bang for the buck"** on this **(or any
text), check out[bestbookbuys.com](http://bestbookbuys.com/)** and perhaps
purchase it online.  ![](ICONS/question.gif) _If any of you know of a better
way to buy books cheaply, let me know._     (I do virtually all my shopping
for books, computer gear, electronics (and games!) online, so don't be
hesitant about it!)

**_WEB DOCUMENTS:_ Web Site for Learning Modules by Dr. Horton H. Tracy at:**

> > ** <http://www.frostburg.edu/dept/cosc/htracy/cosc120/>**

>

> **For those that would liKe to review their COSC 100, INTRODUCTION TO
COMPUTER SCIENCE, my notes for that course may be accessed at:**

>

>> **<http://www.frostburg.edu/dept/cosc/htracy/cosc100/>**

>

> Also see the links under "WEB RESOURCES" in the "Navigation Panel" on the
left side of the course Web page.

**_SOFTWARE PACKAGE:![](ICONS/check3.gif)_ Netscape Communicator 4.7 and WS-
FTPLE ( , both available in the Computer Labs.**

  1. **Two 3.5" Disks: High Density or Double Sided, Double Density**
  2. **Two folders, with pockets and floppy disk compartment, for submitting the first few assignments.**
  3. **REFERENCES (Not required for purchase):**
    1. **A textbook for COSC 100, Introduction to Computer Science.   (Student's may access my [on-line version of COSC 100](http://www.frostburg.edu/dept/cosc/htracy/cosc100/).)**
    2. **A reference book for Nescape Communicator.**
    3. **A reference book for Microsoft Internet Explorer (if you choose to use I.E. in addition to Netscape Communicator)**

**_COURSE OBJECTIVES:_**

> To **help** the student...

>

>   1. understand the scope and facilities of cyberspace,

>   2. learn how **to use cyberspace** as a learning tool and research
resource,

>   3. develop the skill to **efficiently searching cyberspace,**

>   4. develop the skill of **creating HTML documents** and **creating and
managing a Web site** ,

>   5. organize a thorough collection of hypertext links to **cyberspace
resources for his/her major** discipline at F.S.U. and creatively present
these in a Web Site (This **course project** should serve as an invaluable
resource for the rest of the student's life!),

>   6. ![](redstar.gif)**become independent learners** as far as cyberspace is
concerned, i.e. to..

>     1. gain experience **organizing study activities based on the Internet**
,

>     2. gain the **confidence that they can learn how to use unfamiliar
communications hardware and software** on their own (as Cyberspace evolves),
and

>     3. develop the **habit of experimenting and using computer "Help"
feature** s to answer **** their own questions.

> With evolution of the Web, **independent learning will obviously become a
more important aspect of the overall learning experience for everyone,**
especially with the younger generation.  ![](alert_red.gif)Unfortunately,
**typical,current formal education does virtually NOTHING to prepare you to
become an efficient independent learner**.   (If you are a typical high school
graduate, you have had virtually not training in study skills, much less
independent learning skills!)  Therefore **_this course may be a rare
opportunity to focus on and practice those skills that will help you take
advantage of the learing opportunities in Cyberspace now and in the future!_**

To **introduce** the student to ...

>

>   7. the **vocabulary** associated with communications technology and
cyberspace,

>   8. a variety of **hardware and software** for accessing cyberspace, and

>   9. the University computer communications facilities,

>

To give the student an **appreciation of...**  


  10. the **problems associated with using Cyberspace** , e.g.
    1. that the exact information for which you are looking may be difficult to find,
    2. that it's content **can be untrustworthy** and **it may disappear,**
    3. that it can give one **information overload,** and
    4. that the World Wide Web can be a " **world wide waste** " (of time and effort) if you are not careful!
( **[See how this affects yours truley!](AnnounceAll.html#I feel
overwhelmed!)** )

  11. the **ethical implications** of the use and misuse of Cyberspace, and
  12. the **impact on society** of Cyberspace.

**_ATTENDANCE POLICY :_**

Class attendance is **NOT mandatory** ; in fact, since the course is
completely online, **students enrolled in the on-campus course should attend
the on-campus sessions only...**

  1. **if attendance is specified** in the **[schedule](Sched120.htm)** , e.g. the first two class sessions,
  2. if it is **announced that attendance is required** in the [course announcements page](Announce.htm), or
  3. **if you have questions of the teacher** , that can not be addressed via the **[course Forum](http://network54.com/Hide/Forum/50477)** or teleconferencing using Microsoft Netmeeting.

However, this is NOT an excuse to get lazy; students are required to stay
current, i.e. study the material scheduled in the course
**[schedule](Sched120.htm)**. **Students are responsible for all material
discussed in classes for which attendance is specified or announced.**

Students who miss an **assessment** for an **excusable** reason will be
allowed to take a makeup assessment in the Computer Science Department
**immediately** after they return to campus. Excusable reasons include, but
are not limited to, emergencies such as official FSU activities,
Hospitalization, and death in the immediate family.
![](ICONS/alert_red.gif)These **excuses must be phoned in, before the exam** ,
to the Department Secretary (301-687-4364). It should be remembered that
**makeup assessmentss will be more difficult than regular exams and will not
normally benefit from grade curves!**

**_GRADING POLICY:_**

  **WEIGHTS:** |  **GRADE SCALE:**  
---|---  
Assignments (including PRETESTS!) 40% |  A 90% - 100% (rounded)  
3 Assessments (10% each) 30% |  B 80% - 89%        "  
Final Exam (Cumulative) 15% |  C 70% - 79%        "  
Semester Project 15%  |  D 60% - 69%        "  
|  F <60%                "  

**Incomplete assignments** that are resubmitted will receive **automatic 5%,
15%, 25% or 35% deductions** (depending on completeness) **** before they are
regraded. **Assignments turned in late,** but before the graded assignments of
the rest of the class are returned, will receive **automatic 20% deductions.
Very late assignments** (turned in after the graded assignments have been
returned) will receive **automatic 30 or 40% reductions.** However,
**remember, a 60 is much better than a 0 (which will be entered for every
unfinished assignment at the end of the year!).
![](ICONS/poisonbgwht.gif)NOTE: STUDENTS WHO SUBMIT TOO MANY LATE ASSIGNMENTS
FAIL TO FULFILL MY [MINIMUM EXPECTATIONS](Promise.htm) (See a separate
handout.) and WILL _NOT_ MUCH BENEFIT (IF ANY!) FROM THE "CURVE" (actually it
is a normalization) APPLIED TO THE FINAL GRADE.** Please do not abuse this
lenient grading policy; it is implemented to encourage every student to do
every assignment no matter how late it is completed; it is NOT designed to
give students an excuse to ignore or forget deadlines! ****
(![](ICONS/redstar.gif)NOTE: All of my policies are geared **to encourage
learning regardless of deadlines, rules, regulations , etc. If I feel a
student is making a sincere effort to learn, he/she will find that I am very
sympathetic to handicaps, difficulties, frustrations, etc. so come talk to me
about them! (NOTE: The course may be taken on a PASS/FAIL basis by requesting
this from the Registrar.) **Also, I will occasionally give a **plus "+"** to a
grade; that is simply a reminder to me that the submission contained more that
I required.  It does not directly affect the course grade (because it would be
unfair to award grades based on unspecified requirements), however, **if a
student consistently has done more than required I am impressed,** and that
can positively affect a judgment call at the end of the course.

> **(!)NOTE:** It is **essential** to realize that
**[SAQs/FIBs](Guide120.htm#SAQ/TPQ/FIB), [preassessments](Hub_pa.htm) and
assessmentss are integral parts of the learning environment of this course.**
Both are primarily designed to uncover **what you do not know or do not
understand** so that "WE" can correct this before it really hurts you, i.e. on
the Final Assessment, in a subsequent course, or in your career. Therefore,
you will find that **SAQs/FIBs and** **preassessmentswill have the most
challenging questions** (students might call them "tricky") but they do not
(directly) affect your grade. **Assesments** will be less "tricky" but will be
strictly graded. If the class average is too low (because the test is too long
or too difficult) then **students may raise their grades by reworking their
tests** (thereby learning from their mistakes). Otherwise, grades will not be
modified nor dropped. The **Final Assessment** , which is required, should be
straightforward (because you have mastered all the tricky concepts, and you
really can't learn from mistakes on the final), but it will be strictly
graded.

**Assessment grades and the final grade (not the Final Assessment) will be
normalized.** If the class average on assessments is below the standard,
**students, who have honored[A PROMISE TO FULFILL MINIMUM
EXPECTATIONS](Promise.htm) may have the opportunity to "normalize their grade"
by correcting their mistakes on the assessment. ** If a student corrects every
mistake, she or he will gain 100% of the normalization which will be added to
their grade. **(Note that normalization is available only to those who are
present when the graded assessments are returned in class!)**

**_ACADEMIC DISHONESTY:_**

Academic dishonesty is absolutely unacceptable and may result in automatic
failure of the course and perhaps dismissal from the University. Academic
dishonesty is defined to include any form of cheating and /or plagiarism.
**Cheating** and **plagiarism** are defined in the _PATHFINDER_ ). NOTE:
**Students are encouraged to study together and discuss homework
assignments,** but they should write the assignments independently; copying
assignments as well as allowing someone to copy an assignment is considered
cheating.

![](../COSC330/ICONS/redstar.gif)**_To begin the course read and follow the
instructions in the[CHECKLIST FOR COURSE
ACTIVITIES](MANAGEMENT/CheckLists.htm)._**

