# UCLA Computer Science TA FAQ

This document answers some Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) for Teaching
Assistants (TAs) in the UCLA Computer Science Department.

Feel free to add, correct, or organize the information in this document, and
share YOUR experience. If you are a TA, you should have write permission to
this file: /u/class/ta/faq.html

On the Web this document is <http://www.cs.ucla.edu/classes/ta/faq.html>.

* * *

# QUESTIONS

* * *

**Getting Started**

    Who is the TA Coordinator (TAC) for the dept?
    Who were the TACs of the past?
    What courses do I put on my study list?
    How do I receive TA notices?
    What is there to know about paychecks and paperwork? 
    Where can I find out what old TA's did
  
  
**Duties and Responsibilities**

    What are "Discussion Sections"?
    What are "Lab Sections"?
    What about Lectures?
    How many office hours do I need to hold?
    What are my grading duties? 
  
  
**Accessing TA Materials**

    

Where do I store on-line class materials?

    Where do I get copycards?
    Where do I get supplies?     Where and How do I make APS's for my class?
    How can I set up a newsgroup for my class?
    How can I get text books?
    How can I get a laptop projector for my discussion?   
  

**Webpages**

    

How do I edit my class webpages?

    How do I get permission to access these files?
    What should the website contain?
    What is the "Discussion Board"?
    What is the "private" area for?
    What are "Virtual Office Hours"?  
  

**Locations**

    

Where is the TA Office?

    Where do I pick up TA evals?
    Where do students hand-in homework?
    Where do I meet students?
    How can I get in these rooms?
    My swipe key doesn't work.   
  

**Useful Web Sites**

    

[UCLA Catalog of classes](http://www.registrar.ucla.edu/catalog/)
[Academic Calendar](http://www.registrar.ucla.edu/calendar/)     [UCLA
Schedule of Classes](http://www.registrar.ucla.edu/schedule/) [URSA On-
line](http://www.ursa.ucla.edu/) You can look at your study list and enroll
online.     [UCLA electronic directory](http://www.directory.ucla.edu) Look up
students.     [ UCLA libraries - computer
science](http://www.library.ucla.edu/libraries/sel/subjects/cs.htm)     [CS
495 class webpage](http://www.cs.ucla.edu/classes/fall01/cs495/l1)     [ CS
/r/share1 repository](http://www.cs.ucla.edu/r_share1/www/)     [ CS user-run
FAQ (answers to common
questions)](http://www.cs.ucla.edu/r_share1/faq/faq.html)     [ CS newsgroups
archive, including "ta"
announcements](http://www.cs.ucla.edu/r_share1/news/www/)     [ CS
Archives](http://www.cs.ucla.edu/csd/research/archives.html)  
  
**Contributing to this FAQ**

    

How can I contribute to this FAQ?

* * *

# ANSWERS

* * *

# Getting Started

* * *

## Who is the TA Coordinator (TAC) for the dept?

  
Who should you talk to when you have questions about locks for mailboxes in
the Learning Lounge (BH 4428)?  
What if you need white-board markers (or erasers)?  
For questions in general, contact the current TAC, Anand Panangadan
[anand@cs.ucla.edu](mailto:anand@cs.ucla.edu)

## Who were the past TACs?

  * 1997-00 Ian Ferguson [fergie@cs](mailto:fergie@cs.ucla.edu)
  * 1996-97 George Mustafa [mustafa@cs](mailto:mustafa@cs.ucla.edu)
  * 1994-96 Mitchell Tsai [tsai@cs](mailto:tsai@cs.ucla.edu)
  * 1992-94 Elizabeth Borowsky 
  * 1991-92 Prasad Ram

## What courses do I put on my study list?

    
    
    If you are taking TA training this Fall (this includes everyone
    who has not taken this course yet and who will be teaching in some
    quarter thsi year),
    
      Sign up for CS 495 (Course# 587-770-200).  This class is 2 units. 
      All the new TAs will meet twice a week (Tuesday and Thursday from 12 to 2pm
      in Boelter 5420) and Prof. Richard Korf will 
      go over issues in teaching Computer Science.
    
    If you are TA'ing a course in any quarter,
    
      Sign up for CS 375 (Course# 587-620-200).  This is a variable unit
      course, 1-4 units.  Usually, people choose 4 units. There are no
      meetings for this class.
    
    Thus we have 3 options:
    
      1) Old TA who has taken CS 495 before, teaching in Fall: 4 units of 375 
      2) New or Old TA who has not taken CS 495 (4 units of 375) + (2 units of 495)
      3) New or Old TA who has not taken CS495, not teaching in Fall 1996: 2 units of 495
    
    

You can check your study list or even [enroll](http://www.ursa.ucla.edu/) on-
line.

## How do I receive TA notices?

You should receive all TA notices by e-mail. Try "ypmatch dist-ta aliases". If
your login name is not on this list, send mail to the current TAC.

All TA notices are also posted to the [ "ta" newsgroup](news:ta). (In case you
can't access your mail because of a computer crash.) [ Old "ta"
newsgroup](http://www.cs.ucla.edu/r_share1/news/www/) messages are archived.

## What is there to know about paperwork and paychecks

As far as filling out paperwork, picking-up paychecks or arranging for your
paychecks to be direct deposited into a checking acct. You will want to talk
to Roberta Nelson (roberta@cs). She handles all payroll matters for TA's. It
is not a bad idea to check in with her occasionally to make sure everything is
in order.

Also sign your TA contract before the quarter begins. You will have to go to
Verra for this.

## Where can I find out what old TAs did?

To see what old TAs did or had access to; first try looking online. In the TA
list for the current quarter, there are links to previous quarter lists and
materials, and you will be able to find out who the old ta was and what
his/her e-mail address is. Second, try looking in the TA archive, for which
you will need to contact the TAC and make an appt to get access to this
material. The TA archive was started Spring '96, in an effort to give new TAs
the experience of old TAs. Addendum by TAC: Contact me to get this
information, it is stored in a file cabinet and I can loan out the files when
requested.

* * *

# Duties and Responsibilities

* * *

##  What are "Discussion Sections"?

These are held only for courses. Your interaction with the students will
mainly be during the Discussion sections, usually during Fridays. You might be
in charge of more than one section. This time is used to go over the material
that was covered during lectures by the professor - new material is not
introduced unless the professor asks you to do so. Presenting examples and
solving problems are a good way to review the material. Students are
encouraged to ask questions. Depending on your class, you may also have to:
Give quizzes, collect homeworks, give back graded homeworks and quizzes,
discuss homework/quiz solutions, go over programming exercises.

## What are "Lab Sections"?

Usually, you start out by going over the work that has to be done during that
day. You will also have to go over any theory that they might require. You
then move around helping the students do their experiments.

## What about Lectures?

These are given by the professor. It is up to you and the professor to decide
if you need to attend them.

## How many office hours do I need to hold?

You are expected to hold two office hours per week. Preferably, hold them on
different days and times so that all students can make it to at least one of
them. Also, try to schedule office hours to span standard class times. In
other words, an office hour from 9:30-10:30, 11:30-12:30, 1:30-2:30, or
3:30-4:30 will allow a lot more students to be able to attend. You can ask
your students for suitable times before fixing your office hours. Extra office
hours may be held during examination weeks. Post your regular office hours in
the file /u/class/ta/ugrad.html

Office hours are usually held in Boelter 4428.

## What are my grading duties?

Talk with the professor to find out about homeworks and quizzes (how many,
when will they be given, who will prepare the questions/solutions, grading
scheme ...) If you handle over 45 students ask your professor if you can get a
"grader" (usually an undergraduate who has taken the course previously and who
will grade the homeworks for you; you will still be responsible for collecting
and giving back the homeworks). Make sure that you return graded material in
time.

You can collect homeworks in class or ask them to drop it off in one of the
drop-boxes in Boelter 4428. Pick an empty one, label the box clearly, and
contact the TAC for a combination lock.

## How can I get textbooks?

In theory your professor should have ordered an extra text book for you. If
this has not happened, you should talk to the professor and ask the
professor's secretary to order the book. It is best to make sure a book has
been order before the quarter begins, as publishers take 3-4 weeks to mail
textbooks.

## How can I get a laptop projector for my discussion?

Material/Building services has laptops (with Windows 98 and Powerpoint) and
laptop projectors. Fill up their "AVS MSR" form at
[www.matserv.ucla.edu](http://www.matserv.ucla.edu). Don't fill in the
recharge ID. Do give your course number and professor's name. They should then
confirm your order. You can pick up the equipment from their office in Boelter
2685 (entrance from the outside corridor).

* * *

# Accessing TA Materials

* * *

## Where do I store on-line class materials?

Class materials are stored in /u/class/yyyy/csXXX. The web address is
<http://www.cs.ucla.edu/classes/yyyy/>. Where yyyy is the term, fall98,
winter97, etc.

If you can't create your files, check to see if you are in the "ta" group with
"ypmatch ta group." If your login name is not on this list, send mail to the
current TAC.

## Where do I get copycards?

Each TA is allowed a copycard for making class-related photocopies. To get a
copy card, talk to [Ann Burroughs](mailto:ann@cs.ucla.edu). A $10 deposit is
required.

## Where do I get supplies?

A TA should not pay for any supplies necesary for teaching a class. Things
like paper, folders, staplers, transparencies, etc. may be obtained by talking
to any of the departmental secretaries. The best secretary to approach is the
secretary of the professor for whom you are TA'ing. As for dry-erase
markers/erasers, contact the TAC, there should be a supply of them available.

## Where and How do I make APS for my class?

APS stands for Academic Publishing Service, which is the on campus service for
a professor or TA to produce some type of manual, or supplemental for their
class. APS is located in the ASUCLA Copy store on the 3rd floor of Ackerman
union. However, APS takes 3-4 weeks to produce anything. On the otherhand, you
can go to Copymat located in Westwood on Westwood Blvd, Across from the Bankof
America, next to the Mrs. Fields. They will create your APS, and sell them to
your students, and give you a free copy. The best part, is they will do this
within 3-4 days, usually faster. So if you have a choice, go to Copymat and
make your APS manuals there.

## How can I set up newsgroups for my class

Class newsgroups are setup by SEASNET, the SEASNET office is located on the
2nd floor of Boelter Hall. You will need to go down to the SEASNET office in
person and request a newsgroup for your class.

## How can I get textbooks?

In theory your professor should have ordered an extra text book for you. If
this has not happened, you should talk to the professor and ask the
professor's secretary to order the book. It is best to make sure a book has
been order before the quarter begins, as publishers take 3-4 weeks to mail
textbooks.

* * *

# Webpages

* * *

## How do I edit my class webpages?

All classes should have a webpage. These webpages are accessed by students
from [www.cs.ucla.edu/ugrad](http://www.cs.ucla.edu/ugrad)  
A basic webpage has been created for your class:
http://www.cs.ucla.edu/classes/fall01/csXXX/l1/ (for section 1; l2 for section
2 ...)  
The files are in the directory:  
/u/class/fall01/csXXX/l1 (for section 1; in l2 for section 2 ...)

## How do I get permission to access these files?

Access to the directory is controlled using Access Control Lists (man getfacl
and setfacl for more information). You should also belong to the ta group. You
(and your professor) should already have permissions to change your
directories; if not, please contact the TAC.

## What should the website contain?

The webpages usually contain the following information:

* Contact information: of the professor and TA, office hours, lecture and discussion hours and locations. 
* Syllabus and Course Outline 
* Homework assignments: Depending on the professor, solutions may also be posted. 
* Notices of upcoming quizzes and examinations. 
* Lecture slides (if available) 

You can change the format and look of the class webpages, but try not to
change too much (the department is trying to standardize the webpages to get
the undergraduate program accredited).

## What is the "Discussion Board"?

A discussion board is available for each class (a link is there on your
default course webpage). This is meant for the students and TAs to ask/answer
questions, make announcements, etc. Anyone can post on this board - please
make sure that no inappropriate material gets posted.

## What is the "private" area for?

The files under the private directory are protected by an .htaccess file:
private/auth. A password is required to access these webpages. The initial
password and instructions on how to change this password are described in the
file README_FIRST in your course directory. This area is for you to put
copyrighted material that should be accessed only by students of your class
(so give out the password only to students in your class).

## What are "Virtual Office Hours"?

This is a section of the course webpage where students and TAs can interact in
real time - there is a chat and drawing area. This is accessible to all too.
However, you can change the properties by logging in as administrator (the way
to do this is described in the file README_FIRST in your course directory).

* * *

# Locations

* * *

## Where is the TA Office?

Unfortunately, space requirements are such that the TA office, which was
underutilized, has been taken away. There is currently no space for a TA
office. I would suggest you talk to your advisor to see if he/she can come up
with a desk for you.

## Where do I pick up TA evals?

See Brenda Ramirez in 3731G for the evaluation forms to hand out at the end of
the quarter. You should do this in week 9 or 10.

## Where do I meet students?

Office hours and student meetings are held in the Learning Lounge (4428
Boelter Hall). There are two sides to the room, each with a white board.

## Where do students hand-in homework?

There are mailboxes available in the learning lounge. Contact the TAC to get a
lock, assigned on a quarterly basis.

## How can I get in these rooms?

To enter you need a "swipe card". If you don't have a swipe card or you need
to add TA access, contact Terry Valai (terryv@cs) in BH4732. Ask for access to
the Learning Lounge (4428).

    
    
     
    _ a green light : ok, welcome ! 
    _ a red light   : card read but your database entry says "access not allowed"
    _ both lights   : couldn't read, try again
    

## My swipe key doesn't work

If your swipe key doesn't work for some reason, you will need to talk to Terry
Valai (terryv@cs) in BH4732. She will be able to assist you.

* * *

# Contributing to this FAQ

* * *

## How can I contribute to this FAQ?

    
    
    1.  Edit /u/class/ta/faq.html.
        Please add your name/e-mail address to the end of your comments.
    2.  Add your name to the document history at the end of faq.html.
    3.  Save a copy of faq.html in /u/class/ta/old_faqs; i.e. "faq-15.html".
        Please "chmod 664 yourfile", so that other TAs can read your file.
    

