Fundamentals of Computer Science Using C V22.0380 Section 002 Instructor: Dan
Barrish email: barrish@cs.nyu.edu Class Schedule: Monday, Wednesday: 4:00 -
5:20 pm MEC 3-90 Office Hours: Office hours will be held every Wed, from 2:45
- 3:45 pm. Location: Warren Weaver Hall, Room 427 Course Description: This is
a course in computer programming concepts for students with little or no
programming experience. The intent is to teach students to write both clear
and efficient C programs by emphasizing structured programming principles.
This course is intended as a first course for information systems majors, for
students of other scientific disciplines, and for a functional introduction to
programming. Course Home Page: http://cs.nyu.edu/courses/spring98/V22.0380.002
(this is case-sensitive!) The course home page will be updated throughout the
semester. Check here for all homework assignments, exam information, and
additional information regarding the course. In order to best view the home
page content, it is recommended that you use either Netscape Navigator or
Internet Explorer. Text Books: \- The primary (required) textbook is: Deitel &
Deitel, C How To Program, 2nd Edition (New York: Prentice Hall, 1994.)
Available at the NYU bookstore. \- The supplementary text is: Kernighan and
Ritchie, The C Programming Language, 2nd Edition (New York: Prentice Hall,
1988.) Also available at the NYU Bookstore. Computer Software: For the entire
course, we will be using the Borland C++ Compiler for Windows. Borland C++ is
available at all Stern and all Academic Computer Facility (ACF) computer labs.
Other students wishing to purchase Borland C++ can do so at the NYU Computer
Book Store for approximately $50. In order to save your computer programs,
please purchase a few high-density floppy disks. (also available at the NYU
Computer Book Store.) BE SURE TO SAVE ALL YOUR WORK ON FLOPPIES!!! Email/Unix
Account: If you do not already have one, you will also need to obtain a Stern
or ACF Email/Unix account. These accounts will be necessary for subscribing to
the electronic mailing list and for corresponding with the class E-tutor.
Grader/E-Tutor: Our class will have both a grader and an E-tutor. The grader
will be responsible for grading all homeworks. And the E-tutor will be
available throughout the week should you have any questions regarding course
topics or homework assignments. The Grader and E-tutor will be announced in
the second week of the semester. Exams and Grading: The course will include a
number of programming assignments, one midterm and one final. Your grade will
be calculated (roughly) as follows: midterm exam (25%), final exam (35%),
problem sets/projects (40%). Late Policy: In general, homework assignments
will be due on the Wednesday of each week. You must submit your homework via
email (exact instructions will follow.) In order to be considered on time,
your homework must be received by Wednesday at 11:59 pm. If you do not hand in
your homework by that time, you must submit your homework by the following
Wednesday at 11:59 pm. Homework that is up to one week late will receive an
automatic 10 point penalty. Homework that is more than a week late will not be
accepted. Fundamentals of Computer Science Using C Syllabus - keep in mind
that the syllabus is subject to change (hopfully minimal) as the semester
progresses. Week of Topics Reading Assignment January 21 Introduction/Overview
of Course: \- Introduction \- "Hello, World!" Program January 26 Introduction
to C Programming: \- Basic Input/Output \- Basic Data Types \- Basic
Arithmetic \- Operator Precedence Chapter 2 February 2 Structured Program
Development: \- If/Else Selection Structure \- While Repetition Structure \-
Assignment Operators \- Structured Programming Chapter 3 February 9 Program
Control: \- For Repetition Structure \- Switch Multiple Selection Structure \-
Do/While Repetition Structure Chapter 4 February 16 Program Control (cont.):
\- Break and Continue Statements \- Logical Operators [No class on Mon., Feb.
16: President's Day.] February 23 Functions: \- Function Definitions \-
Function Prototypes \- Storage Classes Chapter 5 March 2 Functions (cont.): \-
Call by Value v. Call by Reference \- Random Numbers \- Introduction to
Recursion March 9 Review and Midterm: \- The Midterm will be held on
Wednesday, March 11. March 16 SPRING BREAK March 23 Arrays: \- What's an
Array? What are they used for? \- Declaring Arrays \- Passing Arrays to
Functions Chapter 6 (except for Section 6.8) March 30 More on Arrays:
(Graphics: HAD TO ELIMINATE GRAPHICS, SORRY!) \- Bubble Sort \- Multi-
Dimensional Arrays Rest of Chapter 6 April 6 Pointers: \- What's a Pointer? \-
How are Pointers and Arrays related? \- Pointer Operators Chapter 7: Sections:
7.1 - 7.4, 7.6, 7.8 April 13 Pointers (cont.): \- Pointer Practice \- Bubble
Sort (revisited) April 20 Structures: \- Structure Definitions \- Accessing
Members of Structures Chapter 10: Sections 10.1 - 10.5 April 27 TBA: \-
Depending on time requirements we may spend this week reviewing for the final
exam and/or discussing some other topic. May 4 Review: [Our last class will be
held on Monday, May 4] Final Exam : Wed. May 6, 1998, 4:00 - 5:50 pm (WWH
Rooms 102, 109)

