Math 313: Introduction to Linear Algebra  
Course Outline Spring 2002 (Section 1)

**

Instructor:** Dr. Ann Cushman    **Office:** ENGR 281    **e-mail:**
acushman@math.uccs.edu  
**web:** http://math.uccs.edu/~acushman  
**Live lecture** : T, Th at 3:05 - 4:20pm   RMT    (On-campus in ENGR 109)  
**Office Hours:** 2:00 - 3:00pm RMT in ENGR 281 or by appt, or
whenever/wherever.  
Office Hours are subject to change!

**Prerequisite:** The technical prerequisite for this course is Calculus I.
Because of the theoretical and abstract nature of linear algebra, students
generally find this course quite challenging. This is exacerbated by the fact
that the first 4 weeks of the course are very computational, lulling the
student into a false sense of security. Be aware that the last 2/3 of the
course is quite theoretical and abstract in which proofs and theorems are
commonplace. Expect to work a minimum of 2-3 hours on the course outside of
the classroom for every hour of lecture.

**

Textbook:** **Elementary Linear Algebra:** Applications Version by Anton and
Rorres 8th ed.  
   ISBN 0-471-17052-6 (This can be ordered on line at [UCCS
Bookstore](http://www.uccs.edu/~storeboo) or by phone 800-325-3252.)

**

Objectives:** The study of linear algebra includes linear systems, matrices,
vector spaces, linear transformations, change of basis ideas, eigen theory and
applications. The content of this course includes a combination of
computational techniques and theoretical structure which are extremely helpful
in many applications in the sciences, particularly mathematics, computer
science and engineering. At the end of this course, students should be able to

> ， read and understand proofs in linear algebra;

>

> ， write elementary proofs, verifications and counter examples;

>

> ， use the Gauss-Jordan process for row reducing a matrix;

>

> ， compute with matrices such as finding inverses, calculating determinants,
etc.

>

> ， find bases of vector spaces, especially row, column and null spaces of a
matrix;

>

> ， find a change-of-basis matrix and a matrix of a linear transformation;

>

> ， articulate the "big picture" of the change of basis idea for linear
algebra;

>

> ， compute eigenvalues, eigenvectors and be able to diagonalize a matrix

**

Computing Requirements:**  

  * Learnlinc software:  This is not _technically_ required for on-campus students but will allow you to view class notes, review lectures and attend class on-line if desired.
  * Computer algebra software such as Maple or Matlab for some homework problems.
  * Scientific Notebook (Viewer): recommended to view some homework solutions/problems and practice exams. Required if you wish to hand in homework by email.   See the [links](http://math.uccs.edu/~acushman/math313/links.htm) page for free download.

**

Homework **Homework will be assigned regularly (see the Syllabus page) and
collected weekly. Homework is due by 4:30 pm on the due date (See the syllabus
page).  Homework should be LEGIBLE and include your name and the due date.
You may turn in Homework in the following ways:

  * In person:  In class, or in my in-box in ENGR 281. 
  * By email:  IF you use Scientific Notebook to create it.  Include your name in the filename (eg: cushmanhw3.tex).
  * By fax: (Mathonline students only, please.)  Fax number is (719)262-3605.

Homework will count 100 points toward the final grade. Late homework will NOT
be accepted. You are free (and encouraged) to work together on the homework.
On the other hand if you become a homework "sponge" you may have difficulty on
the exams!

**

Exams: **There will be three in-class exams and one optional Exam 4- see the
Syllabus page for their dates. Each Exam will count 100 points toward the
final grade. Exam 3 and the Exam 4 will occur on the date scheduled for the
Final.  Students can elect to take the optional Exam 4 and use its score to
replace the lowest score from Exam 1 and Exam 2. As a result, **_NO MAKEUP
EXAMS WILL BE GIVEN UNDER ANY CIRCUMSTANCES!

_

Grades:** Your course grade will be calculated from the average of your exam
scores and your quiz grade using the standard 90-80-70-60 scale.( I will give
plusses and minuses, sparingly.)

**

Support: **Start early if you need help! You are encouraged to drop in or call
during office hours (or make an appointment), or send me an e-mail :
[`acushman@math.uccs.edu`](mailto:

acushman@math.uccs.edu)

The [ Math Learning Center](http://web.uccs.edu/mlc) (129 Engineering) also
provides **free** tutoring in this course and for the Maple software. Other
resources will be posted here as I discover them (or on the front page if
they're exciting). Don't be shy! If you have problems or concerns about the
course I want to know about it!

**

Misc:** You are responsible for observing university deadlines. I will try to
inform you of deadlines as they approach. February 6 is the last day to drop a
class without any grade report.

Cheating is a serious offense and will (depress me and) result in a grade of F
for the entire course.







