# Computer Science 340: Introduction to Software Engineering

* * *

**Please Note:** This web page (or, rather, collection of web pages) is very
much a work in progress. I expect that it will evolve over the course of the
semester, being added to and portions edited (perhaps removed). Please check
back here often for news related to the class. .

Much of the following is taken (indeed, copied) from the course syllabus for
this course used by [ John
Riegsecker](http://www.math.ups.edu/faculty/riegsecker/)

* * *

**Quick Links:**

  * **Weekly Schedules**
    * [This Week](http://www.math.ups.edu/faculty/matthews/CS340_F99/ThisWeek.html)
    * [Next Week](http://www.math.ups.edu/faculty/matthews/CS340_F99/NextWeek.html)
    * [Previous Weeks](http://www.math.ups.edu/faculty/matthews/CS340_F99/PreviousWeeks.html)
  * [Group Project](http://www.math.ups.edu/faculty/matthews/CS340_F99/project/home.html)
  * [Final Presentation Schedule](final_presentations.html)
  * [Term Paper](http://www.math.ups.edu/faculty/matthews/CS340_F99/paper.html)
  * **Assignments**
    * [Exercise #1](Assignments/Exercise01.html) (due Monday, Sept. 27)
  * Exam Reviews 
    * [Exam 1 Review](exam_1_review.html) ( **Please note** :  The first hour exam has been rescheduled for Thursday, Oct. 7)
    * [Exam 2 Review](exam_2_review.html)
    * [Exam 3 Review](exam_3_review.html)

* * *

Computer Science 340  
Introduction to Software Engineering  
11:00 AM MTThF  
Thompson 311  
  
**Instructor:** [Bob Matthews](http://www.math.ups.edu/faculty/matthews/)

  * Bob Matthews (email [matthews@ups.edu](mailto:matthews@ups.edu))
  * Thompson 502 (in the Thompson Hall Tower)
  * Extension 3561
  * Office hours (tentative) 
    * 3:00 - 3:50 MTThF
    * Or by appointment.
  * I usually have obligations at 9:00 AM - 4:00 PM each day (including office hours). If you catch me at any other time, please feel free to drop in. Email messages are welcome, and can be used to ask a question or to set up an appointment. A more detailed schedule will be posted on my [ web page](http://www.math.ups.edu/faculty/matthews.html).

* * *

**Text:** Ian Sommerville: [ Software Engineering (fifth
edition)](http://www.comp.lancs.ac.uk/computing/resources/ser/)

I plan to cover chapters 1 - 24 (skipping chapters 11, 16, 21), and 28 - 30

* * *

**Prerequisites:** At least one 300 level computer science course. It would be
helpful to have written at least one program of more than 500 lines (more for
COBOL, less for Forth).

* * *

**Brief course description:**

Software Engineering is concerned with long-term programming projects, and can
be thought of as the care and feeding of large software systems. This course
will be project-oriented and will involve a small [group
project](http://www.math.ups.edu/faculty/matthews/CS340/project/home.html) and
a [ term paper](http://www.math.ups.edu/faculty/matthews/CS340/paper.html).
Lectures and the group project will cover topics in software engineering,
management, problem specification and analysis, system and program design
techniques, testing, and user interface concerns.

Because of the number of topics we must cover, not all topics in all chapters
will be discussed in class. I will assign specific sections for you to read.
Homework assignments may cover topics not discussed in class.

* * *

**Evaluation:**

  * 3 one hour exams: 30% 
    * One of these exams will be in the last full week of the term
  * Assignments: 30% 
    * Homework will be divided into two chunks: Shorter questions (typically from the textbook), but also several larger projects such as 
      * Requirements analysis and definition taken from the textbook
      * Several design exercises: ER, DFD, OOD, Functional, etc.
  * [Term Paper](http://www.math.ups.edu/faculty/matthews/CS340_F99/paper.html): 10%
  * [Group Project:](http://www.math.ups.edu/faculty/matthews/CS340_F99/project/home.html) 30%

* * *

**Notes:**

Programming exercises will be graded on style and documentation as well as
correctness. Programs must include header documentation as well as adequate
internal documentation unless otherwise specified. Written exercises should be
produced on word processing software except (perhaps) for diagrams, which
should be neatly drawn. Late assignments will be accepted (with an increasing
penalty) until the graded exercise is returned to the class, but no extension
of deadline for the term paper or for the group project can be given. All
assignments turned in must represent individual effort: except where a group
effort is a clearly stated part of the assignment (as in the group project).
All students in Computer Science classes at the University of Puget Sound are
responsible for the material contained in the document on academic honesty
published by the Department of Mathematics and Computer Science and included
in the Academic Handbook.

A minimum grade of 50% on exams and 50% on homework assignments is a necessary
(but not necessarily sufficient) condition for a passing grade. Below 40% on
exams, homework, term paper, or the group project will result in an F for the
course.

* * *

A syllabus for the course can be found
[here](http://www.math.ups.edu/faculty/matthews/CS340_F99/syllabus.html)

* * *

The schedule of exams and readings for the course can be found
[here](http://www.math.ups.edu/faculty/matthews/CS340_F99/schedule.html)

* * *

Return to [my home page](http://www.math.ups.edu/~matthews)

