## Course Syllabus

###  Instructor

**[Prof.Zhi-Li Zhang](http://www.cs.umn.edu/~zhzhang)**  
Email: [zhzhang@cs.umn.edu](mailto:zhzhang@cs.umn.edu)  
Office: EE/CS 6-187  
Office hours: 1:30-2:30pm T/Th

###  Teaching Assistants

**[Rohit Rakshe](http://www.cs.umn.edu/~rakshe)**  
Email:[ rakshe@cs.umn.edu](mailto:rakshe@cs.umn.edu)  
Office Hours: 4:00-5:00pm MW  
(EE/CS 2-209) | **Changho Choi**  
Email: [choi@cs.umn.edu](mailto:choi@cs.umn.edu)  
Office:EE/CS 2-209  
Office hours: 2:30-3:30pm W,  
      11:00am-12:00pm F  
---|---  
  
###  Course Description:

This course provides an introduction to fundamental concepts in the design and
implementation of computer communication networks, their protocols, and
applications. Topics to be covered include: layered network architectures,
applications, network programming interfaces (e.g., sockets), transport,
physical media, data link protocols, local area networks and network routing.
Examples will be drawn primarily from the Internet (e.g., TCP, UDP, and IP)
protocol suite. This course will be lectured to both graduate and
undergraduate students.

###  Textbooks:

  * **Required:** _``Computer Networks,''   _by Andrew S. Tanenbaum, Prentice Hall, 3rd edition, 1996
  * **Recommended References:**
    * ``Computer Networking: A Top-Down Approach Featuring the Internet,''   by Jim Kurose and Keith Ross, Addison-Wesley, 2000. ( _Highly recommended!_ )
    * _``Computer Networks and Internets''_ by Douglas E. Comer, Prentice Hall, 2nd edition, 1998

###  Prerequisites:

A rudimentary understanding of computer architecture and operating systems,
while not required, would be helpful. _Programming experience in C is
necessary,_ as the programming projects are in C. You need a computer account
at the IT computer labs for the projects.

###  Coursework and Evaluation:

The grading system for this course is A-F (with +/-).  All students will be
expected to do all work assigned in the course, or  its equivalent as
determined by the instructor. The coursework is listed below. No student is
permitted to submit extra work in an attempt to raise his or her grade. _Note
that students enrolled for graduate -level credit may be graded more strictly
than undergraduate students._  
  Coursework | Timing | Aprox % of grade  
---|---|---  
Assigned readings | weekly  
Written homeworks  | 4 assignments  
\-----------------------  
2- 2 1/2 weeks  | 16 % (4 % each)  
Programming Assignments  |   3  projects  | 24% (1st 6%, 2nd  9%,  3rd 9%)  
Midterm Exam  | mid-semester  | 20%  
Final Exam  | last day of  class  | 40%  
  
As shown above, there will be four written assignments, three  programming
projects, one midterm and a final exam. _Homework assignments and project
reports/documentations must be handed in at the beginning of the class on the
specified due date. No late homework or project (unless with approval from
instructor): one day late 10% deduction, thereafter each extra late day 15%
deduction. No credit if more than one-week late._ (Please _do not_ submit
assignments in EE/CS 6-187, the instructor's office!). All assignments must
have your name and the **student id**. RETAIN A COPY OF YOUR SUBMISSIONS.   If
you have questions regarding the grading of your homework assignments,
projects or exams, you **_MUST_** come to see either the instructor or the TAs
_within two weeks_ after the date your  homeworks, projects or exams have been
returned to you. If you cannot see us within two weeks, you need to email us
within two weeks and make an appointment. If you believe that your homeworks,
projects or exams  __ have been lost, please notify us as soon as possible
(within two weeks). _We are not responsible for missing homeworks, projects or
exams   two weeks after they have been returned._

_In order to **PASS** the course, you **MUST** have a passing grade (50% or
better of the maximum score) on your final exam! However, having a passing
grade on your final exam does not **GUARANTEE** that you will pass the
course._

_Incompletes will in general not be given._ These options will be considered
only when a _provably_ serious family or personal emergency arises, proof is
presented, and the student has already completed all but a small portion of
the work. (According to the _IT Bulltin_ an incomplete should be given "only
when a student has completed all but a small portion of the work of a course
and has made prior arrangements with the instructor to make up the work". The
rule for CLA and other students differ slightly, but not to a large amount.)
The Department of  Computer Science and Engineering requires students who
request an "I" to fill out the "Agreement for Completion of Incomplete Work"
form. _Make-up exams will only be given to those students who have legitimate
reasons such as conflict of finals and other provably serious family or
personal emergency._ Students who need make-up exams are encouraged to notify
the instructor as early as possible (preferrably two weeks earlier) so that
appropriate accommodations can be arranged.

_Scholastic conduct must be acceptable._ See the policy in the appropriate
college bulletin. Specifically, _you must do your homeworks, projects and
exams yourself, on your own._ You may discuss the homeworks with anyone and
use any reference material, provided you do not copy any other persons' work.
_Appropriate reference or credit must be acknowledged if you do not solve the
homework problems on your own._ Just because you have access to solutions to a
homework problem or an exam question (say, from your friends, or from the
previous offerings of the course) does not warrant you to copy the solutions!

_Students with disabilities that affect their ability to participate fully in
class or to meet all course requirements are encouraged to bring this to the
attention of the instructor so that appropriate accommodations can be
arranged._ Further information is available from Disabilities Services (30
Nicholson Hall). University policy prohibits sexual harassment as defined in
the December 1998 policy statement, available at the Office of Equal
Opportunity and Affirmative Action. Questions or concerns about sexual
harassment should be directed to this office, located in 419 Morrill Hall.

_Last but not the least, students are responsible for all information
disseminated in class and all course requirements, including homework and
project due dates and exams._ Hence you are strongly encouraged to attend all
classes. Please also consult the class  web page frequently, in particular,
pay attention to the announcement page. For further information and
requirements of this course, please attend the first-day class. In case you
miss the first-day class, consult the lecture notes of the first-day class, or
come and talk with the instructor.  


