![line separator](webpage/line.gif)

#  Bill Opdyke

![\(photo\)](webpage/wfo.jpg) [opdyke@noctrl.edu](mailto:opdyke@noctrl.edu)  
William F. (Bill) Opdyke  
Associate Professor, Computer Science  
North Central College (Carnegie; Rm. 311B)  
30 North Brainard Street  
Naperville, IL 60540-4690  
phone: +1 630 637-5699  
fax: +1 630 637-5172

[Click here](OOPSLA2002/discovery_index.html) for OOPSLA 2002 workshop
information.

Click here to see my courses.

_Office hrs (Summer):_   Mon/Wed 4:00-5:00 PM (or by appointment).

###  Welcome to my home page!

I recently joined the computer science department at North Central College
(March, 2002).  If you are in the area, please stop by my office sometime; I'd
like to meet you! ([Click here](http://www.noctrl.edu/map/map/index.shtml) for
campus map and directions.)

Previously I worked at Bell Labs as a product and software architect, applied
researcher, requirements analyst, product evolution planner and corporate
trainer.

Below you'll find information on:

  * My courses (recent, current and upcoming).

    * Spring term & Summer term, 2002; subsequent terms.
  * My professional interests and research background.

  * Object-oriented programming, refactoring, evolving software systems, design patterns, internet telephony.
  * Why you might want to contact me (by phone or email).

###  Thanks for visiting; have a great day!

###  ![line separator](webpage/line.gif)

###  MY COURSES - RECENT, CURRENT & UPCOMING:

During summer term, 2002, I am teaching the following course:

  * CSC 160 "Computer Science I"

    * Mon/Wed 5:30- 7:50 PM (Lab 8:00-9:15 PM) ([Click here](csc160/index.htm) for course syllabus.) 

Here are the courses I am scheduled to teach in upcoming terms:

  * Fall, 2002:  CSC 160 "Computer Science I "; CSC 469/569 "Data Communication and Networking".
  * Winter, 2003:  CSC 161 "Computer Science II"; CSC 453 "Systems Analysis".
  * Spring, 2003:  CSC 210 "Data Structures & Algorithms"; CSC 670 "Advanced Networking".

During spring term, 2002, I taught the following courses:

  * CSC 469/569 "Data Communication and Networking"

    * Mon/Wed 4:00-5:50 PM ([Click here](csc469/index.htm) for course syllabus.) 
  * CSC 669 "Local Area Networks & Distributed Systems" 

    * Thurs 6:30-10:00 PM ([Click here](csc669/index.htm) for course syllabus.)

####  (Return to top.)

![line separator](webpage/line.gif)

###  MY PROFESSIONAL INTERESTS & RESEARCH BACKGROUND:

My professional & research interests include:

  * object oriented programming & refactoring
  * leveraging and evolving legacy software systems
  * design patterns
  * internet telephony and converged services.

[Click here](webpage/myPublications.htm) to view a list of my publications,
conference tutorials and panels.

_Recent Presentation(s):_

On Tuesday, May 21, I presented the talk "If Software is So Easy to Create,
Why is it So Difficult to Evolve?"  The talk was jointly sponsored by the IEEE
Fox Valley Subsection and several other local organizations.  [Click
here](webpage/talk020521.htm) for details regarding the talk

_Object-Oriented Programming & Refactoring:_

Software often needs to be (or, at least, ought to be) restructured before it
is extended or reused. My doctoral research into refactoring object-oriented
frameworks (University of Illinois; 1989-1992) focused on documenting the
restructurings that experienced object-oriented developers apply to their
code, and on defining how these operations can be assisted with an automated
tool.

I was a contributing author of [Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing
Code](http://www.aw.com/catalog/academic/product/1,4096,0201485672,00.html)
(Addison-Wesley, 1999). My research is discussed in the [ Design Patterns:
Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented
Software](http://hillside.net/patterns/books/#Gamma) (the "Gang of Four"
design patterns book), Martin Fowler's [ UML
Distilled](http://www.aw.com/catalog/academic/product/1,4096,020165783X,00.html)
book and elsewhere.

I have attended most of the OOPSLA (Object-Oriented Programming Systems,
Languages and Applications) conferences since 1989. Workshops I helped
organize focused on frameworks, discovery costs and project management.  I co-
presented refactoring tutorials at OOPSLA '95 and OOPSLA '96.  My panel
position papers appear in the [ OOPSLA
'97](http://www.acm.org/sigplan/oopsla/oopsla97/fp/fp66.html) and [ OOPSLA
'98](http://www.acm.org/sigs/sigplan/oopsla/oopsla98/ap/tech/tprpm.htm#tp14)
proceedings.  

_Leveraging & Evolving Legacy Software Systems:_

Adding new features to software systems, especially for communications
applications, has proven to be very difficult and expensive.

My research has addressed key leverage points (discovery costs, interface
issues and organizational concerns) and techniques for better controlling
these spiraling costs.  

Recently, I was guest editor for the feature topic [Evolving Communications
Software: Techniques and
Technologies](http://www.comsoc.org/livepubs/ci1/Public/2001/Oct/gstedopdyke.html)
in the [October, 2001 issue of IEEE Communications
magazine.](http://www.comsoc.org/livepubs/ci1/Public/2001/Oct/)

This research grew out of my investigations in software refactoring and in
supporting large, multi-year communications software projects.  Discovery
costs and organizational issues are discussed in [Understanding and Addressing
the Essential Costs of Evolving
Systems](http://www.lucent.com/minds/techjournal/pdf/apr-jun2000/paper05.pdf).
Interface issues are discussed in [Rapid Development and Delivery of Converged
Services Using APIs.](http://www.lucent.com/minds/techjournal/pdf/jul-
sep2000/paper02.pdf)  These papers were coauthored with technical staff at
Bell Labs.  I also led several efforts at Bell Labs related to platforms and
software reuse.



_Design Patterns:_

Design patterns address a critical need to capture, distill, organize and
leverage expertise for a wide range of applications and tasks.  My patterns
research has focused on refactoring patterns and organizational patterns.
Brian Foote's and my paper [ Lifecycle and Refactoring Patterns That Support
Evolution and Reuse](http://www.laputan.org/lifecycle/Lifecycle.html) appears
in the first volume of Addison-Wesley's [Patterns Languages of Program
Design](http://www.awprofessional.com/catalog/product.asp?product_id={FA5A9F65-F874-429D-AAE9-8C38974F09D7})
series. Dave Dikel, David Kane and I authored  [Managing Change to Reusable
Software](http://st-
www.cs.uiuc.edu/users/hanmer/PLoP-97/Proceedings/kane_opdyke.pdf) which
defines some organization patterns related to patterns and reuse.  I have been
active in the Pattern Languages of Program Design (PLoP) community since the
PLoP conferences began in 1994; I have served on the program committees for
several PLOP conferences.

_Internet Telephony & Converged Services:_

Previously distinct communications networks (e.g., wireless/ wireline, voice/
data, internet/ public switched telephone networks) have begun converging in
recent years.  In some areas, the technologies that enable this convergence
have rapidly advanced in maturity and deployment, while in other areas the
progress has been at a far slower pace.  To date, many of the service and
revenue related opportunities have yet to be realized.

Much of my recent work in this area focused on the services aspects of these
evolving networks. Recent publications that I co-authored include:

  * [Rapid Development and Delivery of Converged Services Using APIs,](http://www.lucent.com/minds/techjournal/pdf/jul-sep2000/paper02.pdf) In the July-September, 2000 issue of the Bell Labs Technical Journal.  

  * "IN Services for Converged (Internet) Telephony", in the June, 2000 special issue of IEEE Communications [Intelligent Networks in the New Millenium](http://www.comsoc.org/~ci/public/2000/jun/current.html).  

  * "Making Converged Services Happen:  APIs are Only Part of the Story", presented May, 2001 at the [IEEE Intelligent Network 2001 Workshop](http://www.comsoc.org/IN2001/) in Boston. 

  * [ Converged Services: More Than Converged Networks](http://www.wtc2000.org/programme/ab_081.htm), presented May, 2000 at WTC/ISS 2000.

####  (Return to top.)

![line separator](webpage/line.gif)

###  WHY YOU MIGHT WANT TO CONTACT ME:

  * If you are a student in one of my courses, and have any questions or concerns:  please come by my office (preferably, during office hours) or contact me via phone or email.  

  * If you are interested in learning more about object oriented technologies, evolving software systems, design patterns, internet telephony and (especially) refactoring, I can provide some insights or point you toward resources you might want or need.  

  * If your research interests are similar to mine, I'd like to hear from you!  

  * If you are considering pursuing a PhD/ doctoral degree, and wonder what the experience would be like (the research experience; balancing school, work and family concerns; etc.), I'd be willing to share with you some of the joys and challenges that I faced.  

  * If your enterprise might benefit from analysis and design, consulting and/ or training support in the any of the areas discussed above, let's explore such opportunities!  

####  (Return to top.)

![line separator](webpage/line.gif)

[opdyke@noctrl.edu](mailto:opdyke@noctrl.edu)

Last updated 6/17/2002.

