[![CSE Department Home
Page](http://www.eas.asu.edu/~cse110/dlogo.gif)](http://www.eas.asu.edu/~csedept/)

**Principles of programming with Java**

**CSE 110 - Summer 2002**



**INSTRUCTOR**

**         Sheikh Iqbal Ahamed**

**         Phone:               (480) 965-8267**  
**         Class room:      NUR 101 (MTWTh 11:00-12:15pm)**  
**                                   **  
**         Office:              GWC 328**

**         Office Hours:   MWTh 3:00-4:00**

**TEACHING ASSISTANT**

**        Pavan R Thotireddy**

**         Office:         GWC 393**  
**         Phone:         (480) 965 2776**  
**         Email:       [pavanreddy@asu.edu](mailto:pavanreddy@asu.edu)**  
    


**                                          &nb sp;                 Lab
(GWC185) and Office(GWC393) hours **  


**Day**

|

**Lab (GWC185)**

|

**Office  (GWC393)**  
  
---|---|---  
  
**Monday**

|

3:00-5:00pm



|

10:00-11:00am  
  
**Tuesday**

|

10:00-11:00am

3:00-5:00pm

|

  
  
**Wednesday**

|

3:00-5:00pm



|

10:00-11:00am  
  
**Thursday**

|

10:00-11:00pm



|

3:00-4:00pm  
  
**Friday**

|

1:00-2:00pm

|

  
  
  


**_Course Description:_**

， This course is an **introductory course** to programming using Java
language. The course concentrates on programming concepts, problem solving,
and program design. We will use the predefined Java classes and implement new
classes. **No prior programming experience is required.**

， The course consists of 3 hours lecture and **one hour open lab( GWC 185)
section each week.** In the lab section you get the opportunity to get
individual help and do practical work.

**_Textbook:_** __

  * Java Software Solutions by John Lewis and William Loftus, second edition published by Addison Wesley (ISBN 0-201-61271-2). Includes a CD with additional resources.

**_Materials:_** __

  * At least 5 3.5" floppy diskettes (High Density) for use on IBM compatible computer. At least five letter size (9 in. by 12 in.) **manila-envelopes** for submitting your projects. 

**_Course Objectives:_** _:_

  * Each student will become familiar with a broad range of fundamental concepts in computer science, including computer hardware, operating systems, compilers, and utilities.
  * Students will become familiar with existing Java classes and also implement their own classes.
  * Students will achieve a moderate level of programming skills, including a thorough understanding of the algorithm development process, syntax and semantics of the fundamentals of the Java programming language, and the design of well-structured programs.

**_Major Topics Covered in the Course:_** __

  * Introduction to problem solving, requirements & specifications, algorithms
  * Introduction to classes and objects
  * Java program structure
  * Methods
  * Java control structures, more algorithms
  * Data types, objects, arrays
  * Inheritance 

**_Course Web Site:_**

， Most documents (i.e. assignments, solutions, _some_ notes, etc.,) associated
with this course will be made available at this web site
[**http://www.eas.asu.edu/~cse110**](http://www.eas.asu.edu/~cse194) **. It is
your responsibility to print your assignments from this web site and start
working on the assignment as soon as it is posted. Try to get started early on
your assignments so you can get help if you need it. You should check the
announcement page often as the semester progresses.**

， **_Note:_** You are responsible for the contents of this syllabus and the
information on the homepage. Make sure you know how to access the home page.
Announcements in the class take precedence over printed material. **It is very
important to check the homepage frequently during the semester.**

**_Cheating:_**

You must do your own work. In this course, cheating is defined as representing
someone else's work as your own. You may discuss project's requirements,
concepts, and your approach to solve the problem but you can not look at
someone else's code or show someone else your code.  Every student must work
independently on their assignments. This means that every student must ensure
that neither a soft copy nor a hard copy of their work gets into the hands of
another student.

Sharing your assignments with others in any way is not permitted. All cheating
cases will be handled by the college of Engineering who determines the
punishment. Punishment usually includes a record on the student's transcripts,
an E in the course, and/or dismissal from college This punishment will apply
to all students including those students who did their work but shared with
others. It is your responsibility to take action to prevent other students
from copying your work. This note serves as your only warning in this matter.

Here are useful links for you to check: ASU's Academic Integrity Policy and
Code of Conduct is found at:
<http://www.asu.edu/studentlife/judicial/index.html>  

National Institute for Engineering Ethics is found at: <http://www.niee.org>

**_Grading:  _**

**              Midterm #1                                         50 points**

**              Midterm #2                                         50 points**

**              Final Exam                                          100
points**

    **           Quizzes, Class attendance,**

    **           lab attendance, class participation      20 points**

**              6 Assignments                                     180 points
(Written + Programming)**

**
\-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------**

**              Total possible                                     400
points**

**_Note:_      Each assignment will have 30 points.**

**The following scale (subject to the RESTRICTION described below) will be
used to determine your final grade:**



**A**

|

**(360 - 400)**

|

**> = 90%**  
  
---|---|---  
  
**B**

|

**(320 - 359)**

|

**> = 80%**  
  
**C**

|

**(280 - 319)**

|

**> = 70%**  
  
**D**

|

**(240 - 279)**

|

**> = 60%**  
  
**E**

|

**(0 - 239)**

|

  
  


**  Notes**

  * **  All exams will be closed book and closed notes. A picture ID will be required by all students taking exams. Make-up exams will be given only at the     instructor's discretion. No extra-credit or make-up assignments will be given.**
  * **Students are encouraged to discuss concepts, strategies, etc. with each other.   However, YOU MUST DO YOUR OWN WRITTEN WORK working together on assignments is not permitted.  Having others do work for you is not permitted.  Sharing your written work with others in any way (including reading to others, allowing others to view your computer screen or printouts, etc.) is not permitted.**

  * **THE PENALTY FOR STUDENTS FOUND TO BE IN VIOLATION OF THIS POLICY IS AN "E" FOR THE COURSE. This penalty will apply to all students involved in such "group efforts", including those students who did their own work but shared it with others.THIS NOTE SERVES AS YOUR ONLY WARNING IN THIS MATTER.**
  * **Homework and Programming Assignments:   Learning a computer language requires extensive practice.  Be prepared to work considerable amount of time for this course,  especially for doing programming assignments. There will be 6 or so assignments which will consist of programming and/or written exercises due in class, at the beginning of class on the due dates. It is not acceptable to put assignments under my office door, nor is it acceptable to have assignments placed in my mailbox. Each assignment must be submitted on or before the due date. NO LATE ASSIGNMENTS WILL BE ACCEPTED. **

**Download assignment files as soon as they are made available on the course
web site; plan to do your work as early as possible to avoid unexpected
problems. Printer/Server delays of 12 to 24 hours are not uncommon during the
semester. It is your responsibility to plan ahead and complete the work on
time. Questions regarding the programming assignments may be asked during
lecture or in my office. Please do not expect to get help in the lab if you do
not have written work.**

**If you are unable to complete an assignment by the due date and time, turn
in whatever work you have accomplished for partial credit. Always have at
least one backup copy of your work.**

**Questions regarding a grade on an assignment or an exam must be made in
writing within one week   after it has been returned to the class.  Later in
the semester I will not look at assignments/exams returned earlier in the
semester.**

**Getting Help:** There are many help resources available for this course. You
can get help from TAs during office hours (GWC 385) each week. In addition,
TAs will put time as the on duty helper in the GWC 185 lab. Their schedule
will be available later on the course web page on the Teaching Assistant link.
TAs office hours and lab hours are subject to change. For the latest
information on office and lab hours, please check the class web page
frequently.

If you bring questions regarding assignments, make sure you have the
development of your solution thus far. If you don't have any written plan for
your assignments (pseudo code, file on disk), help will not be provided on the
assignments.

**_Attendance_** _:_   You are expected to attend the class regularly and be
**punctual in class.** You are responsible for all the announcements that are
made in the class whether you attend or not. If you wish to be withdrawn from
the class, you should present a withdrawal slip to me. **DO NOT JUST STOP
COMING TO CLASS**! Submitting a completed withdraw form to the registrar
office is the only guaranteed way to officially withdrawing from the class.

**_Classroom and University Policies:_**

No action on the part of a student, which is detrimental to the learning
process of the class, will be tolerated. All university and college policies
concerning withdrawal deadlines, incomplete, audits, and other procedures are
in effect for this course. All students are advised to be aware of and to
carefully follow these guidelines. Please do not come to me at the end of the
course and want an "Incomplete" simply because you have fallen behind.
**Incomplete is not given.**

  * If you have need for special seating inform me at the beginning of the class. Furthermore I reserve the right to assign seating for any student at the beginning of the semester or during the semester.

**_Computing Facilities_**

If you do not already have an **ASURITE    account, get one as soon as
possible. **Activating. your ASURITE UserID is a self-service process. You can
activate your account by visiting the **[ASURITE Activation Web
site](https://author1.asu.edu/cgi-bin/WebObjects/APSelfSub)**

There are also special terminals set aside just for activating accounts and
adding new services. The largest of which is Computing Commons. The process
takes about fifteen minutes.

Your ASURITE UserID and Password allows you to access many services from on
and off campus. Access to many of these services depends on your affiliation
to the University. Make sure you subscribe to all Basic Services which are
available to students. (You will need all these services to work in the closed
lab,  and to work from home).

If you are planning to work on your own machine, JDK software can be installed
from the CD included in the book.

Java Resources: There are many online high quality resources available for
Java. Check the tutorials at <http://java.sun.com/docs/index.html> and Peter
Van der Linden's Java FAQ at <http://www.afu.com/>

