#  Teaching Summary

Jennifer M. Schopf  
  
As a Ph.D. Candidate in Computer Science at U. C. San Diego, I have attempted
to gain experience for the teaching aspects of an academic career as well as
pursue my thesis research. I've had the opportunity to develop and co-teach a
course with Dr.Keith Marzullo as part of the Preparing Future Faculty program,
I've mentored various undergrads for different lengths of time, and I have
been a teaching assistant for a variety of computer science classes before I
received my NASA Fellowship. I recognize the importance of teaching in any
academic position. Moreover, I've enjoyed teaching and working with students,
and feel strongly that my research has benefited through my teaching, just as
I know my teaching is better when I relate it to research. The following
sections discuss my teaching philosophy, my participation in the Preparing
Future Faculty program, and my previous teaching and mentoring experience.  
  

### Teaching Philosophy

It has been my experience that teaching and research are best when
intertwined, both for the professor and for the students. Research becomes a
part of teaching through:

  * Having a thorough knowledge of the area; 
  * Including current developments to keep the subject interesting for students; 
  * Lending a practical side to even theoretical subjects; 
  * Showing students not only what they need to learn, but where the edge of knowledge of an area is, and why they might pursue it independently. 
Similarly, teaching aids research by providing the opportunity to:

  * Communicate and explain one's results in a clear and concise manner; 
  * See a familiar area one through new eyes; 
  * Further develop critical thinking and analytical problem solving abilities; 
  * Re-visit field fundamentals, and possibly apply them in a new way. 
I believe this connection is one of the strengths of my own teaching and
research. The teaching style I favor is similar to that of a research seminar
-- interactive and exploratory, and adapting to the interests of the students
as needed. In larger classes where this atmosphere is harder to achieve,
interaction is still possible.  
  
Likewise, in the classes I have been able to help teach, the students have
been assigned current research articles to read and independent projects tied
to the students' interests. Whenever possible, we have had the students give
presentations as well, so that they too can experience the teaching needed to
further their research.  
  
My research and teaching are intertwined in another way as well. One strength
of my research is that it ties together many different areas of computer
science. Currently, my research activities touch on a wide range of computer
science disciplines -- algorithm design, computational science, operating
system implementations, compilers, software engineering and visualization. I
try to reflect this in my teaching as well. For example, although the course I
am teaching now with Dr.Marzullo (through the Future Faculty program) is an
operating systems course, we tie in architecture issues as well, and give a
broader scope of the problems that a computer scientist dealing with operating
systems will need to address. The students can then see the problems of
computer science as a whole, not as isolated disciplines.  
  

### Current Teaching Responsibilities

I am currently co-teaching a course with an established professor, Dr.Keith
Marzullo, as a part of the Preparing Future Faculty program organized by the
UCSD Center for Teaching Development. Dr.Marzullo is guiding me through the
intricacies of developing an upper-level undergraduate computer science
course, CSE 121 Operating Systems: Architecture and Implementation. This is a
second quarter operating systems course that follows up on basic operating
system concepts and explores these issues in the context of current operating
systems, such as UNIX and Windows NT. It is a moderately sized class (approx.
50 students), for majors only.  
  
Adapting to new research in the area of operating systems and working from
notes from previous years, we developed a syllabus and selected a preliminary
set of papers to cover in addition to the text. I am developing and teaching
three subsections of approximately two lectures each, about one-third of the
course. The topics I will cover are containers, log structured file systems
and global shared memory. Dr.Marzullo will attend the lectures I am
presenting, and will critique them. They will also be videotaped and analyzed
by the Center for Teaching Development, and the students will be asked to
critique these lectures as well.  
  
My responsibilities for this course include developing and delivering the
lectures, selecting relevant papers for the students (both as required and
secondary reading material), interacting with the students on the lecture
material both in class and individual office meetings, encouraging discussion
and further work in these areas, interacting with the teaching assistant, and
aiding in the writing of the midterm and final. After the course, Dr.Marzullo
and I will evaluate its effectiveness, and revise the material and structure.
We plan to offer the course in the spring quarter as well.  
  
In addition to my class responsibilities, the Preparing Future Faculty program
involves attending a series of workshops designed to formally introduce a
student to various pedagogical topics including: effective public speaking;
course and syllabus design; cognitive strategies; planning effective class
sessions; professional roles and responsibilities; and instructional
technology. At the end of the quarter I will have fulfilled the requirements
for the UCSD CTD Certificate in College and University Teaching, certifying
that I have designed a course and accompanying syllabus, developed and
delivered several lectures for that course, and been observed and critiqued
delivering these lectures and interacting with students, in addition to my
participation in the workshops.  
  

### Previous Teaching Experience

Previously, I have had experience being a Teaching Assistant for a variety of
courses with varying degrees of responsibility during my graduate and
undergraduate careers.

  * **Graduate Parallel Computing, U.C. San Diego, Spring 1995**   
  
Responsibilities: Develop teaching materials for programming projects,
including guides to the N-Cube parallel machine and PVM programming language;
Design, oversee and grade three programming projects; Weekly office hours.  
  

  * **Graduate Computer Architecture, U.C. San Diego, Winter 1994, Winter 1995**   
  
Responsibilities: Informal section and office hours weekly; Grading of
homework assignments and exams.  
  

  * **Undergraduate Parallel Computing, U.C. San Diego, Spring 1993**   
  
Responsibilities: Deliver substantial weekly section lectures; Design, oversee
and grade three programming projects; Develop teaching materials for
programming projects, including guides to the N-Cube parallel machine and PVM
programming language; Grade midterm and final exams.  
  

  * **Calculus I and II, Vassar College, Fall 1989 thru Spring 1992**   
  
Responsibilities: Gradually increasing responsibilities beginning with grading
of assignments and weekly office hours/help sessions. In a coordinated
project, I proofread the text and problem sets for a first year calculus text
book. During the last 18 months, I helped develop, then organized and
maintained, an eight-machine Macintosh computer lab for the math department,
and developed instructional computer notebooks in Mathematica for instruction.  
  

  * **Advanced Programming Languages, Vassar College, 1989-90**   
  
Responsibilities: Weekly lab hours to aid students in programming assignments
for C.  
  

  * **Introduction to Artificial Intelligence, Vassar College, 1988-1990**   
  
Responsibilities: Weekly lab hours to aid students in programming assignments
for Lisp.  
  

  * **Pascal Programming I and II, Vassar College, 1988-1990**   
  
Responsibilities: Weekly lab hours to aid students in programming assignments
for Pascal.

### Mentoring

Over the last three years, three undergraduates have worked with me as a part
of their final projects when taking the undergraduate parallel computation
course. Each one was responsible for porting a scientific code I was using in
my research to a new platform. During weekly meetings, I would help guide the
students in understanding both the code they were working with and the
platform, and encourage them in their own interests in these areas. At the
end, of the quarter the student was responsible for a demonstration of
functionality, documentation for the application on the system, and a write-up
discussing the project and their experiences.  
  
In addition, last summer I was partly responsible for mentoring a visiting
undergraduate as a part of the Computing Research Association's Distributed
Mentor Project. Kelsey Anderson, a third-year student at Harvey Mudd, was
accepted to work with my advisor, Dr.Berman. About half of her time was
assigned to working with me. She ported the NAS parallel benchmarks to the
Parallel Computation Lab's cluster -- a mix of Sparc's and RS6000's -- and we
worked together to develop performance models for each.  
  
\vspace{0.2in} Through my teaching and mentoring experiences, and my
activities in departmental committees, I believe I have been able to
participate in much that a professor will deal with on a day-to-day basis.
I've developed a course and adapted it as needed, I've acquired some of the
managerial skills needed when mentoring students, and I've experienced the
pull between teaching and research that every professor faces. My experiences
have made me appreciate the challenges a faculty member faces, and have
deepened my commitment to the pursuit of an academic career.

