**Course Syllabus  
CS-1121 Introduction to Programming in Visual Basic  
Spring Semester 2002  
(Revision Date 1/21/2002)  
**

Changes may be made to this syllabus, as needed, throughout the semester.
Updates will be posted to this web page.

**Instructor:** Jim Allert (email to [jallert](mailto:jallert@d.umn.edu) )  
**Teaching Assistant:** Saif Mohammad (email to [
moha0149](mailto:moha0149@d.umn.edu) )  
**Lecture:** TTh 8:00-8:50 in MWAH-195  
**Labs:**

  * Section 2 ** Monday, 8:00-8:50, in MWAH-177 
  * Section 3 ** Monday, 9:00-9:50, in MWAH-177 

Email: If you contact the instructor or TA via email please remember to
identify the class (CS-1121) and section you are in. You should not expect
immediate replies. DO NOT email programs for debugging, see your TA during
office hours instead. **

Office Hours: **

  * Instructor: 1-3, TTh and arranged, in HH 324A  

  * TA Office Hours: 8-8:50 T, 8-9:50 Th in HH-314 and by appointment.   

  * You can also get assistance from the consultant in HH-314 Tuesdays from 5-7pm. 

**Bulletin Description:  
** Event-driven Windows programming, data types, operators, objects and
properties, menus, procedures, control structures, and database file
processing. Applications of computers in instruction. **For students with no
prior programming experience.**

**Prerequisites:  
** Students should have the equivalent of 1 year of high school algebra or
instructor approval.

**Course Objectives:  
** This course covers the basics of the Visual Basic programming environment.
Programming assignments reflect the wide variety of applications that this
language has. Examples include simple calculating devices, structured teaching
exercises, games played against the computer, as well as interfaces with
databases and the generation of reports. Students will learn about Windows
programming and both the construction and use of ActiveX controls.

**Text:  
**

  * [ Shelly, G.B., Cashman, T., et. al., Visual Basic 6: Complete Concepts and Techniques, Course Technology, Cambridge, MA, 1999. ](http://www.scseries.com)
  * Halvorson, Michael, Microsoft Visual Basic 6.0 Professional Step by Step, Microsoft Press, 1998. 

**Course Materials:  
** It is strongly recommended that you use zip disks for your projects. They
are supported in most ITSS labs and can store all of your assignments as well
as all related class files. Floppy disks may not be adequate for some of your
projects. **Important: Bring a 100M zip disk to your first lab.**

You are not required to purchase Visual Basic for this course. It is available
in most campus computer labs. However, if you would like to purchase the
software so that you can work on your projects at home you can do so at the
Computer Corner (second floor of Kirby Student Center). The Learning Version
(about $48) is adequate for all but the last project. The Professional Version
(about $100) will handle all course tasks. **Course Requirements:  
** You are responsible for reading the assigned textbook material and for the
material covered in class, including:

  * Lecture notes 
  * Assignments and handouts 
  * Programming assignments and homework 

If you are unable to attend a class meeting, it is your responsibility to
obtain class notes, assignments, and extra copies of handouts. ALL ASSIGNMENTS
MUST BE READY FOR GRADING AT THE START OF LAB. Assignments completed after the
lab has started are docked 50%. Assignments are not accepted once the lab is
over. You must be present in lab to both demonstrate and answer questions
about your program. All written assignments must have a typed cover sheet with
your name, course and assignment title on it. All assignments must be stapled.

**Equal Opportunity:  
** As instructor, I shall make every attempt to treat all students equally,
without regard to race, religion, color, sex, handicap, age, veteran status,
or sexual orientation. I encourage you to talk to me about your concerns of
equal opportunity in the classroom. To inquire further about the University's
policy on equal opportunity, contact the Office of Equal Opportunity, 255
DAdb, phone 726-6827 or log on to their website at [ www.d.umn.edu/equaloo
](www.d.umn.edu/eqauloo)

**Students with Disabilities:  
** If you have any disability (either permanent or temporary) that might
affect your ability to perform in this class, please inform me at the start of
the quarter. I may adapt methods, materials, or testing so that you can
participate equitably. To learn about the services that UMD provides to
students with disabilities, contact the Access Center/Disability Services, 138
Kirby Plaza, phone 726-8217, or log onto their website at [
www.d.umn.edu/access ](www.d.umn.edu/access)

**Liberal Education Fulfillment  
**

This course satisfies a Liberal Education requirement under Category 3 -
Communication, Computer Science, and Foreign Languages. Courses in this
category should develop the ability to use and analyze human and computer
languages. Emphasis should be on the theory and/or development of skills in
the methods of human and computer languages, and rhetoric.

Specifically, the goals and objectives of this course that contribute to this
liberal education requirement are as follows: to understand the basic concepts
in the field of Computer Science, to develop competency in computer-related
skills, and to provide students with the skills necessary to use computer
systems as an effective tool for electronic communication, knowledge
acquisition, and personal productivity.

**Examinations and Grading:  
**

There will be three midterm exams, worth 100 points each. These are problem-
based exams in which you should expect to write Visual Basic programs from
start to finish without the aid of any course materials or the text. Exams
will be handed back, reviewed and then re-collected in lab. If you are unable
to attend lab the day exams are handed back and discussed you are encouraged
to come review your exams during office hours with the instructor. Scores and
total points are posted to the course web page. There will be no make-up exams
or course "incompletes" without PRIOR consent of the instructor, and even then
only in VERY unusual circumstances. There are no extra credit assignments of
any kind.

Programming assignments are worth 30 points each with the exception of the
first lab exercise (10 points). Assignments you demonstrate in lab are graded
as follows: program = 15 points, questions and/or code = 15 points.

Grades are posted each week on the instructor's web page
[(http://www.d.umn.edu/~jallert)](http://www.d.umn.edu/~jallert) using the
last four digits of your student id number. If you wish to have your scores
posted using a number other than your student id you may email your request to
the instructor.

**Grading Procedures:** Final grades are based on total points distributed
approximately as follows:

  * 33% - Labs and other assignments (approx. 250 points) 
  * 13% - Midterm Exam I (100 points) 
  * 13% - Midterm Exam II (100 points) 
  * 13% - Midterm Exam III (100 points) 
  * 28% - Final Exam(200 points) 
There may also be pop quizzes during lecture. These may not be made up.

Grades are assigned on a percentage basis.

  * A- cutoff is 90% 
  * B- cutoff is 80% 
  * C- cutoff is 70% 
  * D cutoff is 60% 
  * F is below 60% 
These percentages may be lowered but will not be raised.

