![Artificial Intelligence and Virtual Worlds](aivr.gif)  
---  
  
### **CSC591Y -- Special Topic: Artificial Intelligence in Virtual Worlds**

**Exploring Narrative in Intelligent Environments**  
Mondays and Wednesdays from 2:10 to 3:25  
Withers Hall Room 222  
  
Spring, 1999  
  
[Dr. R. Michael Young](http://www.csc.ncsu.edu/faculty/young)**  
[young@csc.ncsu.edu](mailto:young@csc.ncsu.edu)**  
Office: EGRC 405  
EGRC office phone: 919.513.3038  
  
Office hours: Mondays and Wednesdays from 1:15 to 2:00 _in Withers 220_ and on
Tuesdays from 1:30 to 2:30 _in EGRC 405_. Office hours are also available by
appointment; appointments made for office hours will be for meetings in my
office at EGRC unless otherwise specified.  
  
**Course Readings and Schedule:**
<http://www.csc.ncsu.edu/faculty/young/aivr/readings.html>

**Instructions on how to vote for the discussions you want to lead:**[
http://www.csc.ncsu.edu/faculty/young/aivr/voting.html](http://www.csc.ncsu.edu/faculty/young/aivr/voting.html)  
_Course Overview_  
In this course we examine issues of intelligent systems in virtual worlds from
a strongly theoretical perspective. Class is in seminar format, drawing from
texts at the intersections of artificial intelligence, cognitive psychology,
multi-agent systems, computational linguistics, user interface design,
narrative and film theory and sociology.  
  
The purpose of the course will be to explore the application of artificial
intelligence to interaction in virtual environments. Most virtual reality
research has focused to date on the structure and visualization of virtual
spaces (for instance, through VRML) rather than on the structure and
manipulation of interactions with them. In this course, we'll examine what new
models of _interaction_ can be created within virtual worlds using (and
extending) tools and techniques from artificial intelligence. In the course,
we'll try and answer some of the following questions:

  * What is interaction like in current virtual world systems? How does a user interact with a text-based MUD or with a 3D graphical world (one built in Alice or VRML, for example)? 
  * What models of interaction would we like to see in future virtual world systems? What current research projects are there that are addressing this issue? 
  * What is narrative as defined by narratologists and others (like film theorists)? How might current notions of narrative be extended to structure interaction in a virtual environemnt? 
  * How might the following techniques from AI be put to use to build up a system that explores novel types of interaction in a virtual space: 
    * Planning and, in general, reasoning about action and change. 
    * Plan recognition. 
    * Communication, including ideas from speech act theory, discourse generation, facial expression animation and gesture. 
    * Reasoning about knowledge and belief, particluarly with regards to a user's engagement with an unfolding narrative or storyline. 
  * How can a system share control with a user and still provide a coherent narrative? What ideas from distributed AI might be applicable here? Should control really be shared, or should the system create the _illusion_ of control. 

The focus of the course is cross-disciplinary, and I hope to attract students
with interests both inside and outside of computer science. While the emphasis
in the course will be on theoretical aspects of intelligent interaction and
will focus on computational techniques from artificial intelligence, its clear
that the course will benefit from the participation of students from related
fields.

Grading is based on class participation, and mid-term and final projects (in
the form of either an essay or an implementation). It is expected that essays
will raise issues at the cutting edge of AI and virtual world design and that
implementations, if chosen, will represent an original contribution to
intelligent virtual worlds research.  
_Pre-requistites_  
  
Consent of instructor. Consent requires that you submit in advance a brief
description of yourself, your work, and what you expect to gain from the
class. Send descriptions to instructor prior to registering through TRACS
(mail me at young@csc.ncsu.edu). Upon consent to register, you'll have to send
me your SSN or visit Mrs. Page in the CSC department office in Withers Hall to
register. Students should be familiar with and/or interested in one of the
following: artificial intelligence, virtual worlds (either from a computer
science or social perspective), human-computer interaction or narrative.

Because the course topics draw from many disciplines, the coursework will be
adapted as best as possilble to accomodate the backgrounds of the
participants. While there will be a fair amount of discussion centered around
computational techniques, programming skill is not a pre-requiste and building
a working system is not a requirement.

Students with a primary background in computer science should expect to gain
exposure to a number of other disciplines, including narrative, performance,
cognitive psychology, all in the context of computer-mediated interface and
interaction. Students with backgrounds in design, social science or the arts
should be prepared to learn about representation and reasoning from AI at a
theoretical level, and to bring ideas from their own disciplines into the
discussion.  
  
_Requirements_  
**Requirements:**  
1\. Attendance at all classes and active participation in discussion. This
includes leading discussions on a rotating basis.

2\. Completion of mid-term project (either research paper or implementation).

3\. Completion of final project (either research paper or implementation).

An **implementation** will involve the development of novel algorithms for
structuring user interaction in a virtual world, along with the implementation
of those algorithms in one of the virtual world systems available to course
participants. The implementation options will require time in the lab outside
of class time in order to acquire any necessary authoring skills, then design,
build and test the finished product. You may give periodic updates on your
project to the class if this is appropriate. At project due date, you will
give a class demonstration of your system, including a short presentation
describing its scientific contributions followed by an example of the system
at work. If your system is interactive (and I'd really like it to be), you
should make your system accessible for class members to experience in settings
less formal than the project review demo (for instance, by designing it so
that we can access it via the net).

You will be expected to submit your presentation slides, design notes and a
three-page description of the system, the central algorithm(s) used, its
contribution and its evaluation.

A **research paper** may be on any topic of your choice as long as 1) it
addresses issues of interface and interaction as they unfold in class and 2)
is approved by the instructor. As you will discover, this makes the acceptable
category extremely broad, but please do not make the error of assuming that
I'll approve any topic or that, once your topic is approved, your paper need
not have depth and focus.  

Research papers should be no more than 15 pages in length, including all
figures, diagrams and references. Papers should use 12 point font, use one and
a half spacing, have no more than 5 lines per inch and margins of one inch all
around. Papers considerably shorter than 15 pages in length will be looked at
with an additional level of curiosity.  
  
All papers will be submitted electronically unless prior approval is given,
and will be made available to the class for our review and possible
discussion.  
_Grading_  
  
Grading is based on class participation and two projects (mid-term and final)
in the form of a research paper or a system implementation. For either form of
project, it is expected that the deadlines determined by the course schedule
will be met. Circumstances such as computer crashes, unexpected software
incompatabilities, various equipment failures and so forth, will be taken into
consideration, but only those that were unanticipated and occured at the last
minute will be considered reasons for mercy.

**Class participation:** 40% of final grade

**Midterm project:** 30% of final grade  
Choose one of:

  * Implementation, broken down as follows:  

    * Project description (essay form): 5% 
    * Design documents: storyboard, system diagrams: 5% 
    * evaluation: 5% 
    * Completed demo: 15% 
  * Research paper: 30% 
**Final project:** 30% of final grade  
Choose one of:

  * Implementation, broken down as follows:  

    * Project description (essay form): 5% 
    * Design documents: storyboard, system diagrams: 5% 
    * evaluation: 5% 
    * Completed demo: 15% 
  * Research paper: 30% 
  
  
  
_Classes_  
  
  
Class meets Monday and Wednesday from 2:10 to 3:25 in Withers Hall Room 222.
Each class will be in seminar format, involving discussion of the readings,
guest lectures (if any), or presentations of relevant systems, demos or
student work.

**The role of you, the students.**  
I'll expect that you have arrived in the seminar with ideas of your own and at
least are in the process of giving thought to research topics in intelligent
virtual worlds. The seminar is a place for you to develop your ideas further,
in light of the issues raised during our discussions.

**The role of me, the instructor** In general I see the instructor in this
course serving two functions. First, acting like a conventional instructor,
I'll provide some structure and background on theory and methods in AI and, to
some extent, relevant research from related disciplines. But this course is
very exploratory, so my second function will be as a collaborator. In this
respect, I'll be exploring these ideas along with you and hope to help you
pursue those ideas that are most interesting to you and to relate those ideas
to your own work.

My goal is for the class to have a much clearer understanding of how
intelligent systems techniques can be applied to interaction in virtual
worlds.  
  
_Readings_  
  
  
Each member of the seminar, on a rotating basis, will lead discussion on the
instructor's assigned readings. Everyone will be responsible for reading and
understanding all the readings. I judge your understanding of the readings
based on your participation during class discussion.  
  
The current (working) version of the readings can be found at [
http://www.csc.ncsu.edu/faculty/young/aivr/readings.html](http://www.csc.ncsu.edu/faculty/young/aivr/readings.html)  
  
  
_Computing Environment_  
  
Because I'm just arriving at NC State, I currently have no lab set up. I'm
hoping to get some lab space soon. The following discussion assumes that I've
gotten that space. If lab space is not available before the class starts,
students may need to access the course's computational resources via the net
from general computing facilities around campus. I'll do my best to get
students access to needed equipment/software/environments.

**My Lab**  
Equipment in my lab (whatever that is) will be available for your use 24 hours
a day, seven days a week during the semester. There will be no lab instructor
or TA to help you with problems, however, so plan on learning the systems
you'll be using on your own. I will be available during office hours to answer
questions related to system-building, however. Details for access to the lab
will be made available once the lab actually exists.

Students working on implementation projects for this course may find
themselves spending a substantial amount of lab time working with computers.
My lab's facilities are limited, necessitating cooperative scheduling and
possibly making use of resources elsewhere. There are excellent computer
facilities at a number of locations around campus \-- I'll do what I can to
make as much available to class members on as many different machines as
possible.

**The Web, The Net, Email, et al.**  
I'll try and have a class mailing list or newsgroup set up, and will make as
much of the course materials and notes available on the departmental web
server. Check your email at least once a day to read any important messages.

**The Lab's Virtual Worlds**  
I am in the process of making available a number of virtual world toolkits as
well as instances of working virtual worlds built with them. These virtual
worlds range from text-based multi-user systems like MUDs and MOOs (see
[www.mudconnect.com](http://www.mudconnect.com)) to 3D interactive worlds (see
[www.alice.org](http://www.alice.org)) to worlds built using the Quake gaming
engine (see [www.idsoftware.com](http://www.idsoftware.com)) and associated
world editors.

You are encouraged to experiment with any of these multi-user environments and
to use them to build interactive, intelligent systems (should you opt for the
project implementation route). See the instructor for more information.  
_Timeline_  
Please submit all mid-term demos or papers by Friday March 3. No mid-term work
will be accepted afterward. Submit all final demos or papers by Monday, April
26. The drop-dead date for final projects is Wednesday, April 28. No work will
be accepted afterward. Projects submitted in the first 24 hours after the due
date will be marked off 15% prior to grading. Projects submitted in the second
24 hours after the due date will be marked off 30% prior to grading.

**Semester Schedule**

Currently, the schedule is still being revised. The current working version of
the readings is organized around a tenative schedule, and can be found at [
http://www.csc.ncsu.edu/faculty/young/aivr/readings.html](http://www.csc.ncsu.edu/faculty/young/aivr/readings.html)  
  

