### Simulation, Modeling, and Monte Carlo Methods in Archaeology

### Keith Kintigh

### Syllabus

**_Basic Information_** __

  * ASM 566 - Spring 2001 - SLN 92850 
  * Tuesday nights 6:40-9:30PM
  * Office Hours: T 1:15-2:30, Th 2:30-4:00. You can make an appointment via email, or catch me when I am around. I will generally respond quickly to email queries (except when I am out of town). If it is a programming problem, include your .java filem as an attachment. 
  * Office: Anthropology112
  * Phone: 480-965-6909
  * email: [Kintigh@ASU.Edu](mailto:Kintigh@ASU.Edu)

**_Abstract_** __

The course presents an introduction to the use of simulation, modeling, and
Monte Carlo methods in archaeology. It includes consideration of the relevant
archaeological literature and teaches the fundamentals of programming.
Students will develop an in-depth conceptual understanding of simulation and
Monte Carlo analysis, an appreciation of the potential of this technique, and
a mastery of the mechanics of programming simple simulations. ASM 565 or
equivalent experience in the use of quantitative methods and computers is a
prerequisite. _No_ prior knowledge of computer programming or simulation is
expected; I anticipate that most students will have little or no such
experience.

**_Requirements_**

Class periods will include lectures, student presentations on readings and
student-led class discussions on the required readings. Students will program
small simulations and Monte Carlo analyses that will be due through the first
part of the course and will develop a larger simulation or Monte Carlo
analysis for a term project. Course grades will be based on the term project,
the assigned problems, in-class presentations, and participation in class
discussions. It will not be possible to get a grade higher than B without
significant participation in discussion.

Problem sets are due in class on the assigned date. Associated writeups should
be typed, not exceed 3 double-spaced pages plus necessary figures and tables.
Problem sets should be written in a reasonably formal academic style as one of
the goals of the course is to enchance your professional skills in writing
clearly and appropriately about quantitative applications. Figures and tables
need not be of publication quality, but should be clear and well-labeled.
Since the problem sets will be discussed on the day they are due, late problem
sets will not be accepted.

The term project is due in my mailbox Friday, May 4, at 5:00 PM. It should be
about 10 pages and may not under any circumstances exceed 20 typed, double
spaced pages of text plus associated figures and tables. You may find it
useful to use SYSTAT or a spreadsheet to analyze or present data developed in
you simulations. A brief, typed abstract is due March 6. A draft of the paper
is due by 9AM on April 9. By April 16, I will read and comment on the draft so
that you can revise it. You make a 15 minute presentation of your simulation
to the class (in the style of a SAA paper) in one of the two final class
periods.

Projects may be done using the campus microcomputer sites, or on home
microcomputers. For programming, the class will use Java SDK 1.3 which is
available at free from Sun Microsystems
[www.java.sun.com](http://www.java.sun.com). For a program editor, you may
want to use TextPad, an evaluation copy of which is available free online from
[www.textpad.com.](http://www.textpad.com) The text for programming is Walter
Savitch, 2001 _, Java: An Introduction to Computer Science and Programming,_
2nd, Ed. Prentice Hall. You can use another Java Book, but I looked at several
and this looked the clearest to me. (Lewis and Loftis, 2001 _Java Software
Solutions_ , Addison Wesley is being used by Computer Science intro courses
and it appears to be good as well). A number of readings will be taken from
Timothy Kohler and George Gumerman, 2000, _Dynamics in Human and Primate
Societies: Agent-Based Modeling of Social and Spatial Processes_ Oxford. Other
readings will be available (for xeroxing) in the Anthropology Library.

**_Tentative Schedule_** (Thursday makeup sessions in red)

Jan 16

  * Course Organization

Jan 23

  * Models
  * Programming: Introduction, Computers, & Languages
  * _PS 1 Due: Coyotes & Rabbits_

Jan 25 (Thursday)

  * Monte Carlo Methods, Resampling
  * Programming: Variables, Constants, and Simple I/O

Jan 30

  * Chronology
  * Programming: Flow of Control-While, If, For 
  * _PS 2 Due: Hello World_

Feb 6

  * Exchange
  * Programming: Object Orientation, Formatted Printing, Math Class
  * PS 3 Due: Mean and Std

Feb 13

  * Exchange
  * Programming: Flow of Control, Revisited; Arrays; File I/O
  * _PS 4 Due: Pot Breakage 1_ __

Feb 20

  * Demography I
  * Programming: Object Orientation, Monte Carlo Strategies
  * _PS_ _5 Due: Pot Breakage Revisited_ __

Feb 27

  * Demography II
  * Programming: Sorting & Searching, Recursion
  * _PS 6 Due Chaco-Paquime_
  * _Term Paper Abstract Due_

Mar 6

  * Social & Political Organization
  * Systems Simulation - SW
  * Programming: Wrapup, jBuilder
  * _PS 7 Due Gravity Model_

_Mar 13 Spring Break_

_Mar 20 Kintigh at SAA Executive Committee Meeting, San Juan_

Mar 27

  * System Simulation __

_Apr 3 Kintigh in Washington DC_

Apr 10

  * Complex Adaptive Systems
  * SWARM __

_Apr 17 SAA Meeting_

Apr 24

  * Sampling
  * Predictive Modeling
  * Wrapup __
  * _Term Paper Draft Due 4/9 9AM_
  * _Term Paper Draft Returned 4/16 9AM_

Apr 26 (Thursday), May 1 __

  * _Term Project Presentations_

May 4 __

  * _Term Paper Due 5PM_

  
  

