[CS 414: Object-oriented Design](index.html) __

Syllabus



**Instructor:**

|

Professor [Roger Alexander, Ph.D.](http://www.cs.colostate.edu/~rta)

University Services Building, Room 240

Voice: 491-7026, Fax: 491-2466

Email: [rta@cs.colostate.edu](mailto:rta@cs.colostate.edu)

Web: <http://www.cs.colostate.edu/~rta/>

Office Hours: Tuesday and Thursday, 11:00 am -1:00 pm, and by appointment.  
  
---|---  
  
**Teaching Assistant:**

|

Conrad Braganza

University Services Building, Room TBD

Voice: TDB, Fax: 491-2466

Email: [braganza@cs.colostate.edu](mailto:braganza@cs.colostate.edu)

Web: <http://www.cs.colostate.edu/~braganza/>

Office Hours: TBD, and by appointment  
  
**Course Web Page:**

|

[
http://www.cs.colostate.edu/~rta/courses/cs414/](http://www.cs.colostate.edu/~rta/courses/cs414/CS414Syllabus.html)  
  
**Venue:**

|

Clark C248, Tuesday and Thursday, 9:30-10:45  
  
**Prerequisites:**

|

Successful completion of [CS314](http://www.cs.colostate.edu/~cs314/). It is
also assumed that you are proficient at writing Java programs, or that you at
least possess the ability to develop the skills necessary to successfully
complete the course.  
  
#### Overview

Object-oriented technology (OOT) has been with us since the late 1960's, and
has been in wide industrial use since the early 1990's. In the twenty-first
century, it is clearly the dominant technology in terms of industrial
programming languages, as well as design and development methods. Arguably,
the many benefits of this technology have been demonstrated repeatedly.
However, in spite of its benefits and strengths, the use of OOT does not
guarantee the production and delivery of high quality software. Contrary to
popular belief, in many ways, the use of OOT has not reduced the level of
effort to design and construct correct programs.

This course will cover the subject of object-oriented design with an emphasis
on construction. That is, emphasis will be placed on creating detailed designs
(as opposed to analysis models) that represent the semantics of a particular
solution, and the design and implementation of corresponding programs that are
realizations of the solution. As such, this will be a **programming-
intensive** course.

All of the assignments in this class will be done in Java. To be successful,
you will need to competent and confident in your Java programming skills, and
in your ability to learn new technology (an important skill for a professional
to have!). It is likely that this course will require you to learn to use
technology (e.g. tools and class libraries) that are new to you. It is part of
_your_ responsibility to acquire this technology, install it, and learn how to
use it effectively **on your own**. Neither the instructor nor the teaching
assistant will provide instruction, though we will be available to answer
general questions.

#### Objectives

At the end of this course, the successful student will:

，       Know how to express designs using (a subset of) the Unified Modeling
Language (UML)

，       Know how to translate a UML-expressed design into an implementation
using the Java programming Language

，       Given the specification of a method, know how to derive the
corresponding control structure

，       Know how to specify the semantics of classes and methods using
invariants, preconditions, and postconditions.

，       Know how to specify the representation and abstraction invariants for
classes and their implementations.

，       Know the principles of object-oriented design.

，       Know how to apply effective exception handling strategies and
understand the defensive and non-defensive programming models

，       Understand the principles of data encapsulation and modularity

，       Understand inheritance and polymorphism

，       Understand the general principles behind design patterns, and know how
and when to apply specific design patterns.

，       Be able to express the detailed design using object-oriented
technology, and produce a corresponding implementation using and object-
oriented language.

，       Understand the issues associated with testing and maintaining object-
oriented programs.

#### Course Materials

Required:

  * Liskov, B. (2001). _Program Development in Java_.  Reading, Massachusetts, Addison Wesley.



  * Meyer, B. (1997). _Object-Oriented Software Construction, 2e_.  Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, Prentice Hall.



Recommended:

，       Any Java reference.

#### Requirements and Grading

There will be exams, graded homework assignments, and quizzes for this course.
Your grade will be based on the following:

，     A mid-term and final examination.

，     Homework programming assignments.

，     In-class quizzes.

，     Term programming project.

Final course grades will be determined using the weighting scheme:

，     Midterm examination (20%)

，     Final examination (30%)

，     Homework (20%)

，     Quizzes (10%)

，     Programming Project (20%)

Note that I do not assign grades based on a distribution, nor do I apply
grading curves. The final grade that you receive will be based solely on your
performance of the assignments, quizzes, and examinations. **There will be no
extra credit assignments to raise course grades.**

The following table will be used to determine final course grades:



Course Grade

|

**Weighted Grade _x_**  
  
---|---  
  
A

|

94 <=

|

_x_

|

<= 100  
  
A-

|

90 <=

|

_x_

|

< 94  
  
B

|

84 <=

|

_x_

|

< 90  
  
B-

|

80 <=

|

_x_

|

< 84  
  
C

|

70 <=

|

_x_

|

< 80  
  
D

|

60 <=

|

_x_

|

< 70  
  
F

|

_ _

|

_x_

|

< 60  
  


#### Policies

#### Contacting the Instructor. You may contact me by telephone or in person
during my regularly scheduled office hours (please do not drop by without an
appointment outside of office hours). You may also send email (preferred). In
an effort to help ensure that you get a timely response to email messages,
please prefix the subject line of your message with "CS414:" My email reader
is configured to issue an alert whenever a message with such a prefix arrives.
If you do not use the prefix, your message will likely be lost in the plethora
of messages that I receive every day.

**Assignments**. Assignments are due at the **beginning** of the class in
which they are due. Late assignments will note be accepted unless prior
arrangements are made. Thus, don't be late and do not miss class!. It you are
going to be absent, it is your responsibility to get your assignment turned in
before the start of class. Specific requirements for submitting assignments
will be covered separately in class.

**Make-up work**. There will be no make-up examinations unless arrangements
are made **prior** to the date of the exam. Note that I will approve a make-up
examination for cases of illness or a death/birth in the family. In all cases,
you must provide documented proof of the reason (e.g. doctor 's statement,
birth certificate, death certificate) and contact information where I can
verify the reason.

**Extra credit**. There will be no extra credit given. Your only opportunities
to improve your grade are through the scheduled assignments and examinations,
and through any other assignment that I may make to the entire class.

**Attendance**. Attendance is only required for examinations. However,
attendance to all other class meetings is highly recommended. There will be
material covered in class that is not in the presentations or reading
assignments. If you miss this material, it is your responsibility to obtain it
from some source (e.g. fellow students) other than the instructor or the
teaching assistant.

**Re-grading**. If you feel that the grade that you receive on a particular
assignment is incorrect, I will be happy to re-grade the assignment, though it
will receive **higher** scrutiny. Note that this can have a positive or
negative effect on the original grade, or no effect whatsoever. If I find
errors in the original grading in your favor, your original grade will be
increased accordingly. Likewise, any errors in the original grading against
your favor will result in a decrease.

**Honesty**.  Your work must be your own. You may not collaborate with other
students on your programming projects, homework, or other assignments.
Unauthorized collaboration constitutes cheating (see below).



**Cheating**. **_Cheating will not be tolerated_**. Any student found guilty
of cheating will receive a grade of  "F" for the course. Further disciplinary
action may be taken according to the policies of the [Department of Computer
Science](http://www.cs.colostate.edu/) and of [Colorado State
University](http://www.colostate.edu/).

#### Important Dates

，     **Last day to register** : 30 January 2002

，     **Last day to drop** : 18 March 2002

，     **Spring Recess (no class)** : 10-17 March 2002

，     **Last day of classes** : 3 May 2002

，     **Final Exam** : 7 May 2002 __

** **

**_< span style='font-s

