**Linguistics 467/567 and CSE 567  
Computational Linguistics**

**Spring 2002**

  

  
_Time and Place_ : | **260 Capen** , MW: 12:30-1:50  
---|---  
_Professor_ : | Jean-Pierre Koenig  
_Office Hours_ : | Thursday 9-11 or by appointment  
_Office_ : | 613 Baldy Hall  
_Phone number_ : | 645-2177 (extension 717)  
_E-mail_ : | ` jpkoenig@acsu.buffalo.edu`  
  
  

#  Course Description

This course is an introduction to the field of Computational Linguistics. It
is an appropriate sequel to CS 572, Introduction to Artificial Intelligence,
or to an introductory graduate-level linguistics course. Topics to be covered
will include: Formal Language Theory, Parsing, Semantic Interpretation, and a
very brief introduction to Knowledge Representation and its use in
Linguistics. The discussion of parsing techniques will pay particular
attention to their use in natural language understanding: the use of finite-
state transducers to model phonological rules, the use of finite-state
automata to model morphological parsing, and the use of ATN's or Chart parsers
for syntactic parsing.

There are no formal prerequisites (in particular, knowledge of a programming
language is not required). Most students, though, will either be graduate
students in Linguistics, in Computer Science with a graduate level
introduction to Artificial Intelligence, or graduate students in any of the
other cognitive sciences (Philosophy, Psychology, CDS, Anthropology ...) who
feel their knowledge of computer science or linguistics is sufficient for them
to participate in the course. Permission of the instructor is required.

#  Texts

The textbook I will be using this semester is:

    Daniel Jurafsky and James Martin (1999) _Speech and Language Processing_. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 

The textbook is big. I chose it because it includes a significant introduction
to statistical techniques in Computational Linguistics, which have become very
popular over the last 10 years It also is linguistically-savvy and
comprehensive. But there are a few glitches with it, like with any textbook.

Here is a list of additional readings which you might want to consult, if not
read: Allen1995, GazdarandMellish1989, Groszetal1986, ManningandSchutze1999
RocheandSchabes1997, RussellandNorvig1995 Shapiro1992, Sproat1992,
Winograd1983.

  
At times during the semester, I will also put on reserve a few interesting
papers or chapters for you to read. Their will be two copies of each
additional reading. One, for local consultation only, will be placed in 687
Baldy Hall (you must go through the Linguistics department office to go to the
reading room). The other will be placed in 612 Baldy Hall. You can borrow this
copy to xerox it. But, be considerate, do it quickly, so that others can
borrow the readings too. Each paper or chapter will be put in a box with the
number of the course on it.

#  Course Requirements:

Students are expected to attend classes and participate in class discussions.
There will be several homeworks and a final project, a 10 to 15 pages paper.
The homeworks are worth 60% and the paper is worth 40%. This paper may, but
need not, include an appendix detailing a computational implementation. Your
topic must be approved by me in advance, and a proposal of 6 to 8 pages must
be turned in by April 1. The final version of the paper will be due on May 1,
2001.

#  Class List and Internet site

I set up a class list so that you can chat with each other and with me
regarding class matters. The e-mail address of the list is:

` lin567-sp02-list@listserv.acsu.buffalo.edu`.

By sending an e-mail message to this list everybody will receive it. You can
use it without my being involved! Be sure to use it, since it can help you;
many of you will have similar questions and problems; no reason to keep them
quiet.

I also set up a site for our class where you will find information regarding
the class, syllabus, homework assignments, hand-outs, and so forth. I will
contact you by e-mail or mention in class when some new material is put on the
Web. The URL of the website is:

`http://wings.buffalo.edu/linguistics/people/koenig/spring02.html`

#  Course outline

  

**Table 1:** Course Outline

  
| **Module** | **Topic** | **Week** | **Readings**  
---|---|---|---  
1 | Formal Language Theory | 1-2 | Chapter 2.1, 9, 13  
2 | Finite State Methods in Morphology | 3-4.1 | Chapter 2.2., Chapter 3  
3 | Probabilistic models for morphosyntax | 4.2-5.1 | Chapters 6 and 8  
4 | Parsing CFGs | 5.2-7 | Chapters 10 and 12  
5 | Unification | 8-9 | Chapter 11  
6 | Compositional Semantics | 10-11 | Chapter 14-15  
7 | Lexical Semantics, WSD, and IR | 12-13 | Chapters 16 and 17  
8 | Discourse | 13 | Chapter 18  
9 | Generation | 14 | Chapter 20  
  
  

2

#  About this document ...

This document was generated using the [**LaTeX** 2`HTML`](http://www-
dsed.llnl.gov/files/programs/unix/latex2html/manual/) translator Version 98.1
release (February 19th, 1998)

Copyright (C) 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, [Nikos
Drakos](http://cbl.leeds.ac.uk/nikos/personal.html), Computer Based Learning
Unit, University of Leeds.

The command line arguments were:  
**latex2html** ` -split 0 -no_navigation syllabus-cl.tex`.

The translation was initiated by Jean-Pierre Koenig on 2002-01-23  

* * *

_Jean-Pierre Koenig_  
_2002-01-23_

