  
  
![](614GIFS/image.gif)

* * *

Syllabus | [Coursework](614Coursework.html) |

* * *

# LiS 614, Information Theory and Transfer: Martin Fricke

## Spring, 1997, Outline and Requirements

**

* * *

**

**This is current as of 2/26/97. Material may be added or changed on a
continuing basis. Three sections will remain unchanged throughout :
Requirements, Grading, and the Academic Code of Integrity.**

**

* * *

**

**Introduction**

This course will consist of the study of certain core issues in the theory of
information science, together with a selection from among topics that are more
exploratory or research-oriented.

The core will consist of theories of information and the transmission of
information. These will include signal information, information as knowledge,
semantic information, other ideas on information, information in
thermodynamics, information and probability, signal transmission, database ...

More exploratory material might consider some of the following questions: Why
is information of interest and value to us? How does information relate to
problem solving? How does information help in decision making? What is
relevant information? How is information to be valued? What are the properties
of information depicted in diagrams, as opposed to in text? How is information
transferred across different media?

The course presupposes no specific prior knowledge or skills on the part of
intending students, and academically it will be of an intermediate level of
difficulty.

**Coursepack and readings**

There is a small coursepack which contains



> Belkin, N.J. [1978]. 'Information Concepts for Information Science'. Journal
of Documentation, 34, 55-85.

>

> Brookes, B.C.[1980]. 'Foundations of information science.Part 1.
Philosophical aspects'. Journal of Information Science, 2, 125-133.

>

> Brookes, B.C.[1981]. 'The foundations of information science.Part IV.
Information science: the changing paradigm'. Journal of Information Science,
3, 3-12.

>

> Bush, Vannevar. [1945]. 'As we may think'. in Kochen Manfred. The Growth of
Knowledge: Readings on Organization and Retrieval of Information. New York,
NY: Wiley (Reprinted from the Atlantic Monthly, 176(1), July 1945, pp.
101-108); 1967:209-15.

>

> Fox, Christopher J. [1983]. 'Information in Information Science' Chapter 3
of Information and Misinformation, Westport: Greenwood, 1983.

>

> Hayek, Friedrich A.[1945], 'The Use of Knowledge in Society', reprinted in
Hayek, Friedrich A.[1948], Individualism and Economic Order, London:Routledge,
1948

>

> Larkin, Jill H., and Simon, Herbert A.[1987], 'Why a Diagram is (Sometimes)
Worth Ten Thousand Words', Cognitive Science, 11, 65-99

>

> Mill John Stuart, 1806-1873.[1956!], On Liberty Chapter II, `Of the Liberty
of Thought and Discussion', Indianapolis, Bobbs-Merrill,1956.

>

> Miller George A. [1956], 'The magical number seven plus or minus two: Some
limits on our capacity for processing information', Psychological Review, 63,
81-97, 1956



There is also a useful book, which is inexpensive,

> Pierce John R. [1980]. An Introduction to Information Theory, New York:
Dover, 1980.

**Requirements**

The course requirements are a) a coursework requirement and b) a final
examination. The coursework requirement will be two papers, one due about 4
weeks and the other 8 weeks into the course, at times to be announced in
class. The final examination will be a take-home exam of three hours duration.
It will be handed out on Wednesday May 7th and has to be returned to my
mailbox at latest by Wednesday May 14th at 4.00pm.

**Grading**

I use the following scales



Internal |

Internal |

For Graduate School  
---|---|---  
  
90-100% |

A+ |

A  
  
85-89% |

A |

A  
  
80-84% |

A- |

A  
  
75-79% |

B+ |

B  
  
70-74% |

B |

B  
  
65-69% |

B- |

B  
  
below 64% |

C |

C  
  
Thus, for example, a mark of Internal: 82 A- External: A on a piece of work
would be seen by outsiders as an A; however, the A- will convey to you that
the work can be improved.

The coursework will count for 50% of the final grade, and the final exam for
50% of the grade.

**Academic Code of Integrity**

**Students are expected to abide by The University of Arizona Code of Academic
Integrity. 'The guiding principle of academic integrity is that a student's
submitted work must be the student's own.' If you have any questions regarding
what is acceptable practice under this Code, please ask an instructor.**

**Contacting me**

Please raise queries in class, or by email to Fricke@ccit.arizona.edu or in
Room 16 during Office Hours (Wednesday 11-2, and Thursday 11-2).

**Outline**

The course is scheduled to have 15 weekly two and a half hour meetings. I
conceive of the course as consisting of 30 'Lectures' or 'Topics'; so, on
average, we will get through two of these lectures per meeting (or per week).

There is some flexibility here over the exact topics to be lectured on--
perhaps not all of these topic will appear, and maybe some others not in this
list will make an entry.

  * Setting the scene 
  * Section A The Conceptual and History Setting 
    * 1: Some preliminary considerations 
    * 2: What is information? Pruning a list of tentative answers 
    * 3: Syntax: Manipulating Inscriptions: Shannon's Signal Theory 
    * 4: Syntax: Compression and Noise 
    * 5: Semantics: Logic, Content, and Verisimilitude 
    * 6: Pragmatics: Cognitions 
  * Section B Some Issues 
    * 7: Actions 
    * 8: Decisions 
    * 9: Problem Solving 
    * 10: Competing 
    * 11: Librarianship 
    * 12: Encryption and Security 
    * 13: Epistemology 
    * 14: Logic 
    * 15: Systems Theory 
    * 16: Management 
    * 17: Physics 
    * 18: Probability Theory 
    * 19: Heterogeneous Media 
    * 20: Information is power, information superhighway 
    * 21: Computer Science and Management Information Science: How to design an information system 
    * 22: Is information science a science? 
    * 23: Properties of information 
    * 24: Questions 
    * 25: Search 
    * 26: The Value of Information  

[Assignments received](614Assessment.html)

* * *

Syllabus | [Coursework](614Coursework.html) |

* * *



