WinterTerm 1998, History 350 | [Professor Daniel
Pope](../../../people/faculty/regular/pope.htm)  
---|---  
American Radicalism | [Download Word97](350.doc)  
  | [Download Text-Only](350.txt)  
  | [Office Hours](../../../people/faculty/office.htm)  
  
Course Description  
Course Format and Requirements  
Course Texts  
Course Outline

![](../../../_themes/history/urbhorsd.gif)

COURSE DESCRIPTION

History 350 this term deals with movements and individuals from the American
Revolution through the late 1800s. This is the first term of a two-term
sequence. History 351, offered in the spring, will cover topics from about
1900 to the present. Although the two terms develop some common themes, they
are independent and can be taken separately.

This course does not assume previous course work in American history; there
are no prerequisites. However, if you find that either the class sessions or
the reading assignments refer to concepts, events, etc. which are unfamiliar
to you, please let me know, so that I can explain some of the context.

![](../../../_themes/history/urbhorsd.gif)

COURSE FORMAT AND REQUIREMENTS

Notes:

![](../../../_themes/history/urbbul1d.gif)| The syllabus here is rather
tentative. There may be delays, digressions and alterations along the way.  
---|---  
![](../../../_themes/history/urbbul1d.gif)| Unfortunately, the length of the
assigned readings varies from topic to topic. Try to plan ahead, so that you
don't find yourself too burdened when you have other commitments. You will
find the class sessions more fruitful if you keep up with reading assignments.  
![](../../../_themes/history/urbbul1d.gif)| The political and ethical
implications of the topics which we study should be of personal as well as
academic concern to you. Therefore, class discussion and your own thoughtful
evaluation of the material covered are essential parts of the course. Although
the class is likely to be large and it will be necessary to lecture most of
the time, I shall provide as much opportunity as possible for discussion.
Questions and comments in class are welcome. We will also try to provide an
optional weekly discussion session to explore some of the issues in greater
detail.  
  
A. A midterm examination, worth about 25% of your grade, Friday, Feb. 6 .

B. A short paper (4-6 pages typed double-spaced or handwritten of equivalent
length) worth about 25%, due class time March 6. Paper options will be
described on a separate handout.

C. A final exam, worth about 50% (10:15 Mon., March 16). I may offer a take-
home alternative to the in-class exam.

D. Useful class participation (quality, not quantity) will weigh in your favor
in borderline cases.

![](../../../_themes/history/urbhorsd.gif)

COURSE TEXTS

The following books have been ordered at the University Bookstore. Used copies
are likely to be available at Smith Family Bookstore on East 13th between
Hilyard and Alder.

Tom Paine Common Sense

Stephen Oates The Fires of Jubilee

William E. Cain William Lloyd Garrison and the Fight Against Slavery

Lois Banner Elizabeth Cady Stanton

Robert McMath American Populism: A Social History

Note: Three other books, William Styron, The Confessions of Nat Turner, Howard
Zinn, A People's History of the United States, and Staughton Lynd,
Intellectual Origins of American Radicalism, may be on the bookstore shelf for
this course. Don't buy them yet; they are optional reading for the paper
topics to be described on another handout.

There is also a readings packet (Packet 1) for this course. (There will be
another packet, Packet 2, there also; packet 2 is for one of the paper topic
options, so don't buy it unless you decide to do that option.)

![](../../../_themes/history/urbhorsd.gif)

COURSE OUTLINE

Jan. 5-7: Introduction--Some Themes and Controversies

In these sessions, we will offer some definitions, note some themes in the
history of American radicalism, and discuss claims that American history is
marked by the absence of significant radical movements.

Jan. 9-14: American Revolution or War for Independence: Questions about Rights

Read: Declaration of Independence; documents in Section A of Readings Packet
1; handout on Trenchard and Gordon; start reading Thomas Paine, Common Sense.

In these sessions, we will ask what, if anything, was revolutionary about the
American Revolution. How did social tensions within the colonies relate to the
struggle against Great Britain? We will also examine the central text of the
era, the Declaration of Independence and discuss what validity and relevance
it may have had then and may have now.

Jan. 16-23: Tom Paine--the Nation=s First Radical?

Read: Paine, Common Sense and documents in Section B of Packet 1. (Note: Any
edition of Common Sense will do, including versions on the Web. If you have
the Penguin Books edition, edited by Isaac Kramnick (there are many used
copies at Smith Family Bookstore), I strongly recommend Kramnick=s
introduction as background material on Paine and his ideas.)

Paine's life and ideas make him in a very real sense the world's first
professional international revolutionary. We will look at his life experiences
and his intellectual contributions, examining in particular the ideology of
artisan republicanism he espoused.

Jan. 26-Feb. 2: Slave Revolts and the Case of Nat Turner

Read: Oates, The Fires of Jubilee (entire book)

We will look at the varying patterns of slave revolts in the Western
Hemisphere and then discuss the Nat Turner revolt, examining motives, tactics
and results. Can Turner serve as an inspiration for movements of the
oppressed? What is the relationship between individual psychology and group
action?

Feb. 4: Alexis de Tocqueville's America

Tocqueville was probably the most insightful of the European travelers who
wrote about the United States in the nineteenth century His ideas will form a
backdrop for our discussion of social movements during the second half of the
term.

Feb. 6: MIDTERM EXAM

Feb. 9-18: The Dilemmas of Anti-Slavery

Read: Cain, William Lloyd Garrison and the Fight against Slavery, Part One
(Introduction) and Part Two, # 1-9, 13-16, 19-20, 24, 26-29, 32-34, 36-38,
40-41.

William Lloyd Garrison was not only the most prominent but also the most
controversial advocate of the immediate abolition of slavery. In this section,
we will look at some of the dilemmas facing the anti-slavery movement: Should
abolitionists take part in elections and political parties? If so, how? What
role should women play in the movement? Should the anti-slavery movement
reject violence as a means of liberating slaves? What was the relationship
between slavery and racism, and how should the movement respond to racism?

Feb. 20-Mar. 2: Women=s Suffrage and Feminism: Elizabeth Cady Stanton

Read: Banner, Elizabeth Cady Stanton (entire book) and Section C of Packet 1.

The appearance of a women's rights movement in the mid-nineteenth century and
its eventual concentration on the demand for women's suffrage will be our main
focus here. We will also look at Cady Stanton's life to analyze some questions
about the relationship between the personal and the political, a persistent
concern among radicals and those who seek to understand movements for social
change.

Mar. 4-13: Populism--Mass Movements, Electoral Politics, the "Agrarian Myth"
and American Democracy

Read: McMath, American Populism, entire book; documents in Section D of
Readings Packet 1.

