* * *

# Info Net Economics -- Syllabus

**Econ 495** (Department of Economics, LSA)  
University of Michigan  
Winter 1994 (Mondays 4:00-5:30 pm, 171 Lorch Hall)  
Instructor: Jeffrey K. MacKie-Mason  
Office Hours: Wednesdays 1-3 pm, or by appointment)  
Contacts: jmm@umich.edu, 764-7438  

TA: Jon Bakija Office Hours: Tuesdays and Wednesdays, 11:30-12:30 pm, 106
Lorch

* * *

This page and presentation of information is Copyright  (C) 1994, 1995 by [
Jeff MacKie-Mason](http://www.spp.umich.edu\\people\\jmm\\jmm_info.html)
(jmm@umich.edu). All rights reserved.

* * *

## Jump to other pages:

  * [Class schedule](schedule.html)
  * [Readings and resources](readings.html)
  * [Written assignments](assignments.html)
  * [Due dates](due-dates.html)
  * [Peer reviewer assignments](reviewers.html)
  * [Submitted student papers](writings.html)
  * [Project ideas](paper-ideas.html)
  * [Internet and Web resources](net-resources.html)
  * [ Hypermail archive of interesting items](http://ippsweb.ipps.lsa.umich.edu/ipps744/misc.hyper/index.html)
  * [(Usenet) News group for this class](news:umich.lsa.econ.class.495-3) \-- use for discussion of interesting topics 

* * *

## Introduction

Welcome to the syllabus page for Econ 495, _Information Networks Economics_.
This page contains all of the official information and requirements for the
course. There are links to other pages with a class schedule, assignment due
dates, paper ideas, Internet tools, and reading resources.

This is an honors seminar on economic issues surrounding the development of an
information network infrastructure. The focus will be on the emergence of
integrated services, broadband public switched networks. We will consider a
variety of old and new media through this lens, with an emphasis on
convergence and the driving forces of new technologies.

Some of the questions we will address: Why do networks develop, and will
current voice, video and data networks converge into a single, integrated
information "superhighway"? Should the government guide network development,
or even pay directly for the national information infrastructure? How should
scarce network bandwidth, information services and information itself be
priced? Who owns information, and how can intellectual property be protected?

Most of the resources for this course will be found on the Internet. Your
written work must be submitted over the network, and will be in the form of
hypertext documents that can be published on the network.

## Writing

This is also an ECB upper-level writing course, whether or not you have
elected it as such. There will be a significant amount of writing, and some
class time will be devoted to writing. There is also a TA for the seminar,
whose primary responsibility will be to evaluate and assist you with your
writing.

The ECB offers writing assistance. As an undergraduate, you have the right to
a 30 minute session with an ECB writing specialist _every week_ of every
semester. All of you should be taking advantage of that: even the best writers
can improve substantially, and good writing is one of the single most
important skills in almost any profession. The best writers know that nothing
helps more than having another good writer read your work and make
suggestions. Please take your drafts and revised drafts to ECB. In addition,
from time to time either the TA or I may specifically refer you to ECB for
extra assistance.

## Toolkit

You will need to become familiar with some Internet resource discovery tools,
and with writing and editing in HTML (Hypertext Markup Language). A number of
introductory documents, resource centers, and reference materials for using
the Web and HTML are collected for you [here](net-resources.html).

## Requirements

  1. This is a seminar. The most important requirement is that you come prepared to discuss each week's topic. 
  2. Two short discussion memos (plus at least one revision of each), and two peer reviews. The first memo is due 23 January; the second memo is staggered throughout the term. 
  3. A term paper and a peer review: proposal due 13 February; detailed outline due 13 March; due 10 April; revision due 24 April. 

All written assignments must be submitted electronically, as HTML documents
(except for peer reviewer comments); memos and term papers will be posted on
the class server for everyone to read. Peer reviews are due one week after the
first draft is submitted. The revised draft is due one week after the peer
review.

Click [here](assignments.html) to see a more detailed discussion of the
assignments. Here are the [due dates](due-dates.html).

## Materials and Starting Points

The two most important resources for you to start with are WWW servers
maintained by me and Prof. Hal Varian. Mine contains over 350 links to
[Telecom Information Resources](http://www.ipps.lsa.umich.edu/telecom-
info.html) on the net; Hal's contains all of the interesting materials on the
[Economics of the
Internet](http://gopher.econ.lsa.umich.edu/EconInternet.html) that he has
found on the net.

I have collected a number of interesting articles and commentaries from
various electronic mailing lists and other places. They are collected in a [
Hypermail
archive](http://ippsweb.ipps.lsa.umich.edu/ipps744/misc.hyper/index.html)
where you can look through them by subject, author or date. This is a good
place to browse to get some ideas about various policy and economic debates
taking place. Here is a page with some [ fun
things](http://ippsweb.ipps.lsa.umich.edu/ipps744/misc/funstuff.html).

## Topics and Schedule

  * [Class schedule](schedule.html)
  * [Readings and resources](readings.html) 

* * *

[ Jeff MacKie-
Mason](http://www.ipps.lsa.umich.edu/ipps/people/jmm/jmm_info.html) /
University of Michigan / <jmm@umich.edu> Last modified: Fri Aug 25 07:56:05
1995

