History of Western Civilization I

Ancient History Syllabus



Lecture and Discussion Topics:

  1. Humans before writing: The Stone Ages

    * the hunter-gatherers (Paleolithic Era)

    * the farmers (Neolithic Era)

  1. Ancient Sumeria (Iraq): The first civilization and its people. Geography and climate; importance of polytheistic religion; the economy; what we know of government; laws and what they reveal about Sumerian and later Semitic society 
  2. Ancient Egypt: Comparison and contrast with ancient Sumeria - Old Kingdom, Middle Kingdom, New Kingdom. 
  3. The Hebrews and their God: How did they differ from Egypt and Sumeria, and what influence did these two civilizations have on the Hebrews?
  4. Ancient Greece

    * Background of the Greeks: Minoan and Mycenaean Cultures
    * Homeric Tales
    * The development of the polis, its strengths and weaknesses
    * A comparison of Sparta and Athens
    * The Persian and Peloponnesian Wars
    * Greek culture
    * The rise of Macedonia and the end of Greek independence

  1. Ancient Rome

    * The birth of the Roman Republic
    * Wars of expansion and the results of Roman imperialism
    * The Gracchi Brothers and a comparison of the early and late Republic
    * A century of civil war and attempted domination of the Republic by ambitious generals
    * The emergence of one-man rule and the end of the Republic
    * Jesus and his teachings--who was he, what influenced him, etc.
    * The first two centuries of the Roman Empire and "pax romana"
    * The growth of Christianity--what was its appeal?
    * Factors in the disintegration of the Empire



ANCIENT HISTORY READING SCHEDULE

History 103, Fall, Rapp

text: _Roots of the Western Tradition_ (Hollister)

other: _Lysistrata_ (Aristophanes) and readings found at main desk in library,
College Hall;

these readings are almost all from the book _Beginnings_ , and you can either
read them

in the library or copy them and take them home with you to read.

wk. 1, Sept. 3 text, pp. 1-12; _Beginning_ s, pp. 19-22 ("Underground
Beastiary" and

Stone Ages "Types and Locations of Paleolithic Art")

wk. 2, Sept. 8 text, pp. 12-16, and "The Worst Mistake...", an article found

Stone Ages at main desk, library

wk. 3 Sept. 15 "Early Civilizations and the Natural Environment" (library);

Mesopotamia text, pp. 17-28 (ch. 2, Meso.)

wk. 4, Sept. 22 _Beg_ , pp. 25-40; text, pp. 29-36

Meso., Egypt

wk. 5, Sept. 29 _Beg._ , pp. 53-57 and 61-66; text, pp 36-43

Egypt Oct. 3

wk. 6, Oct. 6 text, pp. 44-57 (Near East, ch. 4)

Hebrews

wk. 7, Oct. 13 _Beg._ , pp. 41-52

Hebrews

wk. 8, Oct. 20 text, pp. 65-75 (Ch. 5); _Beg._ , pp. 79-88

Greece

wk. 9, Oct. 27 text, pp. 76-92 (Ch. 6); _Beg_., pp. 95-98

Greece

wk. 10, Nov. 3 _Lysistrata_

Greece

wk. 11, Nov. 10 text, ch. 9

Greece

wk. 12, Nov. 17 _Beg._ , pp. 89-94, "Polis and Hubris"

Greece, Rome

wk. 13, Nov. 24 text, ch. 11, pp. 163-168; _Beg._ , pp. 11-112; 130-133

Rome

wk. 14, Dec. 1 text, pp. 168-181; _Beg._ , pp. 134-137; 121-129

Rome

wk. 15, Dec. 8 text, pp. 182-196; _Beg._ , pp. 138-144

REQUIREMENTS Rapp

Ancient History-HIS 103 Fall

This course requires writing, weekly reading, reasonable attendance (see

below) and discussion. During the semester there will be a mid-term
examination,

a final examination, and four quizzes. The quizzes and exams are mostly essay

and they cover readings as well as lecture and discussion. Your grade is based
on

presenting and analyzing information in a clear and organized manner.

Attendance

I will take attendance each class period, including after break (for the 3:45
M

class). There is a high correlation between regular attendance and success in
the course.

The attendance policy is as follows: His 103 NC class- if you miss more than
one and

a half classes you will earn 5 points off your final grade; for each class
missed after that,

it will be lowered by one grade; His 103 KC class--if you miss more than three
classes

you will earn 5 points off your final grade; for each class missed after that,
it will be

lowered a further 5 points.



Make- ups

Make- ups are difficult to administer for a variety of reasons and I
discourage them.

A student can take a make-up only for the mid-term exam, and that make-up will
be

administered in mid November. For the quizzes, I drop a student's lowest quiz
grade or a

quiz the student may have missed, but not both. If you have a borderline grade
in class

you will benefit by taking all the quizzes.

To drop this course

You can drop this, or any course, without an instructor's signature until
October.

After that date I will sign a drop slip only under special circumstances.

Office number:

PH 227, phone number 215 641-6385. Leave a message if I am not in my office.
Parkhouse Hall Information Desk-641-6412. Office hours are as follows: M
2:45-3:45 p. m.;

T 3:15-3:45 p.m.; Th. 10:00- 11:00 a.m. and 2:10-3:10 p.m.

A Note on Cheating and Plagiarism

Cheating and/or plagiarism will not be tolerated in this class any more than
it is by the

College. If a student is found cheating or plagiarizing on any assignment
he/she will earn an

automatic "F". If a student is found cheating a second time, that student will
earn an "F"

for the course. I am aware the majority of students here do not need this note
of caution:

this is only for those who do!

