**SOC 176.401 (Spring 2001)**

**Cyberspace/Cybersociety**

Syllabus



MW 12:30-1:45 PM Prof. Andrew Herman

Office: 102 Howard Hall (x2936) Office Hours: MW 8:30-9:30 AM,

T 3-4 PM



**Course Description, Objectives and Requirements**



**I. Prerequisites**



a) _Background_. This course is primarily intended for students with some
prior background in sociological, anthropological and cultural theory.
Although it will not be classified as a  "theory intensive" course, it will be
theoretically intensive. As such, it will be most appropriate for third and
fourth year students, although some second year students would have no problem
in the course. Therefore, at a minimum, an entry-level sociology or
anthropology course, or one course in Cultural Studies is required.

b) _Technology_. Given the subject nature of the course, it is imperative that
students possess or have access to computer technology that enables them to
connect to the Internet and the World Wide Web. Whether you use Drake or some
other company as an Internet Service Provider, it is **essential** that you
are able to use a web browser such as Netscape Navigator or Mircosoft Internet
Explorer on a regular basis. My preference is for you to use Netscape
Communicator (version 4.0 or later) because we may be using Page Composer to
create web pages.

**II. Course Content and Objectives**

The overall purpose of this course is to engage in a sociologically grounded
yet interdisciplinary analysis into the rhetorics and rituals through which
social identity is constructed in the topos of cyberspace. The term "topos" is
derived from the Greek word topoi which, according to Aristotelian theories of
rhetoric, denotes the 'common places' or shared understandings that constitute
the basis for argument and persuasion. However, the connotative meaning of
topoi, is somewhat broader, referring to common places of symbolic meaning
within which people in any given society and culture are able to locate and
construct their social identity in existential, normative and utopian terms.
Thus, such places of identity compose a rhetorically constituted and ritually
enacted symbolic matrix of meaning, or a social imaginary, within which people
are given a sense of who they are, what they should endeavor to become, and
the possibilities and limits of their hopes and desires

Inquiry into topics in the social imaginary prises open taken-for-granted
assumptions about the nature of social identity. By examining the processes by
which particular topics are given form and acquire cultural hegemony, we are
able to critically reflect upon the prevailing epistemological premises and
ontological definitions of self-hood, individuality, community, gender and
sexuality, ethnicity , nationality, race and so on through which we craft our
identities in everyday life. As such, this course is intended to critically
interrogate the process of perception, embodiment and social interaction
through which cyberspace constructs different or multiple places or locations
of identity in the social imaginary of information based capitalism.
Specifically, the course will focus upon the epistemology and ontology of
cyberspace as a cultural technology that produces a particular convergence of
spatiality, identity, and community. The very term "cyberspace" foregrounds
the material and metaphorical spatial dimension of its social imaginary as a
distinctive topos.

Our investigation of these topics in the social imaginary will involve the use
of readings of primary texts as well as secondary readings drawn from
sociology, history, philosophy, theology, and literary and cultural studies.
We will also use films, novels, music, computer-mediated communication (CMC)
and other modes of representation which evoke the processes by which such
topoi are created and how people locate themselves within them.

**III. Course Requirements**

A. Class Preparation and Participation

1) _Conscientious class preparation_ in terms of the assignments for each
class. In your written assignments, group projects, and class discussions I
will expect that you demonstrate that you are familiar with the material.
Copies of all non-text required readings have been placed on reserve in the
library.

2) _Class participation_. My basic pedagogical philosophy is that  "knowledge"
is the fruit of the effervescence of discussion and dialogue between people
who are willing to be changed, however slightly, by what they hear and speak.
For this change of heart and mind called "learning" to take place, you must
actively participate in class. Although I will take the lead in conjuring the
space of dialogue and giving form to the discussion, as well as sometimes
lecturing in order to explain difficult concepts, the success of this course
for you individually and the class as a whole depends on your willingness and
desire to be responsible for your own education by being prepared for and
participating in class.

3) _Participation in Course Web Forum_. I will be establishing a Web-based
threaded discussion group for members of this class on the University's VAX
computer. **__Accordingly, every student must have an e-mail account, either
with Drake or some other ISP and must send to me immediately (like, today)__**
in order to participate in the forum. Instructions on how to use and access
the forum will be forthcoming shortly, but the basic idea behind it is to
extend class interaction and discussion beyond the time/space boundaries of
the class period itself. The forum will be a virtual forum for all of us to
develop positions, ask questions, comment on the readings, lectures or class
discussion outside of class. The forum is also meant to provide those students
who feel initially uncomfortable with expressing themselves in class with
another venue and mode of participating in class discussion

**Class participation will comprise 10% of your final course grade**.

B. Written Assignments

1\. _Individual Position Papers_. Each student will be required to write
**two** , 5-7 page "position papers" on clusters of readings assigned for a
particular class or group of classes. As the name implies, a position paper is
a paper in which you take a position or intellectually situate yourself in
relation to the arguments and analysis in the readings. The purpose of these
position papers is two-fold: first, to get you thinking about the material in
a rigorous fashion and; second, to ensure that there is a critical mass of
students in each class who are prepared to give shape and energy to our class
discussions. I will be providing you with more detailed guidelines on how to
write position papers, as well as a tentative schedule of when particular
readings and their respective position papers will be due at the appropriate
time.

**The individual position papers will comprise 60% of your grade.**



3\. _Collaborative Web Project_. The culminating experience of the course will
be a collaborative production of a  "web ring" consisting of inter linked web
sites, devoted to explorations of the politics of identity and community in
cyberspace, produced by small groups of students. This will require that
students become moderately proficient in the use of HTML (Hypertext Markup
Language) and the use of web page authoring programs such as Netscape Page
Composer or some other web authoring program such as Page Mill). I will be
providing you with resources on how to use HTML and we will spend some time in
Dial Center Lab using Netscape Composer and Page Mill.

**The Web project will comprise 30% of your grade.**

**V. Reading**

As you can see, the amount of readings I have assigned for the course is
"heavy." The plan for reading that is laid out here reflects a range of
material that I would like to ideally cover during the course of the semester.
Unfortunately (or fortunately, depending on your perspective) the actual
course of events that is dictated by reality is often very unkind to ideal
schemes. Accordingly, there is a very large probability that a number of the
reserve readings will be dropped as required assignments as we proceed through
the semester.

A. Readings for Purchase

The following books are _required_ and are available for purchase at either
the University Book Store. **However, I strongly suggest that you do not buy
all of these books at once as we may not have time to cover them. I will let
you know which books to purchase and when. This is to minimize the unnecessary
and annoying cost of buying books you will not read.**

Herman, Andrew and Thom Swiss, Eds. _The World Wide Web and Contemporary
Cultural Theory: Magic, Metaphor, and Power._ Routledge, 2000

Johnson, Steven. _Interface Culture: How New Technology Transform the Way We
Create and Communicate_. San Francisco: Harper/Edge, 1998

Jordan, Tim. _Cyberpower: The Culture and Politics of the Internet_.
Routledge, 1999.

Stephenson, Neal. _Snow Crash._ New York: Bantam, 1992.







B. Reserve Readings:

The following readings are on reserve at Cowles Library:

Berland, Jody. "Angels Dancing: Cultural Technologies and the Production of
Space" in _Cultural Studies_ edited by L. Grossberg, C. Nelson and P.
Treichler. New York: Routledge, 1992

Bush, Vannevar. "As We Might Think" in Druckery, Timothy (ed.). _Electronic
Culture: Technology and Visual Representation_. New York: Aperture, 1996.

Chambers, Iain. _Migrancy, Culture, and Identity_. New York: Routledge, 1994.

Dibble, Julian. "A Rape In Cyberspace" in M. Dery, Ed., _Flame Wars_. Durham,
N.C.: Duke University Press, 1994

David Holmes, "Virtual Identity: Communities of Broadcast, Communities of
Interactivity" in Holmes, David, Ed. _Virtual Politics: Identity and Community
in Cyberspace_. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1997.

Kirby, Kathleen. _Indifferent Boundaries: Spatial Concepts of Human
Subjectivity_. New York: Guilford, 1995.

Landow, George. "Hypertext and Critical Theory" in _Hypertext: The Convergence
of Contemporary Critical Theory and Technology_ . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1992

Moulthrop, Stuart. "Rhizome and Resistance: Hypertext and the Dreams of a New
Culture" in George Landow, ed., _Hyper/Text/Theory_ . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1992(reserve)

Robins, Kevin. "Cyberspace and the World We Live In" in M. Featherstone and R.
Burrows, Eds., _Cyberspace/Cyberbodies/Cyberpunk_. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage,
1995.

Romanyshyn, Robert. _Technology as Symptom and Dream_. New York: Routledge,
1989.

Rose, Nikolas. "Identity, Genealogy, History" in S. Hall and P. Du Gay, Eds.,
_Questions of Cultural Identity._ Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1996.





VI. Course Outline

Topic I

Travels in the Dreamtime of Technology

Books surround us, and yet they are but one small item of the body of
technological inventions which flesh out our time. Radio and television,
newspapers and films, automobiles and airplanes, nuclear power plants and
nuclear bombs, are also part of our world. The are the social and
psychological body our age as much as Gothic cathedrals formed in part the
body of the late medieval world. These things and events incarnate the dreams
of the world we have built and in so doing they tell the story of who we are
and who we imagine ourselves to be. In dreams we are addressed by the
underside of events and things, by the unspoken in what has been said, by
connections and allusions which may other wise be unnoticed. Dreams shadow
waking life and what we, individually and culturally, cannot bear in conscious
life we dream. To attend to our cultural dreams is to attend to the shadows
and silences of our culture. It is, moreover, also something more, for in
presenting the shadows and silences every dream, whether individual or
cultural, preserves them. In this respect every dream is also a call to
remember what would otherwise be forgotten on the surface of events and
things.

Robert Romanyshyn

  

Reading:

Robert Romanyshyn, _Technology as Symptom and Dream_ (selections/reserve)

Iain Chambers, _Migrancy, Culture and Identity_ (selections/reserve)

Jody Berland. "Angels Dancing: Cultural Technologies and the Production of
Space"(reserve)

Jody Berland, "Cultural Technologies and the Evolution of Technological
Cultures" in Herman and Swiss

Robert McChesney, "So Much for the Magic of Technology and Free Markets" in
Herman and Swiss

  

Film:

_Until the End of the World_ (Wim Wenders, 1992)

Topic II

Hypertext and Interface Culture

What is really likely to happen when the hierarchically organized, routinized
space of the corporation meets the rhizomatic propensities of electronic
media? Are such encounters conceivable as anything more than flights of fancy,
or might the ostensible "smoothness" of new writing systems be more delusion
than Deluezian? These questions are bound to disturb our dreams of a new
culture.

Stuart Moulthrop  

Vannevar Bush, "As We Might Think" (reserve)

Stuart Moulthrop, "Rhizome and Resistance" (reserve)

Gregory Landow, "Hypertext and Critical Theory" (reserve)

Steve Johnson, _Interface Culture_ , Chapters 1-5

Nancy Kaplan, "Literacy Beyond Books" in Herman and Swiss

Rob Shields, "Hypertext Links: The Ethic of the Index and its Space-Time
Effects" in Herman and Swiss

  

Topic III:

Mapping of Places of Power, Subjectivity and Identity

in Cyberspace

"The space of the subject?" What could the phrase mean or be made to mean?

Kathleen Kirby

"How should we do a history of the person?

Nikolas Rose

  

Reading:

Kathleen Kirby, _Indifferent Boundaries_. (selection/reserve)

Nikolas Rose, "Identity, Genealogy, History" (reserve)

Tim Jordan, _Cyberpower_ , Chapters 1 and 2







Topic IV

Virtually Real?

The Ambiguous Politics of Sovereignty, Identity and Community in Cyberspace



"Where do you want to go today?'

Advertising Slogan for Microsoft



Is this a great time or what?:-)

Advertising Slogan for MCI Internet

Cyberspace's collective imagination works through hopes and fears and, in
doing so, inhabits all corners of individual and social cyberpower. The dreams
of the imaginary may often appear as imaginative froth bubbling on top of real
individuals and societies but they work to bind individuals and societies
together through imagined communities. . . . Cyberpower of the imaginary
inhabits the cyberpowers of the individual and the social, underpinning both
trough moments when common citizenship of cyberspace is recognized and driving
both forward through evangelical imaginings.



Tim Jordan  

Reading:

1)Virtual Identity and the Individual

Tim Jordan, _Cyberpower_ , Chapter 3

Stephenson, _Snow Crash_ , pgs. 1-177





2)The Socius and Politics of Virtual Communities

Tim Jordan, _Cyberpower_ , Chapter 4

Julian Dibble, "A Rape In Cyberspace" (reserve)

David Holmes, "Virtual Identity: Communities of Broadcast, Communities of

Interactivity" (reserve)

Jodi Dean, "Webs of Conspiracy" in Herman and Swiss

Teresa Senft, "Baud Girls and Cargo Cults" in Herman and Swiss

David Tetzlaff, "Yo-Ho-Ho and a Server of Warez" in Herman and Swiss

Stephenson, _Snow Crash_ , pgs.177-279





3)Off-Line, On-Line, and In-Between: Production, Consumption and Power in the
Network Society

Tim Jordan, _Cyberpower_ , Chapters 5-6

Manuel Castells, _The Rise of the Network Society_ (selections/reserve)

Andrew Herman and John Sloop, "Red Alert: Rhetorics of the World Wide Web and
Friction Free Capitalism" in Herman and Swiss

Andrew Herman and Rosemary Coombe, "Corporate Personae and Consumer Politics
in the Space of Flows on the World Wide Web" (reserve)

Vincent Mosco, "Webs of Myth and Power" in Herman and Sloop

Stephenson, _Snow Crash_ , pgs. 279-368



4)Coda

Tim Jordan, _Cyberpower_ , Chapter 7

Stuart Moulthrop, "Error 404: Doubting the Web" in Herman and Swiss

Kevin Robins, "Cyberspace and the World We Live In" (reserve)

Stephenson, _Snow Crash_ , pgs. 368-470

