![](e300news_metonymy.gif)2 Jan 1999  
   Syllabus |  |  English 300  
---|---|---  
 Calendar |  |  Critical Approaches to Literature  
 [Assignment
Guides](http://campus.murraystate.edu/academic/faculty/kevin.binfield/assignment_guides.htm)
|  |  Murray State University  
 Resources |  |  Spring 1999  
  
Course: Critical Approaches to Literature (3 cr. hrs.)  
Places and Times: Section 1, FH 105, MWF 9:30-10:30; Section 2, FH 409, W
6:00-9:00  
Professor: [Dr Kevin
Binfield](http://campus.murraystate.edu/academic/faculty/kevin.binfield/binfield.htm)  
Office: FH 7B7  
Phone: 762-4541  
Email: [kevin.binfield@murraystate.edu](mailto:kevin.binfield@murraystate.edu)  
Office Hours: 8:20-9:30 MWF; 11:30-1:00 MWF; 4:00-6:00 W (and by appointment)

####  **Catalogue Description:**

English 300 is a study of the various methods of literary criticism being
practiced at the present time: historical-biographical, formalistic, generic,
textual, archetypal, philosophical, Freudian, and others. Students will study
each theory and will be given practice in the application of the theory to
selected works.

**Prerequisites:**

English 101 and 102 (or English 104) and Humanities 211 and 212; love of
literature; curiosity; humility; good humor.

**Purpose:**

The purpose of English 300 is to enable students, through reading works of
literature, literary criticism, and literary theory, to read and write about
literature, criticism, and theory in a disciplined manner informed by a clear
understanding of a variety of critical approaches and their methods,
limitations, assumptions and origins.

**Course Objectives:**

  * After successful completion of the course, the student will be able to read, speak, and write about works of literature using a variety of critical approaches;
  * be familiar with literary technique and be able to conduct technical readings of literary works as a basis for critical readings;
  * be able to read works of literary criticism with a sense of each work's methods, assumptions, implications and limitations;
  * be able to analyze and understand the differences between, advantages of, and limitations of current approaches and to identify the theories underlying works of criticism;
  * be able to demonstrate familiarity with, understanding of, and ability to use literary and critical terminology.

**Instructional Activities:**

Reading, writing, lecture, and both Socratic and student-guided discussion and
queries will be the primary methods of instruction.  Most participative
activities will emphasize critical thinking--identifying and resolving some
problem regarding a particular work of literature, criticism, or theory.  Have
regular and frequent access to the internet and your email account because any
instructional method may be conducted electronically via email or the course
homepage.

**Content Outline:**

The course will be organized around three blocks--an introduction to criticism
and its history, a careful study of the major critical approaches of the
twentieth century, and examination of a major work from several of those
critical perspectives.

**Required Primary Texts (other texts assigned will be available in Waterfield
Library or on the Internet):**

  * Murfin, Ross and Supryia Ray, _Bedford Glossary of Critical and Literary Terms_ (Bedford-St. Martin's, 1997)--handbook required for all English classes. (Murf)
  * Bressler, Charles,  _Literary Criticism: An Introduction to Theory and Practice_ , Second Edition (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1998)--simplified text generally treating current approaches and exemplifying those approaches with student essays. (Bres2)
  * Conrad, Joseph, _Heart of Darkness: Case Studies in Contemporary Criticism_ (Bedford-St. Martin's, 1995)--novel with critical essays representing a variety of approaches. (Conrad)
  * Selden, Raman, Peter Widdowson, and Peter Brooker, _A Reader's Guide to Contemporary Literary Theory_ , 4th ed. (Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1997)--more sophisticated and reliable text covering current approaches. (Seld)

**Library Reserve Materials:**

  * Bressler, Charles,  _Literary Criticism: An Introduction to Theory and Practice_ , First Edition (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1994)--simplified text containing three literary works and student essays on those works. (Bres1)
  * Davis, Robert Con, _Contemporary Literary Criticism_ (Longman, 1986)--anthology of articles in critical theory and literary criticism. (Davis)

**Internet Materials:**

  * [Literary Genres and Techniques](http://campus.murraystate.edu/academic/faculty/kevin.binfield/e300/genres_technique.htm), by Kevin Binfield, Murray State University
  * [Glossary of Literary Terms](http://wihtikow.sifc.edu/english/WritersGuide/64WPGlossaryofLiteraryTerms.htm), by English Department, Saskatchewan Indian Federated College
  * [Literary Glossary](http://ccd.cccoes.edu/~ksmiles/lit115/glossary.html), Kathleen Miles, Community College of Denver
  * [Introduction to Literature Lessons and Lectures](http://ccd.cccoes.edu/~ksmiles/lit115/lessons.html), Kathleen Miles, Community College of Denver
  * [Virtual Seminars for Teaching Literature](http://info.ox.ac.uk/jtap/), by Humanities Computing Unit, Oxford University
  * Other webpages related to general literary matters and particular critical approaches are listed below
  * Please print off and bring to class a copy of each of the online poems assigned in the Calendar below

**Requirements and Grading Weights:**

  * A daily list of three queries or comments (or other assigned writings) in response to the assigned readings designed to facilitate your and your classmates' understanding of the readings (+/- effect on final course grade). Should I call on you, you should be able to help conduct a discussion using your comments and queries;
  * Short writings, in-class and out (20%);
  * One major paper, chosen from the three following options: a bibliographical essay that summarizes and critiques the application by several critics of a single type of approach to a single literary work; a pedagogical paper that demonstrates how you might teach a literary work in a classroom using one or two critical approaches; a critical paper applying a single critical approach to a single work of literature.  The literary work must be one of those read for this class.  The paper must be at least eight full pages long (excluding a works cited page), will be developed in drafts from prospectus with [annotated bibliography](http://campus.murraystate.edu/academic/faculty/kevin.binfield/e656s98.htm#Annotated Bibliography) to final copy, and will be due December 8 (30%);
  * Presentations--pedagogical, demonstrative, or interpretive, but necessarily interactive (+/- effect on final course grade)
  * Quizzes (20%)
  * One comprehensive final examination (30%);
  * Regular participation in class discussions.  Extraordinary contributions will have a positive effect on the final course grade.

**Grade Scale:**

  * A=100-90, B= 89-80, C=79-70, D=69-60, E=59-0

**Absence and Integrity Policies:**

  * For Section 1, each absence over four results in the subtraction of three points from the final course grade.  For Section 2, each absence over two will result in the subtraction of five points from the final course grade.  Every absence counts.
  * Missed in-class graded work may not be made up. If you miss an examination, the grade-weight for that exam will be made up by substituting a multiple of the grade-weights for the other coursework.
  * Academic dishonesty will result in failure of the course and other sanctions imposed by the University. Consult the academic integrity policy posted on my office door.

**Calendar of Assignments (all assignments due by first class meeting of each
week; subject to additions and adjustments):**

  * Jan 11, 13 (Introduction)
    * Survey of history of literary theory and criticism
    * Questions: What is literature? How do we read literature? Is our method of reading "natural"?
    * Sample poems and critical exercises (Byron's ["So We'll Go No More A-roving"](http://www.artofeurope.com/byron/byr1.htm) and the conflict between intention and reception; Hands' _[The Death of Amnon](http://campus.murraystate.edu/academic/faculty/kevin.binfield/hands2.htm)_ volume and Genette's concept of the paratext as rhetorical tool)
    * Introduction to technical reading
    * Introduction to MLA Bibliography and literary research
  * Jan 18, 20 (History of Criticism)
    * Read [Literary Genres and Techniques](http://campus.murraystate.edu/academic/faculty/kevin.binfield/e300/genres_technique.htm)\--yup, the entire list
    * Read Bres2 1-36; Seld 1-12
    * Read on the course homepage the "Analytical Questions for Literary Criticism and Theory"
  * Jan 25, 27 (Technical Criticism of Drama
    * Read Murfin's entries on Drama, Tragedy, Comedy, Plot, Catharsis, Anagnorisis, Hamartia, Character
    * Shakespeare, _[Hamlet](http://www.gh.cs.usyd.edu.au/~matty/Shakespeare/texts/tragedies/hamlet_0.html)_ (all, but not the critical essays)
    * **SHORT ESSAY:** Write outside of class a 300-word essay describing the anagnorisis in _Hamlet_
  * Feb 01, 03 (Technical Criticism of Verse, Formalism)
    * Bres2 36-61; Seld 13-46
    * Read Browning's ["My Last Duchess"](http://utl1.library.utoronto.ca/disk1/www/documents/utel/rp/poems/browning1.html) (Web or Library Reserve--Bres1 153-54)
    * Read Herrick's ["Upon Julia's Clothes"](http://utl2.library.utoronto.ca/disk1/www/documents/utel/rp/poems/herrick14.html) (available online or in several editions in the Library)
    * Read Murfin's entries on Poetic Diction, Blank Verse, Dramatic Monologue, Elegy, Sonnet, Figurative Language, Imagery, Meter, Rhyme
    * **SHORT ESSAY:** Write outside of class a 300-word formalist analysis of ["Upon Julia's Clothes"](http://utl2.library.utoronto.ca/disk1/www/documents/utel/rp/poems/herrick14.html)
  * Feb 08, 10 (Technical Criticism of Prose Fiction, Reader-Oriented)
    * Read Murfin's entries on Narrative, Narrator, Novel, Character, Conflict, Climax, Plot, Point of View, Short Story
    * Bres2 62-86; Bres1 45-57; Seld 47-65
    * Read Hawthorne's "Young Goodman Brown" (Web or Library Reserve--Bres1 144-52)
    * Work in Waterfield Library
    * **FIRST QUIZ**
  * Feb 15, 17 (Structuralism)
    * Bres2 87-113; Seld 66-87; Bres1 67-70 (student essay--Library Reserve)
    * Glaspell's _Trifles_ (Web or Library Reserve--Bres1 155-65)
    * Eco's "The Myth of Superman" (library)
    * **GROUP LESSONS DUE:** Group One will explain structuralist theory; Group Two will explain how it can be applied to "Trifles"
  * Feb 22, 24 (Marxism)
    * Bres2 210-35; Bres1 122-26 (student essay); Seld 90-120
    * **PROSPECTUS AND [ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY](http://campus.murraystate.edu/academic/faculty/kevin.binfield/e656s98.htm#Annotated Bibliography) DUE**
  * Mar 01, 03 (Torture, Pain, Indescribable Agony, and some Psychoanalysis)
    * **MID-TERM QUIZ**
    * Bres2 147-77; Seld 150-69; Bres1 96-101 (student essay, Library Reserve)
    * **GROUP LESSONS DUE:** Group One will psychoanalyze Adrienne Rich's "Diving into the Wreck" (available from me); Group Two will critique the psychoanalytic student essay in Bres1
  * Mar 08, 10 (Feminism)
    * Bres2 178-209; Seld 121-49
    * Be prepared to conduct a feminist reading of Robert Herrick's ["The Vine"](http://www.cas.usf.edu/~lucas/comp/lit/vine.html)
  * Mar 15, 17 (Debauchery, Oblivion, Ontological Crisis)
    * **SPRING BREAK**
  * Mar 22, 24 (Deconstruction/Poststructuralism)
    * Bres2 114-146; Seld 170-86; Student essay in Bres1 83-86;
    * **SHORT ESSAY:** Write outside of class a 300-word essay deconstructing Herrick's ["Upon Julia's Clothes"](http://utl2.library.utoronto.ca/disk1/www/documents/utel/rp/poems/herrick14.html)
  * Mar 29, 31 (Poststructuralism/New Historicism)
    * Bres2 236-62; Seld 187-99
    * **PRESENTATIONS:** Five minute report on progress on papers--question you seek to answer, tentative thesis, range of criticism you have found
  * Apr 05, 07 (Postmodernism/Postcolonialism; Cultural Studies)
    * Bres2 263-277; Seld 200-20; Seld 221-42; Bhabha (library)
    * **THIRD QUIZ**
  * Apr 12, 14 (Gender, Sexuality, and Queer Theory)
    * Seld 243-66; Sedgwick (Library Reserve)
    * Be prepared to conduct a gender theory reading of Lord Byron's ["When we Two Parted"](http://www.penwith.co.uk/artofeurope/byron/byr3.htm)
  * Apr 19, 21 (Varieties of Application)
    * Conrad, _Heart of Darkness_ (all, including critical essays)
    * **PRESENTATIONS:** Five minute reports on papers, which should be almost entirely finished
  * Apr 26, 28 (Application)
    * Conrad, _Heart of Darkness_ (continued)
    * Revisit _Hamlet_ (read critical essays)
    * **PRESENTATIONS**
    * **TERM PAPER DUE**
  * May 04, May 05 Section 2 (Twinges, Pangs, Bittersweet Release)
    * **FINAL EXAM** (Section 1, May 04, 8:00 am; Section 2, May 05, 6:00 pm)

* * *

**Useful General Sites:**

  * **[World Lecture Hall (for other Literary Theory course syllabi)](http://www.utexas.edu/world/lecture/)**
  * **[Sarah Zupko's Cultural Studies Center: Theorists and Critics](http://www.mcs.net/~zupko/cs_criti.htm)**
  * **[Sources via Kamm Literary Theory Syllabus](http://www.umassd.edu/1Academic/CArtsandSciences/ForeignLitLang/faculty/LKamm/ENL684/FLL684.html#WEBSOURCES)**
  * **[Literary Theory Links (Jerry Everard at ANU)](http://www.anu.edu.au/english/lt.html)**
  * **[Hytelnet via Saskatchewan (for access to web OPACs)](http://library.usask.ca/hytelnet)**
  * **[Yale's Library Gopher (for access to no-web OPACs)](gopher://libgopher.cis.yale.edu)**
  * **[Carnegie-Mellon English Department (generally useful English site)](http://eng.hss.cmu.edu/)**
  * **[Penn's English Department Webpage (generally useful English site)](http://www.english.upenn.edu)**
  * **[Alex: Catalogue of Electronic Texts](http://www.lib.ncsu.edu/staff/morgan/alex/alex-index.html)**
  * **[Brown University's Storyspace Cluster Literary Theory Page](http://www.stg.brown.edu/projects/hypertext/landow/SSPCluster/theorists.html)**
  * **[WordStream: Literary Theory Online](http://www.stthomasu.ca/WordStream/ws_theo.htm)**
  * **[Lemma: Aesthetic Theory](http://ourworld.compuserve.com/homepages/Gary_Tedman/intro4.htm)**
  * **[Voice of the Shuttle Literary Theory Page](http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/shuttle/theory.html)**
  * **[Electronic Texts at the University of Toronto](http://utl1.library.utoronto.ca/disk1/www/documents/utel/rp/utel.html)**

**Web Resources Categorized by Critical Approach**

  * **Cultural Materialism:**[Dino Felluga, "Modern Theoretical Discourses"](http://www.ucalgary.ca/~wah/WW/Primer/Felluga.Theory.html)
  * **Cyber Theory:**[George Landow, _Hypertext in Hypertext_](http://muse.jhu.edu/press/books/landow/HTinHT2.html)
  * **Generic Criticism:**[George Landow, "Dramatic Monologue: An Introduction"](http://www.stg.brown.edu/projects/hypertext/landow/victorian/rb/dm1.html)
  * **Literacy Studies and Literary Reading:**[Russ Hunt, "On Literary Reading"](http://www.stthomasu.ca/hunt/litread.htm)
  * **Marxism:**[Lemma: Aesthetic Theory](http://ourworld.compuserve.com/homepages/Gary_Tedman/intro4.htm)
  * **New Historicism:**[Dino Felluga, "Modern Theoretical Discourses"](http://www.ucalgary.ca/~wah/WW/Primer/Felluga.Theory.html)
  * **Performance Theory:**[Bert States, "Performance as Metaphor"](http://jhupress.jhu.edu/demo/theatre_journal/48.1states.html)
  * **Post-Colonial Theory:**[Aruna Krishnamurthy, "Post Colonial Reader"](http://www.ucet.ufl.edu/~akrishna/link1.html)
  * **Rhetorical and Reader-Oriented Criticism:**[Glenn Everett, "The Silent Listener in 'My Last Duchess'"](http://www.stg.brown.edu/projects/hypertext/landow/victorian/rb/duchess2.html)
  * **Semiotics:**[University of Colorado at Denver, "Semiotics"](http://www.cudenver.edu/~mryder/itc_data/semiotics.html)

* * *

  
**What is Literature: A Survey of Answers**

  * **Plato:** Literature is an imitation (in words) of an imitation (in matter or material existence) of an idea that exists originally in the mind of God. As an imitation twice removed from true reality, it is inferior, deceptive, and dangerous, largely because audiences imitate what they see and read. ( _The Republic_ , Books 2, 3, 10)
  * **Aristotle:** Literature is an imitation of a sequence of events. Literature can be categorized and, thereby, understood according to the method of operation and execution of each category. Viewing or reading literature facilitates the expression (pushing out) of undesirable emotions. ( _Poetics_ )
  * **Longinus:** Literature is written work that causes or fails to cause the experience of the sublime--awe attached to terror. ( _On the Sublime_ )
  * **Horace:** Literature is an imitation of events or objects. It ought to delight and instruct readers. ( _Ars Poetica_ )
  * **Sidney:** Literature is an imitation of events or objects in such a manner as to render a "golden" world, improved over the real object in nature (which Sidney calls "brazen"). Literature ought to delight, instruct, and inspirit the reader. ( _An Apology for Poesy_ )
  * **Corneille:** Literature is the execution in language of a number of rules that govern how to render an imitation of events gracefully and according to form and verisimilitude. ( _Three Discourses on Dramatic Poetry_ )
  * **Pope:** Literature is an imitation of nature that is executed not by copying nature directly but rather by imitating the works and techniques of previous writers who are somehow "closer" to nature and to the original. ( _An Essay on Criticism_ )
  * **Johnson:** Literature is an imitation which has been judged to have value over a period of centuries as a true but general reflection of human nature in a variety of real or imaginary circumstances. ("Preface to Shakespeare")
  * **Wordsworth:** Literature (poetry, at least) is "the spontaneous overflow of powerful feeling . . . recollected in tranquility." ("Preface to _Lyrical Ballads_ ")
  * **Shelley:** Literature is a creative expression of Platonic ideas that is cast in a form that affects readers by operating upon their sympathies and antipathies, thereby affording an emotional experience of ideas that Plato had believed could be apprehended logically. ("Preface to _The Cenci_ ," _Defence of Poetry_ )
  * **Arnold:** Literature is "the best of what has been thought and written." Poetry, at least, is an imitation of a noble action and ought to impart pleasure by permitting a "vent in action" of emotions which would otherwise be stifling. ("Preface to _Poems_ " [1853])
  * **Shklovsky:** Literature defamiliarizes the familiar; that is, it causes us to see the ordinary in a way that jolts us out of our automatic ways of perceiving and acting. ("Art as Technique")
  * **Mukarovsky:** Literature is language that draws attention to the mode of expression itself and thereby goes beyond merely describing or communicating ideas. ( _Aesthetic Function_ )

* * *

  
**Questions for Reading Critical Theory**

(From Donald G. Marshall's "Doxography versus Inquiry," in Dianne F. Sadoff
and William E. Cain, eds., _Teaching Contemporary Theory to Undergraduates_
[New York : Modern Language Association, 1994])

**Terms: What are the critic's key terms? How are they defined? What are the
differences between these words as "terms of art" and as ordinary terms? How
are the terms related to each other?**

**Concerns: What are the critic's primary concerns? Does she or he explicitly
pose any particular problems or questions? Upon which of the four sites of
literary inquiry (author, audience, world, work) does the critic focus? Is
there one problem that is more important to the critic than others?**

**Methodology: Does the critic describe a methodology for solving the problem
she or he addresses? Is there an implicit methodology at work, too?**

**Application: If the critic treats an actual work, is the critic's treatment
consistent with the method she or he describes? Does the critic ignore or
overlook any part of the work? Would the method apply well to another work or
genre?**

* * *

  
**Prospectus Form**

**A prospectus is a forward look to a project--a kind of proposal that follows
an identifiable form to convey to a reader particular information about the
project envisioned. The prospectus should be written only after much of the
research has already been conducted. Every prospectus (as well as every
research paper) contains sections treating the following matters:**

    * **Statement of problem or question;**
    * **Survey of scholarship on the problem;**
    * **Primary texts consulted;**
    * **Secondary texts consulted;**
    * **Methodology to be employed;**
    * **Tentative or anticipated results.**
**[See my two examples of a
prospectus.](http://campus.murraystate.edu/academic/faculty/kevin.binfield/prosp300.htm)**

* * *

  


