##  **Dr. Beckie Flannagan**

##  **Office: Founder's Hall, 122**

**Phone: 661-1516**

**E-mail: Flannxyz@aol.com**

**Texts:**  
**Nathaniel Hawthorne, _The Scarlet Letter_**  
**Herman Melville, _Moby Dick_ (excerpts, but you'll need a copy of the
novel)**  
**Henry James, _The Portrait of the Lady_**  
**Mark Twain, _The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn_**  
**William Faulkner, _The Sound and the Fury_**  
**Ernest Hemingway, _The Sun Also Rises_**  
**Zora Neale Hurston, _Their Eyes Were Watching God_**  
**Ralph Ellison, _Invisible Man_ (excerpts, but you'll need a copy of the
novel)**  
**Ken Kesey, _One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest_**  
**Alice Walker, _The Color Purple_**  
**Anne Tyler, _The Accidental Tourist_**

**_NOTE:_ In some cases, I have chosen certain versions of these texts for a
purpose, but please do not feel obliged to purchase these versions if you
already own copies of these texts.   Certainly, if you have the same text as
others, you may be at an advantage when discussing page numbers and scenes,
but I do not want you to be financially over- burdened by this course.**

****this course is writing intensive. It includes instruction in the writing
process and in the writing conventions of the discipline. The course contains
at least two formal writing assignments, some instruction in timed writing,
and informal writing to learn activities. At least 60% of the final grade will
be based on writing assignments.****

**\--Students will be expected to engage texts and write papers using outside
sources as they place works within historical, cultural, and critical
heritages. Students will also be expected to respond to texts using close
reading and critical thinking strategies.**

###  **_Class Goals_**

**In this survey course, we will trace the development of the American novel.
We will start with its beginnings as a part of the American Renaissance
movement and its "borrowings" from England and elsewhere.  I hope we can see
how the novel changes to accommodate other movements in American literature
such as romanticism, realism, naturalism, modernism, and post modernism. We
will look at the relationship of novels to other cultural phenomena, as well
as impose a variety of "perspectives" on texts. Readings will include some
traditional "canonical" works which many may have already studied such as
Hawthorne's _The_ _Scarlet Letter_ ,  but will also include novels such as
_One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest_.**

**_Class requirements and Grading_**

###  The class requirements and their value in the overall grade calculation
are as follows:

###  1\. Two tests.  The midterm will be worth 15%  of the total grade, and
the final--partially comprehensive--worth 20%.  My tests typically contain
identify questions, as well as one essay question.  Students are responsible
for all material read in class, as well as information gained from class
presentations.

###  3\. One paper, a 7-10 page paper on some aspect of one of the novels read
in class or on an instructor approved topic/author. (Please see me well before
the due date to get approval for any special topic. We will be meeting to
discuss your paper in conference beforehand, but the sooner you arrive at a
topic, the better!) Paper is worth 25% of total grade and will be due on April
30th by 4:00.

###   [NOTE: Because you may need help finding outside resources for your
paper and your in-class presentation, plan on beginning these projects well
_before_ the last minute. In some cases, you may need to secure something
through Interlibrary loan and that takes time. Prepare for these kind of
emergency needs!]

###  5\. Class notebook. Students will be expected to keep a class notebook
which will house class notes, as well as in-class writing assignments and more
formal reading responses, one for each novel.  In addition, students will
provide feedback responses about each in-class presentation. Students will
meet with the instructor near the end of the course to discuss the contents of
the notebook and plan for its completion  Notebook worth 10% of overall grade
and will be turned in at the final or upon completion of the final paper.

###  6.  Typically, I will have you respond to a text in class about once per
week.  Sometimes these responses will be in the form of writing assignments,
sometimes in the form of quizzes.  (If you fail three quizzes or in-class
writings,  you will be required to meet with me for an office conference.)
These daily grades will be averaged for 10% of your grade.

###  7.  Each of you will put together a class presentation on a selected
author and novel not covered in the course.  See list for suggested topics:
[Presentation List](435prto.html). You will need to prepare a 10-15 minute
overview of a particular author and text. You will need to read this
additional novel in order to present its contents effectively in class.  (You
may consider these as "teaching units."  You are the teacher during that 10-15
minute segment.) Students will prepare a feedback response of each
presentation for their journals. Since these presentations will be on material
not studied in class, your presentation will be an important aspect of the
overall class instruction. Material from the presentations will appear on
tests and quizzes. You need to choose from a list of presentation topics.
NOTE: Student presentations will be scattered throughout the semester.
Students who elect to do the first presentation on Charles Brocken Brown will
receive an automatic five points to their presentation grade. [See
Presentation guidelines.](435prgui.html)

###  Keep in mind that you need to perform _real research_ for this
presentation.   Don't simply consult Web pages and Internet sites on these
writers.  (Remember:  not all Internet sources are reputable!) Explore the
library, and do so early in the process.  If you wait until the last minute,
you will do a much poorer job. You cannot use Internet-copied material as your
handout for the class UNLESS you also provide another 1-2 page handout which
you have written yourself. Also keep in mind that you need to present a
"balanced" look at the writer/novel.  Presentation grade is worth 20 % of
total grade.

###  _Paper preparation_

###  Papers for this class will follow the most current MLA Guidelines. [If
you don't know what these are, you may want to invest in an _MLA Handbook_
available at the Patriot Bookstore.] I encourage you to use up-to-date
sources, as well as sources specific to your paper topic. Avoid using generic
books or articles that only tangentially relate to your topic.

###  If you need help coming up with an angle for your paper or need any other
help in the course, please see me during office hours, leave me a voice mail,
or write to me at one of my e-mail addresses.  We will meet to discuss your
paper topic during an office conference later in the semester, but feel free
to come earlier to discuss topics with me.

###  _Attendance and Reading_

###  I expect you to be in class every day, the day's reading completed,
textbook or required handouts in hand, with questions or comments about the
texts floating around in your eager mind. Since this is a novels course, you
will be required to read large chunks of text for each class period.  You can
handle this reading in several ways.  You can choose to read the books in
large chunks.  (Class discussion will follow the novel in a chronological
fashion; therefore, if you read a large part of the beginning of the book, you
should be adequately prepared for the first day's discussion of that novel.  I
will make suggested reading amounts at the end of each class, but you should
try to read more, if you can.) OR you can read the entire book in advance of
the planned discussion dates.  I recommend that you read more of the larger
books at a time, since those will take you longer to read, theoretically. The
linked [reading schedule](435read.html) should allow you to access what
reading will be due each day.  In addition, I will insert links into this
reading schedule so that you can find additional information--often
chronologies which you will need to print out in advance of the class--on most
of the writers.  Please follow all links, since some will provide you with
material which we will using in class.

###  Remember:  we might have a quiz at any time. We might have an in-class
writing assignment. We will always have discussion. If you fail three in-class
writing assignments and/or quizzes, you will be required to meet with me
during an office conference.  If you are frequently unprepared for a class, I
will ask you to leave class and you will be counted absent. After five
absences of any variety, I will drop you from the class.  Try and be on time.
This is an early class and that may make for some difficulties for some.  I
will count every second tardy as an absence.

###  In-class quizzes or writings cannot be made up. If you are absent on the
day of a test or on the day of your presentation, you need to bring me some
sort of authoritative excuse to be able to make up these events. If you know
you must be absent in advance, please let me know. Papers are lowered one
letter grade for every day they are late, including weekends.

**_Please print this syllabus to keep in your class notebook._**  
    


