Dr. Neil Jumonville  
Florida State University  
AMH-6148  
Fall 1999

**GRADUATE SEMINAR IN AMERICAN HISTORIOGRAPHY**  

**READING LIST**

Francis Parkman, _Montcalm and Wolfe_ [1869] in _France and England in North
America_ , vol 2, (NY: Library of America, 1983). Read pages 1085-1103, and
1308-1479.

Henry Adams, _History of the US in the Administrations of Jefferson_
[1890-91], abridged and edited by Earl Harbert (NY: Library of America, 1986).
Read pages 5-53, 107-226, and 319-79.

Fredrick Jackson Turner, _The Frontier in American History_ [1920] (Tucson,
AZ: University of Arizona Press, 1986). Read chapters 1, 7, and 9-12.

Vernon Parrington, _Main Currents of American Thought_ , vol one [1927]
(Norman, OK: Univ of Oklahoma Press, 1987). Read pages 3-75, and 179-247.

Constance Rourke, _American Humor_ [1931] (Gainesville: University Presses of
Florida, 1986). Read pages 3-104, 163-265, and 288-302.

Daniel Boorstin, _The Genius of American Politics_ (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1953).

Neil Jumonville, _Henry Steele Commager: Midcentury Liberalism and the History
of the Present_ (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina, 1999).

Herbert Gutman, _Work, Culture, and Society in Industrializing America_ (NY:
Vintage, 1977). Read chapters 1, 4, 5. [Pages 3-78, and 211-260.]

Peter Novick, _That Noble Dream_ (NY: Cambridge Univ Press, 1988). Read
chapters 13-16.

* There will be a photocopied packet of readings available to be purchased at TARGET COPY on Tennessee Street. It will contain all of the starred (*) readings in the weekly assignments.  

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS**

Read these requirements closely, because they tell you all you need to know
about the operation of the class and the requirements for your paper. Don't
read these once and then forget them, because you'll be judged on the basis of
them.

ATTENDANCE: Because each of these classes represents one week's worth of the
course, it is important not to miss any of them, except under the most
unavoidable circumstances. Part of your discussion grade is also a grade for
attendance--which means showing up for class on time. If you're someone who
makes a habit of walking in after class begins, then you'll feel the impact
quite significantly in your semester grade.

READING: All students must complete the reading for the course. Weekly
assignments are indicated in the syllabus. It is important for you to do the
reading in time to participate in the discussions.

DISCUSSIONS: As much as possible, the discussions will be a friendly exchange
of ideas, but part of your grade for the semester will be based on your active
participation in the dialogues.

PAPERS: There will be one research paper due in class on THURSDAY DECEMBER 9\.
You may write your paper on any historian(s) or historiographical issue
important enough to warrant study. This is not meant to be a study in
biography, although biographical elements may be included. You should connect
the subject of your paper to the historiographical themes and issues that we
cover in the seminar during the semester. Your choice of subject is not
limited to major figures, but make sure to choose a topic that has potential
importance in the field at large. Remember Melville's advice: "To produce a
mighty book, you must choose a mighty theme. No great and enduring volume can
ever be written on the flea, though many there be who have tried it."

All papers are to be exactly 20 pages of text (with normal margins) and no
more than 3 pages of single-spaced endnotes (so no more than 23 pages total).
Papers may not be one page more or less. This is to give you practice writing
to required length, as you will need to do throughout your career. Please use
endnotes rather than footnotes.

The papers will be graded on the strength of their ideas; the breadth, depth,
and originality of their research; the originality, intelligence, and power of
their thesis or interpretation; and the grace and clarity of their writing
(their use of language, spelling, punctuation, and syntax). Naturally, any
plagiarism (having someone write the paper for you, or copying it from another
source) will result in an immediate failure of the entire course.

All papers must be double-spaced and either typewritten or printed by
computer. Handwritten papers will not be accepted. No extensions on written
assignments, even in the event of a nuclear war. For every day the paper is
late, it will drop a full grade (for example, from a B+ to a C+).

PRESENTATIONS: Each student will give two presentations to the seminar during
the course of the semester.

The first presentation will be sometime during weeks four through nine, and
will be on a historian or point of view related to the outlook we are reading
for that week. This presentation will be assigned early in the semester to
give you time to prepare it. It should be a 20 minute presentation delivered
lecture style, and you should plan to lead a discussion of the material for 10
minutes followiing your presentation. Total time will be 30 minutes.

The second presentation will follow the format of the first, but will
summarize the results of your semester research paper. Pay particular
attention to your interpretation and how it relates to the content of the
seminar throughout the semester.

STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES: Students with disabilities covered by the
Americans with Disabilities Act should follow these steps: 1) Provide
documentation of your disability to the Office of Disabled Student Services
(08 Kellum Hall, 644-9566). 2) Bring a statement from the Office of Disabled
Student Services indicating that you have registered with them to your
instructor the first week of class. The statement should indicate the special
accommodations you require.

GRADES: Class discussion will count 40%. Each of your two presentations will
count 10%. The final research paper will count 40%.

OFFICE HOURS: Friday 12:05 to 1 pm, in Bellamy 420.  

**CLASS SCHEDULE**

  
THR, SEP 2. WEEK 1: EARLY AMERICAN HISTORIOGRAPHY  
  
No reading. We will discuss American historiography before the romantic
historians. A short tour of library indexes.

THR, SEP 9. WEEK 2: ROMANTIC HISTORY  
  
Francis Parkman, _Montcalm and Wolfe_ [1869] in _France and England in North
America_ , vol 2, (NY: Library of America, 1983). Read pages 1085-1103, and
1308-1479. (Reading in this book = 189 pages.)  
  
* Francis Jennings, "A Vanishing Indian: Francis Parkman Versus His Sources," _Pennsylvania  
Magazine of History and Biography_ 87(3):306-23, July 1963.  
  
* David Levin,  "The Historian as Romantic Man of Letters," _History as Romantic Art_ [1959] (NY: AMS Press, 1967), pp. 3-23.

THR, SEP 16. WEEK 3: SCIENTIFIC HISTORY  
  
Henry Adams, _History of the US in the Administrations of Jefferson_
[1890-91], abridged and edited by Earl Harbert (NY: Library of America, 1986).
Read pages 5-227. (Reading in this book = 222 pages.  
  
* Van Wyck Brooks,  "On Creating a Usable Past," in Claire Sprague, ed., _Van Wyck Brooks: The Early Years_ (NY: Harper, 1968), 219-26.

Presentations on related historians.

THR, SEP 23. WEEK 4: THE FRONTIER THESIS  
  
Fredrick Jackson Turner, _The Frontier in American History_ [1920] (Tucson:
University of Arizona Press, 1986). Read chapters 1, 7, and 9-12. (Reading in
this book = 146 pages.)  
  
Presentations on related historians.

THR, SEP 30. WEEK 5: PROGRESSIVE HISTORY  
  
Vernon Parrington, _Main Currents of American Thought_ , vol one [1927] (Univ
of Oklahoma Press, 1987). Read pages 3-75, and 179-247. (Reading in this book
= 140 pages.)  
  
Presentations on related historians.

THR, OCT 7. WEEK 6: AMERICAN STUDIES: MYTH AND SYMBOL  
  
Constance Rourke, _American Humour_ [1936] (Gainesville: University Presses of
Florida, 1986). Read pages 3-104, 204-265, and 288-302. (Reading in this book
= 164 pages.)  
  
Neil Jumonville, _Henry Steele Commager: Midcentury Liberalism and the History
of the Present_ (Chapel Hill, UNC Press, 1999). Read pages 70-77, and chapter
8.  
  
Presentations on related historians.

THR, OCT 14. WEEK 7: CONSENSUS HISTORY  
  
Daniel Boorstin, _The Genius of American Politics_ (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1953). (Reading in this book = 189 pages.)  
  
Jumonville, _Henry Steele Commager_. Read pages 230-44.  
  
Presentations on related historians.

THR, OCT 28. WEEK 8: THE LEGACY OF MIDCENTURY HISTORIANS  
  
Neil Jumonville, _Henry Steele Commager: Midcentury Liberalism and the History
of the Present_ (Chapel Hill, UNC Press, 1999). Read the preface, and pages
3-70, 81-192, and 244-78. (Reading in this book = 215 pages.)

THR, OCT 21. WEEK 9: SOCIAL HISTORY  
  
Herbert Gutman, _Work, Culture, and Society in Industrializing America_ (NY:
Vintage, 1977). Read chapters 1, 4, and 5. (Reading in this book = 124 pages.)  
  
* Philip Morgan,  "Work and Culture: The Task System and the World of Lowcountry Blacks, 1700-1880," _William and Mary Quarterly_ 39(4):563-599, October 1982.   
  
Presentations on related historians.

THR, NOV 4. WEEK 10: THE CRISIS IN HISTORY  
  
Peter Novick, _That Noble Dream_ (NY: Cambridge Univ Press, 1988). Read
chapters 14-16. (Reading in this book = 161 pages.)  
  
Jumonville, _Henry Steele Commager_. Review chapter 8.  
  
* Thomas Haskell,  "Objectivity is not Neutrality: Rhetoric vs. Practice in Peter Novick's That Noble Dream," _History and Theory_ 29(2):129-57, May 1990.

THR, NOV 11. WEEK 11: VETERAN'S DAY HOLIDAY  
  
No class. Work on your research paper.

THR, NOV 18. WEEK 12: ROUNDTABLE ADVISING  
  
No reading. Meet in class to discuss research projects and trade advice.

THR, NOV 25. WEEK 13: THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY  
  
No class. Work on your research paper.

THR, DEC 2. WEEK 14: RESEARCH  
  
No class. Work on your research paper.

THR, DEC 9. WEEK 15: RESEARCH PRESENTATIONS  
  
Presentations of students' research projects.  
  
RESEARCH PAPERS DUE IN CLASS TODAY.

