Syllabus RS 401, Ancient  RS 401  
Ancient Roots of Western Civilization  
Winter 2002  
![](cave.gif)  
(copyright Far Side)  |  An examination of ancient cultures, particularly the
Egyptian, Mesopotamian, Greek and Roman, and an analysis of their influence
upon later western civilization.  
---|---  
You may use the arrow keys to scroll down through the syllabus or click on the
highlighted text to go to specific topics.  

  * Reading Schedule (weekly)  

  * [Reading Response Form](readingResponse.html)
  * Course Requirements
  * Work Load
  * Course Objectives
  * Map Identification
  * Suggestions for Papers
  * [Bibliography](http://www.csubak.edu/~bjones/bibl401.html)
  * Return to the Beginning of Syllabus
  * [Bruce Jones' Homepage](http://www.csubak.edu/~bjones/)
  * [CSUB Homepage](http://www.csubak.edu) 

    
    
    RS 401                                                Winter 2002
    TueThur 10:30-12:55                                Bruce W. Jones
    
    Instructor's Office:  Faculty Towers 101-B
    Home telephone: 833-8607.               E-mail: bjones@csubak.edu
    Office Hours:  Tuesday 1-2:30 or by appointment
    

* * *

**Textbooks:**

  * C. Warren Hollister, _Roots of the Western Tradition_ , 6th ed. 
  * A. Bernard Knapp, _The History and Culture of Ancient Western Asia and Egypt_
  * Nels M. Bailkey, _Readings in Ancient History_ , 5th ed. 
  * Sophocles, "Antigone," _Three Theban Plays_. 

* * *

WEEKLY SCHEDULE ![](mummy.gif)  
(copyright Far Side)  |  Most of the reading assignments are for a whole week.
They should be completed by the date indicated. A Reading Response
[form](readingResponse.html) should be submitted by E-mail every Monday by 5
p.m.  
---|---  
      
    
    
    Jan. 10 Prehistory.
            Knapp, chap. VI; Hollister, chap. 1, 2
         14 Development of governments.  Development of writing.
            Knapp, chap. I, II
         17 paper topic and preliminary bibliography due
         21 Ancient Mesopotamia.
            Hollister, chap. 3
            Knapp, chap. III
            Bailkey, pp. 3-17, 73-74, 114-118, 49-50
         28 Mesopotamian contributions to civilization.  Discussion
            of law codes and the rule of law.
            Knapp, chap. IV
            Bailkey, pp. 17-20, 26-38, 56-58, 81-86
     Feb. 4 Egyptian contributions to civilization.
            Hollister, chap. 4
            Knapp, chap. V
            Bailkey, pp. 59-62, 90-98, 120-123
          7 midterm examination
         11 Crete and Mycenae.  Role of women in ANE.
            First millennium in ANE.  Kush and Palestine.
            Hollister, chap. 5-7
         14 paper outline and thesis statement due
         18 Classical Greece.  Democracy.  Greek contributions to
            civilization.
            Hollister, chap. 8-10
            Bailkey, pp. 159-168, 177-199, 203-214, 226-232
         25 Greek drama.  The Hellenistic Age.
            Sophocles, "Antigone"
            Bailkey, pp. 296-302, 313-316
    March 4 Roman contributions to civilization.  The Republic.
            Hollister, chap. 11-13
            Bailkey, pp. 370-385, 415-426, 455-458
          7 papers due at beginning of class
         11 Rule of law, problems of imperial governance, role of
            women in Greece and Rome.
            Hollister, chap. 14, 15
            Bailkey, pp. 473-483, 502-517
         14 last class
         21 final examination (comprehensive), 11-1:30.  If you want
            early notification of your grade, please bring a
            self-addressed postcard.
    
    

* * *

Continue to scroll with the arrow keys or click on a highlighted item:

  * Map Identification
  * Suggestions for Papers
  * [Reading Response Form](readingResponse.html)
  * Return to the Beginning of Syllabus
  * [Bruce Jones' Homepage](http://www.csubak.edu/~bjones)
  * [CSUB Homepage](http://www.csubak.edu)

* * *

**Course Requirements:**  

There will be a research paper of [2,000-4,000
words](http://www.csubak.edu/~bjones/FAQwords.html) (counts 50% of the course
grade), a midterm (20%) and a final examination (20%). In addition, [ Reading
Responses](readingResponse.html) should be submitted by E-mail every Monday by
5 p.m. (10%). Paper topic, bibliography, thesis and outline should be handed
in by the dates indicated. Late papers will be penalized. A partial
bibliography is available on the Internet, at www.csubak.edu/~bjones/ [
bibl401.html](http://www.csubak.edu/~bjones/bibl401.html). Note also the link
there to "Exploring Ancient World Cultures" ([
eawc.evansville.edu](http://eawc.evansville.edu)). You may click on the
relevant picture to start, or consult the index. Class participation is not
graded. Students with disabilities should speak to the instructor about their
particular needs.

* * *

**Work Load**  

Most of the material in this class will be new for most students, and most of
it is difficult in the sense that the names of people and places will be
unfamiliar. The primary texts are certainly not easy to read. Some of them
were written 4,000 years ago, and all of them were written in a cultural
context very, very different from our own. It may be necessary to read some of
the assignments two or more times in order to fully understand them. Don't be
discouraged, but do plan to spend enough time studying to do well in the
class.

Traditionally, to say that a course gives five units of credit means that the
student should spend five hours in class and ten hours studying outside of
class _each week_. It may be possible for students to pass the course by
putting in less time than that, but they should not expect to receive high
grades. Because the term paper counts one-half of the course grade, students
should expect to spend five hours a week preparing it, perhaps more in the
early weeks.

* * *

**COURSE OBJECTIVES**

  1. Students will be able to identify and describe some of the more important ancient roots of Western civilization. 
  2. _Students will be able to describe the evolution of writing, from pictograms to syllabic cuneiform to alphabetic cuneiform and alphabetic scripts, and be able to trace the process of transmission of alphabetic writing from Phoenician to Greek and to the Roman system used in European languages today._
  3. Students will become acquainted with some ancient literatures. 
  4. _Students will be able to describe the role of women in the ancient world, as it is reflected in legal practices, literature and religion._
  5. Students will be able to compare ancient cultures to each other and to their own, and will be able to identify differences as well as similarities between past and present. 
  6. _Students will be able to assess the contribution of Greece and Rome to later western ideas of government._
  7. Before the midterm examination, students will be able to locate the following on a map: 
    
    
    Aegean Sea           Alexandria           Anatolia
    Asia Minor           Assyria              Athens
    Babylon              Black Sea            Carthage
    Constantinople       Crete                Dead Sea
    Upper Egypt          England              Euphrates River
    Lower Egypt          France               Iran (Persia)
    Italy                Jericho              Jerusalem
    The Levant           Macedonia            Mediterranean
    Memphis              Mesopotamia          Nile River
    Palestine            Peloponnesus         Persian Gulf
    Red Sea              Rome                 Sicily
    Spain                Sparta               Sumer
    Syria                Thebes (Egypt)       Tigris River
    

* * *

Use the arrow keys or click on a highlighted item:

    * Reading Schedule (weekly) 
    * [Reading Response Form](readingResponse.html)
    * Return to the beginning of Syllabus
    * [Bruce Jones' Homepage](http://www.csubak.edu/~bjones/)
    * [CSUB Homepage](http://www.csubak.edu/) **SUGGESTIONS FOR PAPERS**

The paper should be [2,000 to 4,000
words](http://www.csubak.edu/~bjones/FAQwords.html) . Paper topic,
bibliography, thesis and outline should be handed in by the dates indicated.
Your paper should develop and defend your own point of view and should
persuade readers that that point of view is correct. Papers will be graded on
the basis of originality, clarity, organization, writing skills and
sophistication of argument. I will be looking for _your_ perspective and
_your_ conclusions about the topic. I will be particularly impressed by a
paper that does its own independent analysis of primary sources and does not
depend exclusively on secondary sources.

You must document **all** your sources of information, following some standard
form for reference notes, such as that used in Eng. 110 (see _The Little,
Brown Handbook_ ).

Students who need help are encouraged to sign up for General Studies 151, "The
Term Paper" (2 units, MW 2:00).

Papers should be typed, double-space, and pages should be numbered. I prefer
papers held together by a paper-clip rather than bound in a cover. Late papers
will be penalized.  
---|---|---  
  
You may write on any relevant topic, and may consult me for suggestions. Some
examples follow:

    
    
    The Renaissance understanding of Greece and Rome
    American colonists' understanding of Greece and Rome
    Herodotus' view of Egypt
    Ancient roots of the "divine right of kings"
    Mesopotamian literature
    Egyptian literature
    The role of women in Egypt (or Mesopotamia or Greece or Rome)
    The evolution of historical writing
    Egyptian beliefs about death and afterlife
    Was Pharaoh Akhenaton a monotheist?
    Patterns of warfare
    Mesopotamian (or Greek) contributions to medicine
    Mesopotamian (or Greek) contributions to mathematics
    Astronomy and astrology
    Kush:  Black rulers of Egypt (XXVth dynasty)
    New archaeological discoveries at Ebla
    Egyptian proverbs and the Old Testament
    Evaluating Bernal's _Black Athena_ hypothesis
    The impact of Greek architecture in America
    The Greek (or Roman) contribution to government and politics
    Roman anti-Semitism
    Creation stories in Mesopotamia and in the Old Testament
    Flood stories in Mesopotamia and in the Old Testament
    Comparing legal systems in Mesopotamia and Israel
    The impact of Roman law on western civilization
    The effect of Homer upon later literature
    Analysis of a Greek play
    The effect of Greek philosophy upon Christianity
    The effect of mystery religions upon Christianity
    The continuing relevance of Greek and Roman philosophy
    Accomplishments of Roman engineering
    

Click on the **BACK** button or on a highlighted item:

    * [CSUB Homepage](http://www.csubak.edu/)
    * [Bruce Jones' Homepage](http://www.csubak.edu/~bjones/)
    * Return to the Beginning of Syllabus
    * Reading Schedule (weekly)  

    * [Reading Response Form](readingResponse.html)
    * Course Requirements
    * Work Load
    * Course Objectives
    * Map Identification

