**COURSE OUTLINE**

English 413/513

Fall 1997

Dr. Donna M. Campbell

Robinson House 22, x3276

campbell@gonzaga.edu Office Hours: M W F 9:00-10:30

Course materials available at
http://www.gonzaga.edu/faculty/campbell/enl413/enl413.htm

_Course Description_

This course explores the diverse themes, social contexts, and intellectual
backgrounds of the American novel from its beginnings in romantic tradition
through the realist and naturalist movements of the late nineteenth century.
The works listed below offer a rich opportunity to investigate issues not only
of literary value but of race, class, and gender in nineteenth-century
America. In addition to analyzing each work's form and genre, we will ask the
following questions: What accounts for the inclusion (or exclusion) of this
work from the canon of American literature? In what ways does the work
reflect, critique, or ignore its social context?

_Required Texts_

Clemens, Samuel Langhorne (Mark Twain). _Pudd'nhead Wilson_ and _Those
Extraordinary Twins_. 1894. Ed. Sidney E. Berger. Norton Critical Edition. New
York: Norton, 1980.

Harper, Frances E. W. _Iola Leroy_. 1892. _The African-American Novel in the
Age of Reaction_. Ed. William L. Andrews. New York: Mentor, 1992\.

Hawthorne, Nathaniel. _The Blithedale Romance._ 1852\. New York: Penguin,
1983.

Howells, William Dean. _The Rise of Silas Lapham_. 1885. New York: Penguin,
1983.

James, Henry. _The Portrait of a Lady_. 1881, 1907-9. London: Everyman, 1995\.

Melville, Herman. Moby-Dick. 1851. Ed. Harrison Hayford and Hershel Parker.
Norton Critical Edition. New York: Norton, 1967.

Norris, Frank. _McTeague_. 1899. Ed. Donald Pizer. Norton Critical Edition.
2nd ed. New York: Norton, 1997.

Wharton, Edith. _The House of Mirth_. 1905. New York: Bantam, 1984.

_Schedule of Assignments_

Like all upper-division courses in the novel, this course requires that you
keep up with a challenging reading load. Reading days scheduled for the middle
of the semester will allow you to read ahead for the second half of the
semester. In addition, some report days will allow some flex time for reading.

This syllabus will change, depending upon the needs of the class. You should
anticipate that some assignments may be dropped and others may be added. Check
our class web page, consult with me, or ask a classmate if you are absent.

Since this course does not require a reading journal, students should instead
come to class prepared with a 3 x 5" index card on which is written a question
on, comment about, or favorite quotation from the day's reading. Cards will
not be graded individually but will be used in both class discussions and
small group discussions.

**Week Date Additional Assignments**

    
        1    9/3      Introduction                                                       
    
         9/5      _The Blithedale Romance_ 1-57                                        
    
                                                                                     
    
    2    9/8      _The Blithedale Romance_ 57-127                                      
       9/10     _The Blithedale Romance_ 127-193                                     
    
         9/12     _The Blithedale Romance_ 193-end                                     
    
                                                                                     
    
    3    9/15     _Moby-Dick_ 1-66                                                     
    
         9/17     _Moby-Dick_ 66-140                                                   
    
         9/19     _Moby-Dick_ 140-207                    Reports on Hawthorne and      
                                                       Melville                      
    
                                                                                     
    
    4    9/22     _Moby-Dick_ 208-286                                                  
    
         9/24     _Moby-Dick_ 286-356                                                  
    
         9/26     No Class: Labor Day Observed                                       
    
                                                                                     
    
    5    9/29     _Moby-Dick_ 356-423                    Prospectus for Paper 1 Due    
    
         10/1     _Moby-Dick_ 423-469                                                  
    
         10/3     Exam 1                                                             
    
                                                                                     
    
    6    10/6     Reports on James                     Revision Option Due Date      
                                                       Reports on James              
    
         10/8     _Portrait of a Lady_  1-110                                          
    
         10/10    _Portrait of a Lady_  111-229                                        
    
                                                                                     
    
    7    10/13    _Portrait of a Lady_ 230-346           Paper 1 Due                   
    
         10/15    _Portrait of a Lady_ 347-466                                         
    
         10/17    _Portrait of a Lady_ 467-581                                         
    
                                                                                     
    
    8    10/20    No Class: Founder's Day                                            
    
         10/22    Reading Day                                                        
    
         10/24    Reading Day                                                        
    
                                                                                     
    
    9    10/27    _Rise of Silas Lapham_ 1-125           Reports on Howells and Twain  
    
         10/29    _Rise of Silas Lapham_ 126-242                                       
    
         10/31    _Rise of Silas Lapham_ 243-365                                       
    
                                                                                     
    
    10   11/3     _Pudd'nhead Wilson_ 1-115                                            
    
         11/5     _Pudd'nhead Wilson_ (continued)                                      
    
         11/7     Exam 2                                                             
    
                                                                                     
    
    11   11/10    _Iola Leroy_ 1-74                                                    
    
         11/12    _Iola Leroy_ 74-153                                                  
    
         11/14    _Iola Leroy_ 154-211                   Prospectus for Paper 2 Due    
    
                                                                                     
    
    12   11/17    _McTeague_ 1-76                        Reports on Harper and Norris  
    
         11/19    _McTeague_ 76-143                                                    
    
         11/21    _McTeague_ 143-208                     Revision Option Due Date      
    
                                                                                     
    
    13   11/24    _McTeague_ 208-243                                                   
    
         11/26    No Class: Thanksgiving Holiday                                     
    
         11/28    No Class: Thanksgiving Holiday                                     
    
                                                                                     
    
    14   12/1     Reports on Wharton                   Reports on Wharton            
    
         12/3     _House of Mirth_ 1-93                                                
    
         12/5     _House of Mirth_ 93-172                Paper 2 Due                   
    
                                                                                     
    
    15   12/8     _House of Mirth_ 172-249                                             
    
         12/10    _House of Mirth_ 250-317                                             
    
         12/12    Discussion                                                         
    
         12/15    Final Exam 8-10 a. m.                                              
    
    

**Course Policies and Requirements**

_Formal papers._

Students in English 413 will write two formal papers, a short (6-8 pages)
analytical interpretation of a work, and a longer analytical paper (11-14
pages) that will require some research. A list of paper topics will be handed
out well before the papers are due.

In addition, for each paper handed in on the regular due date students must
hand in a 100-200 word prospectus. Generally speaking, this covers the
proposed subject of the paper, its thesis (if known), works to be covered, and
source materials. Students may also hand in the paper's introduction as a
prospectus. The prospectus will receive comments but will not be graded. If
the prospectus is missing, the paper grade will be lowered 5 points.

_Format_

Papers must be neatly typed and double-spaced on 8 1/2 by 11" paper. Please
put your name and the page number in the top right corner of each page. Staple
the pages; do not use plastic covers.

Proofread your work carefully and keep an extra copy on disk or elsewhere as
insurance against mishaps. Citations should follow MLA style as it is outlined
in the _MLA Handbook_ or grammar handbooks such as _The Little, Brown
Handbook_. Although I do not expect to encounter plagiarism in this course,
cases of plagiarism will be treated according to GU's Academic Honesty Policy.

_Late papers_

Late papers are penalized at the rate of one letter grade per class day late.
Missed papers receive a 0. You are allowed one 48-hour extension without
penalty if you speak to me about it at least one class day before the paper is
due.

_Option to Revise_

Students have the option to hand in papers early and to resubmit them for
credit on the usual due date. Revising a paper does not guarantee a higher
grade the second time around.

The revision option is a no-risk proposition, however, for if the paper
receives a higher grade the second time, both grades will be averaged and
counted toward the final course grade. Resubmitted papers that receive a lower
grade will not be counted. Papers will not receive extensive comments on the
second grading. Please note that this option does not constitute an editing
service: papers that exhibit too many mechanical or spelling errors will be
turned back unread.

_Exams_

The in-class examinations will primarily be in essay format. They will not be
cumulative; each will test students on the readings covered since the previous
exam.

_Quizzes and In-class Writings_

Depending on class participation, short quizzes on the readings or brief in-
class writings may be given to focus the day's discussion. Brief reading
quizzes, short, in-class response essays, and 1-page out-of-class response
papers may be given from time to time. Quizzes cannot be made up. If quizzes
are given, the lowest quiz grade will be dropped.

_E-mail Discussion List_

Another way to participate in this class is to join the optional discussion
group that will shortly be set up on BARNEY, the campus mainframe. This
voluntary exercise that carries 3-5% extra credit and counts favorably toward
your class participation grade.

_Reports_

Students will research a topic of interest to the class and present a clear,
concise (7-10 minutes) oral report on their findings on selected report days.
(Those who do not wish to present their findings orally will be expected to
write a 2-3 page paper on their topic instead.) The report will be graded.

You can also research and prepare a web page (or pages) as your report. Please
see me if you are interested in pursuing this option.

_Attendance_

Attendance is required. According to the Gonzaga University Student Handbook,
after six unexcused absences in a course that meets three times a week,
students will receive a grade of"V," which "has the same effect as an 'F' on
the grade point average" (62). Being late onthree occasions or more than 10
minutes late on any one occasion will count as an absence.

If there are students in this class who have a disability that may affect
their ability to accessinformation and/or materials presented in this course,
I strongly encourage you to contact me or Disability Support Services in the
Crosby Student Center as soon as possible. This wouldenable us to discuss
accommodations necessary to ensure full participation and facilitate your
education.

_Class Participation._

Participating in class discussion is an important part of the class. Even if-
perhaps especially if-you don't think that you understood the readings well,
you should feel free to bring your concerns, questions, and comments to class.
Class participation counts toward your overall grade.

At times, you will be asked to read critical essays and discuss them with the
class, or to lead group discussions on a particular subject.

Paper 1 15%

Paper 2 25%

Report 10%

Exams 35%

In-class writings, responses, cards, quizzes, class participation 15%

