English 558 Syllabus American Literature in the Later Nineteenth Century

* * *

  

_This syllabus reflects a typical spring schedule, for a class that meets
three times a week_

The following texts are available at Von's Book Shop on State Street:

  1. Louisa May Alcott. Alternative Alcott. Ed. Elaine Showalter (Rutgers UP)
  2. Charles W. Chesnutt. The Marrow of Tradition in Three Classic African American Novels. Ed. Henry Louis Gates, Jr. (Vintage)
  3. Kate Chopin. The Awakening and Selected Stories. Ed. Sandra Gilbert (Penguin)
  4. Stephen Crane. Stephen Crane: Prose and Poetry. Ed. J. C. Levenson (Library of America)
  5. Emily Dickinson. The Complete Poems. Ed. Thomas H. Johnson (Little, Brown)
  6. William Dean Howells. The Rise of Silas Lapham. Ed. Kermit Vanderbilt (Penguin)
  7. Henry James. The Portrait of a Lady. Ed Regina Barreca (Signet) [1881 first edition text]
  8. Sarah Orne Jewett. The Country of the Pointed Firs and Other Stories. Ed. Mary Ellen Chase (Norton)
  9. Frank Norris. McTeague. Ed. Kevin Starr (Penguin)
  10. Harriet Beecher Stowe. Uncle Tom's Cabin. Ed. Ann Douglas (Penguin)
  11. Mark Twain. Adventures of Huckleberry Finn. Eds. Walter Blair and Victor Fischer (Mark Twain Library/U of California P)
  12. Walt Whitman. Whitman: Poetry and Prose. Ed. Justin Kaplan (Library of America)

Also available, at Copy Mat in Chauncy Hill Mall, are two course readers
containing several of the shorter main texts in the course (e.g., Rebecca
Harding Davis's Life in the Iron Mills) and other supplementary materials
(e.g., Henry James's "The Art of Fiction"). Items from these readers marked
(*R) are required reading; items marked (R) are recommended.

**Unit One--"Democratic En-Mass": Warring Genres, Warring Genders, and the War
between the States**

**Week One**

Introductory Meeting  
  
**Lecture--The Barbaric Yawp: Walt Whitman as Prophet and Public Poet**  
Assignment: Walt Whitman, 1855 preface to Leaves of Grass(5); "There Was a
Child Went Forth" (138); "The Sleepers" (107); "Song of Myself" (27); "Great
Are the Myths" (142); "New Poetry" (1080-82)  
Assignment: Whitman, "Song of the Broad-Axe" (330); "I Sing the Body Electric"
(250); "This Compost" (495); "Crossing Brooklyn Ferry" (307); "Song of the
Open Road" (297); "A Hand Mirror" (408); "I Sit and Look Out" (411); "Of the
Terrible Doubt of Appearances" (274); "Out of the Cradle Endlessly Rocking"
(388); "As I Ebb'd with the Ocean of Life" (394); "To Him that was Crucified"
(510); "You Felons on Trial in Courts" (511)

**Week Two**

Assignment: Whitman, "I Hear America Singing" (174); "Poets to Come" (175);
"From Pent-up Aching Rivers" (248); "Scented Herbage of My Breast" (268);
"Whoever You Are Holding Me Now in Hand" (270); "When I Heard the Close of
Day" (276); "I Saw in Louisiana a Live Oak Growing" (279); "I Hear It Was
Charged Against Me" (281); "Sometimes with One I Love" (285); "So Long!"
(609); "When I Heard the Learn'd Astronomer" (409); "A Farm Picture" (412);
"City of Ships" (429); "Cavalry Crossing a Ford" (435); "Bivouac on a Mountain
Side" (435); "Come Up from the Fields Father" (436); "Vigil Strange I Kept on
the Field One Night" (438); "A March in the Ranks Hard-Prest" (439); "A Sight
in Camp in the Daybreak Gray and Dim" (441); "The Wound-Dresser" (442); "Over
the Carnage Rose Prophetic a Voice" (449); "Look Down Fair Moon" (453);
"Reconciliation" (453); "When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom'd" (459);
"Ashes of Soldiers" (598); "Pensive on Her Dead Gazing" (605); "Shut Not Your
Doors" (175)  
  
Assignment: Whitman, "Chanting the Square Deific" (559); "One's-Self I Sing"
(165); "A Noiseless Patient Spider" (564); "Passage to India" (531); "to a
Locomotive in Winter" (583); "Yonnondio" (626); "Good-by My Fancy" (654); from
Specimin Days, pp. 724-26, 744-51, 756-58, 769-73, 781-82, 787-92, 799-803,
816-18, 830-33, 845-46, 848-52, 896-98, 938-39, 945-50.  
  
**Lecture--The Loaded Gun: Emily Dickinson as Private and Woman's Poet**

**Week Three**

Assignment: Dickinson, poems 61, 67, 76, 125, 126, 130, 165, 178, 187, 193,
214, 216, 241, 248, 249, 253, 254, 258, 273, 280, 303, 308, 314, 315, 324,
326, 327, 335, 339, 341, 350, 351, 352, 357, 366, 370, 376, 384, 389, 401,
413, 419, 435, 441, 442, 443, 448, 449, 451, 465, 489, 508, 510, 520, 539,
564, 576, 585, 589, 605, 607, 608, 609, 610, 611, 612, 613, 614, 616, 627,
632, 640, 648, 650, 657, 668, 675, 677, 696, 709, 711, 712, 745, 749, 754.  
  
Assignment: Dickinson, poems 791, 812, 822, 824, 829, 832, 840, 843, 875, 932,
937, 952, 1058, 1072, 1073, 1075, 1079, 1082, 1090, 1129, 1158, 1176, 1182,
1202, 1205, 1210, 1212, 1247, 1295, 1317, 1545, 1549  
  
Assignment: Dickinson, poems 1551, 1620, 1632, 1640, 1651, 1712, 1716, 1775.

**Week Four**

**Lecture--The Antebellum Background: The Novel, The Gothic, The Romance,
Domestic Fiction, and Sensational Fiction**  
Assignment: James Fenimore Cooper, "Preface to the Leather-Stocking Tales"
(*R); Nathaniel Hawthorne, excerpt from "The Custom House" (*R); Hawthorne,
preface to The House of the Seven Gables (*R); William Gilmore Simms, excerpt
from 2nd preface to The Yemassee (*R); Herman Melville, The Confidence Man:
His Masquerade, Chs. 14, 33 (*R); Henry James, excepts from Hawthorne, Howells
letter, Notebooks (*R)  
Assignment: Melville, "The Paradise of Bachelors and The Tartarus of Maids"
(*R); Rebecca Harding Davis, Life in the Iron Mills (*R); Davis, excerpt from
Margaret Howth: A Story of To-day (*R)  
  
Assignment: "The Tartarus of Maids and Life in the Iron Mills continued

**Week Five**

**Lecture--The House of Stowe and the Great American Novel: The Paths to Uncle
Tom's Cabin**  
Assignment: Ann Douglas introduction to the Penguin edition of  Uncle Tom's
Cabin; Harriet Beecher Stowe, 1852 preface to  Uncle Tom's Cabin (*R); Stowe,
Uncle Tom's Cabin; or, Life among the Lowly  
  
Assignment: Uncle Tom's Cabin, continued  
  
Assignment: Uncle Tom's Cabin, continued

  

**Week Six**

**Lecture--Behind a Mask: The Many Careers of Louisa May Alcott**  
Assignment: Elaine Showalter, introduction to Alternative Alcott; Louisa May
Alcott, Hospital Sketches; "My Contraband";  Behind a Mask; and
"Transcendental Wild Oats"  
Assignment: Hospital Sketches, "My Contraband, Behind a Mask, "Wild Oats,"
continued  
  
Assignment: Hospital Sketches, "My Contraband, Behind a Mask, "Wild Oats,"
continued

  

**Unit Two--"Yeah, I Know the Son of a Bitch": Veritism, Realism, and the
Gilded Age**

**Week Seven  

Lectures--

  1. The Rise of American Literary Realism
  2. From Belletrists to Capitalists: The Evolution of the Nineteenth-Century Literary Marketplace

**

Assignments:  
Walt Whitman, Democratic Vistas (1871, in Whitman), pp. 953-62, 967-73,
979-81, 995-1012, 1016-18  
John William DeForest, ["The Great American Novel"] (R) [item 6]  
Thomas Sergeant Perry, ["The Great American Novel"] (R) [item 7]  
William Dean Howells, "Novel-Writing and Novel-Reading" (*R)  
Howells, excerpt from Criticism and Fiction (*R) [item 33]  
Howells, "Problems of Existence in Fiction" (*R) [item 34]  
Howells, "An Opportunity for American Fiction" (R) [item 35]  
Howells, [untitled article in Harper's, 1891] (R) [item 36]  
Howells, [untitled article in Harper's, 1892] (*R) [item 37]  
Howells, "The Future of the American Novel" (*R) [item 38]  
Howells, "A Possible Difference in English and American Fiction (*R) [item 39]  
Arnold Bennett, "The Future of the American Novel" (R) [item 40]  
Mark Twain, "What Paul Bourget Thinks of Us" (R)  
Twain, Life on the Mississippi, Ch. 9 (*R)  
Twain, "Fenimore Cooper's Literary Offences" (*R)  
Twain, "Fenimore Cooper's Further Literary Offences" (R)  
DeForest, excerpt from Miss Ravenel's Conversion (*R)  
Henry James, "The Art of Fiction" (*R)  
Hamlin Garland, ["On Veritism"] (*R) [item 41]  
Garland, ["The West in Literature"] (*R) [item 42]

  

**Week Eight**

**Lecture--Center of the Storm: Howells and Critical Realism**  
Assignment: William Dean Howells, The Rise of Silas Lapham; Henry James,
"William Dean Howells" (R); Mark Twain, "William Dean Howells" (R); Stephen
Crane, "Howells Discussed at Avon-by-the-Sea" (in Crane, p. 457); Crane,
"Howells Fears Realists Must Wait" (in Crane, pp. 614-18)  
Assignment: The Rise of Silas Lapham, continued  
  
Assignment: The Rise of Silas Lapham, continued

  

**Week Nine (Spring Break)**

**Week Ten**

**Lecture--Portrait of a Master: The World and Art of Henry James**  
Assignment: Henry James, The Portrait of a Lady [1881 first edition]; James,
excerpt from The Notebooks of Henry James (*R); James, New York Edition
preface to The Portrait of a Lady (*R)  
Assignment: The Portrait of a Lady, continued  
  
Assignment: The Portrait of a Lady, continued

  

**Week Eleven**

**Lecture--"Wild Man of the Pacific Slope?": Mark Twain, the Vernacular, and
the "Problems" of Huckleberry Finn**  
Assignment: Mark Twain, Roughing It, Chs. 5, 8, 18, 32-34, 36, 51, 53 (*R);
Twain, Adventures of Huckleberry Finn; Twain, "Whittier Birthday Dinner
Speech" (*R); Twain, "The Private History of a Campaign that Failed" (R);
Twain, "How to Tell a Story" (R); William Dean Howells, excerpt from My Mark
Twain (*R)  
Assignment: Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, continued  
  
Assignment: Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, continued

  

**Unit Three--"The Musky Odor of Pinks": Naturalism, Symbolism, and the
1890s**

**Week Twelve**

**Lecture--Apocalypse Then: The American 1890s and Early Naturalism**  
Assignment: Stephen Crane, Maggie: A Girl of the Streets (A Story of New York)
(5); "Experiment in Misery" (538); "The Blue Hotel" (799); "Stephen Crane's
Own Story" (875); "The Open Boat" (885)  
Assignment: Stephen Crane, The Red Badge of Courage (79) and "The Veteran"
(666); Willa Cather, "When I Knew Stephen Crane" (R); Joseph Conrad, "His War
Book" (R)  
  
Assignment: The Red Badge of Courage, continued

  

**Week Thirteen**

**Lecture--The Transformation of Woman's Fiction: Gender and the Problem of
"Regionalism" and "Local Color"**  
Assignment: Sarah Orne Jewett, "A White Heron" and "The Foreigner"; Mary
Wilkins Freeman, "A New England Nun" (R) and "The Revolt of 'Mother'" (*R);
William Dean Howells, ["Puritanism in American Fiction"] (*R)  
Assignment: Sarah Orne Jewett, The Country of the Pointed Firs [ **Note:** If
you have a different edition of this novel, the last two chapters should be
"Along Shore" and "The Backward View." Omit any chapters between them.]  
  
Assignment:  The Country of the Pointed Firs, continued

  

**Week Fourteen**

**Lecture--Life Along the Color Line: The Rise of African American Fiction**  
Assignment: Paul Laurence Dunbar, "We Wear the Mask" (*R); Charles W.
Chesnutt, "The Goophered Grapevine" (*R); W.E.B. DuBois, excerpts from  The
Souls of Black Folk (R); Charles W. Chesnutt, The Marrow of Tradition  
Assignment: The Marrow of Tradition, continued  
  
Assignment: The Marrow of Tradition, continued

  

**Week Fifteen**

**Lecture--Darwin (Un)chained: Norris and the Theories of Naturalism**  
Assignment: Frank Norris, McTeague: A Story of San Francisco; "Zola as a
Romantic Writer" (*R); "Frank Norris' Weekly Newsletter" (*R); "The True
Reward of the Novelist" (*R); "Novelists of the Future" (R); "The Need of a
Literary Conscience" (R); "The Mechanics of Fiction" (*R); "A Plea for
Romantic Fiction" (*R); "Fiction Writing as a Business" (R); "The Literature
of the West" (R); "The Great American Novel" (*R); "Story-Tellers vs.
Novelists" (*R); "The Novel with a 'Purpose'" (*R); "The Responsibilities of
the Novelist" (*R);  
William Dean Howells, "A Case in Point" (*R); Willa Cather, reviews of Frank
Norris  
Assignment: McTeague, continued  
  
Assignment: McTeague, continued

  

**Week Sixteen**

**Lecture--Toward Modernism: Kate Chopin, the "New Woman," and the New Woman
Writer**  
Assignment: Dorothy Dix, "Are Women Growing Selfish?" (*R); "The American
Wife" (*R); "Summer Flirtations" (R); "A Strike for Liberty" (*R); "Women and
Suicide" (*R);  
Charlotte Perkins Gilman, excerpt from Women and Economics (*R);  
Thorstein Veblen, excerpt from The Theory of the Leisure Class (*R);  
Charlotte Perkins Gilman, "The Yellow Wallpaper" (*R);  
Gilman, "Why I Wrote 'The Yellow Wallpaper'" (*R);  
Kate Chopin, "At the 'Cadian Ball," Desiree's Baby," "The Story of an Hour,"
"Lilacs," "The Storm: A Sequel to 'The 'Cadian Ball'"  
Assignment: Kate Chopin, The Awakening  
  
Assignment: Kate Chopin, The Awakening

  

**Note:** There will be a **final exam** and a **15-20 page paper** due during
final exam week.

**Have a wonderful Summer Vaction; you've earned it. You are the few, the
proud, the students of American Realism**

* * *

[Return to Bob Lamb's page](lamb.html) [Return to Faculty
page](../Faculty.htm) [Return Home](../../default.html)

