## History 110, Sections 01, 03, and 07  
MODERN WESTERN CIVILIZATION  
SPRING l998

Instructor: Maurice P. Sneller  
Office: 235 M. Ruffner  
Office Telephone: 395-2223  
Office hours:  
MW and TT 3:30 and at your convenience  

## Contents

Course Description  
Required Texts  
Course Objectives  
Class Schedule  
Course Requirements  
Grading  
Attendance Policy  
Research Paper  
Definition of Plagiarism  
Honor Code  

### Course Description:

A survey of the development of Modern Western Civilization from the Age of
Absolutism to the present, with emphasis upon the political, economic, social,
cultural, and intellectual attributes which have marked its rise to worldwide
influence in the Twentieth Century.  
  
Return to Table of Contents  
  

### Text:

  * Spielvogel, Jackson J. _Western Civilization_. Vol. II, 3rd ed. Minneapolis/St. Paul: West Publishing, 1997. 
Return to Table of Contents  
  

### Course Objectives:

Upon completion of the course, students will have gained an appropriate
increase in:  

  * 1\. knowledge and understanding of the forces which shaped Western history since the seventeenth century. 

  * 2\. knowledge of historical study and methodology 

  * 3\. understanding of the importance of ethical dilemmas in the shaping of history 

  * 4\. the ability to do historical research 

  * 5\. the skills necessary to use a word processor. 
Return to Table of Contents  
  

### Class Schedule:

**Test 1----Feb. 3 or 4 (Tues.) or (Wed.); Pages 528-671; Chapters 16-19**  
_Subjects:_  

#### Week 1 (Jan. l3-16)

##### Assignment: Chapter 16

Absolutism. Limited Monarchy. Constitutionalism. France of Louis XIV. Central,
Eastern, and Northern Europe. Mercantilism. Overseas Trade and Colonies. The
Balance Sheet of Imperialism.  
  

#### Week 2 (Jan. 19-23)

##### Assignment: Chapter 17

The Scientific Revolution. Technology. Nature, Reason, and Progress. The
Scientific Method. Science and Society.  
  

#### Week 3 (Jan 26-30)

##### Assignment: Chapter 18

Age of the Enlightenment. The Philosophes and Their Ideas. Arts and Letters in
the Eighteenth Century. The Doctrine of Progress. Nature and Natural Law.
Deism. Atheism and Toleration. Limits of the Enlightenment.  
  

#### Week 4 (Feb 2-6)

##### Assignment: Chapt 19

Eighteenth-century Warfare. National States, International Wars. Economic,
Political, and Social Change. The Social Order of the Eighteenth Century.  
  
**Test 2--Feb. 26 or 27 (Th.) or (Fri.); Pages 672-775; Chapters 20-22.**  
_Subjects:_  

#### Week 5 (Feb. 9-13)

##### Assignment: Chapter 20

The French Revolution, Napoleon, and Europe. Underlying Preconditions for
Revolution. Financial Crisis and Noble Response. The Destruction of the Old
Regime. The Radical Revolution. Reaction and the Directory. Napoleon. The
Consulate. The Empire and the European Response. Place of Napoleon in History.  
  

####  Week 6 (Feb. 16-20)

##### Assignment: Chapter 21

The Industrial Revolution. Origins. Changes Technological and New Forms of
Industrial Organization. Science, Religion, and Philosophy. Social Impact of
the Industrial Revolution: Man, the State, and Society. Arts and Letters.  
  

#### Week 7 (Feb. 23-27)

##### Assignment: Chapter 22

Reaction, Revolution, and Romanticism, 1815- 1850\. The Conservative Order,
1815-1830. Ideologies of Change. Liberalism. Nationalism. Early Socialism.
Revolution and Reform, 1830-1850. Romanticism.  
  
**Test 3--March 26-27 (Th.) or (Fri.); Pages 777-885; Chapters 23-25**  
_Subjects:_  

#### Week 8 (March 2-6)

##### Assignment:Chapter 23

Age of Nationalism and Realism, 1850-1871. The France of Napoleon III. Italian
Unification. German Unification. The National State in Mid-Century. The
British Empire. Imperial Russia. Austrian Empire. United States.
Industrialization. Marxism. Realism and Cultural Life. Revolution in Health
Care.  
  

#### March 11-13 SPRING BREAK

#### Week 9 (March 16-20)

##### Assignment: Chapter 24

Society and Politics, 1871-1914. Developing Industry. Technology. Urban
Environment. Social Structure. Socialist Movement. Domestic Politics of the
National State. Great Britain. France. Mediterranean Powers. Italy. Germany.
Austria-Hungary. Russia. United States.  
  

#### Week 10 (March 23-27)

##### Assignment: Chapter 25

Imperialism and Culture in the "Age of Progress," 1871-1914. The Expansion of
Europe. International Rivalry. Intellectual and Cultural Developments.
Science. Religion. Literature. Arts. Education.  
  
**Remainder--Pages 896-1063; Chapters 26-30.**  

#### Week 11 (March 30-April 3):

##### Assignment: Chapter 26

World War I. Nationalism. Militarism. War Movement. Industrial and
Geographical Balance. Politics, Society, and the Home Front. Outbreak of War.
Stalemate: 1914-1915.Decision on the Western Front. Total War. Impact of the
War. War and Revolution. Germany. Austria. Russia. Peace.  
  

#### Week 12 (April 6-10)

##### Assignment: Chapter 27

The Interwar World, 1919-1939. Search for Security. The Twenties. The Great
Depression. Democratic States: United States, Great Britain, France.
Authoritarian and Totalitarian States: Italy, Germany, Russia, Japan. Cultural
and Intellectual Trends.  
  

#### Week 13 (April 13-17)

##### Assignment: Chapter 28

The Road to War. New Warfare. Industrial and Geographical Balance. The Course
of World War II. Turning Point, 1942-1943. Last Years of the War. Emergence of
the Cold War.  
  

#### Week 14 (April 20-24)

##### Assignment: Chapter 29

The Postwar World International Relations Since 1945. Confrontation in Europe
and Asia. Europe Since 1945. Containment: America in Vietnam. Culture in the
Postwar World.  
  

#### Week 15 (April 17)

##### Assignment: Chapter 30

The End of the Twentieth Century. War and Peace in Asia. Europe and Unity.
World Economy. Toward the Twenty-first Century.  
  
Return to Table of Contents  
  

### Course Requirements:

Three tests  
Paper  
Final comprehensive examination  
  
Return to Table of Contents  
  

### Grading:

During the semester there will be three tests and a final examination. Tests
will be worth approximately sixty (60) percent. The remaining forty (40)
percent will be the examination and a paper.(Note: Included in the above two
numbers will be five (5)percent for professionalism. This means class
attendance, fulfilling assignments on the scheduled date, arriving in class on
time, a willingness to learn, and consideration for other class members.) The
examination will be comprehensive in containing material from the beginning to
the end.  
  
Return to Table of Contents  
  

### Attendance Policy:

Logic says you should attend classes; the College Catalog adds that absence
may impair academic performance. Being somewhat a realist, your instructor
knows that on occasion you may have to miss. For example, you may be
participating in a College-sponsored activity, be sick, or involved in a
recognizable emergency. While such reasons may exist, use caution in
exercising them, and make certain that you take your test early if there is a
field trip or athletic event creating a conflict.  
  
Do not miss a test or examination because there is little chance of a make-up.
If you request a make-up, be prepared to include an explanation for your
school absence from your doctor or appropriate College official. Even a rare
make-up must be taken within five calendar days from the originally scheduled
date. In a word, get the maximum reward for your study by taking the test when
it is scheduled.  
  
Return to Table of Contents  
  

### Research Paper:

You will have the opportunity to write a paper this semester. The instructor
will discuss suitable topics during the first class meeting. When you begin to
write, remember that important statements of fact should carry citations.
Quoted material should also indicate a source. By such means you avoid any
suspicion of plagiarism. Finally, style should conform to that in Kate L.
Turabian, _A Manual for Writers of Term Papers, Theses, and Dissertations._  
  
The paper will be due on Thursday or Friday, February 12 or 13. A late paper
will lose value each calendar day. There are no acceptable excuses for
lateness. If you wish to be safe, hand in the paper early.  
  
The instructor will be happy to talk to you if you have any questions. His
office is Main Ruffner, Room 235.  
  
Return to Table of Contents  
  

#### PLAGIARISM:

Students should be reminded that the use of an author's ideas in a student
paper without giving proper credit to the author constitutes plagiarism.
Likewise the use of an author's words without placing those words in quotation
marks and providing proper citation is plagiarism. Students sometimes believe
that by changing an occasional word or two or even three in a sentence or
paragraph, they are avoiding plagiarism. This is not the case! The information
and ideas taken from a source must be re-formed into your own words! And after
re-forming it into your own words, you must use a footnote or endnote giving
proper credit to the author.  
  
If your instructor suspects intentional or unintentional plagiarism, your
paper will be returned ungraded and you will be asked to bring your sources to
his office to verify the scholarship.  
  
Return to Table of Contents  
  

### Honor Code:

Because trust and integrity are integral parts of an academic environment and
decent society, all work in the course will be your own. Write out and sign
the honor pledge when you hand in papers. (I have neither given nor received
any help on this test nor am I aware of any infraction of the Honor Code.)  
  
Return to Table of Contents  
  

* * *

[Return to Course Syllabi Page"](syllabi.htm)  
[Return to Department of History and Political Science Homepage](home.htm)  

* * *

