

[Course Outline](outline.htm#Course Outline) | [Sigrid Peterson's Home
Page](http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/~petersig)



RELIGIONS OF THE WEST:

JUDAISM, CHRISTIANITY, ISLAM



Religious Studies 002

Summer Session I, 1999



Sigrid Peterson, PhD

[petersig@ccat.sas. upenn.edu](mailto:petersig@ccat.sas.upenn.edu)

Religious Studies

232 Logan Hall

215/552-8918 or 215/898-7453

Office hours by appointment

Course Home Page at http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/rs/rs002



Helpful Links in Judaism, Christianity, and Islam at [
http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/rs/rs002/links.htm](http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/rs/rs002/links.htm)



**

Description

**

* * *

This course is an introduction to the three major religions that originated in
the Middle East, Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. We will be become
acquainted with some of the sacred writings of each religion, especially where
each has its own view of similar content. We will also compare some of the
positions of these religions on common dimensions of religion, such as
Authority, Scripture and Tradition, their Monotheistic beliefs, Worship and
Ritual, and Ethics. We will be seeking to master details of each tradition, as
expressed in special technical terms, and will also pull back at times to ask
such questions as "How does each of these religions seek to transform its
followers?"

Each student will need to own the following books:

1\. _The TaNaKh_ \-- The sacred writings of Judaism, in the New JPS
Translation; either the hardcover "Sacred Writings" edition available at the
Pennsylvania Book Center, or the following paperback edition: [$9.95,
hardback]

TANAKH: The Holy Scriptures, The New JPS Translation According to the
Traditional Hebrew Text(Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 1991).
[$19.95, paperback]

2\. _The New Testament_ \-- The sacred writings that are exclusively Christian

_

The New Revised Standard Version New Testament_ available at the Pennsylvania
Book Center, 34th and Sansom Streets, University City.

3\. _Al-Qur'an_ -The sacred writings of Islam

_

Al-Qur'an: A Contemporary Translation by Ahmed Ali_ (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1988).

Also available at the Pennsylvania Book Center, 34th and Sansom Streets,
University City.

In addition, you may consult the following electronic translation, for times
when you don't have Ali's translation with you. [ Al-
Qur`an](http://www.submission.org/Quran.html)

4\. Corrigan, J., Denny, F. M., Eire, C. M. N., and Jaffee, M. S. _Jews,
Christians, Muslims: A Comparative Introduction to Monotheistic Religions_
(Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1998)

5\. Corrigan, J., Eire, C. M. N., Denny, F. M., and Jaffee, M. S. _Readings in
Judaism, Christianity, and Islam_ (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall,
1998)

Also available at the Pennsylvania Book Center, 34th and Sansom Streets,
University City.

**Course Requirements

(Adapted from a syllabus created by Ross Kraemer)

1) attend class conscientiously. ** If religious observance requires you to
miss class, please be sure to notify me well in advance. If you are sick, or
have a personal emergency, please make every effort to notify me in advance,
by email to [ petersig@ccat.sas.upenn.edu](mailto:petersig@ccat.sas.upenn.edu)
or else by phone to 215/898-7453. Regardless of the reasons, students who are
absent should make every effort to do the reading and to obtain notes from the
class(es) missed.

**

2) prepare for and participate in class.** The success of a fairly small class
depends on regular, informed, and thoughtful participation of all members. All
students are expected to contribute constructively to the discussion on a
regular basis. To do so, you will need to have done a significant portion of
the assigned readings, and to have spent some time thinking about the
material.

**

3) do the assignments.** The readings for this class are not necessarily
uniform in length; I anticipate that you will need 12 hours a week outside of
class time in order to do the reading and other assignments.

**

4) take the quizzes.** There will be weekly brief open-book quizzes on
Tuesdays which will consist of either brief identifications or brief, five-
minute essay questions that encourage you to think about the materials you
have prepared.

**

5) prepare the final paper (8-10 page minimum).** The final paper includes
several tasks: a) preparation by negotiating the topic with me, probably via
email; b) submitting either an abstract (paragraph description of the paper)
or an outline of the way in which you plan to write it, and c) submitting the
paper on time and correctly spelled with appropriate word usage, technical
vocabulary, and correct grammar. This does *not* mean relying on Microsoft
Word's Spellchecker and Grammarchecker. It *does mean using those tools to
catch things you understand and just overlooked, and not changing anything you
don't understand.

With individual permissions, I will post good papers to the class web site.

OR

**

5) take the final exam on the last day of class.** In this case, the final
exam will be three hours of nitpicking short answer identifications tapping
technical vocabulary and historical understanding of all three religions.
There may be an integrative question that is completely new to you, which will
use those things you have learned as a basis for understanding and answering
the question. There will be some choice of which items to answer.

The class will vote on which alternative they prefer at the end of the second
week. If the chosen alternative turns out to be very hard for you to live
with, then make an appointment with me right away, **in the third week of
class** , and we will find an acceptable alternative.

Last updated June 2, 1999 by Sigrid Peterson, PhD

_



Continues as _[Course Outline](outline.htm#Course Outline)

