
    American Studies 3390Landscape and American CultureWinter 1995 Cina 202 09:00-10:05 MWF Steve AdamsHumanities 415726-8132Office Hours: 10:10-11:30 MWF and by appointmentGoals of the course:As D. W. Meinig insists, "landscapes tell us much about the values we hold and at the same time affect the quality of the lives that we lead . . . a well-cultivated sense of place is an important dimension of human well-being." Peirce F. Lewis adds, "Landscapes mirror and landscapes matter . . . Our human landscape is our unwitting autobiography, reflecting our tastes, our values, our aspirations, and even our fears in tangible, visible form."In this course we will:(1) survey perspectives on the American landscape from the 16th Century to the present, with special attention to what perceptions of landscape reveal about American culture (how have we shaped the land, and how has the land shaped us?);(2) explore how perception of our environment (and of everything else) is shaped and colored by inherited cultural paradigms;(3) improve our ability to read intelligently, to analyze texts and cultural artifacts using a variety of interdisciplinary critical methods, and to express ourselves effectively in discussions and writing;(4) increase our enjoyment of the American landiscape and its representations in writing and visual media.Textbooks: (a copy of each is on library reserve)D.W. Meinig, The Interpretation of OrdinaryLandscapes William Bartram, Travels Henry David Thoreau, Civil Disobedience and Other Essays Walt Whitman, Selected Poems Willa Cather, My Antonia Aldo Leopold, A Sand County Almanac Terry Tempest Williams, RefugeRequirements:Course project (roughly 30% of grade)Final Examination (25%)Informed Class Participation (20%)Daily Writing (15%)Short Essay (10%)Course Project: you will explore some important topic related to the American landscape and then work your study into a substantial, polished presentation of some kind. Topics and forms of presentation will be decided individually in consultation with the instructor. (See the "Course Project" handout for further information and suggestions.)The final examination (open book, open notes) will consist of two essays: one in which you explore a significant theme in landscape studies (possible topics will be given before the exam) and one in which you explicate an excerpt from a work on our syllabus.This is a discussion rather than a 1ecture course. Everyone is expected to participate in class discussions, which will (I hope) proceed in a relaxed, friendly, anxiety-free atmosphere. You will not be called on to stand beside your desk and recite. You will be expected to contribute what insights and questions you can about the works under consideration so that we can get a variety of perspectives on them and help each other to read them as intelligently and imaginatively as possible. Please come to classes prepared--that is, read the assigned works by the date they are listed on the schedule and be ready to discuss them. If possible, read the works twice--once quickly for the basic concerns, and then again slowly for a careful analysis of structure, theme, tone, imagery, style, etc. As Gaston Bachelard insists, "Every good book should be reread as soon as it is finished. After the sketchiness of the first reading comes the creative work of reading."Please speak loudly enough in class so that everyone can hear you and listen courteously when others are speaking. Also, please sit in a different spot each day. Move around the room to meet intelligent, fascinating, friendly new people--your classmates.To record attendance, prepare for class discussions and demonstrate how carefully you are reading the assigned works, you will spend a few minutes every class period writing about the day's assignment. Each brief writing exercise (e.g., a paragraph of reaction to the day's reading or a quiz) will be graded on a five-point scale. To allow for the rew occasions you might have to miss class, you may skip three writing exercises without penalty--or, if you do them all, your three lowest scores will be discarded from the computation of your average for the quarter. No make-up writings will be given--life is too short for the additional time and labor involved.The short essay (due by Dec. 23) is intended to get you into a local museum for close study ef one particular American landscape painting or photograph of your choice. In two to three typed pages, describe and respond to a work from the Tweed Museum or the Depot. Give the artist, title, and date of the piece; describe the work as clearly as possible (subject, perspective, composition, texture, color, light, scale, etc.); then respond to the work in some way (How does it affect you? What does it seem to say about the American landscape? How does the work relate to your reading for the course?).If you ever have questions or concerns about readings, procedures, assignments, grades, or anything else connected with the course, please feel free to consult with me about them. I am available in my office during the hours listed above; if the office hours are impossible for you, please talk with me before or after class or call me to arrange some other time. If you have any disability, either temporary or permanent, that might affect your performance in this class, please let me know as soon as possible so that I may adapt materials or testing to provide for equitable participation.-------------------------------------------------------------Reading/Discussion ScheduleWe will begin with theories and methodologies of studying landscape and develop a vocabulary of terms (Henry Glassie: "The American land is an artifact . . . . We should learn the landscape's language"). Then we will apply those analytical methods to specific selected American landscapes as perceived at particular historical periods (Meinig: "History takes place, and places are created by history"). As we work on common materials in our class discussions, you will also be working on your individual project for the course and will keep all of us informed about your project.Please complete the required readings by class time on the dates listed below. We may not discuss the material that day, but adhering to the schedule will ensure that you have prepared the texts by the time we do cover them in class.Nov 28 Introduction to the course30 Meinig, Interpretation: "Introduction" (1-7); Lewis, "Axioms forReading the Landscape" (11-32); Meinig, "The Beholding Eye" (33-48)Dec 2 Meinig, Interpretation: Tuan, "Thought and Landscape" (89102);Lowenthal, "Age and Artifact" (103-28)5 Meinig, Interpretation: Jackson, "The Order of a Landscape" (15363); Meinig, "Symbolic Landscapes" (164-92); [rec: Fred E.H. Schroeder Front Yard American: The Evolution and Meanings of a Vernacular Domestic Landscape (1993) on library reserve] (Guest discussant) Fred Schroeder on the American front lawn7 film: Koyaanisqatsi (Dir. Godfrey Reggio; music by Philip Glass); begin reading Bartram's Travels9 (Guest discussant) Alison Aune: Introduction to landscapes in the visual arts and to resources of the Tweed Museum (meet in the Tweed); begin thinking about & researching your course project12 Early Virginia (handout: excerpts from Barlowe, Smith, Ffrethorne, Drayton, Hariot, et al.; slides from John White)14 Early Virginia (cont.)16 Bartram's Travels: Part I, Intro, Chs. 1-5 (try to read all of Bartram if you can, but concentrate on the chapters listed here)19 Bartram's Travels: Part II, Chs. 1,3,4,521 Bartram's Travels: Part II, Chs. 6,823 Bartram's Travels: Part III, Chs. 2,3,8,10; personal conferences regarding course project; short essay dueWinter Break Dec 24-Jan 8: have a wonderful holiday seasonJan 9 Emerson, excerpts from Nature (handout); Thoreau, "Walking," "Life without Principle"11 Whitman, "Starting from Paumanok," "Song of the Open Road," "Song of the Redwood-Tree," "Pioneers! O Pioneers!"13 Whitman, "When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom'd," "Song of the Broad-Axe," "By Blue Ontario's Shores" video: The Hudson River and Its Painters; last day to submit on course project 16 Holiday: Martin Luther King's Birthday18 Cather, MY Antonia: Introduction-Book I, Ch. XIII (1-61)20 Cather, MY Antonia: Book I, Ch. XIV-Book II, Ch. VII (62-123)23 Cather, MV Antonia: Book II, Ch. VIII-Book III, Ch. IV (124-88)25 Cather, MV Antonia: Books IV and V27 Leopold, Sand County Almanac: Part I, January-September (358)30 Leopold, A Sand County Almanac: Part I, October-Part II, Wisconsin (58-124) Feb 1 Leopold, A Sand County Almanac: Part II, Illinois and Iowa-Manitoba (124-73)3 Leopold, A Sand County Almanac: Part III (175-2335); (Guest discussant) Alison Aune on Duluth and Northern Minnesota in landscape art (meet in the Tweed Museum)6 Leopold, A Sand County Almanac: Part IV (235-95)8 Williams, Refuge: Prologue-Peregrine Falcon (3-57) 10 Williams, Refuge: Wilson's Phalarope-Kilideer (58-119); (Guest discussant) Alison Aune on the "Women Photograph the Land" series (meet in the Tweed Museum); course proiect due (two copies)13 Williams, Refuge: Whistling Swan-Storm Petrel (120-78)15 Williams, Refuge: Greater Yellowlegs-Birds-of-Paradise (179238)17 Williams, Refuge: Pintails, Mallards, and Teals-Clan of the OneBreasted Women (239-90); take-home final examination distributed23 (Thursday) final examination due in Humanities 415 by noonThis schedule is tentative; it can be modified to meet the needs of this particular student group. You are responsible for any changes announced in class.We will not be able to discuss in class every reading assigned for the day. By focussing intensely on selected works, we should each develop our own skills as independent readers. Do bring to class questions that you want answered and your own choices for the texts that we will discuss together. You are encouraged to read widely in works from the recommended reading lists. Explore other selections for additional practice at intelligent reading, for more extensive familiarity with American landscape studies, and for your own enjoyment .------------------------------------------------------COURSE PROJECTThe course project is intended to let you explore in depth and detail an aspect of American landscape studies that particularly interests you. If you wish, you may write a conventional term paper (or several short papers) on a topic related to landscape. Or you may try something more experimental and out of the ordinary--for example, an informal journal of your readings in a specific area, or a lecture/ slide presentation to the class, or a photographic essay in which you present your own photographs of landscape along with your commentary on them, or some other creative work (prose, poetry, visual arts) related to our concerns in the course.In any case, your project should be a substantial contribution to our study this quarter (around 8-15 pages of formal written work; the equivalent amount of time for a presentation in a different medium). Please see me as early as possible with your own proposal for the course project--we will work out the details together. By January 13 at the latest, please submit a brief paragraph in which you explain exactly what your project will be.Some possibilities to get you thinking:Research an aspect of the work of an author or artist on the course bibliography of recommended readings.Explore some historical development or controversy related to landscape (e.g., the depiction of America in early European travel propaganda; 18th-century philosophies of the sublime and picturesque; 19th-century images of the American West; the creation of Central Park; the debate between John Muir and Gifford Pinchot over forest management; history of the BWCA; recent developments in ecological movements--e.g., Deep Ecology, ecofeminism).Analyze a painting or photograph (or related series of works) by an artist who especially appeals to you; or trace a particular image or theme that runs through a period or an artist's work (e.g., the dead tree in the foreground of Hudson River School canvases; the desert in the works of Georgia O'Keeffe).Explore some aspect of the local landscape--e.g., How did early visitors to northeastern Minnesota describe the land? How have mining and logging changed the landscape? What artists have visited Duluth, and how did they depict the city?Analyze the treatment of landscape in film--some possibilities: Days of Heaven (1978), Deliverance (1972), Heartland (1979), Badlands (1973), Easy Rider (1969), Country (1984), The River (1984), Places in the Heart (1984), or westerns such as Shane (1953).Examine the sociological, psychological, or anthropological implications of landscape. E.g., how do different social groups perceive the land differently? What can you reconstruct of early native American relations to the land? How does a people's religion affect their attitudes toward their natural environment? Do men and women bring to the land different preconceptions?Discuss landscape as it manifests itself in music--e.g., in individual works such as The New World Symphonv, Appalachian Spring, Grand Canyon Suite, Oklahoma, or in related bodies of songs such as country blues, Appalachian ballads, or ecological protest songs from the 60s and early 70s.Joint or cooperative projects are possible, if you wish to work with a classmate (or classmates) on a topic of mutual interest. We can arrange together the precise details of how the labor will be divided.Alison Aune and Peter Spooner of the Tweed Museum have indicated their willingness to assist with projects related to landscapes in art. Consult them for suggestions, advice, and bibliographical aids.Begin work on your project early and keep me informed of your progress on it. (I will also ask you occasionally to update the class on your work so that we can share ideas, questions and concerns and help each other as much as possible.) Unless we set a different individual deadline for your project, it should be completed by February 10. Please submit two copies of your project (if appropriate for the medium you have selected): one for me to grade and the other for your classmates to review, if they wish.

* * *

Copyright (C) 1996\. This document may not be reproduced in whole or in part,
in any form, without written permission from its author(s). This document has
been edited for electronic publication and does not appear in its original
form.

* * *

