**

XIDS 2100-05

Representing American Womanhood

Fall 1999

Dr. Debra Ann MacComb

**

Office: Humanities 150

Phone: 770-836-6512 (messages); email: dmaccomb@westga.edu;
webpage:www.westga.edu/~dmaccomb

Office Hours: M, 3:15-5:00; T, 11-1;W, 11-12; Th, 11-1; F, 9-12, and by
appointment.

**

Course Description

**

Through analysis of representations in the literary and visual arts of both
the high and popular culture, this course will examine the range of
identities, images and ideologies associated with "the" American woman from
the early Republic to the modern period.

**

Required Texts:

**

Fern, _Ruth Hall

_

Fitzgerald, _The Great Gatsby

_

Foster, _The Coquette

_

James, _Daisy Miller

_

Jacobs, _Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl

_

Wharton, _The House of Mirth

_

each student will also need an active email account.

**

Course Goals

**

  * To develop both reading and visual comprehension skills in response to works of art by application of established aesthetic criteria and analysis of specific works' adherence to and/or modification of those criteria. 
  * To develop the ability to synthesize from diverse modes of artistic expression common ideas and ideals, as well as to recognize and appreciate the unique qualities of individual works, through a thematic approach to course material. 
  * To develop a critical awareness of how artistic expression both shapes and is shaped by specific cultural contexts as well as by more generalized cultural ideals.

**

Course Requirements and Grading

**

every student is responsible for:

**

Attendance and Particpation: 15%.** Includes the following three
considerations:

>Students should come to class prepared to contribute to class discussion of
assigned readings. Brief quizzes (short answer, analysis) will periodically
preface class discussion. Missing more than 20% of the class meetings will be
considered grounds for failure.

>Students will keep an online reading journal that will include at least one
substantial entry per week on a text under discussion, a lecture, a
observation made or a question posed by me or another member of the class. A
"substantial" entry encompasses not only length, but content; entries that
merely parrot what has already been said or simply agree with another's
posting without explanation will be considered inadequate. I will respond
privately to such postings. Be both intelligent and civil in your responses:
the whole class will be able to read your postings.

>Students in XIDS classes are required to attend five "artistic events" over
the course of the semester. You may fulfill this requirement by attending any
of the productions at the Townsend Center, or you may go to museums, theatre
or art exhibits in an Atlanta venue. I will try to apprise the class of any
particularly relevant events in eitther Carrollton or Atlanta. To prove your
attendance at these events, please bring me a ticket stub.

**

Media Reports: 20%.

**

The last three class meetings will be devoted to group presentations. Each
group will be asked to research representations of American women found in the
popular culture of the last thirty years--specifically magazines, television,
music, music videos, and movies. Each group will then present a twenty-minute
report on these representations.

**

Midterm (2 @ 20% each) andFinal ( 25%) Exams.

**

These tests will include defintion, short answer and quotation identification.
The final exam, which will be cumulative, will also include at least one
essay. The purpose of these tests is to determine how well you have mastered
the texts as well as the lecture and discussion material presented in class.

**

Class Preparation

**

The readings are to be completed by the beginning of class on the day they
first appear on the syllabus. Read carefully, jotting down any observations or
questions you might have about the text. Many of your questions will be
answered by lecture and discussion, but if they are not, be prepared to ASK!

Be prepared to spend between six and nine hours per week on outside
preparation for this class.

**

Classroom Protocol

**

During classroom lectures and discussions, you will need to listen attentively
and take careful notes. It is YOUR responsibility to ask questions about
material that isn't clear to you. I'm happy to respond to your questions
during lecture or discussion: DON'T BE SHY ABOUT ASKING!

You are expected to be in class on time. Frequent tardiness is rude and
disruptive, and will not be tolerated. Once in class, you are expected to
remain for the entire period. Finally, show your respect to other members of
the class by attending to others' comments and questions.

**























XIDS 2100-05: Representing American Womanhood

Course Schedule

Republic and Early 19th Century

**

Week 1

T 8/24 Introduction to class requirements

Th 8/26 Representing American Women: Colony to Republic

Week 2

T 8/31 Foster, _The Coquette_

Th 9/2 Foster, _The Coquette

_

Week 3

T 9/7 The "True" Woman and the Domestic Ideal

Th 9/9 Fern, _Ruth Hall_

Week 4

T 9/14 Fern, _Ruth Hall_

Th 9/16 Fern, _Ruth Hall_

Week 5

T  9/21 Lecture: Women and Slavery

Th 9/23  Jacobs, _Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl_

Week 6

T 9/28 Jacobs, _Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl_

Th 9/30 Jacobs, _Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl

_

Week 7

T 10/5 Midterm #1

**

Post-Bellum America and the Gilded Age

**

Th 10/7 Lecture: The American "Girl"

Week 8

T 10/12 James, _Daisy Miller_

Th 10/14 James, _Daisy Miller_

Week 9

T 10/19 The "New Woman" and the Gilded Age

Th 10/21 Wharton, _The House of Mirth_

Week 10

T 10/26 Wharton, _The House of Mirth_

Th 10/28 Wharton, _The House of Mirth_



Week 11

T 11/2  Midterm #2

**

Modernism and Beyond**

Th 11/4 Lecture: Flapper and Vamp

Week12

T 11/9  Fitzgerald, _The Great Gatsby_

Th 11/11  Fitzgerald, _The Great Gatsby_

Week 13

T 11/16 Lecture: From Rosie the Riveter to the Liberated Woman

Th 11/18 Film: _An Unmarried Woman_

Week 14

T 11/23 Film: _An Unmarried Woman_

Th 11/25 **Thanksgiving Holiday

**

Week15

M 11/29 Student Reports

W 12/1 Student Reports

Week 16

M 12/6 Student Reports

**

Th 12/16 Final Exam, 8-10 AM**



[Return to Dr. MacComb's Home Page

<http://www.westga.edu/~dmaccomb>

](http://www.westga.edu/~dmaccomb)





