Instructor: Dr. Gary Forsythe  
Office: 142 Holden Hall  
Office Phone: 742-0492  
Home Phone: 791-4347

Office Hours:

Monday 10-11 A.M.  
Wednesday 11-12 A.M.  
Friday 1-2 P.M.  
other times by appointment

**Syllabus for Western Civilization I  
History 1300, Section 3, Fall 2001**

Required Textbooks

Two textbooks are required for this course:

A History of Western Society, Volume I, From Antiquity to the Enlightenment,
Sixth Edition 1999, by John P. McKay, Bennett D. Hill, and John Buckler;

and Heritage of Western Civilization Volume I, Eighth Edition 1995, by John L.
Beatty and Oliver A. Johnson.

For simplicity these books will be cited throughout the remainder of this
course outline as MHB and BJ respectively. MHB will serve as the principal
textbook for the course and can be purchased at either the University
Bookstore or the Varsity Bookstore. BJ is a collection of ancient, medieval,
and early modern texts that will be used to supplement MHB and the classroom
meetings. It can also be purchased at either the University Bookstore or the
Varsity Bookstore. In addition to these two books, you will have to purchase a
bound packet of material that I have prepared for this course. This packet
will contain a copy of the syllabus, suggestions on how to study for the
course's four hourly exams, all study guides for each class meeting,
geographical data pertinent to each of the four exams, and various readings
that I have chosen to supplement those in BJ.

Class Meetings, Exams, and Grading

Any student who because of a disability may require some special arrangement
in order to meet course requirements should notify me as soon as possible to
make necessary accommodations. The format of the three weekly class meetings
will be either lecture or class discussion. In order to take best advantage of
classroom activity and your own time invested in doing the required reading,
you should come to class after having done the assigned reading in the two
textbooks and the bound packet. The class meetings will serve to contextualize
and supplement the required reading, and the required reading will allow you
to understand fully the material covered in class. In order to assist you in
your reading, your classroom note taking, and your preparation for exams, the
bound packet will contain a study-guide sheet listing all important terms,
events, and dates that you will be expected to know. You should use these
study guides in three different ways: (1) you should consult them before doing
the assigned reading, because they will indicate what are the more important
things that you need to learn; (2) you should use them to help to focus your
attention on the more important concepts, persons, events, and developments
treated in the class meetings; and (3) you should use them in reviewing the
course material in preparation for taking the four exams.

Class attendance will be taken, and your attendance and participation in class
will count 10% toward your final grade. You will be required to take all four
of the exams for this course. The first three will be scheduled approximately
at the first quarter, midterm, and three-quarter stages of the term. The
fourth exam will be administered during the period of final exams at the very
end of the semester. The highest of your four examscores will be counted as
30% of your final grade, and the other three exams will each make up 20% of
your final grade. The format of these four hourly exams will be identical:
five direct quotations to be identified from a list of ten possible choices,
each answer counting 2 points for a total of ten points; identification of
five important dates or periods of time from a choice of ten possible answers,
each counting 2 points for a total of 10 points; ten fill-in- the-blank
questions, each counting 2 points for a total of 20 points; locating five
places or areas on a blank outline map, each counting 2 points for a total of
10 points; and your own written answer to one of two essay questions, counting
50 points. Make-up exams will be given only if arranged with the instructor at
least one week in advance of the exam date. Pre-arranged make-up exams will be
given before the date of the official exam. Make-up exams after the date will
be given only to absences due to emergencies. Such cases must be officially
documented.

Schedule of Lecture Topics, Exams, and Reading Assignments

Aug. 27: Orientation to the Course.

Aug. 29: Introduction to the Modern Study of History, and Prehistoric

Background to the Earliest Civilizations. Reading: MHB 2-11.

Aug. 31: The Earliest Civilizations of Mesopotamia. Reading: MHB

11-20.

Sep. 5: The History and Civilization of Ancient Egypt. Reading: MHB

20-6.

Sep. 7: Class Discussion of Ancient Mesopotamian and Egyptian Thought

and Literature. Reading: MHB 34-5, BJ 2-20, and packet material.

Sep. 10: Other Derivative Civilizations of the Second Millennium B.C..

Reading: MHB 26-33 and 63-68.

Sep. 12: the Assyrian, Neo-Babylonian, and Persian Empires. Reading:

MHB

37-40 and 47-58.

Sep. 14: The Early History of the Hebrews. Reading: MHB 41-7.

Sep. 17: The Religion of the Hebrews. Reading: MHB 60-1, BJ 21-38, and packet
material.

Sep. 19: The Rise of the Greek City-State. Reading: MHB 68-76 and packet
material.

Sep. 21: First Exam.

Sep. 24: The Political Institutions of Athens and Sparta. Reading: MHB 76-80
and BJ 129-46.

Sep. 26: The History of Classical Greece. Reading: MHB 80-93, 97-99, 102-3, BJ
41-58, and 82-95.

Sep. 28: Class Discussion of Greek Culture and Literature during the Classical
Period. Reading: MHB 93-7, BJ 59-81, and 96-122.

Oct. 1: Alexander the Great and the Hellenistic World. Reading: Chapter 4 of
MHB.

Oct. 3: Rome's Rise to Supremacy over the ancient Mediterranean.  Reading: MHB
135-46 and BJ 169-81.

Oct. 5: The End of the Roman Republic. Reading: MHB 151-8 and packet material.

Oct. 8: Augustus, the Principate, and the Pax Romana. Reading: MHB 163- 7,
175-8, and BJ 212-20.

Oct. 10: Society and Economy of the Roman Empire. Reading: MHB 178-85, 196-7,
and packet material.

Oct. 12: Class Discussion of Roman Life and Literature. Reading: MHB 146- 51,
168-70, BJ 182-96, and 221-28.

Oct. 15: Second Exam.

Oct. 17: The History of Early Christianity. Reading: MHB 122-4, 132-3, 160-1,
170-5, 189-90, 199-211, BJ 229-43, and packet material.

Oct. 19: The Collapse of the Roman Empire. Reading: MHB 185-93.

Oct. 22: Western Europe during the Dark Age. Reading: MHB 215-23, 240-1, BJ
258-67, and packet material.

Oct. 24: The Byzantine Civilization. Reading: MHB 223-30.

Oct. 26: The Islamic World and The Age of Charlemagne. Reading: MHB 230-7,
243-56, and BJ 268-88.

Oct. 29: Class Discussion of Manorialism and Feudalism. Reading: MHB 256- 62,
270-1, 305-15, BJ 245-248, and 289-96.

Oct. 31: Magyars, Vikings, and the Spread of Christianity. Reading: MHB 262-7
and packet material.

Nov. 2: Monasticism. Reading: MHB 211-5, 277-8, 322-9, 368-70, and packet
material.

Nov. 5: The Church in Medieval Europe. Reading: MHB 199-211, 278-83, 294-5,
371, 392-6, BJ 306-12, and packet material.

Nov. 7: Third Exam.

Nov. 9: The Rise of States. Reading: MHB 273-5, 335-49, 374-5, and BJ 299-305.

Nov. 12: The History of the Crusades. Reading: MHB 283-95, 298-9, and packet
material.

Nov. 14: Political, Economic, and Social Changes in the Later Middle Ages.
Reading: MHB 275-6, 301-5, 315-22, 332-3, 349-58, 379-92, BJ 296-8, and
343-50.

Nov. 16: Class Discussion of Life and Culture in the Later Middle Ages.
Reading: MHB 358-68, 396-408, 412-3, and BJ 313-42.

Nov. 19: The Renaissance. Reading: MHB 415-22, 428-37, 448-9, BJ 352-60, and
368-381.

Nov. 26: Video Presentation on Renaissance art. Reading: MHB 422-8, BJ 382-96,
and packet material.

Nov. 28: The Reformation. Reading: MHB 437-45, 451-75, 484-5, and BJ 397- 434.

Nov. 30: The Counter-Reformation and the Wars of Religious Intolerance.
Reading: MHB 475-81, 487-502, and BJ 435-43.

Dec. 3: European Expansion and Contact with Non-Europeans. Reading: MHB 502-12
and BJ 361-7.

Dec. 5: The Beginnings of Modern Science. Reading: MHB 512-24 and packet
material.

Dec. 11: Final Exam beginning promptly at 1:30 in the afternoon.  
  
---  
  
> _Copyright 2001, Gary Forsythe, Ph.D. and Texas Tech University.   Site
maintained by the Teaching, Learning, and Technology Center.  All rights
reserved._  
  
---

