This information effective for Winter 1999.  
Check with instructor the first day of class for any changes.

#

* * *

Economics Advance Course Information-  
Winter 1999

**[ECON-001-01] [ECON-002-01] [ECON-080G/137-01] **

**[ECON-113-01] [ECON-138-01]**

* * *

## Economics 1

## Principles of Microeconomics



Professor Lori Kletzer

204 Social Sciences I

Winter 1999

MWF 12:30-1:40PM

This is an introductory course in microeconomics. The course has two principal
goals: to introduce you to the ways in which economists view the world and
attempt to solve economic problems, and to teach you to utilize these ways of
thinking when you approach economic questions. We will focus on some basic
concepts which most economists find useful in analyzing economic issues and we
will apply these concepts to a variety of problems. The central theme of the
course is how and why markets work, why they may fail to work, and the
implications for social policies of both their successes and failures. Among
the markets to be examined are the market for labor that largely determines
who is poor and who is affluent, the markets for goods, and the markets for
clean air and water.

Course Materials

The textbook for the course is Principles of Microeconomics by N. Gregory
Mankiw (Forth Worth, TX: The Dryden Press, 1997), first edition. The text is
available at the Bay Tree Bookstore, and it is sold with an accompanying study
guide. I encourage you to use the study guide.



Course Requirements

In addition to reading the textbook, I expect you to read a daily newspaper on
a regular basis. Whenever possible, class material will incorporate the latest
U.S. and international events. The class meets three times each week for
lectures and once each week for a small discussion session lead by a teaching
assistant (TA). Everyone must be signed up for one of the conference sessions.
TA sessions are an important part of the course. While the large size of the
lecture sessions makes it difficult to have discussions, TA sessions are small
and offer the opportunity to explore lecture topics in a more informal and
individual setting. You are also required to attend 1-2 additional discussion
sections lead by me. I will set up a schedule for these additional meetings.
There will be regular problem sets, and these will be returned and discussed
in your TA sessions. Late problem sets will not be accepted without the
permission of your TA. The graded midterm exams will be distributed and
reviewed in the conference sessions. Your performance in the conference
sessions will be evaluated by your TA on the basis of problem sets and class
discussion.

Grades will be determined as follows:

Problem sets 20%

2 midterm exams 40%

Final exam 40%

Economics 1 On-line

Information about this class is available on-line. I have created a course
home page, where you can find the course syllabus, problem sets, sample exams,
and answer keys. You will also find on-line versions of some of the readings
on reserve and links to data sources and other points of interest. The address
is:

[http://wwwcatsic.ucsc.edu/~econ1](http://wwwcatsic.ucsc.edu/~econ1%0D)

Other important points

Learning and teaching in a large-lecture format requires your cooperation. I
consider late arrivals, early departures, reading the newspaper, and talking
to be rude and disruptive to the class. Please be considerate of your fellow
students and of me. If you think you need to leave early or arrive late
routinely, please consult your TA. You are expected to adhere to standards of
academic integrity. You should familiarize yourselfwith these standards by
reading The Navigator. Violations of academic integrity standards will be
dealt with in accordance with University policy.

Problem sets are an important part of the course and I strongly encourage you
to complete themand turn them in on time. You may find working in groups to be
helpful and even enjoyable. If you do some of the preliminary work in groups,
be sure that you know how to solve for or think through the answer; don't rely
too heavily on getting the answer from someone else (after all, exams are
closed-book, closed-note, individual efforts). You must write up the answers
on your own.

Class Schedule

I encourage you to complete the assigned readings before the class for which
they are assigned. I suggest you read the material again after lecture.

Introduction and Overview

Introduction to Supply and Demand

Demand: A Closer Look

Elasticity

Producer Decisions: Supply

Firm Behavior and Supply

Competitive Markets

First Midterm Exam

Other Market Structures: Monopoly

Product Differentiation and Strategic Behavior

Factors of Production: The Labor Market

Labor: Unions and Collective Bargaining

Factor Pricing: Profits, Rent, and Interest

The Distribution of Income

Second Midterm Exam

Policy Debate - Work versus Welfare

Regulating Market Power

Public Goods, Externalities and Government Intervention

International Trade

* * *

## Economics 2

## Principles of Macroeconomics

Professor Carl Walsh

Winter 1999

Economics 2, Principles of Macroeconomics, will introduce you to the major
economic issues of growth, business cycles, unemployment, and inflation that
form the core of macroeconomics. Building on the basic principles of
economics, we will develop a theoretical framework for understanding the role
of monetary and fiscal policies in affecting the economy. The focus is on
contemporary economic policy debates.

The text for the course will be is Macroeconomics: Principles and Applications
by Robert E. Hall and Marc Lieberman (South-Western, 1998). Additional
readings will be made available through the class web page. Course assessment
will be based on problem sets, two midterms, and a final exam.

Further information about the course is available at
http:/econ.ucsc.edu/~walshc/Econ2.

Tentative Course Outline:

Week /Topics

1 Introduction, Micro Review

2 Overview of Macro

3 The Long-Run

4 Economic Growth

5 Business Cycles

6 Interest Rates and Monetary Policy

7 Economics of Trade

8 Open Economy Macro

9 Macroeconomic Policy Issues

10 Summing up

* * *

## ECONOMICS 80G-137

## MONEY & THE ARTS: TWO ALL CONSUMING PASSIONS (PERFORMING ARTS IN THE PUBLIC
AND PRIVATE ECONOMY)



    
    
    David E. KaunSYLLABUSTEXTSHeilbrun and Gray, The Economics of Art and Culture Scitovsky, The Joyless Economy READER--80 G///SUPPLEMENTAL READER--FOR 137 on reserve---American Canvas Estimated class meetings1+ IntroductionH&G, Part I (pp. 3-54) 3 Demand for the ArtsH&G, Chs. 4 and 5 (pp. 55-98)READER(S) Demand Section 3 The Performing Arts FirmH&G, Chs. 6-8 (pp. 98-148)READER(S) Production Section 2 The Visual Arts @ MuseumsH&G, Part III (pp. 149-198READER(S) Visual Arts Section 3 The Performing Arts as an OccupationH&G, Ch. 14 (pp. 281-301)READER(S) Art as an Occupation Section 1+ Economics of the Symphony OrchestraH&G, Review Chs. 6-8READER(S) The Symphony Orchestra Section(NOTE: START READING AMERICAN CANVAS) 2+ Public Policy Towards the ArtsH&G, Part IV (pp. 199-280)READER(S) Public/Private Subsidies Section 1 Taste and Culture in the United StatesH&G, Ch. 16 (pp. 323-349)READER(S) Review section on DemandScitovsky, The Joyless Economy*** 2 A Future for the Arts (Class Discussion)American Canvas (on reserve)H&G, Ch. 17*** Scitovsky's book should be started during week oneECON 80 G (137) CLASS REQUIREMENTS All students will be asked to do four bi-weekly paper (EVERY OTHER WEEK,AS OPPOSED \TO FOUR ON THE LAST DAY OF CLASS!!). This should be a short (2 page typed) paper, discussing any of the relevant media items from the Reader as they relate to the material covered in class and in the text for the respective week. These papers will be read and evaluated by the class reader, reviewed by the instructor, and will constitute a significant portion of your class evaluation. [please note: save these papers, and turn them in to the instructor on the last class meeting]. All students will also be asked to turn in a short paper (5 typed pages),reviewing Scitovsky's analysis of our national disdain for culture (pp.224-247, 258-263, and 275-277), to be read by instructor. This paper is due the last day of class (Thursday, June 11th)In addition, students taking 137 will be asked to do ONE or TWO papers, totaling approximately ten pages. The topic(s) should be drawn from the journal articles in the Supplemental Reader in addition to the general class reader. The first of these papers (OR A PARTIAL DRAFT, IF YOU AREWRITING ONE PAPER) is due by the end of the seventh week of the quarter(May 19th), and the BALANCE OF THE WRITTEN WORK, by the last day of class(Thursday, June 11th). A short MID-TERM EXAM will be given in class following the section on the Performing Arts Firm (format of the mid-term and precise date will be discussed in advance). The FINAL EXAM for both classes will consist of one of two options: OPTION 1. A take-home exam, covering the material in the course will be available on Tuesday, June 9th, and should be returned no later than 5pm, Monday, June 15th. OPTION 2. Perfect class attendance ( = all classes but two), as well as a passing grade on the mid-term. Attendance will be taken at most every class meeting in the form of a brief "attendance quiz" during the last five minutes of class. Students may miss two classes for any reason; students missing more than two classes, for whatever reason, opt for OPTION 1 above.Students who wish to select both options may do so (after a consultation with a member of the counseling service).

* * *

## ECONOMICS 113

## EMPIRICAL METHODS FOR ECONOMISTS



University of California, Santa Cruz Professor Lori Kletzer

204 Social Sciences I

Winter 1999

MWF 9:30-10:40am

This course is an introduction to the theory and practice of econometrics, the
application of statistical methods to the analysis of economic phenomena. The
course focuses on the strengths and weaknesses of the basic econometric
techniques used in empirical research. Emphasis will be placed on intuitive
understanding rather than on rigorous proofs and derivations. The most
important part of this course is learning to apply statistical and econometric
methods to real-world economic problems. Weekly problem sets will be an
important component of the course. Through these problem sets, I will
introduce you to the STATA statistics and econometrics software package. No
prior knowledge of computer programming is required.

COURSE MATERIALS

The main textbook for the course is Economic Statistics and Econometrics, by
Thad W. Mirer (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1995), third edition.

[THE BOOK BELOW MIGHT CHANGE FOR WINTER 1999]

Statistics with STATA 5, by Lawrence C. Hamilton (Duxbury Press, 1998), will
help you bridge the gap between textbook statistics and practical problem-
solving. This book demonstrates how to use STATA for data management and
statistical analysis.



Both books are available at the Bay Tree Bookstore and at Slug Books Co-op.
Slug Books is a student/alumni-run co-op discount textbook store, and it is
located at 224 Cardiff Place, by 7-11 and Bay Federal Credit Union, two blocks
from the base of campus. For more information, contact Slug Books at 469-SLUG,
info@slugbooks.com, or http://www.slugbooks.com.

COURSE REQUIREMENTS

This is a class in empirical (data-based) economics. Many of my lecture
examples will be motivated by "real world" events, facts, and applications. In
that spirit, I encourage you to read a daily newspaper on a regular basis. I
will also make reference to a number of the concepts and theories you learned
in Economics 100A and 100B. The class meets three times a week for lectures
and once a week for a small conference section lead by a teaching assistant
(TA). Everyone must be signed up for one of the conference sections. These
sections are an important part of the course because they provide an
opportunity to explore and understand topics in a more informal and individual
setting. There will be two midterm exams during the quarter, a comprehensive
final exam, and weekly problem sets. Your grade will be determined as follows:

Problem Sets 20%

Hour Tests 40%

Final Exam 40%



GUIDELINES FOR PROBLEM SETS

Econometrics can be learned only with a great deal of practice. You will have
approximately one week to complete each problem set. Problem sets will be
distributed in class and copies will also be available on-line. Completed
problem sets will be turned in at the start of lecture. Graded problem sets
will be returned during the TA sections. Answer keys for the problem sets will
be placed on reserve in McHenry Library and online. Late problem sets will not
be accepted without the prior consent of the TA. The weekly problem sets give
you the practical experience necessary for learning econometrics. Most problem
sets will require some computer work, which you should not leave until the
last minute. Computer difficulties are not a sufficient excuse for a late
submission; such difficulties should be expected and you should allocate
adequate time to complete the exercises. To minimize frustration and wasted
time, you are encouraged to work together or ask our TAs or me whenever you
are repeatedly getting no output or nonsensical output from the computer. If
you do some of the preliminary work in groups, be sure that each member of the
group learns how to obtain the results, not just the group leader. You must
write up the answers on your own, although you may discuss with others
possible interpretations of the results.

OFFICE HOURS AND COMPUTER LAB TIMES

My office hours will be on Mondays 1-2pm, and Thursdays 10:00-11:30am, or by
appointment. My office telephone number is 459-3596. You can also contact me
via e-mail at lkletzer@cats. STATA is installed in the Social Sciences I
Computing lab for your work. You may use the lab anytime during open hours;
our reserved times grant us priority use of the computers. Our reserved times
are: Wednesdays and Thursdays, 4-5pm, and Fridays 2-3:30pm.

OTHER IMPORTANT POINTS

Attending lecture is important. I doubt whether you can really learn this
material on your own. One of the many benefits of attendance is that I will
try to involve you directly in the class as much as possible, within the
constraints of a moderately-sized lecture class. Learning and teaching in this
format requires your cooperation. Please be considerate of your fellow
students and of me. Do not arrive late, leave early, read the newspaper, or
engage in behavior that others may consider rude or disruptive. You are
expected to adhere to standards of academic integrity. You should familiarize
yourself with these standards by consulting The Navigator. Violations of
academic integrity standards will be dealt with in accordance with University
policy.

ECONOMICS 113 ON-LINE

Information about this class is available on-line. I have created a course web
site, where you can find the course syllabus, problem sets, answer keys,
sample exams, and links to data sources. The address is:
<http://wwwcatsic.ucsc.edu/~econ113>

If you are feeling shaky about your basic computer skills, there is a self-
paced online computer literacy course that you can try at any of the CATS
Instructional Computing Labs. You will find the course at:
<http://nettrail.ucsc.edu/nettrail/master>



COURSE OUTLINE - dates are from Fall 1998 I encourage you to complete the
assigned readings before the class for which they are assigned. The readings
in Hamilton are computer interactive statistical exercises and they should be
done at the Social Sciences I Computer Lab. I do not require you to turn in
output from these exercises.

Oct. 2 Introduction

Mirer, chapters 1 and 2

Oct. 5, 7 Descriptive Statistics

Mirer, chapters 3 and 4

Hamilton, chapter 2, pp. 11-32; ch. 3, pp. 60-75 & pp. 78-85

Oct. 9, 12 Simple Regression: Theory

Mirer, chapter 5

Hamilton, chapter 4, pp. 94-98 & 103-113

Oct. 14, 16 Simple Regression: Application

Mirer, chapter 6

Hamilton, chapter 6, pp. 129-140

Oct. 19, 21 Multiple Regression

Mirer, chapter 7

Hamilton, chapter 6, pp. 147-154

Oct. 23, 26 Probability Theory

Mirer, chapter 8

Oct. 28 FIRST MIDTERM EXAM

Oct. 30, Nov. 2 Random Variables and Probability Distributions

Mirer, chapter 9

Nov. 4, 6 The Normal and t Distributions

Mirer, chapter 10

Nov. 9, 11 Inference for the Mean and Variance

Mirer, chapter 18

Hamilton, chapter 5, pp. 114-119

Nov. 13 Sampling Theory in Regression: The Linear Model

Mirer, chapter 11

Nov. 16, 18 Hypothesis Testing

Mirer, chapter 12

Hamilton, chapter 6, pp. 145-147

Nov. 20 Estimation and Confidence Intervals

Mirer, chapter 13, to pp. 288

Nov. 23 SECOND MIDTERM EXAM

Nov. 25, 30 Specification Error

Mirer, pp. 157-161, 290-294

Dec. 2, 4 Autocorrelation

Mirer, pp. 332-343

Hamilton, chapter 7, pp. 163-166

Dec. 7 Heteroscedasticity Multicollinearity

Mirer, pp. 161-163, 288-290, 325-332

Hamilton, chapter 7, pp. 181-184

Dec. 9, 11 More Testing and Specification Limited Dependent Variables

Mirer, pp. 303-323



* * *

## Economics 138, "The Economics and Management of Technology and Innovation"

### (Call #34734)

### Professor Nirvikar Singh

Examines the analytics of issues in technology and innovation, including
cooperation in research and development (R&D), standardization and
compatibility, patents and intellectual property rights, and strategic
management, using economic models and firm case studies.

### Prerequisites:

Course 10A and one of the following courses: 101, 115, 135A, or 136



* * *

**[**[top of page](top) **]**

