  ![](Rotund.gif) | ![](h_bar.gif)  
     Western Civilization I: Fall 2001  
---|---  
  
###  Syllabus

* * *

Dr. Costa  
Office: Email: **[tmc5a@mcs.uvawise.edu](mailto:tmc5a@wise.virginia.edu)**  
Office: Zehmer 219  
Office Hours:  
Monday: 3:00-4:00 PM (Wise), 5:00-6:00 PM (Abingdon)  
Wednesday: 1:00-2:00 PM, 3:00-4:00 PM  
Friday: 1:00-2:00 PM  
         (Sometimes I will be at meetings during convocation hour.)   
TTH: 11:00 AM-12:30 PM  
Others by Appointment

 Description: History 101 is a survey of "the historical development of
western institutions, ideas and cultures from ancient times to the era of
European expansion." It satisfies three hours of the western heritage portion
of the general education requirements.

Text: Perry, et al., _Western Civilization: Ideas, Politics, and Society_ ,
vol. I: To 1789

 In addition to the main text, there are a number of [primary readings linked
to this page](read.html).

Tests: There will be two in-class tests and a two-hour comprehensive final
exam. All tests will include both objective (e.g., multiple choice, fill in
the blank, etc.) and subjective (essay, identification) components. In
addition to the scheduled tests, there will also be any number of short answer
quizzes on the reading assignments. For a preview of the quizzes, questions,
students should access the online review questions for each chapter. The
quizzes are designed to familiarize the student with the types of objective
questions which will appear on the major tests.

 Writing: Each student will write two short (3-5 pp.) essays on the [primary
readings](read.html). Each essay should focus on one or more of the specific
reading selections. Your essay should not merely recount the narrative of the
selection but should also examine the context. Who is the author? What is the
author trying to say? What biases does the author exhibit, and, above all,
what does this particular selection tell you about the period in which it was
written? Do not try to explain the significance of the reading selection in
terms of today's society; rather, you should relate the reading to the time in
which it was produced. Aristotle's ideas about politics, for example, have
been very important throughout the history of western civilization, but if you
choose to write about them, you should explain them in terms of the politics
of classical Greece, rather than today's US political system. The first essay,
on at least one source reading, will be due by the first week of October; the
second essay, on two or more readings, is due by the middle of November. You
are encouraged to confer with me if you need help with this assignment.

 Student papers are to be typed, double-spaced. Each paper should have a cover
sheet with the student's name, the title of the essay, and the following text:

> I, ______________________ [signature], certify that this is a college-level
paper. I have proofread it completely and corrected any spelling or
grammatical errors. I have organized the material and tried to present it in
as clear a manner as possible. I have used my own words throughout the paper
and have limited the use of direct quotes from the sources to a minimum of one
per page. I have enclosed all such direct quotes in quotation marks and have
indicated the source of all quotes and paraphrases. I have included a
bibliography page for any source other than the text or the readings. I
understand that severe penalties will be assessed for sub-standard writing,
use of other writers' words instead of my own and failure to meet the deadline
set for this assignment.

 Papers are to be stapled in the top left corner. DO NOT use plastic or other
report covers.

 Reading: Students are expected to have each week's assignment read before
coming to Tuesday's class. Reading before each class will help you contribute
to any class discussion and will also help should I happen to give a quiz. You
should always take notes as you read: highlighting is not a very good way of
mastering large amounts of material. Don't worry if you don't understand
everything, and don't be afraid to ask questions in class.

 Grading: Your grade is based on approximately 1000 points (it will be more or
less than 1000, depending on how many quizzes I give.) Each quiz will count 1
point for each question (25 questions=25 pts.). Each hour test will count 200
points. The first essay will count 100 points; the second will count 200. The
final exam will count 300 points. NOTE: No student will be given a passing
grade who does not take the two tests, the final, at least three quizzes and
hand in both essays. There will be no exceptions to this rule.

Grade Scale (%):  
A=90-100  
B=80-89  
C=70-79  
D=60-69  
F=less than 60

  The numbers may vary depending on the number of quizzes taken. Plus or minus
may be added to the basic letter grade based upon my evaluation of each
student's contribution to the class. Poor attendance and participation may
result in a minus being given; good attendance and participation may result in
a plus being given. In addition, students who attend any of the various
college functions, including lectures, Pro Art concerts, etc., and who turn in
written summaries of their attendance, may be eligible for extra credit points
added to their totals.

 Attendance and Exclusion: Attendance and participation are very important to
your success in this class. You are expected to attend punctually and
participate actively in classes. I will deduct points from final grades of
students who have more than one unexcused absence. Make-ups will not be given
for missed quizzes, but provided the student has a valid excuse, the missed
quiz will not count. Makeups for missed tests (provided the student has a
valid excuse) will be given on the first Saturday after the final day of
classes. Only illness or death in the family will constitute valid excuses,
and third- party written excuses are to be presented to me on the day the
student returns to class. Excused or unexcused, no student who misses 33% or
more of the scheduled class sessions will receive credit for this course.
Failure to attend and participate may result in the Dean, upon my written
recommendation, excluding the student from the course with a grade of "W." A
student who is making no progress in a course may also be excluded from the
course (with a grade of "W") by the Dean of the College upon my
recommendation. This procedure is not used after the last day for dropping a
course. Please see me if you think your progress is unsatisfactory.

 The Honor Code: Students at UVA-Wise govern themselves through an honor
system which dates back to the nineteenth century. While the system itself is
primarily student-administered, I am a strong supporter of the code and will
not tolerate violations in the form of lying, cheating, stealing, or
plagiarism. On test days, please DO NOT talk about the content or difficulty
of the test until the tests are graded and returned. The constitution of the
UVAW Honor System is found in the student handbook, _The Source._

[Go to the Calendar](http://www.uvawise.edu/history/wciv1/cal.html).

* * *

**|[Main](index.html)|**

