History S105

U. S. History to 1877: Honors



James Haw Spring 2002

Office: CM 203; phone 481-6694; email Haw@ipfw.edu

Office hours: MWF 9-9:50, 11-11:50, and by appointment



This course provides a solid overview of U. S. History to 1877, an
introduction to historical methods, and opportunity to develop analytical
skills.



Course requirements and grades:



1. Four essay examinations, each counting 1/6 of the course grade. A good essay should respond clearly and directly to the question; should display sound reasoning or interpretation; should support the major points with evidence or explanation; should be consistent with the facts available to you; and should answer the question as thoroughly as time permits.



2. One paper based on one of the chapters listed on this syllabus from Wheeler and Becker, _Discovering the American Past_ , vol. 1, counts 1/6 of the course grade.



3. Class participation, evaluated qualitatively as well as quantititavely, counts 1/6 of the course grade.



Plagiarism or academic dishonesty will result in a grade of zero for the
assignment in question, and in such cases the course grade will be computed on
a strict numerical average. University regulations require a course grade of F
for unauthorized withdrawal. If a student stays in the course through the
final examination but fails to complete one or more course requirements,
grades of zero will be given for the uncompleted requirements and the course
grade will be computed on a strict numerical average.



_Tape recorders_ : History Department policy does not allow the use of tape
recorders in the classroom. The instructor will make exceptions on request for
students with disabilities.



_Required reading_ :



Paul Boyer et al, _The Enduring Vision_ , concise 4th ed., vol. 1

William Wheeler and Susan Becker, _Discovering the American Past_ , 5th ed,
v.1

_ Opposing Viewpoints in American History_, vol. 1



_Course outline and assignments_ :



Jan. 14 Introduction

16 Origins (Vision, 1-31; Viewpoints, 1-A)

18 Cortez and Montezuma (Discovering Am. Past, ch. 1)



23 Virginia (Vision, 31-32, 45-48)

25 Puritanism and Massachusetts (Vision, 32-45; Viewpoints, 1-B)



28 Massachusetts dissent (Discovering Am. Past, ch. 2; Viewpoints, 5-B)

30 The Restoration Empire (Vision, 49-62)

Feb. 1  Slavery (Vision, 48-49; Viewpoints, 10-A and B)



4 Colonial Politics, 1690-1760 (Vision, 62-72)

6 Great Awakening and Enlightenment (Vision, 72-78; Viewpoints, 7-A&B)

8  FIRST EXAMINATION



11 Crisis of Empire (Vision, 79-99; Viewpoints, 11-A and B)

13 Boston Massacre (Discovering Am. Past, ch. 4)

15 Independence (Vision, 99-114; Viewpoints, 13-A and B)



18 Fruits of the Revolution (Vision, 114-21)

20  Confederation on trial (Vision, 121-24; Viewpoints, 15-A and B)

22 The Constitution and Ratification (Vision, 124-29; Viewpoints, 16-A and B)



25 Hamilton vs. Jefferson (Vision, 130-37; Viewpoints, 18-A and B)

27 The 1794 Philadelphia election (Discovering Am. Past, ch. 5)

Mar. 1  Foreign affairs and party conflict (Vision, 137-49; Viewpoints, 20-A
and B)



4 Catch-up session

6 SECOND EXAMINATION

8 Origins of the War of 1812 (Vision, 157-65)



18 Jeffersonian America: internal politics (Vision, 150-57, 165-68)

20 Jeffersonian America: territorial expansion (Viewpoints, 21-A and B)

22 Growth and economic change, 1815-1850 (Vision, ch. 9 and 11)



25  Working women of Lowell (Wheeler and Becker, ch. 7)

27  Political change in the 1820s (Vision, 186-90; Viewpoints, 24-A and B)

29 Jacksonian democracy (Vision, 190-97; Viewpoints, 23-A and B)



Apr. 1 Age of reform (Vision, 197-206; Viewpoints, 27-A and B)

3 Slavery (Vision, ch. 12)

5 Slavery from the inside (Discovering Am. Past, ch. 8)



8 THIRD EXAMINATION

10 Texas, Oregon, and the Mexican War (Vision, 243-60; Viewpoints, 30-A and B)

12 Wilmot Proviso debate (Vision, 261-62; Discovering Am. Past, ch. 9)



15 Toward Civil War (Vision, 264-76; Viewpoints, 31-A and B)

17 Toward Civil War (Vision, 276-80; Viewpoints, 33-A and B)

19 Secession (Vision, 280-83; Viewpoints, 34-A and B)



22 Civil War (Vision, ch. 15; Viewpoints, 35-A and B)

24 Black soldiers in the Civil War (Discovering Am. Past, ch. 10)

26 Reconstruction (Vision, 309-20; Viewpoints, 40-A and B)



29 Reconstruction (Vision, 320-30; Viewpoints, 41-A and B)

May 1, 3 Catch-up or reading days



FOURTH EXAMINATION, Wednesday, May 8, 8-10 a.m.





HIST S105 Paper Requirements Spring 2002

James Haw



You are to write a paper on the major issue raised in _any one_ of the
chapters that are listed below from Wheeler and Becker, _Discovering the
American Past_ , vol. 1. The paper should be five to eight pages long, typed
double-spaced with one-inch margins, using 10-point or 12-point type. Papers
are due in class on the day that that chapter is discussed in class. _Late
papers will not be accepted after a chapter has been discussed in class_. (If
you have written a paper on one of these chapters and then are unable to
attend class on the day it is discussed, have someone bring it in for you on
the due date, or mail it to me so that it will be postmarked on the due date.)



Due dates and topics are listed below.



Chapter

|

Date due

|

Topic  
  
---|---|---  
  
1

|

Jan. 18

|

How did Cortez and other Europeans view the American Indians, and vice versa?
What consequences might these perceptions have had for European-Indian
relations?  
  
2

|

Jan. 28

|

Why was Anne Hutchinson expelled from Massachusetts Bay Colony?  
  
4

|

Feb. 13

|

Reconstruct what really happened at the Boston Massacre. Was Captain Preston
guilty?  
  
5

|

Feb. 27

|

Why did John Swanwick defeat Thomas Fitzsimons in the election? Who supported
each candidate, and why? (The questions to consider on pp. 113-116 are a good
guide to issues you should discuss.)  
  
7

|

Mar. 25

|

How did Francis Lowell try to make it acceptable for young women to come to
Lowell and work in his factory? What did public opinion think about Lowell and
its workers? How did the working women of Lowell react to their situation and
to criticisms of them? Did the Lowell women accept or reject the assumptions
of the "cult of true womanhood?"  
  
8

|

Apr. 5

|

What did the slaves think about slavery and their lives? (The questions to
consider on page 202 are a good guide to issues you should discuss; feel free
to add others if you wish.)  
  
9

|

Apr. 12

|

What arguments were made for and against the Wilmot Proviso? How fundamental
were the disagreements between North and South that this dispute revealed? Wht
disagreements, if any, were there among Northern speakers? Among Southern
speakers?  
  
10

|

Apr. 24

<td width=712 valign=top style='width:533.7pt;border-top:none;border-left:
none;border-bottom:solid windowtext .5pt;border-right:solid windowtext .5pt;
mso-border-top-alt:solid windowtext .5pt;mso-border-left-alt:solid windowtext
.5pt; padding:0in 5.4

