* * *

**HISTORY 75-B (SPRING 1996)**

* * *

**SECTIONAL DIFFERENCES AND THE COMING OF THE AMERICAN CIVIL WAR**

Instructor: T. Lloyd Benson  
Office: 213-A Furman Hall (next to the elevator)  
Office Hours:  
Monday-Friday: 11:00-12:00  
Tuesday through Thursday 1:30-3:00  
other times by appointment

Phone 294-3492 (Office) 232-2698 (Home)  
E-mail: Lloyd Benson (openmail) Benson@Furman.edu (internet)

**PURPOSES**

More than five generations have passed since the end of the Civil War. For
historians, however, the battle rages on. Traditionalists still contend with
revisionists who fend off attacks from Modernizationists, who debate with
Marxists, who challenge Agrarians, and so on. Ironically, there seems to be
less consensus now in the history profession about sectional differences and
the coming of the Civil War than in the first few generations after the war
ended. To better understand the range of interpretations, we will closely
examine the classic historical literature of the period leading up to
secession. Main themes of inquiry for the seminar will include: 1) how
different were the two sections, and how important were those differences to
the outbreak of war? 2) what was the role of slavery in the emergence of
sectional identity and sectional politics? 3) how influential were political
ideologies such as republicanism in shaping the motives of participants? 4) to
what extent was secession a popular movement?, and 5) how did the nation's
political structure help or inhibit sectionalism?

Because the senior seminar is the capstone course for the major, expectations
for performance are higher than in a standard lecture class. You are also
expected to be familiar with the most outlines of mid-nineteenth century
American history, and with the most important schools of historical thought,
including Progressivism, consensus/anti-progressivism, New Left revisionism,
republicanism, and ethnoculturalism. If any of these historical schools sound
unfamiliar be sure to read the optional Grob and Billias assignment during the
first week.

**FORMAT AND EXPECTATIONS**

This seminar will meet once a week for approximately two and a half hours, at
a time and place agreed upon by the group. Attendance is mandatory, and all
assignments will be due at meeting time.

Because the format will be discussion-only, both participation and
consideration of others will be especially important. Students who do not
speak, or who monopolize discussion, will not do as well as those who strike a
balance between the two skills. You will be expected to make at least one
relevant and sophisticated contribution each meeting. As a rule of thumb, if
you have made at least three comments in a session you should allow someone
else to speak. If you have additional points to make that did not come out in
discussion you may talk to the instructor or e-mail him after class.

In sessions where all participants read the same book, you will be asked to
prepare a book review of approximately three to four pages with a typed list
of two or three questions about the book for discussion by the group. In
sessions where each person has been assigned a different book, you will be
expected to prepare a book review and to give a five minute summary of your
book, including its interpretive structure, the three or four most important
events or themes the author discusses, and your own critical reaction to its
substance and approach. **Warning: out of respect to the other participants,
presentations that are longer than five minutes will be cut short, abruptly if
necessary, by the instructor**. Therefore, you should practice your timing
carefully in advance.

**BOOK REVIEW STANDARDS**

Reviews will be judged on three elements: 1) how effectively the book's
contents are summarized, 2) how intelligently and imaginatively you react to
the book, and 3) the clarity and sophistication of your writing style. The
instructor will look favorably on those essays which relate the current book
to ideas and themes discussed in previous books and previous sessions, and
which display an effort to approach the current book from an innovative and
unique angle. Reference to the main schools of history should be included in
reviews as a matter of course.

Use of professional reviews from scholarly journals as a source of insights
can be helpful. You are advised to read the book first and consult published
reviews afterward, however, so that your own views are not affected by the
review's slant. If you do use a published review, a copy of the review must be
submitted, and you must also give a review of the review in your paper stating
how well you think the reviewer did his or her job in analyzing the book. Note
that unattributed use of published reviews will be considered plagiarism.

**GRADING:**

The final course grade will be based on the following two components:

Book review essays/book questions/Mini research papers 64 percent  
Class participation and debates (attendance, discussion, improvement, etc.) 36
percent

**SCHEDULE:**

History 75 should meet according to the following schedule, though the
instructor reserves the right to make changes without advance notice. In weeks
with multiple titles, you will be assigned a specific book at least one week
in advance. All assignments are due at the beginning of the class meeting.
Note also that failure to make proper computer backup files will not be
considered a valid excuse. Do not start writing until you know how to make
copies of your work!

* * *
    
    
    **WEEK**         **TOPIC**                                                                       
    
    **Week 1:**      **Introduction**                                                                
    Mar. 5-8                                                                                 
    
    **Week 2:**      **The Contours of Sectional Distinctiveness**                                   
    Mar. 11-15   Read Pease and Pease, _Web of Progress: Private Values and Public Styles in_  
                 _Boston and Charleston, 1828-1843,_ and Edward Pessen,  "How Different from    
                 Each Other Were the Antebellum North and South?" _American Historical_        
                 _Review_ LXXXV (December 1980), 1119-1149 (on reserve).  _Optional:_ Grob and   
                 Billias, Introduction to _Interpretations of American History_ (on reserve).  
    
    **Week 3:**      **Political Background**                                                        
    Mar. 18-22   Read William Cooper, _The South and the Politics of Slavery._                 
    
    **Week 4:**      **The Abolitionist Impulse**                                                    
    Mar. 25-29   Read Harriet Beecher Stowe, _Uncle Tom's Cabin_. (supplemental readings       
                 T.B.A.)                                                                     
    
    **Week 5:**      **Family, Community, and the Southern Crisis**                                  
    April 1-4    Read Stephanie McCurry, _Masters of Small Worlds: Yeoman Households, Gender_  
                 _Relations, & the Political Culture of the Antebellum South Carolina Low_     
                 _Country._                                                                    
                                                                                
    
    **Week 6:**      **Changing Interpretations of Civil War Causation**                             
    April 9-12   Read Eric Foner,  "The Causes of the American Civil War: Recent              
                 Interpretations and New Directions," (on reserve) and excerpts from E.A.    
                 Pollard, James Ford Rhodes, Arthur C. Cole, Roy F. Nichols, and Bruce       
                 Levine (to be assigned).                                                    
                                                                                
    
    **Week 7:**      **The Emergence of Northern Sectional Politics**                                
    April 15-19  William Geinapp, _The Origins of the Republican Party, 1852-1856_ , or Eric    
                 Foner, _Free Soil, Free Labor, Free Men: The Ideology of the Republican_      
                 _Party Before the Civil War_.                                                 
    
    **Week 8:**      **Contemporary Comparisons**                                                    
    April 22-26  Read Hinton R. Helper, _The Impending Crisis of the South: How to Meet It_    
                 or Thomas P. Kettell, _Southern Wealth and Northern Profits_.                 
    
    
    

* * *

* * *
    
    
    **WEEK**         **TOPIC**                                                                       
    
    **Week 9:**      **The Road to Secession**                                                       
    Apr. 29-     Individuals will prepare and present brief reports (3 pages plus            
    May 3        bibliography) on the following topics:                                      
                 Personal liberty laws                                                       
                 Bleeding Kansas                                                             
                 Panic of 1857                                                               
                 Dred Scott case                                                             
                 Lecompton Constitution (before congressional submission)                    
                 Congressional LeCompton debates                                             
                 James Buchanan                                                              
                 Lincoln-Douglas debates                                                     
                 John Brown's Raid                                                           
                 Disputed House speakership election                                         
    
    **Week 10:**     **1860: Chronology of Crisis:**                                                 
    May 6-10     Individuals will prepare and present a summary of a four to eight week      
                 period using secondary sources and newspapers.                              
    
    **Week 11:**     **States, Communities, Personalities**                                          
    May 13-17    Steven Channing, _Crisis of Fear: Secession in South Carolina_                
                 William L. Barney, _The Secessionist Impulse: Alabama and Mississippi in_     
                 _1860_                                                                        
                 J. Mills Thornton, _Politics and Power in a Slave Society: Alabama,_          
                 _1800-1860_                                                                   
                 Freehling  & Simpson, eds., _Secession Debated: Georgia's Showdown in 1860_    
                 Walter E. Buenger, _Secession and the Union in Texas_                         
                 Percy L. Rainwater, _Mississippi: Storm Center of Secession_                  
                 Willie M. Caskey, _The Secession and Restoration of Louisiana_                
                 J. William Harris, _Plain Folk and Gentry in a Slave Society_                 
                 Ralph Wooster, _The Secession Conventions of the South_                       
                 Eric H. Walther, _The Fire-eaters_                                            
    
    **Week 12:**     **Secession Winter**                                                            
    May 20-22     "Politics, Slavery, and Southern Secession," in Michael F. Holt, _The_        
                 _Political Crisis of the 1850s,_ pp. 219-259. __ (on reserve)                    
    
    
    

