**

HISTORY 1531

A HISTORY OF THE SOVIET UNION, 1917-1991

**

Professor Terry Martin

To download a PDF version of this syllabus, please click [here](1531syl.pdf).



Classroom: Sever 110 |

Office Hrs. Tu 11:15-12:30  
  
---|---  
TuTh 10-11 |

Coolidge Hall #206  
  
  |

e-mail: martin11@fas.harvard.edu  
  
****

**

Course Description

**

This course analyzes the history of the Soviet Union from its establishment
after the October revolution of 1917 to its collapse in 1991 after the failed
reforms of Mikhail Gorbachev. There will be two hours of lectures a week and
an hour of discussion. The lectures will address some of the following issues:
revolutionary class politics, the role of terror, nationalism and ethnic
relations, everyday social practices, the experience of total war, the Cold
war, the rise of political dissent, gender, and the causes of the collapse of
the Soviet Union. The discussion will be based on the reading of primary
sources designed to give the students a sense of what it was like to live in
the Soviet Union. We will read two novellas, three memoirs by Soviet emigres,
as well as numerous autobiographies of Soviet citizens, two accounts by
western journalists, confidential documents on the Cold War and Great Terror,
and a selection of propaganda, poems, songs and jokes. The goal will be to
give the student an understanding of how the Soviet system worked (and failed
to work) as a society, culture and state.

**



Undergraduate Requirements

** Section Participation | 10% | Regular participation in section and six one-
page written responses to the assigned readings over the course of the
semester.  
  
  
---|---|---  
Take-Home Midterm | 20% | Distributed April 4th. Due April 9th. Two short
essays on lectures and assigned readings.  
  
  
Term Paper | 35% | Due May 15th. 10-12 page paper on topic of student's
choice. A bibliography of English-language primary sources is available on the
course web site.  
  
  
Final Exam | 35%  | Standard 3 hour final.  
  
**



Graduate Requirements

** Take-Home Midterm | 20% | Handed out April 4th. Due April 9th. Two short
essays on lectures and assigned readings.  
  
  
---|---|---  
Research Paper | 80% | Due May 17th. 25-30 page research paper.  
  
  
**Web Site** |  http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~hist1531  
  
  
  
**



Schedule of Readings

** Week 1 (Feb. 5-7)  |   |

Dune, _Notes of a Red Guard_  
Suny, chaps. 1-2  
  
  
---|---|---  
Week 2 (Feb. 12-14)  |   | Fitzpatrick and Slezkine, _In the Shadow of
Revolution_ , 3-165.  
Von Geldern and Stites, 3-32.  
Suny, chaps. 3-4  
  
  
Week 3 (Feb. 19-21)  |   | Fitzpatrick and Slezkine, _In the Shadow of
Revolution_ , 167-301.  
VGS, 52-56, 69-73, 85-120.  
Suny, chaps. 5-6  
  
  
Week 4 (Feb. 26-28)  |   |

Dolot, _Execution by Hunger,_ 62-69.  
VGS, 142, 148-56.  
Suny, chaps. 7, 9  
  
  
  
Week 5 (Mar. 5-7)  |   | Scott, _Behind the Urals  
_ VGS, 128-38, 156-63, 172-81, 212-13 _  
_ Suny, chaps. 8, 10  
  
  
Week 6 (Mar. 12-14)  |   | Andreev-Khomiakov, _Bitter Waters  
_ VGS, 216-27, 234-38, 284-85, 296-98 _  
_ Suny, chap. 12  
  
  
Week 7 (Mar. 19-21)  |   | Chukovskaya, _Sofia Petrovna  
_ Siegelbaum and Sokolov, __Stalinism as a Way of Life_ , _216-249 _.  
_ Getty, _The Road to Terror_ , 470-81 _  
_ VGS _,_ 298-302, 315-21, 325-27, 328-30 _  
_ Suny, chap. 11  
  
  
Week 8 (Apr. 2-4)  |   | Kozhina, _Through the Burning Steppe  
_ VGS, 330-38, 341-45, 371-87, 392-407  
Suny, chaps. 13-14  
  
  
Week 9 (Apr. 9-11)  |   | Jensen, _Origins of the Cold War  
_ VGS, 450-89  
Suny, chaps. 15-16  
  
  
Week 10 (Apr. 16-18) |   | Alexeyeva, _The Thaw Generation  
_ Khrushchev, "Secret Speech" in __Khrushchev Remembers_ ,_ pp. 559-618  
Suny, chap. 17-18  
  
  
Week 11 (Apr. 23-25)  |   | Baranskaya, _A Week Like any Other_ , 1-62  
Smith, _The Russians_ , 166-95  
Suny, chap. 19-20  
  
  
Week 12 (Apr. 30-May 2)  |   | Kotkin, _Steeltown USSR_  
  


**

Books Available at Coop

**

Alexeyeva, Ludmilla and Goldberg, Paul. _The Thaw Generation. Coming of Age
in_   _the Post-Stalin Era_

__

Andreev-Khomiakov, Gennady. _Bitter Waters. Life and Work in Stalin's Russia_

Baranskaya, Natalya. _A Week Like Any Other_

Chukovskaya, Lydia. _Sofia Petrovna_

Dolot, Miron. _Execution by Hunger. The Hidden Holocaust_

Dune, Eduard. _Notes of a Red Guard_

Fitzpatrick, Sheila and Slezkine, Yuri. _In the Shadow of Revolution: Life
Stories of Russian_

_

Women from 1917 to the Second World War

_

Jensen, Kenneth ed. _The Origins of the Cold War_

Kotkin, Stephen. _Steeltown USSR_

Kozhina, Elena. _Through the Burning Steppe: A Memoir of Wartime Russia,
1942-1943_

Scott, John. _Behind the Urals. An American Worker in Russia's City of Steel_

Suny, Ronald. _The Soviet Experiment. Russia, The USSR and the Successor
States_

von Geldern, James and Stites, Richard. _Mass Culture in Soviet Russia. Tales,
Poems,_

_

Songs, Movies, Plays and Folklore, 1917-1953

_**



Books and Articles on Reserve

**__

J. Arch Getty and Oleg Naumov, _The Road to Terror_

Khrushchev, Nikita, _Khrushchev Remembers_

Siegelbaum, Lewis and Sokolov, Andrei, _Stalinism as a Way of Life_

Smith, Hedrick, _The Russians_

NOTE: ALL BOOKS AVAILABLE AT COOP ARE ALSO ON RESERVE

**



Teaching Fellow

**

Robert Cliver

cliver@fas.harvard.edu

