PSY 280 Abnormal Psychology, Summer 2002

Syllabus



Instructor: Jennifer Durst Office: MSU Psychological Clinic, 5C Olds Hall
Phone: 355-9564



Office Hours: Mon. and Wed. immediately after class until 1:30 (if no one
approaches me after class I most likely won't go to my office)



Email:  [durstjen@msu.edu](mailto:durstjen@msu.edu)

Course web page: <http://www.worthpublishers.com/comerabnormalpsychology4e>

Syllabus also posted at
[http://www.psychology.msu.edu](http://www.psychology.msu.edu/) (click on
'course websites' in the undergraduate section)



_Course Description:_ This course focuses on the etiology (explanation),
description, diagnosis, and treatment of psychological disorders in both
adults and children. Specifically, the course examines disorders related to
anxiety and mood, substance abuse, eating and sexual issues, as well as
disorders of childhood and old age, cognitive disorders, factitious disorders
and schizophrenia, among others. These subjects will be covered via reading
assignments, lectures, and group work. In addition, students will complete
several individual and group in-class and out-of-class assignments, a midterm
and final exam, and a final paper.



_Student Course Objectives:_

，        to understand different theoretical explanations for mental illness

，        to become familiar with disorders as currently defined by the DSM-IV

，        to understand the effect of culture and context on our definitions of
mental illness

，        to become familiar with different assessment and diagnostic
techniques, and treatment methodologies



_Required text:_



Abnormal Psychology, 4th edition by Ronald J. Comer



_Course requirements:_



，        Midterm Exam (100 pts.) - will assess knowledge of material covered
during the first half of the class. Format will consist of multiple choice,
true/false, and short answer questions.



，        Final Exam (100pts.) - will assess knowledge of material covered
during the second half of the class. Format will consist of multiple choice,
true/false, and short answer questions.



，        Quizzes (20 pts. each) - there will be a quiz each week for a total
of 6; your lowest quiz score will be dropped. Quizzes will cover mostly
material from the book. 100 total points possible.



，        Group/individual assignments (20 pts. each) - There will be 17 total
graded group or individual assignments; your lowest two grades will be
dropped, leaving 300 total points possible. Most of these assignments will
take place IN CLASS and will be unannounced. If you are absent, you will
receive a score of 0 for the assignment. More information on group work will
be given in class.



，        Paper (150 pts.) - The 8-10 page, double-spaced case study paper
assignment examines an individual's life and behavior from a single
theoretical perspective (e.g. psychodynamic, biological, behavioral,
cognitive, humanistic). You should choose a figure from history, literature,
the arts (i.e. movies), or current events to be the focus of your paper (you
CANNOT pick someone known only to you, e.g. friend or relative or yourself).
You must clear your choice with me first (see Schedule of Classes section of
syllabus for last date to do this). Acceptable cases are those for which
enough information is available about the person's behavior and circumstances
(e.g. family living conditions, major life events and history). The 8-10 pages
consist of three sections: 1. 2-3 pages summarizing the person's behavior and
symptoms (details are presented in theory-free language, but choose them
primarily for their relevance to your chosen theoretical perspective), ending
with a diagnosis using all five axes of the DSM-IV; 2. 4-5 pages explaining
the individual's behavior, using specific concepts from your chosen
theoretical perspective (e.g. specific defense mechanisms, faulty cognitions,
stigma, etc.); and 2-3 pages outlining a hypothetical treatment based again on
your chosen theoretical perspective (e.g. psychoanalysis/dynamic therapy,
systematic desensitization, medication). You should include in this section
your prediction about the likelihood of success or failure of this treatment
with the individual in question.

The following is an example list of real and fictional people that could be
used for your paper. Remember to consider whether information available about
the chosen person/character provides you with enough material to complete the
paper (e.g. may not provide you with enough history of the character). Also,
many books, movies, information on historical figures will imply or tell you
from which disorder the person/character in question suffered, but this may
not be the most accurate diagnosis in all cases (especially if
material/information is older than DSM-IV [1994]). Base your diagnosis on DSM-
IV criteria and information learned in class.



，        Ernest Hemingway, Vincent Van Gogh, Betty Ford, Holden Caulfield,
Norman Bates, Ted Bundy, William Styron, John Nash, Elizabeth Wertzel, Kay
Redfield Jamison, Sylvia Plath, Temple Grandin, Marilyn Monroe, Ed Gein,
Susanna Kayson, Hannibal Lector



，        Obviously, there are 100s, if not 1000s, of more possibilities. You
are encouraged to choose someone on your own.



，        Extra credit (35 total points possible):

，        Online quizzes (3 pts. each): you can take up to 5 of the online
quizzes for credit (available on course website). There is one for each
chapter assigned. You must print out your results sheet and turn it in to me
(in class) within one class period after the chapter was assigned (i.e. if you
decide to take the online quiz for Chapter 1, which is supposed to be read for
Tues., July 2, you would need to turn results in to me no later than Wed.,
July 3, one class period after chapter was assigned). This means that you
can't just do all the quizzes at the end of class and turn them in en masse;
well, you can, but won't get any credit for them. (15 total points possible)



，        Study participation (20 points): you can participate in one of the
several clinically-related research studies being conducted this summer via
the Psychology Dept. subject pool. You will need to earn at least 4 one-half
hour credits (2 hours total) to receive the 20 points (no partial points
awarded). Directions on how to access the subject pool and sign up for
experiments, as well as a list of acceptable experiments, will be discussed in
class. I will receive information on whether you participated, but it is
always in your best interest to have back-up proof (i.e. white card signed,
experimenter's name).



Total class points: 750

Total with extra credit: 785



_Grading*:_ 675-750 4.0

638-674 3.5

600-637 3.0

563-599 2.5

525-562 2.0

488-525 1.5

450-487 1.0

below 450 0.0



*Grading most likely will be on a straight scale as indicated above. If the _majority of students_ ' grades would improve by implementing a curve, then I will grade on a curve. This is usually not the case and I will not know if a curve will be helpful UNTIL ALL GRADES ARE IN AT THE END OF CLASS. My advice is to base your grade on the scale given above.



_Important information to consider:_

，        The shortened summer half-session requires that we cover a lot of
material in a short period of time. Therefore, attendance is extremely
important. If you know you are going to miss several classes, you should not
take the class. Many graded assignments, both group and individual, will be
completed during class and will not be announced. In addition, you will not be
allowed to make up these assignments or quizzes if you miss class (please
don't ask).

，        Schedule of adding, dropping, etc. for second summer session

Start of Classes: July 1  
End of tuition refund: July 12  
Middle of Session and Last day to drop with no grade reported: July 24  
Final date to Withdraw From classes with grades Of W or 0.0 reported: Aug. 2  
Classes End: Aug 15  
  

_Schedule of classes:_ (Readings should be done **prior** to the class with
which they're listed):



1\. Mon., July 1: Introduction to course



2\. Tues., July 2: Context, culture, and "abnormal" behavior - Chapter 1



3\. Wed., July 3: Assessment and Diagnosis - Chapter 4, **Quiz 1**



4\. Mon., July 8: Models of "abnormal" behavior - Chapter 3



5\. Tues., July 9: Mood disorders - Chapter 7



6\. Wed., July 10: Anxiety disorders - Chapters 5 and 6, **Quiz 2**



7\. Mon., July 15: Disorders of childhood and old age - Chapter 18



8\. Tues., July 16: Somatoform, Factitious, and Psychophysical disorders -
Chapter 10



9\. Wed., July 17: Cognitive disorders - Chapter 16, **Quiz 3**. _Paper topic
due (no extensions)_



10\. Mon., July 22: Midterm exam



11\. Tues., July 23: Eating disorders - Chapter 11



12\. Wed., July 24: Substance-related disorders; Suicide - Chapters 12 and 9,
**Quiz 4**



13\. Mon., July 29: Sexual/Gender identity disorders - Chapter 13



14\. Tues., July 30: Schizophrenia - Chapters 14 and 15



15\. Wed., July 31: Other Axis I disorders, **Quiz 5**



16\. Mon., Aug. 5: Personality Disorders - Chapter 17



17\. Tues., Aug. 6: Treatment issues



18\. Wed., Aug. 7: Psychodynamic therapy - pp. 224-226, 246-247, 376-377,
462-465. Also, read about the story Oedipus at one or more of the following
websites. Paper due (no extensions), **Quiz 6**

<http://classics.mit.edu/Sophocles/oedipus.html;> (full text)
[http://www.users.g
lobalnet.co.uk/~loxias/myth.htm;](http://www.users.globalnet.co.uk/~loxias/myth.htm;)
(synopsis) <http://www.theatrehistory.com/ancient/oedipus001.html> (synopsis)



19\. Mon., Aug. 12: Cognitive and behavioral treatments, medication/biological
- pp. 146-151, 226-230, pp. 232-239, 241-246, 313-316, 377-381, 454-462



20\. Tues., Aug. 13: Treatment comparisions - pp. 239-241



21\. Wed., Aug. 14: Final exam





