|  ![](images/stsl_bnl.gif) |  syllabus |  ![](images/stsl_bnr.gif)  
---|---|---  
  
**Introduction to Psychology**

**The University of Alabama**

**PY 101- 010**

**Fall 2000 Syllabus**



**Class Meeting Times: M,W,F, 2:00 - 2:50 p.m.**

**Location: Room 208, Gordon Palmer Hall**

**Instructor: Kim Dixon, M.A.**

**Office: Room 400, Gordon Palmer Hall**

**Office Hours: Monday & Wednesday, 1:00 - 2:00 p.m. , and by appt. **

**Phone: 348-5083**

**Email: dixon002@bama.ua.edu**



**_Required Text_ : **

**Baron, R.A. (1998). _Psychology_ (4th ed.). Needham Heights, MA: **

**Allyn & Bacon. **

**_Optional/Suggested_ :**

**Seta, C.E., Seta, J., & Paulus, P. (1998). _Study guide plus for Baron_
_Psychology_ (4th ed.). Needham Heights, MA: Allyn  & Bacon. **

**Additional handouts and supplemental readings may be distributed during
class.**

**_Course Description and Objectives_**

**This is an introductory course intended to introduce students to the
fascinating field of psychology by providing an overview of current knowledge.
We will cover numerous topics within the broad field of psychology such as
basic neuroanatomy, intelligence, emotion, personality, psychological
disorders and treatment, cognition and perception, social psychology, and the
relation between psychological distress and health. Overall, emphasis will be
placed on developing critical thinking skills which will allow you to apply
scientific principles to everyday life.**

**_Course Format_**

**The class format may be a bit new for you. There will be a combination of
lecture, viewing of videos, class discussion, and in-class activities such as
small group projects and demonstrations of particular psychological phenomena.
I encourage you to bring up in class any thoughts or questions you might have
as they arise. Although you will not be graded on class participation per se,
I hope that you will feel comfortable offering comments and questions on a
regular basis. Remember, if you have a question, someone else in class
probably has the same question. It is expected that you will come to class
having read the assigned chapter in the text and study guide as this will
serve to facilitate learning of the material.**

**_Course Requirements_ **

**1. _Attendance:_ Although attendance is not mandatory, it will be extremely
important for success in this class. Unannounced pop-quizzes and/or extra
credit assignments which cannot be made up, will be given throughout the
semester. Also, novel material not covered in the text will often be presented
and discussed, therefore, if you must miss a class, it is strongly suggested
that you review notes of your classmates. Active participation will greatly
enhance your understanding and ability to master the material. **

**2. _Lecture Material and Assigned Readings:_ You are responsible for all
assigned readings whether or not they are covered in class. It is impossible
in a introductory course of this nature to fully cover every topic in class.
One of the major transitions to college studies is assuming responsibility for
your own learning. Class time is designed to highlight or discuss key
principles; however, not all topics from the text will be covered in class and
likewise, lectures will often introduce material not covered in the text. All
information covered in class, whether it be video clips, class discussion, or
group activities, is fair game for the exams. **

**3. _Exams:_ Four exams are scheduled for the semester. Due to the size of
the class, exam format will be multiple choice. We will review test material
prior to each exam to insure that you have the information necessary to do
well. Additionally, a minimum of 25% of exam questions will come directly from
the study guide. **

**_Note: There will be no make-up tests except in the case of medical_
_emergency or death in the family (a written note from a physician will be_
_required). To be eligible for a make-up exam, I must be notified within 24 of
the missed_ _exam_ _(preferably before). Make-up exams will be given on the
day of the final exam and will consist of essay questions. Failure to make-up
an exam will result_ _in_ _a score of zero_. **

**4. _Research Requirements_ : The Psychology Department requires all PY 101
students to participate in three (3) psychological studies during the
semester. You will find participation in these activities to be quite
interesting, for the most part *-). You can expect to spend only about 2-3
hours on these projects. The purpose of this requirement is to expose you to
research methods that are employed in our field. Departmental faculty members
and/or graduate and undergraduate honors students conduct these studies and
are much appreciative of your participation. If you are uncomfortable
participating in these studies, you will have the opportunity to complete
alternate assignments. Note: Details regarding this course requirement are
forthcoming and will be described in detail at a later date. If you fail to
complete the research studies in a timely manner, points will be deducted from
your final grade. Additionally, if you fail to complete the research
requirement, you will be assigned an Incomplete.**

**5. _Extra Credit:_ Opportunities for extra credit may be provided during the
semester and will be described in class as they become available. **

**_Course Grading_**

**Your course grade will be determined as follows:**

**Exam 1 25%**

**Exam 2 25%**

**Exam 3 25%**

**Final Exam (Cumulative) 25% Omit if grade of A**

**_Grading Scale_**

**The University of Alabama utilizes a +/- grading system as follows:**

**A+ = 97-100**

**A = 93-96**

**A- = 90-92**

**B+ = 87-89**

**B = 83-86**

**B- = 80-82**

**C+ = 77-79**

**C= 73-76**

**C- = 70-72**

**D+ = 67-69**

**D = 63-66**

**D- = 60-62**

**F = 59 and below**

**_Note_ : All grades will be calculated to one decimal point and then rounded
to the nearest whole number (e.g., 79.6 = 80; 79.4 = 79). I encourage you to
discuss your grades with me throughout the semester. If you are having
difficulty, I may be able to help you get back on course. **

**_Office Hours:_ My office hours are your time. I encourage each of you to
drop by during office hours to raise any questions or voice concerns you may
have. Additionally, if you have difficulty coming at the designated times,
feel free to contact me about scheduling an appointment. I will be glad to
answer questions via email as well. **

**_Academic Misconduct:_ Academic misconduct (e.g., cheating on exams,
plagiarism, etc.) will not be tolerated and will be dealt with in accordance
with the Academic Misconduct Disciplinary Policy that appears in the student
affairs handbook. **

**_Special Needs:_ If you are in need of special assistance in the classroom
due to a disability of any type, please contact Disability Services at
348-4285 so that arrangements can be made to accommodate you. After initial
arrangements are made with that office, please contact me. **

**_Other Important Information:_ The course schedule and procedures outlined
in this syllabus are subject to change in the event of extenuating
circumstances. However, every attempt will be made to follow the syllabus as
written. If changes are necessary, I will notify you as soon as possible.**

**Facilitating Class Success**

**Read the assigned material prior to class. This will prepare you for the
information we cover in class.**

**Attend every class. You cannot get all of the information from the texts.**

**Review your notes often. The best time is right after class, or within a few
hours of class. You can develop questions this way, and have them ready to ask
during the next class.**

**Use the study guide! It is very useful in helping you think critically about
the readings as well as in framing the information in a logical manner. I
strongly suggest that you utilize the study guide in preparing for exams.**

**Take advantage of office hours to ask questions that may arise or to clarify
specific concerns.**

**PY 101-010 Tentative Class Schedule**

**(Assignment includes text and associated study guide chapters)**



**Date Day Topic Assignment**

**Aug 23 W Introduction & Course Overview **

**Aug 25 F Psychology as a Science Chapter 1**

**Aug 28 M " "**

**Aug 30 W " "**

**Sep 1 F Overview of Statistics Appendix: p. 704**

**Sep 4 M LABOR DAY HOLIDAY--NO CLASS!!**

**Sep 6 W Biological Bases of Behavior Chapter 2**

**Sep 8 F " "**

**Sep 11 M " "**

**Sep 13 W ~~Sensation & Perception Chapter 3 ~~omit**

**Sep 15 F " "**

**Sep 18 M States of Consciousness Chapter 4**

**Sep 20 W " "**

**LAST DAY TO WD WITHOUT GRADE**

**Sep 22 F Review/Catch Up Day**

**Sep 25 M EXAM 1 Chapters 1-4**

**Sep 27 W Learning Chapter 5**

**Sep 29 F " "**

**Oct 2 M " "**

**Oct 4 W Memory Chapter 6**

**Oct 6 F " "**

**Oct 9 M Human Development: Part 1 Chapter 8**

**Oct 11 W " "**

**Oct 13 F " "**

**Oct 16 M Human Development: Part 2 Chapter 9**

**Oct 18 W " "**

**Oct 20 F " "**

**Oct 23 M ~~Motivation & Emotion Chapter 10~~ omit**

**Oct 25 W " "**

**Oct 27 F Review/Catch Up Day**

**Oct 30 M Exam 2 Chapters 5-6, 8-10**

**Nov 1 W Intelligence Chapter 11**

**Nov 3 F " "**

**Nov 6 M Personality Chapter 12**

**Nov 8 W " "**

**Nov 10 F " "**

**Nov 13 M Psychological Disorders Chapter 14**

**Nov 15 W " "**

**Nov 17 F " "**

**Nov 20 M Therapy Chapter 15**

**Nov 22 W No Class**

**Nov 24 F Thanksgiving Holiday!!**

**Nov 27 M Therapy**

**Nov 29 W Review/Catch Up Day**

**Dec 1 F Exam 3 Chapters 11-12, 14-15**

**Dec 4 M Social Thought & Behavior Chapter 16**

**Dec 6 W " "**

**Dec 8 F " "**



**Dec 12 TUE FINAL COMPREHENSIVE EXAM!! 2:00-4:30 pm**

  
  
|

[![](images/stsl_lgb.gif)  
Home Page](index.htm)

|

[![](images/stsl_lgb.gif)  
**syllabus**](syllab.htm)

|

[![](images/stsl_lgb.gif)  
course materials](toc.htm)

|

[![](images/stsl_lgb.gif)  
vita](vitab.htm)

|

![](images/stsl_lgb.gif)  
other links  
  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
![](images/stsl_bar.gif)



Kim Embleton Dixon  
[dixon002@bama.ua.edu](mailto:dixon002@bama.ua.edu)  
Date Last Modified: 1/14/00  

