### ![](tec.gif)Psychology 101 TEC Syllabus

* * *

Location: GPAB 4413, 4421, and the WEB

Phone: 828-9347

Psychology Office: 808 W. Franklin St.

Phone: 828-1193

Psy101 Office: 104, 810 W. Franklin

Phone: 828-1118

* * *

Welcome to VCU's Psychology 101 Technologically Enhanced Classroom (TEC). We
designed TEC to help students in Psychology 101 learn more about the field's
theories, findings, and applications through the use of computer-based
learning technologies. We call this portion of Psyhology 101 "TEC" instead of
a "lab" because the word lab doesn't describe what you will do in this class.
A "lab," or laboratory, is a physical place where scientists carry out their
researches (they "labor" in the "labor-atory"). But Psy101 TEC isn't a
physical place; its a collection of technologically-based tools that you can
use to learn about psychology. The classroom is not located just in the GPAB,
but also on the Internet, on the World-Wide-Web, and just about any place you
can find a computer that will help you study psychology.

**Goals of Psychology 101 TEC**

TEC is designed to help you accomplish a variety of learning outcomes. Some of
them are strictly related to psychology: We will cover many topics, including
research methods, physiological processes, states of consciousness, learning,
memory, development, and adjustment. Others, though, are more general in
nature: You will develop skill in using the computer, interact extensively
with others, and be challenged to think critically.

1\. You will learn about psychology. We will examine a host of key topics in
the field, including research methods, brain-behavior relationships, sensation
and perception, sleep and consciousness, learning and motivation,
developmental processes, intelligence, personality, stress, psychopathology,
and social processes.

2\. You will learn how to "think like a psychologist." We hope that will
become a psychologist for the semester as you examine how psychologists
generate their theories, how they do research, and assumptions that guide them
in their work. Learning how psychological knowledge is created is as important
a goal as learning the findings and theories of the field.

3\. You will to take an active, involved approach to studying psychology.
Because Psy101 is a College of Humanities and Sciences **General Education**
course, it is designed to increase your involvement in the subject of
psychology, and in your learning in general. It requires active student
involvement in the subject matter. The course will make use of collaborative
learning through small group settings, computer networks and e-mail, and it
will promote communication, critical thinking, computer literacy and ethical
thinking. In also requires the development of conceptual skills, such as the
ability to apply the material, skill in retrieving information relevant to
problems at hand, problem solving, and facility in expressing understanding.

4\. You will acquire insight into yourself and into other people. Psychology
101 examines people, and so many people often view themselves in a somewhat
different light after taking the course. Psychology is also useful in many
professional, business, and vocational settings.

**Format**

Psychology 101-TEC delivers course instruction for psychology through
multimedia instructional programs, e-mail, and the World Wide Web. The
Psychology Department server provides students with access to a group of basic
tools (e.g., writing and statistical programs), network tools (e.g., e-mail
and access to the university library catalog), and a group of psychology-
related tools (e.g., multimedia simulations, hypertext, and lecture notes).
Many of the activities will be carried out during your weekly TEC session, but
you can complete others whenever it is most convenient to you. TEC facilitates
learning by making use of computer-based (1) interactive teaching programs,
(2) interactive demonstrations, (3) research simulations, (4) asynchronous
instruction by the course instructor; (5) programmed assessment, and (6) other
computer-based resources.

1\. Interactive teaching programs. Many "interactive" computer programs have
been installed on the computers in TEC. These programs are interactive in the
sense that they ask you to respond to the content they present, and allow you
to control the direction of the intstruction. You can, for example, run
programs that teach such concepts as operant and classical conditioning,
neuronal structures, schedules of reinforcement, Piaget's theory of
development.

2\. Interactive demonstration programs. A variety of psychological processes
and applications will be demonstrated via computer simulations. One program,
for example, will teach you to distinguish among myriad psychological
disorders by asking you to play the role of a clinician who must diagnose a
client. Another lets you role-play a rat in a maze responding to
reinforcements.

3\. Simulated psychological experiments. Software installed on the network
allows you to replicate classic studies of psychological processes--often by
serving as a subject yourself. One program, for example, examines how you
process words: are your memories for words different when you think about
their meaning, or about how they are spelled? You will find out in TEC.

4\. Electronically facilitated instruction. Depending on your section's
requirements, you will interact, electronically, with you TEC instructor,
other students, and course instructor during the session and at other times
during the week. The course instructor can post motivational and instructive
questions and comments to the course WEB page, and students can reply to all
postings as well. Instructors may also add specialized readings to the course
by posting them to the WEB, or by having you visit WEB sites that are relevant
to psychology. In some cases "guest lecturers" also post messages when someone
asks a question that is better answered by someone other than the course
instructor. Much of this communication occurs outside of the scheduled TEC
hour, but the TEC hour is used for training in email communication.

5\. Programmed assessment. Depending on your section's requirements,
assignments (essay questions) will be made regularly via email to students,
who must respond via email as well. You will also complete, at regular
intervals, diagnostic quizes that determine your progress in the course. If
technologically feasible these quizes will be administered via computer.

6\. Optional learning resources. The simulations, quizes, and discussions play
a central role in the experience, but other resources will also be provided to
students in TEC. You can, for example, access a computerized study guide that
offers such options as practice tests, review of major concepts, true-false
testing, vocabulary building. Some instructors of the lecture section may also
make available their notes to via the Web. More advanced students can also use
other features of the network, at their own discretion. You can, for example,
use the network to reach the library's catalog, and conduct searches for
research materials and books from the TEC. You can also reach the library's
catalog of psychology research, which is an on-line search program for
reviewing recent articles published on psychological topics. You can also gain
access to internet groups that deal with psychological topics.

**Your Responsibilities**

As a student, you are responsible, at minimum, for coming to class, studying
the material, and completing the activities (including quizzes and papers).
Your task of learning psychology, however, will be much easier if you get
involved in the class as much as your busy schedule allows. Feel free to ask
questions and visit the classroom during the Open Hours. These are times when
no class is scheduled, but GTAs are available to answer your questions. The
Open Hours are also the best time to use the tutor program and Internet. You
can also access some of the learning materials from home if you have a
subscription to an internet provider (such as AOL or Erols).

You are individually and personally responsible for your learning in TEC. When
a particular topic interests you, you can delve deeply into the subject. If
you feel challenged by a concept or topic, you can re-run programs and move
through them slowly. If you like to test yourself, you can carry out
exhaustive reviews of your text, multiple drills, and self-quizzes using
computer-based study guides. If you are unsure if you are learning the
material thoroughly you can seek feedback by taking practice quizzes. Some
programs can only be accessed from computer labs on campus, but other
resources are available to you 24 hours a day through any connection to the
WEB. You can learn at any time, or any place that is convenient to you.

Grades

Your performance in TEC will influence your grade in Psychology 101. The work
that you complete will be worth a portion of your Psy101 course grade (see
your syllabus for Psy101 for details). Your grade in TEC will be determined by
your attendance at TEC sessions, completion of assigned activities, grades on
written assignments, and grades on quizes (if any). The assignments, in
general, cannot be turned in late or made up. You will, however, have the
opportunity to complete one extra project to take the place of one exercise
that you did not complete.

**Class Policies**

  * Arrive on time and plan to remain until the final minute of class. 
  * Attendance is mandatory. Attendance will be taken regularly during the semester, and will contribute to your grade. If you must be absent for religious reasons, because you are involved in University-level athletics, or some other good reason, inform your instructor by email of the conflict as soon as possible during the semester. 
  * If you have problems completing work required in TEC, withdraw prior to the 8th week. 
  * Because the number of workstations in the classroom is fixed, you must attend the section that you selected when you registered for class. If you wish to change lab sections, you must do so during the Add-Drop period. 
  * If you require educational adjustments because of psychological, emotional, or physical disabilities, please contact your TA as soon as possible so that adjustments can be arranged.

**Computer Ethics**

Students in the class must also abide by the policies and ethics guidelines
for computer usage. Students are expected to make use of computer-based
resources available in the class. You can gain access to the web at the
library, various labs located around campus, by accessing the web from your
home, or in the TEC.

**Special Considerations**

This course examines behavior, personality, and adjustment, so students should
recognize that they may acquire insight into their own personalities and
behavioral tendencies as a result of participating in this class.
Questionnaires that measure aspects of your personalities will be administered
and discussed and you will be asked to study your own behavior and the
behaviors you observe from a psychological perspective. Hence, you may learn
about yourself and your behavior. The knowledge you gain about yourself should
be both positive and useful. Yet you may, on occasion, be disappointed rather
than pleasantly surprised. As a general rule, the goals of the particular
exercise will be made clear to you before you begin. An exception will only be
made when full disclosure in advance would undermine the educational value of
the exercise.

**A Note About Computer Literacy**

Psychology 101-TEC improves students' learning of basic areas of psychology.
But the TEC also provides a semester-long learning experience with information
technology. The key outcome of this experience concerns you attitudes about
technology, and your skill in using technology to meet your learning goals.
You will learn to do certain things on the computer, if you can't already. For
example:

**Computer literacy. You will develop a basic understanding of the operation
of a computer, including system start up and login, keyboard layout, and mouse
operation. You will also learn the rudiments of networking, as you make
connections to the Psychology Department server and use resources located on
the university servers.

**Windows competency. You will use Windows 95 regularly, including
multitasking, file management, and program management. You will operate all
multimedia programs from Windows.

**Word-processing. You will use simple text-programs like Notepad to write
essays.

**E-mail skills. You will learn to use one Windows-based communication program
(such as Pegasus) and Elm to process electronic mail.

**Information retrieval skills. You will learn communication and retrieval
skills as you access information located at the University libraries, connect
to newsgroups, and seek information from one another.

**Internet skills. You will learn to find resources pertaining to psychology
on World Wide Web sites and in newsgroups.

However, the most important lesson they learn concerns how technology can be
used to learn course material, to do research, and to improve their
understanding of other people. In many cases students are reluctant learners
in skill-focused courses (e.g., statistical analysis, computer literacy) that
teach the skill without any application of the skill to a problem or content.
Only when they must themselves use the skill (e.g., statistics or computers)
to solve a problem or achieve a goal do they themselves acquire the
proficiency they need. In TEC students must learn to use the computer to
achieve the goal of learning psychology. The focus is not on networking,
e-mail, or word-processing, but all these skills are needed so that they can
accomplish the course's content-based goals.

