![Fall Online](../../winteronline/graphics/flag.gif)

  
  

* * *

### Introduction to Psychology

  
PSY 101--Five Quarter Hours  

Dr. Frank Loschiavo  
Ohio University, Zanesville Campus  
112 Elson Hall  
Zanesville, OH 43701  
(740) 588-1522  
E-mail: [loschiav@ohio.edu](mailto:loschiav@oak.cats.ohiou.edu)  
Website:
[www.zanesville.ohiou.edu/psych/losch/losch.htm](http://www.zanesville.ohiou.edu/psych/losch/losch.htm)
|  ![](../../winteronline/graphics/planetearth.gif)

  
  

* * *

|

### Course  
Description

| Introduction to psychology. Survey of topics in experimental and clinical
psychology including physiological bases of behavior, sensation, perception,
learning, memory, human development, social processes, personality, and
abnormal behavior.

**Course Objectives**

  * Acquire an appreciation for the diversity of psychological science and professional practice. 
  * Develop an understanding of the terminology, research findings, and theories of pyschology. 
  * View behavior from a scientific perspective rather than from a common sense framework. 
  * Develop an ability to apply psychological theories and research findings to real-world situations. 

* * *

| **Methods of Course Instruction** |  All course content is presented on the
World Wide Web; e-mail is used for submission of assignments, as well as for
the instructor's evaluation and comments.

For each module in the textbook, I have posted online module previews,
objectives, lectures, and quizzes. You will need to have access to a computer,
the Internet, and email. If you do not have access to a computer at your home
or office, you can use a computer on Ohio University's main campus in Athens,
or at any of the five regional campuses. Furthermore, as an Ohio University
student, an OAK email account has been provided to you free of charge. You
must activate your OAK email account, even if you plan to have your OAK email
forwarded to another address (e.g., Hotmail, Yahoo). To activate your OAK
account, or to set your OAK account to forward your email, visit
[**www.cns.ohiou.edu/email**](http://www.cns.ohiou.edu/email). While you are
enrolled in this course, you should check your email every day.

* * *

|

###  Materials

|  | **Required** |  Meyers, D.G. _Psychology: Myers in Modules,_ 6th edition.
New York: Worth Publishing, 2001

ISBN: 0-7167-5353-7

The textbook comes bundled with a student activity CD and a copy of the
Scientific-American Reader.

**Note:** If you are near the Zanesville campus, you can purchase this
textbook at the [**Campus
Bookstore**](http://www.matc.tec.oh.us/bookstore/index.html). Or you may
purchase the books for the course at Specialty Books, (740) 594-4002. [**Click
here**](http://www.specialtybookstore.com) for online ordering.

* * *

|

### **Course Calendar**

|  | **WEEK** | **SUBJECT** | **ASSIGNMENT** |  by June 17 | Activate and/or
forward Oak account at [**www.cns.ohiou.edu/email/**
](http://www.cns.ohiou.edu/email/) |

Friday,  
June 21  
4-6pm  |

Optional face-to-face meeting.  
162 Elson Hall, Zanesville Campus  |   |

Saturday,  
June 22  
12:30-2:30pm  |

Optional face-to-face meeting.  
162 Elson Hall, Zanesville Campus  |   |  1 |

General Introduction to psychology

Neuroscience and behavior

|

Modules 1-2

Modules 3-4

| 2 |

The nature and nurture of behavior

Developmental Psychology

|

Modules 5-6

Modules 7-8

| 3 |

**Exam 1 due by 7/10**

Sensation  & perception/ESP

|



Modules 11 & 16

| 4 |

States of consciousness

Learning

|

Modules 17-19

Modules 20-22

| 5 | Memory | Modules 23-27 | 6 | **Exam 2 due by 7/26** |    | 7 |

Psychological disorders

Therapy

|

Modules 43-47

Modules 48-50

| 8 |

**Exam 3 due by 8/9**

Motivation

|



Modules 33-35

| 9 | Social psychology | Modules 54-55 | 10 |

Intelligence

**Final Exam due by 8/23**

|

Modules 30-32



  

**The above schedule will help you maintain a reasonable pace throughout the
course. It is unlikely that I will make any changes to this schedule. If
adjustments are necessary, I will post them on the Announcement Board.**

**Note:** If you have documented disability that requires an accommodation,
please notify me within the first week of the quarter.

* * *

| **Grading Policy & Standards ** | Final grades will be determined by total
points earned. You can view your grade online by selecting Student Tools.
Final grades will be based on the percentage scale below. The following is a
breakdown of the possible points.  | "Introduce Yourself" | 2 | Online Class
Participation | 28 | Online Quizzes | 70 | Midterm Exams | 300 | Final Exam |
200 | Total | 600

**The grading scale is as follows:** |  90% = A  
87% = B+  
80% = B  
77% = C+ |  70% = C  
67% = D+  
60% = D  
59% = F

* * *

| **Academic Integrity Statement** |  All work that you do in this course is
expected to be your own. Any form of academic misconduct (e.g., cheating,
plagiarism) will automatically result in a failing course grade. The full
policy on academic misconduct appears in the Ohio University Undergraduate
Catalog.

* * *

| **Examinations** |  There will be proctored exams, three (3) multiple-choice
midterm exams and a comprehensive final exam. Each midterm exam will be worth
100 points, while the final exam will be worth 200 points. The exams will be
spaced evenly throughout the quarter.

  * **Exams must be taken at proctored sites.** You may select a proctored site that is convenient for you. Locations are listed on the [**Ohio University Online**](http://www.ohiou.edu/ouonline) website. Although some proctored sites charge a fee for their services, there is no charge for taking an exam on any of Ohio University's six campuses; Athens, Chillicothe, Eastern, Lancaster, Southern, and Zanesville. It will be easiest for everyone if you take your exams at one of OU's campuses. Please remember, it is your responsibility to call the proctored site, make a reservation for testing, and then inform the Ohio University Online staff of the arrangments either by sending email to **[OU.Online@ohio.edu](mailto:%22OU.Online@ohio.edu%22)** , or by calling (740) 593-2583 or 1-888-551-6446. The Ohio University Online staff will send the exams to the proper location. 

  * **Each exam must be completed by its corresponding due date.** All due dates are listed above on the course calendar. 

**Late Exams:** If you cannot complete an exam by its due date, you must do
each of the following: (1) Contact me **before** the exam due date. You may
call or send email. (2) Provide an official written excuse for your failure to
complete the exam on time (e.g., a note from the doctor who treated you).

  * If both of these conditions are met, you may complete the exam without penalty. 

  * If both of these conditions are **not** met, 15% will be deducted from your exam score each day after the originally scheduled exam due date. For example, if an exam due date is scheduled for Monday and you complete the exam on Wednesday, 30% will be deducted from your exam score. 

**Exams must be completed by the following due dates:** |  Exam 1 | Tues, 7/10
| Modules, 1-8 | Exam 2 | Tues, 7/26 | Modules 11, 17-27 | Exam 3 | Tues, 8/9
| Modules 39-40, 43-50 | Final Exam | Wed, 8/23 | 50% from Modules 30-35,
54-55;  
50% from the previous modules

* * *

| **Online Class  
Participation** | For each unit in the textbook, you will be required to
respond to a question that I have posted on the online discussion board. Each
of your responses will be worth 2 points. To earn credit, you must provide a
well-thought-out response by the due date. No late postings will be graded.

* * *

| **Online Quizzes** |  For each unit in the textbook, you will be required to
complete a brief online quiz. Each quiz will include 5 questions and will be
worth 5 points. You will earn 1 point for each item answered correctly. Each
quiz must be completed by the due date. No late quizzes will be graded.

* * *

| **Study Assistance** |  If you are experiencing difficulty in the course, or
if your exam scores are lower than expected, I highly recommend that you visit
the Learning Advancement Center. Located in Elson Hall room 116, the Learning
Advancement Center offers FREE peer tutoring services. The tutors really know
their stuff, so take advantage of this great opportunity. In addition to
tutoring services, the LAC can help you develop your study skills, your test-
taking strategies, and your reading comprehension. Furthermore, the LAC
provides FREE access to computers, printers, email, and the internet. Call
(740) 588-1510 for more information.

* * *

| **Important Note** |  If you would like to contact me, please feel free to
call me at (740) 588-1522, or send email. If you would like more information
about online courses at Ohio University (e.g., computer requirements, course
offerings), please visit [**Ohio University
Online**](http://www.ohiou.edu/ouonline).

To give us a chance to meet each other, I have scheduled an **optional** face-
to-face meeting--your decision to attend will not affect your grade. The
meeting will take place on Friday, September 7th from 4:00-6:00. For those who
cannot attend Friday's meeting, the same meeting will be held on Saturday,
September 8th from 12:30-2:30. During these meetings, I will introduce myself
and I will demonstrate how to navigate PSY 101 Online. We will meet in 162
Elson Hall on Ohio University's Zanesville Regional Campus, located at 1425
Newark Road.

* * *

| **Technical  
Requirements** | **Hardware**  
Windows PC (486 or better processor, minimum 8MB RAM, DOS 5.0 or higher,
Windows 3.x or Windows 95/98)

Macintosh (68030 or better processor, minimum 8 MB real RAM, system 6.07 or
higher)

SLIPP/PPP Internet connection (if using modem connection, at least 14,400
kbps); connection must not have firewalls preventing access.

**Software**  
Graphical browser (level of Netscape 3.1 or higher)

Standard e-mail communication software

* * *

| **Enrollment  
Information** | **Active Terms:** Term-based; 10 week quarter system

**Registration Dates:** April 1-June 20, 2002

Call the [**Ohio University Online
Staff**](http://www.ohiou.edu/ouonline/index.html) at 1-888-551-6446 if you
have questions about this course or the enrollment process.

Call the education counselors in the Division of Lifelong Learning at (740)
593-2150 if you have questions about Ohio University Degree Opportunities.

