![](logo2.gif)  

* * *

Resources

[Calendar](calendar.htm)

[Drop us a line by email](mailer.htm)

[Topics in Psy101 ](archive.htm)(archive page)

[WEB resources](web.htm)

[Help using this site and FAQs (frequently asked questions)](help.htm)

[TEC](tec.htm)

[VCU student resources and policies](rg.htm)

[VCU Psych Department](http://www.vcu.edu/hasweb/psy/psych.htm)

[Forsyth's page](http://www.vcu.edu/hasweb/psy/faculty/fors/fors.html)

[Readings](readings.htm)

|

**_Psychology 101 Help and FAQs_**

A wide variety of information pertaining to psychology and Psychology 101 at
VCU will be posted on and linked to this page during the semester. On the left
side of the page you will find a list of "resources" that you can use. If, for
example, you have a question while you study, drop us a line via email. Other
general sources of information are also listed under that column.

The information for every unit we cover in the course is organized into 4
sections: The lecture, prof, TEC, and Web.

  * FAQs: Frequently Asked Questions about Psychology 101 and its page
  * Overview of the Four kinds of learning resources
  * [Return to the Current Topic Page](index.htm)
  * [Return to Comprehensive Listing of topics](archive.htm)
  * [Return to VCU's home page](http://www.vcu.edu//)

* * *

**Overview of Four Kinds of Learning resources:** You can get more information
about the four different types of resources used in Psychology 101 by clicking
the icons below.

* * *

| ![](lecture.gif)The Lecture |  | ![](tec.gif)The TEC ......  
---|---|---  
![](home.gif)..The Prof ...... |  | ![](www.gif)The Web  
  
![](logo.gif)

_Copyright 1997 by Donelson R. Forsyth. Students may freely make copies of
these materials for their use in Psychology 101 at Virginia Commonwealth
University, but all other uses are prohibited_.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

The page was designed to be read by using the index buttons at the top of the
page. Click here to return to that index.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

#### Lecture

Whenever time allows, I will post the outline to my lectures before I actually
deliver the lecture in class. Then, after the lecture is completed I will post
more detailed notes. I encourage you to review the lecture outline closely,
and you might even want to print out a copy to bring to class that you can
follow as I lecture. The lecture will be easier to follow if you have an idea
of what I'm going to be talking about in advance. [Click here](intro.htm) for
the outline for the first day's lecture in PSY101.

Return to the index for "Welcome to Psychology 101".

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

#### Prof

Don't think that just because class is over that I won't be trying to
communicate with you about psychology. The WWW breaks down the traditional
barrier between "in class" and "out of class," so I can now teach any time I
get get to the WWW, and you can study psychology any time you can get to the
WWW. I'll be posting various messages, comments, ideas, and suggestions to the
WEB throughout the semester. For example, [click here](Syl97.htm) to review a
copy of the syllabus for this class.

Return to the index for "Welcome to Psychology 101".

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

#### TEC

Information about the activities scheduled for the Technologically Enhanced
Classroom will be posted to our WEB page regularly. For more information,
[click here](Tecsyl97.htm) to review the syllabus for the TEC.

Return to the index for "Welcome to Psychology 101".

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

#### The WEB

There is a wealth of information about psychology on the World Wide Web.
Research labs often file reports about their latest findings, treatment
centers talk about psychopathologies, the National Science Foundation
discusses its newest findings: The possiblities are endless. I will regularly
post links to places that you go each week. I will also post links to some
general "good starting places" if you are interested in some psychology web
surfing.

Return to the index for "Welcome to Psychology 101".

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

#### Frequently Asked Questions about Psychology 101 and the Web Resources

  * How difficult a course is Psychology 101? Psychology 101 is NOT a difficult class. It examines fascinating topics, and we have worked hard to make the material easily understood. Yet, many people do poorly in the class, so do not think that you can pass without studying. As many as 50% of some classes fail or receive Ds--poor performance indeed (for more statistics about Psychology 101 [click here](grade96.htm)). But, if you come to class, read the book, attend TEC, and take advantage of the computer resources, you should do well. 
  * How much time should I devote to this class? I recommend that most students consider the 7 percent solution: dedicating 7% of their week's time to the class. If you are new to college or have had trouble in other classes, then you should devote more than 7% of your time to the class (that's about 10 hours a week). 
  * How can I access the web? You can dial in from home, if you have a computer and a provider (like AOL). You can dial in from home through VCU, too, although you will only get text--no graphical interface. You can also access the web in TEC during your regular hours, during TECs open hours, and at any of the campus computer labs. [Click here ](http://www.vcu.edu/vcu/ucsac/labs/)for a comprehensive listing of Computer Labs on the academic campus (site maintained by UCS--if the site fails contact the VCU Webmaster). 
  * What is the dial-in phone number? 
    * Accounts on atlas: 828-0083 
    * Accounts on titan: 828-7017 
    * IBM low speed: 828-5601 
    * IBM high speed: 828-0611 
  * [Return to the Current Topic page.](index.htm)

  
  
![](file:///A|/care.gif)  
Flame hate and racism on the NET.

