![](images/sylltils.gif)
**[http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/)  
Summer Session II, 2002** ![](images/poptline.gif) || Instructor and Office
Information || Course Description, Goals, and Objectives ||  
|| Required Reading  || Outline of Course Topics || Exams ||  
|| Papers and Projects || Attendance and In-class Activities ||  
|| Optional (Extra Credit) Work || Internet ||  
|| Grading  ||  Policies and General Information || ![](images/poptline.gif)

**__INSTRUCTOR AND OFFICE INFORMATION__**

I am Michael Caruso, an Associate Professor in the Psychology Department. My
office is 1370 on the first floor of University Hall and my phone number is
530-2896. _See the[ **course
schedule**](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/schedule.html) for my
office hours for this term._ Other times can be arranged by appointment. You
can also [e-mail me at
michael.caruso@utoledo.edu](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/mailform.html).
Visit my Lifespan Developmental Psychology Website at
<http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/> for more information about the
course.

**__COURSE DESCRIPTION, GOALS, AND OBJECTIVES__**

This course surveys the major areas of lifespan developmental psychology - the
science of individual human development. The course emphasizes an
understanding of the important methods, terms, theories, and findings in the
field of lifespan psychology. The course is organized in a topical format,
exploring the basic theories and tracing development across the entire
lifespan for each psychological topic covered. It is strongly recommended that
you have passed an introductory Psychology course before taking this class.
The course employs primarily a lecture format, although your comments,
questions, and discussion are strongly encouraged. Use of the internet,
especially e-mail and the world wide web, in support of this course is also
required.

The **__general_ goals and objectives_** of Lifespan Developmental Psychology
are to help the student:  

  * Learn and gain mastery over the basic facts and research findings, terminology, principles, and theories important in the various areas of lifespan developmental psychology. 
  * Develop understanding, skills, and techniques for analyzing human behavior using a scientific approach. 
  * Gain a basic understanding of the interaction between genetic and environmental influences on human development.
  * Gain a basic understanding of cognitive and social development across the lifespan.
  * Gain a basic understanding of family, play, work, and death and dying as they apply to lifespan development.
  * Analyze current issues and controversies in the field of developmental psychology.
  * Practice and develop critical thinking skills, and written and oral communications skills. 
  * Find ways to apply psychological findings to everyday life. 

Lists of specific [**_learning
objectives_**](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/objectives.html)
relating to each textbook and lecture topic are available. These will list
what content you are expected to master for each topic. These objectives can
be printed from the website. Course objectives may be obtained through reading
and studying the textbook, through satisfactory completion of assignments, and
by attention to, and participation in, classroom lectures, presentations,
discussions, and projects.

**__REQUIRED READING__**

The __**required textbook**__ for this course is: Sigelman, C. K. (1999).
_Lifespan Human Development_ (3rd ed.). Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.

  * Assigned chapters include **all** the material in the chapter (eg. text, boxes, review questions, summaries).
  * The textbook provides the background and context for classroom lecture and discussion, and therefore you should read the chapter **before** the class period during which it is discussed. 
  * Notice that **not** every chapter on the exams will be discussed in lecture, so _be sure to schedule in time for reading and studying the chapters on exams that are not covered in lecture_.
  * _See the course schedule for when the chapters will be covered in lecture._

**__OUTLINE OF COURSE TOPICS__**

_PART I - RESEARCH METHODS, HEREDITY AND ENVIRONMENT, COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT_ |
_PART II - PERCEPTUAL,COGNITIVE, GENDER, AND MORAL DEVLOPMENT_ | _PART III -
SELF CONCEPT, AGENTS OF SOCIALIZATION, DEATH, SUMMARY_  
---|---|---  
[Chapter 1 - Understanding Life-Span Human
Development](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/obj01.html) | [Chapter 6
- Perception _(Not covered in
lecture)_](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/obj06.html) | [Chapter 10
- Self-Conceptions and Personality _(Not covered in
lecture)_](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/obj10.html)  
[Chapter 3 - The Genetics of Life-Span
Development](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/obj03.html) | [Chapter 8
- Learning and Information
Processing](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/obj08.html) | [Chapter 14
- The Family](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/obj14.html)_  
[ Chapter 4 - Early Environmental Influences on Life-Span Development _(Not
covered in lecture)_](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/obj04.html)_ |
[Chapter 11 - Gender Roles and
Sexuality](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/obj11.html) | [Chapter 15
- Achievement](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/obj15.html)  
[Chapter 7 - Cognition and
Language](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/obj07.html) | [Chapter 12 -
Social Cognition and Moral
Development](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/obj12.html) | [Chapter
17 - The Final Challenge: Death and
Dying](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/obj17.html)  
  |   | [Epilogue: Fitting the Peices
Together](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/obj18.html)  
  
**__EXAMS__**

There will be three exams, corresponding to the three parts of the course
listed in the table above. Each exam contains matching, multiple choice, and
fill-in/short answer items. Each is worth 115 points, making the three tests
together worth 69% of your total points. Exams are to be taken when scheduled.
In case of an emergency you must contact me as soon as possible to make other
arrangements. _See the[ **course
schedule**](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/schedule.html) for exam
dates for this term._

**__PAPERS AND PROJECTS__**

You are required to complete one internet project. Instructions for this paper
will be given to you on a [**_separate
handout_**](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/writing.html) in class
and posted on the web. This paper/project is worth 100 points, or 20% of your
total points.

Papers must be turned in by class time on the due date in order to receive
full credit. Late papers will be accepted up to class time on the "late" date,
but 10 points will be taken off your score. Failure to turn in a paper by
class time on the "late date" results in a score of "0" for that paper. _See
the[ **course
schedule**](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/schedule.html) for the
paper due dates for this term._

**__ATTENDANCE AND IN-CLASS ACTIVITIES__**

Students are expected to attend all class meetings. Fifty-five points (11% of
the total points) are available for attendance and other in-class activities.
Ten points for attendance, 27 points for quizzes and 18 points for in-class
writing will be available. Points for attendance are given only for actual
attendance, and may be pro-rated for the length of stay in that period. _No
absences will be given credit, regardless of the reason._ All quizzes and
other in-class activities MUST be done in class, no make-ups. Details on these
activities will be provided in class.

**__OPTIONAL EXTRA CREDIT WORK__**

There will be an optional project worth 20 points maximum. One major purpose
of the extra credit credit opportunity is to allow you to make up some points
that you may have missed by occassionally not attending, or by missing any
quizzes or other graded in-class activities. The extra credit project involves
reading some articles that I have selected, and taking a multiple choice quiz
over the content in the articles. The article titles and more detail about the
project are on a [separate
handout](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/extracredit.html) given to
you in class and available on the website. **If you miss the extra credit quiz
and wish to make it up, you must do so within two days of when the quiz was
given in class.** _See the_[ ** _course
schedule_**](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/schedule.html) _for the
extra credit quiz date for this term._

**__INTERNET__**

Students can access course materials from the website [
(http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/)](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/).
Students are also required to make use of the internet for some writing
assignments and are encouraged to [correspond to the professor via
e-mail](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/mailform.html). Instruction or
handouts on internet use can be provided by the instructor.

**__GRADING__**

**Grading** \- Your final course grade will be based on the total points
earned from the three exams, the paper, attendance, quizzes, in-class writing
and any extra credit points. The grade scale assumes that 500 points are
available, although with the extra credit, 520 points are actually possible.
The final grade scale is:

**_Grade_** | **_Percent_** | **_Grade_** | **_Percent_** | **_Grade_** |
**_Percent_**  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
**A** |  93.0-100.0% | **B-** |  80.0 - 82.9% | **D+** |  67.0 - 69.9%  
**A-** |  90.0 - 92.9% | **C+** |  77.0 - 79.9%  | **D** |  63.0 - 66.9%  
**B+** |  87.0 - 89.9%  | **C** |  73.0 - 76.9% | **D-** |  60.0 - 62.9%  
**B** |  83.0 - 86.9% | **C-** |  70.0 - 72.9% | **F** |  0.0 - 59.9%  
  
**__POLICIES AND GENERAL INFORMATION__**

**Withdrawal Policy** \- If you decide to withdraw from the course, you should
file forms in the Registration office before the deadline in order to
withdraw. _See the_[ ** _course
schedule_**](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/social/schedule.html) _for the
withdrawal deadline for this term._ Students for whom I have no record of
attendance in the course by this deadline will be withdrawn by the instructor.
Course instructors can issue a grade of Instructor's Withdraw ( "IW") up until
the end of the tenth week of class (or euivalent period during summer
sessions) for students who had attended at one one time, but who quit
attending. See the University Catalog for more detail on University grade
policies.

**Issuing of Incomplete ( "IN") Grades **\- In some situations, I will issue a
grade of incomplete ("IN") at the student's request. This gives the student an
additional term to complete course requirements. Incompletes are ordinarily
given when a student has completed more than half of the course
requirementsand has a passing average. Incompletes are **_not_** given so that
a student who did poorly in the class can retake the course for a higher
grade. The procedure for that is to repeat the course, pass with a  "C" or
better, and petition to have the first grade deleted. Incomplete work
**_must_** be completed and a grade issued by the end of the following
semester, or the "IN" automatically changes to an "F" on the student's next
grade report. Arrangements for issuing incompletes and completing the work are
to be initiated by the student, and are worked out on a case by case basis
with the professor. See the University Catalog for more detail on University
grade policies.

**Academic Honesty and Student Behavior** \- Students are expected to follow
University policy with regards to issues of academic honesty (e.g. cheating,
plagiarism) and proper conduct in the classroom, as detailed in the Student
Handbook. Disciplinary action for violation of these policies will be decided
on a case by case basis and will be in accord with University policy.

* * *

||[ Forward to the Course
Schedule](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/schedule.html) ||[ Forward
to Instructor Expectations and Study
Tips](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/tips.html) ||  
||[ Forward to the List of Learning
Objectives](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan/objectives.html) ||  
||[ Back to the Lifespan Developmental Psychology Main
Page](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/lifespan) ||[ Back to Professor Caruso's
Home Page](http://www.utoledo.edu/~mcaruso/) ||

* * *

