Developmental Psychology  
Course Objectives  
Course Requirements  
Pre-lecture Assignments  
tests  
Group Projects and in-class work  
Autobiography  
Funny Rule  
  
  

## **Course Objectives:**

  
Developmental Psychologists study how people change from conception until
death. Developmentalists study both the characteristics of people at different
ages and the processes or factors that produce change. Developmentalists are
particularly interested in patterns of change in perception, cognition,
emotions, social behavior, and personality.  I have four specific objectives
for this course. By the end of this course, you should have:

  1. an understanding of the basic facts, principles, methods, and theories of developmental psychology; 
  2. an ability to apply this material to your own life and to the world around you; 
  3. an ability to think critically about developmental psychology and your own development; and 
  4. the ability to do the first three objectives 10 years from now.  

## **Course Requirements**

All of the course requirements are designed to help you achieve the course
objectives. There are four sets of requirements: Pre-lecture Assignments,
Tests, the Autobiography, and in-class group projects.  
  

## **_Pre-lecture Assignments._**

There are eight pre-lecture assignments (also know as PLAs) during the course.
Each contains a small set of questions or activities for you to do before
coming to class. The are worth 15 pints and are due at the start of class on
the first day of a unit (there are eight unites, hence eights PLAs.) in all,
the PLAS are worth 120 points or 24% of your course grade. All PLAs must be
typed!!!  
Research on teaching and learning shows that have a shared cognitive set and a
shared knowledge base will improve your understanding of lectures and class
activities. So to maximize your learning, I have you read and think about the
material before coming to class. Since turning in a late PLA destroys the
educational value of the assignment, late PLAs are strongly discouraged. I
will subtract 3 points of the first day a PLA is late and 1 point for every
additional day. If you have a valid reason for turning them in late, you may
do so, but only with advanced approval from me. Answers to questions should be
typed.  

## **_Tests_**  

There are four tests in this class. The fourth test is given during the final
exam period on Thursday, May 21. All tests are worth 50 points. In all, the
tests are worth 200 points or 40% of the course grade. Each test consists of
short answer and essay questions. I will provide you with a study guide will
appear on the tests.  

## **_Group Projects and in-class work._**  

A total of 80 points (16%) of your course grade will be earned by doing in-
class group projects or indivdual work. This work cannot be made up, as it is
done in class. However, you can drop one of your group project grades and
replace it with your highest score. So if you ge a zero because of an absence,
not to worry! You can replace that zero with your highest score. Group
projects are done in class and everyone in the group gets the same grade. In-
class work is done in class but each person earns an individual grade.  

## **_Autobiography._**  

During the semester you will write an autobiographical essay. This paper will
be 8-10 pages long, typed, double-spaced, and based on research and journaling
you have conducted during the course. You get to determine the focus of the
autobiography (it is your life after all). The of the autobiography is worth
100 points (20% of the course grade) and is due near the end of the course.
Detailed instructions regarding the autobiography will be given out later this
week.  
The main purpose of the autobiography is to get you to think about your own
development and apply the concepts of the course to your own life. By its very
nature, this can be a scary task. To make it less scary, I have built into the
assignment three safeguards. First, do not select a focus for your
autobiography that you don't feel comfortable disclosing. You have a wide
range of things to focus on and could easily pick something that you feel
comfortable talking about. Second, your autobiogray is confidential. I am the
only person who reads them (unless you give it to others) and I will keep all
contents of your autobiography confidential. Third, you have an option of
doing a standard library research paper if you do don wish to do the
autobiography.  

## **THE FUNNY RULE:**  

I have one class rule that may seem strange to you, so I want to explain why I
have this rule. Here is the rule, which I call the funny rule: After you come
to class, you are to remove your watch and put it ;in your bag or backpack or
pocket where you cannot get to it or see it. You are also to disarm any beeper
or alarms on the watch. There are exceptions of course. You may wear a watch
during the tests. Get in the habit of taking off your watch when you enter
class. I will remind you at first. Later I will expect you to do it without
having me remind you.  
OK, so your first reaction is "Weird, this this makes no sense at all!" But it
does. To maximize your learning and what you get out of this course, you need
to be mentally "here," attending to what is happening. Your watch, and your
many other worries and obligations, make it difficult for you to "be here now"
but that is exactly what you need to do to be a successful learner. I will
help you to do this by removing the clock and having you take off your watch.
I will wear a watch with a beeper so that when class ends you will be able to
get on with your life. But the time is my concern, not yours. Your concern is
with grasping the material, SO REMOVE THAT WATCH!  
[![](http://www.users.csbsju.edu/~bjomeara/ag_back.gif) Developmental
Psychology](http://www.users.csbsju.edu/~bjomeara/psy360/) |
[![](http://www.users.csbsju.edu/~bjomeara/returner.gif)
Autobiography](http://www.users.csbsju.edu/~bjomeara/psy360/autobiography)
[CSB/SJU Psychology Department](http://www.users.csbsju.edu/~psych/)

