**Psychology 741: Experimental Psychopathology II** ******Etiology, Diagnosis
and Treatment of Childhood Behavioral Disorders** ******Instructor: Seth
Pollak Fall, 1998**  

This seminar meets Fridays from 2:30 until 4:30 in Psychology 311. Before each
class meeting, all seminar participants will distribute via the class email
list a topic/question for discussion. Weekly questions must be emailed by 11
am the day of class. I will take responsibility for organizing everyone's
questions into outline format to guide the class discussion. The class email
address is: psy-741@lists.students.wisc.edu  


Before all class meetings, students should review any relevant DSM-IV
diagnostic criteria.  


**Lecture 1: Definitional issues, Taxonomic Approaches, Epidemiology**  


Boyle, M.H., et al. (1997). Adequacy of interviews vs checklists for
classifying childhood psychiatric disorder based on parent reports. _Archives
of General Psychiatry_ , 54(9), 793-799.  


Roberts, R.E., et al. (1998). Prevalence of psychopathology among children and
adolescents. _American Journal of Psychiatry_ , 155, 715-725.

Weiss, B., et al. (1998). Common and specific features of childhood
psychopathology. _Journal of Abnormal Psychology_ , 107, 118-127.  


**Lecture 2: Internalizing Disorders**  


Bernstein, G.A., & Borchardt, C.M. (1991). Anxiety disorders of childhood and
adolescents: A critical review. _Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry_ , 30, 519-532.  


Birmaher, B., et al. (1996). Childhood and adolescent depression: A review of
the past 10 years. _Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
psychiatry_ , 35, 1427-1439.  


Hammen, C., et al. (1991). Timing of mother and child depression in a
longitudinal study of children at risk. _Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology_ , 59, 341-345.  


Vasey, M.W., et al (1995). Biased attention in childhood anxiety disorders: A
preliminary study. _Journal of Child Abnormal Psychology_ , 23, 267-279.  


**Lecture 3: Externalizing Disorders**  


Caspi, A., et al. (1993). Unraveling girls' delinquency: Biological,
disposition, and contextual contributions to adolescent misbehavior.
_Developmental Psychology_ , _29_ , 19-30.  


Dodge, K. A. (1993). Social-cognitive mechanisms in the development of conduct
disorder and depression. _Annual Review of Psychology_ , _44_ , 559-584.  


Loeber, R., Lahey, B., & Thomas, C. (1991). Diagnostic conundrum of
oppositional defiant disorder and conduct disorder. _Journal of Abnormal
Psychology_ , 100, 379-390.

**Lecture 4: Attentional Disorders**

Arnold, L.E. (1997). National Institute of Mental Health Collaborative
Multimodal Treatment Study of Children with ADHD (the MTA): Design challenges
and choices. _Archives of General Psychiatry_ , 54(9): 865-870.  


Jennings, J.R., et al. (1997). Inhibition in boys with attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder as indexed by heart rate change. _Developmental-
Psychology_ , 33(2): 308-318.

Klorman, R., et al. (1994). Clinical and cognitive effects of methylphenidate
on children with attention deficit disorder as a function of
aggression/oppositionality and age. _Journal of Abnormal Psychology_ , 103,
206-221.  


**Lecture 5: Pervasive Developmental Disorders**

Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A., & Frith, U. (1985). Does the autistic child have
a "theory of mind"? _Cognition_ , 21, 37-46.  


Bellugi, U., Bihrle, A., Neville, H., Jernigan, T., and Doherty, S. (1992).
Language, cognition and brain organization in a neurodevelopmental disorder.
In M. Gunnar and C. Nelson (Eds.), _Developmental behavioral neuroscience_
(pp. 201-232). NJ: Erlbaum.  


Lord, C., et al. (1997). Diagnosing autism: Analyses of data from the Autism
Diagnostic Interview. _Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders_ , 27(5):
501-517.

Pennington, B., & Ozonoff, S. (1996). Executive functions and developmental
psychopathology. _Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry_ , 37, 51-87.  


**Lecture 6: Risk and Resilience**  


Cicchetti, D., & Toth, S. (1995). A developmental psychopathology perspective
of child abuse and neglect. _Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry_ , 34, 541-565.

Kellam, S.G., & Van Horn, Y.V. (1997). Life course development, community
epidemiology, and preventive trials: A scientific structure for prevention
research. _American Journal of Community Psychology_ , 25, 177-188.  


Weissman, M.M., et al. (1997). Offspring of depressed parents: 10 years later.
_Archives of General Psychiatry_ , 54, 932-940.  


Werner, E. (1995). Resilience in development. _Current Directions in
Psychological Science_ , 81-85.  


**Lecture 7: Treatment**  


Braswell, L., et al. (1997). School-based secondary prevention for children
with disruptive behavior. _Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology_ , 25,
197-208.

Brestan, E., & Eyberg, S.M. (1998). Effective psychosocial treatments of
conduct-disordered children and adolescents: 29 years, 82 studies, and 5,272
kids.  _Journal of Clinical Child Psychology_ , 27(2): 180-189.

Eddy, J.M., et al. (1998). The analysis of intervention change in children and
families: Methodological and conceptual issues embedded in intervention
studies. _Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology_ , 26, 53-69.

Kendall, P. (1993). Cognitive-behavioral therapies with youth: Guiding theory,
current status, and emerging developments. _Journal of Consulting and Clinical
psychology_ , 61, 235-247.  


Final Exam:

Your final exam will be a take-home exam. I will email you the exam on a date
agreed upon by the class and the exams will be due back to me 72 hours later.
Exams can be emailed as WordPerfect attachment files or hard copies placed in
my mailbox.

