##

![Course 016:011 Section 1 and 2](images/header-nam.gif)  
  
---  
  
## Syllabus

**Course Description**

The Vietnam War was a major event in the history of both the United States and
Vietnam. The course will focus on the political and military history of the
conflict between the revolutionary forces on the one hand and the Republic of
Vietnam and its ally, the United States, on the other. Class discussions about
assigned readings are a major component of the course.

**Assignments and Grading**

Your grade will be based on at least 450 points, using the usual scale for
assigning letter grades (93-100%= A, 90-93%=A-, 87-90%=B+, etc.). Your
participation grade will be based on attendance (50%) and my evaluation of
your participation in class discussions (50%).

|

**Assignment**

|

**Points**  
  
---|---  
  
Participation

|

100 points  
  
Role-play assignment

|

50 points  
  
Memoir assignment (paper #1)

|

100 points  
  
Essay Assignment (paper #2)

|

100 points  
  
Final exam (take-home essay)

|

100 points  
  
**Policies**

_Attendance:_ Because of the discussion format of the class, attendance,
punctuality, and class participation are essential. Prepare to discuss and ask
questions about the readings by finishing the assignments before coming to
class. I will take attendance randomly, at least 20 times throughout the
semester. I will deduct 5 points from the attendance portion of your
participation grade for every unexcused absence after the first two. Absences
may be excused by informing me of the reason for your absence and making up
the missed work (usually by submitting a short written assignment). If you
must miss an assignment or exam deadline, notify me in advance in order to
avoid late penalties.

_Late assignments:_ Assignments are due in class on the specified date.
Assignments turned in late without prior approval will be penalized one letter
grade (10%) each day. I will only grade paper copies of assignments, not email
attachments.

_Students with Disabilities:_ I would like to hear as soon as possible from
any student with a disability requiring special accommodation to participate
fully in any aspect of the class.

_Plagiarism:_ Plagiarism occurs when you use someone else's ideas as your own,
including other students' papers and the internet, without acknowledging the
source. Please read the university's policy on plagiarism and forgery in the
[Student Academic
Handbook](http://www.clas.uiowa.edu/students/academic_handbook/rights_respons.shtml).
My policy will be to give any student caught plagiarizing an F (zero points)
for the assignment.

_Grievances:_ Please discuss with me any problem that arises in this class. If
you believe I have not dealt with the problem fairly, contact my faculty
supervisor, Prof. Henry Horwitz, or the Department Chair, Prof. Ken Cmiel.
Either can be reached through the History Department Office, in 280 Schaeffer
Hall, 335-2299.



**Required Textbooks**

These books are available for sale at Iowa Book and Supply, located at 8 S.
Clinton Street. Copies of the required textbooks will also be placed on
reserve in the main library.

McMahon, Robert J. _Major Problems in the History of the Vietnam War_. 2d
edition. Lexington: D. C. Heath and Company, 1995.

Herring, George C. _America's Longest War: The United States and Vietnam,
1950-1975_. 4th edition. Boston: McGraw-Hill, 2002.

**Note:** Students may substitute one of the following books in place of
America's Longest War. We will discuss the necessary changes in reading
assignments in class.

1\. Karnow, Stanley. _Vietnam: A History_. New York: Viking Penguin, 1991.

2\. Morrison, Wilbur H. _The Elephant and the Tiger: The Full Story of the
Vietnam War_. New York: Hippocrene Books, 1990.

3\. Schulzinger, Robert D. _A Time for War: The United States and Vietnam,
1941-1975_. New York: Oxford University Press, 1997.

4\. Kolko, Gabriel. _Anatomy of a War_. New York: Pantheon, 1985.

5\. An, Tai Sung. _The Vietnam War_. Cranbury: Associated University Presses,
1998.



**READING ASSIGNMENTS**

Students are expected to read and prepare to discuss the week's assignments
before Tuesday's class. For example, start reading the material that we'll
discuss on 29 and 31 January during the first week of class. "Herring" refers
to the text America's Longest War, and MP refers to Major Problems in the
History of the Vietnam War, 2d edition.

  1. MP means: _Major Problems in the History of the Vietnam War_.
  2. Herring means: _America's Longest War_.

**Week 1 (22 and 24 Jan): Background**

  * Course introduction, map assignment (24 January: meet in map room, 3rd floor, main library).
  * Start looking for a memoir to read.

**Week 2 (29 and 31 Jan): Vietnamese History and the First Indochina War
through 1954**

  * Herring, 3-51, MP, 50-70; MP, 33-8.
  * Inform me of the memoir you've selected for the memoir assignment by 31 Jan.

**Week 3 (5 and 7 Feb): Political Stability in Republic of Vietnam
(1954-1961)**

  * Herring, 53-87; start reading material for role play assignment.

**Week 4 (12 and 14 Feb): Vietnamese Nationalism and Communism (1961-1965)**

  * Herring, 89-129.
  * Herring, 131-69.

**Week 5 (19 and 21 Feb): Role Plays**

  * Role play assignment due on 19 Feb (American roles) and 21 Feb (Vietnamese roles).

**Week 6 (26 and 28 Feb): Military History (1965-1967)**

  * Herring, 171-223; Handout: Brodie, War and Politics, 1-11.

**Week 7 (5 and 7 Mar): Military Strategy**

  * (5 Mar) MP, 262-75; one of: MP, 246-54 or MP, 257-62 or MP, 275-80.
  * **(7 Mar) No readings (the assigned readings are postponed until 4 April). Regular class meeting is cancelled. Please view the recently-released "We Were Soldiers," playing at Sycamore Mall.**

**Week 8 (12 and 14 Mar): Tet (1968)**

  * (12 Mar) Herring, 225-52; MP, 361-73; MP, 350-51; one of: MP, 344-47 or MP, 347-50 or MP, 356-61.
  * (14 Mar) MP, 467-68 and 470-75; **(either: MP, 487-93 or MP, 494-511 are assigned for 26 March. If your paper is finished, start reading now!).**
  * **Memoir paper due on 14 Mar.**

**Week 9: Spring Break**

**Week 10 (26 and 28 Mar): Tet Offensive and the Media**

  * (26 Mar) Herring, 252-68; either: MP, 487-93 or MP, 494-511; One of: MP, 535-42 or MP, 543-52 or MP, 553-61.
  * (28 Mar) Guest speakers: Jim Manuel and Rock Williams

**Week 11 (2 and 4 Apr): Anti-War Protests**

  * (2 Apr) Guest speakers: Mary Wermuth and David Kohne
  * (4 Apr) Guest speaker: Helen Garvy (Students for a Democratic Society)

**Week 12 (9 and 11 Apr): Discussion**

  * (9 Apr) Discussion of guest speakers (bring your notes)
  * (11 Apr) MP, 312-336.
  * Essay proposal due on 9 April

**Week 13 (16 and 18 Apr): The Republic of Vietnam**

  * (16 Apr) MP, 391-420.
  * (18 Apr) Herring, 271-320.

**Week 14 (23 and 25 Apr): Laws of Armed Conflict**

Video: "Return With Honor"; spend an hour looking at material on the Geneva
Convention and on laws of war. Take some notes on something interesting to you
and bring it to class.

<http://www.unhchr.ch/html/menu3/b/91.htm>

<http://www.unhchr.ch/html/menu3/b/92.htm>

[http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/instree/auoy.htm](http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/instree/auoy.htm%0D\(26%20Mar\)%20Herring,%20252-68;%20either:%20MP,%20487-93%20or%20MP,%20494-511;%20One%20of:%20MP,%20535-42%20or%20MP,%20543-52%20or%20MP,%20553-61.%0D\(28%20Mar\)%20Guest%20speakers:%20Jim%20Manuel%20and%20Rock%20Williams%0D%0DWeek%2011%20\(2%20and%204%20Apr\):%20Anti-
War%20Protests%0D\(2%20Apr\)%20Guest%20speakers:%20Mary%20Wermuth%20and%20David%20Kohne%0D\(4%20Apr\)%20Guest%20speaker:%20Helen%20Garvy%20\(Students%20for%20a%20Democratic%20Society\)%0D%0DWeek%2012%20\(9%20and%2011%20Apr\):%20Discussion%0D\(9%20Apr\)%20Discussion%20of%20guest%20speakers%20\(bring%20your%20notes\)%0D\(11%20Apr\)%20MP,%20312-336.%0D%0DEssay%20proposal%20due%20on%209%20April%0D%0DWeek%2013%20\(16%20and%2018%20Apr\):%20The%20Republic%20of%20Vietnam%0D\(16%20Apr\)%20MP,%20391-420.%0D\(18%20Apr\)%20Herring,%20271-320.%0D%0DWeek%2014%20\(23%20and%2025%20Apr\):%20Laws%20of%20Armed%20Conflict%0DVideo:%20%22Return%20With%20Honor%22;%20spend%20an%20hour%20looking%20at%20material%20on%20the%20Geneva%20Convention%20and%20on%20laws%20of%20war.%20Take%20some%20notes%20on%20something%20interesting%20to%20you%20and%20bring%20it%20to%20class.%0D%0Dhttp://www.unhchr.ch/html/menu3/b/91.htm%0Dhttp://www.unhchr.ch/html/menu3/b/92.htm%0Dhttp://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/instree/auoy.htm%0D%0DWeek%2015%20\(30%20Apr%20and%202%20May\):%20The%20End%20of%20the%20Second%20Indochina%20War%20\(1969-1973\)%0D\(30%20Apr\)%20%22Paris%20Peace%20Accords,%201973,%22%20MP,%20565-69.%0D\(2%20May\)%20Handout:%20Kissinger,%20Diplomacy,%20674-702.%0D%0DEssays%20due%20on%2030%20April%0D%0DWeek%2016%20\(7%20and%209%20May\):%20Legacy%20of%20the%20War%20\(1973-Present\)%0D\(7%20May\)%20Herring,%20323-368.%0D\(9%20May\)%20Review%20for%20final%20exam%0D%0DFinal%20Exam:%20Due%20in%20380%20SH%20at%205:00%20PM%20on%20Monday,%2013%20May.%0D)

**Week 15 (30 Apr and 2 May): The End of the Second Indochina War
(1969-1973)**

  * (30 Apr) "Paris Peace Accords, 1973," MP, 565-69.
  * (2 May) Handout: Kissinger, Diplomacy, 674-702.
  * Essays due on 30 April

**Week 16 (7 and 9 May): Legacy of the War (1973-Present)**

  * (7 May) Herring, 323-368.
  * (9 May) Review for final exam

**Final Exam:** **Due in 380 SH at 5:00 PM on Monday, 13 May.**  
  
[<< Mainpage](index.html)

|

E-mail: [joseph-mason@uiowa.edu](mailto:joseph-mason@uiowa.edu)  
  
![University of Iowa Dept. of History](images/footer-nam.gif)

