[ ![](GIFS/princeton_shield_small.gif) ](http://www.princeton.edu/) **THE
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY OF DECISION-MAKING**  
CIV 105 - Fall 1998 - Princeton University  
M,W 1:30-2:50, E-Quad Rm. C-207  
  

  

_Professor:_  
_EMAIL:_ |  David Bernstein  
[ dhb@princeton.edu ](mailto:dhb@princeton.edu) |  | _Office:_  
_Phone:_ |  E-Quad, E407  
x8-1363  

_Description:_ You make decisions every day. In addition, other people are
constantly making decisions that have an impact on you. In this course we will
consider both how these decisions are made and how they should be made. In
particular, we will focus on the use of computing and information technology
in the decision-making process.

The examples we consider will be taken from everyday life. We will then
consider the broader implications of these examples.

This course will be highly interactive. You will be expected to actively
participate in every lecture.  

|  Lecture |  Topic |  Lab (Due)  |  |  |  |  |  1  |  **Introduction to the
course** |  |  |  |  What is this course all about, anyway?  |  |  2-3  |
**Getting to the top!** |  [ 1](LAB1/index.html) (9/28) |  |  |  Suppose you
run a company and you want to maximize your profits. Or, suppose you're a
mountain climber and you want to get to the top. How should you go about it?
Is the steepest way up always the best?  |  |  4-5  |  **How to pack a
suitcase.** |  [ 2](LAB2/index.html) (10/05) |  |  |  You're packing for a
trip, you don't want your backpack to be too heavy, there's no point in
packing the peanut butter if you can't also pack the jelly... What should you
do?  |  |  6-7  |  **You can't get there from here!** |  [ 3](LAB3/index.html)
(10/12) |  |  |  Everyone knows the shortest distance between two points is a
straight line, but that doesn't help when you are driving a car or riding a
train. So, what should you do instead?  |  |  8-9  |  **Why is there a Burger
King TM next to every McDonaldsTM? ** |  [ 4](LAB4/index.html) (10/19) |  |  |
You know you've thought about it. Find out the answer and how it relates to
that age-old favorite scissors-paper-rock.  |  |  10-11  |  **The Commuters'
Dilemma** |  [ 5](LAB5/index.html) (10/26) |  |  |  And you thought that the
prisoners had it bad...  |  |  12-13  |  **Getting promoted, the stock market,
and the drunken stupor.** |  [ 6](LAB6/index.html) (11/09) |  |  |  How to
predict movements in the stock market!!! How to win the lottery every week!!!!
(Yeah, right...)  |  |  14-15  |  **Why does the store have plenty of _Air
Bob_ s but no _Air Jordan_ sTM ** |  [ 7](LAB7/index.html) (11/16) |  |  |
You go into a shoe store to buy some basketball shoes (so you run faster, jump
higher, and score more!). But the store is out of them. Why?!?!?  |  |  16-17
|  **Why you wait in line!** | [ 8](LAB8/index.html) (11/23) |  |  |  You wait
in line to buy concert tickets, to get on airplanes, to order food at Burger
KingTM (Is this a burger fetish?), and for just about everything. Is it
impossible to prevent lines or do these places just not have enough people
waiting on you?  |  |  18-19  |  **Are there too few green M &Ms;TM? ** |  [
9](LAB9/index.html) (11/30) |  |  |  Green M&Ms;TM are rumored to have a
certain interesting property. For many years, I've thought that there are
fewer green ones than there "should be". Am I right?  |  |  20-21  |  **Why is
Yogi so smart?** |  [ 10](LAB10/index.html) (12/07) |  |  |  Everbody knows
that Yogi is smarter than the average bear. But why? Is it the size of his
head? Is it his diet? Does it have something to do with M&Ms;TM?  |  |  22-23
|  **What have we learned?** |  |  |  |  You've done all of the work. You've
attended all of the lectures. What did it get you?  |  |  24  |  **Can you
believe it? A class about nothing.** |  |  |  |  Sounds like an episode of
"Seinfeld", doesn't it?  |  

_Course Materials:_ All course materials are available on the World Wide Web
at http://www.princeton.edu/ ~civ105. You will need a Java-capable browser for
some of the materials.  

_Grading:_ Labs will account for 50% of your final grade and the final
examination will account for the other 50%. You will need a Java-capable
browser for most of the labs.

There are 10 labs in total. I will drop the lowest lab grade when calculating
your final grade. In effect, this means that you do not have to hand in one of
the labs. However, you should use this option carefully, since NO LABS WILL BE
ACCEPTED AFTER THE DUE DATE. My advice is to plan on handing in all of the
labs. That way, in case you find yourself in a situation where you cannot
complete one of the labs, you will not suffer.  

_Final Exam:_ The final examination will be on January 20 (Wednesday) at
7:30PM in room C-207.  It is open book and open notes. If you're looking for a
way to study, you might want to take a look at some [questions that arose
during the Winter Recess](REVIEW/index.html). Last years final exam is also
available in both [PostScript (.ps)](civ105-fe.ps) and [Acrobat
(.pdf)](civ105-fe.pdf) formats.

  

_Teaching Assistant:_ The teaching assistant this semester is Kelley Scott.
Her email address is
[kscott@dragon.princeton.edu](mailto:kscott@dragon.princeton.edu). Her office
hours are Thursday from 4:30 until 6:00 in room ACE-32. She will hold an
informal precept (i.e., attendance is not required) on Fridays from 1:30-3:00
in room C-207. (If there are not many students at the precept, that time will
be used for office hours.)  

_Readings:_ The book for this course is available in both [PostScript (.ps)
format](http://www.princeton.edu/~civ105/BOOK/civ105bk.ps) and in [ Acrobat
(.pdf) format](http://www.princeton.edu/~civ105/BOOK/civ105bk.pdf). It is only
available to members of the Princeton University community.

![](new01.gif) The above links now point to the new version of the book
(uploaded on January 17, 1999).

  

  

* * *

|  [![](GIFS/email.gif)](mailto:civ105@princeton.edu) |
[![](GIFS/sor_logo_small.gif)](http://www.ceor.princeton.edu/SOR/)  
---|---  
  
* * *

