NYS and the Civil War
![](http://library.morrisville.edu/local_history/images/go_flagl.gif)

# New York State and the Civil War

**  
** This site deals with the Empire State's role in the War of the Rebellion
and its aftermath, and the contributions and sacrifices of her sons and
daughters.  

![](http://library.morrisville.edu/local_history/images/redline2.gif)

![](eagle-tears.jpg)

On Tuesday, September 11, 2001, New Yorkers and all Americans were again
visited by the spectre of devastation on our homeland. Mourning not unlike
that felt by our nation as it struggled through the Civil War is once again in
our hearts. As we survived the Civil War, America today will survive and
remain a beacon of freedom and democracy in the world. Pray for your country,
and for the families and friends of those lost in this tragedy.

God bless the United States of America.  

** ![](http://library.morrisville.edu/local_history/images/redline2.gif)

  * [Civil War/Genealogical Research](genealogy.html)
    * [Can You Help?](help.html) \- researchers' requests for help with N.Y. Civil War units, people, or other... 
    * [N.Y. Unit Information](http://library.morrisville.edu/local_history/sites/unitinfo/) \- regimental information from Phisterer's "New York in the War of the Rebellion"
    * [Where the Men were Obtained](obtained.html) \- Frederick Phisterer's county-by-county list. 
    * [Unit Synonyms, the Nicknames of the N.Y. regiments. ](synonyms.html)
    * [1868 N.Y.S. Adjutant General's Report, _Register of Officers Commissioned in Volunteer Regiments from the State of New York, 1861-1865._](http://www.spaceports.com/~oddballz/) \- click on "Civil War"

  * _EXTRA !!! EXTRA !!!_ \- news and notes of concern to the NYS Civil War Community: 
    * General George Sears Greene's [gravesite](http://library.morrisville.edu/
local_history/sites/unitinfo/greene.html)

    * Theft of ["The Drummer Boy" ](drummer-art.html)from Woodlawn Cemetery, Bronx 

  * [New York State G.A.R. Posts ](http://library.morrisville.edu/local_history/sites/gar_post/)
  * [Regional Resources in N.Y.S.](region.html)
  * [Civil War Soldiers in Madison County](http://library.morrisville.edu/local_history/sites/mad_bury/)
  * [Miscellaneous New Yorkers in the Civil War](miscny.html)
  * [Miscellaneous New York Sites](http://library.morrisville.edu/local_history/sites/misc_cat/)
  * [Biographical Web Pages - The New York Connection](nybio.html)
  * [The Obits](http://www.morrisville.edu/library/local_history/sites/gar_post/obits.html) \- what the newspapers had to say. 
  * [New York Civil War Regiments _Online_](http://library.morrisville.edu/local_history/sites/ny_reg/)
  * [NY's Civil War Flags](flags.html)
  * [New York State's Civil War U.S. Colored Troops](http://www.correctionhistory.org/html/chronicl/nycdoc/html/usct01.html)
  * [New York City Harbor Defenses](http://79ny.homepage.com/NYharborD.htm)
  * Civil War [Prison Camps & Prisoners](prisons.html)
  * [Civil War Resources - Gateways on the WWW](www.html)
  * [ Medal of Honor Winners from New York State](http://www.rootsweb.com/~nygenweb/civwarmoh.htm/)
  * [Letters, Diaries, Reminiscences, and Journals of New York Soldiers and Nurses](http://library.morrisville.edu/local_history/sites/letters/)
  * [Civil War Round Tables in New York State](http://library.morrisville.edu/local_history/sites/cwrt/)
  * [Index of N.Y. Soldiers' Images](http://library.morrisville.edu/local_history/sites/reg_pics/)
  * [Military Disasters](disasters.html)
  * [ Civil War Monuments in New York State](http://library.morrisville.edu/local_history/sites/cw_monum/)
  * New York at Antietam
  * [New York at Gettysburg](http://users.redcreek.net/murrayrl/index.htm) \- author R.L. Murray's site 
  * [New York at Gettysburg](http://library.morrisville.edu/local_history/sites/gburg/)
  * [The Civil War in Other States](states.html)
  * [The New York Connection](http://library.morrisville.edu/local_history/sites/ny_connect/index.html), a work in progress 

[ ![](NYback.gif)](http://www.webring.org/cgi-
bin/webring?ring=nycivilwar;id=19;prev)
[![](NYnext.gif)](http://www.webring.org/cgi-
bin/webring?ring=nycivilwar;id=19;next) **This[ New York in the Civil War
Ring](http://www.geocities.com/nyjeanne1/index.html) site is owned  
by [**Sue Greenhagen**](mailto:greenhsh@morrisville.edu).

**Want to join the[New York in the Civil War
Ring](http://www.geocities.com/nyjeanne1/index.html)?**

**[[Skip Prev](http://www.webring.org/cgi-
bin/webring?ring=nycivilwar;id=19;sprev)] [[Prev](http://www.webring.org/cgi-
bin/webring?ring=nycivilwar;id=19;prev)] [[Next](http://www.webring.org/cgi-
bin/webring?ring=nycivilwar;id=19;next)]  
[[Skip Next](http://www.webring.org/cgi-
bin/webring?ring=nycivilwar;id=19;skip)] [[Random](http://www.webring.org/cgi-
bin/webring?random;ring=nycivilwar)] [[Next 5](http://www.webring.org/cgi-
bin/webring?ring=nycivilwar;id=19;next5)] [[List
Sites](http://www.webring.org/cgi-bin/webring?ring=nycivilwar;list)] **  
  
The response to this website has been tremendous, and I'm very grateful. The
problem is that I am way behind on email. My real full-time job is Technical
Services Librarian at SUNY Morrisville, and all the extra work that goes into
this site is just that - extra. This one-person operation is done in my spare
time, sooooooo - If you've sent me email, and I haven't responded, I
apologize. If you want to write again, do so, and I'll do my best to get back
to you if time permits \- but no guarantees.

![](http://library.morrisville.edu/local_history/images/redline2.gif)

[Awards Page](awards-page.html)

![](http://library.morrisville.edu/local_history/images/redline2.gif)

**Return to[Local History - The Electronic
Collection](http://library.morrisville.edu/local_history/)

![](http://library.morrisville.edu/local_history/images/redline2.gif)

Maintained by [Sue Greenhagen](/~greenhsh).  
E-mail:[ greenhsh@morrisville.edu](mailto:greenhsh@morrisville.edu) **

![](http://library.morrisville.edu/local_history/images/redline2.gif)

The semi-official home page of the other half of the "Sister Act,"  
[Darothy DeAngelo](darothy.html)

[![TC](http://c2.thecounter.com/id=1467454)](http://www.TheCounter.com) since
22 November 2000 **  

