##  [![The U. S. Civil War Center](/cwc/images/uscwcm2.gif)](/cwc/index.htm)  
Researching People  
of the Civil War Era

  

* * *

### Preparing for Your Research

Before we jump right into the research process, there are a few basic pointers
that every new genealogist needs to know. The following guide was compiled for
the novice, and only intended to give some direction for the general research
of Civil War ancestors.

Most researchers begin the long, arduous task of tracing their Civil War
lineage with little more than a name and a family folk tale. If that sounds
familiar, then you already learned the first lesson of genealogy: **DO NOT
OVERLOOK OBVIOUS RESOURCES**. Speak to as many knowledgeable relatives as
possible; even if the stories about the ancestor don't quite match. You will
find that even the most improbable folk tale may yield one or two valuable
leads. After you have exhausted family sources, begin looking elsewhere. Often
we receive requests from beginning genealogists seeking Civil War records
sources on the Internet. These are almost nonexistent. Remember, genealogy is
a profitable business, and it is rare when businesses or facilities that have
paid for Civil War records compilations offer them freely on the Internet. In
addition, most public facilities such as state archives simply cannot afford
to digitize the information. The novice researcher generally overlooks
wonderful sources of information when beginning their search, such as public
libraries, state archives, historical societies, and public universities.
Contact your state archival sources and ask about genealogy facilities in your
area. While some research facilities take research requests, they often charge
fees and generally do only preliminary searches for specific information. Be
prepared to go to facilities and don't be afraid to **ask questions!**

This brings us to lesson two: **DOCUMENT EVERYTHING**. You want to bring a
notebook or a laptop computer every time you go to a research facility. Write
down even those facts that seem insignificant, and always make a note of the
source of your information. Later, it is a good idea to write or type out all
of the facts revealed during the research. By writing or typing everything
out, you have a better understanding of where the information  "gaps" exist.
This will help you figure out what you want to know about the relative so that
your research has a sharper focus.

With this in mind, we come to lesson three: **KEEP IT SIMPLE AND STAY
FOCUSED.** Unfortunately, this is where many novice genealogists quit because
they simply set their expectations too high or they do not have a clear idea
of what it is they want to know about the ancestor. Research efforts beginning
with the goal of finding out "anything" or "everything" about an ancestor are
doomed to fail because there is no idea of where to begin or what to look for.
Keep in mind that Civil War records are generally scarce, and often contain
little genealogical or biographical information. The best way to get your
research off to a productive start is to write down three questions about your
ancestor that you would like to answer in one research attempt. Remember to
keep the questions simple. Write these down on index cards and refer to them
while researching to make sure that you are staying on task. If you find
another possible source of information but it does not pertain to the
questions at hand, copy down the name of the book, microfilm, etc., and its
location for future reference. It may answer the next set of questions you
have, but there is no use in getting off track right now. After each research
effort, it is a good idea to budget in some time to review both the old and
new information, and set new goals for your next research. Don't feel
discouraged if you did not answer your questions in this research attempt.
Genealogy is a time-intensive hobby and it may take awhile for you to get
comfortable with researching. Review your questions and consider simplifying
them.



### Beginning Your Research

The three most valuable pieces of information when researching a Civil War
ancestor are the soldier's name, whether he served for the Union or
Confederate army, and the state from which the soldier served. By knowing
these facts, other aspects of a soldier's record of service can often be
determined. Usually, the piece of information that poses the most problems to
find is the state from which the soldier served. Often, you will find that you
have vague idea of the soldier's state of service, but you are not quite sure.
The easiest way to confirm this is to contact the state archives in the state
of possible service. They should be able to direct you to the muster rolls for
their state if you go to the archives in person, or inform you of the
procedure for requesting that information if you write or call. Remember to
keep your requests simple, and offer only those details pertinent to your
request. Be aware that names were often misspelled, so do not despair if you
have a hard time finding your ancestor. Chances are he is listed under a name
with a similar spelling.

With those three pieces of information verified, the next step is to retrieve
the soldier's pension records. Pension records offer more information useful
to the genealogist, and also provide a more complete picture of a soldier's
military career. Some Confederate states issued pensions until 1959, and those
pension can be found filed in the state archives in the state in which the
soldier retired. All Union pensions and Confederate pensions issued after 1959
can be found by writing the National Archives and Records Administration. A
NATF Form 80 must be requested, filled out, and submitted before records can
be researched. In order for the National Archives to process the NATF Form 80,
you must include the veteran's name, Civil War Union or Confederate service,
branch of service, and the state from which he served. They will contact you
with an invoice for copy fees, which must be paid before the copies are sent.
It will take a few weeks for the request to be fully processed.

If pension records do not exist for your ancestor (Union or Confederate), you
can write to the National Archives for the military record of the soldier in
question. However, you should be aware that these records aren't as useful,
and are subject to the same process as described earlier for requesting
pension records.

Once you have received these records, filling in the holes is relatively easy.
By using the resources listed earlier (public libraries, state archives,
historical societies, and public universities), you can expand your search to
now include books on your relative's company or a battle in which he fought.
Don't overlook books released through small, local presses. Some of those
books can offer good leads within their bibliographies. Libraries in public
universities are often overlooked because many beginning genealogists do not
know about their holdings of valuable
[collections](/cwc/links/links4.htm#UniversityArchives). Many of these
collections were donated by local families and include family heirlooms,
photos, papers, etc., and most are accessible to the public upon request. Also
remember to look at the public universities' regular library holdings, which
are easily accessible through interlibrary loans requested through your local
library. Some of these library listings are available through the Internet.
For example, all Louisiana public university holdings can be searched with the
[Louisiana Online University Information System
(LOUIS)](http://webpac.louis.lsu.edu:8080/). In addition to the resources
discussed, be sure to make use of your [National](http://www.nps.gov/) and
State Parks. Besides park brochures and pamphlets, vertical files or
participant lists are often kept at [battlefield
sites](/cwc/links/hist.htm#Battlefields) to answer information requests.





### Other Helpful Links

    

[A Brief Introduction to Genealogy and the American Civil
War](http://www.outfitters.com/illinois/history/civil/cwgeneal.html)

    

[Genealogy Links](/cwc/links/links5.htm#Gene)

    

[Historical and Genealogical Societies](/cwc/links/orgs.htm#histgene)

    

[Genealogy Resources on the Internet](http://www-
personal.umich.edu/%7Ecgaunt/wisconsin.html)

    

[How To Order Military & Pension Records for Union Civil War Veterans from the
National Archives ](http://www.oz.net/%7Ecyndihow/pensions.htm)  
[Preservation Guide: Caring for Your
Collection](http://lcweb.loc.gov/preserv/careothr.html)  
[Request CW Military, Pension, and other records from the National
Archives](http://members.aol.com/wwhitby/form80.html)

    

[State Archives Referral
List](http://www.sos.state.ga.us/archives/rs/sarl.htm)



    

Official Records and Rosters of Confederate Soldiers

    

Official Records and Registers of Union Soldiers



### National Archives

    

General Reference Branch  
[National Archives and Records Administration](http://www.nara.gov/)  
7th and Pennsylvania Avenue NW  
Washington, D.C. 20408

  

### State Archival Resources

    

[[Alabama](altoar.htm#ALABAMA)] |  [[Alaska](altoar.htm#ALASKA)] |
[[Arizona](altoar.htm#ARIZONA)]  
---|---|---  
[[Arkansas](altoar.htm#ARKANSAS)] |  [[California](catoct.htm#CALIFORNIA)] |
[[Colorado](catoct.htm#COLORADO)]  
[[Connecticut](catoct.htm#CONNECTICUT)] |  [[Delaware](detoil.htm#DELAWARE)] |
[[Florida](detoil.htm#FLORIDA)]  
[[Georgia](detoil.htm#GEORGIA)] |  [[Hawaii](detoil.htm#HAWAII)] |
[[Idaho](detoil.htm#IDAHO)]  
[[Illinois](detoil.htm#ILLINOIS)] |  [[Indiana](intola.htm#INDIANA)] |
[[Iowa](intola.htm#IOWA)]  
[[Kansas](intola.htm#KANSAS)] |  [[Kentucky](intola.htm#KENTUCKY)] |
[[Louisiana](intola.htm#LOUISIANA)]  
[[Maine](metomt.htm#MAINE)] |  [[Maryland](metomt.htm#MARYLAND)] |
[[Massachusetts](metomt.htm#MASSACHUSETTS)]  
[[Michigan](metomt.htm#MICHIGAN)] |  [[Minnesota](metomt.htm#MINNESOTA)] |
[[Mississippi](metomt.htm#MISSISSIPPI)]  
[[Missouri](metomt.htm#MISSOURI)] |  [[Montana](metomt.htm#MONTANA)] |
[[Nebraska](netony.htm#NEBRASKA)]  
[[Nevada](netony.htm#NEVADA)] |  [[New Hampshire](netony.htm#NEW_HAMPSHIRE)] |
[[New Jersey](netony.htm#NEW_JERSEY)]  
[[New Mexico](netony.htm#NEW_MEXICO)] |  [[New York](netony.htm#NEW_YORK)] |
[[North Carolina](nctoor.htm#NORTH_CAROLINA)]  
[[North Dakota](nctoor.htm#NORTH_DAKOTA)] |  [[Ohio](nctoor.htm#OHIO)] |
[[Oklahoma](nctoor.htm#OKLAHOMA)]  
[[Oregon](nctoor.htm#OREGON)] |  [[Pennsylvania](patotx.htm#PENNSYLVANIA)] |
[[Rhode Island](patotx.htm#RHODE_ISLAND)]  
[[South Carolina](patotx.htm#SOUTH_CAROLINA)] |  [[South
Dakota](patotx.htm#SOUTH_DAKOTA)] |  [[Tennessee](patotx.htm#TENNESSEE)]  
[[Texas](patotx.htm#TEXAS)] |  [[Utah](uttowy.htm#UTAH)] |
[[Vermont](uttowy.htm#VERMONT)]  
[[Virginia](uttowy.htm#VIRGINIA)] |  [[Washington](uttowy.htm#WASHINGTON)] |
[[Washington DC](uttowy.htm#WASHINGTON_DC)]  
[[West Virginia](uttowy.htm#WEST_VIRGINIA)] |
[[Wisconsin](uttowy.htm#WISCONSIN)] |  [[Wyoming](uttowy.htm#WYOMING)]  
  


### Other Records Sources

    

U.S. Veterans Homes

    

States Veterans Homes

    

[ROOTS-L Resources: Family History Centers &
Libraries](http://www.rootsweb.com/roots-l/fhc.html)

* * *

![\[Back\]](../../images/back.gif) [Back to Genealogy
Links](/cwc/links/links5.htm#Gene)  

* * *

Note: If you know the correct URL of any broken links, please [fill out our
form](/cwc/linkform.htm), so we can correct them...Thank You!

[![USCWC Home](../../images/ltuscwcs.gif)](/cwc/index.htm)

[[Home](/cwc/index.htm)] [[New Links](/cwc/whatsnew.htm)] [[Links
Index](/cwc/civlink.htm)] [[Events](/cwc/events.htm)]  
[[Search](/cwc/search.htm)] [[Questions?](/cwc/questdir.htm)] [[Become a
Member](/cwc/charter.htm)]  
[[Researching People of the Civil War Era](/cwc/other/genealogy/faq-gene.htm)]

For Questions/Comments, see our [Questions Page](/cwc/questdir.htm)  

######  Last modified: 6/20/02  

