From Quackery to Bacteriology, Document 8

## University of Toledo Libraries

[[Index](http://www.cl.utoledo.edu/canaday/quackery/quack-index.html)]
[[Back](http://www.cl.utoledo.edu/canaday/quackery/quack7.html)]
[[Next](http://www.cl.utoledo.edu/canaday/quackery/quack9.html)]

### Medicine in the Civil War

When the Civil War began in April 1861, medicine was approaching what Surgeon
General William Hammond called "the end of the medical Middle Ages." In
Europe, the work of Koch and Pasteur was just beginning and American
physicians had little knowledge of the cause and prevention of disease and
infection. The Army Medical Department, which was responsible for the care of
the sick and wounded in the North, was unprepared. The staff of 90 doctors was
experienced in dealing with the health problems of small military outposts,
but had no idea of how to deal with large scale medical and logistical
problems.

Early in the war it became obvious that disease would be the greatest killer.
Two soldiers died of disease (dysentery, diarrhea, typhoid, and malaria) for
every one killed in battle. Soldiers from small rural areas suffered from
childhood diseases such as measles and mumps because they lacked immunity.
Outbreaks of these "camp and campaign" diseases were caused by overcrowded and
unsanitary conditions in the field. To remedy this, the U.S. government
created the U.S. Sanitary Commission in June 1861.

The commission was directed by Frederick Law Olmstead. Preaching the virtues
of clean water, good food, and fresh air, the commission pressured the Army
Medical Department to improve sanitation, build large well-ventilated
hospitals, and encourage women to join the newly-created nursing corps.
Despite the efforts of the Sanitary Commission, some 560,000 soldiers died
from disease during the war.

Second to disease as a cause of death was battlefield injuries, totaling some
200,000 casualties. The overwhelming number of wounded created problems in
removing them from the battlefield. As late as 1862 there was no ambulance
corps on either side. In August of that year, however, Union General George B.
McClellan authorized the creation of a trained ambulance corps for the Army of
the Potomac, and other armies, both Union and Confederate, soon did the same.

Risks from surgery were great. Doctors in the field hospitals had no notion of
antiseptic surgery, resulting in extremely high death rates from post-
operative infection. Surgeons ignored anesthesia, instead relying on the
"surgical shock" of battle, when the patient's heart rate was greatest, to
amputate.

[ ![](http://www.cl.utoledo.edu/canaday/quackery/civil1-a.gif) The brutality
of the battlefield produced huge numbers of casualties, as seen in this
rendition of the attack on
Knoxville.](http://www.cl.utoledo.edu/canaday/quackery/civil1.gif)

Amputation of a wounded arm or leg was the most common operation, due largely
to the .58 calibre Minie ball ammunition used during the war. This heavy
conical-shaped bullet of soft lead distorted on impact causing large, gaping
wounds filled with dirt and pieces of clothing. Its heavy weight shattered any
bone it contacted. Because of the severity of the wounds and the overwhelming
case load, surgeons usually elected for fast and easy amputation over trying
to remove the bullet and save the limb.

[ ![](http://www.cl.utoledo.edu/canaday/quackery/civil2-a.gif) Lead bullets
removed from victims show the distortion that occurred on impact. From _The
Medical and Surgical History of the War of the Rebellion,_
1870-1888.](http://www.cl.utoledo.edu/canaday/quackery/civil2.gif)

While the efforts of the Army Medical Department during the Civil War did
little to bring immediate relief for the victims, many medical advances did
result from the war experience. Doctors treating hundreds of thousands of
cases of dysentery, diarrhea, typhoid, malaria and gunshot wounds compiled
copious notes that would aid researchers after the war. These case studies
were later published between 1870 and 1888 under the title _Medical and
Surgical History of the War of the Rebellion._ Medical army officers
recognized that enforcing sanitary standards in the field could reduce the
spread of disease. And the numerous cases of post-operative infections such as
hospital gangrene led to increased study in ways to prevent it, eventually
leading to the use of bromine.

[ ![](http://www.cl.utoledo.edu/canaday/quackery/civil5-a.gif) The effects of
hospital gangrene, from _The Medical and Surgical History of the War of the
Rebellion._ ](http://www.cl.utoledo.edu/canaday/quackery/civil5.gif)

But the largest medical achievements of the Civil War were in the areas of
field hospital organization and personnel. At the beginning of the war, staffs
were haphazardly organized on an "as needed" basis. But these staffs were
usually too small, and healthy soldiers had to be left behind to care for the
sick and wounded. Anyone, regardless of medical skill, could volunteer as a
nurse. Hospital facilities were established in existing unsanitary buildings
or erected wherever convenient. By war's end this all changed. Military
hospital staffs became more permanent. In 1861, Dorothea Dix was appointed
Superintendent of the United States Nursing Corps, and the idea of
professional nursing was born. Finally, hospital facilities were improved by
the use of large, well-ventilated hospital tents and more permanent, cleaner
"pavilion hospitals."

Tripler, Charles S., and George C. Blackman. _Hand-book for the Military
Surgeon._ Cincinnati: Robert Clarke  & Co., 1861.

United States Army, Surgeon-General's Office. _The Medical and Surgical
History of the War of the Rebellion._ Washington: Government Printing Office,
1870-1888.

[ ![](http://www.cl.utoledo.edu/canaday/quackery/civil4-a.gif) Grapeshot
produced devastating wounds to limbs, usually treated quickly and efficiently
with amputation. From _The Medical and Surgical History of the War of the
Rebellion._ ](http://www.cl.utoledo.edu/canaday/quackery/civil4.gif)

Wheelock, Julia S. _The Boys in White; The Experience of a Hospital Agent In
and Around Washington._ New York: Lange  & Hillman, 1870.

* * *

**Barbara Floyd, University Archivist, University of Toledo**

[[Index](http://www.cl.utoledo.edu/canaday/quackery/quack-index.html)]
[[Back](http://www.cl.utoledo.edu/canaday/quackery/quack7.html)]
[[Next](http://www.cl.utoledo.edu/canaday/quackery/quack9.html)]

[ ![](/images/home_btn.gif) Return to the Unversity Libraries' Home Page

