### History 500  
THE ANCIENT NEAR EAST



_Course Description:_ An historical survey of the rise of ancient Near Eastern
Civilizations: A comparative study of the cultures of ancient Mesopotamia,
Egypt, Anatolia, and Israel. Emphasis upon the problems of the rise of
urbanization, the development of Near Eastern kingship and theocracy, Near
Eastern literatures and religions, _mythopoeicism_ , and the historical
background of the Hebrew Bible. This survey stresses the interaction of the
several ancient Near Eastern societies from c.10,000 B.C., to the rise of the
Persian Achaemenid Empire in the sixth century B.C.



_Textbooks_ : Available in paperback at SBX.

  1. Wilson, John _THE CULTURE OF ANCIENT EGYPT_ (Chicago) 
  2. Gordon, Cyrus _THE ANCIENT NEAR EAST_ (Norton) 
  3. Frankfort, Henri, et al. _THE INTELLECTUAL ADVENTURE OF ANCIENT MAN_ (Chicago) 
  4. Pritchard, James (ed.) _THE ANCIENT NEAR EAST_ , Vol. I and II (Princeton) 
  5. Balcer, _ANCIENT NEAR EAST_ (Cop-Ez, basement of Bricker Hall), PLEASE BRING THIS TO CLASS DAILY! 

RECOMMENDED:

  1. _THE NEW ENGLISH BIBLE_ (Oxford), Study Edition. 
  2. Roux, Georges, _Ancient Iraq_ (World Publishing Co.). 



_General Information_ : This class will meet Monday through Thursday. During
the term, there will be a one-hour examination and a final examination. Two
essays are also required. Graduate students are expected to submit exceptional
papers. All papers will be typed, stapled, and in proper order, with endnotes
and bibliography. This set of direction" is absolute, nothing less. See paper
assignments as attached. NO PAPER WILL BE ACCEPTED LATE!

Examinations and essays will emphasize your understanding of the related
primary documents and the archaeological evidence as presented in class, and
also found in the two volumes edited by James Pritchard, and in the numerous
books of the Bible. he basic key to the course is the Frankfort book, THE
INTELLECTUAL ADVENTURE OF ANCIENT MAN, and the numerous aspects of
_mythopoeicism_. _That concept is BASIC to this study_. The materials and
ideas (properly noted) found in Frankfort will be basic to both essays.

For further readings, see bibliographies in the textbooks, and those books
noted for each lecture. For chronology of the Ancient Near East and for maps
see the _CAMBRIDGE ANCIENT HISTORY_ (2ND. ED. ONLY), in the reference room and
room 200, Graduate Reading Room, Thompson Library.

Above all ANALYZE, do not narrate.

Each essay is 20% of your grade, the hour examination another 20%, and the
final is 40%.

My office is 138 Dulles Hall, and office hours are Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
and Thursday, 1:30-2:30.

Good Luck, have fun, and don't get run over.



HISTORY OF THE ANCIENT NEAR EAST  
FROM THE NEOLITHIC ERA TO THE RISE OF THE PERSIAN EMPIRE

Study carefully all photographs as presented in both volumes of Pritchard
_ANET_.

Week One: March 25.

Introduction to the Ancient Near East

Neolithic Age and the Rise of Urbanization

Ubaid, Uruk/Warka, and the Sumerians

Kingship and the Sumerians

Frankfort, _Intellectual Adventure_ , pp. 3-27. Gordon, _Ancient Near East_ ,
pp. 7-71. Roux, _Ancient Iraq_ , chapters 1-5.



Week Two: April 1.

Gilgamesh Epic

Pre-Dynastic Egypt

Archaeology of the Unification

Egyptian Religion

Frankfort, pp. 125-218.

Wilson, _Culture of Ancient Egypt,_ pp. 1-68.

Pritchard, _ANET_ vol. 1, pp. 28-86, pp. 244-5 (especially the Gilgamesh
Epic).

Pritchard, _ANET_ vol. 2, pp. 123-141.

Roux, _Ancient Iraq_ , chapters 6-7.



Week Three: April 8.

Old Kingdom, Pyramids, First Intermediate Period

Sumerians, Akkadians, and the Guti

Archaeology of Sumer, Akkad and Babylonia

Middle Kingdom of Egypt

Frankfort, pp. 31-122.

Wilson, pp. 69-124.

Pritchard, _ANET_ vol. 1, pp. 1-5, pp. 24-27, pp. 234-237.

Pritchard, _ANET_ vol. 2, pp. 142-217.

Roux, chapters 8-10.



Week Four: April 15.

Mind of the Ancient Near Eastern Person

Creation Myths

Ur III, Isin/Larsa, and the Amorites

Babylonia, Hammurapi, and the CODEX

Wilson, pp. 125-153.

Genesis, the entire book.

Pritchard, _ANET_ vol. 1, pp. 133-170.

Pritchard, _ANET_ vol. 2, pp. 260-262. Roux, chapters 11-14.



Week Five: April 22.

Anatolia and the Hittites

Hittite Treaties and the Age of Shuppiluliumush

The Hyksos and the Establishment of the Empire.

**EXAMINATION.**

Gordon, pp. 72-92.

Pritchard, _ANET_ vol. 1, pp. 12-16, 87-91, 173,

182, 237-243.

Pritchard, _ANET_ vol. 2, pp. 31-86.

Roux, chapters 15-16.



Week Six: April 29.

XVIIIth Dynasty of Egypt

Archaeology of the Amarna Revolution I

Archaeology of the Amarna Revolution II

Akhnaton and Nefertiti, Tutankhaton/amon.

Wilson, pp. 154-235.

Psalm 104, study this in relation to the HYMN TO

ATON. Why do we have this?

Gordon, pp. 93-100.

Pritchard, _ANET_ vol. 1, pp. 182-187, 226-230, 262-277, especially the HYMN
TO ATOM.

Pritchard, _ANET_ vol. 2, pp. 87-93.

Roux, chapter 17.



Week Seven: May 6.

XIXth Dynasty and the so-called Sea Peoples.

Yazilikaya

Habiru and the Exodus

Early Israel and the Berit

Joshua, Judges, entire books.

Gordon, pp. 101-150.

Wilson, pp. 236-318.

Pritchard, ANET vol. 1, pp. 16-24, 92-132, 209-224, 231, 257-259.

Pritchard, _ANET_ vol. 2, pp. 29-30.



Week Eight: May 13.

Saul and David

David and Solomon

Rise of Assyria

Assyrian Empire and Economics

I and II Samuel, and I and II Kings, entire books.

Gordon, pp. 151-189.

Frankfort, pp. 223-360.

Pritchard, _ANET_ vol. 1, pp. 94-120.

Pritchard, _ANET_ vol. 2, pp. 137-204.

Roux, Chapters 13-20.



Week Nine: May 20.

Assyria and Hebrew Prophets

Assyria and Judah

Assyrian warfare

Deuteronomy and the Fall of Judah

Gordon, pp. 190-233.

Isaiah, Hosea, Amos, Deuteronomy (D), the entire books.

Pritchard, _ANET_ vol. 1, p. 205.



Week Ten: May 27.

HOLIDAY

Jeremiah

The Rise of the Achaemenid Empire.

The Ancient Near East in Retrospect

Jeremiah and Job, the entire books.

Gordon, pp. 234-303.

Pritchard, _ANET_ vol. 1, pp. 206-208.

Pritchard, _ANET_ vol. 2, pp. 104-112.

Roux, chapters 21-24.

**Prepare for the comprehensive final examination.**



* * *

PAPER #1: COMPARATIVE STUDIES OF ANCIENT CREATION MYTHS

Comparative analysis of the ancient creation myths. Before you begin this
paper, you must digest THOROUGHLY_Frankfort et al.. _the Intellectual
Adventure of Ancient Man_. This book is the key to this paper and to the
second paper as well, and to the course and its examinations. You must
understand all of its ramifications and the processes _of ancient Near Eastern
mythopoeicism_.

Study carefully the texts of the Memphite Creation Myth ( _ANET_ vol. 1, pp.
1-2), and the Akkadian Creation Myth ( _ANET_ vol. 1, pp. 32-). Next study
Pritchard _ANET_ , vol. 2, pp. 1-, especially Tablet V of the Akkadian
Creation Myth, and the Babylonian Theogony; don't omit Nergal and Eresdkigal,
and Zu, there are important elements in these fragments. Determine what I mean
by element. Then turn to Genesis, and the TWO CREATION myths there (you must
study two), the first is Chapter 1:1-2:4, and the second is Chapter 2:5-9.

Consider the common elements in each myth (this is the key to your paper), and
then consider the elements that differ. Then turn to the ancient Greek
creation story as found in Hesiod THEOGONY (go to the Library for this, or buy
your own copy, the Penguin edition is fine), and note the SIMILAR elements
(elements not names). Do not, however, go into a long discussion of Hesiod's
dissimilar elements.

In an essay. about six typed pages, consider the nature of the ancient Near
Eastern creation myths on the bases of comparative analyses and most of all
emphasize the common and dissimilar _elements_. Also consider why the ancient
Near Eastern mind conceived the creation stores as they did, and as
constructed within the realm of mythopoeicism. _You must demonstrate clearly
an understanding of the ideas Presented by Frankfort et al.. as Chap relate to
the question of the development of the Creation Myths_.

PAPER ESSAY FORM IS ABSOLUTE, TYPED, STAPLED, NOTES AND PROPER BIBLIOGRAPHY.

Enjoy, and don't get run over.

Dr. B.



* * *

Paper #2: COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ANCIENT CHRONICLES

Before you begin this paper, review paper #1, but only if it was stellar, and
then reREAD the first chanter of Frankfort afresh.

Study carefully the texts of I and II Samuel and I and II Kings, YES ALL FOUR
BOOKS. Then turn to Pritchard and study carefully the Assyrian texts of
Ashurbanipal II, Shalmaneser III, Adad-Nirari III, Tiglath-Pileser III, Sargon
II, Sennacherib, and Eserhadden, as in _ANET_ vol. 1, pp. 188-202. Then in
_ANET_ vol. 2, ppp. 94-119 (omit the Seleucids), turn to the Marti text of
Yahdun-Lim, the text of Alalakh, the Assyrian text of Ashurnasirpal II, the
Chaldean texts referring to Mabonaidus and the fall of Jerusalem, and the King
Lists.

_

First consider what elements are common to Hebraic and Assyrian chronicles.
and then, second. what elements differentiate the Hebraic from the Assyrian_.
_Then. consider the nature of the chronicles or annals and their writers and
whether they indicate (first) historical development and(second) historical
cause and effect_. _Again, very clearly demonstrate an understanding of the
ideas presented by Frankfort and the relationship of chronicles to
mythopoeicism and as they relate to the mythopoeic in ancient Near Eastern
literature. Then. the ultimate and most important step of all: how do the
chronicles relate to the first steps of writing history._ Careful on this, as
it is a difficult problem.

In an essay, six typed pages, consider the nature of ancient Near Eastern
chronicles. Consider their purposes and whether they relate to that purpose.
In short, what are the basic elements of ancient chronicles and annals, and
what do they intend to relate? ARE THEY MYTHOPOEIC?

In this essay, you must be very reflective and consider very clearly what is
the marked difference between chronicle and history. You are expected to
demonstrate clear and precise thinking.

Proper essay form is absolute, typed, stapled, notes and proper bibliography.

Have fun, enjoy, and don't get run over.

Dr. B.

