## ARY 302/CC 302K

### WEB SITE: http://www.utexas.edu/courses/archaeology/ARY2002/

**APRIL 11 NOTE: AT NOON ALL GREECE IMAGES NOW WORKING**

This is where you will find handouts, some images, web links. Download the
handout for each class beforehand and bring it to class.

Caution: the web site is an aid to study, not a substitute for attending
class. Some short assignments will be given **only** in class, and information
and images covered in class will not all be posted to the web site. You are
responsible for material in class, as well as on the handouts.

![](images/greekkey.gif)

**CONTENTS**

  1. Instructors.
  2. Course Summary and Grading.
  3. Texts.
  4. Good web links.
  5. Syllabus. Contains links to daily handouts.
  6. Egypt.
  7. Near East.
  8. Greece.
  9. Rome.

![](images/greekkey.gif)

### Instructors

#### Professor: Cynthia W.
[Shelmerdine](http://www.utexas.edu/depts/classics/faculty/shelmerdine/)

> Office: WAG 123B  
>  Office Hours: MWF 10-11 and by appointment  
>  E-mail: cwshelm@mail.utexas.edu  
>  Phone: 471-5742

**TA: Bill Friedman**

     Office: WAG 15  
Office Hours: T 10-11, Th 2-3  
E-mail: billfriedman@mail.utexas.edu  
Phone: 471-5742

Now you know who we are, talk to us! And let us get to know you. Come by,
call, or email one of us whenever you are stuck, puzzled or intrigued by what
you hear in class.

###

* * *

Course summary

This course surveys the ancient civilizations of Egypt and the Near East, the
Aegean cultures of Crete and Mycenae, and the world of classical Greece and
Italy. We will examine important sites and excavations such as the Giza
pyramids and King Tut's tomb, Ur and Babylon, Troy and Mycenae, the Athenian
Acropolis, the sanctuary at Olympia, and the cities of Rome and Pompeii. The
course is intended as an introduction to the sites, monuments and artifacts of
these civilizations, not as a series of studies in archaeological theory and
practice. As such, it will be very different from ARY 301.

At the same time, we shall try to compare the cultures studied, to see how
each evolved, and to define through what they have left behind what makes each
similar, or distinctive. The data are archaeological; the approach will be to
use these data to reconstruct history. Some attention will be paid to the
story of how each culture was (re)discovered in the modern era, and how each
is studied today.

### Grading

Grades will be based on four hour tests, each covering a section of the
course. The last test will be given during exam period. The four tests will
count 22 % each; from time to time there will be short assignments to hand in;
together these will add up to 12%. You are responsible for attending the class
meetings in general, and the tests in particular. I will not give make-up
tests except for genuine emergencies and then **only** if you get word to me
ahead of time.

###

* * *

Texts

There are two required textbooks and a reading packet:

#### Textbooks

  * D.B. Nagle, _The Ancient World, a Social and Cultural History_ , 5th ed. (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River New Jersey 2002)
  * M. Stokstad, _Art History_ part 1, 2nd ed. (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River New Jersey 2002)

Stokstad is art history survey which describes the monuments we will be
discussing in class. It also includes time lines and maps, and is a good way
to review names, dates and places. Nagle is organized chronologically, so we
will skip around in it in order to study Egypt and the other civilizations one
at a time. Short fun readings will be posted on the web. But the most
important way to study in this course is to be there to see the slides, and to
use the class handouts. These will be posted on the web, and hard copies will
be available in class for anyone who wants one.

###

* * *

Good Web Links

  * General 
    * Classics and Mediterranean Archaeology Home Page: <http://classics.lsa.umich.edu/welcome.html>
    * links to web sites on archaeology worldwide: <http://archnet.asu.edu/archnet/archtoc.html> (ArchNet: World Wide Web Virtual Library for Archaeology)
    * The Seven Wonders of the Ancient World: <http://ce.eng.usf.edu/pharos/wonders/>
  * Egypt 
    * general sources: <http://www.newton.cam.ac.uk/egypt/>
    * general sources: <http://www.cofc.edu/~piccione/weblinks.html>
    * general sources: <http://emuseum.mnsu.edu/prehistory/egypt/>
    * Zoser's step pyramid complex at Saqqara: <http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/arth/zoser/zoser.html>
    * more Saqqara: <http://www.geocities.com/~amenhotep/saqqara/djoser/main.html>
    * Great pyramids at Giza: <http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/pyramid/>
    * Giza Mapping Project: <http://www-oi.uchicago.edu/OI/PROJ/GIZ/Giza.html>
  * Near East
    * ABZU: <http://www-oi.uchicago.edu/OI/DEPT/RA/ABZU/ABZU.HTML>
      * indexes all known internet resources about the ancient Near East, including Egypt
    * general sources: <http://emuseum.mnsu.edu/prehistory/middle_east/index.shtml>
  * Greece 
    * general sources on Minoans, Mycenaeans and later Greeks: <http://emuseum.mnsu.edu/prehistory/aegean/index.shtml>  
<http://harpy.uccs.edu/greekromelinks.html>

    * good pictures and links to later Greek: <http://harpy.uccs.edu/greek/mycenae.html>
  * Rome 
    * Pompeii: <http://harpy.uccs.edu/roman/html/pompeiislides.html>
    * Pompeii, Villa of the Mysteries: <http://jcccnet.johnco.cc.ks.us/~jjackson/villa.html>

### ![](images/greekkey.gif)

###  Syllabus and Readings

Jan. 14: Introduction. Egypt. [Chronology](Egypt/01.EgChron.htm). Nagle 21-23;
Stokstad 94-95, 127

Jan. 16: [Early Dynastic Period](Egypt/02.ED.htm) and Dyn. III. Nagle 21-28;
Stokstad 95-102

Jan.18: [Old Kingdom](Egypt/03.OK.htm): Dyn. IV-VI. Nagle 28-32; Stokstad
102-108  


Jan. 21: no class (MLK Birthday).

Jan. 23: Old Kingdom and Pyramids film.

Jan. 25: [Middle Kingdom](Egypt/04.MK.htm). Nagle 32-34; Stokstad 108-13  


Jan. 28: Hyksos; [New Kingdom](Egypt/05.NK.htm): Early Dyn. XVIII. Nagle
43-44, 48-52; Stokstad 113-17

Jan. 30: [Amarna Period](Egypt/06.Amarna.htm). Nagle 44-47; Stokstad 117-22

Feb.  1: King Tut. Stokstad 122-25  


Feb.  4: [Dyn. XIX-XX](Egypt/07.LateNK.htm). Nagle 52-54; Stokstad 114-17
again, 125

Feb. 6: [Review](Egypt/08EgReview.htm).

Feb. 8: HOUR TEST 1: EGYPT  


Feb. 11: Near East. [Chronology](NE/01.near_east_chronology.htm) and
[Protoliterate](NE/02.protoliterate.htm) Period. Nagle 1-8; Stokstad 68-70, 91

Feb. 13: [Early Dynastic](NE/03.earlydynastic.htm) Sumerian Period. Nagle
9-10, 16-21; Stokstad 70-76

Feb. 15: [Akkadian](NE/04.akkad.htm) and Neo-Sumerian Periods. Nagle 10-15;
Stokstad 76-78  


Feb. 18: [Old Babylonian](NE/05.2mil.htm) Period. Nagle 15-16, 17 box, 35-37,
38 box; Stokstad 78-80

Feb. 20: Hittites (same handout as Old Babylonian Period). Nagle 40-43;
Stokstad 86-88

Feb. 22: Aegean Bronze Age: [Minoan Crete](NE/06.minoans.htm). Nagle 90-93;
Stokstad 130-42, 151  


Feb. 25: Aegean Bronze Age: Crete and Thera (same handout and readings as Feb.
22).

Feb. 27: [Assyria](NE/07.assyria.htm). Nagle 63-67; Stokstad 80-83

Mar.  1: [Neo-Babylonian](NE/08.babylon_persia.htm) Period; Achaemenid Persia.
Nagle 67-76; Stokstad 83-85, 88-90  


Mar.  4: [Review](NE/09.nereview.htm).

Mar.  6: HOUR TEST 2: NEAR EAST

Mar. 8:  Walk. There will be a museum assignment; to be explained in class.  


Mar. 11-15: Spring Break  

Mar. 18: [Chronology](Greece/01.greek_chron.htm); Aegean Bronze Age:
[Mycenaeans](Greece/02.Myc.htm). Nagle 88-90, 93-99; Stokstad 142-50, 151

Mar. 20: Aegean Bronze Age: Mycenaeans.

Mar. 22: [Geometric-Archaic](Greece/03.geo_archaic.htm) Periods. Nagle 99-132;
Stokstad 154-61, 221  


Mar. 25: [Archaic](Greece/04.archaic.htm) sculpture, architecture. Stokstad
161-71

Mar. 27: Archaic Period-[Early Classical](Greece/05.early_classical.htm)
Period. Nagle 133-42, 154-57; Stokstad 172-84

Mar. 29: High [Classical](Greece/06.classical.htm) Period. Nagle 158-65,
178-200  


Apr.  1: The Athenian Acropolis. Nagle 165-68; Stokstad 185-93

Apr.  3: Late Fifth Century. Nagle 169-78; Stokstad 193-98

Apr.  5: [Late Classical](Greece/07.late_classical.htm) Period. Nagle 201-205;
Stokstad 198-210  


Apr. 8: Hellenistic Period. Nagle 205-22, 242-47, 251-52; Stokstad 210-20

Apr. 10: [Review](Greece/08.Greece_review%20.htm)

Apr. 12: HOUR TEST 3: GREECE  


Apr. 15: [Early Italy and Etruria](Rome/02.etruscans.htm), and Roman
[Chronology](Rome/01.roman_chron.htm). Introduction. Nagle 253-57, 262-65;
Stokstad 233-36, 287

Apr. 17: Etruscans (handout as above). Nagle 257-61; Stokstad 224-33

Apr. 19: [Republican Rome](Rome/03.republic.htm). Nagle 265-74, 295-338;
Stokstad 236-41  


Apr. 22: [Augustan Rome](Rome/04.augustan.htm). Nagle 338-56; Stokstad 241-45

Apr. 24: [Pompeii](Rome/05.pompeii.htm). Stokstad 260-73

Apr. 26: [Imperial Architecture](Rome/06.imp_archit.htm). Nagle 356-77;
Stokstad 246-54  


Apr. 29: [Imperial Sculpture](Rome/07.imp_sculp.htm). Nagle 377-402; Stokstad
254-60

May 1: [Late Empire](Rome/08.laterome.htm). Nagle 403-414; Stokstad 274-86

May 3: [Review](Rome/09.rome_review.htm).  

May 8: HOUR TEST 4: ROME

  * Note: this test will be from 10:30-12 during our regularly scheduled exam period



* * *

 Last update: 1 May 2002

|

Back to top of Syllabus. Back to top of Page.  
  
---|---

