**Harvard University
Professor Cornel West                     **

**Department of Afro-American Studies                              Fall 2001**

M W 11 (and section)
Lowell Lecture Hall  



Afro-American Studies 10:

**INTRODUCTION TO AFRO-AMERICAN STUDIES**



            The aim of this course is to provide an interdisciplinary examination of the complex array of Afro-American cultural practices from slavery to postmodern times.  This shall be done by close readings of those classic texts that provide the most profound grasp of the dynamics of Afro-American thought and practice.



            The requirements for the course are regular attendance in lectures, active and consistent participation in discussion section, two papers, and a final exam. 



_Week 1:_                  **Cultural Theory and Afro-American Practices**  



_Weeks 2-3:_            **Laying Groundwork**  

Readings:               W.E.B. Du Bois, _Souls of Black Folk_ (entire)

Recommended:      Richard Wright, _Twelve Million Black Voices_  

** **

**                               Week 2: Sectioning (see below)**

**                               Week 3: Sections begin**



_Week 4_                  **Constructing Black Religion**  

Readings:               Albert Raboteau, _Slave Religion_ , pp. 3-91, 290-321

                              Orlando Patterson, _Slavery and Social Death_ , pp. 1-76



_Week 5:_                 **Up From Slavery**  

Readings:               Eugene Genovese, _Roll, Jordan, Roll_ , pp. 161-284

                              Toni Morrison, _Beloved_ (entire)



_Week 6:_                 **The Challenge of Reconstruction**

Readings:               Eric Foner, _A Short History of Reconstruction_
(entire)

Recommended:      W.E.B. Du Bois, _Black Reconstruction in America_ , pp.
3-83, 711-775

                              Eric Foner, _Reconstruction,_ pp. 1-123, 228-280



_Week 7:_                 **Black America in the Gilded Age**

Readings:               C. Vann Woodward, _The Strange Career of Jim Crow_ ,
pp. 3-96

                              August Meier, _Negro Thought in America 1880-1915_ , pp. 3-82

**                               **

**                               Week 7: First paper due in section**

_ _

_Week 8:_                 **The Black Womanist Upsurge**

Readings:               bell hooks, _Ain 't I a Woman_, pp. 1-13, 159-196

                              Paula Giddings, _When and Where I Enter_ , pp. 17-31, 75-117

_ _

_Week 9:_                 **The Quest for Black Leadership**

Readings:               Emma Louis Thornborough, "T. Thomas Fortune: Militant
Editor in the Age of Accommodation"

Thomas C. Holt, "The Lonely Warrior: Ida B. Wells-Barnett and the Struggle for
Black Leadership"

Eugene Levy, "James Weldon Johnson and the Development of the NAACP"

                              Lawrence Levine, "Marcus Garvey and the Politics of Revitalization"



The above essays are in John Hope Franklin and August Meier, eds., _Black
Leaders of the Twentieth Century_ , pp. 19-37, 39-61, 85-103, 105-138



_Week 10:_               **Black Cultural Creativity: Music**

Readings:               Leroi Jones, _Blues People_ , pp. 1-16, 81-165

                              Ralph Ellison, _Shadow and Act_ , pp. 77-94, 241-258

                              Albert Murray, _Stomping the Blues_ (entire)

Recommended:      Peter Guralnick, _Sweet Soul Music_ , pp. 1-20, 220-245,
332-352, 395-405

** **

**Note:                     No class Nov. 21.  No sections Thanksgiving
week.**



_Week 11:_               **Black Cultural Creativity: Literature**

Readings:               James Baldwin, _Notes of a Native Son_ , pp. 3-45

                              Richard Wright, _Native Son_ (entire)

                              Lorraine Hansberry, _Raisin in the Sun_ (entire)

Recommended:      Nathan Huggins, _Harlem Renaissance_



_Week 12:_               **The New Black Middle Class**

Readings:               E. Franklin Frazier, _Black Bourgeoisie_ (entire)

                              William Julius Wilson, _The Declining Significance of Race_ , pp. 1-23,                             122-154

_ _

_Week 13:_               **The Postmodern Afro-American Predicament**

Readings:               Cornel West, _Race Matters_ (entire)

                              Audre Lorde, _Sister Outsider_ , pp. 114-123  
**Course Requirements** : section {25%}, one short paper (5-8 pages) {15%},
one long paper (10-12 pages) {30%}, and a final exam {30%}.



_Section_ : **Section attendance and participation are mandatory**.   Sections
meet once per week for one hour.  The first section meetings will take place
during the third week of classes. Section meetings will be devoted to
discussing the assigned reading and lecture material for each week.  Students
are expected to do the assigned reading for each week in advance and come to
section prepared to discuss it.  All students must be enrolled in a section.
**Any student with more than three unexcused absences from section will be
excluded from the course.**



_Sectioning_ : Electronic sectioning will take place from noon on Wednesday,
September 19 to noon on Friday, September 21.  Students must section during
this time.  Please do not section unless you plan to take Afro-American
Studies 10.  If you have any questions about sectioning, please e-mail
[**afam10@fas.harvard.edu**](mailto:afam10@fas.harvard.edu).  

Note: Every student must be able, if necessary, to take a section on Fridays
at 11am, the regular class time.



_Short Paper_ : The first paper is due in section during Week 7.  Paper topics
will be distributed in class.  **No late papers will be accepted**.



_Long paper_ :  The final paper is due on Tuesday, December 11, location TBA.
Paper topics will be distributed in class.  **No late papers will be
accepted.**



_Final Exam:_ format TBA.



All work should be handed to section leaders.  Students may not submit papers
to the department office or to a designated place or box.



Note:  In order to pass Afro-American Studies 10, students must fulfill all of
the course requirements.

** **

**Office Hours:**

_Prof. Cornel West:_   M 2-4, Department of Afro-American Studies, Barker
Center.  By appointment only.  Please e-mail Barbara Karasinski at
[karasins@fas.harvard.edu](mailto:karasins@fas.harvard.edu) or call 496-2454.



_Head TF, Martha Nadell:_   M 3-4, Barker Center 039.  By appointment only.
Please e-mail [mnadell@fas.harvard.edu](mailto:mnadell@fas.harvard.edu) or
call 495-3292.



**Web Site:**   The web site for Afro-American Studies 10 is
[http://www.courses.fas.harvard/~afam10](http://www.course.fas.harvard/~afam10).
The syllabus and additional course information will be posted on this site.



**Pass/Fail:   **Students may take the course pass/fail, subject to the
regulations of the University.  Pass/fail students must complete all of the
course requirements.



**Core Credit:** Afro-American Studies 10 may be taken to meet the Historical
Study A requirement.



**Required Texts (available at the Coop and on reserve at Hilles and Lamont
Libraries)**

W.E.B. Du Bois, _Souls of Black Folk_

Albert Raboteau, _Slave Religion_

Orlando Patterson, _Slavery and Social Death_

Toni Morrison, _Beloved_

Eric Foner, _A Short History of Reconstruction_

LeRoi Jones, _Blues People_

Albert Murray, _Stomping the Blues_

Richard Wright, _Native Son_

Lorraine Hansberry, _Raisin in the Sun_

E. Franklin Frazier, _Black Bourgeoisie_

William Julius Wilson, _The Declining Significance of Race_

Cornel West, _Race Matters_



**Required Texts (available at the Coop, in the course pack, and on reserve at
Hilles and Lamont Libraries)**

Eugene Genovese, _Roll, Jordan, Roll_

C. Vann Woodward, _The Strange Career of Jim Crow_

August Meier, _Negro Thought in America 1880-1915_

bell hooks, _Ain 't I a Woman_

Paula Giddings, _When and Where I Enter_

John Hope Franklin and August Meier, eds., _Black Leaders of the Twentieth
Century_

James Baldwin, _Notes of a Native Son_

Ralph Ellison, _Shadow and Act_

Audre Lorde, _Sister Outsider_

** **

**Recommended Texts (on reserve at Hilles and Lamont Libraries)**

Richard Wright, _Twelve Million Black Voices_

W.E.B. Du Bois, _Black Reconstruction in America_

Eric Foner, _Reconstruction_

Nathan Huggins, _Harlem Renaissance_

Peter Guralnick, _Sweet Soul Music_

