
#### Professor James Der Derian UMASS/Amherst

#### Political Science Thompson 314

#### Spring 1997 jderian@polsci.umass.edu





### 725 International Relations Theory:

### Representations of the Other

####  

#### Professor James Der Derian



This course is about historical and theoretical encounters of otherness in
International Relations. It will focus on the representation of identities
(including ethnic, nationalist, gendered, social, and cultural identities)
rather than the contest of interests, to provide a more comprehensive account
of how historic alienations of identity and negotiations of difference have
defined International Relations. Offering a historical, philosophical, and
legal study of these transnational and cross-cultural encounters, this course
will provide a much broader and deeper theoretical framework than the discrete
levels of analysis (emani, state, and system) that structure traditional IR
theory.



The content and method of the course will draw but go beyond the so-called
'British' or classical approach to International Relations, which emphasizes
philosophical, historical and juridical inquiries into the creation and
expansion of an international society. It will borrow from it, in the sense
that realist ('Machiavellian'), rationalist ('Grotian'), and irenist
('Kantian') traditions will be used to understand historical representations
of otherness. It will go beyond it, however, in the sense of offering
revolutionist ('Marxist') and revaluationist ('Nietzschean') anti-traditions
of thought for late modern forms of alienation that often seem to resist
comprehension through the traditional paradigms. The failure to anticipate the
end of the cold war, as well as the lack of a vision after it, testifies to
this resistance. Contemporary challenges to the traditions, like alternative
security regimes, feminism, the accelerated flows of information, capital, and
refugees, critical social movements, environmentalism, and media politics -
all topics which have been neglected by the traditional classical approaches,
will also be explored in the context of other encounters.



We will go beyond the classical concern with interests, and present identities
as powerful and constitutive forces in world politics. How national,
religious, cultural, social, gendered, political and other identities are
formed, accommodated, or alienated will be the underlying theme of the course.
In other words, the general orientation of the course will be towards the kind
of ethical, critical,and historical reasoning that makes the reader a
normative producer rather than a neutral consumer of knowledge.





#### Course Requirements



Each student will be responsible for: one literature review; one essay to be
presented in class which will respond to a thematic question (and be from a
different section than the literature review); one assignment as discussant
for another studentis thematic essay; and a research paper which will be based
on one of the section topics (but not the same as the thematic essay). The
literature review (3-5 pages) and essay (6-8 pages) will be photocopied and
made available to all students prior to the class. The essay will be revised
and handed in one week after presentation in the seminar. The latest possible
date to hand in the research paper (maximum 20 pages) is May 19.



#### Readings



Required books are available at the Jeffrey Amherst College Bookstore in
Amherst. They and suggested readings will also be on reserve at the library.
Photocopies of articles will be handed out in the seminar.



1 **Introduction**

>  
>

> Peter Barry _Beginning Theory_



2 **Classical Approaches to War and Peace**



> Adam Watson _The Evolution of International Society_

>

> Hedley Bull _^-Martin Wight and the Theory of International Relations^_ ,

>

> Brian Porter (ed), _International Theory: The Three Traditions_

>

> James Richardson _^-The Academic Study of International Relations^_ ,

>

> J.D.B. Miller , _Order and Violence_

>

> and R.J.Vincent (ed)

>

> Timothy Dunne _^-The Social Construction of International Society^_ ,

>

>> > European Journal of International Relations 1(3): 367-89





3 **Theories of Representation and Identity**



> James Der Derian _On Diplomacy: A Genealogy of Western Estrangement_

>

> Ferdinand de Saussure _Course in General Linguistics_

>

> Roland Barthes _^-The Old Rhetoric: an aide-memoire^_ ,

>

>> > The Semiotic Challenge, 11-93

>

> David Campbell _The Political Subject of Violence_

>

> Michael Dillon (eds)





4 **Greeks and Barbarians**



> Herodotus _History of the Persian Wars_

>

> Martin Wight _Systems of States_ , chapters 1-3

>

> A.J. Toynbee Hellenism, _the History of a Civilisation_

>

> Neal Ascherson _Black Sea_



****

5 **Christians and Infidels**



> William Connolly _The Augustinian Imperative_

>

> S.F. Belch _^-Paulus Vladimiri and His Doctrine Concerning_

>

>> > _International Law and Politics_

>

> Hugo Grotius _The Truth of the Christian Religion_

>

> Jean Bethke Elshtain _Augustine and the Limits of Politics_





6 **Europeans and Savages**



> Tzvetan Todorov _The Conquest of America_

>

> F. de Victoria _De Indis (On the Indians)_

>

> V.G. Kiernan _The Lords of Human Kind_

>

> William Connolly _^-Global Political Discourse^_ ,

>

>> > > Identity\Difference ,36-63





7 **Free Men and Slaves**



> C.L.R. James _The Black Jacobins_

>

> David Davis _The Problem of Slavery in Western Culture_

>

> Eric Williams _Capitalism and Slavery_

>

>> > _The Bounds of Race_





8 **Civilized and Uncivilized**



> Michael Howard _The Laws of War_

>

> Immanuel Kant _^-What is Enlightenment?_ ",

>

>> > Perpetual Peace and Other Essays

>

> and Michel Foucault _^-What is Enlightenment?_ ,

>

>> > Foucault Reader

>

> Norbert Elias _The Civilizing Process_ , chapter 1 and excerpts

>

> Samuel Huntington _^-The Clash of Civilizations?^_ ,

>

>> > Foreign Affairs 72 (3), 22-42





9 **Capitalists and Proletariat**



> Adam Smith _The Wealth of Nations_

>

> Karl Marx _The Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844_

>

> Charles Tilly _Coercion, Capital, and European States_

>

> Justin Rosenberg _The Empire of Civil Society_





10 **Patriots and Enemies**



> Zygmunt Bauman _Modernity and the Holocaust_

>

> Adorno _Dialectics of Enlightenment_

>

> and Horkheimer

>

> Vaclav Havel _Recent Writings_

>

> Martha Nussbaum _^-Patriotism and Cosmopolitanism^_





11 **Beautiful Souls and Just Warriors**



> Jean Elshtain _Women and War_

>

> Simone de Beauvoir _The Second Sex_

>

> Butler and Scott _Feminist Theorize the Political_

>

> Zalewski and Enloe _^-Questions about Identity in IR^_ ,

>

>> > International Relations Theory

>>>

>>> Today, 279-305





12 **Humans and Cyborgs**



> Sherry Turkle _Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age of the_

>

>> > _Internet_

>

> William Gibson _Neuromancer_

>

> Donna Haraway _^-A Cyborg Manifesto^, Simians, Cyborgs, and Women_

>

> Paul Edwards _^-Minds, Machines, and Subjectivity in the_

>

>> > _Closed World^_ , The Closed World, 303-352





13 **Conclusion: Remapping International Relations**

