**

HISTORY 334

Topics in Colonial North American History:

Race and Identity, Ethnicity and Difference

**

Fall 2000 Prof. Cornelia H. Dayton

Class meeting:  Tu 1-4 Off. hrs.: M2-3, Tu10-12, W10-11

Place: Wood Hall 4B  Wood Hall 332, 486-5435/3717

email: dayton@sp.uconn.edu

  In Fall 2000, the seminar will serve as an introduction to key themes,
outstanding monographs, and research materials for one of the most important
topics in U.S. history: race. From the outset, we will discuss what concepts
of race circulated in the Age of Encounters and how to bring historical
specificity to social scientific and humanist languages of race and
difference. Current syntheses of U.S. history often refer to the colonies and
early nation as a tri-racial society. Thus our readings focus on the exciting
new secondary literature on the complex nature of exchanges among Indians,
Africans, and European settlers from the mid-15th to the early 19th centuries.
The course includes a three-week research component in which students will
work with primary sources and the materials in local New England repositories
to produce short research reports.

Each class member is required to be prepared to discuss thoroughly the
assigned common readings each week. In addition, there are four written
assignments.

One is an _oral/written report_ on ONE monograph chosen from the supplementary
list of books provided for most weeks in the syllabus.   The in-class, oral
report (NO MORE than 12 minutes) should include both a summary and a critical
assessment of the book. Your report should be submitted in _written form_ , as
a 6- page critical review, no later than ONE WEEK after the date of the oral
presentation.

A second assignment is a critical assessment of several book reviews of one
monograph from our common reading (called the " _meta-review_ "). You select
one of the following books to construct your paper around: Richard White,
James Merrell, Jill Lepore, Ira Berlin, Kathleen Brown, William Piersen,
Daniel Mandell, or Joanne Pope Melish. Your task is to find three substantial
reviews in journals such as the _WMQ_ , _Reviews in American History_ , the
_Radical History Review_ (not the _AHR_ or _JAH_ , if possible) and write a
critical assessment of those reviews in light of your reading of the book (6-7
pages). What choices does each reviewer make? How disparate are the reviews in
style, coverage, and critique? How do the authors indicate their own
preferences for method and interpretation, if at all? What surprises or
disappoints you about these reviews? Finally, what would you add in a critique
of your own that is not present in these reviews?



The third assignment is the research report, based on a topic of your choosing
among a set of "doable" projects that I will be handing out and discussing
when the 3-week research component approaches. (Students can propose to work
as a pair to tackle a particularly ambitious research project.)

The fourth assignment, due at the end of the semester, will be a reflective
essay (6-8 pages) synthesizing course materials, in response to a question to
be handed out well before the due date.

For the purposes of grading, performance in class will account roughly for
20%, the book review and metareviews 15% each, the research report and the
final essay 25% each.

  The format for each week's class will generally be a wide-ranging discussion
of the week's assigned common reading, interpersed at appropriate points with
oral reports by students who have chosen to review monographs from the
supplementary list for that week.  In weeks 3 and 8, we will follow a
roundtable format, with class members presenting and arguing from the books
which they covered.

  Of the books available for purchase at the University bookstore, note that
_only 5_ are required reading for all class members:

Jill Lepore, _The Name of War: King Philip's War and The Origins of American
Identity_ (1998)

Ira Berlin, _Many Thousands Gone: The First Two Centuries of Slavery in North
America_ (1998)

John Thornton, _Africa and Africans in the Making of the Atlantic World,
1400-1800_ 2d ed. (1992, 1998)

Kathleen M. Brown, _Nasty Wenches, Good Wives, and Anxious Patriarchs: Gender,
Race, and Power in Colonial Virginia_ (1996)

Joanne Pope Melish, _Disowning Slavery: Gradual Emancipation and "Race" in New
England, 1780-1860_ (1998) [hardbk only; also available on Library Reserve and
in Wood 328]

In Weeks 3 and 8, for their reading assignment students will choose between
two monographs. For Week 3, students will sign up to read either Richard
White, _The Middle Ground: Indians, Empires, and Republics in the Great Lakes
Region, 1650-1815_ (1991) or James Merrell, _Into the American Woods:
Negotiators on the Pennsylvania Frontier_ (1999). In Week 8, the choice is
between William D. Piersen, _Black Yankees: The Development of an Afro-
American Subculture in 18th-Century New England_ (1988), and Daniel H.
Mandell, _Behind the Frontier: Indians in 18th-Century Eastern Massachusetts_
(1996).

Beyond these monographs, in most weeks, we will be reading several articles.
All of these will be xeroxed and made available in folders (marked by Week 1,
Week 2, etc.) in Room 328 of Wood hall and on Hard Copy Reserve in Babbidge
Library.

Students are responsible for securing copies of the books they choose to
review from the supplementary list; in some cases I can lend copies.



_

Reading for Background in Early American History

_

For those of you interested in refreshing or increasing your grasp of the
general contours of colonial America, there are several helpful volumes. A
foundational and very informative reference work is:  Charles McLean Andrews,
_The Colonial Period of American History_ (1930s), 4 vols. (the first three
volumes present lucid narratives of the settlement of each 17th-century
colony). The Institute of Early American History and Culture periodically
publishes _Books about Early America_ , a list of about 2000 titles of
monographs judged the "most important" and arranged topically; the last
edition came out in 1989 and was edited by David L. Ammerman and Philip D.
Morgan. The two most discussed, recent, synthetic works are: David Hackett
Fischer, _Albion's Seed: Four British Folkways in America_ (1989), and Jack P.
Greene, _Pursuits of Happiness: The Social Development of Early Modern British
Colonies and the Formation of American Culture_ (1988). Syntheses that
highlight the perspectives of indigenous Americans and transplanted Africans
include: Colin G. Calloway, _New Worlds for All_ (1997), and Gary B. Nash's
books, _Red, White, and Black_ and _Race and Revolution_ (1990). You should
also be aware of several well-known or recent essay collections covering the
colonial and revolutionary periods:  

Jack P. Greene and Jack R. Pole, eds., _Colonial British America:   Essays in
the New History of the Early Modern Era_ (1984)

April 1993 issue of the _William and Mary Quarterly_ : see the Forum articles
for review essays of subfields in colonial history by young scholars

Stanley N. Katz, John Murrin, and Douglas Greenberg, eds., _Colonial America:
Essays in Politics and Social Development_ 4th ed. (1992)



Anthologies that take cultural differences, ethnohistory, and contact zones as
main themes include:

Bernard Bailyn and Philip D. Morgan, eds., _Strangers within the Realm:
Cultural Margins of the First British Empire_ (1991)

Martin Daunton and Rick Halpern, eds., _Empire and Others: British Encounters
with Indigenous Peoples, 1600-1850_ (1999)

Jan. 1997 issue of the _William and Mary Quarterly

_

Andrew R. L. Cayton and Fredrika J. Teute, eds., _Contact Points: American
Frontiers from the Mohawk Valley to the Mississippi, 1750-1830_ (1998)

Carla Gardina Pestana and Sharon V. Salinger, eds., _Inequality in Early
America_ (1999)

Ira Berlin and Philip D. Morgan, eds., _Cultivation and Culture: Labor and the
Shaping of Slave Life in the Americas_ (1993)

David Barry Gaspar and Darlene Clark Hine, eds., _More than Chattel: Black
Women and Slavery in the Americas_ (1996)

Ira Berlin and Philip D. Morgan, eds., _The Slaves' Economy: Independent
Production by Slaves in the Americas_ (1991)

Ira Berlin and Ronald Hoffman, eds., _Slavery and Freedom in the Age of
Revolution_ (1983)

Colin G. Calloway, ed., _After King Philip's War: Presence and Persistence in
Indian New England_ (1997)

Colin G. Calloway, ed., _Dawnland Encounters: Indians and Europeans in
Northern New England_ (1991)

Lawrence M. Hauptman and James D. Wherry, eds., _The Pequots in Southern New
England: The Fall and Rise of an American Indian Nation_ (1990)

Peter Benes, ed., _Algonkians of New England: Past and Present_ (1993)

Robert S. Grumet, _Northeastern Indian Lives, 1632-1816_ (1996)

\------------------------------------------------------------





**

Schedule of Meetings and Topics

**



**

Week 1. Sept. 5: Introductory Meeting; Overview and Discussion**

**

Week 2. Sept. 12: Concepts

**

**Submit to me by 9 a.m. on the day of class (by email or hard copy) FIVE
Propositions drawn from the reading that you think merit further discussion,
and indicate very briefly why or along what lines**

Required:

\- Excerpts and headnotes from _Critical White Studies: Looking Behind the
Mirror_ , ed. Richard Delgado and Jean Stefancic (1997) [40 pp.]

\- Nathan Irvin Huggins, "The Deforming Mirror of Truth," in _Revelations..._
(1995) [orig. pub. 1977], 252-83

\- Joyce Chaplin, "Natural Philosophy and an Early Racial Idiom in North
America: Comparing English and Indian Bodies," _WMQ_ 54 (1997), 229-52

\- Karen Ordahl Kupperman, "Presentment of Civility: English Response to
American Self-Presentation, 1580-1640," _WMQ_ 54 (1997), 193-228

\- Nancy Shoemaker, "How Indians Got to be Red," _AHR_ 102 (1997), 625-44

\- C. A. Bayly, "The British and Indigenous Peoples, 1760-1860: Power,
Perception, and Identity," in Martin Daunton and Rick Halpern, eds., _Empire
and Others: British Encounters with Indigenous Peoples, 1600-1850_ (1999),
19-41

\- Philip D. Morgan, "Encounters Bewteen British and 'Indigenous' Peoples, c.
1500-c. 1800," in _Empire and Others_ , 42-78

\- David Roediger, Intro and Chap. 1 from his _The Wages of Whiteness: Race
and the Making of the American Working Class_ (1991), (20 pp.)

\- Kathleen Neal Cleaver, "The Antidemocratic Power of Whitness" [a summary of
Roediger's book], in _Critical White Studies_ , 157-163

\- Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham, "African-American Women's History and the
Metalanguage of Race," _Signs_ 17 (1992), 251-74

\- Winthrop Jordan, _White Over Black: American Attitudes Toward the Negro,
1550-1812_ (1968), 85-98 [Optional: 3-43, 216-65]

\- James Campbell and James Oakes, "The Invention of Race: Rereading _White
Over Black_ ," _Reviews in American History_ 21 (March 1993), 172- 83

\- Kathleen M. Brown, "Native Americans and Early Modern Concepts of Race," in
_Empire and Others_ , 79-100

\- Emily Bartels, "Imperialist Beginnings: Richard Hakluyt and the
Construction of Africa," _Criticism_ 34 (1992), 517-38

\- Brown, _Good Wives, Nasty Wenches_ , Chap. 2 (pp. 43-74)

\- Daniel Richter, "Whose Indian History?" _WMQ_ 50 (April 1993), 379-393

\- Dell Upton, "White and Black Landscapes in 18th-Century Virginia," _Places_
2 (1985), 59-72

\- Three short pieces in _Rethinking American Indian History_ , ed. Donald L.
Fixio (1997): by Theda Perdue, Richard White, and Angela Cavender Wilson

Reports:

\- William Cronon, _Changes in the Land: Indians, Colonists, and the Ecology
of New England_ (1983)

\- Karen Kupperman, _Indians and English: Facing Off in Early America_ (2000)

\- Patricia Seed, _Ceremonies of Possession: Europe's Conquest of the New
World, 1492-1640_ (1995), and reviews

\- Neal Salisbury, _Manitou and Providence:   Indians, Europeans, and the
Making of New England, 1500-1643_ (1982)

\- Kim Hall, _Things of Darkness: Economies of Race and Gender in Early Modern
England_ (1995)

\- Carl Degler, _Neither Black nor White: Slavery and Race Relations in Brazil
and the United States_ (1971)





**

Week 3. Sept. 19

**

Required Reading:

\- Richard White, _The Middle Ground_ (skim Chaps. 10  & 11)

OR

\- James Merrell, _Into the American Woods

_

Articles:

\- James Merrell, "`The Customes of Our Countrey':  Indians and Colonists in
Early America," in Philip Morgan and Bernard Bailyn, eds., _Strangers in Our
Realm_ (1991) (pp. 117-156) **OR** his "Some Thoughts on Colonial Historians
and American Indians," _WMQ_ 46 (1989)

\- Natalie Zemon Davis, "Iroquois Women, European Women," in _Women, "Race,"
and Writing in the Early Modern Period_ , ed. Margo Hendricks and Patricia
Parker (1994) [15 pp]

Reference/Recommended:

\- Bruce Trigger, ed., _Handbook of North American Indians_ v. 15 _(Northeast_
)

\- James Axtell, ed., _The Indian Peoples of Eastern America: A Documentary
History of the Sexes_ (1981)

\- Axtell, _The European and the Indian:   Essays in the Ethnohistory of
Colonial North America_ (1981), or his new collections _After Columbus_
(1988), _Beyond 1492_ (1992), and a 2000 volume; and a recent review essay,
"Columbian Encounters: 1991-1995," _WMQ_ 52 (Oct. 1996), 649-696



Reports:

\- James Axtell, _The Invasion Within: The Contest of Cultures in Colonial
North America_ (1985)

\- Francis Jennings, _The Invasion of America:  Indians, Colonialism, and the
Cant of Conquest_ (1975)

\- Ann Marie Plane, _Colonial Intimacies: Indian Marriage in Early New
England_ (2000)

\- Alice Nash, recent Columbia Univ. diss. on the Abenaki

\- Karen Anderson, _Chain Her by One Foot: The Subjugation of Women in 17th-
century New France_ (1991)

\- Sylvia Van Kirk, _"Many Tender Ties": Women in Fur-Trade Society,
1670-1870_ (1980)

\- James H. Merrell, _The Indians' New World: Catawbas and Their Neighbors
from European Contact through the Era of Removal_ (1989)

\- Daniel H. Usner, _Indians, Settlers, and Slaves in a Frontier Exchange
Economy: The Lower Mississippi Valley Before 1783_ (1992)

\- Matthew Dennis, _Cultivating a Landscape of Peace: Iroquois-European
Encounters in 17th-century America_ (1993)

\- Daniel K. Richter, _The Ordeal of the Longhouse: The Peoples of the
Iroquois League in the Era of European Colonization_ (1992)

\- Richard White, _The Roots of Dependency: Subsistence, Environment, and
Social Changes Among the Choctaws, Pawnees, and Navajos_ (1983)

\- J. Leitch Wright, Jr., _The Only Land They Knew: The Tragic Story of the
American Indians in the Old South_ (1981) and James Axtell, _The Indians' New
South: Cultural Change in the Colonial Southeast_ (1996)

\- Peter Mancall, _Deadly Medicine: Indians and Alcohol in Early America_
(1995), plus parts of Rorabaugh's book

\- Colin G. Calloway, _The Western Abenaki of Vermont, 1600-1800: War,
Migration, and the Survival of an Indian People_ (1990)





**

Week 4. Sept. 26

**

Required: Jill Lepore, _The Name of War

_

Articles:

\- Lawrence Hauptman, "The Pequot War and its Legacies," in _The Pequots in
Southern New Engalnd_ , 69-80

\- Robert Secor, "Ethnic Humor in Early American Jest Books," in Frank
Shuffleton, ed., _A Mixed Race: Ethnicity in Early America_ (1993), 163-93

\- Gary B. Nash, "The Concept of Inevitability in the History of European-
Indian Relations," in _Inequality in Early America_ , ed. C. Pestana and S.
Salinger (1999), 267-91

Reports:

\- Richard Slotkin, _Regeneration through Violence:   The Mythology of the
American Frontier, 1600-1860_ (1973), Chaps. 1-8

\- Alfred A. Cave, _The Pequot War_ (1996), and articles

\- James D. Drake, _King Philip's War: Civil War in New England, 1675-1676_
(1999)

\- Patrick M. Malone, _The Skulking Way of War: Technology and Tactics among
the New England Indians_ (1991), and chapter in Frances Jennings, _Invasion of
America

_

\- Jack Campisi, _The Mashpee Indians: Tribe on Trial_ (1991), and James
Clifford, "Identity in Mashpee," Chap. 12 in _The Predicament of Culture:
20th-century Ethnography, Literature, and Art_ (1998), 277-346





**

Week 5. October 3

**

Required: Ira Berlin, _Many Thousands Gone

_

Recommended:

\- Philip D. Morgan, "Rethinking Early American Slavery," in _Inequality in
Early America_ , ed. Carla Gardina Pestana and Sharon V. Salinger (1999),
239-266

\- Jon F. Sensbach, "Charting a Course in Early African-American History,"
_WMQ_ 50 (1993), 394-405

Reports:

\- Philip D. Morgan, _Slave Counterpoint: Black Culture in the 18th-century
Chesapeake and Lowcountry_ (1998)

\- Peter Wood, _Black Majority: Negroes in South Carolina from 1670 through
the Stono Rebellion_ (1974)

\- Winthrop Jordan, _White Over Black:   American Attitudes toward the Negro,
1550-1812_ (1968), 3-265

\- David Brion Davis, _The Problem of Slavery in Western Culture_ (1966)

\- Lorena Walsh, _From Calabar to Carter's Grove: The History of a Virginia
Slave Community_ (1997)

\- Robert Olwell, _Masters, Slaves, and Subjects: The Culture of Power in the
South Carolina Low Country, 1740-1790_ (1998)

\- Graham Russell Hodges, _Slavery and Freedom in the Rural North: African
Americans in Monmouth County, New Jersey, 1665-1865_ (1997)

\- Jon F. Sensbach, _A Separate Canaan: the Making of an Afro-Moravian World
in North Carolina, 1763-1840_ (1997)

\- Betty Wood, _Women's Work, Men's Work: The Informal Slave Economies of
Lowcountry Georgia_ (1995)

\- Leon Higginbotham, Jr., _In the Matter of Color: Race and the American
Legal Process--The Colonial Period_ (1978)

\- Richard Price, _Alabi's World_ (1990)





**

Week 6.   Oct. 10

**

Required: John Thornton, _Africa and Africans in the Making

_

_of the Atlantic World

_

Articles:

\- Deborah White, "'Yes,' There is a Black Atlantic," _Itinerario_ (1999)

\- David Eltis, TBA

Guest: Prof. Ugo Nwokeji. During the 2nd half of class, we will adjourn to a
Library classroom and all experiment with the CD-Rom Slave Trade Database
(1999).

Reference: Joseph Miller, _Slavery and Slaving in World History: A
Bibliography, 1900-1991_ (1993), with annual updates in the journal _Slavery
and Abolition

_

Reports:

\- Mechal Sobel, _The World They Made Together: Black and White Values in
18th-Century Virginia_ (1988)

\- Gwendolyn Midlo Hall, _Africans in Colonial Louisiana: the Development of
Afro-Creole Culture in the 18th Century_ (1992)

\- Paul Gilroy, _The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness_
(1993)

\- Herbert Klein, _Slavery in the Americas: A Comparative Study of Virginia
and Cuba_ (1989)

\- Herbert Klein, _African Slavery in Latin America and the Carribbean_ (1986)





**

Week 7. Oct. 17

**

Required: Kathleen M. Brown, _Good Wives, Nasty Wenches_ (skip  Chap. 2; skim
Chaps. 8 & 9)

Article:

\- Richard Godbeer, "Eroticizing the Middle Ground: Anglo-Indian Sexual
Relations along the 18th-century Frontier," in Martha Hodes, ed., _Sex, Love,
Race: Crossing Boundaries in North American History_ (1999), 91-111

Reports:

\- Kenneth A. Lockridge, _On the Sources of Patriarchal Rage: The Commonplace
Books of William Bryd and Thomas Jefferson and the Gendering of Power in the
18th Century_ (1992); plus Michael Zuckerman essay and reviews of Lockridge's
book

\- Lois Green Carr, Russell R. Menard, and Lorena S. Walsh, _Robert Cole's
World: Agriculture and Society in Early Maryland_ (1991)

\- Allan Kulikoff, _Tobacco and Slaves: The Development of Southern Cultures
in the Chesapeake, 1680-1800_ (1986)

\- Lisa F. Wilson, _Ye Heart of a Man: The Domestic Life of Men in Colonial
New England_ (1999)

\- A. G. Roeber, _Palatines, Liberty, and Property: German Lutherans in
Colonial British America_ (1993), or a set of his articles

\- Theda Perdue, _Cherokee Women: Gender and Culture Change, 1700-1835_ (1998)

\- Barbara Bush, _Slave Women in Caribbean Society, 1650-1838_ (1990)

\- Marietta Morrissey, _Slave Women in the New World: Gender Stratification in
the Caribbean_ (1989)

\- Deborah Gray White, _Arn't I a Woman? Female Slaves in the Plantation
South_ (1985)

\- Noel Ignatiev, _How the Irish Became White_ (1995)





**

Week 8. Oct. 24

**

Required: Piersen, _Black Yankees

_

OR

Mandell, _Behind the Frontier

_

Articles:

\- Ann Marie Plane, "Legitimacies, Indian Identities, and the Law: The
Politics of Sex and the Creation of History in Colonial New England," in
_Empire and Others_ , 217-237

\- Jean O'Brien, "'Divorced' from the Land: Resistance and Survival of Indian
Women in 18th-century New England," in Calloway, ed., _After King Philip's
War_ , 144-161

Reference: Ives Goddard and Kathleen J. Bragdon, _Native Writings in
Massachusett_ , 2 vols. (1988)

Reports:

\- Jean O'Brien, _Dispossession by Degrees: Indian Land and Identity in
Natick, Massachusetts, 1650-1790_ (1996)

\- Gregory Evans Dowd, _A Spirited Resistance: The North American Indian
Struggle for Unity, 1745-1815_ (1992)

\- Yasuhide Kawashima, _Puritan Justice and the Indian: White Man's Law in
Massachusetts, 1630-1763_ (1986)

\- Anthony F. C. Wallace, _The Death and Rebirth of the Seneca_ (1970)





**

Week 9.  Oct. 31

**

PANEL discussion on research: Brian Carroll, Nancy Shoemaker, and Cornelia
Dayton

Required: a book selected (with the advice of the instructor) as background
for your research topic. Likely choices include:

\- Kathleen J. Bragdon, _Native People of Southern New England, 1500-1650_
(1996)

\- Lorenzo Johnston Greene, _The Negro in Colonial New England, 1620-1776_
(1942)





**

Week 10. Nov. 7** No Class: Continue work on your research  project





**

Week 11. Nov. 14** Individual conferences





**

Week 12.  Nov. 21** No Class: Wrap up work on your research

project





**

Week 13. Nov. 28** Class Presentations and Discussion of

Working with Primary Sources

*Research Reports Due in class*





**

Week 14. Dec. 5** : Clustered readings

READ at least 3 articles from 4 of several topical clusters (e.g.,
Microhistories and Life Histories; Ethnicity; Religion; Material Culture; War;
Revolution and Abolition). A list of the articles for this week will be handed
out separately.

Reports:

\- John Demos, _The Unredeemed Captive: A Family Story From Early America_
(1994)

\- Natalie Zemon Davis, _Women on the Margins: Three 17th-Century Lives_
(1995)

\- Annette Gordon-Reed, _Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemmings: An American
Controversy_ (1997)







**

Week 15. Dec. 12

**

Required: Melish, _Disowning Slavery

_

Article:

\- Ruth Wallis Herndon and Ella Wilcox Sekatau, "The Right to a Name: The
Narragansett People and Rhode Island Officials in the Revolutionary Era,"
_Ethnohistory_ 44 (Summer 1997), 433-62



Reports:

\- W. Jeffrey Bolster, _Black Jacks: African American Seamen in the Age of
Sail_ (1997)

\- Colin G. Calloway, _The American Revolution in Indian Country: Crisis and
Diversity in Native American Communities_ (1995)

\- David Brion Davis, _The Problem of Slavery in the Age of Revolution,
1770-1823_ (1975)

\- Sylvia R. Frey, _Water From The Rock: Black Resistance in a Revolutionary
Age_ (1991)

\- Gary B. Nash, _Forging Freedom: The Formation of Philadelphia's Black
Community, 1720-1840_ (1988)

\- Shane White, _Somewhat More Independent: The End of Slavery in New York
City, 1770-1810_ (1991)

\- Walter Johnson, _Soul by Soul: Life Inside the Antebellum Slave Market_
(1999)

\- Edward Ball, _Slaves in the Family_ (1998)



**Final essay due MONDAY Dec. 18 by 4 p.m. in my office**

