[![](http://www.udel.edu/apa/apa5.gif)Return to the APA Home
Page](http://www.udel.edu/apa/apa.html)

* * *

**The American Philosophical Association**

_Newsletter on_

_Philosophy and the Black Experience_

Leonard Harris, editor

Issue no. 95:1 Fall 1995

**From the Editor**

Leonard Harris, Editor; Blanche Radford-Curry, Robert Birt, Felmon Davis,
Lewis Gordon, Associate Editors

I encourage readers to take note of philosophic projects mentioned in this
issue which have significant influence beyond academia. Johnny Washington's
"Destiny" studies approach, for example, deeply influenced by Alain Locke but
shaped by Washington's own ideas, is the guide for the _Palm Beach Gazette's_
community action plans; the  "Jericho Project" under the guidance of William
Hardy, Tennessee State University, is a library collection and an
undergraduate education program intended to prepare students-with particular
attention to minority students-for graduate school; the Pan-African Symposium
on "Problematics of an African Philosophy: Twenty Years After (1976-1990)"
conference announcement bespeaks the continuing work of hundreds of
philosophers concerned with African philosophy and the diligence of the
symposium's organizer, Claude Sumner; the "Philosophy Born of Struggle II"
conference, under the direction of J. Everet Green, will focus on the
relationship of philosophy and liberation; the "Race," Religion, and Democracy
in America meeting, December 28-30, Riverside Church, New York, under the
auspices of Frank Kirkland; and Villanova University plans "The Academy and
Race: Toward A Philosophy of Political Action" with a broad range of
intellectuals.

This edition includes a continuing debate, Stephen Nathanson's, "Race, Racism,
and Racial Loyalty: A Reply to Steven Martinot." In addition, "Believe It or
Not or the Ku Klux Klan and American Philosophy Exposed," previously published
in the APA's _Proceedings_ , has generated considerable debate and is included
here.

The editors encourage readers to communicate with authors, submit
contributions, attend announced conferences, share news, and discuss the
issues presented in the _Newsletter_.

**From the APA Committee on the  
Status of Blacks in Philosophy**

_Ford Foundation Fellowships for Minorities_

Tommy Lott, Chair, APA Committee on Blacks

In 1995, the Ford Foundation offered approximately seventy predoctoral and
twenty postdoctoral fellowships to members of six minority groups whose
underrepresentation in the nation's Ph.D. population and in the professorate
has been severe and long-standing. The six groups were: Alaskan Natives
(Eskimo or Aleut), Native American Indians, Black/African Americans, Mexican
Americans/Chicano, Native Pacific Islanders (Polynesian or Micronesian), and
Puerto Ricans. The program has existed in various forms for over two decades.
A survey of past fellows is being conducted to determine the impact of these
fellowships on the careers of recipients. Although the results of this survey
are not available yet, the National Research Council has provided numerical
data indicating applications as well as awards for the period 1987-93. There
have been eighteen recipients in Philosophy since 1985.

**Report**

**Washington and Destiny Studies**

From _Palm Beach Gazette_ , 9/8/94

The world-traveled, erudite Dr. Johnny Washington, professor of African-
American Studies and Philosophy, at Southwest Missouri State University, in
Springfield, Missouri, proved to be our greatest inspiration in our five years
of existence. He gave meaning to our understanding of the role of a Black
newspaper and he helped us to realize that the true mission of a publication
that serves the African-American community must be to expound upon The African
Destiny.

Dr. Washington, who first came to us as a professor at Florida Atlantic
University, was anxious to introduce our readers to the unifying principle of
Destiny Studies-which is distinct from Afrocentrism, which stresses that
African values are to be placed in the forefront. He told us that Destiny
Studies seeks to place the African-American experience in the forefront.

"I believe that Destiny Studies is important, insofar as it seeks to introduce
a unifying principle," he said, "an element of directionality and purpose into
teaching and research pertaining to race, ethnicity and related issues."

And in numerous profound articles we were fortunate to be able to publish, Dr.
Washington proved to us the effect that Destiny Study can have on education.
He showed us how the notion of Destiny needs to become an integral part of the
curriculum reform regarding the African-American History infusion concerns.

"In the past," Dr. Washington said, "an examination of the problems of the
African-American community has focused on the issue of low self-esteem among
our youths. A claim is that, due to low self-esteem, many of the African-
American youths lose interest in school and become involved in crimes.

"What I wish to maintain is that a major problem in the African-American
community (and the country generally), is the lack of a sense of Destiny, the
embracing of which inspires and offers hope in this life."

Dr. Washington wants to connect Destiny with certain psychological qualities
including "resoluteness," "sincerity," "opened," "directionality," and
"Purposefulness." Today such "spiritual" qualities are not sufficiently
stressed in the education of African-American youths. Therein, we believe,
lies a great deal of the problem.

Dr. Washington feels that a connecting link is this: that the approximation of
Destiny involves the adoption of an attitude that reflects the above-mentioned
qualities. He says: "The school environment-especially at the high school and
college levels-is the place in which these qualities are to be imparted and
nurtured. The individual's own sense of self-worth needs to be tied in with
the self-worth of the larger whole, the community."

On the basis of the teachings of Dr. Johnny Washington, the _Palm Beach
Gazette_ has decided that Destiny Study will become our main focus as we begin
implementation of **The Palm Beach Project** , an exercise in the merging of
the African System with a unique youth motivation plan conceived by the
publisher-with assistance from Oscar Brown Jr., Robert Dillingham, Jr., Joseph
Gober Nazel, Jr., Atty., Gregory Reed, and all of the ancestors who believed
in the destiny of Africans.

We'll keep you posted.

**Articles**

**" Believe it or Not" or The Ku Klux Klan **

**and American Philosophy Exposed**

**Leonard Harris**

**Purdue University**

The Ku Klux Klan secretly created a profession: American Philosophy. This is a
"Believe It or Not" story about the success of the Klan's creation.

Once upon a time, philosophy, the most honored of intellectual disciplines,
joined with American nationalism and the two begot a child: American
Philosophy. The new child functioned as evidence for white supremacy because
people considered statuses as verification of natures and consequences were
thought adequately to explain antecedents.

**Believe It or Not:**

There are no Blacks on the faculty in the Philosophy Department at any of the
eight Ivy League universities and no Blacks on the faculty in the Philosophy
Department at nine of the eleven Big Ten universities.

The most noted Black philosophers are relegated to the status of kitchen help
on the plantation: Cornel West, at Harvard, holds a joint appointment in
African American Studies and the Harvard Divinity School; Anthony Appiah, also
at Harvard, holds a full time faculty line in African American Studies.
Neither costs philosophy any money.

Angela Davis is not in a philosophy department. She is the most honored of
publicly noted philosophers because she holds the Presidential Chair,
University of Santa Cruz. Senator Bill Leonard (R-San Bernadino), Chairman of
the Senate Republican Caucus, has written in protest of her appointment.

Lucius Outlaw and Bernard Boxill are the most highly honored Black
philosophers in an American philosophy department. Outlaw holds the T. Wishar
Brown endowed chair in the Department of Philosophy at Haverford College.
Haverford is without a doctoral program. Bernard Boxill holds the Pardue
Professorship at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, noted for
his work on affirmative action. He is the only minority in his department.
There are no other Blacks holding either endowed chairs or distinguished
professorships vested in philosophy departments. Anita Allen directs the
Georgetown University program in philosophy and law, the most respected
interdisciplinary program under a Black philosopher. Her position is in the
School of Law.

There are approximately 125 universities granting the Ph.D. in philosophy.

There are currently fourteen Blacks empowered, not as a matter of courtesy but
as a matter of their faculty position, to sit on or chair a doctoral
committee-Laurence Mordekhai Thomas and Georgette Sinkler, Syracuse
University; Michelle Moody-Adams, Indiana University; Howard McGary, Kenneth
Taylor, and Jorge Garcia, Rutgers University; Joseph Tolliver, University of
Arizona; Harvey Cormier, University of Texas at Austin; Bernard Boxill,
University of North Carolina; Olafemi Taiwo, Loyola University; Charles Mills,
University of Illinois at Chicago; Frank Kirkland, Hunter College/CUNY; Lewis
Gordon, Purdue University, and the author. Most of these philosophers only
became empowered to sit on or chair doctoral committees within the last ten
years.

(An aside: A few of the terrors faced by free Blacks-always fearful that they
or their progeny would be enslaved; tainted with suspicion as the most likely
agent of every crime or possible crime; all of their actions and beliefs
reduced to expressions of their racial being. Even during slavery, some mixed-
race persons and Blacks were free.1)

In 1990, there were 8,792 members of the American Philosophical Association
(APA). Assuming they were all employed, 202 persons of color took home pay
checks while 8,590 whites took home pay checks (approximately 2.3% of the APA
was minority, of which 1.1% were Black, 1.2% Hispanic, 0.1 % Native
American).2 According to Archie Bahm's _Directory of American Philosophers
1994-95_ , there were 10,645 philosophers employed at universities and
colleges in the United States in 1993-94.3

Women accounted for 13% of the profession between 1970-75; between 1980-85,
22% of new Ph.D.'s awarded in philosophy were to women. In 1989, approximately
17% of the profession were women.

These increases represent, almost exclusively, changes for the employment of
white women in the profession. There were, for example, approximately two
Black women in 1965 with full time faculty positions in philosophy, and nine
in 1994. Changes in the number, percent, or status of women in the profession
has no correlation to the status of minorities in general or minority women.
Race, more than gender, is a far more reliable indicator of whether a person
is likely to be a member of the profession.

(An aside: Eunuchs and slave women were normal features of many slave systems
and plantation households. Eunuchs and slave women held statuses beneath that
of free women. Neither slave women nor eunuchs were often active in deciding
who counts as a master or mistress, let alone employed and capable of voting
on whom to hire in a philosophy department.)

**Believe It or Not:**

An average of 250 doctoral degrees per year have been awarded in philosophy
since 1949. Approximately 274 philosophy Ph.D.'s were awarded in 1993, of
which six were awarded to Blacks.

No predominately Black university awards a degree in philosophy above the
level of the B.A. There are no laws, rules, or state requirements that exclude
all such colleges from developing doctoral programs. (There are, in addition,
no slave systems without the complicity of slaves.)

The fourteen departments producing the majority of Ph.D.'s between 1986 and
1991 did not have a single African American, Hispanic, or Native American
faculty member above the level of Assistant Professor (Boston College, Brown
University, Columbia University, Georgetown University, Guelph/McMaster
University Joint Program, University of Massachusetts, University of
Minnesota, SUNY Stony Brook, Notre Dame University, University of Pittsburgh,
University of Texas, University of Toronto, Vanderbilt University, University
of Wisconsin). The Big Five Catholic Universities producing the majority of
Ph.D.'s in philosophy between 1986 and 1991 had a sum total of two non-white
faculty members (Boston College, The Catholic University of America, Fordham
University, Georgetown University, and the University of Notre Dame).

In the _Art and Humanities Citation Index_ , none of the thirty six "American
Philosophers Cited Most Frequently" are Black. The most frequently cited
European philosophers include persons of North African heritage. American
philosophers almost never mentor, graduate, cite, employ, or promote non-
whites, no matter how firmly such persons stand on the common ground of
American/European cultural, intellectual, and moral traditions. When it is
time to grant honors, such as professorships and endowed chairs, American
philosophers tend to show deference to individuals that fit the proper racial
kind and relegate others to the kitchen.

(Speaking of the kitchen: Classical American philosophy, in those rare cases
where it is taught, is usually taught in something like the following linear
fashion: Puritanism, Enlightenment ideals and Thomas Jefferson,
transcendentalism and Henry David Thoreau, utopianism and Jonathan Edwards,
evolution and John Fiske, idealism and Josiah Royce, naturalism and George
Santayana, radical empiricism and William James, pragmatism and John Dewey. No
William Whipper, an absolute pacifist abolitionist, no David Walker,
liberation theologian and critic of the non-existing American Enlightenment,
no suffragettes, no atheists-no one associated with denouncing America as
such, no agents of philosophies grounded on denying that the 'founding
principles' or the 'American character' ever existed. Nationalism must remain
blind to agents, no matter how important to the forming of the nation, that
attack its myths of character, belonging, and loyalty.

Alain LeRoy Locke was the first Black Rhodes Scholar and a graduate of
Harvard's philosophy department. He was the author of critical relativism as a
form of pragmatism, the only classical American pragmatist to seriously
consider the experience of racialism, the only homosexual classical
pragmatist.4 Harvard has never had bylaws requiring the absolute exclusion of
the philosophy of a Black author-exclusions just seem to magically happen.
(Possibly, his works are mentioned out in the kitchen.)

**Believe It or Not:**

There are those, somewhere, who doubt that the Ku Klux Klan created American
Philosophy (some people even doubt that smoking is harmful to health). The
denial of deference to groups of persons, across lines of class, independent
of scores on standardized tests, performance, philosophic orientation, and
political affiliation are certainly signs of prejudice. However, even without
the belief that the Klan is the uni-causal source of American Philosophy,
there are reasons to think that American Philosophy is compatible with the
wishes of the Klan.

What better explanation of the ethnic, racial, and gender demographics of the
profession than the following: Unintentional segregation on the part of the
morally pure, concerned solely with standpoint epistemology, rationalist
criteria of warranted belief, critical hermeneutics, etc., unfortunately makes
philosophers appear as unwitting culprits in demographics which are actually
caused by variables completely outside the responsibility of the profession.
It is sheer accident, on this explanation, that the Klan's prime directive of
providing evidence for white supremacy and female inferiority characterizes
how American philosophers live their profession.

American Philosophy's racial apartheid, and its compatibility with Klan
wishes, might be the epistemic workings of folk psychology, or the invisible
hand of reason, or the pragmatics of American know how, or nature or nurture;
not honorable and meritorious minds incapable of invidious practices.

(The following is included to help establish that the author is truly insane:
The absence of any particular racial or ethnic group in a philosophy
department does not mean that the situation exists because of prejudice. It is
hardly surprising that there are few, if any, minorities at any given
university because the actual number of minorities in the profession is so
small. Moreover, modern attitudes toward racial and ethnic identities are
radically different than in previous generations and are hardly identical to
those characteristic of Ku Klux Klan members. But such wide spread absences of
minorities of any non-white ethnicity, no exceptions, no where; such
consistent patterns of denied honor, and nothing is amiss? Analogously, does
it take a great imagination to believe that Jews, Catholics, and homosexuals,
other favorite targets of Klan disdain, have been effected by or excluded
because of contempt, derision, and rejection, especially if almost none are
ever mentored, cited, graduated, employed, or honored? In thirty years,
American Philosophers have employed seven black women, minorities hold two
hundred odd positions out of eleven thousand, and nothing is amiss? Nearly all
of the Black philosophers mentioned in this article, each an individual, and
most of radically different philosophic persuasions and backgrounds, have
published articles or commentaries about their negative racial experiences. Do
you always need a weatherman to know which way the wind blows?)

American philosophers, of all racial and ethnic backgrounds, are surely
unwitting culprits or have no responsibility for what the Klan would predict
as the natural composition of the profession, i.e., white men, a few white
women, no Blacks, no Hispanics, no Asians, no Orientals, no Native Americans-
just good white folks and good colored folks defending Americanism.

Or maybe it is just all cultural, a sort of consensus; nothing to be changed,
evolution is in charge anyway.

Assuming that we know the superior or inferior natures of persons by what
types have positions in philosophy, roughly analogous to the way we know that
Nazis had superior natures in 1933, American Philosophy counts as a grand
dragon/dragonness Klan success.

(An aside: America's racial categories are erroneous; anyone that does not fit
Americas racial cultural code is usually seen as either lacking worth or
representative of an exotic abnormal culture. These facts are not admissible
in American Philosophy, only code words like multiculturalism, diversity, and
merit.)

**Believe It or Not:**

American Philosophy is rarely accorded the same high status as European
philosophy, a fact often bemoaned by Americanist. Yet, because Europe remains
the imagined original of the Aryan/Anglo/white race, "American Philosophy" can
be an exceptionally good instantiation of the original home. Thus, American
Philosophy can be said to maintain an appropriately honorable status peopled
almost exclusively by whites, a fact to be explained not by the antecedents of
rape, murder, child abuse, exploitation, racial elitism, nepotism, xenophobia,
nativism, provincialism, cultural chauvinism, or the treatment of minorities
as exotic instantiation of inferior natures but by intelligence and support of
the right canonical figures. The jaundiced nepotism of persons controlling
faculty positions, endowed chairs, and professorships is irrelevant, except as
evidence of Klan predicted consequences; merit, virtuous character, and the
triumph of scholastic acumen explains all.

(The author denies responsibility for any slaves who kill, burn, treat the
children of white people the way white people treat the children of people of
color, acquire a faculty line, gain tenure, interrogate philosophies and
philosophers, or run away from their slave masters. The author is not bound to
reveal whether he distributes David Walker's _Appeal to the Coloured Citizens
of the World_ , his relationship to Trady Harris, author of "How I Killed My
Mistress and Got Free," nor his role in John Brown's revolt.)

*Originally published in the APA _Proceedings_ , May 1995, Vol. 68, No. 5. The paragraph concerning Dr. Angela Davis was inadvertently not published in the _Proceedings_ version.

**Endnotes**

1\. See for example, David Brion Davis, _The Problem of Slavery in Western
Culture_ , New York: Oxford University Press, 1988, pp. 108-109. Charles W.
Mills, "Non-Cartesian _Sums:_ Philosophy and African-American Experience,"
_Teaching Philosophy_ 17:3 (October 1994) 23-33. Carlin Romano,  "Critique of
Pure Whiteness," _Lingua Franca_ , (July/August 1993) 20-22.

2\. Hoekema, David A., "Special Report: Profile of APA membership, Employment
Patterns, and Doctoral Degrees," _Proceedings and Addresses of the APA_ ,
62:5, June 1989, p. 841. Rescher, Nicholas, "American Philosophy Today,"
_Review of Metaphysics_ , XLVI:4: (June 1993) p. 723.

3\. Bahm, Archie, _Directory of American Philosophers 1994-95_ , Ohio:
Philosophy Documentation Center, 1993, p. 479.

4\. Leonard Harris, ed., _The Philosophy of Alain Locke_ , Philadelphia:
Temple University Press, 1989; Harris, L., "The Legitimation Crisis in
American Philosophy: Crisis Resolution from the Standpoint of the Afro-
American Tradition of Philosophy," _Social Science Information_ , 21:1 (1987)
57-73.

**Race, Racism, and Racial Loyalty:**

**A Reply to Steve Martinot**

**Stephen Nathanson**

**Northeastern University**

In "The Languages of Racial Loyalty," Steve Martinot raises a number of
thoughtful and provocative challenges to views about racial loyalty that I
defended in "Is Patriotism Like Racism?"1

In my paper, I argued for certain parallels between racial and patriotic
loyalties. In considering patriotism, I argued, it is important to distinguish
an extreme form of patriotism that is chauvinistic and xenophobic from a
moderate form of patriotism that lacks these negative features. Likewise, in
thinking about racial loyalty, it is important to distinguish racism, which
affirms the superiority of one's own race and denigrates members of other
races, from moderate racial loyalty, which is characterized by a special
concern for one's own racial group but which lacks the chauvinism and
hostility found in racism.2

As Martinot correctly notes, part of my aim in writing about patriotism and
racial loyalty is to find a position that does justice to both moral
universalism and to the normative force of group loyalties. In carrying out
this strategy, I try to describe the constraints that moral universalism
imposes on group loyalties, and I argue that when these constraints are
honored, then group loyalties are morally permissible and may indeed be
virtuous. Martinot calls my approach "criteriological" because I try to
specify general criteria for distinguishing morally legitimate forms of group
loyalty from morally illegitimate forms.

Martinot objects both to the universalism of my account and to the
understanding of race that, he claims, it presupposes. In his view,

both the language of moral universalism and the logic of criteria are morally
indefensible with respect to racism. . . First, the operation of racism is not
independent of moral universalism; moral universalism is implicated in the
constitution of race itself. Second, a criteriological argument about race or
race loyalty assumes a parity between races which pretends that race has an
objective reality. And third, a notion of parity between races is historically
unintelligible. (8)

For Martinot, then, views about forms of racial loyalty are undermined because
1) the moral universalism I appeal to is itself one of the roots of racism; 2)
the form of racial loyalty I describe falsely assumes that race has an
objective reality; and 3) my discussion of race assumes a kind of racial
parity that is "historically unintelligible."

IN DEFENSE OF UNIVERSALISM

While Martinot raises difficult problems about the notion of race, his views
about moral universalism distort the view beyond recognition.

While moral universalism has been understood in various ways, I take it that
it is at least committed to some notion of the equal value of all people and
to the equal applicability of basic moral norms to all.3 Universalists have
tended to believe in human rights and have opposed racism because of its
failure to recognize and respect the rights of all.

Martinot, however, sees universalism as "implicated in the constitution of
race itself." The alleged implication here cannot be logical implication,
however, since universalism does not presuppose race and could exist in a
world without racial differences. True, the affirmation of universalism only
makes sense where there are divisions among people and where these divisions
are viewed as giving rise to immoral acts. But the divisions opposed by
universalists can be along family, ethnic, religious, or national lines and
need not involve race at all.

Martinot thinks, however, that universalism sets a standard, a definition of
the universal, for which an outside, a possible violation of standards is
implicitly assumed to exist. It is the idea of a universal human, of the
universally human, that permits, and indeed engenders, the notion of the
subhuman, the Other, the being without rights . . . who can be subjected to
enslavement, or denigration, because s/he "doesn't measure up." (9)

Martinot is certainly correct that moral universalism, by affirming the
applicability of moral standards to all human beings, does involve an opposing
idea of the non-human, of that which "doesn't measure up." But his
distinction, when applied properly, is usually quite innocuous. Of course
there are things that "don't measure up" and therefore need not be treated in
accord with the standards of universal morality. Stones, pieces of paper,
roles of tape, cardboard, and logs of wood are non-human, are "the Other" from
a moral point of view and need not be treated with the same regard as human
beings.4 But the whole point of universalism is that all human beings do count
morally, and the racism that Martinot deplores arises as a violation of
universalist norms, not as a consequence of them.

I find Martinot's hostility to universalism puzzling, since universalism and
anti-racism are so closely linked. In any case, his criticism appears to be
based on a serious misunderstanding of the nature of universalism and the
distinctions it implies.

THE REALITY OF RACE

My argument that there can be legitimate forms of racial loyalty does
presuppose the reality of race. If there are no races, then racial loyalty
does not make sense. There would be no object of racial loyalty, nothing for
racial loyalists to be loyal _to._

In his response, Martinot appears to make this criticism. He criticizes my
account because it "pretends that race has an objective reality." (9) This
part of Martinot's critical discussion is, I think, the most interesting, and
he makes clear that my original discussion involved a too casual acceptance of
views about the nature and reality of racial differences.

Nonetheless, his own discussion of this question is somewhat confusing, and it
leaves unclear what better view we should substitute for the erroneous view
that I allegedly presupposed. Here are some of Martinot's remarks about the
status of race.

I will not rehearse the argument . . . that there is no biological basis on
which race can be defined. . . . [T]he main human traits used to characterize
racial features occur in continuous spectra of variation, with no natural
divisions. . . (9)

[R]ace is not a biological reality, but a socially-generated discursive
structure. (9)

If race is without pre-discursive "objective" existence, it cannot be dealt
with empirically; it is a more complex phenomenon. Race exists, but
inseparably from the racism that produced it. (10)

Racial characteristics . . . and, hence, race itself are gratuitous,
senseless, and invented. . . . (10)

Martinot's main criticism is that I falsely believe in the objective reality
of race, and this seems to imply that he denies the reality of race.
Nonetheless, these quotes make clear that his own view on the reality of race
is more complex.

First, he denies that race exists as an objective, biological category. On
this point, there is no disagreement between us.

Second, he charges that race is "gratuitous, senseless, and invented." These
charges are more ambiguous, for many things exist that are gratuitous,
senseless, and invented. One could make these charges about war, for example,
but that would not imply the unreality of war. Martinot's statement expresses
a sense of disgust and condemnation of the system of racial differentiation,
but his criticism presupposes the existence of racial groups. Many things
exist that are gratuitous and invented.

Third, he grants that race exists as "a socially generated discursive
structure." I take this to mean that while race may not have biological
reality, it does have social reality. Race is a sociological concept, not a
biological one. It marks a certain kind of social status. I think this is true
and that when we appreciate its meaning, the differences between Martinot's
views and mine become substantially narrowed.

Two problems emerge when we look at Martinot's various claims about race.
First, it is not clear whether they form a consistent whole, and second, some
of the claims made are erroneous or ill-supported.

The fact that racial classifications are social rather than biological does
not mean that they "cannot be dealt with empirically." Categories like
"college professor," "blue collar worker," and "government official" are all
social categories, but it is empirically verifiable that they apply to certain
people and not to others. The same appears to be true for race, even if some
of the criteria for group membership (such as the "brown bag test" that
Martinot mentions) are arbitrary, stupid, or morally offensive. If criteria
for a certain social status are widely accepted in a society and if certain
people meet those criteria, then it is a fact that they have that social
status and that the group to which they belong is a (socially) real group. If
race is construed as a social category, rather than as a biological category,
then there are races.5

We may think that it would be better if these racial distinctions were not
made and if these (and other) socially constructed group differentiations did
not exist. But they do exist, and given that fact, we can ask whether the
attachments that people feel to particular groups can generate duties and
obligations and whether the desire to advance the well-being of the group to
which one belongs is morally permissible. Those are the issues I raised in my
original paper. My answer may be wrong, but once one concedes the reality of
race as a sociological phenomenon, then my view cannot be wrong because it
mistakenly assumes the existence of racial groups.

CAN THERE BE RACES WITHOUT RACISM?

It is at this point that Martinot's third criticism becomes relevant. This is
the charge that my account rests on an account of race that is "historically
unintelligible" because it presupposes a kind of racial parity that does not
and cannot exist. The force of this criticism can best be brought out by
considering one particular vision of what a non-racist society might look
like.

While I did not advocate any vision of a non-racist future, my account is
compatible with and may suggest the following view:

In our society, people are distinguished as members of different racial
groups. There is nothing inherently evil in this. What is evil is the racist
belief that some groups are superior to others and the use of racial
categories to deny rights and decent treatment to members of some groups. In a
non-racist society, members of different groups would be treated equally and
so no racial groups would be oppressed.

Martinot would reject this vision of racial equality because he thinks that
racial distinctions themselves depend on the existence of racism. To think
that one could distinguish blacks and whites and other groups in a neutral
way, a way that presupposes a parity between them, is "historically
unintelligible." There are no racial distinctions without racism because
racial categories were devised by whites to oppress blacks. For Martinot,
there can be no neutral use of racial categories. Every use of these concepts
(at least by whites) implicates one in the practice of racism.

In responding to this criticism, I will not contest Martinot's historical
claim that racial categories were invented to justify racist domination. Even
if this is true, however, Martinot's further conclusions do not follow. The
basic reason for this is that the original purposes of concepts and the
original meanings of terms do not always stay with them. Terms that begin as
derogatory can become neutral or positive over time. This is certainly true of
names of movements in art, for example. Words like "impressionism" were
introduced to mock an unfamiliar style. Over time, they became neutral, and
people working in that style came to ascribe the term to themselves. The
critical sarcasm of the original usage disappeared as people's view of the art
became more positive.

The same is certainly possible for racial terms. Even if invented to oppress,
they might become neutral as a society moves away from racist hostility.
Moreover, members of the groups denoted by these terms may come to have pride
in their group and might proudly identify themselves as members, using the
same terms that racists had originally used for other purposes. The slogan
"black is beautiful" was one self-conscious effort to alter the dominant
connotations of a racial term.

In addition, just as racial categories have been used to oppress, so may they
be turned to new uses. People who advocate reparations to descendants of black
slaves or defend other forms of redress and special attention to combat the
effects of racism must necessarily use racial terms, but neither their motives
nor the effects of their policies need be racist or oppressive.

There is currently a debate going on about whether to retain racial labels in
the United States census.6 Among those arguing for the retention of these
categories are African-American political leaders who think that the loss of
this group identity would weaken attempts to promote the well-being of their
group. As a matter of strategy, they may be wrong about this, but their view
is hardly "historically unintelligible." We can understand how these
originally stigmatizing terms may have positive uses in a different historical
context.

DISAPPEARANCE OF RACE

Martinot's own vision of the future is not spelled out, but in places, he
seems to suggest what we might call the "disappearance strategy." According to
this view, because race is an arbitrary and insidious concept, we should
strive to do away with it. Racial injustice will end when the use of racial
categories disappears. Striving for racial equality is a bad strategy because
it perpetuates the classification system on which racism rests.

This is an interesting idea. If race exists as a social rather than a
biological category, then it is true that races would disappear if we stopped
making racial distinctions. In a similar fashion, we might say, the nobility
really exists in an aristocratic society, but only because members of that
society believe in the distinction between the nobility and the commoners.
Once people stop believing that the nobility is different from the rest of us
and start treating them in that way, then the nobility no longer exists. If we
understand racial concepts as marking a social status, then they, too, are
capable of disappearing over time.

Some of Martinot's discussion suggests that he sees this disappearance
strategy as the best way to end racism. If this is correct, then my original
idea about the legitimacy of moderate racial loyalty would be flawed for
pragmatic reasons. It would help to perpetuate racism by perpetuating the
importance of racial distinctions and racial identity, while the more
effective means of fighting racism is to "de-entrench" racial concepts.

I think that both of these strategies are worth thinking about, but it is
important to see that both of them acknowledge the social reality of race as
an objective feature of current societies. In this sense, both are logically
compatible with the view I originally defended.

SOME CONFUSIONS

In replying to Martinot, I have tried to interpret his view properly, but it
is sometimes difficult to know just what his view is. Toward the end of his
paper, for example, he writes:

The problem is not that whites must learn to see non-whites as equal, or not-
white, or not Other . . . The problem of racism is that whites must stop
seeing whites as white. (11)

The first part of this seems straightforward. When Martinot denies that the
problem is for whites to see non-whites as equal, he is rejecting the "racial
equality" strategy I discussed earlier. But when he denies that the problem is
that whites must learn to see "non-whites" as "not non-white," then he appears
to be denying the "disappearance" strategy as well. If he rejects both of
them, however, then it is not clear what course he favors.

What he says is that whites must stop seeing themselves as white. This is
unhelpful, however, since it is in fact the same as not seeing non-whites as
non-white. As Martinot himself stresses, these distinctions go together. Every
concept requires an "other," something to contrast its members with. So to
stop seeing oneself as white is to stop seeing others as non-white. Martinot's
language here seems unnecessarily confusing.

There is a second problem. If individual whites stop seeing themselves as
white and stop using racial categories, that by itself will not bring about
the changes Martinot wants. As long as racial identities exist as a social
status, there will be racial groups, and the abstention from racial categories
by some whites will not alter that fact. Martinot acknowledges this when he
points out that even if all whites ceased thinking in racial terms, it

would take a long time before subjected racialized people would believe it,
and a longer time before the effects of [racism] . . . would be dispersed and
archived. (11)

Like other social status terms, racial terms gain their reality both by being
ascribed by others and by being ascribed by their bearers. Since both whites
and blacks (and other groups) use racial terms, their disappearance is not
within the hands of any one group. Moreover, while Martinot thinks racism and
race go together, some people see their racial identity as central and would
no doubt be offended by the idea that they should cease to do so.

If one favors some form of the disappearance view, the most optimistic
scenario would be that racial categories will disappear because the "racial
equality" strategy will succeed in separating racial identities from the
advantages and burdens that they carry in a racist society, and as a
consequence, racial categories will cease to be socially significant in the
same way. As they diminish in importance and as more racial mixing occurs,
people of mixed racial parentage will expose the arbitrariness of the racial
classifications of the past. At that point, the group distinctions that have
been part of racism will either weaken and disappear, or they will be
transformed into cultural categories, which people may choose to apply to
themselves or to reject.

Whether we are on the way to one of these non-racist futures is not something
that we can know. In the meantime, we live in a society marked by racial
divisions, and problems of group loyalty and group connectedness remain with
us. In this context, I continue to believe that it is worth distinguishing
"moderate racial loyalties" from racism.

It is somewhat paradoxical that while Martinot criticizes my contention that
there could be legitimate forms of racial loyalty, he concludes by accepting
this same view. Late in his paper, he writes:

None of this should be construed as implying that black people, or Latinos, or
any other group, should not feel group loyalty . . . ( 1)

If we put this comment together with the fact that Martinot and I both agree
that races exist as social divisions, it becomes much less clear what errors
he meant to expose in my original view.

**Endnotes**

1\. My original essay was in the _APA Newsletter on Philosophy and the Black
Experience_ , Fall 1992. Martinot's reply is in the Fall 1993 issue of the
_Newsletter_.

2\. For a full account of my views on patriotism, see my _Patriotism,
Morality, and Peace_ (Lanham, Md.: Rowman and Littlefield, 1993).

3\. For further discussion of moral universalism, see my "Fletcher on Loyalty
and Universal Morality," _Criminal Justice Ethics_ , 12 (1993): 56-62.

4\. Just what the boundary is between beings which have moral standing and
those which do not is, of course, a contested and difficult matter, but no
universalist justification could be given for using racial distinctions to
mark this barrier.

5\. In making this claim, I am implicitly rejecting the arguments for the
meaninglessness of racial concepts put forward by Naomi Zack in "Race and
Philosophical Meaning," _APA Newsletter on Philosophy and the Black
Experience_ , (Fall 1994), 14-20.

6\. See Steven A. Holmes, "Federal Government is Rethinking Its System of
Racial Classification," _New York Times_ , July 8, 1994, p. A18. For a broader
discussion of this issue, see Lawrence Wright, "One Drop of Blood," _The New
Yorker_ , July 25, 1994, 46-55.

**Teaching**

**Philosophy, Race and Racism**

**Philosophy 22/Black Studies 33**

**Robert Gooding-Williams**

**Description**

An intensive examination of some selected philosophical discussions of race
and racism. Topics include the origins of European racism, the distinction
between intrinsic and extrinsic racism, the conceptual connections between
racist thinking and certain canonized philosophical positions (e.g., Locke's
nominalism), the relationship between racism and our notions of personal
identity, the use of traditional philosophical thought (e.g., the philosophy
of history) to characterize and explain the differences between European and
black African cultures, the possible connections between racism and Pan-
Africanism, the nature of anti-semitism, and recent attempts to conceptualize
race and racism as social constructions.

**Requirements**

Four 5-6 page papers due on February 25, March 31, April 14, and May 11
respectively. Suggested paper topics will be distributed approximately one to
one and one-half weeks before the papers are due. There will be no exams.

**Books**

The following books are required for the course and may be purchased at the
Jeffrey Amherst bookstore. To the best of my ability, I will make copies of
each available on reserve.

Benton, _Racial Theories_

Barker, _The New Racism_

Fanon, _Black Skin, White Masks_

Goldberg, ed. _Anatomy of Racism_

Miles, _Racism_

Mosse, _Towards the Final Solution, A History of European Racism_

Sartre, _Anti-Semite and Jew_

Omi and Winant, _Racial Formation in the United States_

Reading for the course will also include a number of xeroxed essays contained
in a multilith available for purchase in the philosophy department office.

**Tentative Class Schedule**

Jan. 28 _Introduction_

Jan. 30 _European Racial Thought in Historical Perspective_

Required Reading:

Miles, _acism_ , Chap. 1

Benton, _Racial Theories_ , Chaps. 1-3 _and/or_

Moss, Towards the Final Solution, Chaps 1-7

Goldsby, _Race and Races_ , Chaps 2-3

(multilith)

Optional Reading:

Popkin, "The Philosophical Basis of Eighteenth Century Racism" (multilith)

Popkin, "The Philosophical Bases of Modern Racism" (multilith)

West, "A Genealogy of Modern Racism" (multilith)

Delacampagne "Racism in the West: From

Praxis to Logos" (Goldberg, ed.)

**PART I: RACE AND QUESTIONS OF IDENTITY**

Feb. 4-6 _Race and Personal Identity_

Required Reading:

Appiah, "'But Would That Still Be Me': Notes on Gender, 'Race,' Ethnicity, as
Sources of Identity" (multilith)

Feb. 11-18 _Race and Human Identity_

Required Reading:

Bracken, "Essence, accident and race" (multilith)

Bracken, "Philosophy and Racism" (multilith)

Spelman, "Racism and Somataphobia" (multilith)

Simpson, "On Habermas and Particularity: Is There Room for Race and Gender on
the Glassy Plains of Ideal Discourse? (multilith)

Feb. 20-25 _Race and Historical Identity I_

Required Reading:

Hume, "Of National Characters" (multilith)

Popkin, "Hume's Racism Reconsidered" (multilith)

Hegel, "Geographical Basis of History" (multilith)

Snead, "Repetition as a Figure of Black Culture" (multilith)

Optional Reading:

Todorov, "Conquest" (multilith)

Coronil, "Discovering American Again: The Politics of Selfhood in the Age of
Post-Colonial Empire" (multilith)

Feb. 25 _First Paper Due_

Feb. 27-

Mar. 10 _Race and Historical Identity II_

Required Reading:

DuBois, "The Conservation of Races" (multilith)

Appiah, "The Uncompleted Argument: DuBois and the Illusion of Race"
(multilith)

DuBois, "Of Our Spiritual Strivings" (multilith)

DuBois, "The Sorrow Songs" (multilith)

Williamson, "DuBoisian Thought as Hegelian" (multilith)

Royce, "Hegel" (multilith)

Optional Reading:

Frederickson, "Uncle Tom and the Anglo-Saxons:

Romantic Racialism in the North" (multilith)

Moses, "W.E.B. DuBois and Traditional Black Nationalism" (multilith)

West, "W.E.B. DuBois: The Jamesian Organic Intellectual" (multilith)

Gooding-Williams "Evading DuBois" (multilith)

Mar. 12-26 _Race, Social Inquiry, and Ethnic Identity_

Required Reading:

Glazer, "Blacks and Ethnic Groups: The Difference and the Political Difference
it Makes" (multilith)

Omi & Winant, _Racial Formation in the United_

_States_

Optional Reading:

West, "Race and Social Theory" (multilith)

Mar. 31 _Second Paper Due_

**PART II: RACE AND RACISM(S)**

Mar. 31-

Apr. 9 _Perspectives on the Concept of Racism_

Required Reading:

Appiah, "Racisms" (Goldberg, ed.)

Barker, _The New Racism_ Chaps. 1-5

Miles, _Racism_ Chaps 2-3

Goldberg,"The Social Formation of Racist

Discourse" (Goldberg, ed.)

Optional Reading:

Goldsby, _Race and Races_ , Chap. 7 (multilith)

Appiah, "The Uncompleted Argument . . . "

(multilith/reread)

_Apr. 14 Third Paper Due_

Apr 14-

May 7 _Perspectives on Particular Racisms_

(a) _Anti-semitism_

Required Reading:

Sartre, _Anti-Semite and Jew_

Optional Reading:

Mosse, _Towards the Final Solution_ , Chaps 8-10

Balibar, "Paradoxes of Universality" (Goldberg, ed.)

(b) _Racism and Negritude_

Required Reading:

Senghor,"The Psychology of the African

Negro" (multilith)

Sartre, _Black Orpheus_ (multilith)

Appiah, "Alexander Crummell and the Invention of Africa" (multilith)

(c) _Racism and Colonialism_

Required Reading:

Fanon, _Black Skin, White Masks_ (especially Introduction and Chaps. 1, 5, 6
and 8)

Optional Reading:

Pease, "Toward a Sociology of Literary

Knowledge" (multilith)

Bhaba, "Interrogating Identity: The Postcolonial Prerogative" (Goldberg, ed.)

Bhaba, "Foreword: Remembering Fanon" (multilith)

Gates, "Critical Fanonism" (multilith)

(d) _Racism and Gender in American Culture_

Required Reading:

Griffith, _The Birth of a Nation_ (screening time to be announced)

Frederickson, "Southern Negrophobia at the Turn

of the Century" (multilith)

Rogin, "'The Sword Became a Flashing Vision': D.W. Griffith's _The Birth of a
Nation_ " (multilith)

New York Times Article selections on the Clarence

Thomas/Anita Hill hearings (multilith)

Mercer, "Looking for Trouble (Essay on the photography of Robert Mapplethorp)
(multilith)

May 11 _Final Paper Due_

**Untaught Syllabus** **Phil 489**

**African American Philosophy**

**Greg Moses**

**Texas A &M University**

**Note:** Because of budgetary policies which prevented the re-hiring of the
above Lecturer (Salary $23K), the following course will not be taught.

**Course Description** : This course falls into two parts. First, a critical,
historical exploration of the African American experience, with roots in
slavery and resistance. Second, a review of Afrocentric scholarship and its
efforts to establish a critical basis for the reconstruction of identities
among the African diaspora.

**Required Texts**

David Walker. _David Walker's Appeal._ Baltimore: Black Classic Press, 1993.

Laurence Mordekhai Thomas. _Vessels of Evil: American Slavery and the
Holocaust_. Philadelphia: Temple UP, 1993.

Cheikh Anta Diop. _The African Origin of Civilization: Myth or Reality_.
Chicago: Lawrence Hill, 1974.

Asa G. Hilliard. _The Maroon Within Us: Selected Essays on African American
Community Socialization_ , Baltimore: Black Classic Press, 1995.

**Course Requirements:** Regular attendance and participation are required. In
addition, students will submit a midterm essay of six pages (1,500 words) 50%,
and a final paper of twelve pages (3,000 words) 50%.

**Readings** : Readings will proceed in order indicated above, taking about
three weeks per book.

**Ethnic Studies 200B: Race and Ethnicity: A Comparative Perspective**

**Percy C. Hintzen**

**University of California at Berkeley**

This class is intended to examine the concepts of race and ethnicity from a
comparative and international perspective. It is comparative because it
examines the formation, perpetuation, and functions of racial and ethnic
identities in different areas of the world. It is international because it
examines the same things in international relations.

The focus of the course is on the conceptual distinctions between race and
ethnicity and how these function and have functioned in social organization
and in the political economy. It is hoped that this class will be organized as
an interactive educational experience. I have therefore not included readings
on the "meaning" of ethnicity. Instead, we will engage in a process of
inductive reasoning from our own experiences of ethnicity and from some of the
readings. Most of the readings focus on the concept and application of race.

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS**

Final Paper: 60%

Class Presentation: 40%

Final Paper: Students will be required to write a publishable paper (according
to the format and content requirements of academic journals) on an aspect of
race and ethnicity of his/her own choosing. Readings and discussions in the
class must be incorporated into the analytical framework of the paper. The
paper will be due on the last day of classes (Monday, May 13th).

Class Presentation: Each student is required to make at least one classroom
presentation of readings to be assigned and which will be compiled in a class
reader. These assignments will be made at the second meeting of the class at
which time the reader will be available. Given the time factor, the first of
such presentations will be at our second meeting. This assignment will be
given to two volunteers during the first week of classes.

**REQUIRED READINGS** :

Samir Amin, _Eurocentrism_ , New York: Monthly Review Press,1989

Derrick Bell, _And We Are Not Saved_ , New York: Basic Books, 1987

David Theo Goldberg, _Anatomy of Racism_ , Minneapolis, Univ. of Minnesota,
1990.

Ian Goldin, _The Making of Race_ , London: Longman 1987.

Paul Lauren, _Power and Prejudice_ , Boulder: Westview, 1988

Walter Rodney, _How Europe Underdeveloped Africa_ , Washington: Howard
University Press.

There will also be a course reader from which class presentations will be made
(we may also come to a decision of providing references to the students and
have him/her acquire and circulate it)

**Book Reviews**

**Tsenay Serequeberhan, ed., _African Philosophy: The Essential Readings_ ,
Paragon House, New York, 1991, 250 pages.**

**Reviewed by: Sam Imbo, Purdue University**

Here is an excellent anthology for anyone interested in delving into the
debate surrounding the nature and definition of African Philosophy. Of the
eleven papers that make up the anthology, two are appearing for the first time
in print, another two have been translated from French and are making their
first appearance in English, while the remaining have been pulled in from a
wide range of academic journals. A division into roughly two parts can be
discerned. In the first part Henry Odera Oruka, Peter Bodunrin, Kwasi Wiredu,
Paulin Hountondji and Lansana Keita take up positions against the
ethnophilosophy of Fr. Placide Tempels. This cluster of papers provides
arguments for a rejection of culture-specific philosophy and calls instead for
a universalist approach. The second part is comprised of discussions by Oyenka
Owomoyela, Marcien Towa, Okonda Okolo, and Wamba-Dia-Wamba. These discussions
move away from issues of definition and actually engage in African philosophy.

A large part of the anthology is taken up with discussions of whether there
exists an African philosophy, how it is to be defined, what distinguishes it
from Western philosophy, whether it is oral or written, and whether it can be
done by non-Africans or is unique to the continent of Africa. Participants in
the debate bring with them different definitions and underlying assumptions
about the proper way to do philosophy and it is therefore not surprising that
they divide up African philosophy in such different ways. By far the most
widely adopted schema is Odera Kruka's characterization of current African
philosophy into the four trends of ethnophilosophy, philosophic sagacity,
nationalist-ideological and professional philosophy. There is an illuminating
disagreement about the possibility of an African philosophy without a written
literature between Odera Oruka on the one hand and the duo of Bodunrin and
Hountondji on the other. The latter are skeptical about the ability of a
philosophy which is not written down to develop a tradition of debate and
sustained inquiry. Odera however defends orality using a thesis he calls
sagacity, according to which there were in traditional Africa sages who were
philosophic despite their illiteracy. Socrates, he offers as a parallel
example, never wrote down his thoughts and yet is generally considered a great
philosopher. The larger argument is that the notion of text should not be
limited to the written. For a number of contributors proverbs, myths, folk
tales, sculptures and traditional cultures are texts also which are rich in
philosophy.

All the main figures in African philosophy are represented in this anthology.
Surprising, though, is the exclusion of V.Y. Mudimbe who has done influential
work on foreign inventions of Africa and a chapter from him might have
provided much needed historical context for situating the whole debate of
whether or not there exists philosophy in Africa. Secondly, some readers may
question the editor's decision to limit contributions in this volume only to
Africans. While it is important to "hearken to what Africans have to say for
themselves," the issue of whether non-Africans can contribute to African
philosophy is itself debated within the anthology. Since the majority of the
contributors take a universalist approach to philosophy, it would seem that
the editor has taken a stand contradicted by the contributors. Thirdly, as a
textbook in African philosophy, I found the book imbalanced in the sense that
most of the chapters dwelt on questions of definition and justification. The
second part does not give an adequate indication of the landscape of African
metaphysics, epistemology, ethics and aesthetics. A better balance would be
achieved by actually delivering the promised philosophy. Kwasi Wiredu has
written extensively on Akan metaphysics and ethics, Kwame Gyekey on Akan
language, Oyenka Owomoyela on African aesthetics. Discussions such as these
would provide the substance to achieve that balance and hence make it less
necessary to supplement the anthology with other materials when it is used as
the main text.

_African Philosophy: The Essential Readings_ comes at a most opportune time.
It adds a much needed voice or perspective in the practices of philosophy-a
practice which has for too long presented itself as being synonymous with
Western philosophy.

**D.A. Masolo, _African Philosophy in Search of Identity,_ Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1994.**

**Reviewed by: Jeff Crawford, Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio**.

A few years ago a colleague complained that several core texts in African
philosophy were no longer in print. Availability of texts in the field is
still a problem, but recent publications have filled some gaps and at least
two new anthologies are on the way. D.A. Masolo's _African Philosophy in
Search of Identity_ (Indiana University Press, 1994) is one of the latest and
most welcome additions.

We are using this book along with Anthony Appiah's _In My Father's House_ as a
core text in our Topics in African Philosophy course, a course that was
developed to support the minor in African Studies initiated by the Center for
African Studies. The current offering of the course focuses on development of
ethnophilosophy, its critique and defense, but Masolo's book could be used to
support course work on a range of different topics.

_African Philosophy in Search of Identity_ provides a detailed guide to the
last forty years of African philosophy, a time dominated by methodological
debate about the nature and goals of the discipline. Masolo's analysis is rich
and compelling, reflecting a thorough familiarity with both Francophone and
Anglophone sources. Beyond the major traditions and contributors to African
philosophy since the late 1930s, Masolo paints a careful background picture of
the European and African American cultural and scholarly traditions which have
influenced its development. _African Philosophy in Search of Identity_ is
unparalleled for clarity, depth of analysis, and balance.

The nature and role of reason are the central themes of the first chapter,
"Logocentrism and Emotivism: Two Systems in Struggle for Control of Identity."
The second through fifth chapters cover ethnophilosophy, language as a guide
to metaphysics and Mbiti's religious ethnology. Chapters six and seven focus
on analytic and hermeneutic approaches. Chapter eight returns to the central
theme of reason under the title "'Tradition' and 'Modernity': The Role of
Reason," and the brief conclusions "Experience and African Philosophy"
presents the refined results of the argument developed throughout the book.
The index is helpful and the bibliography is excellent. At every step,
Masolo's analysis moves toward a deeper and more richly textured understanding
of the dynamic tensions driving African philosophical development.

Masolo's work is good history, but it is also an original contribution to the
discipline. Philosophy, at least in part, sets its problems and measures
itself by constructing history. In _African Philosophy in Search of Identity_
the author has delineated the major disputes which characterize African
philosophy, and staked out his own territory on rationality, orality,
tradition, modernity and more. And in so far as philosophy both reflects and
informs other disciplines, Masolo's work is likely to have wide ranging
influence.

**Is there an African philosophy**? Addressing a question that has persisted
over the last half century, Professor Masolo traces the history of major
themes, debates, and participants in African philosophy since the 1940s,
discussing Francophone **and** Anglophone philosophers in both the

