WATU-affiliated Writing Seminar, Fall 2001

## [ WATU-affiliated ](faq.html) Writing Seminar:

  

#  Language and Popular Culture, LING 057.

  
Fall Semester, 2001  
H. Schiffman, Instructor

T-Th 9:00-10:30, Room: **WMS Room 28**  
[ Office Hours ](offhrs.html) and [ FAQ ](faq.html)  
![](line3.gif)

|  [ ![](http://lrrc3.plc.upenn.edu/popcult/metaphor/vismetaf.jpg)
](057sked.html)

|  **The purpose of this WATU-affiliated writing seminar is to examine
representations of human (and non-human) language as they appear in popular
media such as the film, television, cartoons, advertising, and other popular
genres. Popular (mis-)conceptions of what human language is like will be
contrasted with more scientific conceptions of language based on the knowledge
constructed in linguistics, psychology, cognitive science, anthropology, and
other disciplines. We will also focus on attitudes about language(s) and their
speakers, as reflected in popular culture. Students will do[ expository
writing ](wrtmodes.htm) about this material. This course counts for 1/2 of the
writing requirement.  
  
[ FAQ ](faq.html) Readings will be assigned, with some required texts and a
course packet. Viewings of media will either be pre-assigned or viewed in
class. Still photographs (advertisements, cartoons, other print stills) will
be available in the coursepak or on this web page:
http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/~haroldfs/popcult/images.  
  
  
---|---  
  


#  [ Schedule of Meetings and Topics

](057sked.html)  
  
---  
Daily and Weekly outline of topics, readings, discussions, viewings, in-class
work.  
  
##  Required texts:

* * *

    1. A Coursepack with selections from [ Various authors ](copaktoc.html) (available from Campus Copy). 

    2. Booth, Colomb and Williams,  The Craft of Research , Chicago 1995.   
  

    3. Lippi-Green, Rosina. _English with an Accent. Language, Ideology, and Discrimination in the United States._ Routledge (paper) 1997.   
  
  
---  
  
##  [ Other Highly Recommended Resources:

](readlist.html)  
  
  * Lexis and Nexis [ search engine ](http://web.lexis-nexis.com/universe) is a huge index of newspaper references to various things, e.g. stories about **your** topic. 

  * Bibliographies, especially about Film, the topic of Foreign Branding, Sociolinguistic issues, can be found [ **here** ](../other.html)

  * Library (Van Pelt and Annenberg) resource page on [ film resources ](http://www.library.upenn.edu/vanpelt/collections/sasia/resources.html) such as collections of film criticism, review indices, bibliographies, etc. 

  * A couple of websites that have many filmscripts to download: 

    * [ Here's one. ](http://www.moviescript.org/)

    * [ Here's another ](http://davidgoldner.com/MovieScripts.htm)

  * Introductory textbook on the subject of **Qualitative Methods in Sociolinguistics** by Barbara Jonstone. (Also on reserve in Rosengarten Reserve Room.) 

* * *  
  


* * *

#  Writing Assignments and Other Tasks  
  
---  
This is a **WATU-affiliated** course, so students will be expected to do a
number of writing projects and other assignments concerned with the topic of
popular conceptions of language:

  1. There will be  ** DEADLINES ** for assignments, and penalties for lateness. See [ Deadlines Summary Page here.](sumrdead.html)

  2. Grading for this course will be weighted as follows: 10% will be based on the first project ("Three New Words"), 25% will be based on the "short" paper (3 to 5 pages), 50% weight will be given to the long project (film), and **15%** for class participation. 

  3. Throughout the course there will be opportunities for writing both in class and before class that will not be graded for _form_ but for content. 

    1. Requests to do **In-class Writing** about particular issues will be assigned on the spur of the moment, and will be graded for content (ideas, issues) not on their _form_.

    2. See the following [ general statement ](responsib.html) about students' responsibilities in this class.

    3. [ FAQ ](faq.html)  
  
##  1\.  New Words Search

|  The first mini-task is to bring to class (due-date Thursday of second week)
_three examples_ of new words found in popular culture but not yet in any [
dictionary.](http://www.m-w.com/cgi-bin/dictionary) For details of this
assignment, look [ here. ](3newords.htm)  
  
##  2\.  Print Medium Project

The second assignment is a smaller (5+ pages) project involving a print-medium
conception of (foreign or non-standard) language (such as print advertising or
cartoons). This will be about 5 pages in length, not counting illustrations.
If time permits, _some_ of these projects can be presented in class for extra
credit.  
  
For resources specifically on advertising, comics, comic books, funny papers,
and for examples of good papers from previous years, see the adjacent box: |

    * [ Comics ](./handouts/comics/comics.html)

    * [ Honor and the Borks. ](http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/plc/borks)

    * [ Balch Institute `exhibit' on ethnicity in the comics ](http://www.balchinstitute.org/museum/comics/comics.html)

    * The Balch Institute also has an on-line exhibit on [ Ethnic Images in Advertising. ](http://www.balchinstitute.org/museum/advert/advert.html)

    * Jane Hill has written about what she calls 'Mock Spanish;' [ here are a number of things ](mockspan.html) that illustrate this. [ Mock Spanish ](http://www.language-culture.org/colloquia/symposia/hill-jane/)

    * For the _format_ of **all** writing assignments (papers) see [**this page.**](./handouts/mockup.html)

    * Here's an example of an excellent paper on [ foreign branding ](http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/~haroldfs/popcult/handouts/adverts/albina/Albina2.html) done last year in this class. 

    * Here's a [ questionnaire ](http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/~haroldfs/popcult/handouts/project1/proj1.html) you can ask yourself to get some ideas about what your paper should focus on. 

    * Here are some print-medium representations of [ "anthropomorphism" ](chimps.html) (animals behaving like humans) of various sorts.   
  
##  3\.  TV/Movie Project

There will be one **[MAJOR ](major.html) ** project, based on linguistic
material (standard or non-standard, human or non-human) depicted or
represented in electronic visual media such as movies or television. (Science
fiction representations of human and non-human language as well as pseudo-
scientific representations (or even tongue-in-cheek representations) of animal
communication are especially germane here.) This assignment will consist of
work in stages, with proposals, outlines, consultation, review, rewriting,
rewriting, and rewriting. It will be due in stages, the final product due the
last week of class. |

    * To understand the requirements for this writing project, see [ Helpful Hints](./handouts/helphint.html). 

    * For _frequently asked questions_ see [ FAQ ](faq.html)

    * For the _format_ of **all** writing assignments (papers) see [**this page.**](./handouts/mockup.html)

    * For ideas about how to cite material from webpages and electronic sources, [ **look here.**](./handouts/formats.htm)

    * Here are examples of some [ good papers ](./handouts/papers.html) from previous years of this course. 

    * Here are some examples of media representations of [ animals "speaking" ](chimps.html) in various ways.   
  
A WATU Assistant will be available to work with you in the preparation of your
written projects, and I will also consult with you on occasion. The WATU
office also has people available on a drop-in basis, and other resources are
available to help students learn how to do [ expository
writing.](wrtmodes.htm)  





![](http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/~haroldfs/grafix/buttons/animdead.gif)  
  
---  
There will be **[ DEADLINES **](deadlines.html) for these various projects,
and schedules to be adhered to. See [ quick summary ](sumrdead.html) of
deadlines here.  
  


* * *







###  Summary of Links to this page, Documents Linked to this Page, and/or this
Site:  
  
---  
  
  * [ Schedule of Meetings and Topics ](057sked.html)   

  * Links to various [ images, sound-files, etc. ](http://lrrc3.plc.upenn.edu/popcult)
  * Link to digitized movie files on [ various servers](http://schiffman.southasia.upenn.edu/movie/) (for _Dances with Wolves, Amistad,_ etc.) 
  * [ Expository writing and other kinds of writing ](wrtmodes.htm)
  * [ Coursepak contents: Various authors ](copaktoc.html)
  * [ Other Highly Recommended Resources to Read ](readlist.html)
  * [ General statement about student Responsibilities ](responsib.html)
  * [ Lexis and Nexis search engine ](//web.lexis-nexis.com/universe)
  * [ Film Resources page ](http://www.library.upenn.edu/vanpelt/collections/sasia/resources.html)
  * First Assignment: [ Three new words in the English language. ](3newords.htm)
  * [ Smaller Project ](./handouts/project1/proj1.html) on print media. 
  * [ Comics Page ](./handouts/comics/comics.html)
  * [ Honor and the Borks. ](http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/plc/borks)
  * [ Balch Institute `exhibit' on ethnicity in the comics ](http://www.libertynet.org/balch/comics/comics.html)
  * [ Jane Hill's article on `Mock Spanish' ](http://www.cs.uchicago.edu/l-c/archives/subs/hill-jane/)
  * [ Helpful Hints on Writing Research Papers ](./handouts/helphint.html). 
  * [ Required format ](http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/~haroldfs/popcult/handouts/mockup.html) for writing assignments. 
  * [ Examples of good papers ](./handouts/papers.html) from previous years of this course. 
  * A few samples of popular representations of [ animals speaking ](http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/~haroldfs/popcult/chimps.html) including the [ Tacobell commercial ](./tacobell/taco23.htm) with dog `speaking' [ Spanish ](./tacobell/tacobell.wav)
  * [ DEADLINES for various projects**](deadlines.html)
  * [ Quick summary of deadlines ](sumrdead.html) 

* * *

* * *

haroldfs@ccat.sas.upenn.edu, last modified May 19, 2000.  fname: syllabus.html

