[![Return to Archaeology and Material Culture Home
Page](revreturnpc.jpg)](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/home.html) |

[![Return to Popular Culture
Syllabus](returnpc.jpg)](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/popcult.html)  
---|---  
  
![](revessaybanner.jpg)

Anthropology 460, Popular Culture  
Fall 2002, [ Dr. Mullins](mailto:paulmull@iupui.edu)

![Electra the electrocuted lady sideshow banner](electra1.jpg) | Your review
essay should be a summary of any paper chosen from the list of review essays
included with this handout and on the syllabus. You may choose any of these
essays, but you cannot go off and select your own essay. Your review should
review the paper's research question (i.e., what do they want to know),
pertinence (i.e., how does this essay seem to contribute to historical and
popular culture research), conclusions (i.e., both what they determine and
possible directions for future research), and persuasiveness (i.e., do you
find their conclusions cogent, are particular facets of the study more
convincing than others, did you perceive contradictions in their conclusion,
was it better than sliced bread [and if so why], and so on).  
---|---  
  
You have likely read many reviews in some form, and regardless of academic or
popular format these reviews generally share the effort to provide some
summary and critical appraisal of a text, movie, or other presentation. This
review exercise paper, though, should not be modeled in expository style or
intellectual tone on something like a book review in the _Washington Post_ ,
where what passes for reviews typically are forced efforts at originality,
cynical humor, or obstinate predispositions toward particular ways of writing
or personalities. Instead, approach this as a written statement you would
provide an academic colleague so that they could evaluate what this paper is
about and whether it is pertinent to their own research interests. This sounds
a bit more dry, but the review should demonstrate your comprehension of the
paper, clearly outline what it is about, and provide some sense of how you
personally viewed this research and its conclusions. Of course you can and
should be critical of a paper which you do not like, but be specific about the
sources of your discontent; i.e., "this paper stinks" is not sufficient, but a
review which more or less says the paper stinks because of specific elements
of the method, presentation, or conclusions is reasonable.

There are some basic issues to consider as you prepare your review. First, did
you basically like the paper? Was the subject of interest to you? Why or why
not? Was the paper clear to you? How and why was it clear, and if it was not
clear, it what specific ways was it confused? Second, who do you suppose is
the intended audience for the paper? What suggests this to you? Does the
format and style of the paper work for a wide audience, or does it have
presentation details which make it seem particularly specialized? Third, what
are the writer's research objectives, what we usually refer to as the research
question? How clearly is this question stated? Are there research objectives
or methods which are not clear to you? Specifically how might they be made
more clear? Did the writer specifically address the paper's stated questions
in the conclusion? Do you find the paper's conclusions persuasive? Fourth, how
well is the paper written? For example, how does the paper flow from one idea
to the other, or from data to interpretation? Does the paper have clear
introductions and transitions, incorporation of quotes and technical details,
etc? Is the evidence clearly analyzed in the paper? Does popular culture have
a prominent role in the analysis?

In all cases, strive to be as specific as possible in your summary, referring
to specific passages or elements of the paper to illustrate your analysis. Do
not be vague or dismissive; if the paper is ambiguous, be clear about what you
find difficult, or simply try another paper for the exercise. I will review
drafts or discuss particular papers if you have any questions.

**Ground rules**

The review must be a **_minimum_** of three double-spaced pages in length,
printed on one side only, with 1 " margins on all sides, and font size no
larger than 12 pitch--MOST ESSAYS WILL BE LONGER THAN THAT.  I will penalize
papers that do not follow the guidelines.  Most reviews will be around four or
five double-spaced pages in length. Unclear grammar, spelling errors, or other
stylistic preparation problems will be considered as part of the paper's
grade. Please staple the completed exercise in the upper left hand corner;
clips and report covers do not reliably stay attached, elaborate origami-
folded corners never stay together, and unstapled papers risk being separated
in the pile. Please remember to put your name on the first page.

**The paper is due on or before September 25**. Papers will be accepted until
the end of the day in my mailbox; any papers arriving during the day should be
taken to the secretary, who will date them to ensure you are credited for
completing the assignment on time. Papers turned in late will be penalized a
letter grade for each day they are late, but you will receive credit, so do
not bag the assignment even if you are late--partial credit is better than no
credit.

Readings for Review Exercise

Review readings

You may choose _any one_ of these readings for your review essay. These
readings are on reserve on ERROL. You are NOT responsible for reading articles
that you do not choose to review.

Best, Steven and Douglas Kellner

1999 [Rap, Black Rage, and Racial
Difference](http://enculturation.gmu.edu/2_2/best-kellner.html).
Enculturation 2(2).  <http://enculturation.gmu.edu/2_2/best-kellner.html>

Foreman, Murray

1992 [ Betrayal and Fear:  Press Coverage of Canadian Skinheads](http://cjc-
online.ca/title.php3?page=2&journal_id=9&document=1).  _Canadian Journal of
Communication_ 17(2)

Greene, Eric

1996 Planet of the Apes. In _" Planet of the Apes" as American Myth: Race and
Politics in the Films and Television Series_, pp.21-54. McFarland, Jefferson,
North Carolina.

Marcus, Greil

1975 Elvis: Presliad.  In _Mystery Train: Images of America in Rock' n' Roll
Music_ , pp.120-175  4th edition.  Penguin, New York.

Radway, Janice A.

1984 The Readers and Their Romances.  In _Reading the Romance: Women,
Patriarchy, and Popular Literature_ , pp.46-85.  University of North Carolina
Press, Chapel Hill.

Weinstein, Deena

1991 Digging the Music: Proud Pariahs.  In _Heavy Metal: The Music and Its
Culture_ , pp.93-144  De Capo Press, New York.

[![Return to Archaeology and Material Culture Home
Page](revreturnpc.jpg)](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/home.html) | [![Return to
Popular Culture
Syllabus](returnpc.jpg)](http://www.iupui.edu/~anthpm/popcult.html) |

[![](24hourssign.gif)  
  
  
](mailto:paulmull@iupui.edu)Email Dr. Mullins  
---|---|---  
  
Last updated July 1, 2002

