PRIM. _Federalist Papers_ ,
[#10](http://WWW.Swarthmore.edu/SocSci/rbannis1/AIH19th/Fed10.html)  
  
T. Jefferson, "The Declaration of Independence," [xerox]  
Benjamin Rush, "Plan for the Establishment of Public Schools," [xerox] _or_
[["Thoughts Upon Female
Education"](http://WWW.swarthmore.edu/SocSci/rbannis1/AIH19th/female.html)
[xerox file]  
H. J. Crevecoeur, [ "What Is the
American?"](http://darwin.clas.virginia.edu/~tsawyer/CREV/letter03.html) from
__[_Letters from an American
Farmer_](http://darwin.clas.virginia.edu/~tsawyer/CREV/home.html") [xerox
excerpt]  
*For the complete text of the Federalist click as follows: [Nos 1-10](http://WWW.swarthmore.edu/SocSci/rbannis1/AIH19th/Federalist/Federalist1-9.html)

SEC.: Ruth H. Bloch, "The Gendered Meanings of Virtue in Revolutionary
America," _Signs_ 13 (1987), 37-58.  
*Joseph J. Ellis, _After the Revolution_ (1979), chs 1-2, epilogue  
Leo Marx. _The Machine in the Garden_ , ch. 3 [on Jeff and Crevecoeur]  

SUPP. J. Appleby, "Republicanism in Old and New Contexts," _WMQ_ _43_ (January
1986), 22--34.  
L. Banning, "Jeffersonian Ideology Revisited," _WMQ_ _44_ (January 1986), 3-19
]  
H. May, _The Enlightenment in America_ , chs. 1-3  
Kramnick, Isaac, _Republicanism and bourgeois radicalism : political ideology
in late eighteenth-century England and America_ (Ithaca, N.Y. : Cornell
University Press, 1990)  [ McCabe JA84.G7 K73 1990]  
Jay Fliegelman, _Prodigals and Puritans: The American Revolution against
Patriarchal authority 1750-1800_ (Stanford, 1984). E 163.F58.1982  
Millican, Edward, _One united people : the Federalist papers and the national
idea_ (Lexington, Ky. : University Press of Kentucky, c1990)  [Magill JK155
.M55 1990: ord. Sw. 7/9]  

HISTOIOG.: R. Shalope, "Toward a Republican Synthesis," _WMQ_ , _29_ (1972),
49-80.  
'' , "Republicanism," _ibid._ , _39_ (1982), 334-56.  
I. Kramnick, "Republican Revisionism Revisited," _AHR_ , _87_ (1982), 629.  
Rodgers, Daniel, "Republicanism: The Career of a Concept," _Journal of
American History_ 79 (June 1992), 11-38  

TOPICS:

**Jefferson the Declaration and "Notes on Virginia"**

J. Appleby, "What is Still American," _WMQ_ _39_ (1982), 287-309  
__________, "The Social Origins of American Revolutionary Ideology," _JAH_
_64_ (1978), 935-58  
C. Becker, _The Declaration of Independence_ (1922)  
_Lost World of Thomas Jefferson_ (1947)  
L. Marx, _The Machine in the Garden_ , chs. 1, 3.  
D. McCoy, _The Elusive Republic_ , chs. 1-3  
G. Wills, _Inventing America_ , pts. 2-3  

Texts. Declaration of Independence. _Notes on the State of Virginia_  

**on the Wills thesis: see R. Hamowy, "Jefferson and the Scottish
Enlightenment," _WMQ_ _36_ (1979; and K,. Lynn, "Falsifying Jefferson,
_Commentary_ 66 #4 (October 1978), also in Lynn, _Air-line to Seattle_

* * *

**II. American Enlightenment (continued)**

**James Madison: Republicanism, Pluralism, and _The Federalist_ **

D. Adair, "10th Federalist Revisited," _W &MQ_ _8_ (1951), 48-67  
P. Bourke, "The Pluralist Reading of the Tenth Federalist," _Perspectives in
Am. Hist._ _9_ (1975)  
M. Diamond, "Democracy and the Federalist," _Am. Pol. Sci. Rev._ ((53)) (1959)  
D. Howe, "The Political Psychology of the Federalist," _WMQ_ _44_ (July 1987),
485-509  
S. Katz, "Origins of Constitutional Thought," _Perspectives in Amer. Hist._
_III_ (1969)  
McCoy, Drew R., _The last of the fathers : James Madison and the Republican
legacy_ (Cambridge  [Cambridgeshire] ; New York : Cambridge University Press,
1989[McCabe E342 .M33 1989  
G. Wills, _Explaining America_ (1980)  

*text: _The Federalist_ For complete text of the Federalist see the URL: gopher://wiretap.spies.com/00/Library/Classic/federalist.txt. It will take a lot of memory to download.

**Crevecoeur's America: Republican or Liberal?**

Allen, Gay Wilson, 1903-, _St. John de Crevecoeur : the life of an American
farmer_ ( New York : Viking, 1987)  [ H Magill PS737.C5 Z54 1987 ; B Canaday
PS737.C5 Z54 1987  
Philbrick, Thomas, _St. John de Crevecoeur_.( New York, Twayne Publishers
[1970][ S McCabe PS737.C5 Z85]  
Regis, Pamela., _Describing early America : Bartram, Jefferson, Crevecoeur,
and the rhetoric of natural history_ / ( DeKalb : Northern Illinois University
Press, 1992 [H Magill PS367 .R44 1992

*for further bibliography see Cutting, Rose Marie., _John and William Bartram, William Byrd II, and St. John de Crevecoeur : a reference guide_ (Boston : G. K. Hall, c1976 [S McCabe Ref Z1231.P8 C87 INHOUSE ONLY]

Text: Letters from an American Farmer Text: _Letters from an American Farmer_

**Gender and Virtue: Benjamin Rush and Republican Schooling**

R. Church, _Education in the United States_ , ch. 1  
H. Kuritz, "Benjamin Rush," _Hist. Ed. Q._ _7_ (1967), 417-31  
J. Messerli, "The Columbian Complex," _Hist. Ed. Q._ _7_ (1967), 417-31  
D. Tyack, "Forming the National Character," _Harvard Ed. Rev._ _36_ (1966),
29-41  
L. Kerber, "The Republican Mother," _American Quarterly_ 28 (1976): 187-205  

*for primary materials see selections from Rush in Wilson Smith, ed., _Theories of Education in Early America_ , and in F. Rudolph, ed., _Essays on Education_. Focus may be on his views of education for women with reference to Bloch, "Gendered Meanings of Virtue" or with reference to "republicanism" and "liberalism" and the thesis of Richard Ellis, _After the Revolution._

**Additional Topics (see fileserver for bibliography)**

_Noah Webster and the Creation of American Identity_



* * *

**III. "Democratic" Politics and Culture: The End of "Virtue"?**



PRIM.: George Bancroft, ["The Office of the
People."](http://WWW.swarthmore.edu/SocSci/rbannis1/AIH19th/Bancroft.html) For
library copy see J. Blau, ed., _Social Theories of Jacksonian Democracy_ , 18.  
J.F. Cooper, _The American Democrat_ [xerox selections]  
Alexis de Tocqueville, _Democracy in America_ (2 vols. 1840), VOL. ii, BK. 4,
ch. 1-8  

SEC..: *J. Kasson, _Civilizing the Machine_ , chs. 1, 4  
*R.J. Wilson, _Figures of Speech_ , Introd. ch. 2.  
Levine, Lawrence W. _Highbrow/Lowbrow: The Emergence of Cultural Heirarchy in
America_ (Harvard, 1988), part I. [xerox file]  

SUPP. K. Halttunen, _Confidence Men and Painted Women_ (1982).  
Lawrence F. Kohl, _The Politics of Individualism: Parties and the American
Character in the Jacksonian Era_ (1989)  [Jk2260.K64.1989]  
M. Meyers, "The Jacksonian Persuasion," _American Quarterly_ (1954)  

**TOPICS:**

**Jacksonian Theorists:**

**(a) George Bancroft : Democrat**  

Canary, Robert H., _George Bancroft_ , (New York, Twayne Publishers
[1974]]McCabe E175.5 .B1916  
Nye, Russel Blaine, _George Bancroft, Brahmin rebel_ (New York, A. A. Knopf,
1944)  [McCabe E175.5.B2 N9]  
Handlin, Lillian, _George Bancroft, the intellectual as Democrat_ (New York :
Harper & Row, c1984) [McCabe E340.B2 H36 1984]  
Howe, M. A. De Wolfe (Mark Antony De Wolfe), _The life and letters of George
Bancroft(_ New York, C. Scribner's sons, 1908) [ McCabe E340.B2 H8 v. 1 -2  

**(b) James F. Cooper: Critic of Democracy**

James F. Cooper, _The American Democrat_.  
Marvin Meyers, _The Jacksonian Persuasion_ (1957), chs. 1-4, and Appendix A.  
Warren Motley, _The American Abraham: James Fenimore Cooper and the Frontier
Patriarch_ (Camb U. Press, 1987)  
Stephen Railton, _Fenimore Cooper: A Study of His Life and Imagination_ (1979)  
Eric Sundquist, _Home as Found: Authority and Geneology in 19th Century
American Literature_ (1979), ch. on Cooper  

*paper should consider James F. Cooper, _The American Democrat_ (1838) with the rhetoric and analysis in the _Federalist_. and in reference to the "political" culture of the Jacksonian era. For background see James F. Cooper: D.A. Ringe, _J.F. Cooper_ (1962); D. Waples, _Whig Myth of J.F. Cooper_ (1938). See also Henry Nash Smith, [_Virgin Land_](http://xroads.virginia.edu/~HYPER/HNS/), and Meyers, _Jacksonian Persuasion_.



* * *

**III. The End of Virtue- continued**

**Minstrels**



Baker, Jean _Affairs of Party,_ ch. 6  
Engle, Gary D. _This Grotesque Essence: plays from the American Mintsrel
Stage_ (1978) [PS632.T47]  
Lott, Eric, _Love and theft : blackface minstrelsy and the American working
class_ (1993). [ISBN 0195078322 (text) :  
Saxton, Alexander"Blackface Minstrelsy and Jacksonian Ideology," _American
Quarterly_ _27_ (1979), 3-23. See also his Saxton, Alexander, _The rise and
fall of the white republic : class politics and mass culture in nineteenth-
century America_ [London ; New York : Verso, 1990][ ISBN 086091271X (hard) [H
Magill E184.A1 S28 1990  
Toll, R. C. _Blacking Up_ (1974)  

**Circuses, Popular Culture and Mass Audience**

Allen, Robert Clyde, _Horrible prettiness : burlesque and American culture_
(Chapel Hill : University of North Carolina Press, c1991) (alk. paper) [B
Canaday PN1948.U6 A45 1991]  
Grimsted, David, _Melodrama Unveiled: American Theater and Culture 1800-1850_
(Chicago, 1968, reprinted 1987) , esp. chs. 7-9 [PN1918.U5.G7.1987]  
Harris, Neil _Humbug: The Art of P.T. Barnum_ (1973)  
Levine, Lawrence W. _Highbrow/Lowbrow: The Emergence of Cultural Heirarchy in
America_ (Harvard, 1988), part I.  

*paper should focus on the allegedly "democratic" character of culture" in this period.

* * *

**IV. Ministers, Women and The Feminization of American Culture**

PRIM..: Catharine Beecher, "How to Redeem Woman's Profession from Dishonor,"
_Harper's_ _31_ (1865)  [xerox]  
Frances Trollope, _Domestic Manners of the Americans_ , chs. 5, 8 [xerox]  
Alexis de Tocqueville,[ _Democracy in America_ "
](http://xroads.virginia.edu/~HYPER/DETOC/home.html)vol. II, chs. 8-12 [xerox]  

SEC..: *Ann Douglas, _The Feminization of American Culture_ , chs. 1-5  
Paul Johnson, _A Shopkeeper's Millennium_ , Introd., Afterword  
Louis J. Kern, _An Ordered Love_ , Introd., pts. I, IV, V  
K. K. Sklar, _Catharine Beecher_ , ch. 11  

SUPP. Gayle Graham Yates, "Spirituality and the American Feminist Experience,"
_Signs_ 9:1 (Autumn, 1983), 59-72  
Mary Kelley, _Private Women, Public Stage_ (1984)  
Donald Scott, _From Ministry to Profession_  
Sandra S. Sizer, _Gospel Hymns and Social Religion_ (1978)  

TOPICS:

**Calvinism and the Cult of Domesticity:The Beechers**

Cott, Nancy, _Bonds of Womanhood_  
'' , "Passionlessness: an Interpretation of Victorian Sexual Ideology
1790-1850," _Signs_ _4_ (1978), 219-36  
Ryan, Mary P. _Cradle of the Middle Class_ , esp. ch 5  
M. Rugoff, _The Beechers: An American Family_  
K. K. Sklar, _Catharine Beecher_  
M. van de Wetering, "The Concept of 'Home' in 19th Century America," _J. of
Am. Studies_ _18_ (April 1984), 5-28  
B. Welter, "Cult of True Womanhood," _Am. Q._ 18 (1966)  

*three of C. Beecher's principal works are in McCabe: _American Women's Home_ (1869), _Religious Training of Children_ (1864) and _Education Reminiscences_ (1874)

* * *

**IV. Ministers, Women, continued**

**Gender and Utopia**

(1) General

Albinski, N.B."Utopia Reconsidered: Women Novelists and 19th Century Utopian
Visions," _Signs_ 13 (1988), 830-41.  
Barker, Charles , _American Convictions_ (for descrtiptive overview of
Utopias)  
Tyler, Alice , _Freedom's Ferment,_ part II  
Walters, Ron, _American Reformers_ , chs. 2,3  
  
p (2) New Harmony and the Owenite Ideal

Kolmerten, Carol A., _Women in utopia : the ideology of gender in the American
Owenite communities_ (Bloomington : Indiana University Press, c1990)  [McCabe
HX696.O9 K65 1990]  

(3) Oneida and the Pursuit of Perfection



M. L. Carden, _Oneida_  
S. Olin, "Oneida," _JAH_ _67_ (Sept. 1980), 285-302  
C. Robertson, _Oneida Community: The Breaking Up 1876-81_ (1972)  
R. D. Thomas, _The Man Who Would be Perfect. . . Noyes_ (1977)  
Foster, Lawrence, _Religion and Sexuality: The Shakers, the Mormons, and the
Oneida Community_ (1981)  
L. Kern, _An Ordered Love . . . Sex Roles in Victorian Utopias_ (1981)  

**Religious Revivals: Charles G. Finney and the "Second" Awakening**

Michael Bakkun, _Crucible of the Millennium: the Burned Over District of New
York in the 1840s_ (1986)  
L. Banner, "Religion and Reform in the Early Republic," _Am. Q._ _23_
(December 1971)  
R.D. Birdsall, "The Second GA and the New England Social Order," _Church
History_ _39_ (1970), 345-64  
Donald Mathews, "The Second Great Awakening as an Organizing Process," _Am.
Q._ _17_ (1969), 23-43  
Paul S. Johnson, _The Shopkeeper's Millennium_  
Nathan O. Hatch, "The Christian Movement and the Demand for a Theology of the
People," _Journal of American History_ _67_ (1980), 545-67  
Ryan, Mary P., _Cradle of the Middle Class_ , ch. 2  

*the paper should discuss Finney's _Lectures on Revivals_ to the secondary literature on the social basis of the 2nd GA.

* * *

**V. Transcendentalism**



PRIM.: R. W. Emerson, Self Reliance, [
](gopher://gopher.vt.edu:10010/02/79/12)The American
Scholar[,](gopher://gopher.vt.edu:10010/02/79/12).  
[Uses of Great
Men](http://WWW.swarthmore.edu/SocSci/rbannis1/AIH19th/Uses1.html)  

SEC.: *J. Kasson, _Civilizing the Machine_ , ch. 3  
R. Jackson Wilson,* _Figures of Speech_ , ch. 4 (on Emerson).  

SUPP.Boller, Paul F., _American transcendentalism, 1830-1860 : an intellectual
inquiry_  
Buell, Lawrence, _New England Literary Culture: from Revolution through
Renaissance_ (Cambridge, Eng. 1986).  
H. May, _Enlightenment in America_ , Sect. IV  
Philip Gura, _The Wisdom of Words_ (1981)  
I. Howe, _The American Newness: Culture and Politics in the Age of Emerson_
(1986)  
David S. Reynolds, _*Beneath the American Renaissance_ ,  
A. Rose, _Transcendentalism as a Social Movement_ (1981)  

TOPICS:



**Emersonian "Individualism" and "Americanism": for Men Only?**

Gay Wilson Allen, _Waldo Emerson_ (1981)  [and review by K. Lynn, "Emerson the
Man," _The Air-line to Seattle_ (1983)  
J. Blau, "Emerson's Transcendentalist Individualism," _Review of Metaphysics_
_31_ (1977), 80-92.  
Cayton, Mary K. _Emerson's Emergence: Self and Society in the Transformation
of New England_ (Chapel Hill, 1990)  
S. Elkins, _Slavery_ , ch. IV  
Leverenz, David, _Manhood and the American renaissance_ (1989), ch. 2  
J. McIntosh, "Emerson's Unmoored Self," _Yale Review_ _65_ (1976), 232-40  
A. de Tocqueville, _Democracy in America_ , Vol. II, ch. 2, Bk. 2.  

*the paper should explore Emerson's doctrine of "individualism" and of "American culture" with reference to changes in the socialization process. For suggestive comments see Rupert Wilkinson, _American Tough_ (1986), pp. 68-9. and Joyce W. Warren, _The American Narcissus: Individualism and Women in Nineteenth Century American Fiction_ (1984).

* * *

**Transcendentalism -con't**

**Transcendentalism and Feminism (Margaret Fuller)**

S. Conrad, _Perish the Thought_ , ch. 2  
A. Douglas, _Feminization_ , ch. 8  
P. Eakin, "Fuller, Hawthorne, James and Sexual Politics," _So. At. Q_. _75_
(1976)  
B. Chevigny, "Introduction," _The Woman and the Myth_ (1976)  
Berkson, D. " 'Born and Bred in Different Nations: Margaret Fuller and Ralph
Waldo Emeson, '" in _Patrons and Prot,_ ed Shirley Marchalonis (Rutgers, 1988)
[PS 147.P38.1988]  

*paper should focus on Fuller's _Women in the 19th Century_. For a recent biography see Paula Blanchard, _Margaret Fuller: from Transcendentalism to Revolution_ (New York, 1978)  [PS2506 .B57 1978] . On Fuller's reputation see J. Meyerson, comp. _Critical Essays on Margaret Fuller_ (1980)  [PS2507.C7]. See also Robert N. Hudspeth, ed. _The Lettersof Margaret Fuller_ (2 vols. 1983).



* * *

**Week VI. American Renaissance: The Writer as Social Critic**

PRIM..: N. Hawthorne,"Rappacini's Daughter," "The Celestial Railroad," Earth's
Holocaust"  
W. Irving, [ "The Legend of Sleepy
Hollow"](http://www.en.utexas.edu/~daniel/amlit/sleepy/sleepy.html) [includes
text and other materials developed at the University of Texas]  
H. Melville, "Paradise of Bachelors/Tartarus of Maids;" ["Bartleby the
Scrivener".](http://www.bartleby.com/index.html) For the text and additional
materials developed at the University of Texas, [click
here.](http://www.en.utexas.edu/~daniel/amlit/bartleby/bartleby.html)  

SEC.: *J. Kasson, _Civilizing the Machine_ , chs. 2  
*R. Jackson Wilson, _Figures of Speech,_ chs. 2, Epilogue  
David S. Reynolds, _Beneath the American Renaissance,_ ch. 4-5, 6, 9-10, 12-13

SUPP.Lawrence Buell, _New England Literary Culture: From Revolution through
Renaissance_ (1986)  
Coultrap-McQuin, Susan Margaret, _Doing literary business : American women
writers in the nineteenth century_ (Chapel Hill : University of North Carolina
Press, c1990.)  [McCabe PS147 .C68 1990]  
L. Marx, _The Machine in the Garden_ , ch. 5

Jeffrey Steele, _The Representation of Self in the American Renaissance_
(Chapel Hill, 1989)  
L. Ziff, _Literary Democracy_

HISTORIOG. Nina Baym, "Melodrama's of Beset Manhood: How Theories of American
Literature Exclude Women Writers," _Am. Quarterly_ 33 (summer 1981)  
Paul Lauter, "Race and Gender in the Shaping of the American Literary Canon,"
_Feminist Studies_ 9 (1983), 435-64.  

TOPICS:

**Washington Irving and the New America**



R. Bone, "Irving's Headless Hessian," _Am. Q._ _15_ (1963)  
H. L. Hedges, _Washington Irving_ (1965)

T. Martin, "Rip, Ichabod and Am. Imagination," _American Literature_ _31_
(1959)  
Rubin-Dorsky, Jeffrey, "A Crisis of Identity: _The Sketch Book_ and
Nineteenth-Century American Culture," _Prospects_ 12 , pp. 255-291  [shelved E
169.1.P898 v. 12]  
R.J. Wilson, _Figures of Speech_ , Introd. ch. 2.  

*paper should focus on Washington's views of American society ( and of women) as reflected in "Rip Van Winkle," and "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow". For older studies of Irving see V. L. Parrington, _Main Currents_ II,



**VI. American Renaissance--con't**





**Hawthorne's Heroines**



Baym, Nina, _The shape of Hawthorne's career_ (Ithaca, N.Y. : Cornell
University Press, 1976) [Canaday PS1888 .B3] [check for piece on Hawthorne's
women]  
Herzog, Kristin, _Women, Ethnics, and Exotics: Images of Power in Mid-
Nineteenth Century American Fiction_ (Tennessee, 1983)  [PS374.W6.H45.1983]  
Reynolds,David S. _*Beneath the American Renaissance_ , ch. 13>

* paper should focus on Hawthorne's attitudes as evidenced in "Rappacini's Daughter" and the short stories discussed in Reynolds, _Beneath,_ ch. 13, (or any of the longer works you may have read, e.g. _Scarlet Letter,_ and with reference to the arguments of Baym, op. cit. Lauter, op. cit. and Joyce W. Warren, _The American Narcissus: Individualism and Women in Nineteenth Century American Fiction_ (1984). For addtional discussions of the theme see Bibliography in Herzog, op. cit.For general studies of Hawthorne see J. R. Mellow, _Hawthorne in His Times_ (1980), T. Stoehr, _Hawthorne's Mad Scientists_ (1978),A. Turner, _N. Hawthorne_ (1980), L. Ziff, _Literary Democracy_ , ch. 7



**Herman Melville:**

(a) Offices and Factorie

T. Bender, _Toward an Urban Vision_ , ch. 3  
A. Dawley, _Class and Community: The Industrial Revolution in Lynn_ (1976)  
L. Marx, _The Machine in the Garden_ , ch. 5.  
A. Meier, "Technology and Democracy," _JAH_ _43_ (1957), 618-40  
J. Sanford, "The Intellectual Origins of American Industry," _The Quest for
Paradise_

*Melville's attitudes toward industrialism/comercialism may be contrasted with those prevalent at the time. For suggestive criticism of "Tartarus" see R. Eby, _Mod. Lang. Q._ (Mar. 1940); W. Thompson, _Am. Q._ _9_ (Spr. 1957); B. Rowland, "Melville's Bachelors and Maids," _Am. Lit._ _41_ (1969); and Marx, _Machine_ , ch. 5. On "Bartleby" see

(b) Melville and Manhood



Douglas, Ann, _Feminization,_ ch. 9  
Haberstroth, Charles J. _Melville and Male Identity_ (1980) [see me for copy]  
Leverenz, David, _Manhood and the American renaissance_ (1989), ch.10  
Martin, Robert K., _Hero, Captain and Stranger: Male Friendship, Social
Critique, and Literary Form in the Novels of Herman Melville_ (Chapel Hill
1990)  
Warren, Joyce W., _The American Narcissus: Individualism and Women in
Nineteenth Century American Fiction_ (1984)



*For a Bibliography of Melville Criticism [click here](http://www.melville.org/crit-bib.htm)

For weeks VII-XIV[ click
here](http://WWW.swarthmore.edu/SocSci/rbannis1/AIH19th/H136C.html).

