### History 575  
United States Constitutional History:  
The Federal System

(Professor Michael Les Benedict)



_SUBJECT MATTER_ : This course chronicles the history of the American federal
system from its origins in the colonial period through the present day. It
concentrates primarily on the constitutional doctrines of federalism and how
they effected the development of public policy throughout American history.
The class does not concentrate on "intergovernmental relations"--the practical
workings of government on the various levels of the federal system--although
some attention is paid to that, too.



_PURPOSES OF THE COURSE_ : The purpose of this course is not only to impart
information about the history of federalism. It is also designed to develop
the ability to analyze legal and historical arguments, to discriminate between
more important and less important information, and to research and report on
legal and historical subjects. This will be done through assignments and
classroom reports and discussions.



_READINGS_ (available only from SBX):

REQUIRED TEXTS:

  1. Michael Les Benedict, _The Blessings of Liberty: A Concise Constitutional History of the United States_
  2. Benedict (ed.), _Sources in American Constitutional History_
  3. Benedict (ed.), _Essays and Supplementary Sources in the History of American Federalism_ 

RECOMMENDED FOR PREPARING TERM PAPERS:

  1. Kate L. Turabian, _A Manual for Writers of Term Papers, Theses, and Dissertations_ 



_STUDENT RESPONSIBILITIES_ :

ATTENDANCE AND PARTICIPATION: Students must be officially enrolled in the
course by the end of the second full week of the quarter. No requests to add
the course will be approved after that time. Students are expected to attend
class regularly and to participate in discussions. Attendance will be taken at
random intervals. No one who attends less than 65% of the classes will receive
credit for the course.

READINGS: Please complete the assigned readings before the day they are
covered. To encourage you to do so, there may be brief quizzes on the reading
material.

TERM PAPER: Undergraduate students will prepare a term paper, which will be a
report on a topic related to federalism. It may be about an event, a court
case, the ideas or activities of a person, or any other appropriate subject.
The paper should be based on a variety of secondary sources, and primary
sources where necessary (especially in discussing a court case). The length of
the paper should be about 10-15 double-spaced pages, but may be more. At all
events, papers must be cogent and complete. The papers will be graded on all
the elements that go into writing an academic essay--accuracy of facts,
persuasiveness of reasoning, style, organization, and correct use of language
and grammar.

Graduate students will prepare an historiographical essay of 15-20 pages,
describing how historians and other legal scholars have described some event,
case, or issue involving federalism. Please note the following dates
associated with the term paper assignment:

April 11--Subject of term papers due. At this point the subject may be
general, to be narrowed after further investigation, or more specific.

April 23--A paper of approximately two double-spaced, typewritten pages
describing the subject in a little detail, the research questions you intend
to investigate, the sources you have utilized so far, and further sources you
have discovered to this point.

April 30--a full list of sources you will use to answer your research
questions. NOTE: Expect to continue to find further sources as you research
your paper.

May 23--outline of the paper.

June 6--Paper due.

EXAMINATIONS: There will be one midterm and one final examination. The midterm
examination will consist of short questions and an essay; the final
examination will consist of short questions, which will cover the whole
course, and two essays, one of which will cover material since the midterm and
the other of which will cover the whole course. Students are required to take
the final examination on the date it is scheduled.



_GRADING_ :

    
    
         Class attendance                     10%
         Participation and quizzes, if any    10%
         Term paper                           25%
         Midterm examination                  20%
         Final examination                    35%
    

NOTE: Attendance, term paper, midterm examination, and final examinations are
required elements of the course. You cannot receive credit for the course
unless you complete them as scheduled, unless you inform me of any problems
ahead of time and make special arrangements.



_SCHEDULE OF CLASSES_ :

  1. Week of Monday March 31

Monday: Introduction to the class. The Significance of the Rule of Law,
Constitutionalism, and Federalism     Readings: Blessings of Liberty, xix-xxii
(3) _Sources_ , xv-xvii (3)

Wednesday: The English Theory of Empire and the Reality     Readings:
Blessings of Liberty, skim chapter 1, paying special attention to pp. 12-15;
read 19-45, especially 19-35, 41-45 (30) Supplementary Sources, #1, 2 (5)
Questions: Describe the relationship between the colonies and Great Britain.
To what degree did the British government provide central authority? Through
what institutions? In what areas? How did this change over time? How did the
reality of central authority match the theory? How had American colonies come
to differ from Great Britain socially, economically, and politically? How did
these differences affect their economic and social interests? Judging by
Sources #1 and 2, what general subjects did American colonial leaders believe
required some sort of concerted action among the colonies?

Friday: The American Revolution--The Whig Theory of Government And Empire
Readings: Blessings of Liberty, 50-63 (14), Essay #1--Greene, "Definitions of
Empire" (17), _Sources_ #6-8 (4), Supplementary Sources #3-6 (7)
Questions: What British proposals precipitated the crisis that led to the
American Revolution? What were Americans afraid of? How did the American
understanding of the authority of Parliament in the Empire differ from that of
the British government? How are the differences reflected in the sources
presented in Benedict, _Sources_? What role did differences in American and
British-government understandings-of the relationship between consent and
representation play? How did Americans propose dividing the spheres of
authority of the British government and the colonial governments? Why couldn't
the British government accept the colonists' position?



  2. Week of Monday. April 7

Monday: The Problem of Central Government in the Age of the Revolution
Readings: _Blessings of Liberty_ , 67-81 (15), _Sources_ #11 (4), Essay #2--
Greene, "In Quest of Republican Empire" to p. 197 (17)      Questions: How did
Americans get practical experience with federalism in the struggle with
Britain from 1765 to 1776? Looking at the Articles of Confederation, where did
sovereignty seem to be located? What leads you to that conclusion? In what
ways did the Articles of Confederation prove ineffectual? Why were they
ineffectual? Why did people resist the idea of strengthening the central
government?

Wednesday: Framing the Constitution     Readings: _Blessings of Liberty_ ,
81-91 (11), The Constitution and the Bill of Rights (Amendments I-X in
_Sources_ , Appendix, A1-12) (12), Supplementary Sources #7 (7), _Sources_
#12-13 (5), Essay #2--Greene, "In Quest of Republican Empire," 197-207 (10),
Essay #3--Wood, "The Federalist Persuasion" (12)      Questions: Looking at
the Constitution, where does sovereignty seem to be located? How did this
differ from the location of sovereignty under the Virginia Plan (in Source
Doc. #12)? the New Jersey Plan (also in #12)? Judging from the Dissent of the
Antifederalist Minority at the Pennsylvania and James Madison's Federalist No.
39, how did the Antifederalists and Federalists disagree about the kind of
government created by the Constitution? Where did sovereignty seem to lie
according to the Antifederalists? the Federalists? How did Madison respond in
Federalist No. 10 to the Antifederalist argument that a central government
over a large territory would lead to despotism? How were powers distributed
between the states and the federal government in the Constitution? How did the
adoption of the Bill of Rights affect this distribution of powers?

Friday: Federalist and Republican Views of American Federalism     DUE: Term
paper subject     Readings: _Blessings of Liberty_ , 95-105 (10), _Sources_
#14-16 (8)      Questions: What were the economic and social issues that
underlay disagreements over federal power in the early Republic? Compare
Jefferson's "strict construction" of national power to Hamilton's "broad
construction.' According to Hamilton, where did sovereign power lie in the
American system? Where did sovereignty lie according to Jefferson? How did
Federalists and Jeffersonian Republicans disagree about which government--
state or national-presented the greater threat to liberty? Did Jefferson's
ideas seem entirely consistent with those of his ally, Madison?



  3. Week of Monday, April 14

Monday: Republican Nationalism (until 4:15)/Questions and Discussion on the
Term Paper (4:15-5:00)     Readings: _Blessings of Liberty,_ 105-110 (5)
Supplementary Sources #8-11 (12)      Questions: Can one reconcile the
Louisiana Purchase with the constitutional views Jefferson expressed in his
argument against the National Bank? Can one reconcile the Embargo Act? How
consistent was the Embargo Act with the spirit of Jefferson's older views of
federalism? Compare Calhoun's views to Madison' s. How did John Quincy Adams's
1825 Inaugural Message to Congress Supplementary Source #11) reflect a
nationalist interpretation of national power? How did nationalist
Republicanism compare to Hamiltonian Federalism?

Wednesday: The Marshall Court and Constitutional Nationalism     Readings:
_Blessings of Liberty,_ 113-26 (13); Supplementary Sources #12-13 (4);
_Sources_ #18-21 (15)     Questions: How did the Marshall Court sustain the
nationalist view of the federal system? According to the emerging nationalist
doctrine of American federalism, who had final authority to decide where
national jurisdiction ended and state jurisdiction began? Describe the
principles of nationalist constitutionalism as they were developed in such
arguments as Hamilton's letter to Washington, and Marshall and Story's Supreme
Court opinions.

Friday: No class



  4. Week of Monday. April 21

Monday: No class

Wednesday: The Reaction Against Constitutional Nationalism     Due: Term paper
subjects, research questions, and leads to sources.     Readings: _Blessings
of Liberty_ , 126-30 (4); Essays #4--McLeod, "The Triple Crisis" (11);
Supplementary Sources #14-18 (9); _Sources_ #22 (3); Supplementary Sources #19
(3); _Sources_ #23 (2).      Questions: What were the practical policy effects
of constitutional nationalism? Why did people resist these policies and
nationalist constitutionalism? What were the elements of state-sovereignty
doctrine developed by Jefferson, Roane, Taylor, and others? How did Marshall
and Story answer them? Did the Marshall Court's later decisions begin to
reflect a greater concern for state jurisdiction?

Friday: Jacksonian Democracy and State Rights     Readings: _Blessings of
Liberty_ , 133-46 (13); Essay #5--Ellis, _The Union at Risk_ (20)     Graduate
Students: Lacey K. Ford, Jr., "Inventing the Concurrent Majority," _Journal of
Southern History_ , 60 (February 1994): 41-58; Supplementary Sources #20-21
(5); _Sources_ #26-29 (12); Supplementary Sources #22-24 (7)      Questions:
How were the policy issues that led people to espouse nationalism and state
sovereignty continued into the Jacksonian era? How did their disagreement over
the Maysville Road indicate the Jackson and Clay's different understanding of
what was national and what was local? How did Calhoun's views, reflected in
the South Carolina Address to the People of the United States, extend the
state sovereignty doctrine of the federalist system beyond the interpretation
of earlier state-sovereignty theorists like Jefferson and Roane? How did
Webster's Reply to Hayne answer the state-sovereignty argument that a strong
central government threatened liberty? How did Jackson and Madison's views of
federalism differ from both those of the nationalists and the state-
sovereignty theorists?



  5. Week of Monday. April 28

Monday: The Taney Court and Federalism     Readings: _Blessings of Liberty_ ,
147-51 (4)     Graduate Students: Daniel J. Elazar, "Federal State
Collaboration in the Nineteenth-Century United States," _Political Science
Quarterly,_ 79 (1964): 248-81; _Sources_ #30 (3); Supplementary Sources #25-28
(12); _Sources_ #31-32 (4); Supplementary Sources #29-31 (10);      Questions:
Compare the willingness of the Marshall court to interpret the Constitution as
restricting the power of states to regulate their economies and societies to
the Taney court's willingness to do so. What different understandings of
federalism emerged from the different opinion in U.S. v. Miln and the
Passenger Cases? What relationship between the state and national government
did Taney articulate in Kentucky v. Dennison? To what degree did the Taney
Court's decisions parallel Jackson's state rights views of the federal system?

Wednesday: Federalism and Slavery     DUE: Term paper sources     Readings:
_Blessings of Liberty_ , 155-69 (14); Suppplementary Sources #29, 32 (2);
_Sources_ #33 (2); Supplementary Sources #33-36 (8)      Questions: How did
Republican views on slavery and on the protective tariff and internal
improvements reflect a consistent constitutional position on national power?
How did pro-slavery polemics convert the "state sovereignty' interpretation of
federalism from a defensive one protecting slavery within state borders to an
offensive one designed to spread aspects of the institution to the rest of the
country? How did the doctrine of "squatter sovereignty"' reflect state-rights
philosophy? Compare Lincoln's view of federalism to Douglas's, as manifested
in the Lincoln Douglas debates. How did Douglas's state-rights philosophy help
reconcile northerners morally to living in a slaveholding nation?

Friday: Dred Scott and the Triumph of Pro-Slavery Constitutionalism
Readings: _Blessings of Liberty,_ 172-79 (7); _Sources_ #37 (8); Supplementary
Sources #37 (4); _Sources_ #38 (1); Essay #6--Bestor, "The Civil War as a
Constitutional Crisis" (25)      Questions: To what degree did the Dred Scott
decision reflect state-rights doctrines? To what degree state sovereignty
doctrines? How did the Dred Scott decision undermine the northern Democrats'
state-rights position on slavery in the territories? (Look at Douglas's
attempt to deal with it through the "Freeport Doctrine," Supplementary Source
#37.) How did South Carolina's ordinance of secession and Declaration of the
Causes of Secession reflect the state-sovereignty doctrine of federalism?



  6. Week of Monday, May 5

Monday: MIDTERM EXAMINATION

Wednesday: The Secession Crisis and the Paralysis of National Government
Readings: _Blessings of Liberty_ , reread 177-79; Supplementary Sources, #31,
38 (6); _Sources_ #39, 42, 40-41, 43; Essay #7--Wills, _Lincoln at Gettysburg_
Questions: How did Buchanan's and Lincoln's reactions to secession reflect
different views of the federal system? How did they relate to Taney's views in
_Dennison v. Kentucky_? How did Lincoln's Inaugural Address and First Message
to Congress strengthen the nationalist argument about the federal system? How
did his Gettysburg Address reflect his understanding of the federal system?
Compare Chief Justice Taney's views about federal power to suppress the
rebellion with Lincoln's.

Friday: The Civil War and the Reinvigoration of the National Government
Readings: _Blessings of Liberty_ , 183-95 (12)     Questions: What sorts of
activities undertaken by the national government during the Civil War era
could be justified only under the doctrine of constitutional nationalism? What
was the effect of these activities and of the war on attitudes towards the
national government?



  7. Week of Monday, May 12

Monday: Reconstruction and State-Rights Nationalism     Readings: _Blessings
of Liberty_ , 199-215, A13-A15 (Amendments XIII-XV (17); Essay #8--Benedict,
"Preserving the Constitution" (25); Essay #9--Kaczorowski, "To Begin the
Nation Anew" (23); Supplementary Sources #39-40 (4); _Sources_ #43-44 (2)
Questions: What were the various constitutional theories about Reconstruction?
What were the constitutional implications of Dana's "Grasp of War" speech? How
did the Civil Rights Bill and the Fourteenth Amendment nationalize civil
rights? Compare Andrew Johnson's view of the federal system with the
Republican view. How do Benedict and Kaczorowski disagree on the
constitutional nature of Reconstruction? Who do you agree with more?

Wednesday: Preserving Federalism     Readings: _Blessings of Liberty_ , 215-20
(5) Essay #LO--Benedict, "Preserving Federalism" (36) Supplementary Sources
#41 (4) _Sources_ , #46-47, 49-50 (17)     Questions: To what degree did the
views of federalism the Supreme Court articulated in Texas v. White, Collector
v. Day and the Slaughterhouse cases reflect doctrines of nationalism and of
state rights? How did the Supreme Court's views compare to those of the
Republicans who passed Reconstruction legislation? to the Democrats who
opposed it? Compare the interpretations of the Thirteenth and Fourteenth
Amendments espoused by the majority of the Supreme Court in the Civil Rights
Cases and Plessy v. Ferguson with those of Justice Harlan. Can Justice
Bradley's dissent in the Slaughterhouse Cases be reconciled with his opinion
in the Civil Rights Cases?

Friday: Laissez-Faire Constitutionalism--Nationalism, State Rights, and
Economic Liberty     Readings: _Blessings of Liberty,_ 224-43 (20); Essay #11
--Freyer, "The Federal Courts, Localism, and the National Economy" (20)
Graduate Students: Charles W. McCurdy, "The _Knight_ Sugar Decision of 1895
and The Modernizaton of American Corporation Law, 1869-1903," _Business
History Review_ , 53 (Autumn 1979): 304-42; _Sources_ #51-53, 56 (10);
Supplementary Sources #42-43 (4); _Sources_ #54 (2); Supplementary Sources #44
(3)      Questions: Was the court's majority opinion in the _Slaughterhouse
Cases_ (Sources #47) consistent with its opinion in _Lochner v. New York_
(Sources # 56)? Compare _Chicago, Milwaukee & St. Paul Ry. Co. v. Minnesota
_(#53) with _Munn v. Illinois_ (#51). Did the former indicate a changed
attitude towards state legislation? What role did the Court seem to be
adopting with regard to state economic regulation? How did it compare to the
role it was adopting with regard to non-economic civil liberties and civil
rights? How do you explain the difference?     Further Questions: Compare the
cases involving national government authority over railroads with the E.C.
Knight case. Are they completely consistent? What about the E.C. Knight case
and the Danbury Hatters' Case? Did the Court apply the same rules to its own
authority with regard to federalism that it did to Congress's?



  8. Week of Monday, May 19

Monday: The Growth of a National Police Power     Readings: _Blessings of
Liberty_ , 247-66 (20); Essay #12--Graebner, "Federalism in the Progressive
Era" (26); _Sources_ , #58, 60 (4); Supplementary Sources #45-47 (8)
Questions: How did the Lottery Case and _Hoke v. U.S._ sustain a national
police power? Were they consistent with the E.C. Knight case? Compare Swift
and Co. v. U.S. with the E.C. Knight case. Did the Swift case draw into
question the strict line separating production from commerce established in
E.C. Knight? Was it more nationalistic? In light of the E.C. Knight case and
the Northern Pacific Ry. case, would a court challenge to the Lever Act have
been sustained? Would you have thought E.C. Knight still good law at the end
of the Progressive-World War I era?

Wednesday: Dual Federalism and Nationalism in the 1920s     Due: Research
Questions     Readings: _Blessings of Liberty,_ 270-81 (11); _Sources_ #64 (3)
Questions: Did Justice Day succeed in differentiating between the facts in
Hammer v. Dagenhart and Champion v. Ames? Were Hammer v. Dagenhart and Bailey
v. Drexel Furniture Co. consistent with the Supreme Court's decision of other
federalism cases since 1900?

Friday: The Depression and the Crisis of Government     DUE: Term paper
outline     Readings: _Blessings of Liberty,_ 284-98 (14) _Sources_ #65-67 (7)
Supplementary Sources #48 (4)     Questions: How convincing to you was the
Court's effort to define what was in and what was outside the "flow" of
commerce? How convincing was the Court's discussion of "direct " and
"indirect" affects on commerce? What was the Court's attitude towards the
argument for national regulation based on "federal effects"? Should the Court
have considered it more seriously? Do you feel President Roosevelt was
justified in trying to "pack" the Court?



  9. Week of Monday, May 26

Monday: No class (Memorial Day)

Wednesday: The Depression and the Crisis of Government (cont.)     Readings:
Essay #13--Leuchtenburg, "The Constitutional Revolution of 1937" to p. 228
(15); Sources _#68-72 (9)     Questions: Compare the doctrines of federalism
espoused in N.L.R.B. v. Jones Laughlin Steel Co., U.S. v. Darby, and Steward
Machine Co. v. Davis to those espoused in E.C. Knight, Hammer v. Dagenhart,
and the early New Deal decisions. How did the opinion in West Coast Hotel v.
Parrish indicate a changed role for the Supreme Court in the area of state
economic regulations? Does the opinion in Erie R.R. Co. v. Tompkins seem to
have been philosophically consistent with the other New Deal decisions? What
about the practical result of the Court following state law in diversity
cases?

Friday: The New American Nationalism     Readings: _Blessings of Liberty_ ,
302-306 (4); Essay #13--Leuchtenburg "The Constitutional Revolution of 1937,"
228-36 (8); Essay #14--Ackerman, "Constitutional Politics/Constitutional Law"
(7)     Questions: Did the New Deal amount to a constitutional revolution?
What do the changes in American constitututional doctrines of federalism that
occurred then suggest about how the Constitution changes? Does it require a
constitutional amendment? Were the changes merely the result of acts of will
by the Supreme Court? Compare the New Deal constitutional revolution with that
of the Civil War and Reconstruction.



  10. Week of Monday June 2

Monday: Nationalizing Rights: The Bill of Rights     Readings: _Blessings of
Liberty,_ 306-21 (15) Essay #15--Leuchtenburg, "The Birth of America's Second
Bill of Rights" (21) _Sources_ #76-77, 91 (8) Supplementary Sources #48-49 (4)
_Sources_ #85 (3)     Questions: What are the different views justices took
between 1938 and 1969 on the limits the Bill of Rights has placed upon the
states? How do they reflect different attitudes towards federalism? How would
you describe the Court's post-New Deal role in the federal system?

Wednesday: Nationalizing Rights: The Civil Rights Movement     Readings:
_Blessings of Liberty_ , 326-40 (14) Supplementary Sources, #50-52 (10)
_Sources_ #88-89 (7) Supplementary Sources #53-56 (5)     Questions: What
doctrines of federalism did southern resistance to national civil rights
legislation rely upon? How did national civil rights legislation reconfirm
nationalist constitutionalism? Were Congress and the Supreme Court willing to
base civil rights legislation on a nationalistic reading of the XIV Amendment?
Are constitutional interpretations of the Fourteenth Amendment and of the
commerce clause consistent in terms of nationalist and state-rights
constitutional doctrine? What about the Court's interpretation of
congressional power under the Fifteenth Amendment (S.C. v. Katzenbach)? the
Thirteenth Amendment (Jones v. Alfred H. Mayer)?

Friday: Constitutional Conservatism and Federalism     DUE: Term paper
Readings: _Blessings of Liberty,_ 356-87 (30) _Sources_ #97, 99, 106-108,
114-15, 117 (19) Supplementary Sources #58 (2)     Questions: To what degree
is the revival of a commitment to what conservative jurists call 'Federalism'
in reality a revival of the state rights doctrine? Assess the constitutional
heritage of Justice Powell's dissenting opinion in E.E.O.C. v. Wyoming. What
is the heritage of President Reagan's views?     Was Justice Brennan's
invitation to state courts to interpret civil-liberties provisions of their
state constitutions more liberally than the Supreme Court's interpretation of
similar provisions in the federal Constitution consistent with his
constitutional nationalism?     What is your view about the proper balance of
federalism? Would you vote for the Council of State Governments resolution? Is
it appropriate for the federal government to "mandate" state actions? What
would be the practical effect of accepting the conservative view of
federalism?

