**SYLLABUS: HISTORY 250**

**History of the United States to 1877**

**Fall 2001**

**Dr. Kevin Kern**

** Office Hours: 10:00-12:00 MW, 1:00-2:00 TTh; or by appointment**

**Office: 220 Olin Hall**

** Phone: 972-7125**

**[ mailto:kkern@uakron.edu](mailto:kkern@uakron.edu)**

**Goals:**

One of the most popular misconceptions about history as a field of study is
that it is simply a description of what has happened in the past. To be sure,
facts and events are important raw materials for the historian, but they are
important mostly as means toward the ultimate end of achieving a sense of
understanding and significance. As such there will be four main goals for this
class:



1)UNDERSTANDING IMPORTANT FACTS: Although this is not a "event-" or "date-"
oriented class, the acquisition of a general knowledge of important historical
"facts" from early American history is one of the aims of this course. Someone
once said that "time is what keeps everything from happening all at once." An
insufficient grounding in major events and dates all too often muddles one's
understanding of history by making everything _seem_ _tohappenallatonce_. The
assigned readings, the quizzes and the map exams are geared to achieve the
goal of placing important people and events in a temporal and spatial
framework.



2)UNDERSTANDING MAJOR POLITICAL, SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC TRENDS: Beyond the famous
people and events in U.S. history, there are larger trends and forces. For
example, mercantilism affected not only U.S. economic development , but also
shaped its social and political evolution.



3)UNDERSTANDING RELEVANT HISTORICAL INTERRELATIONSHIPS: One major criticism
that is often leveled at History that it lacks "relevance." This is probably
because of the common (mis)perception of the field of history as being an
exercise in chronicling the deeds of dead people. However, the knowledge of
major socio-political events and forces allows for a greater understanding of
how the country as we know it came to be. Contemporary political debates still
call upon the traditions of two centuries ago (particularly in election
years).



4)UNDERSTANDING HISTORY ON A PERSONAL LEVEL: In history courses, it is all too
easy to forget that the United States is made up of individuals, and that
these individuals were people not entirely unlike ourselves. An understanding
of the personal sentiments of past Americans is crucial in understanding the
greater events of the period under study. One of the goals of this class,
then, will be to grasp the sentiments and motivations of those people who
"made history happen."



**Texts:**

Garraty and Carnes, **The American Nation.** (10th edition)

Wheeler and Becker, **Discovering the American Past** (5th edition) ****

** **

**Reading Assignments:**

**** Please have the following chapters read by the dates indicated in the
schedule below. Your participation depends on a thoughtful reading of the
texts.



**Evaluations and Tests:**

**** Your final grade will be calculated from the following percentages:

Participation: 10% each

Map Tests: 5% each

Papers: 10% each

Exams:  20% each

MAP TESTS: Two map tests will be given **in your discussion section** over the
course of the semester, roughly corresponding to eight-chapter increments in
your text book. **There will be no "make-up" map tests, and no map tests can
be dropped.** If you know in advance that you will miss a day for which a map
quiz is scheduled, please see your discussion section leader to take the quiz
early.



POSITION PAPERS: There will be two position papers due over the course of the
semester based on chapters in your _Discovering the American Past_ book.
Directions on how to write this paper effectively and a grading rubric will be
found on the course website. Your discussion section leaders will be
conducting seminars on how to write these papers.



EXAMS: **** The three exams will correspond to roughly equal subdivisions of
your text (thus, the final exam is not comprehensive). All exams will be
comprised of essay and identification questions. Study guides for each exam
will be found on the course website.



If, at the end of the semester, you are dissatisfied with your grade for the
class, you may take the **optional comprehensive exam**. This exam will
consist of four essay questions chosen by the instructor from the list of
questions attached to this syllabus. **To qualify to take this exam, you must
have completed all of the other regular exams and papers.** You will have two
and a half hours to complete the optional comprehensive exam.



**Grading:**

Grading will be on the standard ten-point scale (90%=A, 80%=B, etc.)
Thoughtful participation in class discussions will be used to decide final
grades in "borderline" cases.



**Attendance and Tardiness:**

Attendance will be taken, and counts toward your final grade. Conversely,
failure to attend or consistent tardiness to class and discussion sections
will count against your final grade (three tardies=one absence). Anyone who
totals more than seven (7) absences from class and/or three (3) discussion
sections automatically forfeits his or her participation points (i.e., an
entire letter grade). Furthermore, because exams and papers will rely heavily
on information given in class and discussion, failure to attend will also
likely result in the loss of more than just one letter grade.



**Special Notes:**

**** The educational environment aimed for in this class is one of easy access
and inquiry. Please feel free to stop the lecture to ask pertinent questions,
demand clarification, or request repetition of complicated concepts. Outside
of class, please take advantage of the office hours posted or make an
appointment for help or clarification.  

**COURSE SCHEDULE/READING ASSIGNMENTS/DISCUSSION SECTION TOPICS**

** **

( _AN=American Nation, DAP=Discovering the American Past_ )



Week 1 ****

**** Introduction, Pre-Columbian Native American History ****

**** _AN,_ Chapter 1; _DAP,_ Chapter 1.



Week 2

Establishing a European Presence: Spanish, French, Dutch, English

_AN,_ Chapter 2; _DAP,_ Chapter 2.



Week 3

Colonial Development, Social, Economic, and Political

_AN,_ Chapter 3; _DAP,_ Chapter 3.



Week 4

Colonial Unrest and Revolution, Early Republic.

_AN,_ Chapter 4; _DAP,_ Chapter 4.



Week 5

The Constitution and Federalist Era

_AN,_ Chapter 5; _DAP,_ Chapter 5.



Week 6

Jeffersonian Democracy and National Growing Pains

_AN,_ Chapter 6; Paper prep.

**Exam 1: October 4**



Week 7

"Era of Good Feelings?", Toward a National Economy

_AN,_ Chapter 7&8; _DAP,_ Chapter 7\.

**First Position Paper Due, October 11**

Week 8

Jacksonian Democracy, Sectional Tensions

_AN_ , Chapter 9; _DAP,_ Chapter 6.



Week 9

The Making of Middle-Class America, Creation of a Democratic Culture

_AN,_ Chapter 10; Paper discussion, **Map Test 1**.



Week 10

Mexican-American War, Expansion of Slavery.

_AN,_ Chapter 11; Exam Prep.



Week 11

Expansion of Slavery, Southern Society and Economy

_AN,_ Chapter 12; _DAP,_ Chapter 9.

**Exam 2: November 1.**

Week 12

The Sections Go Their Ways

_AN,_ Chapter 13; _DAP,_ Chapter 8.



Week 13

Coming of the Civil War

_AM,_ Chapter 14; _DAP,_ Chapter 10.



Week 14

The Civil War

_AN,_ Chapter 15; _DAP,_ Chapter 11.

**Second Position Paper Due, November 27**

** **

Week 15

Reconstruction

_AN,_ Chapter 16; Final Exam Prep, **Map Test 2**. ****



**Final Exam**



**Optional Comprehensive Final Exam**



1) Using reading materials and lectures, write a history of what came to be
the United States from the pre-Columbian period to the end of the 17th century
(approximately). Include discussions of the New World environment, the
Indians, and early European settlements.



2) Using reading materials and lectures, write a history of the United States
for the colonial period up to (but not including) the Revolutionary War.
Include discussions of social, economic and political trends.



3) Using reading materials and lectures, write a history of the United States
from the opening of the American Revolution through the presidency of Thomas
Jefferson. Include discussions of social, economic and political trends.



4) Using reading materials and lectures, write a history of the United States
from 1809 through the presidency of James K. Polk in 1849. Include discussions
of The War of 1812, the Jacksonian Era, and the Mexican-American War and other
social, economic and political trends.



5) Using reading materials and lectures, write a history of the United States
from 1849 through 1865. Include discussions on the effects of the Mexican-
American War and the factors which led to the Civil War.



6) What is Mercantilism? What were the major social, political and economic
effects of Mercantilism on the development of the United States?



7) Discus the American Revolution. What were its major causes, and what were
the major reasons for the American victory?



8) Discuss the U.S. Constitution. Why was it written? In what ways was it
different from the Articles of Confederation? What types of people supported
and opposed it, and why?



9) Discuss the major political trends in the United States from 1783 to 1865.
Include discussions of positions taken by Alexander Hamilton, Thomas
Jefferson, Andrew Jackson, and Abraham Lincoln. Clearly identify the major
party systems that developed over this period, and for what each party tended
to stand.



10) Briefly describe the growth of U. S. territory and population from 1783 to
1865. What were the factors involved in geographic and demographic expansion?



11) Discuss the development of slavery, and anti-slavery movements, in the
U.S. to 1865.



12) Discuss the role of women and minorities in American culture from the
colonial period through the time of the Civil War.



13) Give the ideological position of both North and South just prior to the
Civil War, and trace how each arrived at their respective positions.



14) Number on a map and label on a separate sheet of paper the 25 places given
to you. (List to be provided at the time of the exam from places covered in
map tests and study sheets).

** **

