![](images/hr1.gif)  
---  
[![LII](images/lii.gif)](http://www.law.cornell.edu/) |  **SUPREME COURT
COLLECTION** | [![Supreme Court Collection
home](images/sc2.gif)](../index.html)  
![](images/hr1.gif)  
  
 [![Supreme Court collection
home](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/images/colln1.gif)](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct)

|

**Search  **   \--all current and historic decisions Current decisions only
Current syllabi only Historic decisions only  
  
---|---  
  Thomas Jefferson Univ. v. Shalala (93-120), 512 U.S. 504 (1994).  
  
---  
**Syllabus**  
 |  **Dissent**  
[ Thomas ]|  **Opinion**  
[ Kennedy ]  
[HTML version](/supct/html/93-120.ZS.html)  
[WordPerfect version](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/word-
perfect/93-120.ZS)| [HTML version](/supct/html/93-120.ZD.html)  
[WordPerfect version](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/word-
perfect/93-120.ZD)| [HTML version](/supct/html/93-120.ZO.html)  
[WordPerfect version](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/word-
perfect/93-120.ZO)  


NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader. See
_United States_ v. _Detroit Lumber Co.,_ [200 U.S.
321](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/sup-choice.cgi?200+321), 337.

**SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES**

Syllabus

THOMAS JEFFERSON UNIVERSITY, dba THOMAS JEFFERSON UNIVERSITY HOSPITAL _v._
SHALALA, SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

certiorari to the united states court of appeals for the third circuit

No. 93-120. Argued April 18, 1994 \-- Decided June 24, 1994

Medicare reimburses provider hospitals for the costs of certain educational
activities, including the cost of graduate medical education (GME) services
furnished by the hospital or its affiliated medical school, [42 CFR ¡ì¡ì
413.85](http://barratry.law.cornell.edu:5123/cgi-bin/cfr-choice.cgi?42+413.85)
413.17(a). However, reimbursement of educational activities is limited by (1)
an "anti redistribution" principle, providing that the Medicare program's
intent is to support activities that are "customarily or traditionally carried
on by providers in conjunction with their operations," but that the program
should not "participate in _increased costs_ resulting from _redistribution of
costs_ from educational institutions . . . to patient care institutions,
¡ì413.85(c) (emphasis added); and (2) a "community support" principle,
providing that Medicare will not assume the cost for educational activities
previously borne by the community, _ibid._ Petitioner teaching hospital, a
qualified Medicare provider, sought no reimbursement for its nonsalary related
(administrative) GME costs before 1984, and those costs were borne by its
affiliated medical college. In fiscal year 1985, the fiscal intermediary
disallowed the hospital's claim for reimbursement for such costs, but the
Provider Reimbursement Review Board reversed in part, allowing reimbursement.
Respondent Secretary reinstated the fiscal intermediary's ruling, concluding
that reimbursement for the nonsalary GME costs borne in prior years by the
medical college would constitute an impermissible redistribution under
¡ì413.85(c). As an independent ground, she concluded that the community support
principle also barred reimbursement. The District Court and the Court of
Appeals affirmed.

_Held:_ The Secretary's interpretation of the anti redistribution principle is
reasonable. Because its application suffices to deny reimbursement of the
disputed costs in this case, there is no need to decide the validity of the
Secretary's interpretation of the community support language. Pp. 7-13.

(a) As petitioner's challenge is to the Secretary's interpretation of her own
regulation, the Secretary's interpretation must be given controlling effect
unless it is plainly erroneous or inconsistent with the regulation. Broad
deference is all the more warranted here because the regulation concerns a
complex and highly technical program in which the identification and
classification of relevant criteria require significant expertise and entail
the exercise of judgment grounded in policy concerns. Pp. 7-8.

(b) The meaning of  ¡ì413.85(c)'s relevant sentence is straightforward: Its
first clause defines the scope of educational activities for which
reimbursement may be sought, and its second clause provides that the costs of
such activities will not be reimbursed if they result from a shift of costs
from an educational, to a patient care, facility. The Secretary's
interpretation of the anti redistribution principle gives full effect to both
clauses, allowing reimbursement for costs of educational programs
traditionally engaged in by a hospital, while denying reimbursement for costs
previously incurred and paid by a medical school. It is not only a plausible
interpretation, but also the most sensible interpretation the language will
bear. The Secretary's reliance on a hospital's and medical school's own
historical cost allocations is a simple and effective way of determining
whether a prohibited redistribution has occurred. Pp. 8-10.

(c) Petitioner's argument that ¡ì413.85(c) prohibits the redistribution of
activities, not costs, ignores the second clause of the critical sentence,
which refers on its face to the "redistribution of costs." Moreover, the term
"costs" is used without condition. Even if the Secretary's interpretation were
not far more consistent with the regulation's unqualified language, her
construction is a reasonable one which must be afforded controlling weight.
Petitioner has presented no persuasive evidence to support its second
argument, that the Secretary has been inconsistent in applying the anti
redistribution principle. Petitioner's argument that the regulation's language
is "precatory" or "aspirational" in nature, and thus lacking in operative
force, is also unpersuasive, since the anti redistribution clause lays down a
bright line for distinguishing permissible from impermissible reimbursement.
Pp. 10-13.

993 F. 2d 879, affirmed.

Kennedy, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which Rehnquist, C. J.,
and Blackmun, Scalia, and Souter, JJ., joined. Thomas, J., filed a dissenting
opinion, in which Stevens, O'Connor, and Ginsburg, JJ., joined.



[![Copyright](/supct/images/copyright.gif)](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/credits.html)
|

 [![About us](/supct/images/aboutus.gif)](http://www.law.cornell.edu/lii.html)
|

 [![Send email](/supct/images/email.gif)](http://www.law.cornell.edu/help/)  
---|---|---

