![](syllabus.jpg)

Fall 2002

This course will explore the emergence and destruction of the most powerful
slave society of the modern world: the American South. We will examine the
lives of slaves and slaveowners, small farmers and large planters, men and
women, soldiers and civilians. The course will focus on the nineteenth
century, including the coming, fighting, and aftermath of the Civil War.

Readings will be diverse, including original documents, materials on the Web,
fiction, and secondary accounts. Requirements include a midterm and final as
well as a substantial research paper. Energetic participation in a weekly
discussion section is a central part of the course.

Professor [Edward L. Ayers](mailto:ela@virginia.edu)

Teaching Associates: [Jaime Martinez](mailto:jam6ah@virginia.edu), [Scott
Matthews](mailto:sm3mb@virginia.edu), [Andrew
Torget](mailto:ajt3d@virginia.edu)

Readings include books of historical analysis, original documents, materials
on the Web, memoirs, and fiction. The selections from the _Oxford Book of the
American South_ ( _OBAS_ ) are linked to a short biographical sketch of the
author, a description of the reading placing it in context, and a select
bibliography for further reading. The books for the course are available at
the University Bookstore:

  * Edward L. Ayers and Bradley Mittendorf, eds., _The Oxford Book of the American South_
  * Walter Johnson, _Soul by Soul_
  * Charlene Lewis, _Ladies and Gentlemen on Display_
  * Ira Berlin, et al, _Free At Last_
  * Nina Silber, _The Romance of Reunion_

Requirements include a midterm, a substantial research paper, and a final
exam. Energetic participation in a weekly discussion section is a central part
of the course. At several points in the semester films will be shown and
discussed in section. These are important parts of the class and attendance is
required.

Students will compose three five-page essays on particular questions focused
on the South's experience in slavery and the Civil War. The essays will focus
on primary sources in the on-line Valley of the Shadow Project, HarpWeek,
Alderman Library's Special Collections, and on microfilm. Each essay will be
submitted at the time of discussion.

There are six orientation sessions to accustom you to research in Special
Collections. Your teaching associate will be happy to discuss your writing at
each stage along the way.

Grading:

  * papers: 36%
  * discussion: 30%
  * midterm: 14%
  * final: 20%

**August 28: Introduction**

> |  reading:  |

>

>   * Edward L. Ayers, "What We Talk About When We Talk About the South" in
Materials

>

  
> ---|---  
  
**September 2 and 4: Our Story Thus Far . . .**

> reading:  |

>

>   * In _OBAS_ : [Olaudah
Equiano](http://www.virginia.edu/~history/courses/fall.97/hius323/equiano.html)
from _The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano_ (1789),
[Thomas
Jefferson](http://www.virginia.edu/~history/courses/fall.97/hius323/tjeff.html)
from _Notes on the State of Virginia_ (1785)

>

  
> ---|---  
  
**September 9 and 11: The South Takes Shape**

> reading:  |

>

>   * Walter Johnson, _Soul by Soul_

>

  
> ---|---  
  
**September 16 and 18: Black Lives**

> reading:  |

>

>   * In _OBAS_ : [Nat
Turner](http://www.virginia.edu/~history/courses/fall.97/hius323/turner.html)
from _The Confessions of Nat Turner_ (1832), [Daniel R.
Hundley](http://www.virginia.edu/~history/courses/fall.97/hius323/hundley.html)
from _Social Relations in Our Southern States_ (1860), [Frederick
Douglass](http://www.virginia.edu/~history/courses/fall.97/hius323/douglass.html)
from _Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass_ (1845), and [Harriet
Jacobs](http://www.virginia.edu/~history/courses/fall.97/hius323/jacobs.html)
from _Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl_ (1862)

>

  
> ---|---  
  
**September 23 and 25: Planter Society**

> reading:  |

>

>   * Charlene Lewis, _Ladies and Gentlemen on Display_

>

  
> ---|---  
> session:  |

>

>   * Special Collections orientation sessions, McGregor Room: Monday 23rd at
3:00-3:30, Tuesday 24th 11:00-11:30, Wednesday 25th at 2:00-2:30, and Thursday
26th at 4:00-4:30

>

  
  
**September 30 and October 2: Southern Identities**

> writing:  |

>

>   * research paper from Special Collections due for discussion: [what kind
of people were slaveholders?](assignments.htm#slaveholders)

>

  
> ---|---  
  
**October 7 and 9: Midterm**

> reading:  |

>

>   * no discussions; reading holiday on Monday

>

  
> ---|---  
> exam:  |

>

>   * midterm on Wednesday

>

  
  
**October 14 and 16: Politics**

> reading:  |

>

>   * The Valley of the Shadow: newspapers and personal paper: [how did
politics work in the United States in 1859 and
1860?](assignments.htm#politics)

>

  
> ---|---  
  
**October 21 and 23: Bringing War**

> writing:  |

>

>   * five-page essay, using the Valley Project : [why
secession?](assignments.htm#secession)

>

  
> ---|---  
  
**October 28 and 30: Creating the Confederacy**

> reading:  |

>

>   * In _OBAS_ : [Sarah
Morgan](http://www.virginia.edu/~history/courses/fall.97/hius323/morgan.html)
from The Civil War Diary of Sarah Morgan (1862-1865) and [Sam
Watkins](http://www.virginia.edu/~history/courses/fall.97/hius323/watkins.html)
from "Co. Aytch" (1882)

>

  
> ---|---  
  
**November 4 and 6: War**

> reading:  |

>

>   * Ira Berlin, et al, _Free At Last_ , chapters 1, 2, 5, and 6

>

  
> ---|---  
> film:  |

>

>   * "Glory" (showing date)

>

  
  
**November 11 and 13: Reconstruction**

> writing:  |

>

>   * using a newspaper on microfilm and HarpWeek: [what was Reconstruction
about?](assignments.htm#reconstruction)

>

  
> ---|---  
  
**November 18 and 20: Reunion**

> reading:  |

>

>   * Nina Silber, _The Romance of Reunion_

>

  
> ---|---  
  
**November 25: Life After Reconstruction**

> reading:  |

>

>   * In _OBAS_ : [Charles
Chesnutt](http://www.virginia.edu/~history/courses/fall.97/hius323/chesnutt.html),
"Dave's Neckliss" (1889), [Grace
King](http://www.virginia.edu/~history/courses/fall.97/hius323/king.html),
"The Little Covent Girl" in Balcony Stories (1893), [Kate
Chopin](http://www.virginia.edu/~history/courses/fall.97/hius323/chopin.html),
"Desiree's Baby" in _Bayou Folk_ (1895), [Booker T.
Washington](http://www.virginia.edu/~history/courses/fall.97/hius323/btw.html)
from _Up From Slavery_ (1901), and [W. E. B.
DuBois](http://www.virginia.edu/~history/courses/fall.97/hius323/dubois.html)
from _The Souls of Black Folk_ (1903)

>

  
> ---|---  
  
**December 2 and 4: Reflections**

> reading:  |

>

>   * In _OBAS_ : [William
Styron](http://www.virginia.edu/history//courses/fall.97/hius323/styron.html)
from _The Confessions of Nat Turner_ (1969), [Sherley Anne
Williams](http://www.virginia.edu/history//courses/fall.97/hius323/williams.html)
from _Dessa Rose_ (1986), [Margaret
Walker](http://www.virginia.edu/history//courses/fall.97/hius323/walker.html)
from _Jubilee_ (1966), [Barry
Hannah](http://www.virginia.edu/history//courses/fall.97/hius323/hannah.html),
"Dragged Fighting from His Tomb," in _Airships_ (1978), [William
Faulkner](http://www.virginia.edu/history//courses/fall.97/hius323/faulkner.html),
"Wash" (1934), and [Margaret
Mitchell](http://www.virginia.edu/history//courses/fall.97/hius323/mitchell.html)
from _Gone with the Wind_ (1936)

>

  
> ---|---  
  
[home](index.html) | [syllabus](syllabus.htm) | [assignments](assignments.htm)
| [contacts](contacts.htm) |
[materials](http://toolkit.virginia.edu/2001_Spring_HIUS323-100/materials) |
[schedule](http://codd.itc.virginia.edu/cod/list.cgi?semester=20023&mnemonic=hius&go=1&submit=Search&cnbr=323)

This web site was designed by Susanna Michele Lee for the [Virginia Center for
Digital History](http://www.vcdh.virginia.edu/).

