![](images/hr1.gif)  
---  
[![LII](images/lii.gif)](http://www.law.cornell.edu/) |  **SUPREME COURT
COLLECTION** | [![Supreme Court Collection
home](images/sc2.gif)](../index.html)  
![](images/hr1.gif)  
  
 [![Supreme Court collection
home](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/images/colln1.gif)](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct)

|

**Search  **   \--all current and historic decisions Current decisions only
Current syllabi only Historic decisions only  
  
---|---  
  Sale v. Haitian Ctrs. Council, 113 S. Ct. 2549, 113 S. Ct. 2549, 125 L.
(92-344), 509 U.S. 155 (1993)  
  
---  
 **Syllabus**  
 |  **Dissent**  
[ Blackmun ]|  **Opinion**  
[ Stevens ]  
[HTML version](/supct/html/92-344.ZS.html)  
[WordPerfect version](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/word-
perfect/92-344.ZS)| [HTML version](/supct/html/92-344.ZD.html)  
[WordPerfect version](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/word-
perfect/92-344.ZD)| [HTML version](/supct/html/92-344.ZO.html)  
[WordPerfect version](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/word-
perfect/92-344.ZO)  


NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader. See
_United States_ v. _Detroit Lumber Co.,_ [200 U.S.
321](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/sup-choice.cgi?200+321), 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

Syllabus

SALE, ACTING COMMISSIONER, IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE, et al. _v._
HAITIAN CENTERS COUNCIL, INC., et al.

certiorari to the united states court of appeals for  the second circuit

No. 92-344. Argued March 2, 1993 \-- Decided June 21, 1993

An Executive Order directs the Coast Guard to intercept vessels illegally
transporting passengers from Haiti to the United States and to return those
passengers to Haiti without first determining whether they qualify as
refugees, but "authorize[s] [such forced repatriation] to be undertaken only
beyond the territorial sea of the United States." Respondents, organizations
representing interdicted Haitians and a number of Haitians, sought a temporary
restraining order, contending that the Executive Order violates ¡ì243(h)(1) of
the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 (INA or Act) and Article 33 of the
United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees. The District
Court denied relief, concluding that ¡ì243(h)(1) does not protect aliens in
international waters and that the Convention's provisions are not self
executing. In reversing, the Court of Appeals held, _inter alia,_ that
¡ì243(h)(1) does not apply only to aliens within the United States and that
Article 33, like the statute, covers _all_ refugees, regardless of location.

_ Held:_ Neither  ¡ì243(h) nor Article 33 limits the President's power to order
the Coast Guard to repatriate undocumented aliens intercepted on the high
seas. Pp. 14-32.

(a) The INA's text and structure demonstrate that ¡ì243(h)(1)--which provides
that "[t]he Attorney General shall not deport or return any alien . . . to a
country if the Attorney General determines that such alien's life or freedom
would be threatened in such country . . ."--applies only in the context of the
domestic procedures by which the Attorney General determines whether
deportable and excludable aliens may remain in the United States. In the light
of other INA provisions that expressly confer upon the President and other
officials certain responsibilities under the immigration laws, ¡ì243(h)(1)'s
reference to the Attorney General cannot reasonably be construed to describe
either the President or the Coast Guard. Moreover, the reference suggests that
the section applies only to the Attorney General's normal responsibilities
under the INA, particularly her conduct of deportation and exclusion hearings
in which requests for asylum or for withholding of deportation under ¡ì243(h)
are ordinarily advanced. Since the INA nowhere provides for the conduct of
such proceedings outside the United States, since Part V of the Act, in which
¡ì243 is located, obviously contemplates that they be held in this country, and
since it is presumed that Acts of Congress do not ordinarily apply outside the
borders, _see, e.g., EEOC_ v. _Arabian American Oil Co.,_ 499 U. S. ___,
¡ì243(h)(1) must be construed to apply only within United States territory.
That the word "return" in ¡ì243(h)(1) is not limited to aliens in this country
does not render the section applicable extraterritorially, since it must
reasonably be concluded that Congress used the phrase "deport or return" only
to make the section's protection available both in proceedings to deport
aliens already in the country and proceedings to exclude those already at the
border. Pp. 15-18.

(b) The history of the Refugee Act of 1980--which amended ¡ì243(h)(1) by adding
the phrase "or return" and deleting the phrase "within the United States"
following "any alien"--confirms that ¡ì243(h) does not have extraterritorial
application. The foregoing are the only relevant changes made by the 1980
amendment, and they are fully explained by the intent, plainly identified in
the legislative history, to apply ¡ì243(h) to exclusion as well as to
deportation proceedings. There is no change in the 1980 amendment, however,
that could only be explained by an assumption that Congress also intended to
provide for the statute's extraterritorial application. It would have been
extraordinary for Congress to make such an important change in the law without
any mention of that possible effect. Pp. 18-21.

(c) Article 33's text--which provides that "[n]o . . . State shall expel or
return _(`refouler')_ a refugee . . . to . . . territories where his life or
freedom would be threatened . . . ," Article 33.1, and that "[t]he benefit of
the present provision may not . . . be claimed by a refugee whom there are
reasonable grounds for regarding as a danger to the security of the country in
which he is [located]," Article 33.2--affirmatively indicates that it was not
intended to have extraterritorial effect. First, if Article 33.1 applied on
the high seas, Article 33.2 would create an absurd anomaly: dangerous aliens
inextraterritorial waters would be entitled to 33.1's benefits because they
would not be in any "country" under 33.2, while dangerous aliens residing in
the country that sought to expel them would not be so entitled. It is more
reasonable to assume that 33.2's coverage was limited to those already in the
country because it was understood that 33.1 obligated the signatory state only
with respect to aliens within its territory. Second, Article 33.1's use of the
words "expel or return" as an obvious parallel to the words "deport or return"
in  ¡ì243(h)(1) suggests that "return" in 33.1 refers to exclusion proceedings,
see _Leng May Ma_ v. _Barber,_ [357 U.S.
185](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/sup-choice.cgi?357+185), 187, and
therefore has a legal meaning narrower than its common meaning. This
suggestion is reinforced by the parenthetical reference to the French word
_"refouler,"_ which is _not_ an exact synonym for the English word "return,"
but has been interpreted by respected dictionaries to mean, among other
things, "expel." Although gathering fleeing refugees and returning them to the
one country they had desperately sought to escape may violate the spirit of
Article 33, general humanitarian intent cannot impose uncontemplated
obligations on treaty signatories. Pp. 23-27.

(d) Although not dispositive, the Convention's negotiating history--which
indicates, _inter alia,_ that the right of _non refoulement_ applies only to
aliens physically present in the host country, that the term _"refouler"_ was
included in Article 33 to avoid concern about an inappropriately broad reading
of the word "return," and that the Convention's limited reach resulted from a
hard fought bargain--solidly supports the foregoing conclusion. Pp. 28-31.

969 F. 2d 1350, reversed.

Stevens, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which Rehnquist, C. J.,
and White, O'Connor, Scalia, Kennedy, Souter, and Thomas, JJ., joined.
Blackmun, J., filed a dissenting opinion.



[![Copyright](/supct/images/copyright.gif)](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/credits.html)
|

 [![About us](/supct/images/aboutus.gif)](http://www.law.cornell.edu/lii.html)
|

 [![Send email](/supct/images/email.gif)](http://www.law.cornell.edu/help/)  
---|---|---

