**MCES 0101: INTRODUCTION TO MULTICULTURAL**

**AND ETHNIC** **** **STUDIES** **\----SAMPLE SYLLABUS (FALL, 1997)**

  
  

****Professors: Dr. N. Mangaliso (Sociology)

Dr. N. Hidalgo (Education)

Meeting Time: Wed. 4-6:30pm

Classroom: Wilson 328

Office Hours: Mangaliso, MW 10:00-11:00 a.m and TUES 10:00-11:00 a. m.

Hidalgo, M 2-4 p.m and F 10:30-11:30 a. m.

Telephone #s: Sociology ext. 5502

Education ext. 5318  
  

**COURSE TEXTS AND READINGS**

1\. Texts.  
  

Hirschberg, Stuart. (1995). _One world, many cultures. N_ ew York: Macmillan
Publishing Company.  
  

Rico, Barbara., & Mano, Sandra. (1995). _The American Mosaic: Multicultural
readings in_ _context_. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.  
  

2\. An interdisciplinary reading package.  
  

3\. Literature Books.

Angelo, Maya. (1993). _I Know Why The Caged Bird Sings._ New York: Bantam
Books.  
  

Cisnero, Sandra. (1989). _The House On Mango Street_. New York: Vintage
Contemporaries.  
  

Dorris, Michael. (1987). _A Yellow Raft In Blue Water._ New York: Warner
Books.  
  

McCourt, Frank. (1996). _Angela's Ashes: A Memoir_. New York: Scribner Book
Publishers.  
  

Tan, Amy. (1995). _The Hundred Secret Senses_. New York: Ivy Books.  
  
  
  
  
  

**COURSE DESCRIPTION**

**** The focus in this introductory course centers on the meaning and
significance of multiculturalism and the nature of ethnic diversity. Students
will have the opportunity to study different cultural and ethnic groups and
learn about the permanence of such groups within the United States and other
countries. Students will be exposed to basic concepts in ethnic studies such
as ethnicity, culture, race socialization, cultural assimilation,
acculturation, migration, immigration,social protest and resistance. This
course will be taught from an interdisciplinary perspective, thereby, allowing
students to build a multicultural/ethnic knowledge base from various
viewpoints: historical, political,economical,sociological, and psychological.  
  
  
  

**COURSE OBJECTIVES**

Consistent with the general goals and/or objectives of the
Multicultural/Ethnic Studies Minor, this course first helps students to
increase multicultural/ethnic knowledge, i.e understanding of the issues
involved in ethnicity and multiculturalism. Second, students can understand
the meaning of cultural relativism. Third, students are expected to understand
(or be sensitive to), and appreciate the differences between their own and
other people's culture's in regard to beliefs, values, behaviors, and socio-
economic systems.  
  
  
  

**METHODOLOGY/FORMAT**

In this class, there will be lectures (regular and guest lectures),
discussions (class and

group discussions), debates, and films. Group activities and group projects
will be encouraged.  
  

**COURSE EVALUATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS**

**** Exam 1 30 (Wednesday October 8)

Exam 2 30 (Wednesday November 12)

Project 35

Class Attendance 5

Total 100

There will be two in-class exams and a group project. The exams will cover
material in the required texts/readings, and any discussions/films or lectures
that are covered in class. The project will be assigned in class. Regarding
the project, students will be required to read literature books and prepare
for a class presentation. Details on the project will be given during the
course of the semester.

Class contribution includes class participation and discussion/involvement. A
student cannot contribute his/her class without coming to class. In other
words, class attendance is required.  
  

**TENTATIVE READINGS AND SCHEDULE**  
  

**CLASS DATES TOPIC CHAPTER PAGES**  
  

Sept. 03 Introduction to the course preliminaries and definitions.

Why study multiculturalism?  
  

Sept. 10 **EARLY IMMIGRANTS**  
  

Rico & Mano. Setting the historical and cultural context pp. 1-8

In the American storm pp.12-18

The fat of the land pp. 33-49

I speak my own piece pp.51-58  
  

The intent of the readings and class discussions is to uncover

the reasons that motivated early immigration into the United

States. How do these reasons compare to those of current

immigrants? Also, continuities and discontinuities in the

experiences of early and current immigrants will be highlighted.

Sept. 17 **NATIVE AMERICANS**  
  

Rico & Mano: American Indians: Setting the historical pp. 528-533

and cultural context.

The Indian Removal Act pp. 535-536

January 26 pp. 538-540

Lullaby pp. 541-548

Where I come from is like this pp. 569-575

A Status Higher Than States pp. 592-605  
  

The readings highlight the complexity of the historical (and current),
relationship between Native Americans and European settlers. Through the
readings and class discussion, the challenges faced by Native Americans to
maintain land, heritage, and family will be explored.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Sept. 24 **AFRICAN AMERICAN**  
  

Rico & Mano: The Harlem Renaissance pp. 207-222

Invisible Man pp. 369-381

Video on the Harlem Renaissance  
  

Oct. 01 **AFRICAN AMERICAN AND CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENTS**  
  

Rico & Mano:The Constitution of South Carolina pp. 162-163

Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka. pp. 366-367

Tomorrow is for our matrys pp. 383-390

Letter from Birmingham Jail pp. 392-405

The Autobiography of Malcolm X pp. 406-412

Video: "I have a dream"

Video of Malcolm X's speech  
  

Hirschberg: Antidisestablishmentarianism pp. 10-17

Why I quit the Klan pp. 318-321

In this segment, the unit of analysis is the African American

group. The discussion highlights this groups' unique history

of involuntary immigration. Emphasis is also put on the

emergence of leadership, social movements, and the enactment

of social change.  
  

Oct. 08 **EXAM 1: Wednesday, October 08**  
  

Oct. 15 **CHICANOS**  
  

Rico & Mano: Setting the cultural and historical context pp. 444-449

The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo pp. 450-454

The Organizer's Tale pp. 456-463  
  

Hirschberg: Border Story pp. 486-498

Cervicide pp. 500-501  
  

Rodney F. Hero: The History and Socio-economic status (Reading Package)

of Latino groups.

William Finnegan: The New Americans (Reading Package)

Enrique Aviles & Michelle A. Banks: On the question of (Reading Package)

race.  
  

In this segment, the unique feature highlighted in the readings and class
discussion is how Chicanos have dealt with the experience of suddenly finding
themselves living in areas ceded to the U.S. Also, the diverse experiences of
Mexican-Americans and Chicanos is explored.  
  
  
  

Oct. 22 **ASIAN AMERICANS**  
  

Rico & Mano:Setting the historical and cultural context pp. 90-100

The land of the free pp. 102-109

Father cures a presidential fever pp.110-120

The grandfather of the Sierra Nevada pp.122-140

Mountains

The world of our grandmothers pp. 142-149  
  

Japanese Americans: Setting the historical and cultural pp.290-294

Japanese Relocation Order pp.295-296

Pearl Harbor Echoes in Seattle pp. 298-309

From No-No Boy pp. 311-322

Hirschberg: Transformation pp.104-108

Yearning to breathe pp.475- 484  
  

The analysis focuses on the Asian groups. The discussion places them

in historical perspective while focusing on their successes and challenges in
contemporary society.  
  

**LITERATURE GROUP WORK. BRING LITERATURE BOOKS TO CLASS.**  
  
  
  

Oct. 29 **FAMILY ORGANIZATION AND GENDER**  
  

Hirschberg: A woman from he-dog pp. 3-8

Childhood in Russia pp.18-26

Amina pp. 40-42

The Little Emperors pp. 43-53

The Mbuti Pygmies pp. 55-59

Arranging a marriage in India pp. 164-171

Her three days pp. 173-184  
  

Audre Lorde:The master's tools will never dismantle the (Reading Package)

master's house.

Age, race, class, and sex.........  
  
  
  
  
  

Hidalgo Nitza:"All of David's Mothers......" (Reading Package)  
  

The readings, set in different cultures, illuminate different family forms.

Universally, however family is defined, single-parent, nuclear, extended, or
even including the entire community, one of its primary functions is to pass
on the values and mores of a particular culture to the next generation. In the
readings, and class discussion, emphasis is put on how gender roles and sexual
identity are culturally conditioned.  
  

Nov. 05 **SOCIAL CLASS**

Hirschberg: What is poverty? pp. 289-293

The Button pp. 294-300

A small place pp. 338-345

The black notebooks pp. 347-350  
  

Adolph Reed Jr:The underclass as a myth and symbol: The

Poverty of Discourse About Poverty. (Reading Package)  
  

The New York Times Magazine:Wealth and Poverty (Reading Package)

The intent of the readings and class discussions is to highlight the

the crucial and often unrecognized relationship between race and

socioeconomic status. The linkage between race and socioeconomic

status in turn producing power or powerlessness.  
  

Nov. 12 **EXAM 2: Wednesday, November 1** 2  
  

Nov. 19 **STUDENT PRESENTATIONS**

Sandra Cisnero: _The House on Mango Street_

Nov. 26 **THANKSGIVING RECESS**  
  

Dec. 03 **STUDENT PRESENTATIONS**

**** Maya Angelou: _I know why the caged bird sings._

Amy Tan: _The Hundred Secret Senses_.  
  

Dec. 10 **STUDENT PRESENTATIONS**

Michael Dorris: _A_ Y _ellow raft in the blue sea_.

Frank McCourt: _Angela's Ashes: A Memoir_.

**CLASS REVIEW**  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

