

# THE UNITED STATES IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY

History 5A  
Swarthmore College  
Prof. Bruce Dorsey  
Fall 1997



## Fall 1997 Theme: Race in Nineteenth-Century America

This course is designed to introduce students to important themes in American
history between the American Revolution and the 20th century. To accomplish
that aim, the course provides an overview of American history while focusing
on a central theme. This semester's theme will be an exploration of the
historical development of race, racial ideas, racism, and how the power
relationships of the racial world of nineteenth-century America were
influenced by class, gender, religion, and popular culture.

##  
REQUIRED READINGS:

The following books are required reading and are available at the College
Bookstore:

  * Bruce Levine, _Half Slave and Half Free_. 
  * Dorothy Sterling, _We Are Your Sisters: Black Women in the Nineteenth Century_. 
  * Frederick Douglass, _Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, A Slave_ _&_
  * Harriet Jacobs, _Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl_ in H. L. Gates, _The Classic Slave Narratives_. 
  * Theda Perdue and Michael Green, eds., _The Cherokee Removal_. 
  * Joseph Glatthaar, _Forged in Battle: The Civil War Alliance of Black Soldiers and White Officers_. 
  * Patricia Limerick, _Legacy of Conquest_. 
  * Nell Painter, _Standing at Armageddon_. 
  * Ida B. Wells, _Southern Horrors and Other Writings_. 

  
In addition, both Reserve Readings and a Documents Binder **** have been
placed **** at McCabe Library General Reserve.

## SUPPLEMENTAL READINGS: (Students are required to read at least one)

  * Douglas Egerton, _Gabriel's Rebellion_. 
  * Glenda Gilmore, _Gender and Jim Crow_. 

## COURSE REQUIREMENTS:

_Class participation_ : Students are required to attend all class meetings,
complete all readings, and be prepared for discussion of the assigned readings
and documents each week. Students are expected to contribute actively to the
collective learning experience of the course. Unexcused absences will result
in a lower final grade.

_Papers_ : Three papers (approximately _6 or 7 double-spaced typewritten
pages_ ) will be written during the entire course. There are six different
paper topics among which students may chose (see class schedule below).
Students may choose freely among paper topics with the following two
exceptions:

1) Each student must write either Paper Topic 1 or Paper Topic 6.

2) No student may write all three papers in any one half of the course.

Note: Additional written assignments and/or quizzes may be given during the
semester.

_Final Examination_ : A comprehensive final examination will be given at the
end of the course, on the scheduled exam date.



## CLASS SCHEDULE:

Week 1:

Sept. 2 -- INTRODUCTION

Sept. 4 -- FRAMEWORK AND DEFINITIONS: THE UNITED STATES' RACIAL PAST

_Readings_ :

  * Audrey Smedley, "Some Theoretical Considerations," in _Race in North America: Origin and Evolution of a World View_ (1993), pp. 13-35. 
  * Barbara Fields, "Ideology and Race in American History," in J. Morgan Kousser and James McPherson, eds., _Region, Race, and Reconstruction_ , pp. 143-77. 
  * Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham, "African-American Women's History and the Metalanguage of Race," _Signs_ 17 (1992), 251-74. 

_Introductory Paper Assignment:_ Write a two-page (double-spaced) essay
evaluating the historical perspective in the _New York TImes_ editorial "Forty
Acres and a Mule," July 21, 1997. _Due in class, Sept. 4._



Week 2:

Sept. 9 -- RACE AND FREEDOM IN REVOLUTIONARY AMERICA

Sept. 11 -- Discussion

_Readings_ :

  * Levine, _Half Slave and Half Free_ , Introduction. 
  * Edmund S. Morgan, _American Slavery, American Freedom,_ chap. 18 (363-87). 
  * William W. Freehling, "The Founding Fathers and Slavery," _American Historical Review_ (1972), 81-93. 
  * Thurgood Marshall, "Race and the Constitution," _Social Policy_ 18 (1987), 29-31. 
  * _Optional Reading_ : Donald G. Nieman, _Promises to Keep: African-Americans and the Constitutional Order, 1776 to the Present_ (1991), pp. 3-14. 

_Documents_ : -- Slavery and Antislavery During the Revolutionary Era

  * Runaway Slave Advertisements, _Pennsylvania Gazette_ (1765-1776) 
  * Caesar Sarter, Essay on Slavery (1774) 
  * Tom Paine, Essay on Slavery (1775) 
  * John Cooper, "To the Public" (1780) 
  * Thomas Jefferson, Selected Writings. 

_Supplemental Reading_ : Douglas Egerton, _Gabriel's Rebellion_ ,.



Week 3:

Sept. 16 -- INDUSTRIAL CAPITALISM AND FREE WHITE LABOR IN THE NORTH

Sept. 18 -- Discussion

_Readings_ :

  * Levine, _Half Slave and Half Free_ , chap. 2 , 3 & 5\. 
  * Sterling, _We Are Your Sisters,_ chap. 8  & 9 (pp. 87-119). 
  * James H. Merrell, "Indian-White Relations in the New Nation" in _The American Revolution: Its Character and Limits_ , pp. 197-223. 
  * Christine Stansell, _City of Women_ , chap 2 (19-37). 

** **

**Paper Topic 1** : Race and the American Revolution -- Write an essay on the
role of race in the founding of the United States, and in the development of
American society in the new nation. What did freedom and slavery mean for the
revolutionary generation and their new society?

**Due: Sept. 23.**

**Note** : You must utilize Egerton's _Gabriel's Rebellion_ for this paper.

(A student may choose to substitute Gary B. Nash, _Forging Freedom: The
Formation of Philadelphia's Black Community, 1720-1840_ , chap. 3-8 for
Egerton's book, but only after receiving permission from the professor.)



Week 4:

Sept. 23 -- SLAVERY IN THE SOUTH

Sept. 25 -- Discussion

_Readings_ :

  * Levine, _Half Slave and Half Free_ , chap. 1 & 4\. 
  * Douglass, _Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, A Slave_ . 
  * George Fredrickson, _The Arrogance of Race_ , chap. 1 _OR_ Fredrickson, _The Black Image in the White Mind_ , chap. 2. 



Week 5:

Sept. 30 -- THE LIVES OF SLAVES AND AN AFRICAN-AMERICAN CULTURE

Oct. 2 -- Discussion

_Readings_ :

  * Jacobs, _Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl_ . 
  * Sterling, _We Are Your Sisters,_ chap. 1-7 (pp. 3-84). 
  * Charles Joyner, _Down by the Riverside: A South Carolina Slave Community_ , chap. 6 (pp. 172-95) 

** **

**Paper Topic 2** : Slavery and the Slave Experience -- Write an essay on the
significance of slaves' experiences in the shaping of Southern slavery in the
antebellum years. How do the narrative accounts of Douglass and Jacobs differ
from one another? **Due: Oct. 7.**



Week 6:

Oct. 7 -- RELIGIOUS REVIVALISM & REFORM -- ABOLITIONISM

Oct. 9 -- Discussion

_Readings_ :

  * Levine, _Half Slave and Half Free_ , chap. 6 & 7\. 
  * Sterling, _We Are Your Sisters,_ chap. 10-11 (pp. 119-180). 
  * _Optional Reading_ : Alexander Saxton, "Blackface Minstrelsy and Jacksonian Ideology," American Quarterly 27 (1975), 3-28. 

_Documents_ : - The Abolitionist Controversy

  * William Lloyd Garrison, _The Liberator_ (1831). 
  * Angelina Grimke, Appeals to the Christian Women of the South (1836). 
  * _David Walker's Appeal_ (1829). 
  * T.H. Sullivan, _Letters Against Immediate Abolitionism_ (1835). 

** **

**Fall Vacation: October 14 & 16**



Week 7:

Oct. 21 -- CONQUEST, REMOVAL, & "MANIFEST DESTINY"

Oct. 23 -- Discussion

_Readings_ :

  * Perdue and Green, eds., _The Cherokee Removal_. 
  * Levine, _Half Slave and Half Free_ , chap. 8 & 9\. 
  * _Optional Reading_ : Michael P. Rogin, _Fathers and Children: Andrew Jackson and the Subjugation of the American Indian_ , chap. 7. 

** **

**Paper Topic 3** : Cherokee Removal -- Write an essay on the reasons,
rationalizations, and reactions to the removal of Native Americans (such as
the Cherokee) to lands west of the Mississippi. What was the significance of
this event? **Due: Oct. 28.**



Week 8:

Oct. 28 -- THE CIVIL WAR

Oct. 30 -- Discussion

_Readings_ :

  * Levine, _Half Slave and Half Free_ , chap. 10. 
  * Glatthaar, _Forged in Battle_ , esp. chap. 1-2, 4-5, 7-10. 
  * Sterling, _We Are Your Sisters,_ chap. 13-15 (pp. 213-61). 

_Documents_ : - New York City Draft Riots, 1863

  * J.T. Headley, _The Great Riots of New York_. 
  * _Diary of George Templeton Strong_. 
  * "A Letter from One of the Rioters," _New York Times_ , July 15, 1863. 
  * "The $300 Exemption," _New York Times_ , July 15, 1863. 
  * Two New York City Broadsides. 

_Film_ : _Glory_ Date  & Time:_________________________



Week 9:

Nov. 4--EMANCIPATION AND RECONSTRUCTION

Nov. 6 -- Discussion

_Readings_ :

  * Painter, _Standing at Armageddon_ , chap. 1. 
  * Sterling, _We Are Your Sisters,_ chap. 17-20 (pp. 309-94). 
  * Eric Foner, "Black Reconstruction Leaders at the Grass Roots," in _Black Leaders in the Nineteenth Century_ (1988), pp. 219-34. 
  * _Optional Reading_ : Jacqueline Jones, _Labor of Love, Labor of Sorrow_ , pp. 44-46, 52-72. 

_Documents_ : - Ku Klux Klan in the Reconstruction South

  * Z. B. Hargrove (former Confederate and white Democrat) Senate Investigation of the KKK. 
  * Thomas M. Allen (former slave, Baptist minister) Senate Investigation of the KKK. 
  * Pierce Harper (former slave, sharecropper) Texas Slave Narratives. 
  * Sue Craft (former slave) Texas Slave Narratives. 
  * Morgan Ray (former slave) Ohio Slave Narratives. 

** **

**Paper Topic 4** : Civil War & Reconstruction -- Write an essay on the
experiences of war and freedom for African Americans. How do you explain why
they seemed both to win freedom and to lose freedom over the course of a few
decades? **Due: Nov. 11.**



Week 10:

Nov. 11--WESTWARD EXPANSION

Nov. 13 --Discussion

_Readings_ :

  * Limerick, _Legacy of Conquest_ , especially pp. 17-65, 97-133, 179-292. 

_Documents_ : - Conflict at Wounded Knee, 1890.

  * Anonymous Pine Ridge Sioux "The Dead Did Not Return." 
  * Letters from United States Indian Agents. 
  * Petitions from white settlers. 
  * Government & U.S. Military versus Indian accounts of Wounded Knee. 



Week 11:

Nov. 18 -- IMMIGRATION, IMPERIALISM, AND SOCIAL DARWINISM

Nov. 20 -- Discussion

_Readings_ :

  * Painter, _Standing at Armageddon_ , chap. 3-6. 
  * Thomas F. Gossett, "Race and Social Darwinism," in _Race: The History of an Idea in America_ , chap. 7 (145-75). 
  * Ronald Takaki, _Strangers from a Different Shore: A History of Asian Americans_ , pp. 79-115. 

_Documents_ : - Immigration / Social Darwinism

  * Josiah Strong, _Our Country_ (1886). 
  * Elizabeth Cady Stanton, "To the Electors of the Eighth Congressional District" (1866). 
  * Frederick Bushee "The Declining Birth Rate and Its Cause," _Popular Science Monthly_ (1903). 

** **

**Paper Topic 5** : Expansionism -- Write an essay on the relationship between
westward expansion, imperialism, and responses to American immigration at the
end of the nineteenth century. How does race figure into your interpretation?
**Due: Nov. 25.**



Week 12:

Nov. 25 -- LABOR VS. CAPITAL

_Readings_ :

  * Painter, _Standing at Armageddon_ , chap. 2. 

_Film_ : _1877: The Grand Army of Starvation_ Date  &
Time:____________________

Nov. 23 -- **Thanksgiving Holiday**



Week 13:

Dec. 2 -- SEGREGATION & RACE VIOLENCE

Dec. 4 -- Discussion

_Readings_ :

  * Painter, _Standing at Armageddon_ , chap. 7. 
  * Wells, _Southern Horrors and Other Writings_. 
  * Sterling, _We Are Your Sisters,_ pp. 426-445, 479-95. 

_Supplemental Reading_ : Glenda E. Gilmore, _Gender and Jim Crow_.

_Film_ : _Ida B. Wells: A Passion for Justice_. Date  &
Time:_______________________



Week 14:

Dec. 9 -- OVERVIEW AND REVIEW

** **

**Paper Topic 6** : Racial Segregation -- Write an essay on race relations
during the age of Jim Crow and lynching in the "New South." Be careful to
include the voices and perspectives of both white and black Southerners.
**Due: Dec. 12.**

_Note_ : You must make use of Glenda Gilmore, _Gender and Jim Crow_ , for this
paper.

** **

**Final Examination** : Date & Time:_________________________



