

![](image4.gif)



# **History 100: Western Civilization**

### **Syllabus**

**Dr. Marion Deshmukh**

**Spring, 2000**

** **

![](line5.gif)



> **This course will describe the development of Western Civilization from
ancient times to the present using chronological and thematic approaches.
Beginning with Egypt under the Pharoahs, the course will discuss the
civilization of Greece, the Roman Republic and Empire, the rise of early
Judaism and Christianity, medieval Europe, changes in social and economic
structure brought about the rise of urban life and overseas explorations, the
Renaissance and religious reformations of the 16th century, the scientific
revolultion, the Enlightenment, the French and Industrial revolutions, the
rise of nationalism, imperialism, World War I and II, Europe during the Cold
War and the fall of communism and rise of European regionalism since 1990.**



> **One of the major goals of the course, will be the acquisition of web and
internet skills in researching topics in addition to acquiring an
understanding of the broad sweep of ancient, medieval, and modern European
history. Each week, you will search the web for information to learn about
specific topics which this website has already linked to source materials.
Your weekly journals will be judged on how well you can incorporate and
analyze websites, material in the text and classroom lectures and activities.
A class distribution list will be set up so that information and announcements
can be e-mailed to you.**

>

>  
>

> **REQUIRED TEXTBOOK: Jackson Spielvogel, _Western Civilization, A Brief
History_ (1999). See weekly schedule for reading assignments in the text.**

>

> **COURSE REQUIREMENTS: There will be a midterm, final exam and weekly
journals. The midterm exam will be held on Thursday, March 9 (please bring a
blue examination book which can be purchased for a nominal cost at the student
book store). The exam will consist of short identification questions and essay
questions. The final examination, covering material _since_ the midtterm, will
be held on Thursday, May 11 (please bring a blue examination book). It, too,
will consist of short identification questions and essay questions. In
addition, students will send weekly e-journals (the equivalent of 2-4 pages)
which, a) reflect upon the readings and class lectures/discussion and b)
describe the web sites located for each weekly assignment. Please make hard
copies of all weekly e-journals and turn in the hard copies on Thursday, May
4. _No make-up exams nor late e-journals will be accepted._**

>

> **GRADING:**

>

> **Class participation: 10%  
>  Midterm Exam: 20%  
>  Final Exam: 30%  
>  *Weekly e-journals: 40%**

>

> **Total: 100%**

>

>   ***Basically the e-journals will be reflective pieces giving your thoughts
on the readings in the text, class lectur and discussion, and the websites
found for that week. You can express your opinion and you can briefly
summarize the material. But rather than simple summary, I would like your
analysis of what you read, saw, and heard.**

>

>   **The length should be approximately equivalent to 2-4 pages of text. Keep
a copy for your records and for printing a hard copy to turn in on May 4th.
Weekly e-journals are due in by close of business day (5 PM) on Friday of the
week they are due.**

>

>   **Reminder: Beginning February 1, the class will be meeting in Robinson B,
Room 102.**

>

>  
>

> **OFFICE HOURS:**

>

> **Tuesdays and Thursdays, 9:30-10:15 AM (or by appointment)  
>  Robinson B, 338 (in the suite of History and Art History offices)  
>  Telephone: (703) 993-2149 Fax:(703) 993-1251  
>  e-mail: mdeshmuk@gmu.edu**

>

> **

>

> * * *

>

> **

>

> ## **_WEEKLY SCHEDULE OF ASSIGNMENTS AND READINGS_**

_  _

> ![](bullet1.gif)**  Week 1. What do we mean by Western Civilization? Ancient
civilizations of the Near East: (Egypt, Sumer, Assyria, Canaan, Persia**

>

> **_Readings:_ Chapters 1 & 2, pp. 2-42**

>

> **_Web assignment_ : Compare the definition of Western Civilization provided
in the textbook with 2-3 definitions found on the web.**

>

>  
>

> ![](bullet1.gif) **Week 2: Greece:**[ **Rise of Greek city-
states**](http://www.virginia.edu/~libarts/clgrkmap.htm) **, wars with Persia
and Sparta, Greek culture.**

>

> **_Readings:_ Chapters 3 & 4, pp. 44-82**

>

> **_Web assignment:_ Locate 5 images of classical Greece and find 5 modern
versions which incorporate the classical images.**

>

>  
>

> ![](bullet1.gif) **  Week 3. Republican Rome: Etruscan civilization, rise of
Italy, **[**Wars of the Roman
Republic**](http://hermes.richmond.edu/dave/roman/battles.html) **.**

>

> **_Readings:_ Chapter 5, pp. 84-104**

>

> **_Web assignment:_ locate definitions of "Census," and Senator.**

>

>  
>

> ![](bullet1.gif) **  Week 4: Imperial Rome and **[**Early
Christianity**](http://www.wsu.edu:8000/~dee/christ/boethius.htm)

>

> **_Readings:_ Chapters 6 & 7, pp. 106-152**

>

> **_Web assignment:_ locate definitions of Augustus, Caesar, Imperium.**

>

>  
>

> ![](bullet1.gif) **  Week 5: Medieval Europe, **[**Chartres
Cathedral**](http://www1.pitt.edu/~medart/menufrance/chartres/charmain.html)

>

> **_Readings:_ Chapters 8, 9, 10, pp. 154-214**

>

> **_Web assignment:_ In addition to the Chartres Cathedral site, locate 4
visual images of Romanesque and Gothic religious architecture.**

>

>  
>

> ![](bullet1.gif) **  Week 6: The Breakdown of the Middle Ages, the Growth of
towns; **[**Overseas
exploration**](http://www.win.tue.nl/~engels/discovery/columbus.html) **.**

>

> **_Readings:_ Chapters 11 & 12, pp. 216-255**

>

> **_Web assignment:_ Find information about two European explorers _not_
including Columbus.**

>

>  
>

> ![](bullet1.gif)**  Week 7: Religious Conflicts: Discussion of the
Protestant Reformation and Catholic Reformation of the 1500s and 1600s.**

>

> **_Readings:_ Chapters 13 & 14, pp. 256-301**

>

> **_Web Assignment:_ Locate sites which present two different interpretations
of the religious conflicts between Catholics and the various Protestant
groups. **[**95 Theses**](http://www.gty.org/~phil/history/95theses.htm)

>

>  
>

> ![](bullet1.gif)**__ Week 8: SPRING BREAK**

>

>  
>

> ![](bullet1.gif)**  Week 9: Scientific Revolution and the Enlightenment. **

>

> **_Readings:_ Chapters 15, 16, 17, 18, pp. 304-384**

>

> **_Web assignment:_ Pick two individuals and locate information about them
from the following list: Copernicius, Johannes Kepler, Issac Newton,
Montesquieu, Voltaire, Rousseau. **[**Voltaire's
Descriptions**](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1778voltaire-newton.html)

>

>  
>

> ![](bullet1.gif) **  Week 10: The French and Industrial Revolution. **

>

> **_Readings:_ Chapters 19, 20, 21, pp. 386-446**

>

> **_Web assignment:_ Look up 18th century images of the guillotine, the steam
engine, the mill. **[**Events of the French
Revolution**](http://www.woodberry.org/acad/hist/frweb/home%20pages/event_home.htm)
**.**[ **Images of the Industrial
Revolution.**](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/modsbook14.html)

>

>  
>

> ![](bullet1.gif)**  Week 11: Legacy of the revolutions: Nationalism and
political ideologies during the 19th Century. **

>

> **_Readings:_ Chapters 22, 23, 24, pp. 448-510**

>

> **_Web assignment:_ Look up origins of the national flages of France,
Germany, Spain, and Italy.** [**The Union
Jack**](http://www.fotw.net/flags/faq3.html#uk) **.**[
**Music**](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/natmusic.html)

>

>  
>

> ![](bullet1.gif)**  Week 12: Europe ascendant: Imperialism and national
rivalries to 1914 **

>

> **_Readings:_ Chapters 25 & 26, pp. 512-556**

>

> **_Web assignment:_ Locate maps showing areas of European imperial activity
in Aftrica and**[ **Asia around
1900.**](http://www.h-net.msu.edu/~german/gtext/kaiserreich/china.html)

>

>  
>

> ![](bullet1.gif) **  Week 13: Europe's Civil Wars: 1914-1945**

>

> **_Readings:_ Chapters 27 & 28, pp. 558-601 **

>

> **_Web assignment:_ Find newspapers which describe the opening days of World
War I and World War II and mention of the German actions against the Jews. The
August Days.** [**World War I and World War
II**](http://www.lib.byu.edu/~rdh/wwi/) **.**[ **The
Holocaust.**](http://www.ushmm.org/exhibits/exhibit.htm)

>

>  
>

> ![](bullet1.gif)**  Week 14: Cultural and Social Changes in the 19th and
20th Century. **

>

> **_Readings:_ Chapter 29, pp. 604-626**

>

> **_Web assignment:_ Find visual images, such as paintings, architecture,
film, photography from 4 periods: Romanticism (early 19th century,
Impressionism (late 19th century), Expressionism (early 20th century,
Abstraction (middle to late 20th century). Artistic
**[**movements.**](http://www.artchive.com/74nadar.htm)

>

>  
>

> ![](bullet1.gif)**  Week 15: Reconstruction and revival since 1945. **

>

> **_Readings:_ Chapter 30, pp. 628-651**

>

> **_Web assignment:_ Look up sites related to efforts to create regional
institutions in post World War II Europe. **[**European
Integration.**](http://www.lib.byu.edu/~rdh/eurodocs/ec.html)

>

>  

