[Applied Philosophy>](http://appliedphilosophy.mtsu.edu/) > Comparative
Religion

# Comparative Religion Summer 2002

# Confirmation: Field Trip to Nashville Islamic Center, THURSDAY 10:00am

[Directions](http://www.muslimeen.org/address.htm) and the [Nashville Islamic
Center](http://www.muslimeen.org) website Note: You should wear modest
clothing: no shorts, and no mini-skirts.

## [Notes over Islam](islam.html)

## Overview

This course provides a comparative analysis of philosophical, social, textual,
and ritual dimensions of major world religions, including >West African
origins* (Zoroastrianism, Judaism, Christianity, Islam), South Asian origins
(Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, Sikkhism), and East Asian origins (Confucism,
Taoism/Daoism, Shintoism). In addition to analyzing various religious world
views, the course will compare sacred writings, rituals, ethics, attitudes
toward gender roles, and attitudes toward modernity including the rise of
religiously sponsored violence. Any comparative religion course probably risks
being either too broad (providing merely a survey) and too narrow (providing
careful treatment of too little information); this course will try to balance
a survey of a number of different views and a detailed disussion of one
tradition, Buddhism. *Since the majority of the curriculum in Religious
Studies at Middle Tennessee State University currently focuses on West African
traditions, this course spends less time on West African origins, except
Islam. [More information is available on the course
syllabus.](http://appliedphilosophy.mtsu.edu:8080/courses/world-
religion/world-religion-syllabus-2002.html)

The course will include daily group and class discussion. To prepare you for
class discussion there will be various readings (books, handouts, websites),
lectures, videos, slide shows, and even _field work_ where you will explore
religious views by visiting them and asking your own questions of the
participants.

The purpose of the course is to help you start to explore your own belief
system more deeply, and to understand and have respect for the views of
others.

## Readings

  * Paul Tillich. [Dynamics of Faith](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0060937130/qid=1018289555/sr=1-1/ref=sr_1_1/104-5699895-2640762). 2001. Harper Perennial; ISBN: 0060937130
  * [Achebe, Chinua. Things Fall Apart.](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0385474547/) ($8) ISBN: 0385474547
  * Huston Smith. [The World's Religions: Our Great Wisdom Traditions](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0062508113/qid=1018289598/sr=12-1/104-5699895-2640762). 1992. Harper San Francisco; ISBN: 0062508113
  * Richard Robinson & Willard Johnson, [The Buddhist Religion](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0534207189/qid=1018289653/sr=1-2/ref=sr_1_2/104-5699895-2640762) 1996\. (4th ed.). Wadsworth Pub Co; ISBN: 0534207189
  * Mark Juergensmeyer. [Terror in the Mind of God: The Global Rise of Religious Violence](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0520232062/ref=pd_sim_books/104-5699895-2640762). 2001. University of California Press; ISBN: 0520232062
  * OPTIONAL/NOT REQUIRED (handout available): [Mbiti, John S. African religions & philosophy. Repr. with corrections. ed. London: Heinemann, 1988.](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0435895915/) ($22) ISBN: 0435895893
  * NOTE: you can get these used for much less than a new book at, for example, Amazon (click on the links above).

## Approximate Schedule

  * **Week 1** : Introduction: What is Religion? (Mon, Tues, Wed); African Religion (Thurs)  
Reading: Tillich, _Dynamics of Faith,_ (selections), Juergensmeyer, _Terror in
the Mind of God: The Global Rise of Religious Violence_ (introduction), Mbiti,
_African Religion_ (handout)

  * **Week 2** : African Religion (Mon); South Asian Religions, focusing on Hinduism (Tues,Wed,Thrs)  
Reading: Achebe _Things Fall Apart_ (all); Smith, _The World's Religions_
(Hinduism, also Jainism and Sikkhism), Juergensmeyer, chapter on violence in
India

  * **Week 3** : South Asian Religion, continued, focusing on Buddhism  
Reading: Smith, _The World's Religions_ (Buddhism); Robinson & Johnson,
_Buddhist Religion_ (half to two-thirds of book)

  * **Week 4** : Buddhism, East Asian Religions  
Reading: Smith, _The World's Religions_ (East Asian sections), Robinson &
Johnson, _Buddhist Religion_ (remainder), Juergensmeyer, chapter on Om
Shinrikyo

  * **Week 5** : East Asian Religions, cont (Mon); Islam (Tues, Wed, Thurs);   
Reading: Smith, _World's Religions_ (Islam); Juergensmeyer, chapters on
violence and Islam

## Menu

[Comparative Religion Main
Page](http://appliedphilosophy.mtsu.edu/world_religion/index.html)  
  
[Course Schedule and
Notes](http://appliedphilosophy.mtsu.edu:8080/courses/world-religion/world-
religion-schedule-2002.html)  
  
[ Syllabus](http://appliedphilosophy.mtsu.edu:8080/courses/world-
religion/world-religion-syllabus-2002.html) Note: the online syllabus reflects
the correct examination schedule / grading policy for the course (3 exams and
a final --not 4 exams and a final as per syllabus handed out in class)  
  
[Optional Meditation
assignment](http://appliedphilosophy.mtsu.edu:8080/courses/world-
religion/meditation-assignment.html)  
  
[email Dr. Robert Hood](mailto:rhood@mtsu.edu?subject=RS3020: Comparative
Religion Syllabus Summer 2002)  
  

