![](Images/bosch_thumb.jpg) | Religious Experience |   | [HOME](index.htm) |  
---|---|---|---|---  
  |  
  


**Theology 1141: Religious Experience  
**  
**Spring 2001**  
  
---  
  
Instructor: David Carpenter  
Office Hours: MWF. 9-10:50 a.m.  
(and by appointment)  |   |   |

Office: 210 Bellarmine  
Phone: 610-660-1871 (Campus)  
           E-mail address: dcarpent   
  


**Course Description** : This course is designed as an introduction to the
study of religious experience and of the history of religions (sometimes
called comparative religion). It differs from other first level Theology
courses in approaching religion as a universal human phenomenon and in
adopting a comparative approach, rather than focusing exclusively on the
Christian tradition. It is intended to serve as an introduction to the study
of religion within the liberal arts or humanities curriculum.

We will be reading and discuss-ing together a number of texts, both primary
and secondary. We will begin by reading the introductory chapters of William
E. Paden's _Religious Worlds: The Comparative Study of Religion_ and William
James' _The Varieties of Religious Experience_ , in order to become familiar
with the issues involved in the modern comparative study of religion. We will
then read a number of primary texts drawn from a number of different religious
traditions. These texts have been selected to illustrate a broad range of
different types of religious traditions, tribal, national and universal, and
are contained in a course reader available through St. Joseph's Photocopying
Center (course packet # to be determined). Represented in the reader are the
religious traditions of Native Americans, the tradi-tion of the Dogon, a tribe
living in contemporary West Africa, the religion of ancient Babylon, as
represented in the creation epic, the _Enuma Elish_ , Buddhism, repre-sented
by the classic biography of the Buddha, the _Buddhacarita_ of Asvaghosa, and
Christianity as represented by the _Gospel of Mark_. We will also view a
number of films to supplement these readings. When we have finished reading
these primary texts we will read and discuss two modern interpretations of
religion, written from two very different perspectives. First we will return
to Paden's _Religious Worlds_ , which will look at relgion from the "outside,"
so to speak, as a process of what Paden calls "world-construction." Religions
are the sacred worlds which structure the world of human existence in terms of
sacred time and space, through such things as myth and ritual. Then we will
read further portions of James' classic study in the psychology of religions,
which will focus on the "internal" aspect of religion, namely on religious
experience itself, in its variety. Both of these two dimensions of religion,
the social and institutional on the one hand and the individual and
experiential on the other, will receive equal emphasis.

**Course Objectives** : A primary objective of this course is to provide you
with an introduction to the comparative study of religion, to introduce you to
the diversity of religious phenomena that make their appearance in the course
of history, to give you some insight into the nature and role of religious
traditions and experiences in our lives, and to provide you with a
"vocabulary" for discussing these phenomena intelligently. In addition to
providing you with this sense of historical and comparative perspective, the
course should also contribute to a critical appreciation of the place of
religion in the modern world. It is hoped that you will acquire the ability to
recognize a common humanity in all forms of religious experience and
expression, even those most foreign and unfamiliar. And it is hoped that this
acquired ability--which I believe to be an essential part of a liberal
education--will in turn enrich your understanding of the religious traditions
with which you are in most immediate contact.

**Course Requirements**. It will be very important for you to do the readings
on time and attend class regularly in order to benefit from the in-class
discussions. I intend to make occasional use of small group discussions to
provide you with a comfortable setting in which to explore the materials with
your fellow students, raise pertinent questions, and develop some facility at
discussing religion from a comparative perspective. This will only be possible
if you are in class regularly and keep up with the reading.

There will be three short objective exams during the course of the semester
and a final exam (essay format), along with a term paper. The paper will be an
essay that responds to the fundamental question, "what is religion?" in light
both of your own experience and the materials studied during the semester. It
must be turned in in duplicate, one hard copy (which will be graded and
returned to you) and one electronic copy in either Microsoft Word or plain
text (.txt) format (which will be kept on file by the instructor, and which
will be submitted to Turn-it-in.com, an internet database, if there is
suspicion of plagarism). Other formats will not be accepted. I would prefer
that you submit the electronic copy via email, as an attachment. The final
exam will be an essay in which you examine Paden and James' answers to this
qusetion and discuss their adequacy for understanding the different religious
traditions examined in the course.

**Class participation.** Class participation will be a significant factor in
your grade. A letter grade of A will be given for consistent and thoughtful
engagement with the class. A B will be given for occasional participation and
consistent attendance. A C will be given for consistent attendance but little
class participation. A D will be given for lack of participation and poor
attendance. An FA will be given for exceeding the allow number of absences
without reasonable cause. By "engagement" I do not mean exclusively speaking
up in class. It is as much a matter of attentiveness, which may be conveyed as
much by body langauge and facial expression as by explicit comments. It also
extends to interactions outside the class room (e.g., visits to my office,
exchanges via email, etc.)

**Grades**. Your final grade will be determined as follows:  
  
  
  
Participation

|   | 15%  
  
Obective Exams

|   | 30% (10% each)  
  
Paper

|   |

30%  
  
Final Exam | 25%  
  


 **Class attendance**. A maximum of five absences are permitted. More than
five absences will make the student liable for the grade of FA (failure due to
absence).

**Academic Honesty**. The University's policy on academic honesty will be
strictly enforced. A statement of this policy may be found in the University
Catalogue. For a detailed explanation of plagiarism, which is a violation of
this policy, you should consult the Heath Handbook or similar reference work.
The penalty for intentional plagiarism is failure of the course. Ignorance is
not a valid excuse.

**One Final Comment** : One's initial exposure to the comparative study of
religion can be unsettling, and the student should be prepared for this. In
this course Christianity will be treated--respectfully--as one religion among
many. It will not be given a privileged status. Even if not explicitly, this
means that certain assumptions about the uniqueness or superiority of
Christianity might be called into question, and this can be an unpleasant
experience for those that hold such assumptions. On the other hand, exposure
to the diversity and richness of the religious heritage of humankind can be
exhilarating and enriching. While this course may well lead you to question
things that you have always taken for granted, the goal is not to undermine
faith but to deepen one's appreciation of the faith of others and to locate
one's own religious commitments within a larger, more inclusive framework.

  
  
  
  


  |   |  
---|---|---  
  
  |   |  
  




