Trinity College, Department of Economics

Economics 316;  Prof.: M. D. Ramirez

International Finance, Spring 2002

_

Texts_:

Steven Husted and Michael Melvin, _International Money and Finance_ , fourth
edition (New York: Addison-Wesley Publishers, 2001). You will also have to
purchase a set of reading materials (RM) especially prepared for this course.
The set of RM is available at the Dept. of Economics, located on the third
floor of Williams Memorial Building.

_

Course Objectives and Organization

_

This course is designed to provide students with a basic understanding of an
economy's trade in financial assets as well as the impact of these
transactions on key macroeconomic variables and policies.  In so doing,
students are exposed to major theoretical and policy issues faced by business
firms, the government, and individual investors in their international
financial transactions.  The techniques and concepts developed are, at times,
difficult, but they go a far way in helping us understand the major financial
problems and issues facing an open economy.  For instance, they provide
answers to some of the following questions:  How does the forward exchange
market contribute to reducing the risk of investing in foreign assets?  What
is meant by triangular arbitrage? What is a foreign currency option, and how
does it differ from a futures contract? Does the law of one price hold over
time in its relative form and does it matter? Why is monetary policy
relatively ineffective in a financial regime characterized by high degrees of
capital mobility and currency substitution? Can the industrialized countries
coordinate their policies in order to stabilize their exchange rates and
economies? Can markets work in Eastern Europe? Is the World moving towards
regional trading blocks such as NAFTA, MERCOSUR, and the EEC? What are the
economic and social effects associated with the globalization of production
and finance? Have Hedge funds contributed to destabilizing world financial and
exchange markets?  Is dollarization a good idea for less developed countries
such as Argentina?  What are some of the common institutional (and economic)
causes of the Mexican peso crisis of 1994-95, the Asian banking and financial
crisis, and the Russian economic debacle? Did these aforementioned crises
constitute a real threat to the stability of the world financial system? More
important, is there anything the governments of the world can, or should do to
prevent these crises? And so forth.

The course is divided into five sections outlined in the general schedule
below.  Briefly, the first section introduces the student to a detailed
analysis of foreign exchange markets and international money markets.  The
next section examines the money links existing between the United States and
the rest of the world as recorded in the balance of payments.  Section III
begins by developing and modifying a simple macro model to suit the needs of
an open economy.  It then proceeds to examine the relative effectiveness of
fiscal and monetary policy under fixed and flexible exchange-rate systems with
varying degrees of capital mobility.  Section IV discusses the asset approach
to exchange rate determination and evaluates some of the controversial policy
prescriptions derived from this approach.  Finally, we examine alternative
international monetary regimes and analyze recent issues confronting the open
economy, such as the consequences of increasing trade and financial
integration for labor markets and the employment relationship.

_Course requirements_

During the spring term two major exams will be given on dates announced below.
The exams will be a combination of short answer, numerical, and analytical
problems.   Exams will cover the assigned text, lectures, and any handouts or
readings given in class. Short quizzes (10 to 15 minutes) will be given on
alternate weeks.  In addition, you will be required to write **at least**
three but **no more** than five short critical review papers (3 to 5 pages) on
articles assigned in class (most of the articles are from Reading Materials
packet). You will also be assigned homework on a regular basis.

Finally, you will be required to write a paper which discusses some
theoretical, empirical, and/or policy issues facing the international
financial system. The paper should be **at least** 16 pages and **at most** 21
pages (w/o including endnotes and references). I will **not accept**
electronically transmitted papers.    An abstract of your paper should be in
my hands no later than Thursday March 28th..

_

Course Grades

_

The tentative weights and dates of the components of your final grade are as
follows:

                           Weights (%)                 Dates

Mid-term exam        30                     March 1 (F)

Final exam               30                     May 1 (W) at 12:00 noon.

Term paper             25                     April 24 (W)

Homework and       15

Quizzes

_

Office Hours and other Administrative Information

_

My office is located in Williams Memorial, Room 312, and I will be available
for consultation on M between 2:10 and 2:50 and T between 11:00 and 11:50 (and
by appt.). I will **only** accept messages on my phone system (X2487) in the
event of an emergency. An emergency constitutes missing a scheduled exam,
failing to hand in a written review or homework, and not handing in the term
paper on the scheduled date. In addition, if you miss class I expect to
receive a **written** excuse or email message from the **Dean** of students.
Unexcused absences will be **counted against** you in the determination of
your final grade.

_

General Schedule

_

I.  **The International Financial System** (approximately 3 weeks).

Husted and Melvin, Chps.. 11, 13,  14, 15 and 16.

RM: Fischer, "Exchange Rate Regimes: Is the Bipolar View Correct?"; Little and
Olivei, "Why the Interest in Reforming the International Monetary system?"
(handed out in class); Friedman, "The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates";
Frankel, "How Well Do Foreign Exchange Markets Work: Might a Tobin Tax Help;
and Engel and Hakkio, " Exchange Rate Regimes and Volatility" (handed out in
class).

_

Suggested_ _Readings_ :

Aliber, Robert Z., "The Interest Rate Parity Theorem: A Reinterpretation,"
_Journal of Political Economy_ , November 1973, pp. 1451-1459.

Baille, Richard and Patrick McMahon, _The Foreign Exchange Market_ (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1990), chp. 1, 2 and 5.

Bonser-Neal, Catherine, "Does Central Bank Intervention Stabilize Foreign
Exchange Rates?" _Economic Review_ , Fe. Bank of Kansas City, 1st Quarter
1996, Vol. 81, No. 1, pp. 43-58.

Frankel, Jeffrey, "How Well Do Foreign Exchange Markets Work: Might a Tobin
Tax Help?" in M. U. Haq and I. Grunberg, eds. _The Tobin Tax: Coping with
Financial Volatility_. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.

________, "On the Mark: A Theory of Floating Exchange Rates Based on Real
Interest Differentials," _American Economic Review_ , Vol. 69, No. 4,
September 1979, pp. 610-622.

Eichengreen, Barry and Ricardo Hausmann, "Exchange Rates and Financial
Fragility," _Global Economic Integration: Opportunites and Challenges_ , Fed.
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2000, pp. 329-367.

Frenkel, Jacob A. and Richard M. Levich, "Covered Interest Arbitrage:
Unexploited Profits?" _Journal of Political Economy_ , Vol. 83, April 1975,
pp. 325-338.

Froot, Kenneth A. and Richard H. Thaler, "Anomalies: Foreign Exchange,"
_Journal of Economic Perspectives_ , Vol. 4, No. 3, Summer 1990, pp. 179-92.

Hausmann, Ricardo et. al., "Financial Turmoil and the Choice of Exchange Rate
Regime," _Working Paper # 400_ , Inter-American Development Bank, 1999, pp.
1-35.

Kumar, Vikram and J. Whitt,Jr., "Exchange Rate Variability and International
Trade," _Economic Review_ , Fed. Bank of Atlanta, May/June 1992, vol. 77, no.
3, pp. 17-32.

II.  **The Balance of Payments** (approx. 2 weeks) **.

**

Husted and Melvin, Chp. 17.

RM: Whitt, "The Mexican Peso Crisis"; Espinosa and Russell, "The Mexican
Economic Crisis: Alternative Views"(handed out in class); Whitt, "The Role of
External Shocks in the Asian Financial Crisis";  Ahearne, "Countering
Contagion: Does China's Experience Offer a Blueprint?"; Snowden, "The
International Financial Architecture after the Asian Crisis: Learning From Las
Vegas?"; Mishkin, "Global Financial Instability: Framework, Events, Issues."

_

Suggested Readings_:

_

Economic Report of the President (January 2001)_, Chp. 4, pp. 145-185.

Herver, Jack L., "Should We Be Concerned About the Current Account?" _Chicago
Fed Letter_ , No. 152, April 2000.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, "Perspectives on OECD Economic
Integration: Implications for U.S. Current Account Adjustment," _Global
Economic Integration: Opportunities and Challenges_ , Fed. Reserve Bank of
Kansas, 2000, pp. 169-207.

Rosensweig, Jeffrey A., "Constructing and Using Exchange Rate Indexes,"
_Economic Review_ , Fed. Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Vol. LXXII, No. 3/4, Summer
1987, pp. 4-19.

III.  **Open Economy Macroeconomics** (approx. 3 weeks) **.

**

Husted and Melvin, Chps. 19 and 21.

RM:  Edwards, "How Effective are Capital Controls?"; Rodrik, "How Far Will
International Economic Integration Go?"; Scott, "The Great Divide in the
Global Village"; Rodrik, "Tensions between Trade and Domestic Social
Arrangements";

_

Suggested_ _Readings_ :

Chang, Roberto, "Understanding  Recent Crises in Emerging Markets," _Economic
Review_ , Second Quarter 1999/ Volume 89, No. 2.

Dornbusch, Rudiger W., "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," _Journal of
Political Economy_ , December 1976, pp. 1161-1176.

Espinosa, Marco and Chong K. Yip, "International Policy Coordination: Can We
Have Our Cake and Eat it too," _Economic Review_ , Fed. Bank of Atlanta, vo.
78, no. 3, May/June 1993, pp. 1-12.

Fischer, Stanley, "On the Need for an International Lender of Last Resort,"
_Journal of Economic Perspectives_ , Vol. 13, No. 4, Fall 1999, pp. 85-104.

McKinnon, Ronald I., "Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies for International
Financial Stability: A Proposal," _Journal of Economic Perspectives_ , Vol. 2,
No. 1, Winter 1988, pp. 83-103.

_________, "Exchange Rate Co-ordination for Surmounting the East Asian
Currency Crises," _Journal of International Development_ , Vol. 11, 1999, pp.
95-106.

Mundell, Robert A., "Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy under Fixed and
Flexible Exchange Rates," _Canadian Journal of Economics and Political
Science_ , Vol. 29, No. 4, November 1963.

Whitt, Joseph, "The Role of External Markets in the Asian Financial Crisis,"
_Economic Review_ , Second Quarter 1999/ Volume 89, No. 2.

IV. **Exchange Rates in Asset Markets** (approx. one and a half weeks)

Husted and Melvin, Chp. 18.

RM: Taylor, "The Consequences of Capital liberalization?" (handed out in
class);   Fieleke, "International Capital Movements: How Shocking Are They?
(handed out in class)

_

Suggested_ _Readings:

_

Darby, Michael R., "The Monetary Approach to the Balance of Payments: Two
Specious Assumptions," _Economic Inquiry_ , Vol. 18, April 1980, pp. 321-26.

Hume, David, "Of the Balance of Trade," in Richard Cooper, ed., _International
Finance_ (Baltimore: Penguin Books, 1969).

Frenkel, Jacob and Harry Johnson, "The Monetary Approach to the Balance of
Payments: Essential Concepts and Historical Origins," in Frenkel and Johnson,
eds., _The Monetary Approach to the Balance of Payments_ (New York: Allen  &
Unwin Ltd., 1976).

Hakkio, Craig S., "Is Purchasing Power Parity a Useful Guide to the Dollar?"
Fed. Reserve Bank of Kansas City, _Economic Review_ , 3rd quarter 1992, vol.
77, no. 3, pp. 37-52.

Tootell, Geoffrey M., "Purchasing Power Parity within the United States," _New
England Economic Review_ , July/August 1992, pp. 15-24.

V.  **Recent Issues in Open-Economy Macroeconomics** (approx. one and a half
weeks) **.

**

Husted and Melvin, Chps 9 and 20.

RM: Cooper, "Should Capital Controls Be Banished?" (handed out in class);
Klein, "European Monetary Union"; Wynne, "EMU at 1"; Chang, "Dollarization: A
Scorecard";  Velde, "Dollarization in Argentina"; Chriszt, "Perpsectives on a
Potential North American Monetary Union" (handed out in class); Edwards,
"Hedge Funds and the Collapse of Long-term Capital Management.".

Handouts and assigned readings

_

Suggested Readings:

_

Bird, Graham and R.S. Rajan, "International Currency Taxation and Currency
Stabilization in Developing Countries," _The Journal of Development Studies_ ,
Vol. 37, No. 3, February 2001, pp. 21-38.

Edwards, Franklin R., " Hedge Funds and the Collapse of Long-Term Capital
Management," _Journal of Economic Perspectives_ , Vol. 13, No. 2, Spring 1999,
pp. 189-210.

Espinosa, Marco and Steven Russell, "The Mexican Economic Crisis: Alternative
Views," _Economic Review_ , Fed. Bank of Atlanta, vol. 81, no. 81,
January/February 1996, pp. 21-44.

Fieleke, Norman S., "Is Global Competition Making the Poor Even Poorer?" _New
England Economic Review_ , Fed.Reserve Bank of Boston, Nov./Dec. 1994, pp.
3-16.

_                          _. "Popular Myths About the World Economy," _New
England Economic Review_ , July/August 1997, pp. 17-26.

Krugman, Paul K.,  "All Fall Down: Asia's Crash," in _The Return of Depression
Economics_. New York: W.W. Norton  & Company, 1999, pp. 83-101.

___________, "Crises: The Price of Globalization?" _Global Economic
Integration: Opportunities and Challenges_ , Fed. Reserve Bank of Kansas City,
August 2000, pp.75-105.

Mundell, Robert A., "What the Euro Means for the Dollar and the International
Monetary System," _Atlantic Economic Journal,_ Vol. 26, No. 3, Sept. 1998, pp.
227-237.

Pollard, Patricia S., "The Creation of the Euro and the Role of the Dollar in
International Markets," _Review_ , Fed. Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Vol. 83,
N0. 5, September/October 2001, pp. 17-36.

Rodrik, Dani., _Has Globalization Gone Too Far?_. Washington, D.C.: Institute
for International Economics, 1997, Chps. 2-4.

Scott, Bruce R., "The Great Divide in the Global Village," _Foreign Affairs_ ,
Vol. 80, No.1, January/ February 2001, pp. 160-177.

Taylor, Lance, "The Consequences of Capital Liberalization," _Challenge_ ,
Vol. 43, No. 6, November/December 2000, pp. 38-57.

Whitt, Jr., Joseph A.,"Decision Time for the European Monetary Union,"
_Economic Review_ , Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Third Quarter 1997, pp.
20-33.

Whitt, Jr., Joseph A. ,"The Mexican Peso Crisis," _Economic Review_ , vol. 81,
no. 1, January/February 1996, pp. 1-20.

