[![Previous](/sdimages/previous.gif)](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[group+415us394!3A\]!28\[level+case+citation!3A\]!7C\[level+case+elements!3A\]!29/doc/{@558}/hit_headings/words=4?prev)  

* * *

### **[Syllabus](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[JUMP:'415us394+syllabus'\]/doc/{@1}/hit_headings/words=4?firsthit)
**

Several creators and producers of copyrighted television programs brought this
suit claiming that defendants had infringed their copyrights by intercepting
broadcast transmissions of copyrighted material and rechanneling these
programs through various community antenna television (CATV) systems to paying
subscribers. The District Court dismissed the complaint on the ground that the
cause of action was barred by this Court's decision in _Fortnightly Corp_. v.
_United Artists Television_ , 392 U.S. 390. On appeal, the Court of Appeals
divided CATV systems into two categories for copyright purposes: (1) those
where the broadcast signal was already "in the community" served by the
system, and could be received there either by a community antenna or by
standard rooftop or other antennae belonging to the owners of television sets;
and (2) those where the systems imported "distant" signals from broadcasters
so far away from the CATV community that the foregoing local facilities could
not normally receive adequate signals. Holding that CATV reception and
retransmission of non-"distant" signals do not constitute copyright
infringement, but that reception and retransmission of "distant" signals
amount to a "performance" and thus constitute copyright infringement, the
court affirmed as to those systems in the first category, but reversed and
remanded as to the remaining systems. _Held_ :

1\. The development and implementation, since the _Fortnightly_ decision, of
new functions of CATV systems -- program origination, sale of commercials, and
interconnection with other CATV systems -- even though they may allow the
systems to compete more effectively with the broadcasters for the television
market, do not convert the entire CATV operation, regardless of distance from
the broadcasting station, into a "broadcast function," thus subjecting the
CATV operators to copyright infringement liability, but are extraneous to a
determination of such liability, since in none of these functions is there any
nexus with the CATV operators' reception and rechanneling of the broadcasters'
copyrighted materials. Pp. 402-405.

2\. The importation of "distant" signals from one community into anotherdoes
not constitute a "performance" under the Copyright Act. Pp. 406-415.

(a) By importing signals that could not normally be received with current
technology in the community it serves, a CATV system does not, for copyright
purposes, alter the function it performs for its subscribers, as the reception
and rechanneling of these signals for simultaneous viewing is essentially a
viewer function, irrespective of the distance between the broadcasting station
and the ultimate viewer. P. 408.

(b) Even in exercising its limited freedom to choose among various "distant"
broadcasting stations, a CATV operator cannot be viewed as "selecting"
broadcast signals, since when it chooses which broadcast signals to rechannel,
its creative function is then extinguished and it thereafter "simply
carr[ies], without editing, whatever programs [it] receive[s]," _Fortnightly
Corp_. v. _United Artists Television, supra_ , at 400. Nor does a CATV system
importing "distant" signals procure and propagate them to the public, since it
is not engaged in converting the sights and sounds of an event or a program
into electronic signals available to the public, the signals it receives and
rechannels having already been "released to the public" even though not
normally available to the specific segment of the public served by the CATV
system. Pp. 409-410.

(c) The fact that there have been shifts in current business and commercial
relationships in the communications industry as a result of the CATV systems'
importation of "distant" signals, does not entail copyright infringement
liability, since by extending the range of viewability of a broadcast program,
the CATV systems do not interfere in any traditional sense with the copyright
holders' means of extracting recompense for their creativity or labor from
advertisers on the basis of all viewers who watch the particular program. Pp.
410-414.

### **[Counsel](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[JUMP:'415us394+counsel'\]/doc/{@1}/hit_headings/words=4?firsthit)
**

Robert C. Barnard argued the cause for petitioners in No. 72-1628 and for
respondents in No. 72-1633. With him on the briefs were R. Michael Duncan,
Charles F. Lettow, and David Z. Rosensweig.

Asa D. Sokolow and Seymour Graubard argued the cause for respondents in No.
72-1628 and for petitioners in No. 72-1633. With them on the briefs were
Charles H. Miller, Royal E. Blakeman, Bertrand H. Weidberg, and Eugene Z.
DuBose. [**+](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[group+415us394!3A\]!28\[level+case+citation!3A\]!7C\[level+case+elements!3A\]!29/doc/{@562}/hit_headings/words=4?popup=1)
**

### **[Opinions](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[Group+415us394!3A\]\[Level+Opinions!3A\]/doc/{@1}/hit_headings/words=4/hits_only?firsthit)
**

Stewart, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which Brennan, White,
Marshall, Powell, and Rehnquist, JJ., joined. Blackmun, J., filed an opinion
dissenting in part, post, p. 415. Douglas, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in
which Burger, C. J., joined, post, p. 416.

#### **[STEWART](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[JUMP:'415us394+STEWART'\]/doc/{@1}/hit_headings/words=4?firsthit)
**

[p*396]MR. JUSTICE STEWART delivered the opinion of the Court.

The plaintiffs in this litigation, creators and producers of televised
programs copyrighted under the provisions of the Copyright Act of 1909, as
amended, 17 U. S. C. ¡ì 1 _et seq_., commenced suit in 1964 in the United
States District Court for the Southern District of New York, claiming that the
defendants had infringed their copyrights by intercepting broadcast
transmissions of copyrighted [p*397] material and rechanneling these programs
through various community antenna television (CATV) systems to paying
subscribers. [**n1](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[group+415us394!3A\]!28\[level+case+citation!3A\]!7C\[level+case+elements!3A\]!29/doc/{@567}/hit_headings/words=4?popup=1)
** The suit was initially [p*398] stayed by agreement of the parties, pending
this Court's decision in _Fortnightly Corp_. v. _United Artists Television_ ,
392 U.S. 390. In that case, decided in 1968, we held that the reception and
distribution of television broadcastsby the CATV systems there involved did
not constitute a "performance" within the meaning of the Copyright Act, and
thus did not amount to copyright infringement. [**n2](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[group+415us394!3A\]!28\[level+case+citation!3A\]!7C\[level+case+elements!3A\]!29/doc/{@567}/hit_headings/words=4?popup=2)
** After that decision the plaintiffs in the present litigation filed
supplemental pleadings in which they sought to distinguish the five CATV
systems challenged here from those whose operations had been found not to
constitute copyright infringement in _Fortnightly_. [**n3](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[group+415us394!3A\]!28\[level+case+citation!3A\]!7C\[level+case+elements!3A\]!29/doc/{@567}/hit_headings/words=4?popup=3)
** The District Court subsequently dismissed the complaint on the ground that
the plaintiffs' cause of action was barred by the _Fortnightly_ decision. 355
F.Supp. 618. On appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for the [p*399]
Second Circuit, the judgment was affirmed in part and reversed in part, and
the case was remanded to the District Court for further proceedings. 476 F.2d
338. Both the plaintiffs and the defendants petitioned for certiorari, and,
because of the seemingly important questions of federal law involved, we
granted both petitions. 414 U.S. 817.

I

The complaint alleged that copyright infringements occurred on certain dates
at each of five illustrative CATV systems located in Elmira, New York;
Farmington, New Mexico; Rawlins, Wyoming; Great Falls, Montana; and New York
City. The operations of these systems typically involved the reception of
broadcast beams by means of special television antennae owned and operated by
Teleprompter, transmission of these electronic signals by means of cable or a
combination of cable and point-to-point microwave [**n4](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[group+415us394!3A\]!28\[level+case+citation!3A\]!7C\[level+case+elements!3A\]!29/doc/{@569}/hit_headings/words=4?popup=1)
** to the homes of [p*400] subscribers, and the conversion of the
electromagnetic signals into images and sounds by means of the subscribers'
own television sets. [**n5](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[group+415us394!3A\]!28\[level+case+citation!3A\]!7C\[level+case+elements!3A\]!29/doc/{@569}/hit_headings/words=4?popup=2)
** In some cases the distance between the point of original transmission and
the ultimate viewer was relatively great -- in one instance more than 450
miles -- and reception of the signals of those stations by means of an
ordinary rooftop antenna, even an extremely high one, would have been
impossible because of the curvature of the earth and other topographical
factors. In others, the original broadcast was relatively close to the
customers' receiving sets and could normally have been received bymeans of
standard television equipment. Between these extremes were systems involving
intermediate distances where the broadcast signals could have been received by
the customers' own television antennae only intermittently, imperfectly, and
sporadically. [**n6](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[group+415us394!3A\]!28\[level+case+citation!3A\]!7C\[level+case+elements!3A\]!29/doc/{@569}/hit_headings/words=4?popup=3)
** Among the various actual and potential CATV operations described at trial
the Court of Appeals discerned, [p*401] for copyright purposes, two distinct
categories. One category included situations where the broadcast signal was
already "in the community" served by a CATV system, and could be received
there either by standard rooftop or other antennae belonging to the owners of
television sets or by a community antenna erected in or adjacent to the
community. Such CATV systems, the court found, performed essentially the same
function as the CATV systems in _Fortnightly_ in that they "no more than
enhance the viewer's capacity to receive the broadcaster's signals," 392 U.S.,
at 399. The second category included situations where the CATV systems
imported "distant" signals from broadcasters so far away from the CATV
community that neither rooftop nor community antennae located in or near the
locality could normally receive signals capable of providing acceptable
images.

The Court of Appeals determined that "when a CATV system is performing this
second function of distributing signals that are beyond the range of local
antennas, . . . to this extent, it is functionally equivalent to a broadcaster
and thus should be deemed to 'perform' the programming distributed to
subscribers on these imported signals." 476 F.2d, at 349. The Court of Appeals
found that in two of the operations challenged in the complaint -- those in
Elmiraand New York City -- the signals received and rechanneled by the CATV
systems were not "distant" signals, and as to these claims the court affirmed
the District Court's dismissal of the complaint. As to the three remaining
systems, the case was remanded for further findings in order to apply the
appellate court's test for determining whether or not the signals were
"distant." [**n7](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[group+415us394!3A\]!28\[level+case+citation!3A\]!7C\[level+case+elements!3A\]!29/doc/{@570}/hit_headings/words=4?popup=1)
** In No. 72-1633 the plaintiffs [p*402] ask this Court to reverse the
determination of the Court of Appeals that CATV reception and retransmission
of signals that are not "distant" do not constitute copyright infringement. In
No. 72-1628, the defendants ask us to reverse the appellate court's
determination that reception and retransmission of "distant" signals amount to
a "performance," and thus constitute copyright infringement on the part of the
CATV systems.

II

We turn first to the assertions of the petitioners in No. 72-1633 that
irrespective of the distance from the broadcasting station, the reception and
retransmission of its signal by a CATV system constitute a "performance" of a
copyrighted work. These petitioners contend that a number of significant
developments in the technology and actual operations of CATV systems mandate a
reassessment of the conclusion reached in _Fortnightly_ that CATV systems act
only as an extension of a television [p*403] set's function of converting into
images and sounds the signals made available by the broadcasters to the
public. In _Fortnightly_ this Court reviewed earlier cases in the federal
courts and determined that while analogies to the functions of performer and
viewer envisioned by the Congress in 1909 -- that of live or filmed
performances watched by audiences -- were necessarily imperfect, a simple line
could be drawn: "Broadcasters perform. Viewers do not perform." 392 U.S., at
398 (footnotes omitted). Analysis of the function played by CATV systems and
comparison with those of broadcasters and viewers convinced the Court that
CATV systems fall "on the viewer'sside of the line." _Id_., at 399 (footnote
omitted).

"The function of CATV systems has little in common with the function of
broadcasters. CATV systems do not in fact broadcast or rebroadcast.
Broadcasters select the programs to be viewed; CATV systems simply carry,
without editing, whatever programs they receive. Broadcasters procure programs
and propagate them to the public; CATV systems receive programs that have been
released to the public and carry them by private channels to additional
viewers. We hold that CATV operators, like viewers and unlike broadcasters, do
not perform the programs that they receive and carry." _Id_., at 400-401
(footnotes omitted).

The petitioners claim that certain basic changes in the operation of CATV
systems that have occurred since _Fortnightly_ bring the systems in question
here over to the broadcasters' "side of the line." In particular, they
emphasize three developments that have taken place in the few years since the
_Fortnightly_ decision. First, they point out that many CATV systems,
including some of [p*404] those challenged here, originate programs wholly
independent ofthe programs that they receive off-the-air from broadcasters and
rechannel to their subscribers. [**n8](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[group+415us394!3A\]!28\[level+case+citation!3A\]!7C\[level+case+elements!3A\]!29/doc/{@573}/hit_headings/words=4?popup=1)
** It is undisputed that such CATV systems "perform" those programs which they
produce and program on their own; but it is contended that, in addition, the
engagement in such original programming converts the entire CATV operation
into a "broadcast function," and thus a "performance" under the Copyright Act.
Second, these petitioners assert that Teleprompter, unlike the CATV operators
sued in _Fortnightly_ , sells advertising time to commercial interests wishing
to sell goods or services in the localities served by its CATV systems. The
sale of such commercials, they point out, was considered in the _Fortnightly_
opinion as a function characteristically performed by broadcasters. _Id_., at
400 n. 28, citing _Intermountain Broadcasting & Television Corp_. v. _Idaho
Microwave, Inc_., 196 F.Supp. 315, 325. Finally, they contend that by engaging
in interconnection with other CATV systems -- whereby one CATV system that
originates a program sells the right to redistribute it to other CATV systems
that carry it simultaneously to their own subscribers-- the CATV operators
have similarly transferred their functions into that of broadcasters, thus
subjecting themselves to copyright infringement liability. [**n9](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[group+415us394!3A\]!28\[level+case+citation!3A\]!7C\[level+case+elements!3A\]!29/doc/{@573}/hit_headings/words=4?popup=2)
** [p*405] The copyright significance of each of these functions -- program
origination, sale of commercials, and interconnection -- suffers from the same
logical flaw: in none of these operations is there any nexus with the
defendants' reception and rechanneling of the broadcasters' copyrighted
materials. As the Court of Appeals observed with respect to program
origination, "even though the origination service and the reception service
are sold as a package to the subscribers, they remain separate and different
operations, and we cannot sensibly say that the system becomes a 'performer'
of the broadcast programming when it offers both origination and reception
services, but remains a nonperformer when it offers only the latter." 476
F.2d, at 347. Similarly, none of the programs accompanying advertisements sold
by CATV or carried via an interconnection arrangement among CATV systems
involved material copyrighted by the petitioners. [**n10](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[group+415us394!3A\]!28\[level+case+citation!3A\]!7C\[level+case+elements!3A\]!29/doc/{@573}/hit_headings/words=4?popup=3)
** For these reasons we hold that the Court of Appeals was correct in
determining that the development and implementation of these new functions,
even though they may allow CATV systems to compete more effectively with the
broadcasters for the television market, are simply extraneous to a
determination of copyright infringement liability with respect to the
reception and retransmission of broadcasters' programs.

[p*406] III

In No. 72-1628 Teleprompter and its subsidiary, Conley Electronics Corp., seek
a reversal of that portion of the Court of Appeals' judgment that determined
that the importation of "distant" signals from one community into another
constitutes a "performance" under the Copyright Act. In concluding that
rechanneling of "distant" signals constitutes copyright infringement while a
similar operation with respect to more nearby signals does not, the court
relied in part on a description of CATV operations contained in this Court's
opinion in _United States_ v. _Southwestern Cable Co_., 392 U.S. 157,
announced a week before the decision in _Fortnightly_ :

"CATV systems perform either or both of two functions. First, they may
supplementbroadcasting by facilitating satisfactory reception of local
stations in adjacent areas in which such reception would not otherwise be
possible; and second, they may transmit to subscribers the signals of distant
stations entirely beyond the range of local antennae." _Id_., at 163.

The Court in _Southwestern Cable_ , however, was faced with conflicting
assertions concerning the jurisdiction of the Federal Communications
Commission to regulate in the public interest the operations of CATV systems.
Insofar as the language quoted had other than a purely descriptive purpose, it
was related only to the issue of regulatory authority of the Commission. In
that context it did not and could not purport to create any separation of
functions with significance for copyright purposes. [**n11](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[group+415us394!3A\]!28\[level+case+citation!3A\]!7C\[level+case+elements!3A\]!29/doc/{@575}/hit_headings/words=4?popup=1)
** [p*407] In the briefs and at oral argument various rationales for the
distinction adopted by the Court of Appeals have been advanced. The first, on
which the court itself relied, is the assertion that by importing signals from
distant communities the CATV systems do considerably more than "enhance the
viewer's capacity to receive the broadcaster's signals," _Fortnightly_ , 392
U.S., at 399, and instead "bring signals into the community that would not
otherwise be receivable on an antenna, even a large community antenna, erected
in that area." 476 F.2d, at 349. In concluding that such importation
transformed the CATV systems into performers, the Court of Appeals
misconceived the thrust of this Court's opinion in _Fortnightly_.

In the _Fortnightly_ case the Court of Appeals had concluded that a
determination of whether an electronic function constituted a copyright
"performance" should depend on "how much did the [CATV system] do to bring
about the viewing and hearing of a copyrighted [p*408] work." 377 F.2d 872,
877. This quantitative approach was squarely rejected by this Court:

"Mere quantitativecontribution cannot be the proper test to determine
copyright liability in the context of television broadcasting. . . . Rather,
resolution of the issue before us depends upon a determination of the function
that CATV plays in the total process of television broadcasting and
reception." 392 U.S., at 397.

By importing signals that could not normally be received with current
technology in the community it serves, a CATV system does not, for copyright
purposes, alter the function it performs for its subscribers. When a
television broadcaster transmits a program, it has made public for
simultaneous viewing and hearing the contents of that program. The privilege
of receiving the broadcast electronic signals and of converting them into the
sights and sounds of the program inheres in all members of the public who have
the means of doing so. The reception and rechanneling of these signals for
simultaneous viewing is essentially a viewer function, irrespective of the
distance between the broadcasting station and the ultimate viewer.

[![Next](/sdimages/next.gif)](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[group+415us394!3A\]!28\[level+case+citation!3A\]!7C\[level+case+elements!3A\]!29/doc/{@558}/hit_headings/words=4?next)

* * *

  
  

