[![Previous](/sdimages/previous.gif)](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[group+415us394!3A\]!28\[level+case+citation!3A\]!7C\[level+case+elements!3A\]!29/doc/{@549}/hit_headings/words=4?prev)  

* * *

### **[Case Information](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[JUMP:'415us394+case+info'\]/doc/{@1}/hit_headings/words=4?firsthit)
**

###### **TELEPROMPTER CORP. ET AL. v. COLUMBIA BROADCASTING SYSTEM, INC., ET
AL.,**

No. 72-1628

**SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES**

415 U.S. 394; 94 S. Ct. 1129; 1974 U.S. LEXIS 110; 39 L. Ed. 2d 415; 181
U.S.P.Q. (BNA) 65

January 7, 1974, Argued

March 4, 1974, Decided [***](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[group+415us394!3A\]!28\[level+case+citation!3A\]!7C\[level+case+elements!3A\]!29/doc/{@555}/hit_headings/words=4?popup=1)
**

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE SECOND CIRCUIT.

476 F.2d 338, affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded to District
Court.

### **[Syllabus](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[JUMP:'415us394+syllabus'\]/doc/{@1}/hit_headings/words=4?firsthit)
**

Several creators and producers of copyrighted television programs brought this
suit claiming that defendants had infringed their copyrights by intercepting
broadcast transmissions of copyrighted material and rechanneling these
programs through various community antenna television (CATV) systems to paying
subscribers. The District Court dismissed the complaint on the ground that the
cause of action was barred by this Court's decision in _Fortnightly Corp_. v.
_United Artists Television_ , 392 U.S. 390. On appeal, the Court of Appeals
divided CATV systems into two categories for copyright purposes: (1) those
where the broadcast signal was already "in the community" served by the
system, and could be received there either by a community antenna or by
standard rooftop or other antennae belonging to the owners of television sets;
and (2) those where the systems imported "distant" signals from broadcasters
so far away from the CATV community that the foregoing local facilities could
not normally receive adequate signals. Holding that CATV reception and
retransmission of non-"distant" signals do not constitute copyright
infringement, but that reception and retransmission of "distant" signals
amount to a "performance" and thus constitute copyright infringement, the
court affirmed as to those systems in the first category, but reversed and
remanded as to the remaining systems. _Held_ :

1\. The development and implementation, since the _Fortnightly_ decision, of
new functions of CATV systems -- program origination, sale of commercials, and
interconnection with other CATV systems -- even though they may allow the
systems to compete more effectively with the broadcasters for the television
market, do not convert the entire CATV operation, regardless of distance from
the broadcasting station, into a "broadcast function," thus subjecting the
CATV operators to copyright infringement liability, but are extraneous to a
determination of such liability, since in none of these functions is there any
nexus with the CATV operators' reception and rechanneling of the broadcasters'
copyrighted materials. Pp. 402-405.

2\. The importation of "distant" signals from one community into anotherdoes
not constitute a "performance" under the Copyright Act. Pp. 406-415.

(a) By importing signals that could not normally be received with current
technology in the community it serves, a CATV system does not, for copyright
purposes, alter the function it performs for its subscribers, as the reception
and rechanneling of these signals for simultaneous viewing is essentially a
viewer function, irrespective of the distance between the broadcasting station
and the ultimate viewer. P. 408.

(b) Even in exercising its limited freedom to choose among various "distant"
broadcasting stations, a CATV operator cannot be viewed as "selecting"
broadcast signals, since when it chooses which broadcast signals to rechannel,
its creative function is then extinguished and it thereafter "simply
carr[ies], without editing, whatever programs [it] receive[s]," _Fortnightly
Corp_. v. _United Artists Television, supra_ , at 400. Nor does a CATV system
importing "distant" signals procure and propagate them to the public, since it
is not engaged in converting the sights and sounds of an event or a program
into electronic signals available to the public, the signals it receives and
rechannels having already been "released to the public" even though not
normally available to the specific segment of the public served by the CATV
system. Pp. 409-410.

(c) The fact that there have been shifts in current business and commercial
relationships in the communications industry as a result of the CATV systems'
importation of "distant" signals, does not entail copyright infringement
liability, since by extending the range of viewability of a broadcast program,
the CATV systems do not interfere in any traditional sense with the copyright
holders' means of extracting recompense for their creativity or labor from
advertisers on the basis of all viewers who watch the particular program. Pp.
410-414.

### **[Counsel](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[JUMP:'415us394+counsel'\]/doc/{@1}/hit_headings/words=4?firsthit)
**

Robert C. Barnard argued the cause for petitioners in No. 72-1628 and for
respondents in No. 72-1633. With him on the briefs were R. Michael Duncan,
Charles F. Lettow, and David Z. Rosensweig.

Asa D. Sokolow and Seymour Graubard argued the cause for respondents in No.
72-1628 and for petitioners in No. 72-1633. With them on the briefs were
Charles H. Miller, Royal E. Blakeman, Bertrand H. Weidberg, and Eugene Z.
DuBose. [**+](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[group+415us394!3A\]!28\[level+case+citation!3A\]!7C\[level+case+elements!3A\]!29/doc/{@562}/hit_headings/words=4?popup=1)
**

### **[Opinions](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[Group+415us394!3A\]\[Level+Opinions!3A\]/doc/{@1}/hit_headings/words=4/hits_only?firsthit)
**

Stewart, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which Brennan, White,
Marshall, Powell, and Rehnquist, JJ., joined. Blackmun, J., filed an opinion
dissenting in part, post, p. 415. Douglas, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in
which Burger, C. J., joined, post, p. 416.

#### **[STEWART](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[JUMP:'415us394+STEWART'\]/doc/{@1}/hit_headings/words=4?firsthit)
**

[p*396]MR. JUSTICE STEWART delivered the opinion of the Court.

The plaintiffs in this litigation, creators and producers of televised
programs copyrighted under the provisions of the Copyright Act of 1909, as
amended, 17 U. S. C. ¡ì 1 _et seq_., commenced suit in 1964 in the United
States District Court for the Southern District of New York, claiming that the
defendants had infringed their copyrights by intercepting broadcast
transmissions of copyrighted [p*397] material and rechanneling these programs
through various community antenna television (CATV) systems to paying
subscribers. [**n1](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[group+415us394!3A\]!28\[level+case+citation!3A\]!7C\[level+case+elements!3A\]!29/doc/{@567}/hit_headings/words=4?popup=1)
** The suit was initially [p*398] stayed by agreement of the parties, pending
this Court's decision in _Fortnightly Corp_. v. _United Artists Television_ ,
392 U.S. 390. In that case, decided in 1968, we held that the reception and
distribution of television broadcastsby the CATV systems there involved did
not constitute a "performance" within the meaning of the Copyright Act, and
thus did not amount to copyright infringement. [**n2](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[group+415us394!3A\]!28\[level+case+citation!3A\]!7C\[level+case+elements!3A\]!29/doc/{@567}/hit_headings/words=4?popup=2)
** After that decision the plaintiffs in the present litigation filed
supplemental pleadings in which they sought to distinguish the five CATV
systems challenged here from those whose operations had been found not to
constitute copyright infringement in _Fortnightly_. [**n3](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[group+415us394!3A\]!28\[level+case+citation!3A\]!7C\[level+case+elements!3A\]!29/doc/{@567}/hit_headings/words=4?popup=3)
** The District Court subsequently dismissed the complaint on the ground that
the plaintiffs' cause of action was barred by the _Fortnightly_ decision. 355
F.Supp. 618. On appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for the [p*399]
Second Circuit, the judgment was affirmed in part and reversed in part, and
the case was remanded to the District Court for further proceedings. 476 F.2d
338. Both the plaintiffs and the defendants petitioned for certiorari, and,
because of the seemingly important questions of federal law involved, we
granted both petitions. 414 U.S. 817.

I

[![Next](/sdimages/next.gif)](/cgi-
bin/foliocgi.exe/copyrtcases/query=\[group+415us394!3A\]!28\[level+case+citation!3A\]!7C\[level+case+elements!3A\]!29/doc/{@549}/hit_headings/words=4?next)

* * *

  
  

