English 630; [Laura Mandell](http://miavx1.muohio.edu/~mandellc/index.html)  
Spring, 1996; Tues. 1:00 to 3:40

# Rethinking Literary History:  
The Eighteenth- and Early Nineteenth-Century  
British Novel

## Course Description

In this course, we will examine the emergence of distinctively modern forms of
subjectivity by looking at what kinds of new oppositions, emerging with the
advent of capitalism and the rise of the middle class, get mapped onto the
opposition masculine/feminine. That is, we will examine how gender
distinctions are used to pry apart the public and the private, production and
consumption, the socioeconomic and the aesthetic into separate realms. We want
to examine not only how these domains get constructed as separate, but also
how transfers between them occur through representations of them: that is, we
will be looking for the way distinctions between kinds of experience and
knowledge are made, and also at how they are figuratively bridged. In short,
we will track the emergence of disciplinarity and interdisciplinarity.

In addition, we will think about agency. On the one hand, the novel constructs
a sense of interiority from which political and social concerns are excluded
as a focus of attention and included as unconscious contents. It creates a
picture of human agency as crossed or even thwarted by unconscious desires and
ideologies poised to coopt any resistance to them. But on the other hand,
novels depict other kinds of agancy as well. Some depict the transfer of
"private" affect into "public" action via the "choices" of a fully rational,
fully self-present consumer. How do these two models of agency coexist in
various works? Are there other models as well, and how do they interact with
the interiority model and the consumer model?

## Course Work and Rationale

A course such as this is not designed to give students knowledge of what has
been said about particular novels--you can search the MLA on-line catalogue
using the novel's title as "subject" in order to find what you need to read
about any given novel. Instead, we will develop ways of approaching any
eighteenth-century novel that we might, in the future, read, teach, or write
about. Developing modes of approaching novels requires, primarily, discovering
and analyzing historical changes taking place during the eighteenth century.
These changes--political, economic, social, sexual, and changes in ideas about
gender--together worked toward bringing the new genre into existence; and the
novels that are members of the new genre each contribute in various ways to
promoting or undermining these historical changes. We will read primary and
secondary (i.e., theoretical) materials in order to understand these changes
and their relation to each of the novels listed below.

In addition to reading novels and understanding the historical milieu in which
they are embedded, a novel course ought to present the central issues that
have come up in literary historians' explorations of the novel. We will
address directly in this course only two: the rise of the novel in relation to
capitalism, and the novel's role in producing the bourgeois public sphere (or
the split between the public and the private). For students who wish to know
more about literary history of the novel, I will provide bibliographies of
work done on other kinds of issues that have predominated scholarly
discussions: two of these that I know of right now, and consequently which
appear on the syllabus, are the question of class (the change, during the
eighteenth century, from a society organized around status to one organized
around socioeconomic class) and the literary movement known as sensibility; we
may encounter other central issues of which I am not yet aware, and I will
provide you with bibliographies on these issues as needed.

As to students' responsibilities, I have designed a course which is top-heavy
with work during the semester but very light on work at the end when you will
be most involved in grading your students' papers and writing other seminar
papers. Your work is fourfold: 1) reading; 2) presentations; 3) journal; 4)
Web Page.

1) **Reading** : You will be required to read one-half of long novels or one
short novel plus one article per class.

2) **Presentations** : I will ask students to do 2 presentations each.
Students will read an article or book, taking notes as they do so. They will
then type up a summary or book review (1-2 pp.) which must be put in our boxes
by the Monday morning preceding the class. The classroom presentation will
ideally consist in leading class discussion about how this material is related
to the novel or other text at hand.

3) **Journal** : Students will keep a journal of questions and thoughts they
have about each class. What ideas did you get from the class? What didn't you
understand at the beginning, but understand better now? What do you still not
understand? What questions do you now have in mind as you do further reading?
You might also add: questions, problems, etc. on the work you are doing to put
together your presentations or your Web Page; evaluations of the conduct of
the class (whether the texts went well together, what texts you wish had been
included, etc.). Journal pages are due in my box by the Thursday morning
following each class.

4) **Web Page** : Instead of writing a seminar paper, students will create
their own web page providing scholarly information, an annotated bibliography
including short essays, about a specific event, issue, or author either
discussed in class or outside of it. Students will be shown how to construct a
Web Page during one of our classes; we will meet at and will receive
instruction on how to make these pages. In addition, I will meet with you once
during the semester at a computer lab to help you put the research you have
done so far onto the Web.

**Rationale** for creating a Web Page rather than writing a seminar paper: the
research you do for your Web Page will be equivalent to the research you would
need to do if writing a scholarly essay for publication; all that is missing
is the argument and the writing of the essay. Because you will not have to do
this writing, I would ask that you treat your journal essays seriously, that
you try to write well when writing them (not for my benefit, but so that I can
help you improve your writing during the course of the semester) and that you
use them to think hard about the issues we are confronting in the class. In my
response to your journal entries, I will note whether you have a potential
argument, the kernel of an essay, in any of them. You may then wish to
construct your web page on an issue relevant to this kernel so that, by the
end of the class, you have all the materials ready to assemble a scholarly
essay for publication.

In this class, students will perform all of the work necessary for writing a
publishable seminar paper, and will thus have the opportunity to consciously
figure out the stages and kinds of work necessary for writing them. In my
view, this experience is more valuable than that of writing an essay too
quickly, missing some of these stages. Should you need to produce from the
coursework done here a writing sample for entry into a Ph.D. program or a
publishable article, I would be glad to help you do so in the "Writing for
Publication" seminar offered this summer (or on our own).

Furthermore, once your Web Page is created, I will be hooking it up to _The
Romantic Chronology_ Web Page at the University of California Santa Barbara:
it will be, in effect, published! You can put your Web Page on your C.V. as
one of your achievements when applying to Ph.D. programs and/or for jobs. You
can also continue to add to it and update it as long as you are here at Miami,
and if you wish can produce other Web pages on completely unrelated topics
that will be made available through the Miami system.

Required Reading:

  * Daniel Defoe, _Robinson Crusoe_ (1719)
  * Samuel Richardson, _Pamela_ (1740)
  * Henry Fielding, _Tom Jones_ (1749)
  * Charlotte Lennox, _The Female Quixote_ (1752)
  * Frances Burney, _Evelina_ (1778)
  * Eliza Fenwick, _Secresy_ (1795)
  * Maria Edgeworth, _Belinda_ (1801)

Recommended Reading:

Catherine Gallagher, _Nobody's Story: The Vanishing Acts of Women Writers in
the Marketplace, 1670-1820_ (This book one the MLA prize for best book
published in 1994.)

## CLASSES

**1/16** Introduction:  
1) **Theoretical Terms** :  
A) HO on the differences among: 1) sex, sexuality, gender; 2) person,
individual, subject.  
B) **Subjectivity** : from Francis Barker, Beechey and Donald, Foucault's
_Discipline and Punish_  
C) **Ideology** : from Michael McKeon's _Origin of the English Novel_  
2) **Historical overview** : credit (Bank of England/South Sea Bubble) and
kings (Glorious Revolution/Jacobite Rebellions)

* * *

**1/23** **The Problem of Fiction**  
Defoe, Preface to Volume III of _Robinson Crusoe_  
Samuel Johnson, _Rambler_ 4  
Lennox, _The Female Quixote_ (begin)

* * *

**1/30** **Fiction and Belief**  
**Pres** : Marc Shell, _The Economy of Literature_ , _Money, Language,
Thought_  
**Pres** : Mackay, "The South Sea Bubble," in _Extraordinary and Popular
Delusions and the Madness of Crowds_

Walter Benjamin, "Stamp Scams," _London Review of Books_ , 8 September 1994

Lennox, _The Female Quixote_ (finish)

* * *

**2/6** **The Advent of Capitalism** : [(HO on **Class**
)](http://miavx1.muohio.edu/~mandellc/class.htm)

**Pres** : R. H. Tawney, _Religion and the Rise of Capitalism_

**Pres** : C. B. Macpherson, _The Political Theory of Possessive
Individualism_ **[(HO: Excerpts from Locke's Two Treatises on
Property](http://miavx1.muohio.edu/~mandellc/locke.htm)**

**Pres** : Nicholas Thomas, "Curiosity: Colonialism in its Infancy," in
_Entangled Objects: Exchange, Material Culture, and Colonialism in the
Pacific_

Max Weber, excerpt from _The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism_ :
"The Spirit of Capitalism"

Defoe, _Robinson Crusoe_ (begin) [**(HO: _Robinson Crusoe_ and _Capital_
)**](http://miavx1.muohio.edu/~mandellc/capit.htm)

Recommended: Ann Louise Kibbie, "Monstrous Generation: The Birth of Capital in
Defoe's _Moll Flanders_ and _Roxana_ ," _PMLA_ 110.5 (October 1995)

David Marshall, _The Figure of Theater_

* * *

**2/13** [**The Rise of the Novel**
(HO):](http://miavx1.muohio.edu/~mandellc/riseno.htm)

**Pres** : Ian Watt, " _Robinson Crusoe_ , Individualism, and the Novel," in
_The Rise of the Novel_

**Pres** : David Saunders and Ian Hunter, "Lessons from the `Literatory': How
to Historicise Authorship," _Critical Inquiry_ 17.3 (Spring 1991): 479-509.

Michael McKeon, "Generic Transformation and Social Change: Rethinking the Rise
of the Novel." _Cultural Critique_ 1 (1985): 159-81

Defoe, _Robinson Crusoe_ (finish)

Recommended: Roxann Wheeler, "`My Savage,' `My Man': Racial Multiplicity in
_Robinson Crusoe_ ," _ELH_ 62.4 (Winter 1995): 821-862.

* * *

**2/20** NO CLASS--Class Exchange Day

Fielding, _Tom Jones_ (begin)

**DUE** : Submit your Web Page topic and schedule a meeting with me at the
library so that we can look at sample Web Pages and discuss how to research
your topic.

* * *

**2/27** **Pres** : Ian Watt, "Fielding as Novelist: _Tom Jones_ ," in _The
Rise of the Novel_

J. G. A. Pocock, "The Mobility of Property and the Rise of Eighteenth-Century
Sociology," in _Theories of Property: Aristotle to the Present_ , eds. Anthony
Parel and Thomas Flanagan.

Fielding, _Tom Jones_ (end)

* * *

**3/5** **Special Class on creating a Web Page**

Samuel Richardson, _Pamela_ (begin)

* * *

**3/12** **Public/Private** [**(HO on
Habermas)**](http://miavx1.muohio.edu/~mandellc/myhab.htm)

**Pres** : Jurgen Habermas, excerpts from _The Structural Transformation of
the Public Sphere_

**Pres** : Carole Pateman, "Feminist Critiques of the Public/Private
Dichotomy," in _The Disorder of Women_

Nancy Armstrong, excerpts from _Desire and Domestic Fiction_ : 3-27; 36-42;
59-69; 96-134.

Richardson, _Pamela_ (finish)

_Recommended_ : Lawrence E. Klein, "Gender and the Public/Private Distinction
in the Eighteenth Century: Some Questions about Evidence and Analytic
Procedure," in _Eighteenth-Century Studies_ 29.1 (Fall 1995): 97-109.

Margaret C. Jacob, "The Mental Landscape of the Public Sphere: A European
Perspective," _Eighteenth-Century Studies_ 28.1 (Fall 1994): 95-114.

**3/19** SPRING BREAK

* * *

**3/26** **Economy and Passion** [**(HO on
Consumerism)**](http://miavx1.muohio.edu/~mandellc/consum.htm))

**Pres** : Albert O. Hirschman, _The Passions and the Interests: Political
Arguments for Capitalism before Its Triumph_

**Pres** : Jean-Christophe Agnew, "The Spectacle of the Market," in _Worlds
Apart: The Market and the Theater in Anglo-American Thought, 1550-1750_

**Pres** : Mary Poovey, "Aesthetics and Political Economy in the Eighteenth
Century: The Place of Gender in the Social Constitution of Knowledge," in
_Aesthetics and Ideology_ , ed. George Levine

Adam Smith, excerpts from _The Wealth of Nations_ , _Theory of Moral
Sentiments_

Edgeworth, _Belinda_ (begin)

**DUE** : Schedule meeting with me at computer lab.

* * *

**4/2** [**(HO on the Consumption of
Goods)**](http://miavx1.muohio.edu/~mandellc/agnew.htm)

 **Pres** : Neil McKendrick, "The Consumer Revolution of Eighteenth-Century
England"; J. H. Plumb, "The Commercialization of Leisure" in Neil McKendrick,
John Brewer, J. H. Plumb, _The Birth of a Consumer Society: The
Commericalization of Eighteenth-Century England_

**Pres** : Pierre Bourdieu, _Distinction_

Terry Lovell, "The Novel as Commodity," in _Consuming Fiction_

Edgeworth, _Belinda_ (finish)

* * *

**4/5 Extra Class:** Guest Lecturer **Jill Campbell** , Yale Univ.

* * *

**4/9** **Pres** : Erica Harth, "The Virtue of Love: Lord Hardwicke's Marriage
Act," _Cultural Critique_ 9 (1988): 123-154, "

**Pres** : R. B. Outhwaite, "Marriage as business: opinions on the rise in
aristocratic bridal portions in early modern England," _Business Life and
Public Policy_ , eds. Neil McKendrick, R. B. Outhwaite.

Burney, _Evelina_ (begin)

* * *

**4/16** **Sensibility** (HO)

**Pres** : Henry Abelove, "Some Speculations on the History of Sexual
Intercourse during the Long Eighteenth Century in England," _Genders_ 6 (Fall
1989): 125-30.

Alan MacFarlane, "Love and Capitalism," _The Culture of Capitalism_

Burney, _Evelina_ (finish)

* * *

**4/23** **Pres** : Colin Campbell, _The Romantic Ethic and the Spirit of
Modern Consumerism_
[**(HO)**](http://miavx1.muohio.edu/~mandellc/agnew.htm#campbell)

Fenwick, _Secresy_

* * *

**4/30** **Class Canceled to Make Up for Extra Class**

##### [Back](http://miavx1.muohio.edu/~mandellc/novelcl.htm) to the Novel
Class Home Page

##### Click [Here](mailto:lmandell@miamiu.muohio.edu) to send mail.

Laura Mandell / Department of English / Miami University / Oxford, OH 45056 /
Voice Phone: 513-529-5276 / FAX: 513-529-1392 / Email:
lmandell@miamiu.muohio.edu

