  
[ ![H-Urban Teaching Center](../graphics/btnsyltc154x40.jpg)](../index.htm) [
![H-Urban Syllabus Archive](../graphics/btnsylsa154x40.jpg)](index.htm) [
![H-Urban](../graphics/btnsylhurban154x40.jpg)](http://www.h-net.msu.edu/~urban)
|  ![Syllabus Archive Selection](../graphics/skysylarchselect.jpg) |



[ ![H-Urban Syllabus Use & Submission
Policy](../graphics/btnsyluse154x40.jpg)](syluses.htm) [ ![Comments and
Questions](../graphics/btnsylcques154x40.jpg)](mailto:EDTEACH-
URBAN@h-net.msu.edu)  
---|---|---  
  
**A History of American Urban Life**  
  
**Steven J. Hoffman**  
  
Carnegie Mellon University  
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA  
  
**Summer 1989**  
  
  
---  
  
* * *

## SYLLABUS

  

### Introduction

The city is a physical artifact which can reveal much about our society, our
values and our history. Using Pittsburgh as a kind of laboratory, we will take
field trips to analyze patterns in the built environment. We will discuss how
social and economic factors shape urban growth, and we will try to figure out
why American cities look the way that they do. In addition to studying the
urban landscape and discussing the social, cultural and technological
influences which have shaped urban spatial patterns over time, we will explore
the city's role as an arena in which the issues of class, race and gender are
debated and resolved by society at large.

### Objectives

You will:

1\. develop skills which will enable you to "read" the urban environment and
place what you see in a historical context;

2\. learn how to read historical essays and monographs "for the argument,"
looking for the main themes and interpretations rather than trying to master
endless detail and mindless minutiae;

3\. learn how to skim historical writings effectively and understand when it
is appropriate to do so; and,

4\. work on improving your writing skills and enhancing your ability to
develop and communicate historical arguments both orally and in writing.

  
You will also

5\. be able to understand and discuss several factors or forces which
influence urban development and affect the nature of the human activity that
occurs in the city;

6\. be able to evaluate the theoretical frameworks we discuss in class in
light of your own experience of the city (and vice versa), and develop your
own personal interpretation of the urban environment;

7\. leave the course with an increased understanding of the historical context
of American urbanization.

8\. develop a deeper appreciation of and greater sensitivity to the complexity
of the urban scene and the variety of images and life experiences encompassed
by the single term "the city."

I hope that by giving you the skills you need to read the American city and a
base of knowledge concerning the history of urban development, this course
will foster an interest in you to continue to explore the built environment in
a meaningful way, and to work toward making our cities more humane places in
which to live.

  

### Course Organization and Requirements

This course consists of discussions in class, readings, four walking tours,
one driving tour, five short papers linking our tours to the readings, a
midterm examination and either one longer paper or a final exam. The choice of
either a final examination or a final paper will be made by the class as a
whole and not by the individual student.

Class participation and discussion of the readings form the core of the
course. Students are expected to actively participate in class discussions,
including commenting on ideas from the reading assignments, concepts presented
by other students, and ideas advanced by the instructor. The success of the
course depends in large part on the active participation of all of its
members. The focus of our discussions will be on the major themes and
frameworks developed in the readings and not on the memorization of details
and "facts."

The tours are an integral part of this course and will form, along with the
readings, the focus of the short papers. These short papers are reflective in
nature and are designed to help you integrate the theoretical frameworks we
discuss in class with your actual experience of the city. Reflective papers
should be approximately 3-5 typewritten pages in length. Each reflective paper
will be due on the Monday following the walking tour on which it is based.

The midterm and final examinations will consist of essay questions to be
answered in class. These questions will come from a list of possible exam
questions that I will give to you in advance.

The long paper, if selected as an option, will allow you to explore in more
detail one of the themes touched on in class. I will hand out a schedule for
the various stages of the paper when and if it is appropriate. These papers
should be approximately 7-10 pages in length.

The components of your grade will be weighted as follows:

50% -- reflective papers (best 4 grades, i.e., drop lowest grade)  
20% -- midterm  
20% -- final exam or paper  
20% -- class participation  

### Required Texts and Readings

  1. Grady Clay, Reading the American City
  2. Raymond Mohl, The Making of Urban America
  3. Kenneth Jackson, Crabgrass Frontier
  4. Sam Bass Warner, Jr., The Private City
  5. Kenneth Kusmer, A Ghetto Takes Shape

Additional readings will be photocopied and distributed to you in class.

A note on reading: Read each assignment actively, that is, read each section
with a series of questions in mind. What is the author's argument (i.e., what
does he or she want me to believe about this subject when I'm done reading)?
What bias does the author have--where is he or she coming from and how might
that influence what they are saying (and my willingness to believe them)? What
evidence does the author use to support their statements and how convincing is
it?

I will give you additional questions to think about for each of the readings
in this course so you can better prepare for our discussions. I will hand
these questions out on the Thursday or Friday before the next week's readings
are due.

## CLASS SCHEDULE

#### Thursday July 6

Introduction  
  

#### Reading the City:

  * Friday July 7:
    * Clay, pp. 1-65.

  * Monday July 10:
    * Clay, pp. 66-181.

#### Images and Meaning

  * Tuesday July 11
    * Salter, "The Cowboy and the City: Urban Affection for Wilderness," Landscape (Vol. 27, No. 3, 1983), pp. 43-47. 
    * Warner, "The Management of Multiple Urban Images," (in Fraser and Sutcliffe, The Pursuit of Urban History), pp. 383-394.
    * Drucker, "Language in the Landscape," _Landscape_ (Vol. 28, No. 1), pp. 7-13.
    * Domosh, "The Symbolism of the Skyscraper," _Journal of Urban History_ (May 1988), pp. 320-345. 

  * Wednesday July 12
    * Mohl, _The Making of Urban America_ , Introduction to Part One, pp. 3-11. 
    * Goldfield, "Pearls on the Coast and Lights in the Forest: The Colonial South," in Mohl, pp. 12-23. 
    * Nash, "The Social Evolution of Preindustrial American Cities, 1700-1820," in Mohl, pp. 24-44. 

  * Thursday July 13
    * Jackson, Crabgrass Frontier, pp. 12-44

  * Friday July 14
    * Walking Tour - Allegheny City/North Side

#### The City as Arena

  * Monday July-15
    * Davis, "Street Theater in Nineteenth-Century Philadelphia," in Mohl, pp. 45-67.
    * Stanzell, "Women, Children, and the Uses of the Streets: Class and Gender Conflict in New York City, 1850-1860," _Feminist Studies_ (Summer 1982), pp. 309-335.
    * FIRST REFLECTIVE ESSAY DUE

#### Capitalism and the city

  * Tuesday July 18
    * Warner, _The Private City_ , Introduction and Part I, pp. ix-45. 

  * Wednesday July 19
    * Warner, _The Private City_ , Part II, pp. 49-157.

  * Thursday July 20
    * Warner, _The Private City_ , Part III, pp. 161-223. 

  * Friday July 21
    * Driving Tour - Metropolitan Pittsburgh

#### The city and Technology

  * Monday July 24
    * Tarr, Transportation Innovation and Changing Spatial Patterns in Pittsburgh: 1850-1934, Essays in Public Works History, no. 6 (Chicago: Public Works Historical Society, 1978) pp. 1-39. 
    * Lawther, "Mount Washington: A Demographic Study of the Influence of Changing Technology, 1870-1910," _Western Pennsylvania Historical Magazine_ , (Jan. 1981), pp. 47-72.
    * SECOND REFLECTIVE ESSAY DUE

  * Tuesday July 25
    * Schultz and McShane, "To Engineer the Metropolis: Sewers, Sanitation, and City Planning in Late Nineteenth-Century America," in Mohl, pp. 81-98. 
    * Kleinberg, "Technology and Women's Work: The Lives of Working Class Women in Pittsburgh, 1870-1900," _Labor History_
    * Bayor, "Roads to Racial Segregation," _Journal of Urban History_ (Nov. 1988), pp.- 3-21.

#### The Industrial City.

  * Wednesday July 26
    * Mohl, _The Making of Urban America_ , Introduction to Part Two, pp. 71-80. 
    * Warner, "The Segregated City," (The Urban Wilderness, Chap. 4, pp. 85-112). 

  * Thursday July 27
    * MIDTERM, (covers material through TUESDAY, JULY 25)

  * Friday July 28
    * Walking Tour - Downtown Pittsburgh

#### Streetcar Suburbs: Development on the Urban Periphery

  * Monday July 31
    * Jackson, _Crabgrass Frontier_ , pp. 116-189. 
    * Jucha, "The Anatomy of a Streetcar Suburb: A Development History of Shadyside, 1852-1916," _Western Pennsylvania Historical Magazine_ (Oct. 1979), pp. 301-319.
    * THIRD REFLECTIVE ESSAY DUE

#### Race, Class and Ethnicity in the Industrial city

  * Tuesday Aug 1
    * Rosenzweig, "Workers in an Industrial City, 1870-1920," (Eight Hours for What We Will, Chap. 1, pp. 1-34). 
    * Bodnar, Weber and Simon, "Migration, Kinship, and Urban Adjustment: Blacks and Poles in Pittsburgh, 1900-30," in Mohl, pp. 170-186.

#### Working Class leisure

  * Wednesday Aug 2
    * Kingsdale, "The 'Poor Man's Club': Social Function of the Urban Working Class Saloon," in Mohl, pp. 122-137. 
    * Rosenzweig, "The Struggle Over the Saloon, 1870-1910" ( _Eight Hours for What We Will_ , Chap. 4, pp. 93-126. 

  * Thursday Aug 3
    * Peiss, "Leisure and Labor," in Mohl, pp. 138-156.
    * Byington, "Family and Milltown: Homestead," (in Lubove, Pittsburgh, pp. 34-44). 
    * Miner and Roberts, "Engineering an Industrial Diaspora: Homestead, 1941," _Western Pennsylvania Historical Magazine_ (Winter 1989), pp. 4-25. 
    * Friday Aug 4 Walking Tour - Homestead

#### The African-American Experience: Blacks in the City

  * Monday Aug 7
    * Kusmer, _A Ghetto Takes Shap_ e, pp. 1-65.
    * FOURTH REFLECTIVE ESSAY DUE

  * Tuesday Aug 8
    * Kusmer, _A Ghetto Takes Shape_ , pp. 66-156.

  * Wednesday Aug 9
    * Kusmer, _A Ghetto Takes Shape_ , pp. 157-234.

  * Thursday Aug 10
    * Kusmer, _A Ghetto Takes Shape_ , pp. 235-274.
    * Epstein, "The Negro Migrant, n (in Lubove, Pittsburgh, pp. 60-65)

  * Friday Aug 11
    * Walking Tour - Hill District

#### The Metropolitan City: Suburbanization and the American Dream

  * Monday Aug 14
    * Jackson, _Crabgrass Frontier_ , pp. 190-305. 
    * FIFTH REFLECTIVE ESSAY DUE

#### Suburbanization and the 1980s -- A New Type of City?

  * Tuesday Aug 15
    * Fishman "American Suburbs/English Suburbs A Transatlantic Comparison," _Journal of Urban History_ (May 1987), pp. 237-251. 
    * Jackson, "Suburbanization in England and America: A Response to 'A Transatlantic Comparison'," _Journal of Urban History_ , (May 1987), pp. 302-306.
    * Conzen, "American Cities in Profound Transition: The New City Geography of the 1980s," in Mohl, pp. 277-289. 

#### The City As An Environment for Living

  * Wednesday Aug 16
    * Warner, "The Peaceable Kingdom," (The Way We Really Live, Chap. V, pp. 51-59). 
    * Warner, "The Metropolitan Zoo" ( _The Way We Really Live_ , Chap. VI, pp. 60-73).

  
---  
  
  
[ ![Author Index](../graphics/btnsylauthor154x40.jpg)](author.htm) [ ![Subject
Index](../graphics/btnsylsubject154x40.jpg)](subject.htm) [ ![Geographic
Index](../graphics/btnsylloc154x40.jpg)](location.htm)  
---  
  
[![H-Urban](../graphics/skyhurban198x38.jpg)](http://www.h-net.msu.edu/~urban)  
Top | [Teaching Center](../index.htm) | [Syllabus Archive](index.htm) |
[Comments and Questions](mailto:EDTEACH-URBAN@h-net.msu.edu) |
[H-Urban](http://www.h-net.msu.edu/~urban)  
[H-Urban Syllabus Use and Submission Policy](syluses.htm)  
  
  

