|  ![](roadlock4d.jpg)  
---  
[**Home**](index.html) |

**The Book Comparison Option: Guidelines**

**introduction**  
**assignment guide** **  
book pairs**

If you have already taken the other semester of this course, you have the
option of writing a four-page critical comparison of two books: an exercise in
reading more intelligently. In return, you will receive 20 per cent of your
course grade and the warm glow of knowing more about two important works about
the cultural landscape. We have pre-selected the options for the books you
will read, so that you can get started right away and devote your time to
sharpening and exhibiting your critical faculties.

Sadly, there is no direct correlation between education and critical reading.
Too many Americans--even Berkeley graduates--actually _believe_ what they
read, especially if it's in a book. They fail to search for the author's
particular arguments or the social and cultural implications of what the
author is saying.

**Your goal:** In this assignment you are to intelligently summarize and
criticize two classic works in the history of the American cultural
environment, choosing a pair of books from the list included below. Your essay
should be no longer than four pages, using the basic freelance writer's
manuscript requirements used in the essay assignment for the other half of the
course.

**The one-sentence summary.** We require only one element in your critical
essay. Somewhere (and with some effort of neutrality on your part), you should
summarize each book's _argument_ in one sentence. The key word is  "argument":
not just the subject approached, but also what the author wants us to believe
about that subject, the most important idea that she or he is expressing.



******TOP**

**Guides for your reading and writing** ****

As you discover and sharpen your abilities for critical reading, consider some
of the following categories of analysis:

**a.** **Evidence and argumentation.** What questions do the authors ask? What
is the clarity and quality of the questions (pleasant, belletristic side-paths
in cultural analysis or searing, central issues)? What key types of sources do
they choose to support their argument? (You see how handy the one-sentence
summary becomes.) Are these eccentric or brilliant selections of sources, or
prosaic ones?  
  
Do the authors pile fact on fact for the overwhelming-with-knowledge effect?
Do they make sweeping assertions that convince readers by artful form more
than logic? Do they weave intricate webs of logic, taking you step-by-step?
When pressed to the wall do they reflexively rely on prior champions of the
word to garner respect?

**b.** **Selection and focus of subject.** Even for James Joyce writing
_Ullyses_ , writers must limit and organize their topic. How do the authors do
that? Do they consciously or inadvertently leave out significant elements,
issues, groups of people, processes, social classes, or places? Obviously, one
cannot fault a book on Virginia for not mentioning the Midwest or Tennessee.
But you might be suspicious about a book on "America in 1900" which makes no
mention of California or Texas, let alone Canada or Mexico, which are also in
America.)

**c.** **Use and understanding of the landscape.** How do the authors make use
of cultural space in their argument and in their view of how society works?
Obviously, since this is an excercise in cultural landscape studies, we have
pre-selected writers who are broadly interested in the visual world. But some
very major cultural landscape writers never show a picture, include a floor
plan, or refer to site organization. Do landscape elements float abstractly
outside the prose? Do the authors rely too much on cultural space--that is, do
they simply  "argue from the ojects" (e.g., stating that because the city plan
is centralized, therefore the social organization is centralized)?

**d.** **Expressed or implied schools of thought.** We do not expect you to be
experts in the intellectual topography of various academic disciplines--least
of all in a field so diverse as cultural landscape studies. Hence for this
exercise you do not need to know that a Princeton anthropologist who studied
closely with Clifford Geertz may have certain tell-tale views of the world as
opposed to an anthropologist who studied with Marvin Harris. But keep your eye
open for such patterns. The footnotes of scholarly writers often disclose the
importance of these schools of thought.

**e.** **Personal beliefs and convictions.** We all have some sort of
political or social biases, many of them noble and admirable. We hold them
with varying degrees of self-awareness, thoughtfulness, sophistication,
momentum, and conviction. How do the biases of your two authors compare? Do
their biases inform, enhance, or detract from the work?

Where and how do the authors state or exhibit their beliefs? Sometimes they
show this best only in a phase or in an ideological buzz word. For instance,
few writers use "ruling class" unless they are making some use of Marxist
analysis, but they are not, ipso facto, Marxists if they use that term. So
too, belief that everyone in American society has had absolute individual
freedom is not automatically the sign of a benighted arch-conservative,
although it might be.  
  
Warning: One or more of your authors may appear or pretend to be value-free,
or as it used to be called, "purely objective" or "scientifically objective."
Frankly, a large and very convincing group of people in the social sciences
and in the humanities generally agree that while "attempted balance" and
fairness are indeed possible, positivistic Pure Truth and Objectivity are not
--not even in physics and particularly not in cultural analysis. As this
currently politically-correct line goes, the observer is always part of the
observation; the trick is to observe artfully and with an understanding of the
observer stance.

  
Eternal verities

Quickly choose the two books that seem most intriguing to you. Do not start
several pairs of books to "decide which ones to write about."

Write your rough draft early, and write more than one draft.

Your book comparison is due on the same day that the new essays are due. Check
the course outline in the reader. Even for brilliant essays, late work will
automatically get lower grades.

Your critical analysis is actually more important than taking notes on every
page of the two books. You do not need to read all of both books with your
slowest reading speed--although you may choose to do that because the books
are so interesting.

******TOP**

**PAIRS OF BOOKS FOR COMPARISON**

**LATE NINETEENTH CENTURY AND TWENTIETH CENTURY AMERICAN LANDSCAPES**

You may choose any one of the following pairs of books. Most of the recently-
published titles are available in paperback editions at Berkeley bookstores.
All are books that you will probably enjoy having in your personal library, or
at least having prominently displayed on your desk or coffee table when your
parents come to visit.

________________________________________________________________________

**Books on reserve:**

The first three pairs of books have been put on overnight-day reserve in the
Environmental Design library (see last page of syllabus for note on the
library's reserve catalog system):

| **1.** |

Gwendolyn Wright, _Moralism and the Model Home: Domestic Architecture and
Cultural Conflict in Chicago, 1873-1913,_ (1980)  
Anthony D. King, _The Bungalow: The Production of a Global Culture,_ (1984)  
  
---|---  
**2.** |

George R. Stewart, _U.S. 40: Cross Section of the United States of America,_
(1953)  
Peirce Lewis, _New Orleans: The Making of an Urban Landscape, (1976)_ , also
part of John Adams, ed., Metropolitan America.  
  
**3.** |

James Borchert, _Alley Life in Washington: Family, Community, Religion, and
Folklife in the City, 1850-1970,_ (1980), pb  
Herbert Gans, _The Levittowners,_ (1967), pb  
  
________________________________________________________________________

**Other pairs of books (not on reserve):**

The following pairs of books are NOT on reserve at the Evironmental Design
Library, but like the others are quite generally available in libraries and
book stores.

**4.**

****

|

Donald Meinig, _Imperial Texas: An Interpretive Essay in Cultural Geography,_
(1968)  
Carl Frederick Kraenzel, _The Great Plains in Transition,_ (1955)  
  
---|---  
**5.** |

Hugh Brody, _Maps and Dreams_ [a study of present-day Native American
perceptions and use of their territory in British Columbia], (1981), pb  
Gerald Suttles, _The Social Order of the Slum: Ethnicity and Territory in the
Inner City,_ (1968)  
  
**6.** |

John Stilgoe, _Metropolitan Corridor: Railroads and the American Scene,_  
(1983), pb  
Jackson Lears, _No Place of Grace: Antimodernism and the Transformation of
American Culture, 1880-1920_ (1981) pb  
  
**7.** |

Lewis Atherton, _Main Street on the Middle Border_ [small town life in
Illinois and Indiana], (1954)  
Sinclair Lewis, _Main Street_  
  
**8.** |

Phoebe Cutler, _The Public Landscape of the New Deal,_ (1985)  
Roy Rosenzweig, _Eight Hours for What We Will: Workers and Leisure in an
Industrial City, 1870-1920,_ (1983), pb  
  
**9.** |

Daniel Nelson, _Managers and Workers: Origins of the new Factory System in the
United States, 1880-1920,_ (1975), pb  
David A. Hounshell, _From the American System to Mass Production, 1800-1932:
The Development of Manufacturing Technology in the U. S._ (1983), pb  
  
**10.** |

Kenneth Jackson, _Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of the United
States,_ (1985), pb  
Constance Perrin, _Everything in its Place: Social Order and Land Use in
America,_ (1977), pb  
  
**11.** |

Robert A. Caro, _The Power Broker: Robert Moses and the Fall of New York,_
(1975), pb  
Bruce E. Seely, _Building the American Highway System: Engineers as Policy
Makers,_ (1987)  
  
**12.** |

William Least Heat Moon, _Blue Highways: A Journey Into America,_ (1982), pb  
Grady Clay, _Close Up: How to Read the American City,_ (1973), pb  
  
**TOP**  
  
**[Syllabus](syllabus.html)**  
**Lecture Notes**  
  
**Assignments:  
****[  
Paper Guide](PR-GUIDE.html)**  
  
**The Book Comparison Option <**  
  
**[Resources](resources.html)**  
It's still in development, but we value your [
feedback](mailto:slussier@sims.berkeley.edu) on this website  
  
  
  
  
  
![](nyc2.jpg)![](utahrange2.jpg)![](pleasanton_mainst.jpg)  
---

