  |  **NEW YORK UNIVERSITY**

**G57.1753 HISTORY AND PUBLIC POLICY**

Prof. Paul H. Mattingly

Department of History

Fall 1997, Tues 6:10-7:50

Email: mttnglyp@ is2.nyu.edu

Voice Mail: x88631

**_Required Reading_**

**PUBLIC POLICY AS AN HISTORICAL ISSUE**

David Tyack and Larry Cuban, _Tinkering toward Utopia_ (1995)  
    


**FROM SOCIAL ISSUE TO PUBLIC POLICY**

Herbert Gutman, _Work, Culture and Society in Industrializing America: Essays
on the American Working-Class and Social History_ (1976) HD 8072/.G78
[Vintage]

Wallace Stegner, _Beyond the Hundredth Meridian: John Wesley Powell and the
Second Opening of the West_ [U Nebr Pr] (1953) Q143/.P8S8

David Rosner, _A Once Charitable Enterprise: Hospitals and Health Care in
Brooklyn and New York, 1885-1915_ (1982) RA982. N49/ R676 [Princeton]

**THE IMPACT OF CAPITALIST POLICY AT THE TURN OF THE CENTURY**

Thomas McGraw, _Prophets of Regulation_ (1984) HD3616.U46/ M38 [Harvard]

David F. Noble, _America By Design: Science, Technology and the Rise of
Corporate Capitalism_ (1977) T14.5/.N6 [Knopf]

**POLICY DILEMMAS IN THE CITY/STATE**

David Hammack, _Power and Society: Greater New York at the Turn of the
Century_ (1982) F128.47/.H2 [Russell Sage]

Thomas Kessner, _Fiorello H._ _LaGuardia and the Making of Modern New York_
(1991)

Steve Fraser and Gary Gerstle (eds) _The Rise and Fall of the New Deal Order,
1930-1980_ [Princeton PB] (1989)

David Yergin, _A Shattered Peace: The Origins of the Cold War and the National
Security State_ (1977) D843/.Y47 [Houghton Mifflin]

**DOMESTIC POLICY IN THE NATION/STATE:**

**INSTITUTIONAL RACISM,CYCLES OF POVERTY,CAPITALIST ENTERPRISE**

Paula Fass, _Outside In: Minorities and the Transformation of_

_American Education_ (1988)

(1976) [Knopf]

Michael B. Katz, _In the Shadow of the Poorhouse: A History of Social Welfare
in America_

(1986) HV91/ .K349 [Basic]

Richard J. Barnet and Ronald Muller, _The Global Reach:_ (1973)  
    


**SYLLABUS**

This course has a twofold purpose: first, it will establish a broad social
context for the examination of public policy and its organizations. A number
of distinct issues will be examined on a rough chronological plane to
underscore a central theoretical assumption: that "policy" is not a particular
category for arranging selective data but rather is itself an ongoing
historical process. Secondly, the course will employ some of the
methodological approaches of Public History and will help students shape a
research project based on an actual public policy issue, which the student
will explore historiographically. This written component will in essence
insert a relevant policy issue into an appropriate historical discourse,
demonstrating how historical knowledge illuminates policy discussions. In
part, we seek to explore how the current dynamics of a seminal issue challenge
and compel a reinterpretation of the existing historical canon on the subject.

The course will follow a Colloquium format for most sessions. All students
will be obliged to have read and discuss each week the required reading.
Thematically discussions will begin by assessing how issues have developed
historically via a definable policy process or its absence. In addition, class
discussions will explore the relative place of historical knowledge in the
conceptualization of policy issues.

The first two sessions will expand on these purposes and pay particular
attention to the difficulty creating a dialogue between historians and policy-
makers, between policy scholarship and its impact.

The next three sessions of the course (Sessions III- V) will explore histories
that take up social issues at the distinctive stage where they become "policy"
matters. The studies selected concentrate on discourses where Public History
has special historical relevance: labor and community strife, water/land
rights and environmental impact, and the delivery of expert service (health
care).

Sessions VI and VII will attempt to integrate the discussions of specific
policy areas and carry the discourse into the 20th century by exploring the
distinctive properties of capitalist organizations.

The fourth section of the course (Sessions VIII-XI) will examine four case
studies of policy impact in the twentieth century: the centralization of urban
policy, the expansion of an urban bureaucracy, the discovery of national
planning, and the international case of atomic diplomacy.

A final section will explore three examples of Domestic "Policy" in the
Nation/State (Sessions XII-XIV).

_Course Requirements_

At the first class two groups will be created and each will be publicly
responsible for **half** of the "Required Reading." Thus, each group will be
responsible every other week for the critique and discussion of the required
text. All are obliged to participate and ultimately to command the material of
all the required reading for the final examination, which in the past has been
an interpretive essay.

All **GRADUATE** students must meet with me during the first two weeks of the
course to discuss and design an **historiographical** (an analysis of the
scholarly discourse surrounding a policy issue) paper. This paper will ideally
use **one of the required readings** as the centerpiece for this essay. Within
six weeks all students must have submitted to me a five-page (typewritten)
scenario of their project. The final historiographical paper will be due at
Session XIV. You might well consider issues, for example, relating to
professional expertise, acculturation, philanthropic investment, corporate
research etc). One of your major sources should be _The Journal of Policy
History_.

For those students without immediate policy topics, I am going to urge you
strongly to consider educational policy issues, not only because of their
wide-ranging involvement in both local and national issues but also because
1998 celebrates the centennial of the five-borough New York City Public School
System.  
    
    
    


**PUBLIC POLICY AS AN HISTORICAL ISSUE**  
    


SESSION I. INTRODUCTION: HISTORY AND PUBLIC POLICY

_Required Reading:_

Hugh Davis Graham, "The Stunted Career of Policy History," _Public Historian_
v.15, no 2 (Spring 1993): 15-37.

David Tyack and Larry Cuban, _Tinkering Toward Utopia_ **** (1995)

SESSION II. THE POLITICS OF PUBLIC HISTORY

_Required Reading:_ [xerox copies outside Public History office]

1) "Introduction" from David J. Rothman and Stanton Wheeler (eds), _Social
History and Social Policy_ , pp.1-16.

2) "Education and Inequality: A Historical Perspective" by Michael B. Katz

3) "The Diary of an Institution: The Fate of Progressive Reform at the Norfolk
Penitentiary" by David Rothman

4) "The Morass: An Essay on the Problem of Employee Pension Problem" by Robert
M. Fogelson"

_Suggested Readings:_

Otis L. Graham, "The Use and Misuses of History: Roles in Policy-Making,"
_Public Historian_ , 5 (Spring 1983): 5-19.

Peter Stearns, "Applied History and Social History," _Journal of Social
History_ , 14 (June 1981): 533-37

___________, "History and Policy Analysis," _Public Historian_ , 4, no. 3
(Summer 1982):5-29.

Margaret Weir, Ann S Orloff and Theda Skocpol, (eds) _The Politics of Social
Policy in the United States_ (1988)  
    


**FROM SOCIAL ISSUE TO PUBLIC POLICY**  
    


SESSION III. LABOR STRIFE

_Required Reading:_ Herbert Gutman, _Work, Culture and Society in
Industrialising America: Essays in American Working Class and Social History_
(1976)

_Suggested Readings:_

David Brody, _Workers in Industrial America: Essays on the 20th Century
Struggle_ (1980)

James B. Gilbert, _Work Without Salvation: America's Intellectuals and
Industrial Alienation, 1880-19l0_ (1977)

David Montgomery, _Beyond Equality: Labor and the Radical Republicans,
1862-1872_ (1981)

Daniel J. Walkowitz, _Worker City, Company Town_ (1978)  
    


SESSION IV. LAND, WATER RIGHTS AND ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT

_Required Reading:_ Wallace Stegner, _Beyond the Hundredth_

_Meridian: John Wesley Powell and the Second Opening of the West_ (l953)

_Suggested Readings:_

Merle Curti, _The Making of an American Community: A Case Study of Democracy
in a Frontier County_ (1959)

Robert R. Dykstra, _The Cattle Towns_ (1968)

Samuel Hays, _Conservation and the Cult of Efficiency_ (1959)

Patricia Limerick, _The Legacy of Conquest: The Unbroken Past of the American
West_ (1987)

Frederick Jackson Turner, _The Frontier in American History_

Donald Worster, _Rivers of Empire: Water, Aridity, and the Growth of the
American West_ (1985)

SESSION V. THE DELIVERY OF PROFESSIONAL SERVICE

_Required Reading_ : David Rosner, _A Once Charitable Enterprise: Hospitals
and Health Care in Brooklyn and New York, 1885-1915_

_Suggested Readings:_

Barbara Melosh, _"The Physician's Hand:" Work Culture and Conflict in American
Nursing_ (1982)

Susan Reverby and David Rosner (eds), _Health Care in America_ (1979)

Charles Rosenberg, _The Care of Strangers_

Paul Starr, _The Social Transformation of American Medicine_ (1982)

Morris Vogel & C. Rosenberg (eds), _The Therapeutic Revolution_ (1979)

Morris Vogel, _The Invention of the Modern Hospital: Boston, 1870-1930_ (1980)  
    
    
    


**THE IMPACT OF CAPITALIST POLICY**

SESSION VI. CORPORATE ADMINISTRATION

_Required Reading:_ Thomas McGraw, _Prophets of Regulation_

_Suggested Readings:_

Alfred D. Chandler, _Strategy and Structure: Chapters in the History of the
American Industrial Enterprise_ (1962)

Alfred D. Chandler & Herman Daems (eds), _Managerial Hierarchies: Comparative
Perspectives on the Rise of the Modern Industrial Enterprise_ (l980)

Robert Cuff, "American Historians and the 'Organizational Factor'," _Canadian
Review of American Studies_ , 4 (1973): 19-31.

Richard DuBoff and Edw. S. Herman, "Alfred Chandler's New Business History: A
Review," _Politics and Society_ , v.l0, no.1 (l980): 87-110.

Morrell Heald, _The Social Responsibilities of Business: Company and
Community, 1900-1960_ (1970)

Gabriel Kolko, _The Triumph of Conservatism_ (1963)

Oliver Zunz, _Making America Corporate, 1870-1920_ (1990)  
    


SESSION VII. ENGINEERING CHANGE VIA SOCIAL SCIENCE

_Required Reading:_ David F. Noble, _American By Design:_

_Science, Technology and the Rise of Corporate Capitalism_ (1977)

_Suggested Readings:_

Alfred D. Chandler, _The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American
Business_ (l977)

Richard Hofstadter, _Anti-Intellectualism in American Life_ (l962)

Michael B. Katz, M. Doucet and Mark Stern, _The Social Organization of Early
Industrial Capitalism_ (l981)

Christopher Lasch, _The Age of Radicalism in America_ (1965)

James Weinstein, _The Corporate Ideal in the Liberal State_ (1968)  
    


**POLICY DILEMMAS IN THE CITY/STATE**

SESSION VIII. THE CENTRALIZATION OF URBAN POLICY

_Required Reading:_ David Hammack, _Power and Society: Greater New York at the
Turn of the Century_ (1982), esp. Pts I, IV, V

_Suggested Readings:_

Paul Boyer, _Urban Masses and Moral Order in America, 1820-1920_ (1978)

Hendrick Hartog, _Public Property and Private Power: The Corporation of the
City of New York in American Law, l730-1870_ (l984)

Theodore Hershberg (ed), _Philadelphia_ (1980)

Stephan Thernstrom and R. Sennett (eds) _Nineteenth Century Cities: Essays in
the New Urban History_ (1969)

David Tyack, _The One Best System_ (l973)

Julia Wrigley, _Class Politics and Public Schools: Chicago, l900-l950_ (1981)

SESSION IX. THE EXPANSION OF URBAN BUREAUCRACY

_Required Reading:_ Thomas Kessner, _Fiorello H. Laguardia and the Making of
Modern New York_ (1991)

_Suggested Readings:_

Robert Caro, _The Power Broker: Robert Moses and the Fall of New York_ (l974),
esp. Pts IV-VI.

Kenneth Jackson, _Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of the United
States_ (1985)

Morton Keller, _Regulating a New Society: Public Policy and Social Change in
America, 1900-1933_ (1994) [rev by Alan Dawley, JAH (Sept 1995):670-71.

Eric Lampard, "American Historians and the Study of Urbanization," _Amer.
Historical Review,_ 67 (October l96l):49-61.

Lewis Mumford, _The City in History_ (1961)

Joel Schwartz, _The New York Approach: Robert Moses, Urban Liberals, and
Revdevelopment of the Inner City_ (Columbus, 19930

Sam Bass Warner, _Streetcar Suburbs_ (1962)  
    


SESSION X. THE PLANNED SOCIETY

_Required Reading:_ Steve Fraser and Gary Gerstle, _The Rise and Fall of the
New Deal Order_

_Suggested Readings:_

Guy Alchon, _The Invisible Hand of Planning: Capitalism, Social Science and
the State in the 1920s_ (1985)

Otis L. Graham, Jr., _Toward a Planned Society: From Roosevelt to Nixon_
(1976) HC106/.G674 [Oxford]

Emily Rosenberg, _Spreading the American Dream: American Economic and Cultural
Expansion, 1890-1945_ (1982)

Stephen Skowronek, _Building a New American State: The Expansion of National
Administrative Capacities, 1877-1920_ (1982) William A. Williams, _The Roots
of the Modern American Empire_ (1969)

SESSION XI. THE DREAM OF GLOBAL POLICY

_Required Reading:_ David Yergin, _A Shattered Peace: The Origins of the Cold
War and the National Security State_ (l977)

_Suggested Readings:_

Gar Alperovitz, _Atomic Diplomacy: Hiroshima and Potsdam_ (1965)

Martin Sherwin, _A World Destroyed: The Atomic Bomb and the Grand Alliance_
(1973)  
    


**DOMESTIC POLICY IN THE NATION/STATE:**

**INSTITUTIONAL RACISM, CYCLES OF POVERTY, CAPITALIST ENTERPRISE**  
    


SESSION XII. THE PUBLIC SCHOOL AS AN INSTRUMENT OF POLICY

_Required Reading_ : Paula Fass, _Outside In: Minorities and the
Transformation of American Education_ (1988)

_Suggested Readings_ :

Ira Katznelson and M Weir, _Schooling for All: Class, Race and the Decline of
the Democratic Ideal_ (1985)

Richard Kluger, _Simple Justice: The History of Brown vs Board of Education
and Black America's Struggle for Equality_ (1976)

D. Ravitch and R. Goodenow (eds) _Educating an Urban People: The New York City
Experience_ (1981)

Robert Shaffer, "Multicultural Education in New York City During World War
II," _New York History_ (July 1996): 301-32.

A. Zilversmit, _Changing Schools: Progressive Educational Theory and Practice,
1930-1960_ (1993)

SESSION XIII. SOCIAL WELFARE

_Required Reading:_ Michael B. Katz, _In the Shadow of the Poorhouse: A
History of Social Welfare in America_ (1986)

_Suggested Readings:_

Stuart D. Brandes, _American Welfare Capitalism, 1880-1940_ (1970)

Robert H. Bremner, _From the Depths: The Discovery of Poverty in the United
States_ (1956)

Dorothy Brown and Eliz. McKeown, _The Poor Belong to Us: Catholic Cahrities
and American Welfare_ (Harv U Pr, 1998)

Linda Gordon, _Pitied But Not Entitled_

Roy Lubove, _The Professional Altruist: The Emergence of Social Work as a
Career, 1880-1930_ (1965)  
    
    
    


SESSION XIV MULTINATIONALS AND NATIONAL POLICY

_Required Reading:_ Richard J Barnet and Ronald E. Muller, _The Global Reach_
(1974)

_Suggested Readings:_

David Lilienthal, _The Multinational Corporation_

Raymond Vernon, _Sovereignty at Bay: The Multinational Spread of US
Enterprises_ (1971)

Mira Wilkins, _The Maturing of Multinational Enterprise: American Business
Abroad from 1914 to 1970_ (1974)  
---|---

