**Political Science 410**

**American Politics Senior Seminar \- 2000**

Prof. George E. Marcus

Office - 304 Stetson (extension: 2538)

George.E.Marcus@Williams.edu

The United States of 2000 is considerably different from the United States of
1787. Over the past two hundred plus years the population has grown by many
multiples, the character of the society has changed from part slave,
agricultural and mercantilist to increasingly liberal, urban and free-market.
Further, the United States of 1787 had just won its freedom from the major
imperial power, England (changing its status from colony to sovereign nation).
In 2000 the United States is the major imperial power of the world. Beyond
these differences are innumerable others - demographic, technological and
political.

The focus of the American Politics senior seminar for this year is whether the
Constitutional Framework and the rationales that justified those arrangements
remain well suited to our current circumstances. Is there a match between
current American social and economic circumstances and the aspirations of the
American people - on the one hand - and American political institutions - on
the other hand? The word "match" is artfully chosen to cover a number of
comparisons and judgments - issues of fact and description as well as judgment
and evaluation. So much of what we hear and observe seems to suggest a modern
world of technological wonder and dramatic change. Is this modern world
capable of democratic governance within a structure created over 200 hundred
years ago? That is the seminal question for our deliberations.

There are two principal considerations that will broadly shape our
deliberations and discussions this semester. The first consideration will be
an analytic one: what claims of justice and freedom are embedded in American
political institutions? These claims form the normative standards we can use
to judge the success of American democracy, then and now. Are these
foundational views, as best we can understand them, adequate to our times?
These queries raise two matters of investigation. The first issue is a matter
of intention: what did the dominant views of the time at the founding mean to
achieve by creating a federal republic? This inquiry will explore how the
notions of justice were understood and how the relationship between public
(the political sphere) and private (the realms of family, economic and social
life) were understood. The second issue is a matter of constitution building:
how were the political institutions constructed to meet these intentions? The
first part of the seminar will investigate these claims and constructions.

The second broad consideration is one of historical comparison and
contemporary analysis: are these claims and constructions as valid today as
they were in the eighteenth century? We need not limit our judgment of this
second consideration to the framing analysis offered by the founders, but we
will certainly need to begin with their understanding. The seminar is
constructed so as to encourage a careful investigation of political life at
the founding of the republic and an equally careful investigation of political
life in the late twentieth century. As we conclude our considerations, we may
endorse the original founding understandings as given; we may offer
modifications to adjust these understandings to contemporary needs that have
since then emerged, or we may reject the founding understanding entirely and
produce radical alternatives.

_The Work of the Seminar:_

This is a different kind of seminar than most of you will likely have
experienced. It is perhaps best described as a research seminar (common in
graduate school). What that means is that each participant is engaged in both
the individual focus of their own work but also engaged in the research
projects of the other seminar participants. Hence, each of you is responsible
not only for your own work but for the quality of the work of your colleagues.

The seminar will meet once per week. The semester will be divided into two
segments. The first segment will consider readings in the founding period. The
second segment will explore your considerations of contemporary life in
America.

The principal evaluations for purposes of grading will be two fold:

I. seminar participation ио 50%

a. mastery of the readings as evidenced in class discussion: 20%

b. seminar leading: 15%

c. critical contributions to the class projects of others: 15%

II. research project - 50%

The seminar participation will be structured so that each seminar participant
will lead at least one seminar. The role of seminar leader is to formulate the
analytic questions and direct the seminar session.

The research project will constitute the other major element in the seminar.
The research project will consist of a comparison of some 17th century aspect
of economic, social or political life (including the institutional aspect)
with the contemporary parallel. For example, the comparison may focus on how
interests are represented then and now, or the structure and politicizing of
family life then and now, or the role of the local press then and now (etc.).
Each individual project will have another seminar member assigned as a
critical reader.

The written research report will be due the last day of class, Friday, May
12th at 3:50 PM. An oral presentation of each project is due at one of the
last two seminar meetings.

_Books for Senior Seminar_ (available at Water Street Bookstore): Alexander
Hamilton, James Madison and John Jay, _The Federalist Papers_. New York:
Bantam Books, Incorporated, 1982.

Morton White, _Philosophy, the Federalist, & the Constitution_. New York:
Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 1989.

Gordon S. Wood, _Radicalism of the American Revolution_. New York: Random
House, Incorporated, 1993.

Richard Hofstadter, _Anti-Intellectualism in American Life_. New York: Random
House, Incorporated,1966.

Orlando Patterson, _The Ordeal of Integration Progress & Resentment in
America's Racial Crisis_. Washington: Counterpoint, 1997.

  
**Class Schedule and Reading Assignments**

Week of January 31st

Organizational meeting (Thursday)

Week of February 7th

Seminar 1 - - Course Introduction and preliminary discussions

[The goals of government, the design of government, the nature of justice and
equality]

Reading: Federalist Papers, 10, 37, 47, 48, 49, 51, 57

Week of February 14th

Seminar 2 - - Reread Federalist 10 ио with special attention to the following
question ио select a county that is of interest to the US (e.g., Haiti,
Somalia, Kosovo, Bosnia, Russia) and consider what kind of democratic
government could/should be constructed?

Week of February 21st

Seminar 3 - - The philosophy of the Federalist Papers

Reading: Morton - all

Week of February 28th Seminar 4 - - The dynamic character of American life

Reading: Wood - all Week of March 6th Seminar 5 - - Presentations: Oral
reports of proposed research Week of March 13th

Seminar 6 - - Presentations: Oral reports of proposed research

**Spring Break**

Week of April 3rd

Seminar 7 - - Democracy unhinged

Reading: Hofstadter \- all

Week of April 10th

Seminar 8 - - Race in America

Reading: Patterson \- all

Week of April 17th

Seminar 9 - - Presentations: oral reports on research projects

Week of April 24th

Seminar 10 - - Presentations: oral reports on research projects

Week of May 1st

Seminar 11 - - Presentations: oral reports on research projects

Week of May 8th

Seminar 12 - - Summary and Evaluation

Reading: Lane, R. E. (1999). The Joyless Polity: Contributions of Democratic
Process to Ill-Being. In S. L. Elkin & K. E. Soltan (Eds.), _Citizen
Competence and Democratic Institutions_ (pp. 329-370). University Park, PA:
The Pennsylvania University Press.  
    
    
    


