**

Ethics in American Politics

POS 4931

**



Spring 2001

Professor Beth Rosenson

Turlington Hall 3331

email: rosenson@polisci.ufl.edu, phone: 392-1010



**

Course Overview

**

The problem of unethical behavior involving elected officials is a perennial
concern in American political life. Since the early days of the Republic,
policy makers and ordinary citizens have sought to control unethical conduct
such as bribery and treason. In recent decades, the focus has shifted to the
problem of "conflicts of interest" between elected officials' private
interests and their public duties, and to the regulation of campaign finance
practices at the national and state levels. This course will examine theories
of political ethics, important episodes of corruption in American politics,
and attempts to regulate political ethics through legislation, prosecution,
and other enforcement mechanisms. Historical examples will come from the
Jacksonian Era, the Progressive Era, and the past 40 years (the decades both
preceding and following Watergate). The main focus will be on the ethics of
elected officials, especially legislators. We will also address the issue of
political ethics as it concerns presidents, governors, and other public
officials and employees.

Some of the main questions we will address include: How do we define ethical
behavior in the political realm? What have been the causes of corruption in
American politics. Which causes have remained relatively constant and which
are more time-specific? What have been the aims of good-government reformers?
What sorts of ethical issues does the American campaign finance system pose?
Should unethical behavior be addressed at the ballot box rather than through
new laws? What is the role of the media in shaping public perceptions of
ethical and unethical behavior? What are the limits to, and problems of,
ethics regulation? What are some of the current proposals to strengthen public
ethics?

We will also look closely at a number of case studies in political ethics from
the past two decades: these include the Keating Five case, Iran-Contra, and of
course, Bill Clinton and the Lewinsky scandal.





**

Course Requirements

TWO SHORT (FOUR PAGE) PAPERS: 12.5% each

ONE HOUR MIDTERM: 30%

SHORT GROUP PRESENTATION: 5%

IN-CLASS FINAL (ONE HOUR): 30%

ATTENDANCE: 10%

**

Students must write two short papers for the class of approximately four pages
in length each. For each paper there will be a choice of topics. The papers
will require students to do a critical analysis of the arguments presented in
the readings for a particular week or weeks. Each paper will count for 12.5%
of the final grade. Every student will also be required to do a brief oral
presentation, in a group with several other students. The short presentation
will contribute an additional 5% of the student's grade. The midterm and the
final will each count for 30%. The final will be non-cumulative, covering only
the material after the midterm. Attendance will count for an additional 10%.

Students are expected to attend all classes. While the lectures will mirror
the readings pretty closely, there will still be material covered in lecture
that is not necessarily covered by the readings. Also, participation is
strongly encouraged; while the course is primarily lecture rather than a
discussion-bsaed, students are encouraged to participate actively by raising
questions from the readings. While you will not be graded on your class
participation (except for the short presentation), you will get more out of
the class if you see yourself as an active partiicpant rather than as a
passive note-taker.

**

Books For Purchase

**

One book is required for purchase, and there will be a coursepack with many
additional readings also available for purchase. It is **highly recommended**
that you purchase the coursepack, although all readings will also be placed on
reserve at Library West.

_

Books Required For Purchase

_

1) Dennis F. Thompson, _Ethics in Congress_ (Washington, D.C.: The Brookings
Institution, 1995)

**





I. Introduction and Course Overview

**

Session 1

**

II. Theories of Political Ethics: Minimalist, Functionalist, Maximalist or
Something Else?

How Do We Define Ethics in Public Life, and How Does It Differ From Ethics in
Private Life?

**Sessions 2,3

****

_Readings

_

Dennis Thompson, _Political Ethics and Public Office_ (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1987), pp.96-122

Dennis Thompson, _Ethics in Congress_ , pp. 10-33, Chapter 3 all

**

III. What Causes Corruption? Where Does it Come From?

**Session 4

_Readings

_**

** George C. S. Benson, _Political Corruption in America_ (Lexington, Mass:
D.C. Heath, 1978), pp. 211-237



**

IV. Corruption and Reform Prior To 1950**

**

**_A. Corruption and Reform Before 1900: The Federal and State Governments_

Sessions 5, 6

_Readings

_

Hubert G. Locke, "Ethics in American Government: A Look Backward," _Annals of
the American Academy of Political and Social Science_ 537 (January 1995), pp.
14-21

George C.S. Benson, _Political Corruption in America_ (Lexington, Mass: D.C.
Heath, 1978), pp. 68-71, 73-87

Robert T. Roberts and Marion T. Doss Jr., "Barbarians at the Gate: 1828-1883"
in Robert T. Roberts and Marion T. Doss Jr., _From Watergate to Whitewater:
The Public Integrity War_ (Westport: Praeger Press, 1997), pp. 9-21

Steven Skowronek, _Building the New American State_ (Cambridge University
Press, 1982), pp. 47-68

_



_

_B. Municipal Corruption: The Political Machine

_

Session 7

_Readings

_

George C.S. Benson, _Political Corruption in America_ (Lexington, Mass: D.C.
Heath, 1978), pp. 17-55

Riordan, _Plunkitt of Tammany Hall_ , pp. xxiii-19

_

__C. The Progressives

_

Sessions 8, 9

_Readings

_

Richard Hofstadter, _Age Of Reform_ (New York: Vintage Books, 1955), pp.

131-173

Arthur S. Link and Richard L. McCormick, _Progressivism_ (Illinois: Harlan
Davidson, Inc.), pp. 26-66

Robert T. Roberts and Marion T. Doss Jr., "The Public Service
Counterrevolution: 1883-1930", pp. 21-29

David Schmidt, _Citizen Lawmakers: The Ballot Initiative and Revolution_
(Phialdelphia: Temple University Press, 1992) pp. 5-23

**



V. Political Ethics in the Late 20th Century: Watergate and its aftermath;
executive branch ethics; Congressional ethics reform; and ethics regulation in
the states

**

_A.Watergate and Reform at the Federal Level: The Executive Branch and
Congress

_**

** Sessions 10, 11

_Readings

_

Michael Johnston, _Political Corruption and Public Policy in America_
(Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole, 1982), pp. 108-39

Congressional Quarterly, _Congressional Ethics: History, Fact and Controversy_
(Washington D.C.: Congressional Quarterly Inc., 1992), pp. 145-161

James D. Carroll and Robert N. Roberts, "If Men Were Angels: Assessing the
Ethics in Government Act of 1978," _Policy Studies Journal_ , Vol. 17, No. 2,
Winter, 1988-89, pp. 435-447







_C. Campaign Finance and Conflict of Interest

_

Sessions 12, 13

(Visit from Professor Richard Scher to discuss ethics in political
campaigning, Session 13)

_Readings

_

Trevor Potter, "The Current State of Campaign Finance Law," in _Campaign
Finance Reform_ , Anthony Corrado, Thomas E. Mann, Daniel R. Ortiz, Trevor
Potter and Frank J. Sorauf, eds., (Washington D.C.: Brookings: 1997), pp. 5-24

David Donnelly, Janice Fine, and Ellen S. Miller, "Going Public," in _Campaign
Finance Reform_ , Anthony Corrado, Thomas E. Mann, Daniel R. Ortiz, Trevor
Potter and Frank J. Sorauf, eds., (Washington D.C.: Brookings: 1997), pp.
364-370

Thomas Kingsley Houston, "Ethics in Political Campaigns," in _Representation
and Responsibility_ , eds. Bruce Jennings and Daniel Callahan (New York:
Plenum Press, 1985)

__



**MIDTERM EXAM

**

Session 14 (February 27)

_D. State legislative ethics reform, 1954-present

_

Sessions 15, 16

_Readings

_

Robert M. Stern, "Ethics in the States," in Bruce Jennings and Daniel
Callahan, eds., _Representation and Responsibility: Exploring Legislative
Ethics_ (New York: Plenum Press, 1985), pp. 243-261

Alan Rosenthal, _Drawing The Line_ : _Legislative Ethics in the States_
(Lincoln: Univeristy of Nebraska Press, 1996), pp. 22-47

David Ensign, "Reforming Public Integrity Laws in an Era of Declining Trust,"
_Book of the States_ 1996-97, pp. 477-484

Arthur Maass, "U.S. Prosecution of State and Local Officials for Political
Corruption," _Publius_ , Summer 1987, pp. 195-204, 206-213, 226-227

_E. Case Studies:_ Congress and the Presidency

Sessions 17, 18

I. Congress (Senator David Durenberger, The Keating Five, House Speaker James
Wright)

_Readings

_

Dennis Thompson, _Ethics in Congress_ , pp. 34-48

II. Presidents and Presidential Candidates

_Readings

_

Charles Lewis, _The Buying of The President_ (New York: Center For Public
Integrity, 1996), pp. 34-94

Peter DeLeon, _Thinking about Political Corruption_ (New York: M.E. Sharpe,
1993), Chapter 7





**

VI.** **Electoral responses to corruption: Should corruption be adddressed at
the ballot box rather than through regulatory laws?

** Session 19

**

**_Readings

_**

** Kirby, James C., "The Role of the Electorate in Congressional Ethics." In
_Representation and Responsibility_ , eds. Bruce Jennings and Daniel Callahan
(New York: Plenum Press, 1985)

Charles Stewart, "Ain't Misbehaving, Or, Reflections on Two Centuries of
Congressional Corruption." Center for American Political Studies. Occasional
Working Papers, 94-4, pp. 25-28

Peters, John and Susan Welch. 1980. "The Effects of Corruption on Voting
Behavior in Congressional Elections." _American Political Science Review_
74:697-708.

Dimock, Michael A. and Gary C. Jacobson. 1995. "Checks and Choices: The House
Bank Scandal's Impact on Voters in 1992." _Journal of Politics_ 57:1143-59.

**

VII. Enforcing Ethics: Legislative Ethics Committees, Independent Commissions
and Independent Counsels

**Sessions 20, 21, 22

**

**_A. Ethics Committees

_

Congressional Quarterly, _Congressional Ethics: History, Fact and Controversy_
(Washington D.C.: Congressional Quarterly Inc.,1992), Chapters 3-4

Dennis Thompson, _Ethics in Congress,_ Chapter 6 and pp. 182-190

_B. Independent Commissions

_

David Magleby and Candace Nelson, The Money Chase (Washington D.C.: Brookings,
1990), Chapter 7, pp.123-136

_

__C. Independent Counsels,

_

Roberts and Doss, pp. 91-93

_

_ Suzanne Garment, _Scandal,_ Chapter Four

_

_ Louis Fisher, "Starr's Record as Independent Counsel." _PS : Political
Science and Politics ,_ Vol. 32, No. 3, pp 546-549

_



_**

VIII. Scandals, Ethics and the Media

** Sessions 23-26

_A. The Media: What Does it Do and How Does it Do It? Does the Media Generate
Scandal or Simply Report Unethical Behavior?

_

Larry Sabato, _Feeding Frenzy,_ pp. 1-6, 25-51

"When Politicians Lie" article

_B. How Much Privacy Do Public Officials Deserve? What Do We Need To Know
About Politicians' Sex Lives?

_

Dennis Thompson, _Political Ethics and Public Office_ (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1987), Chapter 5

_C. Bill Clinton: Assessing His Ethics

_

Robert Shogan, two chapters

Molly W. Sonner and Clyde Wilcox, "Forgiving and Forgetting: Public Support
for Bill Clinton During the Lewinsky Scandal," _PS : Political Science and
Politics,_ Vol. 32, No. 3, pp. 554-557

Arthur H. Miller, "Sex, Politics and Public Opinion: What Political Scientists
Really Learned From The Clinton-Lewinsky Scandal," _PS: Political Science and
Politics,_ Vol. 32, No. 4, p. 721-728

**



X. Is The Ethics Reform Project A Good Idea? What Are Its Problems and Its
Limits? Is More Reform Needed?

**Session 27

_Readings

_**

** Alan Rosenthal, _Drawing the Line_ , pp. 212-236

Thompson, _Ethics in Congress_ , pp. 166-181

Donald J. Maletz and Jerry Herbel, "Some Paradoxes of Government Ethics
Revisited." Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Political
Science Association, 1998. pp. 20-25

**





XI.  FINAL EXAM

**Session 28 (April 24)



