##

* * *

OBERLIN COLLEGE  
Department of History  

* * *

### History 259  
Spring 1997



###

#  

# Revolutionary America  
and  
the Early Republic

  
---  
  
### Gary Kornblith  
Rice 306; x8526  
E-mail: [Gary.Kornblith@oberlin.edu](mailto:Gary.Kornblith@oberlin.edu)



[![](map1763.gif)](map1763big.jpg)This course investigates the formation of
the American Republic and the complex dynamics that shaped American society
and culture in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. We will
begin by examining the British colonies in mainland North America at
approximately 1750, and we will proceed to explore in depth the causes and
consequences of the American Revolution. Historians have long debated the
Revolution's purpose and significance, and we will look at different sides of
this enduring controversy. In the process, we will consider what the War for
Independence meant to Native Americans and African Americans as well as Euro-
Americans. We will also analyze the patriots' efforts to establish a
republican form of government on a firm foundation. In particular, we will
weigh the question of whether the ratification of the federal Constitution
represented the fulfillment, repudiation, or modification of the original
Spirit of '76. We will also evaluate how well the federal system worked during
the early years of the Republic.

Our focus after spring break will be mainly on social history. Some historians
contend that the period covered by this course is the key era of social
transformation in American history. To assess this hypothesis, we will examine
changes in race, gender, and class relations within the context of economic
and geographical expansion and religious revitalization. We will probe the
puzzles and paradoxes of American democracy as it developed in the early
Republic.

Over the course of the semester, students will undertake individual projects
involving intensive research in primary source materials. We will have class
sessions on how to locate appropriate materials in the Oberlin College Library
and on the World Wide Web. Students will submit written prospectuses before
spring break and make oral presentations of their findings in the closing
weeks of the semester. Research papers will be due at the end reading period.
The goal of this project is to empower students to **_do_** history, not just
to read it.

**Format:** The class will meet three times each week. In general there will
be lectures on Mondays, group discussions on Wednesdays, and computer labs on
Fridays. The discussions will focus on the reading assignments, and students
should come to discussion meetings prepared to exchange their views in a
serious yet friendly manner. The last several class sessions will be devoted
to student presentations of their research projects.

**Requirements:** In addition to reading assignments that range up to 220
pages per week, there will be ungraded computer exercises, an oral
presentation, and six graded writing assignments-- four short position papers
on questions raised by the assigned readings (2-3 pages each); the prospectus
for the research project (3-4 pages); and the research paper (10-12pages). The
due dates are given in the schedule of assignments below. _Regular class
attendance is required and active participation in class discussions is
expected._

**Grades:** Final grades will be based on the following formula: position
papers, 40% (10% each); research project prospectus, 5%; oral presentation of
research , 5%; research paper, 40%; and participation in class discussions,
10%. The professor reserves the right to exercise some discretion in
determining final grades.

**Writing Certification:** Students who wish to be considered for
certification of writing proficiency should notify the instructor at the
beginning of the semester.

**Purchases:** The following books are available at the Co-op Bookstore and
should be purchased.

[![](GWPICT.GIF)](GWPICT.GIF)

>   * Gordon S. Wood, **_The Radicalism of the American Revolution_**

>   * Edmund S. and Helen M. Morgan, **_The Stamp Act Crisis_** (3d ed.)

>   * Thomas Paine, **_Common Sense_** , ed. Isaac Kramnick

>   * Colin G. Calloway, **_The American Revolution in Indian Country_**

>   * Michael Kammen, ed., **_The Origins of the American Constitution_**

>   * James Madison, __**_Notes on the Debates in the Federal Convention of
1787_**

>   * Susan Juster, **_Disorderly Women_**

>   * Douglas R. Egerton, **_Gabriel's Rebellion_**

>   * Merrill D. Peterson, ed., **_The Portable Thomas Jefferson_**

**![](FLAG.GIF)**

** **

**_ _**

## **_Schedule of Classes and Assignments:_**

Mon., Feb. 3 **Introduction**

Wed., Feb. 5 **Discussion: British North America at 1750![](gwslaves.jpg)**

>   * Richard Hofstadter, __**_America at 1750_ , **131-79 (on reserve)

>   * John M. Murrin, "Beneficiaries of Catastrophe: The English Colonies in
America," in Eric Foner, ed., **_The New American History_** , 3-23 (on
reserve)

>   * Gordon S. Wood, **_The Radicalism of the American Revolution_** , 3-92

Fri., Feb. 7 **Computer Lab: History on the World Wide Web**



Mon., Feb. 10 **Lecture: Origins of the Imperial Crisis**

Wed., Feb. 12 **Discussion: Colonial Resistance to the Stamp Act**

>   * Edmund S. and Helen M. Morgan, **_The Stamp Act Crisis_** _,_ 3-40,
54-164, 187-213, 271-307

Fri., Feb. 14 **Computer Lab: Basic Strategies for Locating Library
Resources**

> > **_First Position Paper Due_**

>>

>>  

[![](joinordie.gif)](../../Courses/His259syl/joinordie.gif%20)Mon., Feb. 17
**Lecture: Escalation of the Imperial Crisis**

Wed., Feb. 19 **Discussion: Ideological, Economic, and Social
Interpretations**

>   * Bernard Bailyn, "The Central Themes of the American Revolution" in
Bernard Bailyn, **_Faces of Revolution_** , 200-224 (on reserve)

>   * Marc Egnal and Joseph A. Ernst, "An Economic Interpretation of the
America n Revolution," **_William and Mary Quarterly_** , 3d ser., 29 (Jan.
1972): 3-32 (on reserve)

>   * T.H. Breen, "Narrative of Commercial Life: Consumption, Ideology, and
Community on the Eve of the American Revolution," **_William and Mary_
_Quarterly_** , 3d ser., 50 (July 1993): 471-501 (on reserve)

Fri., Feb. 21 **Library Session: Advanced Strategies for Locating Primary
Sources**

> > **[![](signingDofI.gif)](signingDofI.gif)**

Mon., Feb. 24 **Lecture: To the Declaration of Independence**

![](Paine.JPEG) Wed., Feb. 26 **Discussion: The Revolutionary Vision**

>   * Thomas Paine, **_Common Sense_** _,_ ed. Isaac Kramnick, 61-122

>   * James Chalmers, **_[Plain
Truth](http://www.erols.com/candidus/plain-t.htm) _** (online)

>   * "The Declaration of Independence," in Merrill D. Peterson, ed., **_The
Portable Thomas Jefferson_** _,_ 235-241

>   * Wood, **_The Radicalism of the American Revolution_** , 93-225

Fri., Feb. 28 **Computer Lab: Evaluating Web Sites on Revolutionary America**

> > **_Second Position Paper Due_**



Mon., Mar. 3 **Lecture: The War for Independence _ _ as a Social Struggle**

Wed., Mar. 5 **Discussion: Native American Choices![](JosBrant.gif)**

>   * Colin G. Calloway, **_The American Revolution in Indian Country,_**
1-64, 108-212, 272-301

>   * Mary Young, ["Let's Hear It for the
Losers,"](http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/reviews_in_american_history/v024/24.4young.html)
**_Reviews in American History_ ** 24 (Dec. 1996): 579-584. (online)

Fri., Mar. 7 **Video: _Mary Silliman's War_** (Note: This class starts at
12:30 p.m.)



Mon., Mar. 10 **Lecture: Rethinking Republicanism**

Wed., Mar. 12 **Discussion: Framing the Constitution (Part 1)**

>   * James Madison, **_Notes on the Debates in the Federal Convention of
1787,_** 23-67, 73-93, 115-154, 181-201, 253-302, 370-96,

Fri., Mar. 14 **Discussion: Framing the Constitution (Part 2)**

>   * James Madison, **_Notes on the Debates in the Federal Convention of
1787,_** 405-14, 477-85, 503-508, 546-52, 573-79. 586-94, 652-59

>

> **_Prospectus for Research Project Due_**

>

>

#### **Spring Break**

  

Mon., Mar 24 **Lecture: Ratification of the Constitution**

Wed., Mar. 26 **Discussion: Federalists vs. Antifederalists**

>   * Kammen, ed., **_The Origins of the American Constitution,_** 65-76, 84,
86-87, 87-93, 126-130, 140-157, 169-186, 202-206, 219-234, 261-343

Fri., Mar. 28 **Video: _Empire of Reason_**



Mon., Mar. 31 **Lecture: The Political Economy of Nation-Building**

Wed., Apr. 2 **Discussion:** **Making Sense of Thomas
Jefferson![](jeff1.gif)**

>   * Merrill D. Peterson, ed., **_The Portable Thomas Jefferson,_** 73-111.
122-28, 177-99, 214-21, 224-29, 251-58, 261-67, 281-95, 300-302, 305-307,
316-21, 395-98, 400-412, 415-18, 435-40, 444-51, 454-71, 477-79, 497-99,
533-39, 544-50, 567-69

>   * Conor Cruise O'Brien, [ "Thomas Jefferson: Radical and
Racist,"](http://www.theatlantic.com/atlantic/issues/96oct/obrien/obrien.htm)
**_Atlantic Monthly_** (Oct. 1996) (online)

Fri., Apr. 4 **Computer Lab: Using the Great American History Machine (Part
1)**

> > **_Third Position Paper Due_**

>>

>>  

Mon., Apr.7 **Lecture: Transformation of Gender Relations and Religion**

Wed., Apr. 9 **Discussion: What Did Women Want?**

>   * Susan Juster, **_Disorderly Women,_** entire

Fri., Apr. 11 **Computer Lab: Using the Great American History Machine (Part
2)**



Mon., Apr. 14 **Lecture: Transformation of Race Relations and Slavery**

Wed., Apr. 16 **Discussion: Slave Consciousness and Resistance**

>   * Douglas R. Egerton **, _Gabriel's Rebellion,_** entire

Fri., Apr. 18 No class



Mon., Apr. 21 **Lecture: The Transformation of Class Relations and
Capitalism**

> >  

Wed., Apr. 23 **Discussion: The Meaning of the American Revolution**

>   * Gordon S. Wood, **_The Radicalism of the American Revolution,_** 227-369

>   * Joyce Appleby et al, " _Forum_ : How Revolutionary Was the Revolution? A
Discussion of Gordon S. Wood's _The Radicalism of the American Revolution,"_
** _William and Mary Quarterly_** 3d. ser. 51 (Oct. 1994): 677-716

Fri., Apr. 25 **Student Research Presentations**![](betsy1.jpg)

> > **_Fourth Position Paper Due_**

>>

>>  

Mon., Apr. 28 **Student Research Presentations**

Wed., Apr. 30 **Student Research Presentations**

Fri., May 2 **Student Research Presentations**



Mon., May 5 **Student Research Presentations**

Wed., May 7 **Student Research Presentations**

Fri., May 9 **Student Research Presentations**



Tue., May 13 **_Research Paper Due_**























