**COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY** | **Alan Brinkley**  
---|---  
**History W3620 - Fall 1997** | **622 Fayerweather**  
  
### AMERICA IN THE PROGRESSIVE ERA: 1890-1920

[Requirements](index.html#Course Requirements:) |
[Readings](index.html#Reading Assignments:) | [Schedule](index.html#Course
Schedule:) | [Papers](papers.html) | [TA Sections](ta.html) |
[E-Discussion](ediscuss.htm) | [I - Resources](internet.html)

* * *

## **Syllabus**

**_Course Requirements:_** Weekly reading assignments. Two papers, the first
(1000-1500 words in length) due the week of September 15; the second
(2500-3000 words in length) due December 8; both to involve reading and
analysis of primary materials. An in-class midterm examination October 15; a
final examination in December. Participation in weekly section discussions
beginning the week of September 15. Papers, exams, and section participation
will each constitute one-third of the grade for the course. Papers will be
evaluated for both content (evidence and argument) and style of presentation.
Writing style is less important, of course, on exams, but both argument and
evidence are critical there as well. Section participation will be measured by
a combination of attendance, preparation, and participation. Students who do
not attend sections will, needless to say, have no opportunity to be evaluated
for the other elements.

This syllabus, along with other information about this course, will be
available on the History W3620 home page, which you can access through the
history department website on the Columbia web
(<http://www.columbia.edu/cu/history/>).

**_Reading Assignments:_** Specific assignments for discussion sections are
noted in the schedule below. All readings are available for purchase at
Labyrinth Books (536 West 112th Street, between Broadway and Amsterdam) and on
reserve at Butler.

The following assignments should be completed before the midterm examination:

  * Ellen Fitzpatrick, _Muckraking: Three Landmark Articles_
  * John Bodnar, _The Transplanted,_ chapters 1-2
  * Thomas Bell, _Out of this Furnace_ , parts I-III
  * William Riordan, ed., _Plunkitt of Tammany Hall_
  * John F. Kasson, _Amusing the Millions_
  * Lawrence Goodwyn, _The Populist Moment_ , chapters 1-5, 9
  * Richard Hofstadter, _The Age of Reform,_ chapters 1-3

The following assignments should be completed by the end of the term:

  * Richard Hofstadter, _The Age of Reform,_ chapters 4-6
  * Ruth Rosen, _The Lost Sisterhood_
  * C. Vann Woodward, _The Strange Career of Jim Crow_ , chapters 1-3
  * Booker T. Washington, _Up from Slavery_ , chapters 11, 14
  * W. E. B. Du Bois, _The Souls of Black Folk,_ chapters 1, 3
  * Richard Hofstader, _The American Political Tradition_ , chapters 9-10
  * Linda Gordon, _Pitied But Not Entitled_ , chapters 3, 4
  * Nancy F. Cott, _The Grounding of Modern Feminism_ , chapters 1-2
  * Theda Skocpol, _Protecting Soldiers and Mothers_ , chapters 6-8
  * Walter Lippmann, _Drift and Mastery_ , chapter 8, 9, 14
  * David M. Kennedy, _Over Here,_ chapters 1-4

For those who wish a basic introduction to the period considered in this
course, copies of Alan Brinkley and Ellen Fitzpatrick, _America in Modern
Times_ , have been ordered at Labyrinth Books. Chapters 1-4 deal with the
period covered in the first half of the semester. Chapters 5-8 deal with the
period covered in the second half. This is **not** an assignment. It is simply
a supplement for those who think they would find it useful.

General internet resources for the Progressive Era: [Touring Turn-of-the-
Century America: Photographs from the Detroit Publishing Company, 1880-1920
(American Memory)](http://lcweb2.loc.gov/ammem/detroit/dethome.html) |
[Cartoons of the Gilded Age and the Progressive Era](http://www.cohums.ohio-
state.edu/history/projects/uscartoons/GAPECartoons.htm)

**_Course Schedule:_**

Week of September 1

    W: Chicago: 1893


    **_No sections this week._**


    Internet resources: [1893 World's Fair Web-Book](http://fly.hiwaay.net/~shancock/fair/contents.html) | [American Indians and the 1893 World Fair](http://www.heard.org/EDU/HARVEY/wf/wf6.htm) | [Internet 1996 World Exposition: A World's Fair for the Information Age](http://adelaide.park.org/Pavilions/WorldExpositions/chicago.text.html).

Week of September 8

    M: The Industrial Revolution 
    W: The Failure of Politics
     
    **_No sections this week._**

     Reading assignment: Ellen Fitzpatrick, ed., _Muckraking: Three Landmark Articles_


Week of September 15

    M: A Nation of Immigrants
    W: The New South
     
    **_First paper due in section this week; see_**[ ** _assignment_**](papers.html) ** _._**

     Reading assignment: John Bodnar, _The Transplanted_ , chapters 1-2


    Internet resources: [Ellis Island](http://www.ellisisland.org/) | [New York, NY, Ellis Island -- Immigration: 1900-1920](http://cmp1.ucr.edu/exhibitions/immigration_id.html) | [_Five Points_](http://R2.gsa.gov/fivept/fphome.htm)

Week of September 22

    M: The Agrarian West
    W: Labor and Capital
     
    Reading assignment: Thomas Bell, _Out of this Furnace_ , parts I-III
     
    Internet resources: [Ken Burns' The West](http://www.pbs.org/weta/thewest/wpages/wpgs000/w050_001.htm)

Week of September 29

    M: The New City
    W: The First Great Depression
     
    Reading assignment: William Riordan, ed., _Plunkitt of Tammany Hall_ ; John F. Kasson, _Amusing the Millions_


    Internet resources: [The American Variety Stage: Vaudeville and Popular Entertainment, 1870-1920](http://lcweb2.loc.gov/ammem/vshtml/vshome.html)

Week of October 6

    M: The Populist Uprising
    W: The Populist Movement


    Reading assignment: Lawrence Goodwyn, _The Populist Moment_ , chapters 1-5, 9; Richard Hofstadter, _The Age of Reform_ , chapters 1-3


    Internet resources: [Omaha Platform](http://www.eden.com/~reporter/Omaha.html) | [People's Party Platform 1896](http://www.eden.com/~reporter/Populist.Platform.html) | [A Righteous Cause: A Student Project on William Jennings Bryan](http://www.c7p.com/screen/bryan/index.html) | [Goodwyn et al, "Democratic Money: A Populist Perspective," 1996](http://www.eden.com/~reporter/Goodwyn.Greider.html) | [_The Progressive Populist_ (current serial)](http://www.eden.com/~reporter/index.html)

Week of October 13

    M: American Imperialism
    W: MIDTERM EXAMINATION
     
    **_No sections this week._**


    Internet resources: [Anti-Imperialism in the United States, 1898-1935](http://www.rochester.ican.net/~fjzwick/ail98-35.html).

Week of October 20

    M: Dissenters and Utopians
    W: The Progressive Impulse


    Reading assignment: Richard Hofstadter, _The Age of Reform,_ chapters 4-6; Ruth Rosen, _The Lost Sisterhood_


Week of October 27

    M: The Assault on the Parties
    W: Segregation and the Progressives


    Reading assignment: C. Vann Woodward, _The Strange Career of Jim Crow_ , chapters 1-3; Booker T. Washington, _Up from Slavery_ , chapters 11, 14; W. E. B. Du Bois, _The Souls of Black Folk,_ chapters 1,3. The Washington and Du Bois texts are available in many editions, including Booker T. Washington et al., _Three Negro Classics_ , which has been ordered for this course at Labyrinth Books.


    Internet resources: [Up from Slavery](http://www.alcyone.com/max/lit/slavery/)

Week of November 3

    M: UNIVERSITY HOLIDAY
    W: Theodore Roosevelt and the Dream of Mastery


    Reading assignment: Richard Hofstader, _The American Political Tradition_ , chapter 9; 
    Linda Gordon, _Pitied But Not Entitled_ , chapters 3-4


    Internet resources: [Rough Rider's (On-Line Text)](http://www.bartleby.com/51/) | [The Theodore Roosevelt Site](http://www.abcland.com/~jwiedman/tr/index.html) | [The American Experience: Theodore Roosevelt](http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/amex/tr/) | [Theodore Roosevelt Papers at the Library of Congress](http://lcweb2.loc.gov/ammem/trhtml/trhome.html). 

Week of November 10

    M: "Conservation" and the Environment
    W: The Fight for Woman Suffrage


    Reading assignment: Theda Skocpol, _Protecting Soldiers and Mothers_ , chapters 6-8; Nancy Cott, _The Grounding of Modern Feminism_ , chapter 1


    Internet resources: [The Evolution of the Conservation Movement, 1850-1920 (American Memory)](http://lcweb2.loc.gov/ammem/amrvhtml/conshome.html) | [Votes for Women: Selections from the National American Woman Suffrage Association Collection, 1848-1921 (American Memory)](http://lcweb2.loc.gov/ammem/naw/nawshom.html)

Week of November 17

    M: Reforming the Economy
    W: The Progressive Schism


    Walter Lippmann, _Drift and Mastery_ , chapters 8, 9, 14

Week of November 24

    M: Woodrow Wilson and Reform 
    W: NO CLASS


    **_No sections this week._**


    Reading assignment: Hofstadter, _The American Political Tradition_ , chapter 10
    Internet resources: [Wilson's Fourteen Points](http://www.lib.byu.edu/~rdh/wwi/1918/14points.html) | [Speeches of Woodrow Wilson](http://scom.tamu.edu/pres/speeches/wilson.html)

Week of December 1

    M: War and Society
    W: War and the State 
     
    Reading assignment: David M. Kennedy, _Over Here,_ chapters 1-4; Nancy F. Cott, _The Grounding of Modern Feminism,_ chapter 2


    Internet resources: [American Leaders Speak: Recordings from World War I and the 1920 Election, 1918-1920 (American Memory)](http://lcweb2.loc.gov/ammem/amtitle.new.html)


    **_Second paper due December 8 by 3 p.m. See_**[ ** _assignment_**](papers.html) ** _._**

* * *

Comments to the History ERA, [Ellen Stroud](mailto:efs12@columbia.edu).
Created by [Charles B. Forcey, Jr](mailto:cf27@columbia.edu).  
Last edited: Thursday, September 25, 1997.

