**[BACK](../courseinfo/index.htm)**

* * *

**SYLLABUS FOR HISTORY,   4633** ******Dr. Webb** ****

**The United States,   1917-1939** ****

**Objectives:** ****

**The thesis of this class is that the social, economic and political   roots
of modern America developed to a significant degree between 1917 and 1939.
The objective is for students to obtain an interpretive, factual and
bibliographic knowledge of the history of America from America's entrance into
WWI to the outbreak of WWII.** ****

**Course Outline:** ****

**  I.  America and the World War**  
**      A.  Pre-War America**  
**      B.  The Struggle for Neutral Rights**  
**      C.  America at War**  
**      D.  The Struggle for Collective Security-the League of Nations**  
**      E.  Post-War Problems**  
**           1.  Demobilizing the economy**  
**           2.  The Red Scare**  
**           3.  The bitter heritage-racism, bigotry of the KKK**  
**           4.  The Negro:  W.E.B. DuBois and Marcus Garver** ****

**Readings:** ****

**Daniel N. Smith, The Great Departure:   The United States and World War I:
1914-1920.  1965.  pp. 1-201.** ****

**  II.  The 1920's-Domestic Politics and Problems-THE POLITICAL SCENE**  
**       A.  Presidential Election of 1920**  
**       B.  Political Philosophy of Republican Leadership**  
**       C.  Legislative Problems**  
**             1.  Tariff**  
**             2.  Immigration**  
**             3.  Veterans Bonus**  
**             4.  Tax Policies**  
**       D.  Scandals and Political Morality**  
**       E.  Coolidge and Normalcy**  
**       F.  The Progressive Tradition of the 1920's**  
**             1.  Progressivism in state politics**  
**             2.  Presidential election of 1924**  
**             3.  Senator Norris and progressivism at the national level**  
****  ****

**Readings:** ****

**Arthur S. Link,   "What Happened to the Progressive Movement in the 1920's."
The American Historical Review, Vol. LXIV, No. 4, July, 1959, Pages 833-50.**
****

**Ellis Hawley, The Great War and the Search for a Modern Order, pp. 1-224.**
****

**III.   Business and Industry Between Versailles and the Panic of 1929**  
**        A.  Business Philosophy**  
**        B.  The New Industries**  
**        C.  Business Trends:  consolidation, concentration, price levels,
efficiency, etc.**  
**        D.  Shearing Investors**  
**        E.  The Panic of 1929** ****

**IV.   Labor Between War and Depression**  
**        A.  The position of labor during and immediately after WWI**  
**        B.  The decline of organized labor, labor leadership**  
**        C.  Employment and the standard of living** ****

**V.   Agriculture in the 1920's**  
**        A.  World War I and its effect upon American agriculture**  
**        B.  The Agricultural Depression-causes and results**  
**        C.  Demand for government aid**  
**              1.  Pre-McNary-Haugen legislation**  
**              2.  The McNary-Haugen and Export Debenture Plans**  
**              3.  Coolidge, Hoover, and Jardine on agriculture**  
**        D.  The Agricultural Marketing Act, 1929** ****

**VI.   Hoover and the Depression**  
**        A.  The Hoover Philosophy of government and administration**  
**        B.  Government policies**  
**              1.  Attempt of Federal Board to help farmers**  
**              2.  Reconstruction Finance Corporation**  
**              3.  Public Works**  
**              4.  Home Loan Banks**  
**        C.  The Country in depression-attitudes and actions**  
**              1.  The election of 1930**  
**              2.  Unemployment**  
**              3.  Rural unrest**  
**              4.  Business problems**  
****  ****

**Readings:** ****

**Richard Hofstadter, The American Political Tradition and the Men Who Made
It. 1948, Chapter 11, "Herbert Hoover and the Crisis of American
Individualism": (on reserve in the library).** ****

** **  
**VIII.   The New Deal in Action**  
**           A.  The presidential election of 1932**  
**           B.  The first 100 days**  
**           C.  Banking, monetary, and fiscal policies**  
**           D.  Relief for unemployed**  
**           E.  Government programs to redeem industry and save agriculture**  
**           F.  Thunder from the right and left**  
**           G.  Labor and the New Deal**  
**           H.  TVA and other reforms**  
**            I.  Summary and evaluation** ****

**Readings:** ****

**James MacGregor Burns. Roosevelt: The Lion and the Fox. 1956. pp. 3-487.**
****

**Anthony J. Badger, The New Deal: The Depression Years, 1933-1940. pp.
1-364.** ****

**IX.   American Foreign Policy Between World War I and World War II**  
**        A.  Diplomacy in the 1920's**  
**              1.  The Diplomacy of Isolation**  
**              2.  The Washington and London Conference**  
**              3.  The World Court Issue and Isolationism**  
**              4.  Problems of War Debts and reparations**  
**              5.  The Kellogg-Briand Pact**  
**              6.  United States relations with Russia**  
**              7.  The United States and Latin America**  
**        B.  New Deal Diplomacy**  
**              1.  The breakdown of isolation**  
**                   a.  The Unites States and the Far East**  
**                   b.  The Unites States and Europe**  
**                   c.  The United States and Latin America**  
**              2.  Isolation and the Neutrality Acts**  
**              3.  Measures short of war**  
**              4.  Pearl Harbor and American entry into World War II** ****

**Readings:** ****

**Consult Hofstadter, Chapters 9, 12, and 13.**

* * *

**[BACK](../courseinfo/index.htm)**

