**

AGE OF BIG BUSINESS SYLLABUS

SPRING 1999,** M-T-W-F 12:00

**

**

HISTORY 342

J. W. LOZIER

**

OFFICE:** Cochran 327.

**

OFFICE HOURS:** Daily 1-1:50. TWF often in later.

**

PHONE:** Home and answering machine: **829-4603** , Office: 829-7865.

BRIEF COURSE DESCRIPTION:

This course is a basic survey the history of the United States, 1865-1917.

Particular focus will be placed on social, economic, and Western history.

GOALS OF COURSE:

1\. To study in detail the history of the United States, 1865-1917.

**

ATTENDANCE:** This is a seminar-type course with much of the material
presented in class not available in the readings. Discussion will also be an
important component of the course. Therefore, **ATTENDENCE IS EXPECTED.
PERIOD. If you must be gone, let me know--in advance if possible**.

**

QUIZZES: Expect quizzes randomly, so keep up with reading

EXCUSED ABSENCES:** It is **your** responsibility to bring to my attention
excused absences and to see that they are recorded in my grade records.
Official excuses often do not reach teachers or are filled with errors. I am
the final judge of what absences should be excused. I will trust an oral
excuse from you. Please do not violate that trust.

**

SENIORS GRADUATING OR TAKING COMPS THIS TERM:** Are responsible for
attendance, tests, and quizzes up until the time grades are due for them.

**

Unit One Assignments 342

**

Alan M. Kraut, _The Huddled Masses: The Immigrant in American Society,
1800-1921_ , Arlington Heights, Ill.: Harlan Davidson Inc., 1982.

TUE 2/2  CHAP. 1.

WED 2/3  CHAP. 2.

FRI 2/5  CHAP. 3 TO P. 95.

MON 2/8  CHAP. 3 TO END AND PHOTOS.

PAPER. SELECT THREE ILLUSTRATIONS THAT TO BEST EXPRESS THE IMMIGRANT
EXPERIENCE AND/OR THE PROBLEMS IMMIGRANTS FACED, THEN DEFEND EACH OF YOUR
CHOICES AND EXPRESS WHAT EACH SAYS TO YOU. THE PAPER SHOULD BE BOTH BASED THE
READINGS AND YOUR FEELINGS WHILE VIEWING THE PICTURE.

TUE 2/9  CHAP 4.

WED 2/10  CHAP 5.

FRI 2/12  CHAP. 6.

MON 2/15  Review and catch-up time.

TUE 2/16 TEST.

**

Unit One Study Questions

**

Alan M. Kraut, _The Huddled Masses: The Immigrant in American Society,
1800-1921_ , Arlington Heights, Ill.: Harlan Davidson Inc., 1982.

1\. What was the shift in the countries of origin of the new immigrants of the
1880-1921 wave of immigrants as compared to the earlier waves of immigration?
What nations furnished the pre-1880 immigrants? The 1880-1899? The 1900-1920
immigrants. [From where do the immigrants of today come?]

2\. Why do they come? What caused them to _e_ migrate [leave home]. What led
them to _im_ migrate [come] to the United States, as opposed to other
countries? What alternative countries competed with the United States for
immigrants?

3\. What was the journey like? What difficulties did the immigrants face on
the trip? How did they cope?

4\. What problems did the immigrants face when they arrived? How did they
adjust to these? What institutions and strategies helped them to adjust?

5\. What types of jobs and work experiences did they face? What were their
conditions of mobility in the job market?

6\. What were the patterns of immigration: family, ethnic concentration, etc.

7\. What forces facilitated the assimilation and acculturation of the
immigrants?

8\. How did immigration change America? In turn, the immigrants themselves? In
other words, what was the result of the mutual interaction of the immigrants
and their new host culture, the United States?

9\. How did immigrants chose to react to their conditions?

10\. Trace the rise of nativism and other causes of the end of "unlimited
entry" [it was never truly unlimited]?

11\. Is "ethnic pluralism" really the making of virtue of tribalism and
segregation [Orlando Patterson, see p. 181] that needs to be replaced by a new
universalism, or is ethnic heritage really important [Richard Gambino] to
create new solutions to social problems? Does ethnic pluralism enrich the
fabric of America [Mrs. Jollife]?

12\. Discuss Krauts view that history is ultimately about individuals and not
masses [p. 185]. Where does that view leave the new social history which is
often statistical and aggregative history.

13\. Read the bibliographic essay on the subject starting on p. 186, paying
most of your attention to the first four pages. From where do we get our
information on immigrants? What are some the changing views of historians on
immigration?

**



Unit Two Assignments 342

**

WED 2/17 Walter Prescott Webb, _The Great Plains_ , Lincoln: U. of Nebraska
Press, c.1931, Chap. 1.

FRI 2/19 Walter Prescott Webb, _The Great Plains_ , Lincoln: U. of Nebraska
Press, c.1931, Chap. 2.

MON & TUE 2/22-2/23 Frederick Jackson Turner, "The Significance of the
Frontier in American History," _The Early Writings of Frederick Jackson
Turner_ , (Freeport, N.Y.: Books for Libraries Press, 1938, 1969 repr.), pp.
185-229. [Handout]

WED 2/24 Webb, _Great Plains_ , pp. 47-68, 167-179, 200-202. "The Plains
Indians" and "The White Approach to the Great Plains".

FRI 2/26 Webb, _Great Plains_ , Chap. VI, "The Cattle Kingdom," only pp.
205-244. Read quickly.

MON 3/1 START Webb, _Great Plains_ , Chap. VII, "Transportation and Fencing."

TUE 3/2 FINISH the above.

WED 3/3, FRI 3/5 Ray Allen Billington, _Westward Expansion: A History of the
American Frontier,_ 3d ed _._ (New York: The Macmillian Co., c.1967), Chap.
XXXIV, "The Opening of the Great Plains, Chap. XXXV, "The Farmers Frontier,"
[Handout]

MON 3/8 START Webb, _Great Plains_ , Chap. VIII, "The Search for Water in the
Great Plains."

TUE 3/9 FINISH the above.

WED 3/10 START Webb, _Great Plains_ , Chap. IX, "New Laws for Land and Water."

FRI 3/12 FINISH the above.

MON 3/15  **PAPER:** How did the Plains affect American Culture? How did
American culture affect the Plains? Back you points with many specific
examples from Webb. Use page citations. This may be revised without risk, but
the graded draft must be attached.

TUE 3/16 EXAM II.

**





STUDY QUESTIONS

**

Walter Prescott Webb, _The Great Plains_ , Chaps I-II:

1\. What problems did the Great Plains environment pose for US-style
settlement?

2\. Be able to describe the basic geography of the Great Plains and the West.
Be able to locate and, where appropriate, describe the Prairies, the Humid
Plains, the 98th meridian, the semi arid plains, the treeless arid area, the
High Plains, the Rockies, the Basin and Range Province, Wasatch, Cascades,
Coast Range, Bitteroots, Black Hills, Sierra Nevadas, Sonora Desert, Mojave
Desert, Central Valley of California, Willamette Valley, Puget Sound, San
Francisco Bay, Great Salt Lake and Morman heartland to east of it, Chili Belt
around Santa Fe, Lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas, Imperial Valley of
California, Inland Empire south of Spokane, all states from the center of the
United States west, Seattle, Tacoma, Portland, Spokane, Butte, Salt Lake City,
San Francisco, San Diego, Phoenix, Virginia City and the Comstock Lode of
Nevada, Leadville and Cripple Creek mine fields of Colorado, Denver, El Paso,
and Santa Fe, Navajo reservation in NE. Arizona, Pine Ridge Indian Agency in
South Dakota, and the Missouri, Platte, Republican, Red [north], Rio Grande,
Green and Colorado, Columbia, and Snake Rivers.

3\. What is the Great Plains environment? See the three regions of Webb.

Pages 47-68:

4\. What was the Native American approach to living on the Plains?

Webb: pages 167-179, 200-202, 205-244, chaps. VII & VIII; Ray Allen
Billington, _Westward Expansion: A History of the American Frontier,_
Chapters. XXXIV and XXXV,and Frederick Jackson Turner, "The Significance of
the Frontier in American History," _The Early Writings of Frederick Jackson
Turner_ , (Freeport, N.Y.: Books for Libraries Press, 1938, 1969 repr.), pp.
185-229:

5\. What problems did the Yankees have to solve before they settled the Great
Plains, and how did they solve them?

6\. Compare Turner, Billington and Webb: in what mix did each feel the Plains
shaped American civilization, American civilization shaped the Plains culture,
or the technology shaped the plains? What, in other words shapes the
settlement of the Plains and, in turn, reshapes the old culture to the east?
Geography, biology, and climate? Culture? Technology? Do they shape each other
in an interactive process? What do you think?

7\. Describe the character and history of the cattle industry on the Great
Plains.

8\. How, according to Billington and Webb, is technology used to "tame" the
Plains?

9\. How do the Yankees attempt to cope with the Water Problems of the Great
Plains.

10\. Describe in detail the Turner Frontier Thesis, both the impact of the
frontier on American civilization and the Wave Thesis.

**

Unit Three Assignments 342

Willa Cather, _O Pioneers!

**_

WED 3/17 Part I, "The Wild Land."

FRI 3/19 Part II, "Neighboring Fields."

MON 3/29 Part III, "Winter Memories."

TUE 3/30 Part IV, "The White Mulberry Tree."

WED 3/31 Part V, "Alexandria."

MON 4/5 quiz & take-home exam.

You are expected to:

a. Be in class:

b. Have read the reading assigned for the day so that we can have a fruitful

discussion.

There may be either a discussion grade given or a quiz for each day.

**

STUDY QUESTIONS:

**

1\. Describe the geography, culture, and life of the south-central Nebraska
prairies. Back your essay with many examples from _O Pioneers!_

2\. How was that prairie tamed by Alexandria? Back your essay with many
examples from _O Pioneers!_

3\. "Alexandria represents to Willa Cather the new woman hero born of the
struggle to tame the prairie who can tame that prairie." Discuss this
proposition and give many examples from the novel to support or reject the
proposition.

4\. The culture that evolved on the plains was compounded of the following
elements:

a. the geographic constraints of the plains,

b. the material, social, and agricultural culture of those who settled the
Plains,

c. and the political, social, and economic context preordained by the United
States  Government and society.

Show what was contributed to Great Plains culture by each of those elements,
backing your points with examples from _O Pioneers!_ augmented by
illustrations from Webb, Billington, and Turner.

5\. I am struck that one learns as much about Willa Cather from this novel as
one does about the characters in the novel. What did you learn about her? Back
with examples from _O Pioneers!_ and whatever else you read about her life.

**

TAKE-HOME EXAM:

**

Due at the start of class ------------. Write a typed paper of several pages
on one of the five study questions above. Late papers will be penalized. Use
proper citations. Chicago or MLA will do.

**

Unit Four Assignments 342

**

TUE 4/6 Glenn Porter, The Rise of Big Business, 1860-1920 (Wheeling, IL:
Harlan Davidson, Inc., 1992), pp. 1-28.

WED 4/7 Porter, pp. 29-58.

FRI 4/9 Porter, pp. 58-90.

MON 4/12 Porter, pp. 91-120.

TUE 4/13 Half Hour Test.

**

STUDY QUESTIONS:

**

1\. What was Big Business? What changes in American manufacturing and trade
was brought by the rise of Big Business? [For example, the divorce of
ownership and control, chances in management methods, vertical integration and
horizontal integration].

2\. What were the American reactions to Big Business? The railroads? Why? Why
was the rise of Big Business so unsettling to Americans? Why was Big Business
allowed to exist? What was done by government to Big Business? Not done? Why?

3\. What was the role of the railroads in the development of Big Business?
What contributions to the development of Wall Street, to price setting
efforts, to labor relations, and to the management of business were made by
the railroads [this last the subject of the Chandler Thesis].

4\. What do we learn about the character and methods of the rise of big
business in the Swift example? What innovations made possible the rise of
Swift? Be sensitive to the interplay of entrepreneurship and technology. What
became the public reaction to Swift and the Beef Trust? Why? Similarly, trace
these issues in the rise of United Fruit and General Electric.

5\. Be able to describe typical examples of vertical integration. Horizontal
integration. What instruments and methods of horizontal integration and market
control were used?

**

Unit Five Assignments 342

**

WED 4/14 Melvyn Dubofsky, Industrialism and the American Worker,  1865-1920,
2d ed. (Arlington Heights, IL: Harlan Davidson Inc.,  1985), "Preface to the
Second Edition." Also read quickly the  "Bibliographical Essay" at the rear,
but do not try to learn the  authors except Commons, Perlman, David
Montgomery, and Foner.

FRI 4/16 Dubofsky, Chapter 1.

MON 4/19 Dubofsky, Chapter 2 to p. 55.

TUE 4/20 Dubofsky, Chapter 2 from p. 55 to the end

WED 4/21 Dubofsky, Chapter 3.

FRI 4/23 Dubofsky, Chapter 4.

MON 4/26 Test over Porter _The Rise of Big Business_ , and Dubofsky,
_Industrialism and the American Worker_.

You are expected to:

a. Be in class:

b. Have read the reading assigned for the day so that we can have a fruitful

discussion.

There may be either a discussion grade given or a quiz for any given day.

**

STUDY QUESTIONS:

**

1\. In the "Preface to the Second Edition," be familiar with the different
schools of labor history and the fragmentation that exists in the field today.
This is a paradigm for the fragmentation which has affected the whole field of
history today.

2\. In the "Preface" and the "Bibliographic Essay," what is the difference
between the Institutional approach of Commons and Perlman and the New Labor
History and New Social History (starts p. 153).

3\. What was the impact of the Industrial Revolution and the rise of Big
Business on American labor?

4\. What was the impact of race, ethnicity, and gender on American labor? On
the American labor movement? What differences based on race, ethnicity, and
gender existed within American labor?

5\. What happened to wages and the living conditions of labor in the period
1865-1920? Were the promise and dreams labor sought in this period fulfilled?
Why is the answer so unclear? How may it be tied to how it is asked and
researched?

6\. What does the author mean by the "shock of change," and why was the late
nineteenth century a period of "chaos" for labor?

7\. Describe what your author calls the "pattern of conflict and repression"
in American labor history in the late nineteenth century. Be able to describe
the tools used by both labor and capital in dealing with eachother. What was
the role of violence in labor relations? Describe the major symbolic conflicts
such as Haymarket, Homestead, and Pullman.

8\. Describe the evolution of labor unions from NLU through the Knights to the
AF of L. What were the different organizing principles, particularly for the
Knights and AF of L? Why did the AF of L succeed where the others failed? Be
able to describe the wages, hours, and conditions character of American
business unionism. Describe Gomper's vision and practice of unionism. What was
the reformist, political, utopian side to unionism? Describe radical,
socialist unionism. How did unions and labor play the game of politics?

9\. What were the origins and character of the labor reforms of Progressivism?

10\. What was the impact of World War I on unionism? Labor? What was the
impact of the return to "Normalcy."

**

UNIT 6 ASSIGNMENTS

John Hicks, _The Populist Revolt

**_

HANDOUT

What is Hicks' view of the problems the farmers faced, and the causes of these
difficulties?

How do these views of Hicks differ from those of Hofstadter and the other
historians we will study?

What is Hicks' assessment of the nature of Populism, including the Grangers,
the  Alliances, and the People's Party?

Again, how do these views of Hicks differ from those of Hofstadter and the
other  historians we will study?

**

Richard Hofstadter, _The Age of Reform from Bryan to F.D.R.

_

ON RESERVE AT LIBRARY [May be under Young's name]

**

INTRODUCTION

What is his view of the two-fold nature of Populism and  Progressivism?

CHAPTER I Read quickly.

What is the Agrarian Myth?

How did agriculture change after 1815?

How in the late 19th century did the Agrarian Myth and reality differ from
each  other?

CHAPTER II Read only section II, "History as Conspiracy," pp. 70-81.

Who or what did the Populists feel were the malefactors of the farmer and
America?

CHAPTER IV

Who were the Mugwump types? With what were they concerned?

What does he mean by Progressivism was a "Status Revolution"?

What alienated the professionals? Why were the lawyers and clergy
particularly alienated?

CHAPTER V Read only the "Progressive Impulse," pp. 173-196.

How did the mugwumps and middle class progressives differ from the
immigrants?

What was muck raking and its role in Progressivism?

**

Handouts of passages from various historians :

**

1\. Historians have interpreted the reactions to the rise of Big Business
differently. In part these differences reflect the concerns of the time in
which these historians live, the education and technical skills of the
historians, the geographic origins of the historians, and the social origins
and status of the historians. Taking the many views to which you have been
exposed on this era of reform, write an essay on the above thesis supporting
it with evidence from the readings and lectures. You will not be able to
document every point above, but most. _You will be expected to know the views
of the various historians studied.

_

2\. Populism and progressivism were multifaceted reactions to fundamental
changes in America between 1865 and 1914. Show what who were reacting against
how. Why is it so hard to get a handle on Progressivism?

**

Schedule:

**

TUE 4/27 Introduction to unit.

WED 4/28 Ditto, Hicks Handout.

FRI 4/30 Hicks Handout.

MON 5/3 Hofstadter, Introduction & Chapter I.

TUE 5/4 Hofstadter, Chapter II.

WED 5/5 Hofstadter, Chapter IV.

FRI 5/7 Hofstadter, Chapter V.

MON 5/10 Gabriel Kolko, _The Railroads and Regulation_ , 231-239; Albro
Martin, _Enterprise Denied_ , pp. 55-61, 93-95.

TUE 5/11 Lee Benson, Handout.

WED 5/12 Robert H. Wiebe, _The Search for Order, 1870 -1922_ , pp. 111-134,
148-163.

FRI 5/14 Exam over Unit 6.

**

REVIEW--LAST WEEK ASSIGNMENTS.

**

1\. Know the views of each historian and his approach to Progressivism.

2\. How does Kolko reflect the New Left 1960's view that elites dominated a
class society in America?

3\. What is Martin's view of how regulation hurt America?

4\. How does Progressivism look different at the micro-level according to
Benson?

5\. What is the search for order according to Wiebe.

