**Syllabus and Reading List**

![](Syllabus_files/panth5.gif)

Mr. Kevin Purvis

Newberry High School

(352) 472-1101, Ext. 260  
  
  
  

**Course: AP U.S. History**  
  

**Course Description and Goals**  
  

The objective of this course is to increase the student's understanding of
United States history from discovery to the present with the goal of having
each student pass the AP Examination. The areas of concentration include
historical, political and economic history coupled with an intense study of
cultural and intellectual institutions and their development. This course is
taught at the college level. The major difference between a high school and
college history course are the amount of reading and the focus. Most high
school courses stress "What happened" intending to provide enough background
to ensure good citizenship. College courses stress "Why and how" things happen
as well as the consequences of actions.  
  

**Text:** **The Enduring Vision** (1st Edition)

Paul S. Boyer, Clifford E. Clark, Jr., Joseph F. Kett, Thomas L. Purvis,
Harvard Sitkoff and Nancy Woloch  
  

**Supplementary Reading:**  
  

**American History Review Text -** I.L. Gordon  
  

**Great Issues In American History, Vol. II &III** \-

Hofstadter, Richard, ed.  
  

**The American Political Tradition: And the Men Who Made It**

Hofstadter, Richard, ed.  
  
  
  

**SUBJECT OBJECTIVES:**

1\. To provide students with the analytical skills and factual knowledge to
deal with the problems and materials in American history.

2\. To present the student with a multitude of historical interpretations on
events, movements and individuals in American history representing conflicting
points of view.

3\. To prepare students for intermediate and advanced college courses by
making demands upon them equivalent to those of full-year introductory
courses.

4\. To require exposure to standard college textbooks, diplomatic history
textbooks, economic history textbooks, documentary histories and a variety of
specialized period supplementary works that place emphasis on political
history, social history, economic history, and/or diplomatic history.

5\. To present material through lecture, small groups discussions, audio-
visual aids, and student-responsible classroom periods.

6\. To test for factual knowledge and the abilities to analyze, compare,
contrast, and draw valid conclusions.

7\. To prepare students to assess historical materials -- their relevance to a
given interpretation problem, their reliability and their importance -- and to
weigh the evidence and interpretations presented in historical scholarship.

8\. To write essays on the validity and reliability of various historical
interpretations in light of historical evidence.

9\. To require students to interpret documents, maps, charts, graphs,
statistical tables, pictures, private journals, and correspondence for
content, meaning, and usefulness.

10\. To teach students to take useful notes from both printed materials and
lectures or discussions, write essay examinations, and write analytical
research papers, with the ability to express themselves with clarity and
precision and know how to cite sources and credit the persons and ideas of
others.  
  

**Units and** **Reading Assignments**  
  

**_SEMESTER I & II**_  
  

**_Unit 1: Colonial America (1607 - 1763)_**

**Enduring Vision _**Chapters 1, 2, & 3 _

1\. The student will explain how political and economic rivalries among
nations led to the exploration of new areas of the world.

2\. The student will discuss the distinctive patterns of life that developed
in the American colonies in response to environmental needs, and describe the
mobility and economic opportunity as the most distinctive features of the
colonial class system.

3\. The student will identify the basic religious beliefs held by the Puritans
and the ways in which these beliefs shaped the Puritans' political
organization, social practices and values.

4\. The student will discuss how the movement known as the Great Awakening
strengthened the ideals of religious freedom show what connection, if any, it
had with the Enlightenment.

5\. The student will identify conflicting elements between mercantilism and
colonial enterprise by specifying key developments in the American colonies.

6\. The student will evaluate the importance of the French-Indian War in terms
of the impact it had on the deteriorating relationship between Great Britain
and the colonies.  
  

**_Unit 2: The Road to Revolution (1763 - 1788)_**

**Enduring Vision** _Chapters 4 & 5_

1\. Given the statement by John Adams, "The Revolution was effected before the
war commenced," the student will explain the meaning of the "American
Revolution" as Adams conceived it, and identify major forces that brought this
revolution about.

2\. The student will identify the factors that weakened British authority over
the American colonies, and explain the role of each factor.

3\. The student will identify why a revolutionary minority was successful in
causing the colonies to revolt against British rule.

4\. The student will give reasons for the American military victory in the
American Revolution by placing special emphasis on the impact of the
Declaration of Independence.

5\. The student will demonstrate an understanding of one interpretation of the
causes of the American Revolution by presenting in a brief essay the arguments
in support of that interpretation.

6\. The student will identify the reasons for calling the Constitutional
Convention in 1787, and for replacing the Articles of Confederation with the
Constitution of the United States.

7\. The student will make an evaluation of the role played by the Founding
Fathers at the Constitutional Convention (according to Richard Hofstadter in
American Political Tradition) and make a conclusion regarding our heritage as
a "democracy in cupidity" as opposed to a "democracy in fraternity".  
  

**_Unit 3: The Early National Period (1789 - 1841)_**

**Enduring Vision _**_ Chapters 6, 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 & 11

1\. The student will identify elements fostering the growth of a nationalistic
spirit in the United States in the period 1789-1830.

2\. The student will identify the relationship between politics and economic
development by specifying the purposes and achievements of economic policies
formed by Alexander Hamilton.

3\. The student will identify two or more foreign policy objectives of the
United States relating to the War of 1812 and explain by statement to what
extent, if any, these objectives were achieved as a result of the war.

4\. The student will evaluate presidential politics during the Era of Good
Feelings, how these policies altered the political system, and explain the
importance of nationalism and its reflection in the American System.

5\. The student will describe in an essay how democratic government advanced
in this nation from 1789 through Andrew Jackson's presidency. He will include
references to the attitudes of the Founding Fathers on democracy, the role of
political parties, the contributions of Thomas Jefferson, and the features of
Jacksonian democracy.

6\. The student will understand Andrew Jackson's philosophy of government, his
reaction to the nullification theory of John C. Calhoun, and the effect of the
Bank Veto on the presidency and the United States banking system.

**_Unit 4: A House Divided & Conflict (1846 - 1877)**_

**__Enduring Vision __** Chapters 12 , 13 , 14 & 15

1\. The student will define "manifest destiny" and formulate a conclusion
regarding its justification as a national policy.

2\. The student will compare President Monroe's original pronouncement with
the extension of the Monroe Doctrine under President Polk and Secretary of
State Olney and prepare a criticism of the policies inherent therein.

3\. The student will state President Polk's reasons for asking Congress to
declare war on Mexico, and explain the terms of the Treaty of Guadalupe
Hidalgo and their impact on events in the United States.

4\. The student will present reasons for the enslavement of the black African,
and for the failure of attempts to abolish slavery.

5\. The student will specify how technological inventions related to frontier
expansion and how factory expansion contributed to America's pre-Civil War
growth.

6\. The student will give specific reasons for the failure of compromise to
settle national-sectional differences prior to the Civil War.

7\. The student will be able to measure Abraham Lincoln's original aims as
president against his overall achievements.

8\. The student will identify the bases of the power struggle between the
President and Congress regarding Reconstruction policies.

9\. The student will identify the reasons for the failure of Reconstruction
governments in the South.  
  

_**Unit 5: The Gilded Age (1865 - 1900)**_

**__Enduring Vision** Chapters 16 , 17 , 18 , 19  & 20

1\. The student will cite the conditions that necessitated corporate growth
and evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of corporations as a form of
economic operation.

2\. The student will specify the relationship between the beliefs in "rugged
individualism" and "Social Darwinism" as both affected the growth of corporate
monopolies.

3\. The student will describe the close balance between 1876 and 1892 and some
of its effects on the Presidents of the time period.

4\. The student will identify evidence supporting the proposition that the
city was equally important as a force in determining historical events and
their outcomes and in shaping American society as the frontier.

5\. The student will give examples to support the proposition that many urban
problems originated from the lack of city planning, and from the assertion of
one set of values over other values.

6\. The student will identify problems and opportunities that American cities
presented to immigrants.

7\. The student will specify differences between the programs and purposes of
various labor organizations.

8\. The student will reconstruct, by using examples and illustrations, some
aspect of the frontier experience of the American Indian.

9\. The student will identify the economic disadvantages experienced by
farmers working within the free enterprise system of the late nineteenth
century.

10\. The student will be able to name the candidates, issues, and results of
the election of 1896.  
  

**_Unit 6: The Progressive Era (1898 - 1914)_**

**__Enduring Vision __** Chapter 21 ** _**_  
  

1\. The student will discuss American expansion at the turn of the nineteenth
century in terms of its implications for a neo-colonial policy.

2\. The student will formulate a conclusion about the strengths and weaknesses
of the nation's policy of intervention in Latin America during the first part
of the twentieth century, with specific regard to Cuba, Panama, and Mexico.

3\. The student will formulate a conclusion concerning the effectiveness of
American policy in regard to its Pacific possessions.

4\. The student will explain the significance of the Open Door as the
foundation of American foreign policy in Asia during the early twentieth
century.

5\. The student will define the meaning of "progressivism" and the key men who
contributed important philosophic ideas to the movement.

6\. The student will evaluate the differences in achievement of progressive
goals among the programs of President Theodore Roosevelt, William Howard Taft,
and Woodrow Wilson. _ ****_  
  

**_Unit 7: A Time of Transition (1914 - 1932)_**

**Enduring Vision** Chapters 22 , 23 , 24  & 25

1\. The student will list the rights of neutral nations in time of war, and
the rights of belligerents vis-a-vis neutral nations.

2\. The student will justify a conclusion as to whether or not the decision to
intervene in World War I was in accord with the national interest of the
United States.

3\. The student will identify reasons for governmental restrictions of the
economy and of civil liberties during World War I and conclude whether the
imposed restrictions were justified.

4\. The student will list the reasons for this country's failure to ratify the
Treaty of Versailles and explain by statement the effect that failure had on
American foreign policy and world affairs.

5\. The student will identify the elements in international affairs that were
responsible for the ineffectiveness of the steps taken to safeguard the peace
following World War I.

6\. The student will identify the conflicts in American society produced by
increased immigration of non-Anglo-Saxon people to the United States.

7\. The student will explain the change in government attitudes toward
business and its effects on society during the 1920's.

8\. The student will identify the forces which helped to develop a pervasive
sense of materialism in American society during the 1920's.

9\. The student will identify the factors which caused and intensified the
Great Depression.

10\. The student will give reasons to support the statement that Herbert
Hoover was a "transitional figure" in the development of the government as an
active force in the economy in times of depression.  
  

**_Unit 8: The Age of FDR (1933 - 1945)**_

**__Enduring Vision** Chapter 24 , 25  & 26

1\. The student will identify changes in political theory and practice that
occurred under the New Deal and give specific examples of legislation to
illustrate these changes.

2\. The student will list the problems of the first New Deal and the range of
responses provoked by the resolutions to these problems.

3\. The student will identify the achievements and problems of the second New
Deal, citing specific examples.

4\. The student will identify reasons for the widespread acceptance of
totalitarian forms of government during the period 1920-1939.  
  

**_Unit 9: World War II (1939 - 1945)**_

**__Enduring Vision __** Chapter 26

1\. The student will explain how failure by the democracies to stop aggression
by other countries led to the outbreak of World War II.

2\. The student will identify a political, an economic, and a social cause of
the conflict between the United States and Japan in the early decades of the
twentieth century, and evaluate whether war with Japan was inevitable.

3\. The student will differentiate between strategies used in the European
theater and those used in the Pacific, and will develop a conclusion regarding
how geography determines battle strategy.

4\. The student will identify three or more ways in which World War II
influenced the day-to-day lives of Americans.

5\. The student will critically evaluate the decisions of the major wartime
conferences among the Allied heads of state, weighing the military
requirements of that time against long-range political consequences.

6\. The student will evaluate the cataclysmic effects of Hitler's "Final
Solution" and the extent to which they have impacted today's present day
concern with human rights.  
  

_**Unit 10: The Cold War Era (1945 - 1952)**_

**__Enduring Vision** Chapter 27  & 28

1\. The student will define the concept of containment as it applies to
foreign policy and will describe its application in the Cold War.

2\. The student will explain the theory behind President Truman's policy of
conducting a "limited war" in the Korean War, and form hypotheses on the
probable reasons for Communist China's intervention.

3\. The student will define the term "coexistence" as it related to Cold War
diplomacy and will describe how major events between 1955-1960 both
demonstrated its acceptance and affected American-Soviet relations.

4\. The student will critically evaluate "McCarthyism", using references to
other similar movements in American history.

5\. The student will classify major personalities, policies, and political
institutions of the Truman-Eisenhower years as conservative, moderate, or
liberal and defend its classifications.

6\. The student will formulate a hypothesis as to why the tactics of the civil
rights movement changed from those of working through the courts to those of
direct action.

7\. The student will be able to identify causal antecedents from the era
1945-1960 to major domestic problems and issues in American society today.  
  

**_Unit 11: The Sixties & Seventies_**

**Enduring Vision** Chapters 29 , 30  & 31

1\. The student will evaluate the presidency of John F. Kennedy (1961-1963)
and explain the developments of his "New Frontier" program.

2\. The student will understand the goals and legislative achievements of
President Johnson's "Great Society" program (1963- 1969).

3\. The student will identify events and policies which contributed to the
escalation of United States involvement in Vietnam (1961-1973)

4\. The student will be able to identify and describe elements in American
society which have posed problems concerning freedom and dissent during the
past twenty years.

5\. The student will evaluate the record of the Administration of Richard
Nixon on the reform programs of law and order, civil rights, inflation, and
the environment.

