Seminar in American Political Development  
Political Science 406 / UM-Columbia  
Political Science 431 / UM - St. Louis

_

"The past is never dead; it's not even past." -- William Faulkner, _Requiem
for a Nun

__

* * *

Professor Dave Robertson

UM-St. Louis Tower, SSB 347; Phone 314-516-5855, Fax 314- 516-5855

E-Mail: [DaveRobertson@umsl.edu](mailto:DaveRobertson@umsl.edu)

**

1**. The Course Agenda

Why is American politics so different from politics in comparable nations?
American political parties are weaker, economic "peak organizations" less
influential, and interest groups more fragmented than is true abroad. Many
political scientists have tried to explain these patterns by tracing the
development of the unique paths pursued in American politics. Many of these
political scientists emphasize the effects of institutions on these
developments. Studies described as "new institutionalist" focus on the ways
that governing structures (executives, legislatures, judiciaries, and
subnational governments) and structures of political linkage (political
parties and organized interests) shape the development of political conflict
and public policy. Such studies emphasize that the decisions of the past
affect the dynamics of political development by creating opportunities and
constraints in contemporary political strategy, institutional design, and
policy outcomes.

The central goal in this course is to familiarize students with the
application of this perspective in the study of American politics. It combines
several features of the "new institutionalism" in the study of politics:
longitudinal (that is, across time) comparison, the use of developmental
evidence to validate hypotheses, the attention to the effect of rules and
structure on political conflict, and the rediscovery of the "state" as an
independent political force. Two questions will guide many of our discussions:
how does political strategy affect political structure, and how does political
structure affect political strategy?

Evidence drawn from primary and secondary sources will illuminate changes
primarily in Congress, the Presidency, bureaucracy, political parties,
interest groups and public policy since the 1770s. We will examine some of the
classic arguments, interpretations, and writers on American politics, from the
_Federalist Papers_ to the present. Many of these works are more discussed
than read today. We will analyze these interpretations on their own terms, for
their intrinsic values and for a better understanding of the circumstances
that they reflect. Students will choose a political institution or a policy
area and follow its development through periods of change in American
politics.

**

2**. Required Books.

Five books are required for the course. These are available at the University
of Missouri bookstores.

Stephen Skowronek, _The Politics Presidents Make_ (Cambridge: Belknap, 1997)

David W. Brady, _Critical Elections and Congressional Policy Making_
(Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1988).

Lawrence Dodd and Calvin Jillson, eds., _The Dynamics of American Politics_
(Boulder: Westview Press, 1994).

Elisabeth S. Clemens, _The People's Lobby: Organizational Innovation and the
Rise of Interest Group Politics in the United States, 1890-1925_ (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1997)

Jane J. Mansbridge, _Why We Lost the ERA_ (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1986)

  
One book is recommended, not required:

Clinton Rossiter, ed., _The Federalist Papers_ (New York: Mentor) Note: the
Federalist Papers can be read and downloaded on-line at
[<http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/federal/fed.htm>](http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/federal/fed.htm).
The definitive edition of the Federalist Papers is Jacob E. Cook, _The
Federalist_ (Weslyan University Press, 1961)

 In addition to these books, several articles and documents are also required
(see below). The electronic version of this syllabus provides hot links to
several of the historical documents.

You are encouraged to use the [American Political Development
Bibliography](sy431bib.html) for additional readings in your area of interest
and additional research resources.

3\. Grading

\-- Participation: 10%

\-- Four Papers: 15% each

\-- Final Exam: 15%

\-- Research Design: 15%

4\. Participation

You are expected to participate in all seminar sessions and to contribute
thoughtful and informed questions and comments to the discussion. If you do so
you will receive an "A" for this part of the grade. Remember, this seminar
will succeed only to the extent that you participate. Its success depends on
you, particularly because the course will include participation on closed
circuit television.

Four sessions will be devoted in large part to student presentations of their
work. These brief (10-15 minute) presentations will apply the main hypotheses
of the course to the policy or institution chosen for analysis by the student.
The papers will be based on sources from the historical period that is
analyzed that week. At least one of these sources must be an original source,
such as a Congressional debate, a presidential paper, a Supreme Court
decision, a political party platform, or an interest group document. The best
strategy is to pick an institution or a policy area and look at key turning
points in each of the periods that we analyze.

5\. Papers

There will be four short (6-10 page, typed) analytical papers for the course.
They are "think pieces" based on applying the required course readings to the
material that you research independently each week. Since one of the purposes
of these papers is to facilitate class discussion, I will impose a small
penalty for papers handed in after the seminar meeting. This penalty will be
one point per day. Papers coming via campus mail from Columbia will have a
day's grace period. There will be no exceptions.

You may define the topics for the as you wish. Pick a good question to ask,
select a good case, and discover something of interest that you can share with
the class. If you feel more secure with set topic, try the following:

* How did ____________ affect (the presidency, Congress, the judiciary, political parties, or interest groups) in this period?

* In what ways was __________ policy independently shaped by political structure, and in what ways does it reflect other things such as American political culture, economic interests, or other factors that determine political outcomes?

* What theoretical propositions does your evidence suggest about leadership? 

* In what ways does your case illustrate the importance political argument as an independent determinant of political outcomes?

6\. Research Design

There will be a research design assignment of 10-15 pages. For more
information on the research design, click [here](ResearchDesign.html). A
separate page provides more detail on this assignment. You will not have to
turn in a completed research project - only a rigorous plan for such a
project. This design is due on December 14.

 7\. Final Exam

Write a 5-10 page typed essay in response to each of the following questions.
If you have taken relevant graduate-level political science coursework, take
this opportunity to show how you can apply the literature and information from
those courses. Be sure to bring in Tetlock and Belkin and at least one chapter
in Dodd and Jillson.

1\. Political scientists frequently say that "the rules are not neutral."
Specify and demonstrate the theoretical importance of this claim in the
political science literature.

2\. Choose one chapter in the book, _What if the American Political System
Were Different_? (on reserve). Critically assess its argument, and provide a
plausible alternative supported by evidence.



* * *

Brief Schedule

 August 24 (Mon): The New Institutionalism and the Return to History

  * READ: Robertson, "Politics and the Past"  
Dodd and Jillson, pp ix-xvii, 1-22

 August 31 (Mon): American Political Development Perspectives

  * READ: Skowronek, 3-15; Dodd and Jillson, 24-104, 311-330; Clemens, 41-64.

September 7 (Mon): Labor Day, class does not meet

September 14 (Mon): Founding

  * READ: Tetlock and Belkin, 3-38; [The Articles of Confederation](http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/artconf.htm); [The Virginia Plan](http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/debates/529.htm); [the U.S. Constitution](http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/usconst.htm); [The Federalist Papers](http://www.mcs.net/~knautzr/fed/fedpaper.html) 1-18, 21-24, 26, 28, 31-51 

September 21 (Mon): Founding: Rules and Institutions

  * READ: [The Federalist Papers](http://www.mcs.net/~knautzr/fed/fedpaper.html) 52-78, 84-85; Skowronek, 17-58; Brady 1-19

September 28 (Mon): Patrician America

  * READ: Skowronek, 61-154; [Tocqueville](http://history.hanover.edu/modern/detoc.htm); Richard John 

October  5 (Mon): Civil War

  * READ: Lincoln, [Gettysburg Address](http://www.netins.net/showcase/creative/lincoln/speeches/gettysburg.htm), [Second Inaugural](http://www.netins.net/showcase/creative/lincoln/speeches/inaug2.htm); Brady 20-49; Skowronek, 155-227

October 12 (Mon): The State of Courts and Parties

  * READ: Silbey; Brady 50-83; Clemens, 1-40; [Bryan](http://www.c7p.com/screen/bryan/crossofgold.html)

October 19 (Mon): The State of Courts and Parties

**

  * PAPERS DUE

**

October 26 (Mon): Progressivism

  * READ: Clemens, 65-272; Bentley, 200-222 (handout); Skowronek 228-259

November 2 (Mon): New Deal

  * READ: Clemens, 273-325; Brady 85-114; Skowronek, 260-324; Dodd and Jillson, 132-159

November 9 (Mon): New Deal

**

  * PAPERS DUE
**

  * READ: [President Roosevelt's First Inaugural Address](http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/presiden/inaug/froos1.htm); Key (handout)

November 16 (Mon): Cold War Politics

  * READ: Skowronek, 325-406; Brady 115-135; 332-351; Truman, 501-533; Dodd and Jillson, 277-297

November 23 (Mon): The 1960s Transformation

**

  * PAPERS DUE
**

  * READ: Mansbridge, 1-35; [Port Huron Statement](http://ppl.nhmccd.edu/~craigl/primary_folder/29.c.01.Port_Huron.html)

 November 30 (Mon): The 1970s Transformation

  * READ: Mansbridge, 36-199; Skowronek, 409-446; Brady 136-181; [President Reagan's First Inaugural Address](http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/presiden/inaug/reagan1.htm)

December 7 (Mon): Analyzing Contemporary Politics with Historical Perspective

**

  * PAPERS DUE
**

  * READ: Milkis; Dodd and Jillson, 106-131, 208-233, 366-389; Skowronek, 447-464

December 14 (Mon): **Exam and Research Design Due

**



* * *

Comprehensive Course Schedule

**_

August 24 The New Institutionalism and the Return to History

**

Required Readings

_

David Brian Robertson, "Politics and the Past: History, Behavioralism, and the
Return to Institutionalism in American Political Science," in Eric Monkkonen,
ed., Engaging the Past: _The Uses of History Across the Social Sciences_
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1994), pp. 113-153 (or "The Return to
History and the New Institutionalism in Political Science," _Social Science
History_ 17:1, pp. 1-36).

Theodore J. Lowi, "Foreword," and Calvin Jillson, Patterns and Periodicity in
American National Politics," in Dodd and Jillson, _The Dynamics of American
Politics,_ pp ix-xvii, 1-22 _

__

Discussion Questions

_

1.What has prompted political scientists' interest in institutions in recent
years?

2\. What does the term "political development" mean?

3\. What does the term "state" mean? What does it imply?

_



Supplementary Readings:

_

Ira Katznelson, "The Doleful Dance of Politics and Policy: Can Historical
Institutionalism Make a Difference?" _APSR_ 92:1 (March, 1998): 191-198.

Eric Monkkonen, ed., _Engaging the Past: The Uses of History Across the Social
Sciences_ (Duke University Press, 1994)

David B. Easton, John G. Gunnell, and Michael B. Stein, eds. _Regime and
Discipline: Democracy and the Development of Political Science_ (Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press, 1995).

Thomas A. Koelble, "The New Institutionalism in Political Science,"
_Comparative Politics_ 27 (January, 1995), pp. 231-243.

Sanford M. Jacoby, "The New Institutionalism: What Can It Learn From the Old?"
_Industrial Relations_ 29:2 (Spring, 1990).

Paul C. Stern, _Evaluating Social Science Research_ , (Oxford University
Press, 1979), 24-37, 72-77.

Max Weber, _Methodology of the Social Sciences_ (Free Press, 1949)

Jon Elster, _Logic and Society: Contradictions and Possible Worlds_ (Wiley,
1978) and _Nuts and Bolts for the Social Sciences_ (Cambridge UP, 1989)

A.M. MacIver, "Levels of Explanation in History," in May Brodbeck, ed.,
_Readings in the Philosophy of the Social Sciences_ (Macmillan, 1968)

Anthony Giddens, _Central Problems in Social Theory: Action, Structure and
Contradiction in Social Analysis_ (California, 1979) and _The Constitution of
Society_ (California UP, 1984).

Sven Steinmo, Kathleen Thelen, and Frank Longstreth, eds., _Structuring
Politics: Historical Institutionalism in Historical Perspective_ __ (Cambridge
UP, 1992)

Mary C. Brinton and Victor Nee, eds., _The New Institutionalism in Sociology_
(New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1998).

David Collier, "The Comparative Method," in Ada W. Finifter, ed., _Political
Science: The State of the Discipline II_ (American Political Science
Association, 1993), 105-120.

Gary B. Nash, Charlotte Crabtree, and Ross E. Dunn, _History on Trial: Culture
Wars and the Teaching of the Past_ (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1997).



**_

August 31 American Political Development Perspectives

**

Required Readings

_

Skowronek, _The Politics Presidents Make_ , 3-15

Dodd and Jillson, _The Dynamics of American Politics,_ 24-104, 311-330

(Jillson, Burnham, Swift and Brady, Orren and Skowronek)

Clemens, _The People's Lobby_ , pp. 19-49



_

Discussion Questions

_

1\. What does Skowronek mean by "the institutional logic of political
disruption" (p 15)? Who cares?

2\. How has and is socioeconomic change affecting political change in America?

3\. Why is a periodization of American political history worth doing?

4\. Are we in a period of constitutional change, governmental change, or no
change at all?

5\. What kinds of methods are appropriate for doing political history?

6\. What do Swift and Brady mean by the "drawbacks" of specialization in
political science. Critique their claim that historical analysis can overcome
some of these drawbacks.

7\. What do Orren and Skowronek mean by emphasizing the "political frictions
that drive and shape political change? Give examples.

8\. What is the significance of the Orren and Skowronek argument?

9\. What kinds of hypotheses about politics does the concept "state" suggest
that other approaches do not?

10\. Does Clemens' chapter illustrate the synthesis that Swift and Brady
advocate? Explain why or why not.

11\. Explain the significance of "organizational repertoires" in Clemens'
chapter. How do you know one when you see it?

12\. Why do people form political parties? If parties preceded interest
groups, why did they form interest groups?



_

Supplementary Readings

_

Theda Skocpol, "Bringing the State Back In," in Peter Evans, Theda Skocpol,
and Dietrich Rueschemeyer, eds., _Bringing the State Back In_ (Cambridge
University Press, 1985), 3-37.

Morton H. Fried, "State (The Institution)," and Frederick M. Watkins, "State
(The Concept)," in David L. Sills, ed., _International Encyclopedia of the
Social Sciences_ (Macmillan, 1968).

J.P. Nettl, "The State as a Conceptual Variable," _World Politics_ 20:4 (July,
1968), 559-592.

Stephen Skowronek, _Building a New American State: The Expansion of National
Administrative Capacities, 1877-1920_ (Cambridge University Press, 1982).

Gabriel Almond, "The Return to the State," _American Political Science Review_
, 82:3 (September, 1988) 853-874.

Timothy Mitchell, "The Limits of the State: Beyond Statist Approaches and
their Critics," _American Political Science Review_ 85:1 (March, 1991) 77-96.

Clyde W. Barrow, _Critical Theories of the State: Marxist, Neo-Marxist, Post-
Marxist_ (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1993).

Quentin Skinner, "The State," chapter 5 in Terence Ball, James Farr, and
Russell L. Hanson, _Political Innovation and Conceptual Change_ (Cambridge
University Press, 1989)

Eric Nordlinger, _On the Autonomy of the Democratic State_ (Harvard University
Press, 1981)

Roger Benjamin and Stephen L. Elkin, eds., _The Democratic State_ (University
Press of Kansas, 1985).

Stephen D. Krasner, "Approaches to the State: Alternative Conceptions and
Historical Dynamics," _Comparative Politics_ (January, 1984): 223-46

Stephen D. Krasner, "Sovereignty: An Institutional Perspective," _Comparative
Political Studies_ 21:1 (1988), pp. 66-94.

Bob Jessop, _State Theory: Putting the Capitalist State in its Place_ (Penn
State, 1991)

Barbara Geddes, _Politician's Dilemma: Building State Capacity in Latin
America_ (University of California, 1994) [Rational choice analysis]

Byron E. Shafer **,** _Is America Different? A New Look at American
Exceptionalism_ (Oxford, 1991)



**_

September 7: Labor Day - Class does not meet



September 14: Founding

**

Required Readings

_

Philip E. Tetlock and Aaron Belkin, "Counterfactual Thought Experiments in
World Politics: Logical, Methodological, and Psychological Perspectives," in
Tetlock and Belkin, _Counterfactual Thought Experiments in World Politics:
Logical, Methodological, and Psychological Perspectives_ (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1996), pp. 3-38

[ The Articles of
Confederation](http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/artconf.htm)

[The Virginia Plan](http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/debates/529.htm)

[The U.S. Constitution](http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/usconst.htm)

[The Federalist Papers](http://www.mcs.net/~knautzr/fed/fedpaper.html) Nos.
1-18, 21-24, 26, 28, 31-51



_

Discussion Questions

_

1\. Illustrate how the five styles of counterfactual argumentation would be
applied to a significant domestic U.S. political event in the last 35 years
(for example, Watergate; the 1980 or 1992 elections).

2\. "If there had been no New Deal, capitalism would have failed in the U.S."
How could you specify this counterfactual so that it meets the criteria for a
good counterfactual argument spelled out by Tetlock and Belkin, pp. 16-31.

3\. What would have happened had the U.S. _not_ altered the Articles of
Confederation in 1787?

4\. What would have happened had the Constitutional Convention adopted the
entire Virginia Plan?

5\. The Constitution is a solution. What is it a solution _to_?

6\. How do the authors' view of human nature, and how does that view color
their political arguments against the status quo?

7\. How do you know a bad government when you see one, according to the
authors? How do you know a good government when you see one?

8\. How do the authors use historical evidence to make political arguments?
What kinds of evidence is included and excluded in these political arguments?

9\. How federal is the U.S. Constitution?

10\. Are the _Federalist_ 's empirical assumptions about interests accurate?

11\. How do constitutions affect political behavior, and who cares?



_

Supplementary Readings

_

[ The Declaration of
Independence](http://lcweb.loc.gov/exhibits/treasures/trt001.html) / [U.S.
Congressional Documents and Debates,
1774-1793](http://lcweb2.loc.gov/ammem/amlaw/lawhome.html)

Max Farrand, ed., _The Records of the Federal Convention of 1787_ (Yale
University Press, 1966); see _Journal of the Federal Convention_ @ [
http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/debates/debcont.htm](http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/debates/debcont.htm)

Jack N. Rakove, _Original Meanings: Politics and Ideas in the Making of the
Constitution_ (Alfred A. Knopf, 1996)

Gordon S. Wood, _The Confederation and the Constitution: The Critical Issues_
(edited, Little, Brown) and _The Creation of the American Republic_ (Norton,
1969)

Bernard Bailyn, _Ideological Origins of the American Revolution_ (1967)

Calvin C. Jillson, _Constitution Making: Conflict and Consensus in the Federal
Convention of 1787_ (Agathon, 1988).

Richard K. Matthews, _If Men Were Angels: James Madison and the Heartless
Empire of Reason_ (Kansas, 1995).

Lance Banning, _The Sacred Fire of Liberty: James Madison and the Founding of
the Federal Republic_ (Cornell UP, 1995)

Peter F. Nardulli, ed., _The Constitution and American Political Development_
(U of Illinois, 1992)

Mark E. Kann, _A Republic of Men: The American Founders, Gendered Language,
and Patriarchal Politics_ (New York: New York University Press, 1998).

Alan Tully, _Forming American Politics: Ideals, Interests, and Institutions in
Colonial New York and Pennsylvania_ (Johns Hopkins, 1994)

Bernard Grofman and Donald Wittman, eds., _The Federalist Papers and the New
Institutionalism_ (Agathon, 1989)

Samuel H. Beer, _To Make a Nation: The Rediscovery of American Federalism_
(Belknap, 1993)

David Epstein, _The Political Theory of the Federalist_ (University of Chicago
Press, 1984).

Louis Hartz, _The Liberal Tradition in America_ (Harcourt, Brace, 1955)

E.S. Corwin, _The Constitution and What it Means Today_ (Princeton University
Press, 1973).

Charles Beard, _An Economic Interpretation of the Constitution_. (Macmillan,
1913)

Forrest McDonald, _We, The People: The Economic Origins of the Constitution_
(Phoenix Bks, 1963)

Herbert Storing, ed., _The Complete Anti-Federalist_ (University of Chicago
Press, 1980)

Merrill Jensen, _The Articles of Confederation_ (University of Wisconsin
Press, 1963)

Sheldon S. Wolin, _The Presence of the Past: Essays on the State and the
Constitution_ (Johns Hopkins University Press, 1990).



**_

September 21: Founding: Rules and Institutions

**

Required Readings

_

[The Federalist Papers](http://www.mcs.net/~knautzr/fed/fedpaper.html), Nos.
52-78, 84-85

Skowronek, _The Politics Presidents Make,_ pp. 17-58

Brady, _Critical Elections and Congressional Policy Making_ , pp. 1-19

_



Discussion Questions

_

1\. By trying to control for the "mischief of faction," did the constitution
did more harm than good by encouraging a politics of fragmented interest
groups (that is, pluralism)?

2\. Why is it called "Congress?" Why not "parliament," the "national
legislature," or the "national assembly"?

3\. What opportunities do the Federalist's authors envision for the expansion
of Congressional power? Presidential power? Judicial power?

4\. What constraints do the Federalist's authors envision on the expansion of
Congressional power? Presidential power? Judicial power?

5\. What organizational repertoires were the framers trying to establish?

5\. What are the best and worst political predictions made by the authors of
the Federalist?

6\. What is the Federalist authors' vision of the American polity of the
future?

7\. How does political time affect presidential leadership?

8\. How do you recognize a good president when you see one?

9\. What does Brady mean by the term "mid-level theory"?

10\. What causes political realignment?



_

Supplementary Readings

_

Martin A. Reddish, _The Constitution as Political Structure_ (Oxford, 1995)

Giovanni Sartori, _Comparative Constitutional Engineering: An Inquiry Into
Structures, Incentives, and Outcomes (_ New York U Press, 1994)

David Easton, _The Analysis of Political Structure_ (Routledge, 1990).

John Dearlove, "Bringing the Constitution Back In: Political Science and the
State," _Political Studies_ 37:4 (December, 1989), 521-539

William H. Riker, "Implications from the Disequilibrium of Majority Rule for
the Study of Institutions," _American Political Science Review_ 74:2 (June,
1980) 432-446, and Comments and Replies by Peter C. Ordeshook, Douglas W. Rae,
and Riker, pp. 447-458.

William H. Riker, _The Strategy of Rhetoric: Campaigning for the American
Constitution_ (New Haven: Yale University Press).

Jack Knight, _Institutions and Social Conflict_ (Cambridge, 1992)

R. Kent Weaver and Bert A. Rockman, eds., ****_Do Institutions Matter?
Government Capabilities in the United States and Abroad_ (Brookings, 1993).

Roland M. Czada and Adrienne Windhoff-Heritier, eds., _Political Choice:
Institutions, Rules, and the Limits of Rationality_ (Westview, 1990)

John E. Jackson, ed., _Institutions in American Society: Essays in Market,
Political, and Social Organizations_ (University of Michigan Press, 1990)

Terry M. Moe, "Interests, Institutions, and Positive Theory: The Politics of
the NLRB," in _Studies in American Political Development_ 2 (1987), pp.
236-299.

Sven Steinmo, Kathleen Thelen, and Frank Longstreth, eds., _Structuring
Politics: Historical Institutionalism in Comparative Analysis_ (Cambridge,
1992)

Elinor Ostrom, _Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for
Collective Action_ (Cambridge, 1990)

Walter W. Powell and Paul J. DiMaggio, _The New Institutionalism and
Organizational Analysis_ (Chicago, 1991)



**_

September 28: Patrician America

**

Required Readings

_

Stephen Skowronek, _The Politics Presidents Make_ 61-154

Alexis De Tocqueville, [Democracy in
America](http://xroads.virginia.edu/~HYPER/DETOC/toc_indx.html) **:** Read the
following chapters or chapter sections in in Book I: Origin of the Anglo-
Americans, and the Importance of this Origin in Relation to their Future
Condition; Social Condition of the Anglo-Americans; The Principle of the
Sovereignty of the People of North America (section on the administration of
government in New England); Judicial Power in the United States and its
Influence on Political Society; How it can be Strictly Said That the People
Govern in The United States; Liberty of the Press in The United States;
Political Associations in The United States; Government of the Democracy in
The United States (sections on corruption and self-control); Unlimited Power
of the Majority in The United States, and its Consequences.

Richard R. John, "Governmental Institutions as Agents of Change: Rethinking
American Political Development in the Early Republic, 1787-1835," _Studies in
American Political Development_ 11:2 (1997), 347-380 (on reserve)



_

Discussion Questions

_

1\. How did concern about the survival of the republic affect American
political development?

2\. Did institutions shape the early presidents, or did the early presidents
shape American political institutions?

3\. Why does the U.S. differ from Europe, according to Tocqueville? What are
the strengths and weaknesses of his explanations in light of subsequent
developments?

4\. To what extent is its political structure a necessary condition for the
democratic character of American culture as Tocqueville describes it? To what
extent is its political structure a sufficient condition?

5\. What is the evidence for a "tyranny of the majority" in the United States?

6\. Reading Tocqueville, would the authors of the Federalist papers conclude
that they had politically succeeded or failed?

7\. Why are political parties so important in early American history

8\. Does John undermine or reinforce Skowronek's claims?

9\. Why did the discipline of history lose interest in government, according
to Richard John?

10\. Are the Skowronek and John portraits of ante-bellum America consistent
with that of Tocqueville?

_



Supplementary Readings

_

Stanley Elkins and Eric McKitrick, _The Age of Federalism: The Early American
Republic, 1788-1800_ (Oxford, 1993).

James S. Young, _The Washington Community, 1800-1828_ (Columbia University
Press, 1966)

Richard Hofstadter, _The Idea of a Party System: The Rise of Legitimate
Opposition in the United States, 1780-1840_ (University of California Press,
1969)

Matthew Crenson, _The Federal Machine: The Beginnings of Bureaucracy in
Jacksonian America_ (Johns Hopkins, 1975)

Leonard White, _The Jeffersonians_ (Macmillan, 1948)

Leonard White, _The Jacksonians_ (Macmillan, 1954)

Arthur M. Schleslinger, Jr., _The Age of Jackson_ (Little, Brown, 1950)

Marshall Smelser, _The Democratic Republic, 1801-1815_ (Harper and Row, 1968)

George Dangerfield, _The Awakening of American Nationalism 1815-1828_ (Harper
and Row, 1965)

Ken Masugi, ed., _Interpreting Tocqueville's Democracy in America_ (Rowman and
Littlefield, 1991)

Andre Jardin, _Tocqueville: A Biography_ (Johns Hopkins, 1998)

John C. Calhoun, _A Disquisition on Government_ (Bobbs-Merrill, 1953)

Vernon L. Parrington, _The Romantic Revolution in America, 1800-1860_
(Harcourt, Brace, and World, 1927)

Curtis P. Nettels, _The Emergence of a National Economy, 1775- 1815_ (M.E.
Sharpe).

Charles Sellers, _The Market Revolution: Jacksonian America, 1815-1846_
(Oxford, 1991).

Robert Fogel and Stanley Engerman, _Time on the Cross: The Economics of
American Negro Slavery_ (1974)

**_



October 5:  Civil War

**

Required Readings

_

Abraham Lincoln, [Gettysburg
Address](http://www.netins.net/showcase/creative/lincoln/speeches/gettysburg.htm),
[Second
Inaugural](http://www.netins.net/showcase/creative/lincoln/speeches/inaug2.htm)

Brady, _Critical Elections and Congressional Policy Making_ , 20-49

Stephen Skowronek, _The Politics Presidents Make_ 155-227

_



Discussion Questions

_

1\. Did slavery cause the civil war? Was the slavery issue fundamentally
economic or political?

2\. Were 19th century political parties motivated by electoral success or by
principle?

3\. Are there any contemporary proposals comparable to the Wilmot Proviso?
What is their strategic value?

4\. Was the Kansas-Nebraska Act the worst policy blunder in American history?

5\. Who cares about James Polk?

6\. Is Lincoln more than a politician?

7\. What would have happened had Lincoln lived out his term? (use the Belkin
and Tetlock framework).

8\. How did the Civil War realignment affect Congressional policy?



_

Supplementary Readings

_

[ The Seneca Falls
Convention](http://lcweb.loc.gov/exhibits/treasures/trr040.html) / [Compromise
of 1850](http://lcweb.loc.gov/exhibits/treasures/trm043.html) / [Emancipation
Proclamation](http://lcweb.loc.gov/exhibits/treasures/prelim1.jpg)

Thomas Bender, ed., ****_The Antislavery Debate Capitalism and Abolitionism as
a Problem in Historical Interpretation_ (California, 1992)

J. **** David Greenstone, _The Lincoln Persuasion: Remaking American
Liberalism_ (Princeton, 1993)

Richard Franklin Bensel, _Yankee Leviathan: The Origins of Central State
Authority in America, 1859-1877_ (Cambridge University Press, 1990)

Keith M. Stampp, _The Peculiar Institution: Slavery in the Ante-Bellum South_
(Knopf, 1956)

William Freehling, _The Road to Disunion_ , vol. 1, _Sessessionists at Bay,
1776-1854_ (Oxford, 1990)

Michael Holt, _The Political Crisis of the 1850's_ (Norton, 1978)

Joel H. Silbey, _The American Political Nation, 1838-1893_ (Stanford,1991),
_The Partisan Imperative: The Dynamics of American Politics Before the Civil
War_ (Oxford, 1985) and _A Respectable Minority: The Democratic Party in the
Civil War Era, 1860-1868_ (Norton, 1977).

James M. McPherson, _Battle Cry of Freedom: The Civil War Era_ (Oxford, 1988)

Leonard White, _The Jacksonians_ (Macmillan, 1954)

Robert C. Lieberman, "The Freedmen's Bureau and the Politics of Institutional
Structure," _Social Science History_ 18:3 (Fall 1994): 405-437.

**



_

October 12: The State of Courts and Parties

 **Required Readings

_

Joel Silbey, "The State and Practice of American Political History at the
Milennium: The Nineteenth Century as a Test Case I" (handout - not for
quotation or attribution).

Brady, _Critical Elections and Congressional Policy Making_ , 50-83

Clemens, _The People's Lobby_ , pp. 1-40

William Jennings [Bryan](http://www.c7p.com/screen/bryan/crossofgold.html),
"Cross of Gold" Speech



_

Discussion Questions

_

1\. What's more important -- "ordinary" political activity, such as that
described by Silbey and Clemens, or the choices of key political leaders as
analyzed by Skowronek and Brady?

2\. Was the realignment of 1896 predetermined by the constitutional settlement
of 1787? Be sure to deal with the issue of "controlling the mischief of
faction" discussed in the Federalist.

_



Supplementary Readings

_

Morton Keller, _Affairs of State: Public Life in Late Nineteenth Century
America_ (Belknap, 1977).

Leonard White, _The Republican Era, 1869-1901_ (Macmillan, 1958)

Eric Foner, _Reconstruction: America's Unfinished Revolution, 1863-1877_
(Harper and Row, 1988).

Woodrow Wilson, _Congressional Government_ (World Publishing, 1885)

Robert H. Wiebe, _The Search for Order_ (Hill and Wang, 1967)

Michael Kazin, ****_The Populist Persuasion: An American History_ (Basic:
1995)

Lawrence Goodwyn, _The Populist Movement_ (Oxford University Press, 1978)

J. Morgan Kousser, _The Shaping of Southern Politics: Restrictions and the
Establishment of the One-Party South, 1880-1910_ (Yale University Press, 1974)

Richard L. McCormick, _The Party Period and Public Policy: American Politics
form the Age of Jackson to the Progressive Era_ (Oxford University Press,
1986).

Gretchen Ritter, _Goldbugs and Greenbacks: The Antimonopoly Tradition in
America, 1865-1896_ (Cambridge UP, 1997).

**_



October 19: The State of Courts and Parties

Papers Due

**_

Students Present Papers

**_



October 26: Progressivism

**

Required Readings

_

Clemens, _The People's Lobby_ , pp. 65-272

Arthur Bentley, "Group Activities," from _The Process of Government_
(University of Chicago Press, 1908).

Skowronek, _The Politics Presidents Make,_ pp. 228-259.

_



Discussion Questions

_

1\. Is state political & policy innovation a variable or a constant in
American political development? What does this answer tell us about the effect
of the constitution on APD?

2\. What does the "experiment station" chapter in Clemens teach about
contemporary strategies and opportunities for policy innovation?

3\. Was "business" -- as opposed to individual corporations and industries,
such as coal in West Virginia -- also a marginal interest?

4\. Did organized labor pursue a rational strategy or a mistaken one?

5\. Did farmers pursue a rational strategy or a mistaken one?

6\. Does the women's movement chapter suggest that more research should be
done on political elites (Skowronek) or on social history?

7\. Bentley's article suggests that American political scientists have long
been attracted to pluralism as a descriptive tools for analyzing politics.
Why?

8\. Does the referendum constitute a successful or an unsuccessful Progressive
era reform?

9\. Could Theodore Roosevelt effectively have pursued a different strategy for
increasing presidential power? For executive power?

10\. Did Roosevelt fundamentally change the Republican party?

11\. What was Roosevelt's vision of the domestic presidency? What were its
political strengths and weaknesses?



_

Supplementary Readings

_

[ Child Labor](http://lcweb.loc.gov/exhibits/treasures/trm032.html)

Richard Hofsteader, _The Age of Reform_ (Knopf, 1956)

Theda Skocpol, _Protecting Soldiers and Mothers: The Political Origins of
Social Policy in the United States_ (Belknap, 1992)

Edmund Morris, _The Rise of Theodore Roosevelt_ (Coward, McCann, and
Geoghegan, 1979)

Arthur S. Link, _Wilson_ (Princeton University Press, 5 vols., 1947-1965) and
_Woodrow Wilson and the Progressive Era, 1910-1917_ (Harper and Row, 1954).

Morton Keller, _Regulating a New Economy_ (Harvard, 1990) and _Regulating a
New Society: Public Policy and Social Change in America, 1900-1933_ (Harvard,
1994)

Kenneth Finegold, _Experts and Politicians: Reform Challenges to Machine
Politics in New York, Cleveland and Chicago_ (Princeton, 1995)

Eileen McDonagh, "The 'Welfare Rights State' and the 'Civil Rights State':
Policy Paradox and State Building in the Progressive Era," in _Studies in
American Political Development_ 7:2 (1993), pp. 225-274.

Richard F. Hamm, _Shaping the Eighteenth Amendment: Temperance Reform, Legal
Culture, and the Polity, 1880-1920_ (North Carolina, 1995)

Sidney Milkis and Daniel Tichenor, "The Progressive Party, Social Reformers,
and the Politics of "Direct Democracy"," _Studies in American Political
Development_ 8:2 (1994)

David Brian Robertson, "Policy Entrepreneurs and Policy Divergence: John R.
Commons and William Beveridge," _Social Service Review_. 62:3 (1988): 504-531.

William Graebner, "Federalism and the Progressive Era: A Structural
Interpretation of Reform," _Journal of American History_ 64:2 (September,
1977): 331-357.

Richard L. McCormick. 1981. "The Discovery that Business Corrupts Politics: A
Reappraisal of the Origins of Progressivism." _American Historical Review_ 86:
(1981) 247-274.

Gabriel Kolko, _The Triumph of Conservatism: A Reinterpretation of American
History, 1900-1916_ (Free Press, 1963)

William Deverell and Tom Sitton, eds., _California Progressivism Revisited_
(California, 1994)

**_



November 2: New Deal

**

Required Readings

_

Clemens, _The People's Lobby_ , pp. 273-325

Brady, _Critical Elections and Congressional Policy Making_ , pp. 85-114

Skowronek, _The Politics Presidents Make_ 260-324

Dodd and Jillson, _The Dynamics of American Politics_ , pp. 132-159 (Hanson)

_



Discussion Questions

_

1\. Was World War I the most important political turning point of the
twentieth century?

2\. Are electoral realignments really comparable?

3\. What caused the realignment of the 1930s?

4\. What were the strengths and weaknesses of Herbert Hoover's political
leadership? Was Hoover a victim?

5\. What were the strengths and weaknesses of Franklin Roosevelt's political
leadership? What does Roosevelt's experience teach us about presidential
leadership? About leadership?

6\. Why is the effect of a political realignment on Congressional committees
important?

7\. Does a major shift in American public policy only follow from a
realignment?

8\. 4. How did the New Deal realignment differ from previous ones? Who cares?

9\. Did the New Deal go about as far to the "left" as was possible in the
American system?

10\. Did the New Deal revolutionize American politics? How do you know a
political revolution when you see one?

_



Supplementary Readings

_

William E. Leuchtenburg, _Franklin D. Roosevelt and the New Deal, 1932-1940_
(Harper  & Row, 1963)

Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., _The Coming of the New Deal_ (Houghton Mifflin,
1958)

Colin Gordon, _New Deals: Business, Labor, and Politics in America, 1920-1935_
(Cambridge, 1994)

Steve Fraser and Gary Gerstle, eds., _The Rise and Fall of the New Deal Order_
(Princeton, 1990).

James MacGregor Burns, _Roosevelt: The Lion and the Fox_ (Harcourt, Brace, and
World, 1956)

Howard Zinn, (ed), _New Deal Thought_ , (Bobbs-Merrill, 1966)

Lizabeth Cohen, _Making a New Deal: Industrial Workers in Chicago, 1919-1939_
(Cambridge, 1990).

James T. Patterson, _Congressional Conservatism and the New Deal: The Growth
of the Conservative Coalition in Congress, 1933-1939_ (University of Kentucky
Press, 1967)

Eugene J. Genovese, _The Southern Tradition: The Achievement and Limitations
of Southern Conservatism_ (Harvard, 1994)

Peter H. Irons, _The New Deal Lawyers_ (Princeton University Press, 1982).

Theda Skocpol and Kenneth Finegold, "State Capacity and Economic Intervention
in the Early New Deal," _Political Science Quarterly_ 97:2 (Summer, 1982):
255-278

**_



November 9:  New Deal

Papers Due

**



Required Readings

_

[President Roosevelt's First Inaugural
Address](http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/presiden/inaug/froos1.htm)

V.O. Key, "The Nature and Consequences of One-Party Factionalism," in
_Southern Politics_ (Knopf, 1949).

_



Discussion Questions

_

1\. Is the South the most important factor in American politics?

2\. Is the South the most important problem in American politics?

_



Supplementary Readings

_

Earl Black and Merle Black, _Politics and Society in the South_ (Harvard,
1987)

Eugene J. Genovese, _The Southern Tradition: The Achievement and Limitations
of Southern Conservatism_ , (Cambridge, 1994)

Chandler Davidson, and Bernard Grofman, _Quiet Revolution in the South: The
Impact of the Voting Rights Act, 1965-1990_ (Princeton, 1994)

Nicol C. Rae, _Southern Democrats_ (Oxford, 1994)

Gavin Wright, _Old South, New South_ (Basic Books, 1986)

**_



November 16:  Cold War Politics

**

Required Readings

_

Skowronek, _The Politics Presidents Make_ , pp. 325-406

Brady, _Critical Elections and Congressional Policy Making_ , pp. 115-135

David B. Truman, _The Governmental Process_ , pp. 501-533

Dodd and Jillson, _The Dynamics of American Politics,_ pp. 277-297 (Stone)

_



Discussion Questions

_

1\. What are the differences between Truman and Bentley?

2\. Compare Truman to Clemens. If generals are "always fighting the last war,"
are political scientists always trying to explain the "last major political
development"?

3\. Did the Great Society mark a revolution in American politics?

4\. Is the Vietnam War the worst policy blunder in American history?

5\. Was President Johnson a success or a failure?

6\. How are Congressional committees related to political stability? What are
the policy consequences of that relationship?

7\. Was he stability of the 1950s and early 1960s unusual in American
political history? Did that stability bias American political science?

8\. Does Stone really differ substantially from Truman?

9\. To what extent _is_ pluralism descriptively accurate and also desirable?



_

Supplementary Readings

_

Henry R. Luce, "The American Century," _Life_ , February 17, 1941, pp 61-65.
240-411

Thomas G. Paterson, _On Every Front: The Making of the Cold War_ (Norton,
1979)

H.W. Brands, _The Devil We Knew: Americans and the Cold War_ (Oxford, 1993)

Wlater LaFeber, _America, Russia, and the Cold War, 1945-1992_ , 7th ed
(McGraw Hill, 1993)

Ellen Schrecker, _The Age of McCarthyism: A Brief History with Documents_ (St.
Martin's, 1994)

David Cuate, _The Great Fear

_

Robert Higgs, "The Cold War Economy: Opportunity Costs, Ideology, and the
Politics of Crisis," 31:3 (July 1994): 283-312.

Theodore J. Lowi, _The End of Liberalism: The Second Republic of the United
States_ (Norton, 1979)

William E. Leuchtenburg, _In the Shadow of FDR: From Harry Truman to Ronald
Reagan_ (Cornell University Press, 1989)

James L. Sundquist, _Politics and Policy: The Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson
Years_ (Brookings, 1968)

James L. Sundquist, _The Decline and Resurgence of Congress_ (Brookings, 1981)

A. James Reichley, _Conservatives in an Age of Change: The Nixon and Ford
Administrations_ (Brookings, 1981)



**_

November 23: The 1960s Transformation

_

Papers Due

**



_

Required Readings

_

Mansbridge, _Why We Lost the ERA_ , pp. 1-35.

[Port Huron
Statement](http://ppl.nhmccd.edu/~craigl/primary_folder/29.c.01.Port_Huron.html)



_

Discussion Questions

_

1\. Did issues like women's rights destroy the New Deal Democratic coalition?

2\. To what extent is it necessary to recount the history of a policy like the
ERA in order to understand its contemporary politics? Define "understand."

3\. Is public opinion important to the story of the ERA? Is that unique?

4\. Do Americans really want their rights?

5\. To what extent have the values of the Port Huron Statement become
mainstream?

6\. The Port Huron Statement states that "the vast majority of our people
regard the temporary equilibriums of our society and world as eternally
functional parts." Comment on the subsequent accuracy of this statement.

7\. Is political science as a discipline biased toward the explanation of
equilibrium at the expense of understanding change?



_

Supplementary Readings

_

Edward G. Carmines and James A. Stimson, Issue Evolution: Race and the
Transformation of American Politics (Princeton, 1989).

Taylor Branch, Parting the Waters: America in the Kind Years, 1954-1963 (Simon
and Scuster, 1988)

Allen J. Matusow, The Unravelling of America: A History of Liberalism in the
1960s (Harper and Row, 1984)

Stewart Burns, Social Movements of the 1960s: Searching for Democracy (Twayne,
1990)

David Chalmers, And the Crooked Places Made Straight: The Struggle for Social
Change in the 1960s (Johns Hopkins, 1991)

Meta Mendel-Reyes, Reclaiming Democracy: The Sixties in Politics and Memory.
(Routledge, 1995).

David Farber, ed., The Sixties: From Memory to History (U of North Carolina,
1994)

Tom Wells, The War Within: America's Battle Over Vietnam (California, 1994)



**_

November 30: The 1970s Transformation

**

Required Readings

_

Mansbridge, _Why We Lost the ERA_ , pp. 36-199

Stephen Skowronek, _The Politics Presidents Make_ , pp. 409-446

Brady, _Critical Elections and Congressional Policy Making_ , pp. 136-181.

 [President Reagan's First Inaugural
Address](http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/presiden/inaug/reagan1.htm)



_

Discussion Questions

_

1\. Knowing what you know about the American political system, did NOW make a
strategic miscalculation about focusing on wage disparity in the campaign for
the ERA? Did it really have a choice?

2\. Does Mansbridge confirm Tocqueville's observations about the independent
importance of the courts in US policy making?

3\. If groups like NOW depend on ideology, and ideologically based interest
groups propose policies that are so vulnerable to counterattack, how do they
ever succeed?

4\. Compare and contrast the Progressive era women's group campaigns and the
campaign for the ERA. Does the Progressive era contain lessons for
contemporary interest group success?

5\. Does Mansbridge have a clear and fair minded understanding of the
opposition to the ERA?

6\. Was the failure of the ERA a unique, contingent historical event, or can
it contribute to theory building in political science? Be sure to explain how
you can tell the difference.

7\. Was Jimmy Carter a victim of circumstance?

8\. Was Ronald Reagan a beneficiary of circumstance?

9\. Did the 1980 election mark a revolution in American politics?



_

Supplementary Readings

_

David Brian Robertson, ed., _Loss of Confidence: Politics and Policy in the
1970s_ (Penn State UP, 1998).

William Claggett, William Flanigan, and Nancy Zingale, "Nationalization of the
American Electorate," _American Political Science R_ eview 78 (1984): 77-91.

John P. Heinz, Edward O. Laumann, Robert L. Nelson, and Robert H. Salisbury _,
The Hollow Core: Private Interests in National Policy Making_ (Harvard, 1993)

Theodore J. Lowi, _The End of the Republican Era_ (Oklahoma, 1995)

Douglas Brinkley, _The Unfinished Presidency: Jimmy Carter's Journey Beyond
the White House_ (New York: Viking, 1998)

Bryan D. Jones, ed. _The New American Political System? Reflections on
Political Change, the 1992 Election, and the Clinton Administration_
(Westview, 1995)

Benjamin Ginsberg and Martin Shefter _, Politics by Other Means: The Declining
Importance of Elections in America_ (Basic Books, 1990)

Thomas Ferguson and Joel Rogers, _Right Turn: The Decline of the Democrats and
the Future of American Politics_ (Hill and Wang, 1986) E743.F39 1986

William Lunch, _The Nationalization of American Politics_ , (University of
California Press, 1987).

Richard A. Harris and Sidney Milkis, eds., _Remaking American Politics_
(Westview, 1989).

Theodore Lowi and Alan Stone, eds., _Nationalizing Government_ (Sage, 1978).

  

**_

December 7: Analyzing Contemporary Politics with Historical Perspective

_

Papers Due

**_



Required Readings

_

Sidney Milkis, "Remaking Government Institutions in the 1970s: Participatory
Democracy and the Triumph of Administrative Politics," _Journal of Policy
History_ 10:1 (1998), pp. 51-74.

Dodd and Jillson, _The Dynamics of American Politics_ , pp. 106-131, 208-233,
366-389

(Steinmo, Aldrich, Heclo)

Skowronek, _The Politics Presidents Make_ , pp. 447-464



_

Recommended Readings

_

Rogers Smith, "Beyond Tocqueville, Myrdal, and Hartz: The Multiple Traditions
in America," _American Political Science Review_ 87:3 (1993), 549-566.



_

Discussion Questions

_

1\. Is the paradox identified by Milkis a necessary consequence of American
constitutional design? Of the dynamics identified by Clemens?

2\. Does rational choice finally offer a paradigm that can unify the political
science profession?

3\. Should political science give up trying to find a unifying paradigm?

4\. What institutional reform would you suggest for the United States? Would
it make a difference, given American political culture?

_

Supplementary Readings

_

Lawrence C. Dodd and Calvin Jillson, _New Perspectives on American Politics_
(CQ Press, 1994)

E.J. Dionne, Jr., _Why Americans Hate Politics_ , 2nd ed (Touchstone, 1992)

Anthony King, ed., _The New American Political System_ , 2nd Ed. (American
Enterprise Institute, 1990)

"The Rise and Fall of American Technological Leadership: The Postwar Era in
Historical Perspective _," Journal of Economic L_ iterature 30 (December,
1992)



**_

December 14: Exam and Research Project Due

**_



