![](logo.gif)

#  PSCI 207:Political Elections

* * *

The subject of this course is elections in America. The influence of public
opinion on public affairs and popular governments is a relatively new
phenomenon in the history of governments. But the consideration of whether and
how the populace could or should play a role in determining the direction of
authority has long been a controversial issue among the learned. After
reviewing the basics of the controversy we shall explore the character,
sources and dynamics of public opinion in American society and how, and if,
public opinion swings during election campaigns.

There are many interesting questions awaiting us this semester. Among these
are the following:  
       Who wins elections, how and why?   
       When and how do events and crises influence the formation and change of public opinion (i.e., when do people pay attention to politics and political events)?   
        How do campaigns influence the outcome of elections?   
        How do people decide whom to vote for?

**  Goals of the course:** We are in the midst of a national election. As a
result there are lots of elections: local elections, state legislatures and
governors (and also referendum in many states), as well as those at for
federal offices. So we have the challenge of learning about the topic while it
is in full bloom all around us.  
        You should consider the following questions as we proceed through the course.

  *      Public opinion may play an influential role in shaping and/or reacting to political, social and economic elites. In your view, is this good or bad (and, under what circumstances)?
  *       Recent elections, indeed over the course of this century, fewer and fewer Americans participate in elections. Who votes and who does not - the turnout factor \- plays a crucial role in election outcomes in two ways:

        First, differential turnout may swing the election to one party or candidate¨ªs advantage.   
        Second, low turnouts may reflect a more general lack of political legitimacy (consider that recent Presidents have been received the votes of fewer than one out every three possible voters).

**Course Work:** The course has two domains of student work.

The first is the course readings and class discussions. Students are expected
to have read and considered the course readings in preparation for each class.
In addition, students are expected to regularly read (on-line or paper) one of
the major newspapers (New York Times, Washington Post, Los Angeles Times,
etc.) Students are also expected to participate in occasional class
discussions and to be ready to do so on the subject of the day. Mastery of
this element of the course is evaluated by class participation (20% of the
total grade); and the final examination (30% of the total grade).

The second element is a research project on a selected American election, one
taking place this fall. You may select any single contested election at the
local (e.g., mayor), state (state legislature, governor, etc.), or federal
(e.g., Congress, Senate, or President) level. You may select a region (e.g.,
the south), or federal level (e.g., which party won the House, or Senate).

You will notice that a midterm (20% of the grade) is also included in the
grading criteria listed below. In order to give you a sense of how well you
are doing, I have scheduled a midterm examination. However, since this
exercise is designed to see how well you are doing, I discount the grade if
you improve. That is, if you¨ªre grades on the paper and final are higher than
the midterm I do not count the midterm grade in the final grade for the
course.

Grading Criteria:

    Class participation, including conducting the survey (20%)   
    Midterm Examination (20%)   
    Paper (30%)   
    Final Examination (30%)   


Books to be purchased:

Byron Shafer and William Claggett, _The Two Majorities: The Issue Context of
Modern American Politics_ , Johns Hopkins Press. 1995.

W. Russell Neuman, Marion R. Just, and Ann N. Crigler, _Common Knowledge: News
and the Construction of Political Meaning_ , University of Chicago Press.
1992.

Thomas E. Patterson, _Out of Order_ , Random House. 1995

William H. Flanigan and Nancy H. Zingale, _Political Behavior of the American
Electorate_ , 9th edition, CQ Press. 1998.

George E. Marcus, W. Russell Neuman, and Michael MacKuen, _Affective
Intelligence and Political Judgment_ , University of Chicago Press. 2000.

Course Packet containing the readings will be available at a time and place to
be announced in the first class meeting.

The materials in the course packet are noted in the daily readings as CD
(course document) and are listed at the end of the syllabus. Please bring the
designated reading to class for discussion.  

**Reading Assignments** Week of September 4th

Class Meeting 1 - Introduction

The first question to be considered is the role of opinion and knowledge in
societies governed by popular sovereignty. As we shall see there has been a
long-standing dispute about the proper role of the public in directing
collective affairs. We shall begin with classic statements of the
disagreement, that between Plato and Aristotle.

We then turn to some contemporary treatments of the dispute.  
On new development, since the classic period, is the development of systematic
methods of studying public opinion \- we read a couple of exceptional examples
of political science that provides some flavor for how the issues that Plato
and Aristotle raise are dealt with.

Week of September 11th

Class Meeting 2 - Public Knowledge and Public Opinion  
CD-1 Plato "The Simile of the Cave" (from _The Republic_ )  
CD-2 Aristotle "How Far Should The Good Man and Good Citizen Be
Distinguished?"  
    and  "The Wisdom of Collective Judgments" (from _The Politics_ )

Class Meeting 3 - What is Public Opinion?  
CD-3 Lippmann, Walter "The World Outside and the Pictures in Our Heads" and  
    "Leaders and the Rank and File" (From _Public Opinion_ , 1922).   
CD- 4 Converse, Philip E. 1962. Information Flow and the Stability of Partisan  
    Attitudes. _Public Opinion Quarterly_ 26:578-599.   
CD-5 Mueller, John. 1992. Democracy and Ralph's Pretty Good Grocery:
Elections,  
    Equality, and the Minimal Human Being. _American Journal of Political Science_ 36   
    (4):983-1003.

Week of September 18th

The next section examines the core values that constitute the American
political culture and that generate enduring political conflicts. Try to get a
sense of not only the substance of these core values but also try to
understand how core values get applied to concrete issues and events.

Consider the dynamic interplay of these core values. Are these values static,
or does support for these values increase and then decrease in predictable
ways? Do you see these core values at play in the 1992 Presidential campaign.
do you anticipate that they will play a role in the 2000 elections? If so,
which ones will be especially salient and why do you think that?

Class Meeting 4 - American Public Opinion  
    Shaffer and Claggett, _The Two Majorities_ , Chs. 1-4

Class Meeting 5  
    Shaffer and Claggett, _The Two Majorities_ , Chs. 5-8

Week of September 25th

How voters decide has been a hotly debated topic - some finding little
evidence that the public is well informed enough to make a rational choice,
others find that they do. We begin by reviewing the two dominant views -
rational choice (Downs) and partisan loyalties (the Normal Vote) - and then
turn to a new conception of voter behavior based on the role of emotions.

Also, we explore the campaign strategies that have been used in the past to
capture the presidency and the ways in which campaigns try to influence public
opinion.

Class Meeting 6  
    Neuman, Just, and Crigler, _Common Knowledge_ , Chapters 1-4 (skim chapter 2)

Class Meeting 7  
    Neuman, Just, and Crigler, _Common Knowledge_ , Chapters 5-7

Week of October 2nd

Class Meeting 8  
    Patterson, _Out of Order_ , prologue, Chapters 1-3

Class Meeting 9  
    Patterson, _Out of Order_ , Chapters 4-6

Week of October 9th

Class Meeting 10  
    Flanigan and Zingale, Chs. 1-2

Class Meeting 11  
    Flanigan and Zingale, Chs. 3-5

Week of October 16th

Class Meeting 12  
    Flanigan and Zingale, Chs. 6-8

Week of October 23rd

Class Meeting 13 **\- What happens in elections? [** Two Strategies of
Campaigning]  
CD - 6  Richard Withlin, "The Republican Strategy and its Electoral
Consequences"  
CD - 7  Patrick Caddell, "The Democatic Strategy and its Electoral
Consequences"

  *    You should pay attention to today¨ªs major political campaigns. Come to class

    prepared to discuss the strategies Democrats and Republicans are using. To what   
    purpose and to what effect?

Class Meeting 14 - **What happens in the voter's mind?** [Two interpretations]  
CD - 8  Issues Matter: Downs, selections from _An Economic Theory of
Democracy_  
CD - 9  Party Loyalty Matters: Converse, Philip E. 1966. The Concept of the  
    Normal Vote. In _Elections and the Political Order_ , edited by A. Campbell, P. E.   
    Converse, W. E. Miller and D. E. Stokes. New York: Wiley.   
CD - 10 MACRO MODELS I: Alan Abramovitz 2000. "Bill and Al's Excellent  
    Adventure: Forecasting the 1996 Presidential Election"   
CD - 11 MACRO MODELS II: Michael Lewis-Beck and Charles Tien. 2000. "The  
    Future of Forecasting"

Week of October 30th

Class Meeting 15 - **Midterm Examination**

Class Meeting 16 - The Election Outcome - Predictions  
    Class room discussion of 2000 Election (state and national) - what do we expect?

Week of November 6th

Class Meeting 17  
CD - 12 Marcus, George E., and Michael MacKuen. 1993\. Anxiety, Enthusiasm and
the  
    Vote: The Emotional Underpinnings of Learning and Involvement during Presidential   
    Campaigns. _American Political Science Review_ 87 (3):688-701.

Class Meeting 18  
    Marcus, Neuman, and MacKuen, _Affective Intelligence and Political Judgment_ , Chs. 1-4

Week of November 13th

Class Meeting 19  
    Marcus, Neuman, and MacKuen, _Affective Intelligence and Political Judgment_ , Chs. 5-7

Class Meeting 20  
CD - 13 Brader, Ted. 2000. Emotional Engagement and Political Sophistication:
Who  
    Responds to Emotional Appeals? Chicago, IL: Paper presented at the Annual Meeting   
    of the Midwest Political Science Association.   
CD - 14 Marcus, George E., Michael MacKuen, and W. Russell Neuman. 2000. The  
    Emotional Foundations of Partisan Loyalty, Defection, and Rational Choice. Seattle:   
    International Society of Political Psychology.

Week of November 20th

Class Meeting 21 - What happens after Elections?  
CD - 15 Ginsberg and Weissberg, "Elections and the Mobilization of Support"

Class Meeting 22  
Class Presentations - Session I

Week of November 27th

Class Meeting 23  
Class Presentations ¨® Session II

Week of December 4th

Class Meeting 24  
Class Roundtable on the 2000 Elections - Who won? Why? Did the public make  
    the correct decision?

Class Meeting 25 - Conclusion and Summary: Course Evaluation  
CD - 16 Lane, Robert E. 1999. The Joyless Polity: Contributions of Democratic
Process  
    to Ill-Being. In _Citizen Competence and Democratic Institutions_ , edited by S. L. Elkin   
    and K. E. Soltan. University Park, PA: The Pennsylvania University Press.   
  _List of Course Readings_ CD - 1 Plato - "The Simile of the Cave" (from _The
Republic_ )

CD - 2 Aristotle "How Far Should The Good Man and Good Citizen Be
Distinguished?" and "The Wisdom of Collective Judgments" (from _Politics_ )

CD - 3 Lippmann, Walter "The World Outside and the Pictures in Our Heads" and
"Leaders and the Rank and File" (From _PublicOpinion_ , 1922).

CD - 4 Converse, Philip E. 1962. Information Flow and the Stability of
Partisan Attitudes. _Public Opinion Quarterly_ 26:578-599.

CD - 5 Mueller, John. 1992. Democracy and Ralph's Pretty Good Grocery:
Elections, Equality, and the Minimal Human Being. _American Journal of
Political Science_ 36 (4):983-1003.

CD - 6 Richard Withlin, "The Republican Strategy and its Electoral
Consequences,"

CD - 7 Patrick Caddell, "The Democatic Strategy and its Electoral
Consequences."

CD - 8 Issues Matter: Downs, selections from _An Economic Theory of Democracy_

CD - 9 Party Loyalty Matters: Converse, Philip E. 1966\. The Concept of the
Normal Vote. In _Elections and the Political Order_ , edited by A. Campbell,
P. E. Converse, W. E. Miller and D. E. Stokes. New York: Wiley.

CD - 10 MACRO MODELS I: Alan Abramovitz (2000), "Bill and Al's Excellent
Adventure: Forecasting the 1996 Presidential Election"

CD - 11 MACRO MODELS II: Michael Lewis-Beck and Charles Tien (2000), "The
Future of Forecasting"

CD - 12 Marcus, George E., and Michael MacKuen. 1993. Anxiety, Enthusiasm and
the Vote: The Emotional Underpinnings of Learning and Involvement during
Presidential Campaigns. _American Political Science Review_ 87 (3):688-701.

CD - 13 Brader, Ted. 2000. Emotional Engagement and Political Sophistication:
Who Responds to Emotional Appeals? Chicago, IL: Paper presented at the Annual
Meeting of the Midwest Political Science Association.

CD - 14 Marcus, George E., Michael MacKuen, and W. Russell Neuman. 2000. The
Emotional Foundations of Partisan Loyalty, Defection, and Rational Choice.
Seattle: International Society of Political Psychology.

CD - 15 Ginsberg and Weissberg, "Elections and the Mobilization of Support"

CD - 16 Lane, Robert E. 1999. The Joyless Polity: Contributions of Democratic
Process to Ill-Being. In _Citizen Competence and Democratic Institutions_ ,
edited by S. L. Elkin and K. E. Soltan. University Park, PA: The Pennsylvania
University Press.  
    
  **Supplemental Sources on American Public Opinion and Elections** Angus
Campbell, Philip E. Converse, Warren E. Miller, and Donald E. Stokes. (1960)
The American Voter. John Wiley & Sons

W. Lance Bennett (1980) _Public Opinion in American Politics_ Harcourt Brace
and Jovanovich

M. Margaret Conway (1985) _Political Participation in the United States_
Congressional Quarterly Press

Murray Edelman (1977) _Political Language: Words that Succeed and Policies
that Fail_ , Academic Press

Murray Edelman (1971) _Politics as Symbolic Action_ Academic Press

Murray Edelman (1964) _TheSymbolic Uses of Politics_ Indiana University Press

Benjamin Ginsburg (1982) _The Consequences of Consent: Elections, Citizen
Control and Popular Acqauiescence_ , Addison-Wesley

Benjamin Ginsburg (1986) _The Captive Public: How Mass Opinion Promotes State
Power_ , Basic Books

Louis Hartz (1955) _The Liberal Tradition in America_ Harcourt, Brace

Richard Hofstadter (1972) _The American Political Tradition_ Vintage

Elihu Katz and Paul Lazarsfeld (1955) _Personal Influence: The Part Played by
People in the Flow of Mass Communications_ Free Press

V.O. Key, Jr. (1961) _Public Opinion and American Democracy_ Alfred A. Knopf

Seymour M. Lipset and William Schneider (1983) _The Confidence Gap: Business,
Labor and Government in the Public Mind_ Free Press

Herbert McClosky and John Zaller (1984) _The American Ethos: Public Attitudes
toward Capitalism and Democracy_ Harvard University Press

Howard Schuman, Charlotte Steeh and Lawrence Bobo (1985) _Racial Attitudes in
America: Trends and Interpretations_ Harvard University Press

Alexis de Tocqueville (1966) _Democracy in America_ Doubleday

Sidney Verba and Gary Orren (1985) _Equality in America: The View from the
Top_ Harvard University Press

Raymond Wolfinger and Steven Rosenstone (1980) _Who Votes?_ Yale University
Press

John R. Zaller (1992) The Nature and Origins of Mass Opinion Cambridge
University Press

