[![TAMU-
CC](tamuhome.gif)](http://www.tamucc.edu)[![Syllabus](syl5302.gif)](http://www.tamucc.edu/~whatley/padm5302.htm)

![](redrule.gif)

## Playing the Policy Game  
by Matthew A. Cahn

## An Article Review by Lisa Marie Oliver

##### Last Update: April 24, 1998

![](redrule.gif)

**Summary**

This article is the introductory article for the last section in the book
_Public Policy: The Essential Readings_ written by Matthew A. Cahn a coauthor
of the book. The last section uses the analogy of the public policy process as
a game. In a previous article written by Cahn, he describes who the players
were in the public policy process. The players described were either
institutional or noninstitutional actors in the process. In _The Policy Game_
, Cahn proceeds to explain how the game is played to maximize the actors'
interests.

Cahn states players will increase their chances of winning to the extent they
have knowledge of the policy bureaucracy (bureaucratic knowledge), access to
individuals within the bureaucracy (network), citizen backing (size of a
constituency), money for political contributions and resources to mount an
effective public relation (media) campaign.

This article examines the context and environment of the policy game,
including the constitutional basis of public policy, the culture of policy,
maximizing policy strategies, and the problem of policy resources.

**The Constitutional Basis of Public Policy**

This section dealt with the constitutional foundations of the policy game.
Presented was the classic debate over whose interests are best protected by
the constitution. Charles Beard's economic interpretation thesis argues that
the constitution was created by the economic elite at the expense of the
debtor classes. Forrest McDonald and Robert Brown points to the existence of a
large middle class and suggest that all sectors of society benefitted from
ratification [of the Constitution]. They also stated that self interest of the
elites was not their motivation. While looking at historical information and
debate about the constitution, contemporary scholars use this material to
examine how public law has come to be structured and whether it has come to
favor specific groups.

Although delegates of the constitutional convention were economically diverse,
their interests were together in key areas: (1) a strong central government
that could protect commerce across state boundaries and control the interests
of the masses; (2) the creation of a central currency, protecting creditors
from depreciation, (3) creating protection to creditors for monies loaned at
interest.

The best examples of a major propaganda effort were the _Federalist Papers_.
The _Federalist Papers_ focused on the structural changes the constitution
would bring, but the authors, Alexander Hamilton, James Madison and John Jay,
were careful not to discuss the economic implications. Richard Hofstadter, in
_The American Political Tradition_ , states that the framers of the
constitution, liberty was tied to property, not democracy. Freedom meant the
freedom to own and dispose of private property, not freedom of self
government.

The implications for the policy game are significant. The early constitution
provided for republican government, with only limited citizen participation,
resulting in an insulated relationship between elected officials and the
common people. Examples of this are the establishment of the electoral college
and indirect election of the president, the appointment of senators by state
legislators until 1913, single member districts that obstruct minority party
representation, and the state imposed gender and property requirements.

The original constitutional framework has had serious consequences for groups
who were earlier excluded and has been amended to reflect changes as the
policy process has evolved throughout the last two centuries.

**Political Culture and Public Policy**

This section begins with the statement: "Public policy outcomes cannot be
divorced from political culture." It then proceeds to review the impact
political culture has on public policy that they are interrelated. It also
seeks to compare differences in Lockean liberalism and American liberalism.
American political culture is based on the natural rights of individuals. This
can be found in the Declaration of Independence, which declares an individual
rights to life, liberty, and property.

The irony in Lockean liberal individualism is in its commitment to individual
property rights, thus limiting the notion of communal rights, creating a
problem in the definition of the common good. In American liberalism, the
common good is defined as taking in to account an individuals good. The role
of the community is to provide the foundation that makes individual rights
possible.

The other element that is discussed states liberal policy is organized around
economic interaction. In discussing the economic factor in policy
implications, the author introduces the work of Schumpeter in "Capitalism,
Socialism, and Democracy" which explains the dilemma of democracy in a
capitalist political economy. Capitalism defines freedom (rights) on the
principle of ownership: one dollar, one vote. Democracy defines freedom
(rights) on the principle of one person, one vote.

In "Democracy and Capitalism," Samuel Bowles and Herbert Gintis claim the
liberal society is broken up into two spheres, public and private. The public
sphere includes those aspects of society where both liberty and democracy
apply, such as government. The private sphere includes those areas where only
liberty applies. They also used the "labor commodity proposition" to explain
the antidemocratic tendency within the American social culture.

Discussed was also the redevelopment of the utilitarian arguments that people
are created by the role they play in society. Ones values are tied to their
culture. If liberal society is characterized by limited choice and extensive
spheres of domination, the chances of developing democratic values are
limited. The economic system produces social values; that is, "the economy
produces people."

One other argument that is presented by Michael Rogin is that economic
domination is only one of the policy implications of American political
culture. The social contract theory is based on the notion of a society
sharing a single set of cultural and political values. Through shared concept
of civilization, all parties of the social contract are able to live and
interact with each other predictably and safely. For anyone outside of the
social contract, poses as unpredictable, dangerous, and at war with others.
Any individual or group who does not share the dominant cultural nd political
ideology is, by definition, suspect. The policy implications are that
discrimination and inequality are an inherent part of the political and social
environment. Rogin argues that exclusion is a function of American political
culture.

Other scholars argue that while there are intolerance and antidemocratic
tendencies within American society, they are not an integral part of the
political culture.

Policy Strategies

The section begins by describing Machiavelli's notion of virtu'-controlling
political destiny-based on the successful manipulation of human circumstances.
Control is the primary consideration, both of one's populace and of one's
neighboring states.

Maximizing policy strategies for the president in "Presidential Power" by
Neustadt, is patterned after Machiavellian strategy. Neustadt writings are
about how a president expands their power and maintains it. The power to
persuade is critical for presidents since they cannot command as dictators
could. The presidency is a "clerkship," based on balancing differing interests
and keeping in mind the public good.

The Neustadt analysis also states such factors as presentation of image,
charisma, effective use of a political climate, acting quickly and decisively
to criticize opponents and reward allies. He also states that only through the
successful resolution of a crisis can a president truly create dependence and
power.

Presidents can rely on respect and the successful creation of consent.
Creating consent can be achieved through deception and manipulation of the
political climate. Even favorable public opinion can be manipulated. Drawing
on cultural biases, symbols, and traditions a skilled president can maximize
his or her power to implement policies as they see fit.

In the context of American liberalism, the meaning of prerogative is that no
rights are absolute, no rights are inalienable, regardless of the written law.
While the Constitution promises individual rights, at the same time it denies
those rights as the discretion of the president. The example given is the
incarceration of Japanese Americans by President Roosevelt.

In "Constructing the Political Spectacle," Murray Edelman contends that those
who seek to maximize their policy interests will use deceit and symbolism to
manipulate the policy debate. Government influences behavior by shaping the
cognitions of people in ambiguous situations. In this manner, government or
policy elite help engineer beliefs about what is "fact" and what is "proper."
Maximizing policy strategies is critical for winning the policy game. Each
player seeks to influence policy outcomes.

**The Problem of Policy Resources**

Robert Dahl has long recognized the existence of economic elites and their
influence on the policy process. In "A Preface to Economic Democracy," he
argues that rather than compete, the interests of these economic elites link
in specific areas. The result is that democratic processes are dominated by
the influence of economic elite, specifically corporate elites. G. William
Dumhoff asserts that there is a social upperclass that effectively operates a
ruling class by virtue of its having an abundance of economic resources. While
there are other political resources-expertise and bureaucratic knowledge these
can be and are often purchased. Therefore, financial power is often the basis
of policy influence. If true, one could assume that inequality in resource
distribution is identical to inequality in political representation.

**Critique**

This introductory article on playing the policy game is quite broad in scope.
The content describes well-known articles and their relation to the context of
the policy environment. It is necessary to investigate the policy actions of
the past and how they have come to influence our political culture in the
present.

Although the article deals with the policy game at the national level, the
same can apply for the playing policy game at any level. Take for example,
policy strategies. One generalization would be that all politicians could
utilize the factors stated in Neustadt's analysis on how to maximize policy
outcomes. Another component of the game is the probem of policy resources. The
same observation can be made of the wealthy in national, state or local
arenas. Again with the corporate elite usually playing some role in politics.

In G. William Domhoff's "Who Rules America Now?"(1983), the conclusion of the
article answers this question. On the basis of available evidence the best
answer still seems to be that the dominant power in the United States is
exercised by a property based ruling class. There is a small group of upper
class whose members own 20-25 percent of all privately held wealth and 45 to
50 percent of all privately held stock. If we were to look at Corpus Christi
and use this data as the norm and ask who rules Corpus Christi now? Would
there be any surprises, probably not.

In conclusion, the constraints imposed by cultural inheritances are major
influences on the policy process that one can not ignore when playing the
policy game - to win.

![](redrule.gif)

Cahn, Matthew A.1995. "The Policy Game." _In Public Policy: The Essential
Readings_. Theodoulou, Stella Z. and Matthew A. Cahn.1995. Prentice Hall:
Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Dumhoff, G. William.1983. "Who Rules America Now?." _In Public Policy: The
Essential Readings_. Theodoulou, Stella Z. and Matthew A. Cahn.1995. Prentice
Hall: Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

**Works Cited**

