Ph.D. Program in Political Science Professor Andrew J. Polsky

[Term] **** Office: 1574 Grace Bldg.

Thursday 6:30-8:30 PM Phone (Hunter College):

1570 Grace Bldg. (212) 772-5500 or 5507

e-mail: apolsky@shiva.

hunter.cuny.edu  
    
    
  

**U720 American Politics**

  

_Course Description_  


This seminar offers an overview of the American political system and an
introduction to major scholarly controversies in the American politics
subfield of the discipline. Throughout the course a strong emphasis will be
placed on the historical development of political institutions. Following a
session on various approaches to the study of American politics, the first
unit will focus on the framework of American politics, including American
political culture(s), the constitutional foundations of national politics, and
the patterning of inclusion/exclusion in the political community. Next the
course will turn to political participation and linkage institutions (public
opinion, parties, elections, interest groups). The final unit will cover key
national institutions -- the presidency, Congress, the courts, and the
bureaucracy. An overview session at the end of the course will highlight
connections across units and emerging scholarship about American politics. We
will regularly address issues and problems in teaching an introductory
undergraduate course in American politics.  


_Course Requirements_  


1\. Complete assigned readings before class meetings. Students may be asked to
summarize reading assignments to establish a framework for discussion.
Contribution to the class discussion will be considered in the calculation of
the final grade for the course.  


2\. Complete all written assignments. Written work consists of three review
essays and a final exam. The review essays should examine books chosen from
the recommended readings on this syllabus (including the supplemental topics)
or other books approved by the instructor.

Please select one book from each unit of the course. Review essays should be
approximately 8-10 pages. Each review essay will be due one week after we
complete the course unit; the final review essay will be due at the time of
the final exam. While incompletes are a tradition in graduate study, this
course, with no research paper, is designed to be finished on time. Late
papers will be penalized when there is not a valid reason for lateness. The
four written assignments will be given equal weight in the computation of the
written component of the grade.  
    
    


_Books for Purchase_  


The titles listed here are available through the Hunter College Bookstore,
operated by Barnes and Noble, located at Lexington Avenue and 68th Street.
Note that these books (and/or the assigned chapters) are also on reserve at
the graduate school library. Review the number

of chapters assigned before you decide whether you wish to purchase the book.  


John H. Aldrich, _Why Parties? The Origin and Transformation of Political
Parties in America_ (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995).

Edward G. Carmines and James A. Stimson, _Issue Evolution: Race and the
Transformation of American Politics_ (Princeton University Press, 1989).

Lawrence C. Dodd and Calvin Jillson, eds., _The Dynamics of American Politics:
Approaches and Interpretations_ (Westview Press, 1994).

Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, and John Jay, _The Federalist Papers_ (Any
inexpensive paperback edition, e.g., Bantam).

Peter Nardulli, ed., _The Constitution and American Political Development: An
Institutional Perspective_ (University of Illinois Press, 1992).

Mark P. Petracca, ed., _The Politics of Interests: Interest Groups
Transformed_ (Westview Press, 1992).

Gerald N. Rosenberg, _The Hollow Hope: Can Courts Bring About Social Change?_
(University of Chicago Press, 1992).

Stephen Skowronek, _The Politics Presidents Make: Leadership from John Adams
to George Bush_ (Harvard University Press, 1993).

John R. Zaller, _The Nature and Origins of Mass Opinion_ (Cambridge University
Press, 1992).  


_Reserve Readings_  


The articles and books listed below will be found in the course pack that may
be purchased at the Hunter College Bookstore. Both the pack and the individual
articles have been placed on reserve in the Graduate School library.  


Brian Balogh, "Reorganizing the Organizational Synthesis: Federal-Professional
Relations in Modern America," _Studies in American Political Development_ 5
(Spring 1991): 119-72.

Roger Davidson, "The Emergence of the Post-Reform Congress," in Davidson, ed.,
_The Postreform Congress_ (1992), pp. 3-23.

Mark Graber, "The Non-Majoritarian Difficulty: Legislative Deference to the
Judiciary," _Studies in American Political Development_ 7 (1) (Spring 1993):
35-73.

Fred I. Greenstein, "Change and Continuity in the Modern Presidency," chap. 2
in Anthony King, ed., _The New American Political System_ (1979), pp. 45-86.

David Greenstone, "Political Culture and American Political Development:
Liberty, Union, and the Liberal Bipolarity," _Studies in American Political
Development_ 1 (1986): 1-49.

Louis Hartz, _The Liberal Tradition in America_ (1955, 1991), chap. 1 "The
Concept of a Liberal Society," pp. 3-32.

Hugh Heclo, "Issue Networks and the Executive Establishment," chap. 3 in
Anthony King, ed., _The New American Political System_ (1979), pp. 87-124.

Lawrence R. Jacobs and Robert Y. Shapiro, "Studying Substantive Democracy,"
_PS: Political Science & Politics_ 27 (1) (March 1994): 9-17.

James G. March and Johan P. Olsen, "The New Institutionalism: Organizational
Factors in Political Life," _American Political Science Review_ 78 (3) (1984):
734-49.

Paula D. McClain and John A. Garcia, "Expanding Disciplinary Boundaries:
Black, Latino, and Racial Minority Group Politics in Political Science," in
Ada W. Finifter, ed., _Political Science: The State of the Discipline II_
(1993), pp. 247-79.

Eileen L. McDonagh, "Gender Politics and Political Change," in Lawrence C.
Dodd and Calvin Jillson, eds., _New Perspectives on American Politics_ (1994),
pp. 58-73.

Michael L. Mezey, "Legislatures: Individual Purpose and Institutional
Performance," in Ada W. Finifter, ed., _Political Science: The State of the
Discipline II_ (1993), pp. 335-64.

William C. Mitchell and Michael C. Munger, "Economic Models of Interest
Groups: An Introductory Survey," _American Journal of Political Science_ 35
(2) (May 1991): 512-46.

Bert A. Rockman, "The Federal Executive: Equilibrium and Change," in Bryan D.
Jones, _The New American Politics: Reflections on Political Change and the
Clinton Administration_ (1995), pp. 144-64.

Martin Shefter, _Political Parties and the State: The American Historical
Experience_ (1994), chap. 3 "Party, Bureaucracy, and Political Change in the
United States," pp. 61-97.

Kenneth A. Shepsle, "Studying Institutions: Some Lessons from the Rational
Choice Approach,"

_Journal of Theoretical Politics_ 1 (2) (1989): 131-47.

Rogers M. Smith, "Beyond Tocqueville, Myrdal, and Hartz: The Multiple
Traditions in America," _American Political Science Review_ 87 (3) (September
1993): 549-66.

Rogers M. Smith, "If Politics Matters: Implications for a `New
Institutionalism,'" _Studies in_

_American Political Development_ 6 (1) (Spring 1992): 1-36.

Jeffrey K. Tulis, "The Two Constitutional Presidencies," in Michael Nelson,
ed., _The Presidency and the Political System_ , 4th ed., pp. 91-123.

James Q. Wilson, _Bureaucracy: What Government Agencies Do and Why They Do It_
(1989), chap. 5 "Interests," pp. 72-89.

Sheldon S. Wolin, _The Presence of the Past_ (1989), chap. 5 "Tending and
Intending a Constitution: Bicentennial Misgivings," pp. 82-99.  
    
    
    
    


_Schedule of Topics and Reading Assignments_  


Required readings are preceded by a double asterisk. You should read them in
the order in which they are listed. Additional readings for each topic (listed
alphabetically) are intended as a guide to further research and planning for
undergraduate instruction, and so include a mix of classic works, new
scholarship, and popularized treatments.

The syllabus includes a number of supplemental topics that may be covered in
an introductory undergraduate American politics course. These topics are
listed below at the approximate point at which they would be covered in such a
course. I encourage you to explore the supplemental topics as time permits.
You may select books for review drawn from these headings.  


_September 4th. Introduction and Overview._

**Lawrence C. Dodd and Calvin Jillson, "Conversations on the Study of American
Politics: An Introduction", chap. 1 in Dodd and Jillson, eds., _Dynamics of
American Politics_ , pp. 1-22.  


_September 11th. Conceptual Models for the Study of American Institutions._

**James G. March and Johan P. Olsen, "The New Institutionalism: Organizational
Factors in Political Life." [Reserve]

**Kenneth A. Shepsle, "Studying Institutions: Some Lessons from the Rational
Choice Approach." [Reserve]

**John Aldrich, "Rational Choice Theory and the Study of American Politics,"
chap. 9 in Dodd and Jillson, eds., _Dynamics of American Politics_ , pp.
208-34.

**Elaine K. Swift and David W. Brady, "Common Ground: History and Theories of
American

Politics," chap. 4 in Dodd and Jillson, eds., _Dynamics of American Politics_
, pp. 83-104.

**Rogers M. Smith, "If Politics Matters: Implications for a `New
Institutionalism.'" [Reserve]

Gabriel Almond, "The Return to the State," _American Political Science Review_
82 (3) (1988):

853-74.

Martin Carnoy, _The State and Political Theory_ (1984).

Anthony Downs, _An Economic Theory of Democracy_ (1957).

Peter Evans, Dietrich Rueschemeyer, and Theda Skocpol, eds., _Bringing the
State Back In_

(1985).

Gunnar Grendstad and Per Selle, "Cultural Theory and the New
Institutionalism," _Journal of Theoretical Politics_ 7 (1) (1995): 5-27.

Calvin Jillson, "Patterns and Periodicity in American National Politics,"
chap. 2 in Dodd and Jillson, eds., _Dynamics of American Politics_ , pp.
24-58.

James G. March and Johan P. Olsen, _Rediscovering Institutions: The
Organizational Basis of_

_Politics_ (1989).

Eric F. Nordlinger, _On the Autonomy of the Democratic State_ (1981).

Mancur Olson, _The Logic of Collective Action_ (1965).

"Polity Forum: Institutions and Institutionalism," _Polity_ 28 (1) (Fall
1995): 84-140.  
    
    


Part One: The Frameworks of American Politics  


_September 18th. American Political Culture._

**Louis Hartz, _Liberal Tradition in America_ , chap. 1 "The Concept of a
Liberal Society."

[Reserve]

**David Greenstone, "Political Culture and American Political Development."
[Reserve]

**Russell L. Hanson, "Liberalism and the Course of American Social Welfare
Policy," chap. 6 in

Dodd and Jillson, eds., _Dynamics of American Politics_ , pp. 132-59.

**Sven H. Steinmo, "American Exceptionalism Reconsidered: Culture or
Institutions?" chap. 5 in

Dodd and Jillson, eds., _Dynamics of American Politics_ , pp. 106-31.

John Patrick Diggens, _The Lost Soul of American Politics: Virtue, Self
Interest, and the_

_Foundations of Liberalism_ (1985).

Daniel J. Elazar, _The American Mosaic: The Impact of Space, Time, and Culture
on AmericanPolitics_ (1994).

Richard J. Ellis, _American Political Cultures_ (1993).

David F. Ericson, _The Shaping of American Liberalism: The Debates over
Ratification,_ _Nullification, and Slavery_ (1993).

J. David Greenstone, _The Lincoln Persuasion: Remaking American Liberalism_
(1993).

Russell L. Hanson, _The Democratic Imagination in America_ (1985).

Samuel Huntington, _American Politics: The Promise of Disharmony_ (1980).

Robert Kelley, "Ideology and Political Culture from Jefferson to Nixon,"
_American Historical Review_ 82 (1977): 531-82.

James A. Morone, _The Democratic Wish: Popular Participation and the Limits of
American Government_ (1990).

J.G.A. Pocock, _The Machiavellian Moment_ (1975).

Robert H. Wiebe, _A Cultural History of American Democracy_ (1995).

Gordon S. Wood, _The Radicalism of the American Revolution_ (1992).  


_September 25th. The Constitutional Framework._

** _Federalist Papers_ , nos. 9-11, 37-39, 45-46, 48-49, 51, 56-57, 62-63,
68-70, 78, 84.

**Peter F. Nardulli, "The Constitution and American Politics," chap. 1 in
Nardulli, ed., _Constitution and American Political Development_ , pp. 3-31.

**Sheldon S. Wolin, _Presence of the Past_ , chap. 5 "Tending and Intending a
Constitution: Bicentennial Misgivings." [Reserve]

Bruce Ackerman, _We the People: Volume 1: Foundations_ (1991, 1993).

Thornton Anderson, _Creating the Constitution: The Convention of 1787 and the
First Congress_ (1993).

Martin Diamond, _The Founding of the Democratic Republic_ (1981).

Daniel J. Elazer, _The American Constitutional Tradition_ (1988).

Wayne D. Moore, _Constitutional Rights and Powers of the People_ (1996).

Martin H. Redish, _The Constitution as Political Structure_ (1995).

William H. Riker, _The Strategy of Rhetoric: Campaigning for the American
Constitution_ (1996). Herbert J. Storing, ed., _The Anti-Federalist_ (1985).

Herbert J. Storing, _What the Anti-Federalists Were For_ (1981).

Gordon S. Wood, _The Creation of the American Republic, 1776-1787_ (1969).  


_Supplemental Topic. Federalism._

Samuel Beer, _To Make a Nation: The Rediscovery of American Federalism_
(1993).

Raoul Berger, _Federalism: The Founders' Design_ (1987).

Vincent Ostrom, _The Meaning of American Federalism: Constituting a Self-
Governing Society_ (1991).

Paul Peterson, _The Price of Federalism_ (1995).

David B. Walker, _The Rebirth of Federalism: Slouching toward Washington_
(1995).  


_October 9th. Power and the American Political Economy._ (Half period)

**Edward S. Greenberg, "Macroeconomic Change and Political Transformation in
the United States," chap. 7 in Dodd and Jillson, eds., _Dynamics of American
Politics_ , pp. 160-81.

John C. Berg, _Unequal Struggle: Class, Gender, Race, and Power in the U.S.
Congress_ (1994)

Thomas Ferguson, _Golden Rule: The Investment Theory of Party Competition and
the Logic of Money-Driven Political Systems_ (1995).

Edward S. Greenberg, _Capitalism and the American Political Ideal_ (1985).

Charles Lindblom, _Politics and Markets: The World's Political and Economic
Systems_ (1977), chaps. 12-15.

Grant McConnell, _Private Power and American Democracy_ (1966).

Nelson W. Polsby, _Community Power and Political Theory: A Further Look at
Problems of Evidence and Inference_ (1980).

David Vogel, _Fluctuating Fortunes: The Political Power of Business in
America_ (1989).  


_October 9th. Expanding the Political Community: Civil Rights and the
Challenges of Inclusion._ (Half period)

**Rogers M. Smith, "Beyond Tocqueville, Myrdal, and Hartz: The Multiple
Traditions in America." [Reserve]

**Paula D. McClain and John A. Garcia, "Expanding Disciplinary Boundaries:
Black, Latino, and Racial Minority Group Politics in Political Science."
[Reserve]

**Eileen L. McDonagh, "Gender Politics and Political Change." [Reserve]

Chandler Davidson and Bernard Grofman, eds., _Quiet Revolution in the South:
The Impact of the Voting Rights Act 1965-1990_ (1994).

Michael C. Dawson, _Behind the Mule: Race and Class in African-American
Politics_ (1994).

Hugh Davis Graham, _The Civil Rights Era: Origins and Development of National
Policy, 1960-1972_ (1990).

Rodney Hero, _Latinos and the U.S. Political System: Two-Tiered Pluralism_
(1992).

Jennifer L. Hochschild, _Facing Up to the American Dream: Race, Class, and the
Soul of the Nation_ (1995).

Robert Huckfeldt and Carol Weitzel Kohfeld, _Race and the Decline of Class in
American Politics_ (1989).

Donald W. Jackson, _Even the Children of Strangers: Equality Under the U.S.
Constitution_ (1992).

Desmond King, _Separate and Unequal: Black Americans and the U.S. Federal
Government_ (1995).

Andrew Kull, _The Color-Blind Constitution_ (1992).

Michael McGerr, "Political Style and Women's Power, 1830-1930," _Journal of
American History_ 77 (December 1990): 864-85.

Richard M. Merelman, "Racial Conflict and Cultural Politics in the United
States," _Journal of Politics_ 56 (1) (February 1994): 1-20.

Judith N. Shklar, _American Citizenship: The Quest for Inclusion_ (1991).

Katherine Kish Sklar, _Florence Kelley and the Nation's Work: The Rise of
Women's Political Culture, 1830-1900_ (1995).

Mark V. Tushnet, _Making Civil Rights Law: Thurgood Marshall and the Supreme
Court, 1936-1961_ (1994).  


_Supplemental Topic. Civil Liberties._

Margaret A. Blanchard, _Revolutionary Sparks: Freedom of Expression in Modern
America_ (1992).

David Garrow, _Liberty and Sexuality: The Right to Privacy and the Making of
Roe v. Wade_ (1994).

James L. Gibson, "Political Intolerance and Political Repression During the
McCarthy Red Scare," _American Political Science Review_ 82 (2) (1988):
511-29.

Gregg Ivers, _Redefining the First Freedom: The Supreme Court and the
Consolidation of State Power_ (1992).

David A.J. Richards, _Toleration and the Constitution_ (1986).

Cass R. Sunstein, _Democracy and the Problem of Free Speech_ (1993).  
    
    


Part Two: Linkage Institutions and Political Participation  


_October 16th. Public Opinion and Political Behavior._

**John R. Zaller, _The Nature and Origins of Mass Opinion_ , chaps. TBA.

**Robert Huckfeldt and Paul Allen Beck, "Contexts, Intermediaries, and
Political Behavior," chap. 11 in Dodd and Jillson, eds., _Dynamics of American
Politics_ , pp. 252-76.

**Lawrence R. Jacobs and Robert Y. Shapiro, "Studying Substantive Democracy."
[Reserve]

Michael X. Delli Carpini and Scott Keeter, _What Americans Know about Politics
and Why It Matters_ (1996).

James L. Gibson and Richard D. Bingham. "On the Conceptualization and
Measurement of Political Tolerance," _American Political Science Review_ 76
(3) (1982): 603-20.

Robert Huckfeldt and John Sprague, _Citizens, Politics, and Social
Communication: Information and Influence in an Election Campaign_ (1995).

Shanto Iyengar and Donald R. Kinder, _News That Matters: Television and
American Public Opinion_ (1987).

Kathleen Jamieson, _Dirty Politics_ (1992).

Herbert McClosky and John Zaller, _The American Ethos: Public Attitudes Toward
Capitalism_

_and Democracy_ (1984).

Norman H. Nie, Jane Junn, and Kenneth Stehlik-Barry, _Education and Democratic
Citizenship in America_ (Chicago: University of Chicago, 1996).

Benjamin I. Page, _Who Deliberates? Mass Media in Modern Democracy_ (1995)

Benjamin I. Page and Robert Y. Shapiro, "Effects of Public Opinion on Policy,"
_American Political Science Review_ 77 (1983): 175-90.

Benjamin I. Page and Robert Y. Shapiro, _The Rational Public: Fifty Years of
Trends in Americans' Policy Preferences_ (1992)

Samuel Popkin, _The Reasoning Voter: Communication and Persuasion in
Presidential Campaigns_ (1991).

Steven J. Rosenstone and John Mark Hansen, _Mobilization, Participation, and
Democracy in America_ (1993).

James A. Stimson, _Public Opinion in America: Moods, Cycles, and Swings_
(1991).

Sidney Verba and Gary Orren, _Equality in America: The View from the Top_
(1985).

Hanes Walton, Jr., ed., _Black Politics and Black Political Behavior_ (1994).  


_October 23rd and 30th. Political Parties, Elections, and Electoral Regimes._

**John H. Aldrich, _Why Parties?_

**Edward G. Carmines and James A. Stimson, _Issue Evolution_.

Courtney Brown, _Ballots of Tumult: A Portrait of Volatility in American
Voting_ (1991).

Walter Dean Burnham, _Critical Elections and the Mainsprings of American
Politics_ (1970).

Angus Campbell, et al., _The American Voter_ (1960).

Jerome M. Clubb, William H. Flanigan, and Nancy H. Zingale, _Partisan
Realignment: Voters, Parties, and Government in American History_ (1980).

John J. Coleman, _Party Decline in America: Policy, Politics, and the Fiscal
State_ (1996).

Richard Hofstadter, _The Idea of a Party System_ (1969).

Richard L. McCormick, _The Party Period and Public Policy: American Politics
from the Age of Jackson to the Progressive Era_ (1986).

Peter F. Nardulli, "The Concept of a Critical Realignment, Electoral Behavior,
and Political Change," _American Political Science Review_ 89 (1) (March
1995): 10-22.

Kelly D. Patterson, _Political Parties and the Maintenance of Liberal
Democracy_ (1996).

Gerald M. Pomper, _Passions and Interests: Political Party Concepts of
American Democracy_ (1992).

Nicol C. Rae, _Southern Democrats_ (1994).

David Resnick and Norman C. Thomas, "Cycling Through American Politics,"
_Polity_ 23 (Fall 1990): 1-21.

Byron E. Shafer, ed., _The End of Realignment? Interpreting American Electoral
Eras_ (1991).

James L. Sundquist, _Dynamics of the Party System: Alignment and Realignment
of Political Parties in the United States_ (1973, 1983).

Katherine Tate, _From Protest to Politics: The New Black Voters in American
Politics_ (1993).

Martin P. Wattenberg, _The Decline of American Political Parties, 1952-1988_
(1990).  


_November 6th. Interest Group Politics in a Post-Party Era._

**Mark P. Petracca, ed., _Politics of Interests_ , chaps. 1, 3, 6, 8, 13, and
15.

**William C. Mitchell and Michael C. Munger, "Economic Models of Interest
Groups: An Introductory Survey." [Reserve]

**Clarence N. Stone, "Group Politics Reexamined: From Pluralism to Political
Economy," chap. 12 in Dodd and Jillson, eds., _Dynamics of American Politics_
, pp. 277-96.

William P. Browne, _Cultivating Congress: Constituents, Issues, and Interests
in Agricultural Policymaking_ (1994).

Anne Costain, _Inviting Women's Rebellion: A Political Process Interpretation
of the Women's Movement_ (1992).

Thomas Gais, _Improper Influence: Campaign Finance Law, Political Interest
Groups, and the Problem of Equality_ (1996). [Interest groups]

Virginia Gray and David Lowery, _Population Ecology of Interest
Representation_ (1996).

John Mark Hansen, _Gaining Access: Congress and the Farm Lobby, 1919-1981_
(1991).

John P. Heinz, et al., _The Hollow Core: Private Interests in National Policy
Making_ (1993).

Terry Moe, _The Organization of Interests: Incentives and the Internal
Dynamics of Political Interest Groups_ (1980).

Lawrence S. Rothenberg, _Linking Citizens to Government: Interest Group
Politics at Common Cause_ (1992).

Larry Sabato, _PAC Power: Inside the World of Political Action Committees_
(1984).

Kay Lehman Schlozman and John T. Tierny, _Organized Interests and American
Democracy_ (1986).

James A. Smith, _The Idea Brokers: Think Tanks and the Rise of the New Policy
Elite_ (1990).

Robert M. Stein and Kenneth N. Bickers, _Perpetuating the Pork Barrel: Policy
Subsystems and American Democracy_ (1995).

Sidney Verba, Kay Lehman Schlozman, and Henry E. Brady, _Voice and Inequality:
Civic Voluntarism in American Politics_ (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1995).

Jack L. Walker, "The Origins and Maintenance of Interest Groups in America,"
_American Political Science Review_ 77 (1983): 390-406.

Jack L. Walker, _Mobilizing Interest Groups in America_ (1991).  
    
    


Part Three: National Institutions and Policy Making  


_November 13th. Congress: History, Structures, and Politics._

**Michael L. Mezey, "Legislatures: Individual Purpose and Institutional
Performance." [Reserve]

**David Brady, "Incrementalism in the People's Branch: The Constitution and
the Development of the Policy-making Process," chap. 2 in Nardulli, ed.,
_Constitution and American Political Development_ , pp. 35-62.

**Charles Stewart III, "Responsiveness in the Upper Chamber: The Constitution
and the Institutional Development of the Senate," chap. 3 in Nardulli, ed.,
_Constitution and American Political Development_ , pp. 63-96.

**Roger Davidson, "The Emergence of the Post-Reform Congress." [Reserve]

R. Douglas Arnold, _The Logic of Congressional Action_ (1990).

Richard F. Bensel, _Sectionalism and American Political Development:
1880-1980_ (1984).

Joseph M. Bessette, _The Mild Voice of Reason: Deliberative Democracy and
American National Government_ (1994).

Sarah A. Binder and Steven S. Smith, _Politics or Principle? Filibustering in
the United States Senate_ (Washington, DC: Brookings, 1996).

David W. Brady, _Critical Elections and Congressional Policy Making_ (1988).

Gary W. Cox and Matthew D. McCubbins, _Legislative Leviathan: Party Government
in the House_ (1993).

Morris Fiorina, _Congress: Keystone of the Washington Establishment_ (1977).

Richard L. Hall, _Participation in Congress_ (1996).

Barbara Hinckley, _Less Than Meets the Eye: Foreign Policy Making and the Myth
of the Assertive Congress_ (1994).

Gary C. Jacobson, _The Electoral Origins of Divided Government: Competition in
House Elections, 1946-1988_ (1990).

David Mayhew, _Congress: The Electoral Connection_ (1974).

Nelson Polsby, "The Institutionalization of the U.S. House of
Representatives," _American Political Science Review_ 62 (1968): 144-68.

Keith T. Poole and Howard Rosenthal, _Congress: A Political-Economic History
of Roll Call Voting_ (1996).

David F. Rohde, _Parties and Leaders in the Postreform House_ (1991).

Barbara Sinclair, _Legislators, Leaders, and Lawmaking: The U.S. House of
Representatives in the Postreform Era_ (1994).

Barbara Sinclair, _The Transformation of the U.S. Senate_ (1990).

Carol M. Swain, _Black Faces, Black Interests: The Representation of African
Americans in Congress_ (1993).

Elaine K. Swift, _The Making of an American Senate: Reconstitutive Change in
Congress 1787-1841_ (1996).  


_November 20th. Presidential Power Across Time._

**Bert A. Rockman, "Entrepreneur in the Constitutional Marketplace: The
Development of the Presidency," chap. 4 in Nardulli, ed., _Constitution and
American Political Development_ , pp. 97-120.

**Jeffrey K. Tulis, "The Two Constitutional Presidencies." [Reserve]

**Fred I. Greenstein, "Change and Continuity in the Modern Presidency."
[Reserve]

**Stephen Skowronek, _The Politics Presidents Make_ , chaps. 1-3, 7-8.

John P. Burke, _The Institutional Presidency_ (1992).

Thomas E. Cronin, ed., _Inventing the American Presidency_ (1989).

Matthew J. Dickinson, _Bitter Harvest: FDR, Presidential Power, and the Growth
of the Presidential Branch_ (1996).

Thomas S. Langston, _Ideologues and Presidents: From the New Deal to the
Reagan Revolution_ (1992).

William E. Leuchtenburg, _In the Shadow of FDR: From Harry Truman to Ronald
Reagan_ , rev. ed. (1989)

Theodore Lowi, _The Personal President: Power Invested, Promise Unfulfilled_
(1985).

Forest McDonald, _The American Presidency: An Intellectual History_ (1994).

Sidney M. Milkis, _The President and the Parties: The Transformation of the
American Party System since the New Deal_ (1993).

Richard Neustadt, _Presidential Power_ (1960, 1976).

Stephen Skowronek, "Notes on the Presidency in the Political Order," _Studies
in American Political Development_ 1 (1986): 286-302.  


_November 25th (Note: Tuesday). The Judiciary in the Policy Process._

**Gerald N. Rosenberg, _Hollow Hope_ , chaps. 1-5, 12.

**Mark A. Graber, "The Non-Majoritarian Difficulty." [Reserve]

Nancy V. Baker, _Conflicting Loyalties: Law and Politics in the Attorney
General's Office, 1789-1990_ (1992).

Lawrence Baum, "Supreme Court Activism and the Constitution," in Nardulli,
ed., _Constitution and American Political Development_.

Jonathan D. Casper, "The Supreme Court and National Policy Making," _American
Political Science Review_ 70 (1) (1976): 50-63.

John B. Gates, _The Supreme Court and Partisan Realignment: A Macro- and
Microlevel Perspective_ (1991).

Gerald S. Gryski, Gary Zuk, and Deborah J. Barrow, "A Bench that Looks Like
America? Representation of African-Americans and Latinos on the Federal
Courts," _Journal of Politics_ 56 (4) (November 1994): 1076-1086.

Ronald Kahn, _The Supreme Court and Constitutional Theory, 1953-1993_ (1994).

Michael W. McCann, _Rights At Work: Pay Equity Reform and the Politics of
Legal Mobilization_ (1994)

Richard L. Pacelle, Jr., _The Transformation of the Supreme Court's Agenda_
(1991).

Rebecca Mae Saloker, _The Solicitor General: The Politics of Law_ (1992).

Martin Shapiro, "The Supreme Court's `Return' to Economic Regulation,"
_Studies in American Political Development_ 1 (1986): 91-141.  


_December 4th. The Federal Bureaucracy and Regulatory Politics._

**Martin Shefter, _Political Parties and the State_ , chap. 3 "Party,
Bureaucracy, and Political Change in the United States." [Reserve]

**Brian Balogh, "Reorganizing the Organizational Synthesis: Federal-
Professional Relations in Modern America." [Reserve]

**Bert A. Rockman, "The Federal Executive: Equilibrium and Change." [Reserve]

**Hugh Heclo, "Issue Networks and the Executive Establishment." [Reserve]

**James Q. Wilson, _Bureaucracy_ , chap. 5 "Interests." [Reserve]

Brian J. Cook, _Bureaucracy and Self-Government: Reconsidering the Role of
Public Administration in American Politics_ (1996).

Robert F. Durant, _The Administrative Presidency Revisited: Public Lands, the
BLM, and the Reagan Revolution_ (1992).

Marc Allen Eisner, _Regulatory Politics in Transition_ (1993).

Louis Galambos, ed., _The New American State: Bureaucracies and Policies since
World War II_ (1987).

Hugh Heclo, _A Government of Strangers_ (1977).

Mark W. Huddleston and William W. Boyer, _The Higher Civil Service in the
United States: Quest for Reform_ (1996).

Patricia Wallace Ingraham, _The Foundation of Merit: Public Service in
America_ (1995).

Cathy Marie Johnson, _The Dynamics of Conflicts Between Bureaucrats and
Legislators_ (1992).

Ronald N. Johnson and Gary D. Libecap, _The Federal Civil Service and the
Problem of Bureaucracy: The Economics and Politics of Institutional Change_
(1994)

Paul C. Light, _Thickening Government: Federal Hierarchy and the Diffusion of
Accountability_ (1994).

Terry M. Moe, "The New Economics of Organization," _American Journal of
Political Science_ 28 (1984): 739-777.

Francis E. Rourke, ed., _Bureaucratic Power in National Policy Making_ (1982).

Harold Seidman and Robert Gilmour, _Politics, Position, and Power: From the
Positive to the Regulatory State_ , 4th ed. (1986).

Robert M. Stein and Kenneth N. Bickers, _Perpetuating the Pork Barrel: Policy
Subsystems and American Democracy_ (1995).

James Q. Wilson, _Bureaucracy_.

James Q. Wilson, ed., _The Politics of Regulation_ (1980).  


_Supplemental Topic. Politics and the Policy Process._

Frank R. Baumgartner and Bryan D. Jones, _Agendas and Instability in American
Politics_ (1993).

John W. Kingdon, _Agendas, Alternatives, and Public Policies_ (1984).

David B. Robertson and Dennis R. Judd, _The Development of Public Policy: The
Structure of Policy Restraint_ (1989).

Jean Reith Schroedel, _Congress, the President, and Policymaking_ (1994).

Martin J. Smith, _Pressures, Power, and Policy: Policy Networks and State
Autonomy in Britain and the United States_ (1994).

Aaron Wildavsky, _The New Politics of the Budgetary Process_ , 2nd ed. (1992).  
    
    


Conclusion: Overviews and Syntheses  


_December 11th. Piecing Together American Politics: Key Issues and Emerging
Scholarship._

**Karen Orren and Stephen Skowronek, "Beyond the Iconography of Order: Notes
for a `New Institutionalism,'" chap. 14 in Dodd and Jillson, eds., _Dynamics
of American Politics_ , pp. 311-30.

**Lawrence C. Dodd, "Political Learning and Political Change: Understanding
Development Across Time," chap. 15 in Dodd and Jillson, eds., _Dynamics of
American Politics_ , pp. 331-64.

**Hugh Heclo, "Ideas, Interests, and Institutions," chap. 16 in Dodd and
Jillson, eds., _Dynamics of American Politics_ , pp. 366-92.

Alberto Alesina and Howard Rosenthal, _Partisan Politics, Divided Government,
and the Economy_ (1994).

Richard A. Harris and Sidney M. Milkis, _Remaking American Politics_ (1989).

Bryan D. Jones, ed., _The New American Political System? Reflections on
Political Change and the Clinton Administration_ (1995).

Theodore J. Lowi, _The End of Liberalism: The Second Republic of the United
States_ , 2nd ed. (1979).

Theodore J. Lowi, _The End of the Republican Era_ (1994).

David R. Mayhew, _Divided We Govern: Party Control, Lawmaking, and
Investigations, 1946-1990_ (1991).  


_December 18th. Final Exam_

