HISTORY 564

WESTERN AMERICAN HISTORIOGRAPHY

Brian Q. Cannon

Fall 1999 Office: 403 KMB

3-5:30 Monday Hours: 1-1:50 MWF

302 KMB Home: 374-0448

Office: 378-5211

_

Course Description

_

This course offers an overview of fundamental historical interpretations in
western American history, as well as a sampling of recent applications of
innovative methodology in more specialized award-winning monographs. As I see
it, the primary purposes of this course are to develop critical reading,
writing and discussion skills and to acquaint students with the evolution of
western history as a discipline and with some of the most important
interpretive paradigms and debates within the field.

_

Required Reading

_

Frederick Jackson Turner, "The Significance of the Frontier in American
History"; "The Problem of the West"; "Contributions of the West to American
Democracy"; and "The West and American Ideals"
http://xroads.virginia.edu/~HYPER/TURNER/contents.html

Allan G. Bogue, _Frederick Jackson Turner: Strange Roads Going Down_

Gerald D. Nash, _Creating the West: Historical Interpretations, 1890-1990_

Ray Allen Billington, _America's Frontier Heritage_

Patricia Limerick, _Legacy of Conquest: The Unbroken Past of the American
West_

Walter Prescott Webb, _The Great Plains_

Donald Worster, _Rivers of Empire_

Henry Nash Smith, _Virgin Land: The American West as Symbol and Myth_

Robert Berkhofer, _The White Man's Indian_

Dee Brown, _Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee_

Ramon A. Gutierrez, _When Jesus Came the Corn Mothers Went Away_

Elliott West, _Growing Up with the Country: Childhood on the Far Western
Frontier_

Linda Peavy, _Women in Waiting in the Westward Movement_

James N. Gregory, _American Exodus: The Dust Bowl Migration and Okie Culture
in California_

_

Grade Calculation

_

Class attendance and discussion participation 20 percent

Book Reviews  50 percent

Oral Reports 20 percent

Final Essay/Agenda for Scholarship 10 percent

_

Grading Scale

_

A 94-100%

A- 90-93%

B+ 87-89%

B 83-86%

B- 80-82%

C+ 77-79%

C 73-76%

C- 70-72%

D+ 67-69%

D 63-66%

D- 60-62%

E  59% or less

_

Weekly short reviews

_

Each student will write a 3-page review essay on each week's book, with the
exception of the book by Gerald Nash. These papers should be in the form of a
book review that might appear in a professional journal. Devote one page of
your review to identifying the author, offering a brief overview of the
subjects covered in the book and summarizing key conclusions from the book.
Devote the balance of your review (AT LEAST HALF OF THE REVIEW) to a
discussion of the book's strengths and weaknesses. Be sure to discuss the
types of sources and methodology used by the author. You may also discuss
stylistic and literary strengths and weaknesses, offering examples to support
each assertion that you make. Pay particular attention to the author's
assumptions, conclusions and use of evidence in support of conclusions. Which
conclusions are persuasive and why? Which are less persuasive and why? Are
thee alternative explanations that might be equally plausible or more
compelling than the one propounded by the author.

_

Late Papers

_

Papers are due at the beginning of class on the day specified in the syllabus.
Late papers will be accepted but will be penalized by 10% of the points
possible for each week that they are late following the due date.

_

Oral Reports

_

Each student will prepare five oral reports regarding important articles.
Articles are listed on the class schedule. On the first day of class we will
make assignments regarding these reports. Your report should acquaint everyone
in the class with the major interpretive points raised in the article and
should also critically evaluate the work. Your report should be well-organized
and easy to follow. You may quote passages from your article as part of your
oral report. As part of your report you should also prepare and abstract of
the article and provide a copy of the abstract to the class. This abstract may
be in outline or prose format.

_

Final Essay

_

A 6-8 page essay in which you evaluate and synthesize key themes from this
course and evaluate the status of western history as a discipline will be due
in 403 KMB on the last day of the final exam period. The book by Gerald Nash,
which we will read in installments over the course of the semester, may be
especially useful to you in this assignment.

_

Class Participation

_

Each seminar participant should actively contribute to class discussions, and
I will evaluate your oral participation in terms of both quantity and quality.
Your oral reports should be particularly well-organized and insightful.

As someone who tends to be rather quiet, I recognize that it requires
considerable courage even in a fairly small seminar for some to share ideas in
informal discussion. However, with your reviews of each book completed by the
time that we meet in our seminar, you should have well-formulated ideas to
share with the class. At times it may seem that the discussion has already
moved on to a new point by the time that there is a sufficient lull in the
discussion for you to raise a point. If that is the case, do not be bashful
about saying that you want to return to a point that was raised a few minutes
ago. Do not hesitate either to evaluate a book's ideas partly in light of your
understanding of life or parallel situations that you have observed in today's
world. Some of the richest seminar discussions are those in which people draw
upon their distinctive backgrounds and experiences in reacting to a reading.

If you decide after one or two sessions that it would be helpful to you to
have me explicitly draw you out and call on you at key junctures in our
discussion, please let me know. I'd be happy to do so at your request.

Remember that this is a learning experience for all of us. Do not worry if you
articulate your ideas haltingly. Do not worry unduly either if you seem to
have "missed" what others took to be a central message of a book. To
appreciate fully the significance of a book, you must have an excellent
knowledge of a given field and of the intellectual context in which the book
was written (ie. the theoretical and methodological books and articles that
the author had read prior to writing the book.) Hopefully, you will begin to
acquire that contextual knowledge in this seminar, but do not become impatient
with yourself or expect to be able to see the forest through the trees in
every instance.

_

Class Schedule_ (this schedule may be changed at Dr. Cannon's discretion)

THE WEST AS FRONTIER PROCESS

Aug. 30 Introduction/Assigning Oral Reports/Discussion of four articles by F.
J. Turner

Sept. 6 No Class (holiday)

Sept. 13 Discussion of Bogue, _Strange Roads Going Down

_

Oral reports:

1\. George Wilson Pearson, "The Frontier and American Institutions: A
Criticism of the Turner Theory," in Richard Hofstadter, ed., _Turner and the
Sociology of the Frontier_ , 15-42.

2\. Paul W. Gates, "Frontier Estate Builders and Farm Laborers," in Richard
Hofstadter, ed., _Turner and the Sociology of the Frontier_ , 100-119.

Sept. 20 Discussion of Billington, _America's Frontier Heritage

_

Oral Reports:

1\. Martin Ridge, "Frederick Jackson Turner, Ray Allen Billington, and
American Frontier History," _Western Historical Quarterly (WHQ)_ 19 (January
1988):5-20.

2\. Robert E. Lang et al., "Progress of the Nation: The SEttlemetn History of
the Enduring American Frontier," _WHQ_ 26 (Autumn 1995):289-307.

Sept. 27 Discussion of Limerick, _Legacy of Conquest

_

Oral Reports:

1\. Donald Worster et al., "The Legacy of Conquest: A Panel of Appraisal,"
_WHQ_ 20 (August 1989):303-22.

2\. Patricia Limerick, "Turnerians All: The Dream of a Helpful History in an
Intelligible World," _American Historical Review_ 100 (June 1995):697-716.

3\. William Cronon, "Revisiting the Vanishing Frontier," _WHQ_ 18 (April
1987):157-76.

Oct. 4 Discussion of Nash, pp. 1-99.

Oral Reports:

1\. William G. Robbins, "Laying Siege to Western History: The Emergence of New
Paradigms," _Reviews in American History_ 19 (Sept 1991):313-31.

2\. Gerald Nash, "One Hundred Years of Western History," _Journal of the West_
(January 1993):3-4.

3\. Symposium on the New Western History: Martin Ridge, Gerald Thompson,
Gerald Nash and William Goetzmann in _Continuity_ 17 (Fall 1993):1-32.

4\. Michael P. Malone, "Beyond the Last Frontier," _WHQ_ 20 (November
1989):409-27.

5\. R. C. Gordon McCutchan, "Revising the Revisionists: Manifesto of the
Realist Western Historians," _Journal of the West_ 33 (July 1994):3-7.

6\. Robert D. Johnston, "Beyond the West: Regionalism, Liberalism and the
Evasion of Politics in the New Western History," _Rethinking History_ 2
(1998):239-77.

THE WEST AS PHYSICAL OR ECONOMIC REGION

Oct. 11  Discussion of _The Great Plains_ and Nash, Ch. 3

Oral Reports:

1\. Michael C. Steiner, "The Significance of Turner's Sectional Thesis," _WHQ
10_ _(October 1979):437-66_ AND Turner, "The Section in American History"

2\. Earl Pomeroy, "Toward a Reorientation of Western History: Continuity and
Environment," _Mississippi Valley Historical Review_ 41 (March 1955):579-600.

Oct. 18 Discussion of Worster, _Rivers of Empire_ and Nash, Ch. 4

Oral Reports:

1\. Donald Worster, "New West, True West: Interpreting the Region's History,"
_Western Historical Quarterly_ 18 (April 1987):141-56.

2\. Bernard DeVoto, "The West: A Plundered Province," _Harper's_ 169 (August
1934):355-64 AND William Robbins, "The Plundered Province Thesis and the
Recent Historiography of the American West," _Pacific Historical Review_ 55
(November 1986):577-97.

THE WEST AS CULTURAL SYMBOL AND MYTH

Oct. 25 Discussion of Smith, _Virgin Land_ and Nash, Ch. 5

Oral Reports:

1\. Loren Baritz, "The Idea of the West," _American Historical Review_ 66
(April 1961).

2\. Paul Hutton, AFrom Little Bighorn to Little Big Man: The Changing Image of
a Western Hero in Popular Culture,@ _WHQ_ (January 1976).

3\. William H. Truettner and Alexander Nemerov, "What You See Is Not
Necessarily What You Get: New Meanings in Images of the Old West," _Montana:
The Magazine of Western History_ 42 (Summer 1992): 70-80.

Nov. 1 Discussion of Berkhofer, _The White Man's Indian

_

1\. Robert F. Berkhofer, "Space, Time, Culture and the New Frontier,"
_Agricultural_ _History_ 38 (January 1964), 21-30.

2\. William Cronon, "A Place for Stories: Nature, History and Narrative,"
_Journal of_ _American History_ 78 (March 1992):1347-1376.

THE WEST AS CULTURAL CROSSROADS

Nov. 8 Discussion of Brown, _Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee

_

Oral Reports:

1\. _American Historical Review_ 77 (April 1972):589-90.

2.@Native Americans, New Voices: American Indian History, 1895-1995,"
_American_ _Historical Review_ 100 (June 1995):717-40.

3\. Devon A. Mihesuah, "Suggested Guidelines for Institutions with Scholars
Who Conduct Research on American Indians," _American Indian Culture and
Research Journal_ 18 (1993):132.

Nov. 15 Discussion of Gutierrez, _When Jesus Came the Corn Mothers Went Away_

Oral Reports:

1\. Herbert E. Bolton, "The Mission as a Frontier Institution in the Spanish-
American Colonies," _American Historical Review_ 23 (October 1917):42-61.

2\. David Weber, "Turner, the Boltonians, and the Borderlands," _American
Historical_ _Review_ 91 (February 1986).

3\. Sarah Deutsch, "Landscape of Enclaves: Race Relations in the West,
1865-1990,"  _Under an Open Sky_ , 110-31.

Nov. 22 Discussion of Gregory, _American Exodus

_

Oral Reports:

1\. Steven Aron, "Lessons in Conquest: Towards a Greater Western History,"
_Pacific_ _Historical Review_ 63 (February 1994).

2\. Introduction to Howard Lamar and Leonard Thompson, "Comparative Frontier
History," in Lamar and Thompson, eds., _The Frontier in History: North America
and Southern Africa Compared_ (New Haven, 1981), 3-13.

GENDER- AND AGE-SPECIFIC WESTS

Nov. 29 Discussion of West, _Growing Up With the Country

_

Oral Reports:

1\. John Mack Faragher, "History from the Inside-Out: Writing the History of
Women in Rural America," _American Quarterly_ 33 (Winter 1981):537-57.

2\. Susan Armitage, "Women and Men in Western History: A Stereoptical Vision,"
_WHQ_ 16 (October 1985):381-95.

Dec. 6 Discussion of Peavy, _Women in Waiting

_

Oral Reports:

1\. Susan Lee Johnson, AA Memory Sweet to Soldiers: The Significance of
Gender,@ in Clyde A. Milner II, ed., _A New Significance: Re-envisioning the
History of the American West_ (1996), 255-78.

2\. Elizabeth Jameson, "Toward a Multicultural History of Women in the Western
United States," _Signs_ 13 (Summer 1988):761-91.

3\. Virginia Scharff, "Else Surely We Shall All Hang Separately," _Pacific
Historical_ _Review_ 61 (1992):235-55.

Dec. 17 Final Paper Due in 403 KMB by 5 p.m.

