**History 562, Sources and Problems in Nineteenth Century History**

Brigham Young University, Winter 2001

  
  

Thursday 4-6:30 p.m. 331 KMB

Professor Susan Rugh 8-2742 [Susan_Rugh@byu.edu](mailto:Susan_Rugh@byu.edu)

Office hours: 3-4:30 Tuesdays or by appointment

  
  

Course Description:

Not long ago, the history of the nineteenth century U.S. could be encapsulated
into three trends: industrialization, territorial expansion, and
sectionalization leading to the Civil War. In the last two decades social and
cultural history has complicated the study of this period, and has highlighted
themes of citizenship, democracy, individualism, and social categories of
race, class and gender. This transformation has occurred in part because of
the topics that historians have studied, but also because of the
multiplication of theoretical frameworks and methodologies applied to the
study of the problems, or enduring questions, of nineteenth century America.
Thus, in addition to familiarizing you with the major themes of the history of
the nineteenth century, this course has the goal of awakening your awareness
of the historiography of the period. Finally, it is hoped that this course
will allow you to achieve a synthetic view of the century, uniting what may
appear to be disparate concerns into a meaningful thematic whole. Ultimately,
you should attempt to craft your own over-arching synthesis to bring meaning
to your study of the nineteenth century in America. If you do not feel secure
about your knowledge of nineteenth century history, you may want to acquire a
textbook. I recommend William L. Barney, _The Passage of the Republic: An
Interdisciplinary History of Nineteenth Century America_ (D.C. Heath, 1987).
Also helpful are volumes in the _Major Problems_ series from D.C. Heath,
particularly Sean Wilentz, _Major Problems in the Early Republic, 1787-1848_.
You will also want to consult the AHA _Guide to Historical Literature_ (ed.
Mary Beth Norton) and various bibliographies on the topics we study, such as
the American History Series published by Harlan Davidson. (1)

  
  

Course Requirements: It is assumed you will carry out the assigned readings
and thoughtfully contribute to class discussion. Grades will be based on
review essays and a longer historiographical essay on trends in the history of
the nineteenth century U.S. Starred items are required readings; the others
are listed to help you assemble your own bibliography of readings in the
period. Of course, it does not pretend to be a complete listing. I reserve the
right to make changes to this syllabus.

  
  

Required texts available for purchase in the Bookstore; all articles have been
placed on library electronic reserve, and books on 2-day reserve. Please
cooperate with the other students in using the reserve books. That a book was
not available _is not_ a sufficient excuse for being unprepared.

  
  

Schedule of Readings

  
  

**Week 1 (Jan. 11): Introduction: Grand Schemes and Themes**

Dorothy Ross, "The New and Newer Histories: Social Theory and Historiography
in an American Key," and George M. Frederickson, "Nineteenth-Century American
History," in Anthony Molho and Gordon S. Wood, _Imagined Histories: American
Historians Interpret the Past_ (Princeton, 1998) (copies outside my office)

  
  

**Review essays on previous week's readings due by Tuesday noon in my
department mailbox.**

  
  

Section I: Antebellum America

**Week 2 (Jan. 18) Defining an Era**

*Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., _The Age of Jackson_

*Charles Sellers, _The Market Revolution: Jacksonian America, 1815-1846_ (1991)

Christopher Clark, _The Roots of Rural Capitalism: Western Massachusetts,
1780-1860_ (1990)

Alan Taylor, _William Cooper's Town_ : _Power and Persuasion on the Frontier
of the Early American Republic_ (Pulitzer prize winner)

Melvyn Stokes and Stephen Conway, _The Market Revolution_ _in America_

  
  

******Week 3 (Jan 25) Free Labor**

*Bruce Laurie, _Artisans into Workers: Labor in Nineteenth-Century America_ (1989)

*David Roediger, _The Wages of Whiteness: Race and the Making of the American Working Class_ (1993)

Sean Wilentz, _Chants Democratic: New York City & the Rise of the American
Working Class, 1788-1850_ (1986)

Christine Stansell, _City of Women_

Stephan Thernstrom, _Poverty and Progress_

  
  

**Week 4 (Feb. 1) Slave Labor** **and the Old South**

*Fogel and Engerman, _Time on the Cross: The Economics of American Negro Slavery_ (1974)

*Eugene D. Genovese, _Roll, Jordan, Roll: The World the Slaves Made_ (1976)

*Walter Johnson, _Soul by Soul: Life Inside the Antebellum Slave Market (1999)_

Kenneth M. Stampp, _The Peculiar Institution: Slavery in the Ante-Bellum
South_ (1956)

Bertram Wyatt-Brown, _Southern Honor: Ethics and Behavior in the Old South_
(1982) or

Victoria E. Bynum, _Unruly Women: The Politics of Social & Sexual Control in
the Old South_

Christopher Morris, "The Articulation of Two Worlds: The Master-Slave
Relationship Reconsidered," _Journal of American History_ 85:3 (Dec. 1998):
982-1007

  
  

**Week 5 (Feb. 8) Party Politics**

*Harry Watson, _Liberty and Power: The Politics of Jacksonian America_ (1990)

*Michael F. Holt, _The Rise and Fall of the American Whig Party: Jacksonian Politics and the Onset of the Civil War_ (Oxford, 1999) 

*Glenn C. Altschuler and Stuart M. Blumin, "Limits of Political Engagement in Antebellum America: A New Look at the Golden Age of Participatory Democracy," _JAH_ 84 (Dec 97): 855-885.

Altschuler and Blumin, _Rude Republic_

Richard Hofstadter, _The Idea of the Party System_

Paula Baker, _Affairs of Party_ : _The political culture of Northern Democrats
in the mid-nineteenth Century_

Marvin Meyer, _The Jacksonian Persuasion_

Daniel Walker Howe, _Political Culture of the American Whigs_

Lee Benson, _The Concept of Jacksonian Democracy_

  
  

Week 6: (Feb. 15) Breather

  
  

Section II: The Civil War Era

**Week 7 (Feb. 22):** **The Sectional Crisis**

*Eric Foner, _Free Soil, Free Labor, Free Men: The Ideology of the Republican Party before the Civil War_ (1970)

*William H. Freehling, _The Road to Disunion: Secessionists at Bay, 1776-1854_

*Michael F. Holt, _The Political Crisis of the 1850s_ (1978)

David M. Potter, _The Impending Crisis: 1848-1861_ (1976)

Tyler Anbinder, _Nativism and Slavery_

Jane Smiley, _The All True Travels of Lidie Newton_ (novel about Bleeding
Kansas)

Russell Banks, _Cloudsplitter_ (novel about John Brown)

  
  

**Week 8 (March 1) The Civil War**

*Maris A. Vinvoskis, "Have Social Historians Lost the Civil War? Some Preliminary Demographic Speculations," in Vinovskis, _Toward a Social History of the American Civil War: Exploratory Essays_ (1990), 1-30.

*Selected essays in McPherson and Cooper, _Writing the Civil War_ (Mitchell, Holt, Rable)

*Reid Mitchell, _The Vacant Chair: The Northern Soldier Leaves Home_ (1993)

*James McPherson, _For Cause and Comrades_

*Faust, "Altars of Sacrifice" article, _JAH_

Phillip Paludan, _"A People's Contest": The Union and Civil War, 1861-1865_
(1988)

Drew Gilpin Faust, _Mothers_ _of Invention: Women of the Slaveholding South in
the American Civil War_ (1997)

  
  

******Week 9 (March** 8) **Reconstruction**

*Eric Foner, _A Short History of Reconstruction_

*Julie Saville, _The Work of Reconstruction: From Slave to Wage Laborer in South Carolina, 1860-1870_ (Cambridge University Press, 1994; pbk 1996)

C. Vann Woodward, _The Strange Career of Jim Crow_ (latest edition)

Laura Edwards, _Gendered strife and confusion : the political culture of
Reconstruction_

  
  

Week 10 (March 15) Breather

  
  
  
  

Section III: Topics in 19th Century History

**Week 11 (March 22)** **Religion-the Case of Mormonism**

*Nathan Hatch, _Democratization of American Christianity_ (1989)

*John Brooke, _The Refiner's Fire: The Making of Mormon Cosmology, 1644-1844_ (1994)

*Richard Bushman, _Joseph Smith and the Beginnings of Mormonism_ (1988)

Robert H. Abzug, _Cosmos Crumbling: American Reform and the Religious
Imagination_ (1994)

Paul Johnson, _Shopkeeper's Millennium_

David Brion Davis, "Some Themes of Counter-Subversion: An Analysis of Anti-
Masonic, Anti-Catholic, and Anti-Mormon Literature," _Mississippi Valley
Historical Review_ (1960-61).

Terryl L. Givens, _The Viper on the Hearth: Mormons, Myths and the
Construction of Heresy_ ****

  
  

**Week 12 (March 29) Sex, Gender, Race**

*Amy Dru Stanley, _From Bondage to Contract: Wage Labor, Marriage, and the Market in the Age of Slave Emancipation_

*Martha Hodes, _White Women, Black Men: Illicit Sex in the 19 th-Century South_ (Yale, 1997)

*Linda Kerber, "Separate Spheres, Female Worlds, Woman's Place: The Rhetoric of Women's History," _Journal of American History_ Vol. 75 No. 1 (June 1988): 9-39. Kerber article

Nancy F. Cott, _Bonds of Womanhood_ (1977), latest edition

Mary Ryan, _Cradle of the Middle Class: The Family in Oneida County, New York,
1790-1865_ Nancy Isenberg, _Sex and Citizenship in Antebellum America_

Julie Roy Jeffrey, _The great silent army of abolitionism : ordinary women in
the antislavery movement_ (1998)

Jean F. Yellin, _Women and Sisters: The Antislavery Feminists in American
Culture (1989)_

  
  

**Week 13 (April 5)** **The West**

*Frederick Jackson Turner, "The Significance of the Frontier in American History"

*Patricia Nelson Limerick, _The Legacy of Conquest: The Unbroken Past of the American West_

*Jon Gjerde, _The Minds of the West: Ethnocultural Evolution in the Rural Middle West, 1830- 1917_ (1997)

Henry Nash Smith, _Virgin Land: The American West as Symbol and Myth_
(1950/1970)

(Too many to even start here)

  
  

**Week 14 (April 12):** The Gilded Age

*James Turner, "Understanding the Populists," _JAH_ 67 (Sep 1980): 354-373.

*Lawrence Goodwyn, _The Populist Moment: A Short History of the Agrarian Revolt in America_

*Alan Trachtenberg, _The Incorporation of America_

Robert Wiebe, _The Search for Order_

Jeffrey Ostler, _Prairie Populism: The Fate of Agrarian Radicalism in Kansas,
Nebraska, and Iowa, 1880-1892_ (1993)

  
  

Final paper due by noon on Monday, April 23 in my office.

  
  
  
  

1\. Donald R. Wright, _African Americans in the Early Republic, 1789-1831_
(1993); Robert V. Remini, _The Jacksonian Era_ (1997); John Niven, _The Coming
of the Civil War, 1837-1861_ (1990); Brooks D. Simpson, _America's Civil War_
(1996), among others. The AHA also publishes pamphlets on various eras, see
their website <http://www.theaha.org/.> Currently you may view the major
journals (AHR and JAH) online at
<http://www.historycooperative.org/journals/>.

