**To:** **UI**[ **Special Collections**](http://www.lib.uiowa.edu/spec-coll)

  **American Labor and Working Class History at Iowa:  
Part I**

JOHN N. SCHACHT

**From _Books at Iowa_ 53 (November 1990)  
****Copyright: The University of Iowa**

** **

**On Labor Day** **, 1989, Benjamin Kline Hunnicutt, professor of Leisure
Studies at the University of Iowa, appeared on CBS Television's syndicated
program "Nightwatch." The subject was a fit one for a Labor Day interview --
Hunnicutt's widely acclaimed _Work Without End: Abandoning Shorter Hours for
the Right to Work_ (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1988) \-- though
the interviewer, Charles Rose, quite arguably was not. Amidst occasional
questions and a torrent of comments from Rose that were interruptive and
exasperating, Hunnicutt nonetheless managed to patiently explain his book's
subject: the rise and post-1930s decline of the movement to reduce the working
hours of American workers. And he managed to insert some pungent thoughts on
the current status of labor-versus-leisure in the United States.**

**Some four months** **later, Hunnicutt again subjected himself to a lengthy
and difficult interview. This time the surroundings were more modest-an office
on the third floor of The University of Iowa's Main Library. And the subject
was different, namely, the remarkable outpouring of scholarly work in American
labor and working class history at the University in recent years, and
Hunnicutt's place in that body of work. Once again, he was patient and
informative. But at the end, one question stumped him. How do you _explain_
it? I asked. How, in a state whose industrial work force has always been
comparatively small, do you account for an outpouring of scholarship in a
field whose main focus has always been the industrial worker?**

**Hunnicutt did cite** **the effects of outstanding library and archival
resources in the field, both locally and within oneday's drive of Iowa City --
in Chicago, Madison, Champaign, and Detroit. And he noted that labor history
students and scholars had by now come together in sufficient numbers at Iowa
to form a kind of critical mass, whereby scholarship in the field is
encouraged by their mutual presence. But these factors by themselves are
insufficient explanation, he added.**

**And I can't explain it. I share your opinion, though: there is a lot that's
happening. I've come from North Carolina [Hunnicutt earned a Ph.D. in History
from the University of North Carolina in 1975], and there there's virtually
nothing, at least when I left, in labor history. And arriving here, I see a
lot of people working in this area. [1]**

**This essay seeks** **to explain how and why that outpouring occurred and is
continuing. In the course of so doing, it will survey the work of labor
history researchers at Iowa, not only in recent years but also in earlier
decades. (The reader may be surprised to discover, as I was, that Iowa City
was also a center of labor history research during the first quarter of the
twentieth century.) It will show how the development of research in this field
has in some degree hinged upon the research materials available locally, and
how the reverse is also true: the materials that have become available locally
have been shaped by the research being done. It will survey those resources.
And finally, having posed an answer to the basic question, it will seek to
elucidate such implications as that answer may suggest -- for researchers in
labor history and for the librarians, archivists, and library patrons who
assist them.**

**If we are to** **understand how American labor and working class history has
developed at Iowa-and, for that matter, if we are to understand the need, here
and elsewhere, for the somewhat redundant phrase "labor and working class
history"-we must first gain a thorough understanding of how scholarship in the
field has developed at the national level.**

**Although labor history** **has existed as an academic field since before
1900, it was almost entirely ignored by the American historical profession
until the late 1950s. Once the province of well-to-do, cultivated amateurs,
history by the turn of the century had become a profession dominated by men
who imbibed the "scientific" historical methods of the German research
seminar. Yet in its subject matter history remained largely genteel. Since the
time of Thucydides, history in the Western World had meant "past
politics"usually the doings and sayings of great white men. And the men who
inhabited early twentieth century university history departments, drawn mostly
from elite white Protestant backgrounds themselves, were still mostly
unwilling to look beyond the history of statesmen, generals, and diplomats.
The so-called Progressive Historians, it is true, were by 1910 espousing a
"New History" which would cast a somewhat broader purview, draw upon insights
from sociology and the other social sciences then emerging, and present itself
as an indispensable aid to the formation of intelligent public policy. Charles
Beard, Arthur M. Schlesinger, and some others in the Progressive School would
go on to explore the material bases of social conflict in a manner that owed
less to Karl Marx than to James Madison. But the influence of the Progressive
Historians was slow in spreading and never pervasive in the historical
profession. [2]**

**The door** **to the field of labor history was left wide open, and a group
of scholars associated with what came to be called "institutional economics"
walked in to stay for half a century. The institutionalists were rebelling
against the orthodoxies of classical economics, whose models of perfectly free
competition they saw as explaining very little about large-scale
industrialization and serving mainly to rationalize its pernicious effects.
Among other things, they contested orthodoxy's insistence that collective
action by workers constituted inadmissable interference with the free play of
the market. This eventually bound them in practical alliance with the labor
movement. They were also seeking alternatives to abstract models as
explanations of economic behavior. This eventually bound them to empirical
methodologies drawn from other disciplines, including, especially, historical
research. Sustained scholarship in labor history, which wedded an object of
interest and alliance (labor unions) with a preferred method of investigation
(historical research), seemed virtually an inevitable outcome. [3]**

**The scene of** **by far the greatest effort was the University of Wisconsin,
whose faculty Richard T. Ely had joined after leaving Johns Hopkins in 1892. A
distinguished economist, Ely had been fitfully collecting the source materials
he knew he needed if he were to accord the labor movement scholarly historical
study. Finally realizing that the collecting task was beyond the capacities of
a single individual, he managed to secure funds eventually amounting to
$30,000, provided mostly by the Carnegie Foundation, for the 1904
establishment of the American Bureau of Industrial Research. Joining him as
Bureau director was his former student, John R. Commons. Together they
attracted a group of students and scholars whose names would later figure
prominently in the "institutional" or "Wisconsin" school of labor history,
among them John B. Andrews, Helen Sumner, David Saposs, Philip Taft, and above
all Selig Perlman. The Bureau moved into offices in the new building of the
State Historical Society of Wisconsin, with which it was collaborating under
the far-seeing superintendency of Reuben G. Thwaites. And the Bureau set about
its business, which it saw as scouring the nation's libraries and union
headquarters for important source materials pertaining to the history of the
American labor movement, and then copying or collecting as much of that
material as it could . [4]**

**Until it wound** **down in 1913, the effort was massively productive, both
for the Society, which thereby came to hold the first major labor archives in
the United States, and for the group of students and scholars, now under
Commons' leadership, who used the collection as the basis for their
_Documentary History of American Industrial Society_ (11 vols; Cleveland:
Arthur H. Clark, 1910-11) and their _History of Labour in the United States_
(4 vols.; New York, Macmillan, 1918, 1935). These encyclopedic volumes, along
with Perlman's succinct _A Theory of the Labor Movement_ (New York: Macmillan,
1928), laid the basis for the study of American labor history until the 1960s.
[5]**

**There is no** **denying the magnitude of the Wisconsin School's
accomplishment. Their work, more than any other academics', brought legitimacy
to organized labor. They provided key intellectual ammunition in the long
struggle for federal and state labor law reform, a struggle which found
triumph in the Wagner Act, the Social Security Act, and the Wage and Hour Law
of the New Deal era. They erected a skeleton of essential facts and sources.
And as vast as their enterprise was, they maintained an overarching
theoretical coherence. This was largely the contribution of Perlman, who
started with the idea that American workers, left to their own devices, were
practical people interested in better wages, hours, and working conditions-not
in such radical notions as combining to improve their position as a class. Of
paramount interest, then, as the truest vehicle of workers' self-expression,
was the "pure and simple" labor union. Accordingly, the Wisconsin School
located the history of the American worker in the struggle to organize these
unions and bargain collectively with employers. Of interest to it, too, was
ameliorative legislation and the emergence of a legal framework that would
facilitate union development and collective bargaining. [6]**

**With hindsight** **furnished mostly by the scholarship of the 1970s and
'80s, we can now see that the Wisconsin School's close tie to organized labor
was its weakness as well as its strength-at least insofar as its practice of
labor history was concerned. The School's focus on "pure and simple" unions,
built mostly by native white craftsmen, disparaged the organizational
contributions of immigrants and radicals. Its focus downplayed the actual work
performed by workers as well as the cultural and other important aspects of
their lives. And it relegated the majority of people who have done most of the
hard and/or repetitive labor through American history-that is, unorganized
workersto virtual historical insignificance. Further, the School's insistence
that American workers, left to themselves, did not and do not behave in
_class_ terms was unquestionably based on what now may be seen as a rather
narrow band of evidence which came nowhere near reflecting workers' lives in
all their sprawling complexity. [7]**

**But for decades** **the Wisconsin School's formulations were not subjected
to serious challenge. A few intellectuals and scholars of the Old Left, most
notably Philip Foner, did insist that American workers' natural proclivity was
and is to behave in class terms. They tended, however, to _assume_ the truth
of this point of contention rather than argue it coherently in print. And,
curiously, they paired themselves with the Wisconsin School in focusing almost
exclusively on the development of labor unions (often those unions in which
leftists had a history of vying for leadership). University history
departments, another source of potential challenge, did move beyond genteel
subject matter after World War II. A new generation moved in as the G.I. Bill
expanded and democratized higher education, and some of its best scholars went
on to study previously ignored groups, such as urban immigrants. (See
especially Oscar Handlin's, _The Uprooted_ [Boston: Little Brown, 1951]). But
they were very slow in coming 'round to labor history. One suspects that their
broad concurrence in "consensus history" -- that is, the idea that the
_absence_ of truly deep societal fissures and conflicts has been the dominant
theme of American civilization -- played an important role here. In accepting
consensus history, they in effect fenced themselves off from serious
disagreement with the Wisconsin School. That School, after all, had helped
build consensus history by assiduously painting workers as only interested in
incremental gains and by painting their conflict with employers as eminently
subject to adjustment via collective bargaining. In any event, the postwar
generation of academic historians was for years content to leave labor history
in the seemingly capable hands of the institutionalist heirs of the Ely-
Commons-Perlman group. History graduate students found very few history
department courses in labor history, little development of archival materials,
no established journal in the field, and little encouragement from their
mentors."**

**Creditable work** **in labor history continued to flow, for a while, from
labor economists and industrial relations scholars, most of whom now toiled in
university programs in those fields. Leading postwar practitioners included
Joel Seidman, Lloyd Ulman, James O. Morris, Richard Lester, Walter Galenson,
and Mark Perlman. But beginning about 1959 or 1960,younger labor economists
and industrial relations scholars no longer took up historical writing (or did
so at their professional peril). For reasons that need not be detailed here,
there was a headlong retreat from the interdisciplinary scope and
methodological empiricism that had long characterized these disciplines. Labor
economics abandoned the institutional approach to take up neoclassical
analysis and microanalysis with a vengeance. Industrial relations meanwhile
asserted itelf as a behavioral science.'**

**Coincidentally** **, a number of academic historians were finally readying
themselves to step into the breach. For the most part, their early work
followed the Wisconsin school in choosing union development as its subject
matter. The main difference lay in their attempt to improve labor history as
_history_. Most historical work in the Wisconsin tradition had heretofore been
dull, freighted with non-historical concerns, and inattentive to the fine
points of the historian's craft. The academic historians were intent on
raising labor history to the level of excellence then being achieved in other
fields of American history by Oscar Handlin, Richard Hofstadter, and others.
Occasionally they came near their mark. Exemplary studies by historians are
Robert Christie's _Empire in Wood: A History of the Carpenters' Union_
(Cornell Studies in Industrial Relations, vol. 7: Ithaca: Cornell University:
1956), and Sidney Fine's _Sit-Down: The General Motors Strike of 1936-37_ (Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1969). Irving Bernstein's two outstanding
volumes, _The Lean Years: A History of the American Worker, 1920-1933_
(Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1960) and _Turbulent Years: A History of the
American Worker, 1933-1943_ (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1969), may with some
justice be placed in the same grouping, even though Bernstein was by training
and vocation an industrial relations scholar. His volumes are straightforward
historical studies, meeting all standards of the historical profession,
carrying considerable narrative energy, and with their main focus on union
development and labor legislation. Academic historians have since continued to
produce work in this vein of labor history, although, as we shall see, this
work came to be overshadowed in the 1970s and since by work with quite
different emphases.  [10]**

**There were other** **stirrings in the early 1960s. The labor movement had by
then gained in sophistication as well as legitimacy and influence, and it was
much less reticent about opening itself to scholarly inspection. In 1960, its
representatives joined with historians and industrial relations scholars to
form the academic journal _Labor History_. In the same year, Wayne State
University established its Archives of Labor History and Union Affairs, with
generous help from the United Auto Workers. Along with the older archives in
Madison, and smaller collections built up before 1960 at New York's Rand
School and at the University of Michigan, the Wayne State effort was joined in
the 1960s by major labor archival ventures at Penn State, Duke, Georgia State,
Catholic University, and the University of Texas at Arlington. Since then,
microfilm reproduction of sources held by these and other institutions has
become a mini-industry. Labor historians now have access to a wide variety of
journals, proceedings, reports, pamphlets, and manuscripts through this
format.  [11]**

**Ralph Waldo Emerson** **spoke of "what a shallow village tale our so-called
History is," and how we must write it "broader and deeper if we would truly
express our central and widerelated nature." With hindsight, it now seems
plain that by the 1960s labor historians had for too long been telling a
narrow if not shallow tale of institutions, and that their field badly needed
broadening to express the widerelated aspects of working people's lives. As it
happened, the 1960s and 1970s witnessed the birth and maturing of this new
kind of labor history. At first unnamed, during the 1970s it came to be called
"the new labor history" (in contrast with "the old labor history" or sometimes
simply "labor history" of the Wisconsin School). In that decade it experienced
a remarkable flowering that vaulted the study of working people into the
status of a ranking field within the historical profession. Greenwood Press
and the university presses at Temple, New York-Albany, IllinoisUrbana, and
later Rutgers, established major (and still growing) series of books in the
field. And in the report on current historical scholarship in the United
States presented by the American Historical Association to the International
Congress of the Social Sciences in 1980, an entire chapter was devoted to the
field -a signal recognition that would have been unthinkable ten or twenty
years earlier. [12]**

**It rose partly** **in response to changes taking place in academic history
as a whole. As in the early postwar era, university history departments of the
1960s saw an influx of new students and young faculty members whose
backgrounds were often non-WASP and usually non-elite, and who maintained at
least an incipient interest in bringing their forebears within the scope of
historical study. The underpinnings of consensus history were meanwhile fast
eroding: the civil rights movement, the urban riots of the late 1960s, the
anti-Vietnam war movement, and the women's movement spotlighted societal
fissures and grievances which seemed to belie the consensus interpretation's
central argument. The discrediting of consensus history meant that groups who
had been left out of mainstream political and business decisions need no
longer be viewed as marginal, exceptional, inconsequential. Probably most
important, the radical New Left politics often engendered in young historians
through their participation in the civil rights, antiVietnam war, and women's
movements created a politicallybased interest in the impoverished, the
oppressed, and ordinary working people. (A radical political perspective does
not, of course, mean or require special attention to such people -- witness
the work of Philip Foner. But these are the people in whom radicals have most
often lodged their sympathies and best hopes for sweeping change, and keen
interest in them has been a common, seemingly natural consequence.) And for
many, all this was reinforced and channeled by the influence of the English
independent Marxist historian E.P. Thompson. Thompson opened up the subject of
working class culture for American historians, partly through the magnificent
example of close, local study he set in his The Making of the English Working
Class (New York: Pantheon, 1963), but more so through his fresh conceptual
approach. First, he insisted that class is as much a cultural as an economic
formation. Second, he rejected all versions, including Marxist versions, of
what has been termed "the Whig fallacy of history" --in which historical
events are interpreted mainly in light of their contribution to, or delay of,
an enlightened present. Thompson sought to rescue the obscure and "even the
deluded" victims of England's industrial Revolution -- those who struggled but
did not win --from what he called "the enormous condescension of posterity."
[13]**

**A major theme** **among many of the radical younger historians thus became
"history from the bottom up." Nor was this confined to the new labor history.
Also affected were a congery of other fields, loosely arrayed with labor
history under the broad term "social history"-some of which had already been
enriched during the 1950s by the scholarship of historians such as Handlin and
by methodological advances such as those in quantification. Historical
scholarship on ethnicity, the family, and community and urban life were
reinvigorated during the 1960s. But above all it was scholarship in women's
history and African-American history, along with the new labor history, which
was energized by young historians working from an anti-consensus and
frequently New Left or Movement orientation. In consequence, social history
during the 1970s and '80s became the liveliest branch of American history, and
the attention of the entire historical profession turned sharply in its
direction. The new labor history would eventually come to draw heavily upon
the fine work being done in social history's other fields. It would often
overlap those fields in its subject matter and sometimes meet them in
apparently seamless integration. [14]**

**Some of the** **characteristic features of the new labor history were hard
to discern until the late 1970s. For a while in the late 1960s it seemed that
the "corporate liberal" school would emerge as an important strain. Linked
with the New Left's mistrust of the "corporate liberal" institutions which
seek reform within the supposedly corrupt larger society, this school's
adherents first exposed what they viewed as the corporate ideology of American
labor leaders. They went on, in several capable studies, to show that American
unions have at times played conservatizing, coopting roles. But the volume of
work in this vein receded, if anything, during the ensuing decades. [15]**

**In the late 1970s** **, several publications converged to clarify the new
labor history's main features. Herbert Gutman, who in the 1960s and early
1970s had stirred the field with his breathtakingly original
researchespecially his "Work, Culture, and Society in Industrializing America,
1815-1919" ( _American Historical Review_ , 78 [1973]: 531-88)-in 1976 brought
together his previously widely scattered articles in _Work, Culture, and
Society in American Working Class and Social History_ (New York: Random
House). In 1979, David Montgomery, who had earlier written the influential
_Beyond Equality: Labor and the Radical Republicans, 1862-1872_ (New York:
Random House, 1967), brought together his subsequent work in _Workers' Control
in America: Studies in the History of Work, Technology, and Labor Struggle_
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press). And in the same year, David
Brody, who had pioneered in the field with his _Steelworkers in America: The
Non-union Era_ (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1960), pulled its
various strains into a coherent portrait in "The Old Labor History and the
New: In Search of an American Working Class" ( _Labor History_ , 20:
111-26).**

**A principal feature** **, it was now clear, was the rough division of much
of the field into two camps. One camp, heavily influenced by the work of
Thompson and Herbert Gutman, emphasized "working class culture," that is,
workers' habits, customs, and values, not only where they worked but
especially where they worshipped, played, voted, and lived. Gutman-who died in
1985 at age 56, after a thirty-year teaching career capped by a professorship
at the City University of New York-had focused on successive groups of raw
recruits to industrialization: rural Americans entering the factories early in
the nineteenth century, peasant immigrants entering at century's end. He found
them harboring "preindustrial cultural values" which, for a while, at least,
helped workers resist both the imposition of industrial discipline in their
workplace (and elsewhere) and the internalization of acquisitive
individualism. Gutman's themes, and especially his focus on the community as
the real arena for investigation of working class culture and activities, have
prompted a torrent of book-length community studies, to the extent that they
might well be called the characteristic format of the new labor history.
[16]**

**The other camp** **focused on the factory shop floor and was itself divided
into two parts, the larger part starting with the worker. Here the most
influential scholar has been David Montgomery, who taught at the University of
Pittsburgh from 1962 until 1981, when he moved to Yale. Montgomery's work has
recaptured a heritage of workers' struggle for control of the shop floor-
finally lost to management in the 1920s-in which workers relied on their
technical knowledge and their mutualistic ethic of manliness toward employers
and fellow workers. Historians working in this vein are sometimes, half-
jokingly, called the "Pittsburgh School," in recognition of the many
nowestablished scholars who worked with Montgomery there as graduate students.
(The terminology is muddled by the fact that not all historians working in
this vein have been Montgomery-trained graduate students, and not all
Montgomery-trained graduate students have worked in this vein.) The other side
of the subject-the role of management on the shop floor-has been recounted in
the late Harry Braverman's brilliant, strident _Labor and Monopoly Capital_
(New York: Monthly Review Press, 1979) and in the work of Daniel Nelson and a
number of younger scholars.  [17]**

**What the two camps** **have had in common is a Thompsonian concern for
workers who fought valiant but mostly-losing struggles against corporate
industrial capitalism. Another feature common to most of these historians has
been their methodological conservatism. While a few have used quantification
to outstanding effect, and others have borrowed techniques from linguistics
and anthropology, most have been cautious in drawing methods and models from
the social sciences -- at least when compared with practitioners of the other
branches of social history. Another common feature has been the devotion of
much effort to bringing workers' history to working people, in their
communities and in their unions. Aimed in part at stimulating workers'
recalling and preserving their own past, this "outreach" effort has taken the
form of community workshops and exhibitions, and the development of multimedia
curricula intended for non-academic audiences. An entire recent issue of _The
Public Historian: A Journal of Public History_ was devoted to a discussion of
this effort. Another feature they have held in common is the belief, often
implicit in their scholarship, that much of what working people experienced
and did, at least during the industrializing period from 1815 to 1920, can
only be explained in terms of _class_ , and that their membership in a
"working class" was a formidable fact of American life. Accordingly, in the
1980s the term "working class history" often came to be used in place of "the
new labor history." By then, the latter term inadequately described an
enterprise that was no longer new and was no longer confined to the "labor"
aspect of working people's lives. [18]**

**A summary such** **as this cannot, of course, do justice to the diversity of
a field in which serious work has been done by scholars now numbering in the
hundreds. This is particularly so since, as was noted earlier, the field
reaches toward and sometimes overlaps the other, widespread branches of social
history. Single works can often be reasonably claimed by two fields. For
example, Gutman always insisted that his retort to the Moynihan Report's
Black-family "breakdown" thesis, _The Black Family in Slavery and Freedom,
1619-1925_ (New York: Pantheon, 1976), was working-class history as well as
African-American history.  [19]**

**But "overlap"** **does not always mean integration. With respect to women's
history-vis-a-visworking class history, in particular, there have been pleas
for integration where now mere overlapping occurs. The question is not whether
the very large and fast-growing body of feminist historical scholarship
concerned with working-class women can claim a rightful place under the rubric
"working class history." It can and does, and its claim is accepted by
historians of the working class who work in other areas. The question, rather,
is whether those other historians will accept, or even seriously consider, the
use of gender, along with class, as an important analytical category in
examining the history of workers of both sexes. As Alice Kessler-Harris, a
leading historian of working women, put the argument at the most recent
national conference on working class history, held at DeKalb, Illinois, in
1984: working class history "must take account of the central organizing
principle of human life, the sexual division of labor, and all that that
implies for social relations." But she was mostly ignored by her mostly male
audience. Until such arguments are addressed seriously, that large sector of
working class history which is also feminist women's history will remain in
odd, segregated juxtaposition with the remaining scholarship in the field.
(Arguably, it is the "remaining scholarship" which is oddly juxtaposed and
segregated.) [20]**

**Where the 1970s** **saw the emergence of common themes and a widespread
feeling of common enterprise, the 1980s witnessed fragmentation and the
questioning of some of the central tenets formulated earlier. Advocates of the
historic importance of race and racism among American workers have recently
exceeded the feminists' claims for gender, in that they advance race as
something that must enter at the expense of class-a jab at the heart, which
has predictably stirred much controversy. A criticism of longer standing is
that the field is deeply flawed by its lack of concern for power or politics.
In dwelling upon temporary survival of working class culture and shop floor
control, it is argued, historians of the working class have slighted the
obvious power of capitalists and the state -- and the larger experience of
defeat. A somewhat different criticism, levelled mainly by historians within
the field, is that while the field's ever-growing mountain of monographs has
brought forth a wealth of information, our understanding of larger historical
process has not kept pace. "We are going to have to start asking ourselves:
what does it add up to?" they suggest, especially if historians of the working
class (or social historians in general) are ever to reach a wide audience.
They are worried, too, that their specialized studies of the separate
dimensions of working class life have mirrored the way in which contemporary
capitalism segments home from workplace and both from community, thereby
"obscuring the operation of class in industrial society." The watchword of the
1980s thus became the need for "synthesis." But the DeKalb conference, which
was organized in part to help fill that need, seems to have accomplished very
little toward that end. And the same must be said of recent written work in
the field, including David Montgomery's long awaited _The Fall of the House of
Labor: The Workplace, the State, and American Labor Activism, 1865-1925_ (New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1987).  [21]**

**One group** **which has _not_ been prominent among the critics are the many
historians who have continued to write institution-focused "labor history."
The mutual tolerance that has developed between the two groups is perhaps not
so surprising. As with those who became historians of the working class, the
1960s were radicalizing years for the young institutionalists who were falling
heir to the Wisconsin tradition. They had no reason to deny the obviously
pathbreaking nature of working class historiography, and they were not
disposed toward writing history that was politically objectionable from the
viewpoint of the historians of the working class. While they continued to
focus on labor unions and did grapple with the same "pure and simple,"
ameliorative impulses within unions that gladdened Commons and Perlman, they
generally now viewed those impulses in neutral or unfavorable light
themselves, and often sought out contrary impulses in unions wherever they
might find them. Further obviating conflict was the fact that historians of
the working class had always acknowledged that unions were an important
feature of working-class life from the 1930s into the 1970s. They were largely
willing to yield over those decades in any case, since the census schedules on
which their research often hinged were unavailable for that period and since
the features of ethnicity, community, and working-class culture that
interested them were increasingly dispersed or submerged in modern
urbansuburban America.  [22]**

**In the 1980s** **, in fact, there has been some shifting toward a blend of
the two approaches. David Brody has suggested that the post-1975 decline in
the labor movement's membership and power accounts in part for a new interest
in union history on the part of the historians of the working class -- and
also renewed interest on the part of scholars in labor economics and
industrial relations. The decline, he argues, has brought home the fact that
unions are not a static feature of the landscape but are subject to the tides
of history, and therefore worthy of historical attention. Of the new, history-
oriented work being done in industrial relations and economics, the
scholarship of the "labor market segmentation" school has drawn the most
attention from historians. As the 1980s drew to a close, these points of
reconciliation stood in contrast to the broader pattern of fragmentation in
the field of working class history. [23]**

**As with several** **other academic fields, any account of labor history as
practiced in its early decades at Iowa must begin with an explanation of the
remarkable role played by Benjamin F. Shambaugh. Born in 1871, Shambaugh
received a B.A. from Iowa in 1892, an M.A. from Iowa in 1893, a Ph.D. from the
University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School of Finance and Economy in 1895,
and post-graduate training in history at the German universities in Halle,
Leipzig, and Berlin during 189596. Back in Iowa City in 1896, he settled into
a lifelong career as a professor in what was shortly to be the University's
Political Science Department, becoming chairman in 1900. [24]**

**His M.A. and Ph.D** **. research in Iowa frontier history had awakened in
him an interest in the State Historical Society of Iowa, then located on the
University's grounds in Iowa City. He quickly became a leader among the local
scholars who were setting out to make the Society, in the words of Shambaugh's
biographer, Alan Schroder, "a true research institution, rather than the
museum of curios and storage facility for old newspapers and manuscripts that
it was then." He began editing the Society's mostly antiquarian journal in
1900, converting it by 1903 into a modern scholarly journal, the _Iowa Journal
of History and Politics_. Assuming the office of Superintendent and Editor in
1907, meanwhile maintaining his University position, he initiated over a dozen
series of publications by the time of his death in 1940, including, most
notably for labor history purposes, the _Iowa Economic History Series_ (8
volumes totalling 3103 pages, 1910-1928) and the _Iowa Applied History Series_
(6 volumes containing 65 monographs, totalling 4037 pages, 1912-1930).  [25]**

**In short** **, he converted the Society into a major research and publishing
organization in state and regional history. As Schroder explains, "This was
not a state historical society in the model that came to be followed later in
the century. Instead, it was what Shambaugh called a 'laboratory of scientific
historical research,' in which the public benefited, not by visiting a museum
(which the Society did not have) or by doing its own (usually genealogical)
research, but by reading the articles and books produced by the Society's own
professional historians." [26]**

**As his use of** **phrases like "applied history" reveals, Shambaugh hued to
a faith in the powers of historical investigation, a faith that will appear
quaintly exaggerated to many late twentieth century readers but which was
shared during the Progressive Era by many social scientists and reformers --
and, of course, by the small corps of Progressive Historians. "History may be
exploited in the cause of social betterment," he announced when launching the
_Iowa Economic History Series_ in 1910. History, moreover, was "more than
politics and biography." The Society, he declared, "is inspired by the
conviction that . . . as a record of the evolution of human institutions
[history] includes the social and economic life of man." This was a credo that
could welcome, even inspire, scholarship in labor history. [27]**

**While Shambaugh** **, like Thwaites at Wisconsin, felt his historical
society profoundly fortunate to be situated in a state university town, his
manner of exploiting the fact was rather different from Thwaites'. He did not
enlist University agencies in large-scale building of the Society's
collection. Rather, he drew the writer/historians who produced the Society's
publications mostly from among the graduate students and junior faculty of the
University, principally from his own Department of Political Science and also
from the Department of Political Economy and Sociology (whose purview included
economics and commerce as well as sociology). [28]**

**The scholar most** **deeply involved in labor history was Ezekiel H. Downey,
whose 1908 M.A. thesis at the University developed into _History of Labor
Legislation in Iowa_ , a book published by the Society in its _Economic
History Series_ in 1910. Shambaugh had helped by hiring him as a Society
research assistant and, in the manner of Ely, by securing a Carnegie
Institution grant which covered the expenses of data collection. Downey next
went to Wisconsin, to work on his Ph.D. under Commons. His dissertation,
completed there in 1912, was published in the _Economic History Series_ as
_History of Work Accident Indemnity in Iowa_. By the time of his premature
death in 1922, Downey had pursued careers as a teacher at Kenyon College and a
civil servant in Pennsylvania's state government, and his writings had earned
him a reputation as America's foremost authority on workmen's compensation for
industrial accidents . [29]**

**Others in Shambaugh's** **orbit made lesser but nonetheless significant
contributions. One such scholar was Fred E. Haynes, who earned his B.A. in
1889, his M.A. in 1890, and his Ph.D. in 1891, all from Harvard. Teaching at
Morningside College in Sioux City from 1900 to 1914, he was hired by Shambaugh
in 1912 to write for the Society part-time. On this basis he wrote "Child
Labor Legislation in Iowa" ( _Iowa Applied History Series_ , 2 [1914]:
557-627) and then T _hird Party Movements Since the Civil War, With Special
References to Iowa: A Study in Social Politics_ (Iowa City: State Historical
Society of Iowa, 1916), a 564-page study which devoted a chapter to "Labor
Reform Agitation" and touched on labor history at several other points. He was
hired by the University in 1916 and taught there until his retirement in 1939.
His interests meanwhile were shifting from economics and political science
toward sociology. His history, _Social Politics in the United States_ (Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 1924), treated the labor movement in some detail, relying
primarily on the work of the Commons group but also plumbing some original
sources -- as did his earlier work in labor history. Another scholar was John
Ely Briggs, who received his M.A. from the University in 1914. A year later
his book-length _History of Social Legislation in Iowa_ was published as the
second of only two numbers in the Society's short-lived _Iowa Social History
Series_. In 1916 he received his Ph.D. from the University and was hired by
Shambaugh to teach in the Political Science Department, where he served until
his death in 1952. Yet another was Jacob A. Swisher, who held a Ph.D. from
Iowa and worked as a research associate at the society from 1922 until his
retirement in 1950. He was the author of "The Evolution of Wash Day" ( _Iowa
Journal of History and Politics_ , 38 [1940]: 3-49). [30]**

**The ties to** **Shambaugh and the Society were naturally somewhat stronger
in Shambaugh's own Department of Political Science than they were in the
Department of Political Economy and Sociology. Researchers affiliated with the
latter department's economics and commerce programs, in fact, might best be
viewed as a separate orbit of labor history activity, which occasionally
intersected Shambaugh's orbit but was in no way dependent upon it. A prime
mover here was Isaac A. Loos, who joined the faculty in 1890. He wrote an
historical piece for the Society entitled "Child Labor Legislation in Iowa" (
_Iowa Journal of History and Politics_ 3  [1905]: 562-82); he was active in
Commons' American Association for Labor Legislation; and he was the faculty
member at whose suggestion Downey originally undertook his work on the history
of labor legislation in Iowa. Loos was also a key figure in the evolution and
enlargement of his department into the School of Commerce in 1914 and then the
College of Commerce in 1921. (Sociology remained within Commerce until 1946,
when it broke off as a separate department within the College of Liberal Arts.
After 1948 various departments proliferated within Commerce itself. The
College was renamed the College of Business Administration in 1959.) [31]**

**From 1906** **to 1913, Loos taught a course entitled "Socialism and Social
Legislation." From 1906 to 1913 his department also offered "Industrial
History of the United States," a course which, like its post-1913 successor,
"American Economic History," had a strong labor-history component. For a half-
century thereafter, commerce was the domain in which most of the courses
pertinent to labor history were taught. "Trade Unionism" was offered from 1916
to 1923 and "Social and Economic Reform Movements" (taught by Haynes) from
1928 to 1935. A course in labor legislation was established in 1912, a course
in labor economics shortly after World War 1, and a course in industrial
relations in the 1930s. Courses in these latter fields were offered
consistently thereafter. [32]**

**Those who taught** **and took these courses in several instances did
substantial work in labor history. Paul S. Pierce, who held a 1900 Ph.D. from
Yale, taught at Iowa from 1902 to 1904 and from 1906 to 1919, principally in
the economics program, also serving as chairman of the State Child Labor
Commission from 1913 to 1919. He was the author of _The Freedmen's Bureau: A
Chapter in the History of Reconstruction_ ( _Studies in Sociology, Economics,
Politics, and History_ , vol. 3; Iowa City: State University of Iowa, 1904),
one chapter of which treated labor and labor policy. Edwin C. Robbins earned a
B.A. at Iowa in 1910 and authored an extraordinary M. A. thesis in 1912, a
largely historical work entitled "The Printers in Cedar Rapids: A Study in
Organized Labor." Robbins went on to pursue a distinguished academic career,
culminating in a professorship in the Harvard Graduate School of Business
Administration. His publications included several books in the field of labor
relations and one more book in labor history: his _Railway Conductors: A Study
in Organized Labor_ (Columbia University Studies, vol. 56; New York: 1914).
Lorin Stuckey's largely historical 1916 Ph.D. dissertation in economics was
published as the book-length _Iowa State Federation of Labor_ ( _Studies in
the Social Sciences_ , vol. 4; Iowa City: State University of Iowa, 1916.)
Much of the teaching in the courses mentioned above was handled during the
1920s and 1930s by C. Woody Thompson and Dale Yoder. Neither man's research
interests lay in labor history, though Yoder published extensively in the
field of labor relations. [33]**

**As we have seen** **, it was characteristic of the era that labor
historians, if they were to be found at all in a university, should be found
in academic departments encompassing the social sciences and commerce, and not
in the department of history. So it was at Iowa. The University's History
Department, from the 1890s through the 1940s, employed able teachers and
productive scholars, and among its Americanists there were a few, at least,
who departed signally from the "history as past politics" ethos. But no one on
the History faculty during that half century did original research in labor
history. And, with just two exceptions, there was very little interest in the
social or economic history of industrial America.**

**The first of those** **two exceptions was, however, a very conspicuous one.
It was what Arthur M. Schlesinger called his "Iowa interlude." Holding a 1912
Ph.D. from Columbia, Schlesinger came from Ohio State to Iowa City in 1919 as
History Department chairman. He left in 1924 for Harvard, where he remained
until his retirement in 1954. (He should not be confused with his son, the
equally prolific historian Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., who spent much of the
Schlesinger interlude in Iowa City attending the nursery school operated by
the famous Iowa Child Welfare Research Station.) In the early 1920s,
Schlesinger was already applying Progressive History's breadth of interest in
social, economic, and cultural history in his prodigious scholarship. His
_Political and Social History of the United States, 1829-1925_ (New York:
Macmillan, 1925), written largely at Iowa, contains a long chapter on the
labor movement, drawn mainly from the work of the Commons group but also from
the published work of the Iowans Haynes and Robbins. Now Schlesinger was ready
to also bring Progressive History's breadth to his teaching. At Iowa he
revised and taught a course that assumed the title "New Viewpoints in American
History"; he taught a new lecture course on America since 1870; he realized a
long-cherished ambition by introducing a course entitled "The Social and
Cultural History of the United States"; and he taught a new graduate seminar
on America since 1870 that emphasized social and cultural history. We may
assume, on the basis of a surviving syllabus and the significance accorded
labor history in his written work in these fields, that Schlesinger while in
the classroom treated labor history in some depth.  [34]**

**It was Schlesinger's** **impression, writing thirty years later, that in
bringing these new emphases to Iowa's History urriculum he was presenting "the
first instruction offered in any college or university on that phase of our
past." Nor was he content to limit such innovations to his own teaching. As an
outgrowth of his course on "New Viewpoints in American History," Schlesinger
in 1922 brought out a widely-purchased book under that title. Its main purpose
was to summarize, for a readership of high school history teachers and history
graduate students, pertinent findings of economists, sociologists, and the
Progressive Historians in general -- including material in labor history --
and through that readership to reach a very broad public. Similarly, when
Schlesinger discovered that his _Political and Social History of the United
States_ was marketable as a classroom text, he and a coauthor published a
curriculum-guide companion volume that gave significant attention to the rise
of organized labor.  [35]**

**After Schlesinger's** **departure, several of his courses were taken up by
others in the Department: by Louis Pelzer, until his death in 1946, and by
Harrison J. Thornton, from his arrival in 1929 until his death in 1952.
Thornton-the second exceptionmaintained a social and economic emphasis, but
his scholarly interests lay entirely outside the realm of labor history, and
his teaching no doubt reflected that fact. From 1924 until after World War II,
the only seminars offered in American history were in colonial history and the
History of the West. Aside from five undistinguished M.A. theses, labor
history was to receive no further serious attention from History Department
faculty or students until the 1960s. [36]**

**While activity in** **labor history at Iowa was virtually disappearing from
the History Department in the years after 1924, it also declined and sat
nearly dormant in its orbits of erstwhile strength. The torpor lasted from the
mid-1920s to the mid-1940s -- ironically, a span which included organized
labor's 1935-45 period of meteoric growth. Accounting for the decline in
Shambaugh's orbit seems to be simple enough. Shambaugh was cutting back his
scholarly publications program, first, in order to build up more popular and
conventional programs, and then, more radically, in order to cope with
Depressionriddled budgets. The reasons for the torpor in Commerce are less
clear, though Thompson's and Yoder's lack of scholarly interest in labor
history doubtless had some effect. The only significant work in the field was
Jacob Swisher's long 1940 article (see above), and Byron R. Abernethy's
outstanding, historically-oriented 1941 Ph.D. dissertation in Political
Science, published as _Liberty Concepts in Labor Relations_ (Washington, D.C.;
American Council on Public Affairs, 1943).  [37]**

**Abernethy acknowledged** **his Political Science mentor, John Ely Briggs. He
also cited the help of Walter Daykin, who had joined the Commerce faculty in
1930, after a two- year teaching stint at Kansas, and who would remain at the
University until his retirement in 1961. By the early 1940s, Daykin was in
charge of Commerce's courses in labor economics and labor legislation. It was
under his influence that labor history began a mild but sustained comeback.
From the mid-1940s through the 1950s , the only research done in labor history
at Iowa was conducted by Ph.D. candidates working with Walter Daykin. [38]**

**Daykin was a man** **of unusual experience. After starting his working life
at age sixteen in a central Illinois coal mine, he went on to earn his B.A.,
at age 35, from Iowa in 1926, and his M.A. in 1927 and his Ph.D. in 1930.
While a professor at Iowa he also worked extensively in labor mediation and
arbitration, including service as a member of the U. S. Wage Stabilization
Board during World War II. His own publications, primarily in labor law and
legislation, barely skirted labor history, but he did number labor history
among his very wide range of interests. (His M.A. thesis was "A Study of
Utopias," his Ph.D. dissertation "The Sociological Significance of Negro
Literature.") And his adherence to the institutional-economics approach to
labor relations and labor economics afforded labor history an acceptable berth
in many of the research projects launched by his graduate students. By my
count, nineteen of the dissertations he supervised have a significant labor
history component (the equivalent of one chapter or more). Of these, six
contain three or more chapters that are primarily focused on labor history.
[39]**

**Further, Daykin** **was instrumental in the 1950 founding of the
University's Bureau of (later "Center For") Labor and Management, the labor
unit of which was primarily involved in short courses and miscellaneous
extension services for local, state, regional, and occasionally national labor
organizations. (The labor unit became a separate entity, the Labor Center, in
1975.) While the bulk of these activities was unrelated to the practice of
labor history, the labor unit nonetheless advanced labor history's cause at
Iowa. It did so by generating in its publications series occasional pamphlets
involving historical investigation, and it did so by bringing to Iowa as staff
members Harry E. Graham (Ph.D. Wisconsin, 1967) and Anthony V. Sinicropi
(M.I.L.R. Cornell, 1958, Ph.D. Iowa, 1968). Graham brought a strong historical
dimension to the several courses in labor relations which he taught in the
College of Business Administration during his 1967-1970 stay at the
University. While at Iowa he also completed his _The Paper Rebellion:
Development arid Upheaval in Pulp and Paper Unionism_ , published by the
University of Iowa Press in 1970 -- the Press's only book in the labor history
field prior to 1989. Sinicropi, who was hired by the labor unit in 1958 and
left it to join the Business Administration faculty in 1972, was a labor
educator and arbitrator of growing national reputation in 1968, when he
attracted to the University a sizable labor history research project,
envisioned and funded by the major national union representing telephone
workers. The Communications Workers of AmericaUniversity of Iowa Oral History
Project, conducted from 1968 to 1972, eventually completed 89 tape recorded
interviews with men and women who had helped build telephone unionism across
the country, transcribed on some 3000 pages of text. Ph.D. candidates in
History at Iowa had been asked to apply for the job of interviewer. I did so
and was hired. I later relied heavily on the transcribed material when writing
"Toward Industrial Unionism: Bell Telephone Workers and Company Unions,
1929-1937" ( _Labor History_ , 16: 5-36) and in completing my Ph.D.
dissertation in 1977. The revised dissertation was published as _The Making of
Telephone Unionism, 1920-1947_ (New Brunswick, N. J.: Rutgers University
Press, 1985).  [40]**

**Before returning** **to the History Department, where much change affecting
labor and working class history had meanwhile taken place, we may briefly take
note of postwar developments elsewhere on campus. Four postwar Ph.D.
dissertations in Political Science contained a significant labor-history
dimension, normally within one or two introductory chapters. (A fifth, Ronald
M. Mason's outstanding 1981 dissertation, published as _Participatory and
Workplace Democracy: A Theoretical Development in Critique of Liberalism_
[Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1982], touches on labor
history but only barely.) Ph.D. candidates in Sociology, Drama, and Speech
Communication have written dissertations which are not in themselves labor or
working class history but which amass labor-focused material that may well be
of use to future historians of the American working class. The College of
Business Administration, with Daykin gone after 1961 -- and the concurrent
onset, at the national level, of the abovementioned intellectual constructs in
labor economics and labor relations which viewed labor history as mostly
irrelevantproduced no significant labor history in the form of Ph.D.
dissertations or faculty publications. Roberta Till-Retz, of the Labor Center,
maintains an interest in labor history, but she has not published in the
field. [41]**

  **_This is the first of a two-part article.  
Click _**[**_here_** ** _to go to Part Two._**](http://www.lib.uiowa.edu/spec-
coll/Bai/schacht2.htm)





**NOTES:**

**[ 1] Benjamin K. Hunnicutt, typescript of tape recorded Dec. 12, 1989,
interview by the author, in Iowa City, pp. 2-4.**

**[ 2] Thomas Bender, "Making History Whole Again," _New York Times Book
Review_ , Oct. 16, 1985, p. 42; American Historical Association, Committee on
the Planning of Research, Historical Scholarship in America, Needs and
Opportunities (New York: the Association, 1932); Ira Berlin, "Herbert G.
Gutman and the American Working Class," in Herbert G. Gutman, _Power &
Culture: Essays on the American Working Class_, ed. by Ira Berlin (New York:
Pantheon, 1987), p. 8.**

**[ 3] David Brody, "Labor History, Industrial Relations, and the Crisis of
American Labor," _Industrial and Labor Relations Review_ , 43 (1989): 8; David
Brody, "The Old Labor History and the New," _Labor History_ , 20 (1979):.112;
Leon Fink, "The Wisconsin School," paper given at a conference, "Perspectives
on Labor History: The Wisconsin School and Beyond," March 10, 1990, State
Historical Society of Wisconsin, Madison, Wis.**

**[ 4] John C. Colson, _Academic Ambitions and Library Development: The
American Bureau of Industrial Research and the State Historical Society of
Wisconsin 1904-18_ ( _Occasional Papers_ , no. 159; Champaign: University of
Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science, 1983), pp. 5-7.**

**[ 5] Philip P. Mason, "Labor Archives in the United States," _Archivium_
(Munich), 27 (1980): 169; Brody, "Labor," 8.**

**[ 6] Berlin, "Gutman," p. 10; Melvyn Dubofsky, "Give Us that Old Time Labor
History: Philip S. Foner and the American Worker," _Labor History_ , 26
(1985): 122.**

**[ 7] Ronald W. Schatz, "Review Essay: Labor Historians, Labor Economics, and
the Question of Synthesis," _Journal of American History_ , 71 (1984): 94, 99;
Dubofsky, "Give Us," 122; Brody, "Old," 112.**

**[ 8] Dubofsky, "Give us," 122-23; Berlin, "Gutman," p. 8; Brody, "Old," 112;
Mari Jo Buhle and Paul Buhle, "The New Labor History at the Cultural
Crossroads," _Journal of American History_ 75 (1988): 152; Sean Wilentz, "The
New History  & Its Critics, _Dissent_ , Spring 1989, p. 244; Bender, "Making,"
p. 42**

**[ 9] Robert H. Zieger, "Industrial Relations and Labor History in the
Eighties," _Industrial Relations_ , 22 (1983): 61. See especially Seidman's,
_American Labor from Defense to Reconversion_ (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1953); Ulman's _The Rise of the National Trade Union_ (Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press  [hereinafter designated HUP], 1955); Morris'
_Conflict Within the AFL: A Study in Craft Versus Industrial Unionism,
1901-1938_ ( _Cornell Studies in Industrial Relations_ , v. 10; Ithaca:
Cornell University, 1958); Lester's, _As Unions Mature_ (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1958); Galenson's _The CIO Challenge to the AFL: A History
of the American Labor Movement, 1935-1941_ (Cambridge: HUP, 1960); and
Perlman's _The Machinists: A New Study in Trade Unionism_ (Cambridge: HUP,
1961).**

**[ 10] Brody, "Labor," 10-11; Zieger, "Industrial," 64.**

**[ 11] Zieger, "Industrial," 62-63; Mason, "Archives," 170-71.**

**[ 12] I owe the Emerson quote to Wilentz, "New History," p. 249. See also
Berlin, "Gutman," p. 17; Brody, "Labor," 6.**

**[ 13] Robert Zieger notes that the term "New Left" is "one of those catch
phrases that are inaccurate, misleading, and trite but which, through repeated
use, become essential. It carries with it connotations of youth, rejection of
rigid ideological formulations, antagonism toward the liberal, democratic
consensus that has characterized most American reform, and a determination to
be spontaneous, free from given values and rules, and actively involved in the
lives of the oppressed." "Workers and Scholars: Recent Trends in American
Labor Historiography," _Labor History_ , 13: (1972): 257n. See also Zieger,
"Industrial," 63; Brody, "Old," 114; Alice Kessler-Harris, "A New Agenda for
American Labor History: A tendered Analysis and the Question of Class" in
_Perspectives on American Labor History: The Problem of Synthesis_ , ed. by J.
Carroll Moody and Kessler-Harris (DeKalb: Northern Illinois University Press,
1989), pp. 220-21; E.P. Thompson, _The Making of the English Working Class_
(New York: Random House, 1963), p. 12; Brody, "Labor," 15; and Brody,
"Reconciling the Old Labor History and the New," paper given at "Perspectives
on Labor History," March 9, 1990.**

**[ 14] Brody "Labor," 11; Kessler-Harris, "Agenda," p. 218; James M.
McPherson, "Wartime," _New York Review of Books_ , April 12, 1990, p. 33.**

**[ 15] An early example is Ronald Radosh, "The Corporate Ideology of American
Labor Leaders from Gompers to Hillman," _Studies on the Left_ 6 (1966): 66-88.
A later example is Nelson Lichtenstein, _Labor's War at Home: The CIO in World
War II_ (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1982), p. 92. The argument
might be made that the institutional emphasis of this school places them more
logically with the old labor history than with the new. See also Christopher
L. Tomlins, "New Directions in American Labor History," _Labour History_ , no.
43 (1982): 92; Zieger, "Workers," 257.**

**[ 16] Brody, "Old," 124; J. Carroll Moody, "Introduction," in Perspectives
on, pp. x-xi; Berlin, "Gutman," pp. 13, 38-39; Michael J. Frisch and Daniel J.
Walkowitz, "Introduction" in _Working Class America: Essays on Labor,
Community, and American Society, ed. by Frisch and Walkowitz_ (Urbana:
University of Illinois Press  [hereinafter designated UOIP], 1983), p. x.
Titles of a large number of community studies may be viewed in any recent
listing of the UOIP'

