**ANTHROPOLOGY 296 / 296H**

|

Dr. Charles F.
[Urbanowicz](http://www.csuchico.edu/~curban/charlie.gif)/Professor of
Anthropology  
  
---|---  
  
**FALL 2000 WEB SYLLABUS**

|

California State University, [Chico](http://www.chico.ca.us/) /
[Office](http://www.csuchico.edu/~curban/Images/B317Office.jpeg): [Butte
317](http://www.csuchico.edu/anth/)  
  
**Proseminar in the History of Theory and Method in Anthropology** [TRACS
#10220]

|

**Office** **Hours** : Mon & Wed} **9:30- >Noon**  
  
**Mon & Wed} 3->4:15pm in BUTTE 327 **

|

**Office Phone** : (530) 898-6220 / **Dept** : (530) 898-6192  
  
**e-mail:** [curbanowicz@csuchico.edu](mailto:curbanowicz@csuchico.edu)

|

<http://www.csuchico.edu/~curban/>  
  
**(C)** Charles F. Urbanowicz / **August 7, 2000** } This copyrighted Web
_Syllabus_ , printed from
<http://www.csuchico.edu/~curban/syllabi/SYL_296-FA2000.html>, is intended for
use by students enrolled at [California State University,
Chico](http://www.csuchico.edu/), in the **Fall** Semester of 2000 and
unauthorized use/publication is definitely prohibited; for a **MOST**
**IMPORTANT BRIEF DISCLAIMER ESSAY** about these **ANTH 296 / 296H** web
pages, please click here.  
  
---  
  
**DESCRIPTION of ANTH 296:** Investigation of the history of the development
of theory and method in anthropological thought and practice from the
nineteenth century to the present. Seminar format. ( _The 1999-2001 University
Catalog_ , page 195.)

**DESCRIPTION of ANTH 296H:** This investigation of method and theory into
anthropological thought of the last century is directed to individual research
interests and problem development for the honors thesis. Seminar format.

**ANTH 296 / ANTH 296H** is the designated **WP** (Writing Proficiency) class
for the Anthropology Major and the Department of Anthropology graduation
literacy certification requires that you pass this course at the " **C-** "
level. A "Criteria of Writing Proficiency" appears in this syllabus (after the
weekly assignments). The "World Wide Web" and the implications of this
technology for Anthropology (and anthropologists!) will also be discussed
throughout the semester. Please see below for some appropriate URLs that might
be of value to you for this course, as well as other courses.

**_ONE REQUIRED TEXT (AVAILABLE IN THE BOOKSTORE):_** _  
_ L.L. Langness ( **1987** ) _The Study of Culture: Revised Edition_.  

**_SIX TOTALLY_ _ _OPTIONAL__ _TEXTS (AVAILABLE IN THE BOOKSTORE)_ :  
**Ute Gacs _et al._ ( **1989** ) _,Women Anthropologists: Selected
Biographies._  
R. J. McGee  & R.L. Warms ( **2000** ), _Anthropological Theory: An
Introductory History_ (2nd Edition). _  
_ Jerry D. Moore ( **1997** ), _Visions of Culture: An Introduction to
Anthropological Theories and Theorists.  
_ Douglas J. Preston ( **1986** ), _Dinosaurs In The Attic.  
_ George W. Stocking ( **1991** ), _Victorian Anthropology.  
_ Bruce Trigger ( **1989** ), _A History of Archaeological Thought._

**_THIRTY-SEVEN ITEMS ON TWO-HOUR_ _ _RESERVE__ _FOR VARIOUS READING
SELECTIONS:  
_** D. Bidney ( **1953** ), _Theoretical Anthropology_ [GN/24/B492/1967]  
D.J. Boorstin ( **1983** ), _The Discoverers_ [CB/69/B66/1983]  
J. Clifford & G. Marcus ( **1986** ), _Writing Culture: The Poetics and
Politics of Ethnography_ [GN/307.7/W75/1986]  
E.L. Cerroni-Long ( **1999** ), _Anthropological Theory in North America_
[GN/33/A444/1999]  
E. Daniel & J. Peck ( **1996** ), _Culture/Contexture: Explorations in
Anthropology and Literary Studies_ [GN/307.7/C85/1996]  
R. Darnell ( **1974** ), _Readings in the History of Anthropology_ [GN/17/D35]  
A. de Malefijt ( **1974** ), _Images of Man_ [GN/17/D44/1974]  
M. di Leonardo ( **1991** ) _,Gender At The Crossroads of Knowledge: Feminist
Anthropology in the Postmodern Era_ [GN/33/G46/1991]  
P. A. Erickson [with L. Murphy] ( **1998** ), _A History of Anthropological
Theory_ [GN/33/E74/1998]  
R. Fox ( **1994** ), _The Challenge of Anthropology: Old Encounters and New
Excursions_ [GN/29/F69/1994]  
R. Fox ( **1997** ), _Conjectures & Confrontations: Science, Evolution, Social
Concern_ [GN/468/F69]  
U. Gacs et al. [Editors] _(_ **1988** _) ,Women Anthropologists: Selected
Biographies_ [GN/20/W63/1988]  
C. Geertz ( **1988** ), _Works And Lives: The Anthropologist As Author_
[GN/307.7/G44/1988]  
C. Geertz ( **1995** ), _After The Fact: Two Countries, Four Decades, One
Anthropologist_ [GN/21/G44/A3]  
P. Golde ( **1986** ), _Women in the Field: Anthropological Experiences_
[GN/20/G6/1986]  
D. Hakken ( **1999** ), _Cyborgs@Cyberspace? An Ethnographer Looks to the
Future_ [QA/76.9/C66/H34/1999]  
M. Harris ( **1968** ), _The Rise of Anthropological Theory_ [GN/17/H3]  
M. Harris ( **1999** ) _, Theories of Culture in Postmodern Times_
[GN/357/H39/1999]  
Hayes & Hayes ( **1970** ), _Claude L evi-Strauss: The Anthropologist as Hero
_[GN/21/L4/H3]  
H. R. Hays ( **1958** ), _From Ape to Angel [_GN/405/H34]  
J. Helm ( **1966** ), _Pioneers of American Anthropology  
_ C. Herbert ( **1991** ), _Culture And Anomie: Ethnographic Imagination In
The Nineteenth Century_ [GN/357/H47/1991] _  
_ C. Hinsley ( **1981** ), _Savages and Scientists: The Smithsonian...._
[GN/17.3/U6/H56]  
A. Kardiner & E. Preble ( **1961** ), _They Studied Man_ [GN/405/K3]  
A.L. Kroeber & C. Kluckhohn ( **1952** ), _Culture: A Critical Review_
[GN/27/K7]  
A. Kuper ( **1973** ) _,Anthropology and Anthropologists_ [GN/17/K26]  
G. Marcus & M. Fischer ( **1986** ), _Anthropology As Cultural Critique: An
Experimental Moment In The Human Sciences_ , 2nd Edition [GN/345/M37/1999]  
G. Marcus ( **1998** ), _Ethnography Through Thick And Thin_
[GN/345/M373/1998]  
M. Mead & R. Bunzel ( **1960** ), _The Golden Age of American Anthropology_
[E/77/M48]  
A. Montagu ( **1974** ), _Frontiers of Anthropology_ [GN/17/M/59/1974]  
Naroll & Naroll ( **1973** ), _Main Currents in Cultural Anthropology_
[GN/17/N37/1973]  
T.K. Penniman ( **1936** ), _A Hundred Years of Anthropology_ [GN/17/P4]  
H. Powdermaker ( **1966** ), _Stranger and Friend_ [HM/73/P67]  
S. Silverman ( **1981** ), _Totems and Teachers: Perspectives on the
History....._ [GN/17/T69]  
J.S. Slotkin ( **1965** ), _Readings in Early Anthropology_ [GN/17/S46]  
G.W. Stocking ( **1995** ), _After Tylor: British Social Anthropology
1888-1951_ [GN/308.3/G7/S74/1995]  
F.W. Voget ( **1975** ) _A History of Ethnology_ [GN/17/V63]

**_THREE_ _ _RECOMMENDED__ _ITEMS_ : _  
_**_Any_ English Language _Dictionary_.  
William A. Strunk, Jr. (2000) _The Elements of Style_ (4th edition).  
_The World Almanac and Book of Facts 2000_.

**_EVALUATION AND IMPORTANT DATES:  
_** **WRITING ASSIGNMENT #1** |  **DUE** _On_ **18 Sep 2000** _or_ **20 Sep
2000 (5%).**  
---|---  
**EXAM I (Monday)** |  _On_ **2 October 2000** ( **25%** ).  
**WRITING ASSIGNMENT #2 (Monday)** |  **DUE** _On_ **23 October 2000** (
**10%** ).  
**EXAM II (Monday)** |  _On_ **13 November 2000** **(25%)**.  
[**AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION**](http://www.aaanet.org/) **Meetings,
San Francisco, CA** |  **November 15- >19, 2000**  
**THANKSGIVING BREAK!** |  **November 20- >24, 2000**  
**WRITING ASSIGNMENT #3 (Monday)** |  **_DUE_ **_by_ **11 December 2000** (
**25%** ).  
  
**PARTICIPATION / PAPER PRESENTATION**

|

**21 August 2000- >11 December 2000 (10%).**  
  
**DEAR STUDENTS: _READING ASSIGNMENT(s_ ) **should be _completed_ by the day
assigned since they will / **_can_** form the basis of discussion that day /
week. There **_will be_** some lectures ( **and** videos), but hopefully there
will be **_more_** discussion than either lectures or videos! **DURING WEEK 5,
_1/2 the class_ ** will meet **on MONDAY 9/18/2000 and _1/2 the class_** will
meet **on WEDNESDAY 9/20/2000.** This is done to create small discussion
groups. **PLEASE REMEMBER** that **WRITING ASSIGNMENT #1** (a critique) is
**_DUE_** on the day you are assigned to attend class that week: **we** all
will discuss readings to date (as well as your individual critique) on
**9/18/2000** _or_ **9/20/2000**. LOOKING at dates, in addition to **EXAM I**
on **Monday** **10/02/2000** , **_your_** preliminary term paper topic (
**WRITING ASSIGNMENT #2** ) is **DUE _on 10/23/2000_**. Based on **your**
topic, specific days will be assigned for approximately 1/2 class-size
discussions for **Week 11** when **_1/2 the class_ ** will meet **on
10/30/2000** and **_1/2 the class_ ** will meet **on 11/01/2000** and
**WRITING ASSIGNMENT #2** and your **TERM PAPER TOPICS** will be discussed.
**EXAM II (25%)** is on **Monday** 13 November 2000 and the Term Paper
PRESENTATION ORDER will be _distributed_ that day for presentations
**beginning after Thanksgiving Break on MONDAY November 27, 2000. Remember** ,
in-class participation, including term paper presentation, contributes **10%**
towards **_your_** final grade. **NOTE:** _if_ the above dates have to be
changed for any reason **you will be notified well-in-advance** : **_no_**
_sneaky surprises are planned!_

**_PLEASE CONSIDER_** the following:

> "One who makes a close study of almost any branch of science **soon
discovers the great illusion of the monolith**. When he  [or she] stood
outside as an uninformed layman, he [or she] got a vague impression of
unanimity among the professionals. He [or she] tended to think of science as
supporting the Establishment with fixed and approved views. All this dissolves
as he [or she] works his [or her] way into the living concerns of practicing
scientists. **He [and she] finds lively personalities who indulge in
disagreement, disorder, and disrespect. He [and she] must sort out conflicting
opinions and make up his [and her] own mind as to what is correct and who is
sound. ** This applies not only to provinces as vast as biology and to large
fields such as evolutionary theory, but even to small and familiar corners
such as the species problem. **The closer one looks, the more diversity one
finds** [ **stress** added ]." [Norman Macbeth, _Darwin Retried_ , 1971: 18]

**_THINK ABOUT the followin_ g: **Margaret Mead [1901-1978] wrote:
"Anthropologists are highly individual and specialized people. Each of them
[or us!] is marked by the kind of work he or she prefers and has done, which
in time becomes an aspect of that individual's personality." **ALSO CONSIDER**
the following statement made by the father of Ward Goodenough when the young
Goodenough was considering his career: "Anthropology is a subject such that
you can be interested in almost anything and its alright" ( _Anthropology
Newsletter_ , October 1992, page 4); and, finally, **_consider_** these words
of Clifford Geertz: "...and that this was the kind of freedom we could have in
anthropology--to do anything and call it anthropology (which you still can
do!)." Clifford Geertz, 1991, An Interview with Clifford Geertz. _Current
Anthropology_ , Vol. 32, No. 5, 1991, page 603.

**FINALLY, DEAR STUDENTS, Professor Dr. Urbanowicz writes the following to you
for Fall 2000:**

**Beginning Of Brief Essay For Fall 2000!**

**Thanks** for "majoring" in Anthropology (for whatever reason) and / or
taking this course. This is actually a _very_ brief "essay" about **this**
web-assisted course and web pages (which you are reading either
"electronically" or in the printed syllabus). The World Wide Web is an
"electronic organism" which has been created by human beings **and** as human
beings change, the WWW continues to "evolve" over time. Education will
**radically** alter by the time I retire / die and **(a)** while I try to
"keep up" with as much as possible for my students ( _and_ **myself** ) I
realize that **(b)** I am behind as soon as I begin! With that in mind, you
are reminded that **(c)** **ANTH 296 / ANTH 296H** ( **Proseminar in the
History of Theory and Method in Anthropology** ) in Fall 2000 **is not** a
web-based course but is a **(d)** "traditional" course, taught on the campus
of [California State University, Chico](http://www.csuchico.edu/), to
"traditional" (or perhaps a " _semi_ -traditional" group of) Juniors and
Senior students (and the occasional Graduate Student) in Butte Hall 327 for a
seminar/discussion class. These web pages contain **no** frames, **no** Java
scripts, **no** interactive exams, **no** streaming video, **no**
PowerPointPresentations, and **no** other "bells-and-whistles" which are
current on the WWW but they **do** contain **some** "live" links which are
appropriate for the course. The WWW is "alive" (as well as this course **and,
indeed, all education** ) and **evolving over time** and **** please consider
the following **** from _Time_ of July 19, 1999:

> " **800 Million:** **Estimated** number of pages stored on the World Wide
Web as of February  [1999], **up from about 320 million 15 months earlier [or
~November 1997]. ** **16%:** Proportion of the Web reached by the most
comprehensive search engine, down from 34% for the previous study's best
engine  [ **stress** added ]." _Anon_., 1999, _Time_ , July 19, 1999, page 25.

**YOU MAY WELL ASK:** why place this syllabus on the WWW? **Why** did
Urbanowicz go through the trouble to place this on the WWW if it is not an
interactive course? As _The Wall Street Journal_ on July 20, 1998 pointed out:
"It Isn't Entertainment That Makes The Web Shine: It's Dull Data" (Page 1 and
page A8). I _trust_ that you are not reading pages of "dull data" **but**
pages of **ideas** (with _some_ data) that will provide **you** with
background information for **your own ideas!** I **also add** that for more
than a decade I have been providing students with _Guidebooks_ that have
"video notes" and "lecture outlines" for the appropriate courses that
semester. Human beings are "visual creatures" and I use **NUMEROUS** films,
slides, and transparencies in my classes and since I am "used to" the
_Guidebook_ format, I continue to place the _Fall 2000 Guidebook_ on "the web"
(with **numerous** links) for students in my [Anthropology
13](http://www.csuchico.edu/~curban/syllabi/SYL_13-FA2000.html) classes (
**Human Cultural Diversity** ). **_Incidentally_** , you might be interested
in the following (unfortunate) item which I have incorporated in my current
**ANTH 13** course:

> "For many Bay Area students, Independence Day means hot dogs, family
picnics, fireworks--and not much else. **Out of four dozen teens quizzed in an
informal survey** in San Francisco, Concord and Pacifica, most knew that the
Fourth of July had something to do with America's independence, **but less
than half could name the country from which we won our freedom**. 'Japan or
something. China. Somewhere out there on the other side of the world,' said...
[a 14 year old and a 17 year old added:] It's like freedom. Some war was
fought and we won, so we got our freedom.' **As to which country we had been
fighting, 'I don't know.... I don't, even, like, have a clue** [said a 17 year
old 1999 high school graduate]. 'It wouldn't be Canada, would it?' guessed [a
13 year old high school freshman].... 'We're not in school right now, so you
asked the wrong kids.' **The unscientific survey was conducted at Stonestown
Galleria in San Francisco, Sunvalley Mall in Concord and the Linda Mar
shopping center in Pacifica**. Many of those who correctly identified England
as our adversary in the Revolutionary War did so only after some thought. 'Was
it somewhere in Europe, like France? Germany? Russia? Let me think'  [said a
17 year old 1999 high school graduate].... 'Wasn't it Great Britain? I just
had to think.' 'I'm gonna have to go with Spain' [said a 14 year old high
school freshman and someone else].... correctly answered that we fought the
Revolutionary War before World War II. **But was it before or after the Civil
War? ... couldn't say. 'After.** I think it was after'  [said a 14 year old
friend and a 19 year old high school graduate] ... who declined to give his
last name, said he knew we celebrate the Fourth because it's Independence Day.
But the country we were fighting with? 'That I don't (know),' he said. 'I want
to say Korea. I'm tripping.' Asked how long ago it might have been...took a
guess. 'Like 50 years,' he said. **One student wondered aloud whether the
Fourth of July was somehow related to Pearl Harbor. Another was not sure
whether our independence came before or after the Vietnam War.** ... A 1994
study of several thousand eighth- and 12th-graders across the country tested
the students' knowledge of basic history. Thirty-nine percent of eighth
graders scored at a level considered below their basic proficiency; an even
higher number--57 percent--of high school seniors scored below the basic
level. The study was conducted by the U.S. Department of Education's National
Center for Education Statistics. Adults may do better. According to a Gallup
Poll conducted last weekend, a majority of Americans can correctly identify
what the Fourth of July is all about. When asked to name the country from
which we gained our independence, 76 percent correctly named Great Britain or
England. Nineteen percent were unsure. The results were based on telephone
interviews of a randomly selected national sample of 1,016 adults  [
**stress** added ]." Emily Gurnon, 1999, Fourth of July: Kids Unclear on
Concept. _San Francisco Examiner_ , July 4, pages 1 and A9.

**ALAS, PLEASE NOTE** that the above was written in 1999 and on **June 28,
2000,** one reads the following:

> "Nearly 80 percent of senior at 55 top colleges and universities--including
Harvard and Princeton--received a D or F on a 34-question, high-school level
American history test that contained historical references....'These students
are allowed to graduate as if they didn't know the past existed.'...." Anon,
2000, American History Quiz Stumps Many College Seniors. _San Francisco
Chronicle,_ June 28, 2000, page A3.

**ALTHOUGH THE ELECTRONIC WORLD** is changing very rapidly, and one might
question the value of the "printed word" (considering the number of
"electronic books" currently on "the web" such as the
[Bible](http://bible.gospelcom.net/bible?) or Darwin and 1000s of other
available from sources such as the **INCREDIBLE** [Books On Line](http://www-
cgi.cs.cmu.edu/cgi-bin/book/maketitlepage) and [Project
Gutenberg](http://promo.net/pg/)), there will always (I **honestly** believe
as of this writing), a place for the "printed page" that you can hold in your
hands, that **YOU** can read in bed, read outside when the electricity goes
off, or read when you can't make an Internet connection to read the Web pages
located in cyberspace! In short, while the _ephemeral_ culture of the WWW is
_extremely_ important, the _tangible_ culture of a physical object is just as
important and I follow some of the words from the United States Library of
Congress: _Litera scripta manet_ , or the written word endures! The Internet
and the World Wide Web and Cyberspace are changing the very environment "
**we** " all interact in and the "web" points to new resources for all of us
(if we make the time to "dig" them out). This is how I have envision this web-
related course / syllabus (of **~22,869** words): **it is a guide to other
resources to explore on your own. Some of you may not "like" the short quotes:
you want more, so I suggest go to the references cited!** Some of you may
think there are too many quotes and not enough "lecturing" so I say consider
the quotes as un-paraphrased lecture notes! Education is changing (just as you
/ we are changing). Please consider the IMPACT of the Internet and the World
Wide Web, and something like the following:

> " **And then the revolution came.** ... Computers and modems and the mighty
Web **are as ubiquitous** in a child's vocabulary as the multiplication table.
... **Experts say that computers, and more importantly, the Internet, are
changing the way children learn, develop and think**. Amanda Stanley had a
computer in her home even when her family chose not to keep a TV or radio in
the house. 'I've been around computers all my life,' she said. The 13-year-old
[born 1987?], who comes from a family of computer enthusiasts, learned how to
paint jeans at a camp last summer. Now she wants to sell her wearable art
online. She is enrolled in Giga Gals, a program that started at the Austin
[Texas] Children's Museum in February [2000]. **Web designers help 9- to
18-year-olds** get online and start their own sites, from Web diaries to
e-commerce ventures  [ **stress** added ]." Omar L. Gallaga, 2000, For High-
Tech Kids, Computers Are The Norm, Not A Novelty. _The San Francisco
Chronicle_ , May 29, 2000, page B5.

**Please** consider the following:

> " **We have too much information today.** We are saturated by isolated facts
for which we have great difficulty funding any familiar context. ... The
social sciences badly need to take a break, collect their thoughts, begin to
produce reliable histories of their respective disciplines, and clearly
articulate their fundamental doctrines **so that we can see the various trees
of thought that represent the forests in which we all labor** [ **stress**
added ]." David Hurst Thomas, 2000, _Skull Wars: Kennewick Man, Archaeology,
And The Battle For Native American Identity_ (NY: Basic Books), page xiii.

**AND HAS THIS BEEN UPDATED?}** from _USAToday_ June 7, 2000} "...the existing
Web continues to **expand** at a phenomenal pace. In **just the past 24 hours,
2 million new Web pages,** 196,000 new Internet-access devices and 147,000 new
web users **were added**. By 2002, there will be more Web pages than people on
the planet  [ **stress** added ]." Ed Zander, _USA Today_ , June 7, 2000, page
15A; **and on 27 July 2000:** "It turns out that cyberspace, like the
expanding universe, is more unfathomable than we imagined. ... **estimates
that the World Wide Web is 500 times larger than the maps provided by popular
search engines.**... [ **stress** added ]. Michael Liedtke, 2000, Internet
Much Bigger Than Most People Think. T _he San Francisco Chronicle_ , July 27,
2000, page B5.

**End Of Brief Essay For Fall 2000!**

To return to the beginning of this electronic syllabus please click
******here** **.**

**_ALL_ ANTHROPOLOGY MAJORS _SHOULD_ ALREADY KNOW ABOUT ** the _International
Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences_ (1968) [REF/H40/A2I/5] **_AND_** the
_Annual Review of Anthropology_ [GN/1/B52] **_as well as_** _Archaeological_
_Method And Theory_ (edited by Schiefer)  [CC/A242/Vol 1, 1989->], **_AND_ **
the _Encyclopedia of Cultural Anthropology_ (Edited by D. Levinson and M.
Ember)  [ref/GN/307/E52/1996]), **_AS WELL AS_** the various miscellaneous
publications and journals available in Butte 305 ([Ethnographic
Laboratory](http://www.csuchico.edu/anth/EthnoLab/)).  **AND DON'T FORGET**
about:

> "The eHRAF Collection of Ethnography, **available on the web,** is a small
but **growing** collection of HRAF full text and graphical materials
supplemented, in some cases, with additional research through approximately
the 1980's. The eHRAF Collection of Ethnography includes approximately 48
cultures, and regular additions are planned." (And See
<http://www.hti.umich.edu/e/ehraf/> ).

**_ALSO, ALSO, PLEASE THINK ABOUT / READ THE 61 "_** ** _THOUGHTS_** ** _" AT
THE END OF THIS SYLLABUS: THEY WILL PLAY A PART IN DISCUSSIONS THROUGHOUT THE
SEMESTER; ALSO: PLEASE READ THE QUOTATION STATEMENTS ASSOCIATED WITH EACH
WEEK} THEY WILL ALSO PLAY A PART IN DISCUSSIONS THROUGHOUT THE SEMESTER!_**

**_SEVEN GOALS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ANTHROPOLOGY AT CSU, CHICO_**

**1.** An understanding of the phenomenon of culture as that which
differentiates human life from other life forms; an understanding of the roles
of human biology and cultural processes in human behavior and human evolution.  

**2.** A positive appreciation of the diversity of contemporary and past human
cultures and an awareness of the value of anthropological perspectives and
knowledge in contemporary society.  

**3.** A knowledge of the substantive data pertinent to the several sub
disciplines of anthropology and familiarity with major issues relevant to
each.  

**4.** Familiarity with the forms of anthropological literature and basic data
sources and knowledge of how to access such information.  

**5.** Knowledge of the methodology appropriate to the sub-disciplines of
anthropology and the capacity to apply appropriate methods when conducting
anthropological research.  

**6.** The ability to present and communicate in anthropologically appropriate
ways anthropological knowledge and the results of anthropological research.  

**7.** Knowledge of the history of anthropological thought.  

**PLEASE REMEMBER:** INTERNATIONAL FORUM ( **SOSC** 100-01}#14866) for One
Unit every **TUE** from 4- >5:20p.m. in Ayres Hall 120 and the ANTHROPOLOGY
FORUM ( **ANTH** 297-01} #10222) for One Unit every **THU** from 4- >5:20pm in
Ayres Hall 120.  

**_SPECIFIC READING ASSIGNMENTS AND TOPICS FOR THE DAYS OF Monday&
Wednesday:_**

**WEEK 1. 8/21/2000 + 8/23/2000} Introduction & Overview to the course.  
**The profession: 1967-2000+. **_Please_** **_glance_** at the required text
and **_any_** of the RESERVE items by _Monday_ August 28, 2000.  

> "By **'event'** I mean the **development, appearance, or publication** of a
scientific paper, **or** an influential scientific address, **or** a specific
discovery, **or** a letter, **or** a photograph made during the use of
laboratory equipment, **or** a page of a laboratory notebook, **and so
forth**. Each of these has a **physical residue** that can be studied and that
lends itself to the eventual formation of a consensus among competent
observers who come to a historic case from different directions. It is in this
case analogous to what an elementary particle physicist calls an event, for
example, a trace of sparks in a spark chamber. The task of historians of
science  [or Anthropology!], then, **is to use these events as the underlying
factual base** and to proceed inductively from that base  [ **stress** added
]." Gerald Holton, 1986, _The Advancement of Science, And Its Burdens_
(Cambridge University Press), page ix.

"She [Cassie Black] knew all along that what she was doing was as much mental
preparation as anything else. **It was getting back into the rhythm** , the
mind-set [ **stress** added ]." Michael Connelly, 2000, _Void Moon_ , page 42.

> "... **I do believe something very magical** can happen when you read a good
book"  [ **stress** added ]." (Joanne K. Rowling, 1999, Harry Potter Author
Reveals The Secret.... _In_ _USA Weekend_ , November 12-14, 1999, page 4.)

**"I used to imagine I could hold it all in my head, but memory has a way of
pruning** and deleting, eliminating anything that doesn't seem relevant at the
moment. **Later, it's the odd unrelated detail that sometimes makes the puzzle
parts rearrange themselves like magic. The very act of taking pen to paper
somehow gooses the brain into making the leap.** It doesn't always happen in
the moment, but without the concrete notation, the data disappear  [
**stress** added ]." Sue Grafton, 1999, _"O" is For Outlaw_ (NY: Henry Holt),
page 106.

> "First impressions at all times very much depend on one's previously-
acquired ideas." Charles R. Darwin [1809-1882], 1839, _The Voyage of the
Beagle_ (Chapter 18: "Tahiti And New Zealand"), 1972 Bantam paperback edition
(with "Introduction" by Walter Sullivan), page 357.

"....descriptions vary with the conceptual or theoretical framework within
which they are couched. To evaluate a description properly one must know
something about the theoretical framework that brought it into being." D.
Kaplan and R. Manners, _Culture Theory_ , 1972: 22.

> "The barbarous heathen are nothing more strange to us than we are to
them.... Human reason is a tincture in like weight and measure infused into
all our opinions and customs, what form soever they be, infinite in matter,
infinite in diversity." Michel Eyquem de Montaigne [1533-1592], _Essays_ ,
page 53 [1959 paperback publication of a translation from 1603].

"Anthropology is the product of three great historical movements: the Age of
Exploration, the Enlightenment, and Evolutionism." Philip K. Bock, 1990,
_Rethinking Psychological Anthropology: Continuity and Change in the Study of
Human Action_ , page 5.

> "Much of the eighteenth century is often referred to as the Enlightenment or
the Age of Enlightenment. Frequent reiteration does not make these terms any
easier to define. ... The Enlightenment could be described as a **tendency** ,
rather than a movement, **a tendency towards critical enquiry and the
application of reason** [ **stress** added ]." Jeremy Black, 1999, _History of
Europe: Eighteenth Century Europe_ , Second Edition (NY: St. Martin's Press),
page 246.

For the 1998-1999 Academic Year, **349** **females [57%]** received the Ph.D.
in Anthropology and **267 males [43%]** received the Ph.D. in Anthropology,
for a **total** of **616** Ph.D. degrees in 1998-1999. _Source_ : _The
1999-2000 American Anthropological Association Guide_ , page 553.

> **On November 3, 1999** , it was reported that "U.S. Universities are
awarding record numbers of Ph.D. degrees, largely due to a staggering increase
in the number of women seeking graduate education.... **Women earned 17,322
doctoral degrees in the 1996-97 academic year, 40.6 percent of those
awarded.** That is an increase of 20 percent from five years before and of 52
percent from a decade before--and a seven-fold increase since 1967....  [
**stress** added ]." Tanya Schevitz, 1999, 40% of Doctoral Degrees in U.S.
Went to Women in '96-97. _San Francisco Chronicle_ , November 3, 1999, page
A9.

" **The anthropologist is a human instrument** studying other human beings and
their societies. Although he  [and she!] has developed techniques that give
him [and her] considerable objectivity, it is an illusion for him to think he
can **remove** his  [or her] personality from his work and become a faceless
robot or a machinelike recorder of human events [ **stress** added ]."
Hortense Powdermaker [1896-1970], 1966, _Stranger And Friend: The Way Of An
Anthropologist_ , page 19.)

> " **WHY STUDY THEORY?** Theory is critical because, while anthropologists
collect data through fieldwork, data in an of themselves are meaningless.
Whether stated explicitly or assumed, theories are the tools anthropologists
use to give meaning to their data. Anthropologists' understanding of the
artifacts they collect or the events they record in the field is derived from
their theoretical perspective." R.J. McGee  & R.L. Warms, 2000,
_Anthropological Theory: An Introductory History_ , page 1.

" **Is this how it happens? We do what our friends do in order to be one of
the group, to be accepted?** Of course there are always some strong-minded
individuals who have the courage of their convicions, who stand out against
the group's accepted norms of behavior. But it is probably the case that
inappropriate or morally wrong behaviors are more often changed by the
influence of outsiders, **looking with different eyes, from different
backgrounds** [ **stress** added ]." Jane Goodall [with Phillip Berman], 1999,
_Reason For Hope: A Spiritual Journey_ (NY: Warner Books), page 20.

> "An ethnographic novel has much more in common with an historical novel that
with any kind of scientific treatise. As anthropologists we need to come to
terms with the now-recognized fact that in a novel the personalities of the
characters are derived from aspects of the personality of the author. How
could it be otherwise? The only ego that I know at first hand is my own. When
Malinowski writes about Trobriand Islanders he is writing about himself; when
Evans-Pritchard writes about the Nuer he is writing about himself. Any other
sort of description turns the characters into clockwork dummies.
**Ethnographers as authors are not primarily concerned with factual truth;
they convince by the way they write** [ **stress** added ]." (Edmund Leach,
1989, Writing Anthropology. _In_ _American Ethnologist_ , Vol. 16, No. 1,
pages 137-141, page 141).

" **Let us recognize, then, that all literary creative work, whether oral or
written, cannot, at the outset, be other than individual.** When it is
immediately taken over by oral tradition, as is the case in communities
without writing, only the structural levels will remain stable, since they
rest on common foundations, whereas the probabilist levels will be suject to
extreme variability resulting from the personalities of successive narrators
[ **stress** added ]." Claude Levi-Strauss, 1981, "Finale" _in_ The Naked Man,
pp. 625-648, 667-675, 679-695; reprinted _in_ _Teaching L evi-Strauss_, Hans
Penner [Editor], 1998 (Atlanta, GA: Scholars Press), pages 17-28, page
269-322, page 270

> "The ethnographer, having embarked on that work of identification, is always
threatened by the tragic risk of falling victim to a misunderstanding; that
is, the subjective grasp he [or she!] reaches has nothing in common with that
of the indigenous individual, beyond the bald fact of being subjective."
Claude Levi-Strauss, 1987, Introduction To Marcel Mauss, pp. 24-66; reprinted
_in_ _Teaching L evi-Strauss_, Hans Penner [Editor], 1998 (Atlanta, GA:
Scholars Press), pages 17-28, page 21.

"...[I am] **not letting what I can't do define what I can** [ **stress**
added ]." Brooke Ellison ( **b. 1979** ->) [First quadraplegic to graduate
from Harvard University, June 2000.] _San Francisco Chronicle_ , May 23, 2000,
page A6..

> "After dedicating their careers to studying exotic cultures in faraway
lands, **a few anthropologists are coming home. They're taking research
techniques** they once used in African shantytowns and Himalayan villages **to
Knights of Columbus halls, corporate office buildings and suburban shopping
centers**....  [The Anthropologists] study American families the way they
would Polynesian cargo cults or Mongolian nomads--by inserting themselves into
the daily lives of their subjects" [ **stress** added ]." Matt Crenson, 2000,
Anthropologists Among Us. _The Modesto Bee_ , July 17, 2000, pages D1 and D2.

>

> _"Remember the ripple effect. If you change something in a room it changes
the universe of the job. It creates ripples_." Michael Connelly, 2000, _Void
Moon_ , page 108.

"All across America, the landscape suffers from amnesia, not about everything,
but about many crucial events and issues of our past. ... If we cannot face
our history honestly, we cannot learn from the past." James W. Loewen, 1999,
_What Our Historic Sites get Wrong: Lies Across America_ (NY: The New Press),
pages 18 and 22).

> "Beliefs are like cow paths. The more often you walk down a path, the more
it looks the right way." Richard Brodie, 1996, _Virus Of The Mind: The New
Science of the Meme_ [Seattle, WN: Integral Press], page 207.

"There is no pioneer, however great a genius he [or she!] may be, who can
flatter himself [or herself] that he [or she] **has completely broken with the
heritage inculcated** in him since childhood through the **environment** of
his family, his school and the community in which he works. **The sixteen
century [as well as the 17th, 18th, 19th, and 20th!] provides a thousand and
one examples of this truth** [ **stress** added ]." Robert Mandrou, 1973,
_From Humanism to Science: 1480-1700_ (Penguin Books), page 9.

> " **The unit of survival** [or adaptation] **is organism plus environment.
We are learning by bitter experience that the organism which destroys its
environment destroys itself** [ **stress** added ]." Gregory Bateson
[1904-1980], _Steps to an Ecology of Mind_ , 1972: 483.

" **The most important skill** for almost everyone in the next decade and
beyond will be the ability to create valuable, compelling, and empowering
information and experiences for others. **To do this, we must learn
established ways of organizing and presenting data and information as well as
develop** new ones  [ **stress** added ]." Nathan Shedroff, 1999, Information
Interaction Design: A Unified Field Theory of Design. _In_ _Information
Design_ (1999), edited by Robert Jacobson (MIT Press), pages 267-292, page
267.

> **"I love quotations.** Maybe it's a symptom of a short-attention-span,
instant-gratification age, but I'm a sucker for a well-stated tidbit of
brevity and wit. **For me, quotes do with precision what reading does in
general:** they confirm the astuteness of my perceptions, they open the way to
ideas, and t **hey console me with the knowledge that I'm not alone** [
**stress** added ]." John Winkonur, 1990 [editor], _W.O.W. Writers on Writing_
(Philadelphia: Running Press), page 1.

**FINALLY, Urbanowicz adds again** : "I quote others only the better to
express myself." (Michel Eyquem de Montaigne [1533-1592] French
philosopher/essayist); **or** , in another translation: "I only quote others
to make myself more explicit." ( _Essays_ , translated by J.M. Cohen, 1958,
page 52).

**_Interesting (And Somewhat Appropriate) Web Sites Are:_**

[_http://www.csuchico.edu/~curban/Pub_Papers/4field.html_](http://www.csuchico.edu/~curban/Pub_Papers/4field.html)
[1992 Urbanowicz History of Anthropology paper]  
<http://www.csuchico.edu/~curban/NatureCulture1970.html> [1970 Urbanowicz on
various "Ancestors"]  
[_http://www.tamu.edu/anthropology/news.html_](http://www.tamu.edu/anthropology/news.html)
[Anthropology in The News]  
<http://www.oakland.edu/~dow/anthap.htm> [The **ANTHAP** \- Applied
Anthropology Computer Network ]  
<http://www.aaanet.org/> [American Anthropological Association]

> * * *

**WEEK 2. 8/28/2000 + 8/30/2000} History of theory continued, key concepts, as
well as Pre/Post-Darwin individuals and information.**

**Required Reading in:** Langness: pp. xi-12, Ch. 1 (pp. 13-49), and
**_glance_** at Ch 7 (pp. 188-217).  
Please _glance_ at the Kroeber  & Kluckhohn 1952 publication _Culture_ ;
please **_glance_** at Slotkin, pp. v-243.

**_PLEASE_** read any **_one_** of the following items from the selections on
RESERVE:

Boorstin: pp. 626-635.  
Darnell Selection #5 (pp. 61-77) or pp. 289-321.  
Golde: Introduction, pp. 1-15 **_or_** pp. 267-289.  
Kardiner and Preble: pp. 11-32.  
Mead  & Bunzel: pp. 1-12.  
Montagu: pp. 91-97, 49-145, and 157-162.  
Naroll & Naroll: Ch 2 (pp. 25-56).  
Penniman: part of Ch. 4 (pp. 73-110).  
Stocking (1991): pp. 8-45.

**WHAT DOES ONE MAKE** of the following, from Walter W. Taylor (1913-1997): "
**Culture** , consisting as it does of mental constructs, is not directly
observable. **It cannot, therefore, constitute the empirical data of any
discipline** [ **stress** added ]." Walter W. Taylor, 1948, _A Study of
Archaeology_ (Southern Illinois University press), page 108.

> "The Enlightenment is commonly defined as a period that has emphasized **the
exercise of enlightened reason. It was not so much a doctrine of ideas as a
method of pursuing ideas. Rigorous intellect without attachment to
superstition or bias was its hallmark [stress** added]." Jack Watson & Grant
McKernie, 1993, _A Cultural History of Theatre_ , page 244.

**ON certain individuals:** "...of intelligence  [who] notice more things and
view them more carefully, but they comment on them; and to establish and
substantiate their interpretation, they cannot refrain from altering the facts
a little. They present things just as they are but twist and disguise them to
conform to the point of view from which they have seen them; and to grain
credence for their opinion and make it attractive, they do not mind adding
something of their own, or extending and amplifying." Michel Eyquem de
Montaigne [1533-1592] French philosopher/essayist), _Essays_ , translated by
J.M. Cohen, 1958, page 108.

> "Read not to contradict and confute; nor to believe and take for granted;
nor to find talk and discourse; but to weigh and consider. Some books are to
be tasted, others to be swallowed, and some few to be chewed and digested;
that is, some books are to be read only in parts; others to be read but not
curiously; and some to be read wholly, and with diligence and attention."
Francis Bacon [1561-1626], English essayist and philosopher.

"The _Persian Letters_ [published in **1721** by Montesquieu, 1686-1755 ] is
among the earliest major works by students of man and society to apply what
has been called the double optic of cultural relativism. It was this that
enabled Montesquieu to regard his own society as a subject for investigation
at least as problematical as any other." Melvin Richter, 1977, _The Political
Theory of Montesquieu_ , page 31.

> "Who invented the telephone? Microsoft Corp's Encarta multimedia
encyclopedia on CD-ROM has an answer to that simple question. **Rather, two
answers.** Consult the U.S., U.K., or German editions of Encarta and you find
the expected one: Alexander Graham Bell. **But** look at the Italian version
**and the story is strikingly different.** Credit goes to Antonio Meucci, an
impoverished Italian-American candlemaker who, as the Italian-language Encarta
tells it, beat Bell to the punch by five years. **Who's right? Depends on
where you live.** ... in the age of the Internet, the issue of adapting
products to local markets is raising trickier problems. Technology and
globalization are colliding head-on with **another powerful force: history.**
Perhaps nowhere is this conflict more apparent than in information as with
Microsoft's Encarta, which has nine different editions, including one in
British English and one in American. **It's Microsoft's peculiar
accomplishment that it has so mastered the adaptation of its products to
different markets that they reflect different, sometimes contradictory,
understandings of the same historical events. 'You basically have to rewrite
all of the content,'** says Dominique Lempereur, who, from her Paris office,
oversees the expansion of Microsoft's education-related products to foreign
markets. 'The translation is almost an accessory.' ... **Consistency is
clearly not Encarta's goal, and that's something of a controversial
strategy.** Encyclopedia Britannica, for example, has a policy of
investigating contradictions across its editions and deciding on a standard
presentation. Where it can establish a fact that is internationally solid, 'we
go with that, and present other interpretations as need be,' says Dale
Holberg, Britannica's editor in Chicago. His staff has looked into the Meucci
question. Their verdict: Bell still gets the credit, world-wide, for inventing
and patenting the electric telephone. ... Microsoft, as a technology
conglomerate, has an interest in not stirring up controversies that endanger
the sale of its other products. But the universaility of the Web also
frustrates efforts to localize content. And there remains the possibility that
it will bring about pressure for one universally aplicable version of history.
Perhaps one day Mr. Meucci will share space with Alexander Graham Bell in all
of the Encartas  [ **stress** added ]." Kevin J. Delaney, 1999, Microsoft's
Encarta Has Different Facts For Different Folks. _The Wall Street Journal_ ,
June 25, 1999, page 1 & A11.

**Carolus Linnaeus (1707-1778):** "Latinized form of Carl von Linn e. Swedish
naturalist and physician. His botanical work _Systema Naturae_ 1735 contained
his system for classfiying plants into groups depending on shared
characteristics (such as the number of stamens in flowers), providing a much-
needed framework for identification. He also devised the concise and precise
system for naming plants and animals, using one Latin (or Latinized) word to
represent the genus and a second to distinguish the species." Sarah Jenkins
Jones (Editor), 1996, _Random House Webster's Dictionary of Scientists_ , page
299.

> " **Critiques of anthropology from within the discipline and from without
have been a major feature of our intellectual life since the late 1960s.** The
theoretical and empirical bases of cultural and social anthropology have been
under attack since the Marxist and New Left critiques of the 1960s to those
coming more recently from poststructuralism, postmodernism and literate
theory, and postcolonial and cultural studies. **As a result, several academic
generations have been educated by reading the attacks on the field but rarely
dealing with the actual theoretical works and ethnographies of earlier
anthropologists.** This article deals with several of the most common charges
leveled at anthropology, notably that it has regularly and necessarily
exoticized 'Others,' has been ahistorical, and has treated each culture as if
it were an isolate, unconnected to any other. It demonstrates how inaccurate
and easily falsifiable such claims are and recommends a critical reevaluation
of these unexamined and destructuve cliches [ **stress** added ]." Herbert
Lewis, 1998, The Misrepresentation of Anthropology and Its Consequences.
_American Anthropologist_ , Vol. 100, No. 3, pages 716-731, page 716.

"The Marquis de Condorcet (1743-94), who contributed on mathematical subject
to the _Encyclop edie_, became perpetual secretary of the _Acad emie des
Sciences_ and supported Turgot's reforms and freedom of trade. He advanced
probability theory (applying it outside the mechanical sciences) and wrote for
a popular audience. In his _General Picture of Science, which has for its
Object the Application of Arithmetic to the Moral and Political Sciences_
(1783) Condorcet argued that a knowledge of probability, 'social arithmetic',
allowed people to make rational decisions, instead of relying on instinct and
passion. **Condorcet was a great believer in the possibility of indefinite
progress through human action** , seeing the key in education. He believed
that acquired characteristics could be inherited and thus that education could
have a cumulative effect [ **stress** added ]." Jeremy Black, 1999, _History
of Europe: Eighteenth Century Europe_ , Second Edition (NY: St. Martin's
Press), page 320.

> "Anthropology has been for some time now undergoing a critique led largely
by ethnographers, who must face most squarely the moral ambiguities of their
surveillance and its public uses. Most of the historical examination of the
field has been directed at the nineteenth century's climax of bad faith; the
mutual aid offered each other by academic anthropology and the imperial state
has by now been amply documented and lamented." [The author's footnote #53
refers to her footnote #18 and numerous references, including: Edward Said,
1979, _Orientalism_ ; Clifford & Marcus, 1986, _Writing Culture_ ; G.W.
Stocking, 1983, _Observers Observed_ ; G.W. Stocking, 1987, _Victorian
Anthropology_ , as well as many more.] Mary Baine Campbell, 1999, _Wonder &
Science: Imagining Worlds in Early Modern Europe_ (Cornell University Press),
page66.

"Experts call this new field 'cognitive computing,' a blend of **behavioral
sciences and computer science**. Some Web developers now employ staffs of
psychologists, sociologists, and **cultural** **anthropologists** , along with
the requisite software engineers, to create Web interfaces that are tailor-
made for a particular market, or, in some instances, for an individual
customer's consciousness. ' **You have to be a student of human behavior to be
an effective e-commerce developer...you have to tailor content to those
differences online** [ **stress** added ].'" Gene Koprowski, 1998, The (New)
Hidden Persuaders. _The Wall Street Journal_ , December 7, 1998, page R10.

> "This is a fantastic job. In my wildest dreams in graduate school, I
couldn't have imagined a job this great." (John Sherry, **anthropologist** who
studies computer use in extreme environments for Intel) **AND** "Over the
year,  [Bonnie] Nardi [" **long-time design anthropologist** who has worked at
Hewlett-Packard and Apple and now does research at AT &T Labs West in Menlo
Park, Calif."] **has seen the idea of anthropology as a useful addition to
industry becoming more commonplace.** Today, both the University of
California, Irvine, and Georgia Tech include ethnographic training as part of
their computer science degree programs. 'They're attracting not just
supergeeks, but people who want to work on the border of people and
technology,' she says  [ **stress** added ]." Elizabeth Weise, 1999, Companies
Learn Value of Grass Roots: Anthropologists Help Adapt Products to World's
Cultures. _USA Today_ , May 26, 1999, page 4D.

**_Interesting (And Somewhat Appropriate) Web Sites Are:_**

[_http://www.unipv.it/webbio/dfantrop.htm_](http://www.unipv.it/webbio/dfantrop.htm)
**[ A Massive Anthropology site!]  
**<http://www.uncwil.edu/stuaff/career/anthropology.htm> [Anthropology
careers]  
<http://home.worldnet.fr/clist/Anthro/Texts/> [Anthropology Resources on the
Internet] **  
**<http://www.csuchico.edu/lref/guides/rbs/anthro.htm> [Anthropology Resources
beginning with CSU, Chico]  
<http://www.hti.umich.edu/e/ehraf/> [Electronic **HRAF**! - begin from CSU,
Chico ]  
<http://www.sjsu.edu/depts/anthropology/svcp/> [ **The Silicon Valley Cultures
Project** ]  
<http://www.boston.com/dailyglobe2/067/science/Science_fits_nicely_between_art_reality+.shtml>
[Science Fits Nicely Between Art+Reality]

> **NOTE:** "Technocracy is not a new idea. The technocracy movement dates
back to early-nineteenth-century philosopher August Comte, the founder both of
modern sociology and positivism." Thomas S. Valovic, 2000, _Digital
Mythologies: The Hidden Complexities of the Internet_ (Rutgers University
Press), page 202.

"Web Surfing Is Fast Way To Go Job Hopping" from _The Wall Street Journal_ ,
May 27, 1999, page B12 [some sources]:

<http://www.monster.com>  
<http://www.dice.com>  
<http://www.careerpath.com>  
<http://www.hotjobs.com>

**ALSO REMEMBER:**

Career Planning & Placement Office  
<http://www.csuchico.edu/plc/welcome2.html>

Office of Experiential Education  
<http://rce.csuchico.edu/ids/>

> "CSU, Chico's Experiential Education program links the University to
business, industry, and government by giving students an opportunity to
combine classroom study with career related work experience. The program helps
students define their educational goals and prepare for their careers by
exploring the realities of the working world."

>

> * * *

**WEEK 3. _NO CLASS on Monday 9/4/2000_ _but_ class on Wednesday 9/6/2000}
Some 19th Century research in Europe and America: ** **Pre-Boas, Darwin,
Spencer, Morgan, Tyler, Frazer, Powell, Pitt-Rivers, Prichard, _et al._ and
Darwin (1809-1882) in context.**

**Required Reading in:** Langness: Repeat Ch. 1 (pp. 13-49) and _glance_ at
Chapter 2 (pp. 50-73).  
_Glance_ at Slotkin, pp. 244-460.  
_Glance_ at D. Hakken (1999).

**_PLEASE_** read any **_one_** of the following items from the selections on
RESERVE:

Bidney: Ch 7 (pp. 183-214).  
Boorstin: pp. 636-652.  
Hays pp. vii-xv and Ch 1-5 (pp. 1-49).  
Harris (1968): Ch 5 (pp. 108-141).  
Herbert: pp. 1-28.  
Hinsley: pp. 7-63 **_or_** pp. 129-189.  
Kardiner  & Preble: pp. 33-94.  
Malefijt Ch 7 (116-137) or Ch. 8 (138-159) or Ch. 11 (215-255).  
Mead & Bunzel: pp. 58-81.  
Mead & Bunzel: pp. 129-138.  
Mead & Bunzel: pp. 203-245.  
Mead & Bunzel: pp. 305-318.  
Moore: pp. 15-68.  
Naroll & Naroll: Ch 3 (pp. 57-121).  
Penniman: part of Ch. 4 (pp.110-146).  
Silverman: Ch. 1 (pp. 1-33).  
Stocking (1991): pp. 144-185.  
Stocking: pp. 1-14 **_and_** Ch. 3 (pp. 84-123).  
Stocking: Ch. 5 (pp. 179-232).

" **When we employ the tools of our understanding to think about our own tools
of understanding, our thought becomes reflexive and recursive.** Human thought
is thinking about itself, considering the conditions of its own possibility,
and the forms and limits of its own adequacy. ... the reflexiveness or self-
applicability of cultural software is one of its most significant features.
Human understanding - hence human understanding about understanding - is
essentially reflexive and self-referrential. **It can use its own tools to
think about its own tools,** and equally important, it does use its own tools
to think about its own tools. Our examination of our cultural software is a
reflexive study of a phenomenon already reflexive by nature  [ **stress**
added ]." J.M. Balkin, 1998, _Cultural Software: A Theory of Ideology_ , pages
128-129.

> " **Two ideas** dominated the life of Herbert Spencer  [1820-1903]: that of
**evolution** , for which he **invented** them term 'survival of the fittest,'
and that of personal freedom. ... More important for the anthropologist,
**Spencer retained the model of the biological organism** as the basis for
understanding the social realm. ... Spencer also used the term
**_superorganic_** , which has its own place in anthropological theory as
developed in the writings of such authors as Edward Sapir [1884-1939] and
Alfred Louis Kroeber [1876-1960] [ **stress** added ]." Paul Bohannan & Mark
Glazer, Editors (1988) _High Points in Anthropology_ , pages 3-5.

"Paul Broca [1824-1880] was a surgeon, a neurologist and an anthropologist, a
major figure in the development of both medicine and anthropology in the mid-
nineteenth century. ... He loved, as one biographer said, mainly serenity and
tolerance. In 1848 he founded a society of 'free-thinkers.' Almost alone among
French _savants_ of the time, he was sympathetic to Charles Darwin's idea of
evolution by natural selection." Carl Sagan, 1979, _Broca's Brain: Reflections
on the Romance of Science_ , page 7.

> "The field of Anthropology, however, was formally inauguarated by the French
physician Paul Broca (1824-1880), with the establishment of the _Societ e
d'Anthropologie de Paris_ in 1859--ironically the same year that Charles
Darwin produced the full development of his idea that the myriad forms of the
biological world had all arisen and been shaped by the continuing action of
the everydat forces still in operation: evolution by means of natural
selection (Darwin, 1859 [ _Origin_ ]). Broca's Societe served as the model for
the creation of comparable organizations subsequently in both England
(1863)...and Germany (1869 and 1870)...." C. Loring Brace, 2000, Evolution in
an Anthropological View (Walnut Creek: Altamira Press), page 15.

" **No theme in biology and perhaps in all the sciences so seized the
Victorian imagination as did the evolutionary hypothesis.** Evolution, the
development of one form from an antecedent form or series of forms, acquired
obvious relevance for an understanding of the past and present condition of
animal and plant species  [ **stress** added ]." _In_ _Victorian Science: A
Self-Portrait From The Presidential Addresses to the British Association for
the Advancement of Science_ , 1970, edited by George Basalla, William Coleman,
and Robert H. Kargon, page 300.

> "Formal anthropology in the first half of the nineteenth century was defined
by the research project of Prichardian 'ethnology' (the tracing of prehistoric
origins of peoples), and in its next major phase would be preoccupied with
theories of the evolutionary development of civilization. Not until the
twentieth centiry would it discover its vocation of closely scrutinizing
particular societies from the point of view of the idea of culture in the
'wide ethnographic sense'; nor would it institute until then the professional
fieldwork procedures supposed to warrant the scientific authority of the
reconstitute discipline." Christopher Herbert, 1991, _Culture And Anomie:
Ethnographic Imagination In The Nineteenth Century,_ page 150.

"The characteristics of any age are revealed not simply by political and
social developments, but by the manner in which contemporaries tried to
explain their situation in time and place and by the language and concepts in
which such explanations were formulated and discussed. In the case of mid- and
late Victorian Britain the most ambiguous and slippery notion of 'evolution

