From C. Wright Mills, **The Power Elite**. New York: Harper, 1957, pp.
269-297.

* * *

## 12

### The Power Elite

* * *

Except for the unsuccessful Civil War, changes in the power system of the
United States have not involved important challenges to its basic
legitimations. Even when they have been decisive enough to be called
'revolutions,' they have not involved the 'resort to the guns of a cruiser,
the dispersal of an elected assembly by bayonets, or the mechanisms of a
police state.' Nor have they involved , in any decisive way, any ideological
struggle to control masses. Changes in the American structure of power have
generally come about by institutional shifts in the relative positions of the
political, the economic, and the military orders. From this point of view, and
broadly speaking, the American power elite has gone through four epochs, and
is now well into a fifth.

* * *

### 1

I. During the first--roughly from the Revolution through the administration of
John Adams--the social and economic, the political and the military
institutions were more or less unified in a simple and direct way: the
individual men of these several elites moved easily from one role to another
at the top of each of the major institutional orders. Many of them were many-
sided men who could take the part of legislator and merchant, frontiersman and
soldier, scholar and surveyor.

Until the downfall of the Congressional caucus of 1824, political institutions
seemed quite central; political decisions, of great importance; many
politicians, considered national statesmen of note. 'Society, as I first
remember it,' Henry Cabot Lodge once said, speaking of the Boston of his early
boyhood, 'was based on the old families; Doctor Holmes defines them in the
"Autocrat" as the families which had held high position in the colony, the
province and during the Revolution and the early decades of the United States.
They represented several generations of education and standing in the
community . . . They had ancestors who had filled the pulpits, sat upon the
bench, and taken part in the government under the crown; who had fought in the
Revolution, helped to make the State and National constitutions and served in
the army or navy; who had been members of the House or Senate in the early
days of the Republic, and who had won success as merchants, manufacturers,
lawyers, or men of letters.'

Such men of affairs, who--as I have noted-- were the backbone of Mrs. John
Jay's social list of 1787, definitely included political figures of note. The
important fact about these early days is that social life, economic
institutions, military establishment, and political order coincided, and men
who were high politicians also played key roles in the economy and, with their
families, were among those of the reputable who made up local society. In
fact, this first period is marked by the leadership of men whose status does
not rest exclusively upon their political position, although their political
activities are important and the prestige of politicians high. And this
prestige seems attached to the men who occupy Congressional position as well
as the cabinet. The elite are political men of education and of administrative
experience, and, as Lord Bryce noted, possess a certain 'largeness of view and
dignity of character.'

II. During the early nineteenth century--which followed Jefferson's political
philosophy, but, in due course, Hamilton's economic principles--the economic
and political and military orders fitted loosely into the great scatter of the
American social structure. The broadening of the economic order which came to
be seated in the individual property owner was dramatized by Jefferson's
purchase of the Louisiana Territory and by the formation of the Democratic-
Republican party as successor to the Federalists.

In this society, the 'elite' became a plurality of top groups, each in turn
quite loosely made up. They overlapped to be sure, but again quite loosely so.
One definite key to the period, and certainly to our images of it, is the fact
that the Jacksonian Revolution was much more of a status revolution than
either an economic or a political one. The metropolitan 400 could not truly
flourish in the face of the status tides of Jacksonian democracy; alongside it
was a political elite in charge of the new party system. No set of men
controlled centralized means of power; no small clique dominated economic,
much less political, affairs. The economic order was ascendant over both
social status and political power; within the economic order, a quite sizable
proportion of all the economic men were among those who decided. For this was
the period--roughly from Jefferson to Lincoln--when the elite was at most a
loose coalition. The period ended, of course, with the decisive split of
southern and northern types.

Official commentators like to contrast the ascendancy in totalitarian
countries of a tightly organized clique with the American system of power.
Such comments, however, are easier to sustain if one compares mid-twentieth-
century Russia with mid-nineteenth-century America, which is what is often
done by Tocqueville-quoting Americans making the contrast. But that was an
America of a century ago, and in the century that has passed, the American
elite have not remained as patrioteer essayists have described them to us. The
'loose cliques' now head institutions of a scale and power not then existing
and, especially since World War I, the loose cliques have tightened up. We are
well beyond the era of romantic pluralism.

III. The supremacy of corporate economic power began, in a formal way, with
the Congressional elections of 1866, and was consolidated by the Supreme Court
decision of 1886 which declared that the Fourteenth Amendment protected the
corporation. That period witnessed the transfer of the center of initiative
from government to corporation. Until the First World War (which gave us an
advanced showing of certain features of our own period) this was an age of
raids on the government by the economic elite, an age of simple corruption,
when Senators and judges were simply bought up. Here, once upon a time, in the
era of McKinley and Morgan, far removed from the undocumented complexities of
our own time, many now believe, was the golden era of the American ruling
class.

The military order of this period, as in the second, was subordinate to the
political, which in turn was subordinate to the economic. The military was
thus off to the side of the main driving forces of United States history.
Political institutions in the United States have never formed a centralized
and autonomous domain of power; they have been enlarged and centralized only
reluctantly in slow response to the public consequence of the corporate
economy.

In the post-Civil-War era, that economy was the dynamic; the 'trusts'--as
policies and events make amply clear--could readily use the relatively weak
governmental apparatus for their own ends. That both state and federal
governments were decisively limited in their power to regulate, in fact meant
that they were themselves regulatable by the larger moneyed interests. Their
powers were scattered and unorganized; the powers of the industrial and
financial corporations concentrated and interlocked. The Morgan interests
alone held 341 directorships in 112 corporations with an aggregate
capitalization of over $22 billion--over three times the assessed value of all
real and personal property in New England. With revenues greater and employees
more numerous than those of many states, corporations controlled parties,
bought laws, and kept Congressmen of the 'neutral' state. And as private
economic power overshadowed public political power, so the economic elite
overshadowed the political.

Yet even between 1896 and 1919, events of importance tended to assume a
political form, foreshadowing the shape of power which after the partial boom
of the 'twenties was to prevail in the New Deal. Perhaps there has never been
any period in American history so politically transparent as the Progressive
era of President-makers and Muckrakers.

IV. The New Deal did _not_ reverse the political and economic relations of the
third era, but it did create within the political arena, as well as in the
corporate world itself, competing centers of power that challenged those of
the corporate directors. As the New Deal directorate gained political power,
the economic elite, which in the third period had fought against the growth of
'government' while raiding it for crafty privileges, belatedly attempted to
join it on the higher levels. When they did so they found themselves
confronting other interests and men, for the places of decision were crowded.
In due course, they did come to control and to use for their own purposes the
New Deal institutions whose creation they had so bitterly denounced.

But during the 'thirties, the political order was still an instrument of small
propertied farmers and businessmen, although they were weakened, having lost
their last chance for real ascendancy in the Progressive era. The struggle
between big and small property flared up again, however, in the political
realm of the New Deal era, and to this struggle there was added, as we have
seen, the new struggle of organized labor and the unorganized unemployed. This
new force flourished under political tutelage, but nevertheless, for the first
time in United States history, social legislation and lower-class issues
became important features of the reform movement.

In the decade of the 'thirties, a set of shifting balances involving newly
instituted farm measures and newly organized labor unions--along with big
business--made up the political and administrative drama of power. These farm,
labor, and business groups, moreover, were more or less contained within the
framework of an enlarging governmental structure, whose political directorship
made decisions in a definitely political manner. These groups pressured, and
in pressuring against one another and against the governmental and party
system, they helped to shape it. But it could not be said that any of them for
any considerable length of time used that government unilaterally as their
instrument. That is why the 'thirties was a _political_ decade: the power of
business was not replaced, but it was contested and supplemented: it became
one major power within a structure of power that was chiefly run by political
men, and not by economic or military men turned political.

The earlier and middle Roosevelt administrations can best be understood as a
desperate search for ways and means, within the existing capitalist system, of
reducing the staggering and ominous army of the unemployed. In these years,
the New Deal as a system of power was essentially a balance of pressure groups
and interest blocs. The political top adjusted many conflicts, gave way to
this demand, sidetracked that one, was the unilateral servant of none, and so
evened it all out into such going policy as prevailed from one minor crisis to
another. Policies were the result of a political act of balance at the top. Of
course, the balancing act that Roosevelt performed did not affect the
fundamental institutions of capitalism as a type of economy. By his policies,
he subsidized the defaults of the capitalist economy, which had simply broken
down; and by his rhetoric, he balanced its political disgrace, putting
'economic royalists' in the political doghouse.

The 'welfare state,' created to sustain the balance and to carry out the
subsidy, differed from the 'laissez-faire' state: 'If the state was believed
neutral in the days of T.R. because its leaders claimed to sanction favors for
no one,' Richard Hofstadter has remarked, 'the state under F.D.R. could be
called neutral only in the sense that it offered favors to everyone.' The new
state of the corporate commissars differs form the old welfare state. In fact,
the later Roosevelt years--beginning with the entrance of the United States
into overt acts of war and preparations for World War II--cannot be understood
entirely in terms of an adroit equipoise of political power.

* * *

#### **2**

We study history, it has been said, to rid ourselves of it, and the history of
the power elite is a clear case for which this maxim is correct. Like the
tempo of American life in general, the long-term trends of the power structure
have been greatly speeded up since World War II, and certain newer trends
within and between the dominant institutions have also set the shape of the
power elite and given historically specific meaning to its fifth epoch:

I. In so far as the structural clue to the power elite today lies in the
political order, that clue is the decline of politics as genuine and public
debate of alternative decisions--with nationally responsible and policy-
coherent parties and with autonomous organizations connecting the lower and
middle levels of power with the top levels of decision. American is now in
considerable part more a formal political democracy than a democratic social
structure, and even the formal political mechanics are weak.

The long-time tendency of business and government to become more intricately
and deeply involved with each other has, in the fifth epoch, reached a new
point of explicitness. The two cannot now be seen clearly as two distinct
worlds. It is in terms of the executive agencies of the state that the
rapprochement has proceeded most decisively. The growth of the executive
branch of the government, with its agencies that patrol the complex economy,
does not mean the 'enlargement of government' as some sort of autonomous
bureaucracy: it has meant the ascendancy of the corporations' man as a
political eminence.

During the New Deal the corporate chieftains joined the political directorate;
as of World War II they have come to dominate it. Long interlocked with
government, now they have moved into quite full direction of the economy of
the war effort and of the postwar era. This shift of the corporation
executives into the political directorate has accelerated the long-term
relegation of the professional politicians in the Congress to the middle
levels of power.

II. In so far as the structural clue to the power elite today lies in the
enlarged and military state, that clue becomes evident in the military
ascendancy. The warlords have gained decisive political relevance, and the
military structure of America is now in considerable part a political
structure. The seemingly permanent military threat places a premium on the
military and upon their control of men, materiel, money, and power; virtually
all political and economic actions are now judged in terms of military
definitions of reality: the higher warlords have ascended to a firm position
within the power elite of the fifth epoch.

In part at least this has resulted from one simple historical fact, pivotal
for the years since 1939: the focus of elite attention has been shifted from
domestic problems, centered in the 'thirties around slump, to international
problems, centered in the 'forties and 'fifties around war. Since the
governing apparatus of the United States has by long historic usage been
adapted to and shaped by domestic clash and balance, it has not, from any
angle, had suitable agencies and traditions for the handling of international
problems. Such formal democratic mechanics as had arisen in the century and a
half of national development prior to 1941, had not been extended to the
American handling of international affairs. It is, in considerable part, in
this vacuum that the power elite has grown.

III. In so far as the structural clue to the power elite today lies in the
economic order, that clue is the fact that the economy is at once a permanent-
war economy and a private-corporation economy. American capitalism is now in
considerable part a military capitalism, and the most important relation of
the big corporation to the state rests on the coincidence of interests between
military and corporate needs, as defined by warlords and corporate rich.
Within the elite as a whole, this coincidence of interest between the high
military and the corporate chieftains strengthens both of them and further
subordinates the role of the merely political men. Not politicians, but
corporate executives, sit with the military and plan the organization of war
effort.

* * *

The shape and meaning of the power elite today can be understood only when
these three sets of structural trends are seen at their point of coincidence:
the military capitalism of private corporations exists in a weakened and
formal democratic system containing a military order already quite political
in outlook and demeanor. Accordingly, at the top of this structure, the power
elite has been shaped by the coincidence of interest between those who control
the major means of production and those who control the newly enlarged means
of violence; from the decline of the professional politician and the rise to
explicit political command of the corporate chieftains and the professional
warlords; from the absence of any genuine civil service of skill and
integrity, independent of vested interests.

The power elite is composed of political, economic, and military men, but this
instituted elite is frequently in some tension: it comes together only on
certain coinciding points and only on certain occasions of 'crisis.' In the
long peace of the nineteenth century, the military were not in the high
councils of state, not of the political directorate, and neither were the
economic men--they made raids upon the state but they did not join its
directorate. During the 'thirties, the political man was ascendant. Now the
military and the corporate men are in top positions.

Of the three types of circle that compose the power elite today, it is the
military that has benefited the most in its enhanced power, although the
corporate circles have also become more explicitly entrenched in the more
public decision-making circles. It is the professional politician that has
lost the most, so much that in examining the events and decisions, one is
tempted to speak of a political vacuum in which the corporate rich and the
high warlord, in their coinciding interests, rule.

It should not be said that the three 'take turns' in carrying the initiative,
for the mechanics of the power elite are not often as deliberate as that would
imply. At time, of course, it is--as when political men, thinking they can
borrow the prestige of generals, find that they must pay for it, or, as when
during big slumps, economic men feel the need of a politician at once safe and
possessing vote appeal. Today all three are involved in virtually all widely
ramifying decisions. Which of the three types seems to lead depends upon 'the
tasks of the period' as they, the elite, define them. Just now. These tasks
center upon 'defense' and international affairs. Accordingly, as we have seen,
the military are ascendant in tow senses: as personnel and as justifying
ideology. That is why, just now, we can most easily specify the unity and the
shape of the power elite in terms of the military ascendancy.

But we must always be historically specific and open to complexities. The
simple Marxian view makes the big economic man the _real_ holder of power; the
simple liberal view makes the big political man the chief of the power system;
and there are some who would view the warlords as virtual dictators. Each of
these is an oversimplified view. It is to avoid them that we use the term
'power elite' rather than, for example, 'ruling class.' (1)

In so far as the power elite has come to wide public attention, it has done so
in terms of the 'military clique.' The power elite does, in fact, take its
current shape from the decisive entrance into it of the military. Their
presence and their ideology are its major legitimations, whenever the power
elite feels the need to provide any. But what is called the 'Washington
military clique' is not composed merely of military men, and it does not
prevail merely in Washington. Its members exist all over the country, and it
is a coalition of generals in the roles of corporation executives, of
politicians masquerading as admirals, of corporation executives acting like
politicians, of civil servants who become majors, of vice-admirals who are
also the assistants to a cabinet officer, who is himself, by the way, really a
member of the managerial elite.

Neither the idea of a 'ruling class' nor of a simple monolithic rise of
'bureaucratic politicians' nor of a 'military clique' is adequate. The power
elite today involves the often uneasy coincidence of economic, military, and
political power.

* * *

#### **3**

Even if our understanding were limited to these structural trends, we should
have grounds for believing the power elite a useful, indeed indispensable,
concept for the interpretation of what is going on at the topside of modern
American society. But we are not, of course, so limited: our conception of the
power elite does not need to rest only upon the correspondence of the
institutional hierarchies involved, or upon the many points at which their
shifting interests coincide. The power elite, as we conceive it, also rests
upon the similarity of its personnel, and their personal and official
relations with one another, upon their social and psychological affinities. In
order to grasp the personal and social basis of the power elite's unity, we
have first to remind ourselves of the facts of origin, career, and style of
life of each of the types of circle whose members compose the power elite.

The power elite is _not_ an aristocracy, which is to say that it is not a
political ruling group based upon a nobility of hereditary origin. It has no
compact basis in a small circle of great families whose members can and do
consistently occupy the top positions in the several higher circles which
overlap as the power elite. But such nobility is only one possible basis of
common origin. That it does not exist for the American elite does not mean
that members of this elite derive socially from the full range of strata
composing American society. They derive in substantial proportions from the
upper classes, both new and old, of local society and the metropolitan 400.
The bulk of the very rich, the corporate executives, the political outsiders,
the high military, derive from, at most, the upper third of the income and
occupational pyramids. Their fathers were at least of the professional and
business strata, and very frequently higher than that. They are native-born
Americans of native parents, primarily from urban areas, and , with the
expectations of the politicians among them, overwhelmingly from the East. They
are mainly Protestants, especially Episcopalian or Presbyterian. In general,
the higher the position, the greater the proportion of men within it who have
derived from and who maintain connections with the upper classes. The
generally similar origins of the members of the power elite are underlined and
carried further by the fact of their increasingly common educational routine.
Overwhelmingly college graduates, substantial proportions have attended Ivy
League colleges, although the education of the higher military, of course,
differs from that of other members of the power elite.

* * *

But what do these apparently simple facts about the social composition of the
higher circles really mean? In particular, what do they mean for any attempt
to understand the degree of unity, and the direction of policy and interest
that may prevail among these several circles? Perhaps it is best to put this
question in a deceptively simple way: in terms of origin and career, who or
what do these men at the top represent?

Of course, if they are elected politicians, they are supposed to represent
those who elected them; and, if they are appointed, they are supposed to
represent, indirectly, those who elected their appointers. But this is
recognized as something of an abstraction, as a rhetorical formula by which
all men of power in almost all systems of government nowadays justify their
power of decision. At times it may be true, both in the sense of their motives
and in the sense of who benefits from their decisions. Yet it would not be
wise in any power system merely to assume it.

The fact that members of the power elite come from near the top of the
nation's class and status levels does not mean that they are necessarily
'representative' of the top levels only. And if they were, as social types,
representative of a cross-section of the population, that would not mean that
a balanced democracy of interest and power would automatically be the going
political fact.

We cannot infer the direction of policy merely from the social origins and
careers of the policy-makers. The social and economic backgrounds of the men
of power do not tell us all that we need to know in order to understand the
distribution of social power. For: (1) Men from high places may be ideological
representatives of the poor and humble. (2) Men of humble origin, brightly
self-made, may energetically serve the most vested and inherited interests.
Moreover (3), not all men who effectively represent the interests of a stratum
need in any way belong to it or personally benefit by policies that further
its interests. Among the politicians, in short, there are sympathetic _agents_
of given groups, conscious and unconscious, paid and unpaid. Finally (4),
among the top decision-makers we find men who have been chosen for their
positions because of their 'expert knowledge.' These are some of the obvious
reasons why the social origins and careers of the power elite do not enable us
to infer the class interests and policy directions of a modern system of
power.

Do the high social origin and careers of the top men mean nothing, then, about
the distribution of power? By no means. They simply remind us that we must be
careful of any simple and direct inference from origin and career to political
character and policy, not that we must ignore them in our attempt at political
understanding. They simply mean that we must analyze the political psychology
and the actual decisions of the political directorate as well as its social
composition. And they mean, above all, that we should control, as we have done
here, any inference we make from the origin and careers of the political
actors by close understanding of the institutional landscape in which they act
out their drama. Otherwise we should be guilty of a rather simple-minded
biographical theory of society and history.

Just as we cannot rest the notion of the power elite solely upon the
institutional mechanics that lead to its formation, so we cannot rest the
notion solely upon the facts of the origin and career of its personnel. We
need both, and we have both--as well as other bases, among them that of the
status intermingling.

But it is not only the similarities of social origin, religious affiliation,
nativity, and education that are important to the psychological and social
affinities of the members of the power elite. Even if their recruitment and
formal training were more heterogeneous than they are, these men would still
be of quite homogeneous social type. For the most important set of facts about
a circle of men is the criteria of admission, of praise, of honor, of
promotion that prevails among them; if these are similar within a circle, then
they will tend as personalities to become similar. The circles that compose
the power elite do tend to have such codes and criteria in common. The co-
optation of the social types to which these common values lead is often more
important than any statistics of common origin and career that we might have
at hand.

* * *

There is a kind of reciprocal attraction among the fraternity of the
successful--not between each and every member of the circles of the high and
mighty, but between enough of them to insure a certain unity. On the slight
side, it is a sort of tacit, mutual admiration; in the strongest tie-ins, it
proceeds by intermarriage. And there are all grades and types of connection
between these extremes. Some overlaps certainly occur by means of cliques and
clubs, churches and schools.

If social origin and formal education in common tend to make the members of
the power elite more readily understood and trusted by one another, their
continued association further cements what they feel they have in common.
Members of the several higher circles know one another as personal friends and
even as neighbors; they mingle with one another on the golf course, in the
gentleman's clubs, at resorts, on transcontinental airplanes, and on ocean
liners. They meet at the estates of mutual friends, face each other in front
of the TV camera, or serve on the same philanthropic committee; and many are
sure to cross one another's path in the columns of newspapers, if not in the
exact cafes from which many of these columns originate. As we have seen, of
'The New 400' of cafe society, one chronicler has named forty-one members of
the very rich, ninety-three political leaders, and seventy-nine chief
executives of corporations. (2)

'I did not know, what I could not have dreamed,' Whittaker Chambers has
written, 'of the immense scope and power of Hiss' political alliances and his
social connections, which cut across all party lines and ran from the Supreme
Court to the Religious Society of Friends, from governors of states and
instructors in college faculties to the staff members of liberal magazines. In
the decade since I had last seen him, he had used his career, and, in
particular, his identification with the cause of peace through his part in
organizing the United Nations, to put down roots that made him one with the
matted forest floor of American upper class, enlightened middle class, liberal
and official life. His roots could not be disturbed without disturbing all the
roots on all sides of him.

The sphere of status has reflected the epochs of the power elite. In the third
epoch, for example, who could compete with big money? And in the fourth, with
big politicians, or even the bright young men of the New Deal? And in the
fifth, who can compete with the generals and the admirals and the corporate
officials now so sympathetically portrayed on the stage, in the novel, and on
the screen? Can one imagine _Executive Suite_ as a successful motion picture
in 1935? Or _The Caine Mutiny_?

The multiplicity of high-prestige organizations to which the elite usually
belong is revealed by even casual examination of the obituaries of the big
businessman, the high-prestige lawyer, the top general and admiral, the key
senator: usually, high-prestige church, business associations, plus high-
prestige clubs, and often plus military rank. In the course of their
lifetimes, the university president, the New York Stock Exchange chairman, the
head of the bank, the old West Pointer--mingle in the status sphere, within
which they easily renew old friendships and draw upon them in an effort to
understand through the experience of trusted others those contexts of power
and decision in which they have not personally moved.

In these diverse contexts, prestige accumulates in each of the higher circles,
and the members of each borrow status from one another. Their self-images are
fed by these accumulations and these borrowings, and accordingly, however
segmental a given man's role may seem, he comes to feel himself a 'diffuse' or
'generalized' man of the higher circles: a 'broad-gauge' man. Perhaps such
inside experience is one feature of what is meant by 'judgment.'

The key organizations, perhaps, are the major corporations themselves, for on
the boards of directors we find a heavy overlapping among the members of these
several elites. On the lighter side, again in the summer and winter resorts,
we find that, in an intricate series of overlapping circles; in the course of
time, each meets each or knows somebody who knows somebody who knows that one.

The higher members of the military, economic, and political orders are able
readily to take over one another's point of view, always in a sympathetic way,
and often in a knowledgeable way as well. They define one another as among
those who count, and who, accordingly, must be taken into account. Each of
them as a member of the power elite comes to incorporate into his own
integrity, his own honor, his own conscience, the viewpoint, the expectations,
the values of the others. If there are no common ideals and standards among
them that are based upon an explicitly aristocratic culture, that does not
mean that they do not feel responsibility to one another.

All the structural coincidence of their interests as well as the intricate,
psychological facts of their origins and their education, their careers and
their associations make possible the psychological affinities that prevail
among them, affinities that make it possible for them to say of one another:
He is, of course, one of us. And all this points to the basic, psychological
meaning of class consciousness. Nowhere in America is there as great a 'class
consciousness' as among the elite; nowhere is it organized as effectively as
among the power elite. For by class consciousness, as a psychological fact,
one means that the individual member of a 'class' accepts only those accepted
by his circle as among those who are significant to his own image of self.

Within the higher circles of the power elite, factions do exist; there are
conflicts of policy; individual ambitions do clash. There are still enough
divisions of importance within the Republican party, and even between
Republicans and Democrats, to make for different methods of operation. But
more powerful than these divisions are the internal discipline and the
community of interests that bind the power elite together, even across the
boundaries of nations at war.

* * *

#### **4**

Yet we must give due weight to the other side of the case which may not
question the facts bu only our interpretation of them. There is a set of
objections that will inevitably be made to our whole conception of the power
elite, but which has essentially to do with only the psychology of its
members. It might well be put by liberals or by conservatives in some such way
as this:

"To talk of a power elite--isn't this to characterize men by their origins and
associations? Isn't such characterization both unfair and untrue? Don't men
modify themselves, especially Americans such as these, as they rise in stature
to meet the demands of their jobs? Don't they arrive at a view and a line of
policy that represents, so far as they in their human weaknesses can know, the
interests of the nation as a whole? Aren't they merely honorable men who are
doing their duty?"

What are we to reply to these objections?

I. We are sure that they are honorable men. But what is honor? Honor can only
mean living up to a code that one believes to be honorable. There is no one
code upon which we are all agreed. That is why, if we are civilized men, we do
not kill off all of those with whom we disagree. The question is not: are
their codes of honor? The answer to that question is that they are the codes
of their circles, of those to whose opinions they defer. How could it be
otherwise? That is one meaning of the important truism that all men are human
and that all men are social creatures. As for sincerity, it can only be
disproved, never proved.

II. To the question of their adaptability--which means their capacity to
transcend the codes of conduct which, in their life's work and experience,
they have acquired--we must answer: Simply no, they cannot, at least not in
the handful of years most them have left. To expect that is to assume that
they are indeed strange and expedient: such flexibility would in fact involve
a violation of what we may rightly call their character and their integrity.
By the way, may it not be precisely because of the lack of such character and
integrity that earlier types of American politicians have not represented as
great a threat as do these men of character?

It would be an insult to the effective training of the military, and to their
indoctrination as well, to suppose that military officials shed their military
character and outlook upon changing from uniform to mufti. This background is
more important perhaps in the military case than in that of the corporate
executives, for the training of the career is deeper and more total.

'Lack of imagination,' Gerald W. Johnson has noted, 'is not to be confused
with lack of principle. On the contrary, an unimaginative man is often a man
of the highest principles. The trouble is that his principles conform to
Cornford's famous definition: "A principle is a rule of inaction giving valid
general reasons for not doing in a specific instance what to unprincipled
instinct would seem to be right." '

Would it not be ridiculous, for example, to believe seriously that, in
psychological fact, Charles Erwin Wilson represented anyone or any interest
other than those of the corporate world? This is not because he is dishonest;
on the contrary, it is because he is probably a man of solid integrity---as
sound as a dollar. He is a member of the professional corporation elite, just
as are his colleagues, in the government and out of it; he represents the
wealth of the higher corporate world; he represents its power; and he believes
sincerely in his oft-quoted remark that 'what is good for the United States is
good for the General Motors Corporation and vice versa.'

The revealing point about the pitiful hearings on the confirmation of such men
for political posts is not the cynicism toward the law and toward the
lawmakers on the middle levels of power which they display, nor their
reluctance to dispose of their personal stock. The interesting point is how
impossible it is for such men to divest themselves of their engagement with
the corporate world in general and with their own corporations in particular.
Not only their money, but their friends, their interests, their training--
their lives in short--are deeply involved in this world. The disposal of stock
is, of course, merely a purifying ritual. The point is not so much financial
or personal interests in a given corporation, but identification with the
corporate world. To ask a man suddenly to divest himself of these interests
and sensibilities is almost like asking a man to become a woman.

III. To the question of their patriotism, of their desire to serve the nation
as a whole, we must answer first that, like codes of honor, feelings of
patriotism and views of what is to the whole nation's good, are not ultimate
facts but matters upon which there exists a great variety of opinion.
Furthermore, patriotic opinions too are rooted in and are sustained by what a
man has become by virtue of how and with whom he has lived. This is no simple
mechanical determination of individual character by social conditions; it is
an intricate process, well established in the major tradition of modern social
study. One can only wonder why more social scientists do not use it
systematically in speculating about politics.

IV. The elite cannot be truly thought of as men who are merely doing their
duty. They are the ones who determine their duty, as well as the duties of
those beneath them. They are not merely following orders: they give the
orders. They are not merely 'bureaucrats': they command bureaucracies. They
may try to disguise these facts from other s and from themselves by appeals to
traditions of which they imagine themselves the instruments, but there are
many traditions, and they must choose which ones they will serve. They face
decisions for which there simply are no traditions.

Now, to what do these several answers add up? To the fact that we cannot
reason about public events and historical trends merely from knowledge about
the motives and character of the men or the small groups who sit in the seats
of the high and mighty. This fact, in turn, does not mean that we should be
intimidated by accusations that in taking up our problem in the way we have,
we are impugning the honor, the integrity, or the ability of those who are in
high office. For it is not, in the first instance, a question of individual
character; and if, in further instances, we find that it is, we should not
hesitate to say so plainly. In the meantime, we must judge men of power by the
standards of power, by what they do as decision-makers, and not by who they
are or what they may do in private life. Our interest is not in that: we are
interested in their policies and in the _consequences_ of their conduct of
office. We must remember that these men of the power elite now occupy the
strategic places in the structure of American society; that they command the
dominant institutions of a dominant nation; that, as a set of men, they are in
a position to make decisions with terrible consequences for the underlying
populations of the world.

* * *

#### **5**

Despite their social similarity and psychological affinities, the members of
the power elite do not constitute a club having a permanent membership with
fixed and formal boundaries. It is of the nature of the power elite that
within it there is a good deal of shifting about, and that it thus does not
consist of one small set of the same men in the same positions in the same
hierarchies. Because men know each other personally does not mean that among
them there is a unity of policy; and because they do not know each other
personally does not mean that among them there is a disunity. The conception
of the power elite does not rest, as I have repeatedly said, primarily upon
personal friendship.

As the requirements of the top places in each of the major hierarchies become
similar, the types of men occupying these roles at the top--by selection and
by training in the jobs--become similar. This is no mere deduction from
structure to personnel. That it is a fact is revealed by the heavy traffic
that has been going on between the three structures, often in very intricate
patterns. The chief executives, the warlords, and selected politicians came
into contact with one another in an intimate, working way during World War II;
after that war ended, they continued their associations, out of common
beliefs, social congeniality, and coinciding interests. Noticeable proportions
of top men from the military, the economic, and the political worlds have
during the last fifteen years occupied positions in one or both of the other
worlds: between these higher circles there is an interchangeability of
position, based formally upon the supposed transferability of 'executive
ability,' based in substance upon the cooptation by cliques of insiders. As
members of a power elite, many of those busy in this traffic have come to look
upon 'the government' as an umbrella under whose authority they do their work.

As the business between the big three increases in volume and importance, so
does the traffic in personnel. The very criteria for selecting men who will
rise come to embody this fact. The corporate commissar, dealing with the state
and its military, is wiser to choose a young man who has experienced the state
and its military than one who has not. The political director, often dependent
for his own political success upon corporate decisions and corporations, is
also wiser to choose a man with corporate experience. Thus, by virtue of the
very criterion of success, the interchange of personnel and the unity of the
power elite is increased.

Given the formal similarity of the three hierarchies in which the several
members of the elite spend their working lives, given the ramifications of the
decisions made in each upon the others, given the coincidence of interest that
prevails among them at many points, and given the administrative vacuum of the
American civilian state along with its enlargement of tasks--given these
trends of structure, and adding to them the psychological affinities we have
noted--we should indeed be surprised were we to find that men said to be
skilled in administrative contacts and full of organizing ability would fail
to do more than get in touch with one another. They have, of course, done much
more than that: increasingly, they assume positions in one another's domains.

The unity revealed by the interchangeability of top roles rests upon the
parallel development of the top jobs in each of the big three domains. The
interchange occurs most frequently at the points of their coinciding interest,
as between regulatory agency and the regulated industry; contracting agency
and contractor. And, as we shall see, it leads to coordinations that are more
explicit, and even formal.

* * *

The inner core of the power elite consists, first, of those who interchange
commanding roles at the top of one dominant institutional order with those in
another: the admiral who is also a banker and a lawyer and who heads up an
important federal commission; the corporation executive whose company was one
of the two or three leading war materiel producers who is now the Secretary of
Defense; the wartime general who dons civilian clothes to sit on the political
directorate and then becomes a member of the board of directors of a leading
economic corporation.

Although the executive who becomes a general, the general who becomes a
statesman, the statesman who becomes a banker, see much more than ordinary men
in their ordinary environments, still the perspectives of even such men often
remain tied to their dominant locales. In their very career, however, they
interchange roles within the big three and thus readily transcend the
particularity of interest in any one of these institutional milieux. By their
very careers and activities, they lace the three types of milieux together.
They are, accordingly, the core members of the power elite.

These men are not necessarily familiar with every major arena of power. We
refer to one man who moves in and between perhaps two circles--say the
industrial and the military--and to another man who moves in the military and
the political, and to a third who moves in the political as well as among
opinion-makers. These in-between types most closely display our image of the
power elite's structure and operation, even of behind-the-scenes operations.
To the extent that there is any 'invisible elite,' these advisory and liaison
types are its core. Even if--as I believe to be very likely--many of them are,
at least in the first part of their careers, 'agents' of the various elites
rather than themselves elite, it is they who are most active in organizing the
several top milieux into a structure of power and maintaining it.

The inner core of the power elite also includes men of the higher legal and
financial type from the great law factories and investment firms, who are
almost professional go-betweens of economic, political and military affairs,
and who thus act to unify the power elite. The corporation lawyer and the
investment banker perform the functions of the 'go-between' effectively and
powerfully. By the nature of their work, they transcend the narrower milieu of
any one industry, and accordingly are in a position to speak and act for the
corporate world or at least sizable sectors of it. The corporation lawyer is a
key link between the economic and military and political areas; the investment
banker is a key organizer and unifier of the corporate world and a person well
versed in spending the huge amounts of money the American military
establishment now ponders. When you get a lawyer who handles the legal work of
investment bankers you get a key member of the power elite.

During the Democratic era, one link between private corporate organizations
and governmental institutions was the investment house of Dillon, Read. From
it came such men as James Forrestal and Charles F. Detmar, Jr.; Ferdinand
Eberstadt had once been a partner in it before he branched out into his own
investment house from which came other men to political and military circles.
Republican administrations seem to favor the investment firm of Kuhn, Loeb and
the advertising firm of Batten, Barton, Durstine and Osborn.

Regardless of administrations, there is always the law firm of Sullivan and
Cromwell. Mid-West investment banker Cyrus Eaton has said that 'Arthur H.
Dean, a senior partner of Sullivan  & Cromwell of No. 48 Wall Street, was one
of those who assisted in the drafting of the Securities Act of 1933, the first
of the series of bills passed to regulate the capital markets. He and his
firm, which is reputed to be the largest in the United States, have maintained
close relations with the SEC since its creation, and theirs is the dominating
influence on the Commission.

There is also the third largest bank in the United States: the Chase National
Bank of New York (now Chase-Manhattan). Regardless of political
administration, executive of this bank and those of the International Bank of
Reconstruction and Development have changed positions: John L. McCloy, who
became Chairman of the Chase National in 1953, is a former president of the
World Bank; and his successor to the presidency of the World Bank was a former
senior vice-president of the Chase National Bank. And in 1953, the president
of the Chase National Bank, Winthrop W. Aldrich, had left to become Ambassador
to Great Britain.

* * *

The outermost fringes of the power elite--which change more than its core--
consist of 'those who count' even though they may not be 'in' on given
decisions of consequence nor in their career move between the hierarchies.
Each member of the power elite need not be a man who personally decides every
decision that is to be ascribed to the power elite. Each member, in the
decisions that he does make, takes the others seriously into account. They not
only ;make decisions in the several major areas of war and peace; they are the
men who, in decisions in which they take no direct part, are taken into
decisive account by those who are directly in charge.

On the fringes and below them, somewhat to the side of the lower echelons, the
power elite fades off into the middle levels of power, into the rank and file
of the Congress, the pressure groups that are not vested in the power itself,
as well as a multiplicity of regional and state and local interests. If all
the men on the middle levels are not among those who count, they sometimes
must be taken into account, handled, cajoled, broken or raised to higher
circles.

When the power elite find that in order to get things done they must reach
below their own realms--as is the case when it is necessary to get bills
passed through Congress--they themselves must exert some pressure. But among
the power elite, the name for such high-level lobbying is 'liaison work.'
There are 'liaison' military men with Congress, with certain wayward sections
of industry, with practically every important element not directly concerned
with the power elite. The two men on the White House staff who are _named_
'liaison' men are both experienced in military matters; one of them is a
former investment banker and lawyer as well as a general.

Not the trade associations but the higher cliques of lawyers and investment
bankers are the active political heads of the corporate rich and the members
of the power elite. 'While it is generally assumed that the national
associations carry tremendous weight in formulating public opinion and
directing the course of national policy, there is some evidence to indicate
that interaction between associations on a formal level is not a very tight-
knit affair. The general tendency within associations seems to be to stimulate
activities around the specific interests of the organization, and more effort
is made to educate its members rather than to spend much time in trying to
influence other associations on the issue at hand . . . As media for stating
and re-stating the overall value structure of the nation they (the trade
associations) are important. . . But when issues are firmly drawn, individuals
related to the larger corporate interests are called upon to exert pressure in
the proper places at the strategic time. The national associations may act as
media for coordinating such pressures, but a great volume of
intercommunication between members at the apex of power of the larger
corporate interests seems to be the decisive factor in final policy
determination.

Conventional 'lobbying,' carried on by trade associations, still exists,
although it usually concerns the middle levels of power--usually being
targeted at Congress and, of course, its own rank and file members. The
important function of the National Association of Manufacturers, for example,
is less directly to influence policy than to reveal to small businessmen that
their interests are the same as those of larger businesses. But there is also
'high-level lobbying.' All over the country the corporate leaders are drawn
into the circle of the high military and political through personal
friendship, trade and professional associations and their various
subcommittees, prestige clubs, open political affiliation, and customer
relationships. "There is . . . an awareness among these power leaders,' one
first-hand investigator of such executive cliques has asserted, 'of many of
the current major policy issues before the nation such as keeping taxes down,
turning all productive operations over to private enterprises, increasing
foreign trade, keeping governmental welfare and other domestic activities to a
minimum, and strengthening and maintaining the hold of the current party in
power nationally.'

There are, in fact, cliques of corporate executives who are more important as
informal opinion leaders in the top echelons of corporate, military, and
political power than as actual participants in military and political
organizations. Inside military circles and inside political circles and 'on
the sidelines' in the economic area, these circles and cliques of corporation
executives are in on most all major decisions regardless of topic. And what is
important about all this high-level lobbying is that it is done within the
confines of that elite.

* * *

#### **

6**

The conception of the power elite and of its unity rests upon the
corresponding developments and the coincidence of interests among economic,
political, and military organizations. It also rests upon the similarity of
origin and outlook, and the social and personal intermingling of the top
circles from each of these dominant hierarchies. This conjunction of
institutional and psychological forces, in turn, is revealed by the heavy
personnel traffic within and between the big three institutional orders, as
well as by the rise of go-betweens as in the high-level lobbying. The
conception of the power elite, accordingly, does _not_ rest upon the
assumption that American history since the origins of World War II must be
understood as a secret plot, or as a great and coordinated conspiracy of the
members of this elite. The conception rests upon quite impersonal grounds.

There is, however, little doubt that the American power elite--which contains,
we are told, some of 'the greatest organizers in the world'--has also planned
and has plotted. The rise of the elite, as we have already made clear, was not
and could not have been caused by a plot; and the tenability of the conception
does not rest upon the existence of any secret or any publicly known
organization. But, once the conjunction of structural trend and of the
personal will to utilize it gave rise to the power elite, then plans and
programs did occur to its members and indeed it is not possible to interpret
many events and official policies of the fifth epoch without reference to the
power elite. "There is a great difference," Richard Hofstadter has remarked,
"between locating conspiracies _in_ history and saying that history _is_ , in
effect a conspiracy . . ."

The structural trends of institutions become defined as opportunities by those
who occupy their command posts. Once such opportunities are recognized, men
may avail themselves of them. Certain types of men from each of the dominant
institutional areas, more far-sighted than other, have actively promoted the
liaison before it took its truly modern shape. They have often done so for
reasons not shared by their partners, although not objected to by them either;
and often the outcome of their liaison has had consequences which none of them
foresaw, much less shaped, and which only later in the course of development
came under explicit control. Only after it was well under way did most of its
members find themselves part of it and become gladdened, although sometimes
also worried, by this fact. But once the coordination is a going concern, new
men come readily into it and assume its existence without question.

So far as explicit organization--conspiratorial or not--is concerned, the
power elite, by its very nature, is more likely to use existing organizations,
working within and between them, than to set up explicit organizations whose
membership is strictly limited to its own members. But if there is no
machinery in existence to ensure, for example, that military and political
factors will be balanced in decisions made, they will invent such machinery
and use it, as with the National Security Council. Moreover, in a formally
democratic polity, the aims and the powers of the various elements of this
elite are further supported by an aspect of the permanent war economy: the
assumption that the security of the nation supposedly rests upon great secrecy
of plan and intent. Many higher events that would reveal the working of the
power elite can be withheld from public knowledge under the guise of secrecy.
With the wide secrecy covering their operations and decisions, the power elite
can make their intentions, operations, and further consolidation. Any secrecy
that is imposed upon those in positions to observe high decision-makers
clearly works for and not against the operations of the power elite.

There is accordingly reason to suspect--but by the nature of the case, no
proof--that the power elite is not altogether 'surfaced.' There is nothing
hidden about it, although its activities are not publicized. As an elite, it
is not organized, although its members often know one another, seem quite
naturally to work together, and share many organizations in common. There is
nothing conspiratorial about it, although its decisions are often publicly
unknown and its mode of operation manipulative rather than explicit.

It is not that the elite 'believe in' a compact elite behind the scenes and a
mass down below. It is not put in that language. It is just that the people
are of necessity confused and must, like trusting children, place all the new
world of foreign policy and strategy and executive action in the hands of
experts. It is just that everyone knows somebody has got to run the show, and
that somebody usually does. Others do not really care anyway, and besides,
they do not know how. So the gap between the two types gets wider.

* * *

When crises are defined as total, and as seemingly permanent, the consequences
of decision become total, and the decisions in each major area of life come to
be integrated and total. Up to a point, these consequences for other
institutional orders can be assessed; beyond such points, chances have to be
taken. It is then that the felt scarcity of trained and imaginative judgment
leads to plaintive feelings among executives about the shortage of qualified
successors in political, military, and economic life. This feeling, in turn,
leads to an increasing concern with the training of successors who could take
over as older men of power retire. In each area, there slowly arises a new
generation which has grown up in an age of coordinated decisions.

In each of the elite circles, we have noticed this concern to recruit and to
train successors as 'broad-gauge' men, that is, as men capable of making
decisions that involve institutional areas other than their own. The chief
executives have set up formal recruitment and training programs to man the
corporate world as virtually a state within a state. Recruitment and training
for the military elite has long been rigidly professionalized, but has now
come to include educational routines of a sort which the remnants of older
generals and admirals consider quite nonsensical.

Only the political order, with its absence of a genuine civil service. Has
lagged behind, creating an administrative vacuum into which military
bureaucrats and corporate outsiders have been drawn. But even in this domain,
since World War II, there have been repeated attempts, by elite men of such
vision as the late James Forrestal's, to inaugurate a career service that
would include periods in the corporate world as well as in the governmental.

What is lacking is a truly common elite program of recruitment and training;
for the prep school, Ivy League College, and law school sequence of the
metropolitan 400 is not up to the demands now made upon members of the power
elite. (3) Britishers, such as Field Marshall Viscount Montgomery, well aware
of this lack, recently urged the adoption of a system 'under which a minority
of high-caliber young students could be separated from the mediocre and given
the best education possible to supply the country with leadership.' His
proposal is echoed, in various forms, by many who accept his criticism of 'the
American theory of public education on the ground that it is ill-suited to
produce the "elite" group of leaders . . . this country needs to fulfill its
obligations of world leadership.'

In part these demands reflect the unstated need to transcend recruitment on
the sole basis of economic success, especially since it is suspect as often
involving the higher immorality; in part it reflects the stated need to have
men who, as Viscount Montgomery says, know 'the meaning of discipline.' But
above all these demands reflect the at least vague consciousness on the part
of the power elite themselves that the age of coordinated decisions, entailing
a newly enormous range of consequences, requires a power elite that is of a
new caliber. In so far as the sweep of matters which go into the making of
decisions is vast and interrelated, the information needed for judgments
complex and requiring particularized knowledge, the men in charge will not
only call upon one another; they will try to train their successors for the
work at hand. These new men will grow up as men of power within the
coordination of economic and political and military decision.

* * *

#### **7**

The idea of the power elite rests upon and enables us to make sense of (1) the
decisive institutional trends that characterize the structure of our epoch, in
particular, the military ascendancy in a privately incorporated economy, and
more broadly, the several coincidences of objective interests between
economic, military, and political institutions; (2) the social similarities
and the psychological affinities of the men who occupy the command posts of
these structures, in particular the increased interchangeability of the top
positions in each of them and the increased traffic between these orders in
the careers of men of power; (3) the ramifications, to the point of virtual
totality, of the kind of decisions that are made at the top, and the rise to
power of a s

