Doug Guthrie  
[doug.guthrie@nyu.edu](mailto:doug.guthrie@nyu.edu)

**World Cultures: Modern China**

````` Office hours: M, W, 1:30-2:30 and by appointment  
Department of Sociology, 269 Mercer, office 406

* * *

Syllabus  
Mid-term Paper Topics  
Final Exam Questions

**Syllabus**

**_Introduction_**

This course introduces some of the major events, issues, and themes of modern
Chinese society. The course is structured not as a historical chronology, but
as a sampling of approaches to Chinese society from various analytical
perspectives. Grading for the course will be based on three criteria: (1)
Class assignments and section participation (33% of grade); (2) a mid-term
paper (33% of grade); and (3) a final exam (33% of grade).

**_Texts_**

Frederick Mote, _Intellectual Foundations of China_ , New York: Knopf (1971).

Jonathan Spence, _The Search for Modern China_ , New York: WW Norton (1990).

There will also be a reader for the course. Books and Reader can be found at
the University Bookstore. The Reader will also be on reserve at Bobst Library.
An asterisk (*) beside an author indicates an article in the Reader.

**_A note on assignments_** __: Each week (unless otherwise noted) there will
be an assignment due at the beginning of the second class. These assignments
are generally responses to the readings, but they will be organized in
different ways and will ask different questions of you. There are two purposes
to these assignments: (1) they will help you stay engaged with and think
through the readings from a "sociological" and analytical perspective; (2)
they will help me to see the extent to which the analytical perspectives of
the class are sinking in. Thus, to successfully complete these assignments,
you should be striving to mirror the analytical approach to the study of
Chinese society we will be taking throughout the course. You should be
thinking about how and why particular social phenomena have come to pass, what
the causal reasoning behind these phenomena are, what their implications are,
and what potential alternative explanations you can think of from the
explanations we will be reading. Answers to assignments should be short--
generally they should not be more than a page or about 500 words (remember, I
have to read 100 of these)--but they should reflect deep thought about the
topics presented in the week's readings. They will be graded based upon the
extent to which you have engaged with the week's topic from an analytical
point of view.

**Reading Schedule**

_I. Introduction_

Week 1, class 2 (Wed. 9/9): Introduction: A Sociological Approach to History,
Culture, and Politics in China

Week 2, class 1 (Mon. 9/15): Classical Background: Confucianism

Readings: Mote, chapters 1-3.

Week 2, class 2: Classical Background: The Dynastic Periods

Readings: Mote, chapters 4, 6-7.

Assignment 1: Write a response to the readings that explores (1) the ways that
Confucianism forms a set of religious as well as political ideas (2) how it
translates into a "world view" and (3) what it means to think of Confucianism
as one (among a few other) basis for Chinese culture. Try to think about what
it means to think of a system of ideas as the basis for a culture. What does
this imply about the system of ideas? What does it imply about the notion of
culture? How do these "intellectual foundations" relate to your ideas about
Chinese culture?

**NOTE: remember, as with all assignments, you do not necessarily have to
answer all (or even any) of these questions; the important thing is to think
analytically about the reading. Try to use these questions as a way of
positioning your response to the reading.**

_II. Upheaval and Crisis_

Week 3, class 1 (Mon. 9/22): The Western Encroachment and the Opium War

Readings: Spence, chapters 6-7.

Week 3, class 2: The Crisis Within

Readings: Spence, chapters 8-9.

Assignment 2: Write a response to Spence's account of the Opium War that
considers a view of history that begins with the "Western encroachment" as a
basis for the course of Chinese history.

**HINT: Think about (a question the extent to which) the idea that the West
had a significant impact on the course of modern Chinese history.**

Week 4, class 1 (Mon. 9/29): The Nationalist Revolution

Readings: Spence, chapters 11-12, 14.

Week 4, class 2: World War II and the Communist Revolution

Readings: Spence, chapters 17-18.

Assignment 3: Write a response to the readings that compares the political
movements of the Nationalist Revolution and the Communist Revolution.

Week 5, class 1 (Mon. 10/6): The Cultural Revolution

Readings: Spence, pp. 596-617.

Movie: _To Live_ , Part I

Week 5, class 2: The Cultural Revolution

Movie: _To Live_ , Part II

Assignment 4: Think about the real-life implications of the Cultural
Revolution: How did it affect the lives of citizens in Communist China? Think
about the comparison between the politically driven aspects of this movement
and its implications for Chinese citizens.

_III. The Economy_

Week 6, class 1 (Mon. 10/13): Economic Policy in Mao's China

Readings: Spence, pp. 541-582.

Week 6, class 2: Economic Policy in Reform Era China

Readings: Spence, chapters 667-82, chapter 24; Field*.

Assignment 5: Compare and contrast some of the economic policies in Mao's
China and reform-era (post 1979) China. What were some implications of each of
these sets of economic policies?

Week 7, class 1 (Mon. 10/20): China in the World Economy

Readings: Yang*; Lardy*.

Week 7, class 2: Doing Business in China Today

Readings: Wank*.

Assignment 6: Consider China as a part of the world economy. Discuss three
issues that define China's involvement in the world economy?

_IV. Class and Stratification_

Week 8, class 1 (Mon. 10/27): Class and Stratification in Mao's China

Readings: Walder*.

Week 8, class 2: Changing Class Structure in Reform-Era China

Readings: Parish and Michelson*; Walder*.

Assignment 7: Let's think about class and the economic reforms: what is the
best way to analyze social change in the era of economic reforms? Does it make
the most sense to think about Party membership and income? What other
indicators might we consider? What are the flaws in current approaches?

Week 9, class 1 (Mon. 11/2): Education and Intellectuals in China

Readings: Gu*; Cherrington*.

Week 9, class 2: The Emergence of a New Middle Class: Causes and Implications

Readings: Odgaard*.

Paper due.

_V. Democracy and Social Movements in China_

Week 10, class 1 (Mon. 11/10): The May 4th Movement

Readings: Spence, pp. 310-319.

Week 10, class 2: Beijing Spring and Tiananmen

Readings: Spence, pp. 659-66, chapter 25.

Week 11, class 1 (Mon. 11/17): Tiananmen

Readings: Guthrie*.

Movie: The Gate of Heavenly Peace

Week 11, class 2: Foreign Investment or International Pressure: The Human
Rights Debate

Readings: Kueh*.

Assignment 8: Consider the May 4th Movement and the Tiananmen movement: what
did the two groups have in common; what were the major differences; how did
the former influence the latter?

_VI. The Institutional Structure of Chinese Society_

Week 12, class 1 (Mon. 11/23): Social Institutions: Family

Readings: Oberschall*.

Week 12, class 2: Social Institutions: The State

Readings: Zhou*.

Assignment 9: Social institutions (e.g., the family, the State) have profound
implications for the structure of social life in Chinese society. Discuss two
ways that social institutions matter in Chinese society and reflect upon the
ways that these differ from the social institutions of American society.

Week 13, class 1 (Mon. 11/30): The Network Debate

Readings: Bian*; Guthrie*.

Week 13, class 2: Chinese Characteristics?

Readings: Tobin et al., chapter 3*.

_VII. Culture_

Week 14, class 1 (Mon. 12/7): From Lu Xun to Tiananmen

Readings: Bei Dao, selected poems*.

Assignment 10: Drawing on the readings of the previous week (week 13) as well
as those from this week, think what it means to be Chinese: is there something
essential to the notion of Chinese culture? What does it mean to contrast
Chinese culture with an institutional analysis of Chinese society? How does
this fit with modern notions of contemporary culture (e.g. Lu Xun and Bei
Dao)?

Week 14, class 2: Avant-Garde Art in China

Readings: Yang*.

Week 15, class 1 (Mon. 12/14): Culture and Capitalism; also Class Summary

Readings: Karmel*; Martin*.

**LIST OF READINGS**

Bei Dao, _The August Sleepwalker_ , New York: New Directions (1988).

Yanjie Bian, "Guanxi and the Allocation of Urban Jobs in China." _China
Quarterly_ 140(1994): 971-99.

R. Cherrington, "Generational Issues in China: A Case Study of the 1980s
Generation of Young Intellectuals," _British Journal of Sociology_ 48(1997):
302-320.

Robert Field, "Changes in Chinese Industry since 1978," _China Quarterly_
100(1984): 742-61.

X. Gu, "The Economics Weekly: The Public Space and the Voices of Chinese
Independent Intellectuals." _China Quarterly_ 147(1996): 860-88

Doug Guthrie, "Political Theater and Student Organizations in the 1989 Chinese
Movement: A Multivariate Analysis of Tiananmen," _Sociological Forum_
10(1995): 419-54.

Doug Guthrie, "The Declining Significance of Guanxi in China's Economic
Transition," _China Quarterly_ (June, 1998).

S. Karmel, "Emerging Securities Markets in China: Capitalism with Chinese
Characteristics," _China Quarterly_ 140(1994): 1105-1120.

Y. Kueh, "Foreign Investment and Economic Change in China," _China Quarterly_
131(1992): 627-90.

A. Martin, "Makers, Buyers, and Users: Consumerism as a Material Culture
Framework," _Winterthur Portfolio: A Journal of American Material Culture_
28(1993): 141-57.

Nicholas Lardy, "China in the World Economy," Washington, D.C.: Institute for
International Economics (1994).

Frederick Mote, _Intellectual Foundations of China_ , New York: Knopf (1971).

Anthony Oberschall, "The Great Transition: China, Hungary, and Sociology Exit
Socialism into the Market," _American Journal of Sociology_ 101: 1028-41.

O. Odgaard, "Entrepreneurs and Elite Formation in Rural China," _Australian
Journal of Chinese Affairs_ 28(1992): 89-108.

William Parish and Ethan Michelson, "Politics and Markets: Dual
Transformations," _American Journal of Sociology_ 4(1996): 1042-59.

Jonathan Spence, _The Search for Modern China_ , New York: WW Norton (1990).

Joseph Tobin David Y.H. Wu, and Dana H. Davidson, _Preschool in Three
Cultures: Japan, China, and the United States_ , New Haven: Yale University
Press (1989).

Andrew Walder, "Property Rights and Stratification in Socialist Redistrubitive
Economies," _American Sociological Review_ 57(1992): 524-39.

Andrew Walder, "Career Mobility and the Communist Political Order," _American
Sociological Review_ 60(1995): 309-28.

D.L Wank, "The Institutional Process of Market Clientelism: Guanxi and Private
Business in a South China City," _China Quarterly_ 147(1996): 820-38.

D. Yang, "China Adjusts to the World Economy: The Political Economy of China's
Coastal Development Strategy," _Pacific Affairs_ 64(1991): 42-64.

X. Yang, "Maoist Discourse, Trauma, and Chinese Avant-Garde Literature,"
_American Imago_ 51(1994): 229-45.

Xueguang Zhou, "Unorganized Interests and Collective Action in Communist
China," _American Sociological Review_ 58(1993): 54-73.

* * *

**Midterm Paper** ****

Choose one of the three topics and write a paper that explores the issues in
thorough fashion (6-8 pages, double-spaced; the paper can be longer, but
anything beyond 10 pages will not be read). Be sure to draw upon the readings
where appropriate (failure to draw upon the readings will count against your
grade). No outside reading or research is necessary, though you may want to
read additional chapters of Spence to flesh out additional historical factors
or to draw upon different historical examples to support the argument you wish
to make. Also be sure to think about these issues analytically: think about
the ways that culture, a Chinese world view, and the social and economic
structure of Chinese society fit into the topic you are exploring; think about
and evaluate these issues from multiple points of view; support your arguments
with historical evidence. You may be a skeptic about culture, or you might
think that culture is among the most important factors shaping the course of
Chinese history; in either case, however, you must support your perspective
and argument with evidence from the readings. While you should be sure to
answer all of the questions in each topic, you must also be sure to write this
paper as a formal essay and not simply answers to each individual question.
You must construct an argument that takes into account the full range of
questions and themes embedded in each topic in a coherent way.

Topic I

Choose two moments of upheaval and crisis in modern China. Compare these two
historical moments in terms of their cultural, economic, and structural
causes. How are they the same? How are they different? What do they tell us
about the role of culture in modern Chinese history? What do they tell us
about the role of economic interests and the structure of society in the
course of history?

Topic II

Think about communism as an economic and political system. What are the
problems with this political system from an individual point of view? Is
Chinese society better equipped to adopt this economic and political system
than other societies? What are the cultural and structural sides of this
argument? {Hint: think about what communism means for individual interests. Is
Chinese culture better able to incorporate this system than other societies?
Has communism been a success or failure in Chinese society? Why?}

Topic III

The first two decades of the People's Republic of China was a period that went
from extreme hope to extreme despair for many people. Examine this period in
cultural, political, and economic terms. What kinds of insights do these
periods give us about the course of modern Chinese history? What do they tell
us about Chinese politics and culture?

* * *

Essay Questions for Final Exam

For the final exam, you will be required to choose either 3 or 4 questions for
which you will develop essay answers. Of the questions listed below, somewhere
between 5 and 8 will be listed as options on the exam; from this list of
questions, one will be required and the others can be chosen according to your
preferences.

1. Drawing primarily on the work of Fredrick Mote, discuss the ways that Confucianism and Taoism have shaped Chinese culture. Are the ideas that lie at the center of each of these philosophies central to Chinese culture? If yes, in what ways? Discuss three specific examples of the ways that the influence of one or both of these philosophies can be observed over the course of modern Chinese history.

2. Consider the following passage from _The Book of Changes_. Analyze the passage, examining how it relates to (1) ancient China and (2) Chinese culture more generally. {Hint: think about the implications of the ancients' views of creation, the relationship between humans and nature, and the implications these views had for the evolution of Chinese culture.}

_The Judgement / Duration. Success. No blame. / Perseverance furthers. / It
furthers one to have somewhere to go. / The Image / Thunder and wind: the
image of duration. / Thus the superior man stands firm / And does not change
his direction._

3. Consider the following passage from Lucian Pye's _The Mandarin and the Cadre_. Discuss the intent and implications of this statement from a cultural standpoint. What is the notion of Chinese culture here? Do you agree with it? Draw on specific examples from modern Chinese history.

_"In the case of Chinese political culture, the ideal of the omnipotence of
authority has been passed from generation to generation by the imperative of
filial piety, the rule of that absolute obedience and unquestioning deference
shall be shown to one's elders and more particularly to one's father The
Confucian ideals of leadership and followership have thus been retained in
Chinese culture not just by the power of written texts but also by living
practices of authority and obedience in family situations. The automatic
reactions of conformity and deference to superiors have generally been well
established before the Chinese child leaves home"_ (Lucian Pye, _The Mandarin
and the Cadre_ , pp. 138-39).

4. The fall of the Qing Dynasty in the beginning of the 20th Century was a long time in the making. Examine the period from the first Opium War through the end of the 19th Century in terms of the crisis of the Qing Dynasty.

5. For a short time the Nationalist and Communist movements converged. Discuss the origins of and reasons for this alliance as well as the reasons for its dissolution.

6. On October 1, 1949, Mao Zedong and the Communist Party founded the People's Republic of China. This ushered in a new era of economic and social policy in China. Discuss the radical ways the country was transformed in the 1950s both politically, economically, and socially.

7. The Cultural Revolution was a political upheaval that shaped an entire generation of Chinese youth. Discuss the political origins of the Cultural Revolution (i.e., its causes) as well as the impact it had on this generation of Chinese youth.

8. Compare the economic policies of China under Mao Zedong with those of the reform era under Deng Xiaoping. {Hint: you should discuss both industrial and agricultural policies in both periods.}

9. Examine the issue of class in the Maoist era. Be sure to discuss the political as well as economic aspects of class in pre-reform China. How are the issues of class and social mobility changing in the reform era? {Note: Familiarity with Walder's articles is an essential part of answering this question.}

10. There are multiple causes of the Tiananmen movement. However, different arguments emphasize different aspects of social mobilization and collective action. Compare the approaches of Guthrie (in the article, as well as in the ideas I presented in lecture) with those of Zhou to examine the emergence of the Tiananmen movement in China. How do we explain this moment of collective action in China? What were the roles of the state structure, cultural symbols, and the student activists?

11. All China scholars agree on the existence of guanxi in Chinese society. However, there is disagreement over the actual causes of guanxi. The different views can basically be divided into cultural and structural views of the causes of guanxi. Discuss the differences in these approaches. Compare and evaluate each approach.

12. Consider Bei Dao's poem "The Answer", which was written in 1976. Analyze this poem in terms of its relation to the history of the PRC. How is Bei Dao's writing indicative of the social and political changes that swept across the PRC in the 1960s and 1970s? What does this poetry tell us about the generation of Chinese citizens that Bei Dao represents? According to Bonnie McDougall, "The writing of such poetry was itself an unforgivable act of political defiance [This poem] is a clear expression of [Bei Dao's] personal challenge to the political leadership." Why was the writing of this poetry an act of political defiance, and how does this poem challenge the political leadership? Be specific with examples from the text.

_The Answer_

Debasement is the password of the base,  
Nobility the epitaph of the noble.  
See how the gilded sky is covered  
With the drifting twisted shadows of the dead.

The Ice Age is over now,  
Why is there ice everywhere?  
The Cape of Good Hope has been discovered,  
Why do a thousand sails contest the Dead Sea?

I came into this world  
Bringing only paper, rope, a shadow,  
To proclaim before the judgement  
The voice that has been judged:

Let me tell you, world,  
I--do--not--believe!  
If a thousand challengers lie beneath your feet,  
Count me as number one thousand and one.

I don't believe the sky is blue;  
I don't believe in thunder's echoes;  
I don't believe that dreams are false;  
I don't believe that death has no revenge.

If the sea is destined to breach the dikes  
Let all the brackish water pour into my heart;  
If the land is destined to rise  
Let humanity choose a peak for existence again.

A new conjunction and glimmering stars  
Adorn the unobstructed sky now:  
They are the pictographs of five thousand years.  
They are the watchful eyes of future generations.  
    
    
  Top of this page.

