HY102 Western Civilization II  
|  Fall Semester 1996  
  
---|---  
Professor Paul Steeves  
|  Tuesday and Thursday, 6:00-7:15 p.m.  
  
Office: 310 Elizabeth  
|  Office Hours: 2:30 daily and by appointment  
  
  
* * *

This is the syllabus for the course. The subjects covered in it are the
following:

> Grading  
>  Participation  
>  Writing Exercises  
>  Examinations  
>  Assignments  
>  [Calendar of Assignments](hy102calendar.html)  
>

Remember that whenever you see a piece of text underlined and in a distinctive
color, usually blue, it is a link to some other location. You can point to it
and click and arrive at some new location, which might be of interest to you.

In this class we will be studying the changes that have happened within the
human societies of Europe since the middle of the seventeenth century and the
influence that the civilization of those societies exerted on other parts of
the world.

For this class you will need two books and one compact disk:  

> _The Western Heritage, Brief Edition_ , volume 2, by Donald Kagan, Steven
Ozment, and Frank Turner  
>  _History on the Internet_ , by Andrew Stull  
>  _The Western Heritage, Interactive Edition_ , by Kagan, et al.

* * *

**Grading in this course:** At the end of the semester the instructor gives
the student a grade that indicates the instructor's evaluation of that
particular student's work in the class, based on the standard of Stetson
University's definition of grades:

> "Grades . . . represent the instructor's final estimate of the student's
performance in a course. The grade of A (+ or -) may be interpreted to mean
that the instructor recognizes exceptional capacity and exceptional
performance. The grade of B (+ or -) signifies that the student has, for any
combination of reasons, gained a significantly more effective command of
material than is generally expected in the course. The grade of C or C+ is the
instructor's certification that the student has demonstrated the required
mastery of the material." ( _Stetson University Bulletin, 1996-1997_ , p. 37).

In its most natural interpretation, this statement is understood to mean that
C is the grade that most students should expect to earn. To merit a higher
grade, the student will take the initiative to find and master more material
than is required formally and to show evidence of doing extraordinary work.
That something extra could include demonstration of such things as mastering
alternative interpretations of historical questions, helpfulness toward other
students, active intellectual curiosity in class, acute critical thinking, and
creative perspectives on concepts.

In this course, your "required mastery comprises three components:  

> 1\. You must participate as an active collaborator in the course.  
>  2\. You must demonstrate that you are improving your ability to communicate
effectively in writing.  
>  3\. You must show that you have learned some information about European
history.

The instructor considers these three parts of education to be approximately
equal in their importance, and therefore the instructor's evaluation of the
student's mastery of required material will weigh participation, writing
exercises, and quizzes and exams approximately equally, that is, about one
third for each component.

**(1) Participation.** In 1993 the faculty of Stetson University adopted a
mission statement that begins: 'Our mission at Stetson University is to
provide an excellent education in an intellectually challenging and
collaborative learning community." In this course, the aspiration to be a
"collaborative learning community" is taken to mean that a Stetson student is
expected to participate vigorously in the learning process and the instructor
evaluates the involvement of the student when determining the semester grade.
The instructor understands "collaborative learning" to include expressing
one's opinion, criticizing others' opinions in a humane and reasonable manner,
making constructive suggestions about the academic work of colleagues,
cooperating on assignments as appropriate, cultivating interest and curiosity,
and, of course, being prepared for class regularly. The student who does not
do these things is falling short of the standards of performance expected of a
Stetson student.

You can participate effectively only if you attend class. The instructor
applies the traditional university standard that a number of absences greater
than the credit hours of the course is unsatisfactory participation. That is,
for a three credit class that meets three times per week, more than three
absences is unsatisfactory. Accordingly, in the case of a three credit class
that meets on the Tuesday-Thursday sequence, that means that more than two
absences is unsatisfactory.

Tardiness. People who arrive late usually disturb the continuity of the class.
Such disruption is not conducive to the learning process and therefore is a
form of bad participation and will be evaluated as such.

Comradely spirit. Stetson students are expected to help each other with their
studies. This means that they should review the materials of the class
together, share their research efforts, and proofread each others' papers. But
the work that is submitted in the form of quizzes, exams, and papers must be
the student's own. Any violation of this expectation is a serious infringement
of academic ethics and will be handled with severity. It is also imperative
that students not do things which would interfere with others' successful
completion of assignments; this aspect of academic cooperation pertains
especially to libraries and computer labs. The student must be careful not to
commit a violation of academic integrity or even to appear to do so. The
minimum penalty for violation will be a failing grade for all work in the
course up to the time of the violation. Other information about academic
ethics is available in _Connections. The Campus Life Handbook, 1996-97_ , pp.
21-22.

**(2) Writing exercises.** The instructor makes and evaluates writing
assignments because he believes that students who cultivate their ability to
express themselves in writing enhance their potential for personal success. He
commits himself to do the evaluation as soon as he can after the paper is
given to him. Papers must be documented properly by a system which is
consistent and adequately informative (i.e. it must show where information
comes from, who provided it, when it was written, how it can be checked,
etc.). Papers which show inadequate proof-reading will be penalized.

The writing expected in this course is intended to conform to Florida's
"Gordon Rule" standard, that is a minimum of 6000 words (including exams). If
at any time in the future the student needs a written certification to this
effect, the instructor will be happy to provide it. During the semester you
will write the following:  

> 1 introductory paper of about 400 words (approximately one and a quarter
pages).  
>  4 short papers of 800 words (appr. 3 pp.). The instructor will give details
of these assignments during the semester.  
>  4 reports about Curriculum Enrichment (CE) activities. A calendar of
eligible events is posted on the instructor's WEB page. You must select four
events. After you attend, write a reflective essay (appr. 500 words) about the
event. Where possible, try to show how this event pertains to something
addressed in the textbook or in class discussion.

Your papers must be prepared on a word processor and printed out. Keep a copy
of everything you produce for this course on your own floppy disk.

Submit your short papers in a two-pocket folder. The completed, final draft of
the paper will be in the pocket on the right-hand page. In the pocket on the
left side, place an outline and all earlier drafts you write. You must have at
least one preliminary draft of the paper on which you have scribbled
appropriate improvements. It would be preferable that you have more than one
preliminary draft. The reason that the course requires word processed papers
is that this technological aid facilitates revision and rewriting.

Submit your curriculum enrichment papers in a cardstock folder that has a
binding strip in the center so that your CE papers become a kind of journal
for the semester. CE papers are due at the first class meeting after the
event, unless that class comes within 24 hours of the event, in which case you
have one additional class period to submit your paper. You should submit your
first CE paper no later than the end of September and the second no later than
the end of October.

Resubmissions. Any paper which has been submitted by the announced due date
may be rewritten and resubmitted for a second evaluation. The grade assessed
for the rewritten version is the one that will count for the semester grade. A
rewritten paper must be submitted within one week from the time it is returned
by the instructor. The original paper must be included in the folder in which
the paper is submitted

Late Papers. No extensions of deadlines are granted. No specific penalty is
attached to the late submission of a paper, but a regular pattern of tardiness
may be viewed as indicative of inadequately conscientious participation.

**(3) Examinations and Quizzes.** There will be five exams in the class, on 12
September, 10 October, 29 October, 14 November, and 10 December (1:00 p.m.). A
quiz is given at the beginning of each class meeting, covering the reading
assigned for the date. The exams will be weighted equally and all quizzes
together will be worth approximately one additional exam. Items from quizzes
will reappear on exams.

No Make Ups: Exams must be taken on the dates announced here. There will be no
opportunity for make-ups. Absence from the December exam will result in
failure of the course. Similarly, there will be no opportunity for make-up
quizzes; to accommodate that situation, the three lowest quiz scores will be
ignored in computing the grade.

**Assignments.** The requirements in this class are based on the university
standard that in every course a student studies two hours outside of class for
each hour in class, which entails an average of six hours of study per week
for a three-hour course. If it appears that the assignments take substantially
more than that, on average, there is some problem and the instructor should be
consulted about it.

[Calendar of Assignments](hy102calendar.html).

Explanations of the [Writing Assignments](hy102calendar.html#asgn01).

