**Syllabus** **(Fall 1998)**

**HISTORY 470 - TRADITIONAL CHINESE CIVILIZATION**

**Dr. Marilyn Levine, Division of Social Sciences** | **Lewis Clark State
College**  
---|---  
**![](images/Mail4100.gif)Email:**[
**mlevine@lcsc.edu**](mailto:mlevine@lcsc.edu)
******![](images/Phone3372.gif)Phone: 208 799-2270** | **Office: Spalding
205-B**  
**1998 Class - FA 200 - 3:00-5:30 - Wednesday** | **Office Hours: Monday &
Wednesday 10:30-12:00  
Friday 1:00-2:00 **_**or by appointment**_ **.**  
  


![](images/Image20.gif)As the oldest continuing civilization in the world, the
development of Chinese history and culture is a rich and fascinating subject.
This course will survey Chinese traditional cilivation from the prehistoric
beginnings until the mid-1850's. Through lectures, discussions, and other
class activitites, the student will gain an acquaintance with Chinese history,
as well as philosophy and literature.  
---  
  
**I. Required Reading**

Dun J. Li, _The Ageless Chinese_ [ **TEXT** ]

Wm. De Bary, _Sources of Chinese Tradition_ (Volume 1) [ **SCT** ]

Jonathan Spence, _Emperor of China: Self-Portrait of Kang-hsi_

Tsao Hsueh-chin, _Dream of the Red Chamber_

**II. Class Schedule**

8/26 Introduction

> Geography & Prehistoric Cultures

> The Early Dynasties

9/2 The Development of the Feudal Tradtion

> The Hundred Schools of Thought

9/9 The Unification of China

> Reading: Text 1-96

> SCT 1-136 [ ** _Essay Due_** ]

9/16 The Han Empire

> Reading: Text 97-128

> SCT 137-227 [ _Student-led Discussion_ ]

> **Midterm Project Passed out**

9/23 **FILM**

9/30 The Emergence of Buddhism

> **_Midterm Project Turned In_**

10/7 Disintegration & Reunification

> Reading: Text 129-69

> SCT 266-368 _[Student-led Discussion]_

10/14 Summit of Chinese Civilization I - The Tang Dynasty

> Reading: Text 169-190

10/21 Summit of Chinese Civilization II - The Song Dynasty

> Reading: Text 191-245

> SCT 383-454 _[Student-led Discussion]_

10/28 **FILM /CULTURAL EXPERIENCE**

11/4 The Mongol Empire

> The Rise & Flowering of the Ming

> Reading: Text 246-306

> _Emperor of China: Self-Portrait of Kang-hsi_ _[_ ** _Essay Due_** _]_

11/11 **FILM**

> Reading: Text 307-370

> Decline of the Ming Dynasty

11/18 The Qing Dynasty

> Reading: _Dream of the Red Chamber_ _[_ ** _Essay Due_** _]_

11/25 Holiday - Thanksgiving

12/2 Taiping Rebellion

> Western Incursion

> **_Final Project Assignment Passed Out_**

12/9 Class Discussion - Final Wrap-up

**_Final Project will be turned in on Monday, December 14_** ** _th_**



**III. ASSIGNMENTS & GRADING POLICY**

1\. Students will be reponsible for two projects (each worth 25% of the
grade), three essays (each worth 10%), and discussion/participation (20%).

2\. If you need course adaptations or accommodations because of a disability,
if you have emergency medical information to share with me, or if you need
special arrangements in case the building must be evacuated, please make an
appointment as soon as possible. My office location and office hours are at
the top of the syllabus. _All students are encouraged to make use of office
hours._

****

* * *

**Essay Format**



**I. Abstract**

> > > Write an abstract of between 100-200 words that summarizes the main
theme(s) and organization of the book or material. You might want to overview
the broader significance of the work.

**II. Essay - Main Body**

> > > Your essay should be organized around a main theme, but it should also
incorporate the scope of the reading. Make sure your essay includes an
introduction that discusses your main theme and the organization of the rest
of the paper. The main body of the essay should be a systematic discussion of
the reading, the points you pull out of the reading, backed up by examples
from the reading. Your conclusion should summarize and synthesize your essay.

**III. Format and Length of Essays**

> > > All essays should be typed or word processed, double-spaced, 1 inch
borders, and should be between 7-8 pages [ **excluding the abstract** ].
Essays _exceeding_ this length will not be accepted. You should make three
copies of your essay.

**IV. Other Suggestions**

> > > Do not wait until the last minute to read the material or write your
essays.

>>>

>>> Make an outline of your essay to organize it before you begin writing.

>>>

>>> Pay attention to grammar and spelling. Most word processing systems have
spell checkers and grammar checkers.

>>>

>>> Do not laden your material with the first person voice. Make the essay a
piece of analysis not personal opinion.

>>>

>>> Your essay should have transitions between different sections, tying
together the essay throughout.

>>>

>>> Try writing more than one draft of the essay.



* * *

**![](images/Blue_Swirl361.gif)[ Home](Default.htm)** |
**![](images/Blue_Swirl361.gif)[Syllabi](syllabi.htm)** |
**![](images/Blue_Swirl361.gif)[Resum¨¦](resume.htm)** |
**![](images/Blue_Swirl361.gif)[Useful Links](links.htm)**  
---|---|---|---

