39933For my other pages see:  [PEM Index
Page](http://people.clemson.edu/~pammack/pemindex.htm)  

* * *

**HISTORY 322**  
**History of Technology, Fall 1998**  

* * *

  


  

**Instructor:** Prof. Pamela E. Mack: Hardin 203, phone 656-5356 e-mail:
[Pammack@Clemson.edu](mailto:Pammack@Clemson.edu)

**Office hours:** MWF 8:45-10, Tue. 8:45-11, Wed. 1:25-3 and other hours by
appointment (I'm often in Tuesday all day)

**Class meetings: ** MWF 10:10-11:00, Hardin 202

**E-mail and Web pages:**  
     class web page: [http://people.clemson.edu/~pammack/hist322.htm](http://people.clemson.edu/~pammack/hist323.htm)   
     this syllabus on the web:  http://people.clemson.edu/~pammack/syl322.htm   
     review outline:  <http://people.clemson.edu/~pammack/rev322.htm>   
     listserv address: [9808HIST__322001-L@clemson.edu](mailto:9801HIST__323001-L@clemson.edu)

**COURSE DESCRIPTION** : This course is a survey of the history of technology
from the stone age through the British industrial revolution of the late 18th
and early 19th centuries.  History 323 continues the survey through the
American industrial revolution and the 20th century.  The goal of these
courses is to learn something about the process of technological change and
the relationship between technology and society with the help of the broader
perspective that history provides.  In other words, the most important things
you can learn are not what happened when or how an old machine worked, but
rather how to examine the role and significance of a technology in the society
that used it.

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS** : There is now a textbook available for use in this
course, but even it will serve more as a resource than as a survey of the
course. There is no standard interpretation of the history of technology; the
textbook, the professor, and the other readings are likely to disagree.
Analyzing and drawing conclusions from the reading will be central to the
course, so it is essential that you do the reading and come prepared to
discuss it in class. Seats will be assigned so that the instructor can more
easily take attendance and encourage class participation. Because no one book
provides an overview for this course you will quickly find yourself lost if
you do not attend class. Five **absences** will be allowed without penalty.
Coming late or leaving early will count as one half an absence. Excuses do not
have to be given for the five allowed absences, but it is expected that these
will cover all scheduled events (including all extracurricular activities) and
minor illnesses. Additional absences will be excused only for emergencies,
serious illness, or funerals. Students with more than 5 absences will be
penalized 3 points for every additional absence on their final grade for the
course. The class is excused if the instructor does not arrive within 10
minutes of the scheduled starting time.

The goal of the **Listserv** is to allow more thorough and more informal
discussion of the reading and the lectures than is possible in class. Students
will participate simply by sending and receiving e-mail--a special address
will distribute the messages to all participants in the class. I will take
responsibility for teaching you how to use the system--setting up a special
lab session if a number of people need help. Each note you write can be an
answer to a question posed in the topic, a comment on something else in the
subject that interested you, or a reply to another student's comment (debate
is encouraged). There will be a new discussion topic on the system at least
once a week, and older topics will be closed to further comment a couple of
times during the term. Your participation in this system will be graded on the
basis both of quality and quantity. Contributions to the listserv should be
thoughtful comments on the reading and/or the material presented in class
and/or the comments of other students, usually one or two paragraphs long (not
less than 8 lines or more than two screens). Your replies to each topic will
be graded on the basis of understanding of material, thoughtfulness, and
originality (grammar and spelling do not matter so long as your point is
clear). Those grades will be handed out at least twice during the term so that
you can see how you are doing. You will also be graded on the number of notes
you write: for an A you must contribute to at least 12 topics, for a B to 10,
for a C to 8, and for a D to 6. Note that the count is based on the number of
topics you reply to, not simply the number of notes you write; if you make
more than one contribution to the same topic it will only count as one.
However, if you get involved and want to write more than one reply to a topic
it can benefit you: I will look at all your replies in deciding your grade for
that topic. Your final grade on the computer conference will be the average of
your quality grade (grading your replies to each topic) and your quantity
grade (based on the number of topics to which you replied).

The **[research paper](http://people.clemson.edu/~pammack/paper322.htm)**
should be 8 to 10 typed pages and should be documented with footnotes or
endnotes.   Papers must be analytical; that is, they must ask a question or
state a thesis and then develop an argument using specific evidence to prove a
point.  Papers will be evaluated primarily on the basis of your ability to use
evidence and argument to effectively prove your point (this is the skill that
history courses seek to teach).  Suggested topics will be handed out, but you
may invent your own topic if you get approval for your alternate topic at
least one week before the paper is due.  It is your responsibility follow the
basic rules of paper writing; make sure in particular that you understand the
definition of plagiarism.  I will be glad to discuss ideas and outlines, and
will read and comment on rough drafts if they are handed in at least a week
before the paper is due.  Help with paper writing can also be obtained from
the English Writing Lab.

All late papers will be penalized one third of a grade for every class day
late (in other words, a paper due Monday and handed in Wednesday would be
downgraded from a B to a B-), except that papers that receive a C- or better
will not be downgraded lower than a D.  Exceptions to the penalties for
lateness will be given only for emergencies.

**GRADING:**

  * Two tests 15% each
  * Term paper 25%
  * Computer conference participation 20%
  * Final exam 25%
  * Class participation will be taken into account in cases of borderline grades.

**TEXTS:** Jean Gimpel, _The Medieval Machine: The Industrial Revolution of
the Middle Ages_  
_              _Alan I Marcus, _Building Western Civilization: From the Advent
of Writing to the Age of Steam_

**SCHEDULE: ** Readings are listed under each lecture or discussion topic, and
should be done before that day's class. Underlined readings are on the World
Wide Web; if you go to the web version of this syllabus at
http://people.clemson.edu/~pammack/syl322.htm you will find hot links.

August

  * 21 Introduction
  * 24 What is technology? [Discussion of Definitions](http://people.clemson.edu/~pammack/define.htm),  [Five Industrial Revolutions](http://www.fourmilab.ch/autofile/www/section2_84_8.html)
  * 26 Prehistoric technology  [A Paleolithic Painted Cave](http://www.culture.fr/culture/arcnat/chauvet/en/gvpda-d.htm)
  * 28 Irrigation and writing, read Marcus ch. 1
  * 31 Mesopotamia  [Near East](http://www.emory.edu/CARLOS/ODYSSEY/NEAREAST/homepg.html)

September

  * 2 Egypt  [Egyptian Atifacts](http://www.memphis.edu/egypt/artifact.html)
  * 4 Invaders  [From Prehistory to the Iron Age](http://www.turknet.com/ninethousand/prehistory2.html)
  * 7 Pre-Socratics, read Marcus ch. 2
  * 9 Classical Greece  [The Ancient Greek World](http://www.museum.upenn.edu/Greek_World/Intro.html)
  * 11 Hellenistic Alexandria  [Alexandria](http://pharos.bu.edu/Egypt/Alexandria/)
  * 14 Rome, read Marcus ch. 3
  * 16 The fall of Rome and the Arabic world, read Marcus ch. 4
  * 18 The Dark Ages, read Marcus ch. 5
  * 21 The Feudal System, read Marcus ch. 6
  * 23 Medieval agricultural technology, read Gimpel ch. 2 & 4,  [open field farming](http://www.borderdisc.com/mag/openfield.htm)
  * 25 Mills and power technology, read  Gimpel ch. 1 & 3
  * 28 Guilds and towns, read Gimpel ch. 6, Marcus ch. 7
  * 30 Monasteries and technology, Gimpel ch. 5

October

  * 2 *First Test**
  * 5 Cathedrals, Marcus ch. 8
  * 7 Clocks, Gimpel ch. 7
  * 9 Medieval science,  Gimpel ch. 8
  * 12 The decline of the middle ages, Gimpel ch. 9
  * 14 Humanism, Marcus ch. 9
  * 16 Renaissance Art  [Leonardo Da Vinci](http://sunsite.unc.edu/wm/paint/auth/vinci/)
  * 19 The Age of Exploration,  [1492: An Ongoing Voyage](http://sunsite.unc.edu/expo/1492.exhibit/Intro.html)
  * 21 The Reformation, Marcus ch. 10
  * 23 Printing, Marcus ch. 11
  * 26 The Scientific Revolution,  [History of Astronomy](http://www.dc.peachnet.edu/~pgore/astronomy/astr101/kepler.htm)
  * 28 Galileo,  [The Galileo Project](http://es.rice.edu/ES/humsoc/Galileo/index.html) ,  [Middle Finger of Galileo's Right Hand](http://galileo.imss.firenze.it/museo/4/eiv10.html)
  * 30 The relationship between science and technology

November

  * 2 Fall Break
  * 4 The Enlightenment, Marcus ch. 12
  * 6 Origins of the Indust. Revolution  [The Industrial Revolution](http://www.wsu.edu:8000/~dee/ENLIGHT/INDUSTRY.HTM)
  * 9 Agriculture  [History of Agriculture](http://www.liang.8m.com/cgi-bin/framed/1502/edu/hisagri.htm)
  * 11 The steam engine   [James Watt](http://144.26.13.41/phyhist/watt.htm) , [The Steam Engine](http://www.geocities.com/Athens/Acropolis/6914/) , [Kew Br](http://www.cre.canon.co.uk/~davide/kbsm/)
  * 13 Iron  [Ironbridge Gorge Museum](http://www.vtel.co.uk/igmt/)
  * 16 Textiles  [Blackburn through the ages](http://from.net/SLassey/cotton.htm)
  * 17 Extra Credit Event--"War, Slavery, and the Ironies of the American Civil War:  A Philosophical Analysis" by Lawrence Stepelevich, Hardin 200, 5 pm.
  * 18 Transportation  [The Grantham Canal](http://www.argonet.co.uk/users/alan.highet/) (make sure to read the history page), _railroads_
  * 19 Extra Credit Event--Poetry Reading by Ron Rash, 206 Strode Tower, 4 pm.
  * 20 **Second Test** **This date is changed from the syllabus**
  * 23 Science   [Science in the Industrial Revolution](http://www.lucknow.com/horus/guide/si101.html)
  * 25 Factory workers  **[Paper](http://people.clemson.edu/~pammack/paper322.htm) Due**  [Child Labor](http://www.stg.brown.edu/projects/hypertext/landow/victorian/history/hist8.html),  [Living and Working Conditions During the Industrial Revolution](http://www.pomperaug.com/socstud/museum/livingconditions.htm)
  * 27 Thanksgiving Vacation
  * 30 Politics  [Chartism](http://www.stg.brown.edu/projects/hypertext/landow/victorian/history/hist3.html)

December

  * 2 The spread of industrialization _web reading_
  * 4 Review
  * 11 Final Exam, 1-4 pm

  
Send me e-mail at: [Pammack@clemson.edu](mailto:pammack@clemson.edu)  
For my other pages see:  [PEM Index
Page](http://people.clemson.edu/~pammack/pemindex.htm)  

* * *

This page last updated Nov. 10, 1998  
    


