Contemporary Civilization I



  



¡ì 8

Fall 2002

MW, 2-4 p.m.

303 Hamilton Hall



Samuel Moyn

Assistant Professor

Department of History

Fayerweather Hall 616

(212) 854-3009

[s.moyn@columbia.edu](mailto:s.moyn@columbia.edu)

<http://www.columbia.edu/~sam2008>

AOL IM: samuelmoyn

Office Hours: Thursday, 1-3



  



Introduction



This required undergraduate course is intended to introduce you to some of the
major Western texts and thinkers of the ancient, medieval, and early modern
ages. This section is designed as a contrast of two traditions -- Greek and
Hebrew -- that began separately but eventually collided and were combined with
one another with very different results from period to period and thinker to
thinker.



The texts are difficult, but they have to be read (very carefully) if the
course is to succeed both for you personally and for the group as a whole. The
course is not a lecture: it is intended to consist mainly of guided discussion
through which you can hone your ability to communicate and clarify your
ethical and political commitments in light of the opinions of your fellow
students. There is also a substantial writing component, to allow you to
improve the lifelong skill and writing clearly and interestingly. Most of all,
the course is about learning to read and evaluate arguments. For this reason,
doing the reading is the first and most important requirement.





CC Home Page





http:///www.college.columbia.edu/core



Home Page for this Section



via [https://courseworks.columbia.edu](https://courseworks.columbia.edu/)





Required Texts



The following texts (with the one noted exception) are available at Columbia
University Bookstore. The store may bundle them together and offer a discount.
I have also listed the publisher and ISBN for each in case you should want to
order them online. (The links below are directly to Amazon.com.) You should
always bring the text(s) under discussion to class. Note: many of these texts
are available via the Columbia Virtual Reading Room, at
<http://www.columbia.edu/cu/lweb/eresources/ebooks/vrr.html>, but you should
buy the books or check them out from reserve in order to avoid having to print
them from the web.



Plato,
_[Republic](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0872201368/samuemoynshom-20)_
(Hackett), ISBN # 0872201368

Plato, _[Symposium and
Phaedrus](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486277984/samuemoynshom-20)_
(Dover) (at Labyrinth Books for this section), 0486277984

Aristotle, _[Nicomachean
Ethics](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/019283407X/samuemoynshom-20)_
(Oxford World 's Classics), 019283407X

Aristotle,
_[Politics](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0872203883/samuemoynshom-20)_
(Hackett), 0872203883

_[The Holy
Bible](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0195283805/samuemoynshom-20)_ ,
New Revised Standard Ed. (Oxford), 0195283805

Augustine, _[City of
God](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0140444262/samuemoynshom-20)_
(Penguin), 0140444262

_[The Holy
Qur'an](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0915957779/samuemoynshom-20)_
(Amana),  0915957779

St. Thomas Aquinas, _[On Politics and
Morality](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0393952436/samuemoynshom-20)_
(Norton), 0393952436

Niccolo Machiavelli, _[Selected Political
Writings](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/087220247X/samuemoynshom-20)_
(Hackett), 087220247X

Hans J. Hillerbrand, ed., _[The Protestant
Reformation](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0061313424/samuemoynshom-20)_
(Harper and Row), 0061313424

Rene Descartes, _[Discourse on Method
etc.](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0872204200/samuemoynshom-20)_
(Hackett), 0872204200

Thomas Hobbes,
_[Leviathan](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0192834983/samuemoynshom-20)_
(Oxford World 's Classics), 0192834983

John Locke, _[Political
Writings](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0451628616/samuemoynshom-20)_
(NAL/Mentor), 0451628616



Shorter Readings



This semester involves a few shorter readings that appear in the CC Reader,
available for purchase, or via
<https://www1.columbia.edu/sec/acis/ets/lhcc/cc-lh/readings/0203>. Again, if
you choose to access these texts via the web, you must print them out for
class. On the web version of this syllabus, there are links to the individual
texts. Other materials will be handed out.





  

Discussion of Course Requirements



_Attendance/Participation_



As the focus of the course is discussion of the texts with one another,
attendance is mandatory. If you have a good reason to be absent, say so -- if
possible, in advance. In accordance with Columbia University policy, more than
four unexcused absences will severely affect your grade for the worse.



This section has a website. It includes a discussion list. Web posts are
highly encouraged for everyone and I will take them into consideration when
assessing grades (especially for those shy about speaking in person, though
nothing can replace participation in class).



A small part of the participation grade for the class is evaluated through
approximately six random quizzes that will test your reading. If you have done
the reading, you will ace the quiz; if you have not, you will fail. If you are
absent the day of the quiz, you cannot make it up, but I will drop each
student's worst quiz grade for the semester.



_Papers_



You may write either three 5-page or five 3-page papers. Once you commit to
one "track" or the other, you have to stick with it. Mastery of the texts and
of basic writing skills will lead to a good grade; exceptional clarity,
elegance, insight, or creativity will lead to a superior grade. I will hand
out topics by e-mail as the course progresses. You are encouraged to meet with
me to discuss your papers in advance of the due date. You are welcome to
revise any papers with a grade of C+ or below. Plagiarism: please don't. Think
of the consequences if you are discovered. On the syllabus below, the due
dates for the 5-page papers are indicated with numbers (i.e., Paper 1, 2, 3);
those for the 3-page papers are indicated with letters (i.e., Paper A, B, C,
D, E).



_Exams_



The midterm and final exams will consist of short-answer or essay questions or
both.



_Final Grade_



The final grade in this class is computed as follows:



Attendance/Participation 15%

Papers 50%

Midterm Exam 10%

Final Exam 25%  



Syllabus



The materials marked with an asterisk (*) are supplements available on the CC
website; but I suggest you buy the packet version from the Columbia Bookstore
unless you are willing to print out all of them. (Either way, you will need to
have them on paper in class).



Sept. 4: Introduction and Organization



# The Greek Ideal of Perfection



Sept. 9:           Plato, _Republic_ , Books 1-3 (entire)



Sept. 11:        Plato, _Republic_ , Books 4-6 (entire)



Sept. 16:        Class Cancelled - Yom Kippur



Sept. 18:        Plato, _Republic_ , Books 7-10 (entire, Book 10 to be
skimmed)



Sept. 23:        Plato, _Symposium_ (review from Lit-Hum) and _Phaedrus_ , pp.

                            

Sept. 25:        Aristotle, _Nicomachean Ethics_ , Books 1-2 (entire); 3: 1-3;
5: 1-7; 6: 5-8; 12-13 (entire); 8: 9-12; 10: 6-9



Sept. 30:        Aristotle, _Politics_ , Books 1 (entire); 2: 1-5; 3: 1-13; 4:
1-12; 7: 1; 8: 1

                             Paper A Due



Oct. 2:             Aristotle cont'd

                            



## The Monotheistic Alternative



Oct. 7:             The Old Testament, Genesis 1: 1-9; 11: 31-13: 18;
15:1-18:33; 21:1-23:20 and Deuteronomy 1:1-45; 4:1-11:28; 15:1-19:21;
21:10-26:19; 27:11-28:68; 30:1-34:12

                             Paper 1 Due

                            

Oct. 9:             The Old Testament, Isaiah, 1-39 and Daniel (entire)



Oct. 14:          The New Testament, Luke (entire) and Acts 1:1-7:60;
9:1-11:18; 13:1-15:35; 17:1-28:30

                             Paper B Due



Oct. 16:          The New Testament, Romans (entire)

                            

Oct. 18:          Mandatory CC Coursewide Lecture:

                             Speaker: Daniel Bell

                             Roone Arledge Auditorium, 11:00-1:00



Oct. 21:          The Koran (in order) Suras 1, 114, 112, 68, 63, 56, 39, 26,
17, 12, 4, 3, 2

                                     

Oct. 23:          Midterm (one hour)

_ _

Oct. 23:          FILM: _The Matrix_ (on pure v. impure pleasure and the Life
of Jesus plot)

                             8-11 p.m., Hamilton 717  

_Attempts at a Synthesis_



Oct. 28:          Augustine, _The City of God_ , Books 4: 1-4; 8: 1-12, 14
(entire); 19 (entire); and 29-30 (entire)

Oct. 30:          St. Thomas Aquinas, _On Morality and Politics_ , pp. 14-29,
30-33, 37-9, 90-97, 100-105, 109, 171-3

                             Paper 2 Due

                             Paper C Due



Nov. 4:            No Class - University Holiday

Nov. 6:            *al-Ghazali, _Deliverance from Error_ (entire)  <at
<https://www1.columbia.edu/sec/acis/ets/lhcc/cc-
lh/readings/0203/alghazal.pdf>> and *Moses Maimonides, _Guide of the
Perplexed_ , to be handed out on paper





## Rejection of the Project of Synthesis?



Nov. 11:         Niccolo Machiavelli, _Selected Political Writings_ , pp. 1-80

                            

Nov. 13:         * New World theorists (entire) <at
<https://www1.columbia.edu/sec/acis/ets/lhcc/cc-lh/readings/lasindie.pdf>,
<https://www1.columbia.edu/sec/acis/ets/lhcc/cc-lh/readings/lasthirty.pdf>,
and <https://www1.columbia.edu/sec/acis/ets/lhcc/cc-lh/readings/sepulvda.pdf>>

                             Paper D Due



Nov. 18:         Hans J. Hillerbrand, ed., _The Protestant Reformation_ , pp.
4-28, 38-42, 88-107, 43-63

Nov. 20:         Hillerbrand, cont'd and *Galileo Galilei, "Letter to Duchess
Christina" (entire)



Nov. 25:         Rene Descartes, _Discourse_ _on Method_ and/or _Meditations
on First Philosophy_ (entire)

Nov. 27:         Thomas Hobbes, _Leviathan_ , pp. 1-19, 33-42, 58-106

                            

Dec. 2:            Thomas Hobbes, _Leviathan_ , pp. 111-48, 175-82, 212-35,
441-57, 467-75

Dec. 4:            John Locke, _Political Writings_ , pp. 261-387

                             Paper 3 Due

                             Paper E Due



Dec. 9:            John Locke, _Political Writings_ , pp. 390-436





Reading Period: Review Session



Later:               Final Exam, 12 - 3 p.m.

