  University of South Alabama |

 Dr. Michael L. Monheit  
  
---|---  
History Department, 344 Humanities Building |

 Office: 376 Humanities Bldg.  
  
Office telephones: 460-6868/6210 E-mail:
[mmonheit@jaguar1.usouthal.edu](mailto: mmonheit@jaguar1.usouthal.edu) |

Web page: <http://www.southalabama.edu/history/faculty/monheit>  
  
_WITCHCRAFT AND MAGIC IN EARLY MODERN EUROPE_  
_HISTORY 343, SPRING 2000_

**PLEASE READ THIS COURSE GUIDE CAREFULLY - IT CONTAINS IMPORTANT
INFORMATION!**

> _OFFICE HOURS:_ Tuesday and Thursday 1 PM-3 PM, **OR BY APPOINTMENT** \-- I
am happy to arrange a time to meet that is convenient to you. PLEASE NOTE THAT
I SOMETIMES KEEP MY DOOR CLOSED DURING OFFICE HOURS. PLEASE KNOCK!! **MY
OFFICE IS RATHER HIDDEN -- PLEASE SEE MAP ON LAST PAGE OF SYLLABUS**

**READINGS** (Available in Student Bookstores):

**Required:**

Alan C. Kors and Edward Peters, _Witchcraft in Europe, 1100-1700: A
Documentary History,_ University of Pennsylvania Press, 1972, provides many
fascinating examples of writings from medieval and early modern Europe in
which individuals who lived then describe their ideas and report on the
practices they believe to be happening around them, and on the trials and
executions of witches.

Carlo Ginzburg, _The Night Battles_ , Johns Hopkins, describes a people in
Italy who, the author believes, practiced a form of witchcraft.

Robin Briggs, _Witches and Neighbors: The Social and Cultural Contexts of
European Witchcraft_ , Penguin Books, 1996, discusses many aspects of popular
practices and beliefs, how accusations and witch-hunts originated, the role of
assumptions about gender differences in beliefs about witches, and many other
aspects of our subject.

**Recommended:**

Brian Levack, _The Witch-Hunt in Early Modern Europe,_ **SECOND EDITION,**
Longman, 1995 provides a good discussion and overview of the subject.

**THEMES OF THE COURSE:**

How and why did some people -- predominantly women -- come to be tried as
witches? How could such seemingly bizarre accusations appear perfectly
rational to people living in earlier centuries? What practices did ordinary
people engage in that were perceived by the elite as dangerous forms of
witchcraft? What social, intellectual and cultural changes favored the wave of
witch hunts that began in the mid-sixteenth century?

This course is divided into three overlapping sections. In the first, we will
attempt to reconstruct the assumptions about how the world worked that made it
possible for educated and uneducated people to believe in witchcraft and
magic. In the second we will study the recurrent witch-hunting campaigns that
plagued early modern Europe in the light of these beliefs. In the third,
concluding section we will study the decline of witch-hunting and belief in
the reality of witchcraft.

This course assumes a familiarity with the basic course of European history
from the beginning of Christianity in the first century AD to 1750; I strongly
suggest that you take this course only if you have completed Western
Civilization I and II; if you are not familiar with this period I strongly
suggest you keep handy a recent Western Civilization textbook and frequently
refer to it when you are not sure of a time period, event or person referred
to in your readings. Please see me for suggestions.

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS:**

**Midterm** , Thursday, February 24,, 25% of grade  
**In-class critique of paper rough-draft** , **Thursday, March 30.** **IF YOU
DO NOT PARTICIPATE YOU WILL RECEIVE NO CREDIT FOR THE CRITIQUE.**  
**Final draft of paper due** , Thursday, April 27 (last day of class)  
**Final Exam** , Tuesday, May 2nd, 10:30 AM - 12:30 PM, 35% of grade.  
**In-Class Quizzes** , announced and surprise, 10% of grade

**Paper** , 25% of grade, and 5% for your in-class critique of another
student's paper. You will be asked to write a paper on a group of related
documents in Kors. You are required to write a rough draft, which will be
critiqued in class by a fellow student but will not be graded, and a final
draft due on, for which you will receive a grade. **IF YOU DO NOT PARTICIPATE
IN ROUGH DRAFT CRITIQUES, YOU WILL RECEIVE NO CREDIT FOR THE CRITIQUE.**

**OPTIONAL PAPER -- STRONGLY RECOMMENDED FOR STUDENTS CONSIDERING GRADUATE OR
PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLING - REQUIRES INSTRUCTOR'S PERMISSION** \- If you have a
particularly strong interest in pursuing some aspect of this subject in depth,
instead of the above paper you may choose to write a longer research paper (at
least 12 pages). In it you will make use of original writings by people who
lived in the period you are studying (translated into English unless you can
read another language) to explore an issue of interest to you. Your paper will
also make use of books and articles by historians who have written on the
topic you have chosen to study. You will be asked to write a rough and final
draft, and other writings related to your paper. **You are expected to consult
with me frequently on your progress throughout the semester.** In this case,
the paper will count for 45% of your grade, and the Mid-term, Final and
Quizzes will play a proportionally smaller role in your grade.

**Class Participation** \- You will receive extra credit for participating in
class discussion. Frequent participation can earn you an extra half-grade
credit, and could make the difference between an A or a B, a B or a C, etc. In
exceptional cases, you can improve by a whole letter grade. You will have
regular opportunities to discuss the assigned and optional readings for this
course. I will often give you study questions to consider when reading the
day's assignment. The documents in Kors are particularly interesting and I
hope will provide much food for thought. I will frequently give you questions
to think about for the next day's readings. **Although I do not take
attendance, you are expected to attend class regularly. To receive credit for
class participation, you must be there! You are responsible for finding out
from other students about the contents of lectures and discussions you miss,
as well as about announcements in class concerning quizzes, changes in
deadlines, etc. HOWEVER, READING SOMEONE ELSE'S NOTES IS A POOR SUBSTITUTE FOR
BEING THERE YOURSELF!**

If you actively participate in class discussion, you will come out of the
course with a much more sophisticated understanding than if you simply listen
to lectures and discussions. Moreover, since your class-mates also benefit
from lively class discussion, your participation helps your fellow students as
well. **Please prepare the readings carefully in time for the class hour in
which they are to be discussed. Please bring the day's readings to class with
you.**

Please don't be afraid of making mistakes or of "looking foolish." History is
an activity in which you need to "play," not just watch. No athlete ever
became successful who didn't start out playing her or his sport awkwardly or
clumsily, and the same principle applies to history \-- although you may be
more adept at "playing" history than you think! The more chances you take, the
more you will improve. In my evaluation of class participation, you will do
better by speaking up than by keeping silent, even if what you say shows that
you had some difficulties in understanding the reading.

**GRADING:** 90 and above = A, 80 to 89 = B, 70 to 79 = C, 60 to 69 = D, 59
and below = F

I welcome students to come by during my office hours to discuss the course
material and enjoy talking to you. You need not be having a problem to come
by. Of course if at any time you are having difficulties understanding the
material, working on your paper, preparing for exams, I want you to come talk
to me about the problem. It is quite common even for seniors to run into
difficulties in their studies. _If you cannot come during my office hours
(listed at beginning of Syllabus), please speak to me after class or leave a
message in the History Department with the best times to reach you and I will
be happy to arrange an appointment._  
\-----------------

> **TENTATIVE SYLLABUS**

>

>>

>>     **                            PART I: THE MEDIEVAL CULTURAL BACKGROUND

>>  
>>     I. INTRODUCTION

>>          READING:  BRIGGS, Introduction

>>  
>>     II. POPULAR MAGIC: THE BASIC ASSUMPTIONS

>>          READING:  KORS, William of Malmesbury, "The Witch of Berkeley,"
pp. 32-35  
>>                    Caesarius of Heisterbach, "The Demons and the Knight",
pp. 38-43

>>                    KORS, "The Confessions of the Chelmsford Witches," pp.
229-35

>>  
>>     III. ELITE VIEWS OF WITCHES AND MAGIC I: EARLY VIEWS

>>          READING:  KORS, Gratian, "Canon Episcopi" pp. 28-31

>>                    John of Salisbury, pp. 36-7

>>                    Review Caesarius of Heisterbach, 38-43

>>                    St. Augustine, handout, selections on demons from The
City of God.

>>  
>>     IV. ELITE VIEWS II: HERESY, WITCHCRAFT AND THE PACT WITH THE DEVIL

>>          READING:  BRIGGS, chapter I: Myths of the Perfect Witch, Ch: III:
Supernatural Power

>>                    KORS, Nicholas Eymeric, "Heresy, Witchcraft and the
Inquisition," pp. 84-92

>>                    Ralph of Coggeshall, "The Witch of Rheims", pp. 44-47.

>>                    Pope Gregory IX, "Witches of Stedlingerland", 48-49

>>                    (NOTE: Title of this selection is misleading and not
from original)

>>          OPTIONAL: KORS, Aquinas, "Magic and the World of Nature,"

>>                    and "The Demons and Man," pp. 51-71

>>  
>>     V. ELITE VIEWS III: THE WITCH'S SABBATH

>>          READING:  KORS, "The Trial of Suzanne Gaudry," pp. 266-75

>>                    Review  BRIGGS chapter I.

>>  
>>                             PART II: THE WITCH-HUNT

>>  
>>     VI. SOCIAL CHANGE

>>          READING:  BRIGGS, Chapter VIII: The Age of Iron.

>>  
>>     VII.  CHANGES IN RELIGIOUS THOUGHT AND  PRACTICE ON THE EVE OF THE
WITCH-HUNT

>>          READING:  KORS, Innocent VIII, "Witch Bull", pp. 107-112.

>>                    Kramer and Sprenger, "Malleus Maleficarum," pp. 130-154
top.

>>          OPTIONAL: KORS, Remy, "Evidence of Witchcraft", pp. 236-46

>>  
>>     VIII.  SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY OF ACCUSATIONS AND HUNTS

>>            READING:  BRIGGS, Chapter IV, The Projection of Evil

>>                      KORS, "The Devils of Loudun," pp. 260-65

>>            REVIEW:   KORS, Ralph of Coggeshall, "The Witch of Rheims", pp.
44-47.

>>  
>>     IX.  THE ACCUSERS AND THE ACCUSED

>>            READING:  BRIGGS, Chapter II: The Experience of Bewitchment,
Chapter V: Witch-finders and Witch Cures.

>>  
>>     X.  FAMILY AND GENDER IN ACCUSATIONS OF WITCHCRAFT

>>            READING: BRIGGS, Chapter VI, Love and Hatred: Spouses and Kin,

>>                     and Chapter VII: Men Against Women.

>>                     KORS, "Malleus Maleficarum," pp. 113-130

>>            REVIEW:  KORS, "The Confessions of the Chelmsford Witches,"  pp.
229-35

>>                     Think about and review many documents we have read in
which women were the accused.

>>  
>>     XI.  THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENTS AND THE CHURCH

>>            READING:  BRIGGS, Chapter IX: The Web of Power

>>                    KORS, Kramer and Sprenger, "Malleus Maleficarum,"  pp.
154-189

>>                    KORS, Jean Bodin, "The Witches and the Law," pp.  213-15

>>                    "The Persecution at Bamberg," pp. 253-9

>>                    Reread, "The Trial of Suzanne Gaudry," pp. 266-75

>>  
>>     XII. WAS THERE A THRIVING POPULAR PAGAN CULTURE I? THE BENANDANTI

>>          READING:  Begin GINZBURG, Night Battles, Book's forward to p. 39

>>  
>>     XIII. WAS THERE A THRIVING POPULAR PAGAN CULTURE II? THE BENANDANTI AND
A LARGER FERTILITY CULT

>>          READING:  GINZBURG, pp. 40-68

>>  
>>     XIV. WAS THERE A THRIVING POPULAR PAGAN CULTURE III? THE BENANDANTI AND
THE INQUISITORS

>>          READING:  GINZBURG, Night Battles, p. 69-171; Be sure to read
documents in Appendix

>>  
>>     XV.OUTBREAKS OF WITCH-HUNTING

>>          READING:  KORS, "The Persecution in Scotland," pp. 223-228

>>                    "The Persecution at Wurzburg," pp. 251-2

>>          REVIEW:   "The Devils of Loudun," pp. 260-65

>>  
>>     XVI. THE REFORMATION: PROTESTANT TEACHINGS, RELIGIUS CONFLICTS  AND
WITCHCRAFT

>>          READINGS: KORS, Luther, 195-201

>>                    Calvin, pp. 202-212

>>  
>>                   PART III: THE DECLINE OF WITCH-HUNTING

>>  
>>     XVII. THE DECLINE OF WITCH HUNTS I: RELIGIOUS CRITICISMS

>>          READING:  KORS, Reginald Scott, "Credulity and Witchcraft,"
pp. 314-31

>>                    Alonzo Salazar de Frias, "Witchcraft and Delusion," pp.
340-1

>>                    "The Persecution at Trier," pp. 216-21

>>  
>>     XVIII. THE DECLINE OF WITCH HUNTS II: SKEPTICISM, RATIONALISM,
MATERIALISM

>>          READINGS: KORS, Bayle, "Superstition and the Imagination," pp.
360-77

>>                    Montaigne, "Ignorance and Witchcraft" pp. 332-337

>>          OPTIONAL:      KORS, Hobbes, "Demonology as Unsound Philosophy,"
pp. 342-350

>>  
>>     XIX. THE DECLINE OF WITCH HUNTS III: SOCIAL, POLITICAL AND  JUDICIAL
CHANGES

>>  
>>     XX. CONCLUSION AND OVERVIEW OF FIVE HUNDRED YEARS OF WITCH-HUNTS

>>          READING:  BRIGGS, Chapter X, Internal and External Worlds, and
Conclusion

>>  
>>                              IMPORTANT DATES

>>  
>>     Midterm, Thursday, February 24,, 25% of grade

>>  
>>     LAST DAY TO DROP A CLASS: Thursday, February 24.

>>  
>>     Spring Break and Mardi Gras, Monday,  March 6 to Sunday March 12

>>  
>>     In-class critique of paper rough-draft, Thursday, March 30.

>>  
>>     Final draft of paper due, Thursday, April 27 (last day of class)

>>  
>>     Final Exam, Tuesday, May 2nd, 10:30 AM - 12:30 PM.

>>  
>>     **MOVIE**  The Sorceress, will be shown during the semester, date and
time to be announced.

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                              MAP TO MY OFFICE

>>  
>>             __________________ _________ __________ _________ _ _______

>>            |     ___________| |         |          |         |E|  |

>>            |    |  ______   | |  364    |   362    |   360   |L|  |

>>            |----| |______|  |_|_________|__________|_________|E|  |

>>        MY  | X  / |      |                                    V STAIRS }

>>      OFFICE>>X  \ |  390 |          Third Floor Humanities             }

>>        376 |----| |      |             (South Wing)                    }

>>            |    | |      |   ____________________  __________ ___  ____

>>            |    | |______|  |         |       344\/          |   \/    |

>>            |    |___________|         |History Dept Office   |   342   |

>>            |__________________________|______________________|_________|**

>>

>>  

