
    
    
     WOMEN IN MODERN CHINA
     HISTORY 490C05
    
     Fall 1995	Ernst Schwintzer
     Classroom: Morton 201	Phone: 221-3735
     Office: Morton 327
     Class hours:  3:30-4:50, Tuesday and Thursday
     Office Hours: 3:00-5:00, Monday and Wednesday, and by
     appointment.
    
    
     CONTENT One of the stated goals of the Communist Party in China was to
     fully emancipate China's women.  As Mao Zedong put it: "Women hold up half
     the sky,11 This seminar examines how successful the Chinese have been in
     achieving their stated goal.  More specific ally, in this seminar, we
     examine the role and status of women in traditional Chinese society, the
     influence of Western ideas and industrialization on the status of women
     during the first half of the twentieth century, and the degree to which
     the Communis t regime has achieved its stated goals since coming to power
     in 1949.
    
     FORMAT The format of the course is designed to encourage participation.
     Each week one member of the class leads class discussion on a set topic.
     To provide a point of departure for this class discussion, I have posed a
     question on the reading list.  To further
      stimulate discussion, each week, one or two members of the class will
     submit a short paper in response to this question or some other question
     raised in the assigned readings.  All other members of the class are
     expected to come to class prepared to disc uss their classmates' papers
     and the assigned readings.
    
     COURSE REQUIREMENTS Paers:  During the semester all members of the class
     will prepare and rewrite two papers.  Each paper should be six to eight
     pages long.  Each week (except the first week, second week, week of the
     fall break, and week of the Thanksgiving holiday) one or t wo members of
     the class will submit a paper in response to or reaction against that
     week's question in the class syllabus.  To ensure that all members of the
     class and I have time to read a paper before it is discussed, the paper's
     author will provide eac h member of the class with a copy of the paper one
     period before the paper is scheduled to be discussed.
     	All students are to submit their first paper by October 24 and
     their second paper by November 28.  History 490C05 2 Fall 1995
    
     Rewrites: After a paper has been discussed in class, the paper's author
     will revise it in light of class discussion and my written comments.
     Revised papers are to be resubmitted to me not later than two weeks after
     the paper was discussed in class.
    
     Weeklv Comments:  Each week (except the first week, the week of the fall
     break, and the week of the Thanksgiving holiday) all members of the class,
     except the Discussion Leader and those who have submitted a 6-8 page paper
     for discussion, will bring to cl ass a typed page of comments. It should
     list talking points on some or all of the following: the question in the
     syllabus, the questions submitted by the Discussion Leader, and your
     classmates' papers.  I will collect these papers at the end of the class
     each Thursday.
    
     Discussion Leader: To launch the discussion each week, one student will
     act as Discussion Leader.  The Discussion Leader has two responsibilities.
     The first is to stimulate thought by setting one or more questions and one
     or more quotations on that week' s topic.  The question or questions may
     or may not be related to the one on the reading list but should set up
     issues that may be discussed on the basis of the week's readings. Ideally
     these will lead to discussion on the theme of the role and status of w
     omen in modern China.  The quotation or quotations should be chosen from
     the assigned readings and also should stimulate discussion.  Both
     questions and quotations should be short enough to fit on one page. Bear
     in mind that a single question and a short,
      pithy quotation often focuses discussions more sharply than many
     questions or long, rambling quotations.
     	The Discussion Leader's page of questions and quotations should be
     available to me and other members of the class on the Tuesday before class
     discussion.
     	The Discussion Leader's second responsibility is to open
     discussion with a brief (5-10 minute) oral statement which identifies the
     topics to be taken up in that session.  Ordinarily, this statement will be
     based on the assigned readings, the Discussion L eader's own list of
     questions and quotations, and any papers submitted that week. (The
     Discussion Leader may respond to the students' papers bibliographically,
     logically, or historically, but should leave comments on writing style to
     me.)
     	I strongly encourage the Discussion Leader to meet with me at a
     mutually convenient time before class to review the themes and questions
     to be covered in class discussion that week.  I will meet briefly with the
     Discussion Leader after class to evaluate the discussion.  History 490C05
     3 Fall 1995
    
     GRADES Grades will be based on the performance as Discussion Leader (10%
     for each discussion), participation in class discussion (20%), the weekly
     one page papers (20%), and the two longer papers (10% for each first draft
     and 10% for each rewrite).
    
     TEXTS FOR THE REQUIRED READINGS You should purchase the following books.
     They are available at the College Bookstore. Margery Wolf. House of Lim.
     Jonathan Spence. Death of Woman Wang. Kazuko Ono. Chinese Women in a
     Century of Revolution,
     	1850-1950. Ida Pruitt. Daughter of Han. Emily Honig. Sisters and
     Strangers. Ding Ling. I Mvself am a Woman. Edited by Tani Barlow. Li
     Yu-ning, ed. Chinese Women Through Chinese Eyes. Judith Stacey, Patriarchy
     and Socialist Revolution in
     	China.
     Yue Daiyun and Carolyn Wakeman. To the Storm.
     Bai Fengxi. The Women Trilogv.
     Emily Honig and Gail Hershatter. Personal Voices: Chinese Women in the 1980's.
    
     	In addition to the books listed above, we will read a few shorter
     selections from various books and periodia1s.  The periodicals and books
     containing these articles, and/or reprints of these selections have been
     placed on reserve in Swem Library.  Source s placed on reserve have been
     marked with an * in the required readings.
     	Class members with no background in Chinese history should
     familiarize themselves with the broad outline of modern Chinese history by
     reading John K. Fairbank's The Great Chinese Revolution, 1800-1985,
     Jonathan Spence's The Search for Modern China, the r elevant sections of
     John K. Fairbank's China: A New History, or some other general survey of
     modern Chinese history.
     	For your convenience, in addition to the required readings, I have
     listed a few "recommended readings" for each week's class.  Students are
     not required to read any of these selections, and will not be expected to
     be familiar with them during class discu ssions.  If anyone wishes to do
     additional reading on a particular topic, a good source for material
     published before 1982 is Women in China: /bibliography of Available
     English Language Materials, complied by Lucie Cheng et al.  For more
     recent material c heck the bibliographies in the assigned readings.  I
     shall be glad to make bibliographical suggestions. History 490C05 4 Fall
     1995
    
     CLASS SCHEDULE AND READING ASSIGNMENTS
    
     August 24: Introduction. Required Readings: None Recommended Readings:
     Patricia Buckley Ebrey, The Inner Ouarters: Marriage and the Lives of
     Chinese Women in the Sung Period. 1993. Charles P. Fitzgerald, The Empress
     Wu, 1955. Robert Hans van Gulik, Sexual Life in Ancient China: A
     Preliminarv Survey of Chinese Sex and Societv from ca. 15000 B.C. till
     1644 A.D., 1974. Howard Seymour Levy, Chinese Foot Binding: The History of
     a Curious Erotic Custom, 1966.
    
     August 29, 31: The uterine family. Ouestion for Discussion:  What
     strategies did women use in the Chinese family to develop their own sphere
     of influence? Required Readings: Margery Wolf, House of Lim. Judith
     Stacey, Patriarchv and Socialist Revolution in China, 38-59. Recommended
     Readings: Hugh Baker, Chinese Familv and Kinship, 1-174. Myron L. Cohen,
     "Lineage Organization in North China," Journal of Asian Studies 49, no. 3
     (August 1990):
     	509-534. Susan Mann, "Women in the Kinship, Class, and Community
     Structures of Qing Dynasty China," Journal of Asian Studies 46 (1987):
     37-56. Kinship Organization in Late Imperial China. 1000-1940, edited by
     Patricia Buckley Ebrey and James L. Watson, 1986. James L. Watson.
     "Chinese Kinship Reconsidered: Anthropological Perspectives on Historical
     Research," China Ouarterlv 92 (1982): 589-622. Myron L. Cohen, House
     United, House Divided: The Chinese Familv in Taiwan, 1976. Dorothy Ko,
     Teachers of the Inner Chambers. Wolf, Margery. Women and the Familv in
     Rural Taiwan.
    
    
     September 5, 7: Women in late imperial China. Ouestion for Discussion:
     What was the legal position of women in late imperial China? Required
     Readings: Jonathan Spence, Death of Woman Wang. *Vivienne W. Ng, "Ideology
     and Sexuality: Rape Laws in Qing China," Journal of Asian Studies 46
     (1987): 5770. History 490C05 5 Fall 1995
    
     Recommended Readings: T'ung-tsu Ch'u, Law and Society in Traditional
     China, 1965. Jonathan Ocko, "Family Disharmony as Seen in Ch'ing Legal
     Cases," in Orthodoxv in Late Imperial China, edited by Kwang-ching Liu,
     1990. Paul S. Ropp, "The Seeds of Change: Reflections on the Conditions of
     Women in the Early and mid-Ch'ing," Signs 2(August 1976): 5-23.
    
     September 12, 14:  Early challenges to the traditional order:
     Revolutionaries and reformers. Ouestion for Discussion:  What were the
     underlying motives which inspired women to reject the traditional
     political order in late imperial China? Reguired Readings: Ono Kazuko,
     Chinese Women in a Centurv of Revolution, 1-92; Mary Rankin, Early Chinese
     Revolutionaries, 18-47, 126201; Stacey, 68-79. Recommended Readings: Ida
     Belle Lewis, The Education of Girls in China, (1919) 1972; Kwok Pui-lan,
     Chinese Women and Christianitv, 1860-1927, 101-145. Charlotte L. Beahan,
     "Feminism and Nationalism in the Chinese Women's Press, 1902-1911," Modern
     China 1 (October 1975): 379-416.
    
     September 19, 21: Variations on a theme; the life of ordinary women during
     the late nineteenth and early twentieth century. Ouestion for Discussion:
     To what extent did the political and social changes of the late Qing and
     early Republic influence the position of women in Chinese society?
     Reguired Readings: Ida Pruitt, A Daughter of Han; Stacey, 79-107.
     Recommended Readings: Hsiao-t'ung Fei, Peasant Life in China. a Field
     Study of countrv Life in the Yangtze Vallev, (1939) 1962. Chapter 3 on the
     family. Hsiao Hung [Chang Naiying], The Field of Life and Death and Tales
     of the Hulan, 1979. See her memoirs of girlhood in rural Manchuria. Arthur
     Smith, Village Life in China, (1899) 1970. Chapter 23: "Chinese Country
     Girls and Women." Janice E. Stockard, Daughters of the Canton Delta:
     Marriage Patterns and Economic Strategies in South China, 1860-1930, 1989.
     History 490C05 6 Fall 1995
    
     Zeng Jifen, Testimony of a Confucian Woman: the Autobiography of Mrs. Nie
     Zeng Jifen, 1852-1942.
    
     September 26, 28:  Educated women in Republican China. Ouestion for
     Discussion:  What impact did the introduction of Western learning have on
     the attitudes and lives of Chinese scholars and woman Required Readings:
     Li Yu-ning, Chinese Women Through Chinese Eyes, 59-101, 125-174, 182-251.
     Recommended Readings: Florence W. Ayscough, Chinese Women Yesterday and
     Today, (1937), 1975. /buwei Yang Chao, Autobiographv of a Chinese Woman,
     1947. Marion Levy, Jr., The Family Revolution in Modern China,
     	1949.
    
     October 3, 5: Early efforts for Women's Emancipation question for
     Discussion:  Trace Ding Ling's attitude toward gender from her earliest
     writings into the 1930s. Required Readings: Ono, 93-111; Ding Ling. I
     Mvse1f am a Woman, 1-34, 49-200. Recommended Readings: Jonathan Spence,
     The Gate of Heavenlv Peace, 151-302. Yi-tsi Mei Feurwerker, Ding Ling's
     Fiction: Ideology and Narrative in Modern Chinese Literature, 1982.
    
     October 10: Fall break.
     October 13: Film:	"Raise the Red Lantern"
    
     October 17, 19: Women workers question for Discussion:  How did the
     textile workers of Shanghai perceive themselves? Required Readings Ono,
     112-139; Emily Honig. Sisters and Strangers; Lu Lan, "Sorrows of a Factory
     Worker," in Chinese Women throuqh Chinese Eyes, 175-181. Recommended
     Readings: One Dav in China, May 21. 1936, edited by Sherman Cochran, 9-68.
    
     October 24, 26: Women in the Communist Revolution question for Discussion:
     How did the political, military, and social environment of the Communist
     revolution shape the Communist Party's policy toward women? Required
     Readings: Ono 140-175; Ding Ling 260-328; Stacey, 108-194. History 490C05
     7 Fall 1995
    
     Recommended Readings: Kathy LeMans Walker, "The Party and Peasant Women,"
     in Chinese Communists and Rural Society. 1927-1934, edited by Philip Huang
     et al., 1978. Delia Davin, "Women in the Liberated Areas," in Women in
     China, edited by M. Young, 1973. Jonathan Spence, The Gate of Heavenlv
     Peace, 303-417. Helen F. Snow [Nym Wales], Red Dust: Autobiographies of
     Chinese Communists. As told to Nym Wales. 1952. Chapter 7: Autobiographies
     of Cai Dingli and Kang Keqing. Jane Price, "Women and Leadership in the
     Chinese Communist Movement," Bulletin of Concerned Asian Scholars 7
     (January-March 1975): 19-24.
    
     October 31, November 2: Women in rural areas of the People's Republic.
     question for Discussion:  What impact did collectivization and the
     official campaign for women's emancipation have on the socio-economic
     status of women in rural China? Required Readings: Ono, 176-186; Stacey,
     202-235, 243-247; *Sulamith Heins Potter and Jack M. Potter, China's
     Peasants: The Anthropology of a Revolution, 1990:
     	196-269. Recommended Readings: Kay Ann Johnson, Women, the Family
     and Peasant Revolution in China, 93-214; Phyllis Andors, The Unfinished
     Liberation of Chinese Women, 1949-1980. Elisabeth Croll, The Politics of
     Marriage in Contemporary China, 1981. William L. Parish, Jr., Village and
     Family in Contemporary China, 1978.  Part 3: "Family Organization and
     Ritual Life." Stephen W. Mosher, Broken Earth: The Rural Chinese, (1983):
     169-261. Judd, Ellen R. Gender and Power in Rural North China.
    
     November 7, 9: Intellectuals, the Party, and Perpetual Revolution.
     question for Discussion:  How did Yue Daiyun primarily see her role in
     life: as an intellectual?, as a revolutionary?, as a loyal Party member?,
     as a woman? Required Readings: Yue Daiyun, To the Storm, History 490C05 8
     Fall 1995
    
     Recommended Readings: Lynn T. White III, Careers in Shanghai: The Social
     Guidance of Personal Energies in a Developing Chinese City. 1949-1966,
     1978.  See pp. 106-206. Barbara Wolfe Jancar, "Leading Women in Political
     and Cultural Life in the P.R.C.," Women Under Communism, (1978): 229-297.
     Fulang Lo. Morning Breeze: A True Storv of China's Cultural Revolution,
     1989. Nien Cheng, Life and Death in Shanghai. Chen Xuezhao. Surviving the
     Storm: A Memoir. Zhai Zhenhua. Red Flower of China.
    
     November 14, 16: Sexuality, Courtship, and Marriage in Contemporary China.
     Ouestion for Discussion:  Evaluate contemporary urban Chinese women's
     attitude toward their own sexuality and toward their relationship with men
     in light of traditional Chinese practices and in light of Western society.
     Required Readings: Emily Honig and Gail Hershatter. Personal Voices:
     Chinese Women in the 1980's, 1-166. Bai Fengxi, "Once Loved in a Storm
     Returning," and "Say, Who Like Me is Prey to Fond Regret," in The Women
     Trilogy, 9-103, 204-287. Recommended Readings: Elisabeth Croll, "The
     Exchange of Women and Property: Marriage in Post-Revolutionary China." In
     Women and Property -- Women as Property, edited by Renee Hirschon, 1984.
     Margery Wolf, Revolution Postponed: Women in Contemporary China, 1985.
     William B. Jankowiak, Sex. Death. and Hierarchy in a Chinese City,
     165-222.
    
     November 21:	Film: "Small Happiness"
     November 23:	Thanksgiving
    
     November 28, 30: Women, Family, Work, and Society in Contemporary China.
     question for Discussion:  Delineate the forces in contemporary Chinese
     society which either promote or hinder the ability of women to achieve
     full equality in the family, work place, or society at large. Required
     Readings:  Honig and Hershatter, 167-340;  /bai Fengxi, "First Bathed in
     Moonlight," in The Women
     	Trilogy, 104-203.
     History 490C05	9	Fall 1995
    
     Recommended Readings: William B. Jankowiak, Sex, Death, and Hierarchv in a
     Chinese Citv, 223-257. Christina Gilmartin, "Violence Against Women in
     Contemporary China," In Violence in China: Essays in Culture and
     Counterculture, edited by Jonathan Lipman and Stevan Harrell, 1990.
     Articles by Li Xiaojiang, Gao Xiaoxian, Margaret Y.K. Woo, and Cristiana
     K. Gilmartin in Christiana K. Gilmartin, ed., Engendering China. Wong,
     Kam-ming and Angelina Yee, eds. Better by Half? Contemporary Chinese Women
     Writers. Any short stories or novels by contemporary women authors.

