**[Samford](http://www.samford.edu)  |  [Arts &
Sciences](http://www.samford.edu/schools/artsci/cover.html)  |
[History](http://www.samford.edu/schools/artsci/history/index.html)  |
[Frost](http://www.samford.edu/schools/artsci/history/faculty/gsfrost/index.html)**

> **HISTORY 200-05: THE WORLD IN GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE**  
>  TTH 8:00-9:50, DBH 113  
> Dr. Ginger Frost  
> DBH 109, ext. 2819, [gsfrost@samford.edu](mailto:gsfrost@samford.edu)  
> Office Hours: MW 9:00-10:00

>

> **Purpose:**  
>  History 200 is a survey-level course looking at world history between 1500
and the present. Students will explore the history of western expansion and
the varied responses of rest of the globe to these incursions. Students will
also develop critical thinking, speaking, and writing skills.

>

> **Absences, Make-ups, and Other Policies:**  
>  Students who miss class must have an excused absence, which includes ONLY
illnesses (with a doctor's note) and university business (also documented).
With regards to the latter, as soon as you know the dates for your absences,
you must let me know, and I will record these as "excused." I will then
average your grades without counting those days either way. Otherwise,
absences will hurt your grade, particularly on days during which we have
discussions of articles and books. I will begin counting off participation and
on your final grade after two absences. Three lates equals one absence, and
that includes lateness on returning from breaks. I reserve the right to count
off as much as a letter grade on your final grade for excessive absences and
lateness.

>

> I will give one make-up examination for both of the first two exams. If you
miss either the first or second test with an excused absence, I will give you
an objective test over the first two-thirds of the course. If you miss both of
the first two exams, you must drop the course. Otherwise, I will not give
make-up assignments for any reason; one cannot "make up" class participation
or in-class writing assignments. At the end of the semester, I will drop the
lowest grade on in-class assignments. Otherwise, I will give NO extra credit,
so please do not ask.

>

> Journal assignments are due at the BEGINNING of class. I will take off 10
points a day for each day a paper is late. I will not accept papers later than
a week after the due date. No one may take the final who has not turned in all
the assignments. Therefore, if you fail to turn in those assignments by the
specified time, you will be given an F for the course rather than an
incomplete. Incompletes will only be given in the case of grave emergencies
(approved by the dean), when a student has had to miss the final.

>

> **Academic Dishonesty:**  
>  Anyone caught cheating in this course will be flunked for the course. All
papers should be original and written specifically for this class.
Furthermore, students may not plagiarize.

>

> Plagiarism is the act of stealing the words or ideas of another person and
passing them off as your own. The definition of plagiarism is four words in a
row. If you use four or more identical words in a row from ANY text, you must
(1) put those words in quotation marks; and (2) cite the reference in
parenthesis after the quote. For example, "he had returned from his journey
aloft" (Plato, 749). Remember: BOTH the quotation marks AND the page reference
must be present to avoid penalties for plagiarism. Close paraphrasing by
changing a word or two or the tense of the verbs is also plagiarism.

>

> If you use the IDEAS of a writer, but not his/her exact words, you should
cite the author and page without the quotation marks. However, you should
NEVER use quotation marks without citation. In other words, any time you quote
something, you must also tell the reader where the words originated.

>

> If you unintentionally plagiarize, you will be docked ten points for each
instance. If you intentionally plagiarize, you will flunk the course.

>

> Students may not collaborate on examinations or journal articles. Any
students involved in such collaboration will receive zeroes on their papers or
exams. If two students are knowingly involved, BOTH are guilty and will be
penalized accordingly.

>

> **Required Texts:**  
>  Richard M. Golden. _The Social Dimension of Western Civilization_ Vol. II.
_Readings from the Sixteenth Century to the Present_. 4 th edition.  
> Steven Ozment. _The Burgermeister's Daughter: Scandal in a Sixteenth-Century
German Town_.  
>  Jonathan Spence. _The Death of Woman Wang_.  
>  John Demos. _The Unredeemed Captive_.  
>  Huda Shaarawi. _Harem Years: The Memoirs of an Egyptian Feminist_.  
>  Manlio Argueta. _One Day of Life_.

>

> There is an optional textbook. I recommend this if you have trouble
following along, difficulty taking notes, or need extra reminders or
references:  
> Albert Craig, et.al. _The Heritage of World Civilizations_. Vol. II. _Since
1500_. 5 th edition.

>

> **Discussion Methods:**  
>  We will be discussing articles and books throughout the semester. Please
follow these guidelines in discussion:

>

> (1) The rudest thing a student can do is be late to class. It is disruptive
to everyone and harmful to discussion. Be to class on time. If you are
consistently late, I reserve the right to penalize you in your participation
grade and in your overall class grade. You will also miss the quizzes and in-
class assignments, which will hurt still more of your grade.

>

> (2) Do not speak, read, or be disruptive in any way when someone else is
speaking.

>

> (3) Please be focused. Your remarks should follow up on those of the last
speaker (either to disagree, agree, expand the point, etc.) rather than going
off on a different point.

>

> (4) Do not make personal remarks about others during discussions. I expects
students to disagree on occasion, of course, but these should be intellectual
differences only.

>

> (5) Be careful not to dominate class. You are not graded for the amount of
speaking, but the quality and appropriateness of your comments.

>

> (6) Please use gender-inclusive language (this goes as well for written
work).

>

> **Evaluation:**  
>  Three examinations (20% each); journal responses to articles (10%); in-
class assignments and quizzes (10%); group discussion leadership of
book/response grade (15%); and participation (5%). The exams will be all essay
and each will deal with one-third of the course material, and we will discuss
the format more carefully as we approach the dates of the exams. Information
about the discussion leadership can be found at the end of the syllabus.

>

> **Grading Scale**  
> ---  
> 98-100  | A+ | 78-79 | C+  
> 92-97 | A | 72-77 | C  
> 90-91 | A- | 70-71 | C-  
> 88-89 | B+ | 68-69 | D+  
> 82-87 | B | 62-67 | D  
> 80-81 | B- | 60-61 | D-  
> Below 60 | F |   |  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>

>

> COURSE SCHEDULE

>

>  
>  
>

>

> DATE TOPIC ASSIGNMENT  
>  
>

> 8/29 Course Introduction

>

> Reformation Europe  
>  
>

> 8/31 Age of Religious Wars Craig, 449-85

>

> ARTICLE DISCUSSION Golden, 18-29 (Journal)  
>  
>

> 9/5 Mesoamerica and the Age of Discovery Craig, 519-541  
>  
>

> 9/7 Africa and the Slave Trade Craig, 495-516  
>  
>

> 9/12 Early Modern Society and Culture _Burgermeister's Daughter_

>

> BOOK DISCUSSION - LED BY GROUP ONE  
>  
>

> 9/14 Islamic Empires Craig, 637-656

>

> 9/19 Scientific Revolution and Enlightenment Craig, 663-82  
>  
>

> 9/21 Asia in the Early Modern Period Craig, 545-79

>

> BOOK DISCUSSION - LED BY GROUP TWO _Death of Woman Wang_

>

> 9/26 EXAMINATION  
>  
>

> 9/28 European State Building Craig, 585-609

>

> ARTICLE DISCUSSION Golden, 30-46 (Journal)  
>  
>

> 10/3 European State Building II Craig, 613-34

>

> 10/5 Clash of Cultures

>

> BOOK DISCUSSION-GROUP THREE _The Unredeemed Captive_  
>  
>

> 10/10 Revolutions in America, France, Latin Craig, 689-715

>

> America  
>  
>

> 10/12 Industrial Revolution: New Ideas Craig, 719-42  
>  
>

> 10/17 FALL BREAK  
>  
>

> 10/19 19th-Century Europe Craig, 749-70

>

> ARTICLE DISCUSSION Golden, 213-26 (Journal)  
>  
>

> 10/24 Towards Democracy in Europe Craig, 777-804; 829-61

>

> Latin America and India  
>  
>

> 10/26 Domesticity and Feminism Craig, 822-25

>

> ARTICLE DISCUSSION Golden, 227-40 (Journal)  
>  
>

> 10/31 Darwinism Craig, 807-822; 866-75; 921-25

>

> New Imperialism and Africa

>

> 11/2 Women, Islam, Anti-Colonialism Craig, 861-66

>

> BOOK DISCUSSION - GROUP FOUR _Harem Years_  
>  
>

> 11/7 Modern East Asia Craig, 881-913  
>  
>

> 11/9 EXAMINATION  
>  
>

> 11/14 World War I Craig, 925-44

>

> ARTICLE DISCUSSION Golden, 245-58 (Journal)  
>  
>

> 11/16 Russian Revolution and Depression Craig, 947-68

>

> 11/21 World War II Craig, 971-95

>

> ARTICLE DISCUSSION Golden, 260-71; 306-16 (Journal)  
>  
>

> 11/23 THANKSGIVING BREAK  
>  
>

> 11/28 Cold War Craig, 999-1024

>

> Contemporary Western World  
>  
>

> 11/30 Contemporary Non-West Craig, 1033-77; 1085-87  
>  
>

> 12/5 Latin America Craig, 1077-85

>

> BOOK DISCUSSION - GROUP FIVE _One Day of Life_  
>  
>

> 12/7 World in 2000

>

> Evaluations, prepare for finals  
>  
>

> FINAL EXAMINATION: Wednesday, December 13, 2000, 8:00-10:00  
>  
>  
>

>

> DISCUSSION LEADERSHIP--INSTRUCTIONS

>

>  
>  
>

>

> During the semester, students will lead discussion of the texts several
times. The instructor will pick the groups of four or five students and assign
the dates for their leadership at the beginning of the semester. Students
should try to reach the following goals for this assignment:  
>  
>

> (1) Develop discussion questions that engage the text in an analytical
manner;

>

> (2) Use the questions to further the exploration of the broader issues in
world history;

>

> (3) Connect the work with those we have read before (when applicable);

>

> (4) Engage the class with the text.  
>  
>

> Students should not talk more than five minutes about background materials;
in addition, student leaders may not ask for a mere summary of the book.
Instead, the groups should produce questions that discuss complicated issues
and themes in the text. Your grade will depend on the following criteria:  
>  
>

> (1) Ability to start a meaningful discussion, including holding students
accountable for the day's assignment;

>

> (2) Rigorous and thoughtful questions;

>

> (3) Willingness to accept other students' comments;

>

> (4) Oral communication skills (such as making eye contact, speaking clearly
and audibly, having an attractive presentation style, showing enthusiasm, and
using visual aids);

>

> (5) Coordination and smoothness in working together;

>

> (6) Creativity.  
>  
>

> Students are not limited to simply standing at the front of the classroom
and asking questions. They can develop small groups assignments, games, or
contests to get at the themes of the text and course. They can give the class
quizzes or ask for written work. The only requirement is that they engage the
class as a whole rather than giving speeches. Ten percent of the fifteen
percent of this grade will come from their leadership of their text.  
>  
>

> I do not require research for these discussion days, although you may find
it easier to ask analytical questions if you have learned more about the text.
The only written work you will need to turn in is a list of questions. This
must be a coordinated list of all three participants, not separate lists from
each person.  
>  
>

> The final five percent of the grade will come from their response to another
group's leadership. Two response groups will be chosen at random on the day
the class first discusses the text. In other words, you will not have any
warning if your group will be the one of the ones expected to respond, so you
must be prepared every day. Just because you have been chosen one day does not
mean you will not be selected again another day. Your readiness to respond and
help with additional questions and comments will determine this part of your
grade. (If your group is never drawn out of the hat, your grade will come
entirely from your presentation).  
>  
>

> It is extremely important that students show each other the same courtesy
and attention that they show the instructor. The day other students lead is
not a "day off." If students show exhibit behaviors that I find unacceptable
on these days, I will begin instituting quizzes and penalties to improve
deportment.  
>  
>  
>  
>

>

> JOURNAL RESPONSE INSTRUCTIONS

>

>  
>  
>

>

> Students will turn in written responses to the articles from Golden's
reader. These responses should be typed and a minimum of one page in length.
The point of the journal is to show that you have not only read the article,
but also have thought about its implications. You are encouraged, then, to go
beyond simply summarizing the major points of the essay. You may connect it
with other readings, discuss two or three of the major arguments, or dispute
its main points. In other words, thoughtfulness helps.  
>  
>

> Journals will be marked with grades of check plus (95), check (85), and
check minus (75). I reserve the right, however, to give a lower grade to
anyone who does not take the assignment seriously or goes well below the
minimum expectations.  
>  
>

> The key difference between the check pluses and the checks will be critical
thinking skills and writing proficiency. Those who show that they have thought
carefully about what they have read, and those who exhibit superior writing
ability, will do better than those who write simple summaries of the works, or
those who make numerous writing errors.  
>  
>

> Journals are due at the BEGINNING of class. I will count off ten points a
day for every day the assignment is late, and will not accept any journal
papers more than a week after the due date.

