### HISTORY 551  
AFRICA BEFORE COLONIAL RULE



DESCRIPTION: The intention of this course is to establish an appreciation of
indigenous African systems and accomplishments before the twentieth century.
It will also serve to address misconceptions about African life. Issues like
the ancient civilizations of Egypt, Zimbabwe, Aksum and Ethiopia, the use of
iron and brass casting, the empires of the Western Sudan and state formation
will be treated. An examination will also be made of indigenous political
systems, economy and trade.

TEXTS

  1. P. Curtin, S. Feierman, L. Thompson and J. Vansina, _African History_
  2. C. Magbaily Fyle, _The Solima Yalunka Kingdom_
  3. C. Achebe, _Things Fall Apart_ 

A number of readings listed in the weekly schedule have been placed on reserve
in the library.

REQUIREMENTS: Attendance at class sessions is essential and will be worked
into the final grades. The evaluation will be based on one ten page paper, one
mid term essay test, reading presentations, and one final. For the mid term
essay test, students will be given three essay questions to work on at home.
They will be expected to write in class answers to two of these questions
selected by the professor a week later. The ten page essay will culminate in
class presentations. Presenters and discussants will be identified a week in
advance. The essays must be turned in immediately after the presentation or
grades will be lowered in consequence. There will also be specific assigned
readings which will be presented in class. The final exam will be a couple of
essays.

GRADES

    
    
         Ten-Page Essay               30%
         Midterm                      25%
         Reading presentations,
             class participation      20%
         Final                        25%
    



DETAILED SYLLABUS

**

Week 1

**

Relevance of and sources for the study of precolonial Africa

Arabic sources and oral tradition

Geography and human activity

Readings: P. Martin & P. O'Meara, _Africa_ , pp.3-40, 64-70

C. Magbaily Fyle, _Solima Yalunka Kingdom_ , pp. 52-3, 79

\----------------, 'Oral Tradition and Sierra Leone History', _History in
Africa_ 5, 12, 1985

J. Vansina, _Oral Tradition as History_



**

Week 2

**

Ancient Civilizations of Africa 1

Egypt and the Nile

The Civilization of Aksum and Ethiopia

Readings: G. Mokhtar (ed) _Ancient Civilizations of Africa_

_UNESCO General History of Africa_ , Vols. 1 & 2, Introduction, chaps. 1 & 5

Curtin etc. _African History_ , chap. 2



**

Week 3

**

Ancient civilizations of Africa 2

The African Iron Age, Food Production and the Bantu Migration

Readings: R.Oliver & B. Fagan, _Africa in the Iron Age_ , chap. 2

Curtin etc. _African History_ , pp. 25-32

G. Mokhtar (ed), _Ancient Civilization of Africa

UNESCO General History of Africa_, vol. 2, chap. 27

M. el Fasi (ed), _Africa from the Seventh to the Eleventh Centuries: UNESCO
General History of Africa_ , Vol 3, chap. 6.

H. Harlan, J. De Wet, A. Stemler (ads), _Origins of African Plant
Domestication_ (Introduction)



**

Week 4

**

The trans-Saharan trade and the Western Sudan state system

Introduction of Islam into West Africa

Readings: Curtin etc. _African History_ , chap. 3

Martin & O'Meara, _Africa_ , pp. 72-77

N. Levtzion, _Ancient Ghana and Mali_

J. Ajayi & M. Crowder, _History of West Africa_ , vol. 1, chaps. 4, 5, 6

D.T. Niani (ed), _Africa from the 12th to the 16th Centuries: UNESCO General
History of Africa_ , vol. 4, chaps. 6, 7, 8



**

Week 5

**

Islam in East Africa and the rise of Swahili Culture

Readings: Martin & O'Meara, _Africa_ , chap. 5

Curtin etc. _African History_ , pp. 433-437

B. Ogot & Kieran, _Zamani: A Survey of East African History_

D.T. Niani (ed), _UNESCO General History_ , vol. 4, chap. 18 (Matviev, 'The
development of Swahili Civilization')

D. Nurse & T. Spear, _The Swahili

_



**

Week 6

**

European Coastal Activity

Slavery in Africa and the Atlantic Slave Trade

Readings: Curtin etc. _African History_ , chap. 7

S. Miers and I. Kopytoff (eds), _Slavery in Africa_ , chaps. 1 & 7

J.E. Inikori, 'Africa in World History: The Export slave trade from Africa and
the emergence of the Atlantic economic order,' in B. Ogot (ed), _Africa from
the Sixteenth to the Eighteenth Centuries. UNESCO General History vol. 5_

P. Lovejoy, 'African History and the Atlantic Slave Trade', _Journal of
African History_ , 30, (1989)

W. Rodney, _History of the Upper Guinea Coast_ , chap. 4

P. Lovejoy (ed), _The Ideology of Slavery in Africa_ , (particularly the
introduction)

S. Miers & Roberts, _The End of Slavery in Africa

_



**

Week 7

**

Revolutionary Change

The Islamic Revolutions of the 13th and 19th Centuries

The Bantu world and the Mfecane

Readings: Curtin etc. _African History_ , chaps 10 & 12

A. Ajayi & M. Crowder, _History of West Africa_ , vol. 1, chap. 12, vol 2,
chap. 1.

C. Magbaily Fyle, _Solima Yalunka Kingdom_ , chap. 2.

