### History 700  
Seminar in World History



**Description:** This is a graduate reading seminar designed to introduce
students to several approaches to world history, a fast-developing and
increasingly popular subdiscipline within the historical profession. Among the
approaches we shall examine are world-systems theory; what I call  "ocean
history," i.e., cultural integration on the shores of a particular ocean; and
specific cultural integrators such as disease, slavery, and the treatment of
marginal populations. We shall focus for the most part on the period after
1500; however, a critical question in the field today is whether integrative
world historical approaches can be applied to earlier periods, including
antiquity.



**Written assignments** :

  1. Each student will prepare a brief (2-3 pages) **position paper** on each week's readings. A position paper should resemble a short review article, giving your opinion of the strengths and weaknesses of the selections and comparing the contribution of different authors to that week's world historical approach. However, the paper should also note questions and problems that the readings raise in your mind. If you wish, you may also point out connections between readings for this course and work you have done in your area of specialization. Position papers are due at the beginning of class and will be graded excellent/satisfactory/unsatisfactory. You are encouraged to collect your position papers in a notebook so that you will have them handy for future reference. As the quarter progresses, you should find yourself referring to earlier papers in order to compare readings on different approaches. 
  2. Each student will prepare a **bibliographical essay** of about 15 pages critically reviewing the literature on a particular world historical approach and evaluating the applicability of this approach to a particular topic in his/her own area of specialty. A brief (1-2 pages) **prospectus** of the essay is due in class on **November 7**. The completed essay is due by 5:00 p.m. on **Monday, December 5**. Part of the last class will be devoted to brief presentations of the conclusions of the bibliographical essays. 



**Grading:**

    
    
         Attendance and participation       15%
         Position papers                    35%
         Bibliographical essay              50%
            (including presentation)
    
    



**Structure of the course:** During the first hour of class, we shall divide
into three groups. Each week, one person from each group will be designated to
moderate the group's discussion, setting forth what he feels are critical
questions raised by the readings and encouraging other group members to
present their own questions and opinions, while making sure that all readings
are sufficiently discussed and compared. After a short break, the groups will
come together to compare their conclusions. Problems encountered in reading
and research may also be aired during the second hour.



**Readings:** The following books are required for the course and are
available at SBX, Long's, and the University Bookstore:

  1. Janet Abu-Lughod, _Before European Hegemony: The World System, 1250-1350_ (New York, 1989) 
  2. Fernand Braudel, _The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Philip II_ , trans. Sian Reynolds, Vol. I (New York, 1972) 
  3. K.N. Chaudhuri, _Asia Before Europe: Economy and Civilization of the Indian Ocean from the Rise of Islam to 1750_ (Cambridge and New York, 1990) 
  4. Alfred Crosby, _Ecological Imperialism: The Biological Expansion of Europe, 900-1900_ (Cambridge, 1986) 
  5. William H. McNeill, _Plagues and Peoples_ (Garden City, NY, 1976) 
  6. Eric Wolf, _Europe and the People Without History_ (Berkeley, Los Angeles, and London, 1982) 



We shall also read excerpts from the following books:

  1. Leila Ahmed, _Women and Gender in Islam_ (New Haven, 1992) 
  2. Kenneth J. Andrien and Rolena Adorno, eds., _Transatlantic Encounters: Europeans and Andeans in the 16th Century_ (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1991) 
  3. Mark R. Cohen, _Under Crescent and Cross: The Jews in the Middle Ages_ (Princeton, 1993) 
  4. Philip Curtin, _Death by Migration: Europe's Encounter with the Tropical World in the 19th Century_ (Cambridge, 1990) 
  5. S. Jay Kleinberg, _Retrieving Women's History: Changing Perceptions on the Role of Women in Politics and Society_ (Oxford, New York, Hamburg, Paris, 1988) 
  6. William H. McNeill, _The Rise of the West_ (Chicago and London, 1963, 1991) 
  7. Orlando Patterson, _Slavery and Social Death: A Comparative Study_ (Cambridge, MA, 1982) 
  8. Leo Spitzer, _Lives In Between: Assimilation and Marginality in Africa, Brazil, West Africa_ (Cambridge, 1989) 
  9. Marilyn R. Waldman, et al., eds., _Understanding Women: The Challenge of Cross-Cultural Perspectives_ (Columbus, 1992) 
  10. Immanuel Wallerstein, _The Modern World System_ , Vol. I, _Capitalist Agriculture and the Origins of the European World-Economy in the 16th Century_ (San Diego and New York, 1974) 

All the above books have been placed on closed reserve in the Main Library.



**Tips for reading:** Keep a pen and paper (or a PC) handy when you read.
Check the bibliography and acknowledgements of each book to see what sources
the author uses and to whom s/he is beholden. Look over the introduction and
table of contents to see how the book is structured and what the author's
stated approach is. As you continue, ask yourself whether the author follows
through with this approach. Jot down the principal argument of each chapter,
and point out any questions or problems that the book raises in your mind, as
well as any inconsistencies in the author's presentation. Think of points of
comparison with the week's other readings, with readings for other weeks, and
with material in your own area of specialization. When you finish the book,
briefly note your overall impression. This technique should help you in
preparing your position papers and should provide you with ample fodder for
discussion. It may also keep you from getting bogged down in the readings.



**Schedule**

_Sept. 26: Introduction_

_Oct. 3: World Systems_

  * Immanuel Wallerstein, _The Modern World-System_ , Vol. I, Chapters 1, 2, 5, 6, 7; skim 3, 4. 
  * Janet Abu-Lughod, _Before European Hegemony_
  * Immanuel Wallerstein, Review of Janet Abu-Lughod, _Before European Hegemony_ , _International Journal of Middle East Studies_ XXIV, 1 (February 1992): 128-131 (handout)

_Oct. 10: Ocean History_

  * Fernand Braudel, _The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World_ , Vol. I - Skim Part I; focus on Part II. 
  * K.N. Chaudhuri, _Asia Before Europe_ \- Introduction, Part I, Conclusion 
  * Burton Stein, Review of K.N. Chaudhuri, _Asia Before Europe_ , _Journal of World History_ IV, 1 (Spring 1993): 155-158 (handout) 

_Oct. 17: Cultural Contact_

  * William H. McNeill, _The Rise of the West_ , pp. xv-xxxii, 565-599 
  * Eric Wolf, _Europe and the People Without History_ \- Focus on Introduction, Part II, and Afterword. 
  * Alfred Crosby, _Ecological Imperialism_ 

_Oct. 24: Disease_

  * Crosby, _Ecological Imperialism_ \- Review and/or finish. 
  * William H. McNeill, _Plagues and Peoples_
  * Philip Curtin, _Death by Migration_ 

_Oct. 31: Slavery_

  * Orlando Patterson, _Slavery and Social Death_ , pp. 1-101, 299-342 
  * Leo Spitzer, _Lives In Between_ , pp. 40-72 
  * Philip Curtin, _The Tropical Atlantic in the Age of the Slave Trade_ (pamphlet) 

_Nov. 7: Treatment of Religious and Ethnic Minorities_

> _Bibliographical essay prospectus due_

  * Kenneth Andrien and Rolena Adorno, eds., _Transatlantic Encounters_ , pp. 203-267 
  * Mark R. Cohen, _Under Crescent and Cross_ , pp. xv-14, 30-74, 139-199 
  * Leo Spitzer, _Lives In Between_ , 73-173 

_Nov. 14: Status of Women_

  * S. Jay Kleinberg, ed., _Retrieving Women's History_ , pp. 5-29, 303ff. (on ancient India) 
  * Leila Ahmed, _Women and Gender in Islam_ , pp. 41-143 
  * Marilyn R. Waldman, et al., eds., _Understanding Women_ , pp. 81-103, 123-145, 183-204 

_Nov. 21: Research and Review_

_Nov. 28: The Broader Implications of World History_

> _Bibliographical essay reports_

