  
  
  
  

**HST 362:**

**WEST AFRICA AND THE AFRICAN-AMERICAN CONNECTION**

  
  

This course is intended as a foundation for Comparative Black History and as a
key to understanding African history. Designed for students with African and
American interests, it examines the politics, economy and culture of West
African societies during the period from about 1500 to the end of the
precolonial period in the late 19th century. This corresponds to the time when
the Atlantic slave trade had an enormous impact on West Africa and the time
when millions of Africans, unwilling immigrants to the Americas, laid the
foundations of African-American societies. In the course we will study four
themes: **first** , West African cultures, economies and states; **second** ,
the transformations of these cultures in West Africa; **third** , the ways in
which the slave trade and slavery functioned within West Africa and between
West Africa and the Americas; **fourth** , the formation of Afro-American
cultures, particularly in the Caribbean, Surinam and colonial South Carolina.

The course will combine lecture, film, reports and discussion. I count on
active preparation and participation from students, and take this into serious
account in grading your performance. This syllabus is a guide to the course.
**Don't leave home without it**.

Work and grading. First, you will be expected to keep up with readings and
participate actively in discussion, e-mail communications, and role plays;
participation will count for 10% of the grade. Second, papers. 40% of the
grade will come from 2 short papers of about 5-7 pages each; both papers
should include light but critical annotation of the written and electronic
sources used. The first paper will be due in late September on a fixed topic.
Your second paper will come out of your work in a "working group" with at
least one other student colleague; you will make an oral report together, and
produce a written report, either together or separately. The due date for
those reports will be determined by the subject you work on, and where it fits
in to the syllabus. Third, exams. 25% of the grade will be based on a midterm,
given just before the spring break, and 25% on the final; both of these exams
will be in essay format, and you will be to include all relevant materials
(audio-visuals, readings, lectures, class presentations) in your answers.  
  
In your written work for this (or any other) course, do not plagiarize.
Plagiarize means to "steal and use as your own." You are guilty of plagiarism
when you fail to use quotation marks when you are quoting or when you use
someone else's idea without citing your source in a note. It is a serious
offense, often punished by failure in the course; it may even result in
expulsion from the university. At the very least, a paper containing
plagiarism will be failed.  
  
You will find the following books and Course Pack to get you through the
course. **First** , you will use Basil Davidson, _The African Genius_
(required), to give anthropological background to West African societies.
**Second** , you will need David Robinson and Douglas Smith, _Sources of the
African Past_ (recommended), for material on two West African societies and
states, to provide training in how to work historically and critically with
sources. **Third** , you will use John Thornton, _Africa and Africans_
(required), to background on West African history and African-American
history; Thornton makes the "connection" which is the key to this course.
**Fourth** , you will want Philip Curtin, ed, _Africa Remembered_ (required)
to "personalize" that connection with narratives about individual slaves taken
from West Africa to the Americas. **Fifth** , you will need Peter Wood, _Black
Majority_ (required), to show how one group of West Africans and Angolans
refashioned a society for themselves in colonial South Carolina. **Finally** ,
you will need the Course Pack (required) (available at Paper Image and SBS),
to provide need articles and book chapters important throughout the semester.
**All of these materials are also available at Assigned Reading in the Main
Library**.

  
  
Week 1

**AN INTRODUCTION TO THE SOCIETIES OF WEST AFRICA**

Required Reading: Davidson, Genius, 17-234

CP #1 (maps et al)

Film: Davidson, "Caravans of Gold"

  
  

Weeks 2 and 3

**WEST AFRICAN SOCIETIES, #1: AKAN AND ASANTE**

Required Reading: CP 2 (Tarikh readings)

Robinson and Smith, Sources, ch 5

Recommended Reading: Curtin, Africa Remembered, 99-189

Fage, West Africa, 96-110 (Ass Rdg)

I Wilks, "She who blazed a trail: Akyaawa Yikwaa of Asante," in P Romero, ed,
_Life Histories of African Women_ , 113-39 (Ass Rdg)

Film: "Atumpan"

  
  
  
  
Week 4

**THE TRANS-ATLANTIC SLAVE TRADE**

Required Reading: Thornton, Africa and Africans, Part I and 152-62, 183-92.

Film: "Atlantic Slave Trade"

  
  
  
  

Week 5

**WEST AFRICAN SOCIETIES #2: SENEGAMBIA**

Required Reading: Curtin, Africa Remembered, 13-59

CP 4-5 (2 Klein articles)

  
  
  
  

Weeks 6 and 7

**WEST AFRICAN SOCIETIES #3: NORTHERN NIGERIA**

Required Reading: Curtin, Africa Remembered, 193-216

Robinson, "The Jihads of the Western Sudan" (Ass Rdg)

Robinson and Smith, chapter 4

Video: Davidson, "Kings and Cities"

  
  
  
  

Weeks 8 and 9

**WEST AFRICAN SOCIETIES #4 and 5: DAHOMEY AND YORUBALAND**

Required Reading: CP 6-10 (Morton-Williams, Law, Barnes, Bay, Blier)

Curtin, Africa Remembered, 217-333

Recommended Reading: Fage, History of West Africa, 96-104 (reread)

Film: "The World Began at Ile-Ife"

  
  
  
  

Week 10

**FREETOWN AND THE EFFORT TO ABOLISH THE SLAVE TRADE**

Required Reading: John Peterson, _Province of Freedom: A History of Sierra
Leone 1787-1870_ , 229-69 (Ass Rdg)

reread Curtin, Africa Remembered, pp. 199-206, 215-6, 311-322, 332-3.

Recommended Reading: Fage, West Africa, 111-46

Film: "Son of Africa: Olaudah Equiano"

  
  

Weeks 11-14

**THE CREATION OF AFRICAN-AMERICAN CULTURES**

Required Reading: Thornton, Africa and Africans, Part II

Wood, Black Majority

CP 12 (Wood)

Film: "I Shall Moulder Before I Shall Be Taken"

  
  
  
  

Week 15

**CONCLUSION: WEST AFRICAN SOCIETIES AND EUROPEAN COLONIAL RULE**

Required Reading: Davidson, African Genius, 235-64

  
  
  
  

