  
  

**History 360: AFRICAN HISTORY TO 1800**

  
**Introduction.** In this course we look at the development of African
societies across the whole continent from the time of the beginning of food
production, metal working, and the formation of states. We will examine the
emergence and role of Egypt, Christianity in Northeast Africa, the spread of
Islam, the emergence of Zimbabwe and the Indian Ocean trade, states in the
interior and at the coast of West Africa, the Atlantic slave trade and the
connections of Africa to Afro-America, and finally South Africa. The course
will go into the early nineteenth century.  
  
We will also look closely at the various meanings and uses of history. We will
examine history as a discipline of inquiry: how do historians accumulate and
sort evidence, make judgements and produce interpretations? We will also be
interested in how history functions for the actors themselves, the importance
of history to societies. Finally, we will look at how history is produced,
distorted and manipulated, by people inside and outside of the particular
society. We will pay special attention to the ways in which the history of
Africa has been treated (or denied) by non-Africans.  
  
**Evaluation**. You will be expected to attend all sessions of class, keep up
with the readings, and participate in discussion. The grade will be
constituted by a midterm and final exam (25% each), primarily essay in format,
2 short papers (20% each), and participation (10%). The papers will be due at
the beginning of class on the date indicated in the syllabus. For each paper
you will choose one of the two topics. In each paper the construction of your
argument will weigh as heavily as the accuracy of your facts and
interpretations.  
  
**Essay papers**. Your papers should be about 5 pages double-spaced. Make sure
that you have a beginning, in which you pose the question and suggest how you
will go about answering it; a middle, in which you marshal your evidence
around an argument; and an end, where you return to the question on the basis
of the evidence and argument which you have provided. Your argument or
position may well be that the evidence is inconclusive; or you may choose to
summarize the different schools or individuals who have debated the question,
and then venture your own opinion. The important elements which I will be
looking for are these: evidence that you have read the written work, listened
to the lectures and video presentations; evidence that you have thought
carefully about the course materials in the light of your own views; clear and
forceful exposition; originality; good word choice and syntax; good engagement
with your reader; and good flow from beginning to conclusion.  
  
In your written work for this or any course, **do not plagiarize**. Plagiarize
means to "steal and use as your own." You are guilty of plagiarism when you
fail to use quotation marks when you are quoting or when you use someone
else's idea without citing your source in a note. It is a serious offense,
often punished by failure in the course; it may even result in expulsion from
the university. At the very least, a paper containing plagiarism will be
failed.  
  
**Texts**. The following books are at the book store. **First** , John Iliffe,
_Africans: the History of a Continent_ (required), will provide a general
background on how Africans throughout their history have coped with and
developed their environment. **Second** , Graham Connah, _African
civilizations. Precolonial Cities and States in Tropical Africa: an
Archaeological Perspective_ (required), will describe the history and
archeology of each of the major areas we study (with the exception of Egypt
and South Africa). **Third** , Jean Boyd, _The Caliph's Sister. Nana Asma'u
1793-1865. Teacher, Poet and Islamic Leader_ (required), provides a case study
of a remarkable woman leader in the Muslim reform movement of 19th century
Nigeria. **Fourth** , Philip Curtin, ed., _Africa Remembered_ (recommended),
gives narratives of persons involved in the Transatlantic slave trade.
**Finally** , a Course Pack (required) is available at Paper Image and SBS,
and contains articles and book selections we will be using throughout the
semester. **All materials are also located at Assigned Reading (Ass Rdg) in
the Main Library**.  
  
  
  
I. **Introduction** , Week 1  



**Africa's Place in History**

Iliffe, _Africans_ , chapter 1.

McIntosh, "Africa's Storied Past," _Archaeology,_ May-June 1999 (Ass Rdg)

Film: "The World Began at Ile Ife"

  
  
II. **Foundations of African History** , Week 2  
  

**The Beginnings of Humankind**

**Coping with the Environment and Social Structures**

**** Iliffe, chapter 2

Connah, _African Civilizations_ , chapters 1-2

Film: Davidson, "Mastering the Continent"

  
  

III. **Early Complex Societies in Northeast Africa** , Weeks 3-4

**Ancient Egypt**

Iliffe, chapter 3

Connah, chapters 2 and 3

Course Pack: 2. Davidson

Film: Basil Davidson, "Different but Equal"

  
  
**Ethiopia and Christianity**

Iliffe, chapter 4

Connah, chapter 4

Donald Levine, _Greater Ethiopia_ , 1-68 (Ass Rdg)

Slides

  
  
* ***Paper #1 due late September** : choose one topic

1\. Write an essay dealing with 1) the achievements of Ancient Egypt and 2)
the importance of Ancient Egypt in the debates about African history and
society. Make sure that you deal with both subjects and that you keep them
separate.

2\. Write an essay dealing with the role of Christianity in the history of
Ethiopia.

  
  
  
IV. **Islam and East Africa** , Weeks 5-6  
  
  
**The Rise and Spread of Islam in Africa**

**East Africa and Swahili Civilization**

Iliffe, chapters 4 (re-read sections on Islam) and 6

Connah, chapter 7

Course Pack: 4. Hunwick

Film: Davidson, "Caravans of Gold"

  
  
**Swahili Civilization** , cont'd

**The Cultures of Zimbabwe**

Connah, chapter 8

  
  
  
  
V. **West Africa States and Societies** , Weeks 7-10

  
  
**The West African savanna zone**

Iliffe, chapter 5

Connah, chapter 5

Film: Davidson, "Kings and Cities"

  
  
**An Islamic revolution?**

Robinson, "The Jihads of the Western Sudan" (Ass Rdg) (2)

Jean Boyd, _The Caliph's Sister_

Slides

  
  
**MIDTERM**  
  

**The Forest Setting and the Asante Empire**

Iliffe, chapter 5 (re-read)

Connah, chapter 6

Course Pack: 5. Silverman article; 6. _Sources of the African Past_ , chapter
5

Slides

  
  
  
  
VI. **The Slave Trade and African-American Societies** , Weeks 10-12  
  

**The Atlantic Slave Trade: African Dimensions**

Iliffe, chapter 7

Curtin, _Africa Remembered_ , pp. 3-16, 60-98, 143-69

  
  
**The Atlantic Slave Trade: American Dimensions**

Course Pack: 8. Thornton

Film: "I Shall Moulder Before I Shall Be Taken"

  
  
  
****Paper #2 due late November** : choose one topic

1\. Write an essay about the ways in which Osei Bonsu coped with the crises of
his reign, and particularly the following: the role of Muslims within Asante;
internal dissent and revolt; European pressure, especially in relation to the
slave trade. In your answer give an estimate of Bonsu's qualities as a ruler.

2\. Write an essay about the cultural identity of the Surinam society pictured
in "I Shall Moulder." How "African" and how "American" is/was this society?
Explain what you mean, and what Counter and Evans mean, by "African" and
"American." How did this maroon society form and maintain itself?

  
  
  
  
VII. **Southern Africa** , Weeks 13-14  
  

**Ethnicity, Race and Stratification in South Africa**

Iliffe, chapter 6 (re-read)

Course Pack: 9. Marks; 10. Fredrickson

  
  
**The Struggle for Control of South Africa in the 19th Century**

Iliffe, chapter 8

Course Pack: 11. _Sources of the African Past_ , chapter 2

Slides

  
  
  
  
VIII. **Africa on the Eve of European Conquest** , Week 15

**Incorporation into the European-dominated World**

Iliffe, chapter 9

Curtin, 193-216, 289-316

Film: Davidson, "The Bible and the Gun"

  
  

**FINAL EXAM**

