
    
    
     COLLEGE OF william AND Mary
    
     Departinent of History
    
     Professor Abdalla	Fall, 1995
     336 Morton Hall	tel. 1-3727
    
     E-Mail address [IXABDA@inail.win.edu;](mailto:IXABDA@inail.win.edu;) if you have problems but do not have
     the time to see ine in office.
    
     AFRICAN HISTORY TO 1800 A. D.
     Registration Information
     History 307/ 507 Section 01, 3 credits AS
     TR 12:30 - 13:50, Morton 342
    
     Office Hours:	Fridays, 10: -12:00	or by appointinent
    
     Course Obectives
     	This is the first of a two-part survey course (Africa to 1800 A.D.
     and Africa since 1800 A.D.) that introduces the student to Africa and its
     peoples.  Africa's culture, history, social structure, economic and
     political organization in pre-colonial times will be examined Emphasis
     will be placed on the cultural development of early humans, on the
     emergence of the centrally controlled states, long distant trade, kinship,
     and the institution of slavery. The coming and establishment in Africa of
     Christ ianity and Islam will be discussed in detail owing to the major
     impact these monotheistic religions have had on Africans.
     	Africa is a vast, diverse and dynamic continent, and the brief
     period of one semester, or even two semesters, does not allow for a
     detailed analysis of all these important issues. However, the course will
     give the student a useful overview of the contine nt's historical
     achievements, its rich and splendid heritage and an understanding of the
     factors that shaped its past and continue to influence its present.
    
     Course Requirements
     	A) Regular attendance and participation in class discussions are
     essential. Students with attendance rate of less than 80% as recorded in
     class signed attendance sheets will automatically fail the course. Absence
     on medical grounds must be verified.
     	B) Assigned reading is indicated in the syllabus for each week. It
     is the student's responsibility to complete the required reading on
     schedule so as to benefit fully from lectures and participate fruitfully
     in weekly discussions.
     	C) The student is expected to recognize and situate on the map the
     different countries and some major ethnic groups in Africa.
     	D)	There will be:
     	1)	a map quiz,  (Septeiber 12th),	10%
     	2)	a mid-term exam, (October 5th)	20%
     	3)	Outline of paper & annotated bibliog. (11/2nd)	10%
     	4)	one ten-page long term paper, (due in class, november
     28th),	25%
     	5)	and a final exam	25%.
     	HLstcr	1800
    
    
     	6)	participation in class discussions.	10%
    
     note
     	Topic and outline of term paper must be approved by instructor at
     least four to five weeks before dead line for submitting the paper. Since
     the Swem Library's holdings on Africa are limited, it is strongly
     recommended that students verify availability of
      reference materials before selecting topics for paper Term papers that
     show no evidence that the writer has consulted several references and has
     documented all major points in the essay will receive low grades.
     	Exams are accumulative and will cover materials presented in
     lectures, class discussions, films and slide presentations and assigned
     readings.
    
    
     Assigned Texts 1) Paul Bohannan and P. Curtin, African and Africans,
     Waveland Press, Prospect Heights, Illinois, 1988. 2) Graham Connah,
     African Civilizations Cambridge University Press, 1981. 3) Robert 0.
     Collins, Problems ib African History, Markus Wiener Press, New York 1993,
     paper.
    
     Recommended
     1)	Abu-Nasr, J., History of North Africa
     	2)	Ajayi & Crowder (eds) History of West Africa
     	3)	Anto Diop, C., The African Origins of Civilization
     	4)	Bovill, W.,	The Golden Trade of the Moors
     	5)	Davidson, B.,	The African Slave Trade
     	6)	The African Genius
     7)	Hiskett, M.,	The development of Islam in West Africa
     8)	Hopkin,A.,	An Economic History of West Africa
     9)	Lewis,I	Islam in Tropical Africa
     10)Lovejoy, P	The Ideologv of Slaverv
     1l)Mair, L.,	The African kingdoms
     12)Miers & Kopytoff (eds), Slavery in Africa: Historical and
     	Anthropological Perspective 13) Ogot and Zierman, Zamani: A Survey
     of East African History 14) July, R., A History of the African People 15)
     Hibbert, C., Africa Explored 16) Clark,J " the Pre-historic origins of
     African culture" Journal of African History (JAH) V(1964) pp 161-183
    
     Imortant Journals
     a)	Journal of African History
     b)	Africa
     c)	African Studies
     d)	The African Repository
     african history to 1800 a.d.
    
    
    
     Major References
     1)	UNESCO,  General History of Africa
     2)	Cambridge, The Cambridge History of Africa
     	3)	Oxford,	Oxford African Encyclopedia
     4)	Ajayi and Crowder, Historical Atlas of Africa
    
    
    
     Course Schedule and Assigned Reading
    
     Week 1	Th	Organization and introduction
     Readings:	Start next week's readings now
    
     Week 2	T	The Geography of Africa
     	Th	People in Africa
     Readings:	Bohannan & Curtin  Africa and Africans, pp. 1-63,
     	G.	Connah, African civilization, ch 1, 11.	ad
    
     Week 3	T	Nap Ouiz (Africa: countries and capitals)
     	Early woman in Africa
     	Th Food Production Readings: Bohannan & Curtin, pp. 211-241.
     Connah, Sub-heading: "subsistences economy11, pp 5254, 84-85, 111-113,
     138-141, 202-4.
    
     Week 4	T	Stateless Societies
     	Th Early African Kingdoms Readings: Bohannan & Curtin, pp 147-167,
     Connah, African Civilizations, pp.  24-66 and Collins, Problems, pp.
     115-134.
    
     Week 5	T	General discussion of of the readings for the last
     	two weeks, esp. Connah's chapters
     	Th	Who were the ancient Egyptians?
     Readings:	Bohannan & Curtin, pp 263-281.
     R.	Collins, Problems, pp. 1-49.
    
     Week 6	T	Traditional Religions
     	Th	Islam and state in West Africa
     Readings:	Bohannan & Curtin, pp 191-207.
     R.	Collins, pp. 143-182.
     C.	Connah, Chapt. 5.
    
     Week 7	T    [Begin thinking about a topic for your term paper) Forest dwellers
     Readings:	G. Connah, ch 6.
     	Th	Mid-term Exam
    
     Week 8	T	Fall Break
     	Th	Cenral discussion of the readings for the last two
     	weeks, esp. R. CVollins' readings on Islam.
     african history to 1800 a.d.
    
    
    
     Week 9	T	Christianity and State in Africa
     	Th	The Bantu Expansion
     Readings:	C. Connah, ch 4.
     Bohannan & Curtin, pp 204-207.
     R.	Collins, pp. 59-99.
    
     Week 10	T	Medicine in Africa
     	Th	Architecture
     Readings:	C. Connah, pp. 16-17, 54-55, 76-82 and 160-170.
    
     Week 11	T	[Topics for term papers finalizedi
     	African Sculpture
     	Th	Music and performance
     Readings:	Bohannan & Curtin, pp. 87-110.
    
     Week 12	T	Ali Mazrui, Video: the Africans
     	Th	African Women and history
     Readings:	R. Collons, pp. 183-251.
    
     Week 13	T	Slavery and Slave Trade
     	Th	Impact of Slave trade
     Readings:	Bohannan & Curtin, pp 283-298.
     R.	Collons, pp. 253-291.
    
     Week 14	T	[Last day for submitting term paperj
     	The Swahili civilization
     	Th	Tanksgiving
     Readings:	G. Connah, pp 150-182
    
    
    
     Week 15	T	Africa by 1800 A. D.
     	Th	General review
     Readings:	Bohannan & Curtin, pp 243-316.
    
     Note
     Final Exam: December 4th, 95. First Period, 8:30-11:30.

