|

#### [![FSU Home](images/bluseal2.gif)](http://www.uncfsu.edu/)[![Dept of Govt
& Hist Home](images/g&h2.gif)](http://spacer.uncfsu.edu/d_ghp/index.HTM)HIST
120, World History Since 1600--Resources  
[Communication](commun.htm) | [Description](descrip.htm) |
[Resources](texts.htm) | [Outline](outline.htm) | [Requirements](requirem.htm)
| [Syllabus](syllabus.htm) | [Home](index.htm)  
  
---  
  
| [Home](./)  
[Communication](commun.htm)  
[Description](descrip.htm)  
Resources  
[Outline](outline.htm)  
[Requirements](requirem.htm)  
[Syllabus](syllabus.htm)  
  
---  
  




|

Textbook | Print | Web | Tips and Guidelines

#### Textbook

Upshur, Jiu-Hwa L. et al. _World History: Comprehensive Volume_. 3d ed.
Belmont, CA: West/Wadsworth, 1999.

####  Other Printed Resources

A recent controversy in the historiography of early modern world history
involves the relative "progress" of Europe and "stagnation" of Asian economies
in the period between 1600 and 1800 CE.  The traditional account characterizes
the early modern period as that during which Europeans establish a global
trade network that drives the world economy and gives Europe dominance over
non-European countries. That dominance is held to be the result of many
progressive elements in modern European culture: capitalism, modern science
and technology, the modern state, etc. A recent account of modern world
history that more or less follows in this tradition is that of David Landes in
_The Wealth and Poverty of Nations._

An increasing amount of research is calling into question the alleged
superiority of Europe by finding more and more of the supposedly unique
qualities of European civilization in other civilizations. China, in
particular, had a robust and dynamic economy well into the eighteenth century,
an economy that was much larger than that of any European country. This
research is synthesized in _ReOrient_ , by Andr¨¦ Gunder Frank.

Eminent world historian William McNeill wrote an insightful if critical review
of Landes for the _New York Review of Books_.

  * Landes, David S. _The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some are so Rich and Some so Poor_. New York : W.W. Norton, 1998.
  * Frank, Andre Gunder. _ReOrient: Global Economy in the Asian Age_. Berkeley : University of California Press, 1998.
  * McNeill, William H. Review of _The Wealth and Poverty of Nations,_ by David Landes. _The New York Review of Books_ 45, No. 7 (1998): 37.

Other printed sources:

  * Bennett, Norman R. _Africa and Europe: From Roman Times to National Independence_ , 2nd Edition, New York: Africana Publishing, 1982. 
  * Crosby, A. _The Columbian Exchange_. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1972.    
  * Curtin, P. _Cross-Cultural Trade in World History_. New Rochelle, NY: Cambridge University Press, 1984. 
  * Hansberry, William Leo. _Africa and Africans as seen by Classical Writers_. Volume II, Washington, DC: Howard University Press, 1981. 
  * Hodgson, Marshall G.S. _Rethinking World History: Essays on Europe, Islam, and World History._ Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996. 
  * McNeill, William H. _A History of the Human Community_. 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1987. 
  * Northrup, David. _The Atlantic Slave Trade._ Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath and Co., 1994
  * Stavrianos, L. S. _A Global History_. 4th ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1988.  
  * Tracy, James D. _The Rise of Merchant Empires: Long-Distance Trade in the Early Modern World 1350-1750._ Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990. 

#### Web Resources

For web pages related to world history, see my
[links](http://spacer.uncfsu.edu/f_brooks/Links.htm) page.

#### Tips and Guidelines

##### Homework tips

> For instructions, guidelines, and forms to complete the homework exercises,
see the [Online History
Workbook](http://spacer.uncfsu.edu/f_brooks/Frms/Wkbk.htm).

##### Team Assignments

> For instructions and guidelines on completing team assignments, see [Team
Assignments](http://spacer.uncfsu.edu/f_brooks/Frms/Teams.htm).

##### Exam tips

> ##### Identification

>

> To identify a historical person, place, event, or idea, answer the following
questions:

>

>   * **WHO** is the person, or who are the people, involved?

>   * **WHAT** is the event or feature?

>   * **WHEN** did it happen or, in the case of a feature of human geography
such as a border, when did it assume the position it had?

>   * **WHERE** did it happen?

>   * **WHY** did it happen or come to be the way it was? Why is it important
in world history?

>

>

> The last part of the identification--WHY--is both the most difficult and the
most important.  Explaining why something is important in world history means
connecting it with general historical ideas and/or processes, such as the
Enlightenment, the Industrial Revolution, state formation, gender relations,
or class conflict, to name a few examples. If the event or feature affects
history in some way, explain how.

>

> Remember that this is a history course. Keep your identification relevant to
the time and place covered in the section of the course on which you are being
examined. For example, the Japanese city of Nagasaki is important during the
early modern period (c. 1600-1800) because it was the only port where
Europeans could trade. It represents Japan's isolation and Europe's lack of
decisive superiority during this period. In the modern period, Nagasaki is
best known as one of the cities on which the United States dropped an atomic
bomb. This helped end World War II, and it ushered in the atomic age. To mix
these two different periods up is to misunderstand the basic chronology of
history.

> ##### Essays

>

> A good essay will first of all answer the question. Make sure you address
all parts of the question. A good essay is both specific and general: specific
in its examples and references, general in its use of major themes of the
course. Finally, a good essay has a definite structure: an introduction, a
body with an organization and argument, and a conclusion.

Textbook | Print | Web | Tips and Guidelines

  
  
* * *

Return to  
[Communication](commun.htm) | [Description](descrip.htm) |
[Resources](texts.htm) | [Outline](outline.htm) | [Requirements](requirem.htm)
| [Syllabus](syllabus.htm) | [Home](index.htm)

Created by John I. Brooks III ([e-mail](mailto:jibrooks@uncfsu.edu); [home
page](http://spacer.uncfsu.edu/f_brooks/index.htm)). Last updated 01/02/00.  
  
  
---

