|      |

[Return Home](http://bizntech.rutgers.edu/inheritance/) __

|

|

|

[Syllabus](http://bizntech.rutgers.edu/inheritance/syllabus.html)

|

|

|

[Required Work](http://bizntech.rutgers.edu/inheritance/required_work.html)

|

|

|

[Grading Criteria
](http://bizntech.rutgers.edu/inheritance/grading_criteria.html)

|

|

|

[Course Texts](http://bizntech.rutgers.edu/inheritance/course_texts.html)

|

|

|

[Research Guide](http://bizntech.rutgers.edu/inheritance/research_guide.html)

|  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
**[Inheritance & the American
Romance](http://bizntech.rutgers.edu/inheritance/)**  
  
---  
     | 

[Links to
Bibliographies](http://bizntech.rutgers.edu/inheritance/bibliographies.html)

|

|

|

[Bibliography
Directions](http://bizntech.rutgers.edu/inheritance/bib_directions/index.html)

|

|

|

[Go to the Class
Forum](http://www.classguide.net/rutgers/forums/forumdisplay.php?s=&forumid=21)

|

|

|

[Forum
Instructions](http://bizntech.rutgers.edu/inheritance/forum_instructions.html)

|  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
|

**Slavery & Inheritance  
  
****By Kristen Gumbs  
**

[ oualie@eden.rutgers.edu](mailto:oualie@eden.rutgers.edu) ** ******

|

Online Resources

|

Books & Articles  
  
---|---  
  
White America did not consider black slaves to be human. This belief is
reflected in the laws of pre-civil war America where slaves where defined as
chattel --  "an item of tangible movable or immovable property except real
estate" (Merriam Webster's Collegiate dictionary). According to this law
slaves were merely tangible movable pieces of property. In short slaves were,
writes Kevin Halloway (author of a website which chronicles African American
history) "in the same category as livestock". Hence slaves were property that
could be bought, sold, or inherited. This issue of inheritance played a major
role in nineteenth century discourse concerning slavery.

During this period, there was increased pressure on the Southern States, from
political as well as familial sources, to abolish slavery. This pressure made
Southerners overly protective of their right to own slaves, and extremely
sensitive to any criticism about slavery. Randolph B. Campbell, author of _An
Empire for Slavery: The Peculiar Instituion in Texas 1821-1865_ , agrees. He
claims that  "[i]ndications of sensitivity and defensiveness are found in
private expressions by individual slave owners. Otis Marshall . . . wrote his
sister: 'Tell your children to write to me [even] if they do say that I am a
Negro whipper in Texas I am only Uncle Marshall yet' "(204). Otis Marshall was
essentially asking his relatives not to judge him harshly because he owned
slaves. Otis made this plea because his nieces or nephews appeared be ashamed
of their uncle who was a "negro whipper". Hence this quote is also indicative
of the awkwardness and the shame that people in the North, who had relatives
who owned slaves in the South, felt,

However many people defended the right to inherit slaves. Timothy Dwight,
president of Yale University from 1795 to 1817, firmly believed in the white
man's right to own slaves. He argued that a man " who receives slaves from his
parents by inheritance, certainly deserves no censure for holding them".
Dwight's reasoning is that inheritance is a gift, and a person should not be
blamed because he was given a gift. The person who inherits does not choose
his inheritance - it is simply given to him. It can thus be assumed that
Dwight based his reasoning on the assumption that when a person inherited a
slave all that was inherited was the slave. The sin of the actual ownership of
the slave was not inherited.

  
[![](file:///A|/SLAVERY/slavery_pic.jpg)](http://www.hawaii.edu/powerkills/WF.CHAP7.HTM)  

**Selected Works Online**

  * [ Slave Life in Virginia and Kentucky or Fifty Years of Slavery in the United States of America](http://docsouth.unc.edu/fedric/menu.html) (2000) 
  * [BBC News / Africa / Trillions demanded in Slavery](http://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/english/world/africa/newsid_424000/424984.stm) (1999) 
  * [Reparations for the Tulsa Race Riot of 1921 ](http://www.okcu.edu/law/reparationsdft.pdf) (2000)
  * [Index of Slave Narratives ](http://xroads.virginia.edu/%7Ehyper/wpa/index.html) (1998)
  * [North American Slave Narratives ](http://docsouth.unc.edu/neh/texts.html#H) (2001)
  * [The Tragic Mulatto Myth](http://www.ferris.edu/news/jimcrow/mulatto/) (2000)  

  
  
Just as the slaves themselves could be inherited, their slave status was also
inherited. Thomas D. Morris in his book _Southern Slavery and the Law_
explains that "[T]he status of the . . . [slave was] . . . derived from its
mother (23 ). Basically if a person's mother was a slave then he or she was
also a slave. This law served the dual function of relieving the white slave
owners who fathered black children from any parental obligations, and it also
enabled the slave masters to increase their slave population. However this law
did have a loophole: the child of a white woman and a black man was not a
slave. This child would be "bound out" for thirty one years, after this time
had passed he or she was free (Morris 23). Why was this law structured in this
manner? Perhaps the white women bore more love for their mixed race off-spring
than did a white father. Or perhaps the law makers felt a bit queasy about
making the child of a white woman a slave. Unfortunately Morris does not
address this question in his book. However as time passed on, white men's
attitudes towards their mulatto children changed. Some white slave owners
freed their slave children, and with freedom came other benefits. Kevin
Halloway asserts that some of these mixed race children "were also often
included in the master's will . . . [s]ome became the owners of farms and
plantations through inheritance." But it must be reiterated - slaves could not
inherit. The mixed race children that did inherit were first granted their
freedom.

Although slaves could not and did not inherit, their descendants nevertheless
are claiming an inheritance of some sorts in the form of reparation.
Reparation, according to the University Church of Chicago, is defined as a
payment for an injury or redress for a wrong done; an act of making good any
loss, damage or injury". Although everyone who was directly associated with
the institution of slavery is dead - the descendants of these African slaves
assert that their claim is valid. According to N'COBRA, an organization
focused on empowering African Americans, they are the "descendants and thus
the heirs, of Africans . . . enslaved in the Americas". African Americans are
heirs to a debt that is owed to their ancestors - and why not? Wealth is still
transferred through inheritance why not the money that is owed because of past
economic exploitation ( Derek Jennings). But then can this debt really be
viewed as an inheritance? Daniel B. Rego author of "Who should be Receiving
Repatriations" believes that descendants of slaves have no right to claim
"compensation for work done by their ancestors", because their ancestors never
expressed the desire that their descendants should have this reparation.
However this is a weak argument for one very simple reason -- the slaves had
no way of knowing that society would progress to such a point where African
Americans would have the power to ask for reparation. If they had this
knowledge, they certainly would have wanted their descendants to get money for
their labor since they, the slaves, did not. Apart from that, how could slaves
have expressed the desire for reparation? They had no power. On the other hand
one can raise the point that African Americans need reparation not just for
slavery but for many things that occurred after the civil war which were the
direct result of slavery. For example lynchings and the South's Jim Crow laws
were all products of this peculiar institution. All of these things have
played a role in keeping many African Americans on the last rung of the social
ladder. When this is considered as well as the fact that "87% of the . . .
wealth in the US [belongs to] White citizens [and] [m]uch of it was wealth
built up during slavery" then reparation begins to make sense (University
Church). Reparation is only partially about inheritance - because it is not
just about slavery. Reparation is also a way to begin to compensate African
Americans for the racism and other hardships that they still endure today
because of the color of their skin.  



**O nline Resources**

Halloway, Kevin . [A People
divided](http://www.ghg.net/hollaway/civil/contents.htm#civil6).
<http://www.ghg.net/hollaway/civil/contents.htm#civil6>. December 12th, 2001.
This website chronicles the history of African-Americans from slavery to the
present.  

Jennings, Derek M. [The Big Payback
](http://www.indyweek.com/durham/2001-09-12/jennings.html).<http://www.indyweek.com/durham/2001-09-12/jennings.html>.
December 12th, 2001. An article that breaks down the arguments against
reparation.

N'COBRA. [Information about N'COBRA
](http://www.ncobra.com/nbusiness/ncobrainformation/aboutncobra.html)<http://www.ncobra.com/nbusiness/ncobrainformation/aboutncobra.html>
December 12th, 2001. N'COBRA "is a coalition of organizations and individuals
committed to the economic, cultural, intellectual, political, social, and
spiritual empowerment of black people in the USA". The main goal of this
organization is to ensure that reparation becomes a reality. This link will
take you to their "about us page" which gives an in depth explanation of who
N'COBRA is as well as the groups goals.

Poole, Jason. [On Borrowed Ground: Free African-American Life in Charleston
South Carolina
1810-61](http://etext.virginia.edu/journals/EH/EH36/poole1.html).
<http://etext.virginia.edu/journals/EH/EH36/poole1.html>.December 12th, 2001.
An essay about the rise of the mulatto upper class in Charleston.

Staples, Brent. [Wrestling with the legacy of slavery at
Yale](http://www.uscsumter.edu/%7Etpowers/hist111/norslave.htm).
<http://www.uscsumter.edu/~tpowers/hist111/norslave.htm>. December 12th, 2001.
An article from the New York Times On Line which briefly explores Yale's early
association with slavery -- especially where Timothy Dwight (Yale's president
from 1795 - 1817) is concerned.

Rego, Daniel B. [Who Should be
receiving](http://www.dailybruin.ucla.edu/DB/issues/97/11.14/view.rego.html)[reparations
_._](http://www.dailybruin.ucla.edu/DB/issues/97/11.14/view.rego.html)
<http://www.dailybruin.ucla.edu/DB/issues/97/11.14/view.rego.html>. December
12th, 2001. In this article Rego explains why he is against reparations for
slavery.

Reynolds, Brent. [Reparations
statement](http://www.enteract.com/%7Euchurch/reparations.html) .
<http://www.enteract.com/~uchurch/reparations.html>. December 12th, 2001. A
statement made by the members of University Church of Chicago explaining why
they support reparation.  



**Books **

Campbell, Randolph B. An Empire for Slavery: The Peculiar Institution in Texas
1821-1865. Louisiana State University Press, 1989. Campbell examines slavery
in Texas from all angles. He looks at the economics of it, the physical
treatment of the slaves, the behavioral patterns of the slaves and so forth.
Campbell also examines the psychological affect that slavery had on the
slaveholders. He claims that slavery "had a more degrading influence upon
slave owners than it had upon the slaves [because slavery made the white men]
. . . both tyrannical and lazy" (190).

Cobb, Thomas R. R. _Law of Negro Slavery in the United States of America._ New
York: Greenwood publishing Corporation, 1968\. This book was originally
published in 1858, hence it provides the point of view of a male who grew up
in the ninteenth century. Although in the preface the author claims that he
attempted to be impartial, he  "doubts[s] not [that he is] biased by his birth
and education in a slaveholding state" (ii). Inevitbaly the guise of
objectivity is shed early on in the first part of the text. For example when
Cobb recounts the history of slavery, he claims that "the negroes, as a class
are idle, immoral, vicious, preferring to beg and steal rather than work"
(ccvii). The second section of the book examines slavery and the law. Cobb
continues to defend slavery by asserting the inferiority of the black race.
Cobb also explains that slaves are viewed as chattel in the eyes of the law
because of their innate inferiority.

Curtin, Philip D. _The Rise and Fall of the Plantation Complex Essay in
Atlantic History_. Cambridge Univeristy press, 1990. Philip Curtin examines
the development of plantation society. He begins with its Mediterranean
origins and traces plantation society up until the African slave trade. In the
final section of his book he explores the collapse of the plantation complex
and its aftermath.

Fehrenbacher, Don E. _Slavery Law and Politics._ New York: Oxford University
Press, 1981. Don Fehrenbacher examines how slaves and slavery were viewed in
terms of the law. He states that  "a slave was reduced in considerable degree
from a person to a thing, having no legitimate will of its own and belonging
bodily to its owner. As property a slave could be bought and sold . . and his
offspring belonged absolutely to the master" (7). However Fehrenbacher devotes
the majority of the book to the examintation of the legal and political impact
of the "Dred Scott case" on America. To the author, the "Dred Scott case" was
a turning point in America's legal history.

Howard, Richard. _Black Cargo_. Wayland Publishers: London, 1972. Richard
Howard begins by briefly recounting the history of slavery before the African
slave trade. Then he proceeds to trace the African slave trade from its
conception to its abolition and the resulting emancipation of the slaves.
Throughout the book Howard includes numerous pictures, paintings and drawings.
These pictures put faces to the suffering of the slaves, and their history
comes to life. Howard also examines the legacy that slavery and the slave
trade left in the Americas as well as in Africa. The book ends with a
particularly moving quote from Malcolm X:  " For four centuries we contributed
our slave labor to make the country what it is . . . [and] we have not been
paid one dime . . . [we] don't think that an integrated cup of coffee is
sufficient payment for 310 years of slave labor" (120). This beleif is echoed
today in the call for reparation for slavery.

Morris, Thomas D. _Southern Slavery and the law_ _1619 - 1860_. Chapel Hil and
London:The University of North Carolina Press, 1996\. Slaves were regarded
both as people and as possesions by law. In his book, Morris explores this
contradictory legal status.

Tushnet, Mark V. _The American law of Slavery 1810 - 1860 : Considerations of
Humanity and Interest_. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press,
1981. The book is divided into four main sections: slave law and its uses; the
structure of the law of slavery: some case studies; the emergence of a law of
slavery; and social control of the master's will: the contradictions of a
Slave society. What I found to be the most interesting about this book is the
way it documents changing attitudes towards slavery. For example Tushnet noted
that  "it would have been hard to suppress the natural inclinations of white
fathers to free their slave children" (155). This coming from men who a few
years earlier regarded their slave offspring to be chattel. In addition I also
found the use of specific legal cases in order to trace the formation and the
implementation of slave law to be quite interesting as well.

  
  
  |

Return to Top

|  
---|---|---  
  [![](file:///A|/SLAVERY/rulogo.gif)](http://www.rutgers.edu) |

Site contact: Kristen Gumbs,
[oualie@eden.rutgers.edu](mailto:oualie@eden.rutgers.edu). Last updated:
December 12th, 2001.  
  
---|---

