|  ![](images/tavolabanner.jpg) |  Syllabus |  ![](images/tavolabanner.jpg)  
---|---|---  
  
* * *  
  
# Renaissance World and Columbian Exchange



### Course Description

Welcome to the Renaissance World and Columbian Exchange! From the vantage
point of the year 2001, we can easily look back and see the collision of the
European and American cultural areas beginning in the late fifteenth century
as the principal dynamic in Western&emdash;and some would say&emdash;World
history. Renaissance Europe underwent a series of dramatic transformations,
then gradually expanded to become the most dominant area of the world by
1800...or did it?



We will explore the Renaissance world, its diversity, and its historical
development from several different perspectives between the Columbian voyages
and the emergence of Atlantic mercantilism. Highlights will include
discussions of Renaissance ideals, Renaissance art, the commercial revolution,
trade routes, the Columbian Exchange, European colonialism, the Atlantic slave
trade, the Military Revolution, and Eurocentrism. We will consider the
historical contexts of key political, social, economic, cultural, and
religious concepts that are vital to understand our world today, including
commerce, capitalism, state development, gender, representation, epidemic,
ecology, theology, and modernization. Through studying the Renaissance world,
students will also develop research, critical reading, and writing skills.



### Finding Me

416 B Shilling Hall

Office Hours: MW 1-2; MW 3:15-4:30; T 3:15-4:30; or by appointment

Office Phone: (217) 424-5078

e-mail: bsandberg@mail.millikin.edu

website: http://faculty.millikin.edu/~bsandberg



### Required Books

Lisa Jardine, _Worldly Goods: A New History of the Renaissance_

Richard Marius, _A Short Guide to Writing about History_

Alfred W. Crosby, _The Columbian Exchange: Biological and Cultural
Consequences of 1492_

Philip Curtin, _Rise and Fall of the Plantation Complex_

Geoffrey Parker, _The Military Revolution: Military Innovation and the Rise of
the West, 1500-1800,_ 2nd Edition



### Additional Readings and Materials

Photocopies

2 manila folders for assignments



### Renaissance World and Columbian Exchange Website

Be sure to visit the course website! The Renaissance World and Columbian
Exchange website will provide you with specific information on readings and
assignments. The website also has a series of internet resources, a
bibliography, and advice on doing historical research and writing. The site
will eventually contain selected student projects that are of an exceptionally
high caliber. A linked Blackboard Courseinfo site will allow students to
easily communicate with everyone in the class using a chat room, threaded
discussions, and group activities.



### Course Goals

This course is an introductory course designed to have you explore the
historical development of European society and culture, the process of
historical writing, and some of the main issues and interpretive frameworks in
history. In short, this course will both familiarize you with European history
and ask you to engage in historical practice. You may find that history is not
what you thought it was....



### Practical Goals

While I love history and think that learning history is a rewarding endeavor
itself, you may not feel the same way (though I will try to convert you).
Please do not despair. I have structured this course to accomplish several
goals which will make this course applicable to your future life&emdash;before
and after graduation. Those practical goals are:

  * to develop techniques of organization and presentation of information
  * to develop critical thinking and analytic skills
  * to improve expository and argumentative writing processes
  * to develop an appreciation of European society, culture, history, and geography 
  * to learn aspects of European history vital for touring, studying, or working in the EU
  * to become aware of the usages of European history in today's society in America

I hope that these aims will help you recognize some practical utility of this
course.

### Grading

20% Participation, Portfolio Assignments, Quizzes [10 2-point assessments]

10% Descriptive Paper

10% Expository Paper

10% Narrative Paper

10% Analytic Paper

10% Research Project

10% Oral Presentation of Research

### Portfolio Assignments

A wide variety of assignments will make up this portion of your grade, such
as: microthemes (short writing assignments), in-class writing assignments,
readings quizzes, map/geography assignments, drawings, and in-class projects.
All portfolio assignments should be kept in your manila folder at all times. I
will periodically collect the portfolios to check your work. Note that there
will be several films and other activities held outside of class. These
activities will not be mandatory, but will count as extra credit portfolio
assignments.

### Writing Assignments

You will have a number of short papers and writing assignments during the
course of the semester. Some papers will require multiple drafts and
revisions. Please note the due dates on your Assignments Sheet, to be handed
out later. No late papers will be accepted. Further guidelines on the papers
and paper topics will be handed out later and posted on the Assignments page
of the Renaissance World and Columbian Exchange website. Writing assignment
grades will include several 4-6 page papers.

### Research Project

Students will concentrate their efforts on a research project based on
extensive historical research. The key requirement for the project is that it
must be serious, substantial, and based on solid historical research. Students
will define their own research projects through a proposal and outline.
Students' paper process in developing and researching their papers will be
assessed. Each student will write two drafts of his/her paper. Students will
peer review their colleagues' papers. The instructor will provide guidance and
input at each stage of the writing process, but students will have to provide
their own ideas and initiative. For more information, see the Assignments page
of the Renaissance World and Columbian Exchange website.

### Participation

History courses depend on active student participation to develop analysis,
criticism, and debate of important ideas and issues. Your participation is
therefore assessed on the basis of your written and oral communication with
the instructor and with fellow students.

As I begin to learn your names, I will use the following guidelines to assess
participation grades based on 4 criteria: attendance, willingness to
participate, reading comprehension, and perceptiveness of comments:

> A Student is attending class every time, volunteering information
frequently, and willingly joining in the discussion. Student shows full
comprehension of the readings and makes perceptive comments every class
meeting.

>

> B Student is attending class every time, volunteering regularly, and joining
the discussion if called upon. Student shows some comprehension of the
readings and makes perceptive comments most class meetings.

>

> C Student is attending class most of the time and joins the discussion
occasionally, but rarely volunteers. Student does not always show
comprehension of the readings, but does make some comments.

>

> D Student is attending class some of the time, but refuses to join the
discussion. Student rarely shows comprehension of the readings and makes few
comments.

>

> F Student is attending class rarely and refuses to join the discussion.
Student does not show comprehension of the readings and does not actively
participate.

### Extra Credit Opportunities

If you are not happy with all of your grades, you have some recourse. You have
several opportunities to get extra credit grades, which will replace missing
or low portfolio or participation grades. See the Extra Credit page of the
Renaissance World and Columbian Exchange website for more information.

### Classroom Guidelines

  * Come to class! I will conduct class as a freeflowing mixture of lecture and discussion most days. Discussions of readings and peer reviews of writing can only work if you attend class regularly. All of your participation grades and many of your portfolio assignments and participation grades are based on in-class work. 
  * If you know you are going to miss class, please let me know ahead of time by e-mail so that we can prevent you from getting behind on your assignments. I expect advance written notification for an excused absence.
  * There may be a short 5-minute writing assignment or project at the beginning of class some days. If you arrive after the project or writing assignment is completed, you will not be allowed to make up that grade. These short assignments may not be announced in advance. 
  * Read and prepare to discuss the readings that I assign. Take notes on each assignment. Read each assignment before the class period listed.
  * Bring paper, your portfolio, and relevant readings to class in addition to your normal materials. You will occasionally turn in your portfolio so that I can see what you have been writing.
  * Think about the lectures and readings. Ask any questions that you have during discussions, if possible, so that your peers can benefit from your ideas.
  * All major assignments (exams, papers) must be turned in to receive a grade in the course. 





### General Information

I will follow Millikin University's policies on plagiarism and cheating as
indicated on pages 23 of the catalog. Cheating amounts to copying or stealing
answers or information. Plagiarism involves a person using another author's or
student's written work and ideas without citation or proper attribution. The
penalty for academic dishonesty at Millikin University is an F grade for the
course, or a more severe punishment, at the instructor's discretion.



Note that this syllabus may be altered later if necessary.



Finally, note that this class is a 100 level class, a designation which means
that it is a Survey Course (a course which covers a broad range of materials
at a general level). 100-level history courses are NOT easier than 200 or
300-level courses! The 100-level courses have broad areas and periods to
cover, so you will have to confront unfamiliar material and learn many
unfamiliar names, places, and events. Be prepared for these difficulties.



Come see me in office hours if you have problems or if you just want to talk.
Remember&emdash;your dollars go to pay my salary, so get your money's worth!
If you cannot see me during my office hours, talk to me after class to set up
a time to meet.

  
  
 ![](images/stma_bar.gif)



 [Renaissance World and Columbian Exchange](index.html) | **Syllabus** |
[Course Topics and Readings](readings.html) | [Assignments](assignments.html)
| [Internet Resources](internet.html) | [Bibliography](bibliography.html) |
[Student Projects](student.html)



 * * *


 All Design (C) 2001 Brian Sandberg



 Contact: [bsandberg@mail.millikin.edu](mailto:bsandberg@mail.millikin.edu)



 Date Last Modified: 1/27/2001



  

