![](banner.gif)

## HIAF 201  
Early African History through the Era of the Slave Trade

### Fall 1997  
Tuesdays and Thursdays, 9:30-10:45 AM, Maury 104  
[Joseph C. Miller](http://www.virginia.edu/~history/faculty/miller.html)  
  
Office hours: Tuesday 11:00-12:30, Wednesday 1:00-2:30 PM  
Phone: 210 Levering  
[E-Mail: jcm@virginia.edu](mailto:jcm7a@virginia.edu)

* * *

  
About the Course  
Readings  
Syllabus  
Term Paper Assignment  
[Other UVa History Department
Courses](http://www.virginia.edu/~history/courses/)  
[Library Resources ](http://www.virginia.edu/~history/courses/library.html)  
  
---  
  
**Introduction** \-- History 201 introduces undergraduates to the early
history of the peoples of Africa, with emphasis on "Black" Africa south of the
Sahara. The course begins with the origins of African civilizations in the
later "stone age" (ca. 25,000 BCE) and runs through the late-eighteenth-
century years of Africa's most intensive exports of slaves. It concentrates on
people and civilizations indigenous to Africa. It therefore notices Asian and
European visitors only as people in Africa influenced them or took them into
account. Such extraneous (though related) topics in European or world history
as the origins of Islam, the Atlantic slave trade, European wars that touched
African shores, the African diaspora in the New World, and European explorers
and missionaries receive attention mainly in their African aspects. The
emphasis on Africa in this course provides a valuable alternative perspective
on these, and other, seemingly familiar events.

**Course perspective** \-- Students in HIAF 201 are sometimes surprised to
learn that American stereotypes of an integrated "African" past on a
continental scale, or of a single pan-African culture comparable in coherence
to the unity of "American" or "European" history, had little relevance to how
people in Africa thought or acted during the centuries covered in this course.
People living there at that time seldom interacted with one another on so
extensive a basis, and even the largest imperial systems on the continent
covered only modest portions of that huge land mass. As a result, the facts of
"African history" before 1800 or so form no single integrated narrative like
the one that historians of England, for example, can spin around the royal
line of Tudors and Stuarts. Nor were there as many "African" cultural
uniformities of historical significance as Americans might assume. Students
beginning African history must therefore commit themselves to distinguishing
carefully among numerous and highly various civilizations in Africa, some
spanning only a few hundred square miles and comprehending populations as few
in numbers as several thousand individuals -- though none of them any the less
significant for their small size.

**Approaches to the course material** \-- Learning about Africa's past by
memorizing only the "facts" of all these different peoples' historical
experiences would commit the student to memorizing a great mass of unfamiliar
names and terms, in hundreds of different languages. Instead, this course
instead seeks to move beyond such compilation of exotic curiosities to
understand people not as different from ourselves as they at first might
appear. We will seek comprehensibility, and a limited degree of unity, by
emphasizing themes, recurrent tendencies among people even of very diverse
backgrounds who reacted to similar circumstances in similar ways. These themes
transcend and explain the flow of local events and personalities to reveal
recurrent patterns of historical change that extend throughout the continent.
Though students must also learn basic geography and a modest selection of
names and dates, they should concentrate on selected factual examples
principally as they illustrate significant trends of this sort.

This thematic approach means studying the first weeks' lectures and readings
carefully to identify the "key themes" that will develop during the remainder
of the term. It also means that the final examination will test students'
abilities to draw these themes together into a coherent understanding of how
and why people in Africa behaved as they did, both in their distinctiveness
and in ways comparable to history in more familiar parts of the globe.

Students will be responsible for following the course along three
complementary channels, intended to encourage this balance between specific
knowledge of what happened and general understanding of how and why people in
Africa developed their lives as they did. These aspects of doing African
history advance simultaneously through the course syllabus in the following
forms:

  * (1) Lectures focus on general concepts, themes, and patterns; they illustrate general points with apposite (but selected) examples and case studies. The lectures thus present the instructor's interpretation of the subject but make no systematic attempt at comprehensive coverage of what happened. 
  * (2) Readings -- which are to be completed before the week for which they appear in the syllabus -- particularly the text (Shillington, History of Africa), present the factual materials. It is the student's responsibility to grasp the historical narratives developed in the readings and then to relate the doings presented there to the general themes outlined in the lectures. Sometimes the interpretive emphasis in the readings -- that is, the meanings and significance attributed to events -- agrees with that of the lectures; more often it does not. Assigned authors disagree with one another also, sometimes directly, sometimes only by implication. Discussion sections inquire into some of the disputes over interpretation that lurk behind your assignments; you will understand better what you are asked to read if you contribute actively to them. 
  * (3) Still other readings provide opportunities for students to probe technical problems of reconstructing a past documented in Africa no more than marginally by written sources and to consider what other methods enable historians to know the "facts" and themes presented in readings and lectures, and with what certainty. As a general rule, students (like any historian) should accept no conclusion-- not even a seemingly glib assurance by the instructor -- until they have thought through the evidence, methodologies, theories, and facts supporting it. An "HIAF 201 Frequent Critic Program" provides opportunities throughout the term for you to sharpen your critical abilities with the source materials of African history.

The concepts and themes presented in lectures thus introduce a conceptual
"language" in which you will learn to think about Africa, using the factual
raw materials in the readings for "vocabulary" and the rules of the discipline
of history as "grammar". The final examination will invite you to speak as
fluently as you can "in African historyspeak" by the end of the term.

Students should also begin the course with a clear awareness that they may
bring assumptions of their own about "Africa" that will turn out to have
little, if any, basis in Africa's past as the methods of history reveal it. In
the United States, after centuries of racial division, it is almost impossible
not to have formed strong "beliefs" about the subject, often not informed by
disciplined historical thinking. Students in HIAF 201 may therefore be
surprised to see what evidence, as opposed to popular expectations, reveals,
and some may have to suspend deeply held convictions in order to notice what
the lectures and readings are really saying, rather than selecting from them
only elements that support opinions already held.

Students who succeed in integrating all three aspects of HIAF 201 should
emerge from the course with both an intelligent understanding of what people
in Africa have made of their lives and sharpened critical facilities that will
help them to understand other sorts of history, as well as to pursue
intelligently their own life-long educations in African affairs outside the
classroom.

**Specific requirements** \-- Geography is vital, and African historical
geography is not often familiar to American undergraduates. Short map
exercises will be given every week on the materials covered, and students will
be graded on the best ten scores they achieve; no one can take the final
examination with an average of less than "7". During the first weeks of the
term, the instructor will supply lists indicating important geographical terms
and physical features, but by about the fifth week students will themselves
become responsible for distinguishing historically significant geographical,
political, and ethnic aspects of African maps from the merely incidental.
Accurate, appropriate maps accompanying other written work, including
examinations, to illustrate points made in it will count toward the grade
awarded.

Since it is so important that students acquaint themselves with basic facts
and that they grasp the differences among interpretations of Africa's history,
they must remain current in the assigned readings. The map quizzes, in
particular, will require that students carefully evaluate each and every
reading in order to identify the significant geographical points that will
turn up on the quizzes. Evidence of general lack of currency in the readings
among class members will justify a graded "pop" quiz on the current week's
assignment.

Participation in discussion will be graded as: (A) active leadership, (B)
consistent participation, (C) regular presence but only occasional
responsiveness, (D) irrelevant effort and/or irregular presence, and (F)
repeated absence or inattention. The only basis for creditable participation
is careful preparation, on the basis of guidance that you will receive in
advance.

A conventional one-hour written mid-term examination, given in the seventh
week, will consist of two parts: a choice of essays inviting you to synthesize
course themes and interpretations, and a short-answer "identify-and-give-the-
historical-significance-of ... " section on more specific points. Students who
receive an unsatisfying mark on this mid-term and wish to eliminate its
influence on their final grade may do so by writing a similar exam in the
fourteenth week. They will receive credit for only the higher of the two
grades earned.

Students will also submit three four-to-five-page papers, one prior to each of
the (two) mid-term examinations, in which they assess the assigned readings in
ways that will prepare them for the exam (due October 7 and November 20), and
one more analyzing documentary sources from Collins, African History: Text and
Readings (see syllabus) in the light of themes and patterns relevant to the
time(s) and place(s) from which the documents come (due December 4).

The final examination will consist entirely of essay questions inviting
students to integrate what they have learned throughout the semester.

**Grading** \-- All work will be evaluated in the spirit of constructive
criticism; it is unlikely that anyone will submit an assignment so perfect
that it exceeds the instructors' abilities to suggest further improvements. It
is assumed that students have enrolled in HIAF 201 to learn, not simply to
receive praise for their achievements (or to receive a given grade), and that
they will therefore systematically incorporate instructors' suggestions on
early assignments in subsequent work. Papers and quizzes that do not reflect
such effort will be returned, unmarked, for appropriate revision and prompt
resubmission.

No course succeeds unless everyone involved -- students as well as instructors
-- engages in open, honest discussion. The instructors will surely express
honest opinions of your work. To teach effectively they depend on similar
honesty from students in return. If you don't "get it", come in and help us
all understand why; if you have a gripe, tell us (not your roommate). Office
hours and e-mail addresses are posted.

Beyond the instructors, students are encouraged to avail themselves of all the
academic support services of the University: the Writing Center, peer advisory
groups, deans and faculty advisers, the Learning Needs and Evaluation Center,
and others. You must acknowledge specific aid received on written assignments;
it is to your credit that you sought it out and were able to gain from it, and
you will receive appropriate accommodation in the grades awarded.

HIAF 201 proceeds in the spirit of the University's Honor System, particularly
its premise of the prevailing "Community of Trust"; students "pledge" their
written work accordingly. The Systen's sanctions are distinctly secondary to
the collaborative spirit that it establishes for us to proceed to learn.

Final grades for the course are similarly secondary to the learning that has
preceded their award. They will approximate, as closely as possible, students'
"highest consistent performance".

This policy encourages students to take risks -- though always based on the
materials presented in the course -- to think for themselves in a disciplined,
historical way, to obtain instructors' reactions to their efforts, and to
learn from possible failures. Most assignments contain options and
opportunities to discard less-than-successful initial efforts to grasp a
subject unfamiliar to beginning students, particularly those in their first or
second year. Since no mechanical calculation of percentages weights the
isolated low mark against you, occasional valiant but misguided efforts cannot
cause you to miss a higher final grade by 0.1%. The costs to one's grade of
making a mistake or two are thus very low compared to what can be gained in
experience and knowledge from putting yourself on the line.

**Texts** \-- The following titles, all paperbacks, have been requested for
purchase at the Newcomb Hall bookstore:

  * Kevin Shillington, _History of Africa_ (New York: MacMillan, 2nd ed. 1995) TEXT 
  * Thomas Spear, _Kenya's Past_ (London: Longman, 1981) METHODS 
  * Graham Connah, _African Civilizations: Precolonial Cities and States in Tropical Africa: An Archaeological Perspective_ (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1987) 
  * D. T. Niane, _Sundiata: An Epic of Old Mali_ (London: Longmans, 1965), or equivalent edition 
  * Frederick Denny, _An Introduction to Islam_ (2nd rev. ed.) (New York: MacMillan, 1994) 
  * Patrick Manning, _Slavery and African Life_ (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990) 
  * Robert O. Collins, _African History: Text and Readings,_ 3 vols. (New York: Markus Wiener, 1990) RECOMMENDED --SOURCES 
  * Paul Bohannan and Philip Curtin, _Africa and Africans_ (4th ed.) (Prospect Heights IL: Waveland Press, 1995) RECOMMENDED

**Reserve materials** \-- All assigned readings have been placed on two-hour
reserve in Clemons Library, some in multiple copies. Some are listed under
author and others under title; if at first you don't find what you are looking
for, try again, under some other heading. Most shorter materials are also
available in the new Clemons ["ELECTRONIC RESERVE", accessible on the
Web](http:\\\\www.lib.virginia.edu/reserve/) at or [through the VIRGO homepage
(click on course reserves, under Miller).](http:\\\\

www.lib.virginia.edu/reserve/instructors/miller.hiaf201.html) If you want to
print these files directly through your personal computer you will need < a
href="http:\\\www.lib.virginia.edu/reserve/">Acrobat Reader, link to "Acrobat
Reader"); otherwise you can download to a disk(ette) and print through word-
processing software. You can also print through any of the University's
computer labs.

**Course packet** \-- The UVa Copy Center has prepared a packet of photocopied
course materials; it contains the [twelve] items carrying asterisks (*) in
this syllabus. Those who use the packet will want to consult the originals of
the materials containing photographs to study and appreciate the colorful
published versions.

**This Syllabus** \-- The syllabus has been written to anticipate questions
that students raise as they proceed through the course -- how to prepare for
examinations, where to find materials, what approach the course emphasizes,
and so on. Read it carefully, and then return to it again throughout the
semester as you may need it -- and then, if you are still in doubt, by all
means ask the instructors.

> HIAF 201 presupposes no prior familiarity with Africa or with the study of
history, but it demands a willingness on the student's part to come to grips
with a good deal of new material and sometimes to suspend old and comfortable
assumptions to examine new, occasionally unsettling, but always fascinating
facts and theories about Africa.

* * *

**Schedule** \-- The class meets Tuesdays and Thursdays from 9:30 to 10:45 AM
in Maury 104. Each class will contain some combination of lecture, discussion,
and student participation. Everyone should plan to attend every class meeting.

**Teaching assistant**

  * Amy Feely   
924-6391/3 [arf5a@virginia.edu](mailto:arf5a@virginia.edu)  
Office hours - Randall Hall 128; Tues 1:00-2:30 PM, Thurs 3:30-4:30PM (and by
appointment)

  * Discussion sections --  
Section 101 -- Wed 6:00-6:50 PM (Cabell 242)  
Section 102 -- Wed 9:00-9:50 AM (Cabell 334)  
Section 103 -- Fri 8:00-8:50 AM (Cabell 247)

The final examination will be given in Maury 104 on Wednesday 17 December,
2:00-5:00 PM

** Question of the week  
  
This is a history course, about what people did in the past in Africa, but the
syllabus never mentions any of them as "Africans". (Extra points for anyone
who can find that word in the preceding pages.) Why?  
---

