## HIAF 201

## Early African History through the Era of the Slave Trade

**(Fall 2001)**

### Instructor: Joseph C. Miller

Telephones: 924-6395 (office)  
E-mail: <[jcm7a@virginia.edu](mailto:jcm7a@virginia.edu)> or
<[jmiller@virginia.edu](mailto:jmiller@virginia.edu)>  
Office: Levering 210 (East Range - "Hotel F")  
Hours: Wednesday 2:00-3:30 PM, Thursday 11:00 AM-12:30 PM

Class meets Tuesdays and Thursdays, 9:30-10:45 AM, CABELL 345  
Discussion sections, as scheduled

  
INTRODUCTION -- History 201 introduces undergraduates to the early history of
the peoples of Africa, with emphasis on "Black" Africa south of the Sahara.
The course begins with the origins of African civilizations in the later
"stone age" (ca. 25,000 BCE) and runs through the years of Africa's most
intensive exports of people as slaves in the late eighteenth century. It
concentrates on people and civilizations indigenous to Africa. It therefore
notices the European and other visitors familiar to most American students
only as people in Africa took them into account or influenced them. Such
extraneous (though related) topics in European or world history as the origins
of Islam, the Atlantic slave trade, European wars that touched African shores,
the African diaspora in the New World, and European missionaries or explorers
thus receive attention mainly in their implications for people in Africa. The
emphasis in this course on Africa provides an alternative and valuable
perspective on these, and other, seemingly familiar events.

COURSE PERSPECTIVE -- Students in HIAF 201 are sometimes surprised to learn
that American stereotypes of an integrated "African" past on a continental
scale, or of a single pan-African culture comparable to the unity of
"American" or "European" history, had little relevance to how people in Africa
thought or acted during the early centuries covered in this course. At that
time, no one there interacted with others on so extensive a scale; even the
most expansive imperial systems included only modest numbers of the many
communities living in that huge land mass, and even within such "states" few
understood them as coherent wholes. As a result, the facts of "African
history" before 1800 or so form no single integrated narrative like the one
that historians of England, for example, can spin around the royal line of
Tudors and Stuarts. Nor, in a continent with hundreds of languages, were there
as many "African" cultural uniformities as modern Americans often assume. Even
people who drew on common cultural heritages applied them to very particular
concerns of their own. Students beginning African history must therefore
commit themselves to distinguishing carefully among numerous and highly
various historical experiences in Africa, some comprehending populations as
few in numbers as several thousand individuals -- though none of them any the
less significant for their modest size.

APPROACHES TO THE COURSE MATERIAL - Attempting to learn about Africa's past by
memorizing only the "facts" of this multitude of different experiences would
commit the student to accumulating a baffling mass of unfamiliar names and
terms, in hundreds of unfamiliar languages. Instead, this course instead seeks
to move beyond compiling such exotic and isolated curiosities to understand
integrated strategies of thinking and acting not as different from our own -
though not as much so as they might appear at first. We will therefore make
sense, if not any significant degree of unity, by emphasizing themes,
recurrent tendencies among people - even of very diverse backgrounds - who
reacted to similar circumstances in similar ways. These themes transcend the
flows of local events and personalities to reveal why people acted as they did
and thus created coherent patterns of historical change throughout the
continent. Along the way, students learn the basic elements of geography and a
modest selection of names and dates, but they should concentrate on such
"facts" principally as they illustrate significant trends.

The first weeks' lectures and readings will identify the key strategies that
people in Africa worked out early on. Since the remainder of the term will
explore how their heirs adapted these "themes" to changing circumstances as
the centuries passed, it is important to grasp the logic of the course early
on. The final examination will test students' abilities to draw the logic of
these themes together into a coherent understanding of how and why succeeding
generations of people in Africa behaved as they did, both in their
distinctiveness and also in ways comparable to other people in more familiar
parts of the globe.

STUDENTS WILL BE RESPONSIBLE for following the course on three complementary
levels, intended to encourage the necessary balance between specific knowledge
of what happened and general understanding of how and why people in Africa
developed their lives as they did. These aspects of doing African history
advance simultaneously through the course syllabus in the following forms:

    1. _Lectures_ focus on the general concepts, strategies, and patterns; they illustrate general points with apposite (but selected) examples and case studies. The lectures thus present the instructor's interpretation of the subject but make no systematic attempt at comprehensive coverage of what happened in Africa.  
  

    2. _Readings_ \-- _which are to be completed before the week in which they appear in the syllabus_ \-- particularly the text (Shillington, _History of Africa_ ), present the factual materials. _It is the student's responsibility_ to grasp the historical narratives developed in the readings, including the geography, and then to relate the doings presented there to the general themes outlined in the lectures. Sometimes the interpretive emphasis in the readings - that is, the meanings and significance attributed to events, even to such apparently obvious concepts as  "state" or "religion" \- agrees with that of the lectures; more often, it does not. The authors assigned also disagree with one another, sometimes directly, other times by implication. Discussion sections inquire into some of the disputes over interpretation that lurk behind your assignments; you will understand what you are asked to read better if you engage actively in them.  
  

    3. Still other readings provide opportunities for students to probe _technical problems of evidence and historical method_ , that is: how historians reconstruct a past documented in Africa no more than marginally by the written sources usually taken as basic to history. They invite you to consider what other methods historians have developed to know - or surmise - the "facts" and themes presented in readings and lectures, and with what degree of certainty. 

The "facts" matter because historians reason from them, as evidence. But no
matter how many data historians may have at hand from the past, they always
filter them through assumptions of their own, or of their audience, in order
to "understand" in the sense of lending significance in the present to what
they think about the past. For early Africa, the evidence is often scarce, or
ambiguous in meaning. Hence, preoccupations in the present strongly influence
how we understand \- how we "interpret" \- the past there, all the more so
because Africa has strong and emotional resonances in modern American culture.
As a general rule, students (like any historian) should accept no conclusion
\- not even a seemingly glib assurance offered by the instructor - until they
have considered the evidence, methodologies, theories, and historical logic
that support it. For early Africa, this responsibility is primary;
accordingly, HIAF 201 will challenge you continually to think about what you
think you think and how and why you think it.

> The concepts and themes presented in lectures thus introduce a conceptual
"language" in which you will learn to think about Africa, using the factual
raw materials in the readings for "vocabulary" and the rules of the discipline
of history as "grammar". Be alert: these concepts are _not_ the ways in which
modern Americans, or many modern Africans, think now. In learning African
history, you will need to respect others' ways of perceiving their own worlds,
using unfamiliar materials, similar to the way you would approach study of a
foreign language. The final examination will invite you to speak as fluently
as you can in this  "African historyspeak" by the end of the term.

Students should thus begin with a clear awareness that assumptions about
"Africa" that they may bring into the course will turn out to have little, if
any, basis in Africa's past as the methods of history reveal it. In the United
States, after many years of racial division, it is almost impossible not to
have formed strong "beliefs", uninformed by disciplined historical thinking,
about the subject. Students in HIAF 201 may therefore be surprised to see what
evidence \- as opposed to popular expectations - reveals, and some may have to
suspend deeply held convictions in order to notice what the lectures and
readings are really saying, rather than selecting from them only the isolated
elements that seem to support opinions already formed. HIAF 201 is a course in
which the courageous thrive.

Students who succeed in integrating the three aspects of HIAF 201 should
emerge with an informed understanding of what people in Africa made of their
lives, as well as sharpened critical facilities that will help them to
understand other sorts of history and other subjects and also the ability to
pursue life-long educations in African affairs outside the classroom.

SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS -- _Geography is vital_ , and African historical
geography is not often familiar to American undergraduates. Short
(10-question) map quizzes on the materials covered in lectures and readings
will be given in discussion sections every week, and students will be graded
on the _best ten_ scores they achieve; no one may take the final examination
with an average score of less than  " _7_ " on their "ten best". The
instructor will supply lists indicating important geographical terms and
physical features during the first weeks of the term, but by about the sixth
week students will themselves become responsible for distinguishing
historically significant geographical, political, and other aspects of African
maps in the readings and lectures from incidental factoids. Accurate,
appropriate maps accompanying other written work, including examinations, to
illustrate points argued in it will count positively toward the grade awarded.

Since it is so important that students acquaint themselves with unfamiliar
facts and that they grasp the significance of interpretation of Africa's
history, they _must remain current in the assigned readings_. The map quizzes,
in particular, will require that students carefully evaluate each and every
reading in order to identify the significant geographical points that will
turn up on the quizzes. A general lack of currency in the readings among class
members will justify graded  "pop" quizzes on the current week's assignments.

_Participation in discussion_ will be graded as: (A) active leadership, (B)
consistent participation, (C) regular presence but only occasional
responsiveness, (D) silence and/or irregular presence, and (F) repeated
absence or inattention. The only basis for creditable participation is careful
preparation, on the basis of guidance that you will receive in advance.

A _conventional one-hour written mid-term examination_ , given in the seventh
week, will consist of two parts: (1) a choice of essays inviting you to
synthesize course themes and to consider the evidence for them, and (2) a
section asking for short-answers that "identify-and-give-the-historical-
significance-of" more specific points. Students who receive an unsatisfying
mark on this first mid-term and wish to eliminate its influence on their final
grade may do so by writing a similar exam in the twelfth week. They will
receive credit for only the higher of the two grades earned.

Students will also submit _three four- to five-page papers_ , one prior to
each of the (two) mid-term examinations, in which they assess assigned
readings in ways they may use to prepare themselves for the exams (due
September 25, Week 5, and November 1, Week 10), and one more analyzing
documentary sources from Collins, _African History: Text and Readings_ (see
syllabus) in the light of themes relevant to the time(s) and place(s) from
which the documents come (due November 29, Week 14).

> > Students wishing to fulfill the _College Second Writing Requirement_ in
HIAF 201 may do so by rewriting and expanding the second paper, in
consultation with the instructor, for submission on Monday December 3.

The _final examination_ will consist entirely of essay questions inviting
students to integrate what they have learned throughout the semester.

GRADING -- All work will be evaluated in the spirit of constructive criticism;
it is unlikely that many will submit assignments so perfected that they exceed
the instructors' abilities to suggest improvements. It is assumed that
students have enrolled in HIAF 201 to learn, not merely to confirm prior
accomplishment with a grade, and that they will therefore systematically
incorporate instructors' suggestions on early assignments in their subsequent
work. Papers and quizzes that do not reflect attention to such opportunities
for learning will be returned, unmarked, for appropriate revision and prompt
resubmission.

> No course succeeds unless everyone involved -- students as well as
instructors \-- engages in open, honest discussion. You can count on the
instructors to express forthright, constructive assessments of your work. To
teach effectively they depend on similarly honest rsponses from students. If
you don't "get it", come in for a conference and help us all understand why;
if you have a gripe, tell us (not your roommate). Office hours and e-mail
addresses are posted.

>

> Beyond the instructors, students are encouraged to avail themselves of all
the academic support services of the University: the Writing Center, peer
advising groups, deans and faculty advisers, the Learning Needs and Evaluation
Center, and others. You should acknowledge specific aid received from these
sources on written assignments; it is to your credit if you obtain needed
support and are able to gain from it, and you will receive appropriate credit
in the marks awarded.

>

> HIAF 201 proceeds in the spirit of the University's Honor System,
particularly its premise of the prevailing "Community of Trust"; students
"pledge" their written work accordingly. The System's sanctions are distinctly
secondary to the collaborative spirit that it establishes for us all to
proceed to learn together.

>

> Final grades for the course are similarly secondary to the learning that
precedes their award. They will approximate students' "highest consistent
performance", as closely as possible; I do not need to remind you that grading
is not an exact science. Grading by "highest consistent performance"
encourages students to take risks - always based on the materials presented in
the course - to think for themselves in a disciplined, historical way, to
obtain instructors' reactions to their efforts, and to learn from the limits
that these exchanges identify, and move beyond them. Most assignments contain
opportunities to discard less-than-successful initial efforts to grasp a
subject as unfamiliar as Africa, particularly for students in their first or
second year. Since no mechanical calculation of percentages weights a slow
start or an isolated low mark against you, the occasional valiant but
misguided effort cannot cause you to miss a higher final grade by 0.1% (or any
other insignificant margin). The costs to one's grade of making a mistake or
two are thus very low compared to what can be gained from putting yourself on
the line.

TEXTS -- The following titles, all paperbacks, have been requested for
purchase at the Newcomb Hall bookstore:

> > Kevin Shillington, _History of Africa_ (New York: Macmillan, 2nd ed. 1995)
TEXT

>>

>> James L. Newman, _The Peopling of Africa: A Geographic Introduction_ (New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1995) GEOGRAPHY

>>

>> D. T. Niane, _Sundiata: An Epic of Old Mali_ (London: Longmans, 1965), or
equivalent edition

>>

>> Patrick Manning, _Slavery and African Life_ (New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1990)

>

> _Also_ \--

>

>> Paul Bohannan and Philip Curtin, _Africa and Africans_ (4th ed.) (Prospect
Heights IL: Waveland Press, 1995) RECOMMENDED -- GENERAL BACKGROUND

>>

>> John L. Esposito, _Islam: The Straight Path_ (New York: Oxford University
Press, 3rd ed., 1998). RECOMMENDED - BACKGROUND TO ISLAM

>>

>> Robert O. Collins, _African History: Text and Readings_ , 3 vols. (New
York: Markus Wiener, 1990) RECOMMENDED - SOURCES

_Reserve materials_ \-- Digitized versions of this syllabus and assigned
chapters and articles (though not assigned books) are posted on
[TOOLKIT](http://toolkit.virginia.edu/cgi-
local/tk/UVa_CLAS_2001_Fall_HIAF201-100/displaymaterials/SESSION:99910479824358:70733642578125),
which you can access through the [University
Library](http://www.lib.virginia.edu/) home page. You may also reach the site
through the [Department of History Home
Page](http://www.virginia.edu/%7Ehistory), accessible at familiar links
through the main University website.

> > If you want to print these files directly through your personal computer,
or one of the University workstations, you will need [Acrobat
Reader](http://www.virginia.edu/%7Ehistory/courses/acrobat.html).

>>

>> There will be no "course packet" of photocopies unless enough students find
these provisions so inadequate that the delays and costs of preparing one seem
worthwhile.

INTERNET RESOURCES -- more and more materials appear every year on World Wide
Web sites, some of them excellent sources for classroom preparation but others
of very dubious purpose or quality. The reputation of publishers and editors
recommends the academic rigor of materials appearing in scholarly journals and
other print publications, but the entirely unedited cyberspace of the internet
establishes no such accountability. Moreover, the exceedingly large (and
continually multiplying) number of sites on the "net" makes it impossible for
instructors to know and assess the intellectual quality of ones that standard
search engines may lead students to find, and cite.

> > Therefore, students wishing to draw on internet sources have
responsibility for acknowledging and establishing the trustworthiness of the
sites they cite by academic standards. Failure to acknowledge constitutes
plagiarism. Trustworthy academic standards may be established in a footnote or
endnote [beyond providing the URL] that identifies the author of the site and
establishes her/his qualifications as a scholarly authority in the subject
area involved, or by identifying conventional academic sources for the content
of the site. Adherence to these standards allows students to bring the
responsibility for critical thought that lies at the core of a University
education to their explorations of the otherwise unaccountable world of
cyberspace. Some reputable starting points for (and numerous links on to
other) responsible Internet materials on Africa include:

>>

>>> > African Studies Association (U.S.A.) -

>>>>

>>>>> <http://www.africanstudies.org>

>>>>

>>>> University of Pennsylvania African Studies Center -

>>>>

>>>>> <http://www.sas.upenn.edu/>

>>>>

>>>> Columbia University Library (African area studies) -

>>>>

>>>>> <http://www.columbia.edu/cu/lweb/indiv/africa/cuvl/>

>>>>

>>>> Stanford University (African area studies) -

>>>>

>>>>> <http://www-sul.stanford.edu/depts/ssrg/africa/africa.html>

>>>>

>>>> "An A-Z of African Studies on the Internet"

>>>>

>>>>> <http://www.lib.msu.edu/limb/a-z/az.html>

THIS SYLLABUS -- The syllabus has been written to anticipate questions that
students raise as they proceed through the course -- how to prepare for
examinations, where to find materials, what approach the course emphasizes,
and so on. _Read it carefully, and then return to it again throughout the
semester as you may need it_ \-- and _then_ , if you are still in doubt, by
all means ask the instructors.

> > HIAF 201 presupposes no prior familiarity with Africa or with the study of
history. It does demand a willingness on the student's part to come to grips
with a good deal of new material and sometimes to suspend comfortable
assumptions in order to examine new, occasionally unsettling, but always
fascinating facts and theories about Africa's past.

SCHEDULE -- The _class meets_ Tuesdays and Thursdays from 9:30 to 10:45 AM in
Cabell 345. Each class will contain some combination of lecture, discussion,
and student participation. _Everyone_ should plan to attend _every_ class
meeting.

_Teaching assistant_ \- John Mooney (924-6391/3,
<[ajm4t@virginia.edu](mailto:ajm4t@virginia.edu)>)

Office hours - Hours - TBA (and by appointment)

Office - RAN 128

Discussion sections --

Section 101 -- Wed 1:00-1:50 PM (Cabell 338)  
Section 102 -- Wed 9:00-9:50 AM (Cabell 318)  
Section 103 -- Fri 8:00-8:50 AM (Cabell B021)

_The final examination_ will be given in Cabell 345 at 2:00 PM on 12 December.



  
**Question of the week**

  
  
---  
  
  
  
This is a history course, about what people did in the past in Africa, but the
syllabus never refers to any of them as "Africans". (Extra points for anyone
who can find that word in the preceding pages.) Why?  
  
  
  
---  
  


  

  

