
     

**WESTERN KENTUCKY UNIVERSITY**  
**History 358-500/African-American Studies 358-500**  
**Spring Semester 2002**  
**Instructor: John A. Hardin, Ph. D.**  
**5:30-8:15 P. M. Wednesdays**  

COURSE DESCRIPTION:  
  
BLACKS IN AMERICAN HISTORY: TO 1877: A chronological study of African American  
history and culture to 1877 with an emphasis on African American contributions
to American life  
and thought. Crosslisted with AFAM 358\. Junior and Senior levels. 3 credit
hours. Fulfills 1993  
General Education Requirements, Categorical Requirement F. World Cultures and
American  
Cultural Diversity.  
  
COURSE GOALS:  
  
1.To discuss and examine the contributions of African Americans to American
life and  
culture to 1877.  
  
2.To examine historical scholarship on African Americans to 1877.  
  
3.To create a deeper appreciationfor the contributions of African Americans to
American  
life and culture.  
  
COURSE OBJECTIVES:  
  
1.Each student will beexpected to demonstrate a working understanding of
African  
American history to 1877.  
  
2. Each student will be expected to read and complete all assignments including two   
examinations.  
  
3.Each student will be expected to use literate prose in examinations and
written projects.  
  
  
EXPECTATIONS AND EVALUATION CRITERIA:  
  
1.Students will be evaluated for their mastery of class sessions via a midterm
and a final  
examination. The exams will consist of both objective (multiple choice,
matching and  
true-false) and subjective (essay) types of questions.The exams will be based
on the  
lectures, classroom discussions of the readings, and other materials presented
in class.  
  
2.Students are expected to attend all classes.No more than one (1) unexcused
absence is  
allowed excludingexamination and project due dates.A final grade reduction of
one  
letter grade per absence over one will be imposed.  
  
3.Students are expected to read the articles fromSources of the African-
American Past  
and be prepared to discuss them in class. Essay and objective questions will
be derived  
from these discussions. A schedule for the readings will be distributed in
class.  
  
4.Students are required to complete a research paper on a specific topic in
African  
American history to 1877.This double-spaced, typewritten document must be no
less  
than ten (10) nor greater than fifteen (15) pages of text. The bibliography,
cover page and  
outline are not included in this number. DO NOT SUBMIT THE PAPERS IN A  
PLASTIC OR CARDBOARD COVER. Stapling the paper will suffice. Papers should  
conform toKate L. Turabian's A Manual for Writers, Term Papers, Theses and  
Dissertations. Students are encouraged to submit a typed or handwritten, one
page thesis  
statement fortheir paper. This process will allow the instructor to provide
advice on the  
feasibility of writing the paper on the preferred topic.  
  
A special guide "How to Do Research Papers on African American Studies" is
available.  
Click on the following link to access this guide.  
  
[How to Do Research Papers on African American
Studies](C:/My%20Documents/guide.htm)  
  
  
5.The point values are as follows: paper topic (10), midterm (100), final(100)
term paper  
(90) for a total of 300 points. The total number of points will bedivided by
three to  
arrive at the course numerical average. The following scale will be used to
determine the  
letter grade: A = 100-89; B = 88-79; C = 78-69;D = 68-59; andF = 58-0.  
  
TEXTS:  
  
John Hope Franklin and Alfred Moss. From Slavery to Freedom: A History of
African-Americans.McGraw-Hill. Eighth Edition.  
  
Roy Finkenbine. Primary Sources in American History: Sources of the African-
AmericanPast. Longman. First Edition.  
  
OFFICE HOURS/PHONE:  
  
Ivan Wilson Fine Arts Center 200. Phone:(270) 745-2345.In my capacity as
Assistant Dean of  
WKU's Potter College of Arts, Humanities and Social Sciences, my office hours
areMonday  
through Friday from 8:00 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. To schedule an appointment, please
call this  
number andmake arrangements with the office associate.If you need to
communicate by e-mail, please use this address: john.hardin@wku.edu  
  
This syllabus is available through the World Wide Web at the following
address:  
  
[http://wku.edu/~hardija/358syl2.htm](C:/My%20Documents/hardija/358syl2.htm)  
  
  
CLASS CALENDAR:  
  
1.Paper topic: February 6, 2002.  
  
2.Midterm examination: March 6, 2002  
  
3.Spring break: March 20, 2002-no class meeting.  
  
4.Paper: April 17, 2002  
  
5.Final Examination: May 8, 2002, 6:00 P.M.-8:00 P.M.  
  
  
CLASS CONTENT OUTLINE:  
  
I.African Background Before the Diaspora  
  
II.The Slave Trade and Its Implications  
  
III.Slavery in the Western Hemisphere  
  
IV.Colonial Slavery  
  
V.Blacks and the American Revolution  
  
VI.Quasi-Free Blacks  
  
VII.A Species of Property: Slavery in North America  
  
VIII.Blacks and Westward Expansion  
  
IX.The Black Wits: African American Cultural Contributions  
  
X.Intersectional Strife and The Peculiar Institution  
  
XI.Civil War and African Americans  
  
XII.Regaining The Peace: Reconstruction  
  
XIII.Losing the Peace: White Reaction/Black Response  
  
  
SELECTED READINGS IN WKU HELMS-CRAVEN LIBRARY, BOWLING GREEN:  
  
Abzug, Robert H., ed. New Perspectives on Race and Slavery in the Americas.  
  
Bastide, Roger. African Civilizations in the New World.  
  
Berlin, Ira. Slaves Who Were Free: The Free Negro in the Upper South
1776-1861.  
Bay, Mia. The White Image in the Black Mind: African-American Ideas About
White People, 1830-1925.  
  
Blassingame, John W. The Slave Community: Plantation Life in theAntebellum
South.  
  
Cox, Lawanda C. Fenlason. Lincoln and Black Freedom: A Study in Presidential
Leadership.  
  
Delany, Martin Robinson. The Condition, Elevation and Emigration and Destiny
of the Colored  
People of the United States.  
  
Fields, Barbara.Slavery and Freedom on the Middle Ground: Maryland During the
Nineteenth  
Century.  
  
Fitzgerald, Michael W. Union League Movement in the Deep South: Politics and
Agricultural  
Change During Reconstruction.  
  
Foner, Eric. Reconstruction: America's Unfinished Revolution 1863-1877.  
  
Fox-Genovese, Elizabeth. Within the Plantation Household: Black and White
Women of the  
Old South.  
  
Franklin, John Hope. A Southern Odyssey: Travelers in the Antebellum South.  
  
Genovese, Eugene. Roll Jordan Roll: The Worldthe Slaveholders Made.  
  
Gutman, Herbert. The Black Family in Slavery and Freedom: 1750-1925.  
  
Jordan, Winthrop. White Over Black: American Attitudes Toward the Negro,
1550-1925.  
  
Joyner, Charles. Down By the Riverside: A South Carolina Slave Community.  
  
Levine, Lawrence. Black Culture and Black Consciousness: Afro-American Folk
Thought  
From Slavery to Freedom.  
  
Litwack, Leon and Meier, August. Black Leaders of the Nineteenth Century.  
  
Mellon, James (ed.) Bullwhip Days: The Slave Remembers.  
  
Nell, William Cooper. The Colored Patriots of the American Revolution.

Quarles, Benjamin. Allies for Freedom: Blacks and John Brown.  
  
_________________. Black Mosaic: Essays in Afro-American History and
Historiography.  
  
Pease, Jane H. They Who Would Be Free: Blacks Search for Freedom, 1830-1861.  
  
Perman, Michael. Emancipation and Reconstruction 1862-1879.  
  
Raboteau, Albert. Slave Religion: The "Invisible Institution" in the
Antebellum South.  
  
Rose, Willie Lee. Rehearsal for Reconstruction: The Port Royal Experiment.  
  
Smith, Billy G. and Wojtowicz, Richard. Blacks Who Stole Themselves.  
  
Stampp, Kenneth. The Peculiar Institution.  
  
Stevenson, Brenda (ed.) The Journals of Charlotte Forten.  
  
Walker, Juliet E. K. Free Frank: A Black Pioneer on the Antebellum Frontier.  
  
White, Deborah Gray. Ar'n't IA Woman: Female Slaves in the Plantation South.  
  
For students interested in using the resources of the WKU Helms/Cravens
Library, please consult my  
professional page at for the "How to Do Research Papers on African American
Studies" by  
Donna L. Gilton (1985) and Andy Stafford (1991).  
  
INTERNET LINKS OF INTEREST:  
  
http://vi.uh.edu/pages/mintz/primary.htm  
Description: slave narratives and other documents. The site is located at the
University of Houston.  
  
http://www.itd.nps.gov/cwss/africanh.html  
Description: provides data on African American soldiers in the Civil War.Data
provided by  
National Park Service.  
  
http://chumpchange.com//Junteenth/History.htm  
http://www.juneteenth.com  
Description: Both sites provide data on Juneteenth celebrations at the end of
the Civil War.  
  
As with all internet sites, extreme caution is advised about the veracity of
the data found.  
  
  
_HISTORY /AFRICAN AMERICAN STUDIES 358  
Significant Terms, Persons and Events  
Chapter 1  
  
Ghana  
Tenkamenin  
Kumbi Saleh  
Sisse  
Almoravids  
Mali  
Gonga Musa  
Mansa Musa  
Sundiata Keita  
Ibrahim Es Saheli  
Suleiman  
Ibn Batuta  
Sonni Ali Ber  
Gao  
Timbuktu  
Askia Mohammed  
fari  
Jenne  
Mossi  
Idris Alooma  
Hausa  
Empire of the Congo  
Songhay  
Benin  
Oyo  
Ashanti  
Zimbabwe  
  
Chapter 2  
  
village states  
family states  
griots, master drummer  
clan states  
master of the land  
patrilineal  
magic  
animism  
Islam  
Copticchurch  
amulets  
talismans  
Tarikh-es Soudan(Es Sadi)  
Tarikh-el-Fettach(Kati)  
Niger-Congo(Bantu)  
Nilo-Saharan(Sudanic)  
Afro-Asiatic  
KhoiSan("click")  
  
Chapter 3  
  
Ivan Van Sertima  
Estavanico  
Nuflo de Olano  
Jean Baptiste Point du Sable  
Bartolomeo de Las Casas  
asiento  
Company de Cacheo  
Dutch West India Company  
Angola  
Brazil  
Royal African Company  
factories  
caboceer  
Sir John Hawkins  
middle passage  
Philip Curtin  
J.E. Inikori  
Council of the Indies  
Denmark  
absentee landlordism  
Maroons  
Code Noir  
law of descent  
Macandal  
Toussaint L'Ouverture  
Cudgo  
Jamaica  
St. Christopher  
Palmares  
viceroyalty  
New Granada  
La Plata  
New Spain  
Sante Fe  
Minas Geraes  
negros de ganhos  
novenas  
trezenas  
libambo  
miscegnation  
  
Chapter 4  
  
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts  
William Penn  
Lucy Terry  
Virginia slave code  
Quakers  
  
Chapter 5  
  
John Woolman  
Anthony Benezet  
Crispus Attucks  
John Locke  
James Otis  
IssacSkillman  
John Adams  
Peter Salem  
Salem Poor  
Prince Hall  
Lord Dunmore  
Richard Henry Lee  
John Laurens  
Samuel Lawrence  
Christopher Greene  
Prince Whipple  
Oliver Cromwell  
James Forten  
New York Society for Promoting  
the Manumission of Slaves  
Article I, Section 2, U.S. Constitution  
Article I, Section 9, U.S. Constitution  
Article IV, Section 2, U.S. Constitution  
  
Chapter 6  
  
Eli Whitney  
short staple cotton  
cotton gin  
Toussaint L'Ouverture  
Dessalines  
Louisiana  
Haiti  
Jupiter Hammon  
Phyllis Wheatley  
Poems on Various Subjects Religious and Moral  
Gustavus Vassa (Oloudah Equiano)  
An Interesting Narrative on the Life of Gustavus Vassa (Oloudah Equiano)  
Benjamin Banneker  
James Derham  
Paul Cuffe  
Primus Hall  
New York African Free School  
George Liele  
Andrew Bryan  
Richard Allen  
Absolom Jones  
African Methodist Episcopal Church  
Peter Williams  
James Varick  
African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church  
New York African Free School  
Henry Cunningham  
African Baptist Church (Philadelphia)  
Thomas Paul  
Abyssinian Baptist Church (Boston)  
African Lodge No. 459  
Prince Hall Masons  
African Society of Boston (1796)  

    
    
                               Chapter 7
    
    
                                    

York  
Edward Rose  
Pierre Bonga  
James P. Beckwourth  
Edmonia Lewis  
George Bush of Oregon & Washington  
William Burleigh  
John Johnsonand John Davis  
Battle of Chalmette Plains  
Manifest Destiny  
William Trail  
Free Frank  
John Melvin  
Woolfolk, Saunders and Overly  
Franklin and Armfield  
Moncure Conway  
Thomas Dew  
U.B. Phillips  
William L. Yancey  
  
  
  
Chapter 8  
  
Slave Codes  
Nat Turner  
Denmark Vesey  
gang system  
placage  
overseers  
drivers  
"Negro clothes"  
John Canoe  
Herbert Gutman  
John Blassingame  
Josiah Henson  
miscegnation  
infanticide  
Gabriel Prosser  
  
                Chapter 9   
  
Pierre Chastang  
Norbert Rillieux  
Cyprian Ricard  
Marie Metoyer  
placage  
Thomy Lafon  
James Boon  
cakewalks  
The Christian Recorder(1852)  
John Chavis  
Morris Brown  
Ralph Freeman  
Lemuel Haynes  
Henry Highland Garnet  
EdwardJones  
John Russwurm  
Charles Avery  
Myrtilla Miner  
Institute for Colored Youth  
Wilberforce University  
George Moses Horton  
Daniel Payne  
William Wells Brown  
Martin R. Delaney  
Frederick Douglass  
Freedom's Journal  
James G. Birney  
National Council of Colored People  
American Colonization Society  
Liberia  
Lott Cary  
  
Chapter 10  
  
Charles Osborn  
Elihu Embree  
William Swain  
Benjamin Lundy  
David Walker  
William Lloyd Garrison  
Genius of Universal Emancipation  
James G. Birney  
Theodore Dwight Weld  
Arthur Tappan  
Lewis Tappan  
LeviCoffin  
American and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society  
American Anti-Slavery Society  
Elijah Lovejoy  
PrudenceCrandall  
Joshua Giddings  
John H. Hopkins  
George Moses Horton  
Robert Purvis  
George Vashon  
James McCrummell  
Isabella (Sojourner Truth)  
Charles Remond  
Sarah Parker Remond  
John Russwurm  
Underground Railroad  
Issac Hopper  
Thomas Boude  
Tice Davids  
Henry Box Brown  
Calvin Fairbanks  
John Fairfield  
John Mason  
Harriet Tubman  
Josiah Henson  
Edward Brown  
Josiah Nott  
Harriet Beecher Stowe  
Prigg v. Pennsylvania  
Wilmot Proviso  
Kansas-Nebraska Act  
Roger B. Taney  
Dred Scott v. Sanford  
Harpers Ferry  
  
Chapter 11  
  
Confiscation Act of 1861  
Benjamin Butler  
American Freedmen's Aid Commission  
American Missionary Association  
First South Carolina Volunteer Regiment  
Ile'a Vache  
Emancipation Proclamation  
National Convention of Colored Men  
Robert Smalls  
United States Colored Troops  
Robert Gould Shaw  
Fifty-fourth Massachusetts Regiment  
Corps d'Afrique  
Enlistment Act of 1862  
no quarter policy  
Fort Pillow, Tennessee  
Decatur Dorsey  
Juneteenth  
  
Chapter 12  
  
Lincoln's Plan of Reconstruction  
Black Codes  
Thirteenth Amendment  
Fourteenth Amendment  
Fifteenth Amendment  
Thaddeus Stevens  
Andrew Johnson  
ReconstructionAct of 1867  
Bureau of Refugees, Freedmen and Abandoned Lands  
Otis Oliver Howard  
Samuel C. Armstrong  
Erastus M. Cravath  
Fisk University  
Howard University  
Atlanta University  
Colored Methodist Episcopal Church  
Colored Cumberland Presbyterian Church  
Southern HomesteadAct of 1866  
National Negro Labor Union  
Freedmen's Savings and Trust Company  
Alonzo Ransier  
Francis L. Cardozo  
John R. Lynch  
P.B.S. Pinchback  
Jonathan Gibbs  
Hiram K. Revels  
Blanche K. Bruce  
  
Chapter 13  
  
Union League of America  
Radical Republicans  
carpetbaggers  
scalawags  
Ku Klux Klan  
Red Shirts  
"Pitchfork" Ben Tillman  
Rutherford B. Hayes  
EnforcementAct of 1870  
United States v. Cruikshank  
Colored Farmers' National Alliance and Cooperative Union  
Southern Farmers Alliance  
Populists  
Tom Watson  
John C. Dancy  
disfranchisement  
grandfather clause  
Civil Rights Act of 1875  
  
_Reading Schedule  
Finkenbine, Primary Sources in American History: Sources of the African-
American Past  
  
January 23:Venture Smith, Capture and Sale on the Gold Coast,pp. 2-5.  
Olaudah Equiano, The Middle Passage, pp. 5-9.  
  
January 30:Charles Ball, African Culture in the Lowcountry, pp. 15-16.  
John Marrant,The Impact of the Great Awakening,pp. 16-17.  
  
February 6:Phillis Wheatley, Our Modern Egyptians, pp. 22-23.  
A Petition for Freedom in Massachusetts,pp. 23-24.  
Benjamin Banneker, Challenging the Racial Views of a Founding Father,
pp. 24-27.  
  
February 13:Maria W. Stewart, A Little Better Than Slavery, pp. 30-32.  
Richard Allen, The Rise of African-American Churches, pp. 32-34.  
  
February 20:John B. Russwurm, Colonization Endorsed, pp. 36-37.  
Peter Williams Jr., Colonization Rejected, pp. 38-39.  
  
February 27:Solomon Northrup, Life and Labor on a Cotton Plantation, pp.
42-43.  
Louisa Picquet, The Experience of a Female Slave, pp. 44-46.  
Peter Randolph, Culture and Religion in the Quarters, pp. 47-48.  
  
March 13:David Holmes, Escaping From Slavery, pp. 53-55.  
The Confessions ofNat Turner, pp. 55-57.  
  
March 27:David Walker, An Antislavery Appeal, pp. 60-61.  
Henry Highland Garnet, Let Your Motto Be Resistance, pp. 63-66.  
  
April 3:William Summerson, Fleeing to Union Lines, pp. 72-74.  
Frederick Douglass, "Men of Color, To Arms," pp. 74-75.  
  
April 10:Susie King Taylor, Life in Camp, pp. 77-79.  
Charlotte Forten, Teaching the Contrabands on the Sea Islands, pp. 79-80.  
  
April 17:The Freedman's Agenda for Reconstruction, pp. 84-85.  
Richard Harvey Cain, A Black Congressman Demands Equal Rights, pp.85-86.  
Harriet Hernandez, political Terrorism by the Ku Klux Klan, pp. 86-87.  
  
April 24:     Henry Adams, Leaving the South, pp. 92-93.

