|  ![](images/tavolabanner.jpg) |  Course Topics and Readings |
![](images/tavolabanner.jpg)  
---|---|---  
  
* * *  
  
### Week 1 The Idea of the West

17 January What is the West?

We will begin with an overview of the course and a discussion of the idea of
the West.

Readings: Wolf photocopies

Methodological Goals: Questioning Eurocentrism



### Week 2 The Medieval World

22 January The World in 1450

Today, the professor will provide an overview of global societies, cultures,
and economies before the Renaissance and Columbian Exchange.

Readings: Marius, Introduction

Methodological Goals: Writing Process

24 January The Beginnings of Global Commerce

We will examine the global changes in commerce, naval technology, and economic
structures that helped produce the Renaissance movement in the Mediterranean
region.

Readings: Jardine, "Prologue"; Marius, chapters 1 and 3

Methodological Goals: Historical writing styles



### Week 3 Forging the Renaissance

29 January Commodities and Money in the Renaissance

Students will explore the radical changes in Renaissance trade and currencies
through discussion and an analysis of artifacts.

Readings: Jardine, chapters 1 and 2; Marius, chapter 2

Methodological Goals: Objects as sources; the types of sources

Assignments: RP Declaration due

31 January Renaissance Printing

Today, we will delve into the revolutionary development of Renaissance
printing and the printing press. We will discuss the importance of book
production, distribution, and availability. We will also develop techniques of
understanding texts drawn from Renaissance education.

Readings: Jardine, chapter 3; Marius, chapter 2

Methodological Goals: Dissecting books and multimedia

Assignments: Descriptive paper due



### Week 4 Renaissance Knowledge and Commerce

5 February Libraries, Knowledge, and "Civilization"

Now that we understand Renaissance books, we will explore Renaissance
libraries and Renaissance humanist education. We will also consider how modern
libraries continue to function as centers of knowledge/power.

Readings: Jardine, chapters 4 and 5; Marius, chapter 4

Methodological Goals: Libraries as centers of knowledge/power

Assignments: RP Proposal due

7 February Marketing Things

Today, we will consider how Renaissance things were marketed. We will then
explore how marketing can provide useful research techniques.

Readings: Jardine, chapter 6; Marius, chapter 5

Methodological Goals: Marketing as research strategy; Peer reviews

Assignments: Expository Paper due



### Week 5 Nature and Consumption

12 February Natural Philosophy and Astronomy

We will examine Renaissance understandings of the natural world around them
and of the universe. In addition, we will consider what "science" is and how
it is done.

Readings: Jardine, chapter 7; Marius, chapters 6-8

Methodological Goals: History of science research

Assignments: Peer review due

14 February Artistic Patronage and Conspicuous Consumption

Students will view Renaissance artistic works and examine how they were
produced. Afterwards, we will confront the dimensions and meaning of
conspicuous consumption in the Renaissance World.

Readings: Jardine, chapters 8 and "Epilogue"

Methodological Goals: Cultural research and artistic sources

Assignments: RP Bibliography due



### Week 6 The Columbian Exchange

19 February The Idea of a Columbian Exchange

Today, we will discuss Crosby's notion of the Columbian Exchange and debate
the idea of "discovery" of the Americas.

Readings: Crosby, "Forward", "Preface", chapter 1

Methodological Goals: Using perspective in research

Assignments: Narrative paper due

21 February Toward the Americas: Disease, Plants, and Animals

We will consider the implications of the European and African imports to the
Americas and how they reshaped North and South America.

Readings: Crosby, chapters 2 and 3

Methodological Goals: Scientific research and biological accidents



### Week 7 The Americas and the Renaissance World

26 February The Contested History of a Disease

Today, we will concentrate on the diseases exchanged during the Columbian
Exchange and how the history of disease works.

Readings: Crosby, chapter 4

Methodological Goals: The history of disease and medicine

Assignments: RP Revised Proposal due

28 February From the Americas: A Revolution in Cuisines and Economies

Students will examine the exportations from the Americas and their
revolutionary impact on Europe, Africa, and Asia. We will also consider the
cultural significance of food in societies.

Readings: Crosby, chapters 5 and 6

Methodological Goals: Cultural significance of food



### Week 8 Creation of an Atlantic Economy

5 March The Mediterranean, Africa, and Slavery

We will examine the beginnings of the Plantation Complex in the Renaissance
World.

Readings: Curtin, "Preface", chapters 1-3

Methodological Goals: Considering migration and slavery

7 March Sugar and Imperialism

Today, we will look at the impact of sugar on slavery and imperialism.

Readings: Curtin, chapters 4-6

Methodological Goals: Economic explanation and state development



### Week 9 African Slaves and the Plantation Complex

12 March Imperial Control and the Harshness of Slavery

We will explore the limits of imperial control and the attempts to enforce
imperial authority, especially over African slaves.

Readings: Curtin, chapters 7 and 8

Methodological Goals: Exploring peripheries, frontiers, and variation

14 March The Middle Passage

Today, we will examine the Middle Passage of slaves between Africa and the
Americas, focusing on the harshness of the plantation regime and the slave
trade.

Readings: Curtin, chapters 9 and 10

Methodological Goals: Confronting human brutality

Assignment: Argumentative paper due



### Week 10 Spring Break

19 March Hit the Beach!

Readings: How to Surf a Pipeline and Live

Methodological Goals: Surfing form

21 March Grilled Shrimp and Blackened Redfish

Readings: Texas Mesquite Grilling

Methodological Goals: Beachcoming and relaxation skills



### Week 11 The Idea of a Military Revolution

26 March Fortifications and Drill

The idea of the Military Revolution and the techniques of technological
explanation in history will be our focus today.

Readings: Parker, "Introduction" and chapter 1

Methodological Goals: Technological and technical explanation

28 March Supply and the Military Revolution

We will examine the role that supplies and logistics played in military
changes in the Renaissance World. We will also explore the notion of
"bureaucracy" as it emerged in this period.

Readings: Parker, chapter 2

Methodological Goals: Examining bureaucracy



### Week 12 The Military Revolution and the Renaissance World

2 April The Creation of European Naval Dominance

Today, we will look at the rise of European naval dominance around the oceans
of the world and what it meant to societies in the Renaissance World. We will
also consider the role of transportation in societies and trading.

Readings: Parker, chapter 3

Methodological Goals: Oceanic concerns and transportation

Assignments: Session 1 and 2 RP First Drafts due

4 April The Global Military Revolution

We will explore the expanding military changes in the Renaissance World and
how the techniques and technologies of the Military Revolution were adopted
and adapted by societies around the globe.

Readings: Parker, chapters 4 and 5

Methodological Goals: Cultural confrontation and military borrowings







### Week 13 Assessing the Renaissance World

9 April Attacking and Defending the Military Revolution

Today, we will attempt to assess the idea of the Military Revolution,
considering whether it occurred and if it did, then when, where, and how did
it take hold? We will debate the idea of "revolution" and its application to
military changes in the Renaissance World.

Readings: Parker, chapter 6

Methodological Goals: Considering the idea of revolution

Assignments: Session 3 and 4 RP First Drafts due

11 April Four Interpretations of the Renaissance World

We will now attempt to summarize and compare the findings of our four
principal views on the Renaissance World. We will debate which
interpretation(s) seem most convincing and why. We will learn how academic
debate works and why it is so critical.

Readings: Review notes on Jardine, Crosby, Curtin, and Parker books

Methodological Goals: Interpretation, Debate, and Exchange



### Week 14 Renaissance World Conference Opens

16 April Easter Break

18 April Conference Session 1



### Week 15 Renaissance World Conference Continues

23 April Conference Session 2

25 April Conference Session 3

Assignments: Session 1 RP Final Drafts due



### Week 16 Renaissance World Conference Concludes

30 April Conference Session 4

Assignments: Session 2 RP Final Drafts due

2 May Round Table: 1992: 500 Years After the Columbian Voyages

Readings: Photocopies; Crosby, chapter 6

Methodological Goals: Remembrance, current events, politics in research

Assignments: Session 3 RP Final Drafts due



### Week 17 The West and Globalism

7 May The West Today

To conclude, we will consider the processes of globalism at work today and how
our Renaissance World perspective can help us understand the complex world in
which we live.

Readings: Photocopies

Methodological Goals: Current events and historical perspectives

Assignments: Session 4 RP Final Drafts due





  
  
 ![](images/stma_bar.gif)



 [Renaissance World and Columbian Exchange](index.html) |
[Syllabus](syllabus.html) | **Course Topics and Readings** |
[Assignments](assignments.html) | [Internet Resources](internet.html) |
[Bibliography](bibliography.html) | [Student Projects](student.html)



 * * *


 All Design (C) 2001 Brian Sandberg



 Contact: [bsandberg@mail.millikin.edu](mailto:bsandberg@mail.millikin.edu)



 Date Last Modified: 1/27/2001



  

