  
University of Maryland  
Department of History  
Fall 2001



History of the U.S. to 1865 | Prof. I. Berlin  
---|---  
History 156 | Tuesday/Thursday, 10:00  
  
          Exercise #1

         The Origins of Slavery on English Mainland North America

_Purpose:_

This exercise is a chance for you to **think historically** , while seeing how
historians really work and to write some history of your own. It is not a
research paper, but offers you a chance to review an important historical
controversy respecting the origins of slavery on mainland North America.

_Read:_

Oscar and Mary Handlin, "The Origins of the Southern Labor System," _William
and Mary Quarterly_ , 7 (1950), 199-222 ( **on reserve in library; online via
JSTOR** );

Carl Degler, "Slavery and the Genesis of American Race Prejudice," Comparative
Studies in Society and History, 2 (1959), 49-66 (on reserve and in packet);

Edmund Morgan, "Slavery and Freedom: The American Paradox" _Journal of
American History_ , 59 (1972), 5-29 ( **on reserve; online via JSTOR; in
packet** ).  
For instructions on how to retrieve the essays on the Handlins and Morgan on
JSTOR, see the end of this document.

  | The Problem:  
---|---  
  |  
  | Perhaps more than any other institution, African-American slavery shaped
the formative years of American life and, even after its demise in a bloody
civil war, continued to determine much of the course of American history.
Slavery stood at the center of the American economy and American politics, and
influenced the development of American attitudes and patterns of social
relations--not simply between blacks and whites but among black people and
among white people--from the most public to the most intimate.  
  |  
  | Not surprisingly, the origins of chattel bondage have been of great
concern to historians of the American people, and to the people themselves.
Numerous studies explaining the origins of what white Americans came to call
their "peculiar institution" have been published, many during the last
generation. Also, not surprisingly, scholars have disagreed profoundly as to
why slavery came into being. But the debate, for the most part, has not turned
on the issue of facts. Indeed, "the facts" of the case are relatively few and
generally agreed upon. The issue has turned instead on how the facts are
understood and interpreted. You have been asked to read three interpretive
studies of the origins of American slavery. All present more or less the same
facts interpreted in different ways. You are asked first to consider these
facts, the lectures on the subject, your discussions in class, and any
readings of your own. In so doing, consider the following questions:  
  |



**These questions are posed not to be answered in part or in total--but to
give you a means to think about the issues involved.**  
  
1\. What did English people think of Africans in the early seventeenth
century? How did their attitudes affect their first confrontations with
African people? Do "attitudes" determine action? What is the relationship
between "racism" and discrimination?

2\. When did the first black people arrive in English mainland North America?
What was their status? How were they treated? How were they treated compared
to white laborers?

3\. What was the status of white laborers in England and in English mainland
North America during the seventeenth century? How were they treated? How were
they treated in comparison to black laborers?

4\. What was the nature of the relationship between black laborers and white
laborers in seventeenth-century English mainland North America? Did this
relationship change over time?

5\. Englishmen and Africans did not always confront each other in the same
setting. How do regional differences--the West Indies, New England, the
Chesapeake, and lowcountry South Carolina and Georgia---influence race
relations in the seventeenth century?

6\. When did slavery receive legal sanction on English mainland North America?
Why was this legislation passed? How did this legislation affect the status of
black people? What is the relationship between law and social reality?

7\. Is it possible to write a history of slavery and not read America's
subsequent racial conflict into it?

8\. In writing the history of slavery, what are the real facts, how do we know
them, how can we separate fact and interpretation on this emotional subject?

**Again, these questions are not to be answered in whole or part in your
essay; they serve only as a study guide.**

_Write:_

Having considered the issues involved, write an essay of approximately five
but no more than ten double-spaced typewritten pages explaining why slavery
came to English mainland North America. As always, economy of language and
felicity of expression count. **Your papers are due in lecture _September
27th_ in class. **

_Be on notice:_

Regarding absence and lateness: the following proclamation is issued:

Whereas it may come to pass that one or more individuals, whether through
dilatoriness, dereliction, irresponsibility, or chutzpah, may seek respite and
surcease from escritorial demands through procrastination, delay, and
downright evasion;

And whereas this unhappy happenstance contributes mightily to malfeasance on
the part of parties of the second part (i.e.,students, the instructed, YOU)
and irascibility on the part of us (i.e., US);

Be it therefore known, understood, apprehended, and comprehended:

That all assignments must reach your TA, or be tendered to the Department
Receptionist, on or by the exact hour announced in class, and that failure to
comply with this wholesome and most generous regulation shall result in the
assignment forfeiting one half letter grade for each day for which it is
tardy, "one day" being defined as a 24-hour period commencing at the announced
hour on which the assignment is due; and that the aforementioned reduction in
grade shall continue for each succeeding day of delay until either the
assignment shall be remitted or its value shrunk unto nothingness. And let all
acknowledge that the responsibility for our receiving papers deposited
surreptitio (i.e., in my mailbox or under his or her door), whether timely or
belated, resides with the aforementioned second-part parties (i.e., you
again), hence onus for the miscarriage of such items falls upon the writer's
head (i.e., until we clutch your scribbles to our breasts, I assume you have
not turned them in, all protestations to the contrary notwithstanding).

Be it nevertheless affirmed:

That the greater part of justice residing in mercy, it may behoove us acting
entirely through our gracious prerogative, to award an extension in
meritorious cases, such sufferances being granted only upon consultation with
us, in which case a negotiated due date shall be proclaimed; it being
perfectly well understood that failure to observe this new deadline shall
result in the immediate and irreversible failure of the assignment (i.e., an
"F"), its value being accounted as a null set and less than that of a vile
mote. And be it further noted that routine disruptions to routine (i.e., lack
of sleep occasioned by pink terps dancing on the ceiling of your dorm) do not
conduce to mercy, but that severe dislocations brought on by Acts of God
(exceedingly traumatic events to the body and/or soul, such as having the
earth swallow one up on the way to delivering the assignment) perpetrated
either on oneself or on one's loving kindred, do.

And we wish to trumpet forth:

That our purpose in declaiming said proclamation, is not essentially to
terminate the wanton flouting of didactic intentions, but to encourage our
beloved students to consult with us, and apprehend us of their difficulties
aforehand (i.e., talk to me, baby), so that the cruel axe of the executioner
fall not upon their Grade Point Average, stipend, and smite them with a
vengeance.

**FINALLY:** Although you are not required to do additional reading for this
paper, there are many other articles and books on the origins of slavery. You
are welcome to read them and employ them in your paper, but you may NOT
substitute them for any of the above.

Here is a short bibliography of useful studies of the origins of slavery in
the U.S.

Winthrop Jordan, _White Over Black: American Attitudes  
Toward the Negro 1550-1812_ ;  
Edmund S. Morgan, _American Slavery: American Freedom: The Ordeal of Colonial
Virginia;_  
Russell R. Menard,  "From Servants to Slaves: The Transformation of the
Chesapeake Labor System," _Southern Studies_ , 16 (1977), 355-90;  
Richard Dunn, "Servants and Slaves: The Recruitment and Employment of Labor,"
in Jack P. Greene et al., _Colonial British North America_ ;  
David Galenson, _White Servitude in Colonial America: An Economic Analysis_

For some more general theoretical accounts of the origins of slavery (not
necessarily on mainland English North America) see E. D. Domar,  "The Causes
of Slavery or Serfdom: A Hypothesis," _Journal of Economic History_ , 30
(1970), 12-32; Stanley L. Engerman, "Some Considerations Relating to Property
Rights in Man," _Journal of Economic History_ , 33 (1973), 43-65; Philip D.
Curtin, "Epidemiology and the Slave Trade," Political Science Quarterly, 83
(1968), 190-216. David B. Davis, _The Problems of Slavery in Western Culture_
; and Orlando Patterson, _Slavery and Social Death_. The above are just a
sampling of a very large literature.

GOOD LUCK.

_Oh yes: JSTOR_

  
JSTOR FOR ARTICLES ON THE WEB

Degler's piece is not on JSTOR but the Handlin and Morgan article are.

To retrieve articles on the web at JSTOR, do the following:

1\. Go to http://www.jstor.org/

2\. Hit "enter JSTOR."

3\. Click on "Search JSTOR."

4\. Fill in the author, title, and date box according to the article  
you'd like to search. Citations are on your syllabus.

5\. Check History Journal box.

6\. Click on "search."

7\. Click on "article" to read the piece. You can also download the  
article to a disk or print it.

8\. If you'd like to see other pieces that an author has written, just  
fill in the name section. You'll also have to check at least the  
history journal box. Note that some authors may have printed elsewhere,  
however.

