![](images/hr1.gif)  
---  
[![LII](images/lii.gif)](http://www.law.cornell.edu/) |  **SUPREME COURT
COLLECTION** | [![Supreme Court Collection
home](images/sc2.gif)](../index.html)  
![](images/hr1.gif)  
  
**Search  **   \--all current and historic decisions Current decisions only
Current syllabi only Historic decisions only  
  
---  
  McNeil v. Wisconsin (90-5319), 501 U.S. 171 (1991)  
  
---  
 **Opinion**  
 |  **Concurrence**  
 |  **Syllabus**  
 |  **Dissent**  
  
[HTML version](/supct/html/90-5319.ZO.html)  
[WordPerfect version](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/word-
perfect/90-5319.ZO)| [HTML version](/supct/html/90-5319.ZC.html)  
[WordPerfect version](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/word-
perfect/90-5319.ZC)| [HTML version](/supct/html/90-5319.ZS.html)  
[WordPerfect version](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/word-
perfect/90-5319.ZS)| [HTML version](/supct/html/90-5319.ZD.html)  
[WordPerfect version](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/word-
perfect/90-5319.ZD)  


Syllabus

NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been pre-
pared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader. See
_United States_ v. _Detroit Lumber Co.,_ [200 U.S.
321](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/sup-choice.cgi?200+321), 337.

Syllabus

** McNEIL _v._ WISCONSIN

_certiorari to the supreme court of wisconsin

_ No. 90-5319. Argued February 25, 1991  \-- Decided June 13, 1991

Charged with an armed robbery in West Allis, Wisconsin, petitioner McNeil was
represented by a public defender at a bail hearing. While in jail on that
charge, he was questioned by police about a murder and re- lated crimes in
Caledonia, Wisconsin. He was advised of his _Miranda_ rights, signed forms
waiving them, and made statements incriminating himself in the Caledonia
offenses. He was then formally charged with the latter crimes, his pretrial
motion to suppress his statements was de- nied, and he was convicted. His
conviction was affirmed on appeal, the State Supreme Court holding that an
accused's request for counsel at an initial appearance on a charged offense
does not constitute an invocation of his [Fifth
Amendment](http://www.law.cornell.edu/constitution/constitution.billofrights.html#amendmentv)
right to counsel that precludes police interroga- tion on unrelated, uncharged
offenses.

_Held:_ An accused's invocation of his [Sixth
Amendment](http://www.law.cornell.edu/constitution/constitution.billofrights.html#amendmentvi)
right to counsel during a judicial proceeding does not constitute an
invocation of the right to counsel derived by _Miranda_ v. _Arizona,_ [384
U.S. 436](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/sup-choice.cgi?384+436), from
the [Fifth
Amendment](http://www.law.cornell.edu/constitution/constitution.billofrights.html#amendmentv)'s
guarantee against compelled self-incrimination. Pp. 3-10.

(a) The identity between the two rights that McNeil asserts is false as a
matter of fact. The [Sixth
Amendment](http://www.law.cornell.edu/constitution/constitution.billofrights.html#amendmentvi)
right, which does not attach until the initiation of adversary judicial
proceedings, is offense-specific, _Maine_ v. _Moulton,_ [474 U.S.
159](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/sup-choice.cgi?474+159), 179-180 and
n. 16, as is its effect, under _Michigan_ v. _Jackson,_ [475 U.S.
625](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/sup-choice.cgi?475+625), of
invalidating subsequent waivers during police-initiated questioning. Thus
McNeil's invocation of that right with respect to the West Allis robbery poses
no bar to the admission of his statements regarding the Caledonia crimes, with
which he had not been charged at the time he made the statements. More- over,
although the _Miranda_ right to counsel is non-offense-specific, _Arizona_ v.
_Roberson,_ [486 U.S. 675](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/sup-
choice.cgi?486+675), and, once asserted, prevents any further police-initiated
interrogation outside the presence of counsel, _Edwards_ v. _Arizona,_ [451
U.S. 477](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/sup-choice.cgi?451+477),
484-485, its assertion cannot be in- ferred from the invocation of the [Sixth
Amendment](http://www.law.cornell.edu/constitution/constitution.billofrights.html#amendmentvi)
right in light of the differing purposes and effects of the two rights. The
[Sixth
Amendment](http://www.law.cornell.edu/constitution/constitution.billofrights.html#amendmentvi)
right is intended to protect the unaided layman at critical confrontations
with the government after the initiation of the adversary process with respect
to a particular crime, _United States_ v. _Gouveia,_ [467 U.S.
180](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/sup-choice.cgi?467+180), 189. The
_Miranda-Edwards_ guarantee is intended to protect the sus- pect's "desire to
deal with the police only through counsel," _Edwards,_ _supra,_ at 484.
Requesting the assistance of an attorney at a bail hear- ing does not satisfy
the minimum requirement of some statement that can reasonably be construed as
an expression of a desire for counsel in dealing with custodial interrogation
by the police. Pp. 3-8.

(b) Nor will this Court declare as a matter of sound policy (assuming the
existence of such expansive power) that assertion of the Sixth Amendment right
implies invocation of the _Miranda_ right. McNeil's proposed rule offers only
insignificant advantages, and would seriously impede effective law enforcement
by precluding uncounseled but unco- erced admissions of guilt pursuant to
valid _Miranda_ waivers. Pp. 8-10.

155 Wis. 2d 24, 454 N. W. 2d 742, affirmed.

_Scalia,_ _J.,_ delivered the opinion of the Court, in which _Rehnquist,_ _C.
J.,_ and _White, O'Connor, Kennedy,_ and _Souter, JJ.,_ joined. _Ken-_ _nedy,
J.,_ filed a concurring opinion. _Stevens, J.,_ filed a dissenting opin- ion,
in which _Marshall_ and _Blackmun, JJ.,_ joined.



[![Copyright](/supct/images/copyright.gif)](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/credits.html)
|

 [![About us](/supct/images/aboutus.gif)](http://www.law.cornell.edu/lii.html)
|

 [![Send email](/supct/images/email.gif)](http://www.law.cornell.edu/help/)  
---|---|---

