_" Learning is not attained by chance. It must be attended to with diligence."
\--Abigail Adams_

    
    
    History 3900 
    Women in American History

* * *
    
    
    Instructor: Dr. Lynne Curry					Office: 216J Coleman Hall 
    Office Hours: M 2:00 - 4:00 pm 				Phone: 581-7988/3310 
    WF 9:00 - 11:00 am and by appointment 			e-mail: [cflc2@eiu.edu](mailto:cflc2@eiu.edu) 
    * Just before class is NOT a good time

* * *

**Content** : This course surveys the history of women in America from
precolonial times to the present. We will combine lectures, class discussions,
and videos with readings from the course texts and on library reserve. An
additional goal of this course is to introduce students to the historiography
of American women's and gender history.

Course texts: This course is reading-intensive. To aid your own understanding
and to enhance our class discussions, complete reading assignments __before__
coming to class. Required texts are:

1\. From textbook rental: Norton and Alexander, eds., _Major Problems in
American Women's History_ (second edition); Woloch, _Women and the American
Experience_ (second edition); Nella Larsen, _Quicksand and Passing._

2\. At the library: A number of readings have been placed on reserve at Booth
Library. See course agenda for assignments.

3\. Book review: In addition to the works cited above, you will read one
additional book of your choosing for an extended book review. See the syllabus
for further instructions.

**Attendance** : Regular attendance and active class participation are
mandatory. You are responsible for information and material covered in your
absence.

**Examinations** : There are two examinations in this course , a mid-term and
a final. Examinations are in essay format. The final is not comprehensive.

**Papers** : Two papers are required. See the syllabus for further
instructions.

**Note** : If you have a documented disability and wish to receive academic
accommodations, please contact the Office of Disability Services.

    
    
    Grading:		Mid-term = 30%		Paper #1 = 10% 
    			Final = 30%			Paper #2 = 30%

Course Schedule and Reading Assignments

    
    
    N = Norton & Alexander		 W = Woloch

08/2 Introductions

08/23 Defining women's history. Read: N chapter 1

08/25Native American women. Read: N chapter 2

08/28 Women in the Chesapeake. Read: W chapter 2

08/30 Puritan women. Read: W chapter 2

09/01Mary Rowlandson's story. Read: Rowlandson narrative on reserve

09/04 Labor Day. No class.

09/06 Unruly Puritans: Anne Hutchinson. Read: N chapter 3

09/08 Unruly Puritans: The Salem witch trials

09/11 Women and revolution. Read: N chapter 4

09/13 Gender and revolution. Read: W chapters 3 & 4

09/15 _The historian as detective: A Midwife's Tale_

09/18 Women and slavery. Read: N chapter 6

09/20 The Cult of Domesticity. Read: N chapter 5; W chapter 5

09/22 Defining women\rquote s sphere. Read: W chapter 6

09/25 Benevolence and reform. Read: W chapter 8

09/27 Politicizing women's sphere. Read: N chapter 7

09/29 Alternatives. Read: W chapter 7

10/02 Women and the Civil War. Read: Faust article on reserve

10/04 Victorian women and health. Read: N chapter 9

10/06 **Mid-term examination. Last day for book review selections.**

10/09 Women in the West. Read: N chapter 8

0/11 Women at work I. Read: W chapters 9 & 10

10/13 Women at work II. Read N chapter 11

10/16 The New Woman. Jane Addams and Hull House. Read: W chapter 11

10/18 New women and the welfare state. Read: W chapter 12

10/20 Fall break. No class. Begin reading __Quicksand and Passing__

10/23 Votes for women. Read: N chapter 10; W chapters 13 & 14

10/25 The 1920s: The Woman Citizen. Read: N chapter 12

10/27 The 1920s: Flappers and vamps. Read: W chapter 15

10/30 Cinema, sex, and Valentino. Read: W chapter 16

11/01 Women and the Harlem Renaissance. Read: Larsen, __Quicks and and
Passing.__. Paper #1 due in class today.

11/03 Humanizing the New Deal. Read: W chapters 17 & 18

11/06 Women and war, Part I. _The Life and Times of Rosie the Riveter_

11/08 Women and war, Part II. Read: N chapter 13

11/10 Women in postwar America: Work and family. Read: N chapter 14

11/13 Women in postwar America: Ideals

11/17 Fifties' girlhood. Read: Breiner and Douglas on reserve

11/20 - 11/24 **Thanksgiving recess**

11/27 Liberal feminism. Read: N chapter 15

11/29 Radical feminism. Read :W chapter 17

12/01 Defining "equality" . Part I. Read: W chapter 21 **Last day to turn in
Paper #2 in class**

12/04 Defining equality, Part II. Read W chapter 22

12/06 _Roe v. Wade_ Read; N chapter 16

12/08 Where do we go from here?

**Thursday, December 14 th, 2:30 to 4:30 pm**



**Instructions for Papers**

Requirements for Papers #1 and #2: Must be typed and double-spaced. Turabian
style is preferred, but others (e.g., APA, MLA) are acceptable. Papers are due
IN CLASS on date given on the course schedule. }{\b\i Late papers will be
docked one grade level. You are welcome to turn in drafts of either paper for
my suggestions and corrections. Drafts may turned in at any time but no later
than _one week before assigned due date_.

Paper #1: Reaction Paper on Nella Larsen's Quicksand and Passing. This paper
is based on the two short novels assigned in this course. No outside research
for this assignment is necessary, but you will be required to integrate the
novels with historical evidence from our course texts. Questions to guide your
anal ysis will be handed out in class.

Paper #2: Book Review. Choose a book from the list below. Inform me of your
selection in writing or e-mail, no later than Friday, October 6th.

Note: My prior approval is required to select a book not on the list. Your
review must do the following: (1) Present and analyze the author's main
thesis. Do not simply repeat the narrative of events. What argument is the
author making about women in American history? (2) Evaluate the author's
evidence. What sources does she or he use? Do you see potential problems with
these sources? What other sources might have been utilized? (3) Compare and
contrast the author's thesis with ideas raised in our course readings. Is the
author in agreement or disagreement with our readings? Note: You must refer to
specific text readings.

_Colonial and Antebellum Life_

    
    
     Laurel Thatcher Ulrich, _Good Wives_ (1982). Puritan women. 
    John Demos. _The Unredeemed Captive_ (1994). A captive's story. 
    Mary Beth Norton, _Founding Mothers and Fathers_ (1997). Early American society. 
    Linda Kerber, _Women of the Republic_ (1980). Revolutionary thought. 
    Nancy Hewitt, _Women's Activism and Social Change_ (1984). Social reform. 
    Sylvia Hoffert, _Private Matters_ (1989). Childbirth and infant care. 
    Suzanne Lebsock, _The Free Women of Petersburg_ (1984). Antebellum South.
    Elizabeth Fox-Genovese, _Within the Plantation Household_. Antebellum South. 
    Drew Gilpin Faust, _Mothers of Invention_ (1995). Gender and the Civil War.
    George Rable, _Civil Wars_ (1991). Women and southern nationalism. 
    Ann Douglas, _The Feminization of American Culture_ (1988). Intellectual life.
    Frances Cogan, _All-American Girl_ (1989). 19th century ideals of femininity.
    Elliot J. Gorn, _The Manly Art_ (1986). 19th century ideals of masculinity.

_Work_

    
    
     Lynn Weiner, _From Working Girl to Working Mother_ (1985).Working women.
    Alice Kessler-Harris, _Out to Work_ (1982). Wage-earning women. 
    David Katzman, _Seven Days a Week_ (1981). Domestic servants. 
    Ruth S. Cowan, _More Work for Mother_ (1983). Household technologies. 
    Laura Shapiro, _Perfection Salad_ (1986). Women and cooking.
    Suellen Hoy, _Chasing Dirt_ (1995). Women and cleanliness.
    Jacqueline Jones, _Labor of Love, Labor of Sorrow_. African-American women. 

_Ethnicity_

    
    
     Donna Gabaccia. _From the Other Side_ (1994). European immigrants. 
    Vicki Ruiz. _Cannery Women, Cannery Lives (_ 1987). Hispanic women.
    Hasia Diner, _Erin's Daughters in America_ (1986). Irish immigrants. 
    Evelyn Nakano Glenn, _Issei, Nissei, War Bride_ (1986). Japanese immigrants. 
    Susan A. Glenn, _Daughters of the Shtetl_ (1990). Jewish immigrants.

_Social welfare and reform_

    
    
     Linda Gordon, _Heroes of Their Own Lives_ (1988). Domestic violence. 
    Linda Gordon, _Pitied But Not Entitled_ (1994). Single mothers. 
    Robin Muncy, _Creating a Female Dominion in American Reform_ (1991).Progressives. 
    Molly Ladd-Taylor, _Mother-Work_ (1994). Child welfare.
    J. Stanley Lemons, _The Woman Citizen_ (1973). Women and politics after the vote. 
    Elisabeth Lasch-Quinn, _Black Neighbors_ (1993). Race and reform.
    Rickie Solinger, _Wake Up Little Susie_ (1992). Unmarried pregnancy and adoption.

_Health_

    
    
     Darlene Clark Hine, _Black Women in White_ (1989). Black nurses.
    Judith Walzer Leavitt, _Brought to Bed_ (1986). Childbirth practices. 
    Joan J. Brumberg, _Fasting Girls_ (1988). Anorexia nervosa. 
    Joan J. Brumberg, _The Body Project_ (1997). Adolescent sexuality and health. 
    Linda Gordon, _Woman's Body, Woman's Right_ (1976). Birth control. 
    Leslie Reagan, _When Abortion was a Crime_ (1997). Abortion and law. 
    Margaret Marsh and Wanda Ronner, _The Empty Cradle_ (1996). Infertility.

_Frontier and rural_

    
    
     Nancy Grey Osterud, _The Bonds of Community_ (1991). Rural New York. 
    Elizabeth Hampsten, _Read This Only to Yourself_ (1982). Midwestern frontier. 
    Katherine Jellison, _Entitled to Power_ (1993). Farm women and technology. 
    Kathleen Blee, _Women of the Klan_ (1991). Gender and racism. 
    Devon A. Mihesuah, _Cultivating the Rosebuds_ (1993). Cherokee missions.
    Anne M. Butler, _Daughters of Joy, Sisters of Sorrow_ (1985). Prostitutes. 
    Mary Neth, _Preserving the Family Farm_ (1995). Agricultural change in early 20th century

_Politics_

    
    
     Alice Echols, _Daring to Be Bad_ (1989). Radical feminism. 
    Sara Evans, _Personal Politics_ (1979). Modern feminism. 
    Patricia Collins, _Black Feminist Thought_ (1990). Modern feminism. 
    John D'Emilio, _Sexual Politics, Sexual Communities_ (1983). Gay rights. 
    Susan Faludi, _Backlash_ (1992). Antifeminism.
    E. Fox-Genovese, _Feminism Without Illusions_ (1994). Rethinking feminism.

