Soc 530r

# Princeton University

## Department of Sociology

### Fall '94

### Soc 530r: Culture and Social Movements

Professor: Gene Burns

Tuesday, 3-6 pm

(Offered during the second half of the semester, beginning November 1st.)

####  TENTATIVE SYLLABUS

NOTE: The following is a preliminary version of the syllabus, as of early
September 1994. Some readings may change; however, the final syllabus will
probably closely resemble the syllabus below.

There are at least two ways to define the subject matter described by the
phrase "culture and social movements," reflecting a distinction implicit in a
good deal of recent literature in the sociology of culture. First, one might
emphasize the cultural aspects of all social movements (and all social
processes), for example, ideological processes common to all movements.
Alternatively, one might instead focus on culture as a separate sphere of
activity. That is, in the latter case, one might emphasize movements that
specifically and explicitly make an uncompromising commitment to certain
cultural values their central focus; here the New Christian Right and the
animal rights movement would be examples. (And, in the sociology of culture,
there is a good deal of work which treats "cultural" as a social sphere
distinct, for example, from politics or economics.)

Some social movement research emphasizes both aspects of "culture," but
perhaps the existence of these two approaches reflect two independent
influences on the resurgence of interest in "culture and social movements."
The emphasis on cultural processes as an important component of all movements
may reflect primarily a declining confidence in the intellectual and strategic
paradigms that guided the New Left of the 1960s and 1970s, as well as a
critique of the rationalism that prevailed in the sociological study of social
movements in the 1970s and early 1980s.

The approach that distinguishes movements with "cultural" goals from those
with more instrumental goals perhaps reflects less changing intellectual
fashions than changes in movements themselves (though the two are related).
Thus attempts to understand such movements as the animal rights movement and
the New Christian Right (paralleling attempts to understand apparently new
kinds of social revolutions, such as in Iran in 1979) has led to literature
that implicitly treats these as different in kind from the movements dominant
during the period of the New Left.

Students will encounter both types of approaches in this seminar. We will
consider the validity and compatibility of the two approaches, as well as such
questions as the relationship between social-psychological and cultural
approaches and the empirical contributions of cultural approaches to the study
of social movements.

A six-week "mini-seminar" can only scratch the surface of the literature in
any field; yet this remains a manageable literature because of the relatively
recent resurgence of interest in cultural approaches to the study of social
movements. The seminar aims to expose students to some of the more interesting
recent works in this field, emphasizing writings with a clear empirical focus
(e.g., as opposed to explicitly post-modern and other literature that mostly
remains at an abstract level). Most works in this area are qualitative and/or
historical.

Students interested in the sociology of culture, political culture, and
related areas are advised (but certainly not required) to take this course in
conjunction with Sociology 530m, "Cultural Analysis," offered by Professor
Michle Lamont during the first half of the semester. For scheduling
convenience, the two "mini-seminars" meet at the same time slot, i.e., Tuesday
3:00.

While the exact reading material used in this seminar may vary in the future,
readings chosen for the Fall 1994 semester do not overlap with those readings
used in Prof. Burns's seminar offerings of last year, including "Revolutions"
and "The Culture of Politics and the Politics of Domination."

#### COURSE MATERIALS

I would greatly appreciate if students planning to take this seminar notify me
as soon as possible and let me know whether you would like readings available
in a course packet or whether you'd rather have one copy of each reading
available in the mail room, from which you could make your own copies.

#### COURSE REQUIREMENTS

All students must complete all readings, participate regularly, and take a
final exam. In addition, each student must write, over the course of the
semester, three informal memos (about two pages) in reaction to the readings
of that week. Students may choose which weeks they want to write memos and
must turn in the memos by noon the day before the class meeting. I will make
copies of the memos available for other students to read, usually by the end
of the day on Monday.

(However, graduate students in Sociology should consult with the Director of
Graduate Studies about their final exam requirements, which may depend on the
exact structure of their program of study. To obtain credit, such students
must still meet the other course requirements.)

#### COMMUNICATIONS

Office, 2-N-8 Green Hall, x8-5346; home (215)947-0730; e-mail gaburns@pucc.
For appointments, see sign-up sheets on my office door, or pop in if the door
is open.

### READING LIST

  * ##### WEEK 1 (November 1)

    * Bruce Fireman, and William H. Gamson, "Utilitarian Logic in the Resource Mobilization Perspective," pp. 8-45 in The Dynamics of Social Movements, ed. Mayer N. Zald and John D. McCarthy (Cambridge, Mass.: Winthrop, 1979). 
    * William Gamson, Talking Politics (Cambridge University Press, 1992), selections. 
  * ##### WEEK 2 (November 8)

    * Robert D. Benford and Scott A. Hunt, "Dramaturgy and Social Movements: The Social Construction and Communication of Power," Sociological Inquiry 62(1992):36-55. 
    * Benford, "Frame Disputes within the Nuclear Disarmament Movement," Social Forces 71(1993):677-701. 
    * Benford, "`You Could Be the Hundredth Monkey': Collective Action Frames and Vocabularies of Motive within the Nuclear Disarmament Movement," Sociological Quarterly 34(1993):195-216. 
    * Hunt and Benford, "Identity Talk in the Peace and Justice Movement," Journal of Contemporary Ethnography 22(1994):488-517. 
  * ##### WEEK 3 (November 15)

    * Barbara Epstein, Political Protest and Cultural Revolution: Nonviolent Direct Action in the 1970s and 1980s (University of California Press, 1991), Introduction, ch. 1, ch. 7, Conclusion. {109 pp.} 
  * ##### WEEK 4 (November 22)

    * James M. Jasper and Dorothy Nelkin, The Animal Rights Crusade: The Growth of a Moral Protest (New York: Free Press, 1992), ch. 1-4 (pp. 1-55). 
    * Scott Sanders and James M. Jasper, "Civil Politics in the Animal Rights Conflict: God terms versus casuistry in Cambridge, Massachusetts," Science, Technology, & Human Values 19(1994):169-188. 
  * ##### WEEK 5 (November 29)

    * Kristin Luker, Abortion and the Politics of Motherhood (University of California Press, 1984) 
  * ##### WEEK 6 (December 6)

    * Rosalind Pollack Petchesky, "The Antiabortion Movement and the Rise of the New Right," ch. 7 (pp. 241-285) in Abortion and Woman's Choice: The State, Sexuality, and Reproductive Freedom (New York and London: Longman, 1984). 
    * Michael Lienesch, Redeeming America: Piety and Politics in the New Christian Right (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1993), Introduction, ch. 4,and Conclusion (pp. 1-22, 139-194, 247 -260). 
    * Rebecca Klatch, Women of the New Right (Temple University Press, 1987), ch. 1 and 2 (pp. 3-54). 
    * Linda Gordon, "Why Nineteenth-Century Feminists Did Not Support `Birth Control' and Twentieth-century Feminists Do," pp. 40-53 in Rethinking the Family: Some Feminist Questions, ed. Barrie Thorne and Marilyn Yalom (New York and London: Longman, 1982).  

* * *

### Back to the [Graduate Courses](schedule.html)!

sociolog@princeton.edu sept '94

