**Perspectives on Inequality in the United States**  
**SW 302**  
**Thomas P. Vartanian**

This course will examine the U.S. economic landscape and the effects of
government policy choices.  It will provide students an ample opportunity to
examine and discuss policy issues related to income and other forms of
inequality.  Some of the issues that will be explored include welfare and
welfare reform, issues related to poverty, health care policies, unemployment,
environmental policies, crime, education, and tax policy.  Differences between
radical, liberal, conservative, feminist, and other approaches will be
examined.  Current events will be studied extensively by reading both academic
articles and op-ed articles from _The[ New York Times](http://www.nytimes.com)
_ and _The Wall Street Journal_.   The newspaper articles will be assigned and
discussed each week in order to relate what we are learning in class to
current events.  The course will emphasize the differential effect of
government policy choices on women, ethnic minorities, and other disadvantaged
groups.

**Course Objectives:**

1.       to better understand the levels of inequality and how these differentially affect advantaged and disadvantaged groups. 

2.       to better understand the difference in theoretical foundations for the reasons for inequality 

3.       to be able to examine issues related to inequality and argue for particular theories 

4.       to better understand where the United States stands relative to other developed countries on issues related to inequality 

5.       to develop an overall argument for policies regarding inequality 

**Paper Assignments** :

There are two paper assignments for this class.  Each paper will be an eight
to ten page examination of policy issues.   The topics for these papers
include such issues as welfare policy, poverty, crime, education, and health
care.  In the first of these papers, you will write a research paper,
examining one of the above topic areas and make an argument for particular
policies using the tools you've learned in class.  The paper will include a
history of the policies on the area you choose (such as a history of welfare
policy in the U.S.) as well as current policy. Not only will you present your
point of view but will also argue against opposing points of view. Hence, you
may argue that liberal or conservative policies will be ineffective for
particular reasons.

In the second paper, you will write a discussion between at least three of the
authors from your readings or discussed in class and yourself. I would like
you to pick authors with very different viewpoints and argue issues for them
according to their viewpoints. The paper will examine what you believe to be a
just and efficient social and economic system for the U.S.  You will thus
discuss such issues as tax and transfer policies, as well as issues you
believe to be of importance for the country.  For example, you may wish to
write about issues related to poverty -- perhaps the best ways to decrease the
number of poor people.  You will argue what each thinker believes are the best
methods for decreasing the number of poor and the consequences on inequality
and efficiency of these policies.  How will your policy choices affect members
of different groups?    Will these effects be vastly different for particular
members within groups?  You will then use a liberal thinker to respond to the
conservative's call for particular policies.  You will discuss your views and
how others may differ from this view.

Particular thinkers have particular issues that they are most concerned with
(for example, Charles Murray is especially concerned with those on welfare or
those who are poor).  However, you can generalize these views to issues other
than those that they are most concerned with.

The second paper will be in  debate format such that you will speak and have
the others respond to what you have to say.  Some ideas for different types of
social and economic systems to consider include the following:

1.       nationalize all industries or particular industries

a.        nationalize industries in order to guarantee the well-being of all
citizens

b.       decrease government intervention in the economy in order to increase
the level of economic efficiency and thereby increase the economic well-being
of all citizens

2.       change the functioning of the health care system 

a.        institute a national health care plan

b.       institute a system with less government involvement

3.       change the type and funding formulas for educational system

a.        change the funding formulas from a state/local control to national
control

b.       increase the level of local control of schools

4.       expand or contract the welfare system -

a.        institute more or less work requirements than are currrently in
place

b.       increase or decrease the number who are eligible and for how long

c.        institute national policies regarding time and money standards

5.       institute all or none of the above

The liberal, conservative, and radical thinkers we study in the class will all
have something to say about your system.  Perhaps some of them will agree with
parts of your system while others will not.

The first of these papers will be due during the ninth week of class and the
second paper will be due on the last class day.

**Books for the Course** :

1.       Rebecca M. Blank, _It Takes a Nation_ , Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1997. 

2.       Milton Friedman, _Capitalism and Freedom_ , University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 1982.

3.       Joel Slemrod and Jon Bakija, _Taxing Ourselves : A Citizen's Guide to the Great Debate over Tax Reform_ , The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1996.

4.       Arthur M. Okun, _Equity and Efficiency_ : _The Big Tradeoff_ ,  The Brookings Institute, 1976.

5.       Todd G. Buckholz, _New Ideas From Dead Economists_ , Plume Publishing, New York, 1990. 

6.       Nancy Folbre, _The Invisible Heart,_ The New Press, New York, 2001. 

See also

1.       _Great Divides: Readings in Social Inequality in the U.S_ ., 2 nd Edition, edited by Thomas M. Shapiro, Mayfield Publishing Company, Oxford, 2001.

2.         _Social Stratification in Sociological Perspective_ , edited by David B. Grusky, Westview Press, Oxford, 1994. 

3.       _Hard Heads, Soft Hearts_ , by Alan Blinder, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, New York, 1987.

**Course Requirements:**

Evaluation of students will be based on:

1\. Two eight to ten page papers (60%)  
2\. Student participation in class discussions (40%).

**Calendar**

**Week 1: An Overview of inequality and the possible effects of inequality in
the U.S.**

_Readings_ **:**

A.      "Top Heavy" by Edward N. Wolff   in Shapiro.

B.      "Why Inequality?" by Claude S. Fisher, in Shapiro.

C.      [  "Why Their World Might Crumble", by Lester Thurow,  The New York
Times, 11/19/95, p
78](http://www.brynmawr.edu/Acads/GSSW/Vartanian/trico/Rich3.htm) .

D.      [ Eva Bertram and Kenneth Sharpe, "Capitalism, Work, and
Character",](http://www.prospect.org/print/V11/20/bertram-e.html)   in the
_American Prospect_ , September 11, 2001.

E.       [ THE RICH: Who They Are; The Upper Tail, by Andrew
Hacker](http://www.brynmawr.edu/Acads/GSSW/Vartanian/trico/Rich1.htm)

F.       [ The Rich Get Richer: And Why the Poor Don't, by Edward N.
Wolff](http://www.prospect.org/print/V12/3/wolff-e.html)

**Poverty Resources:**

A.      [ Populations in Poverty: Basic
statistics](http://www.jcpr.org/faq/faq_populations2.html)

B.      [ Poverty Guidelines -- How much income is necessary to be above the
poverty line, for different family sizes ( click here, then go to official
measures of poverty)](http://www.jcpr.org/faq.html)

**Weeks 2-5**. An overview of some of the perspectives we'll be examining in
the class.   Some of these perspectives include:

A. Liberal B. Conservative C. Marxian. D. Feminist. E. Environmentalist

_Readings_ :  
1 _._ Todd Buchholz _, New Ideas from Dead Economists_ , chapters 1-4,6, 9 and
10.  
2\. Alan Blinder, _Hard Heads, Soft Hearts_ , Introduction and Chapter 1\.  
3\. Nancy Folbre, _The Invisible Heart_ , Introduction.  
4\. Henry David Thoreau, selections from _Walden_ , edited by Christopher
Bigsby, 1995. Everyman, Vermont. On reserve.

Additional Readings:

            "Alienation and Social Class",  Karl Marx, in Grusky, pp. 65-68.

**Weeks 5+6**. Background on inequality in the United States.

A.      Who are the poor?

B.      Do the poor behave differently than the non-poor?

C.      What does a changing, more technology-oriented economic system mean
for the poor?

D.      International competition and the poor.

E.       Who is helped by economic growth?

_Readings_ :

1.       Blank, _It Takes a Nation_. Introduction, Chapters 1 and 2. 

2.        Edward N. Wolff, "International Comparisons of Wealth Inequality", pp. 42-44 in _The Political Economy of Inequality_ , edited by Frank Ackerman. 

3.       Blinder, _Hard Heads, Soft Hearts_ , Chapter 3.

_Additional Readings_

_A.      __America Unequal_ , by Sheldon Danziger and Peter Gottschalk,
Harvard University Press, 1997.

_B.       __Making Ends Meet: How Single Mothers Survive Welfare and Low-Wage
Work_ , by Kathryn Edin and Laura Lein, Russell Sage Foundation, 1997.

_C.      _"Social Immobility in the Land of Opportunity", by Jay MacLeod, in
Shapiro, pp. 69-72.  
  

**Weeks 6-8: Examining Inequality by Race and Gender**

_Readings_ :

            _Race Readings_ :

A.      "Racial Antagonisms and Race-Based Social Policy", William Julius
Wilson, pp. 295-301 in Shapiro.

B.      "The Tangle of Pathology", by Daniel P. Moynihan, in Grusky.

C.      "We'd Love to Hire Them but...", by Kathryn M. Neckerman and Joleen
Kirschenman, pp. 239-249 in Shapiro

D.      "The Truly Disadvantaged", by William Julius Wilson in _Color, Class,
Identity: The New Politics of Race_ , edited by John Arthur and Amy Shapiro,
Westview Press, 1996.

E.       "The Continuing Significance of Race", by Joe R. Feagin, pp. 278-286
in Shapiro.

F.       "Black Wealth/White Wealth" by Melvin L. Oliver and Thomas M.
Shapiro, pp. 265-277, in Shapiro

_Gender Readings_ :

A.      "Capitalism, Patriarchy, and Job Segregation by Sex," by Heidi
Hartmann, pp. 49-53 in Shapiro.

B.      "[ Gender Pay
Differences](http://www.russellsage.org/publications/working_papers/blaukahn_jep.pdf)
, " by Francine D. Blau and Lawrence M. Kahn.

C.      "The Dialect of Sex", by Shulamith Firestone in , in _Social
Stratification in Sociological Perspective_ , edited by David B. Grusky,
Westview Press, Inc., Boulder, CO, 1994.

D.      "The Unhappy Marriage of Marxism and Feminism: Towards a More
Progressive Union", by Heidi Hartman, in _Social Stratification in
Sociological Perspective_ , edited by David B. Grusky, Westview Press, Inc.,
Boulder, CO, 1994.

E.       Folbre, _The Invisible Heart_ , Chapters 1-3.



_Additonal Readings_

A.      "The Experiences of Minority Women in the United States: Intersections
of Race, Gender, and Class" by Elizabeth M. Almquist, in _Women: A Feminist
Perspective_ , edited by Jo Freeman, call # HQ1426 .W62, 1995.

B.      _The Social construction of gender,_ edited by Judith Lorber and Susan
A. Farrell , call #:     HQ1075.5.U6 S62, 1991.

C.      "American Apartheid: The Perpetuation of the Underclass", by Douglas
S. Massey and Nancy A. Denton, in _Color, Class, Identity,_ edited by John
Arthur and Amy Shapiro, Westview Press, 1996\.

D.      [ "Bullets Don't Got No Name: Consequences of Fear in the Ghetto," by
Jeffrey Kling, Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F.
Katz.](http://www.jcpr.org/wpfiles/kling_liebman_katz.PDF)

E.       [  "Trends in Employment Outcomes for Young Black Men: 1979-2000", by
Harry J. Holzer and Paul Offner, Joint Center for Poverty Rearch Working
Paper, November, 2001.](http://www.jcpr.org/wpfiles/holzer_offner.pdf)

F.       "The Gender Gap: Contours and Causes" by Andrew Hacker, in Money: Who
Has How Much and Why? Scribner Press, New York, 1997, pp. 185-202.

**Week 9.**   Will a more equitable economic system make for a less efficient
economic system?

_Reading_ :

A.      Authur Okun, _Equity and Efficiency: The Big Tradeoff_.

B.       "The Equality Dilemma: Fair Play or Fair Shares," by William Ryan, in
Shapiro, pp. 15-19.

**Note: First paper is due in week 9**.

**Week 9+10**. Welfare and other government aid policies: The recent past and
present.

A.      Who receives welfare and for how long?

B.      How has the welfare system changed?

C.      Inner-city poverty and welfare.

D.      Work policy and welfare reform.

_Readings_ :  
  

A.      Blank, 83-116, 133-160, 252-293

B.      "Globalization, American Politics, and Welfare Policy," by Frances Fox
Piven in _The Annals of the American Acadamy of Political and Social Science_
, pp. 26-37, September, 20001.

C.      "Who Deserves Help? Who Must Provide?" by Linda Gordon, in T _he
Annals of the American Acadamy of Political and Social Science_ , pp. 12-25,
September, 20001.

D.      Nancy Folbre, Chapter 5.

E.       Charles Murray, "What To Do About Welfare", _Commentary_ , December,
1994, pp. 26-34; On reserve.

F.       Friedman, _Capitalism and Freedom_ , Chapters 10-12.

G.      W.J. Wilson, Social Policy and Minority Groups, in _Divided
Opportunities: Minorities, Poverty, and Social Policy_ , Eds. Gary D. Sandefur
and Marta Tienda, pp. 231-252.

H.      L.M. Mead, Social Responsibility and Minority Poverty: A Response to
William Julius Wilson, in _Divided Opportunities:_ _Minorities, Poverty, and
Social Policy_ , Eds. Gary D. Sandefur and Marta Tienda, pp. 253-263.

_Additional Readings_

A.      "The Effects of Welfare and Tax Reform: The Material Well-Being of
Single Mothers in 1980s and 1990s", by Bruce D. Meyer and James X. Sullivan, [
http://www.jcpr.org/book/pdf/IncentivesMeyerChap1.pdf](http://www.jcpr.org/book/pdf/IncentivesMeyerChap1.pdf)

B.      [ "Disadvantage Among Families Remaining on Welfare", by Robert
Moffitt and Andrew Cherlin", The Joint Center for Poverty Research Working
Paper, October,
2001.](http://www.jcpr.org/wpfiles/moffitt_cherlin_SRI2001.pdf)

C.      [ "Barriers to Employment of Welfare Recipients", by Sandra Danziger,
et al., The Joint Center for Poverty Research Working Paper, September,
2000.](http://www.jcpr.org/wpfiles/Danziger.barriers.update2-21-2000.PDF)

D.      [ "Job Performance and Retention Among Welfare Recipients", by Harry
J. Holzer, Michael A. Stoll, and Douglas Wissoker, The Joint Center for
Poverty Research Working Paper, June,
2001.](http://www.jcpr.org/wpfiles/holzer_stoll_wissoker.PDF)

E.       _Diminishing Welfare: A Cross-National Study of Social Provision_ ,
edited by Gertrude Schaffner Goldberg and Marguerite G. Rosenthal, Auburn
House, Westport, CT, 2002.

**  
**

**Weeks 11+12**. Health Care Policy and Education: Should We Provide Equal
Amounts for All?  
  

1.       Medical insurance policy. 

                                                                           i.       Who's insured and who isn't?

                                                                         ii.       How does our current health care system work.

                                                                        iii.       What are the costs and benefits of providing national health insurance? 

                                                                       iv.       Other systems for providing health care

2.       Educational policy 

                                                                           i.       public school funding

                                                                         ii.       vouchers

                                                                        iii.       affirmative action

_Readings_ :  
  

_Education Policy_

1.       Milton Friedman, _Capitalism and Freedom_ , pages 85-107 on education policy 

<p style="margin-left: 1.25i

