**EUROPE: 1914 TO PRESENT**

**SYLLABUS**

**3400:324 /Summer II    2002**



[Return to Europe home page](../europesummer/homepage.htm)



Dr. A. Martin Wainwright

Class hours: Mon. - Fri. 12 noon to 1:30 p.m.

Office hours: Immediately before and after class, and by appointment

Office location:  Olin 201

Office phone: 972-6512



**Purpose**

This course covers the major political and social developments in twentieth
century Europe. Special attention is paid to the role of ideology both as a
force shaping these developments and as a manifestation of the changes that
Europe experienced.



**Required Readings:**

Roderick Phillips, _Society, State, and Nation in Twentieth Century Europe._

Christopher R. Browning, _Ordinary Men: Reserve Battalion 101 and the Final
Solution in_ _Poland._

George Orwell, _The Road to Wigan Pier._



**_Grading and Course Requirements_ :**



 **Assignments and their values** Class Participation |  100 pts.  
---|---  
[Map Assignment](../europesummer/maptext.htm) |  100 pts.  
Book discussions (50 pts each) | 100 pts.  
[Book reviews  
](../europesummer/review.htm)           Initial draft  
          Final draft |   
100 pts.  
100 pts.  
[Midterm Exam](../europesummer/midtermguide.htm) | 250 pts.  
[Final Exam](../europesummer/finalguide.htm) | 250 pts.  
  


**Grading** : The plus and minus system applies. 95-100 A; 90-94 A-; 87-89 B+;
83-86 B; 80-82 B-; 77-79 C+; 73-76 C; 70-72 C-; 67-69 D+; 63-67 D; 60-62 D-;
below 60 F.



**Plagiarism and other forms of academic dishonesty** : Plagiarism is the
attempt to present a copy of somebody else's work, or a portion thereof, and
pass it off as one's own. Assignments exhibiting substantial evidence of
plagiarism may receive an "F" no matter what the other merits of their
content. In-class tests are to be your own work. Evidence of copying from
others or the use of supporting materials in the exam room may fail the exam.
Evidence of extreme forms of plagiarism may result in failure of the entire
course and disciplinary action by the university administration.



**Attendance** : Attendance will be taken every day. Any student who misses
more than three classes must obtain the prior permission of the professor.
Failure to do so will result in the loss of a letter grade in the course for
each class skipped above the four allowed. Exemption from this policy is
allowed only in cases of demonstrable medical emergency or family crisis. The
lectures and discussions contain material not available in the texts. You are
responsible for this material. Students who failed to attend classes regularly
in previous semesters consistently scored poorly on their exams.



**Withdrawals** : Departmental policy forbids students from withdrawing from a
course after the **tenth** week of the Fall or Spring semesters and after the
**third** week of either Summer session.



**Participation** : Students are encouraged to ask intelligent questions and
respond verbally to topics raised in class. This process is defined as active
participation. Active participation constitutes an important part of your
grade. Students should demonstrate through verbal participation that they have
read the entire assignment. Students who attend class but do not demonstrate
their knowledge and commitment through active participation will fail the
participation portion of the course.



**Exams** : Instructions and study guides will be provided for the exams. Both
exams are in-class and closed-book.



**Improvement** : Substantial improvement will be rewarded by adding 1/3 of a
grade (ie. C to C+) to the course total in border-line cases.



**Late assignments** : All assignments are due at the beginning of class on
the day listed in the syllabus. Late assignments will lose 1/3 of a letter
grade per day until they are submitted.





**_Schedule of lectures and readings_**

The following schedule provides approximate dates of the topics to be covered.
Because I encourage discussion in class, it is impossible to guarantee that we
will cover a particular topic in its listed week. It is your responsibility to
attend class, so that you know what we are about to cover and read the
relevant chapters beforehand. Please note that topics are organized by theme
rather than chronology. Thus we will cover the first half of the twentieth
century twice, initially to examine nationalist movements and then, socialist
movements.



**June 17.  ** Geography and ethnography



**June 18-19.**   Origins of nationalism



**June 20.**   Origins of World War I



**June 21 & 24\. ** World War I and its effects

Map assignment due, June 24.

Readings:

Phillips, chs. 4-6.

John Maynard Keynes (1883-1946): [The Economic Consequences of the
Peace](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1920keynes.html), 1920, excerpts [At
Fordham]



**June 25-26.  ** Fascism

Readings:

Phillips, ch. 7.

[The 25 Points](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/25points.html), 1920 [At
Fordham]  An early Nazi program.

Benito Mussolini (1883-1945): [What is
Fascism?](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/mussolini-fascism.html), 1932 [At
Fordham]

[Selections from _Der
Stuermer_](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/stuermer00.html) [At Fordham]

[The Nuremberg Laws:Introduction](http://www.mtsu.edu/~baustin/nurmberg.html),
1935 [At Holocaust/Shoah]

[Law of Protection of the German Race: Hereditary
Health](http://www.mtsu.edu/~baustin/nurmlaw1.html)

[Law of Protection of the German Race:
Citizenship](http://www.mtsu.edu/~baustin/nurmlaw2.html)

[Law of Protection of the German Race: German Blood and German
Honor](http://www.mtsu.edu/~baustin/nurmlaw3.html)

[The Wannsee Conference
Minutes](http://www.historyplace.com/worldwar2/holocaust/h-wannsee.htm),
January 1942

Heinrich Himmler: [Speech to SS Group Leaders at
Posen](http://www.historyplace.com/worldwar2/holocaust/h-posen.htm), 4 October
1943 [At HistoryPlace]

[Homosexuals: Victims of the Nazi Era](http://www.holocaust-
trc.org/homosx.htm) [At Holocaust Teacher Resource Center]  Read the summary
and click on the link for Himmler's speech.



**June 27-28.** Origins of World War II



**July 1-2.** World War II and the eclipse of nationalism

        Book review, initial draft due July 1 

Readings:

Phillips, chs. 7-8.



**July 3.** Midterm exam



**July 4.**   Holiday.  Class does not meet.



**July 5 & 8.** Origins of socialism

        Readings: 

Karl Marx (1818-83): [Scientific
Socialism](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/marx-summary.html), 1844-1875,
an epitome [At Fordham]

Edouard Bernstein (1850-1932): [Evolutionary
Socialism](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/bernstein-revsoc.html), 1909,
[At Fordham]

Vladimir Illyich Lenin (1870-1924): [Marxism and
Revisionism](http://history.hanover.edu/courses/excerpts/111lenin.html), 1908,
excerpts [At Hanover]

Alexandre Millerand: [Reformist
Socialism](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1903millerand.html), 1903 [At
Fordham]

Prince Peter Kropotkin (1842-1921) : [Anarchism: Its Philosophy and
Ideal](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1896kropotkin.html), 1896 [At
Fordham]

[The Internationale](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/INTERNAT.html) [At
Fordham]

[The Red Flag](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/redflag.html) [At Fordham]



 **July 9.** The Russian Revolution

        Book review of Orwell, _The Road to Wigan Pier_ , July 3. 

Vladimir Ilyich Lenin (1870-1924): [What is to Be
Done?](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1902lenin.html), 1902, extended
excerpts [At Fordham]

Vladimir Illyich Lenin (1870-1924): [The State and
Revolution](http://www.idbsu.edu/surveyrc/Staff/jaynes/marxism/lenin/land.htm),
1918, extended excerpts,[At Fordham]

Vladmir Illyich Lenin (1870-1924): [Hanging Order for
Kulaks](http://www.ncsa.uiuc.edu/SDG/Experimental/soviet.exhibit/ad2kulak.html)
8 November 1918 [At UIUC]



**July 10.** Stalinism

Readings:

[Memorandum on the Grain Problem, 1932 [At
LC](http://lcweb.loc.gov/exhibits/archives/k2grain.html)]

[Hymn to Stalin [at Fordham]](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/stalin-
worship.html)

[Letter from Gorky to Stalin on suppression of
religion](http://lcweb.loc.gov/exhibits/archives/f3gorky.gif) [At LC]

[The Soviet Purges: Official
Explanation](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1936purges.html), 1936,
excerpts [At Fordham]

[Constitution of the
USSR](http://coral.bucknell.edu/departments/russian/const/1936toc.html), 1936
[At Bucknell]

Nikita Krushchev: [Secret
Speech](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/krushchev-secret.html), 1956 [At
this Site]



**July 11-12.** The Cold War, the Collapse of the Soviet Union, and the
Resurgence of Nationalism

Readings:

Phillips, chs.9-11.

Winston S. Churchill (1874-1965): ["Iron Curtain"
Speech](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/churchill-iron.html), 1946,
excerpts [At Fordham]

Joseph Stalin: [Response to Churchill's Iron Curtain
Speech](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1946stalin.html), 1946 [At Fordham]

[The Truman Doctrine](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1947TRUMAN.html) ,
1947 [At Fordham]

[The Marshall Plan](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1947marshallplan1.html)
, 1947 [At Fordham]

Charles de Gaulle, President of France: [Europe and Its Role In World
Affairs](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1964-degaulle-europe1.html), July
23, 1964 [At Fordham]



**July 15-17.** Democratic socialism and middle class prosperity

Readings:

Albert Einstein (1879-1955): [Why Socialism](http://www.hartford-
hwp.com/archives/26/001.html), 1949, excerpts [At WHA]

Let Us Face The Future: [A Declaration of Labour Policy for the Consideration
of the Nation](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1945labour-letsusface.html),
1945 [At Fordham]



**July 18.** European union

Readings:

Phillips, ch. 12.

[Le Grand Non: Britain's Proposed Entry Into The Common Market, [at
Fordham]](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1967-degaulle-non-uk.html)



**July 19.** Final Exam.   Book review final draft due



[Return to Europe home page](../europesummer/homepage.htm)



