![](UCWEBAR.jpg) **

History 101-30: Modern Europe

Instructor: Margaret Robinson

**

Fall 98, Office: Wood Hall Rm. 223, # 6-2897

MWF 12:00-1:00, Hours: M 1:00-3:00 or by appointment DRM 103, e-mail: [
mar97002@uconnvm.uconn.edu](mailto: Mar97002@UCONNVM.UCONN.EDU)

**

Required Reading:

**

Borowski, Tadeusz, _This Way to the Gas, Ladies and Gentlemen_

Davis, Natalie Zemon, _The Return of Martin Guerre

_

Hunt, Lynn, _The French Revolution and Human Rights

_

Langford, Jerome, _Galileo, Science and the Church

_

Lenin, V. I., _Imperialism The Highest Stage of Capitalism

_

Perry, Marvin, et. al., _Western Civilization, A Brief History

_

Reserve Reading in Library



**

Course Objectives:

**

This course considers the transformation of European society from the
Renaissance to today. Our focus will be on the development of the liberal and
secular state, the separation of religion and science, changes in the family
and its relation to the state, and the movement from a feudal to a global
capitalist economy. Toward the end of the course, we will address the play of
the state, religion, science, the family, and the economy in the World Wars
and Holocaust of the 20th century.

Course readings will introduce students to some of the major historical topics
in the history of Modern Europe and to a sampling of secondary literature and
primary source material. Scheduled discussions encourage informed and informal
conversations about these historical topics; the final paper enables students
to research a topic of specific interest to them. Students should complete
this course with an appreciation of the ways in which human aspirations,
beliefs, and knowledge have shaped the failures and accomplishments that
comprise the history of Modern Europe.

**



Week One: Introduction to Course, Readings:

**

September 2, 4: Perry, Ch. 8

**



PART I: Challenges to Religious Authority

**

Week Two: Religious Reformations

** **

September 7: No class

September 9, 11: Perry, Ch. 9

**

Week Three: European Society and the State

**

September 14, 16, Davis

September 18: In-class writing assignment and Discussion on Davis

**

Week Four: The Scientific Revolution and the Universe of Knowledge

**

September 21, 23: Perry, Ch. 10 to p. 289

September 25: In-class writing assignment and discussion on Langford: Langford

**

PART II: Monarchical Power and Its Challenges

Week Five: The English "Revolution" and the Enlightenment

**

September 28, 30: Perry, finish Ch. 10,

October 2: Ch. 11

**

Week Six: The French Revolution and Human Rights

**

October 5, 7: Hunt

October 9: In-class writing assignment and Discussion on Hunt; First Paper
topic distributed

**

Week Seven: The Industrial Revolution

**

October 12: No Class

October 14, 16: Perry, Ch. 12

**

Part III: A Century of Ideas: Responding to the French and Industrial
Revolutions

Week Eight: 19th Century Isms and Their Consequences

**

October 19: First Paper Due: Perry , Chs. 14&15

October 21, 23

**

Week Nine: [continuation of Week Eight ]

**

October 26, 28: Perry, Chs. 16&17

October 30: *Reserve reading assignment and Second Paper topic distributed.

**

PART IV: "The Age of Catastrophe** "

**

Week Ten: World War I, The Russian Revolution, and The Creation of Communist
State

**

November 2,4: Perry, Ch. 19, Lenin

November 6: In-class writing assignment and Discussion of Lenin

**

Week Eleven: Fascism: The Third Way Between Russian Communism and Liberal
Capitalism

**

November 9, 11: Perry, Chs. 20 & 21

November 13: Third Paper Topic and Reading Selection Due

**

Week Twelve: World War II and the Holocaust

**

November 16, 18: Borowski

November 20 : Second Paper Due and Discussion on Holocaust Readings:  *Reserve
Readings

**

Week Thirteen: Post War Planning and the Cold War

**

November 23, 25: Perry, Ch. 22

**

PART V: Post-War Europe

Week Fourteen: The Social Welfare State and Its Challenges: European Union,
Global Economy, Ethnic and Religious Conflict, and the Transformation of Cold
War Politics

**

November 30, December 2

December 4: Draft of Third Paper Due

**

Week Fifteen: Discussion of Papers on 20th Century Europe

**

December 7, 9, 11

**

December 14: Final Copy of Third Paper Due; Final Exam Questions Distributed

**

Final Exam: Monday, December 21



**

Grading:

1\. In-class Writing Assignments: 30%

**

Four in-class writing assignments are scheduled; your grade is based on three
of them. **

2\. Papers:

**

a. First and Second Papers, two-three pages: **20%

**

b. Third Paper, four-five pages:

Draft: **10%

**

Final Copy: **20%

**_

All papers must be typed, double-spaced, corrected for spelling and grammar,
and submitted at the beginning of class on the scheduled due date. Late papers
will be downgraded.

_**

3\. Discussion: 10%

**

Your grade is based on your preparation, presence, and participation

for eight scheduled discussions.

**

4\. Final Exam: 10%

**

Exam questions distributed the last day of class.

[ To the Department of History Homepage](http://vm.UCONN.EDU/~WWWHIST/)  
[ ![](http://vm.uconn.edu/images/return.jpg)

