POLITICAL SCIENCE 54

[SEMINAR IN PEACE AND WAR ](ps54.htm)

RONALD TIERSKY



                           SEMINAR IN PEACE AND WAR



The questions, what is war? what is peace? are harder than they initially
seem. It is worth a seminar to clarify matters, even if few final answers are
possible.

Must humanity live with war? If war is bad, is it nonetheless necessary? Are
there still redeeming characteristics to war? What are the moral terms within
which war can be justified? And which kinds of war? Or is war always to be
condemned?  Might war even be abolished?  

The question what is peace seems even harder to answer than what is war.  Is
the meaning of peace just non-war, the absence of war, a "negative" peace?  Or
is peace substantial, a "positive" condition qualitatively different and
superior to the mere absence of violent aggression?  And if there is such a
positive peace, what is its nature? how do we get there from here?  Is it a
reform of this world or will it be a new world? And we must also ask, is the
search for peace the most important problem of human civilization?  Or is war,
at least in some cases, the best, or least bad solution, justifiable as the
protection of other, more important values--liberty, national sovereignty,
independence, and cultural identity?      This seminar is, as the above
questions indicate, a conceptual, political, and moral analysis rather than a
history or a public policy study of war. The syllabus ranges widely: from
classical sources to contemporary understandings, from arguments that war is
inevitable and/or necessary, to assertions that peace and non-violence are
inevitable and/or superior to all other values.  Students should have some
background for the course, either in international relations or political
theory or international law.  Some reading in foreign and comparative studies
--politics, history, anthropology or sociology--will also be useful.  



WORKLOAD:  Two work loads are possible in the course, the one for students
doing it as an advanced seminar for a political science major, the other for
students using it for normal course credit only. For advanced seminar credit,
students will, at midterm, submit a 5 page plan for a 25 page semester
research paper. The research paper will be due the first day of the final exam
period. For regular course credit, students will write two 8-10 page essays in
response to subjects given out at midterm and near the end of class meetings.
Students doing the course as an advanced seminar will have preference in
deciding admission to the course.



BOOKS TO PURCHASE (Jeffrey Amherst Bookstore):  Kant's PERPETUAL PEACE;
Kenneth Waltz's MAN, THE STATE AND WAR; David P. Barash, APPROACHES TO PEACE;
Sebastian Faulks, BIRDSONG: A NOVEL OF LOVE AND WAR.  Other readings are in a
multilith, to be purchased at the Political Science office.

                           

  

Political Science 54

Seminar on War and Peace

Fall 2001

Ronald Tiersky





_  CLASS DISCUSSION/POSSIBLE SEMINAR PAPER TOPICS _





I.  Realities of War



     A.  The Suffering

     B.  The Nobility

C.  War as a Means of Conflict Resolution

     D.  War as a Perpetual Scourge of Humanity



II.  What is War?  Conceptions of War



     A.  War as Fate, War as Destiny

B.  War and The State of Nature

     C.  War and Human Nature 

     D.  War as Necessity, War as Invention

     E.  War as a Continuation of Policy by Other Means

     F.  War's Evolution and the Evolution of Technology

     G.  The Future of War:  Weapons of Mass Destruction and War 

     H.  The Future of War:  The Advent of "Virtual War" 



III. What is Peace?  Conceptions of Peace



     A.  Peace as Non-Violence

     B.  Peace as the Minimization of War

     C.  Peace as the Abolition of War

     D.  Peace and other Good Moral Values (Justice, Freedom)  

     E.  The Theory of the Democratic Peace

     F.  Peace and International Institutions:  Peacekeeping, Peacemaking, the "Right to Intervene," the "Duty to Intervene," vs. National Sovereignty



IV.  Practical Approaches, or How do you get peace?



     A.  Peace and the Civil Constitution of Governments

     B.  Necessity and Morality:  When should one fight? 

     C.  Necessity and Morality:  When should one intervene? Who should intervene? For what goals? 

     D.  What are the Lessons of History, of Theory, of Morality? 

  

















  

Seminar in Peace and War  

Political Science 54

Fall 2001

Ronald Tiersky









                   MULTILITH CONTENTS



\--  Euripides, "THE TROJAN WOMEN" (plus film: M. Cocayannis, dir.)

\--  Simone Weil, "The Iliad, a Poem of Force"

\--  John Keegan,THE MASK OF COMMAND, ch.1, "Alexander the Great"(H)

\--  Quintus Curtius Rufus, THE HISTORY OF ALEXANDER, excerpts

\--  Alfred Lord Tennyson, "The Charge of the Light Brigade"

\--  J. Glenn Gray, THE WARRIORS, "The Enduring Appeals of Battle"

\--  Plato, from THE REPUBLIC, "Thrasymachus:  Justice..."

\--  Thucydides, from THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR, "The Melian Conference"

\--  Thomas Hobbes, LEVIATHAN, pp. 104-32

\--  Edmund O. Wilson, ON HUMAN NATURE, pp. 99-120

\--  Margaret Mead, "Warfare is only an Invention..."-

\--  Joseph Schumpeter, IMPERIALISM & SOCIAL CLASSES, excepts

\--  Karl von Clausewitz, WAR, POLITICS, AND POWER, chs. 1-2

\--  J.A. Hobson, IMPERIALISM, ch. 1

\--  V.I. Lenin, IMPERIALISM, ch.5

\--  E.H.Carr, THE TWENTY YEARS' CRISIS, pp. 41-88

\--  Geoffrey Blainey, "The Mystery of Peace"

\--  Ralph Waldo Emerson, "War"

\--  Michael Walzer, JUST AND UNJUST WARS, pp. 329-35

\--  Woodrow Wilson, 2 speeches

\--  Michael Doyle, "Liberalism and World Politics"

\-- Charles Beitz, "Justice and International Relations'

\-- Linda Bird Francke, GROUND ZERO: GENDER WARS IN THE MILITARY

\-- Ilene Rose Feinman, CITIZENSHIP RITES: FEMINIST SOLDIERS AND
FEMINIST ANTIMILITARISTS

\-- Michael Ignatieff, VIRTUAL WAR: KOSOVO AND BEYOND

\--  Raymond Aron, PEACE AND WAR, ch XIX, "In Search of a Morality"

\--  Arthur Schlesinger, "National Interests & Moral Absolutes"

\--  Edward Luttwak, "Give War a Chance," FOREIGN AFFAIRS, 1999



  

_Political Science 54 _

_FALL 2001_  





                          _   SYLLABUS  _





_  PART ONE:  THE REALITIES OF WAR  _



1.  Introduction: The Realities of War



    FILM:  Euripides, "The Trojan Women" (Dir. Michael Cacoyannis)

  

2.  The Realities of War, Discussion



    Euripides, "The Trojan Women" (M) 

    Simone Weil, "The Illiad, A Poem of Force" (M)



3.  The Purported Nobility of War



   John Keegan, THE MASK OF COMMAND, ch. 1, "Alexander the Great"

   Quintus Curtius Rufus, "The History of Alexander," excerpts (M)

   Alfred Lord Tennyson, "Charge of the Light Brigade"(M)

   J. Glenn Gray, "The Enduring Appeals of Battle"(M)



4.  War as Fate, War as the State of Nature, War as Human Nature 



   Plato, THE REPUBLIC, "Thrasymachus: the nature of Justice" (M)

   Thucydides, THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR, "The Melian Conference" (M)

   Hobbes, LEVIATHAN, pp. 104-32 (M)

   E.O. Wilson, ON HUMAN NATURE, pp. 99-120 (M)

    

5.   War is only an Invention, War is a continuation of policy by other means 



   Margaret Mead, "War is Only an Invention..." (M)

   Schumpeter, IMPERIALISM AND SOCIAL CLASSES, pp.  (M)

   Karl von Clausewitz, WAR, POLITICS & POWER, chs. 1-2 (M)  

   (begin reading S. Faulks novel, BIRDSONG, for #7) (P)



6.   Imperialist War as Intrinsic; Not all States Have an Equal Interest in Peace



  Hobson, IMPERIALISM, ch. 1 (M)

  Lenin, IMPERIALISM, ch. 5  (M)  

  E. H. Carr, THE TWENTY YEARS' CRISIS, pp. 41-88 (M)









7.  World War I as the Turning Point in "Kantian" Consciousness of  War's Suffering 



    Sebastian Faulks, BIRDSONG (P)

  

    Geoffrey Blainey, "The Mystery of Peace" (Rec)







8\. 21st Century "Virtual" War and "Battlefield Space"



    Michael Ignatieff, VIRTUAL WAR: KOSOVO AND BEYOND, 161-218 (M)

    James Adams, "Virtual Defense," FOREIGN AFFAIRS, May/June 2001, pp. 98-114.

    James der Derian, "Virtual war and Virtuous War"

    "Battlefield Space," Jack Hitt, The New York Sunday Times Magazine, August 5, 2001





PAPER #1:  class paper or, for advanced seminar credit, a five page proposal
for your seminar paper, including some preliminary bibliography.





_PART TWO:   THE NATURE AND POSSIBILITIES OF PEACE _  





9.  THE THREE "IMAGES" OF WAR AND THE REALIST VIEW OF PEACE



     Kenneth Waltz, MAN, THE STATE & WAR (P)

        \--the "first image" chaps. 1,2,3

        \--the "second image," chaps. 4-5

        \--the "third image," chaps. 6.7.8

    

10.  THE APPEALS AND POTENTIAL OF NON-VIOLENCE                           



         FILM:  _GANDHI_

         Gandhi, in Barash (ed.) (P)

         Ralph Waldo Emerson, "War" (M)

          Martin Luther King, "Letter from the Birmingham Jail," in Barash (ed) (P)

         Gene Sharp, in Barash (ed.) (P)

         Michael Walzer, JUST AND UNJUST WARS, pp. 329-35 (M)





11.  THE "DEMOCRATIC PEACE" THEORY (I):  FROM KANT TO TODAY



     Immanuel Kant, PERPETUAL PEACE (P)



12.  THE "DEMOCRATIC PEACE" THEORY (II)



     Woodrow Wilson, 2 speeches (M)

     Michael W. Doyle, "Liberalism and World Politics" (M)

     TBA 







12.  THE DEMOCRATIC PEACE (3): WOMEN, GENDER, THE MILITARY, AND WAR

  



  Linda Bird Francke, GROUND ZERO:  GENDER WARS IN THE MILITARY          (New
York:  Simon & Schuster, 1997), chs. 1,8,9 (M)

  Ilene Rose Feinman, CITIZENSHIP RITES: FEMINIST SOLDIERS AND        FEMINIST
ANTIMILITARISTS, chs. 7,8 (M)



   (rec) PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION ON THE ASSIGNMENT OF WOMEN IN THE ARMED
FORCES  (November 15, 1992) (R)

   (rec) Stephanie Guttmann, THE KINDER, GENTLER MILITARY: CAN AMERICA'S
GENDER-NEUTRAL FIGHTING FORCE STILL WIN WARS?            (New York:  Scriber,
2000),  (R)

   (rec) Melissa S. Herbert, CAMOUFLAGE ISN'T ONLY FOR COMBAT: GENDER,
SEXUALITY, AND WOMEN IN THE MILITARY (R)

   (rec) Maj. Jeanne Holm, USAF (Ret.), WOMEN IN THE MILITARY: AN UNFINISHED
REVOLUTION (1982)

    (rec) Judith Hicks Stiehm, ARMS AND THE ENLISTED WOMAN (1989)





13\. CONCLUSIONS:  PEACE IN PRACTICE



    Raymond Aron, PEACE AND WAR, ch 19, "In Search of a Morality"       (M)

    Arthur Schlesinger, "National Interests and Moral Absolutes,"       (M)

    Charles Beitz, "Justice and International Relations"

    Edward Luttwak, "Give War a Chance," FOREIGN AFFAIRS, 1999



