White220F **John White, Ph.D., Professor** |  Office: 201 F  
---|---  
Department of Psychology | Phone: 3330  
**GSTR 220F Western Traditions I** : Exiles from Eden Introduction and
Syllabus | Office Hours: MWF 9-10, MW 4-5,  
TR 9:30-11:30  
  
  
  
**Catalog Description (GSTR) 220, 221.**  
WESTERN TRADITIONS I AND II. These courses center on ideas, social structures,
institutions, technology changes, and beliefs that have shaped western
cultures. Through study of primary texts, students are grounded in the broad
history of western cultures. The texts vary from one section to another, but
some texts are common to all sections. Course readings include materials on
the activities of women that address both the exclusion and assimilation that
have marked their experience. Taken in the sophomore year. GSTR 220 must be
taken before 221 1 Course each.

**Introduction**  
"The conditions under which we must work and love today are radically
different ones from those that obtained when human beings first evolved. Thus
we are all in this sense exiles from Eden..." Harvey Cox, The Divinity School,
Harvard University  
  
The "Fall" of "Our Kind" (Homo Sapiens) described in Genesis begins a new way
of being in the world for the species. The Fall will be viewed as analogous to
the enormous changes wrought in the lives of "Our Kind" as we moved from
foragers to Pharaohs. We lived for some 250,000 years in small nomadic bands
of hunter-gatherers having a high degree of cooperation and sharing, with
little private property, minimal role differentiation (we were all
generalists) and a high degree of gender equity. Recorded history begins
(approx. 10,000 years ago) with our becoming agriculturists, living in densely
populated permanent sites with increased gender differentiation, multiple
occupational roles, hierarchical organization and rigid stratification. This
recorded history of "Our Kind" represents only a moment (10,000 years) in the
history of our species existence (approx. 250,000 years) or about 1 hour of a
twenty four hour "day" of our existence. It will be suggested that the
recorded history of the West, as represented in selected texts is as a working
through of this radical shift in our mode of being in the world.

**Goals**  
The course will emphasize improvement in reading, writing, speaking, thinking
and civility in the context of the study of Western history. Requirements
Reading \- Students will read twelve Chapters in Spielvogel and various
selections from the Norton

Anthology Written Work - The college faculty has decided that the writing
assignments in this course - must include as least one documented, scholarly
essay. The documented essay should: 1) promote active, independent thinking;
2) deepen knowledge and understanding of [a] primary document[s] in the
course; 3) develop abilities in writing and library research. The essays
should be grammatical, use more than one source, fulfill the purposes of the
assignments, and be written in a formal style. Other writing assignments will
be required by individual instructors.

**(Course guidelines 8-9)**  
Specifically, this will include:  
1\. An exploratory essay or concept paper of 1-2 pages where you examine your
essay topic in your own words without references. TOPIC WILL BE DETERMINED IN
CONSULTATION WITH PROF  
2\. An annotated bibliography of at least five sources which address your
topic, ALL FROM THE BC LIBRARY.  
3\. A rough draft of your essay.  
4\. The scholarly essay - SOURCES FROM THE BC LIBRARY * Students will also be
required to write in-class essays or quizzes as part of their evaluation.

**Speaking** \- Students will participate in class discussion and to make two
oral presentations.  
**Thinking** \- Students will demonstrate clear and coherent thinking in the
various assignments.  
**Civility** \- Polite and respectful behavior will be expected. A certain
amount of mutual regard is essential to the educational process. This will
include avoiding insulting comments, making fun of others contribution,
talking to others when someone else has the floor, interruptions, disrupting
class when late (e.g. walking between discussants when class is already in
process), eating and drinking in class, sleeping in class, etc. (An implicit
part of the learning will be attending class, being on time and meeting
deadlines - see evaluation)

**Evaluation** \- Evaluation will be based on 20 in-class essays or quizzes,
the essay process, the oral presentations and a final. There are consequences
for absences, late arrivals and late assignments.  
1\. 40% of the grade will be based on twenty in-class quizzes which will
either be a essay question or objective quiz on the readings of the day. These
will be interspersed throughout the course and will be indicated on the
syllabus. These will be administered at the beginning of class and if one
comes late one may not take them. These may not be made up except under
extraordinary circumstances. 5 pt's each or 100 pt's total  
2\. 40% of the grade will be based on the essay process - 10 pt's concept
paper, 10 pt's bibliography, 80pt's for completed essay or 100 pt's total
(late assignment are penalized 5 pt's per day, beginning with the end of the
class period that the assignment is due)  
3\. 20% of the grade will be based on the oral presentations - 25 pt's each or
50 pt's total (one oral presentation will be a group presentation of a chapter
in Spievogel and one presentation will be the students term paper.)  
4\. Final - Required of all students and worth 50 points. Final may be
exempted if the student has an A or a B total at the end of the regular class
meetings.

**Texts**  
Mack, Maynard, et al, eds. The Norton Anthology of World Masterpieces. Vol.1.
Expanded Edition. New York: W. W. Norton  & Company, 1995  
Spielvogel, Jackson. Western Civilization. 3e. New York: West Publishing Co.,
1997

**FALL 00 Class Schedule** \- GSTR 220 F  
Exiles from Eden - - MWF 10-10:50  
**Key**  
JJS = Spielvogel  
N = Norton Anth.  
Week Date Day Text  
Q = Quiz  
P = Group

1 Sep F | Introduction Presentation 1  
---|---  
4 M | Chapter 1 JJS -Q  
6 W | Process/N 3-42 Gilgamesh  
8 F | Gilgamesh-Q2  
11 M | Chapter 2 JJS-Q  
13 W | Process /N 59-98 Genesis/Job  
15 F | Genesis/Job -Q 3  
18 M | Chapter 3 JJS-Q  
20 W | Exploratory Essay Due-Intro Oedipus  
22 F | N 585-630 Sophocles/Oedipus 4  
25 M | Chapter 4 JJS-Q  
27 W | Visit Lib/Read Oedipus  
29 F | Oedipus -Q 5  
2 Oct M | Chapter 5 JJS-Q  
4 W | Mountain Day  
6 F | Biblio Due/N-755 Plato-Q 6  
9M | Chapter 6 JJS-Q  
11 W | Read N-758-762 Aristotle  
13 F | N Luke/Matthew Q Rough Draft Due 7  
16 M | Midterm Reading Period  
18 W | Luke/Matthew  
20 F |  N 1132-1158 St. Augustine 8  
23 M | Chapter 7 JJS-Q/P  
25 W | St. Augustine  
27 F | St. Augustine Q-PAPER DUE!!! 9  
30 M | Chapter 8 JJS-Q/P  
1 Nov W | Paper Presentations 1-Paper Due Group 3  
3 F | Paper Presentations 2 10  
6 M | Chapter 9 JJS-Q/P  
8 W | Paper Presentations 3  
10 F |  Paper Presentations 4 11  
13 M | Chapter 10 JJS-Q/P  
15 W | Paper Presentations 5  
17 F | Paper Presentations 6 12  
20 M |  Chapter 11 JJS-Q/P  
22 W | Paper Presentations 7  
24 F | Thanksgiving Holiday 13  
27 M | Chapter 12 JJS-Q/P  
29 W | Paper Presentations 8  
1 Dec F | N-Chaucer-Q 14  
4 M | Chaucer  
6 W | Review, Evaluation & Grade Totals  
Final | Thursday, December 14 3:00pm  
  
  

Home URL: <http://www.berea.edu/GST/GST.home.html> |
[carol_derosset@berea.edu](mailto:carol_derosset@berea.edu) |  Last
update:02/08/01  
---|---|---  
All Contents Copyright (C) 2000, Berea College, Berea KY 40404 USA. (859)
985-3000  
  
  
Paper presentations 8 days - 4/day - 10 minutes each Group presentations 6
presentations \- 5/group



