_![](images/images/mhc_trans.jpg)Russian and Eurasian Studies Department_  
  
---  
  
[ Courses](courses.htm)

[Faculty and Staff](faculty.htm)

[Major/Minor Requirements](majorminor.htm)

[Resources](resources.htm)

[Study Abroad](studyabroad.htm)

[Alumnae Network](alumnaenetwork.htm)

[Events](events.htm)

[The Red Corner](redcorner.htm)

|

**_Syllabus_**

**Revolutions**

Professor Stephen Jones

Revolutions have been many and bloody throughout the twentieth century. Two of
the most influential were the Russian Revolutions of 1917 and 1991. The study
of both - one socialist and one capitalist - will help us understand the
nature of revolutions and why they occur. Why do people rebel and under what
conditions? What makes political systems vulnerable to popular political
challenges? What impact do revolutions have on the rest of the world? Our
study of the two Russian revolutions will help us analyze revolutionary
situations globally. The differences between the two force us to ask exactly
what a revolution is, and raise questions about patterns of revolutionary
development. At the end of this course, you will have learnt about Russian,
Soviet and post-Soviet history and politics. You will be able to clarify what
revolution is and perhaps tell us where and under what conditions it is most
likely to occur in the twenty first century. Readings every week emphasize
primary sources, including works from the historical participants themselves.
There will also be a number of feature films illustrating different
interpretations of revolutions and revolutionary events.

**Course Requirements**  
This is a speaking course and you will be expected to contribute primarily
though class discussion, debate, and presentation. We take for granted that
you read all the texts, but more than this we want you to challenge, argue,
and take passionate stands - yet without sacrificing the clarity of your
arguments. This is, after all, a class about revolution. You are encouraged to
use the Speaking, Arguing and Writing Program as an active resource as you
work through this course. You will be divided into groups, and it is through
the group that you will be doing most of your research and participation in
the class. Each group will have a long term project looking at an aspect of
revolution illustrated by either or both of the Russian revolutions. The group
will make a presentation in the twelfth class. Each member of the group, while
working collaboratively, will also write a final paper about their own work
within the group. Groups will be the vehicles through which you will debate
and analyze texts but you will also be given the opportunity to show your
individual skills. You will be evaluated on the basis of participation, both
as part of a group and as an individual within that group, and on the basis of
one paper, two book reviews and an oral exam. A number of feature films about
revolution will be shown in the evenings which you should treat as texts for
class discussion.

**Required Texts** (these can be purchased at the College Bookstore)  
Orlando Figes _A people's tragedy : a history of the Russian Revolution_ , New
York, NY, Viking, 1997.

Anatole France _The Gods Will Have Blood (les Dieux ont soif)_ ,
Harmondsworth, Eng. , New York, Penguin Books, 1979.

John Reed _Ten Days That Shook The world_ , New York, Bantam Books, 1992

Lauren Graham _The Ghost of the Executed Engineer: Technology and the Fall of
the Soviet Union_ , Cambridge, HUP, 1993

Michael Dobbs _Down With Big Brother: the Fall of the Soviet Empire_ , New
York, Vintage Books, 1998.

There is also a Course Packet which can be purchased in the Russian and
Eurasian Studies Department, Ciruti 118.  
This is your _vademecum_.

1) September 15,  
A discussion of group presentations: What to look for on the text and how to
present it. Karl Marx and Freidrich Engels, The Manifesto of the Communist
Party Extract from L. Feuer (ed.), Marx and Engels: Basic Writings on Politics
and Philosophy pp.48-70.  

2) September 22nd  
Theories of Revolution: What is revolution and why does it happen? Some views.
The Social scientist: Charles Tilly (ed.), European Revolutions 1492-1992,
pp.1-20 The Intellectual Historian: Hannah Arendt, On Revolution, pp.13-52 The
Revolutionary: Leon Trotsky, History of the Russian Revolution, Vol. 1 pp.
3-51 The Conservative: Edmund Burke, Reflections on the French Revolution,
pp.117-152  

3) September 29th  
The Backward State and its Challengers: Which way forward? Figes Chs. 1-2
(pp.3-83) or W.E. Mosse, Perestroika Under the Tsars, pp.3-22 (don't read
both) Marc Raeff, The Decembrist Movement, pp. 1-29 George Vernadsky (ed.) A
source book for Russian history from early times to 1917. Vol. 2, pp.513-522.
Aleksandr Herzen, The Russian people and socialism in From the other shore, pp
vii-xxv and pp.171-208.  

4) October 6th The Tsar Liberator: the perils of reform. Figes pp.84-121. The
Emanciptation Text in Ivar and Marion Spector (eds.) Readings in Russian
history and culture, pp. 170-176. Marc Raeff (ed.) Plans for political reform
in Imperial Russia, 1730-1905, pp. 132-140 Gregory Freeze From Supplication to
Revolution: a Documentary Social History of Imperial Russia, pp.170-185.
George Vernadsky, Vol. 1, pp. 664. David Footman The Red Prelude, the life of
the Russian terrorist Zhelyabov, pp. 178-189 and pp.205-221 Film October 7th
The End of St Petersburg, dir. Vsevelod Pudovkin, 89 mins silent October Break

5) October 20th Russia Enters the Twentieth Century: Marxists and Liberals
Figes pp.122-154 and 157-252 or Thomas Riha "Constitutional Developments in
Russia" in Theofanis George Stavrou (ed.) Russia Under the Last Tsar,
pp.87-116. Leopold Haimson "The Problem of Social Stability in Urban Russia,
1905-1917 (part two)," Slavic Review, Vol. XXIV, 1965, pp.1-22. George
Vernadsky, A sourcebook pp.770 - 785. V.I.Lenin What Is to Be Done,
pp.173-200. A. Ascher (ed) The Mensheviks in the Russian Revolution, pp.8-52.
Film Monday October 26th Reds, 1981, dir. Warren Beatty

6) October 27th (Schedule Oral Exams)  
Interpretation of Revolution: the Romantic. John Reed, Ten Days that Shook the
World (the whole book) (For background for classes 6 and 7, read Figes
pp.307-551).

7) November 3rd  
Interpretation of Revolution: the Skeptic. Anatole France: The Gods Will Have
Blood (the whole book)

8) November 10th  
(first book review due) Counter Revolution: Are revolutions always betrayed?
Backgound: Figes pp.555-649. Karl Popper, The open society and its enemies,
Vol. 1, pp.138-148. Three views (Robert Michels,Victor Serge, Leon Trotsky) in
Krishan Kumar (ed.) Revolution pp.270-280. Lauren Graham Ghost of the Executed
Engineer (the whole book) Film Wednesday November 11th Three Songs About
Lenin, dir. D Vertov

9) November 17th  
The New Class: And the Meek Shall not Inherit? Figes pp.721-807. Milovan
Djilas, The New Class, pp.47-72 Giorgi Arbatov The system : an insider's life
in Soviet politics, pp.211-254 and pp.286-294 Mikhail Gorbachev Memoirs,
pp.278-325. Film Wednesday November 18th The Blue Mountains, dir. Eldar
Shengalaia

10) November 24th  
(second book review due) Imperial Troubles: Nationalism - a source or
revolution, or its result? Paul Kennedy The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers
pp.488-574. Michael Dobbs, Down With Big Brother pp.3-95, 217-326

11) December 1st  
Crisis and Coup: A popular revolution from below? Michael Dobbs pp. 99-219
Mikhail Gorbachev Memoirs pp.626-672

12) December 8th  
Group Presentations: Aspects of Revolution Film Wednesday December 9th Taxi
Blues dir. Pavel Lungin

13) December 15th  
(Paper due) The Politics of New Russia: Can democracy work? Lelia Shevtsova,
"Russia's Post-Communist Politics: Revolution or Continuity?", G.Lapidus
(ed.), The New Russia, pp.5-36. Yuri Afanasyev "Russian Reform is Dead: Back
to Central Planning," Foreign Affairs, Vol. 73, No.2, pp.21-26. Other Readings
included in your Course Packet: Reflections on Russia: 1917 and 1991, the
inevitable accidents of history? Richard Pipes, "Did The Russian Revolution
Have to Happen?" The American Scholar, Vol. 63, 1994, pp.215-238. Robert
Daniels (ed) Soviet Communism: From Reform to Collapse, pp.321-378.  
  
[**Home**](index.htm)  
**[MHC Homepage](http://www.mtholyoke.edu) [MHC
Directory](http://www.mtholyoke.edu/dir/) [MHC
Library](http://mtholyoke.edu/lits/library/)  
****[Five College Russian and Eurasian Studies](fivecollege.htm)** ******[MHC
Course Catalogue](https://cat.mtholyoke.edu/)**  
  
Senior Administrative Assistant: [Tracie Alfano-
Aube](mailto:talfaube@mtholyoke.edu) Chair: [Stephen F.
Jones](mailto:%20sfjones@mtholyoke.edu)  
Office Telephone: 538-2648 Fax: 538-2512 Ciruti 118  
Copyright (C) 2002, Mount Holyoke College. This page created and maintained by
Stephen Jones.

