Socialism

Philosophy 303, Spring 2000, TTh 9:30-11:00

REQUIRED TEXTS:  
  

Karl Marx. _Karl Marx: Selected Writings_. Ed., David McLellan. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1977.

V.I. Lenin. _Essential Works of Lenin_. Ed., Henry Christman. New York: Dover
Books, 1966.

Rosa Luxemburg. _The Russian Revolution and Leninism or Marxism?_. Ann Arbor:
The University of Michigan Press, 1961.

David Miller. _Market, State, and Community_. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1990.  
  

TOPICS AND ASSIGNMENTS: (subject to change)  
  

Th. F. 3 Intro.  
  

**I. Marx** (all readings from _Karl Marx: Selected Writings_ except as
otherwise noted)  
  

T. F. 8 Democracy, the State and Civil Society.

(1. from _Critique of Hegel's 'Philosophy of Right'_ , ["On Democracy" & "On
Voting" ](mpages.htm) (27-30, 32-35), 2. Begin _On The Jewish Question_
(39-62). For background: 3. [John Locke, _An Essay Concerning the True
Original, Extent and End of Civil Government_ , Sect. VIII, #s 95-99, Sect.
IX, 4. Jean-Jacques Rousseau, _The Social Contract_ , from Bk. I, Sects. VI -
VIII) ](lrpages.htm)\- Supplementary Readings (SR))  
  

Th. F. 10 Democracy, the State and Civil Society, cont.

(Conclude _On the Jewish Question_ and read the first 1 pages of _Towards a
Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right_ (63-64).  
  

T. F. 15 Conclude Democracy, the State and Civil Society.

Begin Communism and the Overcoming of Alienation.

( _Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts_ , "Alienated Labor" (75-87) and
"Profit of Capital" - SR)  
  

Th. F. 17 Communism and the Overcoming of Alienation, cont.

("Private Property and Communism," 87-96)  
  

T. F. 22 Conclude Communism and the Overcoming of Alienation.

("On Money," 109-111)  
  

Th. F. 24 Historical Materialism and Communist Revolution.

("Theses on Feuerbach," 156-158, _The German Ideology_ , 159-179, "Preface to
_A Critique of Political Economy_ , 388-391)  
  

T. F. 29 Historical Materialism and Communist Revolution, cont.

( _The German Ideology_ , 179-182 & 190-191, [_The Communist Manifesto_
](http://www.anu.edu.au/polsci/marx/classics/manifesto.html), especially parts
1, 2 & 4)  
  

Th. M. 2 Conclude Historical Materialism and Communist Revolution.

(You might go ahead and begin reading _Capital_ , pp. 415-488)  
  

T. M. 7 Marx's "Mature" Economic Critique of Capitalism.

( _Capital_ , 415-476)  
  

Th. M. 9 Conclude Marx's "Mature" Economic Critique of Capitalism.

( _Capital_ , 477-488)

Take Home **Exam** on Marx to be handed out.  
  

**II. Lenin and Luxemburg**  
  

T. M. 14 The Revolutionary Movement and The Party

(Lenin, _Essential Works_ , "What is to Be Done?" 54-72 and, especially,
73-164; Luxemburg, "Leninism or Marxism". For historical background to the
figures and debates discussed in these texts, see the "Introduction" to both
_Essential Works_ and _The Russian Revolution and Leninism or Marxism?_ )

Take Home **Exam** on Marx due.  
  

Th. M. 16 The State and Revolution

(Lenin, _Essential Works_ , "The State and Revolution," 272-313, 333-349; For
the principle texts by Marx that Lenin deals with see _Karl Marx: Selected
Writings_ , "The Civil War in France," 539-558 and "Critique of the Gotha
Programme," 564-570)  
  

T. M. 21 Conclude The State and Revolution

(Luxemburg, "The Russian Revolution," especially, 25-40 and 57-108.)  
  

**III. Reification and Communication: Lukacs and Habermas**  
  

Th. M. 23 Capitalism and the Reification of the Social World

(Georg Lukacs, selections from "Reification and the Consciousness of the
Proletariat," pp. 83-105 & 164-172)  
  

T. M 28 & Th. M. 30 SPRING BREAK  
  

T. A. 4 From Instrumental to Communicative Action: Habermas' Critique of Marx

(Jurgen Habermas, _Knowledge and Human Interests_ , Chs. 2 & 3)  
  

Th. A. 6 Socialism and the Autonomy of Life-Worlds

(Habermas, _Philosophical Discourse of Modernity_ , pp. 349-357, a very brief
selection from _Autonomy and Solidarity_ , pp. 182-183)  
  

T. A. 11 Conclude Socialism and the Autonomy of Life-Worlds  
  

**IV. Market Socialism**  
  

Th. A. 13 A Brief Introduction to the Idea of a Socialist Market

(David Miller, _Market, State, and Community_ , ( _MSC_ ) "Introduction, pp.
1-15)

**Paper Proposals Due**  
  

T. A. 18 The Case for Markets

(David Miller, "[Why Markets?](markets.htm)" - to be distributed)  
  

Th. A. 20 Market Socialism and Overcoming Alienation

( _MSC_ , Ch. 8)  
  

T. A. 25 Socialism, Community and Citizenship

( _MSC_ , Ch. 9)  
  

Th. A. 27 Democratic Socialism and Political Dialogue

( _MSC_ , Ch. 10)  
  

T. M. 2 Student Paper Presentations  
  

Th. M. 4 Student Paper Presentations  
  

T. M. 9 Student Paper Presentations  
  

Th. M. 11 Class Cancelled (I think ...)  
  

COURSE REQUIREMENTS:  
  

1) Read all assigned texts and attend class. If you _need_ to miss a class you
should discuss it with me ahead of time. Excessive absence will be taken into
account in your grade.  
  

2) _Exams_ : There will be two exams, one on Marx to be handed out on the
_preliminary_ date scheduled on the course syllabus and due the next class
meeting and the second on the remaining material covered in the course which
will be handed out the last day of class and will be due on the date scheduled
for the Final Exam for this class. You are required to take both of these and
turn them in on the dates scheduled. Each exam will be worth 25% of your
grade.  
  

__3) _Paper Proposals_ : You will need to turn in a proposal for your research
paper (see part 4 below) by Thursday, April 13. It should be approximately 1
double-spaced typewritten page. The purpose of the proposal is twofold: 1) to
give me a chance to give you some feedback on your ideas before you get
substantially underway, and 2) to make sure you have some idea as to what you
might want to do at least a couple of weeks before it is due.  
  

I will need to see the following information in your paper proposal: 1) a
statement of your thesis, 2) an overview of the argument you plan to make to
support your thesis and 3) a bibliography of the literature you plan on using
explaining how you plan on using it in your paper. Though the paper proposal
will not be graded (that is beside the point, it's the final paper that should
be evaluated, not your initial ideas!) they are required. If you fail to turn
one in or turn in an inadequate one I will deduct up to one letter grade from
the grade assigned to your final paper.  
  

4) _Research Paper_. You will need to write a research paper on some issue
related to the themes examined in the course. It should be at least _8 full
pages_ in length. Calling it a "research" paper means it should be based not
only in the readings we have undertaken and discussed in class, but also in
additional readings we have not done for the course.  
  

Everyone will also be required to present and discuss their papers in class on
one of the days scheduled for Student Paper Presentations at the end of the
course. Everyone's paper will be due at the time of your presentation. There
will be approximately 20 minutes allotted to each presentation divided in half
between your formal presentation of the main points and arguments of your
paper (10 minutes) and a class discussion of your paper (10 minutes).  
  

Everyone will have the option of revising their papers in the light of the
questions raised during class discussion of their paper. Should you take that
option, your revised paper will be due one week after the presentation. If I
do not receive a revised copy of your paper by that point I will read and
grade the one you handed in at the time of your presentation. Though revising
your paper is an option, I will look badly upon a paper that is handed in
unrevised if there are substantial questions raised during your presentation
of it which, if addressed, would have substantially improved the paper. If you
have questions about whether you ought to revise your paper I would, of
course, encourage you to discuss them with me.  
  

_Your paper will count toward 50% of your course grade with the quality of
your presentation taken into account in that grade._  
  

_Content of Paper_. Your paper does not need to be on a topic we have not
discussed in class (in fact, it should be on an issue which has some relevance
to the socialist tradition examined in class) but it should extend our
consideration of any topic discussed in class substantially beyond what we
were able to do in class with that topic. This is where your _research_ is
important. By finding additional readings of relevance to some issue examined
in class you should be able to find different perspectives or questions to
bring to bear to that issue.  
  

The paper should be _expositional_ and _critical_. The expositional dimension
of your paper should present and clarify the claim(s) made by the author(s)
with which you are dealing and, especially, her/his _arguments_ for that
claim(s). It is essential in any good research paper to deal with what others
have had to say about the issue you are considering and present it accurately
and fairly. The critical dimension of your paper should move beyond presenting
the claims others have made to responding to those claims, by critically
evaluating the validity of the arguments made for that claim. In the critical
dimension of your essay you should be assessing the strengths and weaknesses
of the claims you are considering, with an eye toward formulating what you
believe is the most reasonable position to take onto your issue. What you
should be working toward is 1) the formulation of your own position with
respect to the issues you deal with in your paper and 2) a defense of that
position on the basis of your critical assessment of the author's arguments
for the claims s/he makes on that issue. Your own position should, in other
words, emerge as an implication of your critical assessment of the author's
work. It should not emerge from thin air without justification. The point of a
critical essay is to convince _other people_ of your position on a topic. And
the only way you can do that is by showing how it responds to the strengths
and weaknesses of other positions that have been adopted by building on their
strengths and overcoming their weaknesses.  
  

It is also worth nothing that you need not disagree with the author(s) you are
considering in your essay. But even then you should not simply reproduce
her/his work on an issue. There are always _weaknesses_ to an author's work
that need to be considered even if you are otherwise in complete agreement
with an author's position. Conversely, if you disagree with your author there
are always _strengths_ to an author's work that need to be considered and
taken into account in your own contrasting position.  
  

_A Warning about the Use of "Secondary" Texts_ : A secondary text is any text
which presents the claims and arguments of someone else, either with an eye
toward helping us understand that author's ideas better or as a prelude to a
critical assessment of that author's ideas. Secondary texts can be very useful
in helping you to understand aspects of an author's work you are working with
that you might find difficult and I would encourage you to seek out such works
for this reason. But you should never rely exclusively on what a secondary
text says about someone's ideas. You should always turn back to the author
whose work is being discussed to verify that what the secondary text says is
correct. In particular, you should never attribute a specific claim or
argument to an author and then cite a secondary source as your reference. Any
ideas attributed to an author need to be documented with a reference to that
author's own work.  
  

_Hints in Writing your Paper_ : An essay in philosophy is not that different
from any other sort of essay, except you deal primarily with ideas and
arguments rather than facts, characters, or plots. Rules which apply to
writing any other essay apply here as well. For example,  
  

1) When presenting your position, remember that no one is interested in what
you think for its own sake. Your reader wants to know why we should accept
your position as an implication of your evaluation of the position of your
author. In other words, your essay should not be divided into two parts - 1)
What the author believes and 2) What you believe - with no real connection
between the two except, perhaps, that they both refer to the same issue. Your
position should emerge as a reasoned response to the strengths and weaknesses
of the claims and arguments of your author.  
  

2) Document all references to your author's work with appropriate citations.
Whenever you attribute a distinct claim or position to an author you should
provide a citiation to substantiate that reference. And citations should be
specific, giving the specific page numbers in a text where the author's
elaboration of the position in question can be found. Quotations will also
enhanceyour essay by allowing you to more accurately present your author's
position on an issue. But your paper should be more than just a string of
quotations. The essay should present _your_ understanding (in your own words)
of your author's positions, with quotations used only to illustrate and
enhance the positions to which you are referring.  
  

3) Make sure your writing style is clear. Don't introduce ideas without
elaboration. Make sure your sentences make sense. Proofread your paper before
handing it in.  
  

_Technical Specifications for your Paper_ : Your papers should be typewritten,
double-spaced, using a standard sized font, allowing you to get _23 lines of
text per page_. Your _margins are to be no more than 1 inch_ , top, bottom and
sides. You are to place your name and title of the paper on a separate title
page that is not counted in the length of the paper. You are to use endnotes
for any substantial notes (beyond very brief biblioraphical citations for
quotations which may be in the body of the text) that are also not to be
counted in the length of the paper. Citations may be of any form as long as
they are clear enough to easily lead the reader to the source of the citation.
You should refrain from using headers or footers unless you can use them and
still get at least _23 lines of text per page_.  
  

_Guidelines for Internet Research_ : Anyone can publish anything at all on the
internet. As such, the most prudent attitude to take toward the documents you
find there is to assume they are worthless unless you have good reason to
believe otherwise. For this class, there are two types of acceptable
literature to use in writing your papers that you may be able to find on the
internet: 1) a document that is merely an electronic version of an article
published in a scholarly publication such as an academic journal. In this
case, you should provide a citation to the textual publication just as you
would if you had found it in the library. If the web version does not provide
page numbers which correspond with the original text enabling you to cite
specific pages, you should find the original text in the library or through
inter-library loan. 2) Documents that have been posted by someone with
expertise in the topic of the document. Say, for example, you find an essay on
a topic of interest that has been posted by a scholar teaching at a
University. It should be a relatively easy matter to document the author's
position at her/his institution and, in this way, document her/his expertise
in the matter. Any citation of an internet reference that is not an electronic
duplication of an article which has already appeared in a scholarly
publication should have a brief list of the author's credentials, sufficient
to document her/his expertise in the matter. It might look _something_ like
this: "Kordell Stewart, "Evolution and Morality,"
http://www.harvard.edu/~kstewart/evomoral.html. Stewart is Associate Professor
of Philosophy at Harvard University. This is a paper he presented at the
Eastern Division Meeting of the American Philosophical Association, December,
1996."  
  

_Course Grade_ : Your final course grade will be determined as follows: 25%
for each exam and 50% for your research paper.  
  

I use a 100 point scale for grades with 90-100 for A, 80-89 for B, 70-79 for
C, 60-69 for D and 0-59 for F. Pluses and minuses (as in B+, B, B-) will be
given in the following way: minuses for a score in the bottom 3 points for
that grade (e.g., 80-82 = B-), an unqualified grade for a score in the middle
4 points for that grade (e.g., 83-86 = B), pluses for a score in the top 3
points for that grade (e.g., 87-89 = B+).  
  

_LATE OR MISSED ASSIGNMENTS_ : All work should be done by the date specified
in class or on the syllabus. If, however, you have what you believe is a very
good reason for not turning in an assignment on time you should speak with me
about it prior to the due date of the assignment ( _perhaps_ we can come to
alternative arrangements) or, in the case of emergencies, as soon as possible
(if you have a wreck on the way to an exam, call me right after you call the
police!) Assignments which are missed without discussing it with me or without
what I am convinced is a very good reason will result in a grade of zero for
that assignment.  
  

_CONTACTING ME_ : When I am not in my office, I can be contacted either by
calling my office number and leaving me a message on the college's voice mail
system or by e-mailing me at _shendley@bsc.edu_. Though either way should
enable me to get your message within a day, I would recommend e-mail as I'm
more compulsive about checking it than my voice mail.  
  

Though you are always welcome to leave a message for me on voice mail or
e-mail, this should not be used as a substitute for contacting me personally
regarding any problems that may arise with meeting your course
responsibilities. I will always need to discuss these sorts of problems with
you, personally, as soon as possible.  
  

THE HONOR CODE APPLIES TO ALL WORK DONE IN THIS CLASS.

