## **Sample Essay Questions: Secs. D & E of Syllabus**

The following are samples of the sort of questions you will be presented with
in your final exam of the course. There will, of course, be a choice of
questions; certainly a (main) essay on some defined topic and, additionally,
one or more br iefer questions on a specific circumstance. Listed below are a
number of main essay questions I have given in the past which you may use as a
guide to knowing what you'll likely be asked to write about. Therefore, to
perform well, you should certainly be able to cover comprehensively one of the
main essay topics and have a workable general knowledge of most issues
introduced in this section of the syllabus. The following is a 'guide' only
and you should not assume that the questions will appear exactly in the form
given below.  
Your completed essay should be a comprehensive and well-argued narrative
encompassing factual knowledge as well as analysis and explanation that covers
background, events, ideas and consequences as relevant. Unsatisfactory essays
are usually betrayed by t heir brevity, so deal with all the relevant aspects
of the question you select in a clear and orderly manner, especially by
demonstrating your understanding of **both** the material of the lectures and
the assigned reading. If in doubt about essay requ irements, please see the
document [Writing an in-class Essay](../general/ob82.html)  
Also, be sure to stick to the question asked, thus avoiding unnecessary
discussion of unrelated topics. Ask questions if you are unsure about
anything. And need I state that you must write in clear, connected sentences
in well organized separate paragraph s.

(a) **SECTION D

## Topic: World War I

1\. The triumph of nationalism was a crucial underlying precondition of the
First World War. Explain this development insofar as it referred to
nationality problems in the Austrian empire and neighboring Balkans (i.e.,
south-eastern Europe), especially ins ofar as these produced the incident that
actually precipitated the outbreak of war in 1914.

2\. The accumulated tensions and conflicts of the European States system all
broke through the moment that war appeared a certainty in July 1914. Yet most
of these tensions had nothing to do with the event that precipitated that war,
namely, the assassinat ion of Archduke Ferdinand. What were these various
tensions (deriving from considerations of national security, fear, jealousy,
revenge and international rivalry) and how did they develop to the point that
two blocs of powers lay arrayed against each othe r and poised for war. [Note:
this is _not_ a question about the events of July and August 1914--your answer
rather should range freely over the decade or two prior to 1914 and involve
all the major powers (and some minor ones)in the several internati onal crises
that developed in that period?

3\. How did Imperial Germany acquire the reputation (deserved or not) of
international "bully boy" in the early years of the twentieth century? Your
answer should include consideration of Germany's late arrival on the
international scene as well as of the personalities and events relevant to the
crises that erupted in 1905, 1908, 1911 and 1914.

4\. Some historians, in exploring the immediate origins of the First World
War, conclude that in a sense all the European powers, to a greater or lesser
degree, bore responsibility for the outbreak. In each country, political and
military leaders did certa in things which led to mobilization of troops and
declarations of war, or failed to do certain things that might have prevented
those. Taking each of the powers involved (Austria, Serbia, Russia, Germany,
Britain and France), describe and analyze their ac tions (conciliatory and/or
aggressive as events unfolded between the fateful June 28, 1914 and Britain's
declaration of war on August 4.

5\. World War I ended in 1918 on the basis of a cessation of hostilities (an
armistice) pending the conclusion of a peace treaty to be submitted to Germany
by the victorious allied nations.  
    (a) explain why the German government was hopeful that the treaty would accord them relatively lenient treatment.  
    (b) show in detail how the resulting Treaty of Versailles was designed to punish Germany by considering its various (i) military, (ii) territorial and (iii) economic clauses   
    (c) why was Article 231 of the Treaty so much resented by the Germans. How might they have justified that response?  
    (d) what steps were taken in relation to the thorny issue of reparations payments to the allies by Germany and other powers in the period 1922 to 1929.

## Topic:The Russian Revolution: Lenin & Stalin

1\. There were _two_ revolutions in Russia in 1917. Discuss each separately,
citing the main personalities, institutions and events as well as explaining
and analyzing their development between February and December of that year,
showing clearly the transition from the moderate democratic phase (Spring
1917) to an uncompromising Bolshevik solution by the end of the year. What, in
the immediate term, did the latter bode for the social and political
development of the new Soviet Union

2\. Assess the nature of Russian society and politics as she entered the
twentieth century. What evidence of progress, both political and economic,
became evident and what factors worked against the peaceful development of
democracy and social integration in the country before 1917. Also, in what
circumstances did the collapse of tsarism occur in the spring of that year

3\. Explain fully the circumstances that favored the success of the Bolsheviks
in the months before the successful coup of October 1917. What problems were
posed to them in setting up a revolutionary government and how over the next
three or four years did they overcome them. In particular, what finally
induced Lenin to "take one step backward" in 1921 and propose an economic
program that in time would allow the state to "take two steps forward"? What
was unusual about that program?

4\. The First Five-Year Plan (1929-33) and the industrial and agricultural
restructuring that accompanied it have often been described as a 'revolution
from above' in Soviet Russia. Describe and assess the goals and consequences
of the Plan as it shaped th e economy of Russia and the lives (both in
positive terms as well as negative) of its people. Be comprehensive.

5\. In his so-called "testament" of Dec. 1922, Lenin surveyed the qualities of
various party leaders as to their fitness to assume leadership of the party.
When he died one year later, the leadership struggle began in earnest among
the contenders. Name the participants in this contest and explain the personal
and ideological differences of the various factions over the period, showing
clearly the tactics and circumstances that ensured Stalin's eventual success.

## Topic: Weimar Germany and the Rise of the Nazi party

1\. Post-WWI Germany, during the years 1919-23, was ridden by social unrest,
political turmoil and threats against the government. Describe the nature of
the new post-war German government and outline those events related to the
aforementioned factors that disturbed those years in Germany.

2\. Cite the reasons behind and the consequences for the German economy and
society of the French occupation of the Ruhr industrial region in 1923
(include long-term effects). What steps were organized to produce a recovery
from the immediate consequences in subsequent years.

3\. The attached sheet [to be provided] is a record of the electoral fortunes
of the Nazi party in the several elections between 1928 and November 1932 set
against the results for the other main contending parties in the German
political system. Using this record as well as your own knowledge of events in
this period, analyze each election with particular regard to the performance
of the Nazi party. Explain why the party faltered as well as why they
prospered during the period and give the implications of each result in
relation to the party's chances for ministerial office. Finally, explain why
Hitler was offered the chancellorship in Jan. 1933, noting the tactics he then
employed to allay the fears of those extra-party conservative supporters who
had man euvered him into office.

4\. Explain how Hitler surmounted the political and constitutional barriers
standing in the way of his obtaining dictatorial power after he became German
chancellor in Jan. 1933. How did events over the next two months sweep away
these barriers and transfo rm German society. For this answer, you need to
describe the mechanism of government inherited by Hitler and how circumstances
gave him the opportunity to alter it; namely, the Reichstag Fire, the decree
of Feb. 28, the handling of the political oppositio n, the March elections and
the "Enabling Act."

## Topic:Hitler's Germany

1\. When Hitler came to power in 1933 he set out to transform German society
to serve Nazi goals and purposes. Thus he set in train the so-called policy of
_Gleichschaltung_ whereby German society and its institutions were
subordinated to the ideologi cal purposes of the Nazi regime. Take any two of
the following aspects of that plan and show fully what was attempted:  
   (a)the control of religious organizations  
   (b)the suppression of all political activity, national and regional  
   (c)the shaping of youth and educational developments  
   (d)the control of the labor movement  
   (e)supervision of the family and public health policy  
   (f)control of the media (press, literature, visual arts, popular culture)

2\. In its early stages (1933-35), the Nazi regime set about to reduce Jewish
influence in German life by measures, mainly, of discrimination. Describe this
process of abuse and intimidation from its first manifestation on April 1,
1933 until the promulgat ion of the Nuremberg Laws in Sept. 1935. Also, detail
the hardening of anti-Semitic measures throughout 1938, culminating with the
frightful pogrom ("Crystal Night")in November of that year [Note: This is not
a question about the wartime holocaust].

## Topic:Hitler's War

1\. Rearmament, national security and territorial expansion were chief planks
in Hitler's program for Germany after his ascent to power in 1933. In the
first place, he set out to dismantle the hated Treaty of Versailles before
embarking on an aggressive fo reign policy that would make war in Europe a
certainty. Describe the manner in which he proceeded in these self-imposed
tasks between 1933 and the summer of 1941. In each phase of your **step-by-
step** approach, be sure to offer explanation and assessm ent of the various
motives, opportunities and events that generated or facilitated action in
pursuit of his aims during the entire period; that is, consider, in addition
to Hitler's own motives and tactics, those of the powers who were under threat
from h is aggressive designs.

## Topic: The Post-War World

1\. The Second World War had consequences for European society and the world
at large that were every bit as profound as the changes wrought by World War
I. Assess these consequences as they became evident in 1945 as the war ended
as well as for the years following from the standpoint of physical losses
(casualties, refugees, infrastructure, etc.) as well as the political and
territorial settlements in Europe and the world at large.

RETURN TO [HOMEPAGE](../index.html)

