_![](images/images/mhc_trans.jpg)Russian and Eurasian Studies Department_  
  
---  
  
[ Courses](courses.htm)

[Faculty and Staff](faculty.htm)

[Major/Minor Requirements](majorminor.htm)

[Resources](resources.htm)

[Study Abroad](studyabroad.htm)

[Alumnae Network](alumnaenetwork.htm)

[Events](events.htm)

[The Red Corner](redcorner.htm)

|

**_Courses 2002 - 2003_**

**_ 200 level         300 level_**

**110f Elementary Russian**

First semester of a year-long, semi-intensive introduction to Russian language
and culture. Classroom focus on speaking and reading is supplemented by a
video series set in post-Soviet Moscow, frequent written assignments and
weekly conversation with native speakers. Completion of the course will
provide students with a strong speaking base and the skills to undertake
independent reading.

Does not satisfy a distribution requirement. E. Cruise; 3 meetings (50
minutes), 2 meetings (75 minutes), and 1 lab; no credit is awarded for Russian
and Eurasian Studies 110f alone; 6 credits

Syllabus

**111s Elementary Russian** ****

Second semester in a year-long, semi-intensive introduction to Russian
language and culture. Classroom focus on speaking and reading is supplemented
by a video series set in post-Soviet Moscow, frequent written assignments and
weekly conversation with native speakers. Completion of the course will
provide students with a strong speaking base and the skills to undertake
independent reading.

Satisfies Language requirement or Humanities I-A requirement E. Cruise 3
meetings (50 minutes), 2 meetings (75 minutes), and 1 lab; no credit is
awarded for Russian and Eurasian Studies 110f alone; 6 credits

Syllabus

**125j History, Politics and Culture in the Republic of Georgia**

Three weeks in the Republic of Georgia. Students will attend a series of
lectures in English on historical and contemporary issues in Caucasia and will
be allocated short internships according to their interests (e.g. NGOs,
Parliament, hospitals, the Foreign Ministry). There will be a number of
cultural excursions to historical sights with local guides. Students will stay
with families and be expected to write a short report on their internship as
well as a paper about some aspect of Caucasian history or politics.

Meetings and events take place in the Republic of Georgia January 3-24, 2003.
Fees: $1800 for travel and accommodation. Does not satisfy a distribution
requirement. S. Jones; 2 credits

Syllabus

***131s Nomads, Steppes, and Cities: An Introduction to the Peoples and
Cultures of Russia and Eurasia (Politics 109s)**

The collapse of the Soviet Union has revealed a mosaic of nations, peoples,
and cultures emerging from a hidden landscape formerly perceived as
monolithic. We will explore the rediscovered histories, cultures, and arts of
peoples who have dwelled upon the vast Eurasian plain for more than 2,000
years and whose interaction with one another and the West has been and will
continue to be crucial in shaping the history of two continents.

Satisfies Social Sciences III-A: Anthro, econ, geog, etc. requirement. S.
Jones, P. Scotto; 4 credits

Syllabus

[Back to top](courses.htm)

**151f What It Feels Like For a (Russian) Girl** **(Writing-intensive; Taught
in English)**

To pose the question a bit differently than in Madonna's song, what challenges
face contemporary Russian women - young, old, urban, provincial - and how do
these women cope with the stresses of everyday personal and professional life?
In an attempt to arrive at an answer, we will look at interviews, short
women's fiction, Russian feminist essays and two films, Little Vera (1988) and
Adam's Rib (1992). Writers include Baranskaya, Voznesenskaya, Kozhevnikova,
Katerli, Mamonova, Tolstaya and Sadur.

Satisfies Humanities I-A requirement.[ S. Scotto](faculty.htm); 2 meetings (75
minutes); This is a first-year seminar; 4 credits ; enrollment limited to 15

[Syllabus](RES151.htm)

**152f Crown Jewels of Russian Culture (Speaking-intensive)**

We will study masterworks of Russian civilization from a broad range of
periods and types. These works of art, architecture, and literature define the
exceptional essential moments in the formation of the idea of Russian culture.
Topics will include: medieval churches and icons; the Venice of the North, St.
Petersburg; Tolstoy, Dostoyevsky, Chekhov, and Nabokov; the Romanov court
jeweller Faberge; a film by Eisenstein; Tchaikovsky's ballet; Shostakovich's
symphony; and last, but not least, modern Russian dancers like Nureyev and
Baryshnikov.

Satisfies Humanities I-A requirement. C. Pleshakov; 2 meetings (75 minutes);
This is a first-year seminar; 4 credits ; enrollment limited to 15

Syllabus

**201f Intermediate Russian**

Emphasis on increasing active command of grammar while focusing on
conversational topics. Readings include poetry, short stories, and magazine
and newspaper articles. Classes are conducted in Russian.

Satisfies Language requirement; Does not satisfy a distribution requirement.
Instructor: [S. Scotto](faculty.htm); Prereq. Russian L111 or permission of
department; 3 meetings (75 minutes) plus one meeting (50 minutes) to be
announced; 4 credits ; enrollment limited to 15

Syllabus

**202s Intermediate Russian**

Emphasis on increasing active command of grammar while focusing on
conversational topics. Readings include poetry, short stories, and magazine
and newspaper articles. Classes are conducted in Russian.

Satisfies Language requirement; Does not satisfy a distribution requirement.
Instructor: S. Scotto; Prereq. L201 or permission of department; 3 meetings
(75 minutes) plus one meeting (50 minutes) to be announced; 4 credits ;
enrollment limited to 15

Syllabus

***205f The Romanovs: Triumph and Tragedy**

We will study defining periods in Russian and world history with an emphasis
on the powerful Russian monarchs who shaped them: in particular, Peter the
Great, Catherine the Great, Alexander II, and Nicholas II. Russia's tsarist
system raises important questions about the nature of the monarchy. The
Russian case shows how monarchies can change and develop, and why, ultimately,
many of them failed. Why did the Romanovs fail when their relatives, the House
of Windsor, did not? Could Russia have survived as a constitutional monarchy?
What is the role of a royal dynasty in defining nationhood?

Satisfies Social Sciences III-A: Anthro, econ, geog, etc. requirement. C.
Pleshakov; 2 meetings (75 minutes); 4 credits

Syllabus

**207f Small Gems of Russian Literature (Writing-intensive)**

Not all great works of Russian literature can double as paperweights. In this
course, we'll study the gems of short Russian fiction. Nineteenth century
readings will include Pushkin's Bronze Horseman , Gogol's Overcoat and
Chekov's play Three Sisters . From the twentieth century we'll read
Mayakovsky's play The Bedbug , Olesha's Envy and short stories by repressed
Soviet-era writer Xarms. Assignments will include response writings, formal
essays and in-class writing.

Does not satisfy a distribution requirement. [S. Scotto](faculty.htm). _**This
course meets for the first half of the semester only;**_ 2 meetings (75
minutes) ; 2 credits ; enrollment limited to 15

[Syllabus](RES207.htm)

[Back to top](courses.htm)

**208s From Page To Screen: Russian Literature on Film**

Russian film has earned a central place in the history of world cinema. In
this coures, we will study the connections between important Russian films and
the literary works of art that have inspired them. We will focus on the
choices directors have made in translating original texts to the screen. Films
include Gogol's Overcoat (Dir. Batalov), Tolstoy's Kreutzer Sonata
(Schweitzer), Pushkin's Queen of Spades (Protazanov) and Xarms's The Old Woman
.

Does not satisfy a distribution requirement. S. Scotto. This course meets for
the first half of the semester only; 2 meetings (75 minutes); 2 credits

Syllabus

***210f Great Books: The Literature of Nineteenth-Century Russia (Speaking-
and writing-intensive)**

In no other culture has literature occupied the central role it enjoyed in
nineteenth-century Russia. Political, social, and historical constraints
propelled Russian writers into the roles of witness, prophet, and sage. Yet,
far from being limited to the vast, dark "Big Question" novels of legend,
Russian literature offers much humor, lyricism, and fantasy. We will focus on
the Russian novel as a reaction to western European forms of narrative and
consider the recurring pattern of the strong heroine and the weak hero.
Authors will include: Pushkin, Gogol, Turgenev, Tolstoy, Dostoevsky, and
Chekhov.

Satisfies Humanities I-A requirement. E. Cruise; 2 meetings (75 minutes); 4
credits

Syllabus

**211s Manuscripts Don't Burn: The Literature of Twentieth-Century Russia
(Taught in English)**

Despite the manifold disasters visited upon Russia during the twentieth
century, its writers retained their artistic integrity, human voice, and moral
authority. They produced a literature of extraordinary power, depth, and
lyrical beauty that stands as witness both to an age and the sheer tenacity of
artistic creativity. We will place this literature in the context of its time
in order to ask a larger question: Can one retain one's humanity in the face
of chaos, violence, terror and dislocation? Works to be read include:
Olyesha's Envy , Bulgakov's Master and Margarita , Zamyatin's We , Platonov's
Foundation Pit , and Chukovskaya's Sofia Petrovna .

Satisfies Humanities I-A requirement. P. Scotto; 2 meetings (75 minutes); 4
credits

Syllabus

**213f Tolstoy's War and Peace (Speaking- and writing-intensive)**

Focuses on Tolstoy's War and Peace . To explain the fundamental conflict in
Tolstoy's art, Sir Isaiah Berlin advanced the now famous formula that Tolstoy
was a fox (pluralist) struggling to be a hedgehog (monist). Indeed, throughout
his life and in his art, Tolstoy sought to shape experience into a single and
all-embracing philosophical principle, but he was never able to suppress his
extravagant intuition that existence, being contradictory, fragmentary and
ultimately incoherent, defeated attempts at codification. We will read War and
Peace in an attempt to understand how that irresolvable conflict fuels
Tolstoy's intellectual pursuits and informs his theories on art.

Satisfies Humanities I-A requirement. [E. Cruise](faculty.htm); 2 meetings (75
minutes); 4 credits

[Syllabus](RES213.htm)

[Back to top](courses.htm)

***235s Evenings on a Funny Farm Near Dikanka: The Creation of Nikolai Gogol**

Gogol was a strange creature, but genius is always strange. -- Vladimir
Nabokov. Nikolai Gogol is one of Russia's greatest and most enigmatic writers.
Revered by Dostoevsky, he created an idiosyncratic literary universe that has
lost none of its original power with the passage of time. This course will
trace the development of Gogol's genius from his early Ukrainian stories,
through his tales of Saint Petersburg, to his comic masterpiece, Dead Souls.
Special attention to Gogol's deployment of the comic, the fantastic and the
grotesque to confront the reality of tsarist Russia.

Satisfies Humanities I-A requirement. P. Scotto; 2 meetings (75 minutes); 4
credits ; enrollment limited to 15

Syllabus

**240f Russia: From Communism to Capitalism (Politics 209f)**

Russia was transformed by communist revolution into a global superpower which
challenged the dominant ideologies of liberalism and nationalism. It became a
powerful alternative to capitalism. In 1991, this imperial state collapsed and
underwent an economic, political, and cultural revolution. What explains the
Soviet Union's success for seventy years and its demise in 1991? What sort of
country is Russia as it enters the twenty-first century? Is it a democracy?
How has Russia's transformation affected ordinary people and Russia's
relationship to the West?

Satisfies Social Sciences III-A: Anthro, econ, geog, etc. requirement. S.
Jones; 2 meetings (75 minutes); 4 credits ; enrollment limited to 25

[Syllabus](capcomm.htm)

***241f The Foreign Policy of the Soviet Union and Its Successor States
(Politics 264f)**

Since its creation at the beginning of the twentieth century, the Soviet Union
dominated the minds of Western foreign policymakers. None of the West's
policies in the Middle East, the Third World, Europe, or China after World War
II can be understood without the study of Soviet foreign policy. We will
examine the development of Soviet foreign policy since 1917 and, following the
collapse of the USSR in 1991, the role played by Russia and Russia and the
former Soviet republics in the far more complex and multipolar "New World
Order." What should U.S. policy be toward the emerging new states of the
Baltics, Central Asia, and Caucasia?

Satisfies Social Sciences III-A: Anthro, econ, geog, etc. requirement. The
department; 2 meetings (75 minutes); 4 credits ; enrollment limited to 25

Syllabus

**242s Oil and Water Don't Mix: Geopolitics, Energy, and the Environment
(Politics 242s)**

Following the collapse of the USSR and the Gulf War, Central Asia and the
Caucasus became new centers of geopolitical rivalry. The new states are a
source of energy (oil and gas) for Western powers and a vital transit corridor
between Eastern Europe and China. While a new "Great Game" is being fought
between Western, Far Eastern and Middle Eastern powers for control over energy
pipelines, the region is threatened by environmental catastrophe and water
shortages. Is the new oil industry a source of prosperity or an instrument for
further exploitation, corruption and instability? How important are the new
states to the West's strategic energy interests?

Satisfies Social Sciences III-A: Anthro, econ, geog, etc. requirement. S.
Jones; 2 meetings (75 minutes); 4 credits

Syllabus

[Back to top](courses.htm)

**243s Terrorism: Russia as Its Cradle (Politics 243s)**

Russia was the first nation in the world to face political terrorism. In
Russia, the era of terrorism lasted from the 1860s, when the People's Will
group launched the hunt on the tsar Alexander II, until 1918, when the
Socialist Revolutionary Party attempted to assassinate Lenin. A case study of
terrorism in Russia will help us to answer a number of questions highly
relevant today. What are the causes of terrorism? What are its goals and
methods? What can governments do to cope with it? What is the impact of
terrorism on society?

Satisfies Social Sciences III-A: Anthro, econ, geog, etc. requirement. C.
Pleshakov; 2 meetings (75 minutes); 4 credits

Syllabus

**244s Red Star Over Russia: The Totalitarian Regime of Lenin and Stalin,
1917-1953 (History 260s)**

The Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 marked the coming of totalitarianism to
Russia. Led first by Lenin and then by Stalin, the country went through the
most brutal civil war, purges, World War II and the first stages of Cold War.
This period also saw immense social change and sweeping economic
transformation. What were the causes of totalitarianism in Russia? How did the
regime function? What were the major landmarks of Russian history in the
period 1917-1953?

Satisfies Humanities I-B requirement. C. Pleshakov; 2 meetings (75 minutes); 4
credits

Syllabus

**295f Independent Study**

Does not satisfy a distribution requirement. The department. 1 to 4 credits

**295s Independent Study**

Does not satisfy a distribution requirement. The department. 1 to 4 credits

**303f Studies in Russian Culture: The Poet and History (Speaking-intensive)**

Offered at Amherst College as Russian 43 This year's theme will be "The Poet
and History." We will read the historical writings of Alexander Pushkin in
different genres, namely his story "The Captain's Daughter" and his essay "The
History of Pugachev." Both of these works are devoted to the peasant uprising
led by Emelian Pugachev during the reign of Catherine the Great. We will then
read Marina Tsvetaeva's essay "Pushkin and Pugachev," in which she reflects on
how prose genres define the poet's viewpoint on historical events. If time
allows, we will also examine Pushkin's and Tsvetaeva's poems on historical
themes. Taught entirely in Russian.

Satisfies Language requirement or Humanities I-A requirement. V. Schweitzer;
Prereq. Russian 222 or permission of department; 4 credits ; enrollment
limited to 10

Syllabus

[Back to top](courses.htm)

**304s Studies in Russian Culture II: Mikhail Bulgakov (Speaking-intensive)**

Offered at Amherst College as Russian 44 A course designed for advanced
students to increase their speaking and listening skills, solidify grammatical
and idiomatic expressions, and increase their writing ability. Spring 2003-
Topic to be announced

Satisfies Language requirement or Humanities I-A requirement. The department.
Prereq. Russian 303 or permission of department; 2 meetings (75 minutes); 4
credits ; enrollment limited to 15

Syllabus

**313f The New Democracies (Politics 300f)**

With the collapse of the USSR we were told that history was dead and liberal
democracy triumphant. There was a "third wave" of democratic change. How
accurate have these optimistic characterizations turned out to be? After an
introduction to theories of liberal-democracy and to the new discipline of
"transitology" we will look at how states and leaders have applied such
liberal-democratic ideas in Eastern Europe and the former USSR (with
comparative examples from Africa and South America), and with what success.

Satisfies Social Sciences III-A: Anthro, econ, geog, etc. requirement. S.
Jones; Prereq. any two courses in any combination from Politics, International
Relations, or Economics; 1 meeting; 4 credits

[Syllabus](newdemocracies.htm)

**315f Utopia and Anti-Utopia**

The twentieth century has been largely shaped by several nations' ambitions to
build utopian societies. Russia and China have attempted to realize the vast
promises of communism while Nazi Germany aimed to construct a perfect racist
world. Beyond political struggle, wars, and revolutions, recent extraordinary
achievements in technology have contributed to the utopian mindset. Are
political utopias dead in the new millennium? How do cyberspace and the global
village contribute to utopian thinking? What will be the role of utopia in the
twenty-first century?

Satisfies Social Sciences III-A: Anthro, econ, geog, etc. requirement C.
Pleshakov Prereq. 8 credits in politics, international relations, or Russian
and Eurasian studies; 1 meeting (3 hours); 4 credits ; enrollment limited to
15

Syllabus

***330s Nationalism (Politics 308s)**

Courses in this section satisfy the distribution requirement in social
sciences. Nationalism is one of the greatest challenges to multiethnic states.
They have had to create new strategies to deal with the demands of ethnic
minorities. Taking the four states of Spain, Canada,Russia, and the former
Yugoslavia as examples, we will focus on nationalist movements within these
states and the central governments'responses. What has been the effect of the
Communist legacy? Are there alternatives to federalism as a way of managing
national claims? What socioeconomic policies have governments used to control
ethnic tensions? What role can international organizations play in finding
solutions to ethnic conflict?

Satisfies Social Sciences III-A: Anthro, econ, geog, etc. requirement. S.
Jones; Prereq. 8 credits in Politics, International Relations, or Russian and
Eurasian Studies; 1 meeting (3 hours); 4 credits ; enrollment limited to 15

[Syllabus](nationalism.htm)

[Back to top](courses.htm)

**350s Revolutions (Politics 350)**

Revolutions have a rich and bloody history on the European continent. In the
twentieth century, there were frequent revolutionary upheavals, particularly
in Russia and Eastern Europe. We will study two revolutionary periods: Russia
in 1917 and the USSR in 1991. These revolutionary events present great
contrasts, yet at the same time clarify the nature of revolutions and why they
occur. Do they bring the expected fundamental and accelerated change people
hope for? Our focus will be on the contrasts and parallels between Russia's
early twentieth-century socialist revolution and late twentieth-century
capitalist revolution. What was (and is) their impact on European history and
thought?

Satisfies Social Sciences III-A: Anthro, econ, geog, etc. requirement. S.
Jones; Prereq. Russian studies 110 or 8 credits in politics, international
relations, or Russian studies; 1 meeting (3 hours); 4 credits

[Syllabus](revolutions.htm)

**395f Independent Study**

Does not satisfy a distribution requirement. The department. 1 to 8 credits

**395s Independent Study**

Does not satisfy a distribution requirement. The department. 1 to 8 credits  
  
[**Home**](index.htm)  
**[MHC Homepage](http://www.mtholyoke.edu) [MHC
Directory](http://www.mtholyoke.edu/dir/) [MHC
Library](http://mtholyoke.edu/lits/library/)  
****[Five College Russian and Eurasian Studies](fivecollege.htm)** ******[MHC
Course Catalogue](https://cat.mtholyoke.edu/)**  
  
Senior Administrative Assistant: [Tracie Alfano-
Aube](mailto:talfaube@mtholyoke.edu) Chair: [Stephen F.
Jones](mailto:%20sfjones@mtholyoke.edu)  
Office Telephone: 538-2648 Fax: 538-2512 Ciruti 118  
Copyright (C) 2002, Mount Holyoke College. This page created and maintained by
Stephen Jones.

