** **

**![](marxgrav.gif)**

**Introduction to Cultural Studies:**

**The Cultural Study of Commodification**

** **

**Instructor: Rob Latham**

** **

**Course Times: Mondays, Wednesdays & Fridays, 11:30 AM-12:20 PM, in EPB 206**

**Office Hours: Mondays & Wednesdays 1-2 PM and by appointment; in EPB 455**

**Phone: 335-0465 (office); 337-3364 (home); Robert-Latham@uiowa.edu
(e-mail)**

** **

**Required Texts (all at University Bookstore as well as on library
reserve):**

  * **Robert C. Tucker, ed., _The Marx-Engels Reader_**
  * **Georg Lukacs, _History and Class Consciousness_**
  * **Louis Althusser, _Lenin and Philosophy and Other Essays_**
  * **Roland Barthes, _Mythologies_**
  * **Jean Baudrillard, _For a Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign_**
  * **Susan Willis, _A Primer for Daily Life_**
  * **John Tomlinson, _Cultural Imperialism: A Critical Introduction_**
  * **Reserve Readings (marked with asterisk)**

** **

**Description: This course offers an intellectual genealogy of a central
concept in the field of cultural studies: commodification. Since the
production and consumption of commodities provides the basic organizational
framework of modern (and postmodern) capitalist society, an understanding of
the dynamics of this process is an essential component in the critical
analysis of contemporary cultural forms and values. To "do" cultural studies
in any meaningful sense requires, therefore, an attention to the socio-
economic normativity of commodity relations in the production, distribution
and reception of cultural texts and artifacts, even (perhaps especially) when
the latter purport to resist or subvert these norms.**

**While the above may sound rather daunting, this course assumes no prior
knowledge of commodification theory; rather, the syllabus is designed to
survey, in introductory fashion, representative viewpoints on the complex
entanglement of culture with the commodity form. We begin, of necessity, with
Marx, then proceed to major debates in Western Marxism, as theorists
critically engage the evolving forms of consumer society and the dynamics of
mass audiences. Major developments in this intellectual tradition include the
tense but sometimes productive confrontations of Marxism with semiotic
analysis and postmodernist transvaluations of culture. Central figures in
these debates are Georg Lukacs, Theodor Adorno, Walter Benjamin, Antonio
Gramsci, Louis Althusser, Guy Debord, V.N. Volosinov, Roland Barthes, Jean
Baudrillard, Fredric Jameson, and Stuart Hall. Following this establishment of
the critical background, we proceed to situated analyses of the imbrication of
commodities and audiences within the public and private spaces of consumption,
including a consideration of the gender and racial aspects of commodification.
We conclude with an effort at global perspective, grappling with the
internationalization of the commodity form and the effects of cultural
imperialism.**

** **

**Requirements and Assignments: The first requirement is preparation and
attendance; you must be here for every class meeting with the day's reading
completed. Because we have only 50 minutes per class session, you must also be
on time; class will begin promptly at 11:30, and late arrivers will not be
admitted. Students missing more than three sessions (or one week's worth of
classes) will receive an automatic F in this grading area, meaning that no
matter how exceptional your other work may be, you will not be able to score
an A as a final grade (see section on "Grading" below for relevant
percentages). If you feel that you are likely to have trouble meeting this
basic expectation, you should drop this class now.**

**The required writing is as follows: weekly 3-page response papers and a
final 15-page essay. The response papers are designed to record your comments
upon and/or critiques of the week's readings in a fairly organized fashion; I
do not want reading notes, but rather a coherent reaction distilled from such
notes. These weekly responses are due in class on Mondays. On those weeks when
we will be reading a number of essays by different critics and/or excerpts
taken from various sources, I do not expect an exhaustive synthetic response,
but I do want to see some effort to address the material as a whole, even if
you ultimately choose to highlight a particular concept or theoretical
position. What this means is that you should do the entire week's reading
before the Monday session. The weekly reading burden, in terms of number of
pages, is not extraordinarily heavy, but much of the material we will be
covering is quite difficult, and all of it demands the most careful attention,
so if you suspect the reading-and-response requirements are likely to
overwhelm you, you should drop this class now.**

**The final essay is designed to identify and discuss a central topic or
concept covered in the readings. This discussion can take either of two forms:
you can analyze how this topic is treated or this concept deployed in three or
more of the reading assignments, or you can apply some theoretical position or
set of positions deriving from the assigned readings to a cultural text or
texts of your choice. The purpose of the final essay is not to survey your
cumulative knowledge of the course materials (the reading responses and class
discussion will do that adequately enough), but rather to see whether you are
able to work closely and effectively with some limited subset of these
materials. The final essays are due at the end of the semester. If you are
concerned that this expectation of intellectual mastery of a relevant concept
or topic by semester's end is too demanding, you should drop this class now.**

** **

**Grading: The grades will be apportioned as follows: 15% attendance and
participation; 45% reading responses; and 40% final essay. Though I will
provide fairly extensive feedback on the individual reading responses, thus
giving you some developing sense of how you are handling the assignments, they
will not be graded on a week-by-week basis; at the end of semester, I will
assign a letter grade to this work as a whole. Some of you may feel
trepidatious about taking a course in which so much of your grade calculation
is deferred until semester's end; if so, you should drop this class now.**

** **

**![](kmarx.gif)**

**Schedule of Readings:**

** **

**Week 1. The Materialist "Base"**

> **Wed. 1/17:**

>

>   * **Introduction; Review of Syllabus**

>

> **Fri. 1/19:**

>

>   * **Tucker, _Marx-Engels Reader_ , pp. 221-236--selections from the
Introduction to the _Grundrisse_ **

** **

**Week 2. The Commodity Form**

> **Mon. 1/22-Fri. 1/26:**

>

> **Tucker, _Marx-Engels Reader_ , pp. 294-442--selections from _Capital_ ,
Vol. 1**

** **

**Week 3. Class Consciousness and Reification**

> **Mon. 1/29:**

>

>   * **Georg Lukacs, "What is Orthodox Marxism?" (in _History and Class
Consciousness_ , pp. 1-26)**

>

> **Wed. 1/31:**

>

>   * **Lukacs, " Class Consciousness" (in ibid, pp. 46-82)**

>

> **Fri 2/2:**

>

>   * **Lukacs, "The Phenomenon of Reification" (in ibid, pp. 83-110)**

** **

**Week 4. The Culture Industry**

> **Mon. 2/5:**

>

>   * **Max Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno, "The Culture Industry:
Enlightenment as Mass Deception"--in _Dialectic of Enlightenment_ ***

>

> **Wed. 2/7:**

>

>   * **Walter Benjamin, "The Work of Art in the Age of Its Mechanical
Reproducibility"--in _Illuminations_ ***

>

> **Fri. 2/9:**

>

>   * **Horkheimer, Adorno, & Benjamin, cont'd**

** **

**Week 5. Apparatus and Ideology**

> **Mon. 2/12:**

>

>   * **Louis Althusser, "Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses" (in
_Lenin and Philosophy and Other Essay_ s, pp. 127-186)**

>

> **Wed. 2/14:**

>

>   * **Althusser, "Ideology and ISAs," cont'd**

>   * **\---, "A Letter on Art" (in _Lenin and Philosophy_ , pp. 221-228)**

>

> **Fri. 2/16:**

>

>   * **Pierre Macherey and Etienne Balibar, "Literature as an Ideological
Form" ***

** **

**Week 6. Spectacle**

> **Mon. 2/19:**

>

>   * **Guy Debord, _The Society of the Spectacl_ e--selections ***

>

> **Wed. 2/21:**

>

>   * **Debord, _Society_ , cont'd**

>

> **Fri. 2/23:**

>

>   * **Debord, "Decline and Fall of the Spectacle-Commodity Economy" ***

>   * **Mike Davis, "Fortress L.A." ***

** **

**Week 7. Hegemony**

> **Mon. 2/26:**

>

>   * **Raymond Williams, "Hegemony" ***

>   * **Stuart Hall, "Popular Culture and the State" ***

>

> **Wed. 2/28:**

>

>   * **Stuart Hall, "Encoding, Decoding" ***

>

> **Fri. 3/1:**

>

>   * **Stuart Hall, "The Rediscovery of 'Ideology': Return of the Repressed
in Media Studies" ***

** **

**Week 8. The Linguistic Turn**

> **Mon. 3/4:**

>

>   * **V.N. Volosinov, _Marxism and the Philosophy of Language_ \--selections
* **

>

> **Wed. 3/6:**

>

>   * **Roland Barthes, _Mythologies_ \--selections **

>

> **Fri. 3/8:**

>

>   * **Barthes, _Mythologies_ , cont'd**

>   * **\---, "Change the Object Itself: Mythology Today" ***

** **

**Week 9. The Sign Form**

> **Mon. 3/11:**

>

>   * **Jean Baudrillard, _For a Critique of the Political Economy of the
Sign_**

>

> **Wed. 3/13:**

>

>   * **Baudrillard, _Critique_ , cont'd**

>

> **Fri. 3/15:**

>

>   * **Baudrillard, _Critique_ , cont'd **

** **

**Week 10. Spring Break**

> **No Classes**

** **

**Week 11. Postmodernizing Marx**

> **Mon. 3/25:**

>

>   * **Jean Baudrillard, "The End of Production" ***

>

> **Wed. 3/27:**

>

>   * **Fredric Jameson, "Postmodernism: or, the Cultural Logic of Late
Capitalism" ***

>

> **Fri. 3/29:**

>

>   * **Baudrillard & Jameson, cont'd **

** **

**Week 12. The Politics of "Popular" Pleasure**

> **Mon. 4/1:**

>

>   * **W.F. Haug, _Critique of Commodity Aesthetics_ \--excerpt ***

>

> **Wed. 4/3:**

>

>   * **Don Slater, "Going Shopping: Markets, Crowds and Consumption" ***

>

> **Fri. 4/5:**

>

>   * **John Fiske, "Shopping for Pleasure" ***

** **

**Week 13. The Commodity Audience**

> **Mon. 4/8:**

>

>   * **Barbara Klinger, "Digressions at the Cinema: Commodification and
Reception in Mass Culture" ***

>

> **Wed. 4/10:**

>

>   * **Eileen R. Meehan, "Why We Don't Count: The Commodity Audience" ***

>   * **Ian Eng, "Living Room Wars: New Technologies, Audience Measurement,
and the Tactics of Television Consumption" ***

>

> **Fri. 4/12:**

>

>   * **Janice Radway, "Mail-Order Culture and Its Critics: The Book-of-the-
Month Club, Commodification and Consumption, and the Problem of Cultural
Authority" ***

** **

**Week 14. Gender and Race in Commodity Culture**

> **Mon. 4/15:**

>

>   * **Susan Willis, _A Primer for Daily Life_**

>

> **Wed. 4/17:**

>

>   * **Willis, _Primer_ , cont'd**

>

> **Fri. 4/19:**

>

>   * **Willis, _Primer_ , cont'd **

>   * **Kobena Mercer, "Black Hair/Style Politics" ***

** **

**Week 15. Sexing/Queering the Commodity**

> **Mon. 4/22:**

>

>   * **Susan Buck-Morss, "The Flaneur, The Sandwichwoman and the Whore: The
Politics of Loitering" ***

>

> **Wed. 4/24:**

>

>   * **Danae Clark, "Commodity Lesbianism" ***

>   * **Mark Simpson, "Narcissus Goes Shopping: Homoeroticism and Narcissism
in Men's Advertising" ***

>

> **Fri. 4/26:**

>

>   * **Lauren Berlant and Elizabeth Freeman, "Queer Nationality" ***

** **

**Week 16. Cultural Imperialism**

> **Mon. 4/29:**

>

>   * **John Tomlinson, _Cultural Imperialism_**

>

> **Wed. 5/1:**

>

>> **Tomlinson, _Cultural Imperialism_ , cont'd**

>

> **Fri. 5/3:**

>

>   * **Tomlinson, _Cultural Imperialism_ , cont'd **

>   * **Michael Taussig, "Fetishism: The Master Trope" ***

>

> ** **

**Links:**

**[Marx and Engels (writings](http://english-www.hss.cmu.edu/marx/) )**

**[Birmingham Centre for Contemporary Cultural
Studies](http://www.bham.ac.uk/CulturalStudies/)**

**[University of Sheffield Bakhtin
Center](http://www.shef.ac.uk/uni/academic/A-C/bakh/bakhtin.html)**

**[Public Culture (interdisciplinary journal)](http://www2.uchicago.edu/jnl-
pub-cult/)**

**[Cultural Studies Central](http://www.culturalstudies.net/)**



**[Return Home](http://www.uiowa.edu/~c008171/robspage/roblath.html)**

** **





