##  History of Russia Website

**HIST 2250. Webster University**  
**Professor Warren Rosenblum**

  
Syllabus with Study Questions |  Requirements |  Grading  
---|---|---  
Guidelines for Study Questions |   Role-Playing Exercises |  [FINAL EXAM
](Final_Exam_Study_Russia_2002.html)  
  |  Paper Topics |  [Return to Warren Rosenblum's
Homepage](http://www.webster.edu/~wrosenbl/)  
  
* * *

* * *

**Course Description**

This course focuses on the rise and fall of the Soviet Union. In order to
understand the origins of the Russian Revolution, the course will start in the
nineteenth century, exploring the social and political crises of the Czarist
regime. In the middle part of the course, we will examine the great uprising
of 1917, the Civil War which followed, and the consolidation of a Communist
regime under Lenin. We will then consider the transformation of Russian
society and culture in the Stalinist era, including the horific crimes of the
Stalinist regime. In the latter part of the course we will discuss the causes
of Communism's collapse and the state of Russia today.

**Requirements**

The readings for this class have been chosen because they are interesting,
important, and hopefully quite lively and fun. It is vital that you do the
reading on a timely basis and that you submit answers to study questions as
assigned. READING IS AT THE CORE OF THIS CLASS. It will not always be easy. It
will be rewarding if you take it seriously.

Responses to the study questions will be due on Wednesdays unless otherwise
noted in class or on the syllabus. Responses must be typed and should follow
the rules of good composition. Late responses will be marked down unless I was
notified in advance. No study question responses will be accepted beyond one
week after the due date, except by special arrangement. For further
information, see below.

In addition to the study questions you will be required to complete one short
paper and a final exam.

There will be at least one film screening, possibly two. This will be
scheduled for a Wednesday night and will be mandatory.

If you must miss a class, please notify me, preferably via email, in advance.
Any assignments due on the day of your absence should be submitted via email
or placed in my mailbox in HSPC 210.

**Grading** Your final grade will be computed as follows:

> > Participation (including class dicussion, study question responses, and
role-playing exercises):  40%  
> Papers: 20-30%  
> Final Exam: 20-30%

**The following books are required for purchase*:**  
Orlando Figes, _A People's Tragedy_  
David Remnick, _Lenin's Tomb_  
Alexander Solzhenisten, _The Gulag Archipelago_

> _*_ The books are available at the Webster University Bookstore at 8028 Big
Bend Blvd. For online ordering, store hours, and phone numbers, [click
here](http://stores.efollett.com/eFollett/standard/index.gtml?dirName=webster).

**_Week 1._ \-- Jan. 14-16**  
**Tsar and Tsarina**  
**Reading: Figes, pp. 3-34**

**_Week 2_ \-- Jan. 23 (no class Monday, due to holiday)**  
**Government and People in Imperial Russia**  
**Reading: Figes, pp. 55-83, 84-121**  
**[Study Questions](http://www.webster.edu/~wrosenbl/r-study2.html)**

**_Week 3_ \-- Jan. 28-30**  
**The Age of Rebellion**  
**Reading: Figes, pp. 139-154, 157-212**  
**[Study Questions](http://www.webster.edu/~wrosenbl/r-study3.html)**  


**_Week 4_ \-- Feb. 4-6**  
**The Crisis of the Imperial Regime**  
**Reading: Figes, pp. 213-221, 241-291**  
**[Study Questions](http://www.webster.edu/~wrosenbl/r-study4.htm)**

> > **Wednesday -- Role playing Exercise 1:   What is to be done?**

**_Week 5_ \-- Feb. 11-13**  
**The February Revolution**  
**Reading: Figes, pp. 305-353**  
**[Study Questions](http://www.webster.edu/~wrosenbl/r-study5.htm)**

**_Week 6_ \-- Feb. 18-20**  
**Russia under the Provisional Government**  
**Reading: Figes, pp. 354-405, 442-473**

> > **Wednesday -- Role-Playing   2: The fate of the Provisional Government**

**_Week 7_ \-- Feb. 25-27**  
**Revolution in the Balance**  
**No new reading**

> > **Monday -- Role-Playing 2 continued**

**_Week 8_ \-- Mar. 4-6**  
**The Bolshevik Revolution**  
**Reading: Figes, pp. 474-551**  
[Study Questions](http://www.webster.edu/~wrosenbl/r-study8.html)

> > **Wednesday -- Due:Paper 1**

> **Spring Break: Mar. 8th to Mar. 17th**

**_Week 9_ \-- Mar 18-20**  
**War Communism**  
Reading: Figes, pp. 555-570; 603-649

**_Week 10_ \-- Mar 25-27**  
**The NEP Era**  
Reading: Figes, pp. 745-772

**_Week 11_ \-- Apr 1-3**  
**The Rise of Stalin**  
Figes, pp. 773-786, 793- 807  
David MacKenzie, et al, _Russia and the USSR_ , pp. 150-160 (handout)

**_Week 12_ \-- Apr 8-10**  
**Russia under Stalinism**  
Solzhenistsyn, _One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich_ (all)  
            Monday film: _The Life and Times of Josef Stalin_

**_Week 13_ \-- Apr 15-17**  
**The Soviet Union in Crisis**  
Remnick, _Lenin's Tomb_ , pp. 3-9, 24-69, 101-119, 120-140

**_Week 14_ \-- Apr 22-24**  
**Breakup of the Soviet Union**  
Remnick, _Lenin's Tomb,_ pp. 162-215, 234-247, 264-276

**_Week 15_ \-- Apr 29-May 1**  
**Dissonant Notes & Piroshkes**  
**Reading:  ** Remnick, _Lenin's Tomb,_ pp. 279-323; article by Alex Ross on
Dmitri Shostakovich, from _The New Yorker_

> > _Monday:_ Class Cancelled. (Instructor stuck in Ithaca....)

>>

>> _Wednesday_ : Guest lecturer, pianist Alla Voskoboynikova rescheduled.
We'll meet in our normal meeting room to discuss the reading from Remnick and
then proceed to the musical school where we'll talk music.

>>

>> _Monday_ , May 6th. Meet at Dvin Restaurant (8143 Big Bend Blvd) \-- right
near campus, a few doors down from Einstein's Bagles. Final exam review
session over blintzes and pieroshkes sponsored in part (50%) by the History,
Politics, & Law  Department.  
>  

**Final Exam -- Wednesday, May 8th at 1:00 PM**  
**[Final Exam Study Questions are
Online](http://www.webster.edu/~wrosenbl/Final_Exam_Study_Russia_2002.html)**  

* * *

* * *

  
**Guidelines for the responses to Study Questions**

Study question responses must be typed and should follow the rules of good
grammar, style, and spelling.

Your responses must engage with the assigned reading. It is _not_ acceptable
to provide answers based upon material read for other classes, online sources,
or encyclopedias like Encarta or Brittanica. The latter sources in particular
should be used cautiously and only as a supplement to the assigned readings.
They are _not_ always reliable and certainly do not represent authoritative
interpretations of Russian history.

Responses will be graded according to how thoroughly you answer the questions
and how accurately you summarize the assigned reading. Summary is often the
hardest and most important part of the exercise, but it will not always be
enough by itself. The best responses are based on the thoughtful marshalling
of evidence, examples, and interpretations which are drawn from the readings
(and, secondarily, lectures and class discussions).

Study questions responses are due on Wednesdays unless otherwise indicated.
Late responses will be marked down unless the instructor was notified in
advance. _No study question responses will be accepted beyond one week after
the due date, except by special arrangement._

**Paper Topics**  


**Paper 1. Reflections of your character on the Bolshevik Revolution**

This assignment asks for your reflections (in character) on the events of the
revolutionary years and especially the Bolshevik seizure of power. How do you
assess the causes of the revolution? What mistakes did you, your allies, or
your opponents make? To what extent was the course of events shaped by outside
events (e.g. the war) or leading personalities? Which of these factors do you
feel was the most important? What is your basis for saying so?

Papers should be 2-4 pages long. There must be a thesis, i.e. a central
argument that is clearly stated up front -- no drunken rambling regardless of
how "authentic" it seems. Your character's opinions should be historically
realistic, grounded in what we know from the reading.

The paper must have citations, either in the form of footnotes or informal
notation (page numbers in parentheses).  
    
    
    


>  

  
    
    


