**History 3644**

**Twentieth-Century Russia**

**Fall 2000**

**CRN 95389**

**Prof. A. Nelson**

**Office: 417 Major Williams**

**Ph: 231-8369**

**e-mail:**[anelson@vt.edu](mailto:anelson@vt.edu)

**Homepage:**<http://www.majbill.vt.edu/history/nelson/>

**Office Hours: Tues. 4-5, Wed. 1-2 and by appointment**

This course examines the history of the Soviet Union from its immediate pre-
revolutionary origins to its disintegration in 1991. Lectures, discussions and
readings will address the development of the Soviet system in the twenties and
thirties, and the legacy of Stalinism for reform efforts under Khrushchev and
Gorbachev. Readings will include the work of Western and Soviet historians, as
well as political documents and memoirs. We will also view a number of
documentaries and artistic films.

**_Course Requirements_ :** 1) Regular attendance and participation in
discussions of assigned readings and films.

2) A short paper based on selections from the Suny/Adams reader

3) At least once during the term you will be in charge of presenting a reading
and /or leading class discussion, or participating in a group presentation,
such as a skit or short play. The class will be depending on you to be well-
prepared for these exercises. Similarly, those who are leading discussion
should be confident that everyone else will come to class prepared (i.e.
having already done (and thought about) the reading.) I will provide
guidelines for these activities on a separate handout.

4) Short, in-class (or possibly take-home) writing assignments based on the
readings, lecture, or film for a particular topic

5) A mid-term and final examination. Exams will include critical id's, short
answer, and essay questions.

6) A five-page paper on _Through the Burning Steppe_ and other course
material.

The instructor reserves the right to make minor adjustments to the syllabus.

Written work must be turned in by the due date. Except in the case of
documented medical emergencies, late work will be marked down one full letter
grade for each day it is late. **_Grading_** :

Your grade will be calculated as follows:  
  Attendance, class participation, and short assignments | 10 %  
---|---  
In-class presentation or discussion | 10 %  
Suny/Adams paper | 15 %  
midterm exam | 25 %  
5 page paper | 15 %  
final exam | 25 %  
  
**_Honor Code :_**

Students in this course are expected to abide by the University Honor code: "I
have neither given nor received unauthorized assistance on this assignment."

**_Special Needs_ :** ****

If you feel you need an accommodation because of a disability please make an
appointment to see me during office hours.

**_Reading_ :**

The following books have been ordered at the University and Tech Bookstores:
Gregory L. Freeze, ed., _Russia. A History_ (2000)

Ronald Grigor Suny, Arthur E. Adams, eds., _The Russian Revolution and
Bolshevik Victory : Visions and Revisions (Problems in European Civilization)_
3rd edition (1990)

John Scott, _Behind the Urals: An American Worker in Russia's City of Steel_ ,
enlarged edition (1989 [1942])

Elena Kozhina, _Through the Burning Steppe: A Wartime Memoir_ (2000)

Robert V. Daniels, ed., _Soviet Communism from Reform to Collapse (Problems in
European Civilization_ ) (1995) Additional readings are available on reserve
in the library, from the URLs noted in the syllabus, or will be distributed in
class.

**_Class Schedule and Readings_ :**  
    |   | **_Topic:_** | **_Reading:_**  
---|---|---|---  
wk. 1 | t. 8/22 | **I. Introduction** |  
  | th. 8/24 | **II. On the Eve** |  Freeze, pp. 170-199  
wk. 2 | t. 9/1 |   | Lenin, _What is to be done_? Ch. 2 (all) and Ch. 4,
section "c"

(PDF from the Lenin Internet Archive:
<http://csf.colorado.edu/mirrors/marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/index.htm>)

(also on reserve).  
  | th. 9/3 | **III. The First Russian Revolution** |  Freeze, pp. 200-230  
wk. 3 | t. 9/5 |   | Suny/Adams, pp. 7-50 (Part 1: "Variety of Opinion," "The
Issues," and selections by Haimson and Pares)  
  | th. 9/7 | **IV. "Kto-kogo?" The Revolutions of 1917** |  Freeze, pp.
231-250

Suny/Adams, pp. 116-152,166-195, 197-204, 248-268 (selections by Burdzhalov
and Wildman; Part 2: "Variety of Opinion," and "The Issues," selection by
Keep)  
wk. 4 | t. 9/12 |   | Suny/Adams, pp. 241-247, 269-315 (selections by
Rabinowitch, Smith and Rosenberg)  
  | th. 9/14 |   | Suny/Adams, pp. 339-343, 376-431 (Part 3: "Variety of
Opinion," and "The Issues," selections by Daniels and Rabinowitch)  
  | ***m. 9/18** | **_Suny/Adams paper due  _** |  
wk. 5 | t.9/19 | **V. The Bolsheviks in Power** |  Freeze, pp. 250-262

Peasant petitions from 1919 (handout)  
  | th. 9/21 | **VI. NEP and the Evolution of Dictatorship** |  Freeze, pp.
263-290  
wk. 6 | t. 9/26 |   |  
  | th. 9/29 |

**Last day to drop the course | Bolshevik Visions, pp. 73-88, 144-126 (on
reserve)

(intro, essay by Kollontai, letters to editor)  
wk. 7 | t. 10/3 | **V. The Great Turn** |  Freeze, pp. 291-303

Scott, _Behind the Urals_  
  | th. 10/5 |   |  
wk. 8 | t. 10/10 | **VI. Stalin's Russia: The Quicksand Society** |  Freeze,
pp. 304-318

"Discussion of Law on the Abolition of Legal Abortion" (handout)  
  | th. 10/12 |   |  
wk. 9 | t. 10/17 |   |  
  | th. 10/19 | **_**Midterm Exam_** |  
  |   | **VII. WWII**

** ** |  Freeze, pp. 319-335

Kozhina, _Through the Burning Steppe_

Stalin, Speeches (handout)  
wk. 10 | t. 10/24 |   |  
  | th. 10/26 | **VIII. High Stalinism** |  Freeze, pp. 335-346  
wk. 11 | t.10/31 | **IX. De-Stalinization and Dilemmas of Development** |
Freeze, pp. 347-368

Khrushchev, "Secret Speech" (handout)  
  | th. 11/2 |   |  
wk. 12 | t. 11/7 | **X. Detente and "Zastoi"** |  Freeze 368-382  
  | th. 11/9 |   |  
wk. 13 | t. 11/14 | **_** Paper on Kozhina Due_** |  
  | th. 11/16 | **XI. Gorbachev and the Task of Reform** |  Freeze, pp.
383-413  
  |   | Fall Break |  
wk. 14 | t. 11/28 |

  | Daniels, pp. xv-xxviii, 1-9, 35-66 (Introduction and selections by Lewin,
Zaslavskaia and Brown)  
  | th. 11/30 |

  | Daniels, pp. 69-82, 121-140, 143-157, 171-206, 217-229 (Selections by
Gorbachev, Andreeva, Sharlet, Urban, Morrison and Yeltsin, Aslund and White)  
wk. 15 | t. 12/5 | **After Empire**

** ** |  Freeze, pp. 413-421

Daniels, pp. 231-242, 253-267 (Selections from _Pravda_ and _Izvestiia_ and by
Sixsmith)  
  |   |   |  
  | th. 12/14 | **_Final Exam 1-3_** |  
  
[Back to Nelson's Homepage](../../F99Webpages/index.html)

