Changes to the syllabus may be made throughout the semester.  It is your
responsibility to check this web-site frequently.



History 4030, Departmental Proseminar  
---  
  
The Russian Revolution  
  
This class meets Wednesdays, 3:10-5:40 pm, History Room 156.

Marianne Kamp, Assistant Professor of History | Office Hours: Tuesday 1-3 pm;
Wednesday 1-3 pm  
---|---  
Office:  History Bldg 358 | email: mkamp@uwyo.edu  
Phone: 766-5103 | website: http://www.uwyo.edu/mkamp  
  
A seminar, ideally, is a course in which students learn primarily through
reading, discussing what they have read, doing research, and writing.
Lecturing plays a minimal role in a history seminar; in this course I will
lecture occasionally but not extensively.  The History Department Proseminar
is a W3 course; this means that students will do a substantial amount of
writing during the semester.  Shorter papers (3-6 pages) throughout the
semester, including a primary source analysis, a book review, and an
historiographical essay will comprise building blocks for a final research
paper (20-25 pages).  Student attendance at every class session is expected,
as is active and informed participation in every discussion.  Each student
will also make a final presentation of his/her research to the class, and will
make brief presentations on work in progress.

There are three required books for this course.  After the first 5 weeks of
class, most reading assignments will be articles or book chapters, but there
is no course packet.  Most articles will be available to you through links
from the syllabus, but to read them on-line you will need to use the Acrobat
Reader, and the following password: ________.  If your home computer does not
have adequate access for on-line reading, you may want to print or download
text files using a computer on campus.  I will place photocopies of some of
these articles on Reserve.  Nearly all required articles and chapters are
available in hard copy in Coe Library journals or books.

Books for this course can be purchased at the UW Bookstore.

Fitzpatrick, Sheila, _The Russian Revolution_.   Second Edition.  Oxford:
Oxford University Press 1994.

Kowalski, Ronald, _The Russian Revolution, 1917-1921_.   Routledge Sources in
History.  London: Routledge 1997.

Pipes, Richard, _A Concise History of the Russian Revolution_.   New York:
Vintage 1995.

In addition, I recommend that your order the following for your own use:

Turabian, Kate L., _A Manual for Writers of Term Papers, Theses, and
Dissertations_.   Chicago: University of Chicago Press 1996.  I recommend the
sixth edition (1996) because it includes guidelines for citation from
electronic sources as well as print sources.  

[Bibliography](RusRevBib.doc):  This is a thematically-grouped bibliography of
major, and mostly recent, books related to the February and October
Revolutions of 1917 and what followed.  This bibliography should serve as a
place to start when you are thinking about possible topics for your own
research.

_Written work for this class:_

Parameters: Papers can be turned in via email (as an attachment) before class
on the due date, or brought to class on the due date. No late papers or
assignments, with the exception of **one** **5- day** extension.   A student
who chooses to take this extension must notify me by email of that decision by
the paper's due date. Each student is allowed one opportunity to rewrite a
paper to raise grade.



[Grading Scale](grading_scale.htm):  In this course, you earn your grades
through writing and participation in discussion.  Discussion is 30% of the
total grade.  



[Journal](journalprosem.htm):  I will ask you to write and submit journal
entries for the first 5 weeks of class, and then we will discuss whether to
continue this.  The purpose of the journal is to help you to read thoughtfully
and come to class prepared for discussion.  Journal entries are part of the
discussion grade.



Essays:  [Primary Source Analysis](sourcean1.htm); [ Book
Analysis](bookrev.htm); [ Historiographic Essay](Historiographic%20Essay.doc).



[Annotated Bibliography](annobib.htm)

[Research Paper  ](researchpaper.htm)





**Week 1,   Sept 5:**  Introduction.  Explain course.  Open discussion: What
is a revolution?  Library session on research.  Brief overview of the Russian
Revolution.

For next week:  Read Fitzpatrick, _The Russian Revolution_ , pp. 1-119.
Journal questions:  [Answers are to be submitted to me by email no later than
1 pm, Wednesday, Sept. 12.]  

1.  According to Fitzpatrick's understanding, when does the Revolution begin and end, and why? (that is, why does the Revolution begin and end, and what understanding of the idea "revolution" does Fitzpatrick use that allows her to see these points as the beginning and end of the revolution?) 

2.  Fitzpatrick outlines three themes in her introduction.  Focus on the discussion of one of those themes in the book's main chapters.  In what ways does this theme help to explain the changes that took place during the revolutionary period, either as a cause of change, or evidence of change?  Be specific; give examples.   

**Week 2, Sept 12:  ** Discuss Fitzpatrick.  What is a primary source?  Film:
"October: Ten Days that Shook the World."

For next week: Read Fitzpatrick, _The Russian Revolution_ , pp. 119-172.  Read
Kowalski, _The Russian Revolution_ , 17-64.

Journal:  two specific questions

1) Fitzpatrick outlines three themes in her introduction.  Focus on the
discussion of one of those themes in the book's main chapters.  In what ways
does this theme help to explain the changes that took place during the
revolutionary period, either as a cause of change, or evidence of change?  Be
specific; give examples.

2) Kowalski: examining the documents in Chapter 4, how would you compare the
ideals and statements of the Provisional Government with those of the
Bolsheviks?  

Essay:  **Primary Source analysis** , using partial documents in Kowalski, or
others of your choosing.

The V. I. [Lenin Internet Library](http://www.marx2mao.org/Lenin/Index.html)

[Lenin Works
Archive](http://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/date/index.htm)

Albert Rhys-Williams "Mercy or Death to the Whites?" in _Storming the Heavens:
voices of October_ , ed. Mark Jones. London: Zwan Publications, 1987.

**Week 3 Sept. 19**   **Primary Source Analysis ESSAY DUE**   Discuss
Fitzpatrick and Kowalski.  Presentations on primary sources.

For next week:  Read Brinton, Ch. 1 and Ch. 7; and Skocpol.  Journal
questions:  Brinton's understanding of revolution; Skocpol's understanding of
revolution--compare with Fitzpatrick and Kowalski's approaches to the Russian
Revolution

Crane Brinton, _The Anatomy of Revolution_.   New York: Vintage Books: 1965.
[First edition 1932, subsequent editions 1952, 1965].

Theda Skocpol, S _tates and Social Revolutions:   a comparative analysis of
France, Russia, and China_.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 1979.

**Week 4 Sept 26** Discuss Skocpol and Brinton and revolutions

For next week:  Kowalski, 3-13 and Pipes, A Concise History of the Russian
Revolution, pp. xii-210.  Journal questions:  comparing Pipes and Fitzpatrick
on revolution

Choose book for **book review essay** , due Oct. 10.

**Week 5 Oct 3**.   Discuss Pipes and Kowalski.  

For next week:  Pipes 210-406.  Journal questions:  Pipes and theories of
revolution.  Examining Pipes, Fitzpatrick, Kowalski, what topics come into
discussion of the Russian Revolution, depending on how one understands
revolution?  

**Week 6 Oct 10** :  **CLASS CANCELLED**. **BOOK REVIEW ESSAY DUE**

Submit book review essays either by dropping off a hard copy in the office, or
by sending the paper in as an email attachment.



**Week 7 Oct 17**  

Discuss Pipes to end.  

For next week:  Journal questions:  Kowalski discusses the Party and politics
in the revolution and the 1920s, and so do each of the following articles.
What is the major point that each of the three authors below (Service,
Merridale, von Hagen) is making?  Are there similarities or differences in
their views of the way that the Party and political power in general worked?
Do they support or contradict what Kowalski says?  How would you describe the
Party and its authority?

Kowalski 99-127, 193-241.  

Robert Service Chapter 6 from _The Bolshevik Party in Revolution: A Study in
Organizational Change 1917-1923_.   Barnes and Noble, 1979.

Catherine Merridale, _Moscow Politics and the Rise of Stalin: The Communist
Party in the Capital, 1925-32_.   New York: St. Martin's Press 1990, pp.
21-46.

Mark von Hagen, "Soldiers in the Proletarian Dictatorship: From Defending the
Revolution to Building Socialism," in _Russian in the Era of NEP: Explorations
in Soviet Society and Culture_ , eds. S. Fitzpatrick, A. Rabinowitch and R.
Stites.  Indiana University Press 1991, pp.156-173.

**Week 8 Oct 24**

Discuss: The Party and Politics

For next week, read Kowalski 131-165.

Fitzpatrick, Sheila, _Stalin's Peasants: Resistance and Survival in the
Russian Village After Collectivization_.   Oxford University Press 1994.  Pp.
37-79.

Kuromiya, Hiroaki, _Stalin's Industrial Revolution: Politics and Workers,
1928-1932.  _ Cambridge University Press 1988.  Pp. 3-23.

Individual readings from: Beyond the Urals, In the Shadow of Revolution,
Magnetic Mountain, Harvest of Sorrow, Peasant Rebels.

**Annotated Bibliography** , due Oct. 31

**Week 9 Oct 31** **ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY DUE**.  

Economics:   NEP, Collectivization, Industrialization. Discussion: Kowalski,
Fitzpatrick, Kuromiya plus your individual reading.

When reading the two on-line articles, think about what significant changes
take place for workers and peasants between the early revolutionary period
(Kowalski) and the late 1920s (Fitzpatrick and Kuromiya).  You each have one
individual reading.  You will need to present that reading to your classmates,
focusing first on the content and the central themes that your reading
addresses, and then discussing how this changes or shapes the understanding of
collectivization or industrialization that in presented in the Fitzpatrick and
Kuromiya articles above.  

Film: Turk-Sib  

For next week, read:

Anne Gorsuch, "NEP be Damned! Young Militants in the 1920s and the Culture of
Civil War," in _Russian Review_ 56 (October 1997): 564-80.

Eric Selbin, "Bringing Agency Back In," in _Theorizing Revolutions,_ ed. John
Foran.   London, Routledge, 1997, 123-136.

Richard Stites, _Revolutionary Dreams: Utopian Visions and Experimental Life
in the Russian Revolution_. Oxford University Press 1989. Chapter 5, pp.
100-123.

Central Committee, RKP, "On Anti-Religious Propaganda among Women Workers and
Peasants," and The Editors of Bezbozhnik, "Calling All Believers," "Science or
Religion?" "Without God, With Man," in _Bolshevik Visions: First Phase of the
Cultural Revolution in Soviet Russia,_ Vol. 1, ed. William Rosenberg.
University of Michigan Press 1990, pp. 242-252.

N. Malkov, "Music and the Cultural Revolution" in _Bolshevik Visions: First
Phase of the Cultural Revolution in Soviet Russia,_ Vol. 2, ed. William
Rosenberg.   University of Michigan Press 1990, pp. 264-268.

**Week 10 Nov 7**

Culture and Religion.  Read Selbin, Gorsuch,  Stites, Malkov, Central
Committee

In class: discuss the above texts.  Talk about historiographic essay.  Discuss
author sources.



**Historiographic Essay**

**Week 11 Nov 14   HISTORIOGRAPHIC ESSAY DUE**

Women

Valentine Moghadam, "Gender and Revolutions,"  in _Theorizing Revolutions,_
ed. John Foran.   London, Routledge, 1997, 137-166.

Alexandra Kollontai  , "Women and Revolution," in _Storming the Heavens:
Voices of October,_ ed. Mark Jones.   Atlantic Highlands: Zwan 1987, 157-169.

Wendy Z. Goldman, _Women, the State, and Revolution:   Soviet Family Policy
and Social Life, 1917-1936_.  Cambridge University Press 1993, 101-143.

**Week 12 Nov 28**

Nationalities

Read:  Kowalski, 166-175.

Ronald G. Suny, _The Revenge of the Past: Nationalism, Revolution and the
Collapse of the Soviet Union_.   Stanford University Press 1993. Ch. 3
(partial), pp. 84-117.

Individual readings on Ukraine, Siberia, and Armenia

**Week 13 Dec 5   NO CLASS**

Presentations:  Read your classmates' rough drafts before coming to class.
Prepare your own comments on classmates papers.  

**Week 14 Dec 12**

Presentations: Read rough drafts

Ahlers, "Diplomatic Implications Concerning the Non-Recognition of Russia,
1917-1920"

Bailey, on Jews in the Soviet Union after the Revolution

Braaton, "The Red Army in the Interwar Period, 1918-1938"

Cushing, on NEP's social impact

George, "Revolutionary Film in Russia"

Madewell, "American-Russian Relations During the Russian Revolution"

Shah, "Muslim Women in Soviet Central Asia: an Examination of Hujum and
Cultural Resistance"

**Week 15** Finals week, RESEARCH PAPERS DUE.

