    | 

  
**Syllabus**  
  
---|---  
  


|

  
  
|

**Part I: SIGNIFICATION, STRUCTURE, EXCESS**  
  
|  Week 1: Introduction  
9.5 |

  * Introduction to MC11

  
|  
|

Week 2: Signs and Signifying Systems

  * [outline](outline/semio_outline.html)

  
9.10 |

  * Ferdinand de Saussure, _Course in General Linguistics_ , trans. Wade Boskin (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1966), pp. 1-23, 65-134.

  
screening |

  * _Young Mr. Lincoln_ (John Ford, U.S.A., 1939. 100 minutes).

  
9.12 |

  * Roland Barthes, _Mythologies_ , pp. 26-28, 34-5, 41-43, 50-52, 84-87, 94-96, 100-102, 109-159. [book]

  
|  
| Week 3: Structure and (De)mystification  
9.17 |

  * _Cahiers du Cinema_ editors,  "John Ford's Young Mr. Lincoln" in _Movies and Methods_ , ed. Bill Nichols (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1976), pp. 493-529.

  
  |

  * _Written On The Wind_ (Douglas Sirk, U.S.A., 1956, 99 minutes.)

  
9.19 |

  * Claude Levi-Strauss, "The Principles of Kinship" in _The Elementary Structures of Kinship_ (Boston: Beacon Press, 1969), pp. 478-497.
  * \---, "The Effectiveness of Symbols" in _Structural Anthropology_ (New York: Basic Books, 1963), pp. 186-204.

  
|  
|  Week 4: Play and Performance  
9.24 |

  * Jacques Derrida, "Structure, Sign and Play in the Discourse of the Human Sciences" in _Writing and Difference_ (Chicago: University of Chicago, 1978), pp. 278-293, 339.

  
9.26 |

  * Emile Benveniste, "Subjectivity in Language" in _Problems in General Linguistics_ , trans. Mary Elizabeth Meeks (Coral Gables, FL: University of Miami Press, 1971), pp. 223-230.
  * Jacques Derrida "[Signature Event, Context](http://lummi.stanford.edu/Media2/texts/Derrida/Signature_Event_Context.html)" in _Limited, Inc._ (Evanston IL: Northwestern University Press, 1988), pp. 1-23. 

  
|  ****Paper #1 assigned this week****  
|  
| **PART 2: SUBJECTIVITY, SEXUALITY, FANTASY**  
|  Week 5: The Subject in the Text/The Subject as the Text  
10.1 |

  * Sigmund Freud, excerpts from "Part II. Dreams" in _Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis_ , trans. James Strachey (New York: Avon, 1965), pp. 122-153. 167-182, 209-226, 264-282.
  * Emile Benveniste, "Remarks on the Function of Language in Freudian Theory" in _Problems in General Linguistics_ , pp. 65-75.

  
screening |

  * _Dottie Gets Spanked_ (Todd Haynes, U.S.A., 1993, 27 minutes).

  
10.3 |

  * Judith Butler, "Imitation and Gender Insubordination: Lesbian Theories, Gay Theories" in _Inside/Out,_ ed. Diana Fuss (New York and London: Routledge, 1991), pp. 13-31.

  
|  
| Week 6: The Body as Text  
10.8 |

  * UNIVERSITY HOLIDAY! 

  
10.9 | ****Paper #1 due****  
10.10 |

  * Sigmund Freud, _Dora: An Analysis of a Case of Hysteria_. [book]

  
|  
|

Week 7: Regulating Subjectivity and Sexual Difference(s)

  * [outline](outline/psych_outline.htm)

  
10.15 |

  * Alan Sheridan, "Translator's Note" in _Ecrits_ _: A Selection_ , trans. Alan Sheridan (New York: W. W. Norton, 1977), pps. vii-xii.
  * Jacques Lacan, "The Mirror Stage as Formative of the Function of the I" + "The Signification of the Phallus" in _Ecrits_ , pp. 1-7. 281-291.

  
screening |

  * _Splash_ (Ron Howard, U.S.A., 1984, 111 minutes).

  
10.17 |

  * Laura Mulvey, "Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema" in _Visual and Other Pleasures_ (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1989), pp. 14-26. 
  * Luce Irigaray, "This Sex Which is Not One" \+ "Commodities among Themselves" in _This Sex Which Is Not One_ , trans. Catherine Porter (Ithaca, NY: Cornell UP, 1985) pp. 23-33, 192-197.

  
|  
| Week 8: Knowledge, Otherness, Identity  
10.22 |

  * Frantz Fanon "Algeria Unveiled" in _A Dying Colonialism_ , trans. Haakon Chevalier (New York: Grove Press, 1965), pp. 35-67.
  * Frantz Fanon "Concerning Violence" in _Wretched of the Earth_ , trans. Constance Farrington (New York: Grove Press, 1963), pp. 35-106.

  
screening |

  * _My Beautiful Laundrette_ (Stephen Freers, U.K., 1985, 93 minutes).

  
10.24 |

  * Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick, "Introduction: Axiomatic" in _Epistemology of the Closet_ (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990), pp. 1-63.

  
|  ****Paper #2 assigned this week****  
|  
| **PART 3: POWER, IDEOLOGY, RESISTANCE**  
|  Week 9: Working Through the System: Economics and Ideology

  * [outline](outline/ideology_outline.html)

  
10.29 |

  * Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, "Idealism and Materialism" \+ "The Illusion of the Epoch" in _The German Ideology_ (New York: International Publishers, 1947), pp. 37-68.

  
screening |

  * _It's a Wonderful Life_ (Frank Capra, U.S.A., 1946, 130 minutes).

  
10.31 |

  * Louis Althusser, "Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses (Notes Towards an Investigation)" in _Lenin and Philosophy and other essays_ , trans. Ben Brewster (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1971), pp. 127-186. 

  
|  
| Week 10: Tactics, Practices  
11.5 |

  * Pierre Bourdieu, "The Production and Reproduction of Legitimate Language," "Authorized Language," "Rites of Institution," "Description and Prescription" \+ in _Language and Symbolic Power_. pp. 43-65, 107-136.

****Paper #2 due***  
  
screening |

  * _Reversal of Fortune_ (Barbett Schroeder, U.S.A., 1990, 111 minutes.)

  
11.7 |

  * Stuart Hall, "The Problem of Ideology: Marxism Without Guarantees" in _Stuart Hall: Critical Dialogues in Cultural Studies_ , eds. David Morley and Kuan-Hsing Chen (London and New York: Routledge, 1996), pp. 25-46.
  * Stuart Hall , "New Ethnicities," in _Stuart Hall: Critical Dialogues in Cultural Studies_ , pp. 441-449.
  * Wahneema Lubiano, "Like Being Mugged by a Metaphor: Multiculturalism and State Narratives" in _Mapping Multiculturalism_ , eds.Avery Gordon and Chris Newfield (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1996), pp. 64-75. 

  
|  
| Week 11: Power/Knowledge, Discourse/Law  
11.12 |

  * Michel Foucault, "Panopticism" in _Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison_ (NY: Vintage. 1979), pp. 195-228.
  * \---, "We 'Other Victorians'" \+ "Scientia Sexualis" in _The History of Sexuality_ vol. 1 (NY: Vintage, 1978), pp.3-13, 53-73.

  
screening |

  * _A Question of Silence/Stilte rond Christine M., De_ (Marleen Gorris, Netherlands, 1983, 92 minutes).
  * _That Rush!_ (Isaac Julien, U.S.A., 1995, 6 minutes).

  
11.14 |

  * Patricia Williams, "Fire and Ice," "The Pain of Word Bondage," \+ Mirrors and Windows," in _The Alchemy of Race and Rights_ (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1991), pp. 133-178.

  
|  ****Paper #3 assigned this week****  
|  
| **PART 4: TRANSITIONS, TRANSMISSIONS, TOTALITIES?**  
|  Week 12: Reproduction and Simulation  
11.19 |

  * Walter Benjamin, "The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction" in _Illuminations,_ trans. Harry Zohn (New York: Schocken Books, 1968), pp. 217-251.
  * Jean Baudrillard, excerpt from "Simulacra and Simulations" in Jean Baudrillard: Selected Writings ed. by Mark Poster (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1988), pp. 166-184.

  
screening |

  * _eXistenZ_ (David Cronenburg, U.S.A., 1999, 97 minutes).

  
11.21 |

  * U.S. THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY!

  
|  
|

Week 13: New, Live, and Improved

  * [outline](outline/TV_narrative_outline.htm)

  
11.26 |

  * Jane Feuer, "The Concept of Live Television: Ontology as Ideology" in _Regarding Television: Critical Approaches--An Anthology_ , ed. E. Ann Kaplan (Frederick, MD: University Publications of America, 1983), pp. 12-22.
  * Mimi White, "Crossing Wavelengths: The Diegetic and Referential Imaginary of American Commercial Television," in _Cinema Journal_ 25L2 (Winter 1986), pp. 51-64. 
  * Ien Ang, "In the Realm of Uncertainty: The Global Village and Capitalist Postmodernity," in _Living Room Wars: Rethinking Media Audiences for a Postmodern World_ (NY: Routledge, 1996), pp. 162-180 and 187-188.

  
11.27 | ****Paper #3 due**** by 4 p.m. in your section leader's mailbox  
screening |

  * TV screenings, TBA

  
11.28 |

  * Saskia Sassen, "Electronic Space and Power" in G _lobalization and Its Discontents_ (New York: The New Press, 1998) pp. 177-194. 
  * Lev Manovich, "Principles of New Media" \+ "Navigable Space" in _The Language of New Media_ (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001), pp. 27-48, 244-285.

  
|  
| Week 14  
12.3 |

  * Donna Haraway, "A Manifesto for Cyborgs," in _Simians, Cyborgs and Women: The Reinvention of Nature_ (New York: Routledge, 1991), pp. 149-181.
  * Rey Chow, TBA 

  
12.5 |

  * Conclusion

  
| ****Paper #4 assigned this week ****  
  


  |



**[Modern Culture and Media Homepage](http://www.brown.edu/mcm)**

**[Brown University Homepage](http://www.brown.edu)**

