#### RUSSIAN POLITICS

Political Science 340  
| Spring 1996  
  
---|---  
Stetson University  
| MW 2:30-3:45  
  
* * *

Students raised on American politics are used to settled institutional
arrangements and a stable society. Russia offers neither. There, the most
fundamental questions concerning territorial boundaries, the distribution of
political power, and the nature of the economy are being decided before our
eyes. Choices made in Russia this semester, this year, and this decade will
have profound consequences for the country--and the world--well into the next
century.

There is a temptation, as Jerry Hough once observed, for students of Russian
politics to become astrologers. We must resist that in this course. This is
not to say that we'll shy away from all speculation, particularly about
upcoming events such as the June 1996 presidential election, which is likely
to be a defining moment in contemporary Russian history. But our primary task
is to develop an analytical framework through which we can view recent
political developments. This requires us to become familiar with some specific
features of Russia's history, culture, and demography and with selected
theories in comparative political science, including those on transitions,
institutional design, and public choice. The challenge for all of us is to
understand where Russia fits existing theoretical molds and where it breaks
them.

Assessment in the course will be based on a midterm examination, a final
examination, and a short research paper. Each will be weighted equally in the
determination of the final grade. I shall also reserve approximately 10
percent of the grade to reward informed participation or discourage poor
attendance. The research paper will give students an opportunity to puruse in
greater depth a topic raised in the syllabus. In the research, students should
use, whenever possible, translated materials from the Russian press, found in
_Foreign Broadcast Information Service_ (Eurasia) and the _Current Digest of
the Post-Soviet Press_. Among other publications that will be useful in your
research, or in deepening your knowledge of politics in the Russian area, are
_Transition_ (formerly _RFE/RL Research Report_ ), _Post-Soviet Affairs,
Europe-Asia Studies, Moscow News, New Times,_ and _Russian Social Science
Review_ (formerly _Soviet Review_ ). The last three journals publish articles
by Russian authors.

Students are encouraged to stop in during office hours in Elizabeth Hall
(Tuesday and Thursday, 3:45-5:45). If these times are inconvenient, I am happy
to meet by appointment. My extensions are 7576 (Political Science) and 7380
(Russian Studies). The e-mail address is "huskey."

* * *

  * I. THE RUSSIAN POLITICAL INHERITANCE

    * 1\. Lands and Peoples 
      * _Cambridge Encyclopedia of Russia_ , pp. 31-51. 
    * 2\. Revolution, Reform, and Reaction in Russian History 
      * T. von Laue, _Why Lenin? Why Stalin?_ , pp. 37-51 
      * A. Rieber, "The Reforming Tradition in Russian History," in _Perestroika at the Crossroads_ , pp. 3-28 
      * L. Schapiro, "Liberalism in Russia," and "The Pre-Revolutionary Intelligentsia and the Legal Order," in _Russian Studies_ , pp.45-67 
      * J. Hough, "Russia's Khomeini Revolution," _World Policy Journal_ , no. 4 (1987), pp. 583-604 
      * M. McAuley, _Soviet Politics: 1917-1991_ , pp. 1-23 
    * 3\. Building Communism, 1917-1953 
      * M. McAuley, _Soviet Politics: 1917-1991_ , pp. 24-61 
      * W. Leonhard, _Child of the Revolution_ , pp. 109-130 
      * J. Scott, _Behind the Urals_ ,pp. 9-51 
      * S. Bialer, _Stalin's Successors_ , pp. 7-46 
    * 4\. Reforming Communism, 1953-1988 
      * M. McAuley, _Soviet Politics: 1917-1991_ , pp. 61-88 
      * G. Breslauer, "Khrushchev Reconsidered," _Problems of Communism_ (September-October 1976), pp. 18-33 
      * S. Cohen, "The Friends and Foes of Change," _Slavic Review_ no. 2 (1979), pp. 187-202 
      * M. Beissinger, "In Search of Generations in Soviet Politics," _World Politics_ no. 2 (1986), pp. 288-314 
    * 5\. Dismantling Communism, 1988- 
      * M. McAuley, _Soviet Politics: 1917-1991_ , pp. 89-123 
      * A. Dallin, "The Causes of the Collapse of the USSR," _Post-Soviet Affairs_ (October-December 1992), pp. 279-302 
    * 6\. The Politics of Transition 
      * J. Lowenhardt, _The Reincarnation of Russia_ , pp.1-35; 47-173 
      * A. Przeworski, _Democracy and the Market_ , pp. ix-99 
      * V. Bunce, "Comparing East and South," _Journal of Democracy_ , no. 3 (1995), pp. 87-100 

MIDTERM EXAMINATION

  * II. CONTEMPORARY RUSSIAN POLITICS 
    * 1\. Building a New Institutional Order: Comparative Perspectives 
      * J. Lowenhardt, _The Reincarnation of Russia_ , pp. 36-46 
      * E. Huskey, "Democracy and Institutional Design in Russia" (manuscript 1995) 
    * 2\. Executive Politics and Russian Semi-Presidentialism 
      * B. Yeltsin, _The Struggle for Russia_ , (entirety) 
      * E. Huskey, "Yeltsin as State Builder" _Soviet and Post-Soviet Review_ , no. 1 (1994), ppp. 56-62 
    * 3\. Parliamentary Politics 
      * T. Remington and S. Smith, "Communism's Collapse and the Development of Parliamentary Institutions in Russia" (manuscript 1995) 
      * T. Remington and S. Smith, "Political Parties in the Russian Duma: Recent Developments" (manuscript 1995) 
    * 4\. Voters, Parties, and Leaders 
      * M. Urban, "December 1993 as a Replication of Late Soviet Electoral Practices," _Post-Soviet Affairs_ (April-June 1994), pp. 127-158 
      * Article on December 1995 parliamentary elections (TBA) 
      * "What Do Russian Voters Want?" _Russian Social Science Review_ (January-February 1996), pp. 3-36 
    * 5\. Reshaping Relations between Center and Periphery 
      * I. Bremmer, "Reassessing Soviet Nationalities Theory," _Nations and Politics in the Soviet Successor States_ , pp. 1-26 
      * G. Lapidus and Walker, "Nationalism, Regionalism, and Federalism," in Lapidus, ed., _The New Russia_ , pp. 79-113 
      * D. Slider (article TBA) 
    * 6\. The Politics of Economic Reform 
      * A. Przeworski, _Democracy and the Market_ , pp. 100-191 
      * A. Aslund, _How Russia Became a Market Economy_ , pp. 86-101; 223-271 
    * 7\. The Politics of Legal Reform 
      * P. Solomon, "The Limits of Legal Reform," _Post-Soviet Affairs_ , no. 2 (1995), pp. 89-114 
      * E. Huskey, "Russian Judicial Reform after Communism," in P. Solomon, ed., _Reforming Russian Justice_ , 1996 
    * 8\. Does Russia Have a Future? 
      * J. Lowenhardt, _The Reincarnation of Russia_ , pp. 174-182  
FINAL EXAMINATION

