### _From the Legal Information Institute and Project
Hermes_![](/images/crybase.gif)

_[[Other parts of the opinion, WordPerfect versions, and related
documents]](93-517.cpanel.html)_

* * *

NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader. See
_United States_ v. _Detroit Lumber Co.,_ [200 U.S.
321](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/sup-choice.cgi?200+321), 337.

**SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES**

Syllabus

BOARD OF EDUCATION OF KIRYAS JOEL VILLAGE SCHOOL DISTRICT _v._ GRUMET

certiorari to the court of appeals of new york

No. 93-517. Argued March 30, 1994 \-- Decided June 27, 1994

[n.*]

The New York Village of Kiryas Joel is a religious enclave of Satmar Hasidim,
practitioners of a strict form of Judaism. Its incorporators intentionally
drew its boundaries under the State's general village incorporation law to
exclude all but Satmars. The village fell within the Monroe Woodbury Central
School District until a special state statute, 1989 N. Y. Laws, ch. 748,
carved out a separate district that follows village lines. Although the
statute gives a locally elected school board plenary authority over primary
and secondary education in the village, the board currently runs only a
special education program for handicapped children; other village children
attend private religious schools, which do not offer special educational
services. Shortly before the new district began operations, respondents and
others brought this action claiming, _inter alia,_ that Chapter 748 violates
the Establishment Clause of the [First
Amendment](http://www.law.cornell.edu/constitution/constitution.billofrights.html#amendmenti).
The state trial court granted summary judgment for respondents, and both the
intermediate appellate court and the New York Court of Appeals affirmed,
ruling that Chapter 748's primary effect was impermissibly to advance
religion.

_Held:_ The judgment is affirmed.

81 N. Y. 2d 518, 618 N. E. 2d 94, affirmed.

Justice Souter delivered the opinion of the Court with respect to Parts II-B,
II-C, and III, concluding that Chapter 748 violates the Establishment Clause.
Pp. 14-22.

(a) Because the Kiryas Joel Village School District did not receive its new
governmental authority simply as one of many communities eligible for equal
treatment under a general law, there is no assurance that the next religious
community seeking a school district of its own will receive one. __The
anomalously case specific creation of this district for a religious community
leaves the Court without any way to review such state action for the purpose
of safeguarding the principle that government should not prefer one religion
to another, or religion to irreligion. Nor can the historical context furnish
any reason to suppose that the Satmars are merely one in a series of similarly
benefited communities, the special Act in this case being entirely at odds
with New York's historical trend. Pp. 14-17.

(b) Although the Constitution allows the State to accommodate religious needs
by alleviating special burdens, Chapter 748 crosses the line from permissible
accommodation to impermissible establishment. There are, however, several
alternatives for providing bilingual and bicultural special education to
Satmar children that do not implicate the Establishment Clause. The Monroe
Woodbury school district could offer an educationally appropriate program at
one of its public schools or at a neutral site near one of the village's
parochial schools, and if the state legislature should remain dissatisfied
with the local district's responsiveness, it could enact general legislation
tightening the mandate to school districts on matters of special education or
bilingual and bicultural offerings. Pp. 17-20.

Justice Souter, joined by Justice Blackmun, Justice Stevens, and Justice
Ginsburg, concluded in Part II-A that by delegating the State's discretionary
authority over public schools to a group defined by its common religion,
Chapter 748 brings about an impermissible "fusion" of governmental and
religious functions. See _Larkin_ v. _Grendel's Den, Inc.,_ [459 U.S.
116](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/sup-choice.cgi?459+116), 126, 127.
That a religious criterion was the defining test is shown by the legislature's
undisputed knowledge that the village was exclusively Satmar when the statute
was adopted; by the fact that the creation of such a small and specialized
school district ran uniquely counter to customary districting practices in the
State; and by the district's origin in a special and unusual legislative Act
rather than the State's general laws for school district organization. The
result is that the legislature has delegated civic authority on thebasis of
religious belief rather than on neutral principles. Pp. 7-14.

Justice Kennedy, agreeing that the Kiryas Joel Village School District
violates the Establishment Clause, concluded that the school district's real
vice is that New York created it by drawing political boundaries on the basis
of religion. See, _e.g., Shaw_ v. _Reno,_ 509 U. S. ___, ___%___. There is
more than a fine line between the voluntary association that leads to a
political community comprised of people who share a common religious faith,
and the forced separation that occurs when the government draws explicit
political boundaries on the basis of peoples' faith. In creating the district
in question, New York crossed that line. Pp. 8-10.

Souter, J., announced the judgment of the Court and delivered the opinion of
the Court with respect to Parts I, II-B, II-C, and III, in which Blackmun,
Stevens, O'Connor, and Ginsburg, JJ., joined, and an opinion with respect to
Parts II (introduction) and II-A, in which Blackmun, Stevens, and Ginsburg,
JJ., joined. Blackmun, J., filed a concurring opinion. Stevens, J., filed a
concurring opinion, in which Blackmun and Ginsburg, JJ., joined. O'Connor, J.,
filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment. Kennedy,
J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment. Scalia, J., filed a
dissenting opinion, __in which Rehnquist, C. J., and Thomas, J., joined.

* * *

### Notes

* Together with No. 93-527, _Board of Education of Monroe Woodbury Central School District_ v. _Grumet et al.,_ and No. 93-539, _Attorney General of New York_ v. _Grumet et al.,_ also on certiorari to the same court.

* * *

_This archive is a service of the[Legal Information Institute. _

