|

![](../images/clear.gif)  
![](../_borders/Acu-logo.jpg)

| ![](../_borders/DBMM.jpg)  
---|---  
  


|

[_Home_](../default.htm)



_[  
](../about_us.htm) _ [_Majors and Minors_](../Majors&Minors.htm)



[ _Faculty_](../faculty.htm)



[_Staff & Recruiter _](../Staff%20&%20Administration.htm)



[_Courses_](../courses.htm)



[_Contact Us_](http://151.164.131.60/bible.acu.edu/DBMM/contact_us.htm)



[_Institute for Missions and Evangelism_](http://bible.acu.edu/missions)

| _![](../../images/clear.gif)_  
---|---  
|

Abilene Christian University

College of Biblical Studies

Undergraduate Department of Bible, Missions and Ministry

Introduction to Muslim Evangelism

BMIS 440.02
MAYMESTER 2002

3 credit hours
MTWRF 8:00-9:30; 1:10-3:00



![](Dan%20Mc4.gif)

Dan McVey, Visiting Missionary                                         Contact
phone: 674-3711

Ghana, W. Africa
ACU Box 29433

e-mail: mcvey@africaonline.com.gh                         Contact Office: BI
244-A



![](Dan%20Mc5.gif)



_Mission:_ The mission of ACU is to educate students for Christian service and
leadership

throughout the world. The broad mission of the Department of Undergraduate
Bible, Missions,

and Ministry is to provide Biblical training, Christian spiritual formation,
Kingdom expansion,

and a Christian worldview for every student in the university



_Course Audience_ : The class is designed as an introduction class for
students majoring or minoring in missions as well as for anyone interested in
learning more about Islam.



_Course Description_ :  This course seeks to introduce the student to the
basic elements of the

 Islamic faith within cultural and evangelistic contexts. The goal is for
students to gain a better understanding of Islam and relevant mission
strategies. Particular attention will be given to

Islamic worldview and  belief systems, sources of authority in Islam, folk
Islam, women in Islam,  Islam in America, evangelistic strategies,
contextualization and Islamic fundamentalism. The

course will emphasize the cosmic spiritual struggle involved in evangelism
among Muslims and the unique appeal that Jesus Christ has to Muslim people.

_Course Goal_ : The course is intended to introduce the students to the basic
elements of the Islamic religion and relevant issues concerning Christian
evangelism in Muslim contexts. The students will be introduced to:

1\. A brief history of Muhammad and Islam.

2\. The pillars of Islamic faith and basic elements of orthodox and folk
Islamic religious                                     expression.

3\. The general cultural/worldview context of Islam with focus on Islamic
sources of religious                 authority.

4\. The status of women in Islam.

5\. A brief history and analysis of different Christian evangelistic
strategies among Muslims.  

6\. An examination of varying levels of contextualization in Muslim
evangelism.

7\. Focus on the cosmic spiritual struggle necessarily involved in Muslim
evangelism.

8\. The distinctiveness of Islam in America and the impact of fundamentalism
within Islam.

_ _

**_  
_**

_Competencies and Measurements_ : At the end of the course, the students will
be able to:

1\. Identify the basic elements of the Islamic religion.

2\. Recognize the cultural and social impact that Islam has in parts of the
world.

3\. Distinguish between orthodox and folk Islamic practices and traditions.

4\. Recognize effective approaches to Muslims and relevant methods of
evangelism among                 Muslims.

5\. Perceive Islam in the context of the spiritual war raging in opposition to
the Kingdom of God.

_Measured by_ :

1\. Reading Journals of Parshall's book (total of six journal reports)
20%

2\. Group or Individual Report Assignments
10%

 (special topics briefly reported in handouts to the class)

3\. Final Examination
30%

4\. Research Paper
30%

5\. Reflection Paper
10%

Textbooks:

1\. George W. Braswell, Islam: Its Prophets, Peoples, Politics and Power.
(Nashville:

Broadman and Holman, 1996).

2\. Phil Parshall, The Last Great Frontier: Essays on Muslim Evangelism.
(Quezon City,

Philippines: Open Doors With Brother Andrew, 2000).

Recommended:

Bill Musk, The Unseen Face of Islam: Sharing the Gospel With Ordinary Muslims.
(London:                         Evangelical Missionary Alliance, 1989).

_Course Requirements_ :

_Attendance_ : Because of the short duration of this course, it is hoped there
will be no absences. If an emergency occurs, please talk with the teacher
personally. A student may be dropped from class if absent for more than one
day.



_Grading Scale_ :

A = 90-100

B = 80-89

C = 70-79

D = 60-69

F = Below 60



**  
**

 1\. _Reading Assignments_ :

     A. Pre-course: George Braswell, Islam: Its Prophets, Peoples, Politics and Power.

     B. During the course: Phil Parshall, The Last Great Frontier:  Essays on Muslim Evangelism.                          Each student will write a one-page paper on the following points for each of the sections 

         one through six (chapters 1-2, 3-13, 14-15, 16-18, 19-24, 25-28).

            1) Give two specific insights or understandings you gained from this reading.

            2) Describe two specific ways you can apply something you learned from the readings, or         how such principles may be applicable in Muslim evangelism.

2\. _Group or Individual Assignments_ on specially assigned topics to be
briefly reported to the

class in handouts prepared by the student or his group and reported orally if
there is time.        (Sample topics: Veiling in Islam, Sharia, Jihad, Hajj,
Shi'ites, Nation of Islam, Mosques in

the USA, etc.)

3\. _Final examination_ \- essay form covering the major sections of the
syllabus and material covered

in class lectures.

4\. _Research Paper_ : Each student must choose one of the following:

            a. Read Bill Musk, The Unseen Face of Islam: Sharing the Gospel With Ordinary Muslims,                and write a 3-4 page book review, comparing and contrasting Musk's major points                      with related points highlighted in the course lectures.

            b. Write a 5-7 page paper on one of the following topics (with footnotes and bibliography):

                        1) God in Islam and Christianity

 2) Is Islam a Threat to the West?

 3) Prophet Muhammad and the Jewish Clans of Medina

 4) Prayer in Islam and Christianity

 5\. _Reflection Paper_ \- Each student will write a 1-2 page paper,
commenting on two or

three aspects of the class most helpful to the student.

 6\. _Extra Credit_ \- Students who wish extra credit may write a 2-3 page
book review on any                     book listed in the course bibliography.

  _Daily Reading Assignments_ :

Pre-Course: Braswell, Islam: Its Prophets, Peoples, Politics and Power.

During the Course: Parshall, The Last Great Frontier: Essays on Muslim
Evangelism, journal                        reports on sections 1-6. One
journal report is due each day beginning with the first              Wednesday
of the class schedule (total of 6 reports).

_ _

_  _

_  _

_  _

_  _

_  _

**_  
_**

_Daily Schedule_ :

Schedule of main topics for each day's discussions-

Monday- Introduction to the course, requirements/procedures; History of Islam
(Social,

Political, Religious Factors); Prophet Muhammad (History, Social/Religious
Significance).

Tuesday- Pillars of Faith; The Qur'an; The Hadith; Basic Theology-
sin/salvation, Do we

Worship the same God?

Wednesday- Religious Authority; Ideology; Eschatology; Cultural Traits.

Thursday- Cultural Traits continued; Jesus in Islam; Festivals and Social
Expression;                           Fundamentalism.

Friday- Folk Islam- major tenets, social/religious characteristics, getting to
the heart and soul of                      Islam; Satanic origins and elements
of Islam; Animism and Spiritism.

Monday- Women in Islam- in the Qur'an and Traditions; Purdah; the Ideal Woman;
Female

Genital Mutilation; Islam in the USA.

Tuesday- Evangelistic Approaches and Methods- History, Debate vs. Dialogue,
Persecution.

Wednesday- Focus on Jesus in Evangelism; Enculturation; Social Projects (pros
and cons);                  Tentmaking.

Thursday- Evangelism Through Prayer; Church Planting Concerns; Contextualized
Worship.

Friday- Topics to Be Prepared for in Muslim Evangelism; Final Exam.



_  Personal Information_:

Dan McVey has served as a missionary with the Churches of Christ in Ghana,
West Africa, since 1982, working in leadership training, developing church
planting teams, developing teams to pioneer new ethnic groups in evangelism,
relief efforts (medical, disaster and water well drilling), urban and rural
church growth. He was the director of the Nationwide Bible Institute in Accra,
Ghana, from 1984-1999. He has helped launch mission work in The Gambia,
Senegal, Togo, and Burkina Faso, and has worked extensively in La Republique
de Cote d'Ivoire. He has done graduate studies in inter-cultural studies and
is at present pursuing a graduate degree in Muslim studies.

Presently, he and his family live in Yendi, Northern Region, Ghana, working
with a team of African evangelists in church planting, leadership development
and community development, focusing primarily on the Dagomba  (Islamic) and
Konkomba (animists) ethnic groups. Dan and his wife Brenda have two children-
Kyle (16 years old) and Tessa (11 years old).

  
| _**  
**_ |

* * *  
  
---|---  
  
**[![](../images/cbslogo.gif)](http://www.bible.acu.edu/)Last updated:** April
29, 2002  
Questions and comments to
[Webmaster@Bible.acu.edu](mailto:Webmaster@Bible.acu.edu)  
Comments about the web page to
[Webmaster@Bible.acu.edu](mailto:Webmaster@Bible.acu.edu)

