
    
     U.S. Immigration History, 1789-present
     History 212-4, Morton 343
     Spring 1996
     M, W, F from 10:00-10:50 p.m.
    
     Professor Cindy Hahamovitch
     Morton 310
     Phone: (w) 221-3770 (h) 220-1780; email: [cxhaha@mail.wm.edu](mailto:cxhaha@mail.wm.edu)
     Office Hours: Mondays, 2-4 and by appointment (call me).
    
     THE COURSE
    
     Description: This course is an introduction to the history of
     immigration to the United States from 1789 to the present.  Beginning
     in the potato fields of Ireland and ending in the barrios of East
     L.A., we'll cover topics including immigrant life, work, and culture;
     the causes of mass migration; its effect on gender and family
     relations; changing ethnic identity in the U.S.; and federal
     immigration policy.  As you can see from this syllabus, the course
     will combine lectures, discussions, and films.
    
     Course Objectives: The goals of this course are to acquaint you with
     key issues in U.S. immigration history; to get you to think about
     current issues in light of that history; and to get you to express
     your ideas in clear and persuasive prose.  In other words, I want to
     get you thinking and writing like historians about immigration
     history.
    
     Course Requirements: Your grade in this course will be based on four
     factors:
    
     REACTION PAPERS: You will write reaction papers on two of the
     following books (each paper worth 10% of the final grade).  You must
     choose at least one reaction paper with a deadline that falls before
     March 1.
    
     Author     Paper Deadline
     Gallagher   -- January 31
     Yezierska   -- February 21
     Higham  -- March 3
     Gutierrez   -- April 3
     Takaki      -- April 15
    
     **NOTE: Late papers will be docked a half a letter grade a day.  I
     will make exceptions only in cases of verifiable, severe illness or
     family emergency.
    
     GROUP RESEARCH PAPER: After the midterm, I will divide you into
     groups of four.  Each group will study California's hotly debated
     Proposition 187, bringing the historian's skills to bear on the
     subject.  You will divide the necessary research tasks among
     yourselves, but each of you  will write either a separate paper or a
     separate chapter of a larger, group paper (30%).
    
     FINAL EXAM:  The final exam will test your ability to synthesize the
     many subjects and issues raised over the course of the term (final
     30%).  The essay portion of the exam will be a "take-home," but you
     will write the short-answer and identification portions in class,
     without notes or books.
    
     PARTICIPATION: You will be graded also on your preparedness for and
     your contribution to class discussions and in-class projects.  I
     expect that the discussion periods will be the most important and
     interesting part of the course.  A basic premise of the course is
     that ideas count, both yours and mine, and that a mutual sharing of
     ideas will be intellectually stimulating for all of us.  We will need
     to create a supportive atmosphere in which all of us can think aloud,
     challenge each other without taking offense, and feel that we are
     contributing to each other's education.  All of this means that you
     must come to class well versed in the assigned readings and ready to
     participate.  I'm interested in the quality of your comments not just
     their quantity, and I do take attendance (20%).
    
     OTHER COURSE REQUIREMENTS:
    
     FILMS: Three of the films I intend to show are too long to be viewed
     in class.  Thus I will show them on Sunday evenings in the new Tucker
     Hall theatre.  Showtimes are on the syllabus.  There will be lots of
     seats, so feel free to bring friends.  I will put the video tapes on
     reserve at Swem for a week prior to the Tucker showings, so you can
     view them on your own if that's more convenient.  Plan ahead.
    
     DISCUSSION SECTIONS:  On five occasions we'll break up into two
     groups, so that we can discuss assigned books in a more intimate
     setting.  Group A will meet at the regular time and place.  Group B
     will meet in the same room but one hour later.  I'll let you know
     which group you're in by the second week of class.
    
     READINGS
    
     Buy:
    
     Roger Daniels, Coming to America
     Thomas Gallagher, Paddy's Lament
     Anzia Yezierska, The Bread Givers
     John Higham, Strangers in the Land
     Ronald Takaki, Strangers from a Different Shore
     David Gutierrez, Walls and Mirrors (not yet at Bookstore)
    
         Most of these books should also be on reserve at Swem Library (or
     will be shortly).  However, since we will use them extensively in
     class, I strongly recommend that you buy them and bring them with you
     to class on the days they are to be discussed.
    
         I've also made up a very small course-pack with supplemental
     readings and three sets of documents.  You can purchase it from me.
     Coursepack materials are marked with an asterix in the course outline
     below.
    
     SCHEDULE
     January 17W --Introduction.
     January 19F --Read: Daniels, 3-52.
     January 22M --Environmentalism, Revolution and the Slave Trade
     Debate.  Read: Daniels, 53-65, 101-118 and *Unsworth, Sacred Hunger,
     ch. 22 and 24 and Doc. Set #1.
     January 24W --Assimilation or Eradication: the Politics of
     Colonization.  Read: *Doc. Set #2 and start reading Gallagher,
     Paddy's Lament.
     January 26F --Turning the Turner thesis on its head: the expansion of
     slavery and forced labor in the west.
     January 29M --Ireland before the Famine.  Read: Daniels, 66-100, 121-
     184.
     January 31W --Film: "Out of Ireland."  Keep reading Gallagher.
     February 02F    --Small group discussions: Gallagher, Paddy's Lament
     (all).
     February 05M    --Know-Nothingism and the Whitening of the Irish.
     February 07W    --Scientific Racism.  Read: *Gould, The Mismeasure of
     Man, pp. 50-72.
     February 09F    --19th Century ChinaRead: Takaki, Strangers, pp. 3-
     56.
     **February 11 -- 7 p.m. film: "A Thousand Pieces of Gold."
     February 12M    --Discussion of FilmRead: Takaki, Strangers, pp. 79-
     178
     February 14W    --Asian Migration in the Age of EmpireRead: Takaki,
     Strangers, pp. 179-269.
     February 16F    --Small Group Discussions:  Takaki, Strangers from a
     Different Shore (assigned pages).
     February 19M    --The Transformation of World Agriculture (Hobsbawm).
     Read: Daniels, 185-237.
     February 21W    --From Hester Street to Hollywood.  Read: Yezierska,
     Bread Givers.
     February 23F    --Discussion of Yezierska, Bread Givers (all).
     February 25**--Film: Hester Street, Tucker Hall Theater, 7 p.m.
     February 26M    --Discussion of Film and *Document set #2: "A Bintel
     Brief."
     February 28W    --Workers of the World Migrate.
     March 01F   --Mock Midterm Exam.
     March 04-8  --SPRING BREAK
     March 11M   --Germs, Genes and the Immigrant Menace.
     March 13W   --No Class: Attend March 14th Gabaccia lecture.Read:
     Higham, Strangers in the Land, pp. 68-157
     March 15F   --The new environmentalism: Progressives and the
     Immigrants.  Read: Higham, Strangers, pp. 158-193.
     March 18M   --The Dark Side of Assimilation: 100% Americanism and the
     legacy of WWI.  Read: Higham, Strangers, 194-233.
     March 20W   --Lecture: Women and Immigration.
     March 22F   --Small Group Discussions: Higham, Stangers in the Land
     (all).
     March 25M   --Paper Design Workshop.  Read: Gutierrez, pp. 1-38.
     March 27W   --Library tour: how to find sources.
     March 29F   --19th century Mexico.  Read: Daniels, Coming to America,
     pp. 287-327.
     April 1M    --Film and Discussion: Los Mineros, Part I.  Read:
     Gutierrez, pp. 39-116.
     April 3W    --Film and Discussion: Los Mineros, part II.  Read:
     Gutierrez, pp. 117-151.
     April 5F    --Small Group Discussions: Gutierrez, Walls and Mirrors
     (all).
     April 8M    --World War II as Watershed.  Read: Takaki, pp. 357-405.
     April 10W   --Reports on Prop. 187 Research.  Read: Daniels, Coming
     to America, pp. 328-349.
     April 12F   --Refugees and the Cold War.
     April 14**  --Evening Film: "El Norte," 7 p.m.
     April 15M   --Discussion of "El Norte."
     April 17W   --The New Immigration and the Immigration Act of 1986.
     Read: Takaki, pp. 406-471 and Daniels, pp. 371-387.
     April 19F   --Gender and Asylum.  Read: Daniels, pp. 388-308.
     April 22M   --Discussion of Proposition 187 Papers (Papers Due)
     April 24    --Review.
         --Final Exam.
     Cindy Hahamovitch
     Assistant Professor of History
     College of William & Mary
     Phone:     804-221-3770
     Internet:  [cxhaha@mail.wm.edu](mailto:cxhaha@mail.wm.edu)

