
    
     U.S. History, 1865-present
     History 202-02 (3 credits)
     Spring 1996
     MWF from 12:00-12:50 p.m.
     Morton 302
    
     Professor Cindy Hahamovitch
     Morton 310
     Phone: (w) 221-3770 (h) 220-1780; email: [cxhaha@mail.wm.edu](mailto:cxhaha@mail.wm.edu)
     Office Hours: Mondays, 2-4 and by appointment.
    
     THE COURSE
    
     Description: This course will explore recent American history as a
     human creation rather than as an unfolding of events.  We'll begin in
     1865, paying particular attention to how people in the past viewed
     their world, debated its future, and worked to shape the nation
     according to often diverse visions of the good society.  As you can
     see from this syllabus, the course will combine lectures and
     discussions of readings, primary documents, and films.
    
     Course Objectives: The goal of this course is to get you to start
     thinking and writing like historians.  That involves reading other
     historians' writings critically, analyzing primary documents,
     developing your own interpretation of past events, and writing
     clearly and persuasively.
    
     Course Requirements: Your grade in this course will be based on FOUR
     factors:
    
     JOURNAL: See attached instructions (worth 15% of grade).
    
     RESEARCH PAPER: You will write one formal 5-7 page paper interpreting
     primary documents that you'll find in Swem.  I'll give you the actual
     assignment later in the semester (20%).
    
     EXAMS:  The mid-term and final exams will test your ability to
     synthesize the many subjects and issues raised over the course of the
     term.  The final will be cumulative (midterm 15%, final 30%).
    
     PARTICIPATION: You will be graded also on your preparedness for and
     your contribution to class discussions and in-class projects.  I
     expect that the discussion periods will be the most important and
     interesting part of the course.  One of the basic premises of the
     course is that ideas count, both yours and mine, and that a mutual
     sharing of ideas will be intellectually stimulating for all of us.
     We will need to create a supportive atmosphere in which all of us can
     think aloud, challenge each other without taking offense, and feel
     that we are contributing to each other's education.  In a good
     discussion, you will talk among each other, not just with me.  All of
     this means that you must come to class well versed in the assigned
     readings and ready to participate.  I'm interested in the quality of
     your comments not just their quantity, and I do take attendance (20%).
    
     READINGS
     Buy:
     Coursepack (at Graphic Impressions, 1315 Jamestown Rd, 229-6230)
     Nash et al., The American People, vol. II.
     Ralph Andrist, The Long Death
     Elizabeth Ewen, Immigrant Women in the Land of Dollars
     Tim O'Brien, If I Die in a Combat Zone
    
         The books (except the coursepack) are available at the William &
     Mary Bookstore.  They should also be on reserve at Swem Library.
     However, since we will use them extensively in class, I strongly
     recommend that you buy the books and bring them with you to class on
     the days they are to be discussed.  The coursepack is at Graphic
     Expressions off of Jamestown Rd.  Turn right after the Polo Club.
     You'll pass alongside the strip mall and head into a winding office
     complex.  At the top of the hill, take a left.
    
     Final grades will be computed as follows:
    
         Journal:    15%
         Participation:  20%
         Research Paper: 20%
         Mid-term exam:  15%
         Final Exam: 30%
         TOTAL   100%
    
     SCHEDULE
     January 17W --Introduction.
     Week 1: What the War Wrought
     January 19F --Read Nash, ch. 16, and start reading: The Long Death.
     January 22M --Read: Nash, ch. 17.
     January 24W --Read: The Long Death.
     January 26F --Read: Remainder of Andrist, The Long Death.
     Week 2: Free Markets and Free Labor?
     January 29M --Read: Nash, ch. 18
     January 31W --
     February 02F    --Read: Coursepack (CP) #4
     Week  3: Power, Politics, and Patronage in the Gilded Age
     February 05M    --
     February 07W    --Read: Nash, ch. 19.
     February 09F    --Read: CP #5
     Week 4: Entering the Land of Dollars
     February 12M    --Read: Ewen, IMMIGRANT WOMEN, pp. 11-74
     February 14W    --Read: Ewen, IMMIGRANT WOMEN, pp. 75-164.
     February 16F    --Read: Ewen, IMMIGRANT WOMEN, remainder (esp.
     conclusion).
     Week 5: The Progressive Era.
     February 19M    --Lecture: The Search for Order At Home    Read:
     Nash, ch. 21 and CP #6.
     February 21W    --Lecture: The Search for Order Abroad  Read: Nash,
     ch. 20.
     February 23F    --Read: CP #7.
     Week 6: The Great War?
     February 26M    --Lecture: World War I Read: Nash, ch. 22.
     February 28W    --Lecture: The Legacy of War  Read: Nash, ch. 23.
     February 01F    --Midterm Exam.
     Week 7: March 04-8  --SPRING BREAK
     Week 8: Hope and Despair in the Twenties
     March 11M   --Film and Discussion  Read: CP #8.
     March 13W   --Lecture: The Causes of the Great Depression and Bonus
     March
     March 15F   --Discussion of CP #9.
     Week 9: The Imperial Presidency, Labor's New Power, and the Rise of
     the State
     March 18M   --Lecture: The New Deal Coalition and the Welfare State.
      Read: Nash, ch. 24.
     March 20W   --Lecture: The Rise and Fall of Organized Labor.
     March 22F   --Discussion of CP #10.
     Week 10: The Good War?
     March 25M   --Lecture: The war at home.  Read: Nash, ch. 25.
     March 27W   --Lecture: The Roots of the Cold War  Read: Nash, ch. 26.
     March 29F   --Film: Goin' to Chicago (part I).
     Week 11: The Culture of Consensus
     April 1M    --Lecture: The Road to Vietnam Read: Nash, ch. 28.
     April 3W    --Discussion: America in the 50s.  Read: Nash, ch. 27
     and CP #11.
     April 5F    --Film: "Ain't Afraid of Your Jails."  Read: Nash, ch.
     29.
     Week 12: A Culture of Conflict
     April 8M    --Discussion of O'Brien, If I Die in a Combat Zone.
     April 10W   --Discussion of CP #12.
     April 12F   --Visiting Lecturer: Watergate
     Week 13: Rusted Dreams
     April 15M   --Film "Goin' to Chicago" part II and discussion of CP
     #13.
     April 17W   --Lecture: Oil Embargoes, Rusted Dreams, and the New
     Nativism
     April 19F   --Discussion of CP #14.
     Week 14: The Gilded Age Revisited?
     April 22M   --Lecture: The Republican Consensus Reborn, 1968-?
     Nash, ch. 30.
     April 24W   --Review.
     Cindy Hahamovitch
     Assistant Professor of History
     College of William & Mary
     Phone:     804-221-3770
     Internet:  [cxhaha@mail.wm.edu](mailto:cxhaha@mail.wm.edu)

