April 1997 Newsletter

![WB01718_.gif \(2314 bytes\)](WB01718_.gif)

**

Calls for Papers

**

Pioneer America Society1997 Annual Conference

Dearborn, MichiganOctober 2-4, 1997

The Pioneer America Society will hold its 29th annual conference in Dearborn,
Michigan, October 2-4, 1997. The conference committee is currently soliciting
proposals from all appropriate disciplines for papers, special sessions, and
panel discussions on the cultural landscape and the material culture of North
America. Proposals pertaining to the Great Lakes region are especially

welcome. Those interested are encouraged to submit a title with a typed
single-spaced abstract of one/third to one/half page no later than July 28,
1997. For complete conference information, contact:

Marshall McLennan or Ted Ligibel, Historic Preservation Program, Dept. of
Geography, Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, MI 48197, Tel:
313-487-0218, Fax: 313-487-6979

**

Aviation History Conference

**

Planning is underway for a major conference on aviation/aerospace history
scheduled for October 1-3, 1998, at Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio.
Focusing on the first century of powered flight, conference organizers are
seeking individual paper and panel proposals reflecting the

following thematic areas:

Flight and Society

Flight and Public Policy

Flight Technology

Paper/panel proposals are due November 1, 1997; notification of acceptance
will be made by February 1, 1998. Conference organizers plan to publish a
proceedings. Further inquiries and requests for additional information may be
addressed to:

Aviation History Conference

Conference and Events

Rm. E180 Student Union

Wright State University

Dayton, OH 45434-0001

February 25, 1997

Science & Society: Technological Turn

Tokyo, Kyoto & Hiroshima, Japan

March 16-22, 1988

The purpose of the conference is to examine the reality and the problems
raised by undergoing technological change. The deadline for proposal for
sessions is March 15, 1997. The deadline for individual papers and posters is
August 31, 1997. For more information, contact:

Conference Office

c/o Prof. Shin-ichi Kobayashi

Graduate School of Information Systems

University of Electro-communications

1-5-1, Chofugaoka

Chofu City

Tokyo 182

Japan

Fax: +81 424 85 9843

Email: sts@kob.is.uec.ac.jp

Homepage: http://hostcinf.shinshu-u.ac.jp/stsconfjp.html

February 25, 1997

Logic and Mathematical Reasoning Mexico City September

30th-October 2nd, 1997

Plenary Lectures:

Jean Dhombres (University of Nantes)

Solomon Feferman (Stanford University)

Michel Otte (University of Bielefeld)

Hourya Sinaceur(CNRS Paris)

Jean Michel Salanskis (University of Lille)

Daniele Struppa (George Mason University)

Participation is open to any scholar who wishes to present a 40 minute talk.
Please send a one-page abstract by April 30, 1997. For more information,
contact:

Carlos Alvarez

Depto. de Matematicas

Fac. de Ciencias, UNAM

Ciudad Universitaria

04510 Mexico D.F.

February 24, 1997

Oral History Association

The Oral History Association invites proposals for papers and presentations
for its 1998 annual meeting, to be held October 15-18 in Buffalo, New York.
The theme of the meeting is "Crossing the Boundary,  Crossing the Line: Oral
History on the Border." Proposals that relate to  mediations among diverse
communities; class, ethnic, racial, and gender  perspectives; interdiscplinary
approaches; transnational issues;  migration and immigration; transgressions;
new frontiers in technology;  lesbian and gay history; relationships in
interviewing; marginality; oral history and recieved historical wisdom;
shifting borders in oral history; and ethical and legal boundaries are
especially encouraged. Proposals on other topics are also welcomed.

For further information or to submit proposals, contact:

Debra Bernhardt Cliff Kuhn

Robert F. Wagner Labor Archives Department of History

70 Washington Square South Georgia State University

New York, NY 10012 Atlanta, GA 30303

(212) 998-2640 (404) 651-3255

Fax: (212) 995-4070 Fax: (404) 651-1745

Proposal deadline: December 15, 1997

February 24, 1997

The North American Sundial Society

The North American Sundial Society will hold its annual meeting on 11-14
September 1997 in Chicago. Highlights will include visits to the Adler
Planetarium and Astronomy Museum (Chicago) and the Time Museum (Rockford) in
order to inspect their early time-finding instruments. A tour of modern
sundials in the Chicagoland area is also planned. The program committee
invites papers on all aspects of dialling, including the history, culture,
design, fabrication, and science of sundials. Exhibits and short show-and-tell
demonstrations are also welcome. Abstracts (up to 500 words) must be submitted
by June 1st. For further information about NASS or the meeting, please
contact: Sara Schechner Genuth, National Museum of American History, Room
1040, MRC 605, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC 20560; fax (202)
786-2851; sgenuth@sil.si.edu.

February 24, 1997<

Boys and Their Toys? Masculinity, Technology, and Work

For a conference on October 3, 1997, the Center for the History of Business,
Technology, and Society invites scholars to submit proposals for empirical
papers that raise broad issues and offer fresh conceptualizations of the
relationship between masculinity, technology, and work in America since the
Civil War. We welcome historical essays as well as ethnographic studies coming
from the fields of sociology, anthropology, and related social science
disciplines. In considering paper proposals, we will interpret work broadly to
include white and blue collar labor, and entrepreneurship.

Proposals for individual papers should be no more than 500 words in length,
and accompanied by a c.v. or resume. The deadline for submissions is April 1,
1997\. Send to Dr. Roger Horowitz, Hagley Museum and Library, P.O. Box 3630,
Wilmington DE 19807, or by fax to 302-655-3188. For more information call
302-658-2400 or email rh@udel.edu. Funds to support the travel expenses of
paper presenters may be available.

Conference on the History of Computing

The Fifth French Conference on the History of Computing will he held in
Toulouse, France, in March 1998. Previous Computing History conferences have
been held at Grenoble (1988), Paris (1990), Sophia-Antipolis (1993) and Rennes
(1995).

The conference will be sponsored by the Ecole nationale suprieure
d'electrotechnique, d'electronique, d'informatique, et d'hydraulique de
Toulouse (ENSEEIHT) at the University of Toulouse.

The conference will focus on four major topics:

1) Informatics and aerospace (Toulouse is a leading European center of
aerospace research).

2) The teaching of Informatics.

3) Man/machine/system communication (languages, software, peripherals).

4) Norms, standardization, patents.

5) Software industry

Procedures:

Those wishing to present a paper at the conference should send a two-page
outline (three copies please), before February 15, 1997, to:

Pierre-E. Mounier-Kuhn

Centre Roland-Mousnier, Paris-IV Sorbonne

1 rue Victor-Cousin 75005

Telephone : (33) 01 40 46 25 40 - Fax : (33) 01 40 46 31 92

e@mail : mounier@sorbonne.msh-paris.fr

Authors will be informed of the program committee's decision regarding their
proposal by March 15, 1997. The deadline for sending complete papers will be
October 30, 1997. Copies of the papers will be made available at the opening
of the conference.

Exhibition:

There will be an exhibition of historical computing machinery at the
conference. The 1995 Rennes exhibition featured two complete vintage Bull
equipments, carefully restored to working order, classic 1950's
electromechanical machinery and a Gamma 10 computer of 1964. A payroll
application was run to demonstrate the computer. The exhibition was organized
by the federation des quipes Bull (FEB), an association of retired Bull
personnel. Other items displayed were "Minitel" prototypes of the late 1970s
and various computer memories. We expect a similarly informative exhibition in
1998.

Toulouse:

Toulouse is a charming city and hospitable city in South-West France, where
high-tech industry has been harmoniously mixed with ancient architecture.
Toulouse offers music, cuisine and good wines. It is also close to the
Pyrenees ski resorts.

Southern Labor Studies Conference

The Southern Labor Studies Conference will hold its tenth biennial meeting at
the College of William & Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia, from September 25 to
28, 1997. This conference brings together scholars from a wide range of
disciplines, labor activists, teachers, and students to learn about labor in
the South and other parts of the world. The theme of the conference will be
"Organizing the Unorganized: Past and Present, Locally and Globally." In
seeking to fill existing panels, the Program committee seeks paper proposals
in the following areas:

-Contingent workers: temporaries; subcontracted labor; or workers in the informal sector

-Workers and the Law

-Affirmative Action

-Child labor

-the criminalization of vagrancy

-farm workers

Please submit proposals and brief biographies or CVs by February 15, 1997 to:

Cindy Hahamovitch

email cxhaha@mail.wm.edu

fax: 757/221-2111

mail:

Prof. Cindy Hahamovitch

Department of History

P.O. Box 8795

The College of William & Mary

Williamsburg, VA 23187-8795

Perspectives on Science

I am currently soliciting articles for the next, and future, issues of the
journal PERSPECTIVES ON SCIENCE: HISTORICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, SOCIAL  The
journal publishes studies of science (and medicine and technology) that
integrate historical, philosophical, and/or sociological understandings of the
topic(s) being addressed. The editors of PERSPECTIVES believe that publishing
interdisciplinary studies of specific people and events in science will help
scholars gain a more comprehensive understanding of science in general.

The journal has been published for five years by the University of Chicago
Press. Each issue of PERSPECTIVES includes case studies, theoretical articles,
and historiographic essays. Past articles include:

"The Resolution of Discordant Results," Allan Franklin

"Rationality Among the Friends of Truth: The Gassendi-Descartes Controversy,"
Lynn S. Joy

"Towards More Secrecy in Science? Challenges to an Ethics of Science," Mathias
Kaiser

"Cordelia's Love: Credibility, Validity, and the Social Studies of Science,"
Steven Shapin

"Looting, Reparation, and Stewardship: Ethical Issues in Archaeology," Alison
Wylie

"The Political Cartography of the Human Genome Project," Brian Balmer.

Upcoming issues include selcted proceedings of the first annual meeting for
the History of Philosophy of Science and overviews of current themes in the
philosophy of biology and a historiographic essay on books about the Internet.

For more information on the journal in general, or about submitting articles
specifically, please visit the journal's homepage.

Feel free to contact me at the address below if you have any questions.

Ed Lamb

Managing Editor

Perspectives on Science

Department of Philosophy

Virginia Tech

Blacksburg, VA 24061-0126

Ph. (540) 231-7879

Fax (540) 231-6367

Email lamb@vt.edu

Middle Eastern Environments

The Council on Middle East Studies, at the Yale Center for International and
Area Studies, invites proposals for papers to be given at an interdisciplinary
conference scheduled for October 30 - November 1,1997, entitled
"Transformations of Middle Eastern Environments: Legacies and Lessons."

1-2 page abstracts, along with curriculum vitae, are due March 31st,1997.

Proposed Topics: Climate Change; Links between Nature and Culture: Water
Management and Irrigation; Environmental Movements; Deforestation and
Desertification; Pollution; Issues of the Marine Environment; Agrarian Issues
and Development; Environmental Law and Policy; and Remote Sensing as a
Research Tool.

We plan to devote panel presentations and discussions to the above topics.

We also welcome proposals for other subjects for presentation in poster
sessions. Participants will be eligible for reimbursement for travel costs and
lodging. Selected papers will also be considered for publication.

Please forward all abstracts to:

Abbas Amanat, Chair

Council on Middle East Studies

Conference on Environment

Yale Center for International and Area Studies

P.O. Box 208206

New Haven, CT 06520-8206

U.S.A.

Other enquiries can be directed to the conference organizers, Roger Kenna and
Magnus Thorkell Bernhardsson, at

Phone: (203) 432-6252

Fax: (203) 432-9381

E-Mail: Roger.Kenna@Yale.edu

Magnus.Bernhardsson@Yale.edu

Conferences

March 4, 1997

Knowledge and Its Discontents: Science, Expertise, Modernity

Cornell University  May2-4, 1997

The Department of Science & Technology Studies, Cornell University, announces
a conference on expertise, organized with the support of the National Science
Foundation, entitled "Knowledge and Its Discontents: Science, Expertise,
Modernity." This workshop will be held in Ithaca, New  York on May 2-4, 1997.

Leading American and European scholars in the field of science and
technology studies will examine the changing social and political meanings of
expertise and its role in making of modern culture. The design of the
conference is thoroughly interdiscplinary, with panels on

the following topics:

Law, Science, Expertise (Margaret Berger, Sheila Jasanoff, Martha Nussbaum)

Modernity and Expertise (Yaron Ezrahi, Helga Nowotny, Theodore Porter, Brian
Wynne)

Custom, Specialization and Skill (Harry Collins, Peter Galison, Michael Lynch,
Steven Shapin)

Science, Self and Public (Wiebe Bijker, Adele Clarke, Aant Elzinga, Steven
Yearley)

Science's Responsibilities to Its Publics (John Beatty, Thomas Eisner, Evelyn
Fox Keller, Peter Weingart)

In conjunction with the conference there will be a day-long workshop organized
by the Science & Technology Studies graduate students on Friday, May 2.

Further information and registration form for the conference are available
from the Cornell Science & Technology website at
http://www.sts.cornell.edu/Workshop.html. Registration forms and information
can also be obtained from:

Lilian Isacks

Department of Science & Technology Studies

726 University Avenue

Cornell University

Ithaca, NY 14850

USA

Tel: 607-255-6234

Fax: 607-255-0616

Email: li10@cornell.edu

March 4, 1997

Prints in America, 1750-1875: Resources for Judgement

Winterthur, DE  June 20-21, 1997

On Friday June 20th and 21st there will be a seminar "Prints in America,
1750-1875: Resources for Judgement" in Winterthur, Delaware. The seminar will
offer lectures, workshops and tours highlighting Winterthur's museum
collection of historic prints. Speakers include:

E. McSherry Fowble, director of Winterthur's museum collections division

John Krill, senior conservator at Winterthur

Bernard F. Reilly, Chicago Historical Society

David Tatham, Syracuse University

Enrollment is limted. For further information and fees, call

302-888-4600, 800-448-3883 ot TTY 302-888-4907.

February 25, 1997

Penser les Usages (Imagining Uses)  May 27-29,

1997  Bordeaux, France

The conference is aimed at a discussion of the saturaiton of the
communications market and an exploration of the future of communications.

It is hoped that professionals and scholars in communications fields,
business, as well as academics will participate.For more information and a
copy fo the preliminary program, contact:

Secretariat du COLLOQUE INTERNATIONAL

PENSER LES USAGES

ADERA

B.P. 196

33608 Pessac Cedex

France

February 25, 1997

THOMAS A. EDISON SESQUICENTENNIAL CONFERENCE

"INTERPRETING EDISON"

June 25-27, 1997

In recognition of the 150th anniversary of Thomas A. Edison's birth, the
National Park Service, Organization of American Historians and New Jersey
Studies Academic Alliance are pleased to announce a three-day conference,
"Interpreting Edison." This conference, which will be held June 25-27, 1997 at
Rutgers University-Newark and the Edison National Historic Site, will examine
the interpretation of Edison's life and work in academic scholarship, at
museums and historic sites, and in the classroom. Scholars from the United
States, Canada and Europe will present new research on Edison's role as
inventor, business leader and cultural figure. Representatives from five major
U.S. Edison-related sites will discuss their interpretative and museum
management programs. There will also be a series of sessions designed to help
teachers integrate Edison-related themes into the history curriculum.   In the
opening session, distinguished historians Ruth S. Cowan, David Nye, Thomas
Schlereth, John M. Staudenmeier and Alan Trachtenberg will offer their
insights on Edison's place in American history.  Other highlights of the
conference include a virtual tour of Edison's reconstructed Menlo Park
Laboratory at the Henry Ford Museum in Dearborn, Michigan; lunch on the
grounds of Edison's estate, Glenmont; and a demonstration of the Library of
Congress early motion picture webpage. Edison descendant and University of New
Haven professor David Edison Sloane will speak about the Edison family at the
conference banquet.

For more information about the conference, or registration details, please
contact:

Leonard DeGraaf

Edison National Historic Site

Main Street and Lakeside Avenue

West Orange, New Jersey 07052

201-736-0550, ext. 22

Internet: EDIS_Curatorial@nps.gov

The Centenary of the Electron

A conference celebrating The Centenary of the Electron, will be held on 11-12
April 1997 at at the Royal Society and the Science Museum. Sponsored by the
British Society for the History of Science, the Royal Society and the Science
Museum.

For more details please contact Wing Commander Geoffrey Bennett,

31 High St, Stanford in the Vale, Faringdon, Oxon SN7 8LH, fax: 01367 718963,
email G.Bennett@hidex.demon.co.uk, tel: 01367710223

February 25, 1997

Second History of Philosophy of Science Conference

March 12-15, 1998

The Reilly Center for Science, Technology, and Values at the   University of
Notre Dame (Notre Dame, Indiana) will host the Second  History of Philosophy
of Sience Conference from March 12-15, 1998. The  keynote speaker will be
Ernan McMullin. For more infomration contact:

Cassandra Pinnick

Department of Philosophy

Western Kentucky University

Bowling Green, KY 42101

Email: pinnick2@wku.edu

Electronic News

February 26,1997

Library of Congress Online

The Library of Congress Information System (LOCIS) can be accessed at

http://lcweb.loc.gov/homepage/online.html.

February 26, 1997

History of Physics

The history of physics website, mounted by the AIP Center for History of

Physics, can be found at http://www.aip.org/history/.

February 26, 1997

The Burndy Library Catalogue Online

The catalogue of the Burndy Library (Dibner Institute) can be found at
http://www.amira.mit.edu:4300.

February 26, 1997

NSF Short Causes for College Teachers, 1997

The NSF catalogue outlining the short courses for teachers in 1997 can be
found at http://www.engrng.pitt.edu/~chautaug/.

February 25, 1997

The American Studies Crossroads Project and the ASA

International Committee

Invite you to Join

INTERROADS

Interroads is an Electronic Discussion Forum for International/Comparative
Perspectives on the Study of American Culture.

INTERROADS is a moderated listserv cosponsored by the American Studies
Crossroads Project and the International Committee of the US American Studies
Association, and funded with support from the LSOFT Corporation as part of
their "Ten Lists for Education" initiative.

INTERROADS encourages discussions of American Studies from an
international/comparative perspective. The list posts short essays on relevant
subjects followed initially by invited responses from American Studies
scholars around the world. After the essays and responses are posted, the
discussion of the topic under review is opened to the general list membership
until the thread plays to its conclusion.

INTERROADS is available on the World Wide Web at the archive site kindly
provided by the LSOFT corporation:
http://home.dc.lsoft.com/archives/interroads.html

Membership in INTERROADS is free and open to everyone, though it is not
necessary to be a member or even have Internet access in order to submit or
receive postings. To subscribe to INTERROADS, send a message by email to
LISTSERV@home.ease.lsoft.com containing the text SUBSCRIBE INTERROADS
yourfirstname yourlastname (where yourfirstname yourlastname is your own first
name and surname).

We hope you will be interested in joining the INTERROADS list and look forward
to seeing you there!

February 25, 1997

"Inside an American Factory"

The Library of Congress is home to a virtual exhibition titled "Inside an
American Factory: The Westinghouse Works, 1904." It can be accessed at
http://lcweb2.loc.gov/ammem/papr/west/westhome.html.

February 25, 1997

National Museum of Science an Technology - Ottawa,

Canada

The National Museum of Science and Technology in Ottawa, Canada, has a large
collection of trade literature, approximately 40,000 items, including
catalogues, advertisements, owner's manuals, repair manuals, parts lists,
price lists, etc. A list of subjects, corresponding to those of the museum's
artifact collection, is on http://www.science-
tech.nmstc.ca/research/library/etradsbj.htm.

While we have a particular interest in Canadian manufacturers, we collect
trade literature connected with any items sold and used in Canada, whatever
the country of origin.

February 25, 1997

History of Chemistry Discussion List

A new mail distribution list has been set up to carry information and
discussion related to the history of chemistry.

The list is supported by the Chemical Heritage Foundation in Philadelphia, the
Sidney M. Edelstein Center for the History and Philosophy of Science,
Technology, and Medicine in Jerusalem,and by the German Chemical Society's
History Division.

To join send mail to MAISER@LISTSERV.NGATE.UNI-REGENSBURG.DE with nothing but
the following command in the body of your message: subscribe CHEM-HIST

February 25, 1997

Edison Archival Essays Online

The Business History Conference webpage has published the first of a series of
archival essays entitled "Business History Resources in the Edison National
Historic Site Archives." This essay contains descriptions of the extensive
business and economic history-related holdings in the Edison NHS Archives,
located in West Orange, New Jersey. The archives contains over 4.5 million
original items relating to the life and work of Thomas A. Edison.

The essay includes a series of images from the 60,000 item historic photograph
collection, information about researcher access policies, and links to other
Edison-related websites.

By publishing this information, the National Park Service hopes to encourage
greater research use of this collection.

Access the essay at http://www.eh.net/~bhc/Exchange/edhome.html.

Leonard DeGraaf

Edison National Historic Site

February 25, 1997

"The Glovers of Fulton County"

The History and Media Project of the Department of History of the Univesity at
Albany-SUNY has initiated its first major project, "The Glovers of Fulton
County" \-- an encyclopedic, hypertext treatment of an entire Mohawk Valley
industry, examining its evolution from the early 1800s through the late 20th
century. It marks the first of what we hope will be many WWW installations
produced by History Department faculty and students. For a sample of the rich
labor and business history sources we will be installing on the Web, check out
"The Glovers of Fulton County -- The Glove Cutters' Strike of 1914" easily
linked through our Department's http://www.albany.edu/history Webpage.

The project is directed by Prof. Gerald Zahavi and graduate student Susan
McCormick. This project will be followed by one focusing on the history of the
General Electric Corporation, from the 1890s through the present.

Fellowships

March 4, 1997

International Research & Exchange Board

IREX (International Research & Exchange Board) has programs for curriculum
development, travel, and research in Central and Eastern Europe and Eurasia.
For more information, contact:

Tel: 202-628-8188

Fax: 202-628-8189

Email: irex@info.irex.org

Web: http://www.irex.org

February 26, 1997

American Antiquarian Society

The AAS is offering a fellowship, funded by The Andrew W. Mellon   foundation.
The fellowship is open to scholars no more than three years beyond receipt of
the Ph.D. Recipients will use their year-long residency at AAS to extend
research and revise the dissertation for publication. They will be required to
give first refusal on the resulting manuscript to the AAS-CUP monograph series
(Cambridge University Press). The first deadline for applications for this
fellowship will likely be in the fall of 1997 for tenure during the 1998-99
academic year.

For further information, contact:

John B. Hench

American Antiquarian Society

A National Research Library of American History

185 Salisbury Street

Worcester, MA 01609-1634

Tel: 508-755-5221

February 26, 1997

1998-99 Fulbright Awards for U.S. Faculty and

Professionals

Opportunities for lecturing or advanced research in over 135 countries are
available to college and university faculty and professionals outside academe.
U.S. citizenship and the Ph.D. or comparable professional qualifications
required. For lecturing awards, university or college teaching experience is
required. Foreign language skills are needed for some countries, but most
lecturing assignments are in English.

The deadline for lecturing on research grants for 1998-99 is <b>August 1,
1997. Other deadlines are in place for special programs:   distinguished
Fulbright chairs in Western Europe and Canada (May 1) and Fulbright seminars
for international education and academic administrators (November 1).

Contact:

The USIA Fulbright Senior Scholar Program Council for International Exchange
of Scholars<br> 3007 Tilden Street, NW Suite 5M Box GNEWS Washington, DC
20008-3009 Tel: 202-686-7877  Web Page: http://www.cies.org
Email:cies1@ciesnet.cies.org

February 25, 1997

Andrew W. Mellon Foundation

The Andrew W. Mellon Foundation has awarded the Library of   Congress $330,000
to enable it to seek applications for the Mellon Foreign Area Fellowship
research awards, aimed at U.S. citizens with Ph.D. degrees who are intersted
in pursuing research in the Library's

unrivaled foreign-language and area studies collections. The Mellon grant
finances three years of competition for the fellowships. In addition to the
requirements of U.S. citizenship and possession of a doctoral degree, the
awards are for scholars who are proposing or working on a second major
research project with a focus on foreign-language materials. The fellowships
will last from five to 11 motnhs and can begin no sooner than August 1, 1997.
Stipends of $3,000 per month, up to a maximum of $33,000 for 11 months, will
be awarded and may be used to extend the research period supported by other
funds.

Further details on the purpose, duration, stipend, and selection process, as
well as an application, contact the Office of Scholarly Programs at the
following address:

Mellon fellowships

Office of Scholarly Programs

Library of Congress

Washington, DC 20540-4860

Tel: 202-707-1517

Fax: 202-707-3595

Email: pgif@loc.gov

February 25, 1997

CRHST Postdoctoral Awards for Foreign Researchers

The Centre has several research positions funded by the C.N.R.S.   for 1998.
Candidates must have a doctorate in the history of science or technology (or
closely related fields). Applications are encouraged from younger scholars
whose projects fall within one of the Centre's main areas of research:

1\. the history (19th and 20th century) of the relationship between   science,
technology and industry

2\. the history (19th and 20th century) of the spread of scientific and
technical knowledge and practices, including the history of popularization

3\. the history (19th and 20th century) of the interaction of France with
foreign countries in the fields of science and technology

4\. the historiography of science and technology in general

A good command of the French language is required.

Work at the Centre is interdisciplinary, with a strong emphasis on comparative
studies. Research resources include the specialized libraries and other
facilities of the Cite des Sciences et de l'Industrie. Collaboration with this
modern science and technology centre is a unique feature of the CRHST, and
candidates should be interested in getting involved with these activities.

The duration of an appointment usually varies from three to six months. All
positions require a work permit issued by the French authorities. The gross
monthly salary is usually around 13.000 Francs. the position allows complete
access to the Centre's resources. Travel and removla expenses are not
reimbursed.

Deadline for applications for 1998 is March 28, 1997. Letters of application,
accompanied by a complete curriculum vitae, a list of publications, a brief
statement of the proposed research (in French) and two letters of
recommendation, should be sent to:

John Krige, directeur

C.R.H.S.T. Cite des Sciences et de l'Industrie

75930 Paris Cedex 19

France

Tel: 33 1 40 05 75 52

Fax: 33 1 40 05 75 52

February 25, 1997

The Max-Planck-Institute for the History of Science

The Max-Planck-Institute for the History of Science in Berlin announces three
Walther Rathenau postdoctoral research fellowships for the academic year
1997-98. The Rathenau fellowships are intended to give outstanding young
scholars of all nationalities who have recently received their doctorate in
any field the opportunity to pursue a research project that connects
thehistory of science or technology to their own discipline.

The theme for 1997-98 is "Forms and Genres for the Communication of Scientific
Knowledge". Examples might include interdisciplinary projects dealing with the
representation of scientific knowledge in various forms of print and writing
(lab notebooks, research papers, textbooks), museum displays, films,
paintings, and other media, as well as with interactions of popular and expert
knowledge traditions.

Furthermore the Institute announces the Lorenz Kruger Postdoctoral Fellowship
for 1997-98 for an outstanding junior scholar whose current research combines
perspectives from the history of science with those of the philosophy of
science and/or the history of philosophy. The fellowship is named in honor of
the late Professor Lorenz Kruger, of the University of Gottingen, whose work
sought the connect philosophy with the history of science.

The fellowships are awarded for a one year stay at the Institute in Berlin,
beginning October 1997. They are open to scholars of all nationalities who
have completed their Ph.D. no later than 30 September 97 and no earlier than
30 September 92. The stipend for applicants from abroad is 3400 DM per month.
Women are encouraged to apply. Qualifications being equal, precedence will be
given to candidates with disabilities. Applicants are invited to send a
curriculum vitae, a brief research proposal (500 words), a writing sample
(e.g. a dissertation chapter or article), and two letters of recommendation by
31 March 1997 to:

Max Planck Institute for the History of Science  Abt. Personal

Wilhelmstrabe 44 10117 Berlin Germany

Employment

February 25, 1997

University of British Columbia

Applications are invited for a joint (equally shared) tenure stream
appointment at the rank of Assistant Professor in the Departments of Geography
and History at the University of British Columbia. The search is for an
outstanding scholar in American (preferably western American) environmental
history / historical geography who is well-grounded in the sciences and the
humanities. Research and teaching interests must be compatible with those of
both departments and preferred applicants will be those with: developed
interests in the social dimensions of environmental change and the social
construction of nature; and research that centres upon renewable resources,
preferably forestry. Teaching responsibilities include undergraduate courses
in both departments and in two or more of the following areas: American
environmental history, Forest History, Natural resource or environmental
geography, and Humanistic perspectives on the environment.

Applicants are expected to have a Ph.D., teaching experience and significant
publications.

Inquiries or applications, including a curriculum vitae and the names,
addresses and telephone numbers of three referees should be sent to either:

Dr. David Breen Dr. Trevor Barnes

Department of History Department of Geography

University of British Columbia University of British Columbia

#1297 - 1873 East Mall 1984 West Mall

Vancouver, British Columbia Vancouver, British Columbia

V6T 1Z1 V6T 1Z2

FAX: (604) 822-6658 FAX: (604) 822-6150

The closing date for applications is 24 March 1997 and the starting date for
this position is 1 July 1997.

This position is subject to final budgetary approval.

http://www.arts.ubc.ca./history/history.htm

http://www.geog.ubc.ca./

The University of British Columbia welcomes all qualified applicants,
especially women, aboriginal people, visible minorities and persons with
disabilities. In accordance with Canada's immigration requirements, priority
will be given to Canadian citizens and permanent residents of Canada.

February 25, 1997

University of Virginia

History of Technology/Environmental History Postdoctoral Teaching Fellow

The University of Virginia announces the formation of a Committee for the
History of Technology and the Environment which brings together faculty from
the College of Arts and Sciences, the School of Engineering and Applied
Science, and the School of Architecture. The Committee will encourage study of
technological and environmental history through graduate fields and
undergraduate minors.

To further the aims of the Committee, the University will appoint a
Postdoctoral Teaching Fellow. This Fellow will teach undergraduate courses in
the Engineering School which integrate historical perspectives with
professional communications and engineering ethics. In addition, the Fellow
will assist in developing a University-wide faculty seminar on technological
and environmental history and will interact with students in the History
Department's graduate program. The Fellow will be appointed as a Lecturer for
one year and may be renewed, subject to satisfactory performance, for up to
three years total. The successful candidate will have graduate training and
research experience in the history of technology, environmental history, or
another appropriate specialty. Prior teaching experience is desirable. The
candidate must have completed the Ph.D by August 1997 and the appointment will
begin in September 1997. The appointment includes competitive salary with
benefits. Send letter of application, c. v., sample publication or paper, and
three letters of recommendation by 1 April 1997 to Professor W. Bernard
Carlson, Division of Technology, Culture, and Communication, Thornton Hall,
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, 22903. AA/EOE.

February 24, 1997

DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES

Cornell University

BIOLOGY AND SOCIETY

Visiting Assistant Professor in the Department of Science and Technology
Studies, one-year (with possibility of renewal) from August 1997 to July 1998.
The successful candidate will play an active role in the Department's under-
graduate major in Biology and Society. Teaching responsibilities will include
the interdisciplinary core course for the major and two additional courses in
such areas as history of biology, philosophy of biology, gender and science,
biomedical ethics, and environmental ethics. Participation in advising both
undergraduate and graduate students is expected. Area of specialization open,
but favored possibilities include science and technology studies; history;
philosophy or sociology of the life sciences; political and social theory;
law; or gender studies relating to biology or medicine. Applications from
women and members of minority groups are strongly encouraged. Candidates
should submit: (a) a letter of application explaining the relation of their
research and teaching interests to the requirements of this position; (b) a
curriculum vitae; (c) a sample of written work; (d) a sample syllabus for an
undergraduate course; and (e) three letters of recommendation to be sent
directly to the Department. Application materials should be submitted to:
Professor Sheila Jasanoff, Chair, Department of Science and Technology
Studies, 726 University Avenue, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14850.

Applications will be reviewed starting March 1, 1997. For further information,
please contact the Department at 607-255-6234, or li10@cornell.edu, or
http://www.sts.cornell.edu/CU-STS.html. Cornell University is an affirmative
action/equal opportunity employer.

National Museum of American History

The National Museum of American History is planning to hire a curator for the
museum's Armed Forces collection. The incumbent will develop exhibits, acquire
new collections, manage the care and documentation of the collection, and
perform research leading to both scholarly and popular publications and
programs. We seek a skilled public historian whose work has focussed on 20th
century military history. The successful applicant will have demonstrated the
ability to develop innovative exhibitions and programs to portray military
history and its relation to technology and the fabric of American society to a
broad constituency. This is a Federal Civil Service position GS 13/14. Salary
range $52,867-$62,473. To obtain a complete application package call
202-287-3102 , press 9, and request announcement #96C-2170. Applications must
be postmarked or received by March 31, 1997. EEO/AA

Miscellaneous News

February 26, 1997

Space Business Archives

The Space Business Archives continues to grow. At present there are 2500
individual documents, such as records of Geostar and American Rocket Company
(AMROC).

For information, contact:

Space Studies Institute

P.O. Box 82

Princeton, NJ 08542

Tel: 609-921-0377

Fax: 609-921-0389

Email: ssi@ssi.org

February 25, 1997

Chromium Process Technology

Allied Signal Inc. closed their Baltimore Chrome Works facility

in 1986. Manufacturing buildings and process components were dismantled

in 1992. the site is now being remediated. Chromium process facility drawings
and other information will be discarded in May 1997. Anyone having an interest
in looking at and possibly retaining this information should contact Peter
Demming at Mueser Rutledge Consulting Engineers as soon as possible.

Mueser Rutledge Consulting Engineers

708 Third Avenue

New York, NY 10017

Tel: 212-490-7110

Fax: 212-490-6654

Email: MueserEng@aol.com

MRCE@compuserve.com

February 25, 1997

The International Society for Knowledge Organization

The International Society for Knowledge Organization extends an invitation to
join. Based in Frankfurt, germany, it considers itself a  link between
institutions concerned with conceptual questions pertaining  to the
organization and processing of knowledge. Members, for the most part, are from
the fields of logic, system theory, organization science,  psychology, science
theory, and informatics. For more information, contact:

General Secretariat

Woogstr. 36a

D-60431 Frankfurt

Tel: +49 69 52 36 90

Fax: +49 69 52 05 66

Recent Publications

March 4, 1997

Human Resources for Science and Technology: The European Region

The National Science Foundation has published Human Resources for Science and
Technology: The European Region. The book includes a summary of engineering
and science education in Europe since the 1970s as well as a forecast for
future trends.

To request a copy ask for Surveys of Science Resource Series Special Report
(NSF 96-316) from the NSF.

February 26, 1997

The One Best Way: Frederick Winslow Taylor and the Enigma of Efficiency by
Robert Kanigel

Frederick Winslow Taylor was the first efficieny expert,   progenitor of all
the stopwatch-clicking engineers who stalk the factories and offices of the
industrial world. His ceaseless quest for the "one best way"influenced both
Ford and Lenin, and moved management  guru Peter Drucker to include him, along
with Freud and Darwin, as one of the three seminal thinkers of the modern
world.

To organized labor, Taylor was a slave driver. To the bosses, he was an
eccentric who raised wages while ruling the factory floor with a  stopwatch.
To himself, he was a misunderstood visionary who, under the banner of Science,
would confer prosperity on all and abolish the old class hatreds. To millions
today who feel they give up too much to their jobs, he is the source of that
fierce, unholy obsession with "efficiency" that marks modern life.

The One Best Way (part of the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation technology book
series - Viking Press) tells the story of this driven, stubborn, idealistic
man and re-creates the vanished era of steam and steel in which he lived and
worked. For students of business, labor, history, and technology, it is a must
read.

February 25, 1997

Energy and the Making of Modern California

James C. Williams

The University of Akron Press, Series on Technology and the Environment,
edited by Jeffrey K. Stine and William McGucken, presents:

ENERGY AND THE MAKING OF MODERN CALIFORNIA by James C. Williams

For the last 150 years, California's economy and its people's lifestyleshave
been substantially shaped by access to and the application of energy.

In ENERGY AND THE MAKING OF MODERN CALIFORNIA, James C. Williams has written
the definitive history of energy development in the Golden State, illuminating
the forces that formed the region's culture and economy through the interplay
between technology, population growth, human values, and the environment. He
shows how California's complex and versatile environment constantly challenged
technological inventiveness, making the state's experience with energy a rich
case study that clarifies our rising concerns about how we live with the earth
we inhabit.

Williams is past Director of the California History Center and Foundation and
Professor of History at De Anza College. He received his B.A. at the
University of Oregon, M.A. at San Jose State University, and Ph.D. at the
University of California at Santa Barbara. Editor of several volumes on state
and regional history, he has also contributed to many books and journals,
including ICON: Journal of the International Committee for the History of
Technology, California History, and IA: Journal of the Society for Industrial
Archaeology.

THE UNIVERSITY OF AKRON PRESS

374B Bierce Library, Akron, OH 44325-1703

Tel:(330)972-5342  FAX (330)972-6383

e-mail: press@uakron.edu

http://www.uakron.edu/uapress

![WB01718_.gif \(2314 bytes\)](WB01718_.gif)

[Last updated 24-Feb-99 | [Contact SHOT](mailto:shot@jhu.edu) | [Contact the
Webeditor](mailto:shot@jhu.edu) | [Return to the Newsletter
Archive](../archive.htm)]  
_Copyright (C) 2000 Society for the History of Technology  _

