![](AR.gif)

**AMERICAN SOCIAL HISTORY PROJECT/CENTER FOR MEDIA AND LEARNING  
1999-2000 ANNUAL REPORT**  
INTERACTIVE MEDIA PROJECTS  
  
---  
  
* * *

  
  
|  |  ![](86.199.jpg) |  |  **_Liberty, Equality, Fraternity:  
Exploring the French Revolution_**  
_Liberty, Equality, Fraternity: Exploring the French Revolution_ is the latest
multimedia co-production of ASHP/CML and the Center for History and New Media
at George Mason University. This interactive CD-ROM and Web site is authored
by Lynn Hunt and Jack R. Censer, and produced by Pennee Bender, Joshua Brown
and Roy Rosenzweig. It is distributed by Pennsylvania State University Press,
accompanying a textbook (by Lynn Hunt and Jack R. Censer) of the same name.

_Liberty, Equality, Fraternity_ is an extensive history of the French
Revolution that includes overviews of the revolution's place in world history,
the impact on the French colonies, and the revolution's cultural legacy. The
disk includes hundreds of primary text documents, many available in English
for the first time, and over two hundred images, including many rarely seen
engravings from the Museum of the French Revolution in Vizille. The CD-ROM
also  
includes a series of brief illustrated lectures by Lynn Hunt, Annenberg
Professor of History at the University of Pennsylvania and Jack R. Censer,
Professor of History at George Mason University as well as slide
presentations, songs, and commentary on a broad array of historical images and
documents. Linked to the ten chapters of text are a wide range of primary
resources that enable users to analyze images, documents, music, and
artifacts, along with sections on methods for "reading" visual and other
cultural evidence. The disk will also include maps, a glossary, and a
timeline. Over the next year, all of these features will also be posted on the
World Wide Web, allowing students access to a rich collection of primary
sources on the French Revolution.

Supported by a development grant from the Florence Gould Foundation and major
production funding from the National Endowment for the Humanities, _Liberty,
Equality, Fraternity: Exploring the French Revolution_ has the potential to
become the first in a series of multimedia programs on Great Transformations
in World History designed for use in introductory Western Civilization and
World History courses at the college and high school levels as well as for
general audiences. Portions of the CD-ROM have already been posted on the
World Wide Web and were tested in high school classes in Fairfax County,
Virginia, and San Antonio, Texas, and in college classes at Northern Virginia
Community College, the University of Nevada at Las Vegas, MIT, the University
of Pennsylvania, the University of Texas at Austin, and George Mason
University.  
  
**_History Matters: The U.S. Survey on the Web_**  
This project, also a collaboration with the Center for History and New Media
at George Mason University, is ASHP/CML's first major project designed
expressly for the World Wide Web. Since the inception of the New Media
Classroom program in 1996, ASHP/CML has been bringing together media
producers, historians, and educators to confront the challenges of combining
history with new media in high school and college classrooms. With _History
Matters_ [ (http://historymatters.gmu.edu)](http://historymatters.gmu.edu), we
are developing a Web-based set of resources to assist high school and college
teachers of the basic U.S. History survey course. The _History Matters_ site
serves both as a resource itself and as a "gateway" to the vast but uneven
resources now available on the World Wide Web that teachers--faced with too
many demands on their time--can not always quickly master.

With a 1997 grant from the W.K. Kellogg Foundation we conceptualized the
overall parameters of the site and developed a prototype. Even in its
prototype stage, _History Matters_ gained renown as a valuable resource,
attracting an average of 6,000 visitors weekly and receiving a citation as an
exemplary "best of the humanities" Web site on the National Endowment for the
Humanities' [ EDSITEment](http://www.edsitement.neh.gov) Web portal. A major
grant from the NEH's Education Division, awarded in April 2000, is funding the
site's current expansion. _History Matters_ is organized into the following
nine sections; it will eventually contain hundreds of documents, Web site
annotations, and other materials, all contextualized with information that
will make the resources useful for students and teachers.

**WWW.History** is our annotated guide to the most useful Web sites for
teachers of U.S. history.  
**Many Pasts** contains first-person documents in text, image, and audio
formats that chronicle the experiences of "ordinary" Americans in a variety of
eras.  
**Under the Magnifying Glass** offers interactive exercises that explore the
historian's craft.  
**Digital Blackboard** supplies examples of successful Web-based assignments,
most of them growing out of the work of participants in the New Media
Classroom.  
**Making Sense of History** will include ten "Learner's Guides" on Primary
Materials and the Use of Evidence, providing detailed guidance on using
primary sources to teachers and students.  
**Students as Historians** features exemplary online student projects that
illustrate how student-constructed projects can be incorporated into courses.  
**Past Meets Present** contains articles and resources that provide historical
context for current issues and events.  
**Reference Desk** will supply teachers and students with references for
citing and evaluating digital resources, locating information on standards for
history and social studies, and understanding copyright and fair use
requirements.  
**Secrets of Great History Teachers** is a series of online interviews in
which distinguished teachers share their strategies and techniques.  
**Syllabus Central** provides annotated syllabi for the survey course that
offer different approaches to teaching, with an emphasis on using technology.  
**Talking History** offers month-long Web-based forums where teachers can
engage with leading scholars in wide-ranging discussions about how to teach
key subjects covered in the U.S. survey.  
**Visualizing the Past** will offer 150 images, dating from the 1850s to the
1890s, from a variety of nineteenth-century illustrated periodicals.  
  
|  |  ![](feejee.jpg) |  |  
  
  
  
**_The Lost Museum: Exploring Antebellum American Life and Culture_**  
ASHP/CML's most ambitious and innovative Web project to date, _The Lost
Museum: Exploring Antebellum American Life and Culture_ is a Web-based
interactive re-creation of P. T. Barnum's American Museum circa 1865. _The
Lost Museum_ combines narrative, spatial investigation, documentation, and
pedagogical strategies to convey the social, cultural, and political history
of antebellum and Civil War America. Barnum's American Museum, the pre-eminent
popular cultural institution of mid-nineteenth century America, was a uniquely
influential site that both reflected and refracted the compromises,
accommodations, and conflicts of antebellum and Civil War America.

Supported by a planning grant from the National Endowment for the Humanities,
_The Lost Museum_ Web site (prototype located at
<http://web.gc.cuny.edu/ashp/lostmuseum/>) centers on a digital three-
dimensional reconstruction of the American Museum, based on the existing
historical record of descriptions and illustrations. Specific rooms in the re-
created museum broadly embody the site's major humanities themes (including
slavery and the anti-slavery movement, immigration and the creation of white
working-class identities, temperance and industrial morality movements,
urbanization and middle-class formation, gender ideologies, sectional
tensions, and the rise of the rise of commercial popular entertainment).

The site provides three ways to examine and learn from the American Museum.
One option is an interactive Exploration involving users in a search through
the Museum's rooms, exhibits, and attractions for evidence pointing to
possible causes of the fire that destroyed the building in July 1865. Moving
through the American Museum's different environments and investigating its
varied attractions, users search for possible "arsonists" who represent the
political organizations and social groups that contended for power,
representation, and rights in the mid-nineteenth century. The second option
for investigating the American Museum is a searchable Archive of primary
source documents, images, and scholarly essays that expand on the themes
raised by the Exploration, providing a resource where audiences can research
answers to the questions the site raises. A third option, in development, is a
more guided curricular section that will enhance the site's use in college and
advanced-level high school classrooms.

While fundraising efforts continue, virtual construction of _The Lost Museum_
is moving forward, assisted by a team of graduate student researchers in the
CUNY Graduate Center's New Media Lab using Softimage, a state of the art 3-D
imaging program, and a distinguished advisory board of historians and
educators. The prototype site has already received significant media attention
from the CBS _Sunday Morning_ show, the New York _Times_ (see appendix), and
Oregon Public Radio. In addition, the Archivists Roundtable of Metropolitan
New York awarded _The Lost Museum_ its 2000 award for Innovative Use of
Archives.  
  
**_Gay New York: Lesbians and Gay Men in the Making of the City_**  
We are currently researching and fundraising for a feature-length video
documentary based on George Chauncey's acclaimed study, _Gay New York: Gender,
Urban Culture, and the Making of the Gay World, 1890-1940_ , which recaptures
the forgotten time when gay men played an expansive role in urban society and
popular culture. ASHP's video documentary version of _Gay New York_ also will
explore the more private but equally varied life of the city's lesbian
population. A multimedia approach merging live performance, animation, and
archival imagery will offer a vivid and variegated perspective on this largely
unknown story. Visual and sound montages that meld paintings, popular
illustration, film clips, and theatrical posters with dramatic passages,
literary performance vignettes, and musical interludes will show the impact of
lesbian and gay expression on the city's cultural history.

Development of _Gay New York_ has been supported by a pre-production grant
from the New York Council for the Humanities. In the past two years we have
worked with advisors George Chauncey (University of Chicago), Molly McGarry
(Bryn Mawr College) Daniel Czitrom (Mt. Holyoke College), and Barbara Smith
(Bunting Institute, Radcliffe College) to develop the form and content of the
documentary. We have produced a 12-minute video segment for fundraising and
demonstration purposes, begun researching the full script, and plan to raise
the full production funds in 2001.  
  
**_The Secret_ , A Web-based Instructional Drama about Cancer Prevention**  
Funded by a National Cancer Institute Small Business Innovation Research
Grant, this project is a prototype for a Web-based education "soap opera"
about cancer prevention for high-school students. _The Secret_ represents a
new direction for ASHP/CML's work in digital media while it also builds upon
our experience in producing educational and dramatic documentary materials.
Working in collaboration with Main Street Partners, a small New York City
software company, and assisted by an advisory team of psychologists and
pediatric oncologists from CUNY, Mount Sinai Hospital, and health-education
instructors in the New York public schools, we will create a multi-layered
site on the Web that links an engrossing, illustrated story to interactive
lessons about cancer and the ways adolescents can create lifestyles that
inhibit its development. Preliminary episodes of the program, written and
illustrated by Joshua Brown, have been posted on the Web and, during Spring
1998, they were tested by students and faculty at the High School for Health
Professions and Human Services in New York City. Full production of the
program will occur with a follow-up submission for further NCI-SBIR funding in
late 2001. _The Secret_ will offer a new model for educational media on the
World Wide Web that will be applicable to other subjects in high-school and
college curricula.  
  
**_Virtual New York_**  
|  |  _Virtual New York_ is another ASHP/CML foray onto the World Wide Web,
currently in the planning stages. _Virtual New York_ will collect scattered
Web resources on the history of New York City and link them together with
ambitious computer programming to create a sophisticated research and public
history site. The ultimate goal of _Virtual New York_ is to become the prime
portal into the Web resources available on New York history; it will be a
scholarly site, but it will also be a site where the public can share and
exchange memories and artifacts of New York City's past. It will offer both a
place for folks to get information on the history of the city, presented using
the latest Web media, and a community of researchers and history buffs who can
easily communicate with one another.  |  |  ![](vnyfire.jpg)

The central resource for _Virtual New York_ will be the Old York Library,
donated to the CUNY Graduate Center in Spring, 2000. The Old York Library is
an extensive collection of books and memorabilia on New York City, amassed by
the late Seymour B. Durst, a New York real estate developer. Durst pursued his
passion for New York City history with great vigor over many years, resulting
in a collection of approximately 13,000 books and 20,000 postcards, as well as
thousands of photographs, maps, newspaper tearsheets, and other ephemera. The
Old York Foundation has created an endowment to house and maintain the
collection at the Graduate Center, to fund educational initiatives that
utilize material in the collection, and to digitize large portions of the
collection. Working with ASHP/CML, two graduate student Durst Research
Scholars--Lucas Waltzer and Rebecca Simson--are digitizing material and
constructing the prototype for the Web site. _Virtual New York_ will be
inaugurated in Winter 2001 with an initial exhibit, "Disaster!," offering
students, scholars and the public multimedia resources that reveal how
accidents, epidemics, blizzards, fires, riots, and other cataclysmic events
affected New Yorkers and shaped the city's development.  
  
  
  
  
**[Return to 1999-2000 Annual Report Table of Contents](ar9900toc.html)**

