### **LECTURE VI:  
"Liberty, Equality, Fraternity": The Age of Revolution**

**TB NOTE **

**TB Quizzes  
[Chap
19A](http://cw.prenhall.com/bookbind/public_html/pubbooks/king2/chapter19/multiple1/deluxe-
content.html)  
[Chap
19B](http://cw.prenhall.com/bookbind/public_html/pubbooks/king2/chapter19/truefalse1/deluxe-
content.html)  
[Chap
19maps](http://cw.prenhall.com/bookbind/public_html/pubbooks/king2/chapter19/labeling1/deluxe-
content.html)**

**[Chap
20A](http://cw.prenhall.com/bookbind/public_html/pubbooks/king2/chapter20/multiple1/deluxe-
content.html)  
[Chap20B](http://cw.prenhall.com/bookbind/public_html/pubbooks/king2/chapter20/truefalse1/deluxe-
content.html)  
[Chap20maps  
](http://cw.prenhall.com/bookbind/public_html/pubbooks/king2/chapter20/labeling1/deluxe-
content.html)**

**[VIRTUAL SESSION](virtual4.htm)**

[**POP QUIZ** ](qz-vi.htm)

**[SYLLABUS](c4dg-syl.htm)** |

**THEME![](arrow_r.gif) Between the 1760s and the 1820s the power of monarchy
and the Ancien Regime's traditions of privilege were shaken by revolutionary
movements.   In the 1770s thirteen North American colonies of the British
Empire fought and won independence from the English crown and established a
republic.  
A decade later in France, the center of royal absolutism, a revolution began
that abolished the Bourbon monarchy and established a republic that made war
on the rest of Europe for twenty years. In fact, the age of revolution was
also an age of world war. When the French Republic's military genius, Napoleon
Bonaparte,  crowned Emperor in 1804, was defeated in 1815, the Bourbon dynasty
was restored. But the republican ideas and values of a new age had been sown
far and wide. Summarized in the slogan _Libert¨¦, Egalit¨¦, Fraternit¨¦,_ they
continued to influence how people thought about national life and politics.
Into the 20th Century this heritage of republicanism  inspired revolutions
against monarchy and empire and moved people to fight for national self-
determination and individual rights.**

**TEXT BOOK NOTE: For this topic we are using only parts of chapters 19  (pp.
576-594) and 20 (pp. 610-628) dealing with the American and French
revolutions. The remainders of the chapters will be used for the next topic.
Because the online quiz exercises deal with material from the whole chapters,
use them for both lecture topics. For this  topic, try to find the questions
dealing with the backgrounds to the two revolutions and their histories, the
chronological period up to about 1820. There is also [pop quiz](qz-vi.htm) I
wrote on the materials for this topic. Try it out when you finish working
through these notes and the assigned reading. **

| ** Reading**

 **TB** :  
**[chap.
19](http://cw.prenhall.com/bookbind/public_html/pubbooks/king2/chapter19/deluxe.html):
576-594  
[ chap.
20](http://cw.prenhall.com/bookbind/public_html/pubbooks/king2/chapter20/deluxe.html):
610-628  
  
****SB:  
Crevecouer, 14-16  
Paine, 54-62  
Decl aration of Ind. 63-66  
Sieyes, 73-80  
Robespierre, 88-90  
Burke, 94-98  
Napoleon, 91-93.**  
---|---|---  
  
**INTRODUCTION**

**HISTORIANS & THE SEARCH FOR CAUSES: It is natural to ask why the dynastic
states of the two most powerful 18th-century empires were hit by revolutions
in the last quarter of the century. Whenever something important or
unexpected happens in your life, you quickly ask what caused it. "Ugh, why did
I flunk that exam?" "How did my car get stolen?" Historians do the same thing
by looking for  long-term reasons and more immediate causes. The long-term
developments create the context for events that trigger a series of
occurrences that lead to major movements like revolutions or wars. As you read
the TB's brief narratives of the American and French revolutions, try to keep
in mind the long-term influences as well as the events and people who are part
of the stories. **

#### **QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER: As you make notes, pay particular attention to
the following:**

| ![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**How do the American and French Revolutions compare?** |
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul2d.gif)|

**How are they similar and different?**  
---|---  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul2d.gif)|

**Compare their ideals and aims.**  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul2d.gif)|

**Compare their results.**  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**How did these revolutions affect the development of the modern state?** |
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul2d.gif)|

**What characteristics of the early modern dynastic state were lost?**  
---|---  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul2d.gif)|

**What characteristics were retained or strengthened?**  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul2d.gif)|

**What new features were added to political life?**  
  
  
  
#### **COMPETITION FOR EMPIRE: ENGLAND & FRANCE IN CONFRONTATION**

| ![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**International Rivalry and the Centralization of Dynastic States**

| ![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul2d.gif)|

**Organizing States for winning wars**  
  
---|---  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul2d.gif)|

**Standing Armies and Social Hierarchy**  
  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul2d.gif)|

**Mercantilism and Empire Building**  
  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**[The Seven Years War](http://www.infoplease.com/ce6/history/A0844575.html)
(1756-1763) and England's Victory**  
  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**War Debts**  
  
![](_themes/subterra/subruled.gif)

#### **REVOLUTION IN BRITISH AMERICA**

#### [REVOLUTION IN BRITISH
AMERICA](http://www.pbs.org/ktca/liberty/chronicle/timeline.html) [Timeline]  
[What was happening around the world during and after the American
Revolution?](http://www.pbs.org/ktca/liberty/perspectives/globalvillage.html)
(Interactive map of events in the Age of Revolutions)

**When colonists protested new imperial policies like the Stamp Act they did
not intend to make a revolution against the monarchy or to separate from the
British Empire. They claimed they were protecting their rights as Englishmen.
It took over ten years through three crises to turn the resistance movement
into a revolution against the crown and British imperialism.**

**I.[A Decade of 3 Crises: Development of a Revolutionary Movement,
1765-1775](http://lcweb2.loc.gov/ammem/bdsds/timeline.html)**

![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**Crisis I:[ The Stamp Act](http://www.history.pdx.edu/hst201/stampact.htm),
1765 ** ![stamp-th.gif \(14293 bytes\)](stamp-th.gif) **Here's one of the
hated stamps. The rioting that started in Boston and spread to other cities
convinced London to back down. But not without the Declaratory Act that
declared Parliament had the right to tax. That constitutional issue would
eventually lead to revolutionary war ten years later.[ The colonists
argued](http://jefferson.village.virginia.edu/seminar/unit1/stamp.html) that
the stamp was a tax and that it was a constitutional right of Englishmen not
to be taxed without their consent. Since they did not vote for members of
Parliament, the Stamp Act was unconstitutional. When Parliament repealed the
Act the crisis was over.  But because Parliament also passed an act declaring
it had the right to tax the colonies, the constitutional issue remained. **  
  
---|---  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**Crisis II:[ The Townshend
Acts,](http://www.dell.homestead.com/revwar/files/TOWN.HTM) 1767: The use of
Navigation Acts to raise revenue aroused colonial opposition. Note how these
laws controlling trade were part of Mercantilism. Once again protestors used
riots, developed inter-colonial cooperation, and wrote pamphlets in
opposition. Once again London backed down by repealing all the disputed acts
except the one on Tea. **  
  
---|---  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**Crisis III:[ Boston Tea
Party](http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/E/teaparty/bostonxx.htm), 1773:  Read about
the final crisis in the TB and try to interpret this cartoon -- >** **[Tar and
Feather Image](http://academic.brooklyn.cuny.edu/history/dfg/amrv/tar.jpg). **
**Note the symbols, the liberty tree, the Stamp Act upside down etc.**  
  
**II. Revolutionary War, 1775-1781**

![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**[Lexington&
Concord](http://www.kirtland.cc.mi.us/honors/braden/lexington.htm), April,
1775**  
  
---|---  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**[Decision for
Independence](http://www.nara.gov/exhall/charters/declaration/decmain.html),
1776**  
  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**A New Nation, 1783-1789**

| ![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul2d.gif)|

**Articles of Confederation**[ **Articles of
Confederation**](http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/D/1776-1800/constitution/confart.htm)  
  
---|---  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul2d.gif)|

**[Constitutional
Convention](http://www.usconstitution.net/consttop_ccon.html), 1787:
**[**Essay on the Writing of the US
Constitution**](http://www.nara.gov/exhall/charters/constitution/conhist.html)  
  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul2d.gif)|

**Federal Government, 1789**

![](_themes/subterra/subruled.gif)  
  
#### **[REVOLUTION IN
FRANCE](http://landow.stg.brown.edu/victorian/history/hist7.html): [An
Overview]**

**In addition to the brief outline of events below, check out this fuller**
**[Chronology of the French
Revolution](http://www.csv.warwick.ac.uk/fac/arts/History/teaching/french-
rev/chron.html) ** **as a reference**.

**I. THE FIRST PHASE: 1787-1792.**

![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**Government Debt Sets the Stage**  
  
---|---  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**Louis XVI calls the Estates General to meet in 1789** **In this picture note
the ceremonial opening with the King on his throne. [Estates
General](estates.jpg) **  
  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**The 3rd Estate turns into a National Assembly, June 17, 1789**[ **The Tennis
Court Oath**](http://sunsite.auc.dk/cgfa/jdavid/p-jdavid8.htm) **, a
painting** **by David,** **marks the dramatic break with the past. What point
is David making in this image? The revolutionary turn of events is portrayed
in this cartoon,  [The Third Estate
Rises](http://academic.brooklyn.cuny.edu/history/core/pics/0253/img0037.htm).
Find a passage from Sieyes to serve as a caption**. **for it.**  
  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**July-August , 1789 urban and rural riots & collapse of royal authority**  
  
---|---  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**[Fall of the
Bastille,](http://www.woodberry.org/acad/hist/FRWEB/BASTILLE/event_Bastille.htm)
July 14, 1789**  
  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**Peasant uprisings and the Great Fear July/August, 1789**  
  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**Abolition of Feudal Rights, August 4, 1789**[ **Abolition of
Feudalism**](http://history.hanover.edu/texts/abolfeud.htm)  
  
---|---  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**Declaration of Rights of Man and the Citizen, August 26, 1789. In this
cartoon, ****[Equality](equal.jpg),  how is the revolutionary ideal expressed?
What quotation from the Declaration would you choose as a caption?**  
  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**[Royal Family is brought back to Paris,
October,](http://www.woodberry.org/acad/hist/FRWEB/MARCH/event_march.htm)
1789**  
  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

[**Civil Constitution of the
Clergy**](http://history.hanover.edu/texts/civilcon.htm) **, 1790, moves to
secularize the Church.** ** How does this document illustrate Enlightenment
influence? **  
  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**A New Constitution for a limited monarchy, July 1791**  
  
---|---  
  
**II.   THE SECOND PHASE: 1792-1794**

![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**King's Arrest and the new National Convention**  
  
---|---  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**Republic Established, September 21, 1792;[ King Executed (January 21,
1793)](http://www.woodberry.org/acad/hist/FRWEB/TRIAL/event_trial.htm)**  
  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**Domestic and Foreign Crisis: More radical change urged on the Convention,
and a coalition of nations aligned against France.**  
  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

** [Robespierre](http://www.pagesz.net/~stevek/intellect/robespierre.html),
the [Committee of Public
Safety](http://www.britannica.com/bcom/eb/article/6/0,5716,65546+4+63905,00.html),
the
[Terror](http://www.britannica.com/bcom/eb/article/3/0,5716,73663+1+71796,00.html),
and Policy of "Dechristianization"   (1793-1794)**

| ![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul2d.gif)|

**The[Guillotine](http://www.metaphor.dk/guillotine/) as a symbol of the
Terror.  Can the guillotine be seen in any way as also part of the history of
the Enlightenment?**  
  
---|---  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**[Universal mobilization (Levee en
Masse)](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1793levee.html) through a draft.
The Revolutionary Army becomes the largest in European History. **  
  
**III.   THE THIRD PHASE: 1794-1799**

![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**Robespierre Executed (July 28, 1794) and the[Thermidorean
Reaction](http://www.britannica.com/bcom/eb/article/1/0,5716,73951+1,00.html)**  
  
---|---  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**New Constitution (August, 1795) Establishes a Directory of five men to act
as an executive authority.**

| ![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul2d.gif)|

**Period of the Directory - a time of corruption and economic speculation.
Royalists on the right and Jacobins on the left threatened the Directory which
had to rely on the military. **  
  
---|---  
  
**IV.   THE AGE OF NAPOLEON: 1799-1815 ( [PBS series on
Napoleon](http://www.pbs.org/empires/napoleon/))**

![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**Napoleon's coup d'etat. The general becomes the First Consul of the
Republic.**  
  
---|---  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**Napoleon is crowned Emperor, 1804**  
  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**Napoleon's Europe and the Enlightenment Agenda**

| ![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul2d.gif)|

**[An  essay on Napoleon and the
Revolution](http://www.napoleonbonaparte.nl/html/body_nap_and_revolution.html)**  
  
---|---  
  
![](_themes/subterra/subruled.gif)

**LEGACY OF THE AGE OF REVOLUTION: What were the effects of the late 18th-
century revolutions on the development of the modern state?**

![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**Shift from Absolutism to Constitutionalism during the 19th century**  
  
---|---  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**Growth in power of the state**  
  
![bullet](_themes/subterra/subbul1d.gif)|

**Ideologies of Liberalism and Nationalism**  
  
  
  
**Test your knowledge of material from the readings and lecture by taking
this[POP QUIZ](qz-vi.htm). Remember, the important thing is not to get the
right answer but to UNDERSTAND why the answer is right or wrong. If you
disagree with the supplied answer or think certain questions are bad, get a
discussion going in the Caucus.**  
---

