  
March 04, 1999  |  ![](/gazette/images/dot.gif)![Harvard

University Gazette](/gazette/images/mainbar2.gif)  
---|---  
  
* * *

  |  
  
[![Full contents](/gazette/images/contents.gif)](index.html)  
[![Notes](/gazette/images/notes.gif)](notes.html)  
[![Newsmakers](/gazette/images/newsmakers.gif)](news.html)  
[![Police Log](/gazette/images/policelog.gif)](police.html)

* * *

[![Gazette Home](/gazette/images/gazettehome.gif)](/gazette/index.html)  
[![Gazette
Archives](/gazette/images/gazettearchives.gif)](/gazette/archives.html)  
[![News Office](/gazette/images/newsoffice.gif)](/index.html)  
[![Feedback](/gazette/images/feedback_sm.gif)](/gazette/feedback.html)  
  
|  SEARCH THE GAZETTE  
---  
  
  
  |

**HARVARD GAZETTE ARCHIVES**

Faculty and Students Unite To Foster Latino Studies

__

**By June Erlick**

Special to the Gazette

The United States is the second largest Spanish-speaking country in the world,
and a newly formed Interfaculty Committee on Latino Studies seeks to reflect
that reality at Harvard. Nearly 60 students braved last week's snowstorm to
offer advice, support, and, above all, enthusiasm for the new initiative.

Professor of Education Marcelo Suarez-Orozco, the new committee's chairperson,
said the group seeks to promote teaching and research at Harvard on the U.S.
Latino population as well as a sense of community among Harvard faculty and
students with Latino interests.

The community-building seemed to have already begun, as students --
undergraduates and graduate students from the Divinity School, Law School,
Business School, Education School, and the Graduate School of Arts and
Sciences -- vented their frustrations and voiced their aspirations to the
three faculty committee representatives present. Most of the students are
affiliated with Concilio Latino, an umbrella organization for the various
Latino student groups at Harvard's schools.

Dialogue at the meeting focused on identifying potential strategies students
could use to attract attention to Latino needs at Harvard.

At the top of the students' list is recruiting more senior faculty in Latino
studies. Harvard received fairly good marks for Latino Visiting Scholars,
lecturers, and junior faculty, but as one student lamented, "I can't write a
dissertation in a year. Junior faculty are great for classes, but if you can't
be sure someone is staying, the whole next generation of Latino scholarship is
likely to suffer."

Many students pointed to specific needs such as immigration law at the Law
School and a Latino bilingual education expert at the Education School. Felipe
Agredano, a Divinity School graduate now working at Radcliffe, explained how
students there developed a Latino syllabus and systematically identified
Latino academics and set goals with the administration for recruitment.

"There are a lot of opportunities to make things happen," commented John
Coatsworth, director of the David Rockefeller Center for Latin American
Studies, who received lively applause when he pointed out that the United
States is second only to Mexico in its numbers of Spanish speakers. The new
Interfaculty Committee, composed of faculty members from the Faculty of Arts
and Sciences and five of Harvard's professional schools, forms part of the
David Rockefeller Center for Latin American Studies (DRCLAS).

"Latino Studies will contribute not only to addressing an under-represented
and burgeoning population in this country; it will also help to update and to
energize the field that represents all of us citizens and residents of the
United States," said Doris Sommer, professor of Romance languages and
literatures, and a committee member.

Latino studies at Harvard is dedicated to promoting the scholarly study of the
Latino population of the United States and its place in the changing Americas.
To further these investigations, the committee is planning a major conference
next fall on "Latinos in the 21st Century: Setting the Research Agenda," which
Suarez-Orozco is organizing with Coatsworth, Sommer, and Gary Orfield,
professor of education and social policy in the Kennedy School and the
Graduate School of Education. The conference will involve two dozen leading
scholars, invited to Harvard to map an agenda for research in Latino studies
into the next century. The conference will be both comparative and
interdisciplinary in its focus on the Latino population of the United States.

"More is going on at Harvard in the area of Latino research than is generally
perceived, but the whole does not yet add up to more than the sum of its
parts," observed Coatsworth, who is Monroe Gutman Professor of Latin American
Affairs. "Some people -- both faculty and students -- are working on similar
issues and don't even know each other. There could be more synergism and much
better communication."

He added, "The Latin American Center has supported both Latino and Iberian
studies at Harvard since its founding in 1994," pointing to the three-year-old
DRCLAS-supported course on _Latino Cultures_ , taught by Suarez-Orozco and
Sommer, as an example.

Along with Suarez-Orozco and Sommer, Coatsworth called for student
participation and leadership in planning and setting priorities for Latino
studies.

Many students asked about the possibility of a Certificate in Latino Studies
or the creation of an academic department, similar to that of Afro-American
Studies. While the first step toward these possible goals is increasing the
number of Latino faculty and the level of student research projects, the
persistent question seemed to point to a larger theme.

"The increasing presence of Latinos in the United States is stretching more
than the boundaries of what we now consider Latin American studies; it is also
complicating the field of U.S.-based American Studies," pointed out Sommer.
"Latino studies, along with African-American studies, Asian-American studies,
and a reviving field of Native-American studies can now join the Anglo-
American tradition to develop a broader, more interesting, and more democratic
field of interactions that are often defined along ethnic lines.

The Committee on Ethnic Studies, several faculty members in the graduate
program of the History of American Civilization, and other allied programs
have already embarked on these necessary collaborations.

The Interfaculty Committee on Latino Studies also receives support from
Provost's Fund for Interfaculty Collaboration. "The Provost's Fund together
with the support of the David Rockefeller Center allows us to bring to campus
some of the leading scholars in the field of Latino studies," said Suarez-
Orozco. In the long run, the committee hopes to establish goals for a
postcampaign endowment fund drive.

Through the David Rockefeller Center, the Interfaculty Committee will provide
small grants for faculty research; summer research travel grants for
undergraduate, graduate, and professional school students; and support for
extracurricular cultural activities of student organizations. For information
on these opportunities, call DRCLAS at (617) 495-3366 or visit the Center's
Web page at <http://www.fas.harvard.edu/~drclas>.

Concilio Latino plans to hold a students-only meeting infor mid- March to
generate specific ideas for the next dialogue with Interfaculty committee
members.

![](../../images/the_end.gif)



* * *

Copyright 1999 President and Fellows of Harvard College

