**Art of the Western World**  
**Summer 2002**  
**Session A**  
**NO MANDATORY FIRST DAY ATTENDANCE**  
_UNIVERSITY OF SOUTH FLORIDA_  
_USF TELECOURSES_  
**Lakeland Ref. #57119 ART ART 4930 SEC 151 (3 CREDIT HOURS)**  
**Sarasota Ref. #57468 ART ART 4930 SEC 591 (3 CREDIT HOURS)**



**[Midterm Review Sheet](AWWReview01.htm)  
[Final Review Sheet](AWWReview02.htm) **



Please be aware that this syllabus is subject to change. Please be sure to
check the hotline or this web site regularly for changes, as they will be
posted here as soon as we become aware of them.

****Syllabus updated 05/20/2002****  
  
---  
  
**  
Instructor: ** Ms. Anne Jeffrey  
**Office Location:** Ms. Jeffrey does not have an on campus office.  The best
way to reach her is through email.

**Email:[ ](mailto:ajeffrey@helios.acomp.usf.edu)
**[ajeffrey@helios.acomp.usf.edu ](mailto:ajeffrey@helios.acomp.usf.edu) The
best way to reach this instructor is by sending an email.  If you are unable
to use email and need to reach the instructor, please contact Stephanie
Gaskins, Coordinator for assistance at (813) 974-6194.  Adrienne McCain can
also assist you at (813) 974-6192.



**Distance Learning Student Support Information:**  
**Coordinator:** Stephanie Gaskins  
**Email:**[sgaskins@admin.usf.edu](mailto:sgaskins@admin.usf.edu)  
**Office Location:** SVC 1072 (map grid: D3)  
**Office Hours:** Monday - Thursday 8:00 am -7:00 pm Friday 8:00 am -5:00pm  
**Phone:** (813) 974-2996; 974-3063 ( 24 Hour Info Line)

**Listserv:**[art4930@lists.acomp.usf.edu](mailto:art4930@lists.acomp.usf.edu)  
Please type
[joinart4930@lists.acomp.usf.edu](mailto:joinart4930@lists.acomp.usf.edu) in
order to be included in the listserv for this class. The listserv lets you
self-subscribe, thus allowing us better resources for contacting you with
changes that may occur in the syllabus.



If you would like to join a study group so that you may meet with other
students registered in your Telecourse, then please visit:[
http://www.outreach.usf.edu/telecourses/forms/ouforms.htm](http://www.outreach.usf.edu/telecourses/forms/ouforms.htm)
for a study group application and more information. Please fill out the form
completely and return it to SVC 1072.

* * *

**BROADCAST TIMES:** **WUSF-TV Channel 16 Wednesdays from 3:00-5:00pm**
starting 05/22 **and Saturdays from 3:00-5:00am** , starting 5/25. It is
recommended that you tape the programs off the air.  Any missed videos may be
viewed in the University Media Center.  Rental options are listed below.  This
channel is available to students residing in all counties where WUSF-TV is
broadcast.  WUSF-TV is shown on campus cable channel 7.



**CABLECAST TIMES:** "Art of the Western World" is also cablecast on the
**Education Channel, Ch. 18** available to Hillsborough County residents with
Time Warner cable only. It will be shown on **Mondays and Fridays from 5:00 -
6:00pm** starting 05/13.



**VIDEO RENTALS:** This Telecourse may be rented from RMI Media Productions by
calling 1-800-745-5480. The cost to rent the videos is approximately $55.00.
Visit their web site at <http://www.rmimedia.com/>



**COURSE OBJECTIVES:** The focus of this course will be to explore the purpose
and processes of art making in a historical context and to take a
comprehensive broad look at the art produced in the Western world since the
Greeks. Grades will be based on evidence of understanding of major
philosophies and trends as well as the implications of these concepts in the
development of contemporary society. Attendance at reviews will be necessary
to insure success on exams.



**TEXTBOOKS:** A. Stewart, et al., _Art of the Western World_ , Study Guide,
New York, 1989 _(required)_

H. Honour and J. Fleming, _The Visual Arts: A History_ , Englewood Cliffs,
1995 _(optional)_



**Since there is not a Tampa section of this course, the books will _not_ be
available at the bookstore on campus. However, you may purchase them at the
Bookcenter for USF on the corner of Fowler Ave. and McKinley Drive. Call
977-3077 for additional information. Students may order the books on line
through the Lakeland bookstore by going to the following website:
**[**http://www.polk-usf.bkstr.com/**](http://www.polk-usf.bkstr.com/)



**READING ASSIGNMENTS:** Topics covered in each program will follow the list
in the Study Guide. Each unit consists of 2 one-hour programs. It is important
to read the appropriate Study Guide chapter and the applicable sections 1 in
the Honour-Fleming text.

* * *

**MEETINGS:**

Please note that the orientation and reviews will be held on the Lakeland
Campus ONLY. Students may attend the live review in Lakeland if desired.
Sarasota students will be connected to Lakeland via studio classroom for the
live orientation and review sessions.  Tampa students may watch the taped
orientation and review sessions which are available for viewing or overnight
checkout from SVC 1072.



***Tampa students may take the exam in SVC 1072 by contacting 974-2996 to set
up an appointment.  
In Tampa, exams are scheduled during office hours Mon-Thurs 8:00am - 7:00pm,
Friday 8:00 am 5:00pm.**



Lakeland Orientation

|  Friday |  05/17 |  12:00 - 2:00pm |  Room 1280  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
Lakeland Midterm Review

|  Friday |  05/31 |  12:00 - 2:00pm |  Room 1280  
  
Lakeland Midterm Exam

|  Friday |  06/07 |  6:00 - 8:00pm |  Room 1279  
  
Lakeland Final Review

|  Friday |  06/14 |  12:00 - 2:00pm |  Room 1280  
  
Lakeland Final Exam

|  Friday |  06/21 |  6:00 - 8:00pm |  Room 1279  
  


Sarasota Orientation

|  Friday |  05/17 |  12:00 - 2:00pm |  PMA 217  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
Sarasota Midterm Review

|  Friday |  05/31 |  12:00 - 2:00pm |  PMA 217  
  
Sarasota Midterm Exam

|  Friday |  06/07 |  2:00 - 4:00pm |  ** PMA 210 **  
  
Sarasota Final Review

|  Friday |  06/14 |  12:00 - 2:00pm |  ** PMA 215 **  
  
Sarasota Final Exam

|  Friday |  06/21 |  2:00 - 4:00pm |  ** PMA 210 **  
  


**_Essay Make-Up Exam Policy_**

Please mark your calendar immediately with exam dates so that you know in
advance when your exams are scheduled. If you see a conflict immediately upon
receipt of the syllabus, it is your responsibility to inform the Office of
Student Support of the conflict and to submit a request for a make-up exam
with supporting documentation in order for your request to be considered. All
requests must be make prior to the scheduled exam. Generally, **make-up exams
are essay** in format so it is highly recommended that you arrange to take
your exam at the scheduled time indicated in the syllabus.



**REVIEWS:**

Two review lectures will be given. Reviews will be designed to define and
clarify the issues, concepts, and information presented in the aired video
programs and reading assignments. Study sheets for exams will be handed out at
review sessions and are included as links at the beginning of the syllabus.



**EXAMS: Two exams will be administered during the course.**

**The midterm exam will cover segments 1-10. (Video 1-5)**

**The final exam will cover segments 11-18. (Video 6-9)**

**Exams may include slide identification, fill in the blank, short answer and
multiple choice.**



**HOW TO OBTAIN GRADES:**

Grades will be posted in the Student Support office, SVC 1072, within one week
of the scheduled exam for Tampa students.  Lakeland and Sarasota students
should see Toni Moment (863) 667-7000 or Amanda Bennett (941) 359-4231
respectively for grades. Grades will _not_ be given over the telephone.   If
you wish to have your grade mailed to you, please provide the office with a
self-addressed stamped envelope and mail it to: Adrienne McCain, Distance
Learning Student Support Office, USF, SVC 1072, 4202 E. Fowler Ave., Tampa, FL
33620.  Please include your name, your SSN, and which course(s) you are
enrolled in.



**NOTE:**

Much controversy has been made about the teaching of traditional Western
philosophies and histories during the last 20 years or so. Feminists and other
groups have documented the fallacies and misconceptions of this approach to
history. I urge you to thoroughly enjoy and enrich yourselves with the
information given in this course but at the same time I encourage you to look
and read other histories outside the boundaries of the traditional Western
paradigm.

* * *

**Art of the Western World**  
**WUSF-TV, Ch. 16 Television Schedule**  
**Education Channel Schedule (on Time Warner cable in Hillsborough County)**



**VIDEO#**

|

**TITLE**

|

**WUSF-TV Broadcast Dates**

|

**WUSF-TV Broadcast Times**

|

**Education Channel Cablecast Dates**

|

**Education Channel Cablecast Times**  
  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
V-1

|

The Classical Ideal

|

(O) Wed 05/22  
(R) Sat 05/25

|

3:00 \- 4:00pm  
3:00 - 4:00am

|

Monday 05/13

|  5:00 - 6:00pm  
  
V-2

|

A White Garment of Churches: Romanesque and Gothic

|

(O) Wed 05/22  
(R) Sat 05/25

|

4:00 \- 5:00pm  
4:00 - 5:00am

|

Friday 05/17

|  5:00 - 6:00pm  
  
V-3

|

The Early Renaissance

|

(O) Wed 05/29  
(R) Sat 06/01

|

3:00 \- 4:00pm  
3:00 - 4:00am

|  Monday 05/20 |  5:00 - 6:00pm  
  
V-4

|

The High Renaissance

|

(O) Wed 05/29  
(R) Sat 06/01

|

4:00 \- 5:00pm  
4:00 - 5:00am

|  Friday 05/24 |  5:00 - 6:00pm  
  
V-5

|

Realms of Light: The Baroque

|

(O) Wed 06/05  
(R) Sat 06/08

|

3:00 \- 4:00pm  
3:00 - 4:00am

|  Monday 05/27 |  5:00 - 6:00pm  
  
V-6

|

An Age of Reason, An Age of Passion

|

(O) Wed 06/05  
(R) Sat 06/08

|

4:00 \- 5:00pm  
4:00 - 5:00am

|  Friday 05/31 |  5:00 - 6:00pm  
  
V-7

|

A Fresh View: Impressionism and Post-Impressionism

|

(O) Wed 06/12  
(R) Sat 06/15

|

3:00 \- 4:00pm  
3:00 - 4:00am

|  Monday 06/03 |  5:00 - 6:00pm  
  
V-8

|

Into the Twentieth Century

|

(O) Wed 06/12  
(R) Sat 06/15

|

4:00 \- 5:00pm  
4:00 - 5:00am

|  Friday 06/07 |  5:00 - 6:00pm  
  
V-9

|

On Our Own Time

|

(O) Wed 06/19  
(R) Sat 06/22

|

3:00 \- 4:00pm  
3:00 - 4:00am

|  Monday 06/10 |  5:00 - 6:00pm  
  


**Overnight Blockfeed of _Art of the Western World_ on WUSF-TV, Channel 16: **

This is an opportunity to tape the entire Telecourse.

On Monday, 05/20 set your VCR to record because the blockfeed for videos 1-3
will begin at 2:00am on Tuesday, 05/21 and will continue until 5:00am.

On Monday, 05/27 set your VCR to record because the blockfeed for videos 3-5
will begin at 2:00am on Tuesday, 05/28 and will continue until 5:00am.

On Monday, 06/03 set your VCR to record because the blockfeed for videos 6-9
will begin at 2:00am on Tuesday, 06/04 and will continue until 6:00am.

**Attention Students: **

We recommend that you tape the programs as they are being broadcast on WUSF-TV
on a weekly basis.

We do NOT recommend that you rely on the block feed/overnight broadcast as
your only means of seeing the videos



because:

A)  Your VCR could malfunction

B)  Your power could go off

C)  You could forget to set your VCR

D)  WUSF-TV could have broadcasting difficulties



*Also, it is not a valid excuse to request special consideration from the instructor (ie: makeup exam,) if there is a technical problem with the overnight broadcast. Therefore, tape the programs off the air during the weekly broadcasts, and then if you missed any of the programs, the overnight broadcast/block feed will enable you to view the programs you missed.

**  
MISSED PROGRAMS:**

You are encouraged to videotape the programs so that you can watch the
programs at a time more convenient for you. You may view the programs at the
University Media Center, 6th floor, LIB 627 if you should miss a few of the
programs, phone 974-4182 (Tampa campus), on a program/viewing space available
basis.

UMC HOURS: Mon - Thurs, 8:00am - 11:00pm; Fri & Sat, 8:00am - 8:00pm; Sunday,
1:00pm- 9pm. Guidelines for viewing:  
A.) A valid, current USF ID is required.  
B.) You may view no more than 25% of the coursework this way.  
C.) While the video may be available, playback equipment may not be, or vice
versa.

* * *

**Art of the Western World**  
**The following essay is paraphrased and taken from the preface to
_HomoAestheticus, Where Art Comes From and Why_ by Ellen Dissanayake.**

One of the most striking features of human societies throughout history and
across the globe is a prodigious involvement with the arts. Even nomadic
people who own few material possessions usually decorate what they do own;
embellish them, use elaborate poetic language for special occasions; and make
music, sing, and dance.  All known societies practice at least one of what we
in the West call "the arts," and for many groups engaging with the arts ranks
among their society's most important endeavors. This universality of making
and enjoying art immediately suggests that an important appetite or need is
being expressed.

General readers, not familiar with the arcane discourses of today's art world,
may not be aware of the recent changes in consciousness that go by the general
label of "postmodernism." In the larger society, "modernist" art (what used to
be called "modern art"\- everything from the works of French impressionists to
the stuff that is not immediately recognizable as art and what most people
would dismiss as something one's child could make just as well) has scarcely
been assimilated.  Indeed, even the art of the Old Masters remains unfamiliar
and foreign to the great mass of society. Thus the squabbles of a bunch of
artists and intellectuals may seem to be of little consequence.

These arguments encapsulate, however, a larger debate that is occurring in
late twentieth century America, the debate between those who wish to preserve
the two thousand year old heritage of Western, Greco-Roman, Judeo-Christian
civilization and those who consider this heritage to be seriously inadequate.
A growing movement criticizes the traditional Western interpretation of art
and culture, with its Eurocentric bias, for its neglect or outright oppression
of non-Western cultures (who are increasingly visible and vocal in
multicultural society) and of women.

Defenders of Western civilization rightly fear that its very preservation and
future at stake, and wonder what a society that does not esteem symphonies,
museums, and the wisdom of "the Great Books" could possibly offer in their
place. No wonder that some of the most conservative defenders of the status
quo overreact and attempt to stifle all but the most innocuous and familiar
forms and themes.

Looking at the arts today we find a confused state of affairs. The buying and
selling of artworks is a billion-dollar business and thousands of people
throng to major art exhibitions, however the arts remain more perplexing than
insightful to the majority of those people. Some believe it is rare, valuable
made by geniuses and sanctified by its presence at museums. Some others insist
that it is a kind of pretentious folderol that most people quite obviously
manage to live without. Still others believe art to be something that should
disturb, challenge, provoke, and ultimately challenge people to liberate
themselves from stagnant tradition. Contemporary philosophers of art admit
that they cannot define their subject anymore. "We entered a period of art so
absolute in its freedom that art seems but a name for an infinite play with
its own concept."  (Arthur Daunt 1986.)

The establishment may be hyper defensive because it is not easy to justify the
relevance of art in a society where it costs so much, and where art competes
with educational, health, and environmental claims on finite funds.

Because of the grand, somewhat forbidding garments that art has accumulated
over the centuries, it is difficult, when asked what is art that it should
take priority over hospitals, and schools, to discern if there is anything
really there, or if so what the naked creature underneath might really be.
Many practitioners of arts are united in their dissatisfaction with the "high
art" view. Upon critical and careful examination we have discovered that what
has been orthodox, and established as sacred has often masked repression and
narrow-minded elitism. Postmodern thought has opened a door to a new
consideration of the place that art has had or might have in human life.

Still, despite this fresh air, it must be acknowledged that many have found
sustenance and even transcendence in their experiences of the fine arts and
have good reasons to remain convinced that these sources and occasions are
real and valuable. Repudiation of the whole Western civilization is a harsh
and rash response to admitted social inequities, so that post modernist
remedies that recommend flushing the baby away with bath water can well seem
even more misguided than malady.

Over the past century a distancing between people and art has occurred. To
earlier generations art was a divine and mysterious visitation. Today it
becomes further and further detached. Yet acquaintance with the arts at other
times and places reminds us that they have been overwhelmingly integral to
people's lives.

Even when we are told that "beauty" and "meaning" are socially constructed and
relative terms insofar as they have been used by the elite to exclude or
belittle others, most of us still yearn for them.

It is the theory of some that art would be viewed as an evolution of human
behavior that is natural and intrinsic and that it is fundamental to
humankind.

Artist and art teachers may find a biological justification for the intrinsic
importance of their vocation quite welcome and everyone, particularly those
who feel a loss or absence of beauty, form, meaning, value, and quality in
modern life, should find this biological argument interesting and relevant.

Social systems that disdain or discount beauty, form mystery, meaning, value
and quality-whether in art or in life-are depriving their members of human
requirements as fundamental as those for food, warmth, and shelter.

* * *

