**Public History Seminar**

**Dr. Jon Hunner**

* * *

The purpose of the Public History Seminar is to prepare you for conducting
projects in preserving, interpreting, and exhibiting our nation's culture and
heritage. Over the course of the semester, you will have an opportunity to
explore various fields in Public History and work on specific issues in those
fields. This seminar is an introductory course and is meant to give you a
broad exposure to Public History.

**Course Schedule**

**_Section 1: A Culture at Risk?_**

Week

  1.         _Introduction to the seminar_. Explanation of syllabus and discussion of  
            Public History.
  2.         _Academic and Public History_. **Assignment:** _Public History,_ 7-28;Otis  
            L. Graham, "Who Owns American History?" _The Public Historian  
_             (Spring 1995): 8-11; Jeffrey Brown, "Cultural Conservation:
Scholars  
            and the Community," _History Outreach: Programs for Museums,  
_              _Historical Organizations, and Academic History Departments_ ,
29-52;  
             _Presenting the Past_ , 1-17.
  3.         _Sources_. Field trip to the libraries on campus. **Assignments:** _Public  
_              _History_ , 265-91; view video _Public History Today._ **Due:**
Curriculum  
            vita.
  4.         _Fundraising_. **Assignment:** Arthur Ziegler, et al, _Revloving Funds for  
_              _Historic Preservation: A Manual for Practice_ , 3-26, 45-55;
_Past,  
_             21-49. **Due:** Write a proposal for a project from the RFP  
            list.                                                                                   
  
                ** _Section 2: The Fields of Public History_**       
  

  5.         _Public History and the Media_. **Assignment:** Watch episodes 1-3 of **The  
**              **West** on KRWG. Episode 1: Sept. 15; Episode 2: Sept. 16;
Episode  
             3: Sept. 17. Also, access the world wide web site for **The West** at  
            <http://www.gm.com/TheWest>. Read David Remnick, "Inside-out  
            Olympics," _New Yorker,_ August 5, 1996, 26-28. **Due:**  Budget  
            proposal for your project.
  6.         _Preservation and management of documents_. **Assignments:** _Public  
_              _History_ , 31-56; Vernon R. Smith "Pedagogy and
Professionalism: An  
            Evaluation of Trends and Choices Confronting Educators in the  
            Archival Community," _The Public Historian,_ (Summer 1994), 23-43;  
             _Guidelines for College and University Archives_ , Society of American  
            Archives, 1-12.
  7.         _Editing and document management_. **Assignment:** _Public History,  
_             70-104, 427-52. **Due:** Archival proposal for project.

  8.         _Public History for business and government_. **Assignment:** _Public  
_               _History_ , 293-425; _Past_ 225-36.

  9.         _Interpretation and preservation of sites and buildings_.  
             **Assignment:** _Public_ 130-44, 158-73; _National Register Bulletin 15:  
_              _How to Apply the National Register Criteria for Evaluation,_
U.S.  
            Department of Interior, National Park Service, 1-52; _National  
_              _Register Bulletin 39_ , U.S. Department of Interior, National
Park  
            Service, 1-11; _Sources and Searches:Documenting Historic Buildings  
_              _in New Mexico_ , 1-18 (companion text for the video); view
Historic  
            Preservation Division's video _Architectural Styles of New Mexico: A  
_              _Visual Primer_. Choose a building on campus to research for  
            application to the National Register.
  10.         _Management of historic sites_. **Assignment:** _Past_ , 165-99; _Public  
_              _History_ , 111-129; _National Register Bulletin 16A: How to
Complete  
_              _the National Register Registration Form_ , U.S. Department of
Interior,  
            National Park Service, 1-82.
  11.         _Field trip to a local historical site_. **Due:** Nomination form for campus  
            building in preparation for placing it on the National Register.
  12.         _Historic museums and designing an exhibit_. **Assignment:** _Past_ , 37-61;  
             _Public History_ , 199-228; Scott T Swank, "The History Museum," in  
             _The Museum: A Reference Guide_ , Michael Steven Shapiro, ed.,  
            85-114; Barbara Fahs Charles, "Exhibition as (Art) Form," in _Past  
_              _Meets Present: Essays about Historic Interpretation and Public  
_              _Audiences_ , Jo Blatti, ed., 97-104.

  13.         _Mounting an exhibit_. **Assignment:** _Public History_ , 229-50; Edward P.  
            Alexander, _Museum Masters: Their Museums and Their Influence_ ,  
            45-77, 179-201. **Due:** Present proposal to class for museum exhibit.
  14.         _Oral History_. **Assignment** : _Past_ , 249-77; David Thelen, "Memory and  
            American History," _Journal of American History_ 75, no. 4, (March  
            1989), 1117-29. **Due:** Museum exhibit proposal for project.
  15.         _Community history and heritage tourism_. **Assignment** : _Past_ , 121-32,  
            307-36; Stephen C. Jett, "Navajo Sacred Places: Management and  
            Interpretation of Mythic History," _The Public Historian_ , (Spring  
            1995): 39-47; Patricia Mooney-Melvin, "Harnessing the Romance of  
            the Past: Preservation, Tourism, and History," _The Public Historian_ ,  
            (Spring 1991): 35-48. **Due:** Oral History proposal for project.
  16.         _Who's History is it_? **Assignment** : Charles C. Cole, Jr., "Public History:  
            What Difference Has it Made?" _Public Historian_ (Fall 1994), 9-35.
  17.        **Due:** Comprehensive proposal for your project.

**Required Texts**

Susan Porter Benson, Stephen Brier, and Roy Rosenweig, eds., _Presenting the  
_       _Past: Essays on History and the Public_ , (Philadelphia: Temple
University Press,  
     1986).   

Barbara J. Howe and Emory L. Kemp, eds., _Public History:An Introduction  
_      (Malabar, Florida: Krieger Publishing, 1986).

Readings on reserve at the New Library.

**Grading**

Participation in discussions                                   20%  
Leading discussions                                             20%  
Archival Project                                                    5%  
Budgeting Proposal                                               5%  
National Register Nomination Form                       5%  
Museum Exhibit Presentation                                 5%  
Museum Exhibit Proposal                                      5%  
Oral History Proposal                                            5%  
Comprehensive Project Proposal                          30%

**Requests for Proposals**

Cuartocentennial Commemoration of Don Juan de Onate's entrada into New  
     Mexico.

Elephant Butte Irrigation District

Trails across New Mexico

Spaceport at Alamogordo

New Mexico's Statehood Centennial

Door #3

* * *

**[Back to Public History Home
Page](http://web.nmsu.edu/~publhist/index.html)**

