%!PS-Adobe-1.0 %%Title: tr.10.mss %%DocumentFonts: (atend) %%Creator: Barbara
Zayas and Scribe 5(1501) %%CreationDate: 1 June 1992 10:51 %%Pages: (atend)
%%EndComments % PostScript Prelude for Scribe. /BS {/SV save def 0.0 792.0
translate .01 -.01 scale} bind def /ES {showpage SV restore} bind def /SC
{setrgbcolor} bind def /FMTX matrix def /RDF {WFT SLT 0.0 eq {SSZ 0.0 0.0 SSZ
neg 0.0 0.0 FMTX astore} {SSZ 0.0 SLT sin SLT cos div SSZ mul SSZ neg 0.0 0.0
FMTX astore} ifelse makefont setfont} bind def /SLT 0.0 def /SI { /SLT exch
cvr def RDF} bind def /WFT /Courier findfont def /SF { /WFT exch findfont def
RDF} bind def /SSZ 1000.0 def /SS { /SSZ exch 100.0 mul def RDF} bind def /AF
{ /WFT exch findfont def /SSZ exch 100.0 mul def RDF} bind def /MT /moveto
load def /XM {currentpoint exch pop moveto} bind def /UL {gsave newpath moveto
dup 2.0 div 0.0 exch rmoveto setlinewidth 0.0 rlineto stroke grestore} bind
def /LH {gsave newpath moveto setlinewidth 0.0 rlineto gsave stroke grestore}
bind def /LV {gsave newpath moveto setlinewidth 0.0 exch rlineto gsave stroke
grestore} bind def /BX {gsave newpath moveto setlinewidth exch dup 0.0 rlineto
exch 0.0 exch neg rlineto neg 0.0 rlineto closepath gsave stroke grestore}
bind def /BX1 {grestore} bind def /BX2 {setlinewidth 1 setgray stroke
grestore} bind def /PB {/PV save def 3 -1 roll sub translate 100.0 -100.0
scale} bind def /PE {PV restore} bind def /SH /show load def /MX {exch show
0.0 rmoveto} bind def /W {0 32 4 -1 roll widthshow} bind def /WX {0 32 5 -1
roll widthshow 0.0 rmoveto} bind def % Unilogic/Scribe version of LaserPrep
v4.0 % All lines added/changed by Unilogic contain "%UNI" % %{appledict
version #65 % CopyRight Apple Computer, Inc. 1984,1985,1986,1987 All Rights
Reserved. systemdict/currentpacking known{currentpacking true setpacking}if
/LW{save statusdict/product get(LaserWriter)anchorsearch exch pop{length 0
eq{1}{2}ifelse}{0}ifelse exch restore}bind def /LW+{LW 2 eq}bind def
/ok{systemdict/statusdict known dup{LW 0 gt and}if}bind def %UNI ok{statusdict
begin 9 sccinteractive 3 ne exch 0 ne or{9 0 3 setsccinteractive}if end}if /md
250 dict def md begin /av 65 def /T true def /F false def /mtx matrix def /s75
75 string def /s8 8 string def /s1 ( ) def /pxs 1 def /pys 1 def 1 0 mtx
defaultmatrix dtransform exch atan/pa exch def /nlw .24 def /ppr [-32 -29.52
762 582.48] def % default printable page rectangle /pgs 1 def /por true def
/xb 500 array def /so true def /fillflag false def /pnm 1 def /fmv true def
/sfl false def /ma 0 def /invertflag false def /xflip false def /yflip false
def /noflips true def /scaleby96 false def /fNote true def /fBitStretch true
def /fg (Rvd\001\001\000\000\177) def /bdf{bind def}bind def /xdf{exch def}bdf
/xl{neg exch neg translate}bdf /fp{pnsh 0 ne pnsv 0 ne and}bdf
/nop{}bdf/lnop[/nop load]cvx bdf /vrb[ {fp{gsave 1 setlinewidth pnsh pnsv
scale stroke grestore}if newpath}bind /eofill load dup /newpath load 2 index
dup {clip newpath}bind {}bind dup 2 copy ]def currentscreen/spf xdf/rot
xdf/freq xdf /doop{vrb exch get exec}bdf % psu - page setup called at begining
of page % args: smooth, por, bbs1, bbs2, bbey, bbex, scale, dpix, dpiy, pgs, %
invert, xflip, yflip, scaleby96, fBitStretch, fNote % % smooth is T if
smoothing was selected in page setup, else F % por is T for portrait
orientation, F for landscape % bbs2 seems to be offset for start of image area
(in 72nds of an inch) % bbs1 seems to be offset for start of image area (in
72nds of an inch) % bbey is length (or end?) of printable area in 72nd of an
inch % bbex is width (or end?) of printable area in 72nd of an inch % dpix is
dots per inch of coordinate system % dpiy is dots per inch of coordinate
system % scale is scale factor selected in page setup % pgs is a small integer
denoting paper cassette type (legal, a4, etc.) % invert is T to reverse
black/white % xflip is T to rotate image horizontally % yflip is T to rotate
image vertically % scaleby96 is T if "Precision Bitmap Graphics" requested %
fBitStretch is T if "Faster Bitmap Printing" requested % fNote is T to use
small imageable region, F to use large /psu{ /fNote xdf /fBitStretch xdf
/scaleby96 xdf pop F %UNI force yflip off /yflip xdf pop F %UNI force xflip
off /xflip xdf pop F %UNI force black/white reversing off /invertflag xdf
xflip yflip or{/noflips false def}if /pgs xdf % set pgs 2 index % get copy of
scale .72 mul exch div /pys xdf % pys = (.72 * scale) / dpiy % S: smooth por
bbs1 bbs2 bbey bbex scale dpix div .72 mul /pxs xdf % pxs = .72 * (scale /
dpix) 2 index pxs mul 2 index pys mul neg translate %UNI xlate for scribe ppr
astore pop % put "bbs1 bbs2 bbey bbex" into ppr pop T %UNI force portrait on
/por xdf % set por pop F %UNI force smooth request off sn and /so xdf % set
"so" T if smooth req'd AND avail in LW }bdf /txpose{ %UNI don't change paper
type %UNI fNote{smalls}{bigs}ifelse pgs get exec pxs pys scale ppr aload pop
por { noflips{pop exch neg exch translate pop 1 -1 scale}if xflip yflip and{
pop exch neg exch translate 180 rotate 1 -1 scale ppr 3 get ppr 1 get neg sub
neg ppr 2 get ppr 0 get neg sub neg translate }if xflip yflip not and{ pop
exch neg exch translate pop 180 rotate ppr 3 get ppr 1 get neg sub neg 0
translate }if yflip xflip not and{ ppr 1 get neg ppr 0 get neg translate }if }
{ noflips{translate pop pop 270 rotate 1 -1 scale}if xflip yflip and{
translate pop pop 90 rotate 1 -1 scale ppr 3 get ppr 1 get neg sub neg ppr 2
get ppr 0 get neg sub neg translate }if xflip yflip not and{ translate pop pop
90 rotate ppr 3 get ppr 1 get neg sub neg 0 translate }if yflip xflip not and{
translate pop pop 270 rotate ppr 2 get ppr 0 get neg sub neg 0 exch translate
}if } ifelse %UNI statusdict begin waittimeout 300 lt{/waittimeout 300 def}if
end scaleby96{ ppr aload pop 4 -1 roll add 2 div 3 1 roll add 2 div 2 copy
translate .96 dup scale neg exch neg exch translate }if }bdf /fr{3 index 3
index xl ppr aload pop 3 -1 roll 2 mul add 3 1 roll exch 2 mul add 6 2 roll 3
-1 roll sub 3 1 roll exch sub 3 1 roll exch 3 -1 roll div 3 1 roll div exch
scale}bdf /lws{show}bdf /tv{show pop pop}bdf /obl{{0.212557 mul}{pop
0}ifelse}bdf /sfd{ps fg 5 -1 roll get mul 100 div 0 ps 5 -1 roll obl ps neg 0
0 6a astore makefont setfont}bdf /fnt{findfont sfd}bdf /bt{sa 3 1 roll 3 index
and put}bdf /sa(\000\000\000\000\000\000\000\000\000\000)def /fs{0 1 bt 1 2 bt
2 4 bt 3 8 bt 4 16 bt 5 32 bt 6 64 bt 7 128 bt sa exch 8 exch put}bdf /mx1
matrix def /mx2 matrix def /mx3 matrix def /bu{currentpoint currentgray
currentlinewidth currentlinecap currentlinejoin currentdash exch aload length
fg 5 sfl{1}{0}ifelse put pnsv pnsh 2t aload pop 3a aload pop mx2 aload pop mx1
aload pop mtx currentmatrix aload pop mx3 aload pop ps pm restore/ps xdf mx3
astore pop}bdf /bn{/pm save def mx3 setmatrix newpath 0 0 moveto ct dup 39 get
0 exch getinterval cvx exec mtx astore setmatrix mx1 astore pop mx2 astore pop
3a astore pop 2t astore pop/pnsh xdf/pnsv xdf gw /sfl fg 5 get 0 ne def array
astore exch setdash setlinejoin setlinecap setlinewidth setgray moveto}bdf
/fc{save vmstatus exch sub 50000 lt {(%%[|0|]%%)=print flush}if pop
restore}bdf /tc{32768 div add 3 1 roll 32768 div add 2t astore pop}bdf /3a [0
0 0] def /2t 2 array def /tp{3a astore pop}bdf /tt{mx2 currentmatrix pop
currentpoint 2 copy 2t aload pop qa 2 copy translate 3a aload pop exch dup 0
eq {pop}{1 eq{-1 1}{1 -1}ifelse scale}ifelse rotate pop neg exch neg exch
translate moveto}bdf /te{mx2 setmatrix}bdf /th{3 -1 roll div 3 1 roll exch div
2 copy mx1 scale pop scale/sfl true def}bdf /tu{1 1 mx1 itransform scale/sfl
false def}bdf /ts{1 1 mx1 transform scale/sfl true def}bdf /fz{/ps xdf}bdf
/dv{dup 0 ne{div}{pop}ifelse}bdf /pop4{pop pop pop pop}bdf /it{sfl{mx1
itransform}if}bdf /gm{exch it moveto}bdf/rm{it rmoveto}bdf /lm{currentpoint
sfl{mx1 transform}if exch pop sub 0 exch it rmoveto}bdf
/fm{statusdict/manualfeed known}bdf /se{statusdict exch/manualfeed exch
put}bdf /mf{ pop %UNI never allow manual feed %UNI dup/ma exch def 0 gt{fm
se/t1 5 st ok ma 1 gt and{/t2 0 st/t3 0 st statusdict/manualfeedtimeout 3600
put}if}if }bdf /jn{ pop %UNI don't set job name %UNI /statusdict where exch
pop{statusdict exch/jobname exch put}if }bdf /pen{pnm mul/pnsh xdf pnm
mul/pnsv xdf pnsh setlinewidth}bdf /min{2 copy gt{exch}if pop}bdf /max{2 copy
lt{exch}if pop}bdf /dh{fg 6 1 put array astore exch pop exch pop exch
setdash}bdf /ih[currentdash]def /rh{fg 6 0 put ih aload pop setdash}bdf
/dl{gsave nlw pys div setlinewidth 0 setgray}bdf /dlin{exch currentpoint
currentlinewidth 2 div dup translate newpath moveto lineto currentpoint stroke
grestore moveto}bdf /lin{fg 6 get 0 ne{exch lineto currentpoint 0 doop moveto}
{exch currentpoint/pnlv xdf/pnlh xdf gsave newpath/@1 xdf/@2 xdf fp{pnlh @2
lt{pnlv @1 ge {pnlh pnlv moveto @2 @1 lineto pnsh 0 rlineto 0 pnsv rlineto
pnlh pnsh add pnlv pnsv add lineto pnsh neg 0 rlineto} {pnlh pnlv moveto pnsh
0 rlineto @2 pnsh add @1 lineto 0 pnsv rlineto pnsh neg 0 rlineto pnlh pnlv
pnsv add lineto}ifelse}{pnlv @1 gt {@2 @1 moveto pnsh 0 rlineto pnlh pnsh add
pnlv lineto 0 pnsv rlineto pnsh neg 0 rlineto @2 @1 pnsv add lineto}{pnlh pnlv
moveto pnsh 0 rlineto 0 pnsv rlineto @2 pnsh add @1 pnsv add lineto pnsh neg 0
rlineto 0 pnsv neg rlineto}ifelse}ifelse closepath fill}if @2 @1 grestore
moveto}ifelse}bdf /gw{/pnm fg 3 get fg 4 get div def}bdf /lw{fg exch 4 exch
put fg exch 3 exch put gw pnsv pnsh pen}bdf /barc{/@1 xdf/@2 xdf/@3 xdf/@4
xdf/@5 xdf /@6 xdf/@7 xdf/@8 xdf gsave @5 @7 add 2 div @6 @8 add 2 div
translate newpath 0 0 moveto @5 @7 sub @6 @8 sub mtx currentmatrix pop scale
@1{newpath}if 0 0 0.5 @4 @3 arc @4 @3 sub abs 360 ge{closepath}if mtx
setmatrix @2 doop grestore}bdf /ar{dup 0 eq barc}bdf /ov{0 exch 360 exch true
barc}bdf /rc{/@t xdf currentpoint 6 2 roll newpath 4 copy 4 2 roll exch moveto
6 -1 roll lineto lineto lineto closepath @t doop moveto}bdf /mup{dup pnsh 2
div le exch pnsv 2 div le or}bdf /rr{/@1 xdf 2. div/@2 xdf 2. div/@3 xdf /@4
xdf/@5 xdf/@6 xdf/@7 xdf @7 @5 eq @6 @4 eq @2 mup or or{@7 @6 @5 @4 @1 rc} {@4
@6 sub 2. div dup @2 lt{/@2 xdf}{pop}ifelse @5 @7 sub 2. div dup @2 lt{/@2
xdf}{pop}ifelse @1 0 eq{/@2 @2 pnsh 2 div 2 copy gt{sub def}{0 pop4}ifelse}if
currentpoint newpath @4 @6 add 2. div @7 moveto @4 @7 @4 @5 @2 arcto pop4 @4
@5 @6 @5 @2 arcto pop4 @6 @5 @6 @7 @2 arcto pop4 @6 @7 @4 @7 @2 arcto pop4
closepath @1 doop moveto}ifelse}bdf /pr{gsave newpath/pl{exch moveto/pl{exch
lineto}def}def}bdf /pl{exch lineto}bdf /ep{dup 0 eq{{moveto}{exch
lin}{}{(%%[|1|]%%)= flush}pathforall pop grestore}{doop grestore}ifelse
currentpoint newpath moveto}bdf /gr{64. div setgray}bdf /pat{s8 copy pop 9.375
pa por not{90 add}if{1 add 4 mul cvi s8 exch get exch 1 add 4 mul cvi 7 sub
bitshift 1 and}setscreen gr}bdf /sg{freq rot/spf load setscreen gr}bdf
/dc{transform round .5 sub exch round .5 sub exch itransform}bdf
/sn{userdict/smooth4 known}bdf /x8{3 bitshift}bdf /x4{2 bitshift}bdf /d4{-2
bitshift}bdf /d8{-3 bitshift}bdf /rb{15 add -4 bitshift 1 bitshift}bdf /db{/@7
save def/@1 xdf/@2 xdf/@3 xdf/@4 xdf/@5 xdf/@6 @5 @3 4 add mul def dc
translate scale/xdbit 1 1 idtransform abs/ydbit exch def abs def{0 0 1 ydbit
add 1 10 rc clip}if @1 0 eq @1 4 eq or{1 setgray ydbit 0 1 ydbit add 1 2 rc}if
@1 3 eq @1 7 eq or{1}{0}ifelse setgray/@9 @1 0 eq @1 1 eq @1 3 eq or or
invertflag xor def/@13 @6 def @2 fBitStretch or{/@10 @4 x4 def/@11 @3 x4
def/@12 @10 rb def/@13 @12 @11 mul def/@15 1 1 dtransform abs/calcY 1 index
def round cvi/@14 exch def abs/calcX 1 index def round cvi scaleby96 not{1
add}if def/@16 @15 rb def/@17 @16 @14 mul def}if sn @13 60000 lt and @2
fBitStretch or and{mtx currentmatrix dup 1 get exch 2 get 0. eq exch 0. eq and
@17 60000 lt and fBitStretch and{@16 3 bitshift @14 @9 [calcX 0 0 calcY 0
0]{@17 string @13 string currentfile @6 string readhexstring pop 1 index @4 @3
@5 @12 @2 smooth4 @10 @11 @12 dup string 5 index @15 @14 @16 dup string
stretch}imagemask}{@12 x8 @11 @9 [@10 0 0 @11 0 0]{@13 string currentfile @6
string readhexstring pop 1 index @4 @3 @5 @12 @2 smooth4}imagemask}ifelse}{@5
3 bitshift @3 4 add @9 [@4 0 0 @3 0 2]{currentfile @6 string readhexstring
pop}imagemask}ifelse @7 restore}bdf /wd 16 dict def /mfont 14 dict def
/mdf{mfont wcheck not{/mfont 14 dict def}if mfont begin xdf end}bdf /cf{{1
index/FID ne{def}{pop pop}ifelse}forall}bdf /rf{/@1 exch def/@2 exch def
FontDirectory @2 known{cleartomark pop}{findfont dup begin dup length @1 add
dict begin cf {/Encoding macvec def}{Encoding dup length array copy/Encoding
exch def counttomark 2 idiv{Encoding 3 1 roll put}repeat}ifelse pop exec
currentdict end end @2 exch definefont pop}ifelse}bdf /bmbc{exch begin wd
begin /cr xdf save CharTable cr 6 mul 6 getinterval{}forall /bitheight
xdf/bitwidth xdf .96 div/width xdf Gkernmax add/XOffset xdf Gdescent
add/YOffset xdf/rowbytes xdf rowbytes 255 eq{0 0 0 0 0 0 setcachedevice}
{Gnormsize dup scale width 0 XOffset YOffset bitwidth XOffset add bitheight
YOffset add setcachedevice rowbytes 0 ne{ XOffset YOffset translate newpath 0
0 moveto bitwidth bitheight scale sn{ /xSmt bitwidth x4 def /ySmt bitheight x4
def /rSmt xSmt rb def rSmt x8 ySmt true [xSmt 0 0 ySmt neg 0 ySmt] {rSmt ySmt
mul string CharData cr get 1 index bitwidth bitheight rowbytes rSmt so
smooth4} }{rowbytes 3 bitshift bitheight 4 add true [bitwidth 0 0 bitheight
neg 0 bitheight 2 add] {CharData cr get} }ifelse imagemask }if }ifelse restore
end end }bdf /bb{.96 exch div/Gnormsize mdf 2 index /Gkernmax mdf 1
index/Gdescent mdf 3 index div 4 1 roll 2 index div 1. 5 2 roll exch div 4 1
roll 4 array astore/FontBBox mdf }bdf /cdf{mfont/CharData get 3 1 roll put}bdf
/bf{ mfont begin /FontType 3 def /FontMatrix [1 0 0 1 0 0] def /Encoding
macvec def /BuildChar/bmbc load def end mfont definefont pop }bdf /wi LW 1
eq{{gsave 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 moveto lineto lineto lineto closepath clip
stringwidth grestore}bind}{/stringwidth load}ifelse def /aps{0 get 124 eq}bdf
/xc{s75 cvs dup}bdf /xp{put cvn}bdf /scs{xc 3 67 put dup 0 95 xp}bdf /sos{xc 3
79 xp}bdf /sbs{xc 1 66 xp}bdf /sis{xc 2 73 xp}bdf /sob{xc 2 79 xp}bdf /sss{xc
4 83 xp}bdf /dd{exch 1 index add 3 1 roll add exch}bdf /smc{moveto dup lws}bdf
/kwn{FontDirectory 1 index known{findfont exch pop}}bdf /gl{1 currentgray sub
setgray}bdf /mm{/mfont 10 dict def mfont begin /FontMatrix [1 0 0 1 0 0] def
/FontType 3 def /Encoding macvec def /df 4 index findfont def /FontBBox [0 0 1
1] def /xda xdf/mbc xdf /BuildChar{wd begin/cr xdf/fd xdf/cs s1 dup 0 cr put
def fd/mbc get exec end}def exec end mfont definefont}bdf /ac{dup scs kwn{exch
findfont dup length 1 add dict begin cf fmv{/Encoding macvec
def}if/StrokeWidth nlw 1000 mul pys div ps div dup 12 lt{pop 12}if def
/PaintType 2 def currentdict /UniqueID known{/UniqueID UniqueID 16#A80000 xor
def}if currentdict end definefont}ifelse}bdf /mb{dup sbs
kwn{exch{pop}{bbc}{}mm}ifelse sfd}bdf /mo{dup sos
kwn{exch{pop}{boc}{}mm}ifelse sfd}bdf /ms{dup sss
kwn{exch{pop}{bsc}{}mm}ifelse sfd}bdf /ou{dup sos kwn{exch dup ac pop{scs
findfont /df2 xdf}{aoc}{}mm}ifelse sfd}bdf /su{dup sss kwn{exch dup ac pop{scs
findfont /df2 xdf}{asc}{}mm}ifelse sfd}bdf /ao{/fmv true def ou}bdf/as{/fmv
true def su}bdf /vo{/fmv false def ou}bdf/vs{/fmv false def su}bdf /bbc{/da
.03 def fd/df get setfont gsave cs wi 1 index 0 ne{exch da add exch}if
grestore setcharwidth cs 0 0 smc da 0 smc da da smc 0 da moveto lws}bdf
/boc{/da 1 ps div def fd/df get setfont gsave cs wi 1 index 0 ne{exch da add
exch}if grestore setcharwidth cs 0 0 smc da 0 smc da da smc 0 da smc gl da 2.
div dup moveto lws}bdf /bsc{/da 1 ps div def /ds .05 def/da2 da 2. div def
fd/df get setfont gsave cs wi 1 index 0 ne{exch ds add da2 add exch}if
grestore setcharwidth cs ds da2 add .01 add 0 smc 0 ds da2 sub translate 0 0
smc da 0 smc da da smc 0 da smc gl da 2. div dup moveto lws}bdf /aoc{fd/df get
setfont gsave cs wi grestore setcharwidth gl cs 0 0 smc fd/df2 get setfont gl
0 0 moveto lws}bdf /asc{/da .05 def fd/df get setfont gsave cs wi 1 index 0
ne{exch da add exch}if grestore setcharwidth cs da .01 add 0 smc 0 da
translate gl 0 0 smc gl fd/df2 get setfont 0 0 moveto lws}bdf /st{1000 mul
usertime add dup 2147483647 gt{2147483647 sub}if def}bdf /the{usertime sub dup
0 lt exch -2147483648 gt and}bdf /6a 6 array def /2a 2 array def /3q 3 array
def /qs{3 -1 roll sub exch 3 -1 roll sub exch}bdf /qa{3 -1 roll add exch 3 -1
roll add exch}bdf /qm{3 -1 roll 1 index mul 3 1 roll mul}bdf /qn{6a exch get
mul}bdf /qA .166667 def/qB .833333 def/qC .5 def /qx{6a astore pop qA 0 qn qB
2 qn add qA 1 qn qB 3 qn add qB 2 qn qA 4 qn add qB 3 qn qA 5 qn add qC 2 qn
qC 4 qn add qC 3 qn qC 5 qn add}bdf /qp{6 copy 12 -2 roll pop pop}bdf /qc{exch
qp qx curveto}bdf /qi{{exch 4 copy 2a astore aload pop qa .5 qm newpath
moveto}{exch 2 copy 6 -2 roll 2 qm qs 4 2 roll}ifelse}bdf /qq{{qc 2a aload pop
qx curveto}{exch 4 copy qs qa qx curveto}ifelse}bdf /pt{currentpoint newpath
moveto}bdf /qf{/fillflag true def}bdf /ec{1 and 0 ne{0 doop}if grestore
currentpoint newpath moveto/fillflag false def}bdf /eu{currentpoint fp{0
ep}{grestore newpath}ifelse moveto/fillflag false def}bdf /bp{currentpoint
newpath 2 copy moveto}bdf /ef{gsave fillflag{gsave eofill grestore}if}bdf
/sm{0 exch{@1 eq{1 add}if}forall}bdf /lshow{4 1 roll exch/@1 exch def{1 index
wi pop sub 1 index sm dv 0 @1 4 -1 roll widthshow}{1 index wi pop sub 1 index
dup sm 10 mul exch length 1 sub add dv dup 10. mul 0 @1 4 -1 roll 0 6 -1 roll
awidthshow}ifelse}bdf /setTxMode{sa 9 2 index put 3 eq{1}{0}ifelse setgray}bdf
/SwToSym{{}mark false/Symbol/|______Symbol 0 rf 0 sa 6 get 0 ne{pop 1}{sa 7
get 0 eq{pop 2}if}ifelse sa 1 get 0 ne/|______Symbol sa 4 get 0 ne{vs}{sa 3
get 0 ne{vo}{fnt}ifelse}ifelse}bdf /mc{0 3 1 roll transform neg exch pop}bdf
/ul{dup 0 ne sa 2 get 0 ne and{gsave 0 0 /UnderlinePosition kif{mc}{ps -10
div}ifelse/UnderlineThickness kif{mc}{ps 15 div}ifelse abs setlinewidth neg
rmoveto sa 4 get 0 ne{gsave currentlinewidth 2. div dup rmoveto currentpoint
newpath moveto 2 copy rlineto stroke grestore}if sa 3 get sa 4 get or 0
ne{gsave gl 2 copy rlineto stroke grestore rlineto strokepath nlw pys div
setlinewidth}{rlineto}ifelse stroke grestore}{pop}ifelse}bdf /sgt{2 copy
known{get true}{pop pop false}ifelse}bdf /kif{currentfont dup/FontMatrix get
exch/FontInfo sgt{true}{currentfont/df sgt {dup/FontInfo sgt{3 1
roll/FontMatrix get mtx concatmatrix exch true}{pop pop pop false} ifelse}{pop
pop false}ifelse}ifelse{3 -1 roll sgt{exch true}{pop
false}ifelse}{false}ifelse}bdf /blank/Times-Roman findfont/CharStrings
get/space get def /macvec 256 array def
/NUL/SOH/STX/ETX/EOT/ENQ/ACK/BEL/BS/HT/LF/VT/FF/CR/SO/SI
/DLE/DC1/DC2/DC3/DC4/NAK/SYN/ETB/CAN/EM/SUB/ESC/FS/GS/RS/US macvec 0 32
getinterval astore pop macvec 32/Times-Roman findfont/Encoding get 32 96
getinterval putinterval macvec dup 39/quotesingle put 96/grave put
/Adieresis/Aring/Ccedilla/Eacute/Ntilde/Odieresis/Udieresis/aacute
/agrave/acircumflex/adieresis/atilde/aring/ccedilla/eacute/egrave
/ecircumflex/edieresis/iacute/igrave/icircumflex/idieresis/ntilde/oacute
/ograve/ocircumflex/odieresis/otilde/uacute/ugrave/ucircumflex/udieresis
/dagger/degree/cent/sterling/section/bullet/paragraph/germandbls
/registered/copyright/trademark/acute/dieresis/notequal/AE/Oslash
/infinity/plusminus/lessequal/greaterequal/yen/mu/partialdiff/summation
/product/pi/integral/ordfeminine/ordmasculine/Omega/ae/oslash
/questiondown/exclamdown/logicalnot/radical/florin/approxequal/Delta/guillemotleft
/guillemotright/ellipsis/blank/Agrave/Atilde/Otilde/OE/oe
/endash/emdash/quotedblleft/quotedblright/quoteleft/quoteright/divide/lozenge
/ydieresis/Ydieresis/fraction/currency/guilsinglleft/guilsinglright/fi/fl
/daggerdbl/periodcentered/quotesinglbase/quotedblbase/perthousand/Acircumflex/Ecircumflex/Aacute
/Edieresis/Egrave/Iacute/Icircumflex/Idieresis/Igrave/Oacute/Ocircumflex
/apple/Ograve/Uacute/Ucircumflex/Ugrave/dotlessi/circumflex/tilde
/macron/breve/dotaccent/ring/cedilla/hungarumlaut/ogonek/caron macvec 128 128
getinterval astore pop {}mark true/Courier/|______Courier 0 rf {/Metrics 21
dict begin/zero 600 def/one 600 def/two 600 def/three 600 def/four 600
def/five 600 def/six 600 def/seven 600 def/eight 600 def /nine 600 def/comma
600 def/period 600 def/dollar 600 def/numbersign 600 def/percent 600 def/plus
600 def/hyphen 600 def/E 600 def/parenleft 600 def/parenright 600 def/space
600 def currentdict end def currentdict/UniqueID known{/UniqueID 16#800000
def}if/FontBBox FontBBox 4 array astore def}mark true/Helvetica/|______Seattle
1 rf /oldsettransfer/settransfer load def /concatprocs{/proc2 exch cvlit
def/proc1 exch cvlit def/newproc proc1 length proc2 length add array def
newproc 0 proc1 putinterval newproc proc1 length proc2 putinterval newproc
cvx}def /settransfer{currenttransfer concatprocs oldsettransfer}def
/PaintBlack{{1 exch sub}settransfer gsave newpath clippath 1 setgray fill
grestore}def /od{(Rvd\001\001\000\000\177) fg copy pop txpose 1 0 mtx
defaultmatrix dtransform exch atan/pa exch def newpath clippath mark
{transform{itransform moveto}}{transform{itransform lineto}} {6 -2 roll
transform 6 -2 roll transform 6 -2 roll transform {itransform 6 2 roll
itransform 6 2 roll itransform 6 2 roll curveto}} {{closepath}}pathforall
newpath counttomark array astore/gc xdf pop ct 39 0 put 10 fz 0 fs 2
F/|______Courier fnt invertflag{PaintBlack}if}bdf /cd{}bdf /op{/sfl false
def/pm save def}bdf % two args, booleans /cp{ %UNI don't actually print page
pop pop %UNI ignore two args %UNI not{userdict/#copies 0 put}if %UNI ma 0
gt{{t1 the{exit}if}loop}if %UNI {copypage}{showpage}ifelse pm restore }bdf
/px{0 3 1 roll tp tt}bdf /psb{/us save def}bdf /pse{us restore}bdf /ct 40
string def /nc{currentpoint initclip newpath gc{dup type dup/arraytype eq
exch/packedarraytype eq or{exec}if} forall clip newpath moveto}bdf /kp{ct 0 2
index length 2 index 39 2 index put getinterval copy cvx exec mx3
currentmatrix pop}bdf end % dict "md" %UNI don't initialize LaserWriter %UNI
LW 1 eq userdict/a4small known not and{/a4small %UNI [[300 72 div 0 0 -300 72
div -120 3381] %UNI 280 3255 %UNI {statusdict/jobstate (printing) put 0
setblink %UNI margins %UNI exch 196 add exch 304 add 8 div round cvi
frametoroket %UNI statusdict/jobstate (busy) put %UNI 1 setblink} %UNI
/framedevice load %UNI 60 45{dup mul exch dup mul add 1.0 exch sub}/setscreen
load %UNI {}/settransfer load/initgraphics load/erasepage load]cvx %UNI
statusdict begin bind end readonly def}if %UNI md begin/bigs[lnop lnop/legal
load userdict/a4 known{/a4 load}{lnop}ifelse lnop lnop lnop lnop lnop]def %UNI
/smalls[lnop userdict/note known{/note load}{dup}ifelse lnop userdict/a4small
known{/a4small load}{lnop}ifelse 2 index lnop lnop lnop lnop ]def end %UNI
systemdict/currentpacking known{setpacking}if %UNI currentfile ok
userdict/stretch known not and{eexec}{flushfile}ifelse % Begin SEI DeathStar
definition: % Allows SEI logo to appear at the top of documents such as
letters, etc. % -- Logo produced by Gary Ford, SEI. % -- Original font
encoding done by Donald Stone, SEI. % John Kochmar % /square { newpath 0
halfdiag moveto halfdiag 0 lineto 0 0 halfdiag sub lineto 0 halfdiag sub 0
lineto closepath} def /makeline {0 height sub exch hw mul moveto height 2 mul
0 rlineto} def /BuildCharDict 10 dict def /seifont 7 dict def seifont begin
/FontType 3 def /FontMatrix [1 0 0 1 0 0] def /FontBBox [0 0 1 1] def
/Encoding 256 array def 0 1 255 {Encoding exch /.notdef put} for Encoding (A)
0 get /logoleft put Encoding (B) 0 get /logoright put /CharacterDefs 6 dict
def CharacterDefs /.notdef {} put CharacterDefs /logoleft { /height 1 def /hw
height 64 div def /middle height 2 div def /halfdiag height 2 mul 3 div def
gsave 0 0 moveto 1 0 lineto 1 1 lineto 0 1 lineto closepath clip gsave
currentpoint middle add exch height add exch translate square clip 4 hw mul
setlinewidth newpath 30 -10 -30 {makeline} for stroke grestore gsave
currentpoint middle add exch height 2 mul 3 div add exch translate square clip
2 hw mul setlinewidth newpath 25 -10 -25 {makeline} for stroke grestore
grestore } put CharacterDefs /logoright { /height 1 def /hw height 64 div def
/middle height 2 div def /halfdiag height 2 mul 3 div def gsave 0 0 moveto 1 0
lineto 1 1 lineto 0 1 lineto closepath clip gsave currentpoint middle add exch
height add exch translate -1 0 translate square clip 4 hw mul setlinewidth
newpath 30 -10 -30 {makeline} for stroke grestore gsave currentpoint middle
add exch height 2 mul 3 div add exch translate -1 0 translate square clip 2 hw
mul setlinewidth newpath 25 -10 -25 {makeline} for stroke grestore grestore }
put /BuildChar { BuildCharDict begin /char exch def /fontdict exch def
/charname fontdict /Encoding get char get def /charproc fontdict
/CharacterDefs get charname get def 1 0 0 0 1 1 setcachedevice gsave charproc
grestore end } def end /Sei seifont definefont pop % Generate encodings for
accent fonts. Taken from the Postscript Cookbook /reencodedict 5 dict def
/ReEncode { reencodedict begin /newencoding exch def /newfontname exch def
/basefontname exch def /basefontdict basefontname findfont def /newfont
basefontdict maxlength dict def basefontdict {exch dup /FID ne dup /Encoding
ne and { exch newfont 3 1 roll put } { pop pop } ifelse } forall newfont
/FontName newfontname put newfont /Encoding newencoding put newfontname
newfont definefont pop end } def /Stuff { exch 1 add dup Accent 4 2 roll exch
put } def /Accent 256 array def 0 1 255 { Accent exch /.notdef put } for 8#100
[ /Aacute /Acircumflex /Adieresis /Agrave /Aring /Atilde /Ccedilla /Eacute
/Ecircumflex /Edieresis /Egrave /Iacute /Icircumflex /Idieresis /Igrave
/Ntilde /Oacute /Ocircumflex /Odieresis /Ograve /Otilde /Scaron /Uacute
/Ucircumflex /Udieresis /Ugrave /Ydieresis /Zcaron ] { Stuff } forall pop
8#140 [ /aacute /acircumflex /adieresis /agrave /aring /atilde /ccedilla
/eacute /ecircumflex /edieresis /egrave /iacute /icircumflex /idieresis
/igrave /ntilde /oacute /ocircumflex /odieresis /ograve /otilde /scaron
/uacute /ucircumflex /udieresis /ugrave /ydieresis /zcaron ] { Stuff } forall
pop 8#177 [ /a /b /c /d /e /f /g /h /i /j /k /l /m /n /o /p /q /r /s /t /u /v
/w /x /y /z /A /B /C /D /E /F /G /H /I /J /K /L /M /N /O /P /Q /R /S /T /U /V
/W /X /Y /Z /dotlessi /grave /acute /circumflex /tilde /macron /breve
/dotaccent /dieresis /ring /cedilla /hungarumlaut /ogonek /caron] { Stuff }
forall pop /Times-Roman /Times-Accent Accent ReEncode /Times-Bold /Times-Bold-
Accent Accent ReEncode /Helvetica /Helvetica-Accent Accent ReEncode
/Helvetica-Bold /Helvetica-Bold-Accent Accent ReEncode /Courier /Courier-
Accent Accent ReEncode /Courier-Bold /Courier-Bold-Accent Accent ReEncode % %
-- end SEI changes % %%EndProlog %%Page: 0 1 BS 0 SI 12 /Helvetica-Bold AF
24480 3183 MT (Technical Report)SH 24480 5861 MT (CMU/SEI-91-TR-10)SH 24480
7200 MT (ESD-91-TR-10)SH 16 /Helvetica-Narrow-Bold AF 24480 23264 MT (Models
for)SH 24480 25132 MT (Undergraduate Project Courses)SH 24480 27000 MT (in
Software Engineering)SH 12 /Helvetica-Bold AF 27180 29675 MT (Mary Shaw)SH
28514 31014 MT (James E. Tomayko)SH 29781 33159 MT (August 1991)SH ES %%Page:
0 2 BS 0 SI 15 /Helvetica-Bold AF 42907 10094 MT (Technical Report)SH 11 SS
45484 11907 MT (CMU/SEI-91-TR-10)SH 47806 13333 MT (ESD-91-TR-10)SH 48538
14698 MT (August 1991)SH 21 /Helvetica-Narrow-Bold AF 46363 23224 MT (Models
for)SH 29120 26012 MT (Undergraduate Project Courses)SH 35347 28800 MT (in
Software Engineering)SH 39600 50 15480 30289 UL 39600 50 15480 30628 UL 39600
50 15480 30967 UL 39600 50 15480 31306 UL 39600 50 15480 31645 UL 30 /Sei AF
10080 32400 MT (AB)SH 17 /Helvetica-Bold AF 46199 35439 MT (Mary Shaw)SH 11
/Helvetica AF 41136 37731 MT (School of Computer Science)SH 38258 39157 MT
(and Software Engineering Institute)SH 17 /Helvetica-Bold AF 39773 42670 MT
(James E. Tomayko)SH 11 /Helvetica AF 41136 44962 MT (School of Computer
Science)SH 38258 46388 MT (and Software Engineering Institute)SH 27016 49464
MT (This report will also appear as Carnegie Mellon University)SH 21694 50890
MT (School of Computer Science Technical Report No. CMU-CS-91-174.)SH 9 SS
43880 62946 MT (Approved for public release.)SH 46480 64044 MT (Distribution
unlimited.)SH 42530 66240 MT (JPO approval signature on file.)SH 13
/Helvetica-Bold AF 36302 71841 MT (Software Engineering Institute)SH 10
/Helvetica AF 43133 73017 MT (Carnegie Mellon University)SH 41017 74160 MT
(Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213)SH ES %%Page: 1 3 BS 0 SI 15 /Helvetica-Bold
AF 28786 10094 MT (Models for)SH 21282 11518 MT (Undergraduate Project
Courses)SH 23991 12942 MT (in Software Engineering)SH 11 SS 12528 16937 MT
(Abstract:)SH /Helvetica SF 17749 XM (The software engineering course provides
undergraduates) 87 W( with an op-)86 W 12528 18174 MT (portunity to learn
something about) 114 W( real-world software development. Since soft-)115 W
12528 19411 MT (ware engineering) 108 W( is far from being a mature
engineering discipline, it is not pos-)107 W 12528 20648 MT (sible to define a
completely) 20 W( satisfactory syllabus. Content with a sound basis is in)21 W
12528 21885 MT (short supply, and the material most often) 56 W( taught is at
high risk of becoming obso-)55 W 12528 23122 MT (lete within a few years.)SH
12528 25500 MT (Undergraduate software engineering courses are now offered)
279 W( in more than a)280 W 12528 26737 MT (hundred universities. Although
three) 71 W( textbooks dominate the market, there is not)70 W 12528 27974 MT
(yet consensus on the scope) 55 W( and form of the course. The two major
decisions an)56 W 12528 29211 MT (instructor faces are the balance between
technical) 145 W( and management topics and)144 W 12528 30448 MT (the relation
between the lecture and project components. We discuss) 95 W( these two)96 W
12528 31685 MT (decisions, with support from sample) 25 W( syllabi and survey
data on course offerings in)24 W 12528 32922 MT (the United States and Canada.
We also offer) 11 W( some advice on the management of)12 W 12528 34159 MT (a
project-oriented course.)SH 17 /Helvetica-Bold AF 10080 38998 MT (1.
Introduction)SH 11 /Helvetica AF 10080 41613 MT (For most undergraduate
students, an upper-level software engineering course) 72 W( provides the)71 W
10080 43039 MT (best opportunity to learn about "real-world" software
development: group projects, large-)214 W 10080 44465 MT (scale design,
integration of software) 163 W( with larger systems, applying theory in
practical set-)162 W 10080 45891 MT (tings, understanding clients'
requirements, models of the development life) 182 W( cycle, configu-)183 W
10080 47317 MT (ration management, quality assurance, maintenance, and so on.)
84 W( In) 472 W( many universities, it is)83 W 10080 48743 MT (our last and
best chance to show students that developing a real software) 75 W( system is
not at)76 W 10080 50169 MT (all the same as writing) 166 W( a programming
assignment that will be graded and thrown away.)165 W 10080 51595 MT (The
course is most often taken by students about to) 72 W( enter the work force as
programmers;)73 W 10080 53021 MT (our experience is that corporate) 137 W(
recruiters are very enthusiastic about the things students)136 W 10080 54447
MT (learn in these courses.)SH 10080 57014 MT (Versions of the software
engineering project course have been) 197 W( offered for nearly twenty)198 W
10080 58440 MT (years, but despite that extended) 77 W( history the course is
far from standard in either content or)76 W 10080 59866 MT (format. A) 442 W(
great deal of material is available\320much more than can be covered in a
quarter)68 W 10080 61292 MT (or a semester\320so the course design problem is
one of selecting the subset to present and)60 W 10080 62718 MT (the viewpoint
from which to present it.)SH 10080 65285 MT (Any curriculum design task is in
part a resource allocation task. The problem is determining)24 W 10080 66711
MT (the amount of) 78 W( content that can be presented, constrained by the
scarce resources of class)77 W 10080 68137 MT (time, student energy, and
testing attention,) 12 W( among other factors. The evaluation criterion for)13
W 10080 69563 MT (selecting content is benefit to) 89 W( the student through
his or her career, and we often describe)88 W 10080 70989 MT (course content
having this durable value as) 101 W( "fundamental." Along with fundamental
mate-)102 W 45000 50 10080 74651 UL 10 /Helvetica-Bold AF 10358 75600 MT
(CMU/SEI-91-TR-10)SH 54524 XM (1)SH ES %%Page: 2 4 BS 0 SI 11 /Helvetica AF
7920 9802 MT (rial, software engineering includes techniques \050often
management strategies\051 that are cur-)121 W 7920 11228 MT (rently useful but
are likely to be superseded as fundamental material emerges. As a result,)48 W
7920 12654 MT (the challenge to the software engineering instructor is to find
meaty,) 162 W( substantive material)161 W 7920 14080 MT (that will continue to
be significant to the student over many years.)SH 7920 16647 MT (An instructor
faces two major decisions in selecting a strategy for the software) 79 W(
engineering)80 W 7920 18073 MT (course. The) 420 W( first is what balance to
strike between technical issues of software design and)56 W 7920 19499 MT
(development on the one hand) 67 W( and project management topics on the
other. Section 2 dis-)68 W 7920 20925 MT (cusses the considerations that
affect this decision. The instructor's) 91 W( second decision is how)90 W 7920
22351 MT (to allocate class effort between project work) 97 W( and
lectures\320and how to coordinate the two.)98 W 7920 23777 MT (Section 3
describes several course) 76 W( models that make different tradeoffs on this
dimension,)75 W 7920 25203 MT (and Section 4 discusses the)SH /Helvetica-
Oblique SF 21928 XM (kinds)SH /Helvetica SF 24802 XM (of projects used in
undergraduate courses.)SH 7920 27770 MT (In doing this analysis we had the
benefit of the Software Engineering Institute's survey of)134 W 7920 29196 MT
(software engineering courses) 170 W( [84]) SH( and personal contact with some
two) 170 W( dozen instructors.)169 W 7920 30622 MT (Section 5 and the
appendix) 129 W( present some objective data from the spring 1990 survey,
in-)130 W 7920 32048 MT (cluding the position of the courses in the curriculum
and the textbooks in use.)SH 7920 34615 MT (To put flesh on the bones of this
overview, Sections 6 through 10 present the plans) 60 W( of sev-)59 W 7920
36041 MT (eral versions of the course, including syllabi of) 130 W( actual
offerings, outlines of textbooks, and)131 W 7920 37467 MT (curriculum
designs.)SH 7920 40034 MT (Finally, no matter which decision the instructor
makes on the two major questions of content)21 W 7920 41460 MT (and
organization, any course with) 157 W( a significant group-project component
presents several)158 W 7920 42886 MT (special problems. Section 11 notes some
of these and suggests ways to deal with them.)SH 7920 45453 MT (Software
engineering education has regularly been singled out for) 13 W( special
attention. An ear-)12 W 7920 46879 MT (ly workshop was held in 1976) 73 W(
[129].) SH( An) 452 W( annual series of workshops on) 73 W( software
engineer-)74 W 7920 48305 MT (ing education) 388 W( has been sponsored since
1986 by the Software Engineering Institute)387 W 8226 49731 MT ([57, 48, 50,
56, 39].) SH( Papers) 434 W( on particular topics also appear regularly in the
ACM)65 W /Helvetica-Oblique SF 48762 XM (SIGCSE)SH 7920 51157 MT (Bulletin)SH
/Helvetica SF 11834 XM (and in special issues of other professional
journals.)SH 45000 50 7920 74651 UL 10 /Helvetica-Bold AF 8198 75600 MT (2)SH
44197 XM (CMU/SEI-91-TR-10)SH ES %%Page: 3 5 BS 0 SI 17 /Helvetica-Bold AF
10080 10239 MT (2. Content Balance: Technical versus Management)SH 11
/Helvetica AF 10080 12854 MT (Traditionally, engineering is defined as
"creating cost-effective solutions) 168 W( to practical prob-)167 W 10080
14280 MT (lems by applying scientific knowledge to) 139 W( building things in
the services of mankind") 140 W( [114].)SH 10080 15706 MT (Against that
standard, the phrase "software engineering" is a) 75 W( statement of
aspiration, not a)74 W 10080 17132 MT (description of accomplishment.
Nevertheless, we face a crying) 135 W( need to get better control)136 W 10080
18558 MT (over the software development task and to do so in the short
term.)SH 10080 21125 MT (Engineering disciplines have historically emerged) 47
W( from ad hoc practice in two stages. They)46 W 10080 22551 MT (are rooted
in) 155 W( the exploitation of a technology by individual craftsmen. As the
technology)156 W 10080 23977 MT (becomes more significant, management and
uniform production techniques) 114 W( are developed)113 W 10080 25403 MT (to
support a stable market. Problems with) 126 W( production in this commercial
setting stimulate)127 W 10080 26829 MT (the development of a supporting
science. As the science matures, it merges) 152 W( with estab-)151 W 10080
28255 MT (lished practice to enable a professional engineering practice rooted
in the science) 204 W( [114].)SH 10080 29681 MT (Figure 1 depicts this
evolution.)SH /Helvetica-Bold SF 19741 52550 MT (Figure 1:) SH( Evolution) 612
W( of an Engineering Discipline)SH /Helvetica SF 10080 57780 MT (Certainly the
software development task) 33 W( is appropriately an engineering problem: it
involves)32 W 10080 59206 MT ("creating cost-effective solutions to practical)
167 W( problems." What's currently lacking is wide-)168 W 10080 60632 MT
(spread routine application of scientific knowledge) 70 W( to a wide range of
practical design tasks.)69 W 10080 62058 MT (Some science is mature, most
notably algorithms, data structures,) 127 W( and compiler construc-)128 W
10080 63484 MT (tion theory; however, the current demands are far ahead of the
scientific base. In other)174 W 10080 64910 MT (words, the field of software
engineering is still immature;) 12 W( but the situation is improving,
albeit)13 W 10080 66336 MT (more slowly than need requires.)SH 10080 68903 MT
(In the absence of a mature scientific base, developers) 113 W( of large
software systems resort to)112 W 10080 70329 MT (establishing routine
practices which, even if ad hoc, will nevertheless guide programmers to)40 W
10080 71755 MT (relatively predictable outcomes. As a result, the "software
engineering") 132 W( label is being ap-)131 W 45000 50 10080 74651 UL 10
/Helvetica-Bold AF 10358 75600 MT (CMU/SEI-91-TR-10)SH 54524 XM (3)SH ES
%%Page: 4 6 BS 0 SI 11 /Helvetica AF 7920 9802 MT (plied to a set) 26 W( of
management topics such as project planning, cost/schedule estimation, and)27 W
7920 11228 MT (team organization.)SH 7920 13795 MT (These topics may represent
best current practice, but:)SH /Symbol SF 10168 15912 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica
SF 10980 XM (The pipeline of scientific results with practical) 56 W( utility
is filling, particularly in spe-)55 W 10980 17149 MT (cific application
areas.)SH /Symbol SF 10168 18757 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 10980 XM (Course
energy will have the) 59 W( highest payoff if invested in the most durable
con-)60 W 10980 19994 MT (tent.)SH /Symbol SF 10168 21602 MT (\267)SH
/Helvetica SF 10980 XM (Use of the "engineering" label for what are) 50 W(
essentially management topics may)49 W 10980 22839 MT (preempt its use) 40 W(
for real engineering techniques\320and may even divert attention)41 W 10980
24076 MT (from the cultivation of those techniques.)SH 7920 26643 MT (Here
lies the source of the instructor's dilemma: whether to emphasize the mature
science)84 W 7920 28069 MT (or the current) 255 W( practice. The former is
less applicable at present but has been refined)256 W 7920 29495 MT (enough to
retain its value) 149 W( for years to come. The latter represents useful
skills that may)148 W 7920 30921 MT (become obsolete\320and may) 47 W( also be
inefficient in course time per unit of content. The deci-)48 W 7920 32347 MT
(sion is complicated by the need to present material that is required simply
to enable stu-)150 W 9 SS 28736 33403 MT (1)SH 11 SS 7920 33773 MT (dents to
carry) 91 W( out a sizable group project.)90 W 29632 XM (For concreteness, we
list here typical technical)90 W 7920 35199 MT (and management topics. It is
difficult to fully separate the two, for a given) 209 W( subject can)210 W
7920 36625 MT (sometimes be approached with either emphasis.) 25 W( For) 355
W( example, "configuration management")24 W 7920 38051 MT (has both technical
content \050formal methods) 204 W( of system description\051 and management
as-)205 W 7920 39477 MT (pects \050composition and activities of a
configuration control board\051. This) 23 W( dichotomy exists for)22 W 7920
40903 MT (several other areas within the scope) 102 W( of software
engineering: life cycle models, quality as-)103 W 7920 42329 MT (surance,
maintenance topics, etc.)SH /Helvetica-Bold SF 7920 44328 MT (Technical
engineering topics)SH /Symbol SF 10168 46445 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 10980
XM (Abstraction and specification, and their proper use in design)SH /Symbol
SF 10168 47981 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 10980 XM (Formal methods of
requirements specification and of verification)SH /Symbol SF 10168 49517 MT
(\267)SH /Helvetica SF 10980 XM (Large-scale data, including scientific,
commercial database, and AI issues)SH /Symbol SF 10168 51053 MT (\267)SH
/Helvetica SF 10980 XM (Security and reliability)SH /Symbol SF 10168 52589 MT
(\267)SH /Helvetica SF 10980 XM (Distributed systems, including
synchronization/atomicity and) 50 W( network communi-)49 W 10980 53826 MT
(cation)SH /Symbol SF 10168 55362 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 10980 XM (Real-
time systems)SH /Symbol SF 10168 56898 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 10980 XM
(Concepts of prototyping)SH /Symbol SF 10168 58434 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF
10980 XM (Development of metrics for measuring quality factors)SH /Symbol SF
10168 59970 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 10980 XM (System description
languages)SH 10800 50 7920 62759 UL 7 SS 8920 64325 MT (1)SH 9 SS 9309 64657
MT (An additional argument for including management topics arises from
employers' needs: it has been) 164 W( our)165 W 7920 65706 MT (experience that
students) 108 W( with a solid background in software engineering currently
advance quite rapidly after)107 W 7920 66755 MT (graduation to team leadership
positions) 102 W( in which they need to know those skills. In one instance, a
Carnegie)103 W 7920 67804 MT (Mellon graduate found himself leading a small
independent research and development team in a major aero-)120 W 7920 68853 MT
(space company within four) 108 W( months of leaving school. He reported that
his supervisors chose him for the lead)109 W 7920 69902 MT (because he had a
better understanding of) 147 W( the overall software development process than
more experienced)146 W 7920 70951 MT (computer science graduates who had
neither studied software engineering nor, as) 89 W( yet, gained an
appreciation)90 W 7920 72000 MT (for the "big picture.")SH 45000 50 7920 74651
UL 10 /Helvetica-Bold AF 8198 75600 MT (4)SH 44197 XM (CMU/SEI-91-TR-10)SH ES
%%Page: 5 7 BS 0 SI 11 /Symbol AF 12328 9880 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 13140
XM (Techniques for software reuse)SH /Symbol SF 12328 11416 MT (\267)SH
/Helvetica SF 13140 XM (Automated development environments and their
characteristics)SH /Symbol SF 12328 12952 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 13140 XM
(Configuration management)SH /Symbol SF 12328 14488 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF
13140 XM (Structuring software for maintenance)SH /Helvetica-Bold SF 10080
16527 MT (Management topics)SH /Symbol SF 12328 18644 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica
SF 13140 XM (Life cycle models as a framework for development planning)SH
/Symbol SF 12328 20180 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 13140 XM (Requirements
analysis)SH /Symbol SF 12328 21716 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 13140 XM
(Estimation and tracking)SH /Symbol SF 12328 23252 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF
13140 XM (Nature and use of development standards)SH /Symbol SF 12328 24788 MT
(\267)SH /Helvetica SF 13140 XM (Configuration management)SH /Symbol SF 12328
26324 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 13140 XM (Development team organization,) 311
W( structured design methods \050e.g., Yourdon,)312 W 13140 27561 MT (Jackson,
SADT\051)SH /Symbol SF 12328 29097 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 13140 XM
(Tracking progress through internal documents)SH /Symbol SF 12328 30633 MT
(\267)SH /Helvetica SF 13140 XM (The use of quality assurance)SH /Symbol SF
12328 32169 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 13140 XM (Reviews and walkthroughs)SH
/Symbol SF 12328 33705 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 13140 XM (Maintenance)SH
10080 35744 MT (In general, the course plans that we have) 98 W( reviewed show
a strong management emphasis)97 W 10080 37170 MT (both in the topics discussed
in class and in the project work.) 167 W( The) 641 W( most often-used
text-)168 W 10080 38596 MT (books, whose outlines are presented in Section 6,
certainly show that emphasis. For com-)69 W 10080 40022 MT (parison, an
example) 157 W( of a course based on a technical theme, in this case
abstraction, is)158 W 10080 41448 MT (given in Section 7. We can suggest
several) 11 W( reasons for the predominance of courses with a)10 W 10080 42874
MT (management emphasis:)SH /Symbol SF 12328 44991 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF
13140 XM (The most popular texts spend a considerable) 131 W( percentage of
their content dis-)132 W 13140 46228 MT (cussing life cycle models, management
issues relating to organizing software)148 W 13140 47465 MT (teams, quality
assurance and configuration) 31 W( management from the standpoint of)32 W
13140 48702 MT (their organizational impact rather than their technical
activity, etc.; this textual)139 W 13140 49939 MT (emphasis creeps into the
syllabi of inexperienced instructors.)SH /Symbol SF 12328 51547 MT (\267)SH
/Helvetica SF 13140 XM (Instructors with industrial experience recognize that
the chief failings) 200 W( of soft-)201 W 13140 52784 MT (ware projects in the
commercial world are) 76 W( not technical but are problems such)75 W 13140
54021 MT (as poor effort and resource estimates, poor communication, and lack
of config-)54 W 13140 55258 MT (uration management and quality assurance.)SH
/Symbol SF 12328 56866 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 13140 XM (A certain amount of
management material is needed to keep a group project)146 W 13140 58103 MT
(running well. Since this material is qualitatively different from the) 167 W(
topics stu-)168 W 13140 59340 MT (dents are accustomed to seeing in computer
science) 98 W( courses, it is likely to be)97 W 13140 60577 MT (more time-
consuming to teach.)SH /Symbol SF 12328 62185 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 13140
XM (Most of the students plan) 115 W( to go directly into industry after
graduation, and the)116 W 13140 63422 MT (software engineering course is the
only place in the) 151 W( undergraduate computer)150 W 13140 64659 MT (science
curriculum where these topics can be adequately taught.)SH 10080 66698 MT
(Alas, these reasons put vocational) 95 W( considerations ahead of the
traditional criteria of curric-)96 W 10080 68124 MT (ulum design.)SH 45000 50
10080 74651 UL 10 /Helvetica-Bold AF 10358 75600 MT (CMU/SEI-91-TR-10)SH 54524
XM (5)SH ES %%Page: 6 8 BS 0 SI 11 /Helvetica AF 7920 9802 MT (Until very
recently, the technical issues associated with software engineering fit) 137
W( quite well)136 W 7920 11228 MT (within the course alongside the management
issues\320there was so) 233 W( little to discuss that)234 W 7920 12654 MT
(there was plenty of class time for both. The students usually enter the) 114
W( course with a solid)113 W 7920 14080 MT (grounding in program construction,
so the challenge appeared to be meshing the manage-)85 W 7920 15506 MT (ment
techniques with the software) 274 W( development techniques. Software
engineering as a)273 W 7920 16932 MT (technical discipline has) 39 W( hardly
stood still: formal methods, new design paradigms, and other)40 W 7920 18358
MT (technical topics are squeezing the syllabus from one end, while process)
142 W( maturity models,)141 W 7920 19784 MT (post-development management
issues, and other management topics are squeezing) 35 W( it from)36 W 7920
21210 MT (the other. There is now a very real need to make decisions on
content) 10 W( that are different from)9 W 7920 22636 MT (the decisions early
in the last decade.)SH 7920 25203 MT (Various decisions about the balance of
technical and management topics can) 49 W( be supported)50 W 7920 26629 MT
(for different institutional settings) 7 W( and variations on the basic
objective of learning about "real-)6 W 7920 28055 MT (world" software. But to
justify the title "software engineering,") 142 W( the course must convey
to)143 W 7920 29481 MT (students the engineering point of view: that
engineering of software involves generating al-)85 W 7920 30907 MT (ternative
designs and selecting\320for good reasons\320the ones) 163 W( that best
resolve conflicting)164 W 7920 32333 MT (constraints and requirements of the
ultimate customer.)SH 45000 50 7920 74651 UL 10 /Helvetica-Bold AF 8198 75600
MT (6)SH 44197 XM (CMU/SEI-91-TR-10)SH ES %%Page: 7 9 BS 0 SI 17 /Helvetica-
Bold AF 10080 10239 MT (3. Models of the Undergraduate Software Engineering)SH
11971 12536 MT (Course)SH 11 /Helvetica AF 10080 15151 MT (Beginning software
engineering courses have been taught) 14 W( with content that crosses a
range)13 W 10080 16577 MT (from no project work at all to highly intensive
project work.) 89 W( Figure 2 is an illustration of the)90 W 10080 18003 MT
(spectrum of courses. The models described) 118 W( in this section are drawn
from extensive dis-)117 W 10080 19429 MT (cussions with instructors of these
courses over seven years, augmented by the literature.)SH /Helvetica-Bold SF
20322 62087 MT (Figure 2:) SH( Models) 612 W( of the One-Semester Course)SH
/Helvetica SF 10080 67317 MT (An underlying assumption of these models is) 103
W( that students enter the course with the tech-)104 W 10080 68743 MT (nical
background of program construction gained in the prerequisite courses, and the
pur-)121 W 10080 70169 MT (pose of the software engineering course is to) 182
W( demonstrate how this technical material is)183 W 10080 71595 MT (applied in
the context of large-scale software development. Students are expected to
have)90 W 45000 50 10080 74651 UL 10 /Helvetica-Bold AF 10358 75600 MT
(CMU/SEI-91-TR-10)SH 54524 XM (7)SH ES %%Page: 8 10 BS 0 SI 11 /Helvetica AF
7920 9802 MT (knowledge and skills in the) 249 W( application of high-level
programming languages, especially)250 W 7920 11228 MT (those that emphasize
structure and abstraction, knowledge of) 474 W( machine organization)473 W
7920 12654 MT (\050perhaps demonstrated by facility with assembly
language\051, and grounding) 15 W( in the fundamen-)16 W 7920 14080 MT (tal
principles and) 47 W( algorithms of computer science. Further, students should
be good writers)46 W 7920 15506 MT (and should have senior standing. This
last) 81 W( requirement is to ensure that the students have)82 W 7920 16932 MT
(had some upper-division courses such as theory,) 163 W( compiler design, or
survey of program-)162 W 7920 18358 MT (ming languages,) 200 W( and that they
have some maturity in both their academic and personal)201 W 7920 19784 MT
(lives. Jon Bentley once observed that a) 126 W( useful prerequisite for the
study of software engi-)125 W 7920 21210 MT (neering is that the student
"should have been married) 195 W( at least once." This is not strictly)196 W
7920 22636 MT (enforced\050!\051, but the students should) 142 W( have some
ability to communicate and work together)141 W 7920 24062 MT (somewhat
harmoniously.)SH 15 /Helvetica-Bold AF 7920 28204 MT (3.1. The "Software
Engineering as Artifact" Model)SH 11 /Helvetica AF 7920 30630 MT (The leftmost
model illustrates the subject taught almost entirely by lecture,) 65 W( with
some inter-)66 W 7920 32056 MT (action among the instructor and) 147 W(
students, mostly relating to questions and difficult points.)146 W 7920 33482
MT (There are two advantages of this approach: there) 29 W( is easily enough
time in either a 10-week)30 W 7920 34908 MT (quarter or 16-week) 9 W( semester
to present the major concepts of software engineering; and the)8 W 7920 36334
MT (absence of a project means that the students can concentrate on) 103 W(
the issues the instructor)104 W 7920 37760 MT (wants to discuss) 39 W( rather
than the "crisis of the week." The major disadvantage is that teach-)38 W 7920
39186 MT (ing software engineering without doing it is as bad as teaching
piano playing by the lecture)68 W 7920 40612 MT (method. Many issues in
software) 177 W( engineering, particularly in communication and configu-)176 W
7920 42038 MT (ration control, simply cannot be appreciated in) 111 W( the
absence of experience. Because most)112 W 7920 43464 MT (projects that fail do
so because of deficiencies in those two areas, we would be) 106 W( doing
our)105 W 7920 44890 MT (students an injustice by not exposing them) 90 W( to
the problems inherent in actually working on)91 W 7920 46316 MT (software
products. Due to the nature of these courses \050and for reasons discussed) 12
W( in Section)11 W 7920 47742 MT (2\051, instructors often follow the plan
described in Section 6, "Life Cycle Emphasis.")SH 15 /Helvetica-Bold AF 7920
51265 MT (3.2. The "Topical Approach" Model)SH 11 /Helvetica AF 7920 53691 MT
(Although the "topical approach" model is another all-talk, no-action model,
it has the advan-)42 W 7920 55117 MT (tage of in-depth exploration of some
aspects of the) 105 W( subject. Usually used at the graduate)104 W 7920 56543
MT (level, the lecture) 107 W( part of the course is roughly the same as in
the previous model, but it is)108 W 7920 57969 MT (supplemented by weekly
presentations by) 157 W( the students. Each student is assigned a topic)156 W
7920 59395 MT (\050such as object-oriented) 108 W( design, automated
specification tools, and verification of real-time)109 W 7920 60821 MT
(software\051, reads two or three papers on it, and conducts a seminar for the
other) 109 W( students.)108 W 7920 62247 MT (Here a succinctly written text
such as one by) 60 W( Fairley) 61 W( [47]) SH( or Sommerville) 61 W( [118])
SH( can be used)61 W 7920 63673 MT (to back up the main lectures, while the
students provide their own reading material for) 101 W( the)100 W 7920 65099
MT (discussion sessions. Alternatively,) 132 W( essay collections such as
Brooks) 133 W( [24]) SH( or Mills) 133 W( [89]) SH( can)133 W 7920 66525 MT
(feed the discussions. Yourdon's publishing arm has also produced a) 104 W(
pair of collections of)103 W 7920 67951 MT (outstanding papers in software
engineering) 160 W( [134, 135],) SH( though) 160 W( some are becoming
dated.)161 W 7920 69377 MT (Again, even though there are additional readings,
these courses often follow the) 196 W( plan in)195 W 7920 70803 MT (Section
6.)SH 45000 50 7920 74651 UL 10 /Helvetica-Bold AF 8198 75600 MT (8)SH 44197
XM (CMU/SEI-91-TR-10)SH ES %%Page: 9 11 BS 0 SI 15 /Helvetica-Bold AF 10080
10094 MT (3.3. The "Small Group Project" Model)SH 11 /Helvetica AF 10080 12520
MT (The "small group project" model includes a project as part of the course,
for the) 163 W( positive)164 W 10080 13946 MT (reasons discussed above.
Currently the most) 144 W( common model of the software engineering)143 W
10080 15372 MT (course, it makes a fairly) 82 W( even division between project
work and class work. Typically, stu-)83 W 10080 16798 MT (dents are divided
into teams) 57 W( of three to five members each. The projects chosen are
often)56 W 10080 18224 MT (familiar to the students and can be) 33 W(
completed in a single term. However, the limited course)34 W 10080 19650 MT
(effort dedicated to the project necessarily limits its size and scope.)SH
10080 22217 MT (In Kant's) 244 W( presentation of this model) 243 W( [69],)
SH( she suggests some projects: a string-handling)243 W 10080 23643 MT
(package for standard Pascal, a reservation system for the computer center's
terminal room,)40 W 10080 25069 MT (and an interactive text editor, among
others. This model) 43 W( provides the students with some of)42 W 10080 26495
MT (the experience needed) 281 W( to apply the software engineering concepts
discussed in class.)282 W 10080 27921 MT (However, the model is deficient in
its ability to give students) 65 W( experience with the critical dif-)64 W
10080 29347 MT (ficulties inherent in programming-in-the-large.)SH 10080 31914
MT (The use of a small project, small) 95 W( teams and, often, fictitious
customers may simply extend)96 W 10080 33340 MT (the programming-in-the-small
experience normally gained in computer science courses.)290 W 10080 34766 MT
(However, adequate attention to configuration management and quality assurance
can bring)53 W 10080 36192 MT (in larger project issues. One way of taking
advantage of) 85 W( the manageability of small teams)84 W 10080 37618 MT
(while still teaching something about programming-in-the-large is to use the
course) 127 W( organi-)128 W 10080 39044 MT (zation described in Section) 178
W( 10, "Even Balance of Management, Engineering, and Tools.")177 W 10080 40470
MT (Another reason that small teams) 174 W( are used is that the start of the
project is delayed until)175 W 10080 41896 MT (about the middle of the term so
that some prerequisite technical material can) 25 W( be taught) 24 W( [63].)SH
10080 43322 MT (This often happens when instructors use the course plan
described in Section 7,)498 W 10080 44748 MT ("Abstraction Emphasis.")SH 15
/Helvetica-Bold AF 10080 48890 MT (3.4. The "Large Project Team" Model)SH 11
/Helvetica AF 10080 51316 MT (The "large group project" model) 29 W( posits
that the best way to learn techniques for dealing with)28 W 10080 52742 MT
(programming-in-the-large \050which often means dealing with programming-in-
the-many\051) 122 W( is to)123 W 10080 54168 MT (conduct a large team project
within the class. Typically, there is) 134 W( one project, usually one)133 W
10080 55594 MT (piece of deliverable) 141 W( software; often there is also a
real customer, who provides a form of)142 W 10080 57020 MT (motivation
different from grades. If we accept) 183 W( that a central objective of the
course is to)182 W 10080 58446 MT (immerse the student in a) 29 W( practical,
real-life software product development process, then this)30 W 10080 59872 MT
(is how to do it. The figure indicates, quite correctly,) 122 W( that the
majority of the work the stu-)121 W 10080 61298 MT (dents do) 70 W( is on the
project. Many instructors object to this model because they feel that it is)71
W 10080 62724 MT (too difficult to manage.) 180 W( Not so. If it is too
difficult to manage a project team of 15 to 30)179 W 10080 64150 MT (students,
how is it possible to manage a real-life corporate development team of 15 to)
117 W( 30)118 W 10080 65576 MT (software engineers? The authors have run
introductory) 37 W( courses using this model at least 10)36 W 9 SS 28318 66632
MT (2)SH 11 SS 10080 67002 MT (times, in general quite successfully.)233 W
29896 XM (Even with partial failure, the students learn more)234 W 10800 50
10080 70102 UL 7 SS 11080 71668 MT (2)SH 9 SS 11469 72000 MT (Examples of
other instructors successfully managing this sort of course are described in
[94] and [110].)SH 45000 50 10080 74651 UL 10 /Helvetica-Bold AF 10358 75600
MT (CMU/SEI-91-TR-10)SH 54524 XM (9)SH ES %%Page: 10 12 BS 0 SI 11 /Helvetica
AF 7920 9802 MT (about real software engineering with this model than with any
other. The) 36 W( key for the instruc-)35 W 7920 11228 MT (tors is to remember
the following:)SH /Helvetica-Oblique SF 10980 13795 MT (The students are doing
the project. You are not. You) 40 W( are managing the project,)41 W 10980
15221 MT (which means that) 145 W( you are delegating nearly all aspects of
the process to the)144 W 10980 16647 MT (students.)SH /Helvetica SF 7920 19214
MT (In this model, the students are) 198 W( organized in one large team with
different roles such as)199 W 7920 20640 MT (those found in industrial
software) 55 W( development environments. For example, some students)54 W 7920
22066 MT (may be designers, others quality) 96 W( assurance personnel, still
others configuration managers.)97 W 7920 23492 MT (The students remain in
these roles for) 30 W( the duration of the course, and learn about the
activi-)29 W 7920 24918 MT (ties associated with other roles through normal)
111 W( interaction with other team members while)112 W 7920 26344 MT
(developing the software. In Sections 9 and 10, we describe implementations of
this model.)SH 15 /Helvetica-Bold AF 7920 30486 MT (3.5. The "Project Only"
Model)SH 11 /Helvetica AF 7920 32912 MT (The fifth column in Figure 2
represents the "project only" model:) 40 W( the) 385 W( entire course is a
proj-)39 W 7920 34338 MT (ect, and the various topics) 111 W( of software
engineering are learned and applied by immersion.)112 W 7920 35764 MT (This
model is often found as the capstone experience of master's level software) 13
W( engineering)12 W 7920 37190 MT (programs, but several universities also
allow undergraduates to take) 70 W( such a course, organ-)71 W 7920 38616 MT
(izing the resulting teams with the) 98 W( graduate students in leadership
positions and the under-)97 W 7920 40042 MT (graduates subordinate to) 181 W(
them. The undergraduates learn by doing. The course plan in)182 W 7920 41468
MT (Section 8.2 is a version of this model, in which students pursue
independent) 95 W( projects)94 W /Helvetica-Oblique SF 50718 XM (after)SH
/Helvetica SF 7920 42894 MT (taking a course that integrates project and
lecture.)SH 13 /Helvetica-Bold AF 7920 45893 MT (3.5.1. The "Separate Lecture
and Lab" Model)SH 11 /Helvetica AF 7920 47512 MT (In many ways, this model is
a combination of the courses represented by columns) 56 W( one and)57 W 7920
48938 MT (five of Figure) 15 W( 2. Though nominally linked by related course
numbering, software engineering)14 W 7920 50364 MT (lecture courses with
separate labs have coordination) 335 W( reminiscent of freshman physics)336 W
7920 51790 MT (courses of twenty years ago. The amount of coordination is
strongly related to) 117 W( whether or)116 W 7920 53216 MT (not the course
instructor is also the lab instructor.)SH 45000 50 7920 74651 UL 10
/Helvetica-Bold AF 8198 75600 MT (10)SH 44197 XM (CMU/SEI-91-TR-10)SH ES
%%Page: 11 13 BS 0 SI 17 /Helvetica-Bold AF 10080 10239 MT (4. Project
Styles)SH 11 /Helvetica AF 10080 12854 MT (Independent of the organization
that connects the lecture and project components) 176 W( of the)177 W 10080
14280 MT (course, several styles of projects are available. They) 57 W( differ
primarily in the degree to which)56 W 10080 15706 MT (they stretch the student
beyond traditional programming assignments and in the amount of)80 W 10080
17132 MT (interaction among the students taking the course. They also differ)
101 W( in emphasis and in the)100 W 10080 18558 MT (amount of instructor
effort required.)SH 10080 21125 MT (In virtually all project courses, students
are organized into teams. The major) 56 W( parameters in)57 W 10080 22551 MT
(the project decision are:)SH /Symbol SF 12328 24668 MT (\267)SH /Helvetic

