%!PS-Adobe-2.0 %%Title: tr.10.mss %%DocumentFonts: (atend) %%Creator: Barbara
White and Scribe 7(1750) %%CreationDate: 18 September 1996 13:06 %%Pages:
(atend) %%EndComments % PostScript Prelude for Scribe. /BS {/SV save def /PH
exch 100 div def /PW exch 100 div def 0.0 PH translate .01 -.01 scale} bind
def /ES {SV restore showpage} bind def /SC {setrgbcolor} bind def /FMTX matrix
def /RDF {WFT SLT 0.0 eq {SSZ 0.0 0.0 SSZ neg 0.0 0.0 FMTX astore} {SSZ 0.0
SLT neg sin SLT cos div SSZ mul SSZ neg 0.0 0.0 FMTX astore} ifelse makefont
setfont} bind def /SLT 0.0 def /SI { /SLT exch cvr def RDF} bind def /WFT
/Courier findfont def /SF { /WFT exch findfont def RDF} bind def /SSZ 1000.0
def /SS { /SSZ exch 100.0 mul def RDF} bind def /AF { /WFT exch findfont def
/SSZ exch 100.0 mul def RDF} bind def /MT /moveto load def /PF{transform .25
sub round .25 add exch .25 sub round .25 add exch itransform} bind def
/RPF{currentpoint exch 4 1 roll add 3 1 roll add exch PF} bind def /XM
{currentpoint exch pop moveto} bind def /UL {gsave newpath moveto dup 2.0 div
0.0 exch RPF moveto setlinewidth 0.0 rlineto stroke grestore} bind def /LH
{gsave newpath PF moveto setlinewidth 0.0 rlineto gsave stroke grestore} bind
def /LV {gsave newpath PF moveto setlinewidth 0.0 exch rlineto gsave stroke
grestore} bind def /BX {gsave newpath PF moveto setlinewidth exch dup 0.0 RPF
lineto exch 0.0 exch neg RPF lineto neg 0.0 RPF lineto closepath gsave stroke
grestore} bind def /BX1 {grestore} bind def /BX2 {setlinewidth 1 setgray
stroke grestore} bind def /PB {/PV save def newpath 3 -1 roll sub translate
100.0 -100.0 scale /showpage {} def} bind def /PE {PV restore} bind def /GB
{/PV save def newpath translate rotate div dup scale 100.0 -100.0 scale
/showpage {} def} bind def /GE {PV restore} bind def /FB {dict dup
/FontMapDict exch def begin} bind def /FM {cvn exch cvn exch def} bind def /FE
{end /original-findfont /findfont load def /findfont {dup FontMapDict exch
known{FontMapDict exch get} if original-findfont} def} bind def /BC {gsave
moveto dup 0 exch rlineto exch 0 rlineto neg 0 exch rlineto closepath clip}
bind def /EC /grestore load def /SH /show load def /MX {exch show 0.0 rmoveto}
bind def /W {0 32 4 -1 roll widthshow} bind def /WX {0 32 5 -1 roll widthshow
0.0 rmoveto} bind def /RC {100.0 -100.0 scale PW 0.0 translate -90.0 rotate
.01 -.01 scale} bind def /URC {100.0 -100.0 scale 90.0 rotate PW neg 0.0
translate .01 -.01 scale} bind def /RCC {100.0 -100.0 scale 0.0 PH neg
translate 90.0 rotate .01 -.01 scale} bind def /URCC {100.0 -100.0 scale -90.0
rotate 0.0 PH translate .01 -.01 scale} bind def /CL {gsave newpath moveto
setrgbcolor exch dup 0.0 rlineto exch 0.0 exch neg rlineto neg 0.0 rlineto
fill grestore} bind def % Scribe Systems version of LaserPrep v4.0 % All lines
added/changed by Scribe Systems contain "%UNI" % %{appledict version #65 %
CopyRight Apple Computer, Inc. 1984,1985,1986,1987 All Rights Reserved.
systemdict/currentpacking known{currentpacking true setpacking}if /LW{save
statusdict/product get(LaserWriter)anchorsearch exch pop{length 0
eq{1}{2}ifelse}{0}ifelse exch restore}bind def /LW+{LW 2 eq}bind def
/ok{systemdict/statusdict known dup{LW 0 gt and}if}bind def %UNI ok{statusdict
begin 9 sccinteractive 3 ne exch 0 ne or{9 0 3 setsccinteractive}if end}if /md
250 dict def md begin /av 65 def /T true def /F false def /mtx matrix def /s75
75 string def /s8 8 string def /s1 ( ) def /pxs 1 def /pys 1 def 1 0 mtx
defaultmatrix dtransform exch atan/pa exch def /nlw .24 def /ppr [-32 -29.52
762 582.48] def % default printable page rectangle /pgs 1 def /por true def
/xb 500 array def /so true def /fillflag false def /pnm 1 def /fmv true def
/sfl false def /ma 0 def /invertflag false def /xflip false def /yflip false
def /noflips true def /scaleby96 false def /fNote true def /fBitStretch true
def /fg (Rvd\001\001\000\000\177) def /bdf{bind def}bind def /xdf{exch def}bdf
/xl{neg exch neg translate}bdf /fp{pnsh 0 ne pnsv 0 ne and}bdf
/nop{}bdf/lnop[/nop load]cvx bdf /vrb[ {fp{gsave 1 setlinewidth pnsh pnsv
scale stroke grestore}if newpath}bind /eofill load dup /newpath load 2 index
dup {clip newpath}bind {}bind dup 2 copy ]def currentscreen/spf xdf/rot
xdf/freq xdf /doop{vrb exch get exec}bdf % psu - page setup called at begining
of page % args: smooth, por, bbs1, bbs2, bbey, bbex, scale, dpix, dpiy, pgs, %
invert, xflip, yflip, scaleby96, fBitStretch, fNote % % smooth is T if
smoothing was selected in page setup, else F % por is T for portrait
orientation, F for landscape % bbs2 seems to be offset for start of image area
(in 72nds of an inch) % bbs1 seems to be offset for start of image area (in
72nds of an inch) % bbey is length (or end?) of printable area in 72nd of an
inch % bbex is width (or end?) of printable area in 72nd of an inch % dpix is
dots per inch of coordinate system % dpiy is dots per inch of coordinate
system % scale is scale factor selected in page setup % pgs is a small integer
denoting paper cassette type (legal, a4, etc.) % invert is T to reverse
black/white % xflip is T to rotate image horizontally % yflip is T to rotate
image vertically % scaleby96 is T if "Precision Bitmap Graphics" requested %
fBitStretch is T if "Faster Bitmap Printing" requested % fNote is T to use
small imageable region, F to use large /psu{ /fNote xdf /fBitStretch xdf
/scaleby96 xdf pop F %UNI force yflip off /yflip xdf pop F %UNI force xflip
off /xflip xdf pop F %UNI force black/white reversing off /invertflag xdf
xflip yflip or{/noflips false def}if /pgs xdf % set pgs 2 index % get copy of
scale .72 mul exch div /pys xdf % pys = (.72 * scale) / dpiy % S: smooth por
bbs1 bbs2 bbey bbex scale dpix div .72 mul /pxs xdf % pxs = .72 * (scale /
dpix) 2 index pxs mul 4 index pys mul neg translate %UNI xlate for scribe ppr
astore pop % put "bbs1 bbs2 bbey bbex" into ppr pop T %UNI force portrait on
/por xdf % set por pop F %UNI force smooth request off sn and /so xdf % set
"so" T if smooth req'd AND avail in LW }bdf /txpose{ %UNI don't change paper
type %UNI fNote{smalls}{bigs}ifelse pgs get exec pxs pys scale ppr aload pop
por { noflips{pop exch neg exch translate pop 1 -1 scale}if xflip yflip and{
pop exch neg exch translate 180 rotate 1 -1 scale ppr 3 get ppr 1 get neg sub
neg ppr 2 get ppr 0 get neg sub neg translate }if xflip yflip not and{ pop
exch neg exch translate pop 180 rotate ppr 3 get ppr 1 get neg sub neg 0
translate }if yflip xflip not and{ ppr 1 get neg ppr 0 get neg translate }if }
{ noflips{translate pop pop 270 rotate 1 -1 scale}if xflip yflip and{
translate pop pop 90 rotate 1 -1 scale ppr 3 get ppr 1 get neg sub neg ppr 2
get ppr 0 get neg sub neg translate }if xflip yflip not and{ translate pop pop
90 rotate ppr 3 get ppr 1 get neg sub neg 0 translate }if yflip xflip not and{
translate pop pop 270 rotate ppr 2 get ppr 0 get neg sub neg 0 exch translate
}if } ifelse %UNI statusdict begin waittimeout 300 lt{/waittimeout 300 def}if
end scaleby96{ ppr aload pop 4 -1 roll add 2 div 3 1 roll add 2 div 2 copy
translate .96 dup scale neg exch neg exch translate }if }bdf /fr{3 index 3
index xl ppr aload pop 3 -1 roll 2 mul add 3 1 roll exch 2 mul add 6 2 roll 3
-1 roll sub 3 1 roll exch sub 3 1 roll exch 3 -1 roll div 3 1 roll div exch
scale}bdf /lws{show}bdf /tv{show pop pop}bdf /obl{{0.212557 mul}{pop
0}ifelse}bdf /sfd{ps fg 5 -1 roll get mul 100 div 0 ps 5 -1 roll obl ps neg 0
0 6a astore makefont setfont}bdf /fnt{findfont sfd}bdf /bt{sa 3 1 roll 3 index
and put}bdf /sa(\000\000\000\000\000\000\000\000\000\000)def /fs{0 1 bt 1 2 bt
2 4 bt 3 8 bt 4 16 bt 5 32 bt 6 64 bt 7 128 bt sa exch 8 exch put}bdf /mx1
matrix def /mx2 matrix def /mx3 matrix def /bu{currentpoint currentgray
currentlinewidth currentlinecap currentlinejoin currentdash exch aload length
fg 5 sfl{1}{0}ifelse put pnsv pnsh 2t aload pop 3a aload pop mx2 aload pop mx1
aload pop mtx currentmatrix aload pop mx3 aload pop ps pm restore/ps xdf mx3
astore pop}bdf /bn{/pm save def mx3 setmatrix newpath 0 0 moveto ct dup 39 get
0 exch getinterval cvx exec mtx astore setmatrix mx1 astore pop mx2 astore pop
3a astore pop 2t astore pop/pnsh xdf/pnsv xdf gw /sfl fg 5 get 0 ne def array
astore exch setdash setlinejoin setlinecap setlinewidth setgray moveto}bdf
/fc{save vmstatus exch sub 50000 lt {(%%[|0|]%%)=print flush}if pop
restore}bdf /tc{32768 div add 3 1 roll 32768 div add 2t astore pop}bdf /3a [0
0 0] def /2t 2 array def /tp{3a astore pop}bdf /tt{mx2 currentmatrix pop
currentpoint 2 copy 2t aload pop qa 2 copy translate 3a aload pop exch dup 0
eq {pop}{1 eq{-1 1}{1 -1}ifelse scale}ifelse rotate pop neg exch neg exch
translate moveto}bdf /te{mx2 setmatrix}bdf /th{3 -1 roll div 3 1 roll exch div
2 copy mx1 scale pop scale/sfl true def}bdf /tu{1 1 mx1 itransform scale/sfl
false def}bdf /ts{1 1 mx1 transform scale/sfl true def}bdf /fz{/ps xdf}bdf
/dv{dup 0 ne{div}{pop}ifelse}bdf /pop4{pop pop pop pop}bdf /it{sfl{mx1
itransform}if}bdf /gm{exch it moveto}bdf/rm{it rmoveto}bdf /lm{currentpoint
sfl{mx1 transform}if exch pop sub 0 exch it rmoveto}bdf
/fm{statusdict/manualfeed known}bdf /se{statusdict exch/manualfeed exch
put}bdf /mf{ pop %UNI never allow manual feed %UNI dup/ma exch def 0 gt{fm
se/t1 5 st ok ma 1 gt and{/t2 0 st/t3 0 st statusdict/manualfeedtimeout 3600
put}if}if }bdf /jn{ pop %UNI don't set job name %UNI /statusdict where exch
pop{statusdict exch/jobname exch put}if }bdf /pen{pnm mul/pnsh xdf pnm
mul/pnsv xdf pnsh setlinewidth}bdf /min{2 copy gt{exch}if pop}bdf /max{2 copy
lt{exch}if pop}bdf /dh{fg 6 1 put array astore exch pop exch pop exch
setdash}bdf /ih[currentdash]def /rh{fg 6 0 put ih aload pop setdash}bdf
/dl{gsave nlw pys div setlinewidth 0 setgray}bdf /dlin{exch currentpoint
currentlinewidth 2 div dup translate newpath moveto lineto currentpoint stroke
grestore moveto}bdf /lin{fg 6 get 0 ne{exch lineto currentpoint 0 doop moveto}
{exch currentpoint/pnlv xdf/pnlh xdf gsave newpath/@1 xdf/@2 xdf fp{pnlh @2
lt{pnlv @1 ge {pnlh pnlv moveto @2 @1 lineto pnsh 0 rlineto 0 pnsv rlineto
pnlh pnsh add pnlv pnsv add lineto pnsh neg 0 rlineto} {pnlh pnlv moveto pnsh
0 rlineto @2 pnsh add @1 lineto 0 pnsv rlineto pnsh neg 0 rlineto pnlh pnlv
pnsv add lineto}ifelse}{pnlv @1 gt {@2 @1 moveto pnsh 0 rlineto pnlh pnsh add
pnlv lineto 0 pnsv rlineto pnsh neg 0 rlineto @2 @1 pnsv add lineto}{pnlh pnlv
moveto pnsh 0 rlineto 0 pnsv rlineto @2 pnsh add @1 pnsv add lineto pnsh neg 0
rlineto 0 pnsv neg rlineto}ifelse}ifelse closepath fill}if @2 @1 grestore
moveto}ifelse}bdf /gw{/pnm fg 3 get fg 4 get div def}bdf /lw{fg exch 4 exch
put fg exch 3 exch put gw pnsv pnsh pen}bdf /barc{/@1 xdf/@2 xdf/@3 xdf/@4
xdf/@5 xdf /@6 xdf/@7 xdf/@8 xdf gsave @5 @7 add 2 div @6 @8 add 2 div
translate newpath 0 0 moveto @5 @7 sub @6 @8 sub mtx currentmatrix pop scale
@1{newpath}if 0 0 0.5 @4 @3 arc @4 @3 sub abs 360 ge{closepath}if mtx
setmatrix @2 doop grestore}bdf /ar{dup 0 eq barc}bdf /ov{0 exch 360 exch true
barc}bdf /rc{/@t xdf currentpoint 6 2 roll newpath 4 copy 4 2 roll exch moveto
6 -1 roll lineto lineto lineto closepath @t doop moveto}bdf /mup{dup pnsh 2
div le exch pnsv 2 div le or}bdf /rr{/@1 xdf 2. div/@2 xdf 2. div/@3 xdf /@4
xdf/@5 xdf/@6 xdf/@7 xdf @7 @5 eq @6 @4 eq @2 mup or or{@7 @6 @5 @4 @1 rc} {@4
@6 sub 2. div dup @2 lt{/@2 xdf}{pop}ifelse @5 @7 sub 2. div dup @2 lt{/@2
xdf}{pop}ifelse @1 0 eq{/@2 @2 pnsh 2 div 2 copy gt{sub def}{0 pop4}ifelse}if
currentpoint newpath @4 @6 add 2. div @7 moveto @4 @7 @4 @5 @2 arcto pop4 @4
@5 @6 @5 @2 arcto pop4 @6 @5 @6 @7 @2 arcto pop4 @6 @7 @4 @7 @2 arcto pop4
closepath @1 doop moveto}ifelse}bdf /pr{gsave newpath/pl{exch moveto/pl{exch
lineto}def}def}bdf /pl{exch lineto}bdf /ep{dup 0 eq{{moveto}{exch
lin}{}{(%%[|1|]%%)= flush}pathforall pop grestore}{doop grestore}ifelse
currentpoint newpath moveto}bdf /gr{64. div setgray}bdf /pat{s8 copy pop 9.375
pa por not{90 add}if{1 add 4 mul cvi s8 exch get exch 1 add 4 mul cvi 7 sub
bitshift 1 and}setscreen gr}bdf /sg{freq rot/spf load setscreen gr}bdf
/dc{transform round .5 sub exch round .5 sub exch itransform}bdf
/sn{userdict/smooth4 known}bdf /x8{3 bitshift}bdf /x4{2 bitshift}bdf /d4{-2
bitshift}bdf /d8{-3 bitshift}bdf /rb{15 add -4 bitshift 1 bitshift}bdf /db{/@7
save def/@1 xdf/@2 xdf/@3 xdf/@4 xdf/@5 xdf/@6 @5 @3 4 add mul def dc
translate scale/xdbit 1 1 idtransform abs/ydbit exch def abs def{0 0 1 ydbit
add 1 10 rc clip}if @1 0 eq @1 4 eq or{1 setgray ydbit 0 1 ydbit add 1 2 rc}if
@1 3 eq @1 7 eq or{1}{0}ifelse setgray/@9 @1 0 eq @1 1 eq @1 3 eq or or
invertflag xor def/@13 @6 def @2 fBitStretch or{/@10 @4 x4 def/@11 @3 x4
def/@12 @10 rb def/@13 @12 @11 mul def/@15 1 1 dtransform abs/calcY 1 index
def round cvi/@14 exch def abs/calcX 1 index def round cvi scaleby96 not{1
add}if def/@16 @15 rb def/@17 @16 @14 mul def}if sn @13 60000 lt and @2
fBitStretch or and{mtx currentmatrix dup 1 get exch 2 get 0. eq exch 0. eq and
@17 60000 lt and fBitStretch and{@16 3 bitshift @14 @9 [calcX 0 0 calcY 0
0]{@17 string @13 string currentfile @6 string readhexstring pop 1 index @4 @3
@5 @12 @2 smooth4 @10 @11 @12 dup string 5 index @15 @14 @16 dup string
stretch}imagemask}{@12 x8 @11 @9 [@10 0 0 @11 0 0]{@13 string currentfile @6
string readhexstring pop 1 index @4 @3 @5 @12 @2 smooth4}imagemask}ifelse}{@5
3 bitshift @3 4 add @9 [@4 0 0 @3 0 2]{currentfile @6 string readhexstring
pop}imagemask}ifelse @7 restore}bdf /wd 16 dict def /mfont 14 dict def
/mdf{mfont wcheck not{/mfont 14 dict def}if mfont begin xdf end}bdf /cf{{1
index/FID ne{def}{pop pop}ifelse}forall}bdf /rf{/@1 exch def/@2 exch def
FontDirectory @2 known{cleartomark pop}{findfont dup begin dup length @1 add
dict begin cf {/Encoding macvec def}{Encoding dup length array copy/Encoding
exch def counttomark 2 idiv{Encoding 3 1 roll put}repeat}ifelse pop exec
currentdict end end @2 exch definefont pop}ifelse}bdf /bmbc{exch begin wd
begin /cr xdf save CharTable cr 6 mul 6 getinterval{}forall /bitheight
xdf/bitwidth xdf .96 div/width xdf Gkernmax add/XOffset xdf Gdescent
add/YOffset xdf/rowbytes xdf rowbytes 255 eq{0 0 0 0 0 0 setcachedevice}
{Gnormsize dup scale width 0 XOffset YOffset bitwidth XOffset add bitheight
YOffset add setcachedevice rowbytes 0 ne{ XOffset YOffset translate newpath 0
0 moveto bitwidth bitheight scale sn{ /xSmt bitwidth x4 def /ySmt bitheight x4
def /rSmt xSmt rb def rSmt x8 ySmt true [xSmt 0 0 ySmt neg 0 ySmt] {rSmt ySmt
mul string CharData cr get 1 index bitwidth bitheight rowbytes rSmt so
smooth4} }{rowbytes 3 bitshift bitheight 4 add true [bitwidth 0 0 bitheight
neg 0 bitheight 2 add] {CharData cr get} }ifelse imagemask }if }ifelse restore
end end }bdf /bb{.96 exch div/Gnormsize mdf 2 index /Gkernmax mdf 1
index/Gdescent mdf 3 index div 4 1 roll 2 index div 1. 5 2 roll exch div 4 1
roll 4 array astore/FontBBox mdf }bdf /cdf{mfont/CharData get 3 1 roll put}bdf
/bf{ mfont begin /FontType 3 def /FontMatrix [1 0 0 1 0 0] def /Encoding
macvec def /BuildChar/bmbc load def end mfont definefont pop }bdf /wi LW 1
eq{{gsave 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 moveto lineto lineto lineto closepath clip
stringwidth grestore}bind}{/stringwidth load}ifelse def /aps{0 get 124 eq}bdf
/xc{s75 cvs dup}bdf /xp{put cvn}bdf /scs{xc 3 67 put dup 0 95 xp}bdf /sos{xc 3
79 xp}bdf /sbs{xc 1 66 xp}bdf /sis{xc 2 73 xp}bdf /sob{xc 2 79 xp}bdf /sss{xc
4 83 xp}bdf /dd{exch 1 index add 3 1 roll add exch}bdf /smc{moveto dup lws}bdf
/kwn{FontDirectory 1 index known{findfont exch pop}}bdf /gl{1 currentgray sub
setgray}bdf /mm{/mfont 10 dict def mfont begin /FontMatrix [1 0 0 1 0 0] def
/FontType 3 def /Encoding macvec def /df 4 index findfont def /FontBBox [0 0 1
1] def /xda xdf/mbc xdf /BuildChar{wd begin/cr xdf/fd xdf/cs s1 dup 0 cr put
def fd/mbc get exec end}def exec end mfont definefont}bdf /ac{dup scs kwn{exch
findfont dup length 1 add dict begin cf fmv{/Encoding macvec
def}if/StrokeWidth nlw 1000 mul pys div ps div dup 12 lt{pop 12}if def
/PaintType 2 def currentdict /UniqueID known{/UniqueID UniqueID 16#A80000 xor
def}if currentdict end definefont}ifelse}bdf /mb{dup sbs
kwn{exch{pop}{bbc}{}mm}ifelse sfd}bdf /mo{dup sos
kwn{exch{pop}{boc}{}mm}ifelse sfd}bdf /ms{dup sss
kwn{exch{pop}{bsc}{}mm}ifelse sfd}bdf /ou{dup sos kwn{exch dup ac pop{scs
findfont /df2 xdf}{aoc}{}mm}ifelse sfd}bdf /su{dup sss kwn{exch dup ac pop{scs
findfont /df2 xdf}{asc}{}mm}ifelse sfd}bdf /ao{/fmv true def ou}bdf/as{/fmv
true def su}bdf /vo{/fmv false def ou}bdf/vs{/fmv false def su}bdf /bbc{/da
.03 def fd/df get setfont gsave cs wi 1 index 0 ne{exch da add exch}if
grestore setcharwidth cs 0 0 smc da 0 smc da da smc 0 da moveto lws}bdf
/boc{/da 1 ps div def fd/df get setfont gsave cs wi 1 index 0 ne{exch da add
exch}if grestore setcharwidth cs 0 0 smc da 0 smc da da smc 0 da smc gl da 2.
div dup moveto lws}bdf /bsc{/da 1 ps div def /ds .05 def/da2 da 2. div def
fd/df get setfont gsave cs wi 1 index 0 ne{exch ds add da2 add exch}if
grestore setcharwidth cs ds da2 add .01 add 0 smc 0 ds da2 sub translate 0 0
smc da 0 smc da da smc 0 da smc gl da 2. div dup moveto lws}bdf /aoc{fd/df get
setfont gsave cs wi grestore setcharwidth gl cs 0 0 smc fd/df2 get setfont gl
0 0 moveto lws}bdf /asc{/da .05 def fd/df get setfont gsave cs wi 1 index 0
ne{exch da add exch}if grestore setcharwidth cs da .01 add 0 smc 0 da
translate gl 0 0 smc gl fd/df2 get setfont 0 0 moveto lws}bdf /st{1000 mul
usertime add dup 2147483647 gt{2147483647 sub}if def}bdf /the{usertime sub dup
0 lt exch -2147483648 gt and}bdf /6a 6 array def /2a 2 array def /3q 3 array
def /qs{3 -1 roll sub exch 3 -1 roll sub exch}bdf /qa{3 -1 roll add exch 3 -1
roll add exch}bdf /qm{3 -1 roll 1 index mul 3 1 roll mul}bdf /qn{6a exch get
mul}bdf /qA .166667 def/qB .833333 def/qC .5 def /qx{6a astore pop qA 0 qn qB
2 qn add qA 1 qn qB 3 qn add qB 2 qn qA 4 qn add qB 3 qn qA 5 qn add qC 2 qn
qC 4 qn add qC 3 qn qC 5 qn add}bdf /qp{6 copy 12 -2 roll pop pop}bdf /qc{exch
qp qx curveto}bdf /qi{{exch 4 copy 2a astore aload pop qa .5 qm newpath
moveto}{exch 2 copy 6 -2 roll 2 qm qs 4 2 roll}ifelse}bdf /qq{{qc 2a aload pop
qx curveto}{exch 4 copy qs qa qx curveto}ifelse}bdf /pt{currentpoint newpath
moveto}bdf /qf{/fillflag true def}bdf /ec{1 and 0 ne{0 doop}if grestore
currentpoint newpath moveto/fillflag false def}bdf /eu{currentpoint fp{0
ep}{grestore newpath}ifelse moveto/fillflag false def}bdf /bp{currentpoint
newpath 2 copy moveto}bdf /ef{gsave fillflag{gsave eofill grestore}if}bdf
/sm{0 exch{@1 eq{1 add}if}forall}bdf /lshow{4 1 roll exch/@1 exch def{1 index
wi pop sub 1 index sm dv 0 @1 4 -1 roll widthshow}{1 index wi pop sub 1 index
dup sm 10 mul exch length 1 sub add dv dup 10. mul 0 @1 4 -1 roll 0 6 -1 roll
awidthshow}ifelse}bdf /setTxMode{sa 9 2 index put 3 eq{1}{0}ifelse setgray}bdf
/SwToSym{{}mark false/Symbol/|______Symbol 0 rf 0 sa 6 get 0 ne{pop 1}{sa 7
get 0 eq{pop 2}if}ifelse sa 1 get 0 ne/|______Symbol sa 4 get 0 ne{vs}{sa 3
get 0 ne{vo}{fnt}ifelse}ifelse}bdf /mc{0 3 1 roll transform neg exch pop}bdf
/ul{dup 0 ne sa 2 get 0 ne and{gsave 0 0 /UnderlinePosition kif{mc}{ps -10
div}ifelse/UnderlineThickness kif{mc}{ps 15 div}ifelse abs setlinewidth neg
rmoveto sa 4 get 0 ne{gsave currentlinewidth 2. div dup rmoveto currentpoint
newpath moveto 2 copy rlineto stroke grestore}if sa 3 get sa 4 get or 0
ne{gsave gl 2 copy rlineto stroke grestore rlineto strokepath nlw pys div
setlinewidth}{rlineto}ifelse stroke grestore}{pop}ifelse}bdf /sgt{2 copy
known{get true}{pop pop false}ifelse}bdf /kif{currentfont dup/FontMatrix get
exch/FontInfo sgt{true}{currentfont/df sgt {dup/FontInfo sgt{3 1
roll/FontMatrix get mtx concatmatrix exch true}{pop pop pop false} ifelse}{pop
pop false}ifelse}ifelse{3 -1 roll sgt{exch true}{pop
false}ifelse}{false}ifelse}bdf /blank/Times-Roman findfont/CharStrings
get/space get def /macvec 256 array def
/NUL/SOH/STX/ETX/EOT/ENQ/ACK/BEL/BS/HT/LF/VT/FF/CR/SO/SI
/DLE/DC1/DC2/DC3/DC4/NAK/SYN/ETB/CAN/EM/SUB/ESC/FS/GS/RS/US macvec 0 32
getinterval astore pop macvec 32/Times-Roman findfont/Encoding get 32 96
getinterval putinterval macvec dup 39/quotesingle put 96/grave put
/Adieresis/Aring/Ccedilla/Eacute/Ntilde/Odieresis/Udieresis/aacute
/agrave/acircumflex/adieresis/atilde/aring/ccedilla/eacute/egrave
/ecircumflex/edieresis/iacute/igrave/icircumflex/idieresis/ntilde/oacute
/ograve/ocircumflex/odieresis/otilde/uacute/ugrave/ucircumflex/udieresis
/dagger/degree/cent/sterling/section/bullet/paragraph/germandbls
/registered/copyright/trademark/acute/dieresis/notequal/AE/Oslash
/infinity/plusminus/lessequal/greaterequal/yen/mu/partialdiff/summation
/product/pi/integral/ordfeminine/ordmasculine/Omega/ae/oslash
/questiondown/exclamdown/logicalnot/radical/florin/approxequal/Delta/guillemotleft
/guillemotright/ellipsis/blank/Agrave/Atilde/Otilde/OE/oe
/endash/emdash/quotedblleft/quotedblright/quoteleft/quoteright/divide/lozenge
/ydieresis/Ydieresis/fraction/currency/guilsinglleft/guilsinglright/fi/fl
/daggerdbl/periodcentered/quotesinglbase/quotedblbase/perthousand/Acircumflex/Ecircumflex/Aacute
/Edieresis/Egrave/Iacute/Icircumflex/Idieresis/Igrave/Oacute/Ocircumflex
/apple/Ograve/Uacute/Ucircumflex/Ugrave/dotlessi/circumflex/tilde
/macron/breve/dotaccent/ring/cedilla/hungarumlaut/ogonek/caron macvec 128 128
getinterval astore pop {}mark true/Courier/|______Courier 0 rf {/Metrics 21
dict begin/zero 600 def/one 600 def/two 600 def/three 600 def/four 600
def/five 600 def/six 600 def/seven 600 def/eight 600 def /nine 600 def/comma
600 def/period 600 def/dollar 600 def/numbersign 600 def/percent 600 def/plus
600 def/hyphen 600 def/E 600 def/parenleft 600 def/parenright 600 def/space
600 def currentdict end def currentdict/UniqueID known{/UniqueID 16#800000
def}if/FontBBox FontBBox 4 array astore def}mark true/Helvetica/|______Seattle
1 rf /oldsettransfer/settransfer load def /concatprocs{/proc2 exch cvlit
def/proc1 exch cvlit def/newproc proc1 length proc2 length add array def
newproc 0 proc1 putinterval newproc proc1 length proc2 putinterval newproc
cvx}def /settransfer{currenttransfer concatprocs oldsettransfer}def
/PaintBlack{{1 exch sub}settransfer gsave newpath clippath 1 setgray fill
grestore}def /od{(Rvd\001\001\000\000\177) fg copy pop txpose 1 0 mtx
defaultmatrix dtransform exch atan/pa exch def newpath clippath mark
{transform{itransform moveto}}{transform{itransform lineto}} {6 -2 roll
transform 6 -2 roll transform 6 -2 roll transform {itransform 6 2 roll
itransform 6 2 roll itransform 6 2 roll curveto}} {{closepath}}pathforall
newpath counttomark array astore/gc xdf pop ct 39 0 put 10 fz 0 fs 2
F/|______Courier fnt invertflag{PaintBlack}if}bdf /cd{}bdf /op{/sfl false
def/pm save def}bdf % two args, booleans /cp{ %UNI don't actually print page
pop pop %UNI ignore two args %UNI not{userdict/#copies 0 put}if %UNI ma 0
gt{{t1 the{exit}if}loop}if %UNI {copypage}{showpage}ifelse pm restore }bdf
/px{0 3 1 roll tp tt}bdf /psb{/us save def}bdf /pse{us restore}bdf /ct 40
string def /nc{currentpoint initclip newpath gc{dup type dup/arraytype eq
exch/packedarraytype eq or{exec}if} forall clip newpath moveto}bdf /kp{ct 0 2
index length 2 index 39 2 index put getinterval copy cvx exec mx3
currentmatrix pop}bdf end % dict "md" %UNI don't initialize LaserWriter %UNI
LW 1 eq userdict/a4small known not and{/a4small %UNI [[300 72 div 0 0 -300 72
div -120 3381] %UNI 280 3255 %UNI {statusdict/jobstate (printing) put 0
setblink %UNI margins %UNI exch 196 add exch 304 add 8 div round cvi
frametoroket %UNI statusdict/jobstate (busy) put %UNI 1 setblink} %UNI
/framedevice load %UNI 60 45{dup mul exch dup mul add 1.0 exch sub}/setscreen
load %UNI {}/settransfer load/initgraphics load/erasepage load]cvx %UNI
statusdict begin bind end readonly def}if %UNI md begin/bigs[lnop lnop/legal
load userdict/a4 known{/a4 load}{lnop}ifelse lnop lnop lnop lnop lnop]def %UNI
/smalls[lnop userdict/note known{/note load}{dup}ifelse lnop userdict/a4small
known{/a4small load}{lnop}ifelse 2 index lnop lnop lnop lnop ]def end %UNI
systemdict/currentpacking known{setpacking}if %UNI currentfile ok
userdict/stretch known not and{eexec}{flushfile}ifelse % % Begin SEI DeathStar
definition: % Allows SEI logo to appear at the top of documents such as
letters, etc. % -- Logo produced by Gary Ford, SEI. % -- Original font
encoding done by Donald Stone, SEI. % John Kochmar % /square { newpath 0
halfdiag moveto halfdiag 0 lineto 0 0 halfdiag sub lineto 0 halfdiag sub 0
lineto closepath} def /makeline {0 height sub exch hw mul moveto height 2 mul
0 rlineto} def /BuildCharDict 10 dict def /seifont 7 dict def seifont begin
/FontType 3 def /FontMatrix [1 0 0 1 0 0] def /FontBBox [0 0 1 1] def
/Encoding 256 array def 0 1 255 {Encoding exch /.notdef put} for Encoding (A)
0 get /logoleft put Encoding (B) 0 get /logoright put /CharacterDefs 6 dict
def CharacterDefs /.notdef {} put CharacterDefs /logoleft { /height 1 def /hw
height 64 div def /middle height 2 div def /halfdiag height 2 mul 3 div def
gsave 0 0 moveto 1 0 lineto 1 1 lineto 0 1 lineto closepath clip gsave
currentpoint middle add exch height add exch translate square clip 4 hw mul
setlinewidth newpath 30 -10 -30 {makeline} for stroke grestore gsave
currentpoint middle add exch height 2 mul 3 div add exch translate square clip
2 hw mul setlinewidth newpath 25 -10 -25 {makeline} for stroke grestore
grestore } put CharacterDefs /logoright { /height 1 def /hw height 64 div def
/middle height 2 div def /halfdiag height 2 mul 3 div def gsave 0 0 moveto 1 0
lineto 1 1 lineto 0 1 lineto closepath clip gsave currentpoint middle add exch
height add exch translate -1 0 translate square clip 4 hw mul setlinewidth
newpath 30 -10 -30 {makeline} for stroke grestore gsave currentpoint middle
add exch height 2 mul 3 div add exch translate -1 0 translate square clip 2 hw
mul setlinewidth newpath 25 -10 -25 {makeline} for stroke grestore grestore }
put /BuildChar { BuildCharDict begin /char exch def /fontdict exch def
/charname fontdict /Encoding get char get def /charproc fontdict
/CharacterDefs get charname get def 1 0 0 0 1 1 setcachedevice gsave charproc
grestore end } def end /Sei seifont definefont pop % Generate encodings for
accent fonts. Taken from the Postscript Cookbook /reencodedict 5 dict def
/ReEncode { reencodedict begin /newencoding exch def /newfontname exch def
/basefontname exch def /basefontdict basefontname findfont def /newfont
basefontdict maxlength dict def basefontdict {exch dup /FID ne dup /Encoding
ne and { exch newfont 3 1 roll put } { pop pop } ifelse } forall newfont
/FontName newfontname put newfont /Encoding newencoding put newfontname
newfont definefont pop end } def /Stuff { exch 1 add dup Accent 4 2 roll exch
put } def /Accent 256 array def 0 1 255 { Accent exch /.notdef put } for 8#100
[ /Aacute /Acircumflex /Adieresis /Agrave /Aring /Atilde /Ccedilla /Eacute
/Ecircumflex /Edieresis /Egrave /Iacute /Icircumflex /Idieresis /Igrave
/Ntilde /Oacute /Ocircumflex /Odieresis /Ograve /Otilde /Scaron /Uacute
/Ucircumflex /Udieresis /Ugrave /Ydieresis /Zcaron ] { Stuff } forall pop
8#140 [ /aacute /acircumflex /adieresis /agrave /aring /atilde /ccedilla
/eacute /ecircumflex /edieresis /egrave /iacute /icircumflex /idieresis
/igrave /ntilde /oacute /ocircumflex /odieresis /ograve /otilde /scaron
/uacute /ucircumflex /udieresis /ugrave /ydieresis /zcaron ] { Stuff } forall
pop 8#177 [ /a /b /c /d /e /f /g /h /i /j /k /l /m /n /o /p /q /r /s /t /u /v
/w /x /y /z /A /B /C /D /E /F /G /H /I /J /K /L /M /N /O /P /Q /R /S /T /U /V
/W /X /Y /Z /dotlessi /grave /acute /circumflex /tilde /macron /breve
/dotaccent /dieresis /ring /cedilla /hungarumlaut /ogonek /caron] { Stuff }
forall pop /Times-Roman /Times-Accent Accent ReEncode /Times-Bold /Times-Bold-
Accent Accent ReEncode /Helvetica /Helvetica-Accent Accent ReEncode
/Helvetica-Bold /Helvetica-Bold-Accent Accent ReEncode /Times-Italic /Times-
Italic-Accent Accent ReEncode /Helvetica-Oblique /Helvetica-Oblique-Accent
Accent ReEncode /Courier /Courier-Accent Accent ReEncode /Courier-Bold
/Courier-Bold-Accent Accent ReEncode % % -- end SEI changes % %%EndProlog
%%Page: 0 1 61200 79200 BS 0 SI 12 /Helvetica-Bold AF 24480 3183 MT (Technical
Report)SH 24480 5861 MT (CMU/SEI-91-TR-10)SH 24480 7200 MT (ESD-91-TR-10)SH 16
/Helvetica-Narrow-Bold AF 24480 23264 MT (Models for)SH 24480 25132 MT
(Undergraduate Project Courses)SH 24480 27000 MT (in Software Engineering)SH
12 /Helvetica-Bold AF 27180 29675 MT (Mary Shaw)SH 28514 31014 MT (James E.
Tomayko)SH 29781 33159 MT (August 1991)SH ES %%Page: 0 2 61200 79200 BS 0 SI
21 /Helvetica-Narrow-Bold AF 46363 23224 MT (Models for)SH 29120 26012 MT
(Undergraduate Project Courses)SH 35347 28800 MT (in Software Engineering)SH
39600 50 15480 30289 UL 39600 50 15480 30628 UL 39600 50 15480 30967 UL 39600
50 15480 31306 UL 39600 50 15480 31645 UL 30 /Sei AF 10080 32400 MT (AB)SH 13
/Helvetica-Bold AF 36302 71841 MT (Software Engineering Institute)SH 10
/Helvetica AF 43133 73017 MT (Carnegie Mellon University)SH 41017 74160 MT
(Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213)SH 15 /Helvetica-Bold AF 42907 10094 MT
(Technical Report)SH 11 SS 45484 11907 MT (CMU/SEI-91-TR-10)SH 47806 13333 MT
(ESD-91-TR-10)SH 48538 14698 MT (August 1991)SH 17 SS 46199 35439 MT (Mary
Shaw)SH 11 /Helvetica AF 41136 37731 MT (School of Computer Science)SH 38258
39157 MT (and Software Engineering Institute)SH 17 /Helvetica-Bold AF 39773
42670 MT (James E. Tomayko)SH 11 /Helvetica AF 41136 44962 MT (School of
Computer Science)SH 38258 46388 MT (and Software Engineering Institute)SH
27016 49464 MT (This report will also appear as Carnegie Mellon University)SH
21694 50890 MT (School of Computer Science Technical Report No. CMU-
CS-91-174.)SH 32942 70426 MT (Unlimited distribution subject to the
copyright.)SH ES %%Page: 0 3 61200 79200 BS 0 SI 11 /Helvetica AF 10080 9802
MT (This report was prepared for the SEI Joint Program Office HQ ESC/AXS)SH
10080 12700 MT (5 Eglin Street)SH 10080 15598 MT (Hanscom AFB, MA
01731-2116)SH 10080 18165 MT (The ideas and findings in this report should not
be construed as an official) 10 W( DoD position. It is)9 W 10080 19591 MT
(published in the interest of scientific and technical information
exchange.)SH 10080 22158 MT (FOR THE COMMANDER)SH 10080 24725 MT
(\050signature on file\051)SH 10080 27292 MT (Thomas R. Miller, Lt Col, USAF,
SEI Joint Program Office)SH 10080 29859 MT (This work is sponsored by the U.S.
Department of Defense.)SH 10080 32426 MT (Copyright 1991 by Carnegie Mellon
University.)SH 7 SS 10080 34993 MT (Permission to reproduce this document and
to prepare derivative works from this document) 1 W( for internal use is
granted, provided the copyright and)2 W 10080 36419 MT (\134`No Warranty\134'
statements are included with) 51 W( all reproductions and derivative works.
Requests for permission to reproduce this document or to)50 W 10080 37845 MT
(prepare derivative works of this document for external and commercial use
should be addressed to the SEI Licensing Agent.)SH 10080 40412 MT (NO
WARRANTY)SH 10080 42979 MT (THIS CARNEGIE MELLON) 65 W( UNIVERSITY AND
SOFTWARE ENGINEERING INSTITUTE MATERIAL IS FURNISHED ON AN \134`AS-IS\134'
BASIS.)66 W 10080 44405 MT (CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY MAKES NO WARRANTIES OF
ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, AS TO) 99 W( ANY MATTER)98 W 10080
45831 MT (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, WARRANTY) 143 W( OF FITNESS FOR
PURPOSE OR MERCHANTIBILITY, EXCLUSIVITY, OR RESULTS)144 W 10080 47257 MT
(OBTAINED FROM USE) 62 W( OF THE MATERIAL. CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY DOES NOT
MAKE ANY WARRANTY OF ANY KIND WITH)61 W 10080 48683 MT (RESPECT TO FREEDOM
FROM PATENT, TRADEMARK, OR COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT.)SH 10080 51250 MT (This
work was created in the performance of Federal Government Contract Number
F19628-95-C-0003 with Carnegie) 45 W( Mellon University for the)46 W 10080
52676 MT (operation of the Software Engineering Institute, a federally funded
research and development center. The Government of the United States) 7 W( has
a)6 W 10080 54102 MT (royalty-free government-purpose license to use,
duplicate, or disclose the work, in whole or in part and in any manner, and to
have or) 74 W( permit)75 W 10080 55528 MT (others to do so, for government
purposes pursuant to the copyright license under the clause at 52.227-7013.)SH
10080 58095 MT (This document is available through Research Access, Inc. / 800
Vinial Street / Pittsburgh, PA 15212. Phone: 1-800-685-6510. FAX:) 103 W(
\050412\051)102 W 10080 59521 MT (321-2994. RAI also maintains a World Wide
Web home page at http://www.rai.com)SH 10080 62088 MT (Copies of this document
are available through the National) 79 W( Technical Information Service
\050NTIS\051. For information on ordering, please contact)80 W 10080 63514 MT
(NTIS directly: National Technical Information Service / U.S. Department of
Commerce / Springfield, VA 22161. Phone: \050703\051 487-4600.)SH 10080 66081
MT (This document is also available through the Defense Technical Information
Center \050DTIC\051. DTIC provides) 33 W( acess to and transfer of scientific
and)32 W 10080 67507 MT (technical information for DoD personnel, DoD
contractors and potential con tractors, and other U.S. Government) 90 W(
agency personnel and their)91 W 10080 68933 MT (contractors. To) 259 W( obtain
a copy, please contact DTIC directly: Defense) 32 W( Technical Information
Center / 8725 John J. Kingman Road / Suite 0944 /)31 W 10080 70359 MT (Ft.
Belvoir, VA 22060-6218. Phone: 1-800-225-3842 or 703-767-8222.)SH ES %%Page: 1
4 61200 79200 BS 45000 50 10080 74657 UL 0 SI 10 /Helvetica AF 54524 75600 MT
(1)SH 7 SS 10080 9510 MT (Use of any trademarks in this report is not intended
in any way to infringe on the rights of the trademark holder.)SH ES %%Page: 1
5 61200 79200 BS 45000 50 10080 74657 UL 0 SI 10 /Helvetica AF 10358 75600 MT
(CMU/SEI-91-TR-10)SH 54524 XM (1)SH 15 /Helvetica-Bold AF 28786 10094 MT
(Models for)SH 21282 11518 MT (Undergraduate Project Courses)SH 23991 12942 MT
(in Software Engineering)SH 11 SS 12528 16937 MT (Abstract:)SH /Helvetica SF
17748 XM (The software engineering) 86 W( course provides undergraduates with
an op-)87 W 12528 18174 MT (portunity to) 400 W( learn something about real-
world software development. Since)399 W 12528 19411 MT (software engineering
is far from being a mature engineering discipline, it is not)172 W 12528 20648
MT (possible to define a completely satisfactory syllabus. Content with a) 65
W( sound basis)64 W 12528 21885 MT (is in short supply,) 104 W( and the
material most often taught is at high risk of becoming)105 W 12528 23122 MT
(obsolete within a few years.)SH 12528 25500 MT (Undergraduate software
engineering courses are) 280 W( now offered in more than a)279 W 12528 26737
MT (hundred universities. Although three textbooks dominate the) 70 W( market,
there is not)71 W 12528 27974 MT (yet consensus on the scope and form of the
course. The) 56 W( two major decisions an)55 W 12528 29211 MT (instructor
faces are the balance) 144 W( between technical and management topics and)145
W 12528 30448 MT (the relation between) 96 W( the lecture and project
components. We discuss these two)95 W 12528 31685 MT (decisions, with support
from sample syllabi and survey data) 24 W( on course offerings in)25 W 12528
32922 MT (the United States and Canada. We) 12 W( also offer some advice on
the management of)11 W 12528 34159 MT (a project-oriented course.)SH 17
/Helvetica-Bold AF 10080 38998 MT (1. Introduction)SH 11 /Helvetica AF 10080
41613 MT (For most undergraduate) 71 W( students, an upper-level software
engineering course provides the)72 W 10080 43039 MT (best opportunity to learn
about "real-world" software development: group projects, large-)214 W 10080
44465 MT (scale design, integration of software with larger systems, applying)
162 W( theory in practical set-)163 W 10080 45891 MT (tings, understanding
clients' requirements, models) 85 W( of the development life cycle,
configura-)84 W 10080 47317 MT (tion management, quality assurance,
maintenance, and so on. In many universities, it is our)12 W 10080 48743 MT
(last and best chance to show students that developing a real software system
is not) 106 W( at all)105 W 10080 50169 MT (the same as writing) 80 W( a
programming assignment that will be graded and thrown away. The)81 W 10080
51595 MT (course is most often taken by students about to enter the work
force) 93 W( as programmers; our)92 W 10080 53021 MT (experience is that
corporate recruiters are very enthusiastic about the things students learn)65
W 10080 54447 MT (in these courses.)SH 10080 57014 MT (Versions of the
software engineering) 198 W( project course have been offered for nearly
twenty)197 W 10080 58440 MT (years, but despite that extended history the
course is far from standard) 76 W( in either content or)77 W 10080 59866 MT
(format. A) 442 W( great deal of material is available\320much more than can
be covered in a quarter)68 W 10080 61292 MT (or a semester\320so the course
design problem is one of selecting the subset to present and)60 W 10080 62718
MT (the viewpoint from which to present it.)SH 10080 65285 MT (Any curriculum
design task is in part a resource allocation task. The problem is
determining)24 W 10080 66711 MT (the amount of content that can be presented,
constrained by the scarce resources) 77 W( of class)78 W 10080 68137 MT (time,
student energy, and testing attention, among other factors.) 13 W( The) 330 W(
evaluation criterion for)12 W 10080 69563 MT (selecting content is benefit to
the student through his or her career,) 88 W( and we often describe)89 W 10080
70989 MT (course content having) 395 W( this durable value as "fundamental."
Along with fundamental)394 W ES %%Page: 2 6 61200 79200 BS 45000 50 7920 74657
UL 0 SI 10 /Helvetica AF 8198 75600 MT (2)SH 44197 XM (CMU/SEI-91-TR-10)SH 11
SS 7920 9802 MT (material, software engineering includes techniques \050often
management strategies\051 that) 107 W( are)108 W 7920 11228 MT (currently
useful but) 179 W( are likely to be superseded as fundamental material
emerges. As a)178 W 7920 12654 MT (result, the challenge to the software
engineering instructor is to find) 238 W( meaty, substantive)239 W 7920 14080
MT (material that will continue to be significant to the student over many
years.)SH 7920 16647 MT (An instructor) 80 W( faces two major decisions in
selecting a strategy for the software engineering)79 W 7920 18073 MT (course.
The) 418 W( first is what balance to strike between technical issues of
software) 56 W( design and)57 W 7920 19499 MT (development on the one hand and
project management topics on the other.) 68 W( Section) 440 W( 2 dis-)67 W
7920 20925 MT (cusses the considerations that affect) 90 W( this decision. The
instructor's second decision is how)91 W 7920 22351 MT (to allocate class
effort between project work and) 98 W( lectures\320and how to coordinate the
two.)97 W 7920 23777 MT (Section 3 describes several course models that make
different) 75 W( tradeoffs on this dimension,)76 W 7920 25203 MT (and Section
4 discusses the)SH /Helvetica-Oblique SF 21928 XM (kinds)SH /Helvetica SF
24802 XM (of projects used in undergraduate courses.)SH 7920 27770 MT (In
doing this analysis we had the benefit of the Software Engineering Institute's
survey of)134 W 7920 29196 MT (software engineering courses) 169 W( [84]) SH(
and personal contact with some two dozen instructors.)170 W 7920 30622 MT
(Section 5 and the appendix present some objective data from the) 130 W(
spring 1990 survey, in-)129 W 7920 32048 MT (cluding the position of the
courses in the curriculum and the textbooks in use.)SH 7920 34615 MT (To put
flesh on the bones of) 212 W( this overview, Sections 6 through 10 present the
plans of)213 W 7920 36041 MT (several versions of) 178 W( the course,
including syllabi of actual offerings, outlines of textbooks,)177 W 7920 37467
MT (and curriculum designs.)SH 7920 40034 MT (Finally, no matter which
decision the instructor makes on the two major questions of content)21 W 7920
41460 MT (and organization, any course with a significant) 158 W( group-
project component presents several)157 W 7920 42886 MT (special problems.
Section 11 notes some of these and suggests ways to deal with them.)SH 7920
45453 MT (Software engineering education has regularly been singled out for
special attention.) 202 W( An)712 W 7920 46879 MT (early workshop was held in
1976) 178 W( [129].) SH( An) 662 W( annual series of workshops on software
en-)178 W 7920 48305 MT (gineering education has been sponsored since 1986 by
the Software Engineering) 109 W( Institute)110 W 8226 49731 MT ([57, 48, 50,
56, 39].) SH( Papers) 436 W( on particular topics also appear regularly in
the) 65 W( ACM)64 W /Helvetica-Oblique SF 48762 XM (SIGCSE)SH 7920 51157 MT
(Bulletin)SH /Helvetica SF 11834 XM (and in special issues of other
professional journals.)SH ES %%Page: 3 7 61200 79200 BS 45000 50 10080 74657
UL 0 SI 10 /Helvetica AF 10358 75600 MT (CMU/SEI-91-TR-10)SH 54524 XM (3)SH 17
/Helvetica-Bold AF 10080 10239 MT (2. Content Balance: Technical versus
Management)SH 11 /Helvetica AF 10080 12854 MT (Traditionally, engineering is
defined) 505 W( as "creating cost-effective solutions to practical)506 W 10080
14280 MT (problems by) 212 W( applying scientific knowledge to building things
in the services of mankind")211 W 10386 15706 MT ([114]. Against) 314 W( that
standard, the phrase "software engineering" is a statement of aspiration,)4 W
10080 17132 MT (not a description of accomplishment. Nevertheless, we face a
crying) 187 W( need to get better)186 W 10080 18558 MT (control over the
software development task and to do so in the short term.)SH 10080 21125 MT
(Engineering disciplines have historically emerged from ad hoc practice in) 46
W( two stages. They)47 W 10080 22551 MT (are rooted in the exploitation of a
technology by individual craftsmen. As) 156 W( the technology)155 W 10080
23977 MT (becomes more significant,) 113 W( management and uniform production
techniques are developed)114 W 10080 25403 MT (to support a stable market.
Problems) 127 W( with production in this commercial setting stimulate)126 W
10080 26829 MT (the development of a supporting science. As the science
matures, it merges) 261 W( with es-)262 W 10080 28255 MT (tablished practice
to enable a professional engineering practice rooted in the) 65 W( science) 64
W( [114].)SH 10080 29681 MT (Figure 1 depicts this evolution.)SH 1 SS 1 1 0
10080 110307 GB GE 11 /Helvetica-Bold AF 19741 52739 MT (Figure 1:) SH(
Evolution) 612 W( of an Engineering Discipline)SH /Helvetica SF 10080 57969 MT
(Certainly the software development task is appropriately an) 32 W(
engineering problem: it involves)33 W 10080 59395 MT ("creating cost-effective
solutions to practical problems." What's currently) 478 W( lacking is)477 W
10080 60821 MT (widespread routine application of scientific) 151 W( knowledge
to a wide range of practical design)152 W 10080 62247 MT (tasks. Some) 352 W(
science is mature, most notably algorithms, data structures, and compiler) 23
W( con-)22 W 10080 63673 MT (struction theory; however, the current demands
are far ahead of the scientific base. In) 15 W( other)16 W 10080 65099 MT
(words, the field of software engineering is) 13 W( still immature; but the
situation is improving, albeit)12 W 10080 66525 MT (more slowly than need
requires.)SH 10080 69092 MT (In the absence of a mature scientific) 112 W(
base, developers of large software systems resort to)113 W 10080 70518 MT
(establishing routine practices which, even if ad hoc, will nevertheless guide
programmers to)40 W 10080 71944 MT (relatively predictable outcomes. As) 131
W( a result, the "software engineering" label is being ap-)132 W ES %%Page: 4
8 61200 79200 BS 45000 50 7920 74657 UL 0 SI 10 /Helvetica AF 8198 75600 MT
(4)SH 44197 XM (CMU/SEI-91-TR-10)SH 11 SS 7920 9802 MT (plied to a set of
management topics such as project planning,) 27 W( cost/schedule estimation,
and)26 W 7920 11228 MT (team organization.)SH 7920 13795 MT (These topics may
represent best current practice, but:)SH /Symbol SF 10168 15912 MT (\267)SH
/Helvetica SF 10980 XM (The pipeline) 282 W( of scientific results with
practical utility is filling, particularly in)283 W 10980 17149 MT (specific
application areas.)SH /Symbol SF 10168 19994 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 10980
XM (Course energy will have the highest payoff if invested in) 60 W( the most
durable con-)59 W 10980 21231 MT (tent.)SH /Symbol SF 10168 24076 MT (\267)SH
/Helvetica SF 10980 XM (Use of the "engineering" label) 49 W( for what are
essentially management topics may)50 W 10980 25313 MT (preempt its use for
real engineering techniques\320and may even) 41 W( divert attention)40 W 10980
26550 MT (from the cultivation of those techniques.)SH 7920 29117 MT (Here
lies the source of the instructor's dilemma: whether to emphasize the mature
science)84 W 7920 30543 MT (or the current practice. The former is less
applicable at present but has) 256 W( been refined)255 W 7920 31969 MT (enough
to retain its value for years to come. The latter represents) 148 W( useful
skills that may)149 W 7920 33395 MT (become obsolete\320and may also be
inefficient in course time per unit of content.) 48 W( The) 401 W( deci-)47 W
7920 34821 MT (sion is complicated by the need to present material that is
required simply to enable stu-)150 W 7920 36247 MT (dents to carry out a
sizable group project.)90 W 9 SS 28734 35877 MT (1)SH 11 SS 29630 36247 MT
(For concreteness, we list here) 90 W( typical technical)91 W 7920 37673 MT
(and management topics.) 210 W( It) 724 W( is difficult to fully separate the
two, for a given subject can)209 W 7920 39099 MT (sometimes be approached with
either) 24 W( emphasis. For example, "configuration management")25 W 7920
40525 MT (has both technical content \050formal) 409 W( methods of system
description\051 and management)408 W 7920 41951 MT (aspects \050composition
and activities of a configuration control board\051.) 60 W( This) 428 W(
dichotomy exists)61 W 7920 43377 MT (for several other areas within the) 122
W( scope of software engineering: life cycle models, quality)121 W 7920 44803
MT (assurance, maintenance topics, etc.)SH /Helvetica-Bold SF 7920 46802 MT
(Technical engineering topics)SH /Symbol SF 10168 48919 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica
SF 10980 XM (Abstraction and specification, and their proper use in design)SH
/Symbol SF 10168 51692 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 10980 XM (Formal methods of
requirements specification and of verification)SH /Symbol SF 10168 54465 MT
(\267)SH /Helvetica SF 10980 XM (Large-scale data, including scientific,
commercial database, and AI issues)SH /Symbol SF 10168 57238 MT (\267)SH
/Helvetica SF 10980 XM (Security and reliability)SH /Symbol SF 10168 60011 MT
(\267)SH /Helvetica SF 10980 XM (Distributed systems, including
synchronization/atomicity and network com-)447 W 10980 61248 MT (munication)SH
10800 50 7920 62759 UL 7 SS 8920 64325 MT (1)SH 9 SS 9309 64657 MT (An
additional) 165 W( argument for including management topics arises from
employers' needs: it has been our)164 W 7920 65706 MT (experience that
students with a solid background in software engineering currently advance
quite) 107 W( rapidly after)108 W 7920 66755 MT (graduation to team leadership
positions in which they need to know those skills. In) 103 W( one instance, a
Carnegie)102 W 7920 67804 MT (Mellon graduate found himself leading a small
independent research) 296 W( and development team in a major)297 W 7920 68853
MT (aerospace company within four months of leaving school. He reported that
his supervisors chose him for the) 3 W( lead)2 W 7920 69902 MT (because he had
a better understanding of the overall) 146 W( software development process
than more experienced)147 W 7920 70951 MT (computer science graduates who had)
90 W( neither studied software engineering nor, as yet, gained an
appreciation)89 W 7920 72000 MT (for the "big picture.")SH ES %%Page: 5 9
61200 79200 BS 45000 50 10080 74657 UL 0 SI 10 /Helvetica AF 10358 75600 MT
(CMU/SEI-91-TR-10)SH 54524 XM (5)SH 11 /Symbol AF 12328 9880 MT (\267)SH
/Helvetica SF 13140 XM (Real-time systems)SH /Symbol SF 12328 12653 MT
(\267)SH /Helvetica SF 13140 XM (Concepts of prototyping)SH /Symbol SF 12328
15426 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 13140 XM (Development of metrics for measuring
quality factors)SH /Symbol SF 12328 18199 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 13140 XM
(System description languages)SH /Symbol SF 12328 20972 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica
SF 13140 XM (Techniques for software reuse)SH /Symbol SF 12328 23745 MT
(\267)SH /Helvetica SF 13140 XM (Automated development environments and their
characteristics)SH /Symbol SF 12328 26518 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 13140 XM
(Configuration management)SH /Symbol SF 12328 29291 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF
13140 XM (Structuring software for maintenance)SH /Helvetica-Bold SF 10080
31330 MT (Management topics)SH /Symbol SF 12328 33447 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica
SF 13140 XM (Life cycle models as a framework for development planning)SH
/Symbol SF 12328 36220 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 13140 XM (Requirements
analysis)SH /Symbol SF 12328 38993 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 13140 XM
(Estimation and tracking)SH /Symbol SF 12328 41766 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF
13140 XM (Nature and use of development standards)SH /Symbol SF 12328 44539 MT
(\267)SH /Helvetica SF 13140 XM (Configuration management)SH /Symbol SF 12328
47312 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 13140 XM (Development team organization,
structured design methods) 312 W( \050e.g., Yourdon,)311 W 13140 48549 MT
(Jackson, SADT\051)SH /Symbol SF 12328 51322 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 13140
XM (Tracking progress through internal documents)SH /Symbol SF 12328 54095 MT
(\267)SH /Helvetica SF 13140 XM (The use of quality assurance)SH /Symbol SF
12328 56868 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 13140 XM (Reviews and walkthroughs)SH
/Symbol SF 12328 59641 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 13140 XM (Maintenance)SH
10080 62208 MT (In general, the course plans that we) 97 W( have reviewed show
a strong management emphasis)98 W 10080 63634 MT (both in the topics discussed
in class and) 342 W( in the project work. The most often-used)341 W 10080
65060 MT (textbooks, whose outlines are presented in Section 6, certainly) 149
W( show that emphasis. For)150 W 10080 66486 MT (comparison, an example of a
course) 20 W( based on a technical theme, in this case abstraction, is)19 W
10080 67912 MT (given in Section 7. We can suggest several) 10 W( reasons for
the predominance of courses with a)11 W 10080 69338 MT (management
emphasis:)SH /Symbol SF 12328 71455 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 13140 XM (The
most popular texts spend a) 132 W( considerable percentage of their content
dis-)131 W ES %%Page: 6 10 61200 79200 BS 45000 50 7920 74657 UL 0 SI 10
/Helvetica AF 8198 75600 MT (6)SH 44197 XM (CMU/SEI-91-TR-10)SH 11 SS 10980
9802 MT (cussing life cycle models, management issues relating to organizing
software)148 W 10980 11039 MT (teams, quality assurance and configuration
management) 32 W( from the standpoint of)31 W 10980 12276 MT (their
organizational impact rather than their technical activity, etc.; this
textual)139 W 10980 13513 MT (emphasis creeps into the syllabi of
inexperienced instructors.)SH /Symbol SF 10168 16358 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF
10980 XM (Instructors with industrial) 495 W( experience recognize that the
chief failings of)494 W 10980 17595 MT (software projects in the commercial
world are not technical but) 160 W( are problems)161 W 10980 18832 MT (such as
poor effort and resource estimates, poor communication, and lack) 143 W(
of)142 W 10980 20069 MT (configuration management and quality assurance.)SH
/Symbol SF 10168 22914 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF 10980 XM (A certain amount of
management material is needed to keep a group project)146 W 10980 24151 MT
(running well.) 168 W( Since) 641 W( this material is qualitatively different
from the topics stu-)167 W 10980 25388 MT (dents are accustomed to seeing in
computer) 97 W( science courses, it is likely to be)98 W 10980 26625 MT (more
time-consuming to teach.)SH /Symbol SF 10168 29470 MT (\267)SH /Helvetica SF
10980 XM (Most of the students plan to go directly into industry) 116 W( after
graduation, and the)115 W 10980 30707 MT (software engineering course) 150 W(
is the only place in the undergraduate computer)151 W 10980 31944 MT (science
curriculum where these topics can be adequately taught.)SH 7920 33983 MT
(Alas, these reasons put vocational) 193 W( considerations ahead of the
traditional criteria of cur-)192 W 7920 35409 MT (riculum design.)SH ES
%%Page: 7 11 61200 79200 BS 45000 50 10080 74657 UL 0 SI 10 /Helvetica AF
10358 75600 MT (CMU/SEI-91-TR-10)SH 54524 XM (7)SH 11 SS 10080 9802 MT (Until
very recently,) 136 W( the technical issues associated with software
engineering fit quite well)137 W 10080 11228 MT (within the course alongside
the) 234 W( management issues\320there was so little to discuss that)233 W
10080 12654 MT (there was plenty of class) 113 W( time for both. The students
usually enter the course with a solid)114 W 10080 14080 MT (grounding in
program construction, so the challenge appeared to be meshing the manage-)85 W
10080 15506 MT (ment techniques with the software development techniques.) 273
W( Software engineering as a)274 W 10080 16932 MT (technical discipline has
hardly stood still: formal methods, new design paradigms,) 40 W( and other)39
W 10080 18358 MT (technical topics are) 141 W( squeezing the syllabus from one
end, while process maturity models,)142 W 10080 19784 MT (post-development
management issues,) 36 W( and other management topics are squeezing it from)35
W 10080 21210 MT (the other. There is now) 9 W( a very real need to make
decisions on content that are different from)10 W 10080 22636 MT (the
decisions early in the last decade.)SH 10080 25203 MT (Various decisions
about) 50 W( the balance of technical and management topics can be
supported)49 W 10080 26629 MT (for different institutional settings and
variations on the basic objective of) 6 W( learning about "real-)7 W 10080
28055 MT (world" software. But to justify) 143 W( the title "software
engineering," the course must convey to)142 W 10080 29481 MT (students the
engineering point of view: that engineering of software involves generating
al-)85 W 10080 30907 MT (ternative designs and selecting\320for good) 164 W(
reasons\320the ones that best resolve conflicting)163 W 10080 32333 MT
(constraints and requirements of the ultimate customer.)SH ES %%Page: 8 12
61200 79200 BS 45000 50 7920 74657 UL 0 SI 10 /Helvetica AF 8198 75600 MT
(8)SH 44197 XM (CMU/SEI-91-TR-10)SH ES %%Page: 9 13 61200 79200 BS 45000 50
10080 74657 UL 0 SI 10 /Helvetica AF 10358 75600 MT (CMU/SEI-91-TR-10)SH 54524
XM (9)SH 17 /Helvetica-Bold AF 10080 10239 MT (3. Models of the Undergraduate
Software Engineering)SH 11971 12536 MT (Course)SH 11 /Helvetica AF 10080 15151
MT (Beginning software engineering courses have been taught) 13 W( with
content that crosses a range)14 W 10080 16577 MT (from no project work at all
to highly) 90 W( intensive project work. Figure 2 is an illustration of the)89
W 10080 18003 MT (spectrum of courses. The models described in this) 117 W(
section are drawn from extensive dis-)118 W 10080 19429 MT (cussions with
instructors of these courses over seven years, augmented by the literature.)SH
1 SS 1 1 0 10080 102564 GB GE 11 /Helvetica-Bold AF 20322 62276 MT (Figure 2:)
SH( Models) 612 W( of the One-Semester Course)SH /Helvetica SF 10080 67506 MT
(An underlying assumption of these models is that students) 104 W( enter the
course with the tech-)103 W 10080 68932 MT (nical background of program
construction gained in the prerequisite courses, and the pur-)121 W 10080
70358 MT (pose of the software engineering course is) 183 W( to demonstrate
how this technical material is)182 W 10080 71784 MT (applied in the context of
large-scale software development. Students are expected to have)90 W ES
%%Page: 10 14 61200 79200 BS 45000 50 7920 74657 UL 0 SI 10 /Helvetica AF 8198
75600 MT (10)SH 44197 XM (CMU/SEI-91-TR-10)SH 11 SS 7920 9802 MT (knowledge
and skills in the application of) 250 W( high-level programming languages,
especially)249 W 7920 11228 MT (those that emphasize structure and) 163 W(
abstraction, knowledge of machine organization \050per-)164 W 7920 12654 MT
(haps demonstrated by facility with assembly language\051, and grounding) 121
W( in the fundamental)120 W 7920 14080 MT (principles and algorithms of
computer science. Further, students) 172 W( should be good writers)173 W 7920
15506 MT (and should have senior standing. This last requirement is) 82 W( to
ensure that the students have)81 W 7920 16932 MT (had some upper-division
courses such as theory,) 162 W( compiler design, or survey of program-)163 W
7920 18358 MT (ming languages, and that they have some maturity in both their
academic and) 201 W( personal)200 W 7920 19784 MT (lives. Jon Bentley once
observed that a) 186 W( useful prerequisite for the study of software en-)187
W 7920 21210 MT (gineering is that the student "should have) 139 W( been
married at least once." This is not strictly)138 W 7920 22636 MT
(enforced\050!\051, but the students should have some ability to) 141 W(
communicate and work together)142 W 7920 24062 MT (somewhat harmoniously.)SH
15 /Helvetica-Bold AF 7920 28204 MT (3.1. The "Software Engineering as
Artifact" Model)SH 11 /Helvetica AF 7920 30630 MT (The leftmost model
illustrates) 66 W( the subject taught almost entirely by lecture, with some
inter-)65 W 7920 32056 MT (action among the instructor and students, mostly
relating to) 146 W( questions and difficult points.)147 W 7920 33482 MT (There
are two advantages of this approach: there) 30 W( is easily enough time in
either a 10-week)29 W 7920 34908 MT (quarter or 16-week semester to present
the major concepts of software engineering;) 8 W( and the)9 W 7920 36334 MT
(absence of a project means) 104 W( that the students can concentrate on the
issues the instructor)103 W 7920 37760 MT (wants to discuss rather than the
"crisis of the week." The major disadvantage is) 38 W( that teach-)39 W 7920
39186 MT (ing software engineering without doing it is as bad as teaching
piano playing by the lecture)68 W 7920 40612 MT (method. Many issues in
software) 78 W( engineering, particularly in communication and configura-)79 W
7920 42038 MT (tion control, simply cannot be appreciated in the absence of
experience.) 187 W( Because) 678 W( most)186 W 7920 43464 MT (projects that
fail) 105 W( do so because of deficiencies in those two areas, we would be
doing our)106 W 7920 44890 MT (students an injustice by not exposing them to
the) 91 W( problems inherent in actually working on)90 W 7920 46316 MT
(software products. Due) 11 W( to the nature of these courses \050and for
reasons discussed in Section)12 W 7920 47742 MT (2\051, instructors often
follow the plan described in Section 6, "Life Cycle Emphasis.")SH ES %%Page:
11 15 61200 79200 BS 45000 50 10080 74657 UL 0 SI 10 /Helvetica AF 10358 75600
MT (CMU/SEI-91-TR-10)SH 53968 XM (11)SH 15 /Helvetica-Bold AF 10080 10094 MT
(3.2. The "Topical Approach" Model)SH 11 /Helvetica AF 10080 12520 MT
(Although the "topical approach" model is another all-talk, no-action model,
it has the advan-)42 W 10080 13946 MT (tage of in-depth exploration of some
aspects of) 104 W( the subject. Usually used at the graduate)105 W 10080 15372
MT (level, the lecture part of the course is roughly the same as in the
previous model, but) 108 W( it is)107 W 10080 16798 MT (supplemented by weekly
presentations by the students. Each student) 156 W( is assigned a topic)157 W
10080 18224 MT (\050such as object-oriented design, automated specification
tools, and verification) 109 W( of real-time)108 W 10080 19650 MT
(software\051, reads) 108 W( two or three papers on it, and conducts a seminar
for the other students.)109 W 10080 21076 MT (Here a succinctly written text
such as) 61 W( one by Fairley) 60 W( [47]) SH( or Sommerville) 60 W( [118])
SH( can be used)60 W 10080 22502 MT (to back) 100 W( up the main lectures,
while the students provide their own reading material for the)101 W 10080
23928 MT (discussion sessions. Alternatively, essay collections such as
Brooks) 133 W( [24]) SH( or Mills) 132 W( [89]) SH( can)132 W 10080 25354 MT
(feed the discussions. Yourdon's) 103 W( publishing arm has also produced a
pair of collections of)104 W 10080 26780 MT (outstanding papers in software
engineering) 161 W( [134, 135],) SH( though some are becoming dated.)160 W
10080 28206 MT (Again, even though) 195 W( there are additional readings,
these courses often follow the plan in)196 W 10080 29632 MT (Section 6.)SH 15
/Helvetica-Bold AF 10080 33774 MT (3.3. The "Small Group Project" Model)SH 11
/Helvetica AF 10080 36200 MT (The "small) 164 W( group project" model includes
a project as part of the course, for the positive)163 W 10080 37626 MT
(reasons discussed above. Currently the most common) 143 W( model of the
software engineering)144 W 10080 39052 MT (course, it makes a fairly even
division between project work and) 83 W( class work. Typically, stu-)82 W
10080 40478 MT (dents are divided into teams of three to five members each.
The) 56 W( projects chosen are often)57 W 10080 41904 MT (familiar to the
students and can be completed in a single) 34 W( term. However, the limited
course)33 W 10080 43330 MT (effort dedicated to the project necessarily limits
its size and scope.)SH 10080 45897 MT (In Kant's presentation of this model)
243 W( [69],) SH( she suggests some projects: a) 243 W( string-handling)244 W
10080 47323 MT (package for standard Pascal, a reservation system for the
computer center's terminal room,)40 W 10080 48749 MT (and an interactive text
editor, among others.) 42 W( This model provides the students with some of)43
W 10080 50175 MT (the experience needed to apply the software engineering
concepts discussed) 282 W( in class.)281 W 10080 51601 MT (However, the model
is deficient in) 64 W( its ability to give students experience with the
critical dif-)65 W 10080 53027 MT (ficulties inherent in programming-in-the-
large.)SH 10080 55594 MT (The use of a small project, small teams and,) 96 W(
often, fictitious customers may simply extend)95 W 10080 57020 MT (the
programming-in-the-small experience normally gained in computer science
courses.)290 W 10080 58446 MT (However, adequate attention to configuration
management and quality assurance can bring)53 W 10080 59872 MT (in larger
project issues. One) 84 W( way of taking advantage of the manageability of
small teams)85 W 10080 61298 MT (while still teaching something about
programming-in-the-large) 22 W( is to use the course organiza-)21 W 10080
62724 MT (tion described) 282 W( in Section 10, "Even Balance of Management,
Engineering, and Tools.")283 W 10080 64150 MT (Another reason that small teams
are used is that the start of the) 175 W( project is delayed until)174 W 10080
65576 MT (about the middle) 24 W( of the term so that some prerequisite
technical material can be taught) 25 W( [63].)SH 10080 67002 MT (This often
happens when inst

