Archive-Date: Wed, 04 Dec 1996 01:15:14 CST Sender: owner-sts-
list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Date: Wed, 04 Dec 1996 01:15:10 CST From: Elam O'Renick
Reply-To: Elam O'Renick  To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Message-ID:
<009AC509.0E615AA4.65@CCTR.UMKC.EDU> Subject: Faculty Position at UCLA ***
PLEASE NOTE *** The following message was originally posted by Leah Lievrouw,
LLIEVROU@UCLA.EDU. \----------------------------- >Subject: Faculty Position
at UCLA > >Greetings fellow STS people -- I am appending the announcement for
a >position we have open here at UCLA that I think may interest some of you.
>The deadline for receipt of applications (Dec. 15) is SOFT, so if you need
>more information please feel free to contact me. Pardon the long posting, >we
just want you to know about us! > >Leah Lievrouw >========== >University of
California, Los Angeles. The Department of Library and >Information Science of
the Graduate School of Education and Information >Studies at UCLA seeks an
outstanding scholar/researcher to help lead the >field into the next century.
We invite applications for a professor or >associate professor with tenure, or
a tenure-track assistant professor, >starting July 1, 1997. The successful
candidate will lead projects and >engage in research and teaching at the
intersection of information science, >education, and new technology studies. >
>The Department of Library and Information Science offers top-rated MLIS and
>Ph.D. programs, with 13 faculty and approximately 150 Master's and 25 Ph.D.
>students. Department faculty recently have been recognized as among the >most
productive and highly-cited in the LIS field. The Graduate School of
>Education and Information Studies is one of the top-ranked schools in the
>U.S. and supports large graduate programs and internationally-recognized
>research centers. Within the School, DLIS has emerged as an innovative,
>interdisciplinary center for theory and research in the fields of
>information science, archival informatics, new media, and information
>policy. > >The School and the Department have strong commitments to the rich
and >varied multi-cultural communities of the Southern California region, and
a >reputation for merging research and practice in statewide, national, and
>international outreach and service. We seek scholars who will make the most
>of Los Angeles' unique advantages as a setting for research linking
>information studies to public engagement and for creating international
>connections, especially with the Pacific Rim and Latin America. The
>Department has initiated a number of innovative new partnerships for
>research and graduate education, including projects with government and
>corporate organizations. > >We especially encourage applicants with research
interests in either or >both of the following areas: (1) information systems,
including digital >libraries, image databases, multimedia, archival and
record-keeping >technologies, information retrieval, networks and
instructional uses of >information and communication technology; and (2)
social impacts of >information technologies, including social informatics,
social studies of >technology, the design process, information access and
equity, policy, and >institutions. Desirable secondary research interests
might include >economics of information, interface design, multi-cultural
communities, >telecommunications law and policy, social research methodology,
or related >areas. Applicants also should be interested in collaboration with
faculty >from other schools and departments located on campus. >
>Qualifications include an earned doctorate, a demonstrated record of
>research and publication, and established teaching competence and
>experience. The ideal candidate will have experience with obtaining
>extramural funding and grant projects, including the development and
>oversight of major multi-year projects. UCLA has an attractive salary and
>benefits package, including a housing assistance program for new faculty
>members. > >Applications received by December 15, 1996 will receive fullest
>consideration for a fall 1997 appointment, and should include a letter of
>interest, curriculum vita, sample publications, and the names and addresses
>of five references. Nominations and applications should be addressed to: >
>Leah A. Lievrouw, Associate Professor >Chair, Faculty Search Committee
>Department of Library and Information Science, UCLA >216 GSE&IS; Building
>Box 951520 >Los Angeles, CA 90095-1520 > >E-mail: LLIEVROU@UCLA.EDU
>Telephone: (310) 825-8799 >Fax: (310) 206-4460 >
================================================================================
Archive-Date: Thu, 05 Dec 1996 18:23:37 CST Sender: owner-sts-
list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Date: Thu, 05 Dec 1996 18:23:24 CST From: Elam O'Renick
Reply-To: Elam O'Renick  To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Message-ID:
<009AC661.DD9F5DE4.63@CCTR.UMKC.EDU> Subject: Jan on Libraries *** NOTE ***
The following is an original post by phil@uwtc.washington.edu (Phil Bereano)
>To:STS >From:phil@uwtc.washington.edu (Phil Bereano) >Subject: Jan on
Libraries > >The problem with the example offered about the ability to use
libraries as >access points is that libraries are often closed. (Don't a lot
of us do >computer work at night, on Sundays, etc., when government buildings
aren't >open?) Also reducing library hours has been a common municipal tactic
to >balance budgets. > >And you have to go out in the rain and the snow, maybe
deal with streets >that are dangerous. Doesn't match how my colleagues are
using these >technologies. > >It's class stratification; let's not delude
ourselves (a favorite middle >class pastime when thinking about the poor) that
computers at public >libraries is remotely equivalent. This technology will
exacerbate class >differences (and, indeed, I can argue that this was the
intention--to >out-compete those who don't have the latest, best, etc.) > >And
how many of that percentage ("using" the public library in a >year--even one
solo visit) were kids doing a school project? What is adult >use (and
frequency of use), by ethnicity? Are we including homeless who >use public
libraries (and sometimes their computers) to pass the day warm >and dry? > >
Phil Bereano <><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><>< Philip L. Bereano Professor
Department of Technical Communication University of Washington 14 Loew Hall,
Box 352195 Seattle, WA 98195-2195 ph: (206) 543-9037 fx: (206) 543-8858
e-mail: phil@uwtc.washington.edu <><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><
================================================================================
Archive-Date: Thu, 05 Dec 1996 18:25:34 CST Sender: owner-sts-
list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Date: Thu, 05 Dec 1996 18:25:26 CST From: Elam O'Renick
Reply-To: Elam O'Renick  To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Message-ID:
<009AC662.26682D7B.75@CCTR.UMKC.EDU> *** NOTE *** The following is an original
post by phil@uwtc.washington.edu (Phil Bereano) >To:STS@CCTR.UMKC.EDU
>From:phil@uwtc.washington.edu (Phil Bereano) > >It is illogical to believe
that because poor people can afford a TV >(according to one welfare mother I
discussed this with, Goodwill has them >in black and white for as little as
$5) they can afford a >computer/modem/etc. These will never be 5 bucks! >
>Middle class people should stop believing that they know about the lives >of
the poor. Learn from other classes with some humility. > >And as regards that
table of the increasing percentage of jobs that are >computer-related, are
people aware that the government statistics on which >it is based include jobs
like super market check-out clerks and McDonald's >sales people whose job
machinery embodies computers? It is NOT measuring >only what we are doing. > >
Phil Bereano <><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><>< Philip L. Bereano Professor
Department of Technical Communication University of Washington 14 Loew Hall,
Box 352195 Seattle, WA 98195-2195 ph: (206) 543-9037 fx: (206) 543-8858
e-mail: phil@uwtc.washington.edu <><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><
================================================================================
Archive-Date: Fri, 06 Dec 1996 11:05:03 CST Sender: owner-sts-
list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Date: Fri, 06 Dec 1996 11:04:52 CST From:
system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Reply-To: STS@CCTR.UMKC.EDU To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU
Message-ID: <009AC6ED.C4F72902.1@CCTR.UMKC.EDU> Subject: STS back online
Original Post:  Dear STSers - for some unknown reason, a glitch occurred in
the machine which serves this e-list such that mail to STS@CCTR.UMKC.EDU was
returned to the original senders as 'undeliverable'. That problem has been
fixed, and you may resume posting messages to STS. Please accept our sincerest
apologies for any inconvenience this problem may have caused. Elam O'Renick
STS co-listmanager University of Missouri - Kansas City
================================================================================
Archive-Date: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 09:52:49 CST Sender: owner-sts-
list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Date: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 09:51:14 CST From:
system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Reply-To: STS@CCTR.UMKC.EDU To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU
Message-ID: <009AC93E.FAE2D194.875@CCTR.UMKC.EDU> Subject: Call for Papers--
ISTAS'97 Original Post:  International Symposium on Technology and Society
1997 (ISTAS'97) Technology and Society at a Time of Sweeping Change Venue:
University of Strathclyde in Glasgow, Scotland Date: June 20th - 21st 1997
Sponsored by the Institution of Electrical Engineers, IEEE Society on Social
Implications of Technology , IEEE UK and Republic of Ireland Section and IEEE
Region 8 . CALL FOR PAPERS The last decade has seen immense change in the
world, and in Europe in particular. The social and technical landscape is
altering so far and so fast, that it is almost impossible to keep track. What
effect will this have on industrial and developing societies? How will it
effect the natural environment? What effect will these changes have on
technologists and engineers? How will this change into the new millennium?
ISTAS '97 aims to tackle these questions and draw together opinion from both
sides of the Atlantic, as ISTAS moves to Europe for the first time in its
history. Papers are particularly encouraged on the following topics: o
Environmental changes analysis and action. o Monitoring of environmental
change. o International Policy. o Government, Technology and Society. o
Systems of government and their effect on technology and society. o The impact
of change in government on technology and society. o The impact of technology
change on governments. o The effect of culture on technological development. o
Multi-national Interaction. o Communications infrastructures, (e.g. the World
Wide Web). o Globalisation of markets. o Legislation, Intellectual Property
and Freedom of Speech across national boundaries. o The gap between high wage
and low wage economies. o Security issues. o Global Monitoring. o New threats
to security. o Is there a peace dividend? o Trends into the new millennium.
Papers in the traditional ISTAS topics are also welcomed: o Environmental,
health, safety, and peace-related implications of technology. o Social,
economic, and ethical issues involving energy, information, and
telecommunications technologies. o History of electrotechnology o Systems
analysis in public policy decisions ISTAS '97 invites significant
contributions on any of these topics from a wide spectrum of concerned
individuals. Submit a one page abstract of a paper or poster, or a proposal
for a paper session or panel discussion to the Chair at: ISTAS '97 SECRETARIAT
ISTAS '97 Secretariat Conference Services Department The Institution of
Electrical Engineers Savoy Place London WC2R 0BL UK. Tel: + 44(0)171 344
5469/8425 Fax: +44 (0)171 240 8830 E-mail: ISTAS@iee.org.uk COMMITTEE Simon R
Burne, Netherlands (Chairman) A John Baden-Fuller, UK Dr Leslie C Campbell, UK
Gordon K Clarke, UK Ken J Frith, UK John F Gamlin, UK Brian R Harrington, UK
Frederick L Pitt, UK OVERSEAS MEMBERS Clinton Andrews, USA Jacob Baal-Shem,
Israel Kenneth R Foster, USA Joseph R Herkert, USA Jan John, Czech Republic
Thomas Schmid, Switzerland DEADLINES Receipt of Abstracts - 16 December 1996
Notification of acceptance - February 1997 Camera ready copy - 28 April 1997
VENUE The Symposium will be held in Clyde Hall, University of Strathclyde,
Glasgow. Clyde Hall is situated on the River Clyde, adjacent to the Central
Railway Station in the heart of Glasgow. As well as an international Airport
with direct links from Europe and the USA, it is only 1 hour by air from
London and 40 minutes by train from Edinburgh. A fascinating city with a
wealth of art galleries, museums, theatres, sophisticated shops and street
markets. Glasgow is also an excellent base from which to explore Scotland+s
stunning scenery - Loch Lomond, the Trosack mountains and the Ayrshire coast,
Stirling and Edinburgh are all within an hour's drive away. More information
on ISTAS'97 i
================================================================================
Archive-Date: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 11:35:25 CST Sender: owner-sts-
list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Date: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 11:34:41 CST From:
system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Reply-To: STS@CCTR.UMKC.EDU To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU
Message-ID: <009AC94D.6E6A848C.445@CCTR.UMKC.EDU> Subject: Call for Papers--
ISTAS'97 Original Post:  International Symposium on Technology and Society
1997 (ISTAS'97) Technology and Society at a Time of Sweeping Change Venue:
University of Strathclyde in Glasgow, Scotland Date: June 20th - 21st 1997
Sponsored by the Institution of Electrical Engineers, IEEE Society on Social
Implications of Technology , IEEE UK and Republic of Ireland Section and IEEE
Region 8 . CALL FOR PAPERS The last decade has seen immense change in the
world, and in Europe in particular. The social and technical landscape is
altering so far and so fast, that it is almost impossible to keep track. What
effect will this have on industrial and developing societies? How will it
effect the natural environment? What effect will these changes have on
technologists and engineers? How will this change into the new millennium?
ISTAS '97 aims to tackle these questions and draw together opinion from both
sides of the Atlantic, as ISTAS moves to Europe for the first time in its
history. Papers are particularly encouraged on the following topics: o
Environmental changes analysis and action. o Monitoring of environmental
change. o International Policy. o Government, Technology and Society. o
Systems of government and their effect on technology and society. o The impact
of change in government on technology and society. o The impact of technology
change on governments. o The effect of culture on technological development. o
Multi-national Interaction. o Communications infrastructures, (e.g. the World
Wide Web). o Globalisation of markets. o Legislation, Intellectual Property
and Freedom of Speech across national boundaries. o The gap between high wage
and low wage economies. o Security issues. o Global Monitoring. o New threats
to security. o Is there a peace dividend? o Trends into the new millennium.
Papers in the traditional ISTAS topics are also welcomed: o Environmental,
health, safety, and peace-related implications of technology. o Social,
economic, and ethical issues involving energy, information, and
telecommunications technologies. o History of electrotechnology o Systems
analysis in public policy decisions ISTAS '97 invites significant
contributions on any of these topics from a wide spectrum of concerned
individuals. Submit a one page abstract of a paper or poster, or a proposal
for a paper session or panel discussion to the Chair at: ISTAS '97 SECRETARIAT
ISTAS '97 Secretariat Conference Services Department The Institution of
Electrical Engineers Savoy Place London WC2R 0BL UK. Tel: + 44(0)171 344
5469/8425 Fax: +44 (0)171 240 8830 E-mail: ISTAS@iee.org.uk COMMITTEE Simon R
Burne, Netherlands (Chairman) A John Baden-Fuller, UK Dr Leslie C Campbell, UK
Gordon K Clarke, UK Ken J Frith, UK John F Gamlin, UK Brian R Harrington, UK
Frederick L Pitt, UK OVERSEAS MEMBERS Clinton Andrews, USA Jacob Baal-Shem,
Israel Kenneth R Foster, USA Joseph R Herkert, USA Jan John, Czech Republic
Thomas Schmid, Switzerland DEADLINES Receipt of Abstracts - 16 December 1996
Notification of acceptance - February 1997 Camera ready copy - 28 April 1997
VENUE The Symposium will be held in Clyde Hall, University of Strathclyde,
Glasgow. Clyde Hall is situated on the River Clyde, adjacent to the Central
Railway Station in the heart of Glasgow. As well as an international Airport
with direct links from Europe and the USA, it is only 1 hour by air from
London and 40 minutes by train from Edinburgh. A fascinating city with a
wealth of art galleries, museums, theatres, sophisticated shops and street
markets. Glasgow is also an excellent base from which to explore Scotland+s
stunning scenery - Loch Lomond, the Trosack mountains and the Ayrshire coast,
Stirling and Edinburgh are all within an hour's drive away. More information
on ISTAS'97 is available on World Wide Web at document URL:
http://www.iee.org.uk/LSboard/Conf/call_for/istas97.htm
*************************************************************************
Joseph R. Herkert Division of Multidisciplinary Studies Box 7107, North
Carolina State University Raleigh, North Carolina 27695 voice: 919-515-7997
fax: 919-515-1828 email: herkert@social.chass.ncsu.edu internet:
http://www4.ncsu.edu/unity/users/j/jherkert/jrh.html President, IEEE Society
on Social Implications of Technology email: j.herkert@ieee.org internet:
http://www4.ncsu.edu/unity/users/j/jherkert/index.html
*************************************************************************
================================================================================
Archive-Date: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:56:11 CST Sender: owner-sts-
list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Date: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:56:20 CST From:
system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Reply-To: STS@CCTR.UMKC.EDU To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU
Message-ID: <009AC9AC.A839C632.13@CCTR.UMKC.EDU> Subject: Late Delivery.
Original Post:  Received: from DB.Stanford.EDU by axp2.umkc.edu (MX V4.1 AXP)
with SMTP; Mon, 09 Dec 1996 17:32:07 CST Received: from [36.122.0.68] (sts-pb-
edwards.Stanford.EDU [36.122.0.68]) by DB.Stanford.EDU (8.7.1/8.7.1) with
ESMTP id PAA08168 for ; Mon, 9 Dec 1996 15:31:13 -0800 X-Sender:
pedwards@db.stanford.edu Message-Id:  MIME-Version: 1.0 Content-Type:
text/plain; charset="us-ascii" Date: Mon, 9 Dec 1996 15:31:09 -0800 To:
STS@CCTR.UMKC.EDU From: "Paul N. Edwards"  Subject: Radical right goes
constructivist? Major report: enviro sci Status: Late Delivery "For any
scientific issue, there will always be some scientists in agreement and some
in disagreement; scientists will invariably change their minds; and no
reliable process exists to resolve scientific differences of opinion...."
Social constructivist? "Academic leftist," a la Gross and Levitt? Follower of
Feyerabend or Kuhn? Nope. This was the view of the Republican majority on the
House Science Committee and its Subcommittee on Energy and Environment in the
104th U.S. Congress, according to an important report released in October by
Rep. George Brown, the Science Committee's ranking Democratic member. I
summarize the report at the end of this message. The report is a political
fire alarm. Everyone concerned with environmental science and policy should
read it. But for subscribers to this listserv, it poses two intellectual
problems which badly need more discussion. First, it illustrates the fact that
-- contra Gross and Levitt -- "academic leftists" aren't the only ones
purveying the views that scientific truth is a matter of social consensus;
that scientific consensus is political (in the sense that it depends upon
alliances which can always in principle be reconfigured); or that ideologies,
self-interest, and economic support can affect the outcome of scientific
investigations. Although the radical-right critique of science discussed in
the Brown Committee report doesn't draw directly on science-studies
scholarship, some of the parallels are quite striking. Second, it poses in a
dramatic and urgent form the problem of the moral and political responsibility
of people in our field. Whether or not we like to admit it, a great deal of
science-studies scholarship can at least be read as implying that scientific
knowledge is no more (if no less) reliable than any other kind of consensus.
SSK's "symmetry principle" (which I personally think is excellent methodology
but lousy epistemology) suggests to some that all consensus knowledge systems
are equally valid. How does this scholarship connect with the stance we take
on issues like those raised in Brown's report? What does it say about science-
based political decisions? One irony of this particular situation is that
consensus science on climate change, at least, has made a very big deal indeed
of the high levels of uncertainty in its conclusions. These scientists'
attempt to be ultra-responsible about uncertainty has opened the door for the
right's critique. Similarly, enormous effort has gone into broadening the
"peer review" process to include not only highly qualified in-group
scientists, but relative outsiders such as industry lobbies, governments (e.g.
Kuwait, a major opponent of global-warming consensus), and many of the very
same fringe scientists (e.g. Fred Singer and Pat Michaels) who complained most
loudly about their exclusion to the Subcommittee. This is particularly true in
the case of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (the world consensus
body for climate science). Here's how I'd pose the problem: in open democratic
societies, scientific consensus has in the past been viewed as a relatively
nonpartisan, nonpolitical source of knowledge. That view has been breaking
down since the late 1960s, largely because of high-visibility battles over
environmental science. It's being replaced by the views that science is a form
of interest politics like any other, and that scientific consensus is an
illusion. Science studies scholarship, at least on the surface, tends to
support these views. I have a lot more to say about this, but since this
message is already long, I'll stop here and hope to get some discussion going.
You can order the report by email at scidems@hr.house.gov, or lift it directly
off the Web at http://www.house.gov/science_democrats/envrpt96.htm Brief,
informal summary (views expressed below are Brown's, not nec. mine):
"Environmental Science Under Siege: Fringe Science and the 104th Congress," a
report by Rep. George E. Brown, Ranking Democratic Member, to the Democratic
Caucus of the Committee on Science, U.S. House of Representatives, October 23,
1996 The report analyses three 1995 hearings of the Subcommittee on Energy and
Environment, chaired by Rep. Dana Rohrabacher (R). The hearings were billed as
an investigation into "political pressure... put on people to make scientific
decisions." (Rohrabacher) The hearings addressed the following issues: (1)
Stratospheric ozone depletion. Ozone science was the basis of the 1992
decision to accelerate the Montreal Protocol's ban on production and use of
ozone-depleting chemicals (CFCs and others). In the hearings, NASA and the EPA
were accused of overstating the risks. Skeptic scientist Fred Singer testified
that ozone depletion, if real, probably wasn't caused by human activities. (2)
Global climate change. Before the hearings began, Rohrabacher called this
"liberal claptrap." IPCC scientists were accused of understating the
uncertainties in climate science to Congressional committees. "Establishment"
science was accused of deliberate suppression of skeptical views and of
excluding skeptic scientists from the IPCC. (3) Health risks of dioxin
exposure. The EPA was accused of exaggerating risks. All three hearings
promoted the views of conservative think tanks, scientific skeptics, and
industry lobby groups, many of extremely dubious qualifications and whose main
work in the relevant areas had not appeared in peer-reviewed literature. These
groups claimed that establishment science deliberately exaggerated these
problems in order to promote a regulatory agenda. Mainstream scientists
testified too, but on an equal basis with the skeptics and think-tank pundits.
The Subcommittee on Energy and Environment expressed deep suspicion of
government-funded scientists (i.e., most of the work on climate change, ozone
depletion, and dioxin by the US Global Change Research Program, the National
Center for Atmospheric Research, NASA, EPA, and other bodies). The Republican
argument was that government funding created an economic incentive for
scientists to exaggerate the importance of their work and raise unfounded
alarms over the problems they discovered. Key points of the report: (1)
Republican members of the Subcommittee on Energy and Environment repudiated
the peer review process as a corrupt, politicized, politically correct tyranny
of the majority. Peer review was labeled "mumbo-jumbo" by one representative.
These representatives held to the belief that a scientific establishment
systematically ignores and marginalizes skeptics for political reasons (i.e.
the establishment's supposed regulatory agenda). Representatives frequently
cited the history of scientific revolutions (the concept, not the book) to
argue that fringe science is more often right than wrong. Skeptics were seen
as more credible precisely _because_ they opposed consensus. (The Chair of the
Science Committee, Rep. Robert Walker (R), expressed this view.) Through an
intriguing translation process, these views supported the Republican priority
on "revolutionary ideas and pioneering capabilities that make possible the
impossible" (p. 7n). (2) The hearings were set up as a science court in which
Congressional representatives would judge among conflicting scientific views.
Brown's report concludes that in this way the Subcommittee achieved exactly
what it was protesting: the politicization of science. (3) The Subcommittee
constantly promoted "sound science." This turned out to mean "empirical
science," i.e. direct observations rather than models and statistical
analysis. Subcommittee members argued that the government should intervene on
environmental problems only after incontrovertible direct observations confirm
the problems' existence. Brown notes that this standard would make it
impossible to prevent environmental harms in advance.
\------------------------------------------------------------------ Paul N.
Edwards Program in Science, Technology, and Society
http://www.Stanford.edu/group/STS/edwards.html Director, Information
Technology & Society Project http://www.stanford.edu/group/itsp/ Bldg. 370 Rm.
111 (415) 723-6817 (o) Stanford University (415) 725-5389 (fax) Stanford, CA
94305-2120 pedwards@pcd.stanford.edu
================================================================================
Archive-Date: Tue, 10 Dec 1996 00:31:59 CST Sender: owner-sts-
list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Date: Tue, 10 Dec 1996 00:32:12 CST From:
system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Reply-To: STS@CCTR.UMKC.EDU To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU
Message-ID: <009AC9BA.0CAD7A9D.46@CCTR.UMKC.EDU> Subject: job postings/Cornell
Communication Original Post:  CORNELL UNIVERSITY DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION
POSITION:: Assistant Professor, Health and/or Risk Communication, Tenure
Track, 12-month position STARTING DATE: July 1, 1997 or as negotiated
LOCATION: Department of Communication New York State College of Agriculture &
Life Sciences (CALS) Cornell University Ithaca, New York 14853
RESPONSIBILITIES: This position has a 60 percent teaching (typically three
courses per year) and 40 percent research responsibility. The teaching
component will include a large introductory communication theory course, an
undergraduate course in health communication and a course in communication
campaigns or a graduate course. The person also will be expected to advise
undergraduate and graduate students and to develop a strong research and
teaching program. Research should be on communication issues relevant to one
or more of the following CALS program areas: agriculture, biological and life
sciences, community and rural development, environment and natural resources,
food and nutrition, or international programs. The successful candidate will
be expected to generate external funding. QUALIFICATIONS: Ph.D. in
Communication or related social science discipline. The successful candidate
should have evidence demonstrating potential for disciplinary leadership in a
relevant research program in the area of specialization and must be well
grounded in social science research methods. Evidence of teaching ability
should be provided. =================================== CORNELL UNIVERSITY
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION POSITION: Assistant Professor, Communication,
Tenure Track, 12-month position STARTING DATE: July 1, 1997 or as negotiated
LOCATION: Department of Communication New York State College of Agriculture &
Life Sciences (CALS) Cornell University Ithaca, New York 14853
RESPONSIBILITIES: This position has a 50 percent research, 20 percent
teaching, and 30 percent extension/outreach responsibility. Teaching
responsibilities will include courses in the area of information systems and
management and/or technology and social issues. The person will be expected to
advise undergraduate and graduate students and to help develop a new research
and teaching program in the area. Research should be on communication
technology in relation to information access or social issues, especially as
they pertain to one or more of the following CALS major program areas:
agriculture, biological and life sciences, community and rural development,
environment and natural resources, food and nutrition, or international
programs. The successful candidate will be expected to generate external
funding. The extension/outreach activities should be related to the research
emphasis. Initially, because previous extension/outreach experience is not
required, the successful candidate will be assisted in establishing a strong
program in this area. QUALIFICATIONS: Ph.D. in Communication or related social
science discipline. The successful candidate must have evidence demonstrating
potential for disciplinary leadership in a relevant research program in the
area of communication technology and must be well grounded in social science
research methods. ======================= FOR BOTH JOBS: SALARY: Competitive,
commensurate with background and experience. An attractive fringe benefits
package is available. APPLICATION: Applicants are to submit a letter of
application, resume, academic transcripts, and the names, addresses and
telephone numbers of three references to: Dr. Ronald E. Ostman Department of
Communication Cornell University 336 Kennedy Hall Ithaca, NY 14853-4203
CLOSING DATE: January 10, 1997 or until position is filled. Cornell University
is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer. Women and Minorities are
encouraged to apply. =========================
\---------------------------------- Bruce Lewenstein, Assoc. Professor Depts.
of Communication and of Science & Technology Studies 321 Kennedy Hall Cornell
University Ithaca, NY 14853 USA Tel: 607-255-8310, Fax: 607-255-7905, E-mail:
BVL1@cornell.edu
================================================================================
Archive-Date: Tue, 10 Dec 1996 02:08:26 CST Sender: owner-sts-
list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Date: Tue, 10 Dec 1996 02:08:40 CST From:
system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Reply-To: STS@CCTR.UMKC.EDU To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU
Message-ID: <009AC9C7.86336609.15@CCTR.UMKC.EDU> Subject: Re: Late Delivery.
Original Post:
================================================================================
Archive-Date: Tue, 10 Dec 1996 02:27:09 CST Sender: owner-sts-
list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Date: Tue, 10 Dec 1996 02:27:05 CST From:
system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Reply-To: STS@CCTR.UMKC.EDU To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU
Message-ID: <009AC9CA.18F8683E.14@CCTR.UMKC.EDU> Subject: Re: Late Delivery.
Original Post:  The extracts from the Senate House Committee on science and
the comments by Paul Edwards are interesting. Hyper-social constructivism
taken to the extremes can be mobilized in a variety of ways....and it is time
one thought through some of the more intriguing aspects of the constructivist
arguments that border close to conceptual idealism eg. Steve Woolgar in
_Science: the very Idea_. Methinks Edwards seems a bit too hesitant and
guarded while discussing the possible role of over-enthusiastic constructivism
in contributing (without intending to) to some of the more problematic
developments.... Zaheer Baber
================================================================================
Archive-Date: Tue, 10 Dec 1996 07:04:13 CST Sender: owner-sts-
list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Date: Tue, 10 Dec 1996 07:04:28 CST From:
system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Reply-To: STS@CCTR.UMKC.EDU To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU
Message-ID: <009AC9F0.D8D19D30.5@CCTR.UMKC.EDU> Subject: new engineering and
computing ethics website Original Post:  Friends- I am pleased to announce a
new website, the _Web Clearinghouse for Engineering and Computing Ethics_,
which is sponsored by the Division of Multidisciplinary Studies, North
Carolina State University. The purpose of this site, which contains no
original material, is to provide a comprehensive, user-friendly index of
materials on the Web relating to engineering and computing ethics. The
material on the site is indexed according to a number of categories including:
ethics centers; professional societies; codes of ethics; conferences; books
and reports; journals and newsletters; mailing lists and newsgroups; and case
studies. This site was created in conjunction with a paper I presented at the
1996 Frontiers in Education Conference, Salt Lake City, Utah, November 6-9,
1996: "Making Connections: Engineering Ethics on the World Wide Web". A
hypertext version of the paper is also available at the clearinghouse site.
The document URL for the _Web Clearinghouse for Engineering and Computing
Ethics_ is: http://www4.ncsu.edu/unity/users/j/jherkert/ethicind.html Please
send comments and suggestions for additional links via email to
herkert@social.chass.ncsu.edu Best regards, Joe
*************************************************************************
Joseph R. Herkert Division of Multidisciplinary Studies Box 7107, North
Carolina State University Raleigh, North Carolina 27695 voice: 919-515-7997
fax: 919-515-1828 email: herkert@social.chass.ncsu.edu internet:
http://www4.ncsu.edu/unity/users/j/jherkert/jrh.html President, IEEE Society
on Social Implications of Technology email: j.herkert@ieee.org internet:
http://www4.ncsu.edu/unity/users/j/jherkert/index.html
*************************************************************************
================================================================================
Archive-Date: Tue, 10 Dec 1996 07:40:38 CST Sender: owner-sts-
list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Date: Tue, 10 Dec 1996 07:40:50 CST From:
system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Reply-To: STS@CCTR.UMKC.EDU To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU
Message-ID: <009AC9F5.EDA48416.37@CCTR.UMKC.EDU> Subject: Gross&Levitt; quotes
Original Post:  I just read an essay by Roger Hart, a graduate student in
history of Chinese mathematics who was visiting Harvard which is added to the
book version of Science Wars, ed. Andrew Ross, Duke UP, 1996. It's called "The
Flight from Reason: higher Superstition and the Refutation of Science
Studies." It is by far the most careful going over of G&L;'s book and its
quotations that I have seen, noting where quotes are distorted by passages
eliminated by ellipses, various misunderstandings, and citations of anonymous
sources as authories etc. It notes that the famous silly Derrida quote cited
by Sokal, Weinberg, et al is in Gross and Levitt and cited from an article in
Skeptical Inquirer. It even finds G&L; denouncing Derrida for talking
ignorantly about differential topology when Derrida is talking about topics or
topoi of differance (something quite differant, certainly, -- please excuse
lack of accents in e-mail), even when the French phrase is next to the English
mistranslation. I strongly recommend this essay to anyone on the list
interested in the Science Wars debates. It's a real gem. Val Dusek
================================================================================
Archive-Date: Tue, 10 Dec 1996 16:42:37 CST Sender: owner-sts-
list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Date: Tue, 10 Dec 1996 16:41:34 CST From:
system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Reply-To: system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU
Message-ID: <009ACA41.77BCC564.80@CCTR.UMKC.EDU> Subject: Late Delivery.
X-ListName: Science & Technical Studies Discussion Group  Warnings-To: <>
Errors-To: owner-sts-list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Sender: owner-sts-list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU
Received: by CCTR.UMKC.EDU (MX V4.1 AXP) id 445; Mon, 09 Dec 1996 11:34:47 CST
Date: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 11:34:41 CST From: system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Reply-to:
STS@CCTR.UMKC.EDU To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Message-Id:
<009AC94D.6E6A848C.445@CCTR.UMKC.EDU> Subject: Call for Papers--ISTAS'97
Status: Late Delivery Original Post:  International Symposium on Technology
and Society 1997 (ISTAS'97) Technology and Society at a Time of Sweeping
Change Venue: University of Strathclyde in Glasgow, Scotland Date: June 20th -
21st 1997 Sponsored by the Institution of Electrical Engineers, IEEE Society
on Social Implications of Technology , IEEE UK and Republic of Ireland Section
and IEEE Region 8 . CALL FOR PAPERS The last decade has seen immense change in
the world, and in Europe in particular. The social and technical landscape is
altering so far and so fast, that it is almost impossible to keep track. What
effect will this have on industrial and developing societies? How will it
effect the natural environment? What effect will these changes have on
technologists and engineers? How will this change into the new millennium?
ISTAS '97 aims to tackle these questions and draw together opinion from both
sides of the Atlantic, as ISTAS moves to Europe for the first time in its
history. Papers are particularly encouraged on the following topics: o
Environmental changes analysis and action. o Monitoring of environmental
change. o International Policy. o Government, Technology and Society. o
Systems of government and their effect on technology and society. o The impact
of change in government on technology and society. o The impact of technology
change on governments. o The effect of culture on technological development. o
Multi-national Interaction. o Communications infrastructures, (e.g. the World
Wide Web). o Globalisation of markets. o Legislation, Intellectual Property
and Freedom of Speech across national boundaries. o The gap between high wage
and low wage economies. o Security issues. o Global Monitoring. o New threats
to security. o Is there a peace dividend? o Trends into the new millennium.
Papers in the traditional ISTAS topics are also welcomed: o Environmental,
health, safety, and peace-related implications of technology. o Social,
economic, and ethical issues involving energy, information, and
telecommunications technologies. o History of electrotechnology o Systems
analysis in public policy decisions ISTAS '97 invites significant
contributions on any of these topics from a wide spectrum of concerned
individuals. Submit a one page abstract of a paper or poster, or a proposal
for a paper session or panel discussion to the Chair at: ISTAS '97 SECRETARIAT
ISTAS '97 Secretariat Conference Services Department The Institution of
Electrical Engineers Savoy Place London WC2R 0BL UK. Tel: + 44(0)171 344
5469/8425 Fax: +44 (0)171 240 8830 E-mail: ISTAS@iee.org.uk COMMITTEE Simon R
Burne, Netherlands (Chairman) A John Baden-Fuller, UK Dr Leslie C Campbell, UK
Gordon K Clarke, UK Ken J Frith, UK John F Gamlin, UK Brian R Harrington, UK
Frederick L Pitt, UK OVERSEAS MEMBERS Clinton Andrews, USA Jacob Baal-Shem,
Israel Kenneth R Foster, USA Joseph R Herkert, USA Jan John, Czech Republic
Thomas Schmid, Switzerland DEADLINES Receipt of Abstracts - 16 December 1996
Notification of acceptance - February 1997 Camera ready copy - 28 April 1997
VENUE The Symposium will be held in Clyde Hall, University of Strathclyde,
Glasgow. Clyde Hall is situated on the River Clyde, adjacent to the Central
Railway Station in the heart of Glasgow. As well as an international Airport
with direct links from Europe and the USA, it is only 1 hour by air from
London and 40 minutes by train from Edinburgh. A fascinating city with a
wealth of art galleries, museums, theatres, sophisticated shops and street
markets. Glasgow is also an excellent base from which to explore Scotland+s
stunning scenery - Loch Lomond, the Trosack mountains and the Ayrshire coast,
Stirling and Edinburgh are all within an hour's drive away. More information
on ISTAS'97 is available on World Wide Web at document URL:
http://www.iee.org.uk/LSboard/Conf/call_for/istas97.htm
*************************************************************************
Joseph R. Herkert Division of Multidisciplinary Studies Box 7107, North
Carolina State University Raleigh, North Carolina 27695 voice: 919-515-7997
fax: 919-515-1828 email: herkert@social.chass.ncsu.edu internet:
http://www4.ncsu.edu/unity/users/j/jherkert/jrh.html President, IEEE Society
on Social Implications of Technology email: j.herkert@ieee.org internet:
http://www4.ncsu.edu/unity/users/j/jherkert/index.html
*************************************************************************
================================================================================
Archive-Date: Tue, 10 Dec 1996 20:21:04 CST Sender: owner-sts-
list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Date: Tue, 10 Dec 1996 20:20:46 CST From:
system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Reply-To: system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU
Message-ID: <009ACA60.1730B4DE.334@CCTR.UMKC.EDU> Subject: Late Delivery.
X-ListName: Science & Technical Studies Discussion Group  Warnings-To: <>
Errors-To: owner-sts-list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Sender: owner-sts-list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU
Received: by CCTR.UMKC.EDU (MX V4.1 AXP) id 1; Fri, 06 Dec 1996 11:04:40 CST
Date: Fri, 06 Dec 1996 11:04:52 CST From: system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Reply-to:
STS@CCTR.UMKC.EDU To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Message-Id:
<009AC6ED.C4F72902.1@CCTR.UMKC.EDU> Subject: STS back online Status: Late
Delivery Original Post:  Dear STSers - for some unknown reason, a glitch
occurred in the machine which serves this e-list such that mail to
STS@CCTR.UMKC.EDU was returned to the original senders as 'undeliverable'.
That problem has been fixed, and you may resume posting messages to STS.
Please accept our sincerest apologies for any inconvenience this problem may
have caused. Elam O'Renick STS co-listmanager University of Missouri - Kansas
City
================================================================================
Archive-Date: Tue, 10 Dec 1996 21:18:35 CST Sender: owner-sts-
list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Date: Tue, 10 Dec 1996 21:18:05 CST From:
system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Reply-To: system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU
Message-ID: <009ACA68.189FD4D7.197@CCTR.UMKC.EDU> Subject: Late Delivery.
X-ListName: Science & Technical Studies Discussion Group  Warnings-To: <>
Errors-To: owner-sts-list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Sender: owner-sts-list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU
Received: by CCTR.UMKC.EDU (MX V4.1 AXP) id 875; Mon, 09 Dec 1996 09:51:17 CST
Date: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 09:51:14 CST From: system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Reply-to:
STS@CCTR.UMKC.EDU To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Message-Id:
<009AC93E.FAE2D194.875@CCTR.UMKC.EDU> Subject: Call for Papers--ISTAS'97
Status: Late Delivery Original Post:  International Symposium on Technology
and Society 1997 (ISTAS'97) Technology and Society at a Time of Sweeping
Change Venue: University of Strathclyde in Glasgow, Scotland Date: June 20th -
21st 1997 Sponsored by the Institution of Electrical Engineers, IEEE Society
on Social Implications of Technology , IEEE UK and Republic of Ireland Section
and IEEE Region 8 . CALL FOR PAPERS The last decade has seen immense change in
the world, and in Europe in particular. The social and technical landscape is
altering so far and so fast, that it is almost impossible to keep track. What
effect will this have on industrial and developing societies? How will it
effect the natural environment? What effect will these changes have on
technologists and engineers? How will this change into the new millennium?
ISTAS '97 aims to tackle these questions and draw together opinion from both
sides of the Atlantic, as ISTAS moves to Europe for the first time in its
history. Papers are particularly encouraged on the following topics: o
Environmental changes analysis and action. o Monitoring of environmental
change. o International Policy. o Government, Technology and Society. o
Systems of government and their effect on technology and society. o The impact
of change in government on technology and society. o The impact of technology
change on governments. o The effect of culture on technological development. o
Multi-national Interaction. o Communications infrastructures, (e.g. the World
Wide Web). o Globalisation of markets. o Legislation, Intellectual Property
and Freedom of Speech across national boundaries. o The gap between high wage
and low wage economies. o Security issues. o Global Monitoring. o New threats
to security. o Is there a peace dividend? o Trends into the new millennium.
Papers in the traditional ISTAS topics are also welcomed: o Environmental,
health, safety, and peace-related implications of technology. o Social,
economic, and ethical issues involving energy, information, and
telecommunications technologies. o History of electrotechnology o Systems
analysis in public policy decisions ISTAS '97 invites significant
contributions on any of these topics from a wide spectrum of concerned
individuals. Submit a one page abstract of a paper or poster, or a proposal
for a paper session or panel discussion to the Chair at: ISTAS '97 SECRETARIAT
ISTAS '97 Secretariat Conference Services Department The Institution of
Electrical Engineers Savoy Place London WC2R 0BL UK. Tel: + 44(0)171 344
5469/8425 Fax: +44 (0)171 240 8830 E-mail: ISTAS@iee.org.uk COMMITTEE Simon R
Burne, Netherlands (Chairman) A John Baden-Fuller, UK Dr Leslie C Campbell, UK
Gordon K Clarke, UK Ken J Frith, UK John F Gamlin, UK Brian R Harrington, UK
Frederick L Pitt, UK OVERSEAS MEMBERS Clinton Andrews, USA Jacob Baal-Shem,
Israel Kenneth R Foster, USA Joseph R Herkert, USA Jan John, Czech Republic
Thomas Schmid, Switzerland DEADLINES Receipt of Abstracts - 16 December 1996
Notification of acceptance - February 1997 Camera ready copy - 28 April 1997
VENUE The Symposium will be held in Clyde Hall, University of Strathclyde,
Glasgow. Clyde Hall is situated on the River Clyde, adjacent to the Central
Railway Station in the heart of Glasgow. As well as an international Airport
with direct links from Europe and the USA, it is only 1 hour by air from
London and 40 minutes by train from Edinburgh. A fascinating city with a
wealth of art galleries, museums, theatres, sophisticated shops and street
markets. Glasgow is also an excellent base from which to explore Scotland+s
stunning scenery - Loch Lomond, the Trosack mountains and the Ayrshire coast,
Stirling and Edinburgh are all within an hour's drive away. More information
on ISTAS'97 i
================================================================================
Archive-Date: Wed, 11 Dec 1996 08:36:47 CST Sender: owner-sts-
list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Date: Wed, 11 Dec 1996 08:36:56 CST From:
system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Reply-To: STS@CCTR.UMKC.EDU To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU
Message-ID: <009ACAC6.EE50C20E.43@CCTR.UMKC.EDU> Subject: POSITION NOTICE:
BIOLOGY AND SOCIETY Original Post:  DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
STUDIES Cornell University BIOLOGY AND SOCIETY Visiting Assistant Professor in
the Department of Science and Technology Studies, one-year (with possibility
of renewal) from August 1997 to July 1998. The successful candidate will play
an active role in the Department's under-graduate major in Biology and
Society. Teaching responsibilities will include the interdisciplinary core
course for the major and two additional courses in such areas as history of
biology, philosophy of biology, gender and science, biomedical ethics, and
environmental ethics. Participation in advising both undergraduate and
graduate students is expected. Area of specialization open, but favored
possibilities include science and technology studies; history; philosophy or
sociology of the life sciences; political and social theory; law; or gender
studies relating to biology or medicine. Applications from women and members
of minority groups are strongly encouraged. Candidates should submit: (a) a
letter of application explaining the relation of their research and teaching
interests to the requirements of this position; (b) a curriculum vitae; (c) a
sample of written work; (d) a sample syllabus for an undergraduate course; and
(e) three letters of recommendation to be sent directly to the Department.
Application materials should be submitted to: Professor Sheila Jasanoff,
Chair, Department of Science and Technology Studies, 726 University Avenue,
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14850. Applications will be reviewed starting
March 1, 1997. For further information, please contact the Department at
607-255-6234, or li10@cornell.edu, or http://www.sts.cornell.edu/CU-STS.html.
Cornell University is an affirmative action/equal opportunity employer.
Lillian Isacks, Graduate Field Assistant Dept. of Science & Technology Studies
Graduate Field Office 726 University Avenue, Room 205 Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850 Internet: li10@cornell.edu WWW:
http://www.sts.cornell.edu/CU-STS.html Telephone: (607) 255-6234 Fax: (607)
255-0616
================================================================================
Archive-Date: Wed, 11 Dec 1996 21:01:00 CST Sender: owner-sts-
list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Date: Wed, 11 Dec 1996 21:01:09 CST From:
system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Reply-To: STS@CCTR.UMKC.EDU To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU
Message-ID: <009ACB2E.E5E06170.58@CCTR.UMKC.EDU> Subject: Books for kids (fwd)
Original Post:  \---------- Forwarded message ---------- Date: Tue, 10 Dec
1996 23:44:43 EST From: Kathleen M Rai  Subject: Books for kids Give the gift
of literacy... \------------------------------------------------------- The
Houghton-Mifflin publishing co. is giving books to children's hospitals; how
many books they give depends on how many emails they receive from people
around the world. for every 25 emails they receive, they give one book--it
seems like a great way to help a good cause. all you have to do is email:
share@hmco.com. hope you can spare the seconds...and let your friends know. so
far they only have 3, 400 messages...last year they reached 23,000.
\-------------------------------------------------------------------------
John Cheng Dept. of History, 3G1 jcheng@osf1.gmu.edu George Mason University
703-993-1258 Fairfax, VA 22030-4444
================================================================================
Archive-Date: Thu, 12 Dec 1996 09:15:50 CST Sender: owner-sts-
list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Date: Thu, 12 Dec 1996 09:15:51 CST From:
system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Reply-To: STS@CCTR.UMKC.EDU To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU
Message-ID: <009ACB95.88D9EE3F.67@CCTR.UMKC.EDU> Subject: Re: New Science
Issues and the International System Original Post:  The Foreign Policy
Institute at Johns Hopkins University is sponsoring a series of study groups
and lectures on the impact of emerging issues in science on the international
system. If this is a topic that interests you, please visit the project
homepage at www.rand.org/centers/cti/newsci. There is a password protected
discussion attached to this page. If, after reviewing the homepage, you would
like to join the discussion, please contact me at cwagner@rand.org. Thanks.
================================================================================
Archive-Date: Thu, 12 Dec 1996 16:48:41 CST Sender: owner-sts-
list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Date: Thu, 12 Dec 1996 16:48:03 CST From:
system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Reply-To: STS@CCTR.UMKC.EDU To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU
Message-ID: <009ACBD4.B45A6E74.73@CCTR.UMKC.EDU> Subject: Fwd: Roger Hart
essay on Gross + Levitt Original Post:  Alan Sokal wrote in reply to my post
about the Hart article the following: \--------------------- Forwarded
message: From: sokal@acf4.NYU.EDU (Alan Sokal) To: Valdusek@aol.com CC: STS-
LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU, bricmont@fyma.ucl.ac.be, koertge@ucs.indiana.edu,
njlevitt@haven.ios.com, njlevitt@math.rutgers.edu,
prg@faraday.clas.virginia.edu, stocking@indiana.edu Date: 96-12-12 15:48:45
EST Dear Ms. Dusek, *Of course* the "famous silly Derrida quote cited by
Sokal, Weinberg, et al" is in Gross and Levitt: the footnote in my Social Text
parody explicitly cites G&L; (and facetiously attacks them as "willfully
misinterpreting [the Derrida quote] as an assertion about _special_
relativity" rather than _general_ relativity; of course in truth it's nonsense
in either case). G&L; learned about this quote from an article in Skeptical
Inquirer, which they cite. But the original source (cited by G&L; and also by
me) is the discussion after Derrida's talk at the famous 1966 Johns Hopkins
conference on _Les Langages Critiques et Les Sciences de l'Homme_. All this is
made clear in my Social Text article, so I don't see what Hart's great
discovery is. (But it should be said that this is the *only* case, to my
knowledge, in which Derrida has misused the natural sciences; indeed, it's
almost the only case in which Derrida has even *mentioned* the natural
sciences. Derrida's work may or may not be nonsense, but it is not -- with
this one exception -- an abuse of the *natural* sciences. This distinguishes
Derrida from some of the other authors cited in my parody, whose abuse of
science *is* in many cases systematic and extensive. The detailed evidence on
this point will appear in a book I am now writing with my Belgian colleague
Jean Bricmont, entitled _Les impostures scientifiques des philosophes
(post-)modernes_.) Hart is right that G&L; mistakenly attacked Derrida for
using the mathematical term "differential topology": the original French is
"topique differantielle", a Derridean neologism that is quite possibly
meaningless but in any case has nothing to do with mathematical topology
("topologie differentielle"). I also independently noticed this, and
criticized G&L; on this score in an as-yet-unpublished (actually as-yet-
unfinished) review of their book. On the other hand, G&L; also make a mistake
in the opposite direction: they erroneously conclude that psychoanalyst
Jacques Lacan and his literary-critic acolytes "ha[ve] been getting literary
_topoi_ mixed up with the subject matter of mathematical topology" (p. 266).
The truth is much worse: Lacan, especially in the last two decades of his
life, was indeed obsessed with mathematical topology and saw in it a key to
understanding the human psyche. For one example, see the quote from Lacan's
1966 lecture "Of Structure as an Inmixing of an Otherness Prerequisite to any
Subject Whatever" (!) cited in my Social Text parody. Many other examples are
available, and will be cited in my book with Bricmont. This theme is also
discussed in Elisabeth Roudinesco's book on Lacan. I'll let Gross and Levitt
respond to the rest of Roger Hart's criticisms, some of which appear to me to
be valid and some of which appear to be invalid. I do agree with you that
Hart's is "by far the most careful going over of G&L;'s book" by an opponent.
Indeed, it is virtually the only critical article I know of that actually
addresses G&L;'s *arguments*; most of the others seem content with throwing
around epithets and caricatures. Best wishes, Alan Sokal >Subject:
Gross&Levitt; quotes > >Original Post:  > >I just read an essay by Roger Hart,
a graduate student in history of Chinese >mathematics who was visiting Harvard
which is added to the book version of >Science Wars, ed. Andrew Ross, Duke UP,
1996. It's called "The Flight from >Reason: higher Superstition and the
Refutation of Science Studies." It is by >far the most careful going over of
G&L;'s book and its quotations that I have >seen, noting where quotes are
distorted by passages eliminated by ellipses, >various misunderstandings, and
citations of anonymous sources as authories >etc. It notes that the famous
silly Derrida quote cited by Sokal, Weinberg, >et al is in Gross and Levitt
and cited from an article in Skeptical Inquirer. > It even finds G&L;
denouncing Derrida for talking ignorantly about >differential topology when
Derrida is talking about topics or topoi of >differance (something quite
differant, certainly, -- please excuse lack of >accents in e-mail), even when
the French phrase is next to the English >mistranslation. I strongly recommend
this essay to anyone on the list >interested in the Science Wars debates. It's
a real gem. > >Val Dusek
================================================================================
Archive-Date: Thu, 12 Dec 1996 18:00:12 CST Sender: owner-sts-
list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Date: Thu, 12 Dec 1996 18:00:03 CST From:
system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Reply-To: STS@CCTR.UMKC.EDU To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU
Message-ID: <009ACBDE.C337C798.53@CCTR.UMKC.EDU> Subject: science and media
Original Post:  Dears STS'ers, I am interested about newsgroups, magazines,
books and websites related to relationships between media and science. May I
have some good references on this subject? If there is someone working on the
subject or in the neighborhood please let me know. Thanks in advance.
\---------- manuel correia E-mail: mcorreia@individual.eunet.pt
http://individual.eunet.pt/~mcorreia/
================================================================================
Archive-Date: Thu, 12 Dec 1996 20:40:44 CST Sender: owner-sts-
list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Date: Thu, 12 Dec 1996 20:40:52 CST From:
system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Reply-To: STS@CCTR.UMKC.EDU To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU
Message-ID: <009ACBF5.3A848DCA.42@CCTR.UMKC.EDU> Subject: Looking for an
author on Third World climate science Original Post:  For an edited book on
science and the politics of global climate change from a science-studies
perspective, I'm looking for one or more contributors able to write a chapter
or chapters on the politics of climate science in the developing world.
Ideally, the contributor(s) would treat a large country with high stakes in
the global warming debate, such as China, India, or Brazil. Also ideally, the
contributor(s) would be from the developing world. We are hoping to find
someone who can address the relationships between the practice of climate
science and national political structures and agendas. If anyone on this list
is interested, or knows someone who fits this bill, please email me privately.
Thanks! Paul
\------------------------------------------------------------------ Paul N.
Edwards Program in Science, Technology, and Society
http://www.Stanford.edu/group/STS/edwards.html Director, Information
Technology & Society Project http://www.stanford.edu/group/itsp/ Bldg. 370 Rm.
111 (415) 723-6817 (o) Stanford University (415) 725-5389 (fax) Stanford, CA
94305-2120 pedwards@pcd.stanford.edu
================================================================================
Archive-Date: Fri, 13 Dec 1996 07:18:51 CST Sender: owner-sts-
list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Date: Fri, 13 Dec 1996 07:19:04 CST From:
system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Reply-To: STS@CCTR.UMKC.EDU To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU
Message-ID: <009ACC4E.62788102.11@CCTR.UMKC.EDU> Subject: science and media -
Reply Original Post:  Dear STS people, In response to Manuel Correia's request
for Websites, magazines etc related to science and the media may I recommend
Wavelength: http://science.btc.uwe.ac.uk/~waveleng/home.html This is the site
for a Web version of Wavelength magazine which is produced in association with
a BA degree called Science, Society and the Media at the University of the
West of England, Bristol. The latest edition will not be up until after
Christmas but issues 12, 13 and 14 are up now. Look out for a radical facelift
in the new year. There is also a collection of links to other sites which deal
with STS and science in the media. You can reach this directly from here:
http://science.btc.uwe.ac.uk/~waveleng/ssmlinks.html Adam Nieman
================================================================================
Archive-Date: Fri, 13 Dec 1996 09:04:50 CST Sender: owner-sts-
list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Date: Fri, 13 Dec 1996 09:04:42 CST From:
system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Reply-To: STS@CCTR.UMKC.EDU To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU
Message-ID: <009ACC5D.2420B438.51@CCTR.UMKC.EDU> Subject: Re: science and
media Original Post:  The moderated listserv PCST-L@cornell.edu is devoted to
discussions of all aspects of public communication of science and technology,
with a substantial part of the discussion being about media issues. The
listserv has about 500+ subscribers, from more than 20 countries, ranging from
science journalists and public information officers to museum people to
scientists who popularize to academics from journalism, communication, and
science-studies who specialize in science and the media. To join, send the
following message to LISTPROC@cornell.edu subscribe PCST-L yourfirstname
yourlastname (I'm the moderator of PCST-L; almost all I do is screen out
misdirected commands, etc.) \-- Bruce Lewenstein BVL1@cornell.edu On Thu, 12
Dec 1996 system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU wrote: > Original Post:  > > Dears STS'ers, > >
I am interested about newsgroups, magazines, books and websites related to >
relationships between media and science. May I have some good references on >
this subject? If there is someone working on the subject or in the >
neighborhood please let me know. > Thanks in advance. > > > ---------- manuel
correia > E-mail: mcorreia@individual.eunet.pt >
http://individual.eunet.pt/~mcorreia/ > >
================================================================================
Archive-Date: Fri, 13 Dec 1996 11:43:38 CST Sender: owner-sts-
list@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Date: Fri, 13 Dec 1996 11:43:27 CST From:
system@CCTR.UMKC.EDU Reply-To: STS@CCTR.UMKC.EDU To: STS-LIST@CCTR.UMKC.EDU
Message-ID: <009ACC73.515DBF39.

