  
[ ![H-Urban Teaching Center](../graphics/btnsyltc154x40.jpg)](../index.htm) [
![H-Urban Syllabus Archive](../graphics/btnsylsa154x40.jpg)](index.htm) [
![H-Urban](../graphics/btnsylhurban154x40.jpg)](http://www.h-net.msu.edu/~urban)
|  ![Syllabus Archive Selection](../graphics/skysylarchselect.jpg) |



[ ![H-Urban Syllabus Use & Submission
Policy](../graphics/btnsyluse154x40.jpg)](syluses.htm) [ ![Comments and
Questions](../graphics/btnsylcques154x40.jpg)](mailto:EDTEACH-
URBAN@h-net.msu.edu)  
---|---|---  
  
**American Urban and New York City History**  
  
**Timothy Gilfoyle**  
  
Sarah Lawrence College  
Bronxville, New York, USA  
  
**Fall 1987, Spring 1988**  
  
  
---  
  
* * *

## SYLLABUS

### Introduction

According to one historian, America was born in the country and moved to the
city. This course examines that movement and the evolution of the United
States from a rural and small-town society to an urban and suburban nation.
There is a special focus on the largest urban area, the New York metropolitan
region. The city offers one of the best laboratories for the study of American
history, social structure, economic development and cultural change. Certain
problems and themes recur throughout the course of American urban history: the
primacy of private commercial development, the need for efficient and safe
physical infrastructures, the segregation of public and private space,
problems of health and housing resulting from congestion, and blatant social
divisions between the rich and the poor, the native-born and immigrant, and
blacks and whites. The study of these factors, especially in New York, will
enable students to better comprehend their immediate physical environment and
contemporary urban life. The course is chronologically structured and
interwoven with chronological themes, beginning with the colonial mercantile
city, moving to the nineteenth- century industrial city, and concluding with
the modern corporate metropolis.

The primary responsibility of students is to complete the reading on time and
contribute their thoughtful, reflective opinions in class discussion. The
books can be interpreted in a variety of ways and students should formulate
some initial positions and questions to offer in the class discussion. In
addition, each students will be responsible for leading a class discussion on
a reading of their choice. Topics will be divided up and assigned during the
introductory class. During the first semester, students will write a series of
short analytical papers on readings of their choice in consultation with the
instructor. This will prepare them for a longer research paper on a topic of
their choice in the second semester. Finally, since the class meets only once
a week, a series of field trips are scheduled for one Friday each month.

### Suggested Texts

  * John Reps, THE MAKING OF URBAN AMERICA (Princeton University, 1965)
  * Kenneth T. Jackson and Stanley Schultz (eds.) CITIES IN AMERICAN HISTORY (Oxford, 1972)
  * Sam Bass Warner, THE URBAN WILDERNESS: A HISTORY OF THE AMERICAN CITY (Harper, 1972)
  * John Tauranac, ESSENTIAL NEW YORK: A GUIDE TO THE HISTORY AND ARCHITECTURE OF MANHATTAN'S MOST IMPORTANT BUILDINGS, PARKS, AND BRIDGES (Holt Rinehart Winston, 1979)
  * Norval White and Elliot Willensky, THE A.I.A. GUIDE TO NEW YORK CITY (Macmillan, 1978, revised edition)

#### SEPTEMBER 9: Introduction

#### SEPTEMBER 16: Starting from Zero: Making the Colonial Community

  * Sylvia D. Fries, THE URBAN IDEA IN COLONIAL AMERICA (Temple, 1977)

If unavailable:

  * Darrett B. Rutman, WINTHROP'S BOSTON: A PORTRAIT OF A PURITAN TOWN, 1630-1649 (Norton, 1965)
  
  

  * Thomas J. Archdeacon, NEW YORK CITY: 1664-1710: CONQUEST AND CHANGE (Cornell, 1976) OPTIONAL

Field Trip: Friday, SEPTEMBER 18 - Brooklyn; Williamsburg, Coney Island,
Brighton Beach and "little Odessa" (dinner in "little Odessa")

#### SEPTEMBER 23: The American Revolution and the City

  * Gary B. Nash, THE URBAN CRUCIBLE: SOCIAL CHANGE, POLITICAL CONSCIOUSNESS, AND THE ORIGINS OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION (Harvard, 1979)

#### SEPTEMBER 30: The Commercial Foundations of New York

  * Robert G. Albion, THE RISE OF NEW YORK PORT, 1815-1860 (Northeastern University, 1939, 1984)

Field Trip: Thursday, OCTOBER 1: Midnight Bike Ride of New York City

#### OCTOBER 7: Social Structure in the Antebellum Industrial City

  * Sean Wilentz, CHANTS DEMOCRATIC: NEW YORK CITY AND THE RISE OF THE AMERICAN WORKING CLASS, 1788-1850 (Oxford, 1984)

#### OCTOBER 14: Gender in the Antebellum Industrial City

  * Christine Stansell, CITY OF WOMEN: SEX AND CLASS IN NEW YORK, 1789-1860 (Knopf, 1986)

#### OCTOBER 21: Do Cities Make Men Crazy?

  * David Rothman, THE DISCOVERY OF THE ASYLUM: SOCIAL ORDER AND DISORDER IN THE NEW REPUBLIC (University of Chicago, 1971) 
  * Paul Boyer, URBAN MASSES AND MORAL ORDER IN AMERICA, 1820-1920 (Harvard, 1978) OPTIONAL

Field Trip: Friday, OCTOBER 23 - Tour of New York City Municipal Archives and
the New York City District Attorney's Office.

#### OCTOBER 28: Disease in the City

  * Charles E. Rosenberg, THE CHOLERA YEARS: THE UNITED STATES IN 1832, 1849, AND 1866 (University of Chicago, 1962)
  * Jay P. Dolan, THE IMMIGRANT CHURCH: NEW YORK'S IRISH AND GERMAN CATHOLICS, 1815-1865 (Johns Hopkins, 1975) 
  

  * OPTIONAL:  
Edward K. Spann, THE NEW METROPOLIS: NEW YORK CITY, 1840-1857 (Columbia, 1981)

#### NOVEMBER 4: Disorder and Danger in the City

  * Wilbur Miller, COPS AND BOBBIES: POLICE AUTHORITY IN NEW YORK AND LONDON, 1830-1870 (University of Chicago, 1977)

#### November 11: Violence and Crime in the City

  * Roger Lane, ROOTS OF VIOLENCE IN BLACK PHILADELPHIA, 1860-1900 (Harvard, 1986)

Field Trip: Friday, November 13 - Tour of the Bronx.

#### NOVEMBER 18 & 25: The Urban Political Machine

  * Alexander Callow, THE TWEED RING (Oxford, 1965)
  * William I. Riordan, PLUNKITT OF TAMMANY HALL (Dutton, 1905, 1965)
  * Jon Teaford, THE UNHERALDED TRIUMPH: CITY GOVERNMENT IN AMERICA, 1870- 1900 (Johns Hopkins, 1984)

    
    
    [Ed. There is a new edition of this with an introduction by
          Terrence McDonald:
     
      AUTHOR:     Riordan, William L., 1861-1909.
      TITLE:      Plunkitt of Tammany Hall : a series of very plain talks on
                     very practical politics / by William L. Riordon ; edited
                     with an introduction by Terrence J. McDonald.
      PUBL.:      Boston : Bedford Books of St. Martin's Press, 1994     ]

#### DECEMBER 2: Physically Transforming the Nineteenth-Century City

  * Elizabeth Barlow and William Alex, FREDERICK LAW OLMSTED'S NEW YORK (Praeger, 1972), pictures only. 
  * Albert Fein (ed.), LANDSCAPE INTO CITYSCAPE: FREDERICK LAW OLMSTED'S PLAN FOR A GREATER NEW YORK CITY (Cornell University, 1967), pp. 1-171, 329-41, 375-440.
  * Charles E. Beveridge and David Schuyler (eds.) THE PAPERS OF FREDERICK LAW OLMSTED: VOL. III, CREATING CENTRAL PARK, 1857-1861 (Johns Hopkins, 1983), pp. 134-50, 374-452 (pictures), 346-60.

#### DECEMBER 9: New Cities, New Cultures

  * Gunther Barth, CITY PEOPLE: THE RISE OF MODERN CITY CULTURE IN NINETEENTH-CENTURY AMERICA (Oxford, 1980)

#### DECEMBER 16: City Services: Housing the Masses

  * Gwendolyn Wright, BUILDING THE DREAM: A SOCIAL HISTORY OF HOUSING IN AMERICA (Pantheon, 1981)
  * Roy Lubove, THE PROGRESSIVES AND THE SLUMS: TENEMENT HOUSE REFORM IN NEW YORK CITY, 1890-1918 (University of Pittsburg, 1962; Greenwood, 1974).

  

##  _SPRING SEMESTER_

#### JANUARY 27: City Services: Housing the Masses

  * Dolores Hayden, THE GRAND DOMESTIC REVOLUTION: A HISTORY OF FEMINIST DESIGNS FOR AMERICAN HOMES, NEIGHBORHOODS, AND CITIES (MIT Press, 1981)

#### FEBRUARY 3: City Services: Transporting the Masses

  * Charles Cheape, MOVING THE MASSES: MASS TRANSIT IN NEW YORK, BOSTON, AND PHILADELPHIA, 1880-1912 (Harvard, 1980)
  * RECOMMENDED:  
Sam Bass Warner, Jr., STREETCAR SUBURBS (Harvard, 1962)

#### FEBRUARY 10: City Services: Curing the Masses

  * Allan Brandt, NO MAGIC BULLET: A SOCIAL HISTORY OF VENEREAL DISEASE IN THE UNITED STATES SINCE 1880 (Oxford, 1985)
  * RECOMMENDED:  
David Rosner, A ONCE CHARITABLE ENTERPRISE: HOSPITALS AND HEALTH CARE IN
BROOKLYN AND NEW YORK (Cambridge University, 1982)

#### February 17 & 24: Inequality, Race and Social Structure in the American
Metropolis

  * Gilbert Osofsky, HARLEM: THE MAKING OF A GHETTO, NEW YORK, 1890-1930 (Harper, 1966) 
  * Thomas Kessner, THE GOLDEN DOOR: ITALIAN AND JEWISH IMMIGRANT MOBILITY IN NEW YORK CITY, 1880-1915 (Oxford, 1975)
  * Olivier Zunz, THE CHANGING FACE OF INEQUALITY: URBANIZATION, INDUSTRIALIZATION, AND IMMIGRANTS IN DETROIT, 1880-1920 (University of Chicago, 1982)
  * Jacob Riis, HOW THE OTHER HALF LIVES (orig. 1890) (Hill and Wang, 1957)
  * Jeffrey Gurock, WHEN HARLEM WAS JEWISH (Columbia University) 
  * Diane Ravitch, THE GREAT SCHOOL WARS: NEW YORK CITY (1805-1973) (Basic Books, 1974)

Field Trip: Friday, February 19 -- Harlem.

#### March 2 & 9: The Construction of the City

  * David McCullough, THE GREAT BRIDGE: THE EPIC STORY OF THE BUILDING OF THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE (Simon and Schuster, 1972), chapters 1-9, 12-14, 20, 21,23, epilogue.
  * David Mackay, THE BUILDING OF MANHATTAN (Harper and Row, 1987)
  * RECOMMENDED:  
Alan Trachtenberg, BROOKLYN BRIDGE, FACT AND SYMBOL (University of Chicago,
1979), Second Edition

#### MARCH 16 & APRIL 6: Ethnicity and the Welfare State in the City

  * Nathan Glazer and Daniel P. Moynihan, BEYOND THE MELTING POT: THE NEGROES, PUERTO RICANS, JEWS, ITALIANS, AND IRISH OF NEW YORK CITY, Second Edition (M.I.T., 1970)
  * J. Anthony Lukas, COMMON GROUND: A TURBULENT DECADE IN THE LIVES OF THREE AMERICAN FAMILIES (Vintage, 1985).

[Ed.: About the experience of three families in Boston in the wake of the
school busing situation in Boston in the 1970s and 1980s, also looking at
issues of gentrification in Boston's South End.]

  * Ronald Bayor, NEIGHBORS IN CONFLICT: THE IRISH, GERMANS, JEWS AND ITALIANS OF NEW YORK CITY, 1929-1941 (Johns Hopkins, 1978)

Field Trip: Friday, 8 April -- lecture and tour of Proposed Scatter-Site
Housing in Yonkers, by Oscar Newman and a representative of Save Yonkers
Federation.

#### APRIL 13: The Rise of Suburbia

  * Kenneth T. Jackson, CRABGRASS FRONTIER: THE SUBURBANIZATION OF THE UNITED STATES (Oxford, 1985) 
  * Kenneth T. Jackson, "The Capital of Capitalism: The New York Metropolitan Region, 1890-1940, in METROPOLIS, 1890-1940, ed. Anthony Sutcliffe (University of Chicago, 1984), 319-353.

  * RECOMMENDED:  
Ebenezer Howard, GARDEN CITIES FOR TO-MORROW (M.I.T., 1965)  
  
[Ed: There are several editions of this book, which was first published in
1898 as TOMORROW: A PEACEFUL PATH TO REAL REFORM BY Howard (later "Sir"
Ebenezer Howard), who lived from 1850 to 1928. These include:

    * GARDEN CITIES OF TO-MORROW. Edited, with a preface, by F.J. Osborn. With an introductory essay by Lewis Mumford. Faber and Faber ltd (1946), 168 p. illus. (maps, plan) plates, ports., facsim., diagrs. 19 cm.
    * GARDEN CITIES OF TO-MORROW. Edited, with a preface, by F.J. Osborn. With an introductory essay by Lewis Mumford. Cambridge, Mass., M.I.T. Press (1965), 168 p. (Includes illustration of the plans). Includes the 2 prefaces and text of the 1946 ed., first published in 1898.
    * GARDEN CITIES OF TOMORROW/EBENEZER HOWARD; with an introduction by Ray Thomas ; New Towns bibliography by Stephen Potter. New rev. ed. Eastbourne : Attic Books, 1985.

Field Trip: Friday, April 15 -- Planned Communities in the New York
Metropolitan Region -- Garden City on Long Island, Forest Hills and Sunnyside
in Queens, Parkchester in the Bronx, and Radburn, New Jersey; and the Highways
of Robert Moses.

#### APRIL 20: The Automobile, the Highway and the City

  * Robert Caro, THE POWER BROKER: ROBERT MOSES AND THE RISE AND FALL OF NEW YORK (Knopf, 1974), especially introduction and chapters 12, 18-24, 29, 31, 33-35, 37-38, 40, 42, 45-47, 49-50.

#### APRIL 27: The Rise of the Skyscraper Metropolis

  * Ada Louise Huxtable, THE TALL BUILDING URBANISTICALLY RECONSIDERED: THE SEARCH FOR A SKYSCRAPER STYLE (Pantheon, 1985). 
  * Tom Wolfe, FROM BAUHAUS TO OUR HOUSE (Simon and Schuster, 1981)

#### MAY 4: Planning the Post-Industrial City

  * Jane Jacobs, THE DEATH AND LIFE OF GREAT AMERICAN CITIES (Vintage, 1961), especially chapters 1-12. 
  * RECOMMENDED: Roger Starr, THE RISE AND FALL OF NEW YORK CITY (Basic Books, 1985)

Field Trip: Thursday, May 5 - Midnight Bike Ride of New York City.

#### MAY 11: THE URBAN CRISIS OF THE 1970s

  * John H. Mollenkopf, THE CONTESTED CITY (Princeton University, 1983) 
  * Roger Alcaly and David Mermelstein (eds.), THE FISCAL CRISIS OF AMERICAN CITIES: ESSAYS ON THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF URBAN AMERICA WITH SPECIAL EMPHASIS TO NEW YORK (Random, 1977)

.

#### MAY 15: The Urban Renaissance of the 1980s: Myth or Reality?

Evening class and dinner at Tim Gilfoyle's

  * NEW YORK ASCENDANT: REPORT OF THE COMMISSION OF TH EYEAR 2000 (June 1987)
  * E.B. White, "Here is New York," (1947) in THE COLLECTED ESSAYS OF E.B. WHITE (Harper, 1977)

  
---  
  
  
[ ![Author Index](../graphics/btnsylauthor154x40.jpg)](author.htm) [ ![Subject
Index](../graphics/btnsylsubject154x40.jpg)](subject.htm) [ ![Geographic
Index](../graphics/btnsylloc154x40.jpg)](location.htm)  
---  
  
[![H-Urban](../graphics/skyhurban198x38.jpg)](http://www.h-net.msu.edu/~urban)  
Top | [Teaching Center](../index.htm) | [Syllabus Archive](index.htm) |
[Comments and Questions](mailto:EDTEACH-URBAN@h-net.msu.edu) |
[H-Urban](http://www.h-net.msu.edu/~urban)  
[H-Urban Syllabus Use and Submission Policy](syluses.htm)  
  
  

