Brown University Department of Sociology SO 187-A ENVIRONMENTAL SOCIOLOGY: AN
ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE APPROACH Professor Phil Brown Maxcy 404 Telephone:
863-2633 (messages 2367) Spring 1995 Office Hours: Environmental sociology,
like many other approaches to the environment, has undergone a major shift in
recent years. The environmental justice framework has come to involve a
tremendous number of activists, to attract a growing number of scholars, and
to impact on public policy. This course will view environmental sociology
through the environmental justice framework, that is, it will focus on the
centrality of the key social structural compoments of race, class, and gender.
These will be used to show race, class, and gender inequalities in
environmental hazards, as well as alternative worldviews based on those
structural differences. Environmental sociology uses the lens of race, class,
and gender to learn how social problems are defined and constructed in various
arenas: personal ideology, group beliefs, and social and political
institutions. In those arenas, we are concerned with social problems
definitions of issues such as the greenhouse effect and the global
environmental crisis; public, scientific, and governmental risk perception and
risk communication; origins and effects of government regulatory policy; lay-
professional differences in the nature and role of science; the rise of
environmental consciousness and environmental movements; physical and mental
health effects of environmental contamination. Environmental sociology is also
concerned with the relationship of the environment to demographic phenomena,
scientific/technological development, and social change. Given the
environmental justice focus, we will of necessity be emphasizing health
effects. We will also be examining social movements. And, since the
environmental justice framework often depends on proving environmental
injustice, we will emphasize research methods. Fiction and drama will be used
to illustrate various topics. Required Reading (all paperback) -Books to be
purchased at Brown Bookstore Allan Schnaiberg and Kenneth Gould, Environment
and Society: The Enduring Conflict (St. Martin's) Robert Bullard, ed.,
Confronting Environmental Racism: Voices from the Grassroots (South End Press)
Richard Hofrichter, ed., Toxic Struggles: The Theory and Practice of
Environmental Justice (New Society Publishers) Andrew Szasz, Ecopopulism:
Toxic Waste and the Movement for Environmental Justice (University of
Minnesota Press) Phil Brown and Edwin J. Mikkelsen, No Safe Place: Toxic
Waste, Leukemia,and Community Action (University of California Press) Kai
Erikson, Everything in its Path: The Destruction of Community in the Buffalo
Creek Flood (Simon and Schuster) -Packet of readings to be purchased at Jo-Art
Copy Center- these readings are denoted by * on syllabus Course Requirements
-presentations and discussions of readings -several short reaction papers
-semester-long research paper Jan. 25 1) Introduction - Scope of the course,
requirements. read in class: "Principles of Environmental Justice" Appendix in
Hofrichter, Toxic Struggles American Sociological Association, Section on
Environment and Technology, "Members Guide" Videotape - "Toxic Racism" Feb. 1
2) Sociological Perspectives on the Environment Allan Schnaiberg and Kenneth
Gould, Environment and Society: The Enduring Conflict Rachel Carson, The Edge
of the Sea (excerpts)* Feb. 8 3) Structural Inequalities: Capitalism,
Development, and Population Daniel Faber and James O'Connor, "Capitalism and
the Crisis of Environmentalism," in Hofrichter, Toxic Struggles John O'Connor,
"The Promise of Environmental Democracy" in Hofrichter, Toxic Struggles
Cynthia Hamilton, "Coping with Industrial Exploitation" in Bullard,
Confronting Environmental Racism Joni Seager, "Creating a Culture of
Destruction: Gender, Militarism, and the Environment" in Hofrichter, Toxic
Struggles Robert Weissman, "Corporate Plundering of Third-World Resources" in
Hofrichter, Toxic Struggles Walden Bello, "Global Economic Counterrevolution:
The Dynamics of Impoverishment and Marginalization" in Hofrichter, Toxic
Struggles Mark Ritchie, "Trading Away the Environment: Free-Trade Agreements
and Environmental Degradation" in Hofrichter, Toxic Struggles Martin Khor Kok
Peng, "Economics and Environmental Justice": Rethinking North-South Relations"
in Hofrichter, Toxic Struggles Dana Alston and Nicole Brown, "Global Threats
to People of Color" in Bullard, Confronting Environmental Racism Barry
Commoner, "Population and Poverty" from Making Peace with The Planet* Barry
Lopez, Arctic Dreams (excerpts)* Feb. 15 4) Environmental Health William
Freudenburg, "Perceived Risk, Real Risk: Social Science and the Art of
Probabilistic Risk Assessment" Science 1988* Steve Wing, "Limits of
Epidemiology" Medicine and Global Survival 1994, 1:74-86* Griffith, Jack,
Robert C. Duncan, Wilson B. Riggan and Alvin C. Pellom. 1989. "Cancer
Mortality in U.S. Counties with Hazardous Waste Sites and Ground Water
Pollution." Archives of Environmental Health 44:69-74.* Inge Goldstein and
Martin Goldstein, "The Broad Street Pump, " pp. 37-48 in John R. Goldsmith,
ed., Environmental Epidemiology* John R. Goldsmith and Herbert L. Needleman,
"Lead Exposures of Urban Children," pp. 171-180 in John R. Goldsmith, ed.,
Environmental Epidemiology* Janet Phoenix, "Getting the Lead out of the
Community" in Bullard, Confronting Environmental Racism Steven Lagakos,
Barbara J. Wessen and Marvin Zelen. "An Analysis of Contaminated Well Water
and Health Efforts in Woburn, MA." Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 1984, 81(395):583-596.* Arthur Upton, Theodore Kneip, and Paolo
Toniolo, "Public Health Aspects of Toxic Chemical Disposal Sites" Annual
Review of Public Health 1989 10:1-25*. Henrik Ibsen, "An Enemy of the People"
(Act 2)* Feb. 22 5) Environmental Inequity and Environmental Justice: Concepts
and Data Richard Hofrichter, "Introduction" in Hofrichter, Toxic Struggles
Robert Bullard, "Anatomy of Environmental Racism and the Environmental Justice
Movement" in Bullard, Confronting Environmental Racism Dorcetta Taylor,
"Environmentalism and the Politics of Inclusion" in Bullard, Confronting
Environmental Racism Winona LaDuke, "A Society Based on Conquest Cannot be
Sustained: Native Peoples and the Environmental Crisis." in Hofrichter, Toxic
Struggles Devon Pena and Joseph Gallegos, " Nature and Chicanos in Southern
Colorado," in Bullard, Confronting Environmental Racism Richard Moore and
Louis Head, "Acknowledging the Past, Confronting the Present: Environmental
Justice in the 1990s" in Hofrichter, Toxic Struggles Vernice Miller, "Building
on Our Past, Planning for Our Future: Communities of Color and the Quest for
Environmental Justice" in Hofrichter, Toxic Struggles Mar. 1 6) Environmental
Inequity and Environmental Justice: Methods and Measurement Phil Brown, "Race,
Class and Environmental Health," #94-3, Working Papers Series of the Working
Group in Society and Health* Wernet, D. R. and L. A. Nieves. 1992. "Breathing
Polluted Air." EPA Journal. 18 (March-April):16-17.* Charles Lee, "Beyond
Toxic Waste and Race" in Bullard, Confronting Environmental Racism West,
Patrick C., J. Mark Fly, Frances Larkin, and Robert W. Marans. 1992. "Minority
Anglers and Toxic Fish Consumption: Evidence from a Statewide Survey of
Michigan." * Robert Collin and William Harris, "Race and Waste in Two Virginia
Communities" in Bullard, Confronting Environmental Racism Conner Bailey et
al., "Environmental Politics in Alabama's Blackbelt" in Bullard, Confronting
Environmental Racism Benjamin Goldman and Laura Fitton, Toxic Wastes and Race
Revisited: An Update of the 1987 Report on the Racial and Socioeconomic
Characteristics of Communities with Hazardous Waste Sites* Anderton, Douglas.
1994. "Environmental Equity: The Demographics of Dumping." Demography. * Mar.
8 7) Environmental Inequity and Environmental Justice: Methods and Measurement
(continued) Greenberg, Michael. 1993. "Proving Environmental Inequity in
Siting Locally Unwanted Land Uses." Risk: Issues in Health and Society
235:235-252.* Marianne Lavelle and Marcia Coyle, "Unequal Protection: The
Racial Divide in Environmental Law" in Hofrichter, Toxic Struggles Zimmerman,
Rae. 1993. "Social Equity and Environmental Risk." Risk Analysis 13:649-66.*
White, Harvey L. 1992. "Hazardous Waste Incineration in Minority Communities.*
Robert Bullard, "Conclusion: Environmentalism with Justice" in Bullard,
Confronting Environmental Racism Mar. 15 8) Gender Issues in the Environmental
and Toxic Waste Movements Phil Brown and Faith Ferguson, "Making A Big Stink":
Women's Work, Women's Relationships, And Toxic Waste Activism" Gender &
Society, forthcoming* Ynestra King, "Feminism and Ecology" in Hofrichter,
Toxic Struggles Celene Krauss, "Blue Collar Women and Toxic Waste Protests:
The Process of Politicization" in Hofrichter, Toxic Struggles Barbara Epstein,
"Ecofeminism and Grass-roots Environmentalism in the United States" in
Hofrichter, Toxic Struggles Mar. 22 9) Occupational Health and the Environment
Ruth Heifetz, "Women, Lead, and Reproductive Hazards," pp. 160- 173 in David
Rosner and Gerald Markowitz, eds., Dying for Work: Workers' Safety and Health
in Twentieth-Century America* Richard Kazis and Richard L. Grossman, Fear at
Work: Job Blackmail, Labor, and the Environment Ch. 1-3, pp. 3-51* Dorothy
Nelkin and Michael Brown, Workers at Risk: Voices from the Workplace Ch.
2,3,6, pp. 23-49, 83-99* Beverly Wright and Robert Bullard, "The Effects of
Occupational Injury, Illness, and Disease on the Health Status of Black
Americans: A Review" in Hofrichter, Toxic Struggles Cesar Chavez, "Farm
Workers at Risk," in Hofrichter, Toxic Struggles Charles Noble, "Work: The
Most Dangerous Environment" in Hofrichter, Toxic Struggles Marion Moses,
"Farmworkers and PEsticides," in Bullard, Confronting Environmental Racism
Videotape - Chemical Valley(Institute, West Virginia) Apr. 5 10) Community
Context and Community Destruction Kai Erikson, Everything in its Path: The
Destruction of Community in the Buffalo Creek Flood Videotape - The Buffalo
Creek Flood Apr. 12 11) Community Response to Toxic Contamination Phil Brown
and Edwin J. Mikkelsen, No Safe Place: Toxic Waste, Leukemia, and Community
Action Apr. 19 2) The Environmental and Toxic Waste Movements Andrew Szasz,
Ecopopulism Aldo Leopold, A Sand County Almanac (excerpts)* Videotape -
"Convention 93" Apr. 26 13) The Future of the Environment Chris Kiefer and
Medea Benjamin, "Solidarity with the Third World: Building an International
Environmental Justice Movement" in Hofrichter, Toxic Struggles Richard
Hofrichter, "Cultural Activism and Environmental Justice" in Hofrichter, Toxic
Struggles Mary Mellor, "Building a New Vision: Feminist, Green Socialism" in
Hofrichter, Toxic Struggles Eric Mann, "Labor's Environmental Agenda in the
New Corporate Climate" in Hofrichter, Toxic Struggles Laura Pulido,
"Sustainable Development at Ganados Del Valle" in Bullard, Confronting
Environmental Racism Barry Commoner, "Environmental Action" in Making Peace
with the Planet* Lester R. Brown, Christopher Flavin. and Sandra Postel, "
Visions of a Sustainable World." Pp. 299-315 in Lester R. Brown, ed., The
World Watch Reader* Jean Giono, "The Man Who Planted Trees"*

