
    ![
    HHHHHH    HHHHHH
    HHHHHH    HHHHHH
    HHHHHH    HHHHHH
    HHHHHH    HHHHHH
    HHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH
    HHHHHHHHHHH HH H EEEE TTTTT     Humanities
    HHHHHH    H  H H E      T       OnLine
    HHHHHH    H H  H EEE    T       Web Site
    HHHHHH    H HH H E      T       
    HHHHHH    H HH H EEEE   T       H-SURVEY](/graphics/Logo.H-NetBare.GIF)

Syllabus History 1301 (Course No. 3817) Spring Semester, 1995

Dr. Ken Weatherbie  
Office: HH-209 ( ) Hours: __________ Social Science Dept., HH103 ( )  
E-mail: [kenbie@aol.com](mailto:kenbie@aol.com)

History should be studied because it is an absolutely necessary enlargement of
human experience, a way of getting out of the boundaries of one's own life and
culture and of seeing more of what human experience has been. And it is the
necessary, unique way of orienting the present moment, so that you know where
you are and where we have come from and so you don't fantasize about the past
and make up myths to justify some immediate purpose--so you can make decisions
based to some extent on what has gone before, on knowledge of actual
experience. --Bernard Bailyn, historian

Reading & Exam Schedule

(See TAN and HM codes below; numbers refer to chapter numbers in TAN and HM)

    
    
        Jan  17  Introduction                    (Mar) 21  TAN9
              19  TAN1                                 23  THIRD EXAM
    
              24  TAN2                                 28  TAN10; AH24
    
              26  HM8                                  30  HM20
    
              31  TAN3                                Apr  4  TAN11
        Feb  2  FIRST EXAM                             6  HM19; HM23
    
               7  TAN4                              11  TAN13;
    HM21,HM22
               9  HM12;HM13                         13  FOURTH EXAM
    
              14  TAN5                              18  TAN14
              16  HM14; HM15                        20  HM18
    
              21  TAN6                              25  TAN15
              23  SECOND EXAM                       27  HM24; HM25
    
              28  TAN7                              May2  TAN16; HM26
        Mar  2  HM16                                   4  FIFTH EXAM
    
               7  TAN8                                FINAL EXAMS
               9  HM17                                 May 8-12
    

Please Note: You are required to have all reading assignments completed by
class time on the date scheduled. You must have a Scantron A9

Form 882-E or 882-ES for each Exam and the Final Exam.

There will be a Map Test (see handout) at the end of the semester. This is a
departmental exam required of all students enrolled in a history course.  
The Final Exam will be a comprehensive test sampling the entire semester's
assignments. You will have three formal Writing Assignments (see handout)
using material from the required reading.

Required Reading

TAN Garraty, John A. The American Nation: A History of the United States to
1877. Volume I. Eighth Edition. New York: Harper Collins, 1994. Also required;
Weatherbie, Ken. Study Guide to accompany John A. Garraty, The American
Nation. Volume I.

HM McClellan, Jim R. Historical Moments: Changing Interpretations of America's
Past. Volume I: The Precolonial Period Through the Civil War. Guilford, Conn.:
Dushkin, 1994.

Your grade will be determined by your performance on:

    
    
                Percent-Each       Percent-Total     |   Letter grades
    Five Exams    7                         35        |   90  - 100=A
    Final Exam    10                        10        |   80  -  89=B
    Map Test      10                        10        |   70  -  79=C
    
    Three Essays   5, 7, 8                  20        |   60  -  69=D
    Group Quizzes  1                        20        |
    LearningLog    5                         5        |
    

Grades are NOT curved. Each of the first four Exam grades will be replaced by
its successor, if higher. Your Final Exam grade will replace your lowest Exam
grade, if higher.

Please Note

Make-Up Exams and Deadlines: No "make-up" exams (or quizzes) will be given.  
If an emergency forces you to miss an Exam, see or call the instructor as soon
as possible. The Final Exam score will substitute for one missed exam score.
You may arrange to take an Exam early. However, all deadlines for written
assignments are absolute NO EXCEPTIONS.

Absences: Three consecutive or four total absences will result in your
dismissal from the course with a grade of "W" or "WF" depending on the
instructor's determination of your grade at the time of dismissal.

Each class begins when the instructor convenes it and ends when the instructor
dismisses it. Failure to attend any part of a class session will in most cases
be counted as a complete absence. No distinction is made between an "excused"
and an "unexcused" absence. You are responsible for knowing your attendance
status and for requesting adjustments to your attendance record.

Withdrawals: If you decide not to continue coming to class, you must initiate
a drop at the Registrar's office. If you do not, and the instructor does not
drop you, College policy states that you will receive an "F" for the course.

Building Policy: Smoking is NOT allowed in the building. Drinks and food are
NOT allowed in the classroom.

Special Dates

Jan 16 (Monday) Martin Luther King, Jr. holiday Feb 24 (Friday) Last day to
drop this course with an automatic "W" Mar 13-17 (Monday-Friday) Spring Break  
May 1 (Monday) Last day to drop this course

Cooperative Learning

This course in American history is taught using the principles of Cooperative
Learning. This means that the traditional models of learning with which you
are most familiar and most experienced, individualized and competitive
learning, are de-emphasized, though not discarded. Cooperative learning (CL)
is based on a different set of assumptions about how learning occurs. It
values different things, it has some different goals, and it utilizes
different procedures.

CL Assumptions

Learning is an active, constructive process; knowledge is created, not
transmitted.

Learning is influenced by the context and activity in which it is embedded.

Learners are diverse, they bring multiple perspectives to the subject.

    
    
               Learning is inherently social.
               Learning has affective and subjective dimensions; social
    

interaction stimulates learners and learning, learners see themselves as
responsible creators of their own knowledge & meanings.

CL Goals

    
    
               Student involvement in their own education.
               Experience in cooperative enterprise; valuing teamwork,
    

capacity for tolerance, caring for how others are doing, cooperative and
social skills.

Reinvigoration of democracy; habits of participation, sense of responsibility
to others to the community at large, refined listening and articulation
skills.

Firmer grasp, better understanding, and deeper appreciation of the subject
matter.

CL Essential Elements

Positive Interdependence; individual success depends heavily on group success
and vice versa

Promotive Interaction; the basic learning environment is in small group, face-
to-face discussion of the material.

Individual Accountability; each student has personal responsibility to the
group effort and is tested for his/her own learning.

Social Skills; consensus-seeking, problem-solving, decision-making are
important learning and socials skills and can be taught and learned through
practice.

Group Processing; groups improve their performance when given a formal and
frequent opportunity to reflect on their work.

CL Implemented

In practice, CL demands a reconfigured classroom and classroom procedures.
Most class time is devoted to small group discussion. These discussions are
focused on material provided by the professor, who has become less a
transmitter of information and more a designer and manager of learning
experiences. You are assigned "roles" within each group: Gatekeeper,
Taskmaster, Checker, Recorder, etc.

Group study is followed by individual quizzes or production of a group report.
Your Group Performance grade is determined by a combination of your individual
scores on these quizzes and reports, and your group's scores.

Your success in this cooperative group work depends on two things: your will
to work together and your skill at working together. You can learn both of
these. The course is designed to promote your acquisition of both the will and
the skill to cooperate with each other to learn American history.

CL Expectations

This course's CL structure does make significant demands on both you and the
professor. CL has high expectations about your participation and cooperation.
It demands that you change roles:

From listener, observer, and note-taker to active problem-solver, contributor,
and discussant;

From low or moderate expectations of preparation for class to high ones;

From a private presence in the classroom (and few or no risks therein) to a
public one, with many risks;

From attendance dictated by personal choice to that having to do with group
and class expectations;

From competition with or indifference toward other students to cooperation
with them;

From responsibilities and self-definition associated with learning
independently to those associated with learning inter-dependently;

From seeing the professor and the lecture as the source of authority and
knowledge, to seeing other students, yourself, and the thinking of your group
and the class as additional and important sources of authority and knowledge.

These shifts in roles may be problematic. Your schooling has probably
reinforced the values of the competitive and "teacher-as-source-of-knowledge"
model. You may have learned to succeed in that model. You are not familiar
with CL's procedures and they will take a little time getting used to. It's OK
for you to be cautious, even anxious and skeptical, but persevere. Soon you
will discover the stimulation and satisfaction of learning in concert with
others.

(Portions of the above are borrowed and adapted from Goodsell, Anne, Michelle
Mahaer, and Vincent Tinto. _Collaborative Learning: A Sourcebook for Higher
Education_, Vol. I. University Park, PA.: National Center on Postsecondary
Teaching, Learning, and Assessment, 1993.)

Writing Assignments

You are required to write three essays in this course. You will write each
essay out of class and bring the finished essay to class. It is due at the
beginning of class on the date scheduled. Exact requirements for each essay
and its due date will be established as each specific assignment is made.

Each essay will be based on your knowledge, analysis, and interpretation of
the documents or essays assigned in the supplemental readings. When grading
your essay, I will consider each of the following:

Substance Your essay must have a main point and a consistent point of view. It
must clearly identify your subject and the point you are making. I expect a
full discussion of each part of the essay assignment. I also expect your essay
to reflect that you have read carefully the material assigned.

Organization Your essay must have coherence and unity. There must be a logical
and clear development of the main point, each sentence must relate to the main
point, and sentences must relate to each other. I expect correct paragraphing
and smooth transitions within and between each paragraph. Your essay must have
a title, introduction, body, and conclusion.

Mechanics Since these are essays written out of class, you are responsible for
proof-reading your essay to make sure you have used correct grammar, spelling,
punctuation, capitalization, syntax (arrangement of words in a sentence), and
diction (word choice). I will expect your paper to be clean and neat in
appearance. Your essay must be typed (double spaced) on white, 81/2" x 11"
paper. Use either a 10 or 12 point font (elite or pica type).

Evidence Your essay must present historical information that is both accurate
and relevant. It must contain specific details, supporting examples, and
clarifying verbal illustrations that help demonstrate or prove your main
point.

You must hand in all writing used in the preparation of your essay. Your grade
will be based on both the final product of your writing and the extent to
which you demonstrate your commitment to the prewriting, writing, revising and
proof-reading process.

Your essay will be graded Accept (A), Accept with reservation (AR), or Rewrite
(R). If you turn your paper in by the deadline and receive 1) an "A," this
completes your writing assignment and you receive full credit of 100 percent;
2) an "AR," you have the choice of taking 80 percent credit, or you will be
given one week to revise the essay and turn it in a second time for regrading
up to full credit; 3) an "R," you will be given one week to revise the essay
and turn it in a second time for regrading for maximum credit of 80 percent.
If you fail to hand in an essay by the original deadline, or fail to hand in a
Rewrite by the rewrite deadline, you will receive no credit (0 percent) for
it. Deadlines are final and absolute, no exceptions for any reason.

There is nothing exceptional about these requirements. They ask nothing more
than that you present your knowledge, understanding, and point of view clearly
and economically. Meeting these standards is a requirement of each essay.
Please Note: Writing each essay is a requirement of this course.

Complete failure to hand in an essay will diminish your course grade by one
grade.

Note: While you are assigned just three formal essays, you will be writing
almost continuously in this course. All of it is required, much of it is
ungraded. In some cases a designated reporter will be responsible for writing
up conclusions for their group's work for the day. This will be a rotating
responsibility. In other cases, I will require half or full page individually
written conclusions from group work. Frequently, you will be asked to write an
evaluation of your group's work and make written observations on what your
group does well and what it could do better. You are expected to complete the
instructor-prepared discussion guides for each reading assignment and bring
those written notes to class to help guide your contributions to group
discussion. You are also expected to keep frequent entries in your
LearningLog. See what a mean by writing almost continuously?

LearningLog

You are required to keep a cumulative written record of your responses to your
experiences in this course LearningLog. Here you will record your reactions to
the professor, readings, lectures, audio-visual materials, tests, discussions,
and other components of the course. Your LearningLog

might contain such things as:

your reaction to any new information that surprises you or seems contrary to
what you have been told before

your views on any controversial material presented in the reading or in class

your conclusions about the significance of historical personalities or events

how you see a historical person or event affecting your life today

what problems you are having in the course, what confuses you or frustrates
you

what successes you are having in the course, what pleases you or interests you

what connections you see between what you have learned before and what you are
learning now

what connections you see between the course material and the "real" world

what connections you see between what you are learning in this course and what
your are learning in other courses

your feelings about what is happening in the course and in your group how you
see yourself as a learner, what progress you are making, skills you are
developing, new insights and perspectives you have, conclusions you have
drawn, . . .

The LearningLog is not a diary nor a set of notes. It should focus on the
course content and course procedure, but it should register your thoughts,
your responses and reactions to information, ideas, and the way things are
done in the course. It is a record of how you perceive yourself as a learner
in the course; how you think about and feel about what is being presented and
how it is being presented. It should be a record of your interaction with the
professor, other students, and the course material.

For the most part, you will make LearningLog entries outside of class,
although you should bring your LearningLog to class (or leafs of paper you can
enter into your LearningLog later). From time to time I will ask you to write
LearningLog entries in class, usually at the very beginning or end of a class.

Your LearningLog will determine 5 percent of your course grade. It is graded
on a 10 point scale according to my sense of your consistent interaction with
the course material. Therefore, I will collect your LearningLog periodically
(though irregularly) to read it, or portions of it, and respond to some of
your entries. You should star or asterisk any entry to which you particularly
want a response from me. Remove any entries you do not want me to read. Your
writing must be legible and you should not be sloppy on matters of quality of
writing, but your entries will not be graded for spelling, punctuation, and
usage errors.

Keep your LearningLog entries in a loose-leaf binder, one entry per page.
Entries can be of varied length, from a few lines to a full page. Make an
entry frequently, try to average two to three times a week on your own.  
Skillful learners are habitually aware of what and how they are learning (it's
called metacognition). Faithful attention to your LearningLog will make you a
more successful learner.

[![](/graphics/listhome.gif)](/~survey/) [ Return](/~survey/) to H-SURVEY Home
Page.  

* * *

  
[![H-Net Humanities & Social Sciences
OnLine](/footers/graphics/logosmall.gif)](/)  
[Contact Us](/contact/)  
Copyright (C) 1995-2002, H-Net, Humanities & Social Sciences OnLine  
Click Here for an [Internet Citation Guide](/about/citation).  
---

