**Stephen Foster**  
**Summer, 2002**

**Syllabus: HIST 510A, HIST 540A**

**Please note:** this seminar is an exercise in cross listing.   HIST 510A-P1
(The American Colonies in the British Empire) and HIST 540A (The First British
Empire) are the same course in the sense of having the same instructor, the
same meeting time and room, and the same core reading.  What number you choose
to register under depends on whether you wish to use it for American or
European (including British) course credit.  However, in the additional
reading at various stages, those who have registered for American credit will
be asked to read materials pertaining primarily to colonial America, those who
have registered for European credit will be asked to read materials pertaining
primarily to British imperial history.

**Introduction (Brief) and Background (Hurried).  ** The British Empire was
the longest lived of the sea-borne empires founded in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries and the largest polity in the history of the human race.
Within living memory it comprehended one quarter of the land mass of the
planet and just under a third of its peoples.  Nor was this size just so much
invertebrate sprawl: backing it up was a British national economy that as late
as 1914 controlled the majority of the world's overseas investment and the
majority of its shipping tonnage.  When people today speculate about the
decline of great powers and wonder what the position of the United States will
be by the end of this century, it is not really Rome they are thinking of.

We will be dealing with what is generally called the First British Empire, one
oriented around the Atlantic Ocean rather than South Asia and Australasia (as
the Second British Empire was), from its seventeenth-century origins through
its eighteenth-century consolidation, and then its disruption in the American
Revolution--with a quick look at the post-1776 regrouping that it is nicknamed
"the Swing to the East."  We will also be dealing with just under two
centuries of _American_ history.

The early history of what is now the United States can be recounted in three
different ways.  The oldest and most familiar is the "seed time" approach: to
scan these early decades of American history for the origins of the nation to
come after 1776.  More recently, we have come to recognize that the Old World
migrants to America did not move in to an "empty" land and, further, that not
all of them were either European or willing to come--some arrived in chains.
So, a second, newer approach to these years emphasizes the ways in which early
America was a crucible for the "interaction" of three races.  And, finally,
from time to time, attention has been paid to the _colonialness_ of the
colonies, that is, to the degree to which they were what they were because
they were founded as integral parts of that oversized empire in its first
stages.   This course will take on all three stories up to a point (most early
American history does), but stress the third by concentrating on the ways in
which the British Empire influenced colonial development and on the role of
the colonies within an empire that still had centuries more history to go
after it had lost them.  There may be two British Empires in some sense or
another but they overlap with each other almost from the start of British
Imperial history: the _Hector_ reached Surat in India in 1608, just one year
after the founding of Jamestown, and the tea that ended up in Boston harbor on
16 December 1773 was supplied by the East India Company (the same people who
sent the Hector 165 years earlier) from its "factory" in Canton.

Finally, this is a reading seminar--so we will read, and at the usual reading
seminar rate of a medium-sized book a week.  But there is an obvious catch:
Fall and Spring semester seminars have fifteen weeks, and while we have as
many _meetings_ in the Summer seminar, they are compressed in to eight
_weeks_.   Members of the seminar cannot be asked to read twice as fast as in
term time just because the temperature tends towards the nineties, so we will
read somewhat less but in more detail.  And we will ask, roughly, two people
in a week to do a little extra work on the common topic and tell us about it
and how it fits in to what we have all read.

The cramped time scheme presents similar problems when it comes to grading.
One can hardly ask for twenty-page term papers based on four extra books and
perhaps submitted in two drafts.  (Well, one could--and risk being stoned.)
Instead, each of the reports mentioned above, running to two to three pages
double spaced and no more, will be submitted for grading and be worth fifteen
percent of the grade each.  (If you read them in class instead of summarizing
them, you really will be stoned.)  And seventy percent of the grade will go to
a term paper so slimmed down as to be positively svelte: roughly seven to ten
pages based on roughly an extra two books relating to some common theme or
other.  The term papers are not just bigger versions of the two short "focus"
papers however (and, no, I have no idea why they are called that).  They
should be less descriptive and more analytical, avoiding detailed plot
summaries and paying particular attention to the ways in which different
historians attack common concerns.

**  SCHEDULE OF CLASSES AND READINGS**

**_N.B. There is a short assignment for the first class.   We have no choice.
It will be found in volume five of the Oxford History of the British Empire.
We will make so much use of that five-volume work that below it is given just
as OHBE._**

**Weeks I-II:**   What the English Made of and out of their New World.  


> Ia. (18 June).   P.J. Marshall, "The First British Empire," _OHBE_ 5: 43-53;
C.A. Bayly, "The Second British Empire," _ibid_.   5: 54-72; Stephen Foster,
"British North America in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries," _ibid_.
5: 73-93.

>

> Ib. (20 June).  John C. Appleby, "War, Politics, and Colonization,
1558-1625," _OHBE_ 1: 55-78;   Jack P. Greene, _The Intellectual Construction
of America: Exceptionalism and Identity from 1492 to 1800_ , chaps. 1-2.

>

>  IIa. (25 June).  David Armitage, _The Ideological Origins of the British
Empire_ ; Anthony Pagden, "The Struggle for Legitimacy and the Image of the
Empire in the Atlantic to _c_. 1700," _OHBE_ 1:34-54.

>

>  IIb. (27 June).  Philip Morgan, "Encounters between British and
'Indigenous' Peoples, c. 1500- c. 1800,"  in Martin Daunton and Rick Halpern,
eds., _Empire and Others: British Encounters with Indigenous Peoples,
1600-1800_ , pp. 42-78;  Peter C. Mancall, "Native Americans and Europeans in
English America, 1500-1700," _OHBE_ 1: 328-350, Nuala Zahedieh, "Overseas
Expansion and Trade in the Seventeenth Century," _ibid_. 1: 398-422; Jonathan
I. Israel, "The Emerging Empire: The Continental Perspective," _ibid_. 1:
423-444.

  
**Week III:**   Settlement: Toe Hold to "Flourishing" (Slaves Excepted)  


>  IIIa. (2 July).  Edmund S. Morgan, _American Slavery/American Freedom_
**or** Richard Dunn, _Sugar and Slaves: The Rise of the Planter Class in the
English West Indies, 1624-1713_ ; James Horn, "Tobacco Colonies: The Shaping
of English Society in the Seventeenth Century Chesapeake," _OHBE_ 1: 170-192;
Hillary Becles, " The `Hub of Empire': the Caribbean and Britain in the
Seventeenth Century,: _ibid_. 1: 218-240.

>

>  IIIb. (4 July).  Whoopee.  Bang Bang.  Etc.  (Not a good day for the First
British Empire but worth having fun on anyway.)

  
**Week IV:** The One that Got Away (New England), but also the Question of
Provinciality  


>  IVa. (9 July) Perry Miller, _The New England Mind: From Colony   to
Province_.

>

>  IVb. (11 July) More of _NEM_ ; Virginia DeJohn Anderson, "New England in
the Seventeenth Century," _OHBE_ 1: 193-217; Edmund S. Morgan, "The Historians
of Early New England", in Ray Allan Billington, ed., _Reinterpretation of
Early American History_ , 41-63.

  
**Week V:** Governance; or, from Colonies to Empire  


>  Va. (16 July) Charles M. Andrews, _The Colonial Background of the American
Revolution_ ; Richard R. Johnson, "Charles McLean Andrews and the Invention of
American Colonial History", _William and Mary Quarterly_ , 3rd Series, 43
(1986): 528-31.

>

>  Vb. (18 July)  Michael J. Braddick, "The English Government, War, Trade,
and Settlement," _OHBE_ 1: 286-308; Richard S. Dunn, "The Glorious Revolution
and America," _ibid_. 1: 445-466; G.E. Aylmer, "Navy, State, Trade, and
Empire," _ibid_. 1: 467-480; Patrick K. O'Brien, "Inseparable Connections:
Trade, Economy, fiscal State, and the Expansion of America," _ibid_. 2: 53-77;
Ian Steele, "The Anointed, the Appointed, and the Elected: Governance of the
British Empire, 1688-1793," _ibid_. 2: 105-127; Daniel A. Baugh, "Maritime
Strength and Atlantic Commerce: The Uses of `a Grand Marine Empire'," in
Lawrence Stone, ed., _An Imperial State at War: Britain from 1689 to 1815_ ,
185-223.

  
**Week VI:** The Atlantic Economy  


>  VIa. (23 July) David Eltis, T _he Rise of African Slavery in the Americas_
**or** David Hancock, _Citizens of the World: London Merchants and the
Integration of the British Atlantic Community, 1735-1785_.

>

>  VIb. (25 July) More of the same; Jacob M. Price, "The Imperial Economy,
1700-1776," _OHBE_ 2: 78-104; David Hancock, "Markets, Merchants, and the
Wider World of Boston Wine, 1700-1775," in Conrad E. Wright and Kathryn P.
Viens, eds., _Entrepreneurs: The Boston Business Community_ , 63-95.

  
**Week VII:** Empire and the Consolidation of Identities, British and Colonial  


>  VIIa. (30 July) Linda Colley, _Britons: Forging the Nation, 1707-1837_ ;
Greene, _The Intellectual Construction of America_ , chaps. 3-4.

>

>  VIIb. (1 August) More of Same; P.J. Marshall, "Introduction," _OHBE_ 1:
1-27; Kathleen Wilson, "Empire of Virtue: the Imperial Project and Hanoverian
Culture c. 1720-1785," in Stone, ed, _An Imperial State at War_ , 128-164.

>

> Week VIII: Why the Revolution?

>

>  VIIIa (6 August) Free/No Class: work on you term papers.

>

>  VIIIb (8 August) Edmund S. and Helen Morgan, _The Stamp Act Crisis:
Prologue to Revolution_ **or** Bernard Bailyn, _The Origins of American
Politics_ ; T.H. Breen, "Narrative of Commercial Life:  Consumption, Ideology,
and Community on the Eve of the American Revolution," _Wm. &My Qtly_, 3d ser.,
50 (1993): 471-501; P.J. Marshall, "Britain without America: a Second
Empire?," _OHBE_ 2: 576-595.  
>  

**N.B. As the arrangements for VIIIa above imply, the term paper is due on the
last day of class, Thursday, 8 August 2002.   Please be sure and hand it in on
that day--or earlier.  For reasons that will explained in class, the award of
incompletes--never desirable under the best of circumstances--is in this case
virtually impossible.**

