Robert Paul Lamb Professor of English

* * *

  
![](../../images/Lamb2.jpg) |  Having majored in history and philosophy as an
undergraduate, I originally enrolled in an American Studies graduate program
in order to study different disciplines, rather than from any desire to be
"interdisciplinary." This attitude, perhaps somewhat naive at the time, ended
up serving me well, for I believe that before a person can be
interdisciplinary, s/he must first acquire competence in the various
methodologies of more than one discipline on their own terms. I eventually
chose to become a literary critic, but, aside from critics Warner Berthoff (my
dissertation advisor) and Daniel Aaron, my most significant mentors in
graduate school were from outside of literary studies: historians David
Herbert Donald and Bernard Bailyn, political scientist Judith Shklar, and
psychologist Henry A. Murray. As a literary critic and teacher of literature,
my American Studies background taught me to be insistently historicist,
especially in the classroom, for, despite my own scholarly interests in
aesthetics and genre, literary texts can never be meaningfully understood
outside of the cultural, social, political, and economic contexts of their
production, and they are always a part of the complex of discourses of their
times.  
---|---  
  
Years ago, when American Studies programs first developed, historians were
still mainly interested in politics, economics, and diplomacy, while literary
critics, with certain notable exceptions like F. O. Matthiessen and Perry
Miller, were mostly concerned with matters of form and theme. In subsequent
years, a new generation of American Studies scholars, many of whom--like
Daniel Aaron, Henry Nash Smith, Warner Berthoff, and Leo Marx--had been
students ![](../../images/lamb1.jpg) of Matthiessen and Miller, and who had
been trained in literary and cultural history, came to the fore. At the same
time as cultural, social, and intellectual histories were burgeoning in
history departments, literary studies began its long evolution away from New
Criticism, developing historicist, cultural, and ideological approaches to
literature that had much in common with developments in other disciplines.
Today, most fields possess a wide range of interdisciplinary approaches and
concerns, so much so, in fact, that what used to be purely the province of
American Studies programs is now available in the traditional departments.
Yet, American Studies is still the one place where students can focus on
American materials through their coursework, the one place where they can find
a diverse community of scholars interested in America, and the one place where
they are constantly encouraged to consider their interests in a variety of
disciplinary and interdisciplinary contexts. The potential downside of this
can be a certain provincialism, but the benefits include a greater depth,
flexibility of approach, and intellectual cross fertilization. Over the years,
I've noticed that American Studies students tend to be more open to new ideas,
more creative in their scholarship, more catholic in their appreciations, and
less vulnerable to the inducements of a single way of doing things. Whether
this is the result of their American Studies training, or merely that such
students are attracted to American Studies in the first place, I cannot say.
But it is a big reason why I choose to be a part of the American Studies
program at Purdue, and why I feel that my involvement in the program has
benefited me, in my teaching, my scholarship, and my own continuing education.

My publications include the following:  
  
_Monographs:_

  * "James G. Birney and the Road to Abolitionism." The Alabama Review 47 (1994): 83-134.  
  

_Articles:_

  * "Making Mats, or The Literary Critics (A)board the _Pequod_ : Melvillian Thoughts on Reading and Interpretation." The Centennial Review 41 (1997): 17-61.
  * "How Marcus Schouler Found McTeague in Death Valley: Frank Norris, the 'Pivotal Event,' and the Long Arm of Realism." ATQ 11 (1997): 137-56.
  * "Hemingway and the Creation of Twentieth-Century Dialogue."  Twentieth Century Literature 42 (1996): 453-80.
  * "Hemingway's Critique of Antisemitism: Semiotic Confusion in 'God Rest You Merry, Gentlemen.'" Studies in Short Fiction 33 (1996): 25-34.
  * "Observations on Hemingway, Suggestiveness, and the Modern Short Story." The Midwest Quarterly 37 (1995): 11-26.
  * "The Love Song of Harold Krebs: Form, Argument, and Meaning in Hemingway's 'Soldier's Home.'" The Hemingway Review 14.2 (1995): 18-36.
  * "Fishing for Stories: What 'Big Two-Hearted River' Is Really About." Modern Fiction Studies 37 (1991): 161-82.
  * "The Place of The Confidence Man in Melville's Career." The Southern Review 22 (1986): 489-505. _Winner of the Harvard University Bowdoin Prize for Scholarship._
  * "Prophet and Idolater: Walt Whitman in 1855 and 1860." The South Atlantic Quarterly 84 (1985): 419-34.
  * "Citizen Kane and the Quest for Kingship." Journal of American Studies 19 (1985): 267-70.
  * "Eternity's Artifice: Time and Transcendence in the Works of Ernest Hemingway." The Hemingway Review 4.2 (1985): 42-52.

I offer the following courses with some regularity:  
  
ENGL 558--American Literature in the Later Nineteenth Century

  * [ENGL 558 Course Description](engl558desc.html)
  * [ENGL 558 Syllabus](engl558syll.html)

ENGL 578--Modern American Fiction

  * [ENGL 578 Course Description](engl578desc.html)
  * [ENGL 578 Syllabus](engl578syll.html)

ENGL 657--Mark Twain

  * [ENGL 657 Course Description](engl657desc.html)

ENGL 678--The Modern American Story, 1919-1955

  * [ENGL 678 Course Description](engl678desc.html)

ENGL 590--Directed Readings, on such topics as: American literary realism,
theories of Euro-American naturalism, theories of Euro-American modernism,
ethnicity and American literature, American women's fiction from 1852 to 1946,
the African American slave narrative, American women's regionalism, immigrant
narratives, the Harlem Renaissance, proletarian narratives of the 1920s and
1930s, the twentieth-century Jewish American novel, the New Journalism, Herman
Melville, Louisa May Alcott, Henry James, Willa Cather, and William Faulkner.

My degrees are from:  
B.A. (majors in History and Philosophy)--University of Hartford, 1977  
A.M. (in English and American Literature)--Harvard University, 1985  
Ph.D. (in History of American Civilization)--Harvard University, 1988

My email address is [ rlamb@sla.purdue.edu.](mailto:rlamb@sla.purdue.edu)  

Additional Information:  
  
_Works in Progress:_

  * "Hemingway and the Modern Short Story: A Study in Genre and Craft." (book ms.)
  * "Teaching Adventures of Huckleberry Finn in a Racially Sensitive Manner: A Guide for High School and College Instructors." (book ms.) 

_Teaching Awards:_

  * Inducted into the Purdue Teaching Academy, 1998
  * The University Outstanding Undergraduate Teaching Award in Honor of Charles B. Murphy, Purdue University, 1998
  * The School of Liberal Arts Departmental Award for Educational Excellence, Purdue University, 1997
  * Excellence in Teaching Awards, Department of English, Purdue University, 1992-93, 1993-94, 1994-95, 1995-96, 1996-97, 1997-98
  * The Stephen Botein Prize for Teaching Excellence, Department of History and Literature, Harvard University, 1988
  * Finalist, the J. R. Levenson Undergraduate Teaching Prize, Harvard University, 1985
  * Special Distinction in Teaching Awards, Harvard University, 1982-83, 1983-84, 1984-85.

* * *

[Return to Faculty Page](../Faculty.htm) [Return Home](../../default.html)

