## Georgetown University School of Business

### Fall 1995

![MGMT 550 Logo](logo2.gif)

Sessions:

Section 04: Monday and Wednesday, 4:15 to 5:30 p.m.

### William K. McHenry

[Professor McHenry's Faculty
Profile](http://www.georgetown.edu/gsb/faculty/mchenry/mchenry.html)

  * Office telephone: 202 687 3808 
  * Home phone: (703) 820-8268 (before 10 pm) 
  * Internet: mchenry@guvax.georgetown.edu (It's best to use this e-mail address for me, since I can easily check it from home.) 
  * GSB mail: mchenryw@gunet.georgetown.edu

Office Hours:

  * Mondays 3-4 pm 
  * Tuesdays 3-5 pm 
  * Wednesdays 3-4 pm

Click [HERE ](whatsnew.htm) to see What's New with MGMT 550.

Access [ Professor Sutherland's InfoTech
syllabus.](http://www.georgetown.edu/sutherland/mgmt550)

Access Professor McHenry's [ Introduction to the
Internet](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/wkmwww.htm).

This complete document may be found on the World Wide Web at:
[http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/whole.htm
](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/whole.htm)

First Class Meeting: Wednesday, Aug. 30, 1994  
Final Class Meeting: Wednesday, Dec. 6, 1994  
**Final Examination:** Take Home due Dec. 13, 1994

**Read this syllabus carefully. It is my learning contract with you for the
semester.**

All students are encouraged to use e-mail to communicate with me and with each
other. Any comments, requests, discussion, appeals of grades, etc. may be sent
to me via e-mail. Formal work must be submitted, however, in printed form. [
FEEDBACK](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/feedback.htm)

TABLE OF CONTENTS

This syllabus contains information on all aspects of the course. Click on any
bold words to find out more about that particular topic.

  * [ Summary of Course Requirements](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/coureq.htm)
  * [ Course Packet and Reading List](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/coumat.htm)
  * Course Description, Goals, and Diversity 
    * [ Catalog Description](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/catdes.htm)
    * [ Course Overview](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/couove.htm)
    * [ Diversity of Students and Objectives for this Course](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/divobj.htm)
  * Course Policies 
    * [ Class Attendance](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/couatt.htm)
    * [ Policy on Lateness](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/pollat.htm)
  * Description of Assignments 
    * [ Case Briefs (Not Required)](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/csebrf.htm)
    * [ Class Participation ](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/classpt.htm)
    * [ Take Home Final](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/tkhmfn.htm)
    * [ Team Projects](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/teampj.htm)
    * [ Team Project 1: Emerging Technology Team Paper/Presentation](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/emrtch.htm)
    * [ Team Project 2: Building An Information Business Paper/Presentation](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/infobus.htm)
  * [ Topics, Milestones, Due Dates, Reading Assignments](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/cousch.htm)

I received significant help in writing this syllabus from Ewan Sutherland who
may be reached at [
sutherle@gunet.georgetown.edu](mailto:sutherle@gunet.georgetown.edu) and
Deborah Everhard, of the GU Academic Computing Center. Her e-mail is: [
everhard@underdog.georgetown.edu](mailto:everhard@underdog.georgetown.edu).

### Summary of Course Requirements

    
    
    Assignment ........................Points
    Emerging Technology Group Paper ......200
    Class Participation ..................200
    Information Business Group Project ...250
    Take Home Final Exam .................250
    TOTAL  ............................ 1,000
    

The overall grading scale for the course is as follows: A: 930 - 1000 points;
A-: 900 - 929 points; B+: 870 - 899 points; B: 800 - 869 points; B-: 770 -
799; points; C: less than 770. Please think carefully about the implications
of this kind of grading scale: every assignment is important, because poor
performance on one assignment necessarily implies that performance on all the
rest must be outstanding.

A "B" means "Acceptable" - a solid performance which fulfills the minimum
requirements for a particular assignment. An "A" reflects work which is
clearly superior and exceeds the minimum criteria on all dimensions. An "A-"
or a "B+" reflects work that is better than "Acceptable" and exceeds the
minimum criteria on most but not all dimensions. Any work that receives a
grade of "B-" or lower does not meet the minimum requirements for solid
graduate work.

### Course Packet and Reading List

Professor Sutherland has provided an excellent list of additional readings for
this course. Please refer to [ Prof. Sutherland's
List](http://www.georgetown.edu/sutherland/mgmt550/class_reading.html) and
read no further than the Appendix where he has his packet contents listed. His
packet differs somewhat from mine.

Agassi Mini-Case (Will be distributed; not in packet)

  1. Note on Information Technology and Strategy HBS 9-193-137 
  2. Drucker, Peter F. (1995) "The Information Executives Truly Need," Harvard Business Review Jan-Feb, pp. 54-62, reprint 95104 
  3. CASE: Mrs. Fields Cookies 
  4. Minitel Version 1: Case: William Cats-Baril and Tawfik Jelassi, (1994) "The French Videotex System Minitel: a successful implementation of a national technology infrastructure" MIS Quarterly 18 (1) 1-18. 
  5. Minitel Version 2: [Prof. Sutherland's On-Line Minitel Case](http://www.georgetown.edu/sutherland/minitel)
  6. Minitel Supplement: "Clunk-click every trip," The Economist, Aug. 19, 1995, p. 62. 
  7. Charles R Morris and Charles H Ferguson (1993) "How Architecture Wins Technology Wars" Harvard Business Review 71 (2) 86-96. (Reprint 93203) 
  8. Coates, James (1994) "Mainframes Make a Comeback as Users Realize Bigger is Better For Some Huge Computing Tasks," Chicago Tribune, Oct. 2, 1994. 
  9. Kirkpatrick, David (1995) "IBM Moves to fix its Microsoft Problem," Fortune, July 10, pp. 102-111. 
  10. Burrows, Peter (1995) "Texas Instruments' Global Chip Payoff," Business Week, Aug. 7, pp. 64-66. 
  11. Burrows, Peter (1995) "The Computer is in the Mail (Really)," Business Week, Jan. 23, pp. 76-77. 
  12. T. J. Rogers (1990) "No Excuses Management" Harvard Business Review July-August, 1990, as reprinted in Cash et al. Building the Information-Age Organization, Irvin, 1994, pp. 268-285. 
  13. Steven E Prokesch (1993) "Mastering Chaos at the High-Tech Frontier; an interview with Silicon Graphics's Ed McCracken" Harvard Business Review 71 (5) 134-144. (Reprint 93609) 
  14. Schlender, Brett (1995) "Why Andy Grove Can't Stop," Fortune, July 10, pp. 88-98. 
  15. Epstein, Joseph (1995) "Why Andy Grove Should Be Worried," Financial World, Aug. 1, pp. 28-31. 
  16. Kummer, Bill (1993) "Information Services: (1 page handout from Prof. Culnan) 
  17. "Novell: Connection King," The Economist, May 13, 1995, pp. 63-64. 
  18. Reinhardt, Andy (1994) "Building the Data Highway," Byte, March, pp. 46-74. 
  19. Landler, Mark (1995) "House Passes Bill Curtailing Rules on Phones and TV," The New York Times, Aug. 5, 1995, p. 1. 
  20. Harvey, Jeanne Walker (1995) "Set Your Rules on E-Mail," Nation's Business, Aug., 1995, p. 48. 
  21. Edwards, John (1995) "Transforming the Telephone," Nation's Business, Aug., 1995, p. 49\. 
  22. "The Internet: The accidental superhighway," The Economist, July 1, 1995, Survey pp. 1-18. 
  23. "Who Can Measure the Net?" The Economist, July 22, 1995, p. 61. 
  24. "Japan's Internet Tangle," The Economist, July 15, 1995, p. 50. 
  25. CASE: Bradlees and Wal-Mart (Professor McHenry) 
  26. Zuboff, Shoshana (1991), "Informate the Enterprise: An Agenda for the Twenty-First Century," National Forum, Summer, reprinted in Cash et al. Building the Information- Age Organization, Irvin, 1994, pp. 226-233. 
  27. Davenport, Thomas, "Saving IT's soul: Human-centered Information Management," Harvard Business Review Mar-Apr, 1994, pp. 119-131, rpt 94203 
  28. Rao, Srikumar, "Meetings Go Better Electronically," Finance World, March 14, 1995pp. 72-73. 
  29. Gallupe, R. Brent & Cooper, William H., "Brainstorming Electronically," Sloan Manage- ment Review, Fall, 1993, pp. 27-35. 
  30. Dobson, Rick & Andrews, Dave, "What Notes Users Want," Byte, January, 1995, pp. 24- 25 
  31. CASE: Chemical Bank: Technology Support for Cooperative Work: HBS 9-193-131, rev. 3/2/93 
  32. Michael Hammer (1990) "Reengineering Work; Don't Automate, Obliterate" Harvard Business Review 68 (4) 104-112. (Reprint 90406) 
  33. Gene Hall, Jim Rosenthal and Judy Wade (1993) "How to Make Reengineering Really Work" Harvard Business Review 71 (6) 119-131. 
  34. Thomas Davenport and Donna Stoddard (1994) "Reengineering: Business Change of Mythic Proportions?" MIS Quarterly 18 (2) 121-127. 
  35. Raymond Caron, Sirkka Jarvenpaa and Donna B Stoddard (1994) Business Reengineering at CIGNA Corporation: experiences and lessons earned from the first five years" MIS Quarterly 18 (3) 233-250. 
  36. Tomsho, Robert (1994) "How Greyhound Lines Re-Engineered Itself Right Into a Deep Hole," The Wall Street Journal, Oct. 20, pp. A6. 
  37. CASE: IRS 
  38. Michael Porter and Victor Millar (1985) "How Information Technology Gives you Competitive Advantage" Harvard Business Review 63 (4) 149-160. (Reprint 85415) 
  39. Duncan G Copeland and James L McKenney "Airline Reservation Systems; lessons from history" MIS Quarterly 12 (3) 350-370. 
  40. Max D Hopper (1990) "Rattling SABRE; new ways to compete on information," Harvard Business Review 68 (3) 118-125, and the letters to the editor that appeared in a subsequent issue. 
  41. Yetton, Philip W., et al., "Computer-Aided Architects: A Case Study of IT and Strategic Change," Sloan Management Review, Summer, 1994, pp. 57-67. 
  42. David Feeny and Blake Ives (1990) "In Search of Sustainability; reaping long-term advantage from investment in information technology" Journal of Management Information Systems 7 (1) 27-47. 
  43. N Venkatraman (1994) "IT-Enabled Business Transformation; from automation to business scope redefinition" Sloan Management Review 35 (2) 73-87. 
  44. CASE: Baxter International: OnCall As Soon As Possible?, HBS Case, 9-195-103. 
  45. Tom Malone, JoAnne Yates, and Robert Benjamin (1989) "The Logic of Electronic Markets" Harvard Business Review 67 (3) 166-170. (Reprint 89311) 
  46. Robert Benjamin and Rolf Wigend (1995) "Electronic Markets and Virtual Value Chains on the Information Superhighway" Sloan Management Review 36 (2) pp 62-72. (Reprint 3625) 
  47. Ayre, Rick, and Willmott, Don (1995), "The Internet Means Business," PC Magazine, May 16, 1995, pp. 195-245 
  48. Aley, James (1995) "How Investors Can Use Internet," Fortune, April 17, pp. 154-158. 
  49. "Shopping from home in the EU," Business Europe, June 5, 1995. 
  50. Mendler, Camille (1995) "Making Cents of Electronic Money," to appear in Communica- tions Week International, Oct., 1995. 
  51. Wetherbe, James, "Executive Information Requirements: Getting It Right," MIS Quarterly, March 1991, pp. 51-65. 
  52. Markus, M. Lynne, and Keil, Mark, "If We Build It, They Will Come: Designing Information Systems That people Want to Use," Sloan Management Review, Summer, 1994, pp. 11-25. 
  53. Michael Earl and David Feeny "Is your CIO Addiing Value" Sloan Management Review 35 (3) 11-20. (Reprint 3531) 
  54. CASE: Eastman Kodak Co.: Managing Information Systems through Strategic Alliances (HBS 9-192-030) 
  55. Richard L Huber (1993) "How Continental Bank Outsources its 'Crown Jewels'" Harvard Business Review 71(1) 121-29. (Reprint 93102) 
  56. Lacity, Mary & Hirshheim, Rudy (1993) "The Information Systems Outsourcing Bandwagon," Sloan Management Review, Fall, pp. 73-86. 
  57. Mary C Lacity, Leslie P Willcocks and David F Feeny (1995) "IT Outsourcing: Maximize Flexibility and Control" Harvard Business Review 73 (3) 84-93. (Reprint 95306) 
  58. F Warren McFarlan and Richard L Nolan (1995) "How to Manage an IT outsourcing Alliance" Sloan Management Review 36 (2) pp 9-26. (Reprint 3621) 
  59. John Cross (1995) "IT Outsourcing: British Petroleum's Competitive Approach" Harvard Business Review 73 (3) 94-102. (Reprint 95302) 
  60. CASE: Design Management Institute Case Study: "The Washington Post: Balancing technology and human resources by design", Design Management Institute Press, Boston MA 617 338-6380. 
  61. Clifford Stoll (1988) "Stalking the Wily Hacker" Communications of the ACM 31 (5) 484-497. 
  62. Ferranti, Marc (1995) "What a Deal!" Computerworld, July 24, pp. 1,77-79. plus related articles in the July 31 issue. 
  63. Wilder, Clinton and Violino, Bob (1995) "On-Line Theft," InformationWeek, Aug. 28, 1995, pp. 30-40. 
  64. CASE: Lotus MarketPlace (HBS 9-392-026) 
  65. READINGS: Data Protection Act, 1984 (United Kingdom): Overview Handout, 1 pg. 
  66. The Code of Fair Information Practices (United States): Overview Handout, 1 pg. 

### Course Description, Goals, and Policies

#### Catalog Description

This course provides a managerial perspective on the effective use of
information technology for strategic advantage and operational performance in
global organizations through case analyses and class discussions. Topics
include: information technology's relationship to business competition and
strategy; the business value of information systems; the use of computer
systems to achieve strategic advantage, to support managerial decision-making,
to process organizational transactions, to achieve operational control, and to
augment interpersonal communication; information resource management; and the
organizational, social, and ethical issues arising from information
technologies.

### Course Description, Goals, and Policies

#### Course Overview

During the 1980s, American firms poured more than $1 trillion into information
technology. The results, as one cynic in Fortune magazine wrote, was that "...
Information Technology is already one of the most effective ways ever devised
to squander corporate assets..." If during the 1950s and 1960s it was
relatively easy to justify the purchase of computers for direct labor
replacement in areas such as accounting and finance, the 1970s and 1980s
brought integrated applications designed to bring the firm a strategic
advantage. The payoff from these applications, which sometimes launched new
businesses and radically changed the way the firm operated, was a matter more
of faith than of concrete proof, although many CEOs felt that they would lose
any ability to compete without them. Now in the middle of the 1990s we have
seen yet another wave of "business process re-engineering" as yet another
generation of computers makes possible a whole new range of applications.

Are computers really just a sinkhole for corporate assets? Hardly. Yet as the
application of computers becomes pervasive and ubiquitous, it becomes harder
and harder to discern the complex and subtle ways that computers change
organizations. The premise of this course is that computers **can** be used to
give businesses short and long-term strategic advantages in the marketplace.
Firms now allocate about one-quarter to one-half of new capital outlays on
computers; clearly many CEOs are sold on the idea that computers do make a
difference. If the goal is to achieve a strategic advantage, then the means to
get there can be divided into two general areas: doing what we do now better,
and creating entirely new products and businesses based on the information
technologies. These two topics comprise the core of this course.

The managerial issues that confront upper level managers, however, are not
restricted to strategy alone. These computer applications are, naturally,
based on computer hardware, software and networks. Without a basic overview of
the scope and types of products that are available, managers will not be able
to understand or think creatively about how to apply computing technology to
their problems. Similarly, the annual reports of numerous corporations are
filled with the red ink from information systems projects that have gone over
budget, been delayed, or have failed completely. Managers must be aware of the
issues surrounding the management of the development of information systems.
In an age in which personal information can readily be bought and sold,
managers have a special need to be aware of all of the ethical implications of
these systems. Finally, managing in the global arena brings additional
complexities to the task.

To summarize:

Destination: To achieve a strategic advantage by using the information
technologies

How to Get There:  

  * a) do what we do now better 
  * b) create entirely new products and businesses

Means of Travel:  

  * a) management of basic technologies: hardware, software, telecommunications 
  * b) management of the process of building information systems

Potholes on the Way:  

  * a) ethical concerns about labor replacement, privacy, security, etc.  

  * b) special problems from operating global information systems

The course is therefore organized in five segments.

  * Introduction to the course, to achieving a strategic advantage through information technology, and to a new information based product (the World Wide Web). This segment lays the ground work for what is to come. 
  * Second, the basic building blocks of information systems. One of your most important jobs as managers will be to envision a different future for your company. If you think of yourself as an artist, then each technology with which you are familiar is a different color on your palette; without a decent palette, your art work will be flat and uninteresting. Note: I will be doing an overview in these two classes. Your first team project will permit you to pick a technology of greatest interest to you and examine it in greater depth. 
  * Third, how to achieve a strategic advantage by doing things we do now better and by creating new products and markets. 
  * Fourth, management of the process of building information systems. 
  * Fifth, security, ethical, and international issues.

#### Course Goals

After this course, you should:

  *   * understand how technological choices influence business strategy and vice versa 
  * be knowledgeable about specific means by which business achieve strategic advantages by using computers, including best case practices 
  * have an increased familiarity with numerous leading edge technologies in I/S that will define short term choices 
  * have a fairly deep understanding of the rise and dimensions of electronic commerce 
  * be familiar with the management choices involved in managing the I/S function within the corporation 
  * be more familiar with the World Wide Web and the Internet 
  * have more knowledge about danger areas of computer security, privacy, labor relations, and international pressures. 
I hope that all of this together will prepare you to make strategic choices
about information technologies, thereby aligning technology and business
strategy.

### Course Description, Goals, and Policies

#### Diversity of Students in this Course

In the post-class survey after Fall, 1994, 37% said that the
technology/strategy mix in the class was "about right"; 28.8% said there was
too much technology; and 33.9% said there was too little! I suspect that your
class is similar. Some of you have little experience with computers and need
an introduction even to some basic terms and concepts. Others of you have
worked with computers extensively. Some of you want to do hands on projects
using particular software packages, while others never wanted to take this
course in the first place. A course like this magnifies the differences among
students from an engineering background and students from a liberal arts
background. In addition it is no secret that this is the last year in which
this course will be 14 weeks. Starting in 1996-1997, it will become a 7-week
module taught in the second semester of the first year, with at least three
follow-on 7-week electives covering a more diverse range of I/S topics in the
second year.

My approach to addressing this diversity is fourfold:

  1. if you have very little background, there are quite a few reference materials which are or will be on reserve for you at the library under Professor Sutherland's name; see [ Prof. Sutherland's List ](http://www.georgetown.edu/sutherland/mgmt550/class_reading.html) and read no further than the Appendix that lists the contents of his packet. You can also see me to borrow a basic I/S text if you need it. 
  2. if, on the other hand, you feel that you have already covered certain topics, such as computer hardware and telecommunications, you may simply miss those classes. In those classes I will start from the basics but work my way through to recent developments by the end of the class. 
  3. the emerging technologies paper will give you an opportunity to focus on a particular topic of interest to you. No matter how much background you have had, you will still be able to find something new and interesting. 
  4. the final group project focuses on an emerging market - the market for information-based products and services. This is a project where creativity is essential - and everyone in the class is on an equal footing when it comes to the capacity to think creatively. Once again, this is your opportunity to make sure that you walk away from this course with a significant amount of new knowledge. 

### Course Policies

#### Class Attendance

There is no attendance requirement per se in this course. It is up to you to
decide how best to spend your time. However, since a significant amount of
learning will take place using cases, it is to the benefit of the entire class
that you be present when we have a case discussion or a guest speaker. As
explained elsewhere in this syllabus, I will score your performance during
cases. A complete absence receives a score of zero, while your silent presence
will give you some credit. If you know you will be absent, you may avoid
getting a zero in participation by turning in a written brief for the case
before the class in which we discuss it. If an absence is caused by an
emergency, I will negotiate with you about turning in the brief.

#### Course Policies

#### Policy on Lateness

If you have an outstanding reason, almost any deadline can be changed by prior
agreement. Unanticipated lateness represents bad planning or procrastination,
both of which are highly undesirable in the business world. **There will be a
penalty of twenty percent per day (or portion thereof) late**. Weekends count.

### Description of Assignments

#### CASE BRIEFS (Not Required)

There is no requirement to write any case briefs in this course. However, I
will accept any number of briefs from you and give you complete feedback on
them. This will help sharpen your analysis. It will give you a better idea of
what I am looking for in written work, so it will help prepare you for the
take-home final. You may also write a brief if you have to miss a class, as
noted elsewhere. (See [ Class
Attendance.)](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/couatt.htm) If the
brief would have received an A or A-, I will equate that to a performance
level of "good" during the case discussion. If it would have received a B+, or
B, I will equate that to an "adequate" performance. If it would have received
less than a B, I will simply give you credit for silent presence during the
discussion.

If you choose to write a brief, you should fulfill two principal tasks: **1)**
successfully decide what are the key issues in the case. Choosing the right
question is 90% of the battle. **2)** make recommendations about the key
issues that a) take into account the facts of the case, and b) demonstrate
that you have thought through the problem carefully and have come up with a
reasonable proposal. Assume that I am your boss, and am already familiar with
the case (therefore repeat facts of the case only as needed to support your
arguments). Be careful not to get bogged down in issues that have essentially
already been solved in the case. Say what you mean, and no more. Creativity is
definitely desirable, as long as you stay within the bounds of the cases. When
I grade your briefs I will be looking at your selection of issues and how well
you address them. If you find it useful, you can highlight the issues in a
bullet list, or you can incorporate the issues into the text as you see fit. I
will read no further than two double-spaced pages or one single-spaced page.
The smallest font you may use is 10 pt (this type is 11pt), and the margins
should be at least 0.75 inches on all sides. For double-spacing, use a full
space of 2, not 1.3 or 1.5. (I've used all the tricks myself...) If you want
me to write in any comments, double space. Put your name in the upper right-
hand corner.

You may discuss the case with your classmates before writing the brief, but
the brief itself should be your own work.

### Description of Assignments

#### CLASS PARTICIPATION

The class participation part of the grade will be based on impressions, formed
over the course of the whole semester, as to both how much and how well you
participated. I keep track of class participation during each "case" class.
(The classes which are considered CASE classes are identified in the course
schedule. See [ Topics, Milestones, Due Dates, Reading
Assignments.)](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/cousch.htm) **I will
"cold-call" students as necessary to ensure that everyone has a chance to
demonstrate his or her accomplishments in learning the material.** Nothing
makes the case discussion fall apart faster than lack of preparation. I
believe in giving everyone a chance to speak, and will call on people who have
not yet spoken before I let someone have the floor twice.

There will be eleven times I evaluate class participation; I will use the best
ten results when I calculate your grade (in other words, you can drop the
lowest class participation grade). Each time is worth 20 points, so 10 X 20 =
the total 200 class participation points.

I am looking for you to show me 1) mastery of the details of the case,
including the quantitative data in the case, 2) awareness of the key issues,
including reasons for successes and failures, and issues that need to be
resolved, and 3) recommendations about what needs to be done next. I take
notes right after class on who participated, and I evaluate your participation
according to the following scale:

0 - **Absent**. Absent from class  
16 - **Silent** Remained silent or (in rare cases) made comments that did
nothing to move the class ahead.  
18 - **Average.** Participated a relatively small amount, making one or a
small number of comments that were more or less routine within the context of
the class discussion at that point.  
19 - **Good**. Played an important role in the discussion, opening up new
areas of analysis or helping to sharpen and deepen the analysis with good
insights.  
20 - **Outstanding**. provided an exceptional analysis of the case or played a
pivotal role in the discussion.

"Inspiration", the path to the highest participation grade, involves things
such as:

  * applying conceptual material from the readings or the lectures; 
  * applying outside reading in the discussion; 
  * integrating comments from classmates; 
  * reaching back to something said previously in the discussion that is pertinent to the discussion at the moment; 
  * taking issue with a classmate's analysis; 
  * bringing together material from different places in the case; 
  * drawing parallels from previous cases; 
  * tying in briefly an experience you have had that is relevant to the discussion; 
  * asking relevant questions of guests; 
  * demonstrating that you have carefully read the case and given it careful thought. 

For instance, if I ask something like, "what are the threats from new entrants
for this industry," I would probably be inspired by a student who could list
several and give an explanation and assessment of the threat from each.
Participation by reading to us directly from the case may occasionally help us
in clarifying some small point, but will not contribute towards your
participation grade; neither will comments that, although perhaps appropriate
ten minutes before, are now major digressions from the current conversation.
On the other hand, if you say something "wrong" or "dumb" or lose your train
of thought or "hum and haw," it will not count against you - though your
classmates may elect to take issue with remarks they disagree with (by a
reasoned rebuttal rather than ad hominem attacks).

You may also improve your participation grade by turning in occasional short
newspaper clippings and URLs relating to the class. Please put your name on
these and ensure that the source is clear. In some cases I may distribute
copies of these in class.

I try to follow this procedure for calling on people in the class. 1) At the
beginning of cases I will try to call on people who do not speak very often,
to make sure they have a least a few chances during the semester to speak. If
I feel that the level of preparation is not as high as is desriable, I will
cold call. 2) as the case discussion progresses, I will try to always select
people who have not yet had an opportunity to speak before I go back to other
people. 3) I may stop calling on someone who has already had a lot of "air
time."

The purpose of case discussions, in my opinion, is for you to pretend to be a
manager for 75 minutes who has to be responsible for his or her decisions. You
are facing 44 members of the board, and you have to lead this group to the
best decision that can be made in the case. You will be encouraged to defend
your point of view and sharpen your analysis on the basis of what everyone
else says. The group may or may not reach a consensus, and given the fact that
we rarely have all the information needed, we may not be able to say for sure
what is the very best decision. The main point is that you have had to play an
active role and be responsible for your decisions. I also may demonstrate
areas of analysis that you may have missed, which will help you to improve
your analytical skills in the future.

My style of leading case discussions is to encourage you to analyze the case
as deeply as possible. Sometimes I may therefore play the Devil's advocate and
sometimes I may challenge you to defend your views, even if I already think
that you have made a good point. At the end I give "morals of the story" which
will hopefully put the case discussions in perspective.

### Description of Assignments

#### TAKE HOME FINAL

This will consist of an analysis of a case, similar to the cases that we have
done throughout the semester. At the time of the exam I will tell you the
exact format for writing your case analysis. It must be done alone, and it
must be type-written.

### Description of Assignments

#### TEAM PROJECTS

During the semester you will have two team projects. I want you to get strated
with your teams right from the beginning of the semester. Unless a team
completely falls apart, you will keep the same teams throughout the semester.
Teams should have five members. I may modify this depending on the number of
students in the class, but teams must have at least four members in any case.
You may form your own teams (you know everyone better than I do). Groups
should reflect some diversity by race, gender, and/or national origin - for
example, no teams composed entirely of male engineers turned financial wizards
from California. I also suggest that you should carefully read the
descriptions of the team projects and try to find people interested in the
kinds of subjects you are. Send your teams and preferences to me via email on
the GSB LAN to MCHENRYW by Friday, September 8. I reserve the right to make
all final decisions concerning teams, but I will try to make everyone happy.

By now you have all had experience with teams and the things that can go wrong
with them. If you have exhausted all attempts at working together and need my
mediation, I will help. As 50% of your grade will come from team work, you may
wish to institute some form of peer evaluation within the groups. This should
be agreed upon and documented once the group is formed. (This is not
obligatory, but is my only answer to occasional but bitter complaints of
unevenness among contributions.)

The two projects are:

  * [ Team Project 1: Emerging Technology Team Paper/Presentation](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/emrtch.htm)
  * [ Team Project 2: Building An Information Business Paper/Presentation](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/infobus.htm)

### Description of Assignments

#### GROUP PROJECT 1: EMERGING TECHNOLOGY TEAM PAPER/PRESENTATION

Information technology changes with considerable, often frightening speed. To
provide the class with a better understanding of emerging and evolving
technologies and the problems of the relentless change, teams of students will
present overviews on a technology of their choice.

A definition of what an emerging technology is is provided by [
Birnbaum](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/birnbaum.htm). Your team
will select an emerging technology, write a paper about it, and make a
presentation. The presentation should include handing out a 2-page executive
summary to the class. Both the paper and presentation should address these
questions:

  * a brief description of the technology; 
  * what the technology is in simple terms that any manager could understand, but in sufficient detail so that the possibilities of the technology can be understood; 
  * examples of the application of the technology;  

  * the current status of the technology (availability, reliablity, stability);  

  * current costs;  

  * predictions about the evolution of the technology over the next few years;  

  * what it will be used for by businesses or the group to which it is targeted; 
  * why these uses will be significant; 
  * helpful references to sources of additional information.

You should try to include examples of one or more real companies, although
visiting actual companies is not required.

The Paper

The paper can be a heavily annotated version of the overheads that you will
use in the presentation. I want something that I can read at home that will
help me to think over everything that I saw in the presentation. Try to
justify why the technology should be considered "emerging." Be sure to tell
why the technology has a chance at making a strategic difference in
businesses.

The Presentation

You will make a 10-minute presentation about the technology to the class. You
should prepare a 2-page executive summary of your presentation to hand to the
class, and you should either make "overheads" as pages on the World Wide Web,
or use some form or presentation graphics package. You can either get your own
WWW account or you can give me the files and I can put them in my space. You
should come with back-up old-fashioned overheads in case the network is down
at the time of your presentation. You may allocate speaking time among your
group members as you prefer. One person can speak for ten minutes (putting all
your eggs in one basket), or five people can speak for two minutes each
(requiring tight integration).

Assume that your audience is the Executive Committee (EC) of a corporation or
other organization (charity or international organization) in which your team
is employed. You are scheduled in the "education segment" of the EC's normal
twice monthly meeting. The intended audience will have a limited background in
information technology. The focus should be on "what can this do for us" as
opposed to "how it works" or "from whom I buy it." Give enough technical
details to make sure they can understand the eseence of the technology. The
audience should not be seen as executives in the I/T supply industry, rather
they are potential users. Assignments will be graded on how effective the team
is in helping the managers envisage the use of the technology to transform
their business. The professionalism of the presentations, currency, accuracy,
and intelligibility of the material will also be taken into account.

Examples of technologies that you may wish to investigate are: multimedia,
cellular telephony, National Information Infrastructure, frame relay and ATM
communications, client/server architecture, electronic mail, voice mail,
laptop computers, personal digital assistants, voice recognition, handwriting
recognition, expert systems, neural networks, fiber optics, teleconferencing,
groupware, executive information systems, geographical information systems,
project management software, image processing, vehicle identification/location
software, paging and virtual reality.

You must [ form your
teams](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/teampj.htm) and send me
e-mail about their composition to me by Friday, September 8. Your team must
write a one-paragraph description of the emerging technology you have chosen
and submit it to me via e-mail on or before Mon, Sept. 18. Topics are first-
come, first serve - duplication will not be possible. Please brainstorm with
me about your topic. Please do not duplicate topics that I will be covering
directly in class. Presentations will begin on Mon., Oct. 2, and run
throughout the month of October, with roughly one per class. The paper will be
due on the date of the presentation. I will choose presentation dates by
lottery, and then give you a short period to make any trades you may wish to
make. I will use reverse order for the [ second
project/presentation.](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/infobus.htm)

An emerging technology is different from a pervasive technology, which is
defined as follows: "The mark of a pervasive technology is that its absence is
more noticeable than its presence - it has evolved to become part of the very
fabric of society. Such a technology is characterized by being generally
accessible and by offering a service perceived indispensable by most people."
Birnbaum contends that technologies pass through four evolutionary stages.

"They usually begin as an experimental rarity, sometimes as an accidental
discovery in the pursuit of fundamental science; more often they result from
an entrepreneurial attempt to exploit a perceived opportunity. The 2nd stage
usually produces an exotic tool or toy, often solving only a cross section of
a problem and used primarily by a narrow class of experts. In the 3rd stage,
the technology has evolved to the point where it is manufactured in quantity,
has become well known and common- place, but is used directly by only a small
portion of the population. In the 4th stage, the technology has become
integral to daily life. For example, a home or modern hotel room without a
color TV is unusual since we are in the 4th stage of TV technology. Contrast
this with the 3rd stage some 35 years ago when neighbors would congregate at a
pioneer owner's home or in the streets outside store windows to watch the
World Series or Milton Berle. During the 3rd stage of a new technology, there
is usually a proliferation of companies seeking an early competitive edge.
Product distinctions are clear although there are many look-alikes, and
pricing is somewhat arbitrary. [In] the 4th stage, businesses consolidate,
major innovations are far more difficult because of large in-place
investments, and prices stabilize."

Thus a technology "emerges" at various different times to different groups.
You must pick a technology relative to the larger group that has not yet
adopted it. Technologies in stages 1, 2, or 3 are acceptable. A technology
which has been widely applied in one industry, but is just beginning to be
applied to another industry may also be acceptable.

See: Birnbaum, Joel S, "Toward the Domestication of Microelectronics,"
Computer, November 1985, pp. 129.

### Description of Assignments

#### GROUP PROJECT 2: BUILDING AN INFORMATION BUSINESS

The project is to create an information-based business which sells either a
product or a service. The delivery platform for your new product or service
should be a network such as the Internet, Compuserve, America Online or one of
the broadband VoD/ADSL trials. You can re-package existing or propose new
products and services. The new product or service must be information based,
i.e. it must be more than just an ordering service. Customers, whether
individuals or corporations, must obtain the service directly from the
network. Your report should identify the customer group, its unmet needs and
wants, the features of the product or service that will provide for those
needs and wants. The business plan should provide sufficient financial details
to allow a venture capitalist to consider whether to have an initial meeting
with your team.

There will be two deliverables. First, you must summarize your proposal in
written form. Consider this to be the documentation you will hand the venture
capitalist when she asks you for more information. It should contain a
reasonably detailed description of your product or service, a justification of
why this can be considered "information based," a description of how it will
be delivered, and the financial calculations.

The second deliverable is a presentation of no more than than fifteen minutes
using:

  * presentation software (e.g., PowerPoint or Freelance Graphics);   

  * a set of hypertext pages on the World Wide Web (viewable with a browser such as Netscape).

I will use reverse order for the presentations from the [ first pro-
ject/presentation.](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/emrtch.htm)
After the presentation, five minutes will be available for questions and
answers.

Final presentations will be evaluated by members of the class (20%) and the
instructor (80%).

Evaluation criteria for the instructor will include:

  * creativity of the underlying service; 
  * evidence in support of the products potential; 
  * feasibility; 
  * professional quality of the presentation; 
  * effective use of the chosen media.

The class evaluation will take the form of investments. Each student will have
$1,000,000 to invest in blocks of $100,000 in other teams but not their own
team. The team which attracts the most investment will automatically be given
an A grade.

Warnings:

  1. do not go overboard on financial projections; 
  2. do not get carried away with the technology.

_Background material_ The following may be useful:

  1. Index to Multimedia Information Sources. (URL [http://viswiz.gmd.de/MultimediaInfo/ ](http://viswiz.gmd.de/MultimediaInfo/)) 
  2. Rawn Shah "The Business of the Internet: An Introduction to the Internet for Commercial Organizations", RTD Systems and Networking, Inc. (URL [http://www.rtd.com/people/rawn/business.html ](http://www.rtd.com/people/rawn/business.html)) 
  3. A hypertext case on electronic commerce, viewable using Netscape or Lynx. (URL [http://www.cox.smu.edu/mis/cases/webcase/home.html ](http://www.cox.smu.edu/mis/cases/webcase/home.html)). 
  4. Blake Ives and Richard O. Mason (1990) "Can Information Technology Revitalize Your Customer Service?" _Academy of Management Executive_ **4** (1) 52-69. 
  5. Mary J. Cronin (1994) "Doing Business on the Internet" Van Nostrand Reinhold. 
  6. Jill Ellsworth and Matthew Ellsworth (1995) "Marketing on the Internet; Multimedia strategies for the World Wide Web" John Wiley & Son, New York. 
  7. Digital Equipment Corporation (URL [http://www.cox.smu.edu/mis/cases/dec/internet.html ](http://www.cox.smu.edu/mis/cases/dec/internet.html)) (General information on DEC can be found at [http://www.dec.com ](http://www.dec.com).) ([local copy ](dec_www.txt)of the DEC case) 
  8. List of commercial sites on the World Wide Web (URL [http://www.commerce.net ](http://www.commerce.net)) 

Journals of interest include: _Internet Research_ , _Internet World_ and _IEEE
Multimedia_.

This assignment requires some elements of creativity. If you do not believe
you are creative, You might find helpful such books as:

  1. Edward De Bono (1982) "Lateral Thinking; a textbook of creativity" Pelican, Harmondsworth. 
  2. James L. Adams (1986) "Conceptual Blockbusting: A guide to better ideas" Penguin Books, Harmondsworth. 
  3. Roger von Oech (1986) "A Kick in the Seat of the Pants" Harper & Row, New York. 

Be imaginative, challenge assumptions, demolish constraints, be creative, have
fun, listen to your friends question your sanity. Tom Peters claims that if it
is not crazy it is not a good idea. Here is your opportunity to get rich.

### Course Schedule, Readings, and Due Dates

Note: Due dates for the group projects will be determined by lot, so they are
not listed here. Due dates for the [ First Team
Project](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/emrtch.htm) will be
sometime in October, and for the [ Second Team
Project](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/infobus.htm) will be one of
the last three classes Nov. 29, Dec. 4, or Dec. 6.

Note 2: The readings in the packet should be in the order of the classes as
given here and in the master list of the [ Course Packet and Reading
List.](http://www.georgetown.edu/mchenrw/mgmt550/coumat.htm)

**Wed., August 30**

Intro to Course. Basic Ideas about IS. Students complete survey.

Agassi Mini-Case (Will be distributed; not in packet)

**Mon., September 4**

NO CLASS LABOR DAY

**Wed., September 6**

Intro to I/S models, strategic advantage

Note on Information Technology and Strategy HBS 9-193-137

Drucker, Peter F. (1995) "The Information Executives Truly Need," Harvard
Business Review Jan-Feb, pp. 54-62, reprint 95104

**Fri., September 8**

E-mail TEAM rosters to MCHENRYW

**Mon., September 11**

CASE: Mrs. Fields Cookies

**Wed., September 13**

Lab on using the WWW, creating web pages, WWW search strategies. To be held at
the Technology Center, 3600 N St.

**Mon., September 18**

Case, part of which is on the WWW

CASE: Minitel

Version 1: Case: William Cats-Baril and Tawfik Jelassi, (1994) "The French
Videotex System Minitel: a successful implementation of a national technology
infrastructure" MIS Quarterly 18 (1) 1-18.

Version 2: [Prof. Sutherland's On-Line
Version](http://www.georgetown.edu/sutherland/minitel)

Minitel Supplement: "Clunk-click every trip," The Economist, Aug. 19, 1995, p.
62.

**Wed., September 20**

How do we get there part I - I/T platforms (hardware + software)

Industry Overview and Specific Firms:

Charles R Morris and Charles H Ferguson (1993) "How Architecture Wins
Technology Wars" Harvard Business Review 71 (2) 86-96. (Reprint 93203)

Coates, James (1994) "Mainframes Make a Comeback as Users Realize Bigger is
Better For Some Huge Computing Tasks," Chicago Tribune, Oct. 2, 1994.

Kirkpatrick, David (1995) "IBM Moves to fix its Microsoft Problem," Fortune,
July 10, pp. 102-111.

Burrows, Peter (1995) "Texas Instruments' Global Chip Payoff," Business Week,
Aug. 7, pp. 64-66.

Burrows, Peter (1995) "The Computer is in the Mail (Really)," Business Week,
Jan. 23, pp. 76-77.

Interviews/Articles About Industry Leaders:

T. J. Rogers (1990) "No Excuses Management" Harvard Business Review July-
August, 1990, as reprinted in Cash et al. Building the Information-Age
Organization, Irvin, 1994, pp. 268-285.

Steven E Prokesch (1993) "Mastering Chaos at the High-Tech Frontier; an
interview with Silicon Graphics's Ed McCracken" Harvard Business Review 71 (5)
134-144. (Reprint 93609)

Schlender, Brett (1995) "Why Andy Grove Can't Stop," Fortune, July 10, pp.
88-98.

Epstein, Joseph (1995) "Why Andy Grove Should Be Worried," Financial World,
Aug. 1, pp. 28-31.

**Mon., September 25**

How do we get there part I - networks and telecommunications

Kummer, Bill (1993) "Information Services: (1 page handout from Prof. Culnan)

"Novell: Connection King," The Economist, May 13, 1995, pp. 63-64.

Reinhardt, Andy (1994) "Building the Data Highway," Byte, March, pp. 46-74.

Landler, Mark (1995) "House Passes Bill Curtailing Rules on Phones and TV,"
The New York Times, Aug. 5, 1995, p. 1.

Harvey, Jeanne Walker (1995) "Set Your Rules on E-Mail," Nation's Business,
Aug., 1995, p. 48.

Edwards, John (1995) "Transforming the Telephone," Nation's Business, Aug.,
1995, p. 49.

"The Internet: The accidental superhighway," The Economist, July 1, 1995,
Survey pp. 1-18.

"Who Can Measure the Net?" The Economist, July 22, 1995, p. 61.

"Japan's Internet Tangle," The Economist, July 15, 1995, p. 50.

**Wed., September 27**

CASE: Bradlees and Wal-Mart

**Mon., October 2**

Do it better: informated organization, groupware, organizational memory

Zuboff, Shoshana (1991), "Informate the Enterprise: An Agenda for the Twenty-
First Century," National Forum, Summer, reprinted in Cash et al. Building the
Information- Age Organization, Irvin, 1994, pp. 226-233.

Davenport, Thomas, "Saving IT's soul: Human-centered Information Management,"
Harvard Business Review Mar-Apr, 1994, pp. 119-131, rpt 94203

Rao, Srikumar, "Meetings Go Better Electronically," Finance World, March 14,
1995pp. 72-73.

Gallupe, R. Brent  & Cooper, William H., "Brainstorming Electronically," Sloan
Manage- ment Review, Fall, 1993, pp. 27-35.

Dobson, Rick & Andrews, Dave, "What Notes Users Want," Byte, January, 1995,
pp. 24- 25

**Wed., October 4**

Do it better: Chemical Bank Case

CASE: Chemical Bank: Technology Support for Cooperative Work: HBS 9-193-131,

rev. 3/2/93

**Mon., October 9**

NO CLASS - COLUMBUS DAY

**Wed., October 11**

Do it better: reengineering lecture/Greyhound Case

Michael Hammer (1990) "Reengineering Work; Don't Automate, Obliterate" Harvard
Business Review 68 (4) 104-112. (Reprint 90406)

Gene Hall, Jim Rosenthal and Judy Wade (1993) "How to Make Reengineering
Really Work" Harvard Business Review 71 (6) 119-131.

Thomas Davenport and Donna Stoddard (1994) "Reengineering: Business Change of
Mythic Proportions?" MIS Quarterly 18 (2) 121-127.

Raymond Caron, Sirkka Jarvenpaa and Donna B Stoddard (1994) Business
Reengineering at CIGNA Corporation: experiences and lessons earned from the
first five years" MIS Quarterly 18 (3) 233-250.

Tomsho, Robert (1994) "How Greyhound Lines Re-Engineered Itself Right Into a
Deep Hole," The Wall Street Journal, Oct. 20, pp. A6.

**Mon., October 16**

Do it better: IRS case

CASE: IRS

**Wed., October 18**

Strategic Advantage, with particular focus on SABRE as example

Michael Porter and Victor Millar (1985) "How Information Technology Gives you
Competitive Advantage" Harvard Business Review 63 (4) 149-160. (Reprint 85415)

Duncan G Copeland and James L McKenney "Airline Reservation Systems; lessons
from history" MIS Quarterly 12 (3) 350-370.

Max D Hopper (1990) "Rattling SABRE; new ways to compete on information,"
Harvard Business Review 68 (3) 118-125, and the letters to the editor that
appeared in a subsequent issue.

Yetton, Philip W., et al., "Computer-Aided Architects: A Case Study of IT and
Strategic Change," Sloan Management Review, Summer, 1994, pp. 57-67.

David Feeny and Blake Ives (1990) "In Search of Sustainability; reaping long-
term advantage from investment in information technology" Journal of
Management Information Systems 7 (1) 27-47.

N Venkatraman (1994) "IT-Enabled Business Transformation; from automation to
business scope redefinition" Sloan Management Review 35 (2) 73-87.

**Mon., October 23**

Strategic Advantage: interorganizational systems

CASE: Baxter International: OnCall As Soon As Possible?, HBS Case, 9-195-103.

**Wed., October 25**

Strategic Advantage: electric commerce, Part II

Tom Malone, JoAnne Yates, and Robert Benjamin (1989) "The Logic of Electronic
Markets" Harvard Business Review 67 (3) 166-170. (Reprint 89311)

Robert Benjamin and Rolf Wigend (1995) "Electronic Markets and Virtual Value
Chains on the Information Superhighway" Sloan Management Review 36 (2) pp
62-72. (Reprint 3625)

Ayre, Rick, and Willmott, Don (1995), "The Internet Means Business," PC
Magazine, May 16, 1995, pp. 195-245

Aley, James (1995) "How Investors Can Use Internet," Fortune, April 17, pp.
154-158.

"Shopping from home in the EU," Business Europe, June 5, 1995.

Mendler, Camille (1995) "Making Cents of Electronic Money," to appear in
Communica- tions Week International, Oct., 1995.

**Mon., October 30**

Strategic Advantage: electronic commerce guest speaker (Counts as CASE day)

**Wed., November 1**

How do we get there Part II: management of I/S development,

Wetherbe, James, "Executive Information Requirements: Getting It Right," MIS
Quarterly, March 1991, pp. 51-65.

Markus, M. Lynne, and Keil, Mark, "If We Build It, They Will Come: Designing
Information Systems That people Want to Use," Sloan Management Review, Summer,
1994, pp. 11-25.

Michael Earl and David Feeny "Is your CIO Addiing Value" Sloan Management
Review 35 (3) 11-20. (Reprint 3531)

**Mon., November 6**

How do we get there Part II: outsourcing

CASE: Eastman Kodak Co.: Managing Information Systems through Strategic
Alliances (HBS 9-192-030)

Readings:

Richard L Huber (1993) "How Continental Bank Outsources its 'Crown Jewels'"
Harvard Business Review 71(1) 121-29. (Reprint 93102)

Lacity, Mary  & Hirshheim, Rudy (1993) "The Information Systems Outsourcing
Bandwagon," Sloan Management Review, Fall, pp. 73-86.

Mary C Lacity, Leslie P Willcocks and David F Feeny (1995) "IT Outsourcing:
Maximize Flexibility and Control" Harvard Business Review 73 (3) 84-93.
(Reprint 95306)

F Warren McFarlan and Richard L Nolan (1995) "How to Manage an IT outsourcing
Alliance" Sloan Management Review 36 (2) pp 9-26. (Reprint 3621)

John Cross (1995) "IT Outsourcing: British Petroleum's Competitive Approach"
Harvard Business Review 73 (3) 94-102. (Reprint 95302)

**Wed., November 8**

How do we get there Part II: independent consultant Jim Townsend (Counts as
CASE Day)

**Mon., November 13**

Potholes: labor replacement, Washington Post case

CASE: Design Management Institute Case Study: "The Washington Post: Balancing
technology and human resources by design", Design Management Institute Press,
Boston MA 617 338-6380.

**Wed., November 15**

Potholes: security, hackers, pirated software, etc.

Clifford Stoll (1988) "Stalking the Wily Hacker" Communications of the ACM 31
(5) 484-497.

Ferranti, Marc (1995) "What a Deal!" Computerworld, July 24, pp. 1,77-79. plus
related articles in the July 31 issue.

Wilder, Clinton and Violino, Bob (1995) "On-Line Theft," InformationWeek, Aug.
28, 1995, pp. 30-40.

**Mon. November 20**

Potholes along the way: privacy

CASE: Lotus MarketPlace (HBS 9-392-026)

READINGS: Data Protection Act, 1984 (United Kingdom): Overview Handout, 1 pg.

The Code of Fair Information Practices (United States): Overview Handout, 1
pg.

**Wed., November 22**

WWW booster lab. To be held at the Technology Center, 3600 N St.

**Mon., November 27**

Potholes: TBA, probably having to do with IT in transition economies such as
Russia

**Wed., November 29**

Group presentations, 1st day

**Mon., December 4**

Group presentations, 2nd day

**Wed., December 6**

Group presentations, 3rd day

**Wed., December 13**

TAKE HOME FINAL DUE

By 5 PM, 304 OLD NORTH

