## **Chemistry 251 Laboratory -- Spring 2002**

[Go to Lab Syllabus](labsyllabus.251.02.htm)  
**Week 2 (1/28-2/1)** **Identification of Unknowns  
  
**

You will be assigned your very own liquid unknown and you will share a solid
unknown with another student in the lab. Your mission is to use various
spectral and chemical techniques to determine the identity of these unknown
substances. Unlike last semester you will not be given a list of possible
unknowns. But I will tell you this, all of the compounds can be purchased from
Aldrich Chemical Company. I have not purposely contaminated any of the
unknowns, but many of them have been on the shelf for years, sometimes
decades. If you are obtaining unusual results, your unknown may have partially
decomposed, and purification may be necessary.  
  
**Cautions:** If you have a pacemaker or other metallic implant you may not go
near the NMR magnet. Many of the reagents and unknowns used in this experiment
are toxic. Use due care in working with these substances. Always dispose of
used solutions in the appropriate waste containers in the hood or consult with
your instructor.  
---  
  
  
**Reading:** You should read the sections in your lab and lecture texts on
NMR, IR, and Mass Spectroscopy. In addition, you should review the use of the
refractometer and melting point apparatus. It may also be helpful to review
your unknown labs from lst semester. A stepwise strategy for analyzing your
unknown is given [here.](Strategy.htm) There are also a number of useful
[websites that offer guidance in interpreting spectra or practice in solving
unknown
problems](http://www.ups.edu/faculty/hanson/chemwebsites/organicwebsites.htm).
I recommend you try some of them.  

**Week 2 (1/24-1/28):** Before you come to lab you should complete a short
prelab in your lab notebook that outlines the tests you intend to perform on
your unknowns. The instructor will go over the use of the IR, NMR, and GC-MS.
The instructor may also demonstrate the computer programs MacSQUALOR (that you
can use to get more practice determining the structures of unknowns) and
Chemintosh (that can be used to draw structures and predict carbon chemical
shifts). A free drawing programs, ISIS draw is also available for download
from a site listed in the organic websites.  
  
During this week you should acquire as much data as possible on your unknowns.
(See below for details.)  

**Week 3 (2/4-2/8):** _Before you come to lab_ you must analyze the data you
collected on your unknowns and write your observations and interpretations _in
your lab notebook_ ( **25 pts** ). This includes a preliminary analysis of
your spectral data. You do not need to have fully figured out the structure of
your unknowns by this point, but you should describe what you do know and what
additional experiments you plan to do. In addition, your spectra should be
neatly organized in a 3-ring binder and should be fully labelled with your
code number and unknown number. The instructors will collect and grade your
lab notebook (the carbon copy) and your preliminary spectral analysis (be sure
to make an extra copy of your spectra for your instructor). Although you will
be performing another experiment this week, and checking in, you should have
some time to acquire additional data if necessary.  

**References:** There are many reference books that discuss the use of
spectroscopy to identify organic compounds. I strongly suggest that you
consult these in the library. During lab I will make available a copy of
Silverstein, Bassler, and Morrill's _Spectrometric Identification of Organic
Compounds_.  

**Report[75 pts, due at the beginning of your lab during week 4
(2/11-2/15)]:** Reports must be typewritten and should follow [the format
described last semester](ReportWriting.htm). The final report for this lab
will correspond to the Results and Discussion sections of a paper and should
include the results of any tests you performed as well as the spectra you
obtained. The spectra should be fully analyzed and tabulated in standard
format. Describe the _reasoning_ that you used to identify your unknowns.
Comparison to literature values should be made and referenced. Any ambiguities
should be noted.  
  
[General Guidelines for Writing Reports](ReportWriting.htm)  
[Specific Guidelines on Writing this Report](ReportWriting.htm#unknowns)  
  
**Summary of Techniques for Identifying Unknowns  
**

Some of the possible techniques that you may use to elucidate the structure of
your unknowns are described below. Some are required and some are optional.  

**Infrared Spectroscopy** \-- _Required_ for both liquid and solid unknowns.
Review the use of the IR from last semester.  

**Proton NMR Spectroscopy** \-- _Required_ for both liquid and solid unknowns.
The instructor will demonstrate the use of the NMR during the first week. All
the liquid unknowns should be soluble in chloroform, so CDCl 3 can be used as
the NMR solvent. If your solid unknown is not soluble in chloroform, consult
with your instructor on an appropriate solvent system. If using a solvent
other than CDCl3 you may need to get assistance from the instructor in
acquiring the NMR data. [Instructions for using the NMR are available
online](http://www.ups.edu/faculty/hanson/spectroscopy/nmr/simplenmr.htm).  

**Carbon NMR Spectroscopy** \-- _Only for the solid unknown._ I will obtain
the data for you and store it on the SUN workstation under the names
**unknownA** , **unknownB** , etc. You may process the data and get plots at
your leisure. The instructor will describe this procedure during the second
week of lab. If necessary you may ask the instructor to help obtain a carbon
NMR on your liquid.  

**GC-Mass Spectrometry** \-- _Only for the liquid unknown._ The instructor
will demonstrate the use of the GC-MS during the first week. Inject 2  mL of
the NMR sample of your liquid unknown. Alternatively, dissolve two drops of
the liquid unknown in 1 mL of dichloromethane and inject 2 mL of this sample.  

**Solubility Tests** \-- _Required for solid and liquid unknowns._ Review [
last semester's unknown lab for
procedures](http://www.ups.edu/courses/organicchemlab/C250.01/week3handout.01.htm).  

**Melting Point** \-- _Required for solid._ The _Handbook of tables for
Organic Compound Identification_ contains a table that contains many organic
compounds arranged by melting point. This handbook will be available during
lab.  

**Index of Refraction** \-- _Required for liquid.  
_

**Chemical Tests** \-- _Optional_. Many functional groups can be identified by
specific chemical tests. There will be a handout in the lab describing
possible chemical tests. Consult the instructor for help in carrying out these
procedures. In some cases, derivatives can be made to help confirm your
structure determination.  

**Boiling Point** \-- _Optional for liquid_. Consult with your instructor on
how to do this.  

If there are other experiments that you would like to perform to help identify
your unknown, please consult with your instructor.  

