**Chemistry 251 Laboratory -- Spring 2002** **Writing Laboratory Reports**  
[Go to Lab Syllabus](labsyllabus.251.02.htm) Specific Comments for the
Unknowns Lab Report

**Introduction  
**

Being a clear writer is as important to a scientist as being proficient in the
laboratory. A discovery made in the laboratory does not contribute to
scientific knowledge until it is communicated to the rest of the scientific
community, normally through publication as a journal article. It is through
your writing that you (and your results) are judged. A poorly written paper
will be rejected by referees and editors and will not be published. In
addition, a scientist needs to convince others of the importance and
feasibility of his or her work in order to secure funding; in this regard good
grant writing is also essential. Even if you do not intend to be a scientist,
writing will almost certainly be an important part of your career. A major
portion of your laboratory grade in this course will depend on your ability to
write lucid reports in correct scientific style.  

The best way to learn how to write scientific papers is to read a few of them!
Don't be afraid to wander over to the magazine racks of the library and pick
up an issue of the _Journal of the American Chemical Society_. Although the
overall structure and style of all scientific papers are similar, each
subdiscipline has its own conventions for certain aspects of the paper. Thus,
if you are writing for a specific subdiscipline, look at one of the important
journals in that field: for example, _Journal of Organic Chemistry_ ,
_Inorganic Chemistry_ , _Journal of Chemical Physics_. For additional
information you should consult The _ACS Style Guide_. Other books on writing
scientific papers may also be helpful. (For example, Robert Day's _How to
Write and Publish a Scientific Paper_ ). Many of the ideas outlined below were
obtained from these sources.  

Your reader has certain expectations for the style and format of the
scientific paper. You must accommodate your reader or your ideas will lose
their impact since the reader will spend his or her time thinking about the
structure of the paper, not the content. Our goal is for you to complete this
course with the ability to write a complete paper in a standard format used by
the _Journal of the American Chemical Society_ : Title, Abstract,
Introduction, Results, Discussion, Conclusion, Experimental Section. To
accomplish this goal we will begin, in the first reports, by focusing on
individual parts of the scientific paper. Later in the year you will be
required to combine all these elements into a complete report.  

A well written scientific report is the culmination of a great deal of work.
It depends on a well performed experiment that is carefully documented, a
well-kept lab notebook is essential. The results of the experiment must then
be objectively analyzed to assess the implications of the work. It is during
the writing of a report that much of the critical thinking about an experiment
takes place. Give yourself time to revise your initial drafts; it may only be
at the end of the first draft of your report that you fully realize what your
results mean. It is then necessary to go back and revise your report with this
information in mind. Have other students in the class read your draft and
provide feedback on parts that are unclear.  

Clarity is the most important feature of a good scientific report. This
requires clear writing and careful organization. If you want help or advice in
writing a report, the Writing and Learning Center is a good place to visit. A
published novelist, and professor at UPS, once took her own writing to the
writing center and remarked to me that she was impressed by the suggestions
they made. The Writing Center has several upper level science students who
serve as writing consultants.  

**Getting Started Writing  
**

Many students make the mistake of trying to write the report in the same order
in which it appears. One approach for writing a scientific paper which works
well is given below:  

A. Organize your thoughts and your data

B. Write the Experimental Section

C. Prepare the important illustrations (i.e., Tables, Figures, and Schemes)

D. Write the Results section (using the illustrations as a guide)

E. Draft an outline of the Discussion section

F. Write the Introduction

G. Complete the Discussion Section

H. Write the Conclusions

I. Add References

J. Write the Title  & Abstract  

I have included some examples of Title, Byline, Abstracts, Introductions, and
Conclusions from recent papers in the _Journal of the American Chemical
Society_. Inspect them to understand the format that you should follow.  
  

**Writing Style in Scientific Reports  
**

[Much of this section is taken from a copy from a book or article to which I
don't have the reference. If you know the source, please let me know so I can
supply attribution.]  

Don't worry too much about your style during the first draft (so that you
avoid writer's block). Listed below are some things to work on during your
revision(s).  

Since clarity is your main goal, avoid long, run-on sentences. To create a
sense of flow you can use connective words at the beginning of your sentences:  

    
    
     above    accordingly   and so   again
    
    
    
     besides  consequently  alternatively   for instance
    
    
    
     furthermore  however   in addition    indeed
    
    
    
     in particular  instead   likewise   moreover
    
    
    
     nonetheless  rather  similarly  still
    
    
    
     then  therefore  though  thus
    

_Avoid Redundancies  
_

Do not use unnecessary words. If a word can be removed without distorting the
meaning of the sentence, then remove it. Try removing unnecessary words from
the sentences below. For example, in the first sentence the phrase  "...a
period of..." repeats the meaning conveyed by "...eight weeks...", and can be
removed.  

1\. The civil-engineering survey will last a period of eight weeks.

2\. Physically it is smaller than either of the others.

3\. The temperature ranged from a minimum of 100 °„C to a maximum of 120 °„C.

4\. The new switch is smaller in size.  

_Use Strong, Active Verbs  
_

Many scientific articles are written in the passive voice; the action is
directed away from the actor. Although less flexible, the active voice is more
direct. For example,  "The reaction mixture is refluxed in a 220 mL flask.",
can be changed to "Reflux the reaction....". Do not use the active voice
exclusively, but look for sentences where changing from a passive to an active
voice provides power to the sentence. Suggest an active form for the following
sentences.  

1\. This can result in a further reduction in the number of gaps.

2\. A protective series resistance is included in the circuit.

3\. The purpose of this equipment is to accept, analyze, and report system
failures.  

_Use Simple Words  
_

Use simple rather than complex words. This is similar to removing redundancies
in that you decrease verbiage. Some simpler words to use are: so, as, and, or,
to, by, with, and if. For example, in the first sentence replace  "...in such
a manner..." with "...so...".  

1\. This application affects the porous material in such a manner leakage does
not occur.

2\. In order that the compatibility of the system could be maintained, we
rejected the device.  

_Emphasize the Action  
_

Focus on changing the stress from the subject to the verb or action which
takes place. This is done by eliminating unneeded connecting words. An example
is to delete the words  "It is..." and "...that..." in the first sentence.  

1\. It is this necessity that adds to the complexity of the simulator.

2\. There are many application that make this device useful for speech
analysis.

3\. The valves were found to contain metal chips. (Keep the past tense.)

4\. With reference to the instructions they must be followed exactly.  
  

**General Guidelines for Preparing Various Sections  
**

**Title  
**

The title is a _label_ for the contents of the paper. The title should be as
_specific_ as possible. If you were looking for canned peaches at the
supermarket you would be dismayed to see all the canned fruits labeled
"Fruit". In fact, you might even be annoyed to find cans simply labeled
"Peaches" \-- are they peach halves or peach slices? Packed in water or syrup?  

Words in the title are used to generate both written and computer-based
indexes. Thus the title should contain specific _keywords_ that will allow
potential readers to find your article using these indexes. The title is not
normally a sentence and should be as _brief_ as possible. Any unnecessary
words should be ruthlessly removed. Avoid phrases like  "a study of" or "a
report on". In most cases, omit "the" at the beginning of a title. The title
should be in **bold** face and in a slightly larger font than the text. Center
the title at the top of the page and capitalize the first letter in all
important words.  

_Examples:  
_

**A Study of Bond Lengths**

_[This title is so general that it is nearly worthless.]  
_

**A Study of Bond Lengths in Cyanine Dyes**

_[This title is better, since we now know what type of bond lengths were
studied, but the phrase "A Study of" is vague. This title would be improved
just by removing the words "A Study of", or better yet describe what was
done.]  
_

**Calculation of the Average Bond Length in Cyanine Dyes**

**Using the "Particle in a Box" Model**

_[While a bit on the long side, this title clearly indicates the emphasis of
the article.]  
_

**Action of Antibiotics on Bacteria**

_(This title is too vague, it is more like the title for a book. We don't know
which antibiotics or which bacteria were studied.)  
_

**Action of Streptomycin on Mycobacterium tuberculosis.**

_(This title is much better, but "Action of" is vague.)  
_

**Inhibition of Growth of Mycobacterium tuberculosis by Streptomycin**

_(Now we know exactly what this paper is about.)  
_

_Some titles from recent issues of the Journal of the American Chemical
Society:  
_

**Mechanism-Based Inactivation of Pyruvate Formate-Lyase by Fluoropyruvate:**

**Direct Observation of an a-Keto Carbon Radical  
  
**

**Total Synthesis of the Unusual Marine Alkaloid (-)-Papuamine**

**Utilizing a Novel Imino Ene Reaction  
**

**Byline  
**

The Byline follows the title and should be centered and in bold using the
normal font size. Your name, date, course name and number. Others who worked
with you on the research may be listed as coauthors.  

**Abstract  
**

The abstract is a brief (typically  < 250 words) description of the contents
of the paper. Its primary purpose is to permit readers to determine whether
they should read the paper. Researchers searching for information in _Chemical
Abstracts_ or other indexes will use the abstract to decide whether to go to
the trouble of getting a copy of the paper.  

The abstract could be written by an editor (or another chemist) since it
contains only information present in the rest of the paper. Since it reflects
the contents of the paper, write the abstract last. Center it on the page,
indented one-half inch from both margins. The abstract must stand alone;
therefore you may not cite any tables or figures.  

There are currently two types of abstract in general use: informational and
indicative. Most organic chemistry articles use an information abstract, but
in some cases these two types are mixed.  

_Informational Abstract  
_

As described in the _ACS Style Guide_ , "in the abstract you should briefly
state the problem or the purpose of the research when that information is not
adequately contained in the title, indicate the theoretical or experimental
plan used, accurately summarize the principal findings, and point out major
conclusions." The informational abstract often uses the past tense to describe
what was done, and may switch to the present tense to describe results (that
are now known). The passive voice has traditionally been used since scientific
results should not depend on the person doing the study.  

_Indicative Abstract  
_

In contrast to the informational abstract, the indicative abstract is written
in the present tense and describes the paper itself, including the major
findings. It is in the present tense since it is describing the paper which
exists now. The indicative abstract is like a table of contents for the paper
and may also be written in the passive voice.  

**Introduction  
**

The introduction shows why the research described in the paper is interesting
and important to a chemist. What is the motivation for doing the research? The
answer to this question will often require a historical account describing
previous research along with appropriate references. It is the author's
responsibility to convince other chemists of the value of this work. The
introduction provides a clear statement of the problem or project. It sets the
stage for the research and puts it in a chemical context. In some cases this
will require a discussion of the theoretical background for the work. Present
and past tenses are correct in the introduction:  "Absolute rate constants for
a wide variety of reactions are available. Jones reviewed the literature and
gathered much of this information."  

**Results and Discussion  
**

In all writing it is important to consider your audience and your relation to
them. In a scientific paper your audience may change from section to section.
When writing the Results section you should think of yourself as an impartial
observer reporting data to someone knowledgeable in your field, while in the
Discussion section you are writing as an expert to all chemists interested in
your study (even if they aren't as knowledgeable as you).  

The Results section summarizes the data you have collected (along with
statistical treatment of them) and consists chiefly of elaborations of
information in Tables, Figures, and Schemes (including uncertainties if
appropriate). The Results may also present an overview of the experiments, but
without the detail provided in the Experimental Section. (Most readers will
not read the Experimental Section in detail.) The Results section is
predominantly in the past tense, but references to data in tables may be in
the present tense.  

The purpose of the Discussion is to analyze the observed facts. What are the
"principles, relationships, and generalizations shown by the Results." The
Discussion section compares your results to literature values or to the
results that might be expected from various theoretical models. (This may
require the use of error analysis.) The logical implications of your results
are described. Any exceptions should be noted and, if possible, explained. You
are building an argument, making a case. It is your responsibility to convince
other interested chemists that the conclusions you draw are valid and make
sense based on the data presented in the paper. The Discussion is usually in
the present tense.  

The Results and Discussion sections are often combined so that the each result
can be discussed in turn. Feel free to separate the two whenever you feel it
is appropriate.  
  

**Conclusions  
**

This section usually contains a brief summary of the major results along with
their significance. The object is not to merely restate the results, but to
give the reader a feeling for the broader significance of the results. In this
sense, whereas the introduction provided the context for the results and
discussion, the conclusions state the relevance, importance, and significance
of the results to a better understanding of a phenomenon.  

The conclusions may corroborate previous experiment or theories, validate
previous models or observations, or suggest possible improvements in
experiment or theory. Future applications of your findings may also be noted
in this section, or you may simply state the direction of future work.  

Many readers will read only the Abstract, Introduction, and Conclusions, so
make sure they get the proper message and the bottom line. The relative
importance of your work should come across clearly in these three sections.  

**Experimental Section  
**

Here the details of the actual procedure are described. This is what you
actually did, not a copy of the lab handout, nor a recipe for someone else to
follow. The level of detail necessary depends to some extent on the audience,
but in general the experimental section should give all the information
necessary for someone to actually repeat your experiments successfully.  

The experimental section is always in the past tense with the passive voice.  

An experimental section normally begins with a **General** section that
provides information on materials and methods that are common to several
experiments. The type of instruments used (including make and model) and
important instrumental parameters are noted. Sources of chemicals are listed.
Following the General section, each experiment is described in a separate
paragraph that has a brief, descriptive title in bold. (For organic reactions
this title is often the name of the compound synthesized.)  

The Experimental Section has a well-defined, formal, almost cryptic, style
that varies depending upon the exact type of experiment performed. Thus, it is
essential to look at examples in the literature to get a feel for the accepted
format. You may assume that your reader has had an organic chemistry course
and is familiar with standard laboratory procedures.  

A few examples from Experimental Sections are shown below to serve as models
for preparing your own. You might wish to look at additional examples in the
_Journal of the American Chemical Society_ or the _Journal of Organic
Chemistry_ .  

**Footnotes -- End Notes -- References  
**

Any reference to previous work or literature values should be cited.
References should be collected at the end of the paper in the numerical order
in which they appear in the body of the paper. Different journals use
different formats for their references. We will use the _Journal of the
American Chemical Society_ format. Do not use  "ibid." There should be only
one citation in your footnotes for each book or journal article, no matter how
many times you refer to it.  

_Examples:  
_

(52) Boyer, J.H; Mack, G.H.; Goebel, W.; Morgan, L.R. _J. Org. Chem._ **1959**
, _24_ , 1051.  

(53) Martin, S.F.; Oalmann, C.J., unpublished results. (or personal
communication)  

(54) Lin, H.W.; Walsh, C.T. Biochemistry of the Cyclopropyl Group. In _The
Chemistry of the Cyclopropyl Group_ ; Patai, S., Rappoport, Z., Eds.; Wiley:
New York, 1987; Chapter 16.  

(55) Bindraa, J.S.; Bindra, R. _Prostaglandin Synthesis_ ; Academic Press; New
York, 1977.  
  

**Illustrations: Tables, Structures, Schemes, Equations, & Figures  
**

For most papers the narrative is only half of the story. If most papers were
written without the use of illustrations, they would be at least twice as
long, and probably completely unintelligible. In the same way that there are
conventions about how to structure a scientific paper, there are conventions
about the use and format of illustrations. We will follow the format used in
the _Journal of the American Chemical Society_. A few comments on each
illustration type are given, but look at examples from the journal to _see_
the proper format.  

_Tables  
_

Tables are numbered sequentially and labeled **Table 1** , **Table 2** , etc.
in bold face above the table and left justified. Unlike Schemes, tables have
an informative title that immediately follows the label. Footnotes (a,b,c...)
describing aspects of the table may be place directly below the table.  

_Structures  
_

Chemical structures are set off from the text, centered, and numbered with
bold face Arabic numerals. The numbers are centered below the structure and
may also include names.  

_Schemes  
_

A scheme is an illustration that links together several steps in a procedure.
The Scheme is commonly used to illustrate a series of steps in an organic
synthesis. (Although it could also be used to show a series of steps in a
complex purification procedure.) Schemes are numbered sequentially and labeled
**Scheme 1** , **Scheme 2** , etc. in bold face above the Scheme and left
justified. Schemes do not normally use informative titles. Footnotes
(a,b,c...) describing steps in the scheme may be place directly below the
Scheme.  

_Equations  
_

Most equations, unless they are very simple, are set off from the text,
centered, and numbered consecutively by using Arabic numerals in parentheses
along the right hand margin. Long derivations are usually relegated to
appendices unless vital to the main thrust of the paper.  

_Figures  
_

All other illustrations are figures. Notice that graphs are called figures in
scientific papers. Figures are numbered sequentially and labeled **Figure 1**
, **Figure 2** , etc. in bold face below the table and left justified. The
figure normally contains a legend that describes what it is showing. The
figure legend immediately follows the label, but is not in bold.  

_Referring to illustrations in the text  
_

Any illustration in your paper must be referred to somewhere in the text. You
may refer to the table or illustration directly:  "The optical, thermal, and
thermodynamic data of these compounds are given in Table 2." Alternatively, it
is often preferable to refer to the illustration parenthetically at the
appropriate point in the text: "Retrosynthetic analysis of **6** using this
idea gives the pyrone **26** as the key intermediate (Scheme 8). "  

**Examples  
**

When I write a paper, I usually model it off of a similar paper already
published. I recommend you do the same. Look in the the _Journal of the
American Chemical Society_ or _Journal of Organic Chemistry_ to see examples
of Tables, Schemes, Structures, and Figures. When reading the Results and
Discussion sections don't worry too much about what is said (i.e., the
content), focus on how it is said. What tense is used? Is it always the same?
How are illustrations referred to? Notice that using the first person is
acceptable. But don't overdo it. Look at experimental sections to get a feel
for the concise format and the type of information provided.  
  

**Specific Comments for the[Unknowns Lab](week2hndout.htm)  
**

For this report you only need to prepare a Results and Discussion Section. I
recommend combining your Results and Discussion sections for this report. This
section should be divided into two parts, one that focuses on the liquid
unknown and the other on the solid unknown. Assume that your reader is a
chemistry major who has already had organic (but they may have forgotten some
of the details). I have attached an article from the _Journal of the American
Chemical Society_ that deals with isolation and characterization of a new
natural product since this is similar to what you are doing in the unknown
lab.  

Your report should summarize all the data from the various aspects of your
lab. For each unknown include a table that summarizes the data you collected
for that unknown. (In the table IR, NMR, and ms data should be presented in
the standard form used in experimental sections.) Tables should be clearly
labeled, mentioned in the text, and follow the correct format. Your spectra
should be annotated and included as figures (complete with figure legends) and
important absorptions should be identified. Show how your results allow you to
identify your unknown -- be organized and logical in your argument, _it is
your job to convince the reader_. Although you should compare your data to
that reported in the literature, it is not sufficient to identify your unknown
by simply stating that your data is identical to the literature data -- you
should describe the information you obtained from each piece of spectral and
solubility data and how this is consistent with your unknown. If you are
uncertain about the actual identity of your unknown this should be noted and
explained. Compare your data to literature values and include references to
these literature values.  

You _do not_ need to include any detailed information about the procedure you
used for obtaining the melting point, index of refraction, etc., unless there
is something unusual. This type of detailed procedural information would be
presented in the Experimental Methods section. You also don't need an Abstract
or Introduction.  
  

