# ![](Images/header.gif)  
Online English 101 Syllaweb

**This syllabus is a dynamic document. Any printed copy may be obsolete. Check
the online version regularly.**

# [Spring 2002 Assignments and Weekly
Schedule](http://www.ccsn.nevada.edu/english/101outline.htm)

### Instructor Information

  * **Instructor:** [Bradley Bleck](bleck.htm) (visit my homepage)

|

  * **Office:** NA

|

  * **Office Hours:** I'm living in Spokane, Washington so there are no CCSN campus office hours. 

  
---|---|---  
  
  * **E-mail:** [bleckb@nevada.edu](mailto:bleckb@nevada.edu)

|

  * **Phone:** 509.533.3572 (Long distance! The best time to call is between 10:30 and 11:30 a.m. If you if you miss me I'll do my best to get back to you, but email is the preferred mode of communication.

|

  * [CCSN English Department](default.html)

  
  
* * *

Follow the below links for more specific information on the course.  
  
![](Images/spacer.gif) | ![](Images/spacer.gif) | ![](Images/spacer.gif)  
---|---|---  
![Click here for course goals and guidelines](Images/101buttons_r1_c1.gif) |
![Click here for course learning outcomes](Images/101buttons_r1_c2.gif) |
![](Images/spacer.gif)  
[![Click here for course grading
criteria](Images/101buttons_r2_c1.gif)](grades.htm) | [![Click here for WebCT
access to this
course.](Images/101buttons_r2_c2.gif)](http://webcampus.ccsn.nevada.edu/public/ENG101_Bleck/index.html)
| ![](Images/spacer.gif)  
  


### T **o participate in this class, you must subscribe to the class mailing
list. Directions are provided below.**

  1. In your email program, open a new message. 
  2. Address the message to this address: [listproc@nevada.edu](mailto:listproc@nevada.edu)
  3. Leave the subject line blank, as in empty. 
  4. The message should read this way, and this way only: **sub e101 your.first.name your.last.name**

Note that there is no space between the   'e' and the '101' of _e101_. Be sure
there is a space between each other element of the subscription message.

* * *

Follow the below links for more specific information on the course.

  * Required Texts and Supplies
  * Course Goals and Guidelines
  * Learning Outcomes
  * [General Grading Criteria](grades.htm)
  * [Calculate Your Grade](gradcalc.htm)
  * [Step-by-Step Directions to Submit Essays using E-Mail](submit.htm) (Online Students Only)
  * [Understanding Comments within Your Essay](comments.htm) (Online Students Only
  * [MOO Directions](moo.htm)

##  Required Texts and Supplies

_The Writing Process_ , Seventh Edition (this is a new edition; be sure to get
the right one)  
_Student Resource Guide to the Internet_[ ](../../WINDOWS/Temporary Internet
Files/Content.IE5/CHIFWP2N/writ.htm)

##  Course Goals and Guidelines

English 101 comprises the study of and practice in the writing of essays using
standard American English, including some emphasis on grammar, mechanics,
sentences and paragraphs. The goal of this course is to prepare you to
successfully complete English 102 and essay assignments for other classes by
teaching you to use the writing process, rhetoric, and the rhetorical modes.
There will also be an emphasis on supporting claims with evidence and
producing one essay using research to support an argument. Nearly all of our
communicating will be done using either discussion forums in WebCT, private
email within WebCT, the mailing list described above, my private email, or the
MOO where we will hold a weekly chat. However, I will be holding regular
office hours for students who want to meet face-to-face or call me on the
phone. This is how we will meet the class goals:

  1. The key requirement is to be prepared and to participate and to do all of the assigned work--readings and writings--on time. You are responsible for all information presented in the class and posted on the web, whether or not you log-on to retrieve it. These course materials will be accessible unless the server goes down, meaning you can access the work while you travel for work or play. Being out of town or on the road is not an acceptable excuse for not getting work done on time.
  2. To pass the class, you will write five revisable essays over the course of the semester. You will also take a mid-term and final exam; both the mid-term and final will be impromptu essays. These will be explained at the appropriate time. Missing more than one of these seven assignments will result in your not receiving credit for the course. All essay grades carry equal weight. Particular expectations will be given with each assignment. Keep all essays written during the semester.
  3. This writing course will largely be a workshop. You are expected to play an active role as a member of a community of writers. Not participating in peer evaluations will affect your grade. Also, you will be evaluating the evaluations of those students who respond to your essay. More about this later.
  4. Because group work and conferences are an essential feature of the course, promptness and participation are a must. Missed group work results in a lower quality essay and harms your grade. Not participating in peer evaluations and MOOing can also harm the work of other students in the class. Because one focus of this course is writing as process, missing or skipping peer evaluations makes your assignment incomplete. Be considerate of your classmates and do your share.
  5. I consider incomplete assignments to be late and will treat them as such no matter the reasons for lateness or incompleteness. Such papers will be graded down one full grade. Late essays will not be accepted any later than the revision due date for that essay, which is usually one week following the return of graded essays. One late or incomplete essay is allowed without penalty.
  6. Any of the graded revisable essays may be revised for a higher grade if turned in for credit within one week of being returned. Because a 'C' or higher is required to transfer this course to UNLV and most other four year colleges and universities, **any essay given a grade below a 'C' MUST be revised**. Penalized assignments that are revised receive the average of the two grades given. No exceptions for lateness.
  7. During the course I will give you specific guidelines on what constitutes plagiarism, which is an act of academic dishonesty. All acts of academic dishonesty are regarded by the College as very serious offenses. In the event that academic dishonesty on the part of a student is discovered, such an incident will be handled on an individual basis as deemed appropriate. A description of all such incidents shall be forwarded to the College's Vice President for Academic Affairs. The VP may then institute action. Plagiarism is also grounds for failing on any one paper, failing the course, and removal from the College.
  8. All papers and assignments are due at the time listed on the assignment or as modified by me. All others are late. All final drafts must be posted into the appropriate WebCT forum. Work submitted beyond final due dates (see revision information) will be accepted at instructor's discretion.

##  Learning Outcomes

###  Improved Writing and Thinking Skills

Your writing skills will improve much more than you might think possible,
especially if you follow my suggestions and do each assignment. Because the
written word represents the thought process put to paper, the more thought you
put into each assignment the more you will learn about writing, yourself, your
writing abilities, and the topic you write about. Do the work and you'll be a
better writer and a better thinker. The harder you work the more you will
learn.

###  Departmental Course Objectives for Engish 101

  * To develop an awareness of, understanding of, and ability to use logic, Rhetoric and the various Rhetorical Modes.
  * To support generalizations and claims with specific and credible evidence.
  * To make clear to the reader the relationship between the evidence presented and the essay's thesis or main point.
  * To give instruction and practice in the writing of college essays.
  * To write and revise effective sentences, paragraphs, and essays.
  * To demonstrate a competency in the conventions of Standard American English.
  * To gain an understanding of and practice in the use of computer technology for interpersonal communication and academic research.

###  Choices and Consequences

In this class you will not only learn how to write, but you will learn that
the choices you make will result in certain consequences. One choice I expect
you to make is to ask questions when you are unsure about anything taking
place in the class--be it an assignment requirement, comments on your work, or
anything else you don't understand. However, and this is a big "however," do
not put off working on assignments because you are unsure about what to do and
want me to clarify something for you. Usually what you think needs doing is
correct.

Another choice I suggest you make is to keep up with the work load. One
consequence of this will be a better grade than if you fall behind. Another
consequence will be that you will become a better writer. A third consequence
will be less stress with regard to this class. A consequence of falling behind
and not turning your work in on time is a lower grade. Those who do poorly in
this class (and most other classes) are those who regularly miss deadlines,
those who do not prepare themselves for class, and those who fall behind in
their work. Choosing to complete the assigned work--on time--results in
improved writing and thinking skills and a better grade than you would
otherwise earn; it also makes for a more enjoyable experience.

###  Self-Reflectivity

I want you to think about what it is you are doing and how you could possibly
do it better. In part, this means writing your essays well before the day they
are dueso you can let your ideas simmer in your mind. You will also write a
short paragraph (which answers certain assigned questions) at the end of each
essay to evaluate your performance and the behaviors during the writing of
your essays. This is one way to both learn from your mistakes and avoid
repeating them while learning to recognize your strengths as well. I would
also like you to consider how your behavior as a student affects others in the
class. Respect and courtesy are key. Self-reflection is key to writing as
process.

###  The Ability to Work Within Groups

For each assignment in this class you will be working with other writers and
myself. When doing so, you are to offer feedback to help group members improve
the paper they have written. You will not only learn to recognize good writing
and offer help and suggestions on how to improve your classmates' essays, but
you will learn something about the people in your groups. This creates a
community of writers in our "classroom" where you can learn that written
communication is to be read, not just stuffed away in a drawer or to be given
to an instructor to be marked up with red ink (Normally I use blue or black on
paper but will use ALL CAPITALS to mark the electronic texts in this class).
This is also done so you can learn that each member of this class can offer
you something to enrich your life. The rule for responding to the work of
others is to do so with respect and courtesy. We are here to help each other
improve as writers, not to laugh at or judge each other.

Additionally, a process for evaluating the feedback you receive from those in
your peer group will be provided. In short, you will assign a grade to each
set of feedback you receive from your peers. This process will be explained
before the first essay is evaluated.

###  Workshop Groundrules

  * We will listen to and respect what others say.
  * We will offer and accept positive comment and criticism.
  * We will participate and do our share.
  * We will use our experience to make ideas useful.
  * We will take risks.

###  Increased Computer Literacy

Because this course will be conducted with a minimum of (and perhaps no) face-
to-face contact, you will also work on developing, enhancing, and learning new
computer skills. Lecture-type reading material will be read either from your
computer monitor or downloaded from the class website, printed, and read as
hardcopy. Class discussions and exercises will take place regularly using a
MOO site--attendance and participation are required. Peer evaluations will
take place using e-mail to swap essays and provide feedback. Essays will also
be submitted and returned with comments via e-mail. Most individual questions
will be handled using e-mail, but when a question's response applies to
others, the website will be modified. In addition, I will be available by
phone at certain times.

This course is designed to not only teach you ways to improve your writing,
but we will also be writing mostly with and about computers, software, and the
Internet. This is done for a variety of reasons, but primarily because most
writing the the workplace is done with computers so we will work to provide
you the increased computer skills sought in the workplace (computer literate
workers make an average of 15 percent more than non-computer literate workers)
and to provide a focus for our writing and discussions in the class. To that
end, we will explore various aspects of the Internet, use specialized software
designed for writing instruction, and all class materials will be posted as
web pages.  

* * *

####  Students with Documented Disabilities

If you have a documented disability that may require assistance, you will need
to contact the A.C.C.E.S.S. office for coordination in your academic
accommodations. The A.C.C.E.S.S. Office is located in the Workforce
Development Center in the 1100 area of the Cheyenne campus. The phone number
is 651-4045.  

* * *

I reserve the right to change the syllabus at any time (when I do, it is
usually in your favor).  

* * *

If you have questions about the material on this or any other web page for
this course, please contact [Bradley Bleck](mailto:bleckb@nevada.edu) at
bleckb@nevada.edu.

