English 101, Summer 1997 -- Syllabus **ENGLISH 101

SUMMER 1997**

 ****

CB 329 (M, W); Library Computer Lab (T)

10 AM-12 noon

Instructor: Dr. Michael Day

Phone: 394-5100 (office)

Office: CB 303

mday@silver.sdsmt.edu

Office Hours: MTW 1-2 and by appointment

\--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**COURSE DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES.** English 101 is a 3-credit practical
communication course emphasizing basic language skills, style, and the
organization and development of expository prose.

The objectives of English 101 are

to help you understand writing as a mode of learning and as a tool for
critical thinking and problem solving;

to help you with the processes of writing, including prewriting techniques,
revision skills, and the ability to control the surface features of your
prose;

to help you develop the analytical skills common to writing in the university,
such as supporting generalizations with examples, structuring an argument, and
summarizing, paraphrasing, and documenting sources;

to help you develop fluency and confidence in your writing;

to introduce you to the college library system and to basic library skills,
including information retrieval.

**A SPECIAL NOTE ABOUT THIS SECTION OF ENGLISH 101:**

 ****

**** This class has been designated a pilot section of English 101, and will
be used to test the usefulness of several tools and activities related to
computer and Internet assisted writing. This should make the class exciting
and challenging, and will represent a step into the 1990s by SDSM& T's writing
classes. You will need to get an Internet account if you do not already have
one, and learn to use it if you do not already know how. For my part, I will
help you as much as possible, and will be understanding if failures in
technology put us off schedule or cause other problems.

From June 17th until July 27th, we will meet every Tuesday in the Library
Computer Lab. You should come prepared each lab day with a disk upon which you
can save work. We will be trying out the Daedalus Integrated Writing
Environment (DIWE) in the lab, as well as making use of other Internet
functions such as the World Wide Web (WWW) and MOO. Each of these technologies
should have some impact on your growth as a writer. I ask for your patience,
but above all, I ask for feedback about our uses of these new tools and
activities.

 ******CLASS INTERNET DISCUSSION GROUP**

 ****

**** Based on the success of Internet discussion groups in my other classes, I
will be requiring you to participate in a similar discussion during the
summer. Your participation in this discussion, with a minimum of three
submissions, will count for 10% of your final class grade. You will be writing
about topics related to your growth as a writer, expounding upon class
discussions, asking questions of your fellow students, and exploring ideas for
your papers. In your posts to our FYCOMP discussion group, I expect you to
write carefully and correctly, and to demonstrate your ability to engage with
ideas in writing.

[ To subscribe to our FYCOMP discussion group (do this as soon as you
can)](101fcins.htm)

**OUR CLASS WEB PAGE: http:www.sdsmt.edu/courses/is/hum375/101.html**

 ****

Following the example of other classes around the country, we will have a
class web page with this syllabus, class assignments, and handy links to
resources you may need. Please use this web page; I will be asking for your
feedback about it at the end of the summer. I would be pleased if you would
also keep an eye out for web pages that may be of use to the class; if you let
me know, I will do my best to link to them from our page as soon as I can.

****

******A NOTE ABOUT DR. DAY'S TEACHING PHILOSOPHY:**

 ****

**** You may notice that I do not tend to lecture very much, but instead use
class discussion, group work, and hands-on activities in class. This is
because I believe that lecturing does not really help your learn; you need to
be writing and engaged in activities with your classmates in order to improve
your writing and communication skills. I also believe firmly that students
should take an active role in the direction of the class, in order to make it
a community, and in order to give students "ownership" of knowledge and
skills. To the degree possible, I would like to allow you to individualize
your experience in the class. Therefore, if you have an idea for an assignment
or activity which better suits you than what I assign you, I ask that you
please let me know. If your suggestion allows you to demonstrate the skills
the rest of the class is demonstrating, then I may allow you to proceed in
your own direction.

 ****

******REQUIRED TEXTBOOKS AND MATERIALS.**

 **** * D. Hacker, _A Writer's Reference_.

* One plain file folder to be used for submitting your writing assignments, available at bookstore.

* Internet account on silver, SDSM & T's Email server. Apply right away at the ITS Help Desk if you do not have one.

* Also recommended: a standard _college_ dictionary.

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS.** Your final grade will be based on the following: a
portfolio of 3 short papers written during the course of the semester (55%);
one library project/research-based paper (15%), an annotated bibliography--
team activity (10%); a set of activities connected with the class Internet
discussion group (10%); participation and progress/effort (10%). You will also
be required to attend a minimum of two conferences with the instructor to
discuss writing in progress. Conferencing schedules will be provided during
the semester as needed.

Pre- and post-writing activities, such as worksheets, in-class writing,
grammar exercises, research exercises, peer review, conferences, and self-
assessments, will accompany each essay assignment. To receive full credit for
the assignment and as part of your participation grade, you will need to
complete all parts of the assignment. **IMPORTANT:** I will refuse to read and
evaluate a paper that I have not seen "in progress" during these preparation
activities. No last minute changes of topic allowed.

**PORTFOLIO ASSESSMENT AND GRADING**. Your section of English 101 will use
portfolio assessment to determine whether or not your writing demonstrates
freshman level competence, defined as a C or better. (For further information,
see the attached handout: "Portfolio Guidelines.")

So that your _progress_ as a writer is reflected in your final grade,
individual papers (with the exception of the final library/research-based
paper) will not be graded during the course of the semester. Instead, I will
respond narratively to your essay drafts, noting writing strengths and
weaknesses and making recommendations for improving the essays. You'll then be
given the opportunity to revise essays, within the time frame available to us,
so that your work best represents your writing ability. You may choose to
revise a paper only once or several times.

You may also return to some of the papers written earlier in the semester. The
final drafts of each paper will be submitted as your English 101 Writing
Portfolio near the end of the semester. This completed portfolio will receive
a grade worth 55% of your final course grade. In assessing the portfolio I
will look at the entire body of your semester's work to gauge not only writing
ability but also the progress you've made in a semester's time.

******ATTENDANCE AND PARTICIPATION**. Exemplary attendance and active
participation are expected. If you have a reasonable excuse for an absence
(such as illness or family emergency), try to notify me before class time.
(Leave a message on my answering machine if I'm in class or otherwise not in
my office.) Studying for another class, leaving early for the weekend,
participation in social functions, and sleeping through the alarm (among
others) are _not_ considered reasonable excuses.

If you absolutely must miss class, get notes and handouts from someone in your
section. Regardless of your excuse, you are responsible for assignments made
and assignments due. If you're ill or will be out of town on the day an
assignment is due, have a roommate or friend bring the assignment to my office
so you don't get docked for a late paper. Sufficient lead time is provided for
each assignment so that no one need be unprepared. **PLEASE NOTE:** Most in-
class activities, including peer review, can _not_ be made up later.

**PENALTIES** : You are allowed three "free" absences, no questions asked.
With absence #4, your final grade drops one step (e.g., from B+ to B). With
absence #6, your grade drops two steps (e.g., from B+ to B-). With absence #8,
your final grade drops three steps (e.g., from B+ to C+). With absence #10,
you fail the course.

The participation/progress portion of your grade will be based on my
observation of your contributions to the class and peer review sessions, and
your willingness to work toward strengthening your writing skills.
Participation also includes coming to class on time and paying attention;
maintaining a professional, positive, cooperative attitude toward the subject
matter, the professor, and your fellow students; engaging in class discussion
and group work willingly and treating others fairly and courteously; and
completing all parts of the assignments.

**DEADLINES**. "Homework" (e.g., worksheets, research exercises, peer review
sheets) will be due at the beginning of the class period for which it is
assigned. Unless you have made arrangements in advance, I do not accept late
homework. For peer review sessions, complete typed drafts and copies are due
at the beginning of the class period designated for distribution of copies.
**PLEASE NOTE** : Failure to have a draft ready for peer review or failure to
attend peer review will affect your course grade adversely. (You'll also lose
out on valuable feedback from your peers.) Due dates for the essays will be
noted on individual assignments sheets.

Arrangements for late papers (excluding peer review drafts) must be made at
least 24 hours in advance of the established due date.

**ASSIGNMENT FORMAT**. With the exception of in-class writing activities, all
written work must be word-processed. Since revision is required of all formal
essays written for this course, access to a computer or word-processor is
essential. Letter quality or near-letter quality printing is recommended. A
formal paper in unreadable dot matrix will not be well-received. And if you
haven't replaced your printer ribbon recently, do so now! When you submit an
assignment, adopt the attitude of a professional applying for a job: make sure
your "application" is worth reading. All students have access to the computers
on campus. You'll find the tutorial for word processing in MS Word for Windows
on the file server under Tutorial. **Keep a backup copy of every assignment
you turn in, in case it should become lost.**

**PLAGIARISM POLICY.** Plagiarism--handing in written work which is not your
own --is dishonest. Other people (your instructor, students in your English
class, a tutor at the Tech Learning Center) may make suggestions for improving
a piece of written work, but the work itself must be your own.

There are three basic forms of plagiarism. One is unintentional, when you use
other writers' words and ideas, often in a research-based paper, as though
they were your own. This type of plagiarism sometimes occurs because of
unfamiliarity with the conventions of documentation in academic papers. That
is, you may not have learned how to use and document sources. Since we will be
working extensively with documentation, none of you should have a problem with
this or the second kind of plagiarism, the unacceptable paraphrase. In this
second case, you probably document the sources of the information used, but
you don't present it in your own words. In-class work will help you develop
the research/writing skills needed to prevent both these forms of plagiarism.

The third form of plagiarism is outright cheating--turning in a paper, or
parts of a paper, which someone else has written and claiming it as your own,
or copying sections of a book or article without proper documentation when you
have had documentation forms explained to you. My hope is that none of you
will feel the need to cheat in English 101, but do note that the policy of the
School of Mines grants instructors the right to fail students who plagiarize.
This means that if you plagiarize in any way, but particularly after we have
learned about and practiced research writing skills, I have the option of
failing the assignment and/or failing you in the class. Is plagiarizing worth
the trouble it can create for you? Your best approach to this potential
problem is simple: Don't cheat! Ever. Please refer to the section entitled
"Policy Governing Academic Integrity" in the Tech Catalog for further
information.

**TOPICS TO BE COVERED:** Idea generation and organization, using concrete
language and active verbs, formulating thesis statements, writing intros and
conclusions, writing effective paragraphs, writing effective sentences,
developing research skills (summarizing, paraphrasing, quoting, synthesizing,
documenting sources), avoiding plagiarism, honing revision skills, correcting
miscellaneous grammar and mechanics problems.

******HOW TO SURVIVE ENGLISH 101.**

 ****

**** * Have a positive, professional attitude about learning. You're here to
improve your writing, not to prove how well you already write, or how much you
hate to write. Be willing to try out new exercises and technologies on the
computer/Internet.

* Attend class faithfully, pay attention, participate fully in class activities.

* First impressions are hard to break. Aim to create a positive impression: chronic absenteeism or tardiness, falling asleep in class, goofing off with neighbors **does** get noticed and influences grades. 

* Don't wait until after a so-so first essay to show me how well you can do. Give me your best work possible right from the start and use revision opportunities to build on writing strengths, not for damage control.

* If something is unclear, ask questions. You have the right to understand.

* If you have a problem of any kind that means you'll miss class or a deadline, tell me about it. We can work around some problems if I know about them in time. If you are ill for more than a day or two, call and let me know so I can help you catch up. If you are seriously ill or have a serious personal problem, call the Dean of Students Office and let them help you smooth the way with your professors. If you simply "disappear" from class with no explanation, we might assume, wrongly, that you're just goofing off!

* Don't expect this writing course to be like the one you took in high school, or like the one So-and-so took last year at Tech, or even like someone else's section of English 101 this year. Although we try to teach the same basic writing skills, English instructors at Tech do not teach cookie-cutter sections.

* Remember that you are responsible for any material covered and any deadlines missed when you are absent. Make friends with a classmate who can tell you what happened while you were gone, and make arrangements to turn your work in early or have it brought to my office if you'll be absent the day an assignment is due.

* Enjoy the summer's work. Along the way, you'll become a better writer, make some new friends, and learn a lot about yourself. English 101 offers you a unique learning situation--a small class in which we work hard but in which everyone participates and gets to know each other.

**[ENGLISH 101--Summer 1997 COURSE CALENDAR](101sche.htm) **

****

